pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12456763PMC12456763.112456763124567634098652410.1371/journal.pone.0329094PONE-D-25-129941Research ArticlePhysical SciencesChemistryChemical CompoundsOrganic CompoundsAmino AcidsAcidic Amino AcidsGlutaminePhysical SciencesChemistryOrganic ChemistryOrganic CompoundsAmino AcidsAcidic Amino AcidsGlutamineBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsAmino AcidsAcidic Amino AcidsGlutamineBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyEndocrine SystemPancreasMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyEndocrine SystemPancreasBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyExocrine GlandsPancreasMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyExocrine GlandsPancreasResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentStainingImmunofluorescence StainingBiology and Life SciencesBioengineeringBiotechnologyGenetic EngineeringGenetically Modified OrganismsGenetically Modified AnimalsEngineering and TechnologyBioengineeringBiotechnologyGenetic EngineeringGenetically Modified OrganismsGenetically Modified AnimalsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsEndocrine CellsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyEndocrine SystemEndocrine CellsMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyEndocrine SystemEndocrine CellsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryHormonesResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentStainingImmunostainingBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryHormonesGlucagonBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryHormonesPeptide HormonesGlucagonLiver-specific glucagon dysfunction promotes PP-cell hyperplasia and formation of glucagon and PP double-positive cells
Regulation of PP-cell proliferation under glucagon dysfunctionNakagawaYukoConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing HoriiTakuroInvestigationResources FukunakaAyakoConceptualization SatoTakashiConceptualization ZhangZhehaoInvestigation KobayashiMasakiResources KitamuraTadahiroResources HayashiYoshitakaResources NishimuraTakashiInvestigation HatadaIzuhoResources https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0196-4736FujitaniYoshioConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Metabolism, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation (IMCR), Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan2
Laboratory of Genome Science, Biosignal Genome Resource Center, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan3
Metabolic Signal Research Center, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan4
Department of Endocrinology, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan5
Laboratory of Metabolic Regulation and Genetics, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi, JapanMohiuddinMohammad SarifEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## Introduction
Each organ in the body precisely regulates both the number and types of its cells, to ensure proper function. Similarly, the pancreatic islets, which are the endocrine component of the pancreas, maintain a delicate balance among four types of cells, namely, α cells, β cells, δ cells, and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) cells. These cells secrete glucagon (GCG), insulin (INS), somatostatin (SST), and PP, respectively, working synergistically to regulate nutrient homeostasis, including that of glucose [ , ]. Disruptions in the regulation of cell proliferation or identity within the islets are closely linked to the onset of various diseases. For example, β-cell dysfunction or loss is a characteristic feature of type 1 and type 2 diabetes, resulting in insufficient INS action [ , ]. Conversely, the excessive proliferation of endocrine cells can result in endocrine neoplasms, which may impair normal pancreatic function and cause severe clinical complications [ , ]. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying cell fate determination and proliferation is therefore essential for maintaining the normal regulation of pancreatic islet function.
α cells, which are a type of endocrine cell, regulate their proliferation by secreting GCG, which modulates amino acid catabolism in the liver [ ]. Consequently, mice lacking the proglucagon gene, which encodes GCG [ , ], or lacking the glucagon receptor [ – ] exhibit a common phenotype; i.e., enhanced α-cell proliferation and hyperplasia. Incidentally, the proglucagon gene encodes multiple proteins, including GCG, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and others. Although these proteins are derived from the same gene, they have distinct receptors. As a result, proglucagon gene-deficient mice lack all the encoded proteins, leading not only to GCG dysfunction but also to the dysfunction of GLP-1 and other proteins. Hyperplastic α cells caused by GCG dysfunction have been reported to develop into glucagonomas over time, and to metastasize to the liver [ – ]. The mechanism underlying α-cell hyperplasia in the context of GCG action deficiency is well characterized. Previous studies have shown that impaired GCG signaling in the liver induces α-cell hyperplasia [ , – ]. This phenomenon is triggered by increased blood amino acid levels, particularly glutamine, owing to reduced amino acid uptake and catabolism in the liver. Increased glutamine levels upregulate the glutamine transporter Slc38a5 in α cells, promoting enhanced glutamine uptake and subsequent activation of the mTOR pathway, which is a key driver of α-cell hyperplasia [ – ]. Notably, treatment of hyperplastic α cells with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin inhibits amino acid-dependent α-cell replication, and facilitates their transdifferentiation into β-like cells [ ]. This suggests that GCG deficiency may enhance the plasticity of islet cells, enabling them to differentiate into other cell types. In addition to α cells, an increase in cells expressing the Ppy gene, which encodes PP, has been reported in GCG activity-deficient mice [ , ]. However, it remains unclear whether the number of PP protein-expressing cells actually increases, and how this is associated with the increase in α cells.
We previously reported our analysis of Ppy-lineage cells by lineage tracing experiments using Ppy-Cre mice [ ]. We showed that approximately half of the α cells are derived from the Ppy lineage, suggesting that about half of the α cells express the Ppy gene. Furthermore, we utilized Ppy-DTA mice, in which the diphtheria toxin A fragment is specifically expressed in Ppy-expressing cells, leading to their ablation. Interestingly, in the islets of these mice, not only were PP cells completely depleted, but approximately 80% of the α cells were also lost. These findings indicate that, under normal conditions, a substantial proportion of α cells express the Ppy gene, even if they do not produce the PP protein. This suggests that α cells share certain properties with PP cells. It is possible that the absence of PP protein expression in many α cells is regulated by a mechanism that suppresses PP protein translation, thereby contributing to the maintenance of α-cell identity.
Endocrine cells generally follow the “one cell, one hormone” principle, but some cells are known to express multiple hormones. In particular, during the early stages of human fetal development (8–15 weeks of gestation), hormone double-positive cells, which co-express multiple hormones, are frequently observed [ ]. However, as fetal development progresses to later stages, the number of these cells decreases, suggesting that they represent an intermediate stage in endocrine cell differentiation. It is also suggested that immature cells may temporarily express multiple hormones during differentiation. Furthermore, in the mature pituitary glands of both fish and mammals, multi-hormonal cells, which produce and secrete multiple hormones simultaneously, have been identified. In fish, these cells are thought to function to enable the coordinated regulation of different hormones, which is necessary for adapting to changes in the aquatic environment [ ]. Additionally, in the pancreatic islets of mature mice, it has been reported that some PPY-expressing cells co-express the INS, GCG, or SST gene [ ]. These cells exhibit a mixed phenotypic profile, combining characteristics of β cells, α cells, and δ cells, and their gene expression profiles overlap with those of these endocrine cell types. Notably, under diabetic stress conditions, PP cells have been suggested to possess the plasticity to acquire insulin-producing capacity. However, the physiological significance of these multi-hormonal cells remains largely unknown.
In this study, we demonstrate that the hyperplasia of PP cells and GCG and PP double-positive cells (GCG+ PP+ cells) occurs in proglucagon-deficient mice. We aimed to identify the proteins encoded by the proglucagon gene that are responsible for inducing PP-cell hyperplasia and the increase in GCG+ PP+ cells, as well as to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.

## Materials and methods

## Animal care
The protocol for the animal experiments conducted in this study was formally approved by the Animal Care and Ethics Committee of Gunma University (approval number: D21-040). Mice were euthanized humanely by cervical dislocation following anesthesia with isoflurane (Fujifilm, Osaka, Japan), which was administered via a rodent anesthesia inhalation system (NARCOBIT-E, Natsume Seisakusho Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). All efforts were made to minimize suffering. Mice were housed in a specific-pathogen-free barrier facility, maintained under a 12-hour light/dark cycle, and provided with unrestricted access to standard rodent chow (Oriental Yeast, Tokyo, Japan) and water.

## Mice
B6D2F1 mice were purchased from CLEA Japan (Kawasaki, Japan), ICR mice were obtained from Charles River Japan (Yokohama, Japan), and C57BL/6JmsSlc mice were obtained from Japan SLC, Inc. (Shizuoka, Japan). Male mice were used for all the experiments.

## Generation of glucagon receptor gene (Gcgr)-floxed mice
Gcgr-floxed mice were generated by the sequential electroporation method that we reported previously [ ]. Sequences of target crRNAs flanking exons 4–13 of the Gcgr gene, and corresponding donor single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides including loxP are shown in . Fertilized eggs were isolated from superovulated B6D2F1 female mice, 21 h post administration of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). The first electroporation to insert the 5′ loxP into intron 3 was conducted at the 1-cell stage (24–26 h post hCG); and the second electroporation to insert the 3′ loxP into intron 13 was conducted at the 2-cell stage (42–44 h post hCG). The sequentially electroporated embryos were then transferred to the oviducts of pseudopregnant ICR females. The floxed alleles of the obtained mice were confirmed by sequencing analysis. For PCR-based confirmation, the primers used for each Flox insertion site were as follows: for the left Flox insertion site, the forward primer was 5′-CTTGAAGGAGAGGTGCCTTG-3′, and the reverse primer was 5′-GGCCAGCAGGAGTACTTGTC-3′, and a 268-bp band is detected. For the right Flox insertion site, the forward primer was 5′-TCTTTCTCCAGGGTCTGCTG-3′, and the reverse primer was 5′-CAAGTTTCACCTTGGGTTCA-3′, and a 250-bp band is detected.
 

## Generation of systemic Gcgr-knockout mice and liver-specific Gcgr-deficient mice
The cytomegalovirus early enhancer and chicken β-actin (CAG) promoter-Cre transgenic mice (CAG-Cre) [ , ] were crossed with Gcgr-floxed mice. To confirm the deletion of exon 4 to exon 13 in the Gcgr gene by Cre recombinase, PCR was conducted using the primers 5′-CTTGAAGGAGAGGTGCCTTG-3′ and 5′-CAAGTTTCACCTTGGGTTCA-3′. If the deletion is present, a 155-bp PCR product was detected. Liver-specific Gcgr-knockout mice were generated by crossing Gcgr-floxed mice with albumin-Cre mice [ ].

## Immunohistochemistry
After anesthesia with isoflurane (Fujifilm, Osaka, Japan), mice were perfused with normal saline through the heart to remove blood cells from the blood vessels. Subsequently, they were perfusion-fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), and their pancreata were harvested. The harvested pancreata were fixed in 4% PFA at 4°C overnight. Subsequently, the pancreata were transferred to 70% ethanol. The pancreas samples were embedded in paraffin, and the paraffin pancreas blocks were sectioned at a thickness of 5 μm, and subjected to immunostaining. Immunofluorescence staining was conducted following previously described methods [ ]. The primary antibodies used were guinea pig anti-INS (Ready-to-use, IR002, Dako-Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), rabbit anti-GCG (1:1,000, ab92517, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), rabbit anti-Ki67 (1:200, ab16667, Abcam), rabbit anti-somatostatin (1:1,000, T-4103, Peninsula Laboratories, San Mateo, CA, USA), rabbit anti-phosphorylated S6 ribosomal protein (pS6) (1:200, 4858, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), mouse anti-PP (1:1,000, 23-2D3, IBL, Gunma, Japan) [ ], and chicken anti-GFP (1:1,000, ab13970, Abcam). Tissue sections were incubated with the primary antibody, followed by a secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 488, ab150077, Abcam; A11001 and A11039, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA; Alexa Fluor 594, A11012 and A11005, Abcam; Alexa Fluor 647, A31573 and A31571, Abcam, all used at 1:1,000) together with the nuclear dye 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Dojindo Molecular Technologies, Kumamoto, Japan). The sections were then visualized using an FV1000 confocal laser-scanning microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).

## Quantification of α-cell and PP-cell mass
The quantification of α-cell mass and PP-cell mass was performed as previously described [ , ]. After anesthesia with isoflurane, mice were perfused through the heart with normal saline followed by 4% PFA, as described in the “Immunohistochemistry” section. Pancreata were then harvested, and nonpancreatic tissues were removed. The pancreata were post-fixed in 4% PFA at 4°C overnight. To obtain longitudinal sections from the tail to the head of the pancreas, the pancreas was embedded in paraffin, and paraffin blocks were prepared. From the entire pancreas, 6 sections per mouse were collected at 200-µm intervals, and immunostained with an anti-GCG or anti-PP antibody. The immunostained samples were analyzed using a BX-9000 microscope and the BZII analysis application software (Keyence Corporation, Osaka, Japan). The relative cross-sectional areas of α cells or PP cells were determined by dividing the cross-sectional area occupied by α cells or PP cells by the total cross-sectional area of the tissue. The total α-cell mass or PP-cell mass in the pancreas was calculated by multiplying the relative cross-sectional area of each cell type by the weight of the pancreas. Pancreata from four animals in each group were analyzed to determine the α-cell or PP-cell mass.

## Islet culture
Following previously reported methods, islets were isolated from 10-week-old mice [ ]. The islets were collected using a micropipette under a dissection microscope, and cultured overnight in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 medium (11875093, Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Subsequently, 100 islets were placed on a 24-well plate coated with Matrigel (Corning Incorporated, Corning, NY, USA), and cultured for 4 days. Islets in the control group were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium without L-glutamine (32404, Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 500 µM L-glutamine. Islets in the glutamine group were cultured in the same medium supplemented with 3,250 µM L-glutamine. After the culture period, the islets were fixed with 4% PFA, followed by treatment with 15% and 30% sucrose solutions. Finally, frozen tissue blocks were prepared using Optimal Cutting Temperature compound, followed by cryosectioning [ ]. Details of the immunostaining procedure and antibodies used are provided in the “Immunohistochemistry” section above. The sections were subsequently visualized using an FV1000 confocal laser scanning microscope (Olympus).

## Mouse plasma collection
Prior to blood collection, the mice were weighed, and blood glucose levels were measured using the Glutest Neo Alpha blood glucose meter (Sanwa Kagaku Kenkyusho Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan). Blood was collected by cutting the tails of the mice, and using a microhematocrit heparinized capillary tube (22–362566, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The collected blood was then transferred to a 1.5-mL tube. Subsequently, the collected blood was centrifuged at 6,200 rpm for more than 5 minutes, and the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5-mL tube, and frozen using liquid nitrogen.

## Metabolomics analysis
Widely targeted metabolomics analysis was performed as previously described [ , ]. Briefly, frozen plasma samples (the sample preparation method is described above in the “Mouse plasma collection” section) in 1.5-mL plastic tubes were homogenized in 300 µL of cold methanol using φ3-mm zirconia beads and a freeze crusher (TAITEC Corp., Saitama, Japan) at 41.6 Hz for 2 min. The homogenates were mixed with 200 µL of methanol, 200 µL of H2O, and 200 µL of CHCl3, and vortexed for 20 min at room temperature. The samples were then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm (20,000 g) for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was mixed with 350 µL of H2O, vortexed for 10 min at room temperature, and centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. The aqueous phase was collected and dried down using a vacuum concentrator. The samples were redissolved in 2 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) containing 5% methanol, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.
Chromatographic separations in an Acquity UPLC H-Class System (Waters, Milord, MA, USA) were carried out under reverse-phase conditions using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 1.8-µm particles, Waters) and under HILIC conditions using an ACQUITY UPLC BEH amide column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 1.7-µm particles, Waters). Ionized compounds were detected using a Xevo TQD triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled with an electrospray ionization source (Waters). The peak area of a target metabolite was analyzed using MassLynx 4.1 software (Waters).

## Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism version 9.1.1 software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Results are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Differences between two groups were assessed using a two-tailed unpaired Student t-test, and comparisons among three or more groups were performed using one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey test. A p-value of less than 0.05 was regarded as indicating a statistically significant difference between groups.

## Results

## Induced hyperplasia of PP cells and formation of multi-hormonal cells in proglucagon gene-deficient mice
Proglucagon gene-deficient mice (Gcggfp/gfp) lack the production of all hormones encoded by the proglucagon gene, including GCG and GLP-1, owing to the knock-in of the gfp gene into the proglucagon gene locus [ ]. Gcggfp/gfp mice are known to demonstrate α-cell hyperplasia similar to other mice with GCG signaling deficiencies [ ]. In Gcggfp/gfp mice, GFP is expressed in cells that would normally produce GCG. Furthermore, it has been reported that the expression level of Ppy mRNA is significantly elevated in the pancreatic islets of these mice [ , ]. Based on this, we performed fluorescence immunostaining using the PP antibody that we developed [ ] to investigate PP protein dynamics. Fluorescence immunostaining was performed on pancreatic islet sections from 40-week-old Gcggfp/gfp mice. In these islets, in addition to α-cell hyperplasia, PP-cell hyperplasia was observed ( ). Furthermore, many GFP+ PP+ cells were detected. Since the expression level of SST mRNA was also elevated [ ], although not as prominently as Ppy mRNA, we conducted triple staining using antibodies for PP, GFP, and SST. In the pancreatic islets of Gcggfp/gfp mice, PP+ GFP+ SST+ cells were identified ( and ). In contrast, no PP+ GCG+ SST+ cells were observed in the pancreatic islets of Gcg+/+ mice when triple staining was performed using antibodies for PP, GCG, and SST. These findings suggest that the absence of proteins encoded by the proglucagon gene induces PP-cell hyperplasia and the formation of multi-hormonal cells. As the proglucagon gene encodes multiple hormones, including GCG, it was unclear as to exactly which hormone deficiency caused the induction of PP-cell hyperplasia and the production of multi-hormonal cells.
 

## Increased PP cells in Gcgr-deficient mice
To test whether GCG, one of the proteins encoded by the proglucagon gene, is involved in the above effects, CAG-Cre mice were crossed with Gcgr-floxed mice to produce Gcgr knockout (GcgrΔ/Δ) mice ( ). We next investigated whether PP-cell hyperplasia and the production of GCG+ PP+ cells occur in GcgrΔ/Δ mice at 10 weeks of age. Compared with Gcgr+/+ control mice, GcgrΔ/Δ mice demonstrated substantial PP-cell hyperplasia, and the presence of GCG+ PP+ cells ( ). Quantitative analysis demonstrated a significant increase in both PP-cell mass and the ratio of GCG+ PP+ cells relative to GCG+ cells in GcgrΔ/Δ mice compared with Gcgr+/+ mice ( and ). Furthermore, PP+ GCG+ SST+ cells were also detected in GcgrΔ/Δ mice at this stage, consistent with the findings shown in ( ). Collectively, these findings indicate that GCG signaling deficiency induces PP-cell hyperplasia and induces the formation of multi-hormonal cells, including GCG+ PP+ cells.
 

## Induction of PP-cell replication and an increase in GCG+ PP+ cells owing to GCG dysfunction
In 10-week-old GcgrΔ/Δ mice, an increase in PP-cell mass and an increase in GCG+ PP+ cells were observed. To assess how these changes progress at earlier stages, we examined GcgrΔ/Δ mice at 4 weeks of age. The PP cell mass in 4-week-old GcgrΔ/Δ mice was significantly higher than that in Gcgr+/+ mice ( and ). However, unlike the comparison at 10 weeks of age ( , right panel), the number of GCG+ PP+ cells in 4-week-old GcgrΔ/Δ mice was not markedly increased compared with the control Gcgr+/+ mice ( , lower right panel). Therefore, we quantitatively compared the number of GCG+ PP+ cells in GcgrΔ/Δ mice between 4 and 10 weeks of age. The data showed that at 4 weeks of age, the number of GCG+ PP+ cells was comparable to that in the control group. In contrast, at 10 weeks of age, the number of GCG+ PP+ cells was significantly higher in GcgrΔ/Δ mice than in the control group ( and ). Additionally, the number of GCG+ PP+ cells in 4-week-old GcgrΔ/Δ mice was significantly lower than that in 10-week-old GcgrΔ/Δ mice. However, since an increase in PP cell mass was observed at 4 weeks of age, the increase in PP cell mass was considered to be owning to factors other than an increase in double-positive cells. To investigate this possibility, we analyzed PP-cell proliferation. Costaining analysis was performed using antibodies against the proliferation marker Ki67, PP, and GCG to investigate whether PP-cell proliferation was induced. The results showed that the number of Ki67+ PP+ GCG− cells was significantly higher in GcgrΔ/Δ mice than in Gcgr+/+ mice ( and ). These findings suggest that PP-cell proliferation is enhanced in GcgrΔ/Δ mice. Furthermore, considering the temporal changes in PP-cell mass and the increase in GCG+ PP+ cells, it is likely that at 4 weeks of age, the increase in PP-cell mass is primarily owning to the enhanced replication of PP cells caused by GCG dysfunction, and that the increase in GCG+ PP+ cells subsequently becomes apparent at 10 weeks of age.
 

## Induction of PP-cell hyperplasia and an increase in GCG+ PP+ cells is caused by GCG dysfunction in the liver
Next, the tissue responsible for the hyperplasia of PP cells and the increase in GCG+ PP+ cells resulting from GCG dysfunction was investigated. Albumin-Cre;Gcgrf/f (Alb-Cre;Gcgrf/f) mice, lacking GCG signaling specifically in the liver, which is the primary site of GCG action, were generated. As previously reported [ ], 10-week-old Alb-Cre;Gcgrf/f mice demonstrated increased α-cell mass (S3 Fig). In addition, an increase in PP-cell mass and the presence of GCG+ PP+ cells were observed ( – ). Further investigation of 40-week-old Alb-Cre;Gcgrf/f mice demonstrated a more pronounced increase in PP-cell mass ( ), as well as the presence of both GCG+ PP+ cells ( ). Previous studies have reported that mice with liver-specific GCG dysfunction exhibit α-cell hyperplasia. However, regarding β cells, while pancreatic enlargement leads to an increase in total β-cell mass, β-cell mass per gram of pancreas and INS secretion levels remain unchanged compared with control mice [ ]. In this study, PP and INS double staining was performed using Alb-Cre;Gcgrf/f mice, revealing the presence of PP+ INS+ cells, which were not observed in control mice ( ). These results suggest that hepatic GCG dysfunction drives PP-cell hyperplasia and the emergence of GCG+ PP+ and INS+ PP+ cells.
 

## Induction of increased PP cell numbers and GCG+ PP+ cells owing to hyperaminoacidemia
Since impaired GCG action in the liver has been reported to elevate blood amino acid levels [ , , ], we examined whether amino acid levels were altered in the GcgrΔ/Δ and Alb-Cre;Gcgrf/f mice used in this study by measuring plasma amino acid concentrations. As expected, plasma amino acid levels, including glutamine, were significantly increased in 10-week-old GcgrΔ/Δ and Alb-Cre;Gcgrf/f mice compared with control mice ( and ). Next, we investigated whether the addition of large amounts of glutamine would increase the number of PP cells in the pancreatic islets and promote the formation of GCG+ PP+ cells ( ). When pancreatic islets were cultured with a high concentration of glutamine, the proportions of GCG+ and PP+ cells in the islets were significantly increased ( and ). Moreover, the ratio of GCG+ PP+ cells among GCG+ cells also increased ( ). To determine whether the increase in GCG ⁺ PP⁺ cells was mediated by the mTOR pathway, pancreatic islets were treated with the mTOR kinase inhibitor rapamycin. The glutamine-induced increase in GCG ⁺ PP⁺ cells was significantly suppressed by rapamycin treatment ( and ). We then investigated whether pS6, a downstream target of mTOR signaling, could be detected in GCG ⁺ PP⁺ cells under glutamine-rich conditions. As shown in , pS6 signals were clearly observed in these cells. These findings indicate that elevated glutamine levels promote the expansion of GCG⁺ cells, PP⁺ cells, and GCG ⁺ PP⁺ cells in pancreatic islets through activation of the mTOR signaling pathway. Finally, we investigated whether mTOR was activated in GCG+ PP+ cells using tissues from GcgrΔ/Δ mice. Consistent with the results from isolated islets, GCG+ PP+ pS6+ cells were observed in these mice, supporting the role of mTOR activation in the formation of GCG+ PP+ cells ( ).
 

## Discussion
In this study, we analyzed liver-specific Gcgr-deficient mice, to gain additional insights into the effect of GCG deficiency, beyond the previously reported hyperplasia of α cells [ – ]. We found that impaired GCG signaling in the liver also leads to the hyperplasia of PP cells, and the emergence of GCG+ PP+ cells ( ). Additionally, we observed a significant increase in plasma amino acid levels in these mice compared with the control groups ( ). Furthermore, by culturing islets isolated from wild-type mice with high concentrations of glutamine, one of the increased amino acids, we found that the increase in PP cells and GCG+ PP+ cells is facilitated by activation of the mTOR signaling pathway ( ).
Previous studies have reported that expression of the Ppy gene is upregulated in proglucagon-deficient and Gcgr-deficient mice [ , ], however, whether PP protein expression is indeed increased in these mice remained unclear. In this study, as shown in , we observed a significant increase in PP protein expression owing to GCG signaling insufficiency, accompanied by a marked increase in PP-cell mass ( ). Smith et al. reported similar findings in their single-cell RNA sequencing study of islets from systemic Gcgr-deficient mice, in which they found a significant increase in PP-cell clusters in addition toα-cell clusters [ ]. These results support the findings of our present study. Regarding the mechanism underlying the increase in PP cells, as illustrated in and , systemic Gcgr-deficient mice demonstrated a higher proportion of Ki67-positive cells among PP+ cells that were not stained with GCG antibodies, compared with control wild-type mice. The number of PP cells was also higher in the Gcgr-deficient mice than in controls. These findings suggest that GCG signaling insufficiency promotes an increase in PP-cell mass through PP-cell proliferation. The mechanism underlying this PP-cell proliferation remains unclear, and represents a future research question. However, as shown in , in 4-week-old GcgrΔ/Δ mice, pS6 signals were not detected in PP single-positive cells. This suggests that a different pathway, which is distinct from the mechanism by which GCG+ PP+ cells activate the mTOR signaling pathway to promote proliferation, may be involved. Previous studies have reported that other pancreatic endocrine cells, such as α and δ cells, also demonstrate enhanced proliferation under GCG signaling deficiency, although the mechanisms differ. Previous studies have shown that α cells increase in number through proliferation [ ], whereas δ cells expand through both proliferation and duct-derived neogenesis [ ]. In this study, we proposed that the increase in PP-cell numbers is driven by both proliferation and an increase in multi-hormone-producing cells. When comparing systemic Gcgr-deficient mice at 4 weeks of age ( ) with those at 10 weeks of age ( ), we observed a significant increase in PP-cell mass at 10 weeks of age. Corresponding to this substantial change, the number of GCG+ PP+ cells in 4-week-old Gcgr-deficient mice was comparable to that in wild-type mice ( ). However, in 10-week-old Gcgr-deficient mice, the number of GCG+ PP+ cells robustly increased compared with that in both wild-type mice and 4-week-old Gcgr-deficient mice ( ). We propose that this increase in GCG+ PP+ cells accounts for the substantial increase in PP-cell mass observed in 10-week-old Gcgr-deficient mice.
Owing to GCG dysfunction in the liver, the hyperplasia of PP cells and the emergence of multi-hormone-producing cells were observed ( ), associated with an increase in blood amino acid levels. Similar to α-cell hyperplasia, the increased amino acids levels may have triggered these phenomena [ , , ]. Supporting this hypothesis, culturing isolated islets in a high-glutamine medium resulted in an increased number of PP cells ( ) and an increase in GCG+ PP+ cells ( ). Furthermore, we compared PP-cell mass in 10-week-old systemic Gcgr-deficient mice ( ) and liver-specific Gcgr-deficient mice ( ). Despite being the same age, there was a significant difference in the PP-cell mass between the two groups. A potential explanation for this difference is the variation in plasma amino acid levels between the two groups. As shown in , plasma amino acid levels in systemic Gcgr-deficient mice were higher than those in liver-specific Gcgr-deficient mice. Particularly in terms of glutamine levels, systemic Gcgr-deficient mice demonstrated significantly higher values ( ). We believe that this difference in amino acid levels accounts for the variation in PP-cell mass of these mice at the same age.
Our results demonstrate that increased blood amino acid levels resulting from impaired GCG action in the liver activates the mTOR pathway in α cells, leading to the emergence of GCG+ PP+ cells. Previous studies have shown that forced expression of Aristaless-related homeobox (ARX) protein, a key transcription factor that determines the fate of α cells [ – ], in the embryonic pancreas or developing islet cells leads to a marked increase in α cells, accompanied by the loss of β and δ cells. Interestingly, under these conditions, the number of PP cells also increases substantially [ ]. Humans with ARX mutations have normal numbers of β, δ, and ghrelin-secreting ε cells, whereas they are deficient in α and PP cells [ ]. During development, α and PP cells differentiate from a common α/PP precursor [ , , ]. This suggests that their differentiation may also depend on transcription factors other than ARX. However, the mechanisms that distinguish these two cell types and maintain their respective identities remain unclear. Since some transcription factors, such as ARX, are commonly active in both cell types, it is believed that under normal conditions, PP-protein expression is suppressed in α cells to preserve their identity. Collectively, our findings suggest that suppression of the mTOR pathway in α cells inhibits the expression of factors, including PP proteins, that drive PP-cell characteristics. Future studies should focus on elucidating how the mTOR pathway regulates these factors in α cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that GCG dysfunction leads to the emergence of multi-hormone-producing cells, including PP+ INS+ cells ( ) and PP+ GFP+ SST+ cells ( and ). However, the precise mechanistic link between GCG dysfunction and the appearance of these cells remains unclear. Interestingly, a subset of pituitary cells is known to produce multiple hormones and function under specific physiological conditions, such as growth, the stress response, and reproduction. Gene expression analysis further suggests that these multi-hormone cells originate from undifferentiated or plastic cells [ ]. Given these findings, one hypothesis is that the increase in blood amino acid levels due to impaired GCG action in the liver activates the mTOR pathway in α cells, leading to enhanced cell proliferation and increased cellular plasticity. Consequently, α cells may shift to a more undifferentiated state, resulting in an increased emergence of multi-hormone-producing cells, including GCG+ PP+ cells. Future studies are needed to elucidate how these multi-hormone-producing cells influence the progression and regulation of pathological conditions caused by GCG dysfunction.
One of the limitations of this study is the inability to determine the origin of GCG ⁺ PP⁺ cells. Although the Cre-loxP system employed here is widely used for lineage tracing, it has inherent limitations in labeling specificity. Off-target recombination can occur, which complicates the precise identification of cell origin. Consequently, we were unable to definitively trace the developmental lineage of GCG ⁺ PP⁺ cells using this approach. Another limitation is our inability to characterize the cellular properties of GCG ⁺ PP⁺ and PP ⁺ INS⁺ cells. To date, no specific surface markers have been identified that can reliably distinguish these double-positive cell populations. As a result, isolating them by cell sorting remains unfeasible. In future studies, identifying surface markers unique to each population will be essential for isolating these cells and comprehensively analyzing their functional characteristics. Such advances will be crucial for understanding the physiological relevance of these distinct endocrine cell populations.
In conclusion, impaired GCG signaling activates the mTOR pathway via hyperaminoacidemia, particularly elevated glutamine levels, inducing not only α-cell hyperplasia but also PP-cell hyperplasia and the formation of multi-hormone-producing cells ( ). Inhibition of mTOR suppresses these changes. This study reveals a novel mechanism by which GCG dysfunction alters pancreatic endocrine cell composition, highlighting the crucial role of mTOR in endocrine cell plasticity.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Proportion of GCG + SST+ PP+ cells among GCG⁺ cells in 40-week-old Gcg+/+ mice and Gcggfp/gfp mice.
Data are shown as the mean ± SEM, and analyzed by the two-tailed unpaired Student t-test. *p < 0.05; n = 4 each.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## Triple immunostaining using anti-GCG, anti-PP, and anti-SST antibodies in pancreatic islets of 10-week-old Gcgr+/+ mice and GcgrΔ/Δ mice.
(A) Representative immunofluorescence staining of GCG (green), SST (red), PP (white), and nuclei (DAPI; blue) in pancreatic sections from 10-week-old Gcgr+/+ mice and GcgrΔ/Δ mice. Magnified images of the boxed region are shown at the bottom. Scale bar represents 30 μm. (B) Quantification of the proportion of GCG ⁺ SST ⁺ PP ⁺ cells among the GCG⁺ cells in 10-week-old Gcgr+/+ mice and GcgrΔ/Δ mice (n = 4 each). Data are shown as the mean ± SEM, and analyzed by the two-tailed unpaired Student t-test. ***p < 0.001.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## α-cell mass in 10-week-old Gcgrf/f mice and Alb-Cre:Gcgrf/f mice.
Data are shown as the mean ± SEM, and analyzed by the two-tailed unpaired Student t-test. *p < 0.05; n = 4 each
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## PP-cell mass in 40-week-old Gcgrf/f mice and Alb-Cre:Gcgrf/f mice.
Data are shown as the mean ± SEM, and analyzed by the two-tailed unpaired Student t-test. *p < 0.05; n = 6 each.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## Plasma levels of individual amino acids in 10-week-old Gcgrf/f, Alb-Cre:Gcgrf/f, Gcgr+/+, and GcgrΔ/Δ mice.
The relative amounts shown on the Y-axis represent normalized values, where the mean Gcgrf/f level for each amino acid is set to 1. Therefore, it is not appropriate to directly compare these values between different amino acids. Data are shown as the mean ± SEM (n = 4–7 mice each).
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## Plasma glutamine levels in 10-week-old Gcgrf/f, Alb-Cre:Gcgrf/f, Gcgr+/+, and GcgrΔ/Δ mice.
The relative amounts shown on the Y-axis represent normalized values, where the mean Gcgrf/f level is set to 1. Data are shown as the mean ± SEM, and analyzed by one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey test. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001; ns, not significant.
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## Triple immunostaining of pancreatic islets from 10-week-old wild-type mice using anti-GCG, anti-PP, and anti-pS6 antibodies.
Representative immunofluorescence images of pancreatic islets isolated from 10-week-old wild-type mice stained for GCG (green), PP (red), and pS6 (white). Upper panels show untreated controls (Ctrl), and lower panels show islets incubated with high concentrations of glutamine (Gln). Scale bar: 30 μm. Enlarged views of the boxed regions are shown at the bottom.
(TIF)
S8 Fig

## Activation of the mTOR pathway in GCG ⁺ PP⁺ cells from 40-week-old Gcgr+/+ mice and GcgrΔ/Δ mice.
Representative immunofluorescence staining of GCG (green), pS6 (red), and PP (white) from 40-week-old Gcgr+/+ mice and GcgrΔ/Δ mice. Scale bar represents 30 μm. Enlarged images of the boxed region are shown on the very right.
(TIF)
S9 Fig

## Comparison of pS6 signal per PP single-positive cell in 4-week-old Gcgr+/+ mice and GcgrΔ/Δ mice.
(A) Representative immunofluorescence staining of GCG (green), pS6 (red), and PP (white) from 4-week-old Gcgr+/+ mice and GcgrΔ/Δ mice. Scale bar represents 30 μm. Enlarged images of the boxed region are shown on the very right. (B) Ratio of pS6+ GCG− PP+ cells per total PP+ cells in 4 week-old Gcgr+/+ mice and GcgrΔ/Δ mice (n = 25 islets). Data are shown as the mean ± SEM, and analyzed by the two-tailed unpaired Student t-test. ns, not significant.
(TIF)
S10 Fig

## Graphical abstract of the study.
Impaired glucagon action in the liver leads to increased circulating amino acid levels, which in turn activate the mTOR signaling pathway in pancreatic α cells, promoting α-cell hyperplasia and an increase in GCG ⁺ PP⁺ cells. Simultaneously, this condition also induces the hyperplasia of pancreatic PP cells.
(TIF)

We extend our heartfelt gratitude to W. Mizutani, Y. Tamura, A. Suda, N. Kagami, K. Iizuka, A. Fukaishi, Y. Miyazaki, H. Netsu, and T. Ishizaka of the Fujitani Laboratory (Gunma University, Gunma, Japan) for their invaluable technical assistance. We are also deeply grateful to Dr. H.A. Popiel (Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan) for critically reviewing the manuscript. Our sincere thanks go to the members of Dr. Y. Kitamura’s laboratory and Dr. J. Shirakawa’s laboratory (both from IMCR, Gunma University) for their insightful discussions. We also thank Dr. A. Oue, Dr. T. Kakinuma, and other members of the Bioresource Center at Gunma University for their generous support of general research on mice, and the Biosignal Genome Resource Center at Gunma University for the generation of Gcgr-floxed mice.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0329094.r001Decision Letter 0
MohiuddinMohammad SarifAcademic Editor© 2025 Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddin2025Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddinhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
1 Apr 2025

PONE-D-25-12994Glucagon dysfunction in the liver induces hyperplasia of PP cells and the production of glucagon and pancreatic polypeptide double-positive cellsPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Fujitani,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has great opportunity to publish in our Journal. However, we recommend some minor corrections to fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 16 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddin, MD, PhD 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure:
“This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (18K08501 and 21K08547 to YN) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan.”
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed.
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
“This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (18K08501 and 21K08547 to YN) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan. We extend our heartfelt gratitude to W. Mizutani, Y. Tamura, A. Suda, N. Kagami, K. Iizuka, A. Fukaishi, Y. Miyazaki, H. Netsu, and T. Ishizaka of the Fujitani Laboratory (Gunma University, Gunma, Japan) for their invaluable technical assistance. We are also deeply grateful to Dr. H.A. Popiel (Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan) for critically reviewing the manuscript. Our sincere thanks go to the members of Dr. Y. Kitamura’s laboratory and Dr. J. Shirakawa’s laboratory (both from IMCR, Gunma University) for their insightful discussions. We also thank Dr. A. Oue, Dr. T. Kakinuma, and other members of the Bioresource Center at Gunma University for their generous support of general research on mice.”
We note that you have provided funding information that is currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
“This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (18K08501 and 21K08547 to YN) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan.”
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This manuscript provides an excellent investigation into the physiological link between glucagon signaling and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) cell hyperplasia using two or more different mouse models with glucagon signaling deficiency. However, there are a few minor issues in the structure and presentation of the manuscript that need attention. I would recommend revising these to improve the clarity and flow of the paper. Additionally, it might be beneficial to add a few more data or analyses to further support the conclusions, particularly in regard to the molecular mechanisms underlying the observed phenotypes.
In the Methods section, under "Immunohistochemistry," the fixation method through perfusion is described. However, there is an inconsistency between this description and the handling of tissues in the "Quantification of α- and PP-cell mass" section. Please revise the manuscript to ensure consistency between these two sections.
In the "Islet culture" section, there is insufficient information about how islets were collected. A brief additional explanation would be helpful. Also, at the end of this section, the embedding with OCT compound is mentioned, but there is no further description about immunostaining. Please either add this explanation to this section or include it in the "Immunohistochemistry" section.
In the "Metabolomic analysis" methods, there is no explanation about which tissues' "frozen samples" were used, and the Results section does not mention the results obtained using this method. This should be clarified and included.
In Figure 2B, the ratio of Gcg/PP double-positive cells is quantified. It would be helpful to perform the same quantification in Figure 1B for consistency. Additionally, in Figure 1B, SST staining is shown; please include SST staining in Figure 2B as well and provide the ratios of single, double, and triple-positive cells for each marker.
In the lines after 305, the term "self-proliferation" is used multiple times, but since it has not been evaluated whether the proliferation is truly "self" or not, it would be more appropriate to simply use the term "proliferation."
In Figures 3D and 3F, the ratios are used for quantification. However, as with Figure 3B, showing mass or the ratio relative to the total islet cells would help enhance the reader's understanding.
In Figure 5F, including the Ctrl+Rap group would make the comparison with the control group clearer.
Reviewer #2: 1)The authors identify GCG+ PP+ and PP+ INS+ cells but do not assess whether these cells are functional. Do they secrete both hormones?
Authors can try hormone secretion assays like ELISA for Glucagon or PP after sorting the cells.
2)The origin of double-positive cells remains unclear. Are α cells adopting PP identity, or are they a distinct lineage?
3)While mTOR activation is implicated, the downstream effectors remain undefined. Authors should check at least mRNA expression of mTOR pathway targeted genes.
4)There is no information about the sex of the mice. Did the study design with both mice? If both types of mice are used for the study, then author should observe whether the phenotypes are sex dependent or not?
5)Provide a graphical model summarizing the proposed mechanism.
6)Although the current title is technically accurate, it is somewhat complex and may be difficult for readers to grasp easily. I recommend simplifying the title to enhance clarity and accessibility, particularly for a broad, interdisciplinary readership. Consider rephrasing to more directly convey the central findings, such as: “Liver-specific glucagon dysfunction promotes PP-cell hyperplasia and formation of glucagon+ PP+ endocrine cells.”
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Rashu Barua
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0329094.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
17 Jun 2025

Written in the response letter
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers Fujitani 4.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0329094.r003Decision Letter 1
MohiuddinMohammad SarifAcademic Editor© 2025 Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddin2025Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddinhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
11 Jul 2025

Liver-specific glucagon dysfunction promotes PP-cell hyperplasia and formation of glucagon and PP double-positive cells
PONE-D-25-12994R1
Dear Dr. Fujitani,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddin, MD, PhD 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0329094.r004Acceptance letter
MohiuddinMohammad SarifAcademic Editor© 2025 Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddin2025Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddinhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-12994R1
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Fujitani,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Mohammad Sarif Mohiuddin
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE