pmcACS Appl Mater InterfacesACS Appl Mater Interfaces822acssd101504991amACS Applied Materials & Interfaces1944-82441944-8252pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11874001PMC11874001.111874001118740013993888010.1021/acsami.4c216571Research ArticleNebulization of RNA-Loaded
Micelle-Embedded Polyplexes
as a Potential Treatment of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis
MüllerJoschka
T. KromerAdrian P. E. EzaddoustdarAysan AlexopoulosIoannis https://orcid.org/0009-0002-3396-9654SteineggerKatharina M. Porras-GonzalezDiana Leidy BerninghausenOtto BeckmannRoland BraubachPeter BurgstallerGerald WygreckaMalgorzata https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4151-3916MerkelOlivia M. 1Department
of Pharmacy, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
Munich, Butenandtstrasse 5-13, Haus B, 81377 Munich, Germany2Center for
Infections and Genomics of the Lung (CIGL) Justus Liebig University
Giessen German Center for Lung Research, Aulweg 132, 35392 Gießen, Germany3Institute
of Lung Health (ILH), Justus Liebig University
Giessen, Aulweg 128, 35392 Gießen, Germany4Comprehensive
Pneumology Center with the CPC-M bioArchive and Institute of Lung
Health and Immunity, Helmholtz-Zentrum München, Member of the
German Center of Lung Research (DZL), Max-Lebsche-Platz 31, 81377 Munich, Germany5Department
of Biochemistry, Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
Munich, Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, 81377 Munich, Germany6Biomedical
Research in Endstage and Obstructive Lung Disease Hannover (BREATH)
Research Network, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hanover, Germany7Center for
NanoScience (CeNS), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
Munich, Schellingstraße 4, 80799 Munich, Germany8Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
Munich, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Butenandtstrasse 5-13, Haus B, 81377 Munich, Germany*Email: olivia.merkel@lmu.de.12022025260220251784832881186111872101220242701202524012025030320250403202506032025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2025The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
Biodegradable poly(β-amino) esters (PBAEs) have
been a focus
of interest for delivering therapeutic siRNA for several years. While
no approved therapies are on the market yet, our study aims to advance
PBAE-based treatments for currently “undruggable” diseases.
The PBAEs used in this study are based on a recently reported step-growth
copolymerization, which results in polymers with a unique balance
of lipophilicity and positive charge, thereby showcasing diverse properties.
Upon incubation with siRNA, these PBAEs form a unique structure and
topology, which we classify as a subtype of classical polyplex, termed
“micelle-embedded polyplexes” (mPolyplexes). The impact
of different nebulizers on the physicochemical performance of these
nanoparticles was investigated, and it was found that various mPolyplexes
can be nebulized using vibrating-mesh nebulizers without the loss
of gene silencing activity nor a change in physicochemical properties,
setting them apart from other nanoparticles such as marketed LNPs.
Finally, their therapeutic application was tested ex vivo in human precision-cut lung slices from patients with lung fibrosis.
mPolyplexes mediated 52% gene silencing of matrix metalloprotease
7 (MMP7) and a downstream effect on collagen I (Col I) with 33% downregulation
as determined via qPCR.

siRNAPBAEpolyplexmicelleplexmicelle-embedded polyplexvibrating-mesh nebulizeridiopathic pulmonary fibrosisH2020 European Research Council10.13039/100010663ERC-2022-COG-101088587Volkswagen Foundation10.13039/501100001663AZ-9A872pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9am4c21657document-id-new-14am4c21657ccc-price1

## Introduction
The lung offers numerous
advantages for local administration over
systemic administration, particularly when diseases originate in the
lungs. This noninvasive approach is generally more comfortable for
patients than parenteral administration. It is essential to distinguish
whether the treatment is intended for local or systemic effects; in
the former case, the drug should remain in the lungs for as long as
possible to maximize its effectiveness and minimize side effects.
Furthermore, this approach ensures direct delivery to the target tissue
and cells, while reduced protein concentration in the lungs minimizes
adsorption effects that can lead to unpredictable changes in cellular
uptake. The reduced overall protein concentration
typically correlates with a reduced nuclease concentration in the
lungs, enhancing RNA stability for pulmonary delivery. 
This study focuses on the treatment of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis
(IPF), a lung disease that would clearly benefit from a local therapeutic
approach. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) presents a promising method
for downregulating mRNA associated with the disease utilizing the
cell’s own machinery. While ONPATTRO, the first siRNA drug,
was approved in 2018, no siRNA-based therapies have so far been approved
for pulmonary application. However, numerous studies are currently
underway targeting extrahepatic application, reflecting a growing
interest in this research area. For the
encapsulation of negatively charged siRNA molecules using nonviral
carriers, a variety of materials and nanoparticles are available,
including lipid nanoparticles (LNPs), lipoplexes, polyplexes, micelleplexes,
lipid–polymer hybrid nanoparticles, gold nanoparticles, and
others. Our group specializes in biodegradable and biocompatible poly(β-amino)
esters (PBAEs), which irregularly alternate with spermine side chains
for RNA-encapsulating and oleylamine side chains for hydrophobicity
and fusogenicity. , 
To produce an inhalable
formulation from aqueous solutions, different
nebulization devices are available. Besides air-jet and ultrasonic
nebulizers, vibrating-mesh nebulizers (VMN) are the most recently
developed technology. VMNs nebulize aqueous suspensions via extrusion
through a thin vibrating perforated membrane driven by piezoelectric
crystals. Given that siRNA is an expensive and highly shear- and heat-sensitive
material, it is essential to nebulize this active pharmaceutical ingredient
(API) through the least stress-inducing nebulizer device. VMNs are
suitable for this purpose due to their low dead volume, heat resistance,
and low shear stress. Unsurprisingly, most current clinical trials
of siRNA inhalation utilize VMNs. 
Here, we will evaluate two VMNs, the Aerogen Pro and the PARI eFlow
Rapid, for their suitability in nebulizing PBAE-based drug delivery
systems. Kleemann et al. described that VMNs are preferable to air-jet
nebulizers for liposomal formulations due to lower shear stress. VMNs also exert less thermal load, as the energy
required for nebulization is introduced through the vibrating mesh
rather than directly into the solution. Other researchers also identified
VMNs as the best option for surface-active substances, as they maintained
constant drug output. However, the PARI
eFlow Rapid caused a temperature increase of over 10 °C, as shown
by Hertel et al., which is noticeably higher than the temperature
increase of 3.2 °C for the Aerogen Pro. Nevertheless, the same study demonstrated that active cooling prevented
any temperature rise for over 4 min for the PARI eFlow Rapid. Furthermore,
VMNs were shown to preserve the aerodynamic properties of reconstituted,
freeze-dried nanoparticle suspensions during nebulization. Unlike air-jet and ultrasonic nebulizers, which
left most resuspended nanoparticles in the reservoir, VMNs did not.
As a result, VMNs are recommended for “sensitive” formulations,
including nanoparticle suspensions. Patel et al. further demonstrated
that PBAE nanoparticles remain stable during nebulization with an
Aerogen VMN, as evidenced by both dynamic light scattering (DLS) and
electron microscopy (EM), resulting in uniform distribution across
all five lung lobes after nebulization in vivo.( )
IPF is clinically characterized by exertional
dyspnea, dry cough,
and often auscultatory findings, with a poor median survival of 3–5
years. , IPF pathogenesis is still poorly understood,
but the prevailing theory involves repeated microinjuries to a genetically
predisposed alveolar epithelium, followed by activation of fibroblasts,
their transdifferentiation into collagen-producing myofibroblasts,
and finally excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition in the
lungs. This process impairs gas exchange
and lung function. The accumulation of the ECM and Col I, a key component
of a fibrotic ECM, creates a diffusive barrier that complicates treatment,
a hallmark of all interstitial lung diseases. Interestingly, Jacquemart
et al. demonstrated that hydrophobic materials exhibit stronger adsorption
to Col I than more hydrophilic ones, a factor that could influence
the effectiveness and penetration of PBAE formulations through collagen
deposits in treating IPF. , 
With IPF’s
unclear etiology, recent research has focused
on identifying both genetic factors involved in the disease development
and biomarkers with predictive, diagnostic, or prognostic value. The only approved drugs for IPF, pirfenidone
and nintedanib, have limited efficacy in reducing mortality, merely
slowing disease progression through pleiotropic effects such as reducing
inflammation and inhibiting fibroblast proliferation and ECM production. Consequently, IPF is currently considered an
“undruggable” disease, making it a prime candidate for
siRNA-based interventions, which are commonly more target-specific
than small-molecule drugs.
MMP7, a zinc-dependent endopeptidase,
has been consistently identified
as one of the most upregulated genes in the lungs of patients with
various forms of progressive pulmonary fibrosis, including IPF. Primarily expressed in lung epithelial cells,
MMP7 (also known as matrilysin) contributes to IPF progression via
the WNT/β-catenin pathways. Following the dephosphorylation
of β-catenin, transcription factors are activated, resulting in the transactivation of MMP7 and
triggering downstream disease-promoting effects: MMP7 facilitates
epithelial-to-mesenchymal cell transdifferentiation and increases
profibrotic mediators through regulation of PKA and ERK1/2 signaling,
ultimately leading to an overexpression of collagen I. , Elevated MMP7 levels have been found in lung tissues, the bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (BALF), and peripheral blood of IPF patients, with higher
blood levels predicting increased mortality risk. Notably, in vivo studies also suggest
MMP7’s central role, as MMP7–/– mice
were protected against bleomycin-induced IPF. Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals is currently conducting a clinical trial
on inhaled siRNA targeting MMP7, underscoring its potential therapeutic
application. 
The aim of this project
is the development of an inhalable siRNA
formulation for MMP7 downregulation. This aim was pursued by synthesizing
various PBAEs with differing oleylamine (OA) contents and forming
mPolyplexes by adding siRNA. Additionally, the impact of nebulization
using VMNs on the stability and performance of these complexes was
investigated, followed by testing in a relevant ex vivo model to downregulate the therapeutic target MMP7 using RNA interference
(RNAi).

2

## Materials and Methods
2.1

## Materials
Dicer substrate double-stranded
siRNA targeting enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) (siGFP,
25/27mer), amine-modified Dicer substrate double-stranded siRNA targeting
enhanced green fluorescent protein (25/27mer), and scrambled siRNA
(siNC, 25/27mer) were purchased from IDT (Integrated Technologies,
Inc., Leuven, Belgium), and sequences and additional information are
given in the Supporting Information, Table S1. HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid), Tris-EDTA
buffer solution 100×, RPMI 1640 medium, Triton X-100, heparin
sodium salt from porcine intestinal mucosa, heat-inactivated fetal
bovine serum (FBS), penicillin/streptomycin solution (P/S), geneticin
(G418), Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and branched
polyethyleneimine (PEI) (5 kDa, Lupasol G100) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich
(Darmstadt, Germany). Di-tert-butyl decarbonate,
oleylamine, spermine, Lipofectamine 2000, OPTI-MEM serum reduced medium,
0.05% trypsin-EDTA, Alexa Fluor 647 NHS ester, and a SYBR Gold Nucleic
Acid Gel Stain 10.000X concentrate in DMSO and siMMP7 were purchased
from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Schwerte, Germany). 1,4-Butanendiol
diacrylate was obtained from TCI Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. (Tokyo,
Japan). Trifluoroacetic acid (99,9%, extra pure) was purchased from
Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium).

2.2

## Polymer Synthesis
PBAE copolymers
were synthesized applying a well-characterized synthesis approach
previously reported by our group. Briefly,
the reaction was composed of a diacrylate monomer forming the backbone
of the polymer and two side chains forming primary amines in different
ratios. We applied 1,4-butandiol diacrylate as the backbone and tribocspermine
(TBS) together with OA in different ratios. All educts were dissolved
in a concentration of 300 mg/mL in DMF. After the reaction time, polymers
were deprotected using trifluoroacetic acid. The deprotected polymers
were precipitated three times in pentane before the final drying.
Monomer ratios (stated forthgoing as the percentage of OA in the final
polymer) were estimated by 1H NMR spectroscopy.

2.3

## Particle Preparation
Particles were
prepared by using a batch mixing approach. Briefly, siRNA and polymer
solutions were prepared and mixed in equivalent volumes of 10 mM HEPES
at pH 5.4. Polymer concentrations varied between each polymer, and
siRNA solutions were prepared at a concentration of 500 nM. PBAE or
PEI was mixed with the siRNA solution by rapid pipetting for a defined
speed and time. PBAE or PEI solutions were prepared at concentrations
resulting in a 10-fold excess of protonated amines in the used polymer
over phosphate groups in the siRNA backbone (N/P ratio of 10) following and . 1 2where m(Polymer) describes the mass of the used polymer, n(siRNA) describes the molar amount of applied siRNA, n(Nucleotides) is the molar amount of nucleotides
in the used siRNA sequence, r(OA/Spermine) gives the relative ratio of either OA or spermine in the used polymer,
and n(OA/Spermine amines) refers
to the total number of protonable amines in the respective unit. After
mixing, solutions were incubated at room temperature for 90 min for
mPolyplexes (PBAE) and 30 min for polyplexes (PEI).

2.4

## Nebulization
Two commercially available
nebulizers were utilized for this study: a PARI eFlow Rapid (PARI,
Starnberg, Germany) and an Aerogen Pro (Aerogen, Ratingen, Germany).
Each nanoparticle suspension was immediately nebulized after the incubation
time ended. Samples were loaded in the corresponding reservoirs, and
aerosols were collected in cooled 15 mL Falcon tubes for further analysis.
A minimum volume of 600 μL was applied to the Aerogen Pro and
at least 1000 μL was added to the PARI eFlow Rapid for each
nebulization.

2.5

## Particle Characterization
The hydrodynamic
diameter and polydispersity index (PDI) of nanoparticles were determined
by dynamic light scattering (DLS), and the ζ-potential was determined
by phase analysis light scattering (PALS) applying a Zetasizer Advance
Ultra (Malvern Instruments, Inc., Malvern, UK) at a 173° backscatter
mode. Nanoparticles were measured in formulation triplicates (N = 3) and analyzed using ZS Xplorer software (v.3.2.0).
Additionally, nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) was applied using
a NanoSight NS300 (Malvern Instruments, Inc., Malvern, UK) to support
DLS data and obtain more information regarding particle concentration.
All results are reported as the mean size (nm) ± the standard
deviation (SD). Results were further validated using cryogenic transmission
electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) of nanoparticle suspensions before
and after nebulization.

2.6

## RNA Encapsulation and Stability Assay
The RNA encapsulation efficiency was determined using a modified
SYBR Gold assay, comparable to a previously described method. Briefly, nanoparticles were prepared as described
above and split before being partially subjected to nebulization.
The collected samples were diluted with RNase-free water to obtain
the same siRNA concentration as that in the RNA stability test. Formulations
were transferred to a Fluotrac 384 well plate (Greiner Bio-One, Frickenhausen,
Germany) and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C under shaking. Per sample,
3 μL of a 4× SYBR Gold Nucleic Acid Gel Stain was added
and incubated for 5 min under light exclusion. The encapsulation efficiency
was determined in comparison to a sample with siRNA only (non-nebulized),
which represents 100% free siRNA. To evaluate potential losses of
RNA through nebulization, a newly developed particle disruption approach
was applied. Nanoparticles encapsulating 10 pmol of siRNA were prepared
as described above and subjected to nebulization. Formulations were
transferred to a Fluotrac 384 well plate. Per formulation, 10 μL
of a 2% Triton X detergent solution and 2 μL of a 2000 U/mL
heparin solution were added and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C under
shaking. Subsequently, 3 μL of a 4× SYBR Gold Nucleic Acid
Gel Stain was added and incubated for 5 min under light exclusion.
A sample containing free siRNA only was subjected to the same conditions
and represents 100% free siRNA. Following incubation, fluorescence
measurements were conducted on a microplate reader (TECAN Spark, TECAN,
Männedorf, Switzerland) at an excitation wavelength of 492/20
nm and an emission wavelength of 537/20 nm. The results are expressed
as a percentage of free siRNA ± the standard deviation (SD).
Technical triplicates (n = 3) of formulation triplicates
(N = 3) were utilized for the measurements.

2.7

## Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Molecular
Dynamics (MD) simulations were run in Gromacs 2021.4 applying the
Martini 3 force field as previously described. The siRNA was adapted from the model introduced previously
for the Martini 2 force field, whereas polymers were newly parametrized
based on an all-atom model. 
Simulations
contain 15 siRNA molecules and the respective polymer at an N/P ratio
of 10, randomly inserted at the initial setup. The box size was (40
nm)3, and molecules were solvated with 10 mM HEPES pH 5.4.

2.8

## Aerosol Characterization by Laser Diffraction
Aerosol characterization was evaluated applying laser diffraction
analysis. Particles were prepared as described above and nebulized
with the two respective VMNs into the laser diffractor (HELOS, Sympatec,
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany) with an equipped R2 lens and INHALER
module. Aerosol was applied through a punched silicone mouthpiece
using an Aerogen Pro T-piece placed approximately 50–100 mm
before entering the laser beam. The whole experimental setup was carried
out in a closed Plexiglass box to control the relative humidity (%
RH), which was kept over 70% RH during analysis. Aerosol was extracted
at a rate of 13.9 L/min to avoid re-entry of aerosol to the laser
beam. Each measurement consisted of three repeated runs with a duration
of 5 s and a signal integration time of 200 ms. Measurements were
carried out in triplicates (n = 3). Results are given
as the Q3 volume median diameter (Q3-VMD) ± SD of nebulized droplets
following the Mie theory suitable for nebulized droplets, calculated
as an aqueous buffer with corresponding complex refractive indices.

2.9

## In Vitro Protein Knockdown
in H1299-eGFP Cells
H1299 cells stably expressing eGFP (H1299-eGFP)
were used to determine the in vitro performance of
the different nanoparticle systems. H1299-eGFP were cultured in an
RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% P/S, and 0.4% G418.
Cells were routinely cultured and passaged when reaching a confluency
of 80–90% with 0.05% (v/v) trypsin and maintained at all times
in humidified air with 5% CO2 at a temperature of 37 °C.
For experiments, cells were seeded at a density of 8 × 103 cells/well in 500 μL of a culture medium in 24-well
plates and incubated for 24 h. Subsequently, the medium was exchanged,
and transfection was performed by adding 100 μL of a transfection
medium. The transfection medium consisted of nanoparticle suspensions
encapsulating 50 pmol of siRNA either in a nebulized or non-nebulized
form, 10 mM HEPES pH 5.4 as a blank, and free siRNA or Lipofectamine
2000 with the same amount of siRNA, prepared according to the instruction
manuals. Samples were prepared as described under and were nebulized with
the nebulizer, which had resulted in the lowest impact on physicochemical
properties of the respective formulation. Following transfection,
the cells were incubated for another 48 h. Afterward, cells were detached
using 0.05% (v/v) trypsin and washed twice with PBS (400 rcf, 5 min,
21 °C) before resuspending them in 400 μL of PBS with 2
mM EDTA. Samples were analyzed by flow cytometry (Attune NxT, Thermo
Fischer Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA), the average median
fluorescence intensity (MFI) was measured with a 488 nm excitation
laser, and emitted light was detected through the BL-1H filter set.
Experiments were performed in three biological replicates (N = 3), each measured in technical triplicates (n = 3). Sample results are displayed as % eGFP expression
through dividing the average MFI of siRNA-treated samples by blank
samples with corresponding standard deviation (SD).

2.10

## Application in Fibrotic Precision-Cut Lung
Slices (PCLS)
2.10.1

## Human Donors and Ethics Statement
Investigations using a human fibrotic tissue were approved by the
ethics committee of the Hannover Medical School (MHH, Hannover, Germany)
and are in compliance with “The Code of Ethics of the World
Medical Association” (renewed on 2015/04/22, number 2701-2015).
Informed consent was obtained from all patients prior to their inclusion
in the study. PCLS were prepared from explanted peripheral lung tissues
obtained from 45- and 53-year-old male patients with progressive pulmonary
fibrosis having a usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern. A nonfibrotic
tissue from a non-CLD patient was obtained from the CPC-M bioArchive
at the Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC Munich, Germany). The
study was approved by the local ethics committee of the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
of Munich, Germany (ethic vote 19-630). Written informed consent was
obtained for the study participant.

2.10.2

## Preparation of PCLS
After cannulating
the human lung lobes with a flexible catheter, the explanted lung
segments were inflated with warm (37 °C) low-melting agarose
(1.5%) prepared in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
nutrient mixture F-12 Ham (DMEM-F-12), supplemented with 15 mM HEPES,
100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen
Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). Following the sol–gel transition
of the agarose solution on ice, tissue cores of a diameter of 8 mm
were sectioned into 250–300 μm thin slices using a sharp,
rotating metal tube. The sectioning procedure was conducted using
a Krumdieck Live Tissue Microtome (Alabama Research and Development,
AL). PCLS were washed three times for 30 min in DMEM-F-12 supplemented
with 15 mM HEPES, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin
(growth medium) and then left for 2 days in culture to acclimate and
settle prior to transfection experiments.

2.10.3

## Transfection and MMP7 Gene Silencing in
PCLS
PCLS were placed into a 12-well plate and cultured in
800 μL of a growth medium for 24 h. mPolyplexes were prepared
according to encapsulating either siMMP7, siNC, or Alexa Fluor 647-labeled
siRNA at an N/P ratio of 10. Afterward, the mPolyplexes were nebulized
applying the best suited nebulizer, and aerosol was collected in a
15 mL Falcon tube. Subsequently, PCLS were transfected with 100 pmol
of siRNA in 200 μL of a formulation buffer. PCLS were cultured
for another 72 h and then collected for imaging and RNA or protein
isolation.

2.10.4

## Two-Photon Laser Scanning Microscopy of
PCLS
Two-photon microscopy of transfected PCLS was performed
with an inverted Leica SP8 DIVE system, equipped with a SpectraPhysics
Insight X3 multiphoton laser and external spectral detectors. For
the acquisition of the two-photon z-stacks, we used
a 10× 0.4 NA air objective, while the samples were mounted on
a 35 mm glass-bottom dish with a glass thickness of 0.17 mm. The xyz image data had a voxel of 0.76 μm × 0.76
μm × 5 μm. The second harmonic generation (SHG),
which was produced by collagen fibers, was acquired by using an excitation
at 860 nm. The backscattered SHG was recorded with a Hybrid external
spectral detector (HyD) set at the 425–430 nm detection range.
Simultaneously, we recorded with a second HyD the autofluorescence
signal (produced by the same excitation at 860 nm) in the range of
450–510 nm. The Alexa Fluor 647 dye was excited in a frame-by-frame
sequential manner by a two-photon laser tuned at 1250 nm, and the
emission was captured with an external spectral PMT (photomultiplier
tube) at a range of 635–705 nm. The acquired image data were
uploaded on an Omero instance, and the presented image panel was generated
using the Omero.Figure plugin. 

2.10.5

## RNA Isolation and qPCR
Total RNA
was isolated by means of the TRIzol/chloroform method and quantified
using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt,
Germany). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using a high-capacity
cDNA reverse transcription kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) was performed using an iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix
(Bio-Rad, Feldkirchen, Germany) on a StepOnePlus system (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT)
was used as the reference gene. For normalization of MMP7 levels,
the ΔΔCt method was applied. The primer sequences used
are depicted in .
 
2.10.6

## Western Blotting
PCLS were homogenized
in a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM
EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS, supplemented
with 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF protease inhibitor,
and 1 μg/mL cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied
Science, Indianapolis, IN). The detergent-insoluble material was precipitated
by centrifugation at 18,600g for 30 min at 4 °C.
The protein concentration was measured using a Pierce BCA protein
assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Twenty μg of protein was
separated on a 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel and subsequently transferred
to a PVDF membrane (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany). The membrane was blocked
with 5% nonfat milk for 1 h at room temperature and then incubated
with a mouse anti-MMP7 (1:500, cat. no. MAB9071, R&D Systems,
Wiesbaden, Germany) or goat anticollagen 1 (1:500, cat. no. 1310-01,
SouthernBiotech, Birmingham, AL) antibody overnight at 4 °C.
β-actin, used as a loading control, was detected using a mouse
anti-β-actin antibody (1:5000, cat. no. A1978, Sigma-Aldrich,
Taufkirchen, Germany). Proteins were detected using either an Amersham
ECL Select Western blotting detection reagent (GE Healthcare, Chicago,
IL) or a Pierce ECL Western blotting substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
All images were acquired using a ChemiDoc imaging system (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA).

2.11

## Statistical Analysis
All experiments
were performed in triplicates. Statistical analysis was performed
using GraphPad Prism 9.5.1 software and one-way ANOVA analysis or
an unpaired t test.

3

## Results and Discussion
3.1

## Particle Formation
Using the endogenous
polyamine spermine, we established polymers with significantly improved
encapsulation efficiencies, reaching 100% encapsulation at polymer:siRNA
weight ratios of less than 10. It was previously shown that introducing
hydrophobicity into polymeric siRNA delivery vehicles can have many
advantages, such as increasing transfection efficiency through enhanced
endosomal escape and reducing toxicity
through shielding of cationic charges. , Therefore,
we introduced varying hydrophobicity into the PBAE polymers studied
here in a new and precise matter applying a controlled synthesis approach
previously reported by our lab ( A). This enabled a precise
tuning of polymer characteristics, improving the conclusiveness of
the resulting data. By analyzing the resulting structures with various
methods, including cryo-TEM and MD simulations, a new structure type
of nanoparticle was observed and named micelle-embedded polyplexes.
This name was chosen because of the results obtained by previous MD
simulations showing a deviation from typical micelleplex or polyplex
structures reported by our group. Micelleplexes
are known to have a hydrophobic core and a hydrophilic shell in which
the siRNA is encapsulated. Polyplexes such as PEI typically have a
uniform inner structure composed of encapsulated siRNA and a polymer.
Our results indicate the formation of small micelles composed of the
PBAE carrier attached to the siRNA with their hydrophilic outer shell.
Thereby, larger structures form with an siRNA core, a hydrophobic
micelle-shell, and a hydrophilic outer surface, composed of spermine
side chains. Several of these structures coalesce into bigger particles
with an additional hydrophilic outer shell ( B,C). Due to this unique structure, we named
these particles micelle-embedded polyplexes (mPolyplexes).
 
3.2

## Particle Characterization
The aim
of this study was therapeutic pulmonary delivery of siRNA to target
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Therefore, a suitable delivery route
to reach the cytosol of alveolar cells was necessary. As already discussed
above, VMNs have been reported to be the gentlest aerosolization devices
for liquid formulations. Here, the two clinically applied VMNs, the
PARI eFlow Rapid and the Aerogen Pro, were applied to nebulize different
mPolyplex suspensions. The difference between non-nebulized and nebulized
particles was investigated for each mPolyplex formulation nebulized
with each VMN. For additional comparison, PEI polyplexes were nebulized
and investigated as well ( A).
 All polymers tested formed monodisperse particles
with a small
size ranging from 90 to 110 nm and a PDI of 0.1–0.2 ( B). The 30% OA mPolyplexes
formed the smallest and the 75% OA mPolyplexes formed the largest
particles. This size increase may be due to decreased charge density
in the 75% OA mPolyplexes, leading to less compact particles. As the
OA ratio increases, particle hydrophobicity also rises, leading to
a greater proportion of weaker hydrophobic interactions as particle
stabilizing forces. Consequently, the overall intraparticular forces
decrease, potentially causing larger particles, as was similarly observed
with NTA ( C).
All particles exhibited positive ζ-potentials between 15 and
25 mV ( D),
crucial for cellular uptake as the positive charge aids in attraction
to the negatively charged cellular membrane, which is rich in glycan chains. Although not statistically significant,
the ζ-potential decreased with increasing OA ratios, likely
due to shielding effects of the hydrophobic polymer content. Finally,
the siRNA encapsulation and release from the particles were evaluated,
and all polymers encapsulated 100% of the provided siRNA at an N/P
of 10, with no detectable free siRNA even after nebulization. Interestingly,
only a combination of Triton X, a surfactant that disrupts hydrophobic
interactions, and heparin, a polyanion that displaces siRNA from polyplexes
through competition, successfully released 100% of the encapsulated
siRNA from the mPolyplexes ( E,F). Neither heparin nor Triton X alone achieved full
siRNA release (data not shown, but available in this reference ). This observation suggests that mPolyplexes
are stabilized by hydrophobic and electrostatic intraparticular forces,
which underlines the unique structure of this new particle class.
PEI and 30% OA mPolyplexes showed no statistically significant
changes in their physicochemical properties after nebulization with
either VMN. Parameters such as the hydrodynamic diameter ( B), PDI ( B), particle concentration
( C), and ζ-potential
( D) remained
stable, indicating that the stronger ionic intraparticular forces
are resistant to nebulization-associated stress. Changes were only
observed for particles with a higher hydrophobicity content. Physicochemical
characteristics of 55% OA mPolyplex were affected by nebulization
with the PARI eFlow Rapid. The hydrodynamic diameter increased ( B), while the particle
concentration, determined by NTA, decreased ( C). This concentration drop likely results
from aggregate formation during nebulization, explaining the increased
particle size. A similar, though not statistically significant, trend
was observed for the 30% OA mPolyplexes ( C), suggesting that higher hydrophobic contents
within the particles increase the susceptibility to VMN-induced shear
stress. Interestingly, this susceptibility was even more pronounced
in the 75% OA mPolyplex, but only when nebulized with the Aerogen
Pro VMN. Here, the hydrodynamic diameter increased significantly ( B), and the ζ-potential
became significantly more neutral ( D), which could promote aggregation due to
reduced particle repulsion. This explains the increased particle size
and significantly lower particle concentration ( C). Additionally, these particles were the
only formulation in which only a fraction of the encapsulated siRNA
could be recovered ( F). It remains unclear if the siRNA was indeed degraded or
if the formed aggregates resisted complete dissociation by the Triton
X and heparin mixture.
It seems plausible that the higher OA
content, with its weaker
intracellular forces, the 55% OA mPolyplexes, was insufficient to
withstand the higher energy input of the PARI eFlow Rapid ( ). However, it is
surprising that this trend was not observed in the 75% OA mPolyplexes,
which appeared more resistant to the high energy input but were more
sensitive to the faster nebulization speed. This suggests that the
shear stress in the Aerogen Pro may be higher, causing destabilization
of the 75% OA mPolyplexes.
 These results confirm that a suitable VMN device was
identified
for all mPolyplex formulations, without impacting their physicochemical
characteristics. Cryo-TEM images of the 30 and 55% OA mPolyplexes
taken before and after nebulization (Figure S1) further support this observation. It was concluded that particles
stabilized by hydrophobic interactions are more susceptible to nebulizer-induced
aggregation and degradation, a trend also observed with lipid nanoparticles.
However, it is surprising that mPolyplexes with very high OA ratios
responded differently to the two tested nebulizers.

3.3

## Aerosol Characterization by Laser Diffraction
Aerosol characterization was carried out using laser diffraction,
with results presented as Q3-VMD in . The results allow a direct comparison of
each nanoparticle formulation, varying in the hydrophobic content,
across the different VMNs in comparison with the formulation buffer
only. PEI served as the control for siRNA polyplexes without any surface-active
properties.
 As shown in and Figure S2, all nebulized
nanoparticle
formulations fell within the 1–5 μm droplet range, a
well-known size range for effective sedimentation and deposition within
the alveoli, making all tested nebulizers suitable for pulmonary delivery
of the chosen formulations. An interesting
trend emerged for the Aerogen Pro: the formulation buffer only showed
the highest median diameter at 5.43 ± 0.09 μm. When PEI
polyplexes were added, the median diameter decreased to 4.54 ±
0.07 μm. However, including surface-active polymers forming
mPolyplexes further reduced the median diameter, with the 75% OA PBAE
(the most lipophilic compound) reaching a minimum of 4.18 ± 0.02
μm with the Aerogen Pro.
A similar trend was observed
with the PARI eFlow, though less pronounced:
the formulation buffer had a median diameter of 4.49 ± 0.13 μm,
which increased slightly to 4.77 ± 0.06 μm with PEI polyplexes.
However, adding amphiphilic nanoparticles reduced the median diameter
below that of the formulation buffer, reaching a low of 4.12 ±
0.16 μm for the 30% OA PBAE polyplex formulation.
The
literature provides some theories about these findings: first,
adding nanoparticles to the buffer may decrease the median droplet
diameter due to higher charge density from negatively charged siRNA
and positively charged carriers, such as PEI and PBAEs. Increased
charge density is known to reduce the mass median aerodynamic diameter
(MMAD), as shown in studies adding different salts to nebulizer solutions. , Zhang et al. observed that increased conductivity lowers the droplet
VMD and fine particle fraction (FPF) of aerosols and increases reproducibility
between the measurements. 
The experimental
setup chosen here also answers the less clear
question of the influence of surface-active molecules on aerosol characteristics.
Studies with surfactants, such as SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate) and
Tween 20, in formulations used in vibrating-mesh nebulizers resulted
in a decrease in VMD. Beck-Broichsitter et al. attributed this effect
primarily to the increased conductivity rather than changes in surface
tension alone, as both parameters were monitored during their study. 
A 2012 study found that increasing poly(vinyl
alcohol) (PVA) concentrations
reduced MMAD, suggesting that surface-active
molecules significantly affect droplet size. According to Tate’s
law, surface tension influences the droplet volume as Zhang et al.
noted. Another factor is the wetting
of the hydrophilic nebulizer’s palladium–nickel membrane.
While increased surface tension reduces output due to decreased spreading
on the nebulizer membrane, Zhang et al. also found that surfactants
such as pluronic at equilibrium concentrations cannot consistently
lower surface tension at the continuously forming new droplet interfaces.
The comparably minor influence of surface tension was explained by
the surfactants’ slow adsorption rate to the newly created
air–water interfaces, leading to surface tension gradients
at the site where aerosol droplets form. 
It was also shown that increased viscosity reduces MMADs and
output
ranges, but this parameter is expected
to have little-to-no influence here. Instead, the relative humidity
significantly impacts aerosol performance, with higher % RH (as present
in the physiological lung) leading to smaller median diameters, fitting
better into the target 1–5 μm range. This is due to the
faster evaporation from smaller particles at low % RH leading to a
shift to wrongfully higher median diameters. Therefore, our experimental
setup (Figure S3) was all enclosed in a
plastic box with a humidifier (Beurer GmbH, Ulm, Germany), maintaining
values above 70% RH.

3.4

## In Vitro Protein Knockdown
in H1299-eGFP Cells
Although the above experiments showed
that the physicochemical properties of the nanoparticle systems remained
stable during nebulization with at least one of the tested VMNs, it
is equally important to preserve the biological stability and activity
of the siRNA during this process. To assess biological activity postnebulization,
the stably eGFP expressing cell line H1299-eGFP served as an in vitro model for siRNA gene silencing efficacy. This epithelial-like
lung cell line is an ideal model as it mimics the likely port of entry
for nebulized formulations.
Based on the above experiments,
the best-performing nebulizers were selected for each formulation:
the Aerogen Pro for 30% OA PBAE and 55% OA PBAE mPolyplexes was chosen
and the PARI eFlow Rapid for 75% OA PBAE mPolyplexes. As shown in A–C, particles
encapsulating negative control siRNA had no gene silencing efficacy
at all. On the contrary, these particles seemed to induce eGFP, possibly
through nanoparticle-stimulated overall induction of protein biosynthesis.
Most importantly, however, siGFP-loaded nanoparticles mediated sequence-dependent
RNAi: the 30% OA non-nebulized mPolyplexes reduced eGFP expression
by about 23% ( A), while the nebulized achieved a 73% reduction, tripling gene silencing
efficacy despite no observable differences in physicochemical properties.
Nebulization was hypothesized to induce internal structural changes
that may loosen siRNA/polymer interactions. A previously reported
stability assay confirmed this assumption (Figure S4), revealing a decrease in EC50 from 9.4 to 8.4,
indicating slightly weakened intraparticular forces. It was previously
hypothesized that highly stable particles can be detrimental to successful
cytosolic siRNA delivery due to a hampered release of siRNA. It is important to point out that the reduced
intraparticular binding strength had no observable impact on the colloidal
stability. Additionally, no significant differences in transfection
efficiency were observed between non-nebulized and nebulized 55% OA
PBAE ( B) and
75% OA PBAE formulations ( C). In the case of the most cationic 30% OA PBAE polymer
( A), however,
significantly improved gene silencing activity after nebulization
further supports our hypothesis of a reduction in intraparticular
binding strength during nebulization.
 Comparing the three different OA contents of the
PBAEs reveals
a trend: a higher hydrophobic OA content correlates with increased
gene silencing efficacy. The 75% OA PBAE mPolyplexes showed the highest
efficiency, silencing eGFP by 91% in the non-nebulized form and 80%
postnebulization. The 55% OA PBAE achieved 78% before and 79% after
nebulization. The recent literature also underlines this trend, , suggesting that a higher unsaturated fatty acid content enhances
nanoparticle fusogenicity, thus enhancing endosomal escape. Furthermore,
considering the changed behavior of the 30% OA PBAE before and after
nebulization, it is possible that increased hydrophobic contents could
lead to a favorable less pronounced siRNA binding to the polymer,
allowing more effective siRNA release. Overall, these results are
promising for therapeutic applications, as the biological effect of
mPolyplexes was maintained or even improved after nebulization.

3.5

## Nanoparticle Transfection Efficiency in Fibrotic
PCLS
Following the 3R principle, we applied a model better
suited for studying human IPF than classical murine models. We tested
the efficacy of our approach in the complex model of human lung fibrosis
using PCLS, which maintain the lung’s native architecture,
including cell and ECM composition, and thus mimic the disease’s
pathophysiological characteristics ( ). Studying
nanoparticle behavior in this diseased state is crucial for better
understanding potential treatment options and advancing from preclinical
to clinical stages. Preliminary experiments in peritumor tissues,
using GAPDH knockdown, showed no difference between the nebulized
and non-nebulized 30% OA PBAE mPolyplexes (Figure S5). In fact, mPolyplexes made of 30% OA PBAE showed no negative
changes in the physicochemical properties across all VMNs. While mPolyplexes
made of 75% OA PBAE showed a slight decrease in gene silencing efficacy
postnebulization, the 30% OA PBAE mPolyplexes performed better in
PCLS (Figure S5). Furthermore, initial
prescreening in fibrotic PCLS showed superior gene silencing capacity
of the 30% OA PBAE in comparison to the more lipophilic ones (Figure S6), making it the lead candidate for
additional PCLS experiments.
 The transfection efficacy of this lead formulation
was subsequently
investigated in three PCLS samples from different regions of the fibrotic
lung from one patient using high-resolution live imaging. A transfection
control with only formulation buffer was included. As shown in , all PCLS samples
displayed a pronounced ECM, visualized by strong fluorescence in the
second harmonic generation (SHG) channel, which visualizes fibrillar
collagen I and II, confirming the fibrotic nature of the samples.
In the control sample with HEPES, no fluorescence was detected in
the siRNA channel, but strong fluorescence appeared in all nanoparticle-treated
samples, indicating excellent transfection efficiency with varying
signal intensity depending on lung tissue architecture and cell composition.
Across all three ex vivo samples, the siAF647-labeled
nanoparticles penetrated the fibrotic PCLS, confirming that excessive
collagen in the model does not hinder nanoparticle mobility.
 
3.6

## MMP7 Knockdown in a Relevant Idiopathic Fibrotic
PCLS Model
The gene silencing efficacy of mPolyplexes was
further investigated in a relevant idiopathic fibrotic PCLS model.
MMP7, a profibrotic molecule that contributes to increased ECM production
and, consequently, to elevated collagen I levels, is a promising RNAi
target for treating IPF. Given the satisfactory siRNA delivery efficiency
observed in confocal images, 30% OA mPolyplexes were selected to assess
the MMP7 knockdown potential. Lipofectamine 2000, while efficient
for transfection, is too toxic for in vivo use and
served as a positive control only. According to qPCR results ( A), using the ΔΔCt
method with the housekeeping gene HPRT, Lipofectamine 2000 achieved
a relative knockdown of 21% of the target gene compared to siNC samples.
Interestingly, the nebulized lead nanoparticle formulation showed
a superior 52% knockdown, surpassing Lipofectamine 2000's transfection
level without its associated high toxicity. For the downstream effect,
collagen I levels were determined via qPCR, showing similar trends
( B): while
Lipofectamine 2000 treatment led to a nonsignificant gene silencing
of 11%, the tested 30% OA PBAE achieved a downregulation of 33% for
Col I, indicating that the MMP7 downstream cascade was partially inhibited ex vivo. Fibronectin levels, which are also considered to
be part of IPF’s pathology, were
downregulated on minor levels for Lipofectamine 2000 and 30% OA PBAE
after siMMP7 treatment and are depicted in Figure S5.
 Interestingly, the hydrophobic carrier appears
to influence the
treatment effectiveness. Others have shown that hydrophobic polystyrene
exhibits stronger adsorption to collagen I than its oxidized counterpart. Therefore, it is hypothesized that 30% OA PBAE
mPolyplexes balance effective collagen penetration with sufficient
endosomal release for gene silencing. While increasing the OA content
improved knockdown efficiency in the H1299-eGFP model before nebulization,
this effect was less pronounced in peritumoral PCLS tissues (Figures S6 and S7). Consequently, it can be inferred
that in tissues with significant collagen overexpression, the use
of a more hydrophilic carrier system may be advantageous.
Western
blot analysis was used to assess the effect of the siRNA
formulations on protein levels, specifically targeting MMP7 (Figure S8), with β-actin serving as a control
protein. 30% OA mPolyplexes reduced MMP7 protein levels compared to
the control formulation, leading to a marked reduction in collagen
I expression, a downstream effector of MMP7. Since collagen I is a
key ECM component and is often elevated in IPF patients, this reduction
is highly relevant and suggests that this treatment may positively
influence the progression of the disease, addressing the underlying
cause of IPF rather than merely alleviating symptoms.
Therefore,
the primary advantages of these newly developed PBAE-micelleplexes
lie in their excellent nebulizability, which retains or even enhances
their functionality, as well as their customizable properties. The
ability to adjust the lipophilic content to suit specific disease
states is particularly advantageous, as is the overall flexibility
in modifying structural entities and potentially incorporating targeting
ligands.

4

## Conclusions
This study demonstrated
that PBAE-based nanoparticles can be nebulized
using clinically relevant VMNs without altering their physicochemical
characteristics. Increasing hydrophobicity reduced nanoparticle stability
against nebulization associated stress, but suitable nebulization
settings were found to maintain particle integrity and functionality
as confirmed in vitro. The presence of mPolyplexes
slightly decreased the VMDs of buffer solutions with the used VMNs.
The research aimed to assess a potential inhalable siRNA therapeutic
approach for IPF. With a disease-relevant ex vivo model, successful nanoparticle uptake and MMP7 gene knockdown were
confirmed via Western blotting and qPCR in PCLS, resulting in downregulation
of the disease-related protein collagen I. These findings highlight
the potential of this new delivery system for targeting pulmonary
diseases, even in challenging conditions such as IPF. Especially,
the tunability of hydrophobicity and nebulizer settings allows for
rapid adaptation to different pathophysiological needs. Furthermore,
IPF patients would benefit from nebulization as a route of administration
compared to other pulmonary delivery methods such as pressurized metered
dose inhalers or dry powder inhalers due to their often limited lung
capacity. Additionally, this approach could also be applied to other
pulmonary diseases, including asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, by choosing a suitable molecular target. It is believed that
this study will advance nebulization-based pulmonary disease research
and accelerate the development of clinically relevant formulations.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsami.4c21657.siRNA sequences used in this research, cryo-TEM micrographs
of freshly prepared and nebulized mPolyplexes, laser diffraction results
of nebulized formulations, photograph of the experimental setup within
an equipped humidity box, mPolyplex stability data before and after
nebulization, gene silencing results in human peritumor and fibrotic
lung tissues, and Western blot analysis results (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
am4c21657_si_001.pdf

## Author Contributions
§ J.T.M. and A.P.E.K. contributed equally to this
work.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Ronan MacLoughlin from Aerogen Ltd. for
kindly providing us the used Aerogen Pro for experimental purposes.
Olivia Merkel gratefully acknowledges the Volkswagen Foundation (AZ-9A872)
and the European Research Council (ERC-2022-COG-101088587). We gratefully
acknowledge the provision of human biomaterial (nonfibrotic fresh
tissue from a non-CLD patient) and clinical data from the CPC-M bioArchive
and its partners at the Asklepios Biobank Gauting, the LMU Hospital,
and the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München. We thank
the patient and their family for their support. We thank Thomas Michler
for providing scientific input and supervision. Figures were partially
generated using biorender.com.