4134crpddCurrent Research in Pharmacology and Drug DiscoveryCurr Res Pharmacol Drug DiscovElsevierPMC1245287912452879124528794098974010.1016/j.crphar.2025.100232Cyclodextrin-based therapeutics delivery systems: A review of current clinical trials
HotiGjylije BajwaNeha CalderaFabrizio SinghPreet Amol HusseinIbrahim CeconeClaudio MatencioAdrián SpagnoloRita ArgenzianoMonica CavalliRoberta MadanJitender TrottaFrancesco aDepartment of Drug Science and Technology, University of Turin, Via P. Giuria 9, 10125, Turin, ItalybDepartment of Chemistry, NIS Interdepartmental Centre, University of Turin, Via P. Giuria 7, 10125, Turin, ItalycUniversity Centre of Excellence in Research (UCER), Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot, 151203, Punjab, IndiadDepartment of Phytomedicine, University Centre of Excellence in Research (UCER), Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot, 151203, Punjab, IndiaeDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology A, Biology Teaching Unit, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine. Regional Campus of International Excellence "Campus Mare Nostrum", University of Murcia, Murcia, SpainfDepartment of Pharmaceutics, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research, Hyderabad, 500037, India⁎Corresponding author. francesco.trotta@unito.it
1These authors have contributed equally (Shared co-first authorship).
308202591002321002322392025© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## Abstract
This review highlights the current status of cyclodextrin-based formulations tested in human participants, highlighting ongoing clinical research in this area. It provides a comprehensive link between the structure, properties, and clinical applications of these formulations, bridging the gap between medical theory and practical use. The aim of this work is to support the future commercialization of cyclodextrin-based therapies for patient care. Additionally, it emphasizes the need for expanded clinical investigations on cyclodextrin-based formulations, particularly cyclodextrin-based polymers, to pave the way for their successful introduction to the market. This is related to the potential of cyclodextrin-based polymers as advanced drug delivery systems, improving the therapeutic efficacy of numerous drugs. Expanding clinical trials will contribute to the optimization of cyclodextrin-based polymer synthesis, boosting their effectiveness as nanocarriers and facilitating the discovery of new disease treatments.
This review also explores the potential of artificial intelligence (AI) to support clinical and medical solutions.
Keywords: Cyclodextrin-based formulations, Cyclodextrin-based polymers, Therapeutic efficacy, Drug delivery systems, Nanocarriers, Clinical study, Artificial intelligence

## Graphical abstract
“Created in BioRender. Hoti, G. (2024) BioRender.com/x47j677 ”.
 

## Highlights
•This review highlights the progress of cyclodextrin-based formulations tested in humans and ongoing clinical research.
•It links structure, properties, and clinical applications of these formulations, bridging medical theory with practical implementation.
•This work supports future commercialization of cyclodextrin-based therapies to enhance patient healthcare.
•This work stresses the need for more clinical trials on cyclodextrin polymers to advance their path to commercialization.
•The role of artificial intelligence (AI) in supporting clinical research and medical applications is discussed as a promising innovation.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Apr 24; Revised 2025 Aug 19; Accepted 2025 Aug 29; Collection date 2025.

1.

## Introduction
1.1.

## Cyclodextrins and their derivatives
The cyclodextrins (CDs) were first mentioned in a written record by French scientist A. Villiers, in 1891, where 3 g of crystalline substance are isolated from the bacterial digest of 1000 g of starch. The substance, like cellulose, did not exhibit reducing characteristics and was stable towards acid hydrolysis. This experimental study indicated “cellulosine”, a term that was replaced by Schardinger with “crystalline dextrin”, and later with α-dextrin and β-dextrin. He paved the way for CD chemistry, and in the succeeding years the CDs were identified as Schardinger dextrins in his recognition as the “founding father”. These compounds are currently known as CDs ( ), ( ), and have been the subject of research over the years. The history of CDs, as presented in , can be categorized into three distinct stages: a) discovery (1891–1930); b) development (1930–1970), and c) industrial applications (1970-onwards) ( ; ; )
 CDs are cyclic oligosaccharides with a low molecular weight (typically varying from 973 to 2163 Da) produced by a three-steps process: (1) the fermentation and extraction of CD glycosyltransferase using a bacterium such as Bacillus macerans, (2) enzymatic breakdown of starch via cyclodextrin (CD)-glycosyltransferase, and the precipitation of CD via complexation, (3) removal of the complexing compound and subsequent purification of the material. These cyclic oligomers, due to steric factors, comprise six (α-CD), seven (β-CD), eight (γ-CD), and a higher number of D-glucose units, bonded through α-(1,4) glycosidic linkages to create cyclic structures, as presented in . Among the various sizes reported, α-, β-, and γ-CD are the most extensively studied, particularly in pharmaceutical and clinical applications. Three main CDs are crystalline, non-hygroscopic, and homogeneous substances and have different sizes of the central cavity.
 In light of the stronger binding of the CD molecules in the crystalline form, α-, β-, and ϒ-CD exhibit reduced solubility in comparison to linear dextrins. The improvements in CDs solubility can be reached by random substitution of their primary and secondary hydroxyl groups. Substitution with ethyl, methyl, carboxymethyl, hydroxypropyl, saccharide groups, hydroxyethyl, sulfobutyl, or CDs polymerization produces CDs derivatives. The hydrophobic moieties like methoxy functions can also contribute to these improvements. The chemical and physical characteristics of the CD derivatives are impacted by the position of the attached substituent inside the CD molecule, its structure and the quantity of substituents groups per CD molecule. CDs are prone to generate inclusion complexes with nonpolar drugs or organic molecules, because of their lipophilic center and hydrophilic outer layer ( ), ( ). β-CD is of the greatest commercial interest due to its optimal cavity size for forming inclusion complexes with numerous drugs ( ), and its cost-effectiveness ( ), ( ).
1.1.1.

## Cyclodextrin complexes
The complexation mechanism comprises a driving force, the nonexistence of covalent bonds, and the release of high-enthalpy water molecules within the cavity. Non-inclusion complexes are formed when the hydroxyl groups located on the external surface of the CD molecule establish hydrogen bonds with the pharmaceutical compound. Besides the non-inclusion complexes formed with water-soluble polymers and organic salts, CDs are also known to participate in inclusion complex formation. The drug/CD inclusion complex can enhance the aqueous solubility and the chemical and physical stability of the drug, and improve its delivery across biological membranes. CDs can encapsulate molecules of size and polarity that fit into their lipophilic inner cavity. The drug molecules encapsulated in the CD inclusion complex maintains a dynamic equilibrium with the uncomplexed molecules. CDs and their derivatives are used to strengthen the dissolving characteristics of poorly-soluble drugs, or control the dissolution speed of water-soluble drugs ( ), ( ), ( ), ( ), ( ) The formation of hydrogen bonds between polar hosts and the primary hydroxyls simultaneously establishes polar interactions. Moreover, hydrophobic hosts will be accommodated in the CD cavity due to hydrophobic van der Waals interactions ( ), ( ), ( ).
The formation of CD complex (DmCDn) occurs in a reversible manner (Equation ):
Equation 1mD+nCD↔DmCDnwhere m drug molecules (D) bind with n molecules (CD) to create a complex of m: n stoichiometry ( a)). The complex binding constant can be expressed as follows (Equation ):
Equation 2Km:n=[DmCDn][D]m[CD]n Electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, van der Waals contributions, the release of conformational tension and charge-transfer interactions, are the driving forces behind complex formation. Although the molecules of water within the cavity are accompanied by high energy, they form fewer hydrogen bonds. The shift in free energy throughout the process is not inherently negative, even though the release of water molecules from the cavity results in a negative enthalpy change. The water molecules which fill the weakly apolar CD cavity, in an aqueous solution, are thermodynamically unfavorable (apolar-polar interaction). Therefore, the water molecules within the cavity are replaced by the “guest molecules” that display less polarity compared to water ( b)). The “host” molecule is the dissolved CD, whereas the “driving force” is the replacement of the water molecules with high enthalpy by a compatible guest molecule. The water molecules are represented by small circles which are driven away by the guest (hydrophobic p-xylene), and the host (lipophilic cavity of the CD). The substitution of the polar-apolar interaction such as apolar guest and water ( b)- a)), apolar CD cavity and water ( b)-b)), and the apolar-apolar interaction (guest-CD, b)-c)), are the driving forces that facilitate inclusion complex formation ( ).
The 1: 1 drug/cyclodextrin complex (D/CD) is the most typical type of CD complex.
The potential of CD to form inclusion complexes enables their utilization in pharmaceutical science and technology. This contributes to enhancing drug stability, solubility, and absorption, controlling drug release profiles, masking odors and tastes, easing both local and systemic toxicity, and optimizing drug passage through biological membranes. To advance the pharmaceutical characteristics of native CDs concerning controlled drug delivery and inclusion capability, solubility, and toxicity, modified CDs have been synthesized. These consist of highly soluble ( ), hydrophobic ( ), and amphiphilic ( ) derivatives. Currently, more than 120 pharmaceutical products on the market are derived from CD complexes ( ). CDs and their derivatives have been effectively utilized to design supramolecular networks and innovative functional materials, optimizing host-guest interactions within the CD units and guest molecules.

1.2.

## Cyclodextrin-based polymers, their structure, properties, and applications
Chemical modification is a widely used strategy to enhance the effectiveness of parent CDs ( ). In CDs, the reactive hydroxyl groups (2, 3, 6-) can be altered by substituting the hydrogen atom or the hydroxyl group with various substituent groups. The OH groups at positions 2 and 6 are recognized the most reactive group. Through chemical modification, CD-based polymers are formed, consisting of two or more covalently bonded CD units ( ). The usage of CDs in pharmaceutical development can be extended by the incorporation of CD-based polymers. Deprotonation, condensation, and dehydration, are the basic synthesis methods. The reaction of the acidic OH group with a strong base generates an anion that displays the SN2-type polymerization (e.g., the reaction of the CD-ring with epichlorohydrin). Condensation refers to the direct reaction of CDs with a bi-functional linker (e.g., diisocyanate). CDs react with diol or diacid in sulphuric acid solution through the dehydration method producing polyethers and polyesters. Based on the reaction, and substituents, CD polymers may be water-soluble or insoluble. The water-soluble polymers are synthesized when only a few CD rings are bound to each other. This presents a much higher solubility than the parent CD, especially regarding βCD-based polymer. The solubility depends on the time of reaction, the reactivity of the cross-linking agent, and substituents. Citric acid, epichlorohydrin, and pyromellitic dianhydride are the most common cross-linkers.
 Water-soluble CD polymers ( a)) are typically obtained when a limited number of CD units are covalently coupled. These polymers can be synthesized by polycondensation of functionalized CD monomers (often via modification of the secondary hydroxyl groups), grafting CDs onto preformed polymers, or by carefully controlling the reaction to prevent gelation during sol–gel processes. The resulting products are soluble in aprotic organic solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), but insoluble in solvents of lower polarity (e.g., acetone, ethanol, and other low-polarity solvents). The molecular weight of the soluble polymers ranges from ∼2000 to several million Daltons, depending on the degree of substitution and chain length. Water-insoluble cross-linked CD polymers ( b)) are formed when a greater number of CD units are interconnected under conditions, such as elevated temperatures, prolonged reaction times, or higher monomer concentrations, that enhance extensive cross-linking, resulting in a shift from soluble to insoluble properties. This leads to the formation of three-dimensional polymeric networks, known as nanosponges (NSs), characterized by enhanced mechanical strength, chemical and thermal stability, stimuli-responsiveness, and tunable drug release profiles. These properties make them highly suitable for advanced applications in drug delivery, biomedical devices, catalysis, etc. These networks remain insoluble in aqueous and organic solvents but may swell significantly in aqueous media ( ; ; ; ), ( ), ( ), ( ). In aqueous environments, cross-linked CD polymers can swell to form hydrogels ( c)). These nanoporous 3D polymeric networks, formed either physically or chemically, retain substantial amounts of water and serve as efficient drug delivery matrices, allowing controlled drug release with optimized therapeutic profiles. Hydrogels also enhance drug stability and prolong residence time, especially for compounds with short biological half-lives ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
Nanosponges (NSs) introduce a new group of small sponge-like structures. Min Ma and De Quan Li, 1999, used the term nanoporous polymeric materials, or as are known “nanosponge” (NS) for the first time ( ). They are not soluble in either organic solvents or water, they are porous, non-toxic, and stable at temperatures up to 300 °C, and they exhibit a narrow size range with an average diameter below 1 μm. NSs can be found in both crystalline and para-crystalline forms which are predominantly influenced by the processing parameters. NSs are prepared by applying several methods such as the microwave-assisted and ultrasound-assisted synthesis, melting method, solvent method, and emulsion solvent diffusion method as presented in a) ( ), ( ).
 The most common method used in NSs synthesis is the solvent method. CD-based NSs can simply be synthesized through the reaction of the nucleophilic hydroxyl group of the chosen CD with an appropriate cross-linking agent, with two reactive electrophilic sites, that arrange molecular nanocavities into non-soluble nanoporous three-dimensional structures. Considering the elemental composition and characteristics, CD-based NSs may be divided into five consecutive generations ( ) as summarized in b).
The encapsulation potential of NSs for various molecules has led to considerable research initiatives. Consequently, CD-based NSs, due to their highly porous nanomeric structure, are perceived as a potential material across diverse fields such as enzymological, environmental, catalytical, agricultural, and pharmaceutical applications, biomedical, along with gas storage, flame retardants, etc ( ), ( ; ; ; ). The timeline of the progression of CD-based NSs shows that the NSs emerged over the years starting from a relatively simple polymer network, made up of crosslinked CDs, in the 1960s. The pharmaceutical application of CD-based NSs emerged in the period 2016–2019 ( ). CD-based NSs are of interest for drug delivery because they are not absorbed either from the gastrointestinal tract, or saliva through the skin, but serve as temporary drug carriers ( ). Across all findings, it has been determined that NSs can be deemed as a potential nanocarrier system as they improve the compatibility of drugs with biological systems, enhance the aqueous solubility of the selected drugs, and ensure more regulated and sustained drug release in comparison with CD-inclusion complexes or uncomplexed drugs ( ), ( ), ( ).
Due to the peculiar physicochemical properties of CD-based NSs, their complete characterization is a great challenge. Mastery of the analytical tools greatly enhance the evaluation criteria of CD-based NSs such as safety, enhanced inclusion capacity, biodegradability, and distinct swelling characteristics. These quality parameters are crucial for utilizing CD-based NSs in drug targeting and delivery, tissue engineering, and regenerative therapy. Many characterization techniques are applied in light of the increasing relevance of CD-based NSs. The major analytical tools used to characterize CD-based NSs include spectroscopic techniques such as Ultraviolet–Visible (UV–Vis) spectrophotometry, Raman spectroscopy, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), and Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy; thermal analysis methods like Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA); microscopy techniques such as Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM), Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), X-ray Diffraction (XRD), Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM); as well as techniques like zeta sizer, potentiometric titration, and Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) analysis. The confirmation of NSs formation is made by spectroscopic techniques, particularly FTIR.
The structural features of NSs are studied by NMR. The beneficial information regarding the formation of NSs, and host-guest interactions is reached by thermoanalytical techniques combined with XRD. SEM and TEM are techniques utilized to accurately investigate the size, shape, and detailed morphology of NS. CLSM investigates the cytoplasmic distribution of fluorescent dye incorporated in NSs, and their mechanism of action in body cells. The stability of NSs systems is evaluated by zeta potential and polydispersity index measurement ( ), ( ), ( ), ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). To improve healthcare outcomes, the safety and efficacy of the cyclodextrin-based formulations need to be investigated with human participants. Clinical research is essential for connecting medical theory with the practical use of cyclodextrin-based formulations.

1.3.

## Clinical applications
1.3.1.

## Clinical trials-cyclodextrins and cyclodextrin-based polymers
Clinical studies are carried out to ensure the risk-free status and effectiveness of products with meaningful impact on patients. The document of the European Medicines Agency, “ICH efficacy guidelines”, guides the clinical development lifecycle, including designing quality in clinical studies. The ICH document “General Considerations for Clinical Studies” is meant to depict general concepts as there are presented in ( ).
 The clinical trial is a systematic process that is utilized to discover the efficacy, effectiveness, and well-being of an innovative therapeutic drug or a medical device in diagnosing, preventing, or treating a medical condition. Safety dictates the optimal dose or the maximum tolerable dose required to achieve the desired clinical benefit within that dosage range. Efficacy defines the clinical efficacy, positive or negative, over placebo. Effectiveness depicts the drug's clinical benefits in a “real-life” situation ( ; ; ).
Objectives in clinical trials follow the step-by-step process to address the five questions such as Who?, What?, Why?, When?, and Where? ( ). Furthermore, a clinical trial needs to meet the fundamentals of scientific discovery as laid down in the 19th century.
 presents the steps of planning clinical trials most pertinent to the previous questions. To plan a clinical trial, a series of steps must be cleared, particularly those that are crucial for ensuring the relevance of the results to the real questions ( a)) faced by scientists or patients. The clinical trial will not be conducted without the clearance of the Ethical Review board, making it the most significant step. Planning and designing a clinical trial is a hard experiment that is required to test new treatments in humans and collect scientific data ( ), ( ).
 Clinical trials are performed in phases being designated via the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ( ). Each stage of clinical trials is performed with key players such as clinical trial coordinators, principal investigators, clinical research pharmacists, nurses, and monitors ( ).
 presents the roadmap for a drug bridging the gap between the lab and the clinic. It displays the clinical trial field that has developed in the last twenty years, influenced by developments in drug innovation and clinical study design.
 The tracking of such changes is made by ClinicalTrials.gov initiated in 2000 with over 500,000 registered studies (116,366 were classified as “observational” and 387,651 were classified as “interventional”) in ClinicalTrials.gov, as accessed on August 01, 2024 ( ) ( ), ( ).
 The drug discovery program begins because there is a clinical condition without adequate healthcare products. Therefore, during this discovery, intensive research leads to discovering a therapeutic candidate that will progress into preclinical, and clinical development, and thus become a marketed medicine ( ). In preclinical trials, laboratory tests of the new drug candidate are performed on animals to ensure their safety, tolerability, and efficacy, before testing it in humans. The preclinical development begins prior to clinical trials and encompasses both cell-based and animal studies ( ).
Stages of clinical trials cover Phases 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 clinical studies, and evaluate if an intervention will have positive or negative effects on humans as presented in . Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics are established during Phase 0. This phase has no diagnostic or therapeutic purpose, but it limits researchers to establishing if an innovative compound exhibits adequate pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic features in humans such as bioavailability, tissue distribution, and metabolism. Safety trials are considered during Phase 1, efficacy throughout Phase 2, and validation of safety and performance during Phase 3. Phase 3 clinical trials are considered the ideal model for proving the effects of an experimental therapy. Monitoring studies are completed in Phase 4, while studies on community engagement is accomplished in Phase 5. The clinical trial plan must be developed to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of the product and enhance the number of therapies becoming available on the market for patients ( ; ; ; ).
 To address the issue of low drug bioavailability, there are two main alternatives such as a) eliminating drug candidates with poor biopharmaceutical characteristics, and b) developing novel drug delivery systems (DDSs).
DDSs are gaining attention because they have the potential of overcoming drug bioavailability limitations ( ). DDSs must be safe, provide convenient administration and ease of production, and deliver their therapeutic effect for a more productive and reliable route to clinical use ( ), ( ).
CDs and cyclodextrin-based polymers (CD-based polymers) because of their benefits for drug delivery are the subject of clinical trials ( ). There are several research studies of CD ( ) and CD-based polymers concerning clinical trials ( ). Despite the promising potential of cyclodextrin-based polymers, their presence in clinical trials remains limited ( ), highlighting the need for increased focus and exploration of their therapeutic potential.
 Numerous clinical studies are being performed with CD. Some of the studies used CD as an excipient whereas other studies used it as a drug formulation to treat various diseases like a Niemann-pick disease and cancer. The 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (HP-β-CD) was commonly utilized within cell culture models to adjust cellular cholesterol levels. In pre-clinical studies on Niemann-Pick disease type C1 (NPC1) mouse models, HP-β-CD, discharged bound cholesterol from the late endosomal/lysosomal compartment in accordance with the dose, alleviated hepatosplenomegaly and neurological symptoms, and extended life expectancy. According to these pre-clinical studies, HP-β-CD was intravenously administered in human trials to assess its safety, pharmacokinetic profile, and pharmacodynamics in peripheral tissues and the central nervous system (CNS). HP-β-CD demonstrated beneficial pharmacodynamic effects in plasma (normalizing cholesterol levels), liver (reduction in cholesterol content), and CSF (reduction in total Tau), and the drug showed good tolerability. The dosing amount and administration frequency of HP-β-CD applied in this study were determined based on pre-clinical data of NPC−L- mice subjected to subcutaneous administration of 4000 mg/kg of 2-HP-β-CD. At this dosing level, 2-HP-β-CD was eliminated from the mice within 24h, and the effective dose 50 (ED50) in mice was nearly 230 mg/kg. Additionally, it was proven that the effective duration of 2-HP-β-CD was about 7 days. The observations present that cholesterol levels in humans accumulate 13 times slower than in mice, and thus the initial dosage in humans was estimated to produce a serum concentration ranging from 0.1 mM to 1.0 mM. Pharmacokinetic data collected from compassionate use patients demonstrate that a dose of 2500 mg/kg could lead to reach this serum concentration range. This range was established in pre-clinical studies as non-toxic to neurons and peripheral tissues and to avoid depleting cholesterol stores, that would trigger increased cholesterol synthesis. Phase 1 is conducted with a group of adults (18 years or older) diagnosed with NPC1 at the University of California San Francisco Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland in Oakland, California, US (Clinical Trials, gov number, NCT02939547). The goal of the study was to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacodynamic, and pharmacokinetics of two distinct doses of intravenous HP-β-CD (1500 mg/kg body weight and 2500 mg/kg body weight, Cyclo Therapeutics, Gainesville, FL), through the evaluation of plasma, serum, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, along with liver examinations upon completion of 7 infusions over 14 weeks ( ).
 shows that clinical trials involving CD are predominantly conducted in phase 1. The cyclodextrin-based polymer studied in several clinical trials is a linear CD polymer conjugated to Camptothecin (CLRX101/IT-101) and only one phase 1a/1b clinical trial was performed with a cationic linear CD polymer (CALAA-01) for siRNA delivery. Previous studies showed that α-CD can lower LDL cholesterol ( ), ( ). Therefore α-CD was investigated for its effect on total cholesterol in non-diabetic patients where it showed promising outcomes in the phase 2 trials. CD is also investigated in various cancers as a cyclodextrin-based polymer-cancer drug ( ).
The phase 3 clinical trial purpose focuses on evaluating the effectiveness of the intervention in a larger number of patients. This phase needs to demonstrate the therapeutic effectiveness and safety of the intervention compared to that of the existing medication. Randomized studies are performed in this phase. To eliminate the bias in the study results, double-blinded studies are implemented ( ), ( ). The new drug gets approval only after the successful completion of this phase. This phase also reports rare and long-term side effects ( ).
In this phase, β-CD is investigated as an excipient with the drug piroxicam to treat toothaches and sensitivity in patients ( ). FDA recently approved redeliver for COVID-19 treatment. The lyophilized formulation of remdesivir is being investigated which encompasses sulfobutylether β-cyclodextrin sodium as one of the inactive ingredients ( ). Phase 4 starts post-marketing of the drug and involves thousands of patients and lasts for many years. This clinical phase determines the long-term safety, effectiveness, and optimal use ( ).
Sugammadex is administered to patients after surgery in order to eliminate rocuronium and vecuronium, two neuromuscular blocking agents that inhibit the connection between nerves and muscles to prevent patient movement during surgical interventions. It forms highly stable inclusion complexes with these agents, enabling their efficient removal from the body without side effects. Clinical studies have shown that sugammadex does not significantly impact heart rate. Consequently, it is considered a safe and effective agent for the rapid reversal of neuromuscular blockade during and after anesthesia ( ; ; )

1.4.

## Efficacy and safety
1.4.1.

## Evaluation of the efficacy of cyclodextrin-based formulations in clinical trials over conventional formulations
A core challenge in pharmaceutical engineering involves the design of novel DDSs that optimize the health-promoting benefits of drugs and minimize the toxic effects of drugs on organs ( ). Camptothecin (CPT) has demonstrated to be an effective treatment for cancers during preclinical studies, but its clinical application has been restricted due to poor tolerability ( ).
Therefore, CRLX101 (formerly IT-101), a nanopharmaceutical based on CD is considered as a therapeutic drug for various cancers. CRLX101 is a novel nanomedicine that was formed via a distinctive process called “self-assembly”. In this instance, a nanoparticle drug conjugate is made up of a cyclodextrin-containing polymer, a linker molecule, and CPT. Furthermore, a drug-polymer conjugate is formed when CPT covalently links to the polymer containing cyclodextrin via a fragmentable linker. This conjugate subsequently self-organizes into nanoparticles, trapping more CPT in the nanoparticle core. Currently, CRLX101 is advancing in the concluding stages of clinical trials. CRLX101 offers a notable superiority over traditional CPT formulations because of its potential to extend the exposure time of cancer cells to the therapeutic agent. CRLX101 promotes a controlled and prolonged release of CPT, thereby strengthening its anti-cancer activity. By addressing the tumor microenvironment instead of individual cancer cells, CRLX101 may bypass common drug resistance mechanisms which are considered a major drawback of many conventional anti-cancer treatments ( ). Weiss et al. investigated patients with progressive solid cancers in phase ½a, administering CRLX101 intravenously for 1 h between two different dosing schedules, once a week at 6, 12, and 18 mg/m2, and once every 2 weeks at 12, 15, and 18 mg/m2. This study evaluated the side-effect profile, tolerability, and pharmacokinetic of CRLX101 in individuals with solid cancers. Results displayed that CRLX101 exhibits a distinctly modified pharmacokinetic profile compared to free CPT. Specifically, polymer-conjugated CPT exhibited mean maximum concentration (C_max) values ranging from 3580 to 8780 ng/mL, with peak concentrations typically occurring within ∼2 h of infusion. In contrast, unconjugated CPT, released gradually from the polymer, had a lower C_max of 116 to 351 ng/mL. Mean unconjugated CPT Cmax values ranged from 17.7 to 24.5 h across the evaluated dose range, consistent with the gradual and sustained release of CPT from the polymer conjugate. Furthermore, the area under the curve (AUC) for conjugated CPT was approximately 11-fold higher than that of the unconjugated form, reflecting prolonged circulation and exposure.
These findings suggest that cyclodextrin polymer conjugation reduces peak drug concentrations, prolongs drug release, and increases overall exposure, factors that contribute to improved safety and therapeutic efficacy. Furthermore, evidence of tumor localization was demonstrated histologically. Unconjugated CPT, observed by its natural fluorescence, and CRLX101 nanoparticles, marked by the fluorescence of Au-PEG-AD-modified nanoparticle staining, were not found in pretreatment tumor tissue but were identified in post-treatment tumor tissue, as demonstrated in ( ).
“Reproduced with permission from Springer Nature” G. J. Weiss et al., “First-in-human phase 1/2a trial of CRLX101, a cyclodextrin-containing polymer-camptothecin nanopharmaceutical in patients with advanced solid tumor malignancies,” Invest New Drugs, vol. 31, pp. 986–1000, 2013 ( ).
 Krasner et al., utilized the phase 2 studies to investigate the efficacy of CRLX101, as a single agent and with bevacizumab, for recurrent epithelial ovarian, tubal or primary peritoneal cancer ( ). Additionally, CALAA-01, a cyclodextrin polymer-based nanoparticle containing siRNA, was the first receptor-targeted nanoparticle systemically administered to humans, incorporating transferrin as a targeting ligand. ( ). This represents a promising example of receptor-mediated targeting in a clinical setting. The preclinical and clinical data for CALAA-01 demonstrated a consistent safety profile along with predictable biodistribution. Based on preclinical animal data, the main concerns for CALAA-01 in clinical use were kidney and liver toxicity. However, patients receiving CALAA-01 showed no changes in kidney function tests such as serum creatinine or blood urea nitrogen (BUN). This may be due to the pre-infusion IV hydration protocol protecting the kidneys, the administered doses being too low, or humans being less sensitive to the polymer-related kidney toxicity. No clear evidence of liver toxicity was observed, although some patients showed a slight, clinically insignificant increase in liver enzymes at the beginning of each treatment cycle.
Both CRLX101 and CALAA-01 utilize linear cyclodextrin polymers that self-assemble into nanoparticles and have shown promise in clinical development. In contrast, crosslinked cyclodextrin-based systems, such as nanosponges, have yet to reach clinical testing.
Clotrimazole (CTZ) is a synthetic imidazole derivative with antifungal activity that can be used to treat fungal corneal infection caused by Fusarium spp. Clotrimazole-β-cyclodextrin (CTZ- β-CD) is developed as an aqueous ophthalmic solution to boost the solubility of CTZ and its permeation through the ocular epithelium. The CTZ- β-CD is clinically assessed on keratitis in comparison with freshly formulated amphotericin B eyedrops (0.5 % w/v). The clinical trial based on past data involved 50 patients diagnosed with fungal keratitis who were divided into two groups, each consisting of 25 cases, depending on the dosage of the drug given: the CTZ group and the amphotericin B group. The CTZ formulation demonstrated notably greater effectiveness (P < 0.05) against yeast infection (Candida sp.) than amphotericin B. Results from the clinical study indicated that 16 patients (64 %) indicated a promising reaction to amphotericin B (P > 0.05), whereas 20 patients (80 %) responded positively to the CTZ–β-CD eyedrops, achieving total healing of the corneal ulcer. Amphotericin B is evaluated as a treatment for the eye infections associated with Candida, Fusarium, and Aspergillus. The in situ-formulated amphotericin B solution is unstable and acts as an eye irritant, and hence, it can be stored in the refrigerator for only 1 week post-preparation. As a result, CTZ is chosen for its broad-spectrum antimycotic action, and an inclusion complex with β-CD (in eyedrop form) is developed to improve its water solubility. Two patients with fungal keratitis and hypopyon (Rasool et al.) are presented in ( ).
“Reproduced with permission from Springer Nature”, B. K. A. Rasool and H. M. Salmo, “Development and Clinical Evaluation of Clotrimazole – β -Cyclodextrin Eyedrops for the Treatment of Fungal Keratitis,” AAPS PharmSciTech, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 4–10, 2012 ( ).
 
1.4.2.

## Safety profile of cyclodextrin-based formulations based on clinical trial data
Safety is pivotal in the choice of pharmaceutical excipients. Natural CDs and their derivatives are categorized as non-active ingredients and recognized as excipients in pharmaceutical formulations by U.S. FDA. The toxicity of CD is influenced by the route of administration. All three parent CDs are “generally recognized as safe” (GRAS) by the U.S. FDA ( ). Natural CDs are classified as non-toxic upon oral intake, owing to their inability to be absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. Both α-CD and β-CD are not affected by human amylase but are easily broken down by microflora within the gastrointestinal system and excreted intact in feces, while ϓ-CD is digested by this enzyme ( ). ϓ-CD is recognized safe (GRAS) by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. The intake of ϓ-CD in formula diets comprises up to 18g/person/day ( ). When given via parenteral routes, CDs are rapidly eliminated from the body without undergoing metabolism. When administered intravenously, α-CD, β-CD, and related compounds are unsafe. This is due to their ability to form crystals and gather in kidney tissue, resulting in nephrotoxicity. The natural α-CD and β-CD exhibit greater toxicity compared to their water-soluble derivatives. Hydroxypropyl cyclodextrin (HP-β-CD) and sulfobutylether cyclodextrin (SBE-β-CD)are approved for use in parenteral solutions due to their safety. Meanwhile, the use of methylated CDs with surface activity is more limited. The MTT assay was utilized to assess the cytotoxicity of random methyl β-cyclodextrin (RM-β-CD) on buccal mucosa, revealing that 10 % RM-β-CD caused inflammatory effects based on the duration of exposure. Additionally, 2 % and 5 % RM-β-CD are considered safe for buccal administration of drugs. While methylated CDs exhibit corrosive effects on tissues, some commercial products consist of RM-β-CD, such as nasal formulations (Aerodil) and eyedrops (Clorocil) ( ). Notably, a single oral dose of 8 g ϓ-CD was found to be well tolerated in human subjects. The tolerance was assessed in a placebo-controlled, double-blind crossover trial with 24 healthy volunteers. Numerous clinical investigations have been performed with both IV and oral itraconazole solutions, a formulation comprising 1 % itraconazole and 40 % HP-β-CD. Human trials have shown that HP-β-CD demonstrates good tolerability when co-administered orally alongside itraconazole at doses of 200 mg/kg twice daily, totaling 400 mg/kg/day. Furthermore, the maximum orally administered dose of SBE-β-CD to humans is no less than 12 g, without any observed adverse effects. A single intravenous dose of up to 3 g of HP-β-CD in healthy volunteers was easily tolerated without indications of kidney toxicity. No significant abnormalities were detected after a 1 h intravenous infusion of SBE-β-CD, given at 96 mg/kg, with doses given at 12-h intervals for the initial two administrations, and subsequently at 48 mg/kg at 12-h intervals over a period of 2–9 days ( ). The clinical study of the previously discussed nanomedicine, CRLX101, does not contribute to toxicity in the treated patients. Therefore, this study resulted in establishing the foundation for international clinical development of CRLX101 over multiple tumor varieties ( ). Furthermore, a single-blind randomized study in a Phase 1 clinical trial among 36 healthy volunteers showed that HP-β-CD is safe and can be considered as a novel adjuvant for human influenza vaccine ( ).

1.5.

## Formulation technologies
Pharmaceutical formulation is a multi-stage process in which the active pharmaceutical ingredient is combined with various components, taking into account pH, solubility, particle size, and polymorphism, to reach the desired therapeutic effects ( ). Various formulation technologies are developed to confront diverse therapeutic needs ( ), and to overcome biopharmaceutical challenges like the bioavailability and solubility of poorly soluble compounds ( ). These formulation approaches comprise chemical or structural modification, water-soluble polymer, bio-conjugation, amorphous drug-solid systems, particle size reduction, nanoparticulate techniques, nanocrystal methods, guest-host complex formation and lipid-based technologies ( ). Novel formulation strategies are preferred for drugs with poor solubility, as traditional approaches frequently fail to address this challenge effectively. Solid dispersion technologies include the stabilization of a drug in its amorphous form, encapsulated in a carrier matrix made up of at least two parts such as a primarily hydrophilic solid dispersion carrier and a drug with low-solubility. The preparation methods of solid dispersion are the melting method (fusion method, melt agglomeration, hot melt extrusion), physical mixing or kneading method, melting solvent method, and solvent evaporation (spray drying, super critical fluid technology, electrospinning, lyophilization, co-precipitation). CDs may be utilized to generate a host-guest inclusion complex and hence improving the dissolution of compounds with limited solubility. The preparation methods of inclusion complexes are kneading, co-precipitation, grinding, super critical carbon dioxide, spray-drying, microwave irradiation, etc. Developing a self-emulsifying drug formulation is another strategy to formulate challenging drugs through the emulsification of oils, surfactants, and cosolvents within the aqueous solution of the gastrointestinal tract under very gentle conditions of agitation. The methodologies available for the lipid-based formulation comprise high-pressure homogenization (HPH), solvent emulsification-diffusion technique, water/oil/water (w/o/w) double emulsification method, ultrasonication, super critical fluid technique, electrospray method, membrane contractor technique, solvent injection method, desolvation technique, etc. Nanoparticles with high surface area enhance dissolution and offer the potential for active or passive targeting of drugs. High-pressure homogenization (HPH), milling, liquid antisolvent (LAS) precipitation, and supercritical fluid (SCF) are various methods to produce nanoparticles ( ), ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
 offers a brief overview of the various cyclodextrin-based formulation strategies for drug delivery. It presents details and key findings on the formulation type, preparation method, delivery system components, and therapeutic benefits. Various approaches such as a) inclusion complexes of CDs, b) nanosuspensions, and c) nanostructured lipid carriers. have been mainly explored to formulate cyclodextrin-based formulations.
 
1.6.

## Regulatory status
Despite the large number of CD-based approved products, which indicate a bright future ahead, regulatory agencies remain skeptical about the use of CDs. Agencies will gain more confidence and ease restrictions on the usage of CDs, with an improved understanding of the weaknesses and strengths ( ). Various CDs are included in widely recognized pharmacopeias such as the European Pharmacopoeia, National Formulary, US Pharmacopoeia ( ), and Japanese Pharmaceutical Codex (JPC) ( ), ( ). It is crucial to recognize if an excipient of pharmaceuticals has formerly been used in the marketed formulations ( ). The legal status of CDs influences their usage as an excipient in pharmaceutical products. As indicated by the European Medicines Agency (EMA), excipients are divided into four distinct groups: excipients outlined in the European Pharmacopoeia (EP), excipients outlined in a pharmacopoeia from an external country, excipients not outlined in any pharmacopoeia, and innovative excipients ( ). In Japan, native CDs are viewed as natural products with minimal restrictions in medicines and foods. In Western countries, the intake of native CDs is monitored by the Joint WHO/FAO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA), with pharmaceutical applications regulated by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in Europe and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States of America. Native CDs can be ingested with minimal absorption, and are deemed “Generally Recognized as Safe”, by the FDA. α-CD and ϓ-CD can be consumed freely, while the daily oral dose of β-CD is up to 5 mg per kilogram of body weight. In terms of parenteral use, native CDs are under much tighter controls. Due to the potential risk of renal toxicity, the EMA opposes the intravenous administration of α-CD and β-CD. Additionally, native CDs can induce hemolysis in vitro, at concentrations of 6, 3, and 16 mM for α-, β-, and γ-CDs, by extracting cholesterol and phospholipids from the erythrocyte membrane ( ), ( ). In Europe, only α-CD, 2-HP-β-CD, and SBE-β-CD are approved by the EMA for use in parenteral formulations. The FDA in the U.S. has also authorized ϓ-CD for intravenous delivery ( ). HP-β-CD is among the safest chemically modified CDs for oral, parenteral, rectal, ocular, and dermal pharmaceutical formulation, whereas SBE-β-CD is utilized in oral and parenteral formulations. Furthermore, methylated derivatives of CDs are banned from pharmaceuticals, apart from randomly methylated β-CD (RM-β-CD) which is authorized for topical application, because of their high potential to cause haemolysis and their high lipophilicity ( ).

1.7.

## Future perspectives
CDs are a significant category of pharmaceutical excipients that have emerged as DDSs owing to their capacity to elevate the therapeutic effectiveness of numerous drugs. CD-based formulations are easily and efficiently manufactured, ensuring safety for various administration routes. Since the launch of the Prostarmon E™ sublingual tablet as the initial CD-based pharmaceutical product in 1976, the number of approved products has progressively increased ( ), ( ). However, the limited efficacy of native CDs has advanced with chemical modifications to improve their properties ( ). As highlighted in this review, clinical investigations have presented that CDs are utilized for the therapy of Niemann-Pick disease Type C1, and polymeric CDs are used for tumor targeting. In the future, clinical studies of additional CD-based formulations, with a focus on CD-based polymers are required for the successful commercialization of these products. The CD-based polymers ( ) are constantly developing as a suitable carrier system due to the challenges linked to controlled drug release and targeted drug delivery.
 Along with the issues discussed in this review, the clinical investigations of CD-based formulation in the treatment of various diseases will facilitate better their management and side effects. The safety and clinical efficacy data presented in all studies must be confirmed through multicenter trials to meet FDA and EMA standards. Clinical scientists need to develop skills in productive strategies to promote patient involvement throughout the research process.
Furthermore, in a clinical trial, artificial intelligence (AI), through the stimulation of human intellect by machines, can provide excellent clinical and medical solutions.

1.8.

## Clinical trial design using artificial intelligence (AI)
Clinical trials are lengthy and resource-intensive processes, often taking 10–15 years to bring a new therapeutic agent to market. In recent years, the rapid advancement of information technologies has enabled the integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into clinical trial design. AI contributes significantly to various aspects of drug development, including target identification, side effect prediction, and optimization of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies, particularly in oncology ( ; ; ; ). Within this context, AI accelerates target discovery, predicts drug toxicity profiles, and facilitates personalized treatment strategies.
Despite these advantages, the integration of AI into clinical workflows must navigate challenges associated with human expertise, such as clinical intuition, medical judgment, and ethical decision-making. Therefore, collaboration between technologists and clinicians is essential to address the regulatory, ethical, and practical challenges associated with the use of AI in clinical research ( ). Key considerations for incorporating AI and machine learning (ML) into clinical trials are summarized in . These include model validation, interpretability, bias mitigation, and patient safety ( ). AI and ML are now widely adopted across biotechnology companies, academic institutions, and the pharmaceutical industry. Applications include drug target identification, prediction of physicochemical properties of compounds, medical image analysis, and the integration of multimodal data through deep learning techniques ( ). These implementations underscore the shift of AI from theoretical research to real-world impact, delivering measurable improvements in clinical and healthcare outcomes ( ). In particular, predictive modeling enables clinicians to identify high-risk patient populations, optimize treatment protocols, and potentially reduce healthcare costs ( ), ( ). Nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems, such as polymeric, metallic, or liposomal carriers, offer advantages including improved pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, enhanced drug efficacy and solubility, protection from degradation, and reduced toxicity. However, individual patient variability and molecular heterogeneity continue to present significant therapeutic challenges. To address these complexities, the integration of AI and nanotechnology presents a promising and transformative approach. AI tools can process large-scale biomedical data, predict pharmacological behavior, anticipate disease progression, and tailor therapies to patient-specific profiles.
 In nanomedicine, AI facilitates the planning and synthesis of nanomaterials, real-time optimization of surface morphology, and the fine-tuning of critical parameters such as particle size and surface charge. This convergence of AI and advanced drug delivery enables the rational design of nanocarriers with predefined biological behaviors and interaction profiles (e.g., with membranes or immune cells), as illustrated in . Several AI-driven platforms, including PREDICT, NetLapRLS, SLAMS, and DTINet, have been developed to integrate heterogeneous data sources for predictive modeling in drug development.
 ( ; ; ; ; ). Notably, Anderson et al. conducted computational studies on β-CD inclusion complexes using potential of mean force (PMF) and metadynamics simulations. Their findings highlighted the influence of substitution patterns on host–guest interaction dynamics, offering valuable insights into the design of novel CD-based drug delivery systems ( ).
Nonetheless, the clinical translation of nanoparticle-based therapies remains hindered by the complex and often unpredictable pharmacokinetic behavior of nanocarriers, specifically, their biodistribution, accumulation, and clearance. Traditional AI models show promise but are often constrained by reliance on empirical data alone, lacking incorporation of mechanistic insights ( ).
To address this, proposed a hybrid modeling framework combining AI with physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling. This approach enables biologically grounded and individualized predictions of drug behavior by integrating physiological and disease-specific parameters into AI systems, thereby improving both accuracy and interpretability. Building on this concept, introduced a multi-view deep learning model that incorporates nanoparticle attributes (e.g., surface charge, particle size) into an ensemble system using deep neural networks, XGBoost, and Random Forest algorithms. Coupled with PBPK modeling, the framework accurately predicts key critical pharmacokinetic parameters, such as KTRESmax, KTRESn, KTRES50, and KTRESrelease, that govern nanoparticle distribution and tumor-specific release. These strategies are particularly relevant for CD-based nanocarriers, where drug inclusion efficiency, formulation type, and administration route significantly influence in vivo performance holding strong potential to advance precision nanomedicine and improve the clinical success of CD-based therapeutics.

2.

## Conclusion
CD-based drug delivery systems (DDSs) are broadly applied for efficiently delivering their therapeutic effect and reducing drug toxicity to organs. CDs, CD derivatives, and CD-based polymers are promising carrier systems, as is evident from all the findings, to enhance the drug biocompatibility and aqueous solubility, improve drug permeability across biological barriers, mask odors and tastes, etc. CD-based polymers provide a more regulated and prolonged drug release versus CD-based inclusion complexes or non-complexed drugs. The clinical trial plan is progressing to ascertain the performance and safety profile of the CD-based formulations. CDs and CD-based polymers in light of their advantages for drug delivery are the subject of clinical trials. Therefore, a connection between their structure, properties, and current applications with clinical research is essential for connecting medical theory with the practical use of cyclodextrin-based formulations. This will lay the groundwork for the market availability of CD-based therapies for patients.

## CRediT author statement
Term: Definition.
Conceptualization: Gjylije Hoti; Neha Bajwa; Jitender Madan; Francesco Trotta.
Methodology: Gjylije Hoti; Neha Bajwa.
Validation: Gjylije Hoti; Neha Bajwa; Preet Amol Singh.
Investigation: Gjylije Hoti; Neha Bajwa; Fabrizio Caldera; Claudio Cecone; Rita Spagnolo.
Resources: Gjylije Hoti; Neha Bajwa; Preet Amol Singh; Ibrahim Hussein.
Writing - Original Draft: Gjylije Hoti; Neha Bajwa.
Writing - Review & Editing: Gjylije Hoti, Neha Bajwa, Fabrizio Caldera, Preet Amol Singh, Ibrahim Hussein, Claudio Cecone, Adrián Matencio, Rita Spagnolo, Monica Argenziano, Roberta Cavalli, Jitender Madan; Francesco Trotta.
Visualization: Gjylije Hoti; Neha Bajwa; Preet Amol Singh; Ibrahim Hussein; Adrián Matencio; Monica Argenziano; Roberta Cavalli.
Supervision: Jitender Madan; Francesco Trotta.
Project administration: Jitender Madan; Francesco Trotta.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgment
The authors are thankful to the CYCLONET-Young investigator Fellowship 2019 for granting Dr. Neha Bajwa a Research Training Fellowship, which enabled her to carry out research at the Department of Chemistry, University of Turin, Italy, under the guidance of Prof. Dr. Francesco Trotta.
The research activity of G.H. is part of the NODES project, which has received funding from the MUR–M4C2 1.5 of PNRR with the grant agreement no. ECS00000036.
The authors acknowledge their support from Project CH4.0 under the MUR program “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza 2023–2027” (CUP: D13C22003520001).
A.M is receiving a Ramon y Cajal Contract (Grant RYC2023-043196-I) funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by the FSE+.

## Contributor Information
Gjylije Hoti, Email: gjylije.hoti@unito.it.
Neha Bajwa, Email: nehabajwa2765@gmail.com.
Fabrizio Caldera, Email: fabrizio.caldera@unito.it.
Preet Amol Singh, Email: preetnabha67@gmail.com.
Ibrahim Hussein, Email: ibrahim.mahussein@unito.it.
Claudio Cecone, Email: claudio.cecone@unito.it.
Adrián Matencio, Email: adrian.matencioduran@unito.it.
Rita Spagnolo, Email: rita.spagnolo@unito.it.
Monica Argenziano, Email: monica.argenziano@unito.it.
Roberta Cavalli, Email: roberta.cavalli@unito.it.
Jitender Madan, Email: jitenderpharmacy@gmail.com.
Francesco Trotta, Email: francesco.trotta@unito.it.

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be made available on request.