567jbcThe Journal of Biological ChemistryJ Biol ChemAmerican Society for Biochemistry and Molecular BiologyPMC1228451212284512122845124054499610.1016/j.jbc.2025.110406PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation drives mitochondrial dysfunction, mitophagy, and cancer progression in Cr(VI)-associated lung cancer
ZhangQiongsi PengJia LiZhiguo RaoXiongjian AllisonDerek B QiaoQi ZhangZhuangzhuang KongYifan ZhangYanquan WangRuixin LiuJinghui WangXinyi LiChaohao MaoFengyi ShaoQing GaoTianyan LiuXiaoqi 1Department of Toxicology and Cancer Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA2Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA4Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA5Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA∗For correspondence: Xiaoqi Liu Xiaoqi.Liu@uky.edu
‡These authors contributed equally to this work.
206202530171104061104062372025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) is a class I environmental carcinogen that induces lung epithelial cell transformation and promotes lung cancer progression by altering cell cycle regulation and cellular energy metabolism. In this study, we investigated the role of polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) in Cr(VI)-transformed (CrT) bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) and found that PLK1 expression was significantly upregulated in these cells, leading to impaired mitochondrial function and enhanced mitophagy, which in turn stimulated cell proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that PLK1 directly phosphorylates the pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 subunit alpha 1 (PDHA1) at Thr57, leading to its destabilization and disruption of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHc) integrity. This modification inhibits oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and induces mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, mitochondrial dysfunction triggers mitophagy and accelerates PDHA1 degradation, establishing a positive feedback loop that amplifies mitochondrial impairment and mitophagy, ultimately promoting cancer cell proliferation. These findings underscore the pivotal role of PLK1 in Cr(VI)-associated cancer progression and offer new insights into potential therapeutic targets to inhibit Cr(VI)-induced tumorigenesis.
Keywords: hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)), polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), mitochondrial dysfunction, mitophagy

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 May 21; Collection date 2025 Jul.

Hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) is a well-established carcinogen associated with an increased risk of lung cancer, particularly among workers in industries that manufacture or use chromate compounds ( , ). It is also a prevalent environmental pollutant, commonly absorbed through inhalation of cigarette smoke ( ), ambient air ( ) or ingestion of contaminated drinking water ( ). According to recent case studies from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), approximately 558,000 workers in the United States are potentially exposed to Cr(VI) and related compounds, leading to a significant increase in the incidence of lung and bronchus cancers with cumulative exposure ( , ). A recent meta-analysis estimated an overall standardized mortality ratio (SMR) of 1.41 (95% CI: 1.35–1.47) for lung cancer among 47 studies of workers with possible chromium (VI) exposure ( ). Therefore, the results continuously show that exposure to Cr(VI) is significantly associated with the risk of lung and bronchus cancer.
Although Cr(VI) has been defined as a human carcinogen, and epidemiology studies also imply an inseparable relationship between Cr(VI) exposure and lung cancer incidence, the mechanisms of Cr(VI)-associated carcinogenesis and tumorigenesis are still undefined. As the molecular mechanism of Cr(VI)-associated carcinogenesis is being explored continuously, it has been confirmed that Cr(VI) promotes chromosomal instability and damage by generation of Cr-DNA adducts ( ) and DNA oxidation ( ). Short-term Cr(VI) exposure results in DNA damage-mediated cell cycle arrest and apoptosis ( ), whereas chronic exposure induces cell morphology changes, cell transformation, and neoplastic transformation ( , ). The establishment of cell cycle checkpoints in response to Cr(VI)-induced genotoxic stress is essential for maintaining genomic integrity. However, bypassing these checkpoints enhances Cr(VI)-associated mutagenesis, leading to genetic or epigenetic modifications that confer growth advantages and promote uncontrolled proliferation.
Studies reported by Lal et al. revealed that Akt1 activation can bypass the G1/S checkpoint induced by Cr(VI) exposure in normal human diploid cells ( ). In the following studies, Chun et al. reported that another protein serine/threonine kinase, PLK1, is necessary for bypass of the G2/M checkpoint after Cr(VI) exposure in HLF cells and S. cerevisiae ( ). Cr(VI)-associated cancer progression not only requires cells to overcome the growth limitation imposed by cell cycle regulation but also requires a supply of energy sufficient to provide growth momentum, and requires cells to adapt to excessive apoptotic stress caused by DNA damage and reactive oxygen species (ROS). During prolonged adaptation to Cr(VI), transformed cells progressively acquire advantages in division and survival. However, the key mechanisms orchestrating chromium-induced cell transformation and cancer progression remain largely unexplored.
PLK1, a well-established mitotic regulator, not only plays a pivotal role in cell cycle regulation but is also involved in a diverse range of biological events. Dysregulation of PLK1 has been shown to disrupt many of these events ( ). In addition, PLK1 overexpression has been reported in a variety of cancers, including lung cancer ( , , , ), and higher PLK1 expression has been correlated with poor prognosis of cancer ( , ). Pre-clinical evidence suggests that the molecular targeting of PLK1 could be an effective therapeutic strategy in a wide range of cancers ( , ). Although it was indicated that PLK1 has a potential regulatory role in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) ( , ), details of the underlying mechanisms are still lacking. A more thorough study of PLK1 will enable us to comprehensively understand the accumulation of growth advantages, the transformation of energy metabolism, immune evasion, and anti-apoptosis of cancer cells. This will provide a new target for cancer therapy, thereby limiting the occurrence and progression of cancer.
In our study, we investigated the diverse functions of PLK1 in cancer development and found that PLK1 expression was significantly elevated while mitochondrial activity was reduced during Cr(VI)-induced cell transformation. Manipulation of PLK1 protein levels and kinase activity rescued mitochondrial function and resulted in a marked decrease in cancer cell proliferation in both in vitro and in vivo models. Mechanistically, we identified PDHA1, a key enzyme in oxidative phosphorylation, as a critical downstream target of PLK1 in mitochondrial regulation. Specifically, we demonstrated that PLK1 phosphorylates PDHA1 at Thr57, leading to the destabilization of the E1 heterotetramer, suppression of OXPHOS, inhibition of mitochondrial function, and activation of mitophagy. These findings provide valuable insights into the oncogenic role of PLK1 in Cr(VI)-induced carcinogenesis and highlight the potential therapeutic benefits of targeting the PLK1-PDHA1 axis for lung cancer treatment.

## Results

## Expression of PLK1 is upregulated during Cr(VI)-mediated cell transformation and cancer progression
Cr(VI)-associated cell transformation enhances cell proliferation and disrupts cell cycle regulation. As a key regulator of the cell cycle, PLK1 plays a critical role in eukaryotic cell division. Previous studies have reported that PLK1 is closely associated with cancer progression and is highly expressed in multiple cancer types. To investigate whether PLK1 is involved in Cr(VI)-associated carcinogenesis, we analyzed PLK1 protein levels in human bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) and Cr(VI)-transformed human bronchial epithelial cells (CrT). Compared to BEAS-2B cells, CrT cells exhibited significantly higher PLK1 protein levels, indicating that Cr(VI)-associated transformation leads to PLK1 overexpression ( A).
 In addition to analyzing CrT cells generated by chronic Cr(VI) exposure, we treated BEAS-2B cells with short-term sodium dichromate exposure. Western blot analysis showed that PLK1 expression levels increased in a dose-dependent manner following sodium dichromate treatment ( B). These findings suggest that both long-term Cr(VI) treatment and short-term Cr(VI) exposure elevate PLK1 expression in BEAS-2B cells.
To further assess the oncogenic potential of PLK1, BEAS-2B cells were transduced with a lentivirus encoding PLK1 or an empty vector (E.V). Equal numbers of BEAS-2B control (BEAS-2B E.V) and BEAS-2B PLK1-overexpressing (BEAS-2B PLK1-OE) cells were subcutaneously injected into nude mice. Tumors formed in 7 out of 15 mice injected with BEAS-2B PLK1-OE cells, while no tumors were observed in the BEAS-2B control group ( C). These findings indicate that PLK1 overexpression promotes carcinogenesis.
To determine the significance of PLK1 in Cr(VI)-associated carcinogenesis, we performed PLK1 knockdown in CrT cells using shRNA and confirmed knockdown efficiency via immunoblotting ( D). PLK1 knockdown in CrT cells significantly reduced cell proliferation compared to parental CrT cells ( E). Furthermore, CrT cells with stable PLK1 knockdown exhibited decreased cell migration ( F) and invasion ability ( G), reinforcing the notion that PLK1 positively regulates Cr(VI)-associated carcinogenesis.
To assess the impact of PLK1 knockdown on tumor growth in vivo, equal numbers of CrT shCtl and CrT shPLK1 cells were subcutaneously injected into nude mice. Tumor weights and volumes were significantly reduced in the PLK1 knockdown group compared to controls ( H–J). Immunofluorescence staining for Ki67 further confirmed that PLK1 knockdown resulted in reduced tumor cell proliferation ( K). Histological examination of xenograft tumors derived from CrT cells revealed a significantly lower number of mitotic cells in shPLK1 tumors compared to shCtl tumors ( ). These findings indicate that downregulation of PLK1 inhibits cancer cell proliferation in vivo. In conclusion, PLK1 plays a pivotal role in promoting Cr(VI)-associated carcinogenesis by enhancing cancer progression both in vitro and in vivo.

## PLK1 elevation results in inhibition of OXPHOS and downregulation of PDHA1
Prior studies reported that Cr(VI) exposure can cause respiration inhibition and defective mitochondrial function in vivo, ex vivo, in isolated mitochondria, and in intact cells. In addition, increasing evidence suggests that PLK1 activation is linked to tumor progression; thus, we speculated that PLK1 may be critical for regulating mitochondrial activity and oxidative phosphorylation in Cr(VI)-associated cancer progression. To verify our hypothesis, we treated CrT cells with the PLK1 inhibitor BI6727, followed by a mitochondrial stress test using the Seahorse Bioscience XFe96 analyzer. Inhibition of PLK1 kinase activity indeed enhanced basal respiration and spare respiratory capacity in CrT cells, supporting the notion that PLK1 plays a significant role in regulating OXPHOS. Given the high expression of PLK1 and abnormal mitochondrial metabolic function in various NSCLC cell lines ( ), we extended similar tests to H2009 cells, an NSCLC cell line, which confirmed our finding that inhibition of PLK1 kinase activity enhances OXPHOS ( A).
 To further evaluate PLK1’s role in OXPHOS regulation in Cr(VI)-associated cell transformation, we compared the basal respiration and spare respiratory capacity between CrT shCtl and CrT shPLK1 cells. While PLK1 knockdown had limited effects on basal respiration, CrT shPLK1 cells exhibited significantly higher spare respiratory capacity than CrT shCtl cells. This finding suggests that lower PLK1 expression enhances mitochondrial activity and ATP generation through oxidative phosphorylation under stress conditions ( B). Consistently, PLK1 downregulation also restored mitochondrial activity and rescued mitochondrial membrane potential in CrT cells ( C), further supporting its negative regulatory role. Abnormal changes in ΔΨm have been implicated in impaired cell viability and apoptosis induction ( ). To confirm these findings, we performed a mitochondrial stress test in BEAS-2B cells and BEAS-2B PLK1-overexpressing (PLK1-OE) cells. In agreement with our PLK1 knockdown results, BEAS-2B PLK1-OE cells exhibited reduced basal respiration and spare respiratory capacity ( D). These results strongly indicate that PLK1 acts as a suppressor of mitochondrial function and OXPHOS.
Having established PLK1 as a negative regulator of OXPHOS, we next sought to identify the mechanism underlying this effect. Pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 subunit alpha 1 (PDHA1), a key component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex, plays a central role in OXPHOS by converting pyruvate into acetyl-CoA, fueling the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle ( ). Interestingly, during Cr(VI)-induced transformation of BEAS-2B cells into CrT cells, we observed a simultaneous decrease in PDHA1 protein levels and an increase in PLK1 expression ( E). Given PDHA1’s essential role in OXPHOS, these observations suggest that the PLK1-PDHA1 axis may contribute to Cr(VI)-induced transformation.
To validate this hypothesis, PLK1 was knocked down in Crt cells, as indicated in F, the knockdown of PLK1 led to an upregulation of the protein level of PDHA1. As an important functional protein in mitochondria, the function and protein level of PDHA1 are regulated by multiple mechanisms, including regulation of transcription, post-translational modification, and mitochondrial biogenesis. To find out by which way PDHA1 is regulated by PLK1, CrT shCtl, and CrT shPLK1 cells were collected, followed by measurement of the levels of PDHA1 protein and mRNA. To first rule out a potential effect of PLK1 on mitochondrial biogenesis, we demonstrated that the transcriptional level of mtDNA-encoded cytochrome b (mtCYB) was not significantly altered in CrT shPLK1 cells compared with either CrT shCtl cells or parental BEAS-2B cells ( G). Notably, PLK1 knockdown only resulted in upregulation of the PDHA1 protein level ( F), but not PDHA1 transcriptional level ( H), indicating that PLK1-associated PDHA1 downregulation was likely due to post-translational modification.
To determine whether PLK1 directly regulates PDHA1 protein stability, we co-expressed tdTomato-PDHA1 and Flag-PLK1 in HEK293T cells. As demonstrated in I, PLK1 overexpression led to a dose-dependent reduction in PDHA1 protein levels. To further confirm whether PLK1 kinase activity is necessary for PDHA1 downregulation, we overexpressed PDHA1 along with three PLK1 constructs: wild-type PLK1, the constitutively active T210D variant, and the kinase-defective K82M variant. Expression of the T210D variant further suppressed PDHA1 protein levels, whereas the K82M mutant preserved PDHA1 expression ( J). Consistently, treatment of CrT cells with the PLK1 inhibitor BI6727 also restored PDHA1 levels, confirming that endogenous PDHA1 suppression by PLK1 is dependent on its kinase activity ( K). Additionally, xenograft tumors derived from PLK1-depleted cells exhibited higher PDHA1 protein levels, reinforcing the in vivo relevance of this mechanism ( L). Further, we examined PLK1 and PDHA1 expression in a tissue microarray (TMA) of 216 NSCLC patient samples using immunohistochemistry (IHC). As shown in M, our findings revealed a strong negative correlation between PLK1 and PDHA1 protein levels. In another unpublished study by Peng et al., we further demonstrated that higher PLK1 and lower PDHA1 expression are associated with poorly differentiated tumors and worse overall survival outcomes. These findings underscore the critical role of the PLK1-PDHA1 axis in lung cancer differentiation and prognosis.

## PLK1 phosphorylates PDHA1 at Thr57 and dysregulates PDHc activity
Having established that PLK1 is a negative regulator of PDHA1, we further explored the molecular details of the PLK1/PDHA1 axis. To determine whether PDHA1 directly interacts with PLK1, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assays in HEK293T cells expressing Flag-PLK1 and tdTomato-PDHA1. Both anti-Flag and anti-tdTomato IP confirmed a direct interaction between PLK1 and PDHA1 ( A and B). Similarly, an endogenous co-IP experiment in CrT cells confirmed that PLK1 and PDHA1 interact in vivo ( C).
 To address whether PDHA1 is a direct substrate of PLK1, a series of in vitro kinase assays were performed with purified PLK1 and recombinant PDHA1 in the presence of [γ-32P] ATP. As indicated in D, we showed that PLK1 phosphorylates PDHA1 in vitro. To map the phosphorylation site(s), we mutated all the potential serine and threonine residues into alanine and identified Thr57 (T57) as the PLK1 phosphorylation site ( E). To further verify this phosphorylation site, a polyclonal antibody that specifically targets the phosphorylated form of PDHA1 at T57 was generated ( F).
With the pT57-PDHA1 antibody, we addressed whether endogenous PDHA1 can be phosphorylated by endogenous PLK1 at T57 in vivo. As indicated, the pT57-PDHA1 antibody was able to detect the phosphorylation signal of PDHA1 in CrT cells, but the epitope was dramatically reduced in CrT cells upon PLK1 knockdown ( G). Similarly, doxycycline-induced PLK1 knockdown in H2030 cells decreased the phosphorylation level of PDHA1 at T57 ( ). The requirement of PLK1-associated kinase activity for the pT57-PDHA1 epitope was further tested with the PLK1 inhibitor BI6727. Accordingly, CrT cells were treated with nocodazole or BI6727 and harvested for IB, where nocodazole was used to enhance the kinase activity of PLK1 via M phase arrest, and BI6727 was used to inhibit the kinase activity of PLK1. As shown in H, nocodazole treatment increased the level of pT57-PDHA1, and co-treatment with BI6727 inhibited the level of pT57-PDHA1, supporting the notion that the PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation is PLK1 kinase activity-dependent.
Phosphorylation is a critical post-translational modification in which the addition of a phosphate group converts a protein region from hydrophobic and apolar to hydrophilic and polar. This alteration alters the protein's structure and enables the protein to change its conformation during interactions with other molecules. Additionally, the phosphorylated amino acid can serve as a docking site for other molecules, which may then recruit further proteins to facilitate the assembly or disassembly of protein complexes ( ). Through these mechanisms, phosphorylation can modulate protein function, either activating or deactivating the protein as needed. To further investigate the function of PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation, we predicted the initial structures of wild-type PDHA1 (PDHA1-WT) and PDHA1-T57-phosphorylation (PDHA1-T57pho) based on the sequences published on UniProt (P08559) by using AlphaFold2 ( ). We further investigated the conformation of the PDHA1-WT and PDHA1-T57pho in explicit aqueous solution using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations ( A). The final configuration of MD simulation showed that the PDHA1-T57pho (red) presents a conformation different from the PDHA1-WT (blue) in both the N-terminal and C-terminal. The difference in structural conformation implies a distinct function between PDHA1-WT and PDHA1-T57pho. The flexibility of PDHA1 can be characterized using the root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) of its Cα atoms. The value of ΔRMSFi between PDHA1-WT and PDHA1-T57pho was calculated as RMSFi (PDHA1-T57pho) – RMSFi (PDHA1-WT), where i refers to the Cα atom on amino acid residue i. As shown in B, RES1-25 (N-terminal) and RES293 to 303 show the ΔRMSF value < 0.5 nm, indicating that PDHA1-T57pho has a more rigid conformation compared with PDHA1-WT within these regions. We also found that RES 370 to 390 (C-terminal) presented the ΔRMSF value >0 nm, suggesting that more flexible structures are observed in the C-terminal when T57 of PDHA1 gets phosphorylated. In consonance with these findings, compared to the secondary structure of PDHA1-WT, both RES1-25 and RES293 to 303 in PDHA1-T57pho present more ordered structures. shows that T57 phosphorylation of PDHA1 induces the conversion of coil structures into helix structures in RES1-25 (a and b) and bend structures in RES293 to 303 (c and d). In contrast, RES370 to 390 has more β-sheet structures on PDHA1-WT than the PDHA1-T57pho ( E and F). This also explains why ΔRMSF ≤ −0.5 nm for RES1-25 and RES293 to 303, while the ΔRMSF value is >0 nm for RES370 to 390.
 We then examined the phosphorylation-mediated changes of the tertiary structures of the PDHA1. Residue-residue contact and mean smallest distance of Cα atoms on PDHA1-wt and PDHA1-T57pho were calculated and analyzed ( C). The residue–residue contact map of PDHA1-T57pho shows the loss of residue contact within both the N-terminal and C-terminal. RES293 to 300 region also shows an increased residue-residue contact, but not as significant as the N-terminal and C-terminal. To check the stability of the simulation, the radius of gyration (Rg) of the protein and the solvent accessible surface area (SASA) of the protein were investigated. The average Rg of PDHA1 was reduced from 2.230 nm to 2.096 nm upon T57 phosphorylation ( D). In addition, SASA% shows that the RES57 presents more exposure area on phosphorylated PDHA1 than the wild-type PDHA1 ( E). Together, these data demonstrate that PLK1-mediated T57 phosphorylation of PDHA1 results in PDHA1 protein structure changes, which possibly leads to distinct enzymatic activity and downstream consequences.
The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHc) is a multi-enzyme complex composed of multiple copies of three enzymes: pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1 component), dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase (E2 component), and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3 component). Considering E1 component is composed of catalytic PDHA1 and regulatory PDHB subunits, and the integrity of this unit is critical for PDH activity, we hypothesized that PLK1-mediated PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation induces a structural change in PDHA1 that might reduce the binding efficiency between PDHA1 and its binding partners. To investigate this, we established the final configuration of WT-PDHA1-PDHB and T57 phospho-PDHA1-PDHB heterotetramer by using AlphaFold2 ( F) in NaCl solution ( ) and characterized the interaction of the PDHA1-PDHB complex using protein-protein hydrogen bonds. The hydrogen bonds are defined by the criteria proposed by the Chandler group ( ). The distance between O (donor) and O (acceptor) is 0.35 nm. The angle of H (donor)-O (donor)-H (acceptor) 30°. show the average number of protein-protein hydrogen bonds (NHB) between the four proteins in the complex. The NHB is 22.01 ± 4.99 between two wt-PDHA1 and reduces to 11.82 ± 3.06 between the two pho-PDHA1. No significant reductions are observed between the other unit pairs upon phosphorylation ( G and H). The nearly 50% reduction of hydrogen bonds between two PDHA1 pairs may cause the decrease of the stability for the complex, further indicating that phosphorylation of PDHA1 at T57 interferes with hydrogen bond formation between two copies of the PDHA1 subunit in E1 and results in the binding collapse in E1 heterotetramer.
 Based on the hints we got from protein simulation, we generated CrT cells stably expressing three HA-tagged PDHA1 constructs (WT, T57D, and T57A), which were used to compare the binding capability between PDHB and the PDHA1 variants with a co-IP assay. As indicated in I, endogenous PDHB was co-IPed with wild-type HA-PDHA1. Of note, the phospho-mimetic PDHA1-T57D displayed a lower binding affinity to PDHB compared to that of wild-type PDHA1. In contrast, the phosphor-null PDHA1-T57A variant showed a significant increase in binding capability to PDHB. To further determine whether T57 phosphorylation-mediated PDHA1/PDHB binding collapse affects PDH enzymatic activity, PDHA1 protein was enriched from CrT cells stably expressing HA-PDHA1-WT or HA-PDHA1 variant by IP, followed by PDH activity measurement. Compared to PDHA1-WT and PDHA1-T57A, PDHA1-T57D demonstrates decreased PDH activity level, suggesting that PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation blocks PDHA1-PDHB binding and leads to a reduction of PDH enzymatic activity. The proteins of PDHA1-WT, A and PDHA1-T57D used in PDH enzymatic activity detection were also collected, followed by WB. Consistently, we found that the PDHA1-T57D variant binds less PDHB compared to PDHA1-WT and PDHA1-T57A ( J). Noting that PDH catalyzes the conversion of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate, the levels of acetyl-CoA in CrT cells expressing PDHA1-WT and PDHA1 variants were investigated. Cells expressing PDHA1-T57D showed a lower level of acetyl-CoA than that of cells expressing WT and T57A ( K). Collectively, these results suggest that T57 phosphorylation of PDHA1 alters its conformation, leading to E1 subunit collapse and further inhibiting PDHc activity. The inactivation of PDHc disrupts OXPHOS, forcing cells to rely on glycolysis and driving metabolic reprogramming in cancer. The mechanism by which PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation induces this metabolic shift is detailed in our other study, which will be published by Peng et al.

## PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation dysregulates mitochondrial function and induces mitophagy
We have demonstrated that PLK1 negatively regulates mitochondrial activity and that PLK1-associated PDHA1 phosphorylation results in PDHc inactivity. Given the central role of PDHc in mitochondrial energy metabolism, its dysfunction due to PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation is likely to contribute to mitochondrial impairment. To explore whether PLK1 affects mitochondrial function in a PDHA1-dependent manner, we performed mitochondrial stress tests on CrT cells stably expressing different PDHA1 variants (WT, T57A, and T57D). As shown in A, both basal respiration and spare respiratory capacity were increased in CrT cells expressing wild-type PDHA1 or PDHA1-T57A compared to control CrT cells. However, overexpression of PDHA1-T57D failed to rescue mitochondrial function, suggesting that PLK1-mediated inhibition of OXPHOS is due to PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation.
 To further examine mitochondrial health, we assessed mitochondrial ROS levels using MitoSOX, which accumulates in mitochondria due to its positive charge. We found that cells expressing PDHA1-T57D had lower mitochondrial ROS levels compared to cells expressing WT and T57A PDHA1 ( B). We next evaluated mitochondrial membrane potential using tetramethylrhodamine, ethyl ester (TMRE), a fluorescent dye sequestered by active mitochondria. Hyperpolarized mitochondrial membrane potential is a chronic feature of cancer, which facilitates cancer cells to antagonize apoptosis response and eventually contributes to cancer progression and drug resistance development ( ). As indicated in C, CrT cells stably expressing PDHA-T57A had the lowest TMRE fluorescence, whereas cells expressing PDHA-T57D had enhanced TMRE fluorescence, indicating that PLK1-mediated PDHA1 T57 phosphorylation promotes hyperpolarization of mitochondria. Consistent results were observed by using HEK293T cells expressing different forms of tdTomato-PDHA1 constructs (WT, T57D, and T57A), followed by TMRE and mitoSOX treatment to indicate mitochondrial membrane potential and mitochondrial ROS generation ( A and B). We further verified these findings in in vivo model using MEFs separated from PDHA1 T57D conditional knock-in transgenic mouse line as described in our unpublished work by Peng et al. As expected, MEFs transfected with Lenti-GFP-Cre, which can induce expression of PDHA1-T57D had a lower level of maximum respiratory capacity and ATP production compared to MEFs transfected with Lenti-GFP ( D and E). Mitochondrial superoxide generation was also downregulated in the Cre induction group in 3 out of 4 MEF lines ( F). These results are not surprising because PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation decreases the binding efficacy between PDHA1 and PDHB, which fundamentally impairs PDH activity as well as PDHc-related metabolic flux and eventually undermines mitochondrial physiology. Moreover, these metabolic changes and mitochondrial physiology alterations were largely reversed in cells expressing PDHA1-T57A compared to cells expressing PDHA1-T57D, further demonstrating that PLK1-associated inhibition of mitochondrial function is due to PDHA1 phosphorylation by PLK1.
Mitophagy is a selective form of autophagy that degrades damaged mitochondria to maintain cellular homeostasis ( ). In various kinds of cancers, mitophagy supports tumor survival, metabolic adaptation, and therapy resistance ( ). Understanding the roles of mitophagy in cancer is critical for developing targeted therapies that exploit this process to improve cancer treatment outcomes. Given our findings, we hypothesized that PDHA1 phosphorylation-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction may trigger mitophagy. Mitochondria are highly dynamic organelles that undergo continuous fission, fusion, biogenesis and mitophagy, all of which maintain mitochondrial morphology, homeostasis and inheritance in different cases of bioenergetics or oxidative challenges. Dysfunctional mitochondria often exhibit distinct morphological, for example, alterations in mitochondrial dynamics (fusion and fission) ( A), resulting in smaller, fragmented mitochondria. Mitochondrial fission is also considered a pre-step for mitophagy ( ).
 Using confocal microscopy, we observed that BEAS-2B cells have a more complete mitochondrial network compared to CrT cells. B illustrates qualitatively how elongation of the mitochondria severely underwent mitochondrial fission during cell transformation from a filamentous phenotype observed in the BEAS-2B cells to appearing fragmented and aggregated perinuclearly in the CrT cells. Similar experiments in CrT shCtl and CrT shPLK1 cells revealed that PLK1 downregulation restored mitochondrial network integrity, as indicated by increased mitochondrial mean branch length in CrT shPLK1 cells compared to CrT shCtl cells ( C). These findings indicate that PLK1 promotes mitochondrial fission, a precursor step to mitophagy, while PLK1 depletion preserves mitochondrial morphology. In addition, we noticed that PLK1 phosphorylation of PDHA1 at T57 results in PDHA1 re-localization from mitochondria to cytosol in BEAS-2B cells ( D and E). Further, we demonstrated that the PDHA1-T57D variant was localized in both cytosol and mitochondria in CrT cells, whereas PDHA1-T57A and wild-type PDHA1 were located exclusively in mitochondria ( F).
To directly assess mitophagy activation, we utilized the mitophagy indicator Su9-mCherry-GFP( G) ( ). Su9-mCherry-GFP is first expressed in mitochondria, where both mCherry and GFP signals are observed, resulting in a yellow color. When mitochondria are subjected to mitophagy and fused with lysosomes, only the mCherry signal is detected since the GFP signal is quenched due to the acidic pH of the lysosomes. The mitophagy index was calculated based on the degree of GFP and mCherry co-localization as measured by the Pearson coefficient. To determine the effect of PLK1 on mitophagy activation, we transfected the CrT shCtl cells and CrT shPLK1 cells with the mitophagy indicator. An additional group of CrT shCtl cells treated with FCCP was used as a positive control, indicating the level of mitophagy activation. Two days after transfection, we quantified the co-localization of GFP and mCherry. As shown in H, mitophagy activation was significantly inhibited in cells with PLK1 downregulation. To further confirm the functional importance of PLK1 on mitophagy, CrT shPLK1 cells were co-transfected with the mitophagy indicator and three different forms of PLK1 constructs (WT, T210D, and K82M), respectively. After 2 days, cells were harvested for mitophagy index analysis. As shown in I, compared to the cells expressing wild-type PLK1, we found no significant difference in mitophagy index in cells expressing PLK1-T210D. We did notice that in some cells with PLK1-T210D, the degree of GFP and mCherry co-localization was dramatically downregulated, indicating that cell expression constitutively active PLK1-T210D has a higher mitophagy activation than the kinase-defective PLK1-K82M variant. Furthermore, mitophagy activation was significantly blocked in cells expressing PLK1-K82M, suggesting that inhibition of PLK1 kinase activity attenuates mitophagy activation in CrT cells.
Considering that PDHA1 degradation is closely related to PLK1-mediated phosphorylation and the autophagy/mitophagy-lysosome pathway, we further addressed whether PLK1-associated PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation triggers mitophagy activation. Accordingly, three groups of CrT cells were infected with lentivirus encoding different forms of PDHA1 (WT, T57D and T57A). After puromycin selection, cells stably expressing these PDHA1 variants were transfected with the mitophagy indicator for 2 days, followed by mitophagy analysis. As shown in J, mitophagy activation was dramatically promoted in cells expressing phospho-mimetic PDHA1-T57D compared to that of cells expressing wild-type PDHA1. As expected, the PLK1 unphospho-mimetic PDHA1-T57A variant had no effect on mitophagy activation. Moreover, mitochondria-lysosome colocalization was significantly upregulated in BEAS-2B cells with PDHA1-T57D expression compared to both cell lines expressing PDHA1 WT or T57A, further implying that phosphorylation of PDHA1 at T57 triggers mitophagy activation ( K). Together, these findings demonstrate that PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation not only impairs mitochondrial function but also promotes mitophagy.

## PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation triggers its degradation through mitophagy
In the previous section, we demonstrated that PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation downregulates PDHA1 at the post-translational level; however, the underlying mechanism remained unclear. To determine whether this decrease results from protein synthesis inhibition, we compared the protein turnover of different PDHA1 variants (WT, phospho-mimetic T57D, and unphosphorylatable T57A) using a cycloheximide (CHX) chase assay. Compared to WT-PDHA1, PDHA1-T57D protein levels rapidly declined within 24 h of CHX treatment, whereas PDHA1-T57A remained stable for up to 48 h ( A). These findings confirm that PLK1-mediated PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation accelerates its degradation.
 Having established that PLK1 phosphorylates PDHA1 at T57 and induces its degradation, we next explored the underlying mechanism. Eukaryotic cells have two major protein degradation pathways: the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and the autophagy-lysosomal pathway (ALP). To characterize the pertinent regulatory pathway, 293T cells transfected with tdTomato-PDHA1 and Flag-PLK1 were treated with or without the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (25 μM) for 4 h. As shown in A, the expression level of PDHA1 was downregulated upon PLK1 co-expression compared to the control. However, the turnover of PDHA1 protein failed to be rescued with the inhibition of proteasome activity. Thus, PLK1-associated PDHA1 protein degradation is probably not mediated by the proteasome. To further characterize the degradative mechanisms, 293T cells transfected with tdTomato-PDHA1 and Flag-PLK1 were treated with or without the autophagy inhibitor 3-MA (3 mM) for 4 h. Surprisingly, PDHA1 protein, which was attenuated by PLK1 co-expression, returned to the control level upon inhibition of autophagy, suggesting that PLK1-associated PDHA1 protein degradation depends on autophagy ( B). To confirm this conclusion, 293T cells transfected with two tdTomato-PDHA1 constructs (WT and T57A) were treated with 3 different autophagy/mitophagy inhibitors, 3-MA, chloroquine, and liensinine, following 100 ng/ml nocodazole treatment. We found that wild-type PDHA1 protein degradation was enhanced by nocodazole treatment and blocked by autophagy/mitophagy inhibition. For cells expressing the T57A variant of PDHA1, neither nocodazole nor autophagy/autophagy inhibitor treatment affected the PDHA1 protein level. Therefore, PDHA1 protein degradation in PLK1 highly upregulated cells is mediated through autophagy, and the elimination of PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation prevents autophagy/mitophagy-mediated PDHA1 degradation ( C). In summary, we conclude that PLK1-associated PDHA1 degradation depends on ALP rather than UPS. To further confirm the impact of mitophagy on PLK1-mediated PDHA1 degradation, mitophagy-deficient cells were generated via knocking down ATG5 by siRNA ( D). Then, ATG5-KD cells were co-transfected with PDHA1 and PLK1, followed by the treatment with 3-MA. However, in ATG5-KD cells, both the degradative effect of PLK1 on PDHA1 and the restorative effect of 3-MA on PDHA1 were abolished ( E). This suggests that PLK1-mediated phosphorylation and degradation of PDHA1 are primarily driven by ATG5-mediated mitophagy.
Based on the result, PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation triggers mitophagy. While mitophagy primarily targets entire mitochondria for degradation, it can indirectly lead to the degradation of mitochondrial proteins. PDHA1 is a critical subunit of PDHc, which is located in the mitochondrial matrix, which means that it is likely to be engulfed by an autophagosome with impaired mitochondria. This might be a possible explanation of how T57 phosphorylated PDHA1 is degraded. In the process of verifying this hypothesis, we found that knockdown of PLK1 halted the accumulation of poly-ubiquitination on mitochondrial and conjugation of ATG5-ATG12, indicating that knockdown of PLK1 inhibits the activation of mitophagy ( F). In addition, we testified that the knockdown of PDHA1 facilitated the mitochondrial polyubiquitination and stabilization of Parkin on mitochondria, further suggesting that PLK1-associated PDHA1 downregulation promotes activation of mitophagy ( G). To further support this, mitochondria were isolated in CrT cells expressing these PDHA1 variants, and we compared the effects of PDHA1 variants on the activation of mitophagy. As shown in H, compared to cells expressing wild-type PDHA1 and PDHA1-T57A variant, PDHA1-T57D variant promoted mitochondrial poly-ubiquitination, stabilization of P62, and conjugation of ATG5-ATG12. In contrast, poly-ubiquitination of mitochondria was markedly inhibited in the cells expressing the PDHA1-T57A variant.
We further explored the effects of different PDHA1 variants on mitochondrial polyubiquitination and mitophagy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. First, we knocked down PDHA1 in the A549 and H2030 cell lines, then re-expressed wild-type PDHA1 along with two PDHA1 variants (T57A and T57D) ( B and C). Next, we assessed mitochondrial poly-ubiquitination levels in these cell lines. Interestingly, we observed a similar pattern to our previous findings: compared to A549 and H2030 cells re-expressing wild-type PDHA1, the PDHA1 T57D variant promoted mitochondrial poly-ubiquitination and downstream mitophagy markers, whereas the PDHA1 T57A variant exhibited the opposite effect ( I and J). These findings collectively demonstrate that phosphorylation of PDHA1 at T57 by PLK1 promotes mitophagy activation by inducing mitochondrial dysfunction, ultimately leading to PDHA1 degradation, which further exacerbates mitochondrial impairment.

## PLK1-mediated PDHA1 phosphorylation promotes tumor growth
Mitochondria are central to cellular energy production, metabolism, and the regulation of cell death. Mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy have been demonstrated to be intricately involved in cancer biology, influencing tumor initiation, progression, and treatment response ( , ). Having established that PLK1-associated PDHA1 phosphorylation negatively regulates mitochondrial function and leads to mitophagy, we investigated whether PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation has any impact on cancer cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo.
To assess this, we compared the proliferation rate of CrT cells stably expressing different forms of PDHA1 (WT, T57A and T57D). As shown in A, expression of PDHA1-T57A led to a marked decrease in cell proliferation compared to cells expressing wild type and PDHA1-T57D. In contrast, expression of PDHA1-T57D promoted cell growth compared to wild-type PDHA1. Notably, compared to parental cells without PDHA1 overexpression, both WT-PDHA1 and PDHA1-T57A-expressing cells exhibited reduced cell growth, consistent with the notion that PDHA1 promotes mitochondrial ROS generation and enhances mitochondria-associated apoptosis.
 To extend these findings in vivo, we performed xenograft tumor formation assays. Tumors derived from cells expressing PDHA1-T57D exhibited enhanced growth, whereas those expressing PDHA1-T57A showed a dramatic reduction in tumor progression ( B–D). These findings collectively indicate that PLK1-mediated PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation impairs mitochondrial function and promotes tumor growth both in vitro and in vivo.

## Discussion
In Cr(VI)-associated cell transformation, there is a significant inhibition of mitochondrial function and reduction of OXPHOS, which further promotes cancer progression. However, most of the research on Cr(VI)-associated cell transformation has focused on the effects of short-term or chronic Cr(VI) treatment on glycolysis, with limited investigation into the inhibitory mechanisms on mitochondrial function. In our study, we identified PLK1 as a key player in Cr(VI)-mediated cell transformation and cancer progression and as a link between Cr(VI)-associated cancer progression and OXPHOS reprogramming. PLK1 is a protein kinase known for its role in maintaining cell cycle homeostasis, and it has also been implicated in other physiological events, however, the mechanisms underlying PLK1's involvement in OXPHOS regulation are poorly understood, here we used lentivirus-based approaches or treatment with a PLK1 inhibitor to show that inhibition of PLK1 results in upregulation of OXPHOS in both CrT and H2009 cells, indicating that this observation is not limited to a specific cell line. Furthermore, overexpression of PLK1 in BEAS-2B cells led to inhibition of mitochondrial activity and contributed to tumor formation and growth, supporting the role of PLK1 in modulating mitochondrial function in the context of Cr(VI)-associated cancer progression.
To dissect the underlying mechanism of PLK1-associated inhibition of OXPHOS, we identified PDHA1 as the major downstream target in this process. As one of the most critical catalytic enzymes functioning in the metabolic flow from glycolysis to OXPHOS, PDHA1 has a well-documented role in cancer metabolism. Accumulating evidence has shown that the enzymatic activity and protein level of PDHA1 are significantly downregulated in a variety of cancers, including ovarian cancer, gastric cancer, and so on ( , ). We propose a detailed model to explain how the upregulation of PLK1 during Cr(VI)-associated transformation affects PDHA1. PLK1 phosphorylates PDHA1 at T57, and subsequently alters its conformation, leading to E1 subunit collapse and further inhibiting PDHc activity. The inactivation of PDHc further disrupts OXPHOS and impairs mitochondrial function. Using site-specific phospho-antibodies, we demonstrated that PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation indeed occurs in vivo in a PLK1-dependent manner.
Under normal physiological conditions, cells tend to maintain an intact mitochondrial network to efficiently supply energy. However, in cancer cells, mitochondrial dynamics are altered to adapt to increased energy demands and environmental stress. Elevated levels of PLK1, consistent with its oncogenic role, have been shown to induce impaired mitochondrial function and mitochondrial fission, likely through phosphorylation of PDHA1. Mitochondrial fission is considered a precursor of mitophagy ( ) which is frequently reported to drive malignant phenotypes of cancer. Mitophagy is a selective mode of autophagy in which mitochondria are specifically targeted for degradation at the autophagolysosome, which helps the recycling of damaged mitochondria or dysfunctional proteins and enhances cancer progression. Our findings show that PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation leads to PDHA1 translocation from mitochondria to the cytosol, likely due to phosphorylation-induced binding collapse between PDHA1 and PDHB within the E1 complex and subsequently activates mitophagy. Next, we verified that PDHA1-T57 phosphorylation-mediated degradation is mainly by activation of mitophagy, as PDHA1 levels were restored after being treated with several autophagy/mitophagy inhibitors.
PLK1-mediated phosphorylation of PDHA1 at Thr57 destabilizes PDHA1, disrupts PDH complex integrity, and impairs the respiratory chain, resulting in reduced OXPHOS and mitochondrial dysfunction. This mitochondrial impairment, in turn, triggers mitophagy, which selectively degrades damaged mitochondria along with associated mitochondrial proteins, including PDHA1. The progressive depletion of PDHA1 further impairs mitochondrial function and reinforces mitophagy. This positive feedback loop ensures that once PLK1 expression is elevated in CrT cells, mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy continue to escalate, ultimately enhancing cancer cell proliferation. This finding emphasizes the importance of targeting the PLK1-PDHA1 axis in potential therapeutic strategies.
In summary, our study uncovers a novel mechanism by which PLK1 upregulation during Cr(VI)-associated cell transformation induces mitochondrial dysfunction through PDHA1 phosphorylation. These findings highlight the interplay between cell cycle regulators and mitochondrial function in cancer progression. Furthermore, elucidating the PLK1-PDHA1 axis not only deepens our understanding of Cr(VI)-associated transformation but also suggests that targeting this pathway could present promising therapeutic opportunities for cancer treatment. As mentioned in the previous part, PDHA1 is a critical catalytic enzyme that drives the metabolic flow from glycolysis to OXPHOS. The regulatory role of the PLK1-PDHA1 axis in cancer metabolism is further explored in the unpublished study by Peng et al., which demonstrates that PLK1 phosphorylation of PDHA1-T57 drives metabolic reprogramming in lung cancer. Notably, the combination of PLK1 and PDK inhibitors synergistically suppresses lung tumor growth, underscoring the therapeutic potential of targeting the PLK1-PDHA1 axis in lung cancer treatment.

## Experimental procedures

## Cell culture, chemicals, and reagents
Human bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B (ATCC Cat# CRL-9609, RRID:CVCL_0168), human embryonic kidney 293T cell line was a gift from Dr Andrea Kasinski (Purdue University), and lung cancer cell lines H2009 (ATCC Cat# CRL-5911, RRID:CVCL_1514), H2030 (ATCC Cat# CRL-5914, RRID:CVCL_1517), and A549 (ATCC Cat# CCL-185, RRID:CVCL_0023) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). Chromium-transformed (CrT) cells were generated as described. BEAS-2B, HEK-293T, CrT and A549 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Sigma-Aldrich, D5796) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (R&D, S11550H) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, A5955) at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 in air. H2009 and H2030 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Sigma-Aldrich, R8758) supplemented with 10% and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2.
Sodium dichromate dehydrate (Sigma-Aldrich, 398063) was used for Cr (VI) treatments. For short-term exposure to Cr (VI), cells were grown to 80 to 90% confluent, and then the medium was replaced with DMEM medium containing sodium dichromate dehydrate at the dose and duration indicated. BI6727, MG132, cycloheximide, 3-MA, chloroquine, liensinine and doxycycline were obtained from Selleckchem.

## Immunoblotting and antibodies
Upon harvest, cells were suspended with TBSN buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.5% NP-40, 5 mM EGTA, 1.5 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM sodium vanadate, and 150 mM NaCl) with protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors, sonicated and then centrifuged, and protein concentration was measured by Protein Assay Dye Reagent from Bio-Rad. Equal amounts of protein from each sample were mixed with SDS loading buffer, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and transferred to PVDF membranes, followed by incubations with appropriate primary and secondary antibodies.
Antibodies against PDHA1(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3205, RRID:AB_2162926), phospho-Histone H3 (Ser10) (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3377, RRID:AB_1549592), GST(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 2622, RRID:AB_331670), VDAC(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 4661, RRID:AB_10557420), GAPDH(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 5174, RRID:AB_10622025), HA(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3724, RRID:AB_1549585), ATG12 (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 4180, RRID:AB_1903898), P62(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 39749, RRID:AB_2799160), PINK1(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 6946, RRID:AB_11179069), β-actin(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 4970, RRID:AB_2223172), and α-tubulin(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3873, RRID:AB_1904178) were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Antibodies against Ki-67(Abcam Cat# ab15580, RRID:AB_443209), Parkin(Abcam Cat# ab77924, RRID:AB_1566559), PDHB(Abcam Cat# ab155996, RRID:AB_2814826) were purchased from Abcam. Antibodies against PLK1(Millipore Cat# 05-844, RRID:AB_310836) was obtained from MILLIPORE. Antibodies against Flag (Sigma-Aldrich Cat# F3165, RRID:AB_259529) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Antibodies against tdTomato(Origene Cat# TA150128, RRID:AB_626858) was obtained from Origene. Antibodies against LAMP2(Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-18822, RRID:AB_626858) was obtained from Santa Cruz. Antibodies against phospho-PDHA1 (T57) were generated by SinoBiological (Wayne, PA). In brief, a peptide containing phosphorylated-T57 was used to immunize two rabbits over a 2-month period. Serum was collected, followed by affinity chromatography-based purification to obtain pT57-PDHA1 antibodies.

## Cell viability assay
Cells were seeded onto 96-well plates and incubated overnight, then treated with the respective agents for an additional 3 days. Cell viability was determined using AquaBluer (MultiTarget Pharmaceuticals LLC) as an indicator of viable cells according to manufacturer’s recommendation. Each assay consisted of 6 replicate wells and was repeated at least three times. Data are expressed as the percentage survival of the control, which was calculated using fluorescence after correcting for background noise.

## Cell invasion assays
The cell invasion assays were performed using Transwell (6.5-mm diameter, 8-μm pore polycarbonate membrane), which was obtained from Corning. Cells (105) in 200 μl medium were placed in the upper chamber, and the lower chamber was filled with 1 ml serum-free medium supplemented with 0.1% bovine serum albumin. After incubation for 24 h, non-migrating cells were removed using cotton swabs, and the cells that migrated to the lower surface of the filter were stained with crystal violet. Cells were counted using a microscope. Triplicate results are expressed as the mean (standard deviation).

## CrT cell-derived mouse xenograft model
1 × 106 CrT cells express different forms of PDHA1 or with PLK1 knockdown and 1 × 106 BEAS-2B cells with PLK1 overexpression were injected into flanks of 6-week-old male NU/J mice (The Jackson Laboratory, RRID: IMSR_JAX:002019) respectivelyTumor volumes were calculated from the formula V = L × W2/2. The mice were kept at standard holding room temperature for rodents: 74 ± 2°F (23 ± 1 °C) with a standard light cycle of 12 h of light and 12 h of dark. Separate team members were assigned for injection and outcome assessment. The person assessing tumor size and taking measurements was unaware of the genotype of tumors of each group. Mice displaying clear signs of sickness or pain (weight loss exceeding 15% of normal weight, abnormal posture, lethargy, moribund, dehydration) were excluded from our analysis. All animal experiments in this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of University of Kentucky (Protocol No. 2020-3681).

## Mitochondrial stress test
Mitochondrial stress test was performed using a Seahorse Bioscience XF96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience). 104 cells were seeded in Seahorse XF96 V3 PS cell culture microplates and grown overnight. Before the experiment, cells were washed and changed to seahorse assay medium (supplemented with 10 mM glucose, 1 mM pyruvate, 2 mM glutamine, adjusted to pH 7.4), then incubated in a non-CO2 incubator for 1 h. After measuring the basal OCR level, oligomycin, FCCP, and antimycin/rotenone were sequentially injected into the cell chamber according to Seahorse standard protocol. The basal OCR level was calculated based on the AUC (area under the curve) before the injection of oligomycin. The maximal OCR level was calculated based on the AUC between the injection of FCCP and antimycin/rotenone.

## Quantitative reverse transcription PCR
Total RNA was extracted with the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN) and treated with DNase (Ambion, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) mixtures were assembled with 1 μl cDNA template, iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad), and primers for PDHA1 and mtCYB. PCR was carried out for 40 cycles with the following thermal cycling conditions: 95 °C for 10 s (denaturation) and 61 °C for 60 s (annealing). All data were normalized to β-Actin mRNA expression levels.

## Acetyl-CoA level determination
The level of acetyl-CoA was determined by use of a PicoProbe Acetyl-CoA Fluorometric Assay Kit (Biovision) ( ). Briefly, 106 cells were lysed by the corresponding assay buffer. After samples were deproteinized with the 10 kDa molecular weight cut off spin columns (Biovision), specific reactions were performed according to manufacturer’s instructions to measure the fluorescence using a spectrofluorometer.

## In vitro PLK1 kinase assay
In vitro kinase assays were performed with TBMD buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 2 mM EGTA, 0.5 mM sodium vanadate, and 20 mM p-nitrophenyl phosphate) supplemented with 125 μM ATP and 10 μCi of [γ-32P] ATP at 30 °C for 30 min in the presence of purified GST-PDHA1 and PLK1. After the reaction, mixtures were resolved by SDS-PAGE, the gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue, dried, and subjected to autoradiography.

## Mitochondrial imaging and MINA network analysis
BEAS-2B, CrT, CrT shCtl, and CrT shPLK1 cells were grown on glass coverslips in a 6-well plate in DMEM medium until 70% confluent. Cells were then washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and pre-incubated with 5 Mitotracker Red (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in PBS for 15 min at 37 °C in the dark. After treatment, the dye was removed, and the cells were washed three times with PBS and fixed with ice-cold methanol. Coverslips were then mounted onto glass slides using Antifade mounting medium. Images were taken using a Nikon A1+ confocal microscope. The images generated were preprocessed on ImageJ (NIH) following steps previously outlined ( ). After pre-processing, the images were skeletonized. Post skeletonization, images were segmented using Adobe Photoshop CC 2018. These segmented images were opened in ImageJ, and the MiNA macros were used to quantify mitochondrial morphological parameters of each segmented image.

## In vitro mitophagy assay
To examine mitophagy, we transfected cells with Su9-mCherry-GFP(Dr Hiromi Sesaki (Johns Hopkins University) and fixed the cells with paraformaldehyde to visualize mCherry and GFP signals. The mitophagy activation index was calculated based on the degree of GFP and mCherry co-localization as measured by the Pearson coefficient. Decreased co-localization (i.e. a decrease in mitophagy index) indicates increased mitophagy. Images were taken with a Nikon A1+ confocal microscope, and the Pearson coefficient was determined using Nikon NIS-Elements software.

## Molecular model and simulation detail
All-atom models were used to describe the wild-type and phosphorylated PDHA1 protein (PDHA1-wt and PDHA1-pho), water molecules and ions. The initial structures of wild-type PDHA1 and PDHA1-pho were predicted by AlphaFold2(30) using the sequences published on UniProt (P08559). The simulation systems are created by placing a PDHA1 protein or variant in the center of a cubic box and surrounding the protein with a 3.5nm-thick shell of 0.15 M NaCl solution. The details of the two systems of PDHA1 in NaCl solution are shown in . Counter-ions were added to neutralize the system. The simulation box size is determined to ensure that the protein does not interact with its mirror. The 3.5 nm shell of NaCl solution is used to ensure the protein is surrounded by enough aqueous solution. This work deploys the GROMOS 54B7 force field ( ) to describe bonded and non-bonded interactions in the systems. The non-bonded interactions are a sum of short-range Lennard-Jones 12-6 potential and long-range coulombic potential, as shown in Equation 1. The bonded interactions are a sum of the bond length, bond angle, and dihedral potentials, as described in the force field.
Equation 1Eij(rij)=4εij((σijrij)12−(σijrij)6)+eiej4πε0rijwhere Eij is the potential energy due to the non-bonded interactions between atoms i and j, rij is the distance between atoms i and j, is the energetic parameter, is the geometric parameter and is the partial charge of atom i. The Jorgensen mixing rule is applied to obtain and for atoms belonging to different types.
A three-step simulation process was conducted for every simulation system. First, energy minimization was conducted to remove any too-close contacts between atoms. Second, a 200-ns canonical (NVT, T = 310 K) ensemble MD simulation (integral step = 2 fs) was conducted to let the system reach thermodynamic equilibrium. Third, a 300-ns canonical (NVT, T = 300 K) ensemble MD simulation (integral step = 2 fs) was conducted to collect the trajectory at a frequency of 200 ps. The Berendsen method ( ) is used to control the temperature and pressure of the system in the second step because it allows the system to reach the desired pressure and temperature at a fast pace. The velocity-rescaling method ( ) is used to control the temperature of the system in the third step. The short-range van der Waals interactions use a 1.2-nm cut-off, and the long-range electrostatic interactions were calculated using the particle mesh Ewald sum ( ). All bonds involving H atoms were constrained during the simulations. The energy minimization and MD simulations for all the systems were conducted using Gromacs-2021 ( ).

## Mitochondrial-ROS detection
Cells were seeded and grown in a 96-well plate in DMEM medium until 70% confluent. Cells were then washed twice with PBS and pre-incubated with 5 μM MitoSOX Red (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in PBS for 15 min at 37 °C in the dark. MitoSOX Red allows selective visualization of O2•− generated in the mitochondria because it is rapidly oxidized by O2•− only. After treatment, the dye was removed, and the cells were washed three times with PBS. Fluorescence was measured at 530/590 nm by a TECAN plate reader.

## Immunofluorescence (IF) analysis
Xenograft tumors were subjected to paraffin embedding after fixation with 10% formaldehyde overnight. After dewaxing, the sections were heated at 95 °C in pH 6.0 citric acid solution for epitope retrieval, followed by permeabilization with 0.2% Triton X-100 and quenched in 3% H2O2 to abolish endogenous peroxidase. After eliminating peroxidase, tumor tissues were blocked with 10% horse serum in PBS, and incubated with antibodies against Ki67 (1:200)in buffer A (1% BSA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10% horse serum in PBS) for 30 min at 37 °C. Tumor tissues were then incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody and mounted using DAPI. The cells were visualized using a Nikon A1+ confocal microscope.

## Tissue microarray (TMA) and IHC staining
TMA slides containing 216 NSCLC patient samples were obtained from the University of Kentucky, Markey Cancer Center. IHC staining procedures were described in detail in an unpublished study by Peng et al.

## Statistical analysis
Cell viability assay, wound healing assay, cell invasion assay, flow cytometry, IF staining, IHC staining, mitochondrial stress test, qRT-PCR, mitoROS generation, mitochondrial membrane potential, mitophagy assay and tumor mass data were analyzed by unpaired Student t test. Correlations between PLK1 and PDHA1 were assessed using a linear regression test. Tumor growth for different groups was analyzed by Two-way ANOVA test. All data are presented as the mean ± SEM. Data were analyzed using the GraphPad Prism 9 software package. ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001; ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001; n.s., not significant.

## Data Availability
All data supporting the findings of this study are included in the article and its supplementary files. No data amenable to deposition in large-scale repositories was generated in this study.

## Supporting information
This article contains .

## Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Savita Sharma from the Redox Metabolism Shared Resources (RMSR) for her expert support with seahorse studies. We sincerely appreciate the critical reading of the manuscript by Eleanor Erikson and Andrew Lane.

## Author contributions
J. P. and Q. Z. investigation; J. P., Q. Z., Q. Q., and Q. S. data curation; J. P., Q. Z., Z. L., X. R., D. B. A., Q. Q., Z. Z., Y. Z., J. L., Y. K., R. W., X. W., C. L., Q. S., T. G., and F. M. methodology; J. P., Q. Z., D. B. A., Q. Q., and Q. S. formal analysis; J. P. and Q. Z. software; J. P. and Q. Z. validation; J. P. and Q. Z. visualization; X. L., J. P., and Q. Z. writing—original draft; J. P., Q. Z., D. B. A., and X. L. writing—review and editing; Z. L., X. R., D. B. A., Q. Q., Z. Z., Y. Z., J. L., Y. K., R. W., X. W., C. L., Q. S., T. G., X. L., and F. M. resources; Z. L., T. G., and X. L. supervision; Y. Z., X. L., and J. L. project administration; X. L. conceptualization; X. L. funding acquisition.

## Funding and additional information
The research was generously supported by NIH
R01 CA196634 (X. Liu), R01 CA256893 (X. Liu), R01 CA264652 (X. Liu), R01 CA157429 (X. Liu), R01 CA272483, and DoD-HT9425-24-1-0442 (X. Liu). This research was also supported by the Biospecimen Procurement & Translational Pathology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Redox Metabolism, and Flow Cytometry and Immune Monitoring Shared Resources of the University of Kentucky Markey Cancer Center (P30CA177558). Research reported here was supported by an Institutional Development Award (IDeA) from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under grant number P30 GM127211.

Reviewed by members of the JBC Editorial Board. Edited by Qi-Qun Tang

## Supporting information

## Supporting information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supporting information

## Data Availability Statement
All data supporting the findings of this study are included in the article and its supplementary files. No data amenable to deposition in large-scale repositories was generated in this study.