pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10810432PMC10810432.110810432108104323827143810.1371/journal.pone.0294847PONE-D-23-135191Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsBlood CellsWhite Blood CellsLymphocytesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsLymphocytesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsLymphocytesMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsLymphocytesResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsAnimal ModelsMouse ModelsMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineDiagnostic RadiologyMagnetic Resonance ImagingResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesDiagnostic RadiologyMagnetic Resonance ImagingMedicine and Health SciencesRadiology and ImagingDiagnostic RadiologyMagnetic Resonance ImagingMedicine and health sciencesClinical medicineClinical trialsPhase II clinical investigationMedicine and health sciencesPharmacologyDrug research and developmentClinical trialsPhase II clinical investigationResearch and analysis methodsClinical trialsPhase II clinical investigationResearch and Analysis MethodsBioassays and Physiological AnalysisMuscle AnalysisBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryLipidsFatsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBody LimbsArmsForearmsMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBody LimbsArmsForearmsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsMuscular DystrophiesDuchenne Muscular DystrophyMedicine and Health SciencesNeurologyMuscular DystrophiesDuchenne Muscular DystrophyMedicine and Health SciencesClinical GeneticsX-Linked TraitsDuchenne Muscular DystrophyBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsHeredityGenetic LinkageSex LinkageX-Linked TraitsDuchenne Muscular DystrophyA phase 2 open-label study of the safety and efficacy of weekly dosing of ATL1102 in patients with non-ambulatory Duchenne muscular dystrophy and pharmacology in mdx mice
Phase 2 clinical trial of ATL1102 in non-ambulatory DMDhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4902-034XWoodcockIan R.Data curationFormal analysisMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing TachasGeorgeConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyResourcesWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing DesemNuketFormal analysisProject administrationWriting – review & editing HouwelingPeter J.ConceptualizationData curationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KeanMichaelData curationSoftwareWriting – review & editing EmmanuelJaimanData curationFormal analysisWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1805-6937KennedyRachelProject administrationWriting – review & editing CarrollKateProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing de ValleKatyProject administrationWriting – review & editing AdamsJustineWriting – review & editing LamandéShireen R.ResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing ColesChantalFormal analysisWriting – review & editing TiongChrystalFormal analysisMethodologyWriting – review & editing BurtonMatthewWriting – review & editing VillanoDaniellaSupervisionWriting – review & editing ButtonPeterFormal analysisSoftwareWriting – review & editing HogrelJean-YvesFormal analysisWriting – review & editing Catling-SeyfferSarahProject administrationWriting – review & editing RyanMonique M.ConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing DelatyckiMartin B.SupervisionWriting – review & editing YiuEppie M.SupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Neurology, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia2
The Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia3
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia4
Antisense Therapeutics Ltd, Melbourne, Australia5
Department of Medical Imaging, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia6
Department of Physiotherapy, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia7
McCloud Consulting Group, Sydney, Australia8
Institut de Myologie, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France9
Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, Australia10
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Melbourne, AustraliaDumonceauxJulieEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), a severe, progressive, X-linked genetic muscle disease is the most common muscle disorder in boys, affecting 1 in 5000 live male births worldwide [ ]. Boys with DMD have onset of progressive muscle weakness in the first decade of life, with death due to cardiorespiratory failure expected in the late third or early fourth decades [ ]. Currently the only disease modifying medical treatment is corticosteroid therapy, which delays loss of ambulation by a median 3 years, to 13 years of age [ – ] but carries a significant treatment burden of adverse effects [ ].
DMD is associated with absence of dystrophin from muscle. This causes increased susceptibility to contraction-induced muscle damage, with activation of the innate immune macrophages in turn activating the adaptive immune system T lymphocytes, leading to upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including the extracellular structural protein osteopontin, resulting in chronic inflammation, fibrosis and reduced muscle strength [ ]. CD49d, the alpha chain subunit of integrin very late antigen 4 (VLA-4) is expressed widely on immune cells in this cascade and can bind osteopontin [ ].In patients with DMD, the number of CD49d high expressing T lymphocytes is inversely proportional to ambulation speed, with highest concentration seen in non-ambulant patients [ ]. Patients with higher concentrations have more severe weakness and are more likely to lose ambulation before 10 yrs of age despite corticosteroid use, suggesting CD49d may be a biomarker of disease severity or activity [ ]. In ex vivo studies a monoclonal antibody to VLA-4 prevented patient T-cell binding to muscle cells and transendothelial migration, highlighting a potential therapeutic avenue [ ].
ATL1102 is a second-generation immunomodulatory 2’MOE gapmer antisense oligonucleotide which specifically targets human CD49d RNA. After binding to the RNA of CD49d, intracellular RNase H attaches resulting in downregulation of CD49d RNA. ATL1102 has previously been trialled to treat Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (RRMS), noting that CD49d high expressing T cells are the effector and central memory T cells in RRMS. In this phase 2 RRMS clinical trial, ATL1102 dosed 200mg three times weekly in the first week and twice weekly to 8 weeks substantially reduced inflammatory brain lesions by 88.5% and circulating lymphocytes and T lymphocytes by 25% [ ].
Reported here, collaborators from the same institution ran two separate but complementary studies. The initial trial, a phase 2 clinical trial examining for the first time the safety and efficacy of a low dose ATL1102 treatment for 24 weeks in non-ambulant patients with DMD on concomitant corticosteroid treatment. The second, a pre-clinical study in the mdx mouse model for DMD, conducted using a mouse specific second generation CD49d ASO (ISIS 348574) to show that monotherapy treatment can reduce CD49d mRNA expression in muscle and decrease contraction induced muscle damage.

## Methods

## Ethics statement
The clinical trial received approval from the Royal Children’s Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee with assigned number HREC/17/RCHM/121. The trial was subsequently registered at the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ACTRN12618000970246). An independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) was established to provide safety oversight for the trial. Participant consent to participate in the trial was sort from parents. Pre-clinical mdx mouse analyses were approved by the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute (MCRI) animal care and ethics committee (ACEC; approval number A899).

## Pre-clinical studies in mice
The mdx mouse model is commonly used to study DMD. We tested efficacy of the second generation 2’MOE gapmer mouse specific CD49d ASO ISIS 348574 as ATL1102 is specific to human CD49d RNA and not homologous to mouse. Mdx mice do not have circulating lymphocytes with high CD49d but have high CD49d expressing lymphocytes in the lymph nodes at 9 weeks [ ]. Symptomatic 9 week old mdx mice were treated for 6 weeks to determine the effect of ISIS 348574 on CD49d mRNA expression and muscle function measures.
Male mdx and age matched C57Bl10/J wild-type controls were purchased from the Jackson laboratories at 5 weeks of age and acclimatised to the MCRI facility for a total of 4 weeks. Animals were housed in a specific-pathogen-free environment at a constant ambient temperature of 22°C and 50% humidity on a 12 h light-dark cycle, with ad libitum access to food and water. The mdx mice (n = 12 /group) were randomly assigned to 4 treatment groups (saline, low (5mg/kg) and high (20mg/kg) dose ISIS 348574, and a control gapmer oligonucleotide with the same 20 nucleotides scrambled such that it is not complementary to CD49d or other RNA (20mg/kg)). Mdx Mice received weekly subcutaneous injections of either saline, ISIS348574 and control oligonucleotide for a total of 6 weeks. Wild-type controls (n = 12) received saline only. The high dose (20mg/kg/week) equates to 1.6mg/kg/w dose in human equivalent body surface area (BSA) and the low dose (5mg/kg/week) equates to 0.4mg/kg/week dose on BSA. After treatment mice were anaesthetised using inhaled isoflurane (0.6 ml per min) and muscle function was examined using the Arora Scientific 1300A whole mouse test system and 701C stimulator as previously published [ ]. Mice were then euthanised by cervical dislocation and the spleen and skeletal muscle (quadriceps) were collected for further analysis.

## Flow cytometry
The mdx spleen was perforated to isolate the splenic sub-cellular content and incubated in red blood cell lysis buffer (Thermofisher) for ten minutes at 4°C. Splenocytes were centrifuged 1500 g for five minutes at 4°C. Cell pellets were washed in wash buffer (PBS:1% BSA (bovine albumin serum)). CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations were identified using anti-CD4-V450 (Biolegend, San Diego, CA, USA) and anti-CD8a-allophycocyanin–cyanine 7 (anti-CD8a-APC-Cy7) (Biolegend, San Diego, CA, USA). Stained cells were analysed using BD LSRFortessa™ X-20 Cell Analyzer to identify populations of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.

## Clinical trial design
This was a phase 2 open-label clinical trial assessing the safety of ATL1102 in non-ambulant boys with DMD concomitantly with their usual corticosteroid therapy, in all but one participant who discontinued corticosteroids years prior to the study. CONSORT flow diagram of study design is shown in . Eligibility criteria for the clinical trial are included as . Participants were recruited from a single site in Melbourne, Australia with the study running from August 2018 until January 2020.
 After providing written informed consent, participants received weekly subcutaneous injections of 25mg of ATL1102 for twenty-four weeks. Injections were administered into subcutaneous fat of the abdomen by a registered nurse or trained parent. Injection sites were rotated in quadrants around the umbilicus. Parents monitored injection sites for cutaneous reactions and participant discomfort for fourty-eight hours post-administration. Adverse events were recorded in a diary which was returned to the study coordinators at each fortnightly visit.
Participants underwent fortnightly venepuncture for exploratory and safety blood tests. This included monitoring of haematology, biochemistry and inflammatory markers and at point of care urinalysis dipstick to monitor kidney function. Participants were seen monthly by the study team for physical examination and respiratory function assessments.
Participant safety was monitored routinely and at regularly scheduled meetings by the independent DSMB.

## Outcome measurements
The primary endpoint of the trial was safety of ATL1102 as assessed by the frequency and intensity of adverse events, including injection site reactions and any laboratory value derangement.
Secondary outcome measures included both laboratory and functional efficacy endpoints. Laboratory efficacy outcome measures included lymphocyte-modulation activity determined by cell surface flow cytometry measuring variation in the number and percentage of total lymphocytes as well as those CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes expressing high levels of CD49d (CD49dhi) to week twenty-four of treatment and to week twenty-eight, four weeks past the last treatment.
Changes in upper limb muscle strength and function were measured at baseline and again at weeks five, eight, twelve and twenty-four. Muscle function was assessed by a questionnaire-based outcome measure of disease burden (Egen Klassifikation Scale version 2—EK2) and performance-based measures (the Performance of the Upper Limb scale version 2 (PUL 2.0), and the Moviplate 30 second finger tapping score of the MyoSet tool). The Myoset tool also measured distal upper limb strength as determined by the MyoPinch (key pinch strength) and MyoGrip (hand grip strength) scores [ – ]. Other outcome measures assessed were respiratory function (forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1)), and quality of life assessed using the neuromuscular module of the Pediatric Quality of Life Instrument (PedsQL NMD™).

## Muscle Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
Participants underwent MRI of the dominant forearm at baseline, week twelve and week twenty-four. Unilateral upper-limb MRI was performed at 1.5T (Siemens Aera; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using a flexible surface matrix coil (4-Channel Flex Coil) wrapped around the forearm. Participants lay in the scanner in the head-first supine position, with the arm to be imaged lying in a comfortable position on the scanner bed alongside the torso. Two point-Dixon images were acquired (3D gradient-echo TE1/TE2/TR = 2.39/4.44/6.99ms, flip angle 10°, nine 6mm axial slices, slice gap 0mm, FOV 18x18cm, matrix 320×320, pixel size 0.56×0.56mm, NEX = 4). Fat fraction maps were obtained using on scanner tools.
Change over time in muscle composition (atrophy, oedema and fatty infiltration) was measured on the muscles of the central, proximal, and distal forearm using Short Tau Inversion Recovery (STIR) and 3-point Dixon sequences on MRI. Changes in muscle composition were scored using the semi-quantitative visual scoring Mercuri method and by quantitative fat fraction analysis [ – ]. Due to fatty infiltration, identification of individual muscles was challenging, such that a compartment composite score of volar, dorsal and ECRLB Br (extensor carpi radialis longus/brevis and brachioradialis) compartments was used as per a previous published study [ ]. The lean muscle mass was calculated using previously published methods: Cross-sectional muscle compartment area x ((100 –total muscle compartment fat percent) / 100) [ ].

## Statistical analysis
Based upon data from a previous study of ATL1102 in RRMS patients analyzing blood 3 days after the last dose in week 8, the laboratory efficacy end point of lymphocyte modulation potential was established as a reduction in total lymphocyte count of 0.47x109/L (25% reduction) [ ]. For the sample size calculation, the level of significance was set to 0.05 with a 2-sided paired t-test, mean difference of 0.47 (x109/L) from baseline to end of treatment, and standard deviation of 0.428 (x109/L). Using nQuery (Version 8.5.2.0, Table MOT1-1 Paired t-test for differences in means, Statistical Solutions Ltd.), a sample size of 9 participants was calculated as required to achieve a power of 80%. Nine participants were considered sufficient to investigate the safety, tolerability and PK and PD profile of ATL1102 in this rare target patient population. Data were analysed using SAS® Version 9.4. primary and secondary efficacy measures were analysed using the paired t-test and the non-parametric Wilcoxon sign-rank test. The study was not powered to see a change on the secondary efficacy endpoints from baseline to end of treatment. The study protocol and statistical analysis plan are available as supplementary data in “Protocol” and eSAP1 and eSAP2 respectively. Repeated measures analysis of lymphocytes and T lymphocyte and NK lymphocyte subsets in a post hoc analysis was conducted comparing baseline to a linear combination of values measured three days post-dose at weeks 8, 12 and 24. Associations between variables was tested using a Pearson correlation test.
Preclinical mdx mouse analyses were performed in Graphpad Prism (V9, Graphpad Software Inc.). For in situ muscle function, one-way ANOVA with Tukey correction for multiple testing was performed (n = 9 animals / treatment). Unpaired T-Tests were used for CD4 and CD8 T-cell analyses (n = 5–6 samples / treatment). All data shown as mean with 95% confidence intervals, unless otherwise stated in the figure legends.

## Results

## Proof of concept preclinical study using mdx mice
Ex vivo analyses of monocytes collected from mdx mice (n = 3), showed that the ASO to mouse CD49d, ISIS 348574 can reduce the expression of CD49d mRNA ( ). We then examined the in vivo response to ISIS 348574 in mdx mice treated for 6 weeks which showed that CD49d mRNA expression was reduced in skeletal muscle by approximately 40% when treated with either a low (5mg/kg/week) or high (20mg/kg/week) dose of ISIS 348574, compared to saline controls ( , One-way ANOVA, summary p<0.01, with Tukey correction displayed on the graphs, p = * <0.05, ** <0.01).
 This study also found that mdx mice treated with the 20mg/kg/week dose of ISIS 348574 showed a reduction in the percentage of splenic CD4+ (30%, p<0.05) and CD8+ (21%, p = 0.058) T lymphocytes, compared to saline treated mice ( ). Furthermore in situ muscle funcation analyses show that the high dose (20mg/kg/week) treated mdx mice were protected from the effects of eccentric muscle damage, producing 72% of the original muscle force (P<0.01). This was in contrast to mdx mice treated with either saline, scrambled control or low dose (5mg/kg) ISIS 348574, which generated approximately 50% of the original force following eccentric muscle contractions. ( , One-way ANOVA summary p = <0.001, with Tukey correction displayed on the graphs, p = * <0.05, ** <0.01, *** <0.001).

## Clinical trial results
Eleven adolescent males with DMD were screened for participation. All had been non-ambulant for at least six months prior to screening. Two screened participants were excluded (one participant had started cardioprotective medication within three months of the initial visit and the other participant exceeded the pre-determined weight limit for inclusion).
Nine participants were enrolled into the open-label study. All had a confirmed pathogenic variant in DMD, with a clinical phenotype consistent with DMD as assessed by their treating/referring clinician and the study investigator. Participant demographics are summarized in .
 

## Safety
There were no serious adverse events (SAEs) or suspected or unexpected serious adverse reactions (SUSARs). A total of 136 adverse events were recorded ( ), with all participants reporting at least one adverse event. Sixty-three percent of the reported adverse events were injection site related, with all but one participant experiencing transient erythema within twenty-four hours of the administration of ATL1102. Six (67%) participants had mild post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation of the skin of their abdomen which was persistent; four had resolved and two were ongoing but improving at the post completion follow-up study visit. The hyperpigmentation was noticed in the first participant after receiving eleven weekly doses of ATL1102. The DSMB was made aware and the participant informed consent form updated. In the five subsequent participants who had a similar reaction it was seen after four to eleven doses. The hyperpigmentation was not regarded as a clinical safety concern by the DSMB. Pain, discomfort or atrophy of the subcutaneous tissues were not reported, and there were no signs of systemic involvement. No participants withdrew from the study. There were no other significant adverse events felt to be related to ATL1102 or its administration.
 

## Efficacy
Lymphocyte Count: There was no statistically significant decrease in lymphocyte count from baseline to week eight, week twelve or week twenty-four of dosing ( ). There was no statistically significant decrease in CD49d+CD3+CD8+ or CD49d+CD3+CD4+ T lymphocytes seen between baseline, weeks 8, 12 or 24 ( ). This 9 participant trial did not achieve the pre-specified laboratory activity outcome measure of a significant -0.47x109/L (25% reduction) in total lymphocyte count.
 There was, though, a consistent trend toward declines in the mean number of lymphocytes, and CD49d+ T lymphocytes measured 3 days post-dose at week 8, 12 and 24. The mean number of CD3+CD49d+ T lymphocytes (i.e. CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+ expressing CD49d) measured at week 28 was statistically significantly higher compared to end of dosing at week 24 (mean change 0.40x109/L 95%CI 0.05, 0.74; paired T-Test, p = 0.030) ( ). Repeated measures analysis of CD3-CD49d+ NK lymphocytes in a post hoc analysis comparing baseline to a linear combination of values measured three days post-dose at weeks 8, 12 and 24 was significantly lower compared to baseline (p = 0.018), with comparable NK lymphocyte numbers at week 28 ( ).
 

## Functional outcome measures
There were no statistically significant changes in any upper limb functional outcome measures at week 24 compared to baseline ( ). The PUL2.0 score remained stable with no significant change between baseline and week twenty-four with a mean increase in PUL2.0 score of 0.9 (95%CI -1.33, 3.11, where a higher score indicates better function) EK2 scores were stable throughout the trial period. ATL1102 treatment showed no significant effect on lung function throughout the 24 week trial period ( ). The components of the Myoset all reflected stable grip and pinch strength over the course of the trial.
 

## MRI
In this trial, there was some variation in the quality of proximal and distal slices due to variable positioning of the participant’s forearm in consecutive scans. The quality of the central slices through the muscle body in the forearms muscles was not compromised and so this measurement was chosen for detailed comparison between baseline and week 24 scans for each participant. No significant change was apparent between baseline and week twenty-four for the mean Mercuri semi-quantitative score of fatty infiltration (0.1 point change), atrophy (0 point change) and muscle oedema (0.3 point change) measuring the central slice around the elbow ( ). There was a trend towards minor improvement in the percentage fat fraction in all muscle groups measuring the central slice, although statistical significance was not achieved. There was no significant pattern of change in cross-sectional muscle area of any muscle group ( ).
 

## Correlation of parameters assessed in the Phase 2 study
Correlation analyses were performed across assessment measures PUL2.0, Myoset and MRI.
Positive correlations were observed in the Phase 2 study between the different measures of muscle function of Moviplate scores and the PUL 2.0 scores of the distal domain (r = 0.664) which support the consistency of the observed changes across the measures assessed in the study over the 24 week ATL1102 treatment period ( ).
Positive correlations were also observed in the Phase 2 study between the MRI results of the lean muscle area (non-fat) and MyoGrip results (r = 0.604), suggesting a consistency of results across the different parameters of muscle structure and muscle strength ( ).

## Discussion

## Safety
This open-label phase 2 clinical trial met its primary safety end point. All but one participant experienced post-injection site erythema, swelling or discomfort suggesting that the investigation product is a mild irritant, as has been observed with other MOE antisense drugs, and is commonly reported with subcutaneiously injected drugs. Future clinical trials of ATL1102 could consider including using ice as a pre-injection site treatment to minimise these reactions. Six participants experienced an unexpected post-inflammatory skin hyperpigmentation which resolved or faded at the completion of the study. Interestingly this reaction has not been previously reported in other clinical trials of ATL1102 and was not viewed as a safety concern [ ].
The dose chosen for this 24 week trial (25mg/week) was considered as a presumed safe dose in this patient population. In a previous phase 2 trial in individuals with RRMS a loading dose of 200mg every other day for one week was administered then 400mg/week (twice weekly 200mg) for seven weeks [ ]. This DMD trial was the first clinical trial to investigate the safety of ATL1102 over a six-month period.

## Lymphocyte modulation
Given the previously observed action of ATL1102 of reducing lymphocytes in the RRMS study, the trial sample size was calculated to see a 25% reduction in total lymphocyte count when the drug is at equilibrium from week 8. This activity endpoint was not met in this trial. There was however a consistent trend toward declines in the mean number of lymphocytes at week 8, 12 and 24 each measured 3 days past dosing, and statistically significant reductions in the mean number of CD49d+ NK lymphocytes at week 8, 12 and 24 weeks of treatment, using repeated measures analysis. The mean number of CD49d+ T lymphocytes (i.e CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+ that are CD49d+) was statistically significantly higher at week 28 compared to week 24, indicating a rebound elevation of CD49d+ T lymphocytes four weeks post the last treatment dose. These results collectively suggest that ATL1102 suppresses CD49d expressing lymphocytes at a dose of 25mg per week. It is anticipated that higher doses will increase the level of lymphocyte reduction whilst maintaining a favourable safety profile in part due to sparing of the majority of T lymphocytes and NK lymphocytes. Future studies will look at dose escalation as supported by this study, and modelling with ATL1102.

## PUL2.0 and EK2 upper limb function
PUL2.0 measures shoulder, elbow, and wrist finger dimensions of disease burden and is a reliable measure of disease severity and progression in DMD where a lower score indicates loss of function. The mean increase from baseline to week twenty-four in the PUL2.0 was 0.9 (95% CI -1.33 to 3.11). Although the Minimal Clinical Important Difference (MCID) for the PUL2.0 has not been established, an external historical cohort with same inclusion criteria as in the ATL1102 phase 2 trial, showed a decrease in PUL2.0 score of 2.0 (standard deviation 3.02) from baseline over a six month period [ ]. In the ATL1102 phase 2 study four of the nine patients achieved an increase in their PUL2.0 score of +2, and another three patients were stabilized in the PUL2.0 score ( ). This is an encouraging trend that warrants further investigation. A previously published data from a historical cohort also reported that over a twelve month period a mean decrease in PUL2.0 score of 2.17 can occur, albeit in a cohort not directly comparable to the participants in the phase 2 study due to older age and larger proportion not on corticosteroids [ ].
There was no change in the EK2 over the course of the trial period. This composite outcome measure encompasses multiple aspects of disease burden and as such is a useful clinical monitoring tool (higher score equals greater disease burden) but is not likely to be as responsive as the PUL2.0 measure to small changes in upper limb function. As such, a stabilisation over the six month trial periods is encouraging and needs to be confirmed in future studies.

## Myoset tests: MoviPlate, MyoGrip, and MyoPinch
The MyoSet functional outcome measures consist of the MoviPlate muscle function assessment of repetitive flexion extension of the wrist and fingers, and MyoGrip and MyoPinch assessment of muscle grip and pinch strength [ , ]. These measures have been validated for use in clinical trials of DMD; MyoGrip and MyoPinch in particular have been shown to be sensitive to change in non-ambulant boys and to correlate well with lean muscle mass on MRI [ ]. There was no change in any of these measures over the trial period. Previous natural history studies have shown significant deterioration over six months (Grip -0.5kg [95%CI -1.01; 0.002] and Pinch -0.38kg [95%CI -0.53; -0.22]) [ , ]. Matching the MyoGrip and MyoPinch protocol with that of a previously published natural history cohort allowed for comparison of change in grip and pinch strength over a six month period, yielding a statistically significant improvement on grip (p = 0.03) and pinch (p = 0.003) strength [ ]. The lack of decline in these measures with ATL1102 during the trial period is once again encouraging and warrants further investigation.

## MRI of upper limb
Magnetic Resonance Imaging of muscle is increasingly used as a biomarker for disease stage and progression. The most widely used scoring method is the Mercuri Score, which requires a skilful investigator to visually score the chosen muscles based upon a standardised set of criteria encompassing degree of atrophy, oedematous changes and fatty infiltration of the muscle, to create an aggregate score. The more recent development of automated fat fraction analysis reduces the inter-user variability and provides a more quantitative measure of assessment. Matching the MRI protocol with that of a previously published natural history cohort allowed for direct comparison of change in fat fraction over a six month period [ ]. From this published natural history data, disease is expected to progress with a mean increase of central forearm muscle fat fraction percentage of 3.9% (95%CI 1.9,5.7) over six months. The apparent trend towards a decrease in mean forearm muscle fat fraction of 0.52% (95% CI -5.62, 4.58; Median 1.4%) seen after six months of treatment with ATL1102 may suggest that ATL1102 could be modifying the rate of fatty infiltration into these muscles. These changes were replicated in the proximal and distal muscle groups. For future MRI studies it would be important to set a clear protocol with imaging tags placed over surface landmarks to ensure uniformity of subsequent scans.

## Conclusion
The proof of concept pre-clinical data supports a potential protective effect of an antisense oligonucleotide to CD49d RNA in the mdx mouse model of DMD. This phase 2 open-label clinical trial has shown that ATL1102 has a good safety profile and is well tolerated with minor injection site reactions the only treatment-related adverse events reported. The positive observations in functional efficacy outcomes suggesting stabilization, and results compared with historical natural history data, particularly the PUL2.0, MyoGrip, MyoPinch and MRI fat fraction analysis, justifies the ongoing drug development program of ATL1102 in non-ambulant boys with DMD and provides a rationale to proceed with larger placebo-controlled studies of this novel therapeutic agent.

## Supporting information
S1 Checklist

## TREND statement checklist.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Inclusion and Exclusion criteria for the clinical trial.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Scatter Plot showing the association between the Moviplate scores and the PUL 2.0 distal dimension scores over the 24 Week ATL1102 treatment period with a linear regression line plotted.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Scatter plot showing the association of the Grip Strength scores and the MRI data of the forearm lean muscle area (non-fat) over the 24 week ATL1102 treatment period: The MRI is the determined lean muscle mass compartment across the mid (central) dominant forearm.
The linear regression line is also plotted.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Gating strategy for identification of murine CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations isolated from spleen of mdx mice treated with ISIS 348574.
A) Singlets (FSC-H vs FSC-A), B) Live cells (Propidium Iodide vs FSC-A) and C) Lymphocytes (SSC-A vs FSC-A) were gated to remove doublets, dead cells, debris and large/granular cells. D) Anti-CD4-V450 and anti-CD8a APC-Cy7 to were used to gate populations of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Correlation of the Moviplate scores and the PUL 2.0 distal dimension scores over the 24 Week ATL1102 treatment period.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Correlation of the Grip Strength scores and the MRI data of the lean muscle area (non-fat) across the mid (central) dominant forearm over the 24-week ATL1102 treatment period.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Table of Participant specific genetic variant within Dystrophin Gene.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 File(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 File(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 File(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 File(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution of Isabelle Ledoux and Simone Birnbaum of the Insitute of Myology, Paris, France who provided support with the quality control and analysis of the MyoSet functional outcome measures; Valeria Ricotti of the Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, London UK, who provided support on the comparative analysis of the MRI observations; and Annabell Leske and Vicky Beal and the team at Avance Clinical, Adelaide, Australia.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0294847.r001Author response to previous submission
Submission Version0
29 Jun 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers June 2023.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0294847.r002Decision Letter 0
DumonceauxJulieAcademic Editor© 2024 Julie Dumonceaux2024Julie Dumonceauxhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
6 Sep 2023

PONE-D-23-13519A Phase 2 open-label study of the safety and efficacy of weekly dosing of ATL1102 in patients with non-ambulatory Duchenne muscular dystrophyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Woodcock,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 21 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Julie Dumonceaux
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests/Financial Disclosure * (delete as necessary) section:
"The ATL1102 in DMD clinical trial was funded in its entirety by the sponsor Antisense Therapeutics Ltd. Authors Ms Desem and Dr Tachas are employees of the sponsor and so received payment for services from the sponsor as employees. Ms. Desem and Dr Tachas hold an equity interest in the sponsor. Dr Tachas and Ms Desem along with other sponsor employees and sub-contracted specialists were involved in the study design and data analysis. Authors Dr Woodcock and Dr Ryan were at the time of the trial employees of the Royal Children’s Hospital and Murdoch Children’s Research Institute and are not affiliated with the sponsor in any way and have not received any direct personal payment or honoraria from the sponsors, nor do they or their family members hold a financial interest or stock in the sponsor company. Dr Woodcock is still an employee of the above institutions, but Dr Ryan has since left the employment to take up public office. Dr Woodcock and Dr Ryan were involved in the trial design as unpaid consultants. As this was a clinical trial, publication was always planned from trial inception. No employees of the sponsor were involved in the data collection, although Ms Desem did liaise closely with the MCRI/RCH site staff and Clinical Trial Organisation throughout the trial.
Author Dr Button was paid for services as the study statistician.
None of the other authors received any payment from the sponsor to conduct this study. All other authors had input into writing or revising this manuscript.  
We note that you received funding from a commercial source: "
Antisense Therapeutics Ltd"
Please provide an amended Competing Interests Statement that explicitly states this commercial funder, along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, marketed products, etc.
Within this Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).  If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include your amended Competing Interests Statement within your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section:
"The authors confirm that the involvement of employees of the sponsor Antisense Therapeutics Ltd in the trial design, data analysis and decision to publish this data does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials."
Please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).  If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include your updated Competing Interests statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. We note that the original protocol that you have uploaded as a Supporting Information file contains an institutional logo. As this logo is likely copyrighted, we ask that you please remove it from this file and upload an updated version upon resubmission.
5. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.  Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
6. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for this interesting paper. I do accept this paper, although following the title I found it confusing to discover that two studies were presented where one included mice. Given the study design and small cohort I woud highlight this 2 front study in the title.
Reviewer #2: Important note: This review pertains only to ‘statistical aspects’ of the study and so ‘clinical aspects’ [like medical importance, relevance of the study, ‘clinical significance and implication(s)’ of the whole study, etc.] are to be evaluated [should be assessed] separately/independently. Further please note that any ‘statistical review’ is generally done under the assumption that (such) study specific methodological [as well as execution] issues are perfectly taken care of by the investigator(s). This review is not an exception to that and so does not cover clinical aspects {however, seldom comments are made only if those issues are intimately / scientifically related & intermingle with ‘statistical aspects’ of the study}. Agreed that ‘statistical methods’ are used as just tools here, however, they are vital part of methodology [and so should be given due importance]. I look at the manuscript in/with statistical view point, other reviewer(s) look(s) at it with different angle so that in totality the review is very comprehensive. However, there should be efforts from authors side to improve (may be by taking clues from reviewer’s comments). Therefore, please do not limit the revision only (with respect) to comments made here.
COMMENTS: Although this manuscript is well drafted [and the study is excellent with respect to most of the aspects], I have few very minor observations/concerns (different opinion) which are given below:
In section ‘Pre-clinical studies in mice’ (lines 112) it is stated that “Male mdx (n = 48) and age matched C57Bl10/J wild-type (WT, n = 12) controls” which I have not understood (clearly). According to my information, sample size of matched samples generally is same. If it is not a standard ‘pair matching’, what type of matching it is? If it is 4 x 1 [4cases, 1control] matching {which is very much valid}, why not make that clear? I think, even for ‘Pre-clinical studies’ the methodology should be rigorously followed.
Since Consort (line 138) is a short form of the term {group of words} [‘CONsolidated Standard Of Reporting Trials (CONSORT)], it should be represented in ‘CAPITAL’ letters, in my opinion.
Is the statement made in lines 196-7 “A sample size of 9 participants was calculated as required to achieve a power of 80%” is correct? Consideration of “power” in Phase-II trials is questionable / rarely seen, in my experience. Most of the known formulas and sample size estimation software are available for Phase-III trials, in my knowledge. Which software or formula is used need to be mentioned.
Except these minor points, the article is acceptable. However, mind you that as pointed out in ‘important note’ above “This review pertains only to ‘statistical aspects’ of the study and so ‘clinical aspects’ should be assessed separately/independently. ‘Minor Revision’ is recommended.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0294847.r003Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
5 Oct 2023

In response to reviewer 1 comments: title to be changed to: “A Phase 2 open-label study of the safety and efficacy of weekly dosing of ATL1102 in patients with non-ambulatory Duchenne muscular dystrophy and pharmacology in mdx mice”
In response to reviewer 2 comments: There were a total of 48 mdx mice and 12 controls purchased from JAX laboratories and these were then split into 4 groups of n = 12 mdx. Wording in the manuscript clarified. 
The manuscript has been amended to include the software used: “Using nQuery (Version 8.5.2.0, Table MOT1-1 Paired t-test for differences in means, Statistical Solutions Ltd.), a sample size of 9 participants was calculated as required to achieve a power of 80%”.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers October 2023.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0294847.r004Decision Letter 1
DumonceauxJulieAcademic Editor© 2024 Julie Dumonceaux2024Julie Dumonceauxhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
10 Nov 2023

A Phase 2 open-label study of the safety and efficacy of weekly dosing of ATL1102 in patients with non-ambulatory Duchenne muscular dystrophy
PONE-D-23-13519R1
Dear Dr. Woodcock,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Julie Dumonceaux
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0294847.r005Acceptance letter
DumonceauxJulieAcademic Editor© 2024 Julie Dumonceaux2024Julie Dumonceauxhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
20 Nov 2023

PONE-D-23-13519R1 
A Phase 2 open-label study of the safety and efficacy of weekly dosing of ATL1102 in patients with non-ambulatory Duchenne muscular dystrophy and pharmacology in mdx mice 
Dear Dr. Woodcock:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Julie Dumonceaux 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE