pmcMedComm (2020)MedComm (2020)4101mcommMCO2MedComm2688-2663WileyPMC12598499PMC12598499.112598499125984994122114810.1002/mco2.70479MCO2704791Original ArticleOriginal ArticleHost Translational Control by Stress Granules Promotes Mycobacterium tuberculosis Pathogenesis
KimJaewhan SonSang‐Hun ChoiJi‐Ae LeeJunghwan JoSeoyeon ChoSoo‐Na NguyenDoan Tam SonDoyi KimKee K. SongChang‐Hwa songch@cnu.ac.kr

1

Department of Medical Science, College of Medicine
Chungnam National University
Daejeon
Republic of Korea

2

Department of Biochemistry, College of Natural Sciences
Chungnam National University
Daejeon
Republic of Korea

3

Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine
Chungnam National University
Daejeon
Republic of Korea
1011202511202561149889010.1002/mco2.v6.11e70479
2492025
3042025
2692025
101120251111202512112025© 2025 The Author(s). MedComm published by Sichuan International Medical Exchange & Promotion Association (SCIMEA) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## ABSTRACT
Stress granules (SGs) are cytoplasmic condensates that regulate mRNA translation and signaling in response to stress. Although SGs have been widely studied in antiviral responses, their function in bacterial infections is not well understood. Here, we demonstrate that SGs promote Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) pathogenesis by suppressing mitochondrial metabolism and innate immunity. Quantitative proteomics revealed that Mtb‐induced SGs sequester mTORC1 and suppress cap‐dependent mRNA translation. This leads to decreased expression of proteins necessary for mitochondrial respiration and immune activation in bone marrow‐derived macrophages (BMDMs). Disrupting SG assembly restored mTORC1 signaling, enhanced oxidative phosphorylation, and increased the production of antimicrobial mediators, such as reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide, and proinflammatory cytokines. This restricted intracellular Mtb growth in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, intracellular ATP depletion triggered by Mtb phagocytosis was sufficient to drive SG formation, linking energy stress to translational repression. Furthermore, SGs captured Ndufa12, a complex I subunit, thereby impairing mitochondrial electron transport and ATP production. These findings identify SGs as key regulators that couple translational arrest to metabolic and immune suppression, enabling Mtb persistence. Targeting SG formation or function could be a host‐directed strategy to restore mitochondrial activity and strengthen immune responses against Mtb infection.

During Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, stress granules (SGs) formed in macrophages sequester key signaling and metabolic regulators such as mTORC1 components (mTOR, Raptor) and mitochondrial complex I subunits (Ndufa12), leading to suppressed cap‐dependent translation, reduced mitochondrial activity, and impaired innate immune responses. In contrast, SG‐deficient macrophages (G3bp1/2 dKD) maintain mTORC1 activity and mitochondrial function, resulting in enhanced immune activation and restricted Mtb survival both in vitro and in vivo. These findings reveal SGs as critical regulators of host cell metabolism and immunity during Mtb infection. 
 

ATPmitochondriaMycobacterium tuberculosisstress granuletuberculosis
National Research Foundation of Korea funded by Korean government (MSIT)
RS‐2025‐00523465RS‐2025‐02263643
Chungnam National University Research
BK21FOURProgram 
2.3

## SGs Inhibit mRNA Translation Upon Mtb Infection
Because SG formation peaked at 24 hpi (Figure  ; see also Figure  ), we hypothesized that SG‐associated or SG‐affected proteins might differ between 12 and 24 hpi. Comparative Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of 97 proteins reduced at 24 hpi, compared to 12 hpi, revealed enrichment in protein transport, mitochondrial translation, apoptosis, and inflammatory responses (Figure  ; see also Figure ). The reduced abundance of proteins associated with apoptosis and inflammation suggests a weakened innate immune response, supporting TB pathogenesis [ ].
 Translation‐related proteins decreased from 12 to 24 hpi, implying that saturated SGs might suppress mRNA translation. To test this hypothesis, we performed a ribopuromycylation assay to profile mRNA translation patterns during Mtb infection. We found that translation increased up to 12 hpi, likely reflecting an early immune response, then declined sharply, while G3bp1 and Eif2α‐pS51 levels remained increased (Figure  ). Inhibition of the ISR with ISR inhibitor (ISRIB) restored translation and lowered the proportion of SG‐positive cells (Figure  ). The ISRIB‐induced upregulation of mRNA translation led to a reduction in Mtb growth in macrophages without affecting host cell death (Figure  ). These data suggest that SGs promote Mtb survival by dampening host mRNA translation.
Next, to examine whether SGs formed during Mtb infection inhibit mRNA translation, we used G3bp1 and G3bp2 double knockdown (dKD; SGneg) macrophages, in which SG formation was strongly inhibited (Figure  ). Mtb‐infected SGneg macrophages showed a marked increase in mRNA translation (Figure  ) and suppressed Mtb survival without affecting host cell viability (Figure  ). Enhanced translation was not observed in uninfected SGneg macrophages, indicating that the effect is specific to the disruption of infection‐induced SGs rather than a nonspecific consequence of G3bp1 and G3bp2 depletion (Figure ). Together, these findings demonstrate that Mtb‐induced SGs inhibit mRNA translation, supporting Mtb survival in macrophages.

2.4

## SGs Inhibit Cap‐Dependent Translation by Sequestering mTORC1
Given that mTORC1 controls cap‐dependent mRNA translation for many mRNAs [ ], we examined whether SGs suppress mRNA translation during Mtb infection through mTORC1. We observed that the expression levels of Raptor, mTOR, and Telo2 increased at 12 hpi but declined at 24 hpi, whereas Akt1s1, a negative regulator of mTOR activity [ ], and Larp1, a regulatory protein in mTORC1‐mediated cap‐dependent translation [ ], increased at both time points (Figure  ). Consistent with the mRNA translation profile during Mtb infection (Figure  ), mTORC1 activity increased to 12 hpi and then decreased (Figure  ). Phosphorylation of 4E‐BP1 and Eif4b followed a similar pattern, and their levels correlated with translation pattern (Figure  ; 4E‐BP1‐pT37/46 vs. Puro, ρ = 0.833, p = 0.0083; Eif4b‐pS406 vs. Puro, ρ = 0.767, p = 0.0214).
 As mTOR has been identified as a component of SGs under stress conditions [ , ], we assessed its subcellular localization. During Mtb infection, mTOR and Raptor colocalized with SGs, with a Pearson correlation coefficient value higher than 0.8 (Figure  ; Videos and ), interacting with G3bp1 (Figure  ). In addition, Astrin, known to recruit Raptor into SGs and suppress mTORC1 [ ], was localized within SGs with Raptor (Figure  ). As mTORC1 activity declined at 12 hpi, Astrin expression increased, and it bound with both G3bp1 and Raptor in Mtb‐infected macrophages (Figure  ; see also Figure  ).
Next, we evaluated the effect of SG on mTORC1 activity and cap‐dependent mRNA translation during Mtb infection. In SGneg macrophages, mTORC1 activity, phosphorylation of translation factors, and puromycin incorporation all increased (Figure  ). Pabp1 and Rack1, key mediators of cap‐dependent mRNA translation [ , ], were also increased. Considering their crucial roles in cap‐dependent mRNA translation, the observed increase in these proteins supports enhanced cap‐dependent translation in SGneg macrophages following Mtb infection. Collectively, these findings suggest that Mtb‐induced SGs inhibit cap‐dependent translation by sequestering mTORC1.

2.5

## Mtb Infection‐Inhibited Autophagy Is Independent of mTORC1
As Mtb‐induced SGs suppress mTORC1, we examined whether SGs affect autophagy via mTORC1. Consistent with prior study [ ], lysosome‐associated protein levels decreased during infection, while LC3‐II and p62 accumulated (Figure ). Notably, autophagy remained inhibited up to 48 hpi, despite decreased mTOR‐pS2448 compared with 12 or 24 hpi (Figures and  ). This suggests that mTORC1 inhibition does not directly impact autophagy activation in Mtb‐infected macrophages. The cause of reduced lysosomal proteins is still unclear, but ESX‐1‐mediated lysosomal damage [ , , ] and endolysosomal damage likely contribute to the impaired autophagy during Mtb infection (Figure ).
To test whether this mTORC1‐autophagy disconnect is specific to Mtb infection, we analyzed p62 turnover during low‐glucose (LG) starvation. Starvation progressively reduced mTORC1 activity and p62 levels, and bafilomycin A1 (Baf. A1) reversed this effect (Figure ). In contrast, p62 levels in Mtb‐infected macrophages were unaffected by mTORC1 status (Figure ). Furthermore, a comparison of Mtb‐infected cells with autophagy‐inhibited cells revealed that the characteristic structures of autophagy, such as autolysosomes and autophagosomes, remained largely unchanged (Figure ). Importantly, lysosomal levels were reduced in Mtb‐infected macrophages compared to uninfected bystander cells (Figure ), suggesting that lysosomal damage disrupts autophagic flux. These results indicate that Mtb suppress autophagy independently of SG‐mTORC1 signaling. Lysosomal damage appears to be a key factor, possibly, impairing, fusion, and degradation steps of autophagy flux, and mTORC1 may later shift toward other cellular pathways, uncoupling from autophagy regulation.

2.6

## SGs Inhibit Immune Response‐ and Mitochondrion‐Associated mRNA Translation of Macrophages
As enhanced mRNA translation restricted Mtb growth (Figure  ) and Mtb‐induced SGs inhibited mTORC1 and cap‐dependent translation (Figure  ), we hypothesized that SGs block host mRNA translation to help Mtb survival. To examine the biological processes regulated by SGs, we compared the proteomes of Mtb‐infected wild type (WT) and SGneg macrophages infected with Mtb (Figure  ). We identified 230 differentially expressed proteins (Figure  and Table ); 124 proteins were increased in SGneg macrophages and enriched for protein transport, innate immune response, macrophage activation, and mitochondria (Figure  ). Importantly, SG deficiency did not induce compensatory activation of alternative stress pathways, instead, the expression of key stress‐related genes was reduced, suggesting that SGs might act as amplifiers of stress signaling rather than passive markers of cellular stress (Figure ). Together, these data suggest that Mtb promotes its survival by sequestering mTORC1 in SGs, thereby suppressing translation of mRNAs involved in innate immune defense and mitochondrial activity.
 
2.7

## SGs Regulate ROS, NO, and Cytokine‐Mediated Innate Immunity During Mtb Infection
Given the enrichment of innate immune and mitochondrial proteins in SGneg macrophages (Figure  ), we examined whether the absence of SGs or pharmacologic mTORC1 activation restores microbicidal activity of macrophages. Activation of mTORC1 with MHY1485 or enhancement of translation with ISRIB increased ROS production upon Mtb infection, while nitrite (NO) production remained unchanged (Figure  ). Both treatments also increased the production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and monocyte chemoattractant protein‐1 (MCP‐1; Figure  ). Consistent with the roles of ROS, NO, TNF, and MCP‐1 in controlling Mtb [ , , ], intracellular Mtb survival decreased in mTOR‐activated and ISRIB‐treated macrophages without affecting host cell viability (Figure  ; see also Figure  ). ROS, NO, and TNF were significantly increased in SGneg macrophages, while MCP‐1 remained stable (Figure  ), reflecting their enhanced anti‐Mtb activity (Figure  ).
However, as those inhibitory effects of siRNA‐mediated dKD of G3bp1 and 2 could be specific roles of G3bp proteins and not Mtb‐induced SGs per se, we confirmed using uninfected BMDMs with no SGs, transfected with siG3bp1 and 2 (Figure ). In the absence of Mtb infection, dKD did not alter translation, mTORC1 activity, cap‐dependent translation‐associated protein expression levels or basal innate immunity (Figure ). Collectively, these observations indicate that SGs suppress key effector mechanisms, including ROS, NO, and cytokine production, against Mtb infection.

2.8

## SGs Regulate Mitochondrial Activity Upon Mtb Infection
A notable observation is the significant recovery of mitochondria‐associated proteins (cluster 3) in SGneg macrophages (Figure  ). The proteins comprising this cluster are implicated in mitochondrial function, and their recovery indicates a plausible involvement in enhancing mitochondrial activity. We therefore hypothesized that SGs impair macrophage activity by limiting mitochondrial function, thereby favoring Mtb survival. To test this, we compared mitochondrial function in WT and SGneg macrophages during Mtb infection (Figure  ). Basal respiration, reduced in Mtb‐infected cell versus UN, was significantly restored in SGneg macrophages (Figure  ). Maximal respiration remained below UN levels but showed no significant difference between WT and SGneg macrophages (Figure  ). ATP‐linked respiration was higher in SGneg macrophages (Figure  ). Mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) fluctuated over time in WT but remained stable in SGneg macrophages, suggesting that SGs affect mitochondrial homeostasis (Figure  ). Accordingly, SGneg macrophages exhibited significantly increased ATP levels (Figure  ) consistent with greater ATP‐linked respiration and suggesting mitochondria, not glycolysis, as the primary source (Figure  ).
 
2.9

## SGs Inhibit Mitochondrial Complex I Activity by Sequestering Ndufa12
To explore how SGs regulate mitochondrial function, we analyzed 37 proteins from those recovered in Mtb‐infected SGneg macrophages that overlap with the known SG proteome (Figure  ) [ , ]. These 37 proteins were grouped into three clusters: translation, mitochondrial, and nuclear import (Figure  ). We found that Ndufa12, Ndufv2, and Ndufs2, which are components of mitochondrial complex I, were included in the SG proteome as well as increased in SGneg macrophages (Figure  and Table ). Because complex I initiates electron transfer to ubiquinone and generates the proton gradient for ATP synthesis [ ], we focused on Ndufa12, which showed the largest increase.
Mtb infection elevated Ndufa12 expression, with a further increase in SGneg macrophages (Figure  ). In WT macrophages, Ndufa12 partly relocated from mitochondria to SG‐containing cytosol, whereas in SGneg macrophages, it remained in mitochondria (Figure  ). To assess the functional consequences of Ndufa12 translocation from mitochondria to SGs, we measured complex I activity in mitochondria. The activity was significantly increased in SGneg macrophages (Figure  ), indicating that Mtb‐induced SGs impair mitochondrial complex I by sequestering Ndufa12.

2.10

## SG Formation in Mtb‐Infected Macrophages Occurs Independently of Lysosomal Damage or Oxidative Stress
We next investigated factors initiating SG formation during Mtb infection. Although lysosomal damage via the ESX‐1 system promotes SG assembly [ , ], SGs also formed in macrophages infected with the avirulent strain H37Ra (ESX‐1 impaired) or bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG; lacking ESX‐1; Figure ). H37Rv infection produced more SGs per cell than H37Ra or BCG, yet the fraction of SG+ cells was similar (Figure ), and phagosomal damage did not differ between WT and SGneg cells (Figure ). This finding indicates that lysosomal damage may not be a primary contributing factor to SG formation during Mtb infection, despite the significant lysosomal damage induced by the infection.
It is noteworthy that increasing MOI tended to raise the ratio of SG+ cells upon H37Rv infection (Figure ). These observations imply a correlation between the number of Mtb infecting macrophages and the subsequent formation of SGs. This phenomenon can be explained by two hypotheses: either there is an increase in the number of Mtb being phagocytosed, or Mtb induces a more pronounced stress response within the cells. To test this, we first examined whether the stress response induced by Mtb influences the formation of SGs. As previous studies have shown that Mtb infection induces oxidative stress [ , ], we investigated how SG formation was affected when cells were treated with ROS scavengers. The results demonstrated that infection‐induced SGs remained unaffected by oxidative stress (Figure ).

2.11

## Intracellular ATP Levels Control Infection‐Induced SG Assembly and Disassembly and Mtb Survival
Interestingly, intracellular ATP concentration was rapidly decreased after Mtb infection (Figure  ). Given that intracellular energy deficiency induces SG formation [ ], we examined whether ATP deficiency initiates SG formation. Treating macrophages with 2‐deoxy‐D‐glucose (2‐DG) and lowering glucose showed that SGs formed when ATP fell below ∼17.5 nmol (Figure  ). Accordingly, we considered 17.5 nmol ATP as the initial concentration for SG formation. Next, intracellular ATP levels were measured after Mtb infection. At 1 hpi, ATP concentration dropped to 7.5 nmol, which was much lower than the initial concentration required for SG formation (Figure  ). The rapid reduction in ATP levels was thought to be due to phagocytosis. This idea is further supported by several papers showing ATP consumption during phagocytosis [ , , ].
 To test this hypothesis under Mtb‐infected macrophages, we tested whether phagocytosis directly affect intracellular ATP levels or whether other immune signals lead to ATP decrease. Zymosan, a phagocytic particle [ ], reduced ATP within 1 h, whereas cytochalasin D (Cyto D) prevented this reduction; LPS (TLR4 activator) or phorbol 12‐myristate 13‐acetate (PMA; NF‐ĸB inducer) slightly increased intracellular ATP levels (Figure  ). These results suggest that intracellular ATP reduction is driven by phagocytosis rather than immune signaling cascades associated with Mtb infection. Next, we examined how intracellular ATP level change over time during Mtb infection with phagocytosis inhibited. Macrophages undergoing phagocytosis showed a rapid ATP drop after infection, whereas ATP remained stable when phagocytosis was blocked (Figure  ). SGs were absent in Cyto D‐treated cells (Figure  ), indicating that phagocytosis‐driven ATP depletion triggers SG assembly.
In order to examine the effect of ATP on SG formation, we used ATP‐containing liposomes (ATPsomes) to restore ATP depletion during Mtb infection. ATPsomes increased ATP to UN levels (Figure  ) and markedly reduced SG formation (Figure  ).
To confirm the relationship between ATP levels and SG dynamics, we modulated ATP with rotenone and antimycin A (Rot/AA; depletion) or ATPsomes (replenishment) in both uninfected and Mtb‐infected BMDMs (Figure ). SG numbers inversely correlated with ATP levels, supporting direct energy‐dependent SG regulation (Figure ). Consistently, replenishing ATP reduced Mtb survival without affecting viability (Figure  ) and increased ROS and NO production (Figure  ). Finally, ATPsomes disassembled preformed SGs and further lowered Mtb burden (Figure  ). These results demonstrated that severe ATP depletion by Mtb infection induced SG formation and those SGs were implicated in the innate immune activity of macrophages and TB pathogenesis.

2.12

## SGs Inhibit the Cellular Activity of Macrophages Upon Listeria monocytogenes Infection
To determine whether other intracellular bacteria also trigger SG formation and suppress host immunity, we examined Listeria monocytogenes (Lm), which causes listeriosis and evades host defense [ ]. Lm infection induced SG formation via phagocytosis‐driven ATP depletion (Figure ). As with Mtb, Lm infection transiently increased mTORC1 activity and cap‐dependent translation, which decreased by 6 hpi (Figure ). Upon Lm infection, SGneg macrophages showed higher mTORC1 activity and cap‐dependent translation (Figure ) and produced more ROS, NO, and TNF, whereas MCP‐1 remained unchanged (Figure ; see also Figure  ). Correspondingly, intracellular Lm survival was significantly suppressed in SGneg macrophages (Figure ). These results demonstrate that SGs induced by pathogenic intracellular bacterial infections, not confined to Mtb, help the survival of bacteria by inhibiting host cellular activities, such as mRNA translation, energy homeostasis, and innate immune responses.

2.13

## SGs Impair Host Defense Against Mtb In Vivo by Suppressing mTORC1 and Cytokine Production
Finally, we evaluated SG effects on host defense in Mtb‐infected mice (Figure  ). Lungs of SGneg mice displayed markedly fewer SGs after Mtb infection (Figure  ). Consistent with our in vitro findings, we observed an increase in mTORC1 activity and cap‐dependent translation‐related proteins in SGneg mice (Figure  ). Histopathological analysis further revealed stronger inflammatory infiltrates in lungs of SGneg mice compared with WT mice (Figure  ). In addition, the cytokine productions were significantly increased in SGneg mice serum than that of WT mice (Figure  ). These effects on innate immune activity ultimately resulted in a significant decrease in Mtb survival in the lung tissues of SGneg mice (Figure  ). Consistently, pharmacological inhibition of SG formation with ISRIB treatment also led to a marked reduction in SGs in lung tissues (Figure  ) and decreased Mtb burdens, confirming the role of SG disruption in enhancing host defense against Mtb (Figure  ). Overall, this study elucidates the previously unknown role of SGs in Mtb infection by demonstrating that SGs act as an integrated negative regulator of cellular activity, including mRNA translation, energy homeostasis, and innate immune response of macrophages against Mtb infection.
 

3

## Discussion
Consistent with the importance of immunometabolism in immune cell activity [ ], TB pathogenesis is associated with the disruption of immunometabolism in various immune cells [ ]. This compromised metabolic homeostasis has been attributed to the development of TB [ ]. In this study, we hypothesized that an energy imbalance may contribute to the pathogenesis of TB. This speculation is supported by our results showing that energy depletion‐induced SGs downregulate immune‐ and mitochondria‐related proteins over a longer duration of Mtb infection. Mtb infection‐induced SGs have three distinct features related to cellular activity: duration of infection, regulation of intracellular energy homeostasis, and the innate immune response.
First, in terms of the duration of Mtb infection, we observed that mRNA translation and mTORC1 activity decreased and that the cellular proteome and mitochondrial activity were altered when SGs were saturated. Considering that the duration of infection may govern cellular activities regulated by ATP‐mediated SGs, the idea that differences in TB development may be driven by the duration of infection and cellular stress in individuals is further supported. Second, in terms of intracellular energy homeostasis, our results showing increased mTORC1 activity, cap‐dependent translation, and mitochondrial activity in SGneg cells support the hypothesis that mTORC1 increases mitochondrial activity and biogenesis through mRNA translation [ ]. Given that ATP recovery inhibits SG formation and disassembles SGs, our study shows that SG‐regulated energy homeostasis may be an important factor in determining the development and symptoms of TB. Third, the innate immune response is an integrated effect of the two aforementioned SG features. We believe that the decrease in immune‐ and mitochondria‐related proteins due to SG formation may adversely affect innate immune activity in Mtb‐infected macrophages, contributing to TB pathogenesis. Our proteomic data further demonstrated that the absence of SGs leads to increased expression of mitochondrial‐ and immune‐related proteins (Figure  ), and these changes are functional consequences directly reflected by the proteomic dataset, as evidenced by enhanced OXPHOS, ROS, NO, and cytokine production (Figures  and  ). These findings support our mechanistic model in which SG‐mediated suppression of mTORC1 activity and mRNA translation leads to reduced energy metabolism and innate immune effector responses. Collectively, energy status, which affects the regulation of SG formation, may determine the pathogenesis of TB.
It has been demonstrated that certain viruses induce SG formation to facilitate their replication, thereby shifting the role of SGs from host protection to viral benefit [ ]. Conversely, we hypothesize that SGs induced by Mtb infection serve a Mtb‐beneficial role. In the initial phases of Mtb infection (up to 12 hpi), Eif2α undergoes phosphorylation (as part of the ISR) and mTORC1 activity is elevated, leading to augmented cap‐dependent translation (Figure  ). This is presumably essential for sustaining energy supply and protein synthesis, which are crucial for mounting an effective immune response. However, SG formation also increases during this period, reaching a peak at 12 hpi (Figures  and  ), where excessive SG accumulation suppresses mTORC1 activity, mitochondrial function, and cap‐dependent translation. This suggests that while initial mTORC1 activation supports macrophage defense mechanisms, prolonged SG formation (potentially by sustained ISR; phosphorylated Eif2α) disrupts integrated cellular activities, including energy production and protein synthesis, ultimately impairing the macrophage's ability to control Mtb. Consequently, in the context of prolonged infection with sustained ISR and SG formation, SG disassembly could be advantageous for macrophages by restoring cellular homeostasis and enhancing their capacity to combat Mtb. The present findings are consistent with those of studies emphasizing the role of the ISR in TB susceptibility and control. Notably, recent research has demonstrated that ISRIB improves outcomes in mouse TB models by mitigating the detrimental effects of sustained ISR activation [ , , ].
The formation of SGs is generally regarded as an adaptive response to cellular stress, with the primary function of preserving cellular homeostasis and promoting survival under stress conditions. However, the present study reveals a paradoxical effect of SGs, wherein they facilitate the survival of pathogens (Mtb and Lm), thereby raising the question of why macrophages induce SGs that are ultimately detrimental to host cells during the infection. One potential explanation for this phenomenon is that the formation of SGs in response to these infections is an evolutionary conserved adaptive mechanism of cells triggered by various cellular stress responses, including kinase activation, ATP depletion, and translational stalling. While SGs are generally beneficial, such as during viral infections or noninfectious cellular stress (e.g., oxidative stress), they can become maladaptive in specific cases of Mtb and Lm infections. This is due to the ability of these pathogens to exploit SGs to support their own survival and replication in macrophages. Alternatively, SG formation may represent an imperfect or incomplete response by macrophages to these pathogens. These pathogens may have evolved to have strategies to utilize SGs or to thrive within the SG‐mediated environment, converting a host survival mechanism to their advantage. Future studies should focus on understanding why macrophages form SGs that are harmful to host cells, revealing the evolutionary and molecular mechanisms that drive this paradoxical response during Mtb and Lm infections.
A recent study has proposed an alternative model of SGs, in which SGs are formed by the ESX‐1‐positive Mtb infection. This model suggests that SGs can restore lysosomal damage caused by the ESX‐1 system, thereby decreasing the Mtb area per cell [ ]. Another study also demonstrated the relationship between lysosomal damage and SGs, indicating that lysosomal damage‐induced SGs interacted with lysosomes and suppressed mTORC1 activity [ ]. In contrast, the present study suggests that SG assembly is not primarily driven by lysosomal damage. We observed significant SG formation in the presence of ESX‐1‐impaired or ‐lacking Mtb strains, which exhibit reduced capacity to induce lysosomal damage (Figure ). Furthermore, the supplementation of ATP prior to infection effectively impeded SG formation, despite the potential for persistent lysosomal damage resulting from Mtb infection (Figure  ). However, we also noted a trend toward increased SG numbers per cell during H37Rv infection compared to BCG and H37Ra infections (Figure ). Consequently, we propose the hypothesis that ATP depletion induced by Mtb infection is the predominant factor driving the process of SG assembly, while lysosomal damage contributes partially to this process.
The observed discrepancies are likely due to differences in the experimental methods used to assess Mtb survival within macrophages. Specifically, their study utilized fluorescence‐labeled Mtb to calculate the bacterial area per cell [ ]; however, this approach has limitations in distinguishing between live and dead Mtb. Furthermore, it is unable to differentiate between Mtb that is engulfed within the cell and Mtb attached to the cell membrane. The tendency of Mtb to form clusters and infect macrophages unevenly suggests that measuring the Mtb area per cell may not accurately reflect the anti‐Mtb effects of SGs, given the significant variation in the number of bacteria per macrophage. From a pathological perspective, accurately measuring only live Mtb is essential to evaluate the impact of SGs on Mtb control within macrophages. Nevertheless, macrophages treated with ATPsome exhibited a consistent trend of reduced Mtb area per cell, accompanied by a notable decrease in CFU (Figure  ).
Consistent with the proposed function of SGs induced by Mtb in our study, we also found that Lm infection also induced ATP depletion and SG formation, resulting in the inhibition of mTORC1 translation and innate immune responses. These results are particularly important, suggesting that the regulatory role of SGs over macrophage antimicrobial activity applies not only to Mtb infection but also to other intracellular bacterial infections. Various immune evasion mechanisms of intracellular pathogens, including the modulation of immunometabolism and phagosomal maturation, may explain their survival within host cells [ ]; however, these mechanisms cannot account for differences in disease development and symptoms among infected individuals. Our results demonstrating energy‐ and stress status‐mediated alterations in cellular activity provide evidence for differences in TB development among infected individuals.
Several studies have focused on the mechanistic role of SGs in mRNA translation [ ]; however, it remains controversial whether SGs can inhibit mRNA translation [ , ]. We found that mRNA translation gradually increased early during infection, when the number of SGs was low, whereas upon the saturation of SG formation, mRNA translation significantly decreased. Our findings imply that mRNA translation is inhibited in the presence of SGs above a certain level and that these mRNAs may be restricted to mTOR‐dependent translation and are important for mitochondrial activity and innate immune responses, at least for Mtb and Lm infections.
SGneg cells showed increased ROS, NO, and TNF, whereas MCP‐1 was unaffected. In addition, mTORC1‐activated and ISRIB‐treated cells showed increased levels of ROS, TNF, and MCP‐1 but no significant difference in NO levels. These differences suggest that SGs have regulatory functions in the innate immune response, including the activation of mTORC1. Importantly, the modulation of mTORC1 activity affects autophagy. Given the implications of xenophagy for invading pathogens [ ], it is important to consider how mTORC1 activation might inhibit intracellular mycobacterial survival. Although the activation of autophagy is important for innate defense against Mtb, our results show a decrease in lysosome‐associated proteins and an accumulation of p62 and LC3‐II in Mtb‐infected cells, suggesting a different regulatory mechanism for autophagy in this condition. We hypothesize that mTORC1 activation in the absence of SGs, or the pharmacological activation of mTORC1, may not affect autophagy because autophagy is already suppressed in Mtb‐infected macrophages. Therefore, we propose that, in addition to activating autophagy to eliminate bacteria, increasing the expression of mitochondrial‐ and immune‐related proteins, along with enhancing global mRNA translation, may have a more integrative impact on controlling Mtb within macrophages, thereby promoting innate immune responses.
A notable finding is the observation that type I IFN response is enhanced by SGs [ ]. The progression of TB in patients has been shown to be closely associated with hyperactivation of the type I IFN response [ , , ]. Furthermore, studies using mouse TB models and human monocyte‐derived macrophages have demonstrated that type I IFN response plays a critical role in TB pathogenesis by disrupting Mtb control and increasing susceptibility to Mtb [ , , , ]. Most recently, type I IFN‐mediated neutrophil extracellular traps have been shown to promote Mtb replication and tissue damage [ ]. These findings suggest that SGs, which are induced by Mtb infection, contribute to increased type I IFN response, thereby impairing macrophage‐mediated TB control and influencing disease progression. This supports the hypothesis that Mtb‐induced SGs help the intracellular survival of Mtb by reducing macrophage activity.
Notably, the inhibition of SG formation had a greater impact on antimycobacterial activity in vivo than in vitro (decrease of 39.8% in vitro and 49.4% in vivo). This suggests that siRNA‐mediated knockdown of G3bp1/2 also affects other immune cells and that the interactions of immune cells have a synergistic effect on enhancing the immune activity of macrophages against Mtb infection. Studies showing an increased type I IFN response by SGs [ ] and impaired macrophage control of Mtb by type I IFN in neutrophils [ ] support our findings.
In our experimental design, we did not distinguish between infected and uninfected bystander cells, instead focusing on the collective and integrated cellular responses to Mtb infection. Given that approximately 60% of infected cells and 20% of uninfected bystander cells form SGs, the observed SG‐mediated phenotypes likely reflect dominant mechanisms during infection. Nevertheless, resolving these populations at the single‐cell level could uncover additional heterogeneity and context‐specific responses. Future studies investigating the subcellular localization and translational control of specific immune transcripts will be essential to dissect the gene‐specific regulatory roles of SGs beyond their global effects on translation. Furthermore, the exact composition of the proteins in Mtb‐induced SGs is still unclear. Previous studies have shown that some pathogens remodel SGs, generating atypical condensates with distinct protein profiles [ , ]. Therefore, it is plausible that Mtb repurposes SGs in a similar manner via its own proteins. Future work should define the proteomic profile of these SGs and its implications for host–pathogen interactions.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that SGs induced by intracellular energy depletion during Mtb infection play an important role in the immunometabolic events that regulate Mtb survival within macrophages. We propose a comprehensive biological and physiological role for SGs in Mtb infection that integrates mRNA translation, mTORC1, and metabolic and immune regulation. We believe that our proposed mechanism of SG‐mediated dysregulation of macrophages against Mtb provides insight into the pathogenesis of TB and a host‐directed therapeutic target for future TB treatment.

4

## Methods and Materials
4.1

## Bacteria and Culture
Mtb strains H37Ra (ATCC 25177), H37Rv (ATCC 27294), H37Rv‐GFP, and BCG were incubated at 37°C in Middlebrook 7H9 liquid medium supplemented with 10% OADC (oleic acid; Sigma #O1008, albumin; Sigma #A9647, dextrose; Sigma #G7528, and catalase; Sigma #C1354), 5% glycerol (DUKSAN #781), and 0.05% Tween‐80 (SAMCHUN #9005‐65‐6), with gentle agitation. Aliquots with a concentration of 1 × 108 CFU/mL were stored at −80°C until use.
Lm (NCCP14714) was provided by the National Culture Collection for Pathogens, the National Institute of Infectious Diseases, and the National Institute of Health. Lm was incubated at 37°C in brain–heart infusion medium supplemented with erythromycin (5 µg/mL) and streptomycin (50 µg/mL). The optical density of the Lm culture was measured at 600 nm, and an OD600 of 1.0 was considered as 2 × 109 CFU/mL.

4.2

## Mice and In Vivo Transfection and Infection
Six‐week‐old female C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Nara Biotech (Seoul, Republic of Korea) and maintained in a specific pathogen‐free barrier at the Preclinical Experiment Center, College of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. All experiments were performed using 6‐week‐old female C57BL/6 mice.
For the in vivo transfection experiment, mice were transfected with control siRNA, siG3bp1, or siG3bp2 (Bioneer, #27041‐3, #23881‐2) using Invivofectamine 3.0. Briefly, siRNAs at a concentration of 2.4 mg/mL were mixed with a complexation buffer in a 1:1 ratio. The diluted siRNAs were then combined with Invivofectamine 3.0 reagent in a 1:1 ratio (v/v) and incubated at 50°C for 30 min. The resulting siRNA complexes were 1/6 diluted in phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS). The final siRNA complexes were intravenously injected at a concentration of 1.8 mg/kg. Two days after the transfection, mice were intratracheally infected by H37Rv with 1 × 106 CFU/50 µL PBS or control PBS, following anesthesia with an intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of avertin (375 mg/mL/kg; Sigma #T48402). Seven days postinfection, the mice were transfected with siRNAs at a concentration of 0.6 mg/kg, and another 7 days later, the mice were sacrificed for further experiments.
ISRIB solution and vehicle were prepared by dissolving in DMSO and PEG400 (1:1 mixture). ISRIB was administered at 0.25 mg/kg by i.p., with a single dose given 2 days before Mtb infection and additional dose administered 7 days after the infection.

4.3

## BMDM Isolation and In Vitro Infection
Bone marrow cells were isolated from the femurs and tibias of female C57BL/6 mice (6 weeks old) and differentiated into BMDMs by culturing in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Welgene) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Welgene), 5% antibiotics, and macrophage colony‐stimulating factor (25 ng/mL; R&D systems #416‐ML) for 4 days. After differentiation, adherent BMDMs were washed and allowed to rest in DMEM containing 5% FBS for 1 day before infection.
For Mtb infection, the cells were infected for 3 h, and nonphagocytosed mycobacteria were washed out, followed by further incubation in DMEM supplemented with 5% FBS. All infections not specifically mentioned in the figure legends were induced with the virulent strain H37Rv at an MOI of 1.
For Lm infection, the cells were infected with Lm at an MOI of 1 for 1 h. Then, the cells were washed with PBS and further incubated in DMEM with 5% FBS containing 50 µg/mL of gentamicin.

4.4

## LC–MS/MS Sample Preparation
The LC–MS/MS sample preparation was performed by EBIOGEN (Republic of Korea). Briefly, cell lysates were quantified using a BCA assay, and a total of 100 µg of proteins were subjected to filter‐aided sample preparation digestion. Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris(2‐carboxyethyl)phosphine for 30 min at 37°C and alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 25°C in the dark. After centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 15 min, 100 µL of 8 M urea (0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5) was added and centrifuged three times at 14,000 × g for 15 min. For digestion, 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added and centrifuged three times at 14,000 × g for 15 min. Trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the protein sample to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and incubated for 18 h at 37°C. The digested peptides were vacuum filtered twice with 40 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The digestion was stopped by adding 15 µL of formic acid (pH 2.0) to the resulting filtrate. The digested peptides were desalted using a C18 Micro‐Spin‐Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was prepared by adding 100 µL of MeOH, 100 µL of 0.1% formic acid, 100 µL of 80% acetonitrile, and 100 µL of 0.1% formic acid. The samples were loaded into the column, followed by the addition of 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid. The samples were eluted by 100 µL of 80% acetonitrile, dried, and stored at −20°C.

4.5

## LC–MS/MS Analysis and Proteomics Analysis
The LC–MS/MS proteomic analysis was performed using a Q‐Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at EBIOGEN. Briefly, Peptides were loaded to the column (trapping column C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 2 cm; analytical column PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 50 cm) with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The m/z range was set to 400–2000 m/z. LC–MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) based on a mouse database from Uniprot (proteome ID UP000000589). Functional annotation clustering and GO analysis were performed using the DAVID Bioinformatics Resources (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp) with default parameters and plotted using GraphPad Prism 10. STRING analysis was performed using the STRING tool v11.5 (http://string‐db.org).

4.6

## H&E Staining
Mouse lung tissue was perfused with 3.5% formaldehyde (SAMCHUN #50‐00‐0) for 3 min and embedded in paraffin. The tissues were sliced into 5 µm thickness using a microtome, and the tissue sections were mounted on glass slides. The slides were deparaffinized with xylene (DUKSAN #115) and hydrated with ethanol. Slides were incubated in Gill's Hematoxylin V (Muto Pure Chemicals #20032) solution for 5 min, decolorized with 0.3% HCl for 15 s, and rinsed with Scott's blue solution for 7 min. Slides were stained with Eosin Y (Muto Pure Chemicals #3200‐2) for 2 min, dehydrated, cleared, and mounted.

4.7

## Antibodies
The following primary antibodies were used for immunoblot analysis: mouse anti‐Eif3η (SCT, sc‐137214), mouse anti‐G3bp1 (SCT, sc‐365338), mouse anti‐Lamp1 (SCT, sc‐20011), mouse anti‐Mfn1 (Invitrogen, MA5‐24789), mouse anti‐mTOR (CST, 4517), mouse anti‐Pabp1 (SCT, sc‐166381), mouse anti‐Raptor (SCT, sc‐81537), mouse anti‐Tomm20 (Sigma, WH0009804M1), rabbit anti‐4E‐BP1 (CST, 9644), rabbit anti‐4E‐BP1‐pT37/46 (CST, 2855), rabbit anti‐β‐Actin (CST, 4970), rabbit anti‐Drp1 (CST, 8570), rabbit anti‐Eif2α (CST, 5324), rabbit anti‐Eif2α‐pS51 (CST, 3597), rabbit anti‐Eif4e (CST, 2067), rabbit anti‐G3bp1 (CST, 61559), rabbit anti‐mTOR‐pS2448 (CST, 5536), rabbit anti‐Ndufa12 (abcam, ab192617), rabbit anti‐Opa1 (CST, 80471), rabbit anti‐p70 S6 Kinase (CST, 2708), rabbit anti‐p70 S6 Kinase‐p389 (CST, 9234), rabbit anti‐SQSTM1/p62 (CST, 23214), rabbit anti‐TSC2 (CST, 4308), rabbit anti‐Astrin (Proteintech, 14726‐1‐AP), rabbit anti‐CoxIV (abcam, ab16056), rabbit anti‐Eif4b (CST, 3592), rabbit anti‐Eif4b‐pS406 (CST, 5399), rabbit anti‐G3bp2 (CST, 31799), rabbit anti‐LC3 (MBL, PM036), rabbit anti‐Parkin (CST, 2132), rabbit anti‐Rack1 (abcam, ab62735), and rabbit anti‐TSC1 (Thermo, PA5‐20131).
The following primary antibodies were used for immunofluorescence analysis: mouse anti‐α‐Tubulin (CST, 3873), rabbit anti‐β‐Actin (CST, 4970), rabbit anti‐G3bp1 (abcam, ab181150), mouse anti‐Eif3η (SCT, sc‐137214), mouse anti‐G3bp1 (SCT, sc‐365338), rabbit anti‐G3bp2 (CST, 31799), rabbit anti‐Rack1 (abcam, ab62735), mouse anti‐Pabp1 (SCT, sc‐166381), mouse anti‐Puromycin (Millipore, MABE343), mouse anti‐Raptor (SCT, sc‐81537), rabbit anti‐mTOR (CST, 2983), rabbit anti‐Astrin (Proteintech, 14726‐1‐AP), and rabbit anti‐Ndufa12 (abcam, ab192617).
The following secondary antibodies were used for immunoblot or immunofluorescence analysis: anti‐Mouse IgG HRP (Millipore, 401215), anti‐Rabbit IgG HRP (CST, 7074), Donkey anti‐Mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 647 (Invitrogen, A31571), Goat anti‐Mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 594 (Invitrogen, A‐11005), Goat anti‐Mouse IgG Alexa Fluor Plus 488 (Invitrogen, A32723), Goat anti‐Rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor Plus 488 (Invitrogen, A32731), Goat anti‐Rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor Plus 647 (Invitrogen, A32733), and Goat anti‐Rat IgG Alexa Fluor Plus 488 (Invitrogen, A48262).

4.8

## Confocal Microscopy Analysis—Tissues
Mouse lung tissues were perfused with 3.5% formaldehyde for 3 min and embedded in paraffin blocks. The paraffin‐embedded tissues were sliced into 5 µm thickness and mounted on glass slides. The slides were then heated in a 55°C oven to dissolve the paraffin, followed by deparaffinization using xylene. Deparaffinized slides were hydrated using ethanol and washed with running tap water for 2 min. Permeabilization was performed using 0.5% Triton X‐100 for 10 min at RT, followed by washing with PBS for 5 min. For antigen retrieval, the slides were placed in a glass jar containing citrate buffer and boiled for 20 min. The slides were immunostained and incubated with 0.1% Sudan Black B (0.1 g/100 µL in 70% EtOH; Sigma #SR2135‐050‐60) for 30 min. The slides were mounted and analyzed using a confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM900). Representative images are shown in all figures.

4.9

## Confocal Microscopy Analysis—Cells
The cells were washed three times with PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 10 min. Cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X‐100 for 15 min, washed with PBS containing 0.1% Tween‐20 (PBST), and blocked with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1 h. After blocking, the antibodies were diluted in 1% BSA and incubated with the cells for 2 h at RT. Secondary antibodies were prepared with 1% BSA and incubated with the cells for 1 h at RT, followed by washing with PBST and mounting. Images were captured using a Zeiss LSM 900 confocal microscope. For Z‐stack analysis and 3D reconstruction, Z‐stack images (0.15 µm step size) were captured using a Zeiss LSM 900 confocal microscope and analyzed using ZEN Microscopy Software v3.2. Dual‐color pixel analysis was performed with the default value of colocalization analysis in ZEN software, and Pearson correlation coefficient values were obtained.
For SYTO9 staining of Lm, Lm‐infected BMDMs were fixed, permeabilized, blocked, and incubated with the above‐mentioned antibodies. During secondary antibody incubation, 50 nM SYTO9 was added to the solution.

4.10

## Immunoblot Analysis
The cells were washed with PBS and lysed using radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer supplemented with a Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (PIC; Roche #11697498001). For the in vivo samples, lung tissues were homogenized and lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer containing PIC. For both the in vitro and in vivo samples, the protein concentration was measured using Bradford Dye Reagent (BIORAD #5000205)t. Protein samples were prepared by mixing lysates with 5 × sample buffer, followed by heating for 10 min at 95°C. The protein samples were subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate‐polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Subsequently, the separated proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes, which were then blocked with 3% skim milk. The membranes were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. The following day, the membranes were washed with TBST and incubated with horseradish peroxidase‐conjugated secondary antibodies. A chemiluminescent horseradish peroxidase substrate was used and detected using a ChemiDoc XRS+. The captured images were analyzed using Image Lab v6.0.1.34.

4.11

## RNA Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization
RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, the cells were fixed with Fixation Buffer and permeabilized with 70% EtOH. The cells were then washed with Wash Buffer A and incubated with Hybridization Buffer containing the T30‐ATTO 647N probe and GFP‐G3bp1 antibody for 4 h. After incubation, the cells were washed with Wash Buffer A and then stained with DAPI, followed by washing with Wash Buffer B and mounting.

4.12

## In Vitro siRNA Transfection and Treatment
After 4 days of differentiation into BMDMs, the cells were transfected with siRNAs using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen #3000001) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Prior to transfection, the medium was replaced with plain DMEM, and an siRNA (200 nM)–lipofectamine complex was prepared in Opti‐MEM. The siRNA mixture was incubated at RT for 15 min and then added dropwise to the BMDMs. After 4 h, the medium was replaced with DMEM containing 5% FBS, and the cells were incubated for 48 h before Mtb infection.
To inhibit phagocytosis, the cells were treated with 2 µM Cyto D at 1 h before infection. For the ISRIB (Sigma #SML0843) treatment, BMDMs were grown in 5% FBS DMEM and treated with 1.5 µM ISRIB for 1 h prior to Mtb infection. To manipulate mTOR activity, BMDMs were treated with the following chemicals at 0 hpi: MHY1485 (MHY; Sigma #SML0810) at 15 µM, and rapamycin (Rapa; Sigma #R8781) at 400 nM. The ROS scavengers: NAC 0.5 mM (Sigma #A7250), 2‐mercaptoethanol 100 µM, and MitoTEMPO 100 µM (Sigma #SML0737), were treated 1 h prior to Mtb infection. To inhibit glycolysis, BMDMs were washed with PBS and maintained in a glucose‐free medium supplemented with glucose and 2‐DG (Sigma #D8375) at the indicated concentrations for 1 h.
Empty liposomes and ATPsomes (Encapsula NanoScience #APS‐208) were used according to the manufacturer's instructions. Liposomes comprising a 3:7 ratio of phosphatidylserine to phosphatidylcholine were dissolved in DW before use. The resulting liposomes were approximately 100 nm in diameter and contained 1 mM ATP. ATP‐containing ATPsomes (10 mM) and an equivalent volume of empty liposomes were added to the media at the indicated times.

4.13

## ATP Measurement
Intracellular ATP concentration was measured using an ATP assay kit (Abcam). Briefly, the cells were washed with cold PBS, harvested, and lysed with ATP assay buffer. The lysate was gently resuspended and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant was added to a 96‐well plate in triplicate. The reaction mixture was prepared as follows: ATP assay buffer 44 µL, ATP probe 2 µL, ATP converter 2 µL, and developer mix 2 µL (total of 50 µL). The reaction mixture was added to the well containing the cell lysate, followed by incubation for 30 min under protection from light. Fluorescence was measured at excitation/emission wavelengths of 535/587 nm.

4.14

## Intracellular Survival Assay
To collect the intracellular mycobacteria, the cells were washed with PBS and lysed using autoclaved DW. Lysates were serially diluted with autoclaved DW and plated in triplicate on Middlebrook 7H10 agar plates. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 14 days, and the resulting colonies were counted. At least three independent experiments were performed, and the mean ± SEM was plotted.
For Lm, cells were washed, lysed, diluted, and plated on brain–heart infusion agar plates. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 1 day, and the resulting colonies were counted. At least three independent experiments were performed, and the mean ± SEM was plotted.
For the intracellular survival assay in mouse lungs, lung tissues were isolated and washed with PBS. The tissues were homogenized with autoclaved DW and filtered with a 70 µm cell strainer. The lysates were serially diluted and plated in triplicate on Middlebrook 7H10 agar plates. The plates were incubated for 2 weeks, and the colonies were counted. Six siControl‐transfected mice and seven siG3bp1/2‐transfected mice were analyzed, and the graph was plotted as mean ± SEM.

4.15

## Ribopuromycylation Assay
A ribopuromycylation assay was conducted to measure de novo protein synthesis. Prior to lysis, cells were treated with puromycin (5 µg/mL) for 10 min at 37°C to label the nascent polypeptide chains. Immunoblotting was performed on the cell lysates, and de novo protein synthesis was detected using an antipuromycin antibody. The band intensities of puromycin were quantified by performing at least three independent experiments using Image Lab v6.0.1.34.
For confocal microscopy analysis of the ribopuromycylation assay, the cells were treated with puromycin (5 µg/mL) before fixation with 4% PFA for 10 min. The cells were permeabilized and blocked with 1% BSA, followed by immunofluorescence staining with an antipuromycin antibody. Confocal microscopy was used to detect puromycin signals, and the fluorescence signal was pseudoscaled to a rainbow color scheme to visualize and quantify the signal intensity. The fluorescence intensities of the segmented cells from three independent experiments were quantified using ZEN Microscopy Software v3.2.

4.16

## Coimmunoprecipitation Analysis
Whole‐cell lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–Cl [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X‐100, 1.5 mM EDTA [pH 8.0], and PIC). Cell lysates containing 0.8 mg of protein were incubated overnight with anti‐G3bp1, TSC1, TSC2, and anti‐control IgG. The next day, Dynabead Protein A was added and incubated for 2 h with rotation. The protein–bead complexes were washed three times with lysis buffer. The complexes were then resuspended in 1 × sample buffer and heated at 95°C for 10 min. The 1% input and immunoprecipitation samples were subjected to immunoblotting.

4.17

## Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA)
The proximity ligation assay (PLA) was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Sigma #DUO92008). The cells were washed with PBS, fixed with 4% PFA, and washed three times with PBST. Cells were blocked with blocking solution for 30 min at 37°C. After blocking, cells were washed with PBST and incubated with primary antibodies in antibody diluent for 2 h at 37°C. Subsequently, cells were washed with Wash Buffer A two times, and 5 × PLA Probes Anti‐Rabbit PLUS and Anti‐Mouse MINUS were diluted with antibody diluent and incubated with the cells for 1 h at 37°C. The ligation solution prepared with ligase and 1 × ligation buffer was added to the cells after incubation with the probes. Cells were incubated with the ligation solution for 30 min at 37°C, followed by a wash with Wash Buffer A. Polymerase was added in 1 × amplification buffer and incubated with cells for 100 min at 37°C. The cells were washed with Wash Buffer B, stained with DAPI to visualize the nuclei, and mounted. PLA puncta were quantified using ImageJ/FIJI software and manually validated. At least 100 cells were analyzed in all PLA experiments. Representative images are shown in all figures.

4.18

## ROS Measurement
The BMDMs were treated with trypsin for 5 min and resuspended in PBS. The cells were then centrifuged at 7000 rpm for 30 s. Pellets were washed with PBS and treated with 20 µM dihydroethidium (DHE; Sigma #D1168) for 30 min at 37°C. After three washes with PBS, the cells were fixed in 4% PFA. ROS levels were measured using a NovoCyte 3000 flow cytometer and analyzed using FlowJo Software v10.8. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

4.19

## Griess Assay
NO formation was investigated by measuring nitrite (NO2
−), which is the primary stable breakdown product of NO, following the manufacturer's instructions for the Griess Reagent System (Promega #G2930). BMDM culture media were filtered and added to a 96‐well plate in triplicate. A standard solution was prepared by serial dilution from 100 to 0 µM. The sulfanilamide solution was added to the standard and culture media and incubated for 10 min under protection from light. After 10 min, NED buffer was added, and the cells were incubated for 10 min at RT while protected from light. Absorbance was measured using a microplate reader with a 520 nm filter. Three independent experiments were performed, and the results were analyzed.

4.20

## LDH Assay
The cell viability was assessed using a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay (Sigma MAK529) following the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, the culture media from Mtb‐infected or other experimental condition‐treated macrophages was collected, and LDH release was measured. The collected supernatant was incubated with the reaction mixture for 30 min. The absorbance was measured at 490 nm. Data were normalized to the values of the control groups. All experiments were conducted in triplicate.

4.21

## Cytometric Bead Array
Cytokine production was quantified in the culture media of BMDMs or mouse serum using a cytometric bead array, following the manufacturer's instructions (BD #552364). In brief, a 50 µL standard solution was prepared by serial dilution from 5000 to 0 pg using an assay diluent, and 50 µL of the filtered culture media of BMDMs or serum was prepared in triplicate. Mouse MCP‐1 and TNF capture beads were added to the standard and sample tubes, followed by the addition of 20 µL of PE detection reagent. The mixture was incubated in the dark at RT for 2 h. The mixture was washed with wash buffer and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min. The resulting beads were resuspended in wash buffer and transferred to round‐bottomed tubes for FACS analysis.
For the FACS analysis, the setup beads were first analyzed to determine the mean fluorescence range of each bead. Intact beads were gated as P1 using an FSC versus SSC dot plot. The PE versus APC dot plot separated the P2 and P3 populations, whereas the FITC versus APC dot plot separated the P4 population. The mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) for each population was adjusted as follows: P2: APC 70000; P3, PE 75; and P4, FITC 75. After adjusting the MFI range using the setup beads, the standard and samples were analyzed by measuring the fluorescence signal from 300 beads for each cytokine. The results were further processed using FCAP Array software. A mouse inflammatory cytokine bead library was established, and the resulting files were assigned to bead clusters, filtered to remove debris, and quantified.

4.22

## Mitochondria Analysis
For the mitochondrial function assay, BMDMs were seeded onto Seahorse XF96 cell culture microplates (Agilent Technologies) at a density of 5 × 104 cells per well. After Mtb infection for the indicated periods, the infected cells were washed twice with XF Base Medium supplemented with 25 mM glucose and 1 mM sodium pyruvate. Mitochondrial oxygen consumption rates were measured using the Seahorse XF96 and analyzed with the following drug injections: port A, oligomycin 1.5 µM; port B, FCCP 1.0 µM; and port C, Rot/AA 0.5 µM. Mitochondrial parameters were calculated according to the manufacturer's instructions.
A mitochondrial membrane potential assay was performed using JC‐1 staining. After infection, cells were treated with 1 µM JC‐1 and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Red and green fluorescence were measured at excitation/emission wavelengths of 550/600 nm for red and 485/535 nm for green using a fluorescence plate reader. Red/green fluorescence ratios were calculated and plotted.
Mitochondria were isolated using a Mitochondria Isolation Kit for Cultured Cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, cell pellets were lysed with Mitochondria Isolation Reagent A by vortexing at medium speed, followed by incubation on ice. Then, 10 µL of Mitochondria Isolation Reagent B was added, followed by the addition of 800 µL of Mitochondrial Isolation Reagent C and inverting. After centrifugation, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged at 3000 × g for 15 min. The resulting supernatant contained the cytosolic fraction, and the pellet contained isolated mitochondria. The fractions were further analyzed by immunoblotting and mitochondrial complex I activity assays.
Mitochondrial complex I activity was determined using a Complex I Enzyme Activity Microplate Assay Kit (Abcam). Isolated mitochondria were subjected to sample preparation, and mitochondrial protein (1.25 µg/µL) samples were prepared with detergent solution. Then, the samples (200 µL) were loaded onto 96‐well plates precoated with capture antibodies specific for Complex I, followed by incubation for 3 h at RT. The plate was washed twice with the Wash Buffer. The Assay Solution was prepared as follows: Dilution Buffer (3.29 mL), 20 × NADH (175 µL), and 100 × Dye (35 µL). The Assay Solution was added to the plate, and the kinetics were measured with the following parameters: wavelength 450 nm, time 60 min, interval 30 s, and shaking between readings at RT. Additionally, 1 µM of rotenone was treated for 1 h as the positive control.

4.23

## Monitoring Autophagic Flux
Autophagic flux was measured using a tandem fluorescence LC3 plasmid (tfLC3). The cells were transfected with tfLC3 for 48 h, followed by infection with Mtb for 24 h or incubation in LG medium with or without 200 nM bafilomycin A1. Subsequently, the cells were fixed with 4% PFA, mounted, and examined using confocal microscopy. Finally, quantification involved counting the number of yellow puncta (autophagosomes) and red puncta (autolysosomes).

4.24

## Immunofluorescence Quantification
To quantify the MFI, images were captured using a Zeiss LSM 900 confocal microscope. The images were further analyzed using ZEN software with default settings of arithmetic mean intensity for each channel and exported to Microsoft Excel. At least three independent experiments were performed. All fields of view were selected and quantified in a blinded manner. The resulting values were plotted on graphs as mean ± SD.
To analyze the Mtb area in the cells, images of Mtb‐infected BMDMs were acquired in triplicate using a Zeiss LSM 900 confocal microscope with five fields of view per sample. The cells were segmented based on DAPI using ZEN software. The Mtb area in each cell type was determined using the GFP channel. At least 100 cells were analyzed and plotted on a violin plot with medians and quartiles.

4.25

## SG Quantification
To quantify the ratio of SG‐positive cells and the number of SGs, the acquired images were analyzed on a percentage cell basis, as described in a previous study [ ], using the ImageJ/FIJI software, followed by manual validation. At least 15 fields of view were analyzed in triplicate, and the results were plotted as mean ± SD. Unless otherwise specified in the figure legend, SG quantification is based on the immunostaining of G3bp1.

4.26

## Statistical Analysis
All statistical analyses were performed as follows: A two‐component hypothesis test was performed using the unpaired t‐test. Multiple variable testing was performed using one‐way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Tukey's post hoc test. p values of < 0.05*, 0.01**, 0.001***, and 0.0001**** were considered significant. All experiments were independently repeated at least three times. All data are presented as mean ± SD, unless otherwise indicated, in the figure legends. For correlation analysis (Figure  ), a normal distribution was determined using the Shapiro–Wilk test, and Spearman correlation coefficients (ρ) were calculated. All data points, including potential outliers, were included in the analysis without exclusion. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism version 10.

## Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Jaewhan Kim, Kee K. Kim and Chang‐Hwa Song. Methodology: Jaewhan Kim. Validation: Jaewhan Kim. Formal Analysis: Jaewhan Kim. Investigation: Jaewhan Kim. Resource: Jaewhan Kim, Sang‐Hun Son, Ji‐Ae Choi, Junghwan Lee, Seoyeon Jo, Soo‐Na Cho, Doan Tam Nguyen and Doyi Son. Writing – original draft: Jaewhan Kim. Writing – review & editing: Jaewhan Kim and Chang‐Hwa Song. Visualization: Jaewhan Kim. Supervision: Jaewhan Kim and Chang‐Hwa Song. Project Administration: Chang‐Hwa Song. Funding Acquisition: Chang‐Hwa Song. All the authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding
This work was supported by grants from National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (RS‐2025‐00523465 and RS‐2025‐02263643) and by BK21 FOUR Program by Chungnam National University Research Grant, 2024.

## Ethics Statement
All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Chungnam National University, Republic of Korea (permit number: CNUH‐2023‐IA0028‐00). All animal experiments and protocols were performed in accordance with Korean Food and Drug Administration guidelines.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Supporting information

Figure S1 GO analysis of differentially expressed proteins in macrophages infected with Mtb. (A) Quantitative proteomics analysis for profiling protein expression. BMDMs were either uninfected (UN) or infected with Mtb for the indicated hours. Whole‐cell lysates were processed for quantitative LC–MS/MS analysis. (B) A heatmap displaying significantly differentially expressed proteins. The average z‐scores of 756 proteins were hierarchically clustered. Fold change (FC) ± 2.0; −log10 (p value) > 2. (C–E) Volcano plots illustrate −log10 (p value) versus log2 FC of Mtb 12 hpi/UN (C), 24 hpi/UN (D), and 24 hpi/12 hpi (E). (F–I) GO analysis of 356 increased (F) and 191 decreased (G) proteins at 12 hpi compared to UN, and 377 increased (H) and 174 decreased (I) proteins at 24 hpi compared to UN. Proteins with log2 FC ± 1.0 and −log10 (p value) > 2 were analyzed. The top five GO terms are shown.

Figure S2 Proteomic analysis of Mtb‐infected BMDMs highlights SG‐related proteins. (A) A Venn diagram of differentially expressed proteins in BMDMs infected with Mtb for 12 or 24 h from LC–MS/MS analysis. Up‐, down‐, and contraregulated proteins are shown in red, blue, and black. UN: uninfected. (B) Functional annotation clustering of 32 proteins consistently upregulated during Mtb infection from (A). Functional enrichment was conducted using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources, and the top three clusters are shown based on enrichment scores. (C) A heatmap of 18 SG‐assembly proteins among 756 identified proteins. Data were annotated using the MGI database v6.22, and z‐scores are represented by a color gradient.

Figure S3 Downregulation of autophagosome–lysosome fusion in Mtb‐infected macrophages. (A) GO analysis of proteins that showed decreased abundance in Mtb‐infected BMDMs (related to Figure S1, C and D). The top five are shown. (B) Immunoblot analysis of autophagy markers in Mtb‐infected BMDMs. LC3A/B‐II and p62 accumulate as infection time increases. (C) Immunoblot analysis of autophagy substrate in low‐glucose (LG)‐starved BMDMs treated with MHY1485 or bafilomycin A1 (Baf. A1). (D) Immunoblot analysis of autophagy substrate in Mtb‐infected WT and SGneg BMDMs or MHY1485‐treated BMDMs. (E) Confocal microscopy images of tfLC3‐transfected BMDMs. Cells were either infected with Mtb or starved in LG for 24 h. The arrowhead indicates the autolysosome. Scale bar indicates 10 µm. (F) Quantification of yellow puncta and red puncta from (E). The bar indicates the total number of yellow and red puncta in a cell. Each color represents a portion of yellow and red puncta. A total of 20 cells were analyzed. Data are presented as mean ± SD. n.s., nonsignificant, **p < 0.01, compared with LG, using Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn's post hoc test. (G) Immunofluorescence analysis of LAMP1 (green) and LC3 (magenta) in RFP‐Mtb‐infected BMDMs treated with MHY1485 or rapamycin (Rapa.) for 24 h. The red dotted image indicates RFP‐positive infected cells, while the white dotted image indicates RFP‐negative uninfected cells. Nuclei: blue. Scale bar indicates 10 µm. Representative images are shown.

Figure S4 SG deficiency does not activate compensatory stress responses during Mtb infection. (A–C) Relative mRNA expression levels of genes involved in the ISR/Eif2α axis (A), Nrf2‐mediated oxidative stress axis (B), and UPR axis (C) were measured in uninfected (UN) or Mtb‐infected BMDMs transfected with siControl or siG3bp1, 2. Data are normalized to β‐Actin and presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). n.s., nonsignificant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; t‐test.

Figure S5 Double knockdown of G3bp1 and G3bp2 did not alter cap‐dependent mRNA translation and immune responses of macrophages. (A) Immunofluorescence analysis of the uninfected G3bp1/2 dKD BMDMs. G3bp1 (green) and G3bp2 (red). Nuclei: blue. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. (B) Immunofluorescence analysis of ribopuromycylation in uninfected G3bp1/2 dKD BMDMs. Puromycin (white). Nuclei: blue. Scale bar indicates 10 µm. (C) Quantification of puromycin signal intensity from (B). (D) Immunoblot analysis of the uninfected G3bp1/2 dKD BMDMs. (E) Total ROS from uninfected BMDMs were measured by DHE staining. (F) Nitrite production was measured in uninfected BMDMs culture media. (G) Quantification of TNF and MCP‐1 production in the uninfected BMDMs culture media.

Figure S6 SGs form independently of virulence and ROS, with minor antigen contribution. (A) Immunofluorescence analysis of SGs in BMDMs infected by BCG, H37Ra, or H37Rv with a MOI of 1 for 24 h and treated with H37Rv culture filtrate proteins (CFPs), or virulent antigens of H37Rv for 24 h. Nuclei: blue; G3bp1: green; α‐Tubulin: red. Scale bar indicates 10 µm. (B) Quantification of number of SGs per cell from (A). n.s., nonsignificant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; compared with UN in black label; compared with H37Rv only in red label; One‐way ANOVA followed by Tukey's multiple comparison post hoc test. (C) Quantification of SG+ cell ratio from (A). n.s., nonsignificant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; compared with UN in black label; compared with H37Rv only in red label; One‐way ANOVA followed by Tukey's multiple comparison post hoc test. (D) Immunofluorescence analysis of phagosomal damage using GAL‐3 staining in siRNA‐transfected BMDMs infected by RFP‐H37Rv with a MOI of 1 for 24 h. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. (E) Quantification of number of GAL‐3 puncta per cell from (D). n.s., nonsignificant; Mann–Whitney test. (F) Immunofluorescence analysis of SGs in BMDMs infected by H37Rv with a MOI of 1, 3, and 5 for 24 h. Nuclei: blue; G3bp1: green. Scale bar indicates 20 µm. (G) Quantification of SG+ cell ratio from (F). n.s., nonsignificant. (H) Immunofluorescence analysis of SGs in H37Rv‐infected BMDMs with ROS scavengers: NAC 0.5 mM, 2‐mercaptoethanol (BME) 100 µM, and MitoTEMPO 100 µM. Nuclei: blue; G3bp1: green. Scale bar indicates 10 µm. (I) Quantification of number of SGs per cell from (H). n.s., nonsignificant, ****p < 0.0001; compared with UN in black label; compared with H37Rv only in red label; One‐way ANOVA followed by Tukey's multiple comparison post hoc test. (J) Quantification of SG+ cell ratio from (H). n.s., nonsignificant, ****p < 0.0001; compared with UN in black label; compared with H37Rv only in red label; One‐way ANOVA followed by Tukey's multiple comparison post hoc test.

Figure S7 Inverse correlation between cellular ATP levels and SG dynamics. (A) Immunofluorescence analysis of uninfected BMDMs treated with Rot/AA (0.1 µM, LOW; 1.0 µM, MID; 2.0 µM, HIGH) or ATPsome (2.5 mM, LOW; 5.0 mM, MID; 10 mM, HIGH) for 24 h. Cells were stained for G3bp1 (green) and nuclei (blue). Scale bar 20 µm. (B) Immunofluorescence analysis of Mtb‐infected BMDMs treated with Rot/AA (0.1 µM, LOW; 1.0 µM, MID; 2.0 µM, HIGH) or ATPsome (2.5 mM, LOW; 5.0 mM, MID; 10 mM, HIGH) for 24 h. Cells were stained for G3bp1 (green) and nuclei (blue). Scale bar 20 µm. (C) Quantification of intracellular ATP concentration (gray) and SG number per cell (green) under different conditions from (A and B). Data represent mean ± SD (n = 15 for ATP; n = 50 for SG). (D) Pearson correlation between ATP levels and SG number per cell for uninfected and Mtb‐infected conditions from (A) to (C).

Figure S8 Lm infection induces ATP reduction and SG formation, thus inhibiting mTORC1 and innate immune activity. (A) Immunofluorescence analysis of the Lm‐infected BMDMs. Cells were infected with Lm (MOI 1) and stained with SYTO9 (Lm) and G3bp1. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. (B) Immunofluorescence analysis of the Lm‐infected BMDMs with or without Cyto D. Cells were infected with Lm (MOI 1) and stained with SYTO9 (Lm) and G3bp1. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. (C) Intracellular ATP concentration of Lm‐infected WT and SGneg BMDMs and Cyto D‐treated BMDMs. n.s., nonsignificant, *p < 0.05, ****p < 0.0001; compared with siCont; One‐way ANOVA followed by Tukey's multiple comparison post hoc test. (D) Immunoblot analysis of Lm‐infected BMDMs undergoing the indicated time of infection. (E) Immunoblot analysis of Lminfected WT and SGneg BMDMs. (F) Total amount of ROS was measured by dihydroethidium staining. WT and SGneg BMDMs were infected with Lm (MOI 1). **p < 0.01, unpaired t‐test. (G) Nitrite production was measured in the Lm‐infected WT and SGneg BMDM culture media. *p < 0.05, unpaired t‐test. (H and I) Quantification of TNF (H) and MCP‐1 (I) production in the Lm‐infected WT and SGneg BMDM culture media. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). n.s., nonsignificant, ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (J) CFU of Lm in WT and SGneg BMDMs. Data from three independent experiments are shown as mean ± SD. ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, compared within the same time point; Mann–Whitney test.

Table S1 Proteomics for total proteomes of UN or Mtb‐infected BMDMs.

Table S2 Proteomics for total proteomes of WT or SGneg BMDMs (Mtb infected).

Table S3 Proteome, which is increased in SGneg BMDMs and included in SG proteome.
Sheet 1: Proteome, which is increased in SGneg BMDMs and included in SG proteome.
Sheet 2: Published SG proteome, integrated

Supporting Video S1 mco270479‐sup‐0005‐VideoS1.mp4

Supporting Video S2: mco270479‐sup‐0006‐VideoS2.mp4

Supporting Video S3: mco270479‐sup‐0007‐VideoS3.mp4

## Acknowledgments
The pathogen resource (NCCP14714; Listeria monocytogenes) for this study was provided by the National Culture Collection for Pathogens, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health. Graphical abstract was created with BioRender.com.

## Data Availability Statement
All data are included in the manuscript or supplements and are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.