pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11389944PMC11389944.111389944113899443925974210.1371/journal.pone.0310219PONE-D-24-199751Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyOrganism DevelopmentAgingBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ProcessesAgingMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsCancer Risk FactorsAging and CancerMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer Risk FactorsAging and CancerBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsPrecipitation TechniquesImmunoprecipitationBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionGene RegulationTranscriptional ControlBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsHepatocytesBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyLiverHepatocytesMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyLiverHepatocytesBiology and life sciencesGeneticsDNADNA replicationBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsDNADNA replicationBiology and life sciencesMolecular biologyMolecular biology techniquesDNA constructionPlasmid ConstructionResearch and analysis methodsMolecular biology techniquesDNA constructionPlasmid ConstructionTranscriptional control of a stem cell factor nucleostemin in liver regeneration and aging
NS in aging liversLiuXiaoqinFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing WangJunyingFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing LiFangInvestigationWriting – review & editing TimchenkoNikolaiConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8357-0812TsaiRobert Y. L.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationSupervisionVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health, Houston, TX, United States of America2
Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Texas A&M University School of Medicine, Bryan, TX, United States of America3
Department of Surgery, Cincinnati Children Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, United States of AmericaAvilaMatias A.Editor – ]. One of the clinically relevant age-dependent changes in the liver is its reduced ability to regenerate with age, as shown by fewer hepatocytes reentering the S-phase after partial hepatectomy (PHx) (30% vs. 99%) and those that replicate do so less rapidly in the aged than in the young [ ]. Consequently, the restored liver mass after injury is reduced and delayed in the elderly compared to the young, creating health issues such as slower recovery from liver resection, decreased survival of transplanted livers obtained from older donors or grafted into older recipients, and a 3-to-5-fold increase in liver disease mortality [ – ].
Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the effect of aging on liver regeneration, including decreased hepatic sensitivity to growth factors [ , ], increased reactive oxygen species, shortened telomere length [ , ], increased inflammatory response, accelerated cellular senescence, and reduced pseudocapillarization. At the molecular level, aging has been shown to increase the activity of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) and E2F4-Rb complex, which silences the expression of hepatocyte proliferative factors such as DNA polymerase α, c-Myc, cdc2, Forkhead Box protein M1, and p300 [ , , – ]. During aging, more genomic errors may accumulate due to insufficient repair of DNA damage caused by toxic agents from external sources or DNA replication per se. A recent genome-wide study revealed new differentially methylated regions and gene targets that are inversely affected by liver aging and regeneration, which may explain some of the adverse effects of aging on liver regeneration [ ].
Nucleostemin (NS) was first discovered in neural stem cells [ , ] and was later found in multiple types of stem cells and cancers [ – ]. It belongs to a family of three GTP-binding nucleolar proteins [ ]. NS expression is relatively low in most adult tissues but is upregulated during regeneration [ – ]. In the liver, NS plays a role in protecting regenerating hepatocytes from replicative DNA damage [ ]. Mechanistically, loss of NS increases replicative DNA damage and impairs RAD51 recruitment to stalled replication-induced foci in stem/progenitor cells [ – ]. It has been shown that NS modulates the outcome of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by helping tumor cells cope with genomic damage caused by replicative stress [ ]. NS activity has also been linked to the activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) in HCC [ , ], and STAT3 is known to be activated during liver regeneration [ ]. These data indicate that NS may provide a mechanism that promotes hepatocyte proliferation by protecting the genome from replicative DNA damage during regeneration and oncogenesis.
Given the important role of NS in liver regeneration [ ], we investigated the upstream mechanism that regulated its transcriptional expression during liver regeneration and aging. Our results showed that aging reduced NS expression in the liver both at baseline and during regeneration. Promoter and expression analyses indicated that NS expression was negatively regulated by C/EBPα during liver aging and regeneration. Further studies confirmed that C/EBPα bound NS promoter and suppressed its transcriptional activity, and depletion of C/EBPα in aged livers increased endogenous NS expression under both baseline and regenerative conditions. Using NS as a case in point, our study provides a new molecular perspective on the homeostatic regulation of liver regeneration during the aging process.

## Materials and methods

## Animal care and partial hepatectomy
Mice were housed in a vivarium with the light-dark cycle set at 12h-12h with lights on at 06:00 and off at 18:00, and allowed free access to normal chow diet and water. All procedures were in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (2018-0396-IBT and 2021-0264-IBT). Animals were sacrificed at specific experimental endpoints as described in individual studies (i.e., 2, 16, and 24 months old). Death was not a likely nor a planned endpoint of this study. No animal required premature euthanasia. 30–70% partial hepatectomy was performed based on a previously published procedure [ ]. Wild-type (C57BL/6J) female mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation. After laparotomy, cuts were made on the falciform ligament and membrane between the caudate and left lateral lobes of the liver. For 70% (2/3) PHx, the left lateral lobe was resected, followed by resection of the right medial and left medial lobes. To perform 30% (1/3) PHx, which was used on 24-month-old mice for better post-operative survival, only the left lateral lobe was ligated with a 5–0 silk suture and resected. The peritoneum was closed using absorbable 4–0 suture. The skin was closed with an Autoclip wound clip (Becton Dickinson). To collect sham-operated samples, laparotomy and suture were performed without liver resection, and animals were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation for tissue collection.

## Real-time RT-PCR assay
The ΔC(t) values between the target and reference genes were determined using the MyiQ single-color real-time PCR detection system and supermix SYBR green reagent, as described previously [ , ]. ΔΔC(t) values were calculated based on measurements of to 4–8 biological replicates with to 2–3 technical repeats for each biological sample. Primers were designed to set the Tm at 60°C for all reactions. The results were compared with those of two reference genes, Rps3 and Hmgn1. The sequences for mouse qRT-PCR primers are as follows: Ns, 5’-GTCTGATCTAGTACCAAAGG-3’ and 5’-GGGAAACCAATCACTCCAAC-3’; c-Myc, 5’-CAGCGACTCTGAAGAAGAGCAAG-3’ and 5’-TAGTTGTGCTGGTGAGTGGAGAC-3’; E2f1, 5’-CTGGATCACCTGATGCACATCTG-3’ and 5’-TCCACAGCTTGTAGTTGGGTCTC-3’; p300, 5’-GCATGCGGTCTGTGAACAACATG-3’ and 5’-TCCAGTACTAGATGGCTGAGCTG-3’; C/EBPα, 5’-CAAGAAGTCGGTGGACAAGAAC-3’ and 5’-GGTCATTGTCACTGGTCAACTC-3’; C/EBPβ, 5’-AAGAAGACGGTGGACAAGCTGA-3’ and 5’-TGCTTGAACAAGTTCCGCAGGG-3’; Rps3, 5’-ATGGCGGTGCAGATTTCCAA-3’ and 5’-CATTCTGTGTCCTGGTGGC-3’; Hmgn1, 5’-GGGAAAGGATAAAGCATCAGAC-3’ and 5’-TTCAGAGGCTGGACTCTGGTT-3’. The sequences for human qRT-PCR primers are as follows: NS, 5’-GAACAAAGCCAAGTCGGG-3’ and 5’-GTCCACTCTGGACAATGG-3’; c-MYC, 5’-AGCGACTCTGAGGAGGAACAAG-3’ and 5’-TGCGTAGTTGTGCTGATGTGTG-3’; E2F1, 5’-CTGGACCACCTGATGAATATCTG-3’ and 5’-TCTGAAAGTTCTCCGAAGAGTCC-3’; p300, 5’-CCATGAGCAACATGAGTGCTAG-3’ and 5’-TCCAGTAGTGGATGGTTGAGCTG-3’; C/EBPα, 5’-CAAGAAGTCGGTGGACAAGAAC-3’ and 5’-GGTCATTGTCACTGGTCAGCTC-3’; C/EBPβ, 5’-AAGAAGACCGTGGACAAGCACA-3’ and 5’-TGCTTGAACAAGTTCCGCAGGG-3’; RPS3, 5’-CTTTCCAGAGGGCAGTGTAGA-3’ and 5’-ATGAACCGCAGCACACCATAG-3’; HMGN1, 5’-GGCAGCAGCGAAGGATAAATC-3’ and 5’-TTCATCAGAGGCTGGACTCTC-3’.

## Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Tissue collection, processing, and immunostaining of NS followed the same procedures as described previously [ ]. Sections were treated with 0.3% H2O2 and antigen-retrieved in boiling 10mM Tris solution (with 1mM EDTA pH9). IHC was performed by incubation with primary anti-rat NS antibody (Ab2438, 1/100×), followed by biotin-labeled secondary antibodies, avidin-conjugated HRP, and DAB color reaction. The specificity of Ab2438 was previously validated [ ].

## Cell-based dual-luciferase reporter assay
Hep3B cells were purchased from ATCC (#HB-8064) and tested negative for mycoplasma infection on 6/29/20 and 3/29/24, respectively. Cells were grown in EMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and passaged every 2–4 days up to 10 passages after thawing. Cell-based dual-luciferase reporter assays were performed as described previously with some modifications [ ]. Hep3B cells were seeded in 24-well plates and transiently transfected with Firefly (100ng) and Renilla (10ng) reporter plasmids with or without C/EBPα (Addgene #66978) or C/EBPβ (Addgene #49198) expression plasmid (100ng or 300ng) using X-tremeGENE 9 DNA transfection reagent (Roche Cat# 06365787001). The total DNA amount in each well was adjusted to 410ng using the empty expression vector (pCIS). Whole-cell extracts were harvested after 24h of transfection plus 24h of recovery. Firefly and Renilla luciferase activities were measured using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega Cat# E1910) on a Cytation 5 Imaging Reader (BioTek). Data represent four biological replicates with one or two technical repeats each (n = 7).

## EMSA
Recombinant proteins were expressed, harvested in extraction buffer containing phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) without Ca2+ or Mg2+ ions, mixed with specified amounts of probes, and incubated on ice. The binding reaction mixture contains 0.2–0.4ng of probe with or without a 100-fold molar excess of unlabeled oligo-nucleotides, 10μg of nuclear extract or 30–40μg of whole cell extract, 2μg of poly(dI-dC), 20mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 100mM KCl, 5mM MgCl2, 1mM DTT, and 10% glycerol. The reaction products were subjected to electrophoresis on a 5% polyacrylamide gel (30:1.5) in 0.5× Tris-borate-EDTA (TBE) buffer at 4°C and detected by autoradiography. To generate EMSA probes, oligonucleotides were radiolabeled with γ-P32 ATP in a T4 kinase reaction, annealed with excess amounts of antisense oligonucleotides, and purified using a nucleotide removal kit. Supershift experiments were performed by adding an anti-C/EBPα antibody to the reaction solution for 30 min.

## Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
Hepa1-6 cells (CRL-1830) were purchased and mycoplasma-tested from ATCC (3/29/22). Cells were grown in DMEM with high glucose (ATCC #30–2002), supplemented with 10% FBS and passaged every 2–4 days. Transfection of FLAG-tagged C/EBPα (Addgene #66978) was performed by using 10μg of plasmid DNA complexed with 15μL of jetPRIME reagent (Polyplus #101000046, New York, NY). After 48 hours, cells (4xE6) were harvested and crosslinked in 1% formaldehyde. Chromosomal DNAs were sheared to 200-500bp fragment by sonication, carried out in 200μL of shearing buffer for 2 minutes using the COVARIS M220 ultrasonic apparatus (Woburn, MA) with average incident power (AIP) of 7.5 watts t. 1/30th of the lysate was used to measure the input DNA amount. Immunoprecipitation was performed using the ChIP-IT Express Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Kit (Active Motif #53008, Carlsbad, CA) with 100μL of sheared chromatin sample, 3μg of anti-Flag antibody (Sigma #1804) or IgG (Sigma #I5381, Saint Louis, MO), and Protein G-magnetic beads. Immunoprecipitated DNAs were extracted by RNase-A and proteinase-K treatment and reverse crosslinking and subjected to qPCR assay. Each group consisted of four biological replicates and two technical repeats (n = 8). The qPCR primer sequences are as follows: Ns-p1, 5’-AATCCCAAACATGTCTTCAGCAG-3’ and 5’-TTCCAGATGTTGAGGAACATAGC-3’; NS-p3, 5’-TTAGTCCTCGAATTCCTACATCC-3’ and 5’-TGTACCGTCACGACGAGTTGAG-3’.

## shRNA design and production
Sense and antisense shRNA oligonucleotides were designed to target two different regions of 21 nucleotides within the coding region of mouse C/EBPα (shCEBPA1 and 2), or a scrambled sequence of 21 nucleotides as a negative control (shScr). The hairpin structure includes a stem-loop sequence of TTCAAGAGA, a 5’ blunt end, and a 3’ XhoI-compatible cohesive end. The target sense sequences were 5’-TCTCGCTTGGGCGAGAGTAAG-3’ (shScr), 5’-AGAAGTCGGTGGACAAGAACA-3’ (shCEBPA1), and 5’-GGAGTTGACCAGTGACAATGA-3’ (shCEBPA2). Each pair of oligonucleotides was ligated into the AAV gene transfer vector AV5-siRNA-GFP (Addgene #124972) at the HpaI and XhoI cloning sites. Purified plasmids were co-transfected with XX, Rep/Cap serotype 8, and AdΔF6 helper plasmids into 293T cells using the iMFectin transfection reagent (GenDepot). The cell viral lysate AAV and media-secreted AAV were combined and purified on a discontinuous iodixanol gradient and concentrated in Amicon filter centrifugation units (100,000 MW). AAV8 titers were quantified by absolute endpoint qPCR using WPRE-172 and WPRE-392 primers.

## Portal vein injection
C57BL6/J mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation (2–4%) mixed with oxygen. Laparotomy was performed with a midline incision. Intestines were pulled out and covered with wetted gauze. AAV8 virus was injected at 1×1011 genome copies (gc) in 50μL per animal via the portal vein using a 32G sterile needle with 3-5mm in depth and less than 5 degrees.

## Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses of qRT-PCR data comparing the expression of genes between two groups and the liver-to-body weight ratios between 2 and 16-m/o livers following PHx were performed using t-test. Relationship between the expression of NS and C/EBPα was calculation by Pearson’s product-moment correlation using the cor.test() function in R 4.4.1.

## Results

## Expression profiles of NS in liver aging and regeneration
To investigate how NS expression was regulated during liver aging and regeneration, we measured NS expression in young (2-m/o), adult (8-m/o), and old (16-m/o) mice using qRT-PCR, as its baseline expression was low in adult livers. The results showed that NS expression was reduced by 40% in 8-m/o and 16-m/o livers compared to that in 2-m/o livers ( ). In 2-m/o livers, NS expression rose rapidly by 35% at 1d following 70% PHx-induced regeneration, continued to increase at 2d and 4d, and returned to the baseline level at 7d ( ). Compared to non-operated livers, NS expression showed no significant changes in the livers collected from 2-m/o mice at 1, 2, 4, and 7 days after receiving sham operation (i.e., laparotomy) ( ). At 16 m/o, the NS expression level also increased rapidly at 1d post-PHx but returned to the baseline level at 4d post-PHx, earlier than that at 2 m/o (7d) ( ). To determine whether the increased expression of NS in liver regeneration could be detected at the protein level, anti-NS immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on liver samples collected at 0d and 2d post-PHx from 2-m/o and 16-m/o mice. The IHC results confirmed the increase of NS signals in the nucleolus at PHx-2d compared to PHx-0d at both 2 m/o ( ) and 16 m/o ( ). The increase of NS signals was manifested in both the signal intensity and the nucleolar size. No clear difference between the basal NS levels of the 2- and 16-m/o livers was detected by IHC. The increase in liver-to-body weight ratios at 1d, 2d, 4d, and 7d post-PHx (70%) were delayed in 16-m/o mice compared to that in 2-m/o mice ( ). These results demonstrate that aging attenuates the baseline expression level of NS and its upregulation during regeneration in the liver.
 

## Promoter analysis of NS-regulatory transcription factors (TFs)
To search for potential TFs that might downregulate or upregulate NS expression during liver aging and regeneration, respectively, we used the TRANSFAC® database to dissect TF-binding sites in the NS promoter region (-3.3kb to -1). Multiple binding sites for c-Myc (red bars), E2F1 (green bars), and p300 (purple bars) were found, mostly in a GC box (-633 to -1) ( ). Upstream of the GC box, a CAAT box with four C/EBPα binding sites (circles) was found (-1216 to -735). c-Myc and E2F1 have been implicated as positive NS regulators in mice and human liver cancer cells, respectively [ , ], whereas C/EBPα and p300 have not yet been linked to NS expression. In addition, MethPrimer analysis identified three CpG islands (blue boxes) within 43kb (-23.5kb to +19.4kb) of the NS transcription start site (TSS), one of which coincided with the GC box.

## Expression profiles of candidate NS-regulatory TFs in liver aging and regeneration
To identify TFs that might regulate NS expression during liver aging and/or regeneration, qRT-PCR assays were performed to match the expression profiles of activating TFs (e.g., c-Myc, E2F1, and p300) ( ) and inhibitory TFs (e.g., C/EBPα and C/EBPβ) ( ) with that of NS ( ). Our results showed that the expression levels of c-Myc, E2F1, and p300 were reduced in 16-m/o livers compared to those in 2-m/o livers ( ). During regeneration, 2-m/o livers showed upregulation of c-Myc, E2F1, and p300 expression in different post-PHx time windows, i.e., 2-7d (c-Myc), 1-7d (E2F1), or 4-7d (p300). In 16-m/o livers, the PHx-induced upregulation of c-Myc, E2F1, and p300 was generally dampened, with p300 showing the most significant decrease ( ). In contrast to these activating TFs, C/EBPα expression remained relatively unchanged ( ), and C/EBPβ expression was upregulated during liver aging ( ). In response to 70% PHx, 2-m/o livers showed a significant downregulation of C/EBPα expression from 1-7d, with the greatest decrease occurring at 1-2d ( ), and a decrease in C/EBPβ at 2d post-PHx ( ). In 16-m/o livers, the PHx-elicited expression response of C/EBPα resembled that in 2-m/o livers ( ), whereas the decrease in C/EBPβ occurred as early as 1d post-PHx ( ). These results show that the time course of NS upregulation during liver regeneration coincides with an increase in E2F1 and a decrease in C/EBPα, both of which occur rapidly within 1d. However, unlike NS or C/EBPα, the level of E2F1 peaks at 2d in 2-m/o livers and 2-4d in 16-m/o livers. In support, Pearson correlation analysis showed that the baseline expression of NS and C/EBPα were inversely correlated in young (2-m/o) and old (16-m/o) livers (r = -0.42, p = 0.052), and the regulated expression of NS and C/EBPα during liver regeneration (D0, D1, D2, D4, and D7) were also inversely correlated at 2 m/o (r = -0.44, p = 0.001) and 16 m/o (r = -0.30, p = 0.038). We therefore conclude that among the five candidate TFs identified by promoter analysis, only C/EBPα reversely matches the temporal expression profiles of NS during liver regeneration, suggesting that it may play a role in suppressing NS expression during liver regeneration.
 

## C/EBPα binds NS promoter sequences and suppresses its transcription activity
To establish the function of C/EBPα in regulating NS expression, we first determined whether it could directly bind to the C/EBP consensus sequences found in the NS promoter ( ). Electromobility shift assay (EMSA) was performed using purified C/EBPα protein mixed with radiolabeled probes with sequences identical to the S1 or S2 site in the NS promoter (NS-S1 and NS-S2) or the C/EBPα-binding motif of PEPCK as a positive control. EMSA confirmed that C/EBPα directly bound the S1 and S2 sequences (Figs and ). The specificity of the C/EBPα-bound signals was validated by supershift experiments using an anti-C/EBPα antibody. To confirm that C/EBPα binds the endogenous NS promoter, Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were performed in Hepa1-6 mouse HCC cells with overexpressed mouse C/EBPα protein tagged with the FLAG epitope (FLAG-C/EBPα). The experimental group consisted of samples transfected with FLAG-C/EBPα and pulled down with anti-FLAG antibody. Control groups included: 1) samples transfected with FLAG-C/EBPα and pulled down with IgG, or 2) samples transfected with empty vector and pulled down with anti-FLAG antibody. The amounts of the endogenous NS promoter in the pulldown fractions were measured by qPCR assays using two pairs of primers spanning the C/EBPα binding sites in the NS promoter ( ) and expressed as percentages of the input DNA of the same samples. The ChIP results showed that anti-FLAG antibody preferentially pulled down the endogenous NS promoter in Hepa1-6 cells expressing FLAG-C/EBPα (lanes 3 and 6) but not in Hepa1-6 cells without FLAG-C/EBPα (lanes 1 and 4). Nor did IgG pull down the endogenous NS promoter in Hepa1-6 cells expressing FLAG-C/EBPα protein (lanes 2 and 5) ( ). All differences were statistically significant (< 0.05), except for the comparison between lanes 4 & 6 (p = 0.08) due to slightly high backgrounds in anti-FLAG pulldown samples. To determine the role of C/EBPα in regulating NS promoter activity, a luciferase reporter construct was created by subcloning the native NS promoter region containing the four C/EBPα−binding sites (×4) into the 3’ end of the pGL2-Promoter (SV40) firefly luciferase reporter vector (pGL2-P×4) ( ). Hep3B cells were transfected with the firefly reporter plasmid (pGL2-P×4 or pGL2-P), Renilla luciferase reporter plasmid as an internal control, and pCIS expression vector for C/EBPα, C/EBPβ, or vector alone. The promoter activity was determined using a dual-luciferase assay. Our data showed that C/EBPα exerted a strong dose-dependent inhibitory effect on pGL2-P×4 but not on pGL2-P ( ). C/EBPβ was found to exert an activation effect on the SV40 promoter of pGL2-P independent of the C/EBP-binding site ( ). To correct for this NS-unrelated effect of C/EBPβ on pGL2-P, C/EBPβ-induced and binding site-dependent changes were determined by calculating the ratios of C/EBPβ-transfected versus non-transfected samples of the same reporter constructs (lane 3 or 4 divided by lane 2; lane 6 or 7 divided by lane 5) and then comparing pGL2-P×4 vs. pGL2-P transfected samples. We found that C/EBPβ also suppressed transcriptional activity in a C/EBP-binding site-dependent and C/EBPβ dose-dependent manner ( ). In comparison, C/EBPα showed stronger inhibitory activity than C/EBPβ. To confirm whether C/EBPα or C/EBPβ inhibited endogenous NS expression in vivo, we determined the effect of C/EBPα and C/EBPβ on the endogenous expression of NS, c-Myc, E2F1, and p300 in Hep3B cells. Expression analyses showed that C/EBPα overexpression significantly decreased the endogenous expression of NS and, to a lesser extent, the expression of p300, but had no effect on the expression of c-Myc or E2F1 ( ). In contrast to the luciferase findings, C/EBPβ overexpression did not affect the endogenous expression of NS. Nor did it affect the expression of c-Myc, E2F1, or p300. These findings suggest that C/EBPα plays a functional role in downregulating NS expression by directly binding to its promoter.
 

## NS expression in 2-m/o C/EBPα (S193D) livers mimics that in 16-m/o wildtype livers in regeneration
Mutation of Ser 193 to Asp (S193D) has been shown to mimic the gain-of-function (GOF) effect of C/EBPα phosphorylation. An S193D-C/EBPα knock-in mouse model was created that showed premature liver aging phenotypes [ , ]. To demonstrate the C/EBPα function in regulating NS expression in mouse livers, we compared NS expression between young (2-m/o) S193D and wild-type livers. Under the baseline condition, the NS expression level of 2-m/o S193D livers was not significantly different from that of 2-m/o wild-type livers ( ). During PHx-induced regeneration, the upregulation of NS in S193D livers resembled that of 16-m/o livers in its early return to the baseline level at 4d but differed from 16-m/o livers in showing a biphasic increase at 7d post-PHx ( ). Under the baseline condition, only p300, but not c-Myc or E2F1, showed a decrease in 2-m/o S193D livers compared to 2-m/o wild-type livers ( ). During PHx-induced regeneration, upregulation of c-Myc, E2F1, and p300 was diminished in S193D livers compared to 2-m/o wild-type livers, with the exception of the c-Myc level at 7d post-PHx ( ). These results show that C/EBPα GOF by the S193D mutation dampens the upregulation of NS in regenerating livers without affecting the baseline expression of NS in aging livers.
 

## C/EBPα knockdown (KD) increases NS expression in aged livers
Our findings indicate a functional role for C/EBPα in suppressing NS expression during liver regeneration. To test this hypothesis in vivo, we determined the effects of C/EBPα knockdown on NS expression in the liver under baseline and regenerative conditions. Two C/EBPα-targeting shRNAs and one control shRNA were created and packaged into adeno-associated virus (AAV) serotype 8 (AAV8) for in vivo delivery ( ). AAV8 is a robust vector for gene delivery to the liver with a minimal tissue immune response. To introduce C/EBPα-KD, 2-m/o mice were injected with AAV8-Scr (control), AAV8-C/EBPA1 (C/EBPα-KD construct 1), or AAV8-C/EBPA2 (C/EBPα-KD construct 2) at 1E+11 genome copies (gc) per mouse via portal vein injection. To evaluate KD efficiency, liver samples were collected and analyzed for C/EBPα expression. qRT-PCR assays showed that C/EBPα expression in the liver was significantly depleted by both AAV8-C/EBPA1 and AAV8-C/EBPA2 constructs from one week (1w) to 4 w post-injection, with peak KD effect observed between 1-2w (Figs and ), and the KD effect was also seen at 1d post-PHx ( ). AAV8-C/EBPA2 showed a stronger and longer KD effect than AAV8-C/EBPA1. At 2 m/o, little or no change in NS expression was seen in C/EBPA2-knockdown livers and a decrease in NS expression was seen in C/EBPA1-knockdown livers under the baseline condition from 1 to 6 weeks after AAV injection (Figs and ), and under the PHx-induced regenerative condition, no difference in NS expression was observed between control-knockdown and C/EBPA1- or C/EBPA2-knockdown livers at 2d after the surgery ( ).
 The lack of changes in NS expression in C/EBPα-KD livers by C/EBPA2 under baseline and regenerative conditions suggests that the C/EBPα-mediated suppression mechanism of NS expression might be active only at old age. To test this hypothesis, 20-24-m/o mice were injected with AAV8-C/EBPA2 via the portal vein and received 1/3 PHx one week later. Here, we focused on the effect of AAV8-C/EBPA2, because AAV8-C/EBPA1 displayed a relatively short-lived knockdown effect and elicited a paradoxical decrease in NS expression in 2-m/o livers. We first confirmed that AAV8-C/EBPA2 injection significantly decreased C/EBPα expression in aged livers under baseline and regeneration conditions ( ). Notably, NS expression significantly increased following C/EBPα-KD in aged livers under both baseline and regeneration conditions ( ). These results support the C/EBPα suppression of NS expression in aged livers but not in young livers.

## Discussion
Adult livers possess the unique capability to regain their original size after removing a large chunk of their mass. This mythological feature of the liver employs a dual mechanism that either rekindles mitotically quiescent mature hepatocytes to reenter the cell cycle or, under extensive damage conditions, activates hepatic stem cells to regenerate both hepatocytes and bile duct epithelial cells. The regenerative capability of the liver is considerably compromised with age, resulting in multiple health-related issues. NS plays a critical role in stem cell self-renewal and liver regeneration by protecting the genome from replicative DNA damage. In this study, we report new findings regarding the transcriptional regulation of NS expression during liver aging and regeneration, providing a new perspective on how tissue homeostasis is orchestrated during the aging process.

## Changes in NS expression inversely match that in C/EBPα during liver regeneration
Aging attenuated the baseline expression of NS and its overall expression during liver regeneration The dynamics of NS expression during regeneration in 16-m/o livers resembled those in 2-m/o livers, except for an early return to the preoperative level (4d). To dissect the transcriptional mechanism underlying the age-dependent regulation of NS, five TFs were identified based on their consensus binding sites in the NS promoter. Among the genes differentially expressed during liver regeneration, NS showed a notable early onset response within 1d, consistent with its role in protecting hepatocytes from replication-induced DNA damage. Therefore, we reasoned that bona fide NS-regulatory TFs would display a temporal expression profile that either matched or preceded the expression of NS during liver regeneration. Of the five candidate TFs, only E2f1 and C/EBPα exhibited early changes within 1d, and only C/EBPα showed peak changes at 1d and 2d, matching that of NS, whereas E2f1 displayed its peak expression level at 2d. Upregulation of c-Myc and p300 began at 2d and 4d, respectively, and downregulation of C/EBPβ began at 2d post-PHx.

## C/EBPα-mediated direct and indirect suppression of NS expression
C/EBPα plays a master role in orchestrating the expression of hepatocyte proliferative factors involved in liver regeneration in an age-dependent manner. Our data showed that C/EBPα bound directly to the C/EBP-binding consensus sequences found in the NS promoter region in vitro. Functional perturbation studies demonstrated that C/EBPα attenuated the transcriptional activity of the NS promoter using four experimental paradigms, including cell-based luciferase assay, endogenous NS expression in Hep3B cells, mouse livers with a GOF mutation of C/EBPα (S193D), and mouse livers with C/EBPα knockdown. S193D mimics the phosphorylation status of C/EBPα, which increases with age via a cyclin D3- and GSK3β-mediated mechanism [ ]. At a young age (2 m/o), S193D livers differed from 2-m/o wild-type livers in their NS expression profiles during PHx-induced regeneration, showing an early return to the baseline level at 4d and a biphasic increase at 7d. Interestingly, this feature of early return to the baseline level at 4d was also noted in the 16-m/o livers. Conversely, C/EBPα depletion increased the expression of NS under both baseline and regenerative (PHx-2d) conditions in aged livers (24 m/o), but not in young livers (2 m/o). These findings support the hypothesis that C/EBPα-mediated inhibition of NS expression affects aged livers. Young mice have a higher regenerative capability and more NS expression in their livers compared to aged mice. In conjunction with the effect of C/EBPα knockdown on NS expression in aged mice but not in young mice, we hypothesize that the C/EBPα-mediated inhibition on NS transcription occurs mainly at the old age and may be controlled by post-translational modification such as phosphorylation at S193.
In addition to the direct regulation of NS expression, C/EBPα phosphorylation also promotes its complexation with Brm (Brahma chromatin remodeling complex) or HDAC1, which inhibits the expression of c-Myc, b-Myb, Cdc2, and FoxM1B after PHx or the expression of c-Myc and FOXM1B, respectively [ , , ]. Given that c-Myc has been shown to regulate NS expression [ , ], it is conceivable that C/EBPα may also downregulate NS via an indirect mechanism of c-Myc inhibition. Furthermore, the C/EBPα-Brm complex downregulates E2F-dependent genes [ ], and E2F-regulated genes are highly co-enriched with NS in HCC samples [ ], raising another indirect mechanism by which C/EBPα might regulate NS via E2F suppression. Our results showed that: (1) changes in C/EBPα and NS expression during liver regeneration coincided with each other and preceded that of c-Myc and E2F1, and (2) NS C/EBPα overexpression significantly downregulated NS without changing the expression of c-Myc or E2F1 in Hep3B cells. These findings support a direct role for C/EBPα in regulating NS expression instead of an indirect role via c-Myc and/or E2F1 regulation. Nevertheless, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that c-Myc and/or E2F1 contribute to NS regulation in a C/EBPα-independent manner at later time points. Aging also increases C/EBPβ expression. Age-dependent increases in the C/EBPβ-HDAC1 complex are involved in the repression of GSK3β and SIRT1 promoters, causing impaired homeostasis and liver proliferation [ , ]. In our experimental systems, even though C/EBPβ displayed a less evident inhibitory effect on NS expression in the cell-based reporter assay, it did not affect endogenous NS expression in Hep3B cells, and the dynamic profile of C/EBPβ expression in liver regeneration did not match that of NS.
In conclusion, this study reports the discovery of C/EBP-alpha as an upstream regulator of NS that functions by negatively controlling the NS expression in aging livers. Understanding how NS is transcriptionally regulated during the regeneration and aging of liver and in response to different environmental factors (e.g., circadian oscillation, nutrition, etc.) via the C/EBPα pathway may provide a broad perspective on the mechanistic orchestration of tissue homeostasis in the aging process.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Liver-to-body weight indices during liver regeneration at 2 and 16 months old.
(PDF)
S2 Fig

## Uncropped and unadjusted images of EMSA data shown in .
(PDF)
S3 Fig

## Hepatic expression of C/EBPα and NS in 2-m/o mice injected with AAV8-shRNA.
(PDF)

We thank Yue Chen, Wenrui Ye, and Britni Trinh for their technical support, Baylor College of Medicine Neurovisualization Core (Dr. Tao Lin) for performing anti-NS IHC, and Dr. Stefan Siwko for reviewing our manuscript before submission.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0310219.r001Decision Letter 0
AvilaMatias AAcademic Editor© 2024 Matias A Avila2024Matias A Avilahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
16 Jun 2024

PONE-D-24-19975Transcriptional Control of A Stem Cell Factor Nucleostemin in Liver Regeneration and AgingPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tsai,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised by the reviewer.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 31 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Matias A Avila, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. To comply with PLOS ONE submissions requirements, in your Methods section, please provide additional information regarding the experiments involving animals and ensure you have included details on methods of sacrifice.
3. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
"This work was supported by NIA-PHS grant R21AG052006 and the Cancer Prevention Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) Individual Investigator Research Award (RP200081) to RYT. "
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript." 
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. Please expand the acronym “NIA-PHS” (as indicated in your financial disclosure) so that it states the name of your funders in full.
This information should be included in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
5. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript: 
"We thank Yue Chen, Wenrui Ye, and Britni Trinh for their technical support, and Dr. Stefan Siwko for reviewing our manuscript before submission. This work was supported by NIA-PHS grant R21AG052006 and the Cancer Prevention Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) Individual Investigator Research Award (RP200081) to RYT. There is no conflicts of interest to report. "
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form. 
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows: 
"This work was supported by NIA-PHS grant R21AG052006 and the Cancer Prevention Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) Individual Investigator Research Award (RP200081) to RYT. "
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
6. Please provide a complete Data Availability Statement in the submission form, ensuring you include all necessary access information or a reason for why you are unable to make your data freely accessible. If your research concerns only data provided within your submission, please write "All data are in the manuscript and/or supporting information files" as your Data Availability Statement.
7. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.   
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This article aims to elucidate the transcriptional mechanisms of nucleostemin (NS) expression during liver regeneration during both liver regeneration in aged livers. The study shows that C/EBPα binding to the NS promoter suppresses its transcriptional activity, leading to reduced NS in this context. In order for this manuscript to be accepted, it is necessary to conduct additional experiments and/or determinations, and clarify certain aspects of the results and discussion, along with correcting certain formal aspects
1. Sham-operated animals should be included to analyze whether the variation in NS levels could be due to the acute-phase response of the laparotomy.
2. Did you observe a delay in the liver index in elderly mice at the end of the experiment? These data should be shown or discussed.
3. What is the significance of NS increase in liver regeneration? You should provide any determination of the impact of defective NS regulation on liver regeneration in elderly mice.
4. It is known that C/EBPα levels change with the circadian rhythm. How could this oscillation affect NS expression? The nutritional status of the mice during the experiment should be explained in the methods.
5. Although basal NS mRNA levels are lower in adult and aged livers, the elevation following partial hepatectomy resembles that of young livers. This suggests that the regulatory mechanisms are similar. It is essential to analyze NS protein levels at selected time points after partial hepatectomy (PH). Do NS and C/EBP (inversely) correlate when performing Pearson correlation analysis?
6. Although EMSA has already demonstrated that C/EBPα binds to the consensus sequences in the NS promoter in vitro, conducting a ChIP would allow verification of this interaction within the context of a chromosome in living cells.
7. Why do AAVs have no effect on young mice? Why did you use 24-month-old mice in AAV studies? Why do you perform a 30% hepatectomy and not a 70% hepatectomy? You need to hypothesize why AAV does not work in young mice but does in old mice.
8. The statistical methods are not described.
Formal aspects:
1. The title "aging livers" in Figure 2 is inappropriate. In other graphs, the titles do not correctly inform what is being represented.
2. Graphs in Figure 5 would be clearer if the gene titles were included and the basal data were combined with the hepatectomized liver data in the same graph.
3. Graphs 6B1 and 6C1 would be better understood as line graphs (time series).
4. In some graphs, the curved lines indicating significance are not used correctly. Review and standardize their use.
5. Please correct "C/ebp alpha" written in lowercase. Standardize its writing.
6. Some points are missing (at the end of sentences).
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0310219.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
16 Aug 2024

We sincerely thank the academic editor and the reviewer for their valid and constructive comments on our manuscript from many angles. We have addressed all the raised critiques by providing new data (Figs. 1A3, 1B, 4B, and S1), new analyses, better clarifications, and justifications (all marked in red in the manuscript). Our point-to-point responses are listed as follows.
Academic editor
1. Make sure our manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements: checked
2. In the Methods section, provide additional information regarding the experiments involving animals and ensure you have included details on methods of sacrifice: provided
3. Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter: included
4. expand the acronym “NIA-PHS”: done
5. Update your Funding Statement: The funding statement of two funders (NIA-PHS and CPRIT) in the manuscript is correct.
6. Complete Data Availability Statement in the submission form: A Data Availability Statement is provided in the manuscript.
7. Upload original uncropped and unadjusted images: EMSA images were included in the Supplemental Information (Fig. S2).
Reviewer
1. Sham-operated animals should be included to analyze whether the variation in NS levels could be due to the acute-phase response of the laparotomy.
Response: We have performed sham-operation on 2-month-old mice to determine the NS response to the laparotomy without PHx. The result, now shown in Fig. 1A3, demonstrates that the upregulation of NS is not caused by a response to laparotomy. NS increase during liver regeneration is consistent with previous findings (PMID: 22775537 and 23813570).
2. Did you observe a delay in the liver index in elderly mice at the end of the experiment? These data should be shown or discussed. 
Response: Liver-to-Body Weight Ratios at 1, 2, 4, and 7 days after 70% PHx at 2 and 16 m/o are presented in Fig. S1.
3. What is the significance of NS increase in liver regeneration? You should provide any determination of the impact of defective NS regulation on liver regeneration in elderly mice.
Response: Determination of the impact of defective NS regulation on liver regeneration is interesting but beyond the scope of this study. The focus of this study is to investigate the transcriptional control of NS. The impact of NS loss on liver regeneration was examined using an Albumin-Cre driven NS-knockout mouse model in CCl4-induced liver regeneration (PMID: 23813570), which was cited in the Introduction.
4. It is known that C/EBPα levels change with the circadian rhythm. How could this oscillation affect NS expression? The nutritional status of the mice during the experiment should be explained in the methods.
Response: While the effect of many environmental factors (e.g., circadian rhythm, nutrition, etc) in regulating NS expression and hence affecting liver regeneration and aging is potentially interesting but beyond the scope of this study. We appreciate the comment and include this idea in the conclusion statement. We also include the following statement in the Method section: Mice were housed in a vivarium with the light-dark cycle set at 12h-12h with lights on at 06:00 and off at 18:00, and allowed free access to normal chow diet and water.
5. Although basal NS mRNA levels are lower in adult and aged livers, the elevation following partial hepatectomy resembles that of young livers. This suggests that the regulatory mechanisms are similar. It is essential to analyze NS protein levels at selected time points after partial hepatectomy (PH). Do NS and C/EBP (inversely) correlate when performing Pearson correlation analysis?
Response: Anti-NS IHC results at selected time points after PHx were provided in Fig. 1B. Pearson correlation analysis showed that the baseline expression of NS and C/EBPα were inversely correlated in young (2-m/o) and old (16-m/o) livers (r= -0.42, p = 0.052), and the regulated expression of NS and C/EBPα during liver regeneration (D0, D1, D2, D4, and D7) were also inversely correlated at 2 m/o (r= -0.44, p = 0.001) and 16 m/o (r= -0.30, p = 0.038).
6. Although EMSA has already demonstrated that C/EBPα binds to the consensus sequences in the NS promoter in vitro, conducting a ChIP would allow verification of this interaction within the context of a chromosome in living cells.
Response: ChIP assays were performed in living Hepa1-6 cells (mouse HCC cells) to confirm the binding of FLAG-tagged mouse C/EBPα protein to the endogenous NS promoter. The results are presented in Fig. 4B. We used FLAG-tagged mouse C/EBPα for ChIP because we were unable to ChIP the endogenous C/EBPα with the anti-C/EBPα antibody even on the DGAT2 promoter (a positive control). 
7. Why do AAVs have no effect on young mice? Why did you use 24-month-old mice in AAV studies? Why do you perform a 30% hepatectomy and not a 70% hepatectomy? You need to hypothesize why AAV does not work in young mice but does in old mice.
Response: Young mice have a higher regenerative capability and more NS expression in their livers compared to aged mice. In conjunction with the effect of C/EBP� knockdown on NS expression in aged mice but not in young mice, we hypothesize that the C/EBP�-mediated inhibition on NS transcription occurs mainly at the old age and may be controlled by post-translational modification such as phosphorylation at S193 (included in Discussion). We perform 30% instead of 70% PHx in 24-month mice because the mortality rate of 70% PHx is much higher than 30% PHx at the old age (included in Methods).
8. The statistical methods are not described.
Response: Statistical methods were added to the Methods as well as in the Figure legends. 
9. The title "aging livers" in Figure 2 is inappropriate. In other graphs, the titles do not correctly inform what is being represented.
Response: Titles of “aging livers” were revised to “baseline livers”, although our original usage of the term “aging livers” is to refer to livers in the aging (ongoing) process from 2-to-8-to-16 m/o, not “aged” livers.
10. Graphs in Figure 5 would be clearer if the gene titles were included and the basal data were combined with the hepatectomized liver data in the same graph.
Response: Gene symbols were included in the titles. We appreciate the reviewer’s suggestion of combining basal w/ PHx data, but since these two sets of studies were not performed in parallel, we think it is prudent not to combine them.
11. Graphs 6B1 and 6C1 would be better understood as line graphs (time series).
Response: Line graphs for 6B1 and 6C1 are provided in Fig. S3.
12. In some graphs, the curved lines indicating significance are not used correctly. Review and standardize their use.
Response: non-significant p values were provided for all curved lines.
13. Please correct "C/ebp alpha" written in lowercase. Standardize its writing.
Response: C/EBP was used throughout the ms based on the suggestion. In the previous version, we used the lower case to refer to mouse genes and the upper case to refer to human genes.
14. Some points are missing (at the end of sentences).
Response: Assuming point means period, we’ve added periods to all the figure legend titles. Please let us know if we miss any additional ones.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0310219.r003Decision Letter 1
AvilaMatias AAcademic Editor© 2024 Matias A Avila2024Matias A Avilahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
27 Aug 2024

Transcriptional Control of A Stem Cell Factor Nucleostemin in Liver Regeneration and Aging
PONE-D-24-19975R1
Dear Dr. Tsai,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Matias A Avila, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0310219.r004Acceptance letter
AvilaMatias AAcademic Editor© 2024 Matias A Avila2024Matias A Avilahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
3 Sep 2024

PONE-D-24-19975R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tsai, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr Matias A Avila 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE