2749ebiomeBioMedicineeBioMedicineElsevierPMC1299195712991957129919574179704810.1016/j.ebiom.2026.106200Circadian rhythm disruption impairs ovarian follicular development via NAD+ metabolic reprogramming
YingYan-Yun ChenXin YaoSen-Yi ChenRui-Xue YingYue QiuHong XuQi-Qi LiZheng-Yi YeCun-Qi QianYu-Li LiangHong-Qing SunXiao ZhangDan aInstitute of Medical Genetics and Development, and Key Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics (Ministry of Education) and Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310006, ChinabDivision of Human Reproduction and Developmental Genetics, Women's Hospital, and Institute of Genetics, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310006, ChinacZhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Cancer Molecular Cell Biology, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310006, ChinadZhejiang Provincial Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, 310006, China∗Corresponding author. Institute of Medical Genetics and Development, and Key Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics (Ministry of Education) and Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310006, China. zhangdan@zju.edu.cn
∗∗Corresponding author. Institute of Medical Genetics and Development, and Key Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics (Ministry of Education) and Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310006, China. xiaosun@zju.edu.cn
∗∗∗Corresponding author. Institute of Medical Genetics and Development, and Key Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics (Ministry of Education) and Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310006, China. lianghongqing@zju.edu.cn
eThese authors contribute equally.
7320261261062001062001832026© 2026 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary

## Background
Circadian rhythms play a crucial role in human health, including reproductive health. Disruption of circadian rhythm is associated with female infertility. However, how circadian disruption affects ovarian function remains unclear. The main purpose of this study is to verify the impact of long-photoperiod exposure on follicular development and ovarian function.

## Methods
In this study, we employed long-photoperiod (LP) conditions (18 h lightness/6 h darkness) in rats to mimic increased light exposure in human lifestyles. Hormone indicators, oestrus cycle, ovary morphology, follicular development and ovulation were used to validate the ovarian function. To investigate the underlying mechanisms, a series of experiments, including RNA sequencing, metabolomics, ChIP/qPCR, transmission electron microscopy, immunofluorescence, and western blotting, were conducted. Additionally, the impact of nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) on ovarian function was evaluated using the mentioned methods above.

## Findings
LP exposure reduced the number of growing ovarian follicles and retrieved oocytes. Mechanistically, LP exposure led to granulosa cell oxidative stress and mitochondria dysfunction via inhibiting SIRT3 activity and SOD2 deacetylation. Metabolomic analysis showed that LP exposure lowered NAD+ levels, a cofactor that determines SIRT3 deacetylase activity. Further study showed that NAMPT, the rate-limiting enzyme in NAD+ synthesis, exhibited a circadian rhythmic expression pattern in the ovary, and LP exposure disrupted the ovarian circadian expression of NAMPT through the core clock protein BMAL1. Treatment with the NAD+ metabolic precursor nicotinamide mononucleotide could ameliorate mitochondria function and increase the numbers of antral follicles (49.56 ± 0.55 vs. 21.83 ± 1.35, p = 0.001) and retrieved oocytes (18.40 ± 1.91 vs. 3.80 ± 1.16, p < 0.001) in LP-exposed rats.

## Interpretation
Our study demonstrates that circadian rhythm disruption by LP exposure affect follicular development and ovulation through impaired NAD+ metabolism, and suggests targeting NAD+ pathways as a potential therapeutic strategy for ovarian diseases.

## Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China - Joint Fund for Regional Innovation and Development, the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the National Key Research and Development Program of China.

Keywords: Follicular development, Circadian rhythm, NAD+, Granulosa cell

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Mar 24; Revised 2026 Feb 1; Accepted 2026 Feb 20; Collection date 2026 Apr.

## Research in context

## Evidence before this study
The photoperiod cycle serves as a critical predictive environmental cue affecting fertility. Previous studies have reported that circadian rhythm disorders impair ovarian function by interfering with follicle development, ovulation, and hormone secretion. Experimental animals exposed to non-standard light cycles, such as constant darkness or constant light, exhibit oocyte meiotic defects and reduced oocyte quality. However, with the widespread use of artificial light sources, individuals are frequently exposed to prolonged illumination, such as long photoperiods. Whether this form of circadian disruption affects ovarian function and its underlying mechanisms remains unclear. Therefore, we aimed to investigate the effects of long photoperiod exposure on ovarian function.

## Added value of this study
Using a long-photoperiod (LP) (18-h light/6-h dark cycle) model on rats, we found that circadian rhythm disruption by LP exposure reduced the number of growing ovarian follicles and retrieved oocytes, indicating that long photoperiod exposure induces ovulation disorder and impairs ovarian function. Mechanistically, LP exposure disturbed the ovarian circadian oscillations of NAMPT by alterations of circadian clock protein BMAL1, thereby inhibiting NAD+ biosynthesis. NAD+ downregulation in turn reduces SIRT3 deacetylase activity and SOD antioxidant function, resulting in mitochondria oxidation stress in granulosa cells. This ultimately resulted in abnormal follicle development and ovulation failure. To attenuate the ovulation disorder, treatment with the NAD+ metabolic precursor NMN could ameliorate mitochondria function and increase the numbers of growing follicles and retrieved oocytes in LP-exposed rats.

## Implications of all the available evidence
Our findings extended the current understanding of the role and mechanism of circadian rhythm in ovarian function, and suggest NMN as a potential therapeutic approach for ovulation disorder.

## Introduction
The circadian rhythm is a 24-h oscillation that controls a variety of physiological activities. Disruption of circadian rhythm is associated with an increased risk of reproductive system diseases, metabolic disorders, immune dysfunction and cancer. , , In addition to the central pacemaker suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus, peripheral tissues also have their own circadian clocks. Emerging evidence suggests that circadian rhythm disorders affect ovarian function by interfering with follicle development, ovulation, and hormone secretion. , Circadian rhythm is generated by an internal transcriptional regulatory feedback loop. The core circadian clock genes include transcriptional activators (CLOCK and BMAL1) and repressors (PER1, PER2, CRY1 and CRY2). Light is one of the most important environment cues that can entrain the circadian clock. 
Environmental stressors, such as alterations in light exposure, work schedules, and lifestyle, have a significant impact on ovarian function. , , Constant darkness or constant light, leads to oocyte meiotic defects and quality deterioration, insulin resistance and hyperandrogenism. , Epidemiological studies have associated menstrual cycle irregularity with circadian disruption in women working nightshift, shiftwork, and rotating shiftwork. There is a clear dose–response relationship between night shift work and irregular menstrual cycles. Additionally, female night shift workers are difficult to restore normal menstrual cycle levels within two years among Chinese nurse populations. Shift work is associated with early menopause and prolonged time to pregnancy in women. With the widespread use of artificial light sources, individuals are often exposed to prolonged illumination, as seen in long photoperiods (18 h lightness/6 h darkness). Whether this kind of circadian disruption affects ovarian function and the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are natural byproducts of mitochondria metabolism. Antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), melatonin, and glutathione peroxidases, are responsible for maintaining the oxidative balance. Emerging evidences showing that antioxidant enzymes show circadian rhythmic expression. , Constant light exposure greatly abolishes the circadian rhythms on SODs, glutathione reductase, and catalases, and induced cell damage in hamster. Circadian clock protein BMAL1 controls rhythmic NAD+ metabolism and SIRT3 activity, which can control acetylation and activity of antioxidant enzymes. However, whether long photoperiod exposure affect mitochondria function through circadian clock proteins is still not clear. Given the circadian regulation of oxidative system, we hypothesised that long photoperiod (18 h lightness/6 h darkness) may affect mitochondria oxidative metabolism and ovarian follicle development by abolishing clock protein circadian expression.
We demonstrate here that LP exposure abolishes the ovarian circadian oscillations of NAMPT by alterations of circadian clock protein BMAL1, which in turn inhibit NAD+ biosynthesis, reduce SIRT3 deacetylase activity and SOD antioxidant function, leading to granulosa cell mitochondria dysfunction. This results in growing follicle reduction and ovulation disorders. More essentially, NMN supplementation could significantly attenuate circadian disruption induced ovulation disorder. Therefore, we have extended the current understanding of the role and mechanism of circadian rhythm in ovarian function, and provide potential therapeutic approaches for ovulation disorder.

## Methods

## Ethics approval
All experimental protocols were performed in compliance with ARRIVE guidelines 2.0 (https://arriveguidelines.org/arrive-guidelines) and approved by the Experimental Animal Welfare Ethics Review Committee of Zhejiang University (No. ZJU20230251). Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were purchased from laboratory animal centre of Hangzhou Medical College, housed in the laboratory animal center in Zhejiang University. Rats were kept at a temperature of 23 °C ± 2 °C and humidity of 55% ± 5%, with food and water ad libitum.

## Animal model
6–8 weeks old female SD rats were acclimated for 2 weeks and randomly divided into 2 groups: control group (Ctrl) and long photoperiod exposure group (LP). The Ctrl group was kept in group (3 adult rats per cage) under a normal circadian rhythm of 12:12 h light/dark (L/D) exposure (lights on at 7:00 a.m.). The LP group was kept in a long photoperiod environment of 18:6 h L/D exposure (lights on at 7:00 a.m., and lights off at 1:00 a.m.) controlled by time switch for 12 weeks. After 12 weeks, rats were first screened: those with obvious disease symptoms or over 20% weight loss compared to the group mean were excluded. The remaining rats were then anaesthetised using 1% isoflurane inhalation for subsequent experiments. The total number of rats involved in this study is approximately 260 rats. The exact animal numbers were provided in the figure legends.
For mating, after modelling phase, female SD rats were separated form light-cycle interference environment, and naturally mated with normal male SD rats to produce offspring. The offspring were reared under a 12:12 h L/D exposure, and their body weights were measured weekly.
Rat treatments, sample collection and experimental measurements were not blinded, as they were conducted by a single investigator. Experimental data analysis was blinded during the assessment with another investigator.

## Oestrous cycle examination
Vaginal smears were taken daily at the same time every morning during the last two weeks. 80 μL of PBS was gently blown into the rat vagina with a pipette, and the irrigation fluid was then applied onto the glass slide. The slide was stained with methylene blue and observed under a light microscope. The oestrous cycle was classified into four phases, dioestrus (D), proestrus (P), oestrus (E), metoestrus (M), based on the cellular composition.

## Sample collection and serum hormone measurement
To investigate the ovarian circadian clock, 5 rats from each group during dioestrus were sacrificed every 4 h from ZT0 to ZT20. ZT0 was defined as 7:00 a.m. Ovaries and serum were collected after the rats were anaesthetised with 1% isoflurane inhalation.
Serum hormones were measured as following, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), estradiol, progesterone and testosterone were assessed with RIA kits by Beijing North Institute of Biotechnology. Melatonin was assessed by ELISA assay (MEIMIAN, MM-0657R2).
Further, ATP of COCs (with 60 COCs per sample) and hormones including FSH, progesterone and testosterone were evaluated by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS, AB Sciex, AB 6500+). 

## Isolation of cumulus–oocyte complexes and primary granulosa cells
To collect cumulus–oocyte complexes (COCs), rats were administered 150 IU/kg pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin (PMSG; CEN’S) by intraperitoneal injection. 48 h later, they were injected with 150 IU/kg human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG; CEN’S) to induce follicle maturation and ovulation. After 18 h, the rats were anaesthetised with 1% isoflurane inhalation. COCs were isolated from oviduct ampullae, washed 3 times, then stored in methanol at −80 °C or transferred to a medium containing 0.1% hyaluronidase (Biosharp, BS171) preheated at 37 °C. Cumulus cells were separated by repeated pipetting and then centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min. Cumulus cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline solution (PBS; Gibco) for further use.
After being treated with PMSG for 48 h, the rats were sacrificed, and the ovaries were aseptically obtained. The primary granulosa cells were isolated as previously described. Briefly, the ovaries were placed in DMEM/F12 medium (VivaCell, C3130-0500), and granulosa cells were released by puncturing the ovaries with needles and separated by low-speed centrifugation. The granulosa cells were diluted and incubated in fresh DMEM/F12 medium containing 5% foetal bovine serum at 37 °C in a water-saturated environment with 5% CO2.

## Cell culture and treatment
Primary granulosa cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 medium containing 5% foetal bovine serum (FBS; Serana) and 1% penicillin and streptomycin, which were cultured in cell incubator with 37 °C and 5% CO2. After 24 h of cell culture, the cells were treated with NMN at different concentrations (0, 5 × 102, 1 × 103 μmol/L; Solarbio) for 48 h.
KGN cells (CL-0603, Procell, China; RRID: CVCL_0375) were cultured in DMEM/F12 medium containing 5% foetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin and streptomycin, which were cultured in cell incubator with 37 °C and 5% CO2. The authentication test and mycoplasma test were tested in institute (https://www.procell.com.cn/p/kgn-cl-0603-69773).

## Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy
Primary granulosa cells were incubated with fluorescent dyes diluted with DMEM/F12 including Reactive Oxygen Species Assay Kit (Beyotime, S0033S), JC-1 (Yeasen, 40705ES03), and were observed using an A2 fluorescence microscope (Nikon).

## Cell proliferation assay
The Cell Counting Kit-8 (Biosharp, BS350C) was used to evaluate the proliferation of cumulus cells. The cells were incubated with 10% CCK-8 reagent for 2 h, and absorbance at 450 nm was determined using a microplate reader (LabServ K3 TOUCH).

## Metabolomics
COCs were collected from each group, with 50 COCs per sample. The extraction and analysis of metabolites were performed as previously described. The metabolite identification was conducted by comparing the accurate mass and retention time with commercial standard compounds using a lab-constructed library. All statistical analyses were performed using “R” (V4.3.2). Student's t-test was used to compare variables. The differential metabolomics profiles were mapped to their respective biochemical pathways. Analysis using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and The Small Molecule Pathway Database (SMPDB) analysis revealed distinct metabolite patterns. KEGG analysis was conducted by importing the processed data into “MetaboAnalyst” software (V5.0) in CSV format for pattern recognition analysis and pattern recognition analysis. Differential metabolites were defined based on q-values <0.05 and fold change (FC) ≥ 2.00. For further analysis, we used SMPDB to search metabolites in every metabolism pathway and calculate the occurrence frequency of differential metabolites in all significantly differential pathways.

## RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (TaKaRa, T9108) and purified according to the manufacturer's protocol. The concentration and quality of total RNA were measured using NanoDrop 2000® (OD260/OD280 ratio: 1.8–2.0). cDNA was generated using 4 × gDNA wiper Mix and 5 × HiScript Ⅱ qRT SuperMix Ⅱ (Vazyme, R223). The cDNA samples were stored at −20 °C.
The qPCR reactions were carried out in a 5 μL reaction mixtures using 2 × ChamQ SYBR Master Mix (Vazyme, Q311). Primer sequences were listed in . The PCR reaction programs were set according to the manufacturer's instructions with a Roche real-time PCR instrument (Roche LightCycler@480Ⅱ). All reactions were performed in duplicate. The relative quantity of each sample was normalised to the level of the housekeeping gene β-Actin and analysed using the ΔΔCT threshold cycle method.

## RNA-sequencing
Oocytes (n = 3) and primary granulosa cells (n = 2, with 20,000 cells per sample) were collected from the Ctrl and LP groups. The construction of the RNA-seq libraries for single MII oocyte was performed by the Smart-seq2 method. Oocytes with normal morphology were picked using a mouth pipette, and their zona pellucida was dissolved. Qualified libraries were loaded onto the Illumina Novaseq™ 6000 platform for PE150 sequencing. For analysis, R package edgeR (V3.2.5) was used to define the differentially expressed mRNAs and genes, with an absolute log2FoldChange >1 and p adjusted <0.05. GO enrichment analysis and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis were performed using the R package Clusterprofiler (V3.2.5), and the threshold of p-value was set as < 0.05. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was conducted to determine the gene-set enrichment score for each sample, utilising the R package Clusterprofiler (V3.2.5).

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was done using CHIP Assay Kit (Beyotime), following the instructions provided by the manufacturer. In brief, ovaries were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde solution for 10 min at room temperature and quenched with 125 mM glycine. DNA fragments ranging from 200 to 1000 bp were obtained by ultrasonication. The lysate was immunoprecipitated with anti-Bmal1 (Cell signalling, 14020) or IgG antibodies (Abcam, 171870). Protein A + G Agarose/Salmon Sperm DNA was added for 2 h-incubation at 4 °C and washed sequentially. DNA-protein complexes were eluted with elution buffer (1% SDS and 0.1 M NaHCO3) and de-crosslinked by adding 0.2 M NaCl and heating for 4 h at 65 °C. Then, the proteins were digested with proteinase K, and the DNA segments were purified by a DNA Purification Kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, D0033) and used for qPCR reaction. The primers for ChIP-PCR are: 5′-AGGATCGACAAGACGGATGG-3′, Reverse primer 5′-CCCACTCTTAGTTCCCGCAC-3′.

## Mitochondrial extraction
Mitochondria were isolated using the mitochondrial extraction kit (Solarbio, SM0020) according to the manufacturer's manual. Briefly, tissues were homogenised with lysis buffer and centrifuged at 1000 g for 5 min at 4 °C twice, then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min. The mitochondrial pellets were rinsed twice and resuspended in store buffer.

## Paraffin section and Hematoxylin-Eosin (HE) staining
Ovaries were fixed and dehydrated through graded alcohol (Sinopharm, No. 10009259), cleared in xylene (Sinopharm, No. 10023418) twice, embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 3 μm. Sections were baked at 60 °C overnight, then deparaffinized and rehydrated in a gradient of ethanol with decreasing concentrations. The slides were initially stained with haematoxylin solution (Biosharp, BL702A) and differentiated in 1% acid ethanol, followed by rinsing with water. After that, the slides were stained with eosin solution and differentiated again. Finally, the slides were dehydrated with graded alcohol and xylene. The slides sealed with resin (Sigma–Aldrich, 8007-47-4) and observed under microscope.

## Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) staining
Rats were given an intraperitoneal injection of 50 mg/kg BrdU (Sigma, B5002). After 2 h, the rats were analysed and sampled for ovarian tissues. Ovarian sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated and rinsed. Sections were treated with 3% hydrogen peroxide after antigen retrieval. Then, sections were blocked with 5% horse serum and incubated overnight at 4 °C with rat monoclonal anti-BrdU antibody (Anti-BrdU, Abcam, ab6326; 1:100 dilution). After washing off the unbound primary antibody with PBS, the sections were incubated with secondary antibody: goat anti-rat IgG H&L (HRP) antibody (Abcam, ab97057; 1:500 dilution). Sections were stained with diaminobenzidine (DAB; Solarbio, DA1016) substrate and counterstained with haematoxylin, followed by differentiation with 1% acid ethanol.

## Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Ovaries were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 48 h at 4 °C and post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide for 2 h. Then they were dehydrated in graded ethanol followed by an acetone series, and infiltrated in epoxy resin. The follicles were positioned and ultrathin sections about 85 nm were examined in a frozen transmission electron microscope (Tecnai G2 spirit, Thermo FEI).

## NAD+ and NADH determination
NAD+ and NADH levels were measured by the NAD(H) Content Assay Kit (Sangon Biotech, D799201) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Ovaries and cells were lysed by the extracting solution and resuspend in working solution. Absorbance at 570 nm was measured with a spectrometer (LabServ K3 TOUCH).

## ATP content measurement
Cellular ATP levels were measured by a firefly luciferase-based ATP Assay Kit (Beyotime, S0026). Briefly, cells were homogenised and centrifuged. The supernatant was mixed with ATP detection working dilution in white 96-well plates. Luminance (relative luminescence units, RLU) was measured by a microplate reader (THERMO Varioskan Flash, Thermo Scientific).

## Total SOD2 activity measurement
Superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity was analysed using a Total Superoxide Dismutase Assay Kit with WST-8 (Beyotime, S0101S) according to the manufacturer's specifications. Briefly, tissues were homogenised and centrifuged. The lysate supernatant was added with WST-8/enzyme working solution and reaction starter working solution into a 96-well plate. The absorbance of each well was measured at 450 nm. The total SOD activity was expressed as a unit of activity per gram of protein.

## MDA content measurement
Malondialdehyde (MDA) content was measured using a lipid peroxidation MDA assay kit (Beyotime, S0131). The supernatant was collected after tissue lysates were incubated in working solutions, then absorption was measured at 532 nm. The MDA levels were expressed as a unit of activity per gram of protein.

## Western blotting
Protein was extracted in cold RIPA buffer (Biosharp, BL507A), containing 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride (Biosharp, P0100). The protein lysates were resolved by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). After protein transfer, the membrane was blocked with 5% BSA and incubated with antibodies overnight. Then incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody at room temperature. The images were captured with a chemiluminescence detection system (Bio-Rad). The antibodies employed were as follows: rabbit anti-BMAL1 (Cell signalling, 14020; 1:1000 dilution), mouse anti-Beta Tubulin (Proteintech, 66240-1-Ig; 1:1000 dilution), rabbit anti-NAMPT (Proteintech, 11776-1-AP; 1:1000 dilution), rabbit anti-Cytokeratin 18 (Proteintech, 10830-1-AP; 1:1000 dilution), rabbit anti-FHSR (Proteintech, 22665-1-AP; 1:1000 dilution), rabbit anti-VIMENTIN (Proteintech, 10366-1-AP; 1:1.000 dilution), rabbit anti-VDAC1/Porin (Proteintech, 55259-1-AP; 1:1000 dilution), rabbit anti-SIRT3 (Proteintech, 10099-1-AP; 1:1000 dilution), rabbit anti-SOD2/MnSOD (Abcam, ab68155; 1:1000 dilution), rabbit anti-SOD2/MnSOD (acetyl K68) (Abcam, ab137037; 1:1000 dilution).

## Co-immunoprecipitation assays (Co-IP)
To perform immunoprecipitation, Protein A-Agarose beads (BBI, C600688) were prepared by washing with PBS in a spin column. Cells (5 × 106–1 × 107) were collected lysed in 1 × Lysis buffer, and centrifuged to obtain cell lysate. Primary antibodies against SOD2 or SIRT3 were incubated with protein A/G agarose beads at 4 °C overnight. The lysate was transferred to the washed Protein A beads, incubated overnight, and centrifuged at 12,000 ×g for 30 s. The beads were washed with 1 × IP buffer six times, followed by the addition of 1 × Loading buffer; the column was capped and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Centrifuged at 12,000 g for 30 s to elute immunoprecipitate for SDS-PAGE. Finally, the immunoprecipitate was analysed by Western blotting.

## Transfection of small interfering RNA
KGN cells were cultured in 6-well plates and incubated in antibiotic-free medium for 24 h. Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting SIRT3 and negative control (NC) were transfected into cells using jetPRIME (Polyplus, 101000001), following the manufacturer's instructions. After 6 h of transfection, medium was changed to DMEM/F12 medium containing 5% foetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. Incubation was continued for 24 h to measure RNA expression and for 48 h for protein level. The siRNAs were synthesised by Girma Biotechnology (Shanghai, China), and their sequences are shown in .
 

## Flow cytometry
Intracellular ROS levels in primary granulosa cells were quantified utilising 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA; Beyotime, S0033M). Following the manufacturer's protocol, cells were incubated in medium containing DCFH-DA for 30 min. After washing, labelled cells were analysed by flow cytometry. The mitochondrial membrane potential in primary granulosa cells was detected by a mitochondrial membrane potential probe (JC-1; Yeasen, 40705ES03) following the manufacturer's protocol, cells were resuspended in 500 μL of JC-1 dye-loading solution for 30 min. The ratio of red fluorescence (590 nm) to green fluorescence (530 nm) was determined via flow cytometry. Data analysis was performed using FlowJo v10.8.1 software.

## CUT&Tag
CUT&Tag experiments were conducted in duplicate as described with minor modifications. Briefly, 20,000 fresh primary granulosa cells were collected and bound to Concanavalin A-coated magnetic beads, and the cell membrane was permeabilized by Digitonin. Samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C with rotation using primary antibodies against BMAL1 (Cell Signalling Technology, 14020; 2 μg) or appropriate normal IgG (ABclonal, AS070; 2 μg), followed by incubation with secondary antibodies (Millipore, AP132; 1:100 dilution) for 1 h at room temperature. The enzyme pA–Tn5 transposase precisely binds to the DNA sequences near the target proteins under antibody guidance, resulting in factor-targeted tagmentation. DNA sequence was tagged, with adaptors added at the same time at both ends, which can be enriched by PCR to form the sequencing-ready libraries (CUT&Tag_Novogene Kit). After the PCR reaction, libraries were purified with the AMPurebeads and library quality was assessed on the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system. Sequencing was performed on the Illumina NovaSeq platform (Tianjin Novogene Bioinformatic Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) using 150 bp paired-end sequencing. After quality control, the reads were mapped to Rattus norvegicus genome using the BWA program (v0.7.12). Peak calling was performed using MACS2 software (v2.1.0) with q-value threshold of 0.05. Peaks were adjusted to the same size (500 bp) centred peak summits and motif discoveries of these loci sequences were performed using findMotifsGenome.pl program in HOMER software (v4.9.1). Peaks were annotated with the ChIPseeker package. Differential peaks were determined by setting thresholds of fold change ≥2 and p-value <0.05.

## Acetyl coenzyme A (Acetyl-CoA) measurement
Acetyl-CoA levels were measured by ELISA kit (JINGMEI, JM-10486R2), performed per manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, cells were collected and centrifuged. Standards or samples were added to microplates pre-coated with anti-Acetyl-CoA antibody. After incubation, biotin-conjugated anti-Acetyl-CoA antibodies were added. The antibodies were then combined with HRP-conjugated streptavidin to form immune complexes, followed by incubation and washing to remove unbound enzyme. The complexes were then added to the chromogenic substrate TMB, which produced a blue colour that converted to a final yellow colour under acidic conditions. Finally, the absorbance (OD) value was measured at 450 nm. The concentration of Acetyl-CoA in each sample was proportional to the corresponding OD value.

## In vitro fertilization (IVF)
Rat IVF was performed as described previously with some modifications. Briefly, female rats were superovulated to collect oocytes, and spermatozoa were obtained from the cauda epididymides of male rats (12–18 weeks old). For capacitation, spermatozoa were incubated at G-IVF medium (supplemented with 20 mM NaCl and 10 mg/mL BSA, Vitrolife, 10134) for 2–3 h at 37 °C under 5% CO2. To initiate the insemination process, 10 μL spermatozoa suspension was added to the medium containing 10 COCs, achieving a final spermatozoa concentration of 1 × 106 cells/mL. After 4 h co-culture, oocytes were collected and washed with G-IVF medium supplemented with 10 mg/mL BSA. The oocytes were further incubated for 20 h to observe 2-cell embryos under a Nikon microscope.

## Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) analysis
GCs were cultured in 96-well Seahorse XF microplates (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) in serum-free DMEM/F12 medium at a density of 1 × 104 cells per well. GCs were separated from Ctrl, LP, Ctrl + NMN, LP + NMN group. OCR was measured using the Seahorse XF Cell Mito Stress Test Kit (Agilent Technologies, 103015-100). Briefly, the serum-free DMEM/F12 medium was replaced with Seahorse XF DMEM medium supplemented with 1 mM pyruvate, 2 mM glutamine, and 10 mM glucose. Cells were monitored in real time by exposure to 1.5 μM oligomycin (ATP synthase inhibitor), 1 μM trifluoromethoxy carbonylcyanide phenylhydrazone (FCCP; targets the mitochondrial proton gradient and potential), and 0.5 μM rotenone plus antimycin A (Rot/AA; inhibitors of Complexes I and III). Measurements of OCR were automatically generated by the Seahorse XFe96 Wave software (V2.6.4).

## Single-cell transcriptome
Two ovaries were collected from each Ctrl and LP rat, pooled, and then dissociated into single-cell suspensions via enzymatic digestion. The cell suspension was adjusted to an optimal concentration of approximately 700–1200 cells/μL. Subsequently, barcoded hydrogel beads were mixed with the cell-enzyme mixture and co-encapsulated into oil-surfactant droplets using a microfluidic system, forming Gel Beads-in-Emulsion (GEMs). These GEMs were collected in a reservoir, where the hydrogel beads dissolved to release barcode sequences. This dissolution enabled reverse transcription, generating barcoded cDNA fragments that uniquely labelled the transcriptome of each individual cell. After GEM disruption and oil droplet lysis, PCR amplification was performed using the cDNA as a template. The amplified products from all GEMs were pooled for standard sequencing library preparation: cDNA was enzymatically fragmented into 200–300 bp segments; sequencing adaptors and primers were ligated following conventional next-generation sequencing (NGS) library construction protocols; and final PCR enrichment was performed thereafter. The resulting DNA library was subjected to high-throughput paired-end sequencing on the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform. Then we used Seurat software (V3.2.5) to perform cell clustering through steps including calculation of highly variable genes and cell clustering.

## Statistical analysis
Data was presented as mean ± SEM (Ctrl vs. LP or Ctrl + NMN vs. Ctrl vs. LP vs. LP + NMN) and statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism Software (V9.5.0). The data was first subjected to the Shapiro–Wilk, Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Q–Q plot normality tests, followed by the Fisher and Bartlett tests to assess the homogeneity of variances. Parametric data was analysed by unpaired t-tests or one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's multiple comparison test. Non-parametric data was analysed by Mann Whitney test, Wilcoxon or sign tests depending on symmetrical distribution, or Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn's multiple comparison test.
The sample size was determined based on an evaluation of effect sizes and variability from previous similar studies. We reviewed literature published by our research group and other published article, which reported highly significant (p < 0.05) effects in follicle counting and ovarian section staining. , Analysis of these data indicated that, with α = 0.05 and β = 0.8, the sample size required to detect similar effect sizes was estimated to be around 3 animals per group. For t-tests, Cohen's D is a way to measure effect size, which is expected to have a large effect over 0.8. For one-way ANOVA, η2 over 0.14 stands for large effect size. Therefore, this study adopted a design of N ≥ 3 per group, which not only meets statistical requirements but also adheres to the Reduction principle of the 3 R guidelines for animal use.
Values of p < 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant. In the graph, ∗ represents p < 0.05, ∗∗ represents p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ represents p < 0.001.

## Role of funders
The funders had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, preparation of the manuscript, or the decision to publish.

## Results

## Long photoperiod impairs follicular development and ovulation in rats
To determine the effect of long photoperiod on follicular development and ovarian function, the group of experimental rats was maintained on a cycle of 18-h light and 6-h dark cycle for 12 weeks, and the group of control rats was kept in a standard 12-h light and 12-h dark cycle ( a). The circadian disruption was assessed by checking serum levels of melatonin, a circadian rhythm-regulated hormone. We found that melatonin was significantly decreased at all phases after 12 weeks of modelling ( b). We assessed whether the circadian rhythm changes in the ovaries by measuring expression levels of core clock genes at different Zeitgeber times (ZT). We found notable differences in the phase of Bmal1, Clock, Per1/2, and Cry1/2 in whole ovaries from long photoperiod exposed rats compared to control rats, which lead to the amplitude changes and phase shifts between Ctrl and LP groups among ZT0/4/12/16/20 ( c, and ).
 To explore whether circadian rhythm disruption induced by long photoperiod affect ovarian function, we checked hormone indicators, oestrus cycle, ovary morphology, follicular development and ovulation. Serum levels of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), testosterone, estradiol and progesterone present differences in rats exposed to LP, which was consistent with the phenotype of ovary in LP group ( ). Rats in the long photoperiod group exhibited prolonged oestrus cycles ( d), which was mainly characterised by an extended oestrus period ( e). Gross observation revealed a reduction in ovarian size and a yellowish appearance in the long photoperiod group ( f). Accordingly, the ovarian weight (26.43 ± 2.79 mg) was significantly decreased in rats from LP group compared to the Ctrl rats (35.89 ± 2.06 mg) (p = 0.007, unpaired Student's t tests) ( g). Histological examination of ovarian sections using H&E staining revealed the LP group had fewer corpora lutea and more expanded cystic follicles compared to Ctrl group ( h). Next, we determined whether the follicular development was affected by long photoperiod by counting all stages of follicles in the rat ovary. We observed an increasing tendency in the number of primordial and primary follicles, while a significant decrease in secondary and antral follicles after long photoperiod exposure ( i) (secondary follicles: 56.25 ± 3.91 vs. 24.33 ± 3.33, p = 0.007; antral follicles: 49.56 ± 0.55 vs. 21.83 ± 1.35, p = 0.001, unpaired Student's t tests), indicating long photoperiod exposure results in disrupted follicle development. To visualise and quantify proliferating follicles in the ovary, we injected 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) 2 h before sacrificing the rats. BrdU signals were reduced in the follicles of LP group, further confirming disordered follicle development ( j). Subsequently, to determine the effect of LP on ovulation, oocytes were collected from rats super-ovulated with PMSG and hCG. The results revealed a significant decline in the number of retrieved oocytes in LP group ( k) (18.40 ± 1.91 vs. 3.80 ± 1.16, p < 0.001, unpaired Student's t tests), along with a corresponding decrease in litter size ( l) (9.29 ± 0.65 vs. 6.82 ± 0.96, p = 0.040, unpaired Student's t tests). These results shown here suggest that long photoperiod leads to defective follicular development and ovulation disorder.

## Long photoperiod results in mitochondrial dysfunction in oocytes and granulosa cells
To investigate the underlying mechanisms, we conducted RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of metaphase (MII) oocytes from Ctrl and LP group ( a). We identified 839 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), with 733 up-regulated and 106 down-regulated genes in the LP group compared to the Ctrl group ( b). Volcano plot analysis visually depicted the DEGs ( c). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis showed significant enrichment of mitochondrial associated pathways among the up-regulated genes in LP-exposed oocytes, including cellular respiration, oxidative phosphorylation, NADH dehydrogenase complex, mitochondria respiratory chain, and H+-transporting ATP synthase activity pathway ( d). The down-regulated genes were significantly associated with cytokine regulation related pathway ( e). Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) confirmed the association of LP exposure with mitochondrial function pathways ( ). We further conducted RNA-seq analysis of primary granulosa cells (GCs) from Ctrl and LP group, GO analysis revealed significant enrichment of mitochondrial associated pathways in LP-exposed GCs, including oxidative stress, NAD+ binding, NAD+ and NAD(P)+ nucleosidase activity ( f). Similar results were also identified within the granulosa cell cluster from our ovarian single-cell transcriptome sequencing ( ). These results suggest that LP exposure induced abnormal follicular development and ovulation disorder may be associated with mitochondria dysfunction both in oocytes and GCs.
 Structural and functional evaluations of mitochondria were conducted by transmission electron microscopy. Abnormal mitochondrial ultrastructure characterised by decreased mitochondrial cristae, contracted membranes, and increased density were observed in the cumulus–oocyte complexes (COCs) of LP exposed rats ( g). To further evaluate mitochondrial function, we measured the mitochondrial membrane potential, ATP levels, and oxygen consumption rate (OCR). Oocytes and the primary granulosa cells were isolated and characterised by their specific markers ( ). A significant decrease of mitochondrial membrane potential was observed in granulosa cells by JC-1 immunofluorescent and flow cytometry ( h, i, and ) (IF: 1.82 ± 0.05 vs. 1.60 ± 0.06, p < 0.001; flow: 15.00 ± 0.64 vs. 1.27 ± 0.06, p < 0.001, Mann–Whitney U test). ATP levels and OCR were assessed as metrics to evaluate mitochondrial energy metabolism. ATP levels were markedly reduced in LP-exposed COCs ( j, and ) (1.20 ± 0.08 vs. 0.85 ± 0.04 μM, p = 0.021, unpaired Student's t tests). Similarly, compared to the Ctrl group, OCR measurements showed a reduction in ATP production and maximal respiratory capacity in the GCs of LP exposed rats ( k) (basal respiration: 34.6 ± 0.40 vs. 18.90 ± 1.00 pmol/min, p < 0.001; maximal respiration: 52.30 ± 1.40 vs. 19.60 ± 2.60 pmol/min, p < 0.001; ATP production: 20.90 ± 0.50 vs. 14.20 ± 0.90 pmol/min, p < 0.001, unpaired Student's t tests). These results suggested mitochondrial depolarisation and increased oxidative stress in COCs after LP treatment. Overall, these experiments showed that mitochondrial dysfunction induced by long photoperiod exposure may contribute to follicle development abnormalities.

## Long photoperiod leads to mitochondria oxidative stress through impairment of SIRT3/SOD2 axis
To assess the oxidative stress in oocytes and granulosa cells, we performed immunofluorescence staining and flow cytometry to evaluate the ROS level. Increased ROS levels were observed in oocytes ( a) and primary granulosa cells ( b–e) from the LP group (oocyte: 51911 ± 2471 vs. 63271 ± 2920, p < 0.001, Mann–Whitney U test; GCs: 16479 ± 1518 vs. 40129 ± 1846, p < 0.001, unpaired Student's t tests). SOD2, a major mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme, scavenges ROS and maintains a cellular reducing environment. RNA-seq of granulosa cells showed that SOD2 expression was upregulated in LP group, which was confirmed by qPCR ( ) (1.00 ± 0.01 vs. 1.61 ± 0.10, p = 0.004, unpaired Student's t tests). As SOD2 acetylation had an inverse correlation with SOD2 antioxidant activity, we detected SOD2 and Acetyl-SOD2 expression in primary granulosa cell and ovary. Compared to Ctrl group, SOD2 and Acetyl-SOD2 level were increased in LP primary granulosa cells ( f). However, the enzymatic activity of SOD2 was significantly lower in GCs of the LP group ( g) (1.00 ± 0.03 vs. 0.80 ± 0.02, p < 0.001, unpaired Student's t tests). It could be interpreted that SOD2 may undergo critical post-translational modifications, which precisely modulate its enzymatic activity. Sirtuin-3 (SIRT3), a major deacetylase located in mitochondria, is reported to reduce cellular ROS by deacetylating SOD2. Consistent with the up-regulated expression of Acetyl-SOD2, we observed a decrease in SIRT3 expression in ovaries of LP group ( h). Further, Co-IP analysis verified the interaction between SIRT3 and SOD2 in KGN cell lines ( i, and ), indicating SOD2 may act as a downstream effector for SIRT3-mediated deacetylation. It is well acknowledged that acetylation is a key post-translational modification that regulates various mitochondrial processes. SIRT3 can regulate the mitochondrial acetylome. Therefore, we also detected the mitochondrial acetylation status and found that the pan-acetylation level was elevated markedly in LP group ( j). This is consistent with reduced expression of SIRT3. These results indicated the activity of SIRT3/SOD2 axis is involved in maintaining ovary mitochondria redox balance, and LP exposure led to oxidative stress by regulating SIRT3 expression and SOD2 hyperacetylation.
 

## LP exposure impaired NAD+ metabolism in COCs
SIRT3 is a specific NAD+-dependent deacetylase, which is known to control mitochondrial metabolism, including the respiratory chain, redox balance, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and fatty acid β-oxidation. , In order to understand the metabolic remodelling after long photoperiod exposure, we performed mass-spectrometry-based metabolomics to directly measure metabolite abundance in COCs. We employed an optimised targeted metabolomics method to detect metabolites with a small number of cells. We collected 50 COCs from Ctrl and LP group, each with three biological replicates per group ( a). Principal component analysis (PCA) on targeted metabolites showed COCs from rats exposed to long photoperiods (LP) were clearly separated from Ctrl group ( b). Among the 130 detected metabolites, 59 (58 lower, 1 higher) showed significant differences ( c). The heatmap showed most of the differential metabolites were decreased in LP group ( d). KEGG pathway enrichment analysis showed ‘nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism’, ‘urea cycle’, and ‘phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis’ were among the top enriched terms of metabolite sets ( e). Further analysis using The Small Molecule Pathway Database (SMPDB) revealed NAD+ and NADH occupied the largest proportion in above pathway ( f). For further validation, we measured the levels of NAD+ and NADH both in COCs and ovaries by NAD(H) Content Assay Kit. LP group had lower levels of NAD+ and NADH in COCs ( g) and ovaries ( h) (COCs: NAD+ 1.00 ± 0.03 vs. 0.35 ± 0.12, p = 0.008, NADH 1.00 ± 0.05 vs. 0.25 ± 0.10, p = 0.003; ovaries: NAD+ 265.10 ± 25.48 vs. 168.20 ± 12.76 nmol/g, p = 0.029, unpaired Student's t tests). NAD+ and its metabolites serve as a central regulatory node mediating a diverse array of physiological functions, including redox balance, genomic stability, gene expression, energy metabolism, and circadian rhythm. Nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism involves the biosynthesis, consumption, recycling, and degradation for NAD+. The expression levels of most enzymes in NAD+ synthesis pathway showed a decreasing trend by qPCR ( ). Nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase (NAMPT) is a rate-limiting enzyme involved in NAD+ biosynthesis. We found the protein level of NAMPT was decreased significantly in LP group compared to Ctrl group ( i). The intracellular NAD+ level is influenced by the oscillation of NAMPT expression. Taken together, these data showed that long photoperiod exposure abolished NAD+ metabolism in COCs through NAMPT.
 

## LP exposure abolished NAMPT oscillated expression through BMAL1
The CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer is reported to regulate the circadian expression of Nampt via direct binding to the E-boxes of Nampt promoter. , We used western blotting to determine whether LP exposure can change the ovarian circadian expression pattern of BMAL1 and NAMPT. We found BMAL1 and NAMPT proteins showed that same rhythmic expression pattern in Ctrl group, while their rhythmic oscillations were disrupted after LP exposure ( a–c). The oscillations of protein expression showed a delay phase compared to those in mRNA expression, which may attribute to the gene transcription and translation. Furthermore, we found that LP exposure induced strong alternations in BMAL1 and NAMPT expression at different ZTs ( d–f). Compared to Ctrl, LP group showed decreased levels of NAMPT and BMAL1 at ZT0, ZT4, ZT8, and ZT12 ( d–f) (p < 0.05, unpaired Student's t tests). Accordingly, statistical analysis revealed a significant positive linear correlation between BMAL1 and NAMPT expression, further demonstrating NAMPT was regulated by BMAL1 ( g). Indeed, genomic profiling by CUT&Tag-seq showed BMAL1 enrichment at the promoters of Nampt ( h). Similarly, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) qPCR analysis revealed a significant decrease in the association of BMAL1 with the E-boxes on the Nampt promoter in the LP group compared to Ctrl group ( h and i) (0.44 ± 0.07 vs. 0.17 ± 0.03, p = 0.004, unpaired Student's t tests). These data revealed that LP exposure abolished ovarian BMAL1 rhythmic expression to down-regulate NAMPT expression.
 To summarise, LP exposure reduced NAD+ level and SIRT3 deacetylation activity in ovary through abolished BMAL1-NAMPT circadian expression pattern, thereby leading to SOD2 activity inhibition and oxidative stress ( j).

## NMN treatment attenuates LP induced oxidative stress
NAD+ depletion is associated with ovarian cell oxidative stress after LP treatment; thus NAD+ repletion should improve mitochondrial outcomes. Nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN), one of the main precursors of NAD+, has been shown to replenish NAD+ levels and reverse defects in mitochondrial homoeostasis, reduce reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and improve DNA repair, and cell survival. , To assess whether NMN replenishment could alleviate mitochondrial dysfunction and improve ovarian cell viability after LP exposure, we treated primary granulosa cells with 1000 μM NMN for 24 h. We found that NAD+ level and NAD+/NADH ratio of primary granulosa cells from LP group were elevated after NMN ( a) (p < 0.05, unpaired Student's t tests). Since NAD+ is converted into NADH, the NAD+/NADH ratio is an important parameter reflecting the redox state of different types of cells. , Besides, the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8) assay revealed that NMN could partially improve the viability of primary granulosa cells in LP group ( b) (1.00 ± 0.03 vs. 0.98 ± 0.04 vs. 0.90 ± 0.03 vs. 1.01 ± 0.04, p = 0.0596 for LP and LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). Compared with the Ctrl group, ATP levels were reduced in LP group, while NMN treatment markedly enhanced ATP levels ( c) (1.80 ± 0.05 vs. 1.38 ± 0.09 vs. 1.02 ± 0.09 vs. 1.67 ± 0.07 μM, p = 0.001 for LP and LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). Furthermore, we examined the levels of mitochondrial oxidative stress markers, including JC-1 and ROS. JC-1 staining showed the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) was significantly increased after NMN supplementation ( d, f) (6.02 ± 0.35 vs. 9.031 ± 0.53 vs. 10.96 ± 0.56 vs. 4.36 ± 0.29 vs. 7.42 ± 0.41 vs. 9.56 ± 0.64, p < 0.001 for LP and LP+1000 μM NMN, Kruskal–Wallis test). We found that ROS levels was significantly increased in LP group compared with Ctrl group, which can be reversed by 1000 μM NMN ( e, g) (43,566 ± 2314 vs. 44,474 ± 2657 vs. 40,257 ± 2500 vs. 58,942 ± 2500 vs. 57,139 ± 2629 vs. 48,268 ± 2,271, p = 0.03 for LP and LP + 1000 μM NMN, Kruskal–Wallis test). We observed that the mitochondrial cristae of granulosa cells in the LP group were restored after NMN treatment ( ). These data suggested that NMN treatment can attenuate circadian rhythm disruption induced oxidative stress in primary granulosa cell.
 

## NMN supplementation alleviates long photoperiod induced ovulation disorder
We examined the effects of NMN supplementation on follicular development and ovulation of long photoperiod exposure rats. We treated rats with NMN (100 mg/kg) via drinking water supplementation for 12 weeks ( a). The levels of NAD+ in ovary and serum were significantly increased after NMN supplementation ( ) (ovary NAD+: 338.10 ± 34.95 vs. 268.50 ± 28.58 vs. 168.20 ± 12.76 vs. 301.10 ± 9.77 nmol/g, p = 0.040 for LP vs. LP + NMN; serum NAD+: 9.65 ± 1.22 vs. 9.16 ± 1.17 vs. 0.85 ± 0.55 vs. 5.92 ± 0.90 nmol/mL, p = 0.049 for LP vs. LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). There was no significant difference in body weight among the four groups (Ctrl + NMN group, Ctrl group, LP group, LP + NMN group) ( ). Besides, no significant differences were detected in the levels of serum FSH and LH between the NMN-treated group and the untreated group ( ). Similarly, the vaginal smears indicated no difference in the duration of the oestrus period between LP and LP + NMN group ( ). From a macroscopic perspective of the ovaries, it can be inferred that supplementing NMN enhanced ovarian blood supply ( b). However, the ovary weight showed no discernible difference between LP and LP + NMN group ( c) (one-way ANOVA). Further, we investigated structural changes by H&E staining. Compared with the LP group, rats exposed to the long photoperiod had more corpora lutea in their ovaries after NMN treatment, which suggest that NMN may improve ovulation function ( d). Moreover, the number of antral follicles in LP + NMN group was significantly increased comparing to LP group ( e) (44.00 ± 12.50 vs. 50.75 ± 10.59 vs. 7.75 ± 3.25 vs. 17.25 ± 0.85, p = 0.028 for LP vs. LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). The number of retrieved oocytes was significantly increased in the LP + NMN group comparing to LP group ( f) (22.00 ± 1.53 vs. 14.67 ± 0.77 vs. 1.00 ± 0.58 vs. 11.00 ± 0.58, p < 0.001 for LP vs. LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). Furthermore, we employed in vitro fertilization (IVF) technology to evaluate the fertilisation capacity after NMN supplementation. The results showed NMN treatment significantly increased the number of 2-cell embryos in the LP + NMN group ( g) (0.87 ± 0.03 vs. 0.83 ± 0.04 vs. 0.22 ± 0.06 vs. 0.55 ± 0.03, p = 0.005 for LP vs. LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). To evaluate the effects of NMN supplementation on fertility, we mated female rats from the above four groups with normal adult male rats to assess litter size and foetal weight. We mated equal numbers of Ctrl + NMN (n = 6) and LP + NMN (n = 6) female rats with male rats to check litter size and foetal weight. However, because long photoperiod exposure impaired the fertility of rats, only 4 rats from the LP + NMN group became pregnant and gave birth to offspring. The results showed that the LP + NMN group (5.50 ± 1.29) exhibited an increasing trend in litter size compared to the LP group (3.25 ± 2.50) (p = 0.600, one-way ANOVA) ( h and i). However, the foetal weight showed no significant differences in the first three weeks ( j) (one-way ANOVA). These findings collectively suggested that NMN supplementation alleviated long photoperiod induced ovulation disorder.
 

## NMN supplementation alleviates long photoperiod induced mitochondria dysfunction through SOD2
To determine whether NMN supplementation alleviates oxidative damage-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, we assessed it impact on ATP production. We found that ROS levels were significantly decreased in oocytes from LP + NMN group compared to LP group ( ) (114,964 ± 28,822 vs. 105,002 ± 25,228 vs. 328,044 ± 30,686 vs. 487,869 ± 46,016, p = 0.006 for LP vs. LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). Flow cytometry and immunofluorescence analyses revealed that NMN supplementation partially restored the MMP and reduced ROS levels in primary granulosa cells of LP + NMN group ( a and b and ), and similarly reduced ROS levels ( c, d and ) (flow for LP vs. LP + NMN, JC-1 p = 0.521, ROS p < 0.001, one-way ANOVA; IF for LP vs. LP + NMN, JC-1 p < 0.001, ROS p < 0.001, Kruskal–Wallis test). Then we evaluated the ovarian oxidative levels by total SOD and malondialdehyde (MDA). Likewise, compared to the LP group, the LP + NMN group exhibited significantly elevated total SOD activity and significantly reduced MDA levels ( e and f) (SOD: 42.12 ± 7.55 vs. 38.30 ± 6.32 vs. 13.15 ± 2.19 vs. 35.29 ± 5.42, p = 0.007 for LP vs. LP + NMN; MDA: 9.13 ± 0.59 vs. 9.55 ± 0.19 vs. 28.13 ± 3.48 vs. 17.65 ± 2.56, p = 0.007 for LP vs. LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). These results demonstrated a significant reduction in ovarian ROS levels in the LP + NMN group compared to the LP group, indicating that NMN supplementation partially restored the oxidative-antioxidant regulatory system. We also measured mitochondrial OCR to assess the mitochondrial energy dynamics, which revealed enhanced ATP production in primary GCs from the LP + NMN group compared to LP group ( g) (ATP: 24.85 ± 0.39 vs. 21.90 ± 0.71 vs. 17.30 ± 0.25 vs. 21.69 ± 0.29, p < 0.001 for LP vs. LP + NMN, one-way ANOVA). Furthermore, NMN supplementation increased SOD2 expression, and reduced Acetyl-SOD2/SOD2 ratio, indicating that more deacetylated SOD2 is available to maintain redox balance ( h). Therefore, these results suggest that NMN supplementation might be a potential therapeutic treatment for ovulation deficiency caused by circadian disruption.
 

## Discussion
The circadian clock plays important roles in mammalian reproductive processes and fertility. Disruption of circadian rhythms is known to affect reproductive function in women exposed to shiftwork schedules and in animal models. , , However, the role and mechanism of circadian disruption in ovarian function are not fully understood. In this study, we found that long photoperiod exposure results in abnormal ovarian follicle development and ovulation disorder. Mechanistically, LP exposure abolishes circadian rhythms of BMAL1/NAMPT/NAD+ axis, which in turn reduces SIRT3 deacetylase activity and SOD antioxidant function, leading to mitochondrial dysfunction in granulosa cells ( ). This eventually results in growing follicle reduction and ovulation disorders. Therefore, our study has uncovered the molecular basis of circadian regulation on ovarian function.
Photoperiod or light–dark cycle refers to the alternating changes in the length of light and dark periods in the day–night cycle. The circadian system is composed of a hierarchy of oscillators that function at the cellular, tissue, and system levels in mammals. Photoperiod serve as significant time givers (or zeitgebers) that entrain the central clock located in the SCN of the hypothalamus. , Mounting evidence shows that peripheral tissues have their own oscillators and ubiquity clock mechanisms. Ovarian cells, including theca cells, granulosa cells, and oocytes, harbour internal molecular clock implicated in follicular growth, steroid hormone synthesis, and ovulation. Emerging studies indicate that disruption of the light–dark cycle caused by irregular light cycles affects women's reproductive health, including impaired ovarian function (including dysmenorrhoea, menstrual irregularities, polycystic ovary syndrome, etc.), decreased fertility, and adverse pregnancy outcomes (including increased miscarriage rates, low birth weight, increased risk of premature birth). , , , , Epidemiological studies have linked menstrual cycle irregularities to circadian disruptions in women who have night work, shiftwork, and rotating shiftwork. , , Moreover, it is challenging for female night shift workers, particularly among Chinese nurse population, to restore normal menstrual cycle levels within two years. Shift work is associated with early menopause and an extended time to pregnancy in women. , With the widespread use of artificial light sources, individuals are often exposed to prolonged illumination, as seen in long photoperiods (18 h lightness/6 h darkness). However, whether long photoperiod exposure affects the ovarian function and its underlying mechanism are still unclear. Therefore, we exposed rats to the long photoperiod to study its effects on ovarian function. The average duration of oestrus cycles was significantly prolonged in rats exposed to long photoperiods, and the hormone levels exhibited several significant changes ( c, and ). Here, we would like to provide some explanations for this. To begin with, there were no significant LH or estradiol peak in LP group, which was consistent with the ovarian function, as the ovary of LP group exhibiting defective follicular development and ovulation disorder, and prolonged oestrus cycles. Correspondingly, progesterone reduction due to the ovulation disorder and the absence of corpus luteum formation. The increase in FSH was speculated to result from the ovarian micro-environment in the LP group deteriorated, which was unfavourable for oocyte development. Therefore, more FSH was required to recruit dominant follicles. Besides, the decrease in testosterone was attributed to the reduction in the number of theca cells, which play roles in secreting testosterone. Research has reported similar findings, such as how constant darkness or constant light affect oocyte meiosis and ovary luteinisation in rodents. , , We found long photoperiods exposure also resulted in fewer corpus lutea ( h). What is more, long photoperiods exposure affects follicle development and ovulation ( i, k). These data also suggested that hormone is an indicator to diagnosis ovarian disease.
Looking at hormone level and ovarian disease, we tend to regard hormone as an indicator rather than an absolute necessity. According to the 2022 FIGO Classification Guidelines for Ovulatory Disorders, the previous classification systems mostly adopted the typing based on gonadotropin and estradiol level. However, the hormone levels have certain fluctuations physiologically. For instance, functional hypothalamic amenorrhoea women with low body weight were associated with decreased mean luteinizing hormone (LH) level but normal follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level. In patients with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), FSH and LH levels usually fall within the normal range as well. Moreover, hyperprolactinemia can be found in 7–52% of PCOS patients. Consequently, it should be noted that hormone levels are only a manifestation of abnormal ovarian functions.
Clock genes, which exhibit rhythmic expression in the ovaries, participate in the process of follicular development. These genes display different rhythmic expressions at different stages of follicle development and regulate oocyte meiotic division. , , As follicles mature, the expression levels and rhythms of clock genes reach stable levels before ovulation. Disturbances in the circadian rhythm can affect the expression of genes related to steroid hormone synthesis, this in turn influences the responsiveness of the ovaries to hormones such as LH and FSH. , Consistent with previous reports, our results demonstrated that under LD18/6 conditions, clock genes such as Bmal1 and Per1 maintained regular rhythmic oscillations. However, long photoperiod disturbed these oscillations and induced a phase advance in the ovary.
We found long photoperiod disrupted mitochondrial dysfunction by abolishing BMAL1/NAMPT/NAD+/SIRT3 cascade. It has been reported that NAMPT modulates the circadian clock gene expression forming an interlocked transcriptional-enzymatic feedback loop in mouse embryo fibroblasts that links cellular metabolism and circadian rhythms. Whether this feedback loop works in ovarian cells remains further elucidation. Previous research has indicated that circadian rhythm disruption can induce metabolic dysfunction by influencing oxidative stress levels, insulin secretion, and lipid metabolism. Metabolic dysregulation not only compromises follicular development but also contributes to diminished reproductive potential. To further investigate the impact of circadian rhythm disruption on ovarian function, we conducted metabolomic profiling of COCs. The analysis revealed notable alterations in NAD+ metabolism of the LP exposure group. NAD+ has been identified as a crucial molecular link between mitochondrial function and the circadian clock. Core clock genes modulate NAD+ oscillations through precise regulation of its biosynthesis and degradation, thereby transmitting mitochondrial signals to the circadian system via sirtuins activity, which synchronises metabolic and behavioural rhythms. Notably, SIRT1 and SIRT3 demonstrate exceptional sensitivity to NAD+ fluctuations. It has been reported that NAMPT-mediated NAD+ biosynthesis modulates the circadian clock gene expression forming an interlocked transcriptional-enzymatic feedback loop in mouse embryo fibroblasts that links cellular metabolism and circadian rhythms. Physiologically, healthy mitochondria maintain rhythmic NAD+ levels, enabling Sirtuin-mediated regulation of clock proteins and establishing a positive feedback loop. While age-related or pathological mitochondrial dysfunction reduces NAD+ availability and sirtuins activity, leading to clock protein dysregulation and circadian disruption. Consequently, mitochondrial dysfunction is exacerbated and creates a self-perpetuating pathological cycle. , Whether this feedback loop works in ovarian cells requires further elucidation. In this study, we found long photoperiod disrupted ovarian mitochondrial dysfunction by abolishing BMAL1/NAMPT/NAD+/SIRT3 cascade. Studies have shown that NAMPT deficiency in oocytes lead to mitochondrial abnormalities and ROS overproduction, thereby inducing oxidative stress, triggering apoptosis, and affecting oocyte maturation. We observed a notable decreased level of NAD+ and its dependent deacetylase SIRT3, a key regulator of mitochondrial function and oxidative homoeostasis through substrate-specific deacetylation. Given this finding, we aimed to explore the potential mechanisms underlying LP-induced ovarian mitochondrial dysfunction. SIRT3 maintains ROS homoeostasis by directly deacetylating and activating SOD2. Under physiological conditions, endogenous antioxidant enzymes, including SOD2, CAT, and GSH-Px, maintain redox homoeostasis through synergistic regulation of ROS levels. However, alterations in the ovarian microenvironment such as diabetes and obesity, disrupt SIRT3-mediated ROS homoeostasis in oocytes and granulosa cells, ultimately compromising oocyte metabolism and quality. , , Based on the aforementioned evidence, we hypothesised that deficient SIRT3-mediated SOD2 deacetylation induces mitochondrial oxidative stress and subsequent LP-induced follicular developmental impairment. However, it remains to be confirmed whether ovulatory disorders in humans resulting from exposure to a long photoperiod share the same mechanism as those induced by prolonged exposure in rats.
NAD+ is a coenzyme for sirtuins, CD38, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerases, and redox reactions, making it central to energy metabolism. NAD+ can influence many key cellular functions, including metabolic pathways, DNA repair, and chromatin remodelling. Decline of NAD+ level is associated with numerous diseases. Therefore, targeting NAD+ metabolism has emerged as a potential therapeutic strategy for related diseases. Previous studies have suggested that NAD+ repletion precursors, such as nicotinamide riboside (NR) or NMN supplementation, can reverse NAD+ decline and improve mitochondria functions. We found that NMN supplementation can ameliorate mitochondrial function, elevate numbers of growing follicles, and improve ovulation in rats after long photoperiod exposure ( , and ). A similar study demonstrated that NMN supplementation significantly improved porcine sperm quality through SIRT3-activating the SOD2/ROS axis and oxidative phosphorylation. Furthermore, previous studies showed that 500 mg/kg NMN supplementation restored NAD+ levels in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus, ventromedial hypothalamus and lateral hypothalamus of ageing rats. This suggests that NMN may affect hypothalamic function and regulate ovarian function and folliculogenesis via hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis. However, this study found no significant differences in pituitary FSH and LH levels between the NMN-treated and untreated groups ( ), which may be due to insufficient NMN dosage. Besides, as a potential therapeutic strategy, whether long-term supplementation with NAD+ precursors has any side effects remains unclear. Previous animal studies have demonstrated that chronic administration of NMN at doses of 100 and 300 mg/kg/day for 12 months effectively attenuated age-associated physiological decline in mice without inducing significant toxicity or adverse effects. Several clinical trials have investigated the effects of NMN on humans. Volunteers received single doses of 100, 250, and 500 mg/day NMN, with no apparent adverse effects observed, and no obvious changes were noted during physical examinations or laboratory data collection. , , , , A recent clinical investigation revealed that daily oral supplementation of 250 mg NMN significantly elevated and maintained whole blood NAD+ levels from 4 weeks until the cessation of administration without any apparent adverse effects. Given that 100 mg/kg/day of NMN was able to mitigate most age-associated physiological declines in rat, an equivalent surface area dose for humans would be 14 mg/kg/day. This suggests its potential translatability to human applications. Besides, pharmacokinetic studies demonstrate that administered NMN undergoes rapid absorption and efficient systemic distribution in metabolically active tissues including the liver and skeletal muscle before returning to baseline levels. Consequently, sustaining elevated systemic NMN levels to maintain its functional benefits remains a critical challenge for its therapeutic applications. As a potential therapeutic method, whether long-term supplementation with NAD+ precursors have any side effects is still unclear.
The following limitations of this study should be noted. First, our experimental subjects are rats, and there is a gap in extrapolating conclusions drawn from rats to humans. In the future, we plan to conduct a randomised controlled study on NMN supplementation in women with ovulatory disorders caused by circadian rhythm disruption, aiming to clarify the safety of NMN supplementation and its efficacy in restoring ovarian function. Second, the mechanism by which long photoperiod exposure exerts its effects through specific cell types remains incompletely elucidated. In the future, advances techniques to conduct in vitro culture of oocytes and granulosa cells will help identify which cell type plays a primary role. Additionally, performing single-cell sequencing on different stages of follicular development may provide more precise insights into follicular development dynamics. Third, while our study has identified the BMAL1/NAMPT/NAD+/SIRT3 pathway as a key mechanism, additional co-regulatory mechanisms likely exist. Existing data suggest that immune regulation is a promising focus for future research, with its specific role requiring further elucidation.
Despite these limitations, this study reveals the impact of circadian rhythm disruption on follicular development from a metabolic perspective. Our study proposes an intriguing mechanism whereby long photoperiod exposure disturbs NAD+ metabolism dependent antioxidant enzymes, resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction in granulosa cells, ultimately leading to abnormal follicle development and ovulation failure. Importantly, NAD+ plays a protective role in ovarian function. It was discovered that NMN supplementation can partially rescue the ovarian dysfunction caused by prolonged photoperiod exposure. These findings may provide a therapeutic avenue to target ovarian disease.

## Contributors
Dan Zhang designed the study. Yan-Yun Ying, Xin Chen, Sen-Yi Yao, and Rui-Xue Chen contributed equally to this work. Yan-Yun Ying, Xin Chen, Sen-Yi Yao, Rui-Xue Chen, Yu-Li Qian, Qi–Qi Xu, Yue Ying, Zheng-Yi Li, and Hong Qiu performed the experiments. Hong-Qing Liang contributed new reagents/analytic tools; Cun-Qi Ye provided the test facilities for high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Yan-Yun Ying, Xin Chen, and Xiao Sun analysed the data, and wrote the paper. Dan Zhang supervised the study, reviewed and edited the manuscript. Ying Yan-Yun and Chen Xin have accessed and verified the underlying data. All authors read and approved the final version for publication.

## Data sharing statement
The raw data of RNA-seq, CUT&Tag, scRNA-seq, and Metabolomics have been deposited in the GSA databases (accession numbers: CRA032247, CRA037813, CRA032366) and OMIX databases (accession number: OMIX012652).

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China - Joint Fund for Regional Innovation and Development (No. U23A20404), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2022YFC2703500), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82394424), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82471708), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2021YFC2700402).
The authors acknowledge the use of BioRender to create and and .

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2026.106200.

## Contributor Information
Hong-Qing Liang, Email: lianghongqing@zju.edu.cn.
Xiao Sun, Email: xiaosun@zju.edu.cn.
Dan Zhang, Email: zhangdan@zju.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data

## Appendix A

## Supplemental Western blots

## Reagent Validation file

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Appendix A

## Supplemental Western blots

## Reagent Validation file