pmcAsian J Pharm SciAsian J Pharm Sci3796ajpharmsciAsian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences1818-08762221-285XShenyang Pharmaceutical UniversityPMC13267544PMC13267544.113267544132675444230535910.1016/j.ajps.2026.101169S1818-0876(26)00055-31011691Research ArticleScavenger receptor–mediated lung-targeted delivery of anti-miR-155 oligoDNA nanomicelles with curcumin for acute lung injury therapy
KangMinjiOhJihunKimEunjyLeeMinhyungminhyung@hanyang.ac.kr Department of Bioengineering, College of Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea⁎Corresponding author. minhyung@hanyang.ac.kr62026295202621351546410116914120262042026652026290520261606202621062026© 2026 Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Published by Elsevier B.V.2026Shenyang Pharmaceutical Universityhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Antisense oligonucleotides offer a powerful strategy for suppressing pro-inflammatory microRNAs, but efficient long-term delivery after systemic administration remains challenging. In this study, we developed a self-assembling oligoDNA-nanomicelle (OD-micelle) platform to simultaneously deliver antisense oligoDNA targeting miR-155 and curcumin, a hydrophobic anti-inflammatory agent, to the lung. The curcumin formulation (OD-micelle/Cur) can be administered intravenously and has a negatively charged surface and average particle size of ∼160 nm, supporting scavenger receptor (SR)-mediated pulmonary delivery. Fluorescence imaging and flow cytometry analyses demonstrated that cellular uptake was comparable to that of OD-micelle/PEI25k, a widely used cationic carrier standard. Hemocompatibility tests demonstrated reduced red blood cell aggregation, compared with PEI25k, indicating improved hemocompatibility without compromising delivery efficiency. Mechanistic studies supported the receptor-dependent transport of the oligoDNA corona. Pre-treatment with excess oligonucleotides reduced the cellular uptake and in vivo lung accumulation of Cy5-labeled OD-micelle/Cur. Furthermore, a RAGE antagonist peptide similarly reduced cellular uptake, suggesting the involvement of RAGE in the SR pathway. In LPS-induced acute lung injury (ALI) mice and LPS-stimulated Raw264.7 cells, the OD-micelle/Cur suppressed the inflammatory response, decreased TNF-α and IL-6 levels, and improved lung histopathology. The antisense oligoDNA corona contributed to the efficacy through miR-155 inhibition, which was confirmed by comparison with scrambled OD-micelle/Cur and increased SOCS1 expression in lung tissue. Furthermore, RAGE pathway inhibition attenuated the inflammatory response, suggesting that RAGE signaling could be an additional therapeutic mechanism. Therefore, OD-micelles are a systemically administrable, lung-targeted oligonucleotide nanoplatform with dual-mechanism anti-inflammatory activity for the treatment of ALI.

## Graphical abstract
OD-micelles self-assemble from cholesterol–antisense oligoDNA (anti–miR-155) and carry curcumin to achieve lung accumulation via an SR-related uptake pathway, with RAGE as a contributing SR candidate, in vitro and in vivo. In inflamed lungs, miR-155 silencing (SOCS1 restoration) and curcumin co-delivery suppresses cytokines and tissue injury, enabling multimode anti-inflammatory therapy for ALI. 

## Keywords
Acute lung injuryOligoDNACurcuminRAGEsMicroRNA-155pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Acute lung injury (ALI) and its severe form, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), are life-threatening inflammatory lung diseases [ ]. ALI/ARDS are characterized by diffuse alveolar damage, edema and intense cytokine release [ , , ]. Despite advances in supportive care, morbidity and mortality remain high due to a lack of effective pharmacological interventions [ ]. Dysregulated inflammation in ALI is driven by innate immune cells, such as neutrophils and macrophages, and the release of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-1β. Therefore, targeting key regulators of this inflammatory cascade, including pro-inflammatory microRNAs, is a potential therapeutic approach [ , ].
OligoDNA-micelles (OD-micelles) have an antisense sequence against microRNA-155 (miR-155). miR-155 is a well-established pro-inflammatory miRNA that is significantly upregulated during ALI [ , ]. In animal models, miR-155 is primarily expressed in alveolar macrophages upon LPS stimulation and promotes inflammation by downregulating suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1), an anti-inflammatory mediator that suppresses nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation [ , ]. Inhibiting miR-155 with OD-micelles might also have additional therapeutic effects in ALI, potentially serving as a multifunctional platform for lung-targeted delivery of antisense oligonucleotides that can incorporate hydrophobic anti-inflammatory cargos for combination therapy of ALI.
Recently, natural anti-inflammatory drugs such as curcumin, resveratrol and quercetin have been investigated as potent therapeutic agents for ALI [ , ]. Intratracheal administration of these natural anti-inflammatory drugs in animal models produced a strong therapeutic effect on ALI, decreasing inflammatory cytokine levels in inflamed lungs [ ]. Among the hydrophobic anti-inflammatory small molecules, curcumin has been extensively studied as a potent cargo candidate for ALI therapy, if efficient lung delivery could be achieved [ , ]. Curcumin can inhibit the activation of the NF-κB signaling pathway, thereby downregulating inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β [ , ]. In addition, it suppresses NLRP3 inflammasome activation. However, it is strongly hydrophobic and has low solubility in aqueous solutions, so a carrier is required for efficient delivery [ ]. Curcumin was delivered into the lungs of model animals using nanoparticles with amphiphilic peptides and polymers. For example, R7L10 peptides, composed of arginine and leucine, were developed to deliver curcumin into the lungs [ ]. They formed micelle structures in an aqueous solution with a hydrophobic core for curcumin loading. Animal experiments indicated that the curcumin-loaded R7L10 decreased inflammatory cytokine levels in the lungs and alleviated the severe inflammation reaction. Polymeric micelles, such as cholesterol-conjugated polyamidoamine (PAM-chol), were also evaluated as carriers of curcumin into the lungs [ ]. The results showed that the PAM-chol micelles effectively delivered curcumin into inflamed lungs, where it reduced cytokine levels. Recently, a curcumin-loaded nano-emulsion system was developed for inhaled delivery into the lungs [ ]. Collectively, these studies underscore that the therapeutic efficacy of hydrophobic anti-inflammatory cargos critically depends on achieving efficient delivery to inflamed lung tissues.
Although inhaling therapeutic agents is an efficient delivery route to inflamed lungs, inhalation has some limitations in its practical application [ ]. For example, the efficiency of delivering drugs by inhalation can depend on the breathing ability of the patient [ ]. In addition, some of the drug can remain in the mouth and be wasted, depending on the administration device and technique [ ]. Also, contamination in the process of inhaling is a possibility. Some individuals are sensitive to humidity, which can make inhaled delivery difficult. Therefore, intravenous (IV) administration is an attractive alternative route, not only for hydrophobic anti-inflammatory cargos, but also for nucleic-acid therapeutics, because it can provide controlled dosing independent of the patient’s breathing capacity and device variability [ ]. Systemic delivery of curcumin for the treatment of ALI has been developed with polymeric carriers [ ]. For instance, polyphosphazene nanoparticles were used as a delivery carrier for curcumin targeting the lungs [ ]. Polyphosphazene released the curcumin in response to inflammation and successfully induced therapeutic effects in inflamed lungs.
In this study, we developed an intravenously administrable OD-micelle platform for scavenger receptor (SR)-related pulmonary targeting of antisense oligonucleotides that can carry hydrophobic anti-inflammatory cargos such as curcumin. Some criteria were considered in our design of a systemic carrier. First, the carrier should have little interaction with blood components to enable stable circulation. Generally, particles with positive charges aggregate with negatively charged blood cells and albumin by electrostatic interaction [ ]. For example, cationic polymers for drug delivery such as polyamidoamine and polyethyleneimine (PEI) bind to blood components to form large aggregates and opsonize rapidly [ , ]. Therefore, particles with neutral or negative charges could enhance circulation. Second, hydrophobic drugs such as curcumin should be stably loaded into the particles [ ]. In this regard, micelles with hydrophobic cores for loading curcumin might be useful. In addition, the critical micelle concentration (CMC) values should be small enough to maintain the micelle structure in serum. Third, the particles must achieve efficient pulmonary accumulation and access the inflamed lung microenvironments where cellular uptake by resident macrophages and epithelial cells is required for therapeutic activity. Therefore, the micelles should be smaller than 200 nm to enable efficient translocation into alveolar spaces [ , ]. Fourth, the carriers should be recognizable by lung epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages to enable efficient therapeutic effects at the inflamed sites [ ]. Single-stranded DNAs are recognized by SRs such as receptors for advanced glycation end-products (RAGEs) [ ]. SRs are induced in lung cells during ALI, including lung epithelial cells and macrophages [ ]. Therefore, a corona containing single-stranded DNA might enable efficient delivery into inflamed lung cells [ ]. Considering those criteria, we designed OD-micelles that combine hydrophilic oligoDNA with a hydrophobic cholesterol to form a micelle structure with a hydrophobic core in which curcumin can be loaded by hydrophobic interaction. Our OD-micelles have some advantages over polymeric nanoparticles. They have a negative surface charge, which could minimize interactions with negatively charged serum proteins and thus reduce opsonization. In addition, oligoDNA might not induce cytotoxicity and thus offer high biocompatibility. Furthermore, single-stranded DNA, such as oligoDNA, could be recognized by SRs such as RAGE and toll-like receptors (TLRs) [ , ]. Therefore, the OD-micelles might be efficiently taken up by alveolar macrophages. In addition to those advantages, oligoDNA can have an antisense sequence to inhibit pro-inflammatory RNAs [ ]. We designed OD-micelles that display an antisense sequence against miR-155, thereby enabling simultaneous lung-targeted delivery and gene-regulatory anti-inflammatory activity through the miR-155–SOCS1 axis.
To evaluate our hypotheses, we prepared cholesterol-conjugated OD-micelles and loaded curcumin into their hydrophobic cores. Their physicochemical properties were characterized, and their cellular uptake and hemocompatibility were compared against a PEI25k-based benchmark carrier. Importantly, we investigated the SR-related delivery mechanism using competitive oligonucleotide pretreatment, and we assessed pulmonary accumulation after IV administration. We also evaluated therapeutic efficacy and mechanistic outcomes in LPS-induced ALI mice and LPS-stimulated macrophages by measuring inflammatory cytokines, lung histopathology, miR-155/SOCS1-associated readouts, and the contribution of RAGE signaling to the anti-inflammatory effects.

2

## Materials and methods
2.1

## Materials
Raw264.7 and L2 cells were obtained from the Korean Cell Line Bank (Seoul, Korea). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was sourced from Gendepot (Baker, CA, USA), while Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) was acquired from Welgene (Seoul, Korea). OligoDNA (5′-ACCCCUAUCACAAUUAGCAUUAA-cholesterol-3′) and scrambled oligoDNA (5′-UCACAACCUCCUAGAAAGAGUA-cholesterol-3′) were synthesized by Bioneer (Daejeon, Korea). A bicinchoninic acid assay kit was obtained from Thermo Scientific (Rockford, IL). 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide, MTT) and heparin were purchased from Pierce (Waltham, MA, USA). 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH), chloroquine diphosphate, amiloride hydrochloride hydrate, and methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD) were bought from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Chlorpromazine hydrochloride and chloroquine diphosphate were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry (Tokyo, Japan). Mouse ELISA kits and Alexa Fluor 647–labeled goat anti-mouse IgG secondary antibodies were obtained from Invitrogen (Eugene, OR, USA). The primary antibodies against SOCS1 were sourced from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX, USA).

2.2

## Preparation of curcumin-loaded OD-micelles
Cholesterol-conjugated oligoDNA (OD-chol) was synthesized chemically and dissolved in a 5% glucose solution to produce OD-micelles. Solvent dispersion and sonication were used to prepare the curcumin formulation (OD-micelle/Cur). First, OD-chol in a 5% glucose solution was mixed with curcumin in ethanol at various weight ratios. As a control, curcumin alone was prepared by mixing 1 mg in ethanol with a 5% glucose solution. The final concentration of ethanol in all the samples was adjusted to 2% (v/v), and the mixture was probe-sonicated at 100 W for 10 min to allow self-assembly of the micelles. Then, the samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 15,000 × g, and each supernatant was transferred to a new tube. To evaluate the loading efficiency, the absorbance of curcumin in the supernatants was measured at 450 nm using a spectrophotometer.

2.3

## Particle size and zeta potential
The OD-micelle/Cur samples were prepared in 5% glucose at various weight ratios. The sizes and zeta-potentials of the samples were measured by dynamic light scattering using a Zetasizer Nano instrument (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK).

2.4

## Drug loading efficiency and capacity
OD-Micelle/Cur was prepared by mixing OD-micelle and curcumin in a 5% (w/v) glucose solution at a weight ratio of 10:1 (50 µg OD-micelle, 5 µg curcumin) to a final volume of 500 µl. The sample was then ultrafiltered with an Amicon® Ultra centrifuge filter (10-kDa MWCO, Merck). It was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C to separate the residue and filtrate. The curcumin bound to the OD-micelle/Cur formulation was considered as the curcumin remaining on the 10 kDa membrane. The residue was collected, and its absorbance was measured at 450 nm with a microplate reader. A calibration curve for curcumin was created under the same measurement conditions, with the control group value subtracted.
Curcumin loading efficiency (%) and loading capacity (%) were calculated as follows.Curcuminloadingefficiency(%)=LoadedcurcuminTotacurcumin×100%Curcuminloadingcapacity(%)=LoadedcurcuminOD−micelle+Loadedcurcumin×100%

2.5

## In vitro drug release profile
To compare curcumin release under normal and weakly acidic inflammation-mimicking conditions, OD-micelles/Cur were incubated in buffer solutions at pH 7.4 and pH 6.5. Specifically, OD-micelles/Cur were added to DPBS (pH 7.4) or sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.5) and incubated at 4 °C for up to 48 h. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C at specified time intervals (0, 2, 4, 8, 12, 24 and 48 h) to remove insoluble or unreleased curcumin. The supernatant was collected, and the amount of released curcumin was measured in absorbance at 450 nm by subtracting control values. The cumulative release rate was calculated by summing the curcumin detected in the supernatant at each time point and normalizing it by the total initial amount of curcumin added.

2.6

## Serum stability
OD-micelle/Cur was prepared in 5% (w/v) glucose as described above. To evaluate colloidal/drug retention stability under protein-rich conditions, the formulation was incubated in DPBS with or without 10% FBS. Briefly, OD-micelle/Cur was mixed with DPBS (±10% FBS) and incubated at 37 °C for up to 4 h. At each designated time point (0, 1, 2, and 4 h), samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm and 4 °C to eliminate insoluble or unassociated particles of curcumin. The supernatant was carefully collected, and the remaining curcumin was quantified by measuring absorbance at 450 nm using a microplate reader with blank subtraction. Curcumin retention at each time point was expressed as a percentage of the initial value.

2.7

## In vitro curcumin delivery assay with OD-micelle/Cur: flow cytometry
L2 and Raw264.7 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium and DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO₂. For the in vitro curcumin delivery experiment, cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 5 × 10⁴ cells/well and incubated overnight. OD-micelle/Cur samples were prepared at different weight ratios, ranging from 5:1 to 20:1. Sample aliquots (1 µg curcumin/well) were added to the cells and cultured for 24 h. Then, the cells were washed twice with DPBS and harvested by treatment with trypsin/EDTA. The harvested cells were resuspended in PBS and subjected to flow cytometry. The mean fluorescence intensity of curcumin in the cells was measured by flow cytometry (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA).

2.8

## In vitro OD-chol delivery assay
L2 lung epithelial cells were cultured in RPMI1640 media and DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO₂ incubator. The cells were seeded in 12-well plates at 5 × 104 cells/well and cultured overnight. For this in vitro OD-chol delivery assay, Cy5-labeled OD-micelle (Cy5-OD-micelle)/Cur was prepared at a 10:1 wt ratio. OD-micelles alone and OD-micelle/PEI25k at a 1:1 wt ratio were prepared in a 5% glucose solution and used as controls. The samples were added to the cells and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. The dose of OD-micelles was fixed at 10 µg/well. The cells were washed with PBS and fixed using 4% paraformaldehyde. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Coverslips were mounted, and the samples were observed using a confocal microscope.

2.9

## Endocytosis inhibitor tests
L2 cells were seeded in a 12-well plate with 1 × 105 cells/well and cultured for 24 h before OD-micelle delivery. Endocytosis inhibitors were added to the wells 1 h before the addition of the OD-micelles. Following previous studies, the final concentrations of the inhibitors were as follows: chloroquine: 60 µM, chlorpromazine: 10 µg/ml, filipin Ⅲ: 0.4 µg, amiloride: 100 µΜ, and MβCD: 1.5 mM [ , ]. Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur was prepared at a 10:1 wt ratio and added to the cells. The OD-micelle doses were fixed at 10 µg/well. The samples were incubated with the cells for 4 h in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37 °C. Then, the media were replaced with fresh RPMI1640, and the intracellular uptake of Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur was analyzed by flow cytometry.
For the confocal microscopy study, the cells were washed with PBS and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde 4 h after sample addition. Then, the nuclei were counterstained with DAPI, coverslips were mounted, and the samples were observed under a confocal microscope.

2.10

## Critical micelle concentration
OD-chol micelle solutions were prepared at various concentrations, and the CMC was measured as described previously [ ].

2.11

## RAGE inhibitor test
To determine the uptake pathway of the OD-micelle/Cur, L2 cells were seeded in a 12-well plate at 1 × 105 cells/well and pre-incubated with bovine serum albumin (BSA) or RAGE-antagonist peptide (RAP) at various concentrations for 4 h. Then, Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur was added to the cells and incubated in a 5% CO2 incubator for 24 h. The OD-micelle doses were fixed at 10 µg/well. The intracellular uptake of the Cy5-OD-chol/Cur micelles was analyzed by flow cytometry.
For the confocal microscope study, the cells were washed with PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. The nuclei were counterstained with DAPI, coverslips were mounted, and the samples were observed using a confocal microscope.

2.12

## In vitro ELISA
Raw264.7 cells were seeded into 12-well plates at 1 × 105 cells per well and cultured in a 5% CO2 incubator for 24 h. OD-micelles, OD-micelle/PEI25k and OD-micelle/Cur were prepared at their optimal ratios and added to the cells. The OD-micelle doses were fixed at 10 µg/well. Then, the cells were incubated with 20 ng LPS at 37 °C for 4 h. The culture medium was replaced with fresh DMEM, and the cells were cultured for an additional 24 h. The culture medium was subjected to ELISA according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.13

## RT-PCR
The miR155 levels were measured using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). To evaluate LPS-induced miR155 expression, RAW264.7 cells, which produce pro-inflammatory cytokines, were used in RT-PCR analysis. These cells were plated at a density of 1 × 105 per well in 12-well plates. For activation, 20 ng LPS was added, and the cells were incubated for 2 h. Delivery assays were performed with OD-micelle alone, OD-micelle/PEI25k, scrambled OD (scrOD)-micelle/Cur and OD-micelle/Cur. Total RNA was extracted from the cells using QIAzol reagent following the manufacturer’s instructions. RT-PCR was performed as previously described [ , ]. MiR-155 levels were normalized to GAPDH and quantified using the 2−ΔΔCt method. Primer sequences have been previously reported [ ].

2.14

## Western blot
Raw 264.7 cells were seeded in a 6-well plate and lysed with reporter lysis buffer. For western blotting, 30 µg of total protein from the lysates and 15 µg from cell lysates were separated on 8% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against NF-κB p105, NF-κB p50, IκB-α and GAPDH. After washing with TBST, they were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with an HRP-conjugated secondary antibody. The signals were identified using enhanced chemiluminescence substrates and captured with a ChemiDoc XRS+ System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).

2.15

## MTT assay
L2 cells were seeded in a 96-well microassay plate at 1 × 104 cells/well and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. OD, OD-micelles and PEI25k were added to the cells at various concentrations, and the cells were cultured for 24 h. Cell viability was measured using the MTT assay, as described previously , , .

2.16

## Hemocompatibility assay
Red blood cells (RBCs) were collected from blood samples of BALB/C mice, as described previously [ , ]. RBCs in DPBS were transferred to microtubes and incubated with OD-micelles, OD-micelle/PEI25k or OD-micelle/Cur. The amount of OD-micelle in each group was fixed at 1 µg. The negative control group was treated with DPBS. After 30 min of incubation, the samples were diluted with an appropriate amount of DPBS and then mounted on a glass slide for observation.

2.17

## In vivo ALI mouse model and treatment
All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Hanyang University (accreditation number: 2025-0063A) and complied with all relevant guidelines. Male BALB/c mice (6 weeks old, 25 g, Koatech) were randomly divided into six groups. To compare the LPS administration group with the OD-micelle/Cur group, we conducted a power analysis on the primary endpoint (TNF-α levels in BAL fluid). Based on preliminary data (mean difference ≈ 1195 pg/ml; standard deviation ≈ 301 pg/ml; Cohen’s d ≈ 3.96), about 3 animals per group are needed for 80% power at α = 0.05 (two-sided). In this study, we used n = 7 to ensure over 99% power for the primary comparison. OD-micelle, OD-micelle/PEI25k, scrOD-micelle/Cur and OD-micelle/Cur were prepared at their optimal ratios in a 5% glucose solution. The mice were anesthetized with Avertin, and the samples were IV injected with a fixed dose of 10 µg of OD-micelle in 10 µl PBS. After 2 h, LPS was intratracheally instilled into the mice. The mice were sacrificed after 24 h, and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and lungs were harvested for further analysis.

2.18

## In vivo biodistribution
For the biodistribution analysis, Cy5-OD-micelles alone, Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur and Cy5-OD-micelle/PEI25k were prepared at their optimal ratios. At a fixed dose of 10 µg OD-micelles per mouse, the samples were IV injected into the animals through the tail vein. At 4 h after administration, the mice were sacrificed, and the organs were harvested for analysis with an Fluorescence-labeled Organism Bioimaging Instrument (FOBI) imaging system (Neo Science, Suwon, Korea).

2.19

## In vivo cytokine ELISA
BAL fluid was harvested from the mice as described previously and centrifuged at 15,000 × g at 4 °C to remove cell debris and blood residues. The supernatants were moved to new tubes and subjected to ELISA according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.20

## Immunohistochemistry
Lung tissues from the mice were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS, dehydrated with alcohol, embedded in paraffin, and then cut into 7 µm-thick sections. The sections were deparaffinized with xylene for 10 min, rehydrated with a step gradient of alcohol for 3 min, treated for antigen retrieval with 10 mM sodium citrate for 20 min, and blocked with 10% goat serum containing 1% BSA in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) for 2 h. The sections were incubated with mouse anti-SOCS1 or anti-TNF-α primary antibodies overnight in a wet box. After being washed with TBS containing 0.01% Tween 100, the sections were treated with Alexa 488–conjugated goat anti-mouse secondary antibody or Alexa 488–conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody in the dark for 2 h. The nuclei were stained with 300 nM DAPI for 15 min [ ]. Then the fluorescence intensity was observed with a slide scanner (ZEISS, Axio Scan Z1, Oberkochen, Germany) and quantified using ImageJ software.

2.21

## Hematoxylin and eosin staining
Lung tissues from the mice were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 7-µm-thick slices. The slices were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), as described previously. The stained samples were analyzed by light microscopy . 

2.22

## Statistical analysis
Data are presented as means ± standard deviations (SD). Statistical analysis was conducted using ANOVA, followed by the Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. A P-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

3

## Results and discussion
3.1

## Design and characterization of OD-micelles for systemic curcumin delivery
OD-micelles were prepared by dissolving OD-chol in a 5% glucose solution. The CMCs of the OD-micelles and OD-micelle/Cur were 0.27 mg/ml ( A). The OD-micelle/Cur were prepared at various weight ratios from 5:1 to 20:1, using a fixed amount of curcumin with increasing amounts of OD-micelles. Unloaded curcumin was precipitated by centrifugation, and the absorbance of the supernatants was measured to evaluate the loaded curcumin. The results showed the greatest loading at a 10:1 wt ratio ( B), where the particle size of OD-micelle/Cur was approximately 160 nm ( C). At higher OD-micelle ratios, the size of the micelles tended to increase up to 250 nm. In contrast, the zeta potential of OD-micelle/Cur decreased as the amount of OD-micelle increased ( C). The mixture of OD-micelles and curcumin without sonication had a size around 150 nm, similar to OD-micelle/Cur with sonication ( C). However, the size distribution was larger in the OD-micelles + Cur, indicating that curcumin was not stably loaded into the micelle cores ( D). Based on these findings, OD-micelle/Cur was prepared at a 10:1 wt ratio for the experiments with systemic delivery of curcumin. Quantitative analysis at this ratio showed a high curcumin content, with a loading efficiency of 92% and a loading capacity of 8.42%. Additionally, this formulation exhibited excellent colloidal stability, with no significant changes in particle size over 7 d under storage and physiological conditions (Fig. S1). The OD-micelle/Cur also had a negative surface charge, which reduced interaction with blood components, and a size around 160 nm, which enabled efficient extravasation into the alveolar space. In addition, the OD-micelle/Cur had single-stranded DNA on its surface for efficient interaction with SRs. The morphology of both OD-micelles and OD-micelle/Cur was investigated with TEM and found to be spherical ( E). 
To evaluate whether OD-micelle/Cur is selectively released in an inflammatory microenvironment, we conducted in vitro release studies under neutral and slightly acidic conditions. OD-Micelle/Cur was incubated in buffers adjusted to pH 7.4 (normal conditions) or pH 6.5 (inflammation-mimicking conditions). As shown in F, under pH 7.4 conditions, curcumin release was minimized. It remained below approximately 10% during the study period, indicating that most curcumin remained within the formulation under physiological pH conditions. In contrast, curcumin release increased significantly at pH 6.5, reaching almost complete release within ∼48 h. This suggests that curcumin release is promoted under slightly acidic conditions.
Additionally, serum-related stability was evaluated by incubating OD-micelle/Cur at 37 °C in DPBS with or without 10% FBS, and monitoring curcumin levels over 4 h. As shown in G, the OD-micelle/Cur formulation maintained a high level of curcumin retention (∼90%) in serum-free DPBS solution, but the residual curcumin decreased more rapidly in the presence of serum proteins.
Taken together, these results indicate that the OD-micelle/Cur formulation remains relatively stable under protein-free aqueous conditions, whereas curcumin release is promoted in physiologically suitable protein-containing environments and under slightly acidic pH conditions. These release characteristics suggest that they can be utilized to maintain formulation stability during handling and administration, while ensuring continuous availability of curcumin even after exposure to the inflammatory microenvironment.

3.2

## Intracellular delivery of curcumin and oligoDNA with OD-micelles
Curcumin delivery efficiency into L2 mouse lung epithelial cells and Raw264.7 mouse macrophages was evaluated by flow cytometry. The results indicate that the OD-micelles increased the delivery efficiency into L2 cells and Raw264.7 cells, compared with the controls, at all the tested ratios ( ), suggesting that OD-micelles efficiently carry curcumin. The curcumin-only samples showed limited delivery efficiency, possibly due to curcumin aggregation in the aqueous condition. Samples with higher OD-micelle ratios had higher curcumin delivery efficiency ( A and B). However, particle size and surface charge are also important in the systemic delivery of curcumin. The particle size of OD-micelle/Cur at a 10:1 ratio was smaller than 200 nm, whereas at higher weight ratios the particles were larger than 200 nm ( C). Therefore, OD-micelle/Cur was used at a 10:1 wt ratio for further study. 
Intracellular uptake of OD-chol was evaluated by flow cytometry. For this experiment, Cy5-OD-chol was used to prepare OD-micelles in a 5% glucose solution. Cy5-OD-micelles alone and Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur were applied to cells, and OD-micelle/PEI25k complexes were used as the control. The cellular uptake efficiency measured by flow cytometry showed that PEI25k provided the most efficient intracellular uptake of OD-chol ( C and D), possibly because the positive surface charge of the OD-micelle/PEI25k complexes facilitated electrostatic interactions between the particles and cell membranes, fostering the uptake of OD-micelle/PEI25k into the cells. The same results were observed in the confocal microscopy study (Fig. S2). This was an anticipated result, given that PEI25k is the most widely used cationic DNA carrier. Compared with PEI25k, the OD-micelles alone and OD-micelle/Cur had lower intracellular uptake efficiency. Because the surface charge of the OD-micelles and OD-micelle/Cur was negative, fewer interactions occurred between the particles and cell membranes, contributing to lower intracellular uptake. The difference between the OD-micelles alone and OD-micelle/Cur was not significant, suggesting that loading curcumin into the OD-micelles did not significantly change the cellular uptake of the OD-micelles.

3.3

## Receptor-mediated endocytosis
We evaluated the endocytosis pathway using various inhibitors. L2 cells were pretreated with endocytic inhibitors before they were exposed to Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur. Then, the cellular uptake of Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur was measured by flow cytometry ( A and B). Those results show that chlorpromazine significantly reduced the endocytic uptake of the complexes, compared with the control group, indicating that clathrin-dependent endocytosis is the primary pathway for OD-micelle/Cur micelle internalization. Conversely, inhibitors of caveolae-mediated uptake such as filipin III and cholesterol-depleted MβCD, had little or no effect on uptake, suggesting that the caveolin pathway is not significantly involved. Amiloride, a macropinocytosis inhibitor, also did not significantly reduce micelle uptake. Interestingly, chloroquine, which increases endosomal pH and inhibits endosomal/lysosomal function, significantly reduced detectable Cy5 uptake (P < 0.05). The chloroquine effect suggests that efficient uptake or release of the substance must occur via the acidic endosomal pathway. Disruption of endosomal maturation might prevent the micelles from effectively releasing a fluorescent substance or cause aborted release. Taken together, these findings suggest that the OD-micelle/Cur micelles primarily enter cells via clathrin-mediated endocytosis, likely via receptor-mediated uptake, and then translocate through the endo-lysosomal compartment. These results were confirmed by confocal microscopy ( C and D). The results also indicate that clathrin-mediated endocytosis is a main endocytosis pathway for the internalization of OD-micelles. 
The receptors for single-stranded DNA have not been identified clearly. However, it is generally accepted that single-stranded DNA is recognized by SRs such as RAGEs and TLRs and enters cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. Consistent with that idea, we first confirmed that OD-micelle/Cur delivery is mediated through an SR-related pathway, as evidenced by reduced uptake upon SR inhibition ( A). Among the various SR candidates, RAGE has been reported to recognize single-stranded DNA and is induced in lung cells in ALI conditions [ ]. Therefore, we used the RAGE inhibitor RAP to evaluate the possibility of RAGE-mediated endocytosis. L2 cells were incubated with RAP for 4 h before the delivery of OD-micelle/Cur. Pre-incubation with RAP partially reduced the cellular uptake of OD-micelle/Cur ( B), suggesting that RAGE is one plausible SR candidate that contributes to OD-micelle/Cur uptake. As a negative control, BSA did not produce a decrease in uptake ( C), supporting the specificity of the RAP-associated inhibition and the validity of this interpretation. The same results were observed in the confocal microscopy study (Fig. S3). Inflamed alveolar macrophages and lung epithelial cells overexpress RAGEs. Therefore, it is likely that OD-micelles are recognized by RAGEs and other SRs and taken up by cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. 

3.4

## In vitro anti-inflammatory effects of OD-micelle/Cur
The anti-inflammatory effects of OD-micelle/Cur were assessed in Raw264.7 cells activated with LPS, with or without OD-micelles and curcumin. After 24 h, inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α and IL-6) levels were measured by ELISA. The group treated only with LPS showed a significant increase in TNF-α compared to the untreated control group, confirming successful induction of inflammation. When OD-micelles, OD-micelle/PEI25k or OD-micelle/Cur were added to the LPS-stimulated cells, all showed an anti-inflammatory effect, evidenced by decreased TNF-α levels, compared to the LPS-only group ( A). Both OD-micelles and OD-micelle/PEI25k both had anti-TNF-α effects, indicating that the anti-miR-155 oligoDNA of the OD-micelles had an anti-inflammatory effect. In addition, OD-micelle/Cur reduced TNF-α levels more effectively than OD-micelles alone, suggesting that curcumin delivered with the OD-micelles had an additional anti-inflammatory effect. The strongest anti-inflammatory effect was identified in the OD-micelle/Cur group, indicating that curcumin and anti-miR-155 oligoDNA combined to produce enhanced anti-inflammatory effects. A similar tendency was observed in the ELISA for IL-6, which was decreased most efficiently in the OD-micelle/Cur group, confirming the combined therapeutic effects of curcumin and anti-miR155 oligoDNA ( B). 
To further verify the gene regulatory mechanism of the anti-inflammatory effect, intracellular miR-155 levels were measured using RT-PCR ( C). As expected, LPS stimulation significantly increased miR-155 expression compared to the untreated control, confirming the activation of miR-155-related inflammatory responses. In contrast, OD-micelles/Cur significantly reduced miR-155 levels, bringing them back to a level similar to the control ( C). This demonstrates the effective delivery and functional activity of anti-miR-155 oligoDNA under inflammatory conditions. Notably, the miR-155 inhibitory effect was maintained even in the curcumin-containing formulation, indicating that adding curcumin does not impair the gene silencing ability of the OD-micelle platform.
Next, NF-κB signaling was analyzed using Western blot to detect NF-κB p105, p50 and IκB-α, with GAPDH as a loading control ( D and E). LPS stimulation increased the levels of proteins related to the NF-κB pathway, including the p50 subunit, while treatment with OD-micelle/Cur appeared to reduce this response ( D). Quantitative analysis showed that the p50/GAPDH ratio was lower in the OD-micelle/Cur group compared to the LPS-only group ( E). These results support the conclusion that curcumin-containing formulations maintain anti-inflammatory activity through regulation of the NF-κB pathway, while the complete micelle platform preserves the anti-miR-155 gene regulatory effects.

3.5

## Cytotoxicity and biocompatibility
To determine any toxicity from the carriers, an MTT assay was performed with OD-micelles and PEI25k ( A). PEI25k, a widely used cationic gene carrier, is known to be cytotoxic due to its high positive charge. Increasing amounts of OD-micelles and PEI25k were incubated with L2 cells for 24 h, and cell viability was measured with the MTT assay. The results show that the OD-micelles were less toxic to cells than PEI25k. As shown in A, the OD-micelles were more toxic to the cells than OD alone, possibly due to the cholesterol moiety, a high concentration of which can interact negatively with the cellular membrane. However, in the animal experiments, the OD-micelles were diluted and did not induce notable toxicity. 
Hemocompatibility was evaluated by incubating the samples with RBCs. Those results show that the OD-micelles and OD-micelle/Cur did not induce any remarkable changes in the RBCs ( B). However, PEI25k induced RBC aggregation, perhaps through charge interactions. Unlike the OD-micelles, PEI25k has a positive charge and interacts with negatively charged RBCs, causing aggregation. Therefore, PEI25k might also bind to negatively charged serum proteins, such as albumin, and induce aggregation, rendering it inappropriate as a carrier for systemic gene delivery. On the contrary, the OD-micelles could be useful for the systemic delivery of curcumin because they do not bind to blood components.
The toxicity of the carriers was also evaluated by IV administration into mice. OD-micelles, OD-micelle/Cur and OD-micelles/PEI25k were injected into the mice through the tail vein. H&E-stained organs from the animals demonstrated no notable change after treatment with OD-micelles or OD-micelle/Cur ( C). However, OD-micelle/PEI25k induced morphological changes in the tissues, particularly the liver. These results demonstrate that the OD-micelles are less cytotoxic than conventional polycationic gene carriers. Their greater safety is also due to the absence of cationic polymers, such as PEI, which disrupt cell membranes and induce oxidative stress. By delivering cholesterol-modified OD, our formulation avoids the toxicity associated with positively charged transfection agents. In other words, OD-micelle/Cur exhibited excellent biocompatibility, which is a favorable therapeutic indication for future development.

3.6

## Therapeutic efficacy of OD-micelle/Cur in the ALI animal model
Given those in vitro results, we evaluated the therapeutic effects of OD-micelle/Cur in a mouse model of ALI. OD-micelles and OD-micelle/Cur were prepared and IV administered to mice via the tail vein. The biodistribution of OD-micelles containing Cy5-OD-chol was investigated using an imaging box. Both groups containing OD-micelle showed clear Cy5 signals in the lungs ( A and B) due to its micelle formation. The mean fluorescence intensities were comparable between OD-micelles and OD-micelle/Cur, with no statistically significant difference ( B). These results indicate that OD-micelles efficiently deliver oligoDNA to inflamed lungs. That incorporation of curcumin does not compromise the lung-targeting/delivery capability of the OD-micelle platform. 
Efficient delivery of OD-micelle/Cur to the lungs by systemic administration is another important aspect of this work. To further support the SR-associated pulmonary delivery mechanism in vivo, mice were pretreated with RAP or excess oligonucleotides to competitively inhibit SR-associated uptake of the oligoDNA corona before an IV administration of Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur, and pulmonary biodistribution was assessed by measuring Cy5 fluorescence signals. As shown in C, the control group showed robust pulmonary accumulation of Cy5-OD-micelle/Cur, whereas oligonucleotide pretreatment reduced the pulmonary fluorescence signal, indicating reduced pulmonary delivery, consistent with an SR-associated receptor-dependent transport mechanism. Importantly, RAP pretreatment also reduced lung-associated fluorescence, but only to a partial extent. Quantification of the lung fluorescence signals ( D) confirmed the qualitative trend presented in C, demonstrating that the in vivo lung accumulation of OD-micelle/Cur was reduced by both competitive oligonucleotide blockade and RAGE inhibition.
These results suggest that oligoDNA possesses an intrinsic affinity for inflamed lung tissue through interactions with some SRs. Competitive pretreatment with excess oligonucleotides reduced cellular uptake and in vivo lung accumulation of Cy5-labeled OD-micelles, supporting an SR-related, receptor-dependent transport mechanism for the oligoDNA corona in inflammatory settings. One potentially relevant SR is RAGE, which is overexpressed in lung macrophages and epithelial cells in the ALI mouse model we used. Previous reports showed that single-stranded DNAs were recognized by RAGE [ ]. Indeed, pre-incubation of cells with RAP inhibited intracellular uptake of the OD-micelles ( ). These results strongly support the involvement of RAGEs in the uptake of OD-micelles in ALI, during which the capillary endothelial layer becomes leaky and increases extravasation of blood components into the alveolar space. OD-micelles with a size around 150 nm might be released into the air space and contact lung macrophages and epithelial cells. RAGEs are also induced in those cells and might contribute to the uptake of OD-micelles into the cells. Other types of receptors, such as TLRs, are also present [ , ]. High-density lipoprotein (HDL) receptors are another candidate for the uptake of OD-micelles because cholesterol-bound nucleic acids can bind to HDL particles. These HDL-sized complexes could then be transported to cells expressing HDL receptors (e.g., SR-B1) or SRs [ , ]. SRs such as RAGEs, TRLs and HDL are induced in lung cells during ALI [ ]. Thus, the inflamed lung microenvironment might facilitate the therapeutic uptake of OD-micelles. In other words, this could be a form of active targeting that does not require specific targeting ligands but instead leverages the natural tendency of immune cells to clear nucleic acid complexes.
The pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 were measured in BAL fluid to evaluate the anti-inflammatory therapeutic effects of the samples. LPS instillation into the lungs induced a surge in inflammatory cytokines in the mouse model. IV administration of OD-micelles or OD-micelle/PEI25k partially attenuated the TNF-α level, compared with LPS treatment ( A), possibly due to antisense inhibition by the miR-155 of the OD-micelles. The OD-micelle/Cur reduced the TNF-α level in BAL fluid more effectively than the other samples. These results indicate that the OD-micelle/Cur had combined therapeutic effects from the antisense miR-155 inhibition and curcumin delivery. Those combined therapeutic effects were confirmed by IL-6 ELISA of BAL fluid ( B). The induction of IL-6 in the LPS-instilled mice was partially inhibited by the OD-micelles and OD-micelle/PEI25k. In addition, scrOD-micelle/Cur decreased the IL-6 level, suggesting that the curcumin delivered by the scrOD-micelles inhibited the secretion of IL-6. However, the most effective decrease of IL-6 was achieved by the OD-micelle/Cur, confirming the combined therapeutic effects of curcumin and the OD-micelles. 
The tissue TNF-α level was evaluated by immunohistochemistry ( A and B). Those results indicated that, among the samples tested, OD-micelle/Cur most effectively reduced TNF-α. These tissue immunohistochemistry results were similar to the ELISA results for the BAL fluid, supporting the presence of synergistic therapeutic effects from our curcumin and OD-micelle delivery system in the ALI mouse model. 
SOCS1, which is a target of miR-155, was downregulated in the ALI mouse model. Because SOCS1 is a critical negative regulator of cytokine signaling known to be directly suppressed by miR-155, the restoration of its expression by the OD-micelles is important for treatment of ALI. The OD-micelles contain an antisense sequence, delivery of which might increase the expression of SOCS1. Immunostaining with the anti-SOCS1 antibody showed that IV OD-micelle administration restored the expression of SOCS1 ( A and B), as did treatment with OD-micelle/PEI25k or OD-micelle/Cur. The OD moiety of the OD-micelles contains a 2′-O-methyl modification that allows them to avoid the attack of DNases in the bloodstream and reach the alveolar space by extravasation. As a result, the OD-micelles could be taken up by alveolar macrophages or lung epithelial cells, reducing the effects of miR-155. Interestingly, the scrOD-micelle/Cur also restored SOCS1 expression, even though the scrOD might not be able to inhibit miR-155. It was previously reported that delivering curcumin into inflamed lungs increased SOCS1 expression [ ]. Notably, although the scrOD-micelle/Cur group also showed a slight SOCS1 increase, compared with the untreated ALI group, due to the protective effect of curcumin, the OD-micelle/Cur group showed greater SOCS1 expression, highlighting the synergistic therapeutic effects of miR-155 silencing and curcumin. 
Finally, lung histopathology was conducted to assess structural damage and protection by group. These results showed the typical features of ALI, including extensive pulmonary edema with thickened alveolar walls and perivascular cuffs, capillary congestion, and extensive alveolar hemorrhage in the LPS-only group ( ). In contrast, the lungs of mice treated with OD-micelle/Cur showed marked protection, with only minor hemorrhaging and minimal inflammatory cell infiltration, indicating that edema and leukocyte extravasation were significantly prevented by the treatment. The treated lungs also exhibited significantly lower neutrophil accumulation and hemorrhaging, suggesting successful suppression of the inflammatory response in the tissue. These results, consistent with the biochemical and IHC data, demonstrate that our OD-micelle/Cur nanomedicine effectively mitigated tissue damage in the ALI mouse model. 

4

## Conclusion
In summary, we developed an intravenously administrable oligoDNA-nanomicelle platform that enables SR-related pulmonary-targeted co-delivery of antisense oligoDNA (anti-miR-155) and curcumin for the treatment of ALI. Cholesterol-conjugated oligoDNA readily self-assembled with curcumin to form stable micellar structures, eliminating the need for conventional carriers. Mechanistic studies support receptor-dependent pulmonary delivery, and competitive oligonucleotide pretreatment reduced the cellular uptake and lung accumulation of Cy5-labeled OD-micelles in inflammatory conditions. Importantly, the OD-micelle/Cur exhibited enhanced hemocompatibility, as evidenced by reduced hematocrit, while maintaining cell delivery efficiency comparable to the PEI25k-based benchmark. Therapeutically, the OD-micelle/Cur attenuated inflammatory responses both in vitro and in vivo, consistent with the combined action of miR-155 inhibition (including SOCS1 restoration) and curcumin-mediated anti-inflammatory activity, and suggesting RAGE signaling as an additional therapeutic axis. Collectively, the OD-micelles are a mechanistically supported lung-targeting oligonucleotide nanoplatform with multimodal anti-inflammatory potential for the treatment of ALI.

## Declaration of competing interests
The authors declare that there is no conflicts of interest.

 Appendix

## Supplementary materials

Image, application 1

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Individual Basic Science & Engineering Research Program (NRF-2022R1A2B5B01001920 and RS-2026-25473739) through the National Research Foundation, funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT in Korea.
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ajps.2026.101169.