pmcJ Adv ResJ Adv Res2546jare101546952Journal of Advanced Research2090-12322090-1224ElsevierPMC13131523PMC13131523.113131523131315234075934810.1016/j.jare.2025.07.057S2090-1232(25)00587-91Basic and Biological ScienceElevated lactate production exacerbates PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis by stabilizing TGF-β1
LiuZhihao LiuWeiweijielietu@163.com WeiHuaiqing PingYiping YuZhenjie DongZheng RenJiayu ZhangShuping LiuSijin aSchool of Public Health, Shandong First Medical University and Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong 250117, ChinabMedical Science and Technology Innovation Center, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan 250117, ChinacDepartment of Hematology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, Shandong 250021, ChinadInnovative Institute of Chinese Medicine and Pharmacy, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan 250355, ChinaeState Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China⁎Corresponding author at: Science and Technology Innovation Center, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, China. weijielietu@163.com52026058202583512772299314183202528720252972025050820250105202609052026© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
Our findings revealed that macrophages exhibited heightened lactate production during PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Elevated intracellular lactate levels in macrophages inhibited expression of the ubiquitin ligase CHIP (encoded by Stub1), thereby preventing the degradation of TGF-β1. Mechanistically, intracellular lactate accumulation in macrophages induced H3K18 lactylation and promoted the enrichment of H3K18la at the Stub1 promoter. Consequently, TGF-β1 secretion from macrophages was enhanced, ultimately aggravating the fibrotic symptoms. Moreover, inhibition of lactate production significantly alleviated the pulmonary fibrosis phenotype in PM2.5-exposed mice.
 

## Highlights
•Exposure to PM2.5 results in increased lactate production in pulmonary macrophages relative to other cell types.
•PM2.5-induced intracellular lactate accumulation impairs TGF-β1 degradation and promotes TGF-β1 secretion by macrophages.
•PM2.5 exposure induces H3K18 lactylation and suppresses CHIP (Stub1) expression.

## Introduction
Lactate, a glycolysis byproduct, has been implicated in the fibrotic process, while transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-β1) plays a central role in promoting fibrosis. Air pollution, particularly fine particulate matter (PM2.5), represents a significant environmental risk factor for the development of pulmonary fibrosis. However, the role of lactate and the underlying mechanisms by which it acts in PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis remain poorly understood.

## Objectives
This study aimed to identify the cell types contributing to lactate accumulation in lung tissue during PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis and elucidate the mechanism by which lactate regulates TGF-β1.

## Methods
Seven types of lung cells from PM2.5-exposed mice were isolated using fluorescence-activated cell sorting to determine their lactate production. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting were performed to assess the impact of lactate on TGF-β1 stability. The effect of histone lactylation on Stub1 gene expression was investigated by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.

## Results
Macrophages exhibited elevated lactate production during PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Elevated intracellular lactate levels in macrophages suppressed the expression of carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP, encoded by Stub1) via the enrichment of lactylated H3K18 at the Stub1 promoter locus. Consequently, reduced CHIP expression impeded TGF-β1 degradation, promoted enhanced TGF-β1 secretion by macrophages, and exacerbated pulmonary fibrosis symptoms. Moreover, the inhibition of lactate production significantly alleviated the pulmonary fibrosis phenotype in PM2.5-exposed mice.

## Conclusion
Elevated lactate production in macrophages induced by PM2.5 inhibits the ubiquitination and degradation of TGF-β1 through the suppression of CHIP expression, thereby enhancing TGF-β1 secretion and exacerbating pulmonary fibrosis.

## Keywords
PM2.5Pulmonary fibrosisLactateTGF-β1Lactylationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Pulmonary fibrosis is a progressive interstitial lung disease characterized by abnormally activated fibroblasts and excessive, pathologic deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) protein which distort lung architecture and impair gas exchange [ , ]. The most common form of pulmonary fibrosis is idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), with high mortality and limited treatment options [ ]. The pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis involves a complex interplay of predisposing factors. Among these, environmental exposures are considered a vital risk factor [ ]. Fine particulate matter (PM2.5; aerodynamic diameter ≤2.5 μm) persists as a critical global health challenge. Owing to its small size, PM2.5 demonstrates enhanced pulmonary deposition efficiency and penetrates deeply into the respiratory system, depositing in the terminal bronchioles and alveoli [ ]. Epidemiological evidence has established well-characterized associations of PM2.5 with progressive respiratory pathologies, including IPF and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) [ , , ].
The progression of pulmonary fibrosis involves injury, inflammation, and dysregulated tissue repair [ , ]. Initial damage from autoimmune/allergic reactions, environmental particles, infections, or mechanical stress disrupts normal lung tissue architecture, priming the lung for subsequent inflammatory and fibrotic responses. PM2.5 exposure is thought to drive pulmonary fibrosis pathogenesis primarily via alveolar epithelial barrier damage. Repeated stimulation by airborne particles disrupts pulmonary oxidative stress homeostasis, triggering or enhancing inflammatory pathways that exacerbate lung injury [ ]. Recent studies highlight that PM2.5 exposure induces cellular senescence in alveolar type II epithelial cells and basal cells via modulation of cGAS [ ] and p53 pathways [ ], thereby impairing the alveolar epithelial barrier and contributing to the progression of fibrosis. Besides, metabolic dysregulation is a hallmark of lung tissue in pulmonary fibrosis patients, characterized by impaired mitochondrial function and increased glycolysis [ , , ]. As the end product of glycolysis, lactate levels were found to be abnormally elevated in both the serum and lung tissues of pulmonary fibrosis patients [ , ], as well as in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of bleomycin (BLM)-treated mice [ ]. Yan P et al. found that Chaperonin containing TCP1 subunit 6A (CCT6A) inhibits lactate production by promoting the ubiquitination and degradation of hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha (HIF-1α), thereby reducing BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis [ ]. Increased lactate triggered by PM2.5 exposure was reported to enhance the expression of profibrotic genes in macrophages [ , ]. Previous studies have predominantly focused on the direct toxicity of PM2.5 in pulmonary fibrosis pathogenesis. However, whether PM2.5 exposure influences pulmonary fibrosis progression by modulating lactate metabolism remains poorly understood. Given the cellular heterogeneity of lung tissue, the dynamic changes in lactate metabolic patterns across different cell types following PM2.5 exposure have not been elucidated.
Recently, lactate has been demonstrated to have a pivotal regulatory position in both energy metabolism and signal transduction processes [ ]. Lactate also regulates gene expression or protein function through lactylation, a recently identified post-translational modification [ , , ]. Hypoxia-driven lactate production enhances the fibrogenic potential of IPF mesenchymal progenitor cells by activating the lactate receptor GPR81 [ ]. In the BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis mouse model, myofibroblast-derived lactate promotes macrophage profibrotic activity via inducing histone lactylation at the pro-fibrotic gene promoters [ ]. In nitrite-related IPF, high lactate levels augment global lactylation in fibroblasts, promoting their transition into myofibroblasts [ ]. Although studies have explored the relationship between histone lactylation and pulmonary fibrosis, the molecular mechanisms by which lactylation participates in PM2.5-exposed fibrosis remain unclear. TGF-β1, the principal driver of fibrosis [ ], is initially synthesized as precursor monomeric polypeptides [ ]. Extracellular activation of TGF-β1 is triggered by diverse stimuli, including acidic microenvironments, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and integrin-mediated cleavage [ ]. Intracellular TGF-β1 homeostasis is maintained by ubiquitination-mediated degradation, a process orchestrated by the E3 ligase CHIP (carboxy terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein, encoded by Stub1) [ ]. One in vitro study showed that lactic acid (not lactate) modulates myofibroblast differentiation through the activation the TGF-β1 in a pH-dependent manner [ ]. However, whether PM2.5 exposure can regulate the stability of TGF-β1 proteins via lactate/lactylation remains undefined.
In this study, we demonstrated that pulmonary lactate levels in mice were significantly elevated following PM2.5 exposure. Through fluorescence-activated cell sorting of distinct lung cell populations, we observed that lactate levels in macrophages were markedly higher than those in other cell types. Inhibition of lactate production significantly attenuated the fibrotic phenotype in PM2.5-exposed mice. Mechanistically, elevated intracellular lactate levels in macrophages suppressed the expression of the ubiquitin ligase CHIP by promoting lactylation of H3K18 at the Stub1 promoter region. Consequently, reduced CHIP expression impaired TGF-β1 degradation, promoting TGF-β1 secretion by macrophages and exacerbating pulmonary fibrosis. Our findings elucidate a previously unrecognized role of lactate in PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis and provide potential therapeutic targets for  the management of this condition.

## Methods

## Human sample collection
Thirteen adult male underground gold miners from a single mining site in Shandong Province were consecutively enrolled from the Occupational Diseases Hospital of Shandong First Medical University. All participants met diagnostic criteria for Stage I pneumoconiosis (confirmed by standardized occupational disease screening protocols) and were treatment-naïve prior to biological sample collection (designated as OP group). Age-matched healthy controls (n = 10) comprising university staff members without occupational dust exposure history underwent identical sampling procedures (designated as Healthy group). Comprehensive clinical characterization including high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest imaging and standardized pulmonary function tests was completed for all pneumoconiosis cases prior to enrollment.
Exclusion criteria comprised recent antimicrobial exposure (within 4 weeks prior to sampling), acute infectious comorbidities, and physical/psychological limitations affecting protocol compliance.
Peripheral blood samples were collected under fasting conditions between 08:00 and 09:00 h using standardized venipuncture protocols. Serum aliquots were immediately processed through centrifugation at 3,000g for 10 min and stored at −80 °C until analysis. This observational cross-sectional study was conducted in accordance with principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and received ethical approval from the Institutional Review Board of Shandong First Medical University (No. R202306270137). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to study initiation.

## Collection and preparation of particle matter
Airborne PM2.5 samples were collected in Beijing, China, utilizing a DL-6100 medium-flow PM2.5 sampler (Dongliweiye Environmental Protection Equipment Co., Ltd., China). The PM2.5 particles collected on polytetrafluoroethylene filter membranes were subsequently eluted with ultrapure water through ultrasonic extraction and subsequently freeze-dried.
For pulmonary fibrosis modelling, processed PM2.5 was subjected to acid digestion in 1 M hydrochloric acid (110 °C, 1 h) using Teflon-lined digestion vessels, followed by three centrifugal washes with sterile water, and terminal sterilization through dry-heat treatment (110 °C, 12 h) [ ].
The elemental composition of PM2.5 was measured by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) following the Scientific Compass (China). The size and morphology of PM2.5 particles were analysed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, 120 kV, HT7800, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) and scanning electron microscope (SEM, Regulus8100, Tokyo, Japan). The hydrodynamic size and zeta potential of PM2.5 were measured using dynamic light scattering (DLS, Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK). Detailed characterization results are shown in .

## Animal model
All animal care and protocols were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee at the Shandong First Medical University (Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences) College of Laboratory Animals (Provincial Laboratory Animal Center). Specific pathogen-free (SPF) grade 8-week-old male BALB/c mice were purchased from the Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co. Ltd (Beijing, China) and were acclimatized for at least 2 weeks in the animal facility before initiating experiments. Mice were acclimatized under controlled environmental conditions featuring 12/12 h light/dark cycles with precision temperature regulation (23.5 ± 0.5 °C) and humidity control (50 ± 5 %). During this period, animals were housed in HEPA-filtered individually ventilated cages containing autoclaved corncob bedding and environmental enrichment devices, with ad libitum access to standard chow and water through automated delivery systems. Daily health monitoring protocols assessed body weight dynamics, fur integrity, and behavioural indicators to ensure pre-experimental homeostasis.
Mice were randomly divided into four groups (n = 7 per group). Mice were anesthetized and given saline (Ctrl), 2.5 U/kg body weight BLM and 200  mg/kg body weight PM2.5 [ ] by intratracheal instillation, respectively; PM + 2-DG group, mice were anesthetized and given PM2.5 (200 mg/kg) by intratracheal instillation and daily intraperitoneal 2-DG (500 mg/kg) injections were conducted from day 7 to day 14. On day 21, mice were euthanized followed by collection of blood, lung tissue, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF).

## Collection of BALF
The trachea and thoracic cavity of mice were exposed, a small opening was made in the trachea, a blunt needle was inserted into the trachea, and 0.8 mL of PBS buffer was drawn into a syringe. The buffer was slowly injected into the airway, followed by gentle repeated rinsing, and the fluid was collected in an Eppendorf tube.

## Materials and antibodies
The information on the primary antibodies used in this work is as follows: We obtained anti-TGF-β1 (cat#3711S), anti-HIF-2α (cat#7096), Ubiquitin (P4D1) (cat#3936), and Goat Anti-Mouse IgG, Light-Chain Specific Antibody (cat#91196S) from Cell Signaling Technology Inc (USA). CD24-BV605 (cat#101827), CD31-APC (cat#102509), CD45-PerCP (cat#103129), CD170-PE (cat#155505), CD64-APC (cat#139306), CD103-BV421 (cat# 121422), Ly6G-BV711(cat#127643), MHC class II-PE-Cy7 (#107629), Ly6C-BV510 (cat# 128033), 7-ADD (cat#420403) were obtained from Biolegend (USA). CD326-APC-ef780 (cat# 47-5791-80), T1a/Pdpn-Alexa Fluor 488 (cat#53-9003-80) were obtained from Invitrogen (USA). CD11b-FITC (cat# 553310) was obtained from BD BIOSCIENCE (USA). Anti-collagen III (cat#22734-1-AP), anti-collagen I (cat#14695-1-AP), anti-α-SMA (cat# 14395-1-AP), anti-β-actin (cat#20536-1-AP), anti-LDHA (cat#19987-1-AP), anti-CTHRC1 (cat#16534-1-AP), HRP-conjugated Mouse anti-Rabbit IgG Light Chain (cat#SA00001-7L), and HRP-conjugated Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG(H + L) (cat#SA00001-2), HRP-conjugated Goat Anti-Mouse IgG(H + L) (cat#SA00001-1) were obtained from Proteintech (USA). We obtained Anti-CHIP (cat#ab228742) from Abcam (USA). We obtained anti-HIF-1α (cat#A22041) from ABclonal (China). Other reagents used in this work include lactate (cat#BD01238833, Bidepharm, China); C646 (cat# HY-13823) Bleomycin (cat#HY-17565A), LDHA-IN-3 (cat# HY-139319), 2-DG (cat#HY-13966), Mouse IL-4 (cat#HY-P7080), and Human IL-4 (cat# HY-P70445) (MCE, USA); DNase I (cat#18047019), Collagenase IV (cat#17104019), Compensation microspheres (cat# 01-3333-41) and RBC lysis buffer (cat#00-4333-57) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA); 100 nm SiO2, 500 nm SiO2 (cat#ZKKY-14-0050), 1 μm SiO2 and 2 μm SiO2 (Zhongkekeyou, China). We obtained anti-H3K18la (cat#PTM-1427RM), anti-H4H5la (cat#PTM-1407RM), anti-H4K8la (cat#PTM-1415RM), anti- H4K12la (cat# PTM-1411RM), anti-H4K16la (cat# PTM-1417RM), anti-H2AK11la (cat# PTM-1422RM), anti-H2BK16la (cat# PTM-1424RM) from PTM BIO (PTM BIO, China).

## Cell culture
The following cell lines were utilized in this study: RAW 264.7 (Procell, China), MRC-5 (Procell, China), L929 (Procell, China), THP-1 (Procell, China), and BEAS-2B (ATCC, USA). RAW264.7 and BEAS-2B cells were maintained in DMEM (Gibco, USA) medium, supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1 % penicillin–streptomycin solution (P/S) (Corning, USA). MRC-5 and L929 cells were maintained in MEM (Gibco, USA), supplemented with 1 % NEAA (Gibco, USA),10 % FBS and 1 % P/S. THP-1 cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 (Gibco, USA), supplemented with 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol (Gibco, USA), 10 % FBS, and 1 % P/S.

## Tissue preparation and fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS)
The lung was dissected into fragments measuring 1–2 mm2 and transferred to RPMI-1640 solution containing 5 % FBS (20 μg/mL DNase I, 0.1 mg/mL protease inhibitor, 2 mg/mL collagenase IV). Subsequently, the tissue was incubated in a 37 °C water bath for 60 min, with gentle agitation every 5–10 min. Upon complete digestion of the lung tissue, the reaction was halted by an ice bath, after which the dispersed cells were gently resuspended, filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer, and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min. Post-centrifugation, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in 500 μL of red blood cell lysis buffer, followed by immediate centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant was again removed, and the pellet was washed with PBS solution containing 5 % FBS by resuspension and subsequent centrifugation (repeated 1–2 times). Finally, the cell suspension was filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer, and the cells were counted prior to proceeding to the next step.
The primary cell populations in lung tissue were sorted using the loss-of-cell apparatus, including alveolar macrophages, interstitial macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils, endothelial cells, alveolar type I epithelial cells, alveolar type II epithelial cells, and fibroblasts. The sorting strategies for alveolar type I (ATI) cells, alveolar type II (ATII) cells, and endothelial cells: As shown in B, In R3 (CD45- 7-AAD-), endothelial cells (R4) were gated as CD31+ CD326-, while alveolar epithelial cells (R5) were identified as CD31- CD326+. Within R5, R6 was defined as CD24- cells. Subsequently, ATII cells (R7) was gated as MHCII+ Papn-, and ATI cells (R8) was identified as MHCII- Papn+ [ , ].
The sorting strategies for alveolar macrophages (AMs), interstitial macrophages (IMs), monocytes, and neutrophils: CD45+ cells were gated from R2 (single cells), and further subpopulations were analysed. Alveolar macrophages (R4) were identified as CD170+ CD11b-. Within R5, R6, and R7 were defined based on CD103 expression. Specifically, dendritic cells (DCs) were identified as CD103+ CD11b-. Neutrophils (R8) were gated as CD11b+ Ly6G+ cells from R7. Eosinophils (R9) were identified as CD170+ cells within R8. CD170- cells were further gated by CD11b+ (R10). Monocytes (R11) were defined as MHC II- cells within R10, while intermediate monocytes (R12) were identified as MHC II+ cells. Within R12, interstitial macrophages were gated as CD64+ CD24-, and CD11b+positive DCs were identified as CD64- CD24+. Finally, within R11, LY6C- cells were classified as patrolling monocytes, and LY6C+ cells were classified as intermediate monocytes [ , ]( C).
Cell surface staining was conducted using a panel of fluorophore-conjugated antibodies at 4 °C for 20 min in the dark. Detailed information regarding the antibodies utilized for flow cytometry is provided in the Materials and Antibodies. Following staining, cells were sorted with a CytoFLEX SRT Benchtop Cell Sorter (Beckman Coulter, USA). Post-sorting, the isolated lung cells were transferred to a 15 mL conical tube and subjected to centrifugation at 1,000 rpm for 5 min. After centrifugation, the cell pellet was resuspended in 300 μL of PBS for subsequent cell counting ( A).

## Lactate measurement
Lactate contents were measured using CheKine™ Micro Lactate Assay Kit (Abbkine, China). The lactate contents in lung tissue were normalized to tissue wet weight. The lactate concentrations of cells were normalized to cell count.

## Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Masson staining of lung tissue slices
The fresh lung tissues were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde. H&E staining and Masson staining were performed by Servicebio Technology Co., Ltd. (China). Images were captured under a light microscope with SLIDEVIEW VS200 (Olympus, Japan).

## TGF-β1 detection
TGF-β1 concentration in cell culture medium and mice BALF were detected using the ELISA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (ABclonal, China).

## RNA extraction and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reactions (qPCR)
Total RNAs were isolated from tissue specimens and cultured cells using TRIzol™ Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), and quantified via NanoDrop ND-2000 spectrophotometry (A260/A280 ratio 1.8–2.0). cDNA was synthesized using reverse transcription kit (Forever Star Biotech, China). qPCR assays were performed using the GoTaq qPCR Master Mix (Promega, USA) on a CFXconnect qPCR instrument (Bio-Rad, USA), as previously reported [ ]. β-ACTIN was used as a loading control for normalization. Primers used for reverse qPCR were as follows: murine,
β-Actin (F: TATGCTCTCCCTCACGCCATCC, R: GTCACGCACGATTTCCCTCTCAG), Tgf-β1 (F: GGACCGCAACAACGCCATC, R: CACTGCTTCCCGAATGTCTGAC), Ldha (F: CGGCTGGGTCCTGGGAGAAC, R: ACCTCCTTCCACTGCTCCTTGTC), Stub1 (F: GATGATATTCCTAGTGCCCTTCGC, R: AATGAGCCTGGTGAGATATGAATGC); human, β-ACTIN (F: CTGGCACCACACCTTCTACAATG, R: TCAAACATGATCTGGGTCATCTTCTC), TGF-β1 (F: GCAACAATTCCTGGCGATACCTC, R: CCTCCACGGCTCAACCACTG), CHIP (F: TCAGGTGGATGAGAAGAGGAAGAAG, R: TGCGGTCGTAGGTGATGCC),

## siRNA transfections in cultured cells
The siRNA oligonucleotides were synthesized and purchased from GenePharma (China). For in vitro cultured cells, when the confluence reached 70–80 %, siRNA molecules were transfected into cells with Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentration and duration required to achieve optimal silencing were validated by western blotting and qPCR. The siRNA sequences used to target mouse LDHA, 5′-GAACAAGAUUACAGUUGUUdTdT-3′, 5′-AACAACUGUAAUCUUGUUCdTdT-3′, 5′-AGCAAAGACUACUGUGUAAdTdT-3′. CHIP, 5′-AGCUGGAGAUGGAGAGUUAtt-3′, 5′-UAACUCUCCAUCUCCAGCU-3′, P300, 5′- CCAGACCAGAAUUCAAUGCUUdTdT-3′, 5′- AAGCAUUGAAUUCUGGUCUGGdTdT-3′.

## Immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis
Total proteins were extracted from tissues or cells using RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime, China) supplemented with 10 % protease inhibitor cocktail (MCE, USA) and 1 % phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (MCE, USA). Protein concentrations were quantified using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). For immunoprecipitation, TGF-β1 antibody (1:100 dilution, Cell Signaling Technology, USA) and Protein A/G Magnetic Beads were employed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Vazyme, China). The immunoprecipitated proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were probed with primary antibodies, followed by incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. Protein bands were visualized using an ECL kit (Merck Millipore, Germany) on a ChemiDoc XRS + system (Bio-Rad, USA). Detailed information of antibodies used in western blotting was described in Materials and Antibodies.

## Macrophage and fibroblast co-culture system
The co-culture experiments were conducted using a Transwell® system (Corning, USA). MRC-5 or L929 fibroblasts were seeded in 12-well plates, while IL-4-primed macrophages (THP-1/RAW264.7 cells, 10 ng/mL IL-4, 12-hour induction) were serum-starved, PBS-washed twice, and seeded in upper chambers at a 1:2 (macrophage: fibroblast) ratio. The lower and upper transwell sections were separated by a 0.4 µM microporous membrane to prevent close contact between the macrophage and fibroblast. All cultures were maintained in a humidified 5 % CO2 incubator at 37 °C. For pharmacological interventions, prior to exposure to PM2.5, IL-4 induced THP-1 or RAW264.7 cells were pre-treated with or without LDHA-IN-3, LDHA-targeting siRNA, or Stub1-targeting siRNA.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
The ChIP assay was performed using the ChIP Assay Kit (Beyotime, China) following the manufacturer’s guidelines. Briefly, RAW264.7 cells were cross-linked with 1 % formaldehyde solution for 10  min at room temperature and quenched with 125  mM glycine. DNA fragments ranging from 200 to 500  bp were obtained by ultrasonication. Then, sonicated lysates were incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-H3K18la (1:100, cat# PTM-1427RM, PTM BIO) and normal rabbit IgG (1:250, #2729, Cell Signaling) as a negative control. Besides, 2 % of the starting chromatin was used as input. Purified DNA and 2 % input were quantified by real-time PCR using the CFXconnect qPCR instrument (Bio-Rad, USA). The comparative threshold cycle (Ct) method was used for relative quantification. The ChIP-qPCR primers are listed as promoter-Stub1 (F: TGCAGCAGCTGTTCCACATA, R: TGAGCTACACACCCTGCAAG).

## Statistical analysis
Data were obtained from at least three independent experiments, and results were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). Unpaired Student’s t test was used to compare differences between the two groups. The statistical significances of the differences in multiple groups were assessed by one-way ANOVA, followed by the least significant difference multiple comparison tests. All the statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.5, and statistical significance was accepted at P < 0.05.

## Result

## Lactate concentrations are elevated in PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis
Previous studies have shown that individuals with pulmonary fibrosis exhibit significantly higher lactate levels in lung tissue and BALF compared to healthy controls [ , ]. To investigate whether PM2.5 exposure alters lactate levels, we collected ambient air samples of PM2.5 for subsequent experiments ( ). Given that the lung microenvironment comprises various stromal cells, including fibroblasts, endothelial cells, epithelial cells, phagocytes (e.g., monocytes and macrophages), and dendritic cells [ ], we treated corresponding cell lines with PM2.5, using BLM as a positive control. As shown in A, treatment with either BLM or PM2.5 for 24 h significantly increased both extracellular and intracellular lactate levels. Additionally, we assessed lactate levels and pulmonary fibrosis phenotypes in mice exposed to BLM or PM2.5. Mice in the sham operation group received an equal volume of PBS (Ctrl). Similar to BLM-treated mice, Masson’s Trichrome staining revealed significant collagen deposition in the lungs of PM2.5-exposed mice, compared to the Ctrl group ( B). Furthermore, protein levels of Collagen-I, Collagen-III, and α-SMA were markedly elevated in the lungs of PM2.5-exposed mice ( C). Both BLM and PM2.5 treatments led to a dramatic increase in lactate levels in BALF and serum compared to the Ctrl group ( D). In addition, serum lactate concentrations were measured in occupational pneumoconiosis (OP) patients, who had chronic exposure to particulate matter and were diagnosed with pulmonary fibrosis. Serum lactate levels in these patients were 30 % higher than those in healthy controls ( E). These data suggest that pulmonary fibrosis induced by PM2.5 exposure is accompanied by increased lactate levels. 

## Hypoxia induces elevated lactate levels during pulmonary fibrosis process mediated by PM2.5
Next, we monitored dynamic fluctuations in lactate levels during pulmonary fibrosis by quantifying lactate in both lung tissue and BALF from mice at various time points following BLM or PM2.5 exposure. The patterns of lactate variations in lung tissue and BALF of PM2.5-exposed mice were similar in both magnitude and trajectory to those observed in BLM-treated mice. Compared to the Ctrl group, lactate levels in lung tissue from PM2.5-exposed mice peaked at day 5, showing an 87.9 % increase, while BALF lactate levels continued to rise, reaching a 2.6-fold increase by day 21 ( A). These results suggest that lactate accumulation correlates with the pathological progression of pulmonary fibrosis. Induced by obstruction during pulmonary fibrosis [ , ], hypoxia may be the underlying cause of the upsurge in lactate concentrations. Western blotting analysis revealed that, within lung tissue, expression of both HIF-1α and HIF-2α were significantly upregulated just 24 h after exposure to either BLM or PM2.5. Their expression levels continued to rise over time. It is well-established that high levels of HIF-1α promote a metabolic shift toward glycolysis, while HIF-2α simultaneously suppresses oxidative phosphorylation [ , ]. In light of this, we investigated the expression of lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), responsible for catalysing the conversion of pyruvate to lactate. Concordant with the observed trends in lactate levels, the expression of LDHA was found to be upregulated following exposure to BLM or PM2.5 ( B). These results suggest that, in the context of PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis, the elevation of lactate levels in lung tissue and BALF was caused by tissue hypoxia. 
To gain further insight into the potential contributors to lactate accumulation in lung tissue during PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis, we developed cell sorting templates based on well-established literature [ , , ] and isolated seven cell types, namely alveolar macrophages (AM), interstitial macrophages (IM), neutrophils, monocytes, type I alveolar epithelial cells (ATI), type II alveolar epithelial cells (ATII), and endothelial cells, from lung tissue for lactate detection ( ). In the BLM group, lactate levels in inflammatory cells peaked on day 3, then declined to a stable baseline by day 5. In contrast, the response in the PM2.5 group was slower, with lactate levels in macrophages peaking on day 5 before stabilizing by day 7 ( C). The difference in lactate kinetics is likely due to the more acute and robust inflammatory response triggered by BLM compared to PM2.5 exposure [ ]. In endothelial and epithelial cells, intracellular lactate concentrations remained elevated above baseline in the exposed groups starting on day 3 and persisting thereafter ( C). Based on the determined proportions of each cell population within lung tissue (ATI: 8 %, ATII: 16 %, endothelial cells: 30 %, and immune cells fluctuating with AM and IM accounting for the highest proportion at 5 %) [ ], we quantified the absolute lactate content in each cell type. Results showed that, during the early stages of pulmonary fibrosis, macrophages were the primary producers of lactate ( ). As the disease progressed, endothelial cells and ATII cells also began contributing to lactate production ( ). These data indicate that among various cell types in lung tissue, lactate levels in macrophages are significantly elevated at both the early and late stages of PM2.5-induced fibrosis, highlighting macrophages as important contributors to lung lactate accumulation.

## Inhibiting lactate production alleviates the fibrosis phenotypes induced by PM2.5
To investigate the effect of lactate on pulmonary fibrosis, we intraperitoneally injected the glycolysis inhibitor 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) into mice to reduce lactate production and assess its impact on fibrosis development following PM2.5 exposure ( A). Compared to the Ctrl group, exclusive 2-DG treatment led to a 26.13 % reduction in lactate levels in BALF. Notably, administration of 2-DG to PM2.5-exposed mice resulted in a substantial 36.4 % decrease in BALF lactate levels, indicating that 2-DG effectively inhibited PM2.5-induced lactate production ( B). Histological analysis revealed no significant changes in the lung tissue of mice treated with 2-DG alone, but collagen deposition was notably reduced in the PM2.5-treated group supplemented with 2-DG ( C). Consistent with Masson staining, 2-DG treatment significantly lowered the protein expression of Collagen I, Collagen III, and α-SMA in the lungs of PM2.5-exposed mice ( D). TGF-β1 represents a pivotal cytokine intricately engaged in in the initiation and progression of pulmonary fibrosis [ ]. We observed that 2-DG administration in the PM2.5 group downregulated the expression of the TGF-β1 precursor and led to a 13.8 % reduction in mature TGF-β1 levels in BALF, compared to PM2.5 exposure alone ( D and E). These findings suggest that inhibiting lactate production can alleviate PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Intriguingly, this beneficial effect appears to be linked to a reduction in TGF-β1 levels, implying a potential regulatory mechanism where lactate influences the TGF-β1-mediated fibrotic cascade. 

## Lactate promotes macrophages to secrete TGF-β1
During the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis, lung macrophages serve as a crucial source of TGF-β1 [ ]. Given the essential role of TGF-β1 in fibrotic processes and our findings that macrophages are the primary contributors to lactate production ( C), we next investigated whether lactate influences macrophage TGF-β1 secretion. To reduce lactate production, we performed siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous LDHA in the RAW264.7 macrophage cell line. Efficient knockdown of LDHA expression was confirmed by Quantitative PCR (qPCR) and western blotting ( A and B). As expected, LDHA knockdown significantly reduced both intracellular and extracellular lactate levels by 58.78 % and 65.11 %, respectively, compared to control siRNA knockdown (siNC, A). In parallel, TGF-β1 expression was reduced, and its secretion into the culture medium decreased by 36.0 % ( B and C). To simulate the crosstalk between macrophages and fibroblasts in the pulmonary microenvironment, we employed a non-contact co-culture system ( D). In comparison to untreated cells, exposure to PM2.5 led to a 1.15-fold increase in intracellular lactate levels in RAW264.7 cells ( E), and TGF-β1 levels in the culture medium increased by 1.07-fold ( F). However, in LDHA-knockdown macrophages, the effects of PM2.5 exposure were significantly attenuated. Specifically, the increase in intracellular lactate levels was 26.88 % lower, and medium TGF-β1 contents were diminished by 36.02 % ( E and F). As a result, the fibrotic phenotypes in the co-cultured fibroblast cell line L929 were notably alleviated, as shown by reduced levels of Collagen I, Collagen III, and α-SMA proteins, as well as the alveolar fibroblast marker Cthrc1 [ ] ( G). Similar results were observed in co-cultures using human cell lines THP-1 and MRC-5 ( C and D). These findings suggest that lactate plays a pivotal role in modulating TGF-β1 secretion by macrophages. Inhibiting lactate generation within upstream macrophages can effectively mitigate the fibrotic phenotypes manifested by downstream fibroblasts. 

## Lactate increases TGF-β1 stability by inhibiting CHIP
To elucidate the molecular pathways governing the relationship between lactate and TGF-β1 secretion, we directly exposed macrophages to lactate. Lactate exposure significantly increased intracellular lactate concentrations in RAW264.7 cells ( A). qPCR analysis revealed that lactate did not affect the transcriptional expression of Tgf-β1 mRNA over time ( A). However, lactate significantly enhanced the stability of the TGF-β1 precursor ( B). The ubiquitin ligase CHIP (carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein, encoded by Stub1) has been shown to mediate the ubiquitination and degradation of TGF-β1 protein [ ]. We observed that lactate decreased CHIP expression at both the mRNA and protein levels ( C and D). When lactate production was inhibited using an LDHA inhibitor or through LDHA knockdown, we observed a significant upregulation of CHIP expression. In contrast, the introduction of exogenous lactate led to a marked suppression of CHIP expression ( C and D). Moreover, co-immunoprecipitation (CoIP) data demonstrated that lactate treatment significantly reduced the ubiquitination of TGF-β1 in macrophages ( E). Similar results were obtained in THP-1 cells ( B-E). These results reveal a regulatory mechanism wherein lactate, through its impact on CHIP expression, modulates the ubiquitination and degradation of TGF-β1. 

## PM2.5 inhibits CHIP expression by inducing H3K18 lactylation
Next, we investigated whether PM2.5 can suppress CHIP expression. Similar to lactate, PM2.5 exposure led to a notable decrease in CHIP expression in RAW264.7 cells at both the protein and mRNA levels. Inhibition of LDHA effectively prevented this reduction in CHIP expression induced by PM2.5, while supplementation with exogenous lactate further exacerbated the suppressive effect of PM2.5 on CHIP ( A and B). In the non-contact co-culture system, CHIP knockdown in RAW264.7 cells (upper layer) led to increased expression of fibrotic proteins in L929 fibroblasts (lower layer) ( A-C). Lactylation, a recently identified post-translational modification, was initially discovered to regulate gene expression in macrophages through histone lactylation [ ]. To investigate whether PM2.5 regulates Stub1 gene expression by histone lactylation. We measured the lactylation of multiple histone lysine residues in RAW264.7 cells exposed to PM2.5, and identified a significant upregulation of H3K18 lactylation (H3K18la) ( C). Similar to histone methylation and acetylation, H3K18la can alter chromatin accessibility at gene regulatory elements (e.g., promoters and enhancers), thereby orchestrating gene transcription [ , ]. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays manifested a significant enrichment of H3K18la at the promoter of Stub1 in PM2.5-exposed RAW264.7 cells ( D). P300 has been established as a lactylation “writer” in previous studies [ ]. We found that treatment with C646, a selective P300 inhibitor, abrogated PM2.5-induced enrichment of H3K18la at the promoter of Stub1 and alleviated the PM2.5-mediated reduction in CHIP expression ( B, D, and E). Consistent results were observed in P300-knockdown RAW264.7 cells ( D-F). Together, these findings suggest that PM2.5-induced intracellular lactate accumulation enhanced H3K18la and reduced Stub1 gene expression. Mechanistically, this repression is associated with H3K18la enrichment at the Stub1 promoter. 
Furthermore, we validated these findings in the lung tissues of mice exposed to PM2.5. As the duration of BLM or PM2.5 exposure increased in vivo, we observed a significant decline in CHIP protein levels in lung tissues, accompanied by an increase in the TGF-β1 precursor expression ( F). This was further supported by the sustained increase in TGF-β1 levels detected in the BALF of exposed mice ( G). Notably, 2-DG administration significantly inhibited the PM2.5-induced reduction in CHIP protein expression in lung tissue ( H). Collectively, these findings indicate that PM2.5 exposure promotes the enrichment of H3K18la at Stub1 promoter to suppress CHIP expression, leading to elevated TGF-β1 levels by, ultimately culminating in the exacerbation of pulmonary fibrosis.

## Discussion
Air pollution is a global challenge that impacts both developed and developing countries alike [ ]. PM2.5, a key component of air pollution, originates from vehicular emissions, industrial activities, biomass burning, and natural producers such as dust and wildfires [ ]. While high-income nations have made progress in improving air quality over recent decades, urban areas within these countries still struggle with elevated levels of particulate matter, particularly in cities with heavy vehicular traffic and industrial emissions [ ]. The health burden of PM2.5 exposure is both substantial and growing. According to the Global Burden of Disease study, PM2.5 exposure ranks among the leading risk factors for death and disability worldwide [ ], contributing to a broad spectrum of chronic diseases, including respiratory and cardiovascular conditions, and incurring trillions of dollars in social costs [ , , ].
The mechanism underlying PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis involves a cascade of events, including inflammation, oxidative stress, epithelial injury, fibroblast activation, and ECM deposition [ ]. Accumulating evidence demonstrates that, similar to cancer, pulmonary fibrosis is accompanied by elevated glycolysis and sustained activation of HIF-1α, Akt2, and PDK1 [ , ]. Studies have shown that lactate levels in the lung tissue of IPF patients are significantly elevated, reaching up to 5 mM [ , ]. Similarly, in pneumoconiosis patients whom we tested, serum lactate levels were also markedly increased. Mice exposed to PM2.5 and developing pulmonary fibrosis exhibited significant increases in lactate levels both in lung tissue and BALF. The substantial burden of PM2.5 deposited in the alveoli disrupts alveolar-capillary integrity and microvascular perfusion [ , ]. Concurrently, particle-elicited inflammation increases oxygen consumption by infiltrating immune cells and activated parenchymal cells [ , , ]. These cascading reactions culminate in a hypoxic pulmonary microenvironment, which activates the HIF signaling pathway [ ]. As a master transcriptional regulator of cellular adaptation to low oxygen [ ], HIF-1α upregulates key glycolytic enzymes (e.g., HK, PFK, LDHA) and glucose transporters (e.g., GLUT1) [ ], driving a metabolic shift toward anaerobic glycolysis and resultant lactate accumulation. Not merely a metabolic byproduct, lactate actively modulates diverse biological processes [ ]. During the early stages of PM2.5 exposure, elevated lactate levels may represent a protective host mechanism. On one hand, lactate fuels inflammatory cells, enhancing their phagocytic, proliferative, and migratory capacities to facilitate the clearance of invading particulate matter. On the other hand, lactate exerts immunomodulatory effects to prevent excessive immune responses [ , ], balancing host defense with tissue homeostasis. TGF-β is a central regulator of fibrosis. During pulmonary fibrosis, M2 macrophages serve as a critical source of TGF-β1 [ ]. Lactate has been shown to promote M2 macrophage polarization [ , ]. PM2.5-induced lactate accumulation may increase M2 macrophage numbers in the pulmonary microenvironment. Besides, our findings demonstrated that lactate inhibits TGF-β1 degradation. Collectively, these mechanisms culminate in sustained production of TGF-β and other mediators by lactate-educated M2 macrophages, thereby creating a powerful pro-fibrotic milieu [ , , ]. This milieu activates resident fibroblasts and recruits circulating fibrocytes, leading to their differentiation into ECM-producing myofibroblasts [ , , ].
In this study, we found that PM2.5-mediated elevation of lactate leads to increased H3K18la, which in turn suppresses the expression of the CHIP gene. Histone lactylation is dynamically regulated by enzymes that catalyze its addition (“writers”) and removal (“erasers”) [ ]. While the full spectrum of lactylation-specific enzymes remains incompletely characterized, emerging evidence suggests that lysine acyltransferases (KATs, including GNAT, MYST, and P300/CBP family) and deacylases (KDACs, including Zn2+-dependent HDACs and NAD+-dependent SIRTs) may exhibit preferential activity toward distinct histone residues. P300 was the first reported writer of histone lactylation, which participates in macrophage polarization by promoting H3K18la [ ]. Since then, a growing body of studies have demonstrated that P300-mediated H3K18la is involved in a variety of physiological and pathological processes. Histone modification is contingent upon the “accessibility” of histone tails to modifying enzymes. Luger et al. observed that the electron density of the N-terminal region of H3 is weak in most cases, a feature indicates that this structural segment is relatively more susceptible to interactions with other molecules [ ]. Henry RA et al. compared the differences in specificity and selectivity between CBP- and p300-mediated acetylation of histone H3 and H3/H4. When acetyl-CoA is in excess, p300 exhibits a specificity as follows: H3K18 ≈ H3K14 ≈ H3K23 > H4K12 > H4K8 > H4K5 > H4K16 > H3K9. The specificity of p300 is up to 101⁰-fold higher than that of CBP [ ]. Collectively, these lines of evidence suggest that p300 has a higher preference for histone H3, particularly H3K18, compared to other histone lysine residues. Second, competitive regulation at other histone lysine residues may contribute to the observed selectivity. Lysine residues on histones are often subject to crosstalk between multiple post-translational modifications (e.g., acetylation, methylation, or succinylation), as different modifications may target the same lysine. For other lactylation sites such as H4K12, it is plausible that constitutive or lactate-unaffected modifications (e.g., acetylation) might occupy these residues, precluding lactylation. Moreover, protein lactylation occurs via two recognized mechanisms: the canonical lactyl-CoA-dependent pathway and the more recently discovered lactyl-CoA-independent pathway [ ], with the former being the primary mode for histone lactylation to date. While PM2.5 globally elevates intracellular lactate, local lactate and lactyl-CoA concentrations at chromatin loci may vary. H3K18-containing loci might be localized in regions with higher lactyl-CoA accumulation, thereby providing sufficient substrate drive site-specific lactylation.
Beyond this transcriptional regulation, lactate may affect CHIP through addition pathways. ROS plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis and progression of pulmonary fibrosis [ , , ]. Lactate can promote pulmonary fibrosis by enhancing mitochondrial fission-derived ROS production via the ERK/DRP-1 signaling pathway [ ]. Notably, a recent study demonstrated that ROS primarily modulates the subcellular localization of CHIP (specifically, its recruitment to ROS-stressed peroxisomes) rather than regulating its expression. This localization is critical for CHIP to promote ubiquitin-dependent pexophagy and maintaining peroxisomal quality control [ ]. Additionally, pulmonary fibrosis induces hypoxia in lung tissues, which upregulates the expression of HIF-1α and LDHA, thereby promoting lactate accumulation [ , ]. Liliana M. Sanmarco et al. found that lactate limits CNS autoimmunity by stabilizing HIF-1α in dendritic cells [ ]. More recently, acute hypoxia was found to induce the acetylation of CHIP at lysine-287, promoting its translocation into the nucleus and selectively suppressing HIF-2 activity [ ]. Given that lactate can be metabolized to pyruvate, which enters mitochondria to generate acetyl-CoA, lactate may affect CHIP through the acetyl-CoA pathway. These findings indicate that lactate might impede TGF-β1 degradation by altering the subcellular localization of CHIP.
In our study, administration of 2-DG to PM2.5-exposed mice, aimed at reducing lactate production, led to a marked alleviation of the pulmonary fibrosis phenotype. To date, 2-DG has demonstrated antifibrotic efficacy in preclinical models of cancer [ , ]. However, its clinical application remains limited by systemic toxicity and off-target effects on normal glycolytic pathways [ , , ]. Similarly, LDHA inhibitors such as NCI-737 or stiripentol derivatives are undergoing early-phase trials for cancers but face challenges in specificity and bioavailability for chronic pulmonary conditions [ , ]. Given the indispensable role of glycolysis as a cornerstone of cellular energy metabolism, the translational development of these therapeutic agents mandates precision-targeted delivery systems (e.g., ligand-directed nanoparticles or pH-responsive prodrugs) and spatiotemporally controlled release mechanisms (e.g., enzyme-triggered activation in fibrotic microenvironments). These strategies are critical to mitigate off-target perturbations of glycolytic homeostasis in healthy tissues. Concurrently, a rigorous framework of longitudinal safety surveillance (e.g., multi-omics profiling of metabolic adaptations, immunophenotyping of off-target effects, and real-world evidence generation through adaptive clinical trial designs) is essential to delineate the risk–benefit landscape for chronic administration.
TGF-β1 is regarded as one of the pivotal molecules in triggering the activation of the fibrotic process [ , ]. It has been reported that E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP is capable of mediating the ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of TGF-β1 [ ]. In recent years, lactate has emerged as not only a key energy substrate and signaling molecule, but also a regulator of protein stability, influencing proteins like APOC2 [ ], NDRG3 [ ], transcription factor EB (TFEB) [ ], discoidin, CUB and LCCL Domain-Containing protein 1(DCBLD1) [ ], through direct binding or lactylation. Our findings demonstrate that lactate does not affect TGF-β1 transcription; however, it enhances TGF-β1 stability. Further mechanistic studies revealed that an increase in intracellular lactate can inhibit the expression of CHIP in macrophages by enriching lactylated H3K18 at the Stub1 promoter. The direct evidence for lactylation as the mediator of these effects warrants further in-depth investigations. For example, H3K18la enrichment at the promoter may interfere with the binding of transcription factors essential for CHIP expression, thereby blocking transcriptional activation. H3K18la may alter histone acetylation or other PTMs, leading to conformational changes in chromatin that render the gene locus transcriptionally repressive.
TGF-β1 not only facilitates fibrosis but also exerts a substantial influence on tumor progression and development [ ]. It is involved in processes such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition, activation of cancer-associated fibroblasts, and immunosuppression [ ]. Moreover, independent clinical studies have highlighted that CHIP expression is decreased in a variety of cancers [ , , ]. Low CHIP expression is associated with decreased overall survival and is correlated with tumor node metastasis in cancers such as non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), breast cancer, renal cell cancer, oral cancer, gastric cancer, head and neck cancer, and pancreatic cancer [ ]. CHIP deficiency resulted in elevated levels of TGF-β1 and Treg cells, thereby accelerating tumor progression. As is well known, the Warburg effect leads to an increase in lactate levels within the tumor microenvironment [ ]. Our findings provide an alternative explanation for the role of lactate in tumorigenesis from the perspective of the lactate-CHIP-TGF-β1 axis.

## Conclusion
In this study, we demonstrated a significant increase in lactate levels in lung tissues and BALF from PM2.5-exposed mice, with lactate levels in macrophages significantly higher than those in other cell types. The elevated lactate was attributed to the hypoxic environment induced by PM2.5, as indicated by increased expression of HIF-1α, HIF-2α, and LDHA. Inhibition of lactate production using 2-DG effectively alleviated PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis phenotypes. Mechanistically, intracellular lactate accumulation in macrophages suppressed the expression of the ubiquitin ligase CHIP by promoting lactylation of H3K18 at the Stub1 promoter region. Reduced CHIP impaired the ubiquitination and degradation of TGF-β1 precursor, thereby enhancing TGF-β1 secretion from macrophages and exacerbating pulmonary fibrosis. Collectively, our findings elucidate a previously unrecognized role of lactate-mediated regulation in PM2.5-induced pulmonary fibrosis and provide potential therapeutic targets and novel insights for preventing or treating PM2.5-related lung diseases.

## Ethical statement for human participants
This study was designed as a cross-sectional study, and its protocols were approved by the Ethics Review Committee of Shandong First Medical University (approval number: R202306270137). All participants signed informed consent before the collection of any samples.

## Ethical statement on animal experimentation
All animal care and protocols were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee at the Shandong First Medical University (Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences) College of Laboratory Animals (Provincial Laboratory Animal Center, approval number: LS2024069).

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zhihao Liu: Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft. Wei Liu: Project administration, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Huaiqing Wei: Investigation, Data curation. Yiping Ping: Data curation. Zhenjie Yu: Data curation. Zheng Dong: Data curation. Jiayu Ren: Data curation. Shuping Zhang: Data curation, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. Sijin Liu: Conceptualization, Data curation, Project administration, Writing – review & editing.

## Funding
This study is financially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 22076104) and the “Taishan Scholars” Program for Young Expert of Shandong Province (NO. tsqn202103105).

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary material
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1

Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.07.057.