2546jareJournal of Advanced ResearchJ Adv ResElsevierPMC1313151613131516131315164091442010.1016/j.jare.2025.08.055Hepatotoxicity induced by polylactic acid microplastics: The mediating role of gut microbiota and uric acid metabolism
DengYanhong LiZhiming HuangYuji ZhongYizhou QiuAiqin ChenXiaoqing HuangXiyun YangXiaohong FengYu BaiRuobing FanBingchi XianHongyi LiHao ChenDa LiangBoxuan HuangZhenlie aNational Medical Products Administration (NMPA) Key Laboratory for Safety Evaluation of Cosmetics, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, ChinabDepartment of Cardiovascular Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, ChinacCollege of Environment and Climate, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution and Health, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China⁎Corresponding authors at: Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, 1023-1063 Shatai Nan Road, Guangzhou 510515, China. lbx0306@163.comhuangzhenlie858252@smu.edu.cn
49202583557557–573152026© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
 Keywords: Biodegradable plastics, Microplastics and nanoplastics, Gut microbiota, Uric acid, Hepatotoxicity

## Highlights
•PLA particles cause liver damage via gut microbiota changes.
•Complete PLA degradation in the gut alleviates hepatotoxicity.
•PLA particles induce liver injury by increasing lipid droplet formation via HSD17B13.

## Abstract

## Introduction
The increasing use of biodegradable plastics has led to the inevitable human consumption of biodegradable microplastics (MPs). These MPs can be degraded and absorbed into various organs and tissues via the gastrointestinal tract, with the liver being the primary target for digestion and absorption.

## Objectives
This study aimed to investigate the toxic effects and mechanisms of biodegradable MPs on the liver following gastrointestinal degradation.

## Methods
Polylactic acid (PLA) was used as a representative bioplastic. We simulated pristine and partially degraded states using polymeric and oligomeric PLA MPs. Mice were exposed to these MPs via 28-day repeated gavage administration at environmentally realistic concentrations. In vivo multi-omics analyses, combined with in vitro studies, were employed to explore underlying mechanisms.

## Results
Exposure to PLA oligomers and polymers disrupted gut microbiota, triggering an increase in plasma and hepatic uric acid levels in the mice. Elevated uric acid levels, in turn, upregulated the Hsd17b13 mRNA expression in the liver. This cascade was linked to an accumulation of hepatic triglycerides, triggering liver inflammation and promoting the progression of fibrosis. The clearance of the intestinal microbiota mitigated PLA MP-induced liver injury in mice. In HepG2 cells, PLA oligomers and polymers did not enhance the HSD17B13 mRNA expression or increase cellular lipid droplet formation. Conversely, the presence of uric acid upregulated the HSD17B13 and augmented lipid droplet production. Furthermore, simultaneous exposure to PLA particles and uric acid did not intensify lipid accumulation or lipid droplet formation within these cells.

## Conclusion
Our findings demonstrate that PLA MP-induced liver damage is mediated by gut microbiota-driven elevation of uric acid. This highlights the critical role of systemic factors, particularly gut microbiota, in assessing the hepatotoxicity of PLA MPs.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 May 22; Revised 2025 Jul 11; Accepted 2025 Aug 22; Collection date 2026 May.

## Introduction
In recent years, bioplastics have emerged as a viable alternative to conventional non-degradable plastics, offering a promising solution to the pervasive problem of white pollution and its associated environmental challenges [ ]. While bioplastics have the potential to completely degrade into harmless byproducts such as methane, carbon dioxide, and water, this process typically requires considerable time [ ]. Furthermore, achieving the conditions necessary for the complete degradation of bioplastics in the natural environment remains challenging [ ]. These factors imply that a significant amount of microplastics (MPs) will inevitably be produced during the degradation process. As the production of bioplastics continues to increase rapidly [ ], it is expected that bioplastic MPs in the environment will also become more prevalent. The increasing presence of bioplastic MPs in the environment will inevitably lead to their entry into human consumption pathways. Bioplastic MPs exhibit significant toxicity in mammals, with studies showing that exposure to polylactic acid MPs (PLA MPs) causes intestinal and neurotoxicity in mice [ , ]. However, the toxic effects of bioplastic MPs on other mammalian organs remain largely unknown.
The liver, a crucial organ for immune system function and metabolism, is also a key target for MPs [ , , , ]. Oral exposure to polystyrene MPs (PS-MPs) in mice leads to adverse outcomes such as hepatic inflammation, fibrosis, lipid metabolism disturbances, and hepatocyte apoptosis [ ]. Similarly, bioplastic MPs can cause hepatotoxicity through both inhalation and oral routes [ ]. However, the precise molecular mechanisms underlying bioplastic MP-induced hepatotoxicity remain unresolved. Our previous research suggests that bioplastic MPs, which are incompletely degraded in the gastrointestinal tract into oligomeric nanoparticles, may enhance their neurotoxicity [ ]. The impact of this transformation on hepatotoxicity and its mechanisms remains largely unexplored.
To address this gap, we selected PLA as a representative bioplastic due to its status as the most widely consumed biodegradable plastic globally [ ]. Drawing on previous studies and our experimental findings, we utilized both polymeric and oligomeric PLA MPs with molecular weights of 40,000 and 2,000, respectively, to represent pristine and partially degraded PLA [ ]. The polymeric form simulates newly produced PLA, while the oligomeric form reflects a partially degraded state, mimicking environmental conditions under which PLA undergoes natural biodegradation. Mice were exposed to these MPs via 28-day repeated gavage administration. This study integrated comprehensive in vivo multi-omics analyses, including metabolomics, transcriptomics, and 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing, alongside in vitro mechanistic validation ( ). It advances beyond previous research by demonstrating that liver damage caused by PLA MPs is indirectly mediated through alterations in the gut microbiota, rather than being a direct effect. This study lays a foundation for future evaluations of the potential benefits and risks of using biodegradable plastics as alternatives to traditional fossil-derived plastics, providing a basis and reference for developing standards for the prevention and control of MP toxicity.

## Materials and methods

## Microplastics and chemicals
Fluorescence leakage from PLA MPs was quantitatively assessed over 7 days of incubation in simulated intestinal and gastric fluids using an in vitro system. Leakage remained below 2 % for all particle types, indicating negligible release under the experimental conditions [ ]. Infrared spectra of dried PLA MPs were analyzed using attenuated total reflection Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR; Nicolet 6700, Thermo Nicolet Corp., Madison, WI) over a scan range of 400–4000 cm−1. Additionally, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis was performed on PLA MPs dissolved in a deuterated reagent using an NMR spectrometer (Bruker AVANCE III HD, 400 MHz).

## Mouse husbandry
To ensure continuity with our previous work [ ] and to maximize reproducibility, we employed male C57BL/6J mice, a strain with well-defined genetic and metabolic characteristics that is widely used in hepatotoxicity studies [ ]. Limiting the cohort to males minimizes the metabolic variability introduced by estrous-cycle hormones. Housing conditions were strictly controlled: the mice were kept in a temperature-regulated environment (23–25 °C) with 50–60 % humidity and a 12-h light/dark cycle (lights on from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.). The mice were provided ample living space, with ad libitum access to food and sterilized water. Weekly monitoring of food and water intake was conducted alongside behavioral assessments to identify any signs of aggression, distress, or stress. Upon arrival, the mice underwent a 7-day acclimatization period, during which any individuals exhibiting aggressive behaviors were excluded. Random allocation to experimental groups was performed based on initial body weights and overall health status at the start of the experiment.

## 28-Day repeated dose oral toxicity study in mice
As previously described, twenty-five mice were randomly assigned to five groups (n = 5 per group): Control, Oligomer_2.5 mg/kg, Oligomer_25 mg/kg, Polymer_2.5 mg/kg, and Polymer_25 mg/kg. These groups underwent a 28-day repeated oral gavage study. Suspensions of PLA oligomer and polymer MPs were prepared daily in double-distilled water to ensure consistency and freshness. Prior to administration, the suspensions were thoroughly mixed using a vortex mixer to maintain an even distribution of PLA MPs. Each group received a daily oral gavage of either double-distilled water (Control) or PLA MP suspensions at a volume of 10 mL/kg body weight for 28 consecutive days. Body weights were recorded weekly, between 8:00 and 9:00 a.m., throughout the exposure period to monitor health and adjust the gavage volumes accordingly (0.1 mL per 10 g of body weight). Gavage procedures were performed using a standardized technique by a single trained researcher to minimize animal stress and variability in administration.

## Antibiotic treatment
Twenty mice were randomly divided into four groups (n = 5 per group): Control, PLA, antibiotic cocktail (ABX)-Control, and ABX-PLA. Two groups (ABX-Control and ABX-PLA) received a combination of ampicillin (0.5  g/L), vancomycin (0.5  g/L), tetracycline (0.5  g/L), and ciprofloxacin (0.5  g/L) in their drinking water for three weeks to achieve bacterial depletion. Following successful gut microbiota depletion, these mice were subjected to a 28-day repeated-dose oral toxicity study. Mice in the PLA and ABX-PLA groups received daily oral gavage of PLA polymer MPs (25 mg/kg) suspended in double-distilled water at a dosage of 10 mL/kg body weight for 28 consecutive days. Body weights were recorded weekly between 8:00 and 9:00 a.m., both before and during the exposure period, with gavage volumes adjusted accordingly (0.1 mL per 10 g of body weight). Broad-spectrum antibiotics were continuously administered to the ABX-PLA group via drinking water throughout the exposure period, while the control groups received sterilized water. Fresh stool samples were collected from each mouse before and after the exposure period for analysis. To verify the efficacy of antibiotic treatment, fecal microbiota cultures were performed. Fecal samples from each group of five mice were pooled, homogenized with ultrapure water at a 1:50 ratio, filtered, and evenly spread onto LB broth medium. After incubation at 37 °C for 48 h, microbial growth was assessed to confirm successful depletion of gut microbiota.

## Fluorescent particle detection on tissue slides
Frozen liver samples (n = 5 per group) were sectioned into 5 μm-thick slices for fluorescence detection following established protocols, with one slide prepared per animal [ ]. Specifically, the left lobe of each dissected liver was frozen, fixed overnight, and subsequently treated with a gradient of sucrose solutions (10 %, 20 %, and 30 %; Sigma-Aldrich) to ensure proper cryoprotection. The tissues were then embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound (Tissue-Tek®, Sakura Finetek Japan Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Slides were scanned using a Pannoramic MIDI scanner (3D HISTECH, Budapest, Hungary). For each slide, three images were systematically acquired from the central, upper-left, and lower-right regions using Pannoramic Viewer software (3D HISTECH). Fluorescence quantification was performed with ImageJ software (version 1.52) by two independent researchers blinded to the experimental groupings to ensure unbiased analysis. Control group tissues were processed under identical conditions to evaluate potential autofluorescence in liver tissues or interference from experimental reagents.

## Histopathological analysis
Liver tissues from mice (n = 5 per group) were immediately fixed in 4 % (wt/vol) paraformaldehyde solution (Solarbio, #PH0427) for 24 h. Following fixation, the tissues were dehydrated using an automated tissue processor. Standardized exposure times were applied during dehydration, with tissues subjected to a graded ethanol series (70 %, 80 %, 95 %, and 100 %; ZOSEN, #ZS-TZJJ95) for 1 h per concentration, followed by a 1-h treatment in xylene (Macklin, #X820585). The samples were then embedded in paraffin (Mreda, #M060593) at 56 °C. Tissue sections were cut to a uniform thickness of 5 μm for hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Masson staining. Two sections were prepared for each group of five animals. The entire section area was examined under an Olympus microscope (Olympus Corporation, Japan), and micrographs of inflammation sites or Masson blue-stained regions were captured, following previously established protocols [ ]. The degree of liver inflammation and fibrosis was quantified using ImageJ analysis software by calculating the proportion of inflammation foci and Masson blue-stained areas relative to the total tissue area. Pathology specimens were evaluated independently by two experienced pathologists in a double-blind manner, ensuring unbiased assessment without knowledge of the experimental groups or sample identifiers.

## Detection of triglycerides
Liver tissue (n = 5 per group) were homogenized using a low-temperature high-speed mill (Servicebio, #SWE-FP) following the addition of isopropanol at a ratio of 100–200 μL per 10–20 mg of tissue. For cell samples (n = 3 independent experiments), isopropanol was added at a ratio of 100–200 μL per 20 million cells, and the mixture was thoroughly pipetted. The resulting cell homogenate was then transferred from the six-well plates into centrifuge tubes for further processing. The homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected. Triglyceride levels in the tissue or cells were measured using a triglyceride assay kit (Beyotime, #S0219S), following the manufacturer's instructions. To construct a standard curve, eight equidistant points spanning the range of 0.2–10 mM were selected, yielding a strong linear relationship (R2 > 0.99). Sample absorbance was measured at 570 nm using a microplate reader. Negative control wells containing either detection buffer alone or detection buffer with an equivalent amount of isopropanol, but no sample, were included to account for background absorbance. Each sample was analyzed in three technical replicates. In this study, triglyceride levels were quantified as millimoles per gram in tissues and as millimoles per gram of protein in cells.

## Detection of uric acid
According to the manufacturer's instructions, a uric acid assay kit (Solarbio, #BC1365) was used to measure uric acid levels in liver tissue (n ≥ 3 per group), plasma (n = 5 per group) and cells (n = 3 independent experiments). Liver tissue was homogenized in the extraction buffer provided by the kit at a 1:10 ratio (w/v) and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min. The resulting supernatant was collected and kept on ice until testing. Plasma samples were processed directly following the manufacturer's instructions, without additional extraction steps. For cell samples, the extraction buffer was added at a ratio of 1 mL per 5 million cells. Cell lysis was achieved through ultrasonication in an ice bath (200 W power, 3 s sonication, 7 s interval, for a total of 5 min). The lysates were then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected and maintained on ice for subsequent analyses. The kit has a detection limit of 0.00388 μmol/mL. The amount of each sample was quantified using the standard curve provided by the kit, with an R2 > 0.99 indicating a high degree of linearity. Absorbance was measured at 505 nm using a microplate reader. Three technical replicates were performed for each sample. In this study, uric acid levels in tissues and plasma were measured in micrograms per gram and micrograms per milliliter, respectively, while in cells, they were quantified as micrograms per gram of protein.

## Protein concentration quantification
Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay, following the manufacturer's instructions (Beyotime, #P0012). The BCA working solution was prepared by mixing Reagent A and Reagent B in a 50:1 ratio. A series of bovine serum albumin (BSA) standards with known concentrations (0, 0.025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5 mg/mL) were prepared to construct a standard curve, which demonstrated strong linearity (R2 > 0.99). Equal volumes of the standards and appropriately diluted protein samples were added in triplicate to a 96-well plate. Subsequently, 200 μL of the BCA working solution was added to each well, and the plate was incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Absorbance at 562 nm was measured using a microplate reader, and protein concentrations were calculated based on the standard curve.

## Detection of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST)
Plasma samples (n = 5) were analyzed using ALT (Njjcbio, #C009-2-1) and AST kits (Njjcbio, #C010-2-1), following the manufacturer’s protocols. Plasma samples were directly processed without additional extraction steps. After adding the respective reagents, the plate was gently shaken to mix the contents and left to stand at room temperature for 15 min. Each sample was tested in triplicate to ensure reproducibility. Standard curves for ALT and AST were generated using the standards provided by the manufacturer, with both curves exhibiting strong linearity (R2 > 0.99). The absorbance of the samples was measured at 505 nm using a microplate reader. The absolute absorbance (sample absorbance minus solvent control absorbance) was interpolated from the standard curves to calculate ALT and AST activity levels.

## Cell line and culture conditions
Caco-2 enterocyte-like monolayers and the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2 are widely recognized models for investigating the intestinal and hepatic toxicity of MPs, respectively [ , , ]. In this study, these cell models, at passages 10–20, were employed to evaluate the direct toxic effects of PLA MPs on intestinal and liver cells. Both cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. They were maintained at 37 °C in a 5 % CO2 atmosphere in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco, #C11995500BTx) supplemented with 10 % heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, #10270106) and 1 % penicillin–streptomycin (Gibco, #15140122). Cells in the logarithmic growth phase were seeded onto culture plates at a density of 1.5 × 105 cells/mL for experimental use. Culture medium was replaced every two days to maintain optimal growth conditions and physiological relevance throughout the study. Regular Mycoplasma contamination screening was conducted every 3 months using a One-step Quickcolor Mycoplasma Detection Kit (Yise Medical Technology, #MD001).

## Cell transfection
To silence gene expression, we transfected cells with small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting the HSD17B13 gene. HepG2 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and allowed to reach 50 %–70 % confluence over a 48-h period before transfection. HepG2 cells were transfected with 100 nM siRNA using RNAFit (Tsingke, #TSV405) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The following siRNA sequences were used: human HSD17B13-1 sense, 5′–GGUCAACAUCCUAGGACAU–3′, human HSD17B13-1 antisense, 5′–AUGUCCUAGGAUGUUGACC–3′; human HSD17B13-2 sense, 5′–CAGGCAGACUACUUAUGAA–3′, human HSD17B13-2 antisense, 5′–UUCAUAAGUAGUCUGCCUG–3′. Six hours after the transfection, the siRNA-containing medium was replaced with DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS. The efficacy of transfection and the extent of gene knockdown were assessed via qPCR, quantifying HSD17B13 expression post-transfection. A negative siRNA control was included to confirm that the observed effects were specific to HSD17B13 silencing and not due to non-specific siRNA introduction into the cells. After successful transfection, cells were exposed to uric acid (120 μg/mL) for 48 h and were used to detect triglycerides and Oil Red O staining (n = 3 per group). Detection of triglycerides and Oil Red O staining can be found in the Materials and methods corresponding sections.

## Oil Red O staining
The cells were cultured in Petri dishes and passaged at 75–85 % confluency using 0.25 % Trypsin-EDTA for cell detachment. HepG2 cells were seeded into 6-well plates at a density of 3 × 105 cells per well and incubated overnight. Subsequently, these cells were treated with PLA MPs at concentrations of 64 μg/mL or 640 μg/mL, supplemented with 400 nM sodium oleate (OA) for 48 h. These concentrations were selected based on findings from our previous study [ ]. The addition of OA was to provide a substrate for lipid droplet formation within the cells [ ]. A cell-free blank control was included to confirm that staining was not influenced by PLA MPs or any other components of the medium. Following incubation, the cells were washed three times with PBS to remove any adherent PLA MPs before further analysis. HepG2 cells (n = 3 independent experiments) were fixed, washed, and then incubated with a 0.5 % Oil Red O dye solution in isopropanol, following the manufacturer's instructions (Solarbio Science & Technology, #G1262). After staining, samples were washed to remove excess dye and counterstained if necessary. Stained lipid droplets were visualized as red inclusions under a microscope, and images were captured using an Olympus microscope (Olympus Corporation, Japan). Image analysis was performed using ImageJ software to quantitatively evaluate the lipid droplets. Specifically, the percentage of positively stained cells (i.e., the number of Oil Red O-positive cells divided by the total number of cells) was determined. This analysis was conducted independently by two pathologists blinded to the experimental conditions, ensuring unbiased assessment.

## RNA isolation and RNA-Seq analyses
Total RNA was isolated from frozen animal tissues (n = 5 per group) using Trizol Reagent (Accurate Biology, #AG21102), followed by DNase I treatment to remove residual genomic DNA. RNA integrity and quality were evaluated using the RNA Integrity Number (RIN) determined by the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Only RNA samples with RIN scores greater than 7 were deemed suitable for downstream analyses. Strand-specific libraries of liver samples were prepared using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), following the manufacturer's instructions. Sequencing read counts were calculated using StringTie (v. 1.3.0). Differential expression analyses, including calculation of fold changes and probability (P) values, were performed using the EdgeR R package (v3.32.1) [ ].

## 16S rRNA sequencing
Microbial DNA was extracted from five samples per group using the DNeasy PowerSoil Kit (Mo Bio/QIAGEN, #47014). DNA concentration was determined by measuring absorbance at 260 nm and 280 nm, and quality was assessed via 1 % agarose gel electrophoresis. The V3–V4 regions of the 16S rRNA gene were amplified using primers (forward: 5′-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-3′; reverse: 5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′) on a GeneAmp 9700 thermocycler PCR system (ABI, USA). The 25 μL PCR reaction included: (1) an initial denaturation at 95 °C for 3 min; (2) 30 s denaturation at 95 °C; (3) 30 s annealing at 55 °C; (4) 45 s extension at 72 °C; (5) 27 cycles of steps (2) – (4); and (6) a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. Target PCR products were resolved using 2 % agarose gel electrophoresis, purified with the AxyPrep DNA Gel Extraction Kit (Axygen, #AP-GX-500), and quantified with QuantiFluor™-ST (Promega, USA). Purified amplicons were pooled in equimolar amounts and sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, USA). Gut microbiota composition was analyzed using dual-indexing amplification and sequencing, followed by bioinformatics processing with QIIME2. Taxonomic annotation of microbial species was conducted using the Greengenes database, enabling identification and relative quantification of microbiota across samples.

## Metabolomic analysis
Liver tissues from mice (n = 5 per group) were homogenized in chromatography-grade water at a 1:9 ratio (mg:μL) using a Wonbio-96c high-throughput tissue pulverizer. Metabolomics samples were prepared via liquid–liquid extraction by mixing 30 μL of homogenate with 120 μL of methanol containing 200 ppb internal standard (DL-4-chlorophenylalanine) [ , , , ]. Extracts were cryoprecipitated at − 80 °C for 2 h and centrifuged at 16,000 rpm, 4 °C, for 10 min. The supernatant (95 μL) was collected for non-targeted metabolomics analysis, and quality control (QC) samples were prepared by pooling equal volumes of all sample solutions.
Metabolites were separated using a Waters ACQUITY UPLC® HSS T3 column (1.8 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm) coupled with a VanGuard™ Pre-Column (2.1 × 5 mm), maintained at 30 °C. The mobile phase for positive ion mode (POS) consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in water (Phase A) and 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile (Phase B), while for negative ion mode (NEG), it consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate in water (Phase A) and acetonitrile (Phase B). Samples (5 μL) were injected at a flow rate of 350 μL/min, with a total run time of 15 min per injection. The gradient was programmed as follows: 2 % B (1 min), linearly increased to 50 % B (2 min), further increased to 100 % B (6 min, held for 3 min), followed by a linear decrease to 2 % B (0.1 min), and re-equilibration at 2 % B (3 min). Mass spectrometric data were acquired using a Thermo UHPLC-Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (MS) equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) source operating in either positive or negative ion mode. Details of MS acquisition parameters are provided in .
Raw data were processed using Progenesis QI software. Metabolic features were matched to the mzCloud and mzVault databases with minimum match scores of 60 and 50, respectively. Matches below these thresholds were excluded. Features were manually verified, with metabolites confirmed only if at least three fragmentation peaks matched database entries. Data preprocessing included two steps: first, peak intensities were normalized using internal standards to correct for injection errors and retain metabolites in the MS/MS spectra; second, a blank subtraction was applied, retaining features with a detection frequency above 70 %. Features below the limit of detection (LOD) were calculated as LOD/ (√2). Three technical replicates per sample were analyzed to ensure reproducibility. To investigate the effects of PLA MPs on liver metabolites, differential metabolite enrichment was conducted using MetaboAnalyst (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca/MetaboAnalyst/).

## Quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis (qPCR)
RNA samples with RIN scores greater than 7 were used for cDNA synthesis with the HiScript II First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Vazyme, #R211-01) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The synthesized cDNA was diluted 10-fold before use in qPCR. mRNA-specific primers were designed and synthesized by Qingke Biotechnology (Beijing, China). qPCR was performed using the SYBR® Green Premix Pro Taq HS qPCR kit (Accurate Biology, #AG11718) on an ABI QuantStudio™ 6 Flex Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). The qPCR reaction conditions were as follows: 30 s at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of 5 s at 95 °C and 34 s at 60 °C. Primer amplification efficiency was evaluated by generating a standard curve from serially diluted cDNA, and amplification specificity was confirmed by melting curve analysis. Detailed primer sequences, amplification efficiencies, and specificities are provided in . Negative controls were included in all qPCR reactions, including no-template controls and no-reverse-transcription controls, to verify the absence of contamination and non-specific amplification. Each sample was analyzed in quadruplicate to ensure reproducibility. Relative mRNA expression levels were normalized to β-actin as the internal control. Gene expression was quantified using the 2−ΔΔCT method and compared against the control group.

## Protein extraction and western blot
Mouse liver tissues (n = 5 per group) were lysed in RIPA buffer (Beyotime, #P0013B) supplemented with a 1:100 dilution of protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (keygen, #KGB5101-100). The tissue lysate was homogenized for 3 min at 60 Hz using a high-speed cryogenic tissue homogenizer (Servicebio, #KZ-III-FP) to ensure complete disruption of tissue structure and efficient protein extraction. Cells (n = 3 independent experiments) were washed with phosphate-buffered saline and lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (Beyotime, #P0013B). The lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove cell debris. Protein samples were fractionated by sodium lauryl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Beyotime, #P0012A) and transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (Bio-Rad, #IPVH00010). Membranes were blocked in 5 % skim milk (Cell Signaling Technology, #9999 s) and probed with primary antibodies (anti-HSD17B13 [ , ], Thermo Fisher, #PA5-109834, 1:1000 dilution; anti-β-ACTIN, Proteintech, #66009–1-Ig, 1:5000 dilution) overnight at 4 °C. The specificity of the primary antibodies was validated in previous studies that utilized the same antibodies [ ]. After washing the membranes three times, they were incubated with HRP-labeled secondary antibodies (anti-rabbit, Proteintech, #SA00001-2, 1:5000 dilution) for 2 h at room temperature. The protein bands were visualized using Western Lightning Plus-ECL (PerkinElmer, #NEL103001EA), and the grayscale of the bands was quantified using ImageJ software.

## Statistical analysis
Each experiment was conducted with at least three replicates. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS (version 25; IBM Inc.). The normality of data distribution and the homogeneity of variances were assessed by Shapiro-Wilk test and Levene's test, respectively. For data that followed a normal distribution with homogeneous variances, Student’s t-test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons test was applied. For non-normally distributed data or data with unequal variances, the Mann-Whitney U test or Kruskal-Wallis H test was used. Post hoc comparisons after the Kruskal-Wallis H test were conducted using Dunn's test with Bonferroni correction. Correlation analysis was performed using the Pearson correlation test. Data are presented as means ± standard deviations (SD) for normally distributed variables; non-normally distributed data are reported as medians with interquartile ranges (IQR). A two-sided P-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant for all tests.

## Results

## PLA oligomer and polymer MPs indirectly disrupted liver lipid metabolism in mice
We evaluated the characteristics of PLA polymer and oligomer MPs and found them to be uniformly spherical with commendable stability [ ]. The PLA oligomers and polymers were characterized using FTIR and NMR, confirming a purity exceeding 99 % for both particle types. ( A-D). After 28 consecutive days of oral exposure, PLA polymer MPs exhibited a higher hepatic distribution than PLA oligomer MPs, with no red fluorescence signals detected in the liver tissue of the control group, confirming the specificity of the fluorescence to PLA MPs ( A and B). No changes in food or water intake, nor in behavior (including signs of aggression, distress, or stress), were observed throughout the experiment in relation to PLA MP exposure. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining revealed that both PLA oligomer MPs and PLA polymer MPs induced hepatic inflammatory infiltration. Notably, PLA polymer MPs caused a significantly greater degree of inflammatory infiltration in mice compared to PLA oligomer MPs ( A and G), along with upregulated expression of the inflammatory genes Tnf-α and Il-6 ( B and C). Masson staining indicated that both high doses of PLA oligomer and polymer MPs led to fibrotic alterations in the liver tissue ( G). At low doses, only PLA polymer MPs caused fibrotic alterations ( D and G), which were accompanied by upregulated expression of the fibrosis-related genes Col1a1 and Col3a1 ( E-F). Furthermore, PLA polymer MPs elevated plasma levels of ALT and AST compared to the control group ( H and I), indicating liver dysfunction. These findings suggested that both PLA oligomer and polymer MPs exhibited hepatotoxic effects, with PLA polymer MPs showing greater toxicity than PLA oligomer MPs.
 Given that inflammatory infiltration and fibrosis are hallmark features of liver steatosis, we measured triglyceride levels in the liver. High doses of both PLA oligomer and polymer MPs increased liver triglyceride levels, whereas at low doses, only PLA polymer MPs elevated triglyceride levels ( J). This suggested that PLA oligomer and polymer MPs may disrupt lipid metabolism in the liver of mice. However, in vitro assays using HepG2 liver cells did not show an increase in triglyceride levels ( K) or intracellular lipid droplets ( L and C) following exposure to PLA oligomer or polymer MPs, indicating that the disruption of liver lipid metabolism may occur through indirect mechanisms rather than direct effects in mice.

## PLA MPs indirectly increased hepatic uric acid, leading to liver steatosis in mice
To better understand how hepatic metabolic processes are affected by PLA MPs, we measured the metabolomic response of mouse livers to PLA polymer and oligomer MPs. Employing k-means clustering, metabolites were categorized into four distinct clusters. We found cluster 2 exhibit a concordant upregulation pattern akin to liver damage indicators alterations ( A). Pathway enrichment analyses revealed that these metabolites were mainly involved in histidine metabolism, purine metabolism, pyrimidine metabolism, and β-alanine metabolism ( B). Notably, among the metabolites showing perturbations following PLA MP exposure, those within purine metabolism, specifically xanthine and uric acid, displayed positive correlations with liver damage indicators ( C). Furthermore, we also found that other intermediates in the purine metabolism pathway, such as adenine, hypoxanthine, and xanthosine, were significantly elevated following exposure to both PLA polymer and oligomer MPs ( D). We measured the amount of uric acid in liver tissue and plasma and found that high doses of both PLA oligomer and polymer MPs increased uric acid levels in liver tissue and plasma. At low doses, only PLA polymer MPs elevated uric acid levels in liver tissue ( E) and plasma ( F). Plasma creatinine and urea nitrogen remained unchanged after either treatment, indicating that the rise in uric acid stemmed from increased production rather than reduced renal excretion ( ). Given the highest fold-change among the metabolites and the strong correlation between uric acid and liver steatosis observed in population data [ ], we speculate that uric acid plays a key role in PLA MP-induced liver steatosis. Indeed, we found that uric acid increased triglyceride levels ( G) and lipid droplet accumulation in HepG2 cells ( H-I). However, no changes were observed in the expression of xanthine dehydrogenase (XDH), a key enzyme involved in uric acid synthesis, in the mouse liver following exposure to PLA oligomer or polymer MPs ( J). Furthermore, neither PLA oligomers nor polymers altered uric acid levels in HepG2 cells ( K). These findings suggested that PLA MPs may not directly increase uric acid production in the liver, indicating a potential extrahepatic source of uric acid in vivo.
 

## Bacillales were increased in PLA oligomers and polymers, correlating positively with uric acid
Given the significant role of the gut and gut microbiota in metabolism, and our findings that PLA polymer and oligomer MP exposure significantly upregulated the expression of Xdh gene ( ) and uric acid levels ( A) in the mouse gut, we speculate that the gut could be the source of the excess hepatic uric acid induced by PLA MPs. PLA polymer and oligomer MPs did not directly increase uric acid levels in Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells in vitro ( B), emphasizing the crucial role of gut microbiota in this process. We performed 16S rRNA sequencing on the intestinal mucosa of mice to investigate the impact of PLA MP exposure on gut microbiota. The Shannon index showed no difference between groups, suggesting that PLA polymer and oligomer MPs did not affect microbial diversity in the mouse gut ( C). However, restricted principal coordinate analysis indicated significant changes in bacterial community composition following exposure to PLA polymer and oligomer MPs ( D). Volcano plots showed that various doses of PLA polymer and oligomer MPs significantly altered the abundance of numerous Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) ( E). We intersected the differential OTUs from the low-dose and high-dose groups of PLA polymer MPs with those from the low-dose and high-dose groups of PLA oligomer MPs, identifying 20 and 27 OTUs, respectively ( F). These OTUs belonged to 12 and 11 orders. We found that the gut microbiota changes induced by PLA polymer and oligomer MPs were largely consistent, primarily involving Clostridiales, Bifidobacteriales, Bacteroidales, Bacillales, and Lactobacillales, which accounted for 81 % and 88 % of the total abundance in their respective groups ( G). Correlating the abundance of these altered bacteria with hepatic uric acid levels revealed that only Bacillales showed a positive correlation with hepatic uric acid levels ( H). Further analysis indicated that the two branches of Bacillales genera, Brevibacillus and Alicyclobacillus, were positively correlated with hepatic uric acid levels ( I). These results suggested that Bacillales may have been associated with the increase in hepatic uric acid induced by PLA oligomers and polymers.
 

## Effects of gut microbiota on uric acid production and liver damage
To verify that the gut microbiota is the source of uric acid production, we used antibiotic treatment to remove gut microbiota in mice ( A). Fecal microbiota culture suggested that antibiotic treatment successfully cleared the intestinal flora of mice ( B). Given that the altered flora of PLA oligomer and polymer MPs was nearly identical, we used PLA polymer MPs for exposure. Following 28 days of exposure, liver metabolomic profiling revealed 228 distinct metabolites, of which 53 showed increased levels post-PLA MP exposure but decreased concentrations following antibiotic intervention ( C). Pathway enrichment analyses indicated significant alterations in the purine metabolic pathway, which had the highest impact score ( D). Metabolomics analysis revealed that antibiotic treatment attenuated the increase in uric acid and its upstream metabolites induced by PLA MP exposure ( E). Notably, the mRNA expression of Xdh in the intestines was significantly upregulated following PLA MP exposure ( ). Additionally, uric acid levels in the intestine, plasma, and liver, as measured using assay kits, also showed a significant increase ( F-H). The upregulation of Xdh mRNA expression and the rise in uric acid levels were both mitigated by antibiotic treatment ( F-H and S5). This underscored the critical role of intestinal flora in modulating hepatic uric acid levels. Furthermore, assessment of hepatic triglyceride content revealed an elevation induced by PLA polymer MPs, which was effectively reduced by antibiotic intervention ( A). In addition, PLA MP-enhanced ALT and AST levels were mitigated following antibiotic treatment, suggesting improved liver function ( B-C). Notably, antibiotic treatment also protected against PLA MP-induced hepatic pathologies, including exacerbated inflammatory responses and increased fibrotic alterations ( D-J). Although a significant weight loss was observed in the ABX-treated mice ( ), no significant differences in the aforementioned health indicators were observed when comparing the ABX group to the control group. This suggested that the adverse effects of the ABX treatment were unlikely to have contributed to the observed outcomes in our study.
 

## Genes associated with gut microbiota-mediated hepatic toxicity of PLA MPs
RNA sequencing analysis revealed that PLA polymer exposure significantly altered 230 genes at low doses and 118 genes at high doses ( A and B). KEGG pathway enrichment analysis indicated that these DEGs were predominantly associated with lipid metabolism and inflammation-related pathways, such as fat digestion and complement and coagulation cascades, further corroborating our previous findings ( C and D). To investigate the mechanisms underlying PLA MP-induced liver injury in mice, we used a Venn diagram to identify 25 genes with consistent alterations across both dosage groups ( A). A scatter plot, with fold change as coordinates, highlighted six genes—C2, Cp, Cyp3a11, Cyp2f2, Hsd17b13, and Mtarc1—exhibiting a dose–response relationship, with higher upregulation ratios at the high dose compared to the low dose ( B).
 To determine which of these genes are associated with gut microbiota-mediated hepatic toxicity of PLA MPs, we examined the expression of these six genes in the livers of antibiotic-treated mice. We found that antibiotic treatment abrogated the upregulation of only the Hsd17b13 gene ( C–H). Western blot analyses corroborated concordant alterations in HSD17B13 protein levels, further implicating its pivotal role in PLA MP-induced metabolic perturbations ( I). Furthermore, we delineated a positive correlation between hepatic uric acid levels and Hsd17b13 expression, underscoring its putative involvement in mediating uric acid-associated hepatic sequelae ( J). Importantly, the expression level of Hsd17b13 exhibited positive correlations with key indicators of liver injury, including hepatic triglyceride content ( K), inflammatory area ( L), and fibrosis area ( M).

## Effects of uric acid and HSD17B13 on triglyceride and lipid droplet formation in vitro
Uric acid induced the upregulation of HSD17B13 expression and HSD17B13 levels in HepG2 cells ( A and B). Additionally, uric acid increased triglyceride levels ( C) and lipid droplet formation ( D-E) in HepG2 cells. To inhibit this upregulation, we transfected cells with two different HSD17B13 siRNAs, achieving a knockdown efficiency of approximately 30 % ( A and B). Successful suppression of HSD17B13 expression attenuated the increase in triglycerides and lipid droplets induced by uric acid ( C-E). Considering the coexistence of PLA MPs and uric acid in the liver in vivo, we further investigated the effect of co-exposure to PLA polymer and oligomer MPs and uric acid on the formation of triglycerides and lipid droplets in HepG2 cells. The results showed no significant changes in triglyceride content ( F) and lipid droplet formation ( G-H) in the oligomer + uric acid group and polymer + uric acid group compared to the UA group.
 

## Discussion
The harmful effects of MPs and nanoplastics (NPs) on human health have garnered widespread attention [ , , , ]. Using biodegradable bioplastics to replace traditional petroleum-based plastics is considered a key strategy to reduce the presence of MPs and NPs in the environment [ ]. However, biodegradable does not mean completely or immediately degradable. During this process, biodegradable plastics can still form a large number of MPs and NPs [ ]. The impact of these biobased MPs and NPs on human health remains unclear. Our previous study found that biobased PLA MPs can degrade in the mouse gastrointestinal tract, forming oligomer NPs [ ]. This characteristic affects their biodistribution and toxicity in mice. Additionally, we discovered that the liver is the organ with the highest distribution of PLA MPs and NPs [ ]. While studies have shown that PLA MPs and PLA NPs in food can cause hepatotoxicity [ ], the specific mechanisms of PLA MPs' liver toxicity and the impact of gastrointestinal digestion and degradation on their toxicity are not yet clear. This study demonstrated that both PLA polymer and oligomer MPs produce hepatotoxicity through the same indirect mechanism: disrupting the gut microbiota, increasing uric acid levels, and subsequently causing excessive triglyceride accumulation in the liver, leading to liver damage. Because neither particle type displays direct cytotoxicity toward hepatocytes in vitro, converting polymers to oligomers does not alter their intrinsic hepatocellular toxicity. In vivo, however, PLA polymer MPs produce more severe liver damage than pre-formed oligomeric MPs. This disparity likely reflects gastrointestinal kinetics: PLA oligomer MPs are almost completely degraded during digestion, whereas PLA polymer MPs persist and undergo only partial hydrolysis, continuously releasing new oligomeric fragments and exerting a sustained perturbation on the gut microbiota.
Although bioplastics currently represent only about 0.5 % of the more than 400 million tonnes of plastic produced annually, their production is projected to triple within the next five years [ ], which will markedly elevate human exposure to biodegradable MPs. In the absence of precise data on biodegradable MP intake, we based our dosing on estimates of total MP ingestion (0.2–10 mg/kg/day for adult [ ]), selecting 2.5 mg/kg to approximate current exposure levels and 25 mg/kg to evaluate potential risks. Previous studies indicated that when mice were orally dosed with PLA MPs at a dose of 25 mg/kg, the accumulation in the liver was approximately 640 μg/g. This finding guided our selection of 640 μg/mL as the high dose and 64 μg/mL as the low dose for in vitro experiments [ ]. At these concentrations, PLA MPs were found to induce hepatotoxicity primarily through indirect mechanisms, although direct hepatotoxic effects at higher exposure levels and longer durations cannot be excluded.
The primary finding of this study is that PLA MPs induce hepatic steatosis through an indirect mechanism, rather than through direct toxicity. This mode of action contrasts with that of other MP and NPs—such as polyethylene terephthalate and PS—which directly disrupt central metabolic pathways, including the tricarboxylic-acid (TCA) cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, fatty-acid catabolism, and amino-acid and carbon metabolism [ , ]. Depending on dose and co-exposure to nanoparticles, these materials can up- or down-regulate enzyme activity, protein turnover, and metabolic biomarkers spanning the TCA cycle, amino acids, lipids, and nucleotides [ ]. They also cause DNA damage [ ], trigger lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress in the liver [ ], and penetrate hepatocytes, where they damage mitochondria and compromise cellular and tissue function [ ]. Given that our experiments and those involving other particles utilized virgin materials, these differences in toxicity are likely attributable to the inherent characteristics of the particles, such as their surface properties. Importantly, our findings do not imply that PLA MPs are safer than other MPs. In fact, when compared to polyvinyl chloride (PVC) MPs, PLA MPs demonstrated even greater impacts on the liver and digestive system of mice [ ]. Our research highlights the necessity for comprehensive safety evaluations of biodegradable plastics, emphasizing the importance of considering their indirect effects mediated through gut microbiota and metabolic byproducts. A distinctive feature of biodegradable bioplastics, compared to traditional petroleum-based plastics, is their capacity to degrade within the gastrointestinal tract, leading to continuous and dynamic changes. This characteristic presents a significant challenge for studying their toxicity and mechanisms: does degradation alter their toxicological effects and mechanisms? Our research revealed that PLA MPs, regardless of their stage of degradation, induce similar alterations in liver transcriptomics, lipid metabolism, and gut microbiota. This indicated that PLA MP degradation in the gastrointestinal tract primarily influences the magnitude, rather than the nature, of their biological effects. This observation aligns with our previous findings in the nervous system [ ]. Such insights may streamline future research into the toxicity and mechanisms of biodegradable MPs with varying sizes and molecular weights.
Another key finding of this study is the identification of the critical role of uric acid and uric acid-induced upregulation of hepatic Hsd17b13 expression in PLA MP-induced liver steatosis. Epidemiological studies have shown a significant association between uric acid levels and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), showing that patients with hyperuricemia have a significantly higher risk of developing NAFLD compared to those with normal uric acid levels [ ]. Moreover, elevated uric acid levels are independently associated with more severe hepatic steatosis and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis [ ]. Animal experiments have also demonstrated that uric acid can lead to lipid accumulation in the liver of mice [ ]. Our study further revealed that Hsd17b13 expression is upregulated in response to both uric acid and PLA MPs, suggesting its potential as a biomarker for PLA MP-induced liver damage. HSD17B13 is a lipid droplet-associated protein predominantly expressed in the liver [ , ]. It is significantly upregulated in the hepatic lipid droplets of patients with fatty liver and promotes liver steatosis in both normal mouse livers and cultured human hepatocytes [ , ]. Although the exact function of HSD17B13 remains unclear, other members of the HSD17B family, including HSD17B-4, −7, −10, and −12, have been implicated in cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism [ ], suggesting that HSD17B13 may also participate in lipid metabolic pathways. Our study elucidated that uric acid induces liver steatosis by upregulating hepatic Hsd17b13 expression, thereby underscoring the specific role of this gene in PLA MP-induced hepatotoxicity.
We further elucidated that the increase in uric acid induced by PLA MPs is mediated by the gut microbiota. While numerous studies have documented the disruptive effects of MPs on gut microbiota [ ], the specifically effects of PLA MPs on gut microbiota remain largely unknown. Consistent with previous findings [ ], we discovered that PLA MPs significantly alter the gut microbiota composition in mice. Notably, a positive correlation was observed between the abundance of Bacillales and hepatic uric acid levels. Bacillales, members of the Firmicutes phylum, are known for their spore-forming ability, which confers resistance to harsh environmental conditions. Brevibacillus carries numerous sigma-factor and chemotaxis-receptor genes, giving it remarkable ecological plasticity and a strong tendency to sporulate under stress [ ]. These spores may contribute to intestinal inflammation and elevate uric acid levels through the release of specific factors [ ]. Likewise, the acidophilic genus Alicyclobacillus germinates swiftly and accumulates endospores in the low-pH niche created by PLA-MP degradation in the gut [ ]. This process may, in turn, stimulate oxidative stress and excess uric acid production in the intestine. Our results demonstrated that when gut microbiota were eliminated by antibiotic treatment, PLA MPs no longer elevated uric acid levels in mice, highlighting the crucial role of gut microbiota in the PLA MP-induced increases in hepatic uric acid and subsequent steatosis. However, our current findings regarding microbiota remain speculative and are primarily based on correlational data. To identify specific microbiota that may enhance uric acid production in host cells and modulate hepatic effects, further in vitro studies involving targeted microbiomes and intestinal epithelial cells are necessary. Additionally, utilizing gnotobiotic mice with defined microbiota or employing specific microbial depletion techniques will be essential for validating the role and mechanisms of relevant microbiota in PLA MP-induced hepatotoxicity.
Caution should also be taken as the mouse model could not fully replicate the complexity of human exposure. Furthermore, while our study focused on pristine PLA MPs, it is important to note that plastic products often contain chemical additives. Given the potential interactions between MPs and these additives [ , , ], further research is necessary to evaluate their combined effects on gut microbiota homeostasis and toxicity following in vivo digestion. Finally, to minimize variables, we employed laboratory-synthesized PLA MPs as the representative biodegradable MPs instead of introducing environmental samples of natural or incurred MPs. Therefore, caution should be exercised when extrapolating our findings to other types of biodegradable MPs. Additionally, other MPs have been shown to contribute to hepatotoxicity [ ], with mechanisms that appear independent of uric acid, which distinguishes them from the uric acid-linked hepatotoxicity observed with PLA MPs. Future studies should incorporate direct comparisons with other types of MPs in parallel experiments to elucidate both the shared and unique toxicological profiles across different MPs.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates that PLA polymer and oligomer MPs can indirectly induce liver steatosis, with PLA polymer MPs causing more severe liver damage due to the complete gastrointestinal degradation of PLA oligomer MPs. Mechanistically, both types of MPs share common targets and toxicity pathways: they disrupt gut microbiota, elevate systemic uric acid levels, upregulate hepatic Hsd17b13, and promote lipid accumulation in the liver, ultimately leading to liver damage. These findings highlight potential targets for mitigating PLA MP-induced liver damage and propose effective interventions to address such effects. This study provides a foundation for future evaluations of the potential benefits and risks associated with biodegradable plastics as alternatives to traditional fossil-derived plastics, and establishes a basis for developing standards for the prevention and management of MP toxicity.

## Compliance with ethics requirements
All Institutional and National Guidelines for the care and use of animals (fisheries) were followed.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yanhong Deng: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Zhiming Li: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Yuji Huang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Yizhou Zhong: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Aiqin Qiu: Software. Xiaoqing Chen: Software. Xiyun Huang: Software. Xiaohong Yang: Software. Yu Feng: Software. Ruobing Bai: Software. Bingchi Fan: Software. Hongyi Xian: Software. Hao Li: Software. Da Chen: Software. Boxuan Liang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Zhenlie Huang: Conceptualization, Resources, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Writing – review & editing.

## Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 82473661, 82273656, 82304177, 82504441, 82073519), the Science and Technology Project of Guangdong Province, China (Grant No.2022A0505050035), the Guangdong Basic Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grant No. 2022A1515010610, Grant No. 2025A1515011141, Guangdong-Dongguan Joint grant 2022A1515111098, Guangdong-Guangzhou Joint grant
2023A1515110373), the Chinese Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2023M741553, 2024M761349), the National Postdoctoral Researcher Funding Program of China (Grant No. GZC20250510, GZC20240653, GZC20231055), the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research (Grant No. 2017B030314035), the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) Key Laboratory for Safety Evaluation of Cosmetics, and the Guangdong Medical Products Administration (GDMPA) Project of Scientific and Technological Innovation (Grant No. 2024ZDZ09), the Shenzhen Medical Research Fund (A2402045).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.08.055.

## Contributor Information
Boxuan Liang, Email: lbx0306@163.com.
Zhenlie Huang, Email: huangzhenlie858252@smu.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplementary Data 1