3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1157977511579775115797753958373110.1021/acsomega.4c06800Coassembly of Cell-Penetrating
Peptide Octaarginine
with Acetazolamide: Emergent Interactions with E. coli
ChoubeyRinku ChatterjeeMoumita PandeyPramina Kumari MishraAbhijit DattaBhaskar †Department
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology
Gandhinagar, Palaj, Gandhinagar 382355, India‡Department
of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute
of Technology Gandhinagar, Palaj, Gandhinagar 382355, India§Department
of Biological Sciences & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Palaj, Gandhinagar 382355, India*Email: bdatta@iitgn.ac.in.
71120249464620446204–4621622112024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The investigation of established pharmaceutical agents
for recalibrating
usage strongly supplements new drug development. In this work, we
have prepared coassembled complexes of acetazolamide (AZM) with the
cationic peptide octaarginine (R8) in an attempt to enhance its potency
and scope of use. R8 and AZM in different weight ratios coassemble
into remarkable nano- and microstructures such as ribbons, sheets,
and stick-like structures. A combination of FTIR, XRD, SEM, and DSC
has been used to characterize the R8:AZM coassemblies. The sulfonamide
SO2 and NH2 groups of AZM are associated with
the guanidinium amine, free amine, and terminal carbonyl groups of
R8 resulting in distinctive topologies. Treatment of Escherichia coli with the complexes results in a
distinctive pattern of membrane disruption and pore formation. The
R8:AZM coassemblies inhibit carbonic anhydrase and E. coli growth with greater efficiency compared to
bare AZM. The 1:5 w/w complex leads
to pronounced outer and inner membrane rupture and significantly restricts
glucose uptake by E. coli. The ability
of R8 and AZM to coassemble into a distinctive set of structures based
solely on differences in their relative proportions and their engagement
with E. coli as more than the sum of
their parts are novel facets of R8 and AZM behavior and underscore
a straightforward and elegant approach for enhancing the scope of
use of small molecule drugs.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Jul 24; Accepted 2024 Oct 18; Revised 2024 Sep 27; Collection date 2024 Nov 19.

## Introduction
The rising incidence of drug-resistant
bacteria, coupled with the
excessive use of pharmaceuticals, presents major challenges in both
human and veterinary healthcare. The primary mechanisms of resistance
are reducing drug uptake, altering the drug’s target, inactivating
the drug, and actively expelling the drug. − Drug repurposing is an appealing strategy for speeding up the development
of new pharmaceuticals by using existing drugs, thereby significantly
accelerating the discovery process. The approach benefits from leveraging
the conformity of established drugs toward regulatory hurdles and
clinical development risks. The Zn2+-containing metalloenzyme
carbonic anhydrase (CA) plays a vital role in numerous physiological
and pathological processes in both humans and bacteria. − Its functions include respiration, pH regulation, sodium retention,
calcification, bone resorption, signal transduction, electrolyte secretion,
gluconeogenesis, ureagenesis, and lipogenesis. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs) are potent antienterococcal
agents, with acetazolamide (AZM) showing especially strong activity
against tested isolates, as indicated by minimum inhibitory concentrations
(MICs) ranging from 1 to 4 μg/mL. AZM is a CAI that is commonly used as a mild diuretic and for the
treatment of glaucoma, idiopathic intracranial
hypertension, congestive heart failure, acute mountain sickness, periodic paralysis, and epilepsy. 
AZM at concentrations above 31.2 μg/mL
can inhibit Escherichia coli growth
and impair glucose uptake. AZM effectively
inhibits two recombinant E. coli carbonic
anhydrases: β-CA CynT2 and
γ-CA EcoCAc. The inhibitory constants (KIs) for these enzymes
are 227 nM for CynT2 and 248 nM for EcoCAc, respectively, indicating
potent inhibition by AZM. , AZM has shown promising
results against vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), outperforming
linezolid in mouse models for both VRE colonization reduction and
systemic infection. Extensive safety studies support its use in humans
at dosages up to 4 g/day, with favorable pharmacokinetics enhancing
its therapeutic value. However, based
on its poor aqueous solubility and low permeability, AZM is classified
as a class IV drug, which exhibits limited ocular bioavailability. , Biopharmaceutics classification system (BCS)-designated class IV
drugs, such as AZM, pose formulation challenges, necessitating efforts
to enhance bioavailability.
Cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs)
have been explored as effective
carriers for drugs with a poor aqueous solubility or low bioavailability.
Among CPPs, arginine-rich CPPs, comprising 30 amino acids, show significant
promise for delivering various therapeutic agents, including small
molecules, peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids. These peptides enhance cargo solubility and promote efficient
internalization of the attached payload into cells through the endocytic
pathway. A self-assembling peptide–siRNA
complex is reported to simultaneously block SARS-CoV-2 entry and inhibit
replication, offering a dual-action antiviral strategy against COVID-19. Polyarginine has been extensively researched
for its ability to deliver drugs as part of multifunctional constructs.
Polyarginine-modified siRNA liposomes have been used for gene silencing, while octaarginine-modified PEGylated liposomal
doxorubicin has proven effective against nonsmall cell lung cancer. Octaarginine-enhanced delivery of oxaliplatin
improves colorectal cancer treatment outcomes in vitro and in vivo. In glioma therapy, paclitaxel-loaded liposomes
with multifunctional peptides provide targeted delivery, and octaarginine-modified gold nanoparticles
increase colorectal cancer cells’ sensitivity to radiation. Octaarginine boosts antifungal drug activity and improves insulin delivery via alginate nanoparticles. We have previously reported the distinctive
antibacterial activity of physical complexes of CPP octaarginine with
thiazolyl benzenesulfonamide derivatives. , The covalent conjugation of suitable cargo with CPPs forms the conventional
approach for the use of carrier peptides. Our previous works were
motivated by improvements in aqueous solubility of the small molecule
using a lesser explored physical complexation with charged CPP and
without scrutinizing the supramolecular structure of such complexes.
In this regard, covalently conjugated drug–peptide conjugates
have seldom been explored for their ability to form supramolecular
structures.
The dearth of literature on the direct coassembly
between CPPs
and small molecule drugs has created a knowledge gap pertaining to
design and scope of use of such complexes. In this work, we seek to
address these hitherto unexplored facets of coassembly between a CPP
octaarginine (R8) and a representative small molecule drug AZM. In
contrast to previous approaches that predominantly leverage CPP behavior
of R8, in this work, R8 is sought as an active participant in coassembly.
The R8:AZM coassemblies display a variety of structures depending
on the weight ratio of the components. These structures manifest unique
interactions with E. coli. In addition
to an assessment of their antibacterial behavior, we investigate the
effects of R8:AZM coassemblies on CA inhibition, glucose uptake, and
bacterial membrane disruption. Our results suggest that the R8:AZM
coassembly not only retains the core functions of its constituents
but also displays an emergent and superior performance compared to
R8 or AZM alone.

## Materials and Methods
AZM and glucose were acquired
from Sigma-Aldrich, Bangalore, India.
All chemicals required for peptide synthesis including Fmoc-Arg (Pbf)-OH,
Fmoc-Rink amide aminomethyl polystyrene resin, piperazine, trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA), diisopropyl carbodiimide (DIC), piperidine, ethylcyano(hydroxyimino)acetate
(Oxyma), and 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene (DBU) were procured
from Sigma-Aldrich (Bangalore, India). N,N-Dimethylformamide anhydrous (DMF), dichloromethane, and
acetonitrile (ACN) were purchased from Finar Limited, Gujarat, India. E. coli (ATCC 25922) and Staphylococcus
aureus (ATCC 25923) were obtained from the Microbial
Type Culture Collection and Gene Bank (MTCC) in Chandigarh, India.
The present work was entirely performed with these repository-procured
nonpathogenic strains. No clinical samples were used at any time.
Soybean broth was sourced from Himedia in Mumbai, India. Propidium
iodide (PI) P1304MP and the LIVE/DEAD BacLight assay kit (L7007) were
procured from Invitrogen, Bangalore, India. The Carbonic Anhydrase
1 Inhibitor Screening Kit (ab283387) was purchased from Abcam, and
the manufacturer’s instructions were followed for use.

## Coassembly of R8 and AZM
Peptide R8 was synthesized
and characterized as described in the Supporting Information (Figures S1–S3 and Table S1). The coassembly
of R8 and AZM involves two steps. First, AZM was dissolved in ethanol,
and R8 was dissolved in deionized water. In the next step, an ethanolic
solution of AZM was added dropwise to the aqueous solution of R8.
The resulting mixture was subjected to shaking for a duration of 2
days (48 h). Subsequently, the solvent was removed using a vacuum
oven. The remaining solution was frozen and subjected to lyophilization.
The coassembled complex displayed a fluffy texture, and the color
of complexes was influenced by the proportions of R8 and AZM. R8:AZM
coassemblies were prepared in the (w/w) ratios of 1:2, 1:3, 1:4, and 1:5. To simplify the designation of
R8:AZM complexes, we have also referred to these as 1:2 (P/A), 1:3
(P/A), etc., when displaying certain experimental results. These coassemblies
of R8 and AZM provided the opportunity to study effects of different
AZM and peptide loading in the superstructure ultimately influencing
the structural and functional outcomes of the constructs.

## Physiochemical Characterization of R8:AZM Coassembly
Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) analysis was conducted by using a
Bruker X-ray diffractometer (Model D8 DISCOVER) equipped with GIXRD.
The scan speed employed was 0.2 s per step, and Cu Kα (λ
= 0.15418 nm) radiation was used. The analysis was performed on a
small sample holder, and the 2θ range of measurements spanned
from 5 to 60°. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was carried
out using a NETZSCH STA 449F3 instrument. The temperature range for
the analysis was set from 25 to 500 °C, and the heating rate
was maintained at 10 °C/min. Bare AZM, peptide, and the R8:AZM
coassembly were subjected to DSC analysis for study of the thermal
behavior and phase transitions. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
spectra of the lyophilized powder form of bare AZM and the coassemblies
were recorded using a PerkinElmer Spectrum Two spectrophotometer.
UV–vis absorption spectra were measured on a PerkinElmer LAMBDA
365 UV–vis spectrophotometer. Solutions of R8, AZM, and R8:AZM
complexes were prepared in a water and ethanol mixture at the same
concentration (10 ppm in 1 mL) and the absorbance spectra were measured
in the 180–800 nm wavelength range. An attenuated total reflectance
accessory in transmission mode was utilized, and the spectra were
acquired at a resolution of 4 cm–1 in the wavelength
range of 4000–400 cm–1. Scanning electron
micrographs were obtained by using a JEOL 7600F field-emission scanning
electron microscope (FESEM). Before imaging, the dry samples were
subjected to plasma coating using a platinum-based sputter coater
for 100–120 s under an argon gas environment. A Leica TCS SP8
confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) was used to capture the
confocal microscopy images. The CLSM setup included an inverted microscope
with a 63× oil objective lens, which was primarily used for imaging
purposes. The LASX software was employed to capture the images without
any further processing using imaging software.

## MIC Assay on R8:AZM
A fresh culture of bacterial cells
was prepared 1 day in advance. The culture was allowed to incubate
at a temperature of 37 °C until it reached the stationary phase.
Subsequently, the stationary phase culture was diluted using a soybean
medium and further incubated at 37 °C for a period of 2 h, allowing
it to reach the mid log phase. The absorbance of the culture was measured
at 600 nm, and the optical density (OD) was adjusted to 0.5. To achieve
a concentration of 5 × 105 colony-forming units/mL,
the mid log phase culture was diluted with broth. The lyophilized complex was reconstituted in water before
the experiment, and a 2-fold dilution series was prepared. 10 μL
of the diluted complex samples, along with appropriate negative and
positive controls, was added to 90 μL of the mid log phase bacterial
suspension in 96-well plates. Quadruplicate samples were prepared
for each condition. The plates were then incubated at 37 °C for
a duration of 17 h. After the incubation period, the absorbance of
the bacterial cultures was measured at 600 nm using a spectrophotometer.
Based on the absorbance data obtained, the percentage of survival
was calculated using shown below.
1 

## Microscopy of AZM- and R8:AZM-Treated E. coli
The morphology of untreated E. coli and upon treatment with bare AZM and separately with R8:AZM was
measured using a FESEM. Following the determination of MIC, the treated
and untreated bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation at
6000 rpm for 2–3 min. The resulting pellets were rinsed with
sterile PBS and incubated overnight in a 2.5% paraformaldehyde solution.
The fixation solution was subsequently removed, and the cells were
washed once with sterile PBS, followed by 3–4 washes with sterile
water. The pellets were then subjected to lyophilization to obtain
a dry powder of bacterial cells, and the cells were examined using
the FESEM. The BacLight bacterial viability kit was used to evaluate
the viability and membrane permeabilization of E. coli and S. aureus. This kit combines SYTO 9 and PI
dyes. E. coli and S. aureus treated with AZM and R8:AZM coassemblies were mixed with SYTO 9
and PI dyes for a confocal-microscopy-based assessment in a volume
ratio of 100:1. The resulting mixture was incubated in a dark environment
for 15 min. Confocal laser scanning microscopy of samples was performed
by excitation by using a 488 nm laser line. The emission from PI was
recorded between 600 and 650 nm, while the SYTO 9 emission window
spanned from 500 to 550 nm. 

## Glucose Uptake of E. coli upon
Treatment with AZM and R8:AZM
Based on the results of the
MIC experiment, a concentration of 500 μg/mL for each coassembled
complex was used for the glucose uptake experiment. Here, the phenol-sulfuric
acid assay enabled the determination of concentration and uptake of
glucose. Briefly, 10 μL of bare
AZM or separately R8:AZM coassembly was added to 90 μL of bacterial
suspension in a 96-well plate. The plate was then incubated at 37
°C for 6 h in the presence of a 10 μL solution of 1 mg/mL
glucose. Positive control samples containing untreated bacterial cells
were included in the same plate. After the incubation period, a 30
μL sample was taken from each well, and the phenol-sulfuric
acid methodology was used for determining the remaining glucose in
the bacterial suspension. 150 μL of concentrated sulfuric acid
and 30 μL of 5% phenol were added to 30 μL of the bacterial
suspension. The reaction mixture was incubated for 15 min at room
temperature, and the absorbance was measured at 490 nm using a Varian
Cary 50 Scan UV Visible spectrophotometer.

## CA Inhibition Assay
We used a commercially available
CA inhibitor screening kit as per the manufacturer’s details.
Briefly, assay buffer volumes corresponding to background control,
enzyme control, inhibitor control, and the test samples were added
to a 96-well plate. The coassemblies were dissolved separately in
DMSO and distilled water for use as test samples. Following the addition
of controls and test samples in wells, the mixtures were incubated
at room temperature for 10 min. 50 mL of CA substrate was added to
each well followed by absorbance measurements at 340 nm. The measurements
were started immediately after the addition of the CA substrate and
continued for a duration of 60–90 min at 37 °C. The absorbance
versus time measurements were used for selecting absorbance values
at specific time points that can be used for determining the percentage
(%) relative inhibition or relative activity.
These absorbance
measurements provide valuable information like percentage relative
inhibition calculated as follows
2 

## Outer Membrane Permeability Assay
For the NPN membrane
permeability assay, cells were cultured until they reached an OD of
0.5 at 600 nm (OD-600). They were then incubated with bare AZM and
separately with R8:AZM coassemblies for 0, 30, 2, and 4 h at 37 °C.
Subsequently, the cells were subjected to centrifugation at 8000 rpm
for 5 min at 4 °C. After removing the supernatant, the cells
were resuspended in a 5 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazine ethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES) buffer. 100 μL of cell samples and 100 μL
of 50 μM NPN in HEPES were transferred into a 96-well plate
with a black Polysorp bottom (Nunc). Fluorescence measurements were
recorded at 37 °C, with excitation and emission wavelengths set
at 355 and 402 nm, respectively. Experiments
were performed at least in triplicate, and the % NPN uptake measurement
was calculated.
3 In the context provided, F(obs) represents the fluorescence observed from cells when exposed
to different R8:AZM coassemblies. F(control) refers
to the fluorescence observed from cells in the presence of NPN, while F(B) indicates the fluorescence observed from NPN in the
HEPES buffer alone.

## Hoechst Accumulation Assay
Fresh bacterial cell cultures
were prepared 1 day before experimentation. The culture was incubated
at 37 °C until it reached the stationary phase. Then, the culture
was diluted with a soybean medium and further incubated at 37 °C
for 2 h to attain the mid log phase. The OD of the culture was adjusted
to 0.5 at a wavelength of 600 nm. After centrifuging the cells at
15,000 rpm for 15 min, they were suspended in sterile PBS, and the
OD was readjusted to 0.5 at 600 nm. Each well of a flat-bottom black
plate was then inoculated with 176 μL of the cell suspension
and 4 μL of either R8:AZM coassemblies (500 μg/mL) or
CCCP (62.5 μg/mL) at this concentration. Hoechst dye H33258
(20 μL) was added to the wells to achieve a final concentration
of 2.5 μM. Fluorescence was measured from the top of the wells
with excitation and emission wavelengths of 360 and 460 nm, respectively.
The measurements were recorded for 80 min, with a 10 min interval
between each reading cycle. 

## Statistical Analysis
Measurements were performed in
triplicate and are reported as mean ± standard deviation calculated
with n = 3. The statistical analyses included ordinary
one-way ANOVA, and the resulting statistical significance (p values) with p ≤ 0.05, p ≤ 0.01, and p ≤ 0.0001
is denoted with one asterisk (*), two asterisks (**), and four asterisks
(****), respectively. Nonsignificant p values are
not represented.

## Results and Discussion

## Structure of R8:AZM Coassemblies
The PXRD of AZM ( ) revealed multiple
sharp peaks that suggested a crystalline nature of the compound. In
contrast to AZM, the PXRD of R8 indicated amorphous behavior, in agreement
with previous reports. Remarkably, the coassemblies of R8 with different
mole ratios of AZM displayed new crystalline peaks in the PXRD ( ). The PXRD of R8:AZM
coassemblies highlights the crystalline behavior of the complexes.
 Several sharp diffraction peaks were observed in
the PXRD of AZM
at 10.13, 12.25, 16.60, 17.50, 18.21, 19.70, 20.11, 20.39, 21.12,
21.93, 23.78, 25.06, 26.01, 27.56, 28.74, 29.64, 30.33, 31.72, and
33.41° and some less intense peaks that correlated with strong
crystal packing in the solid state. For the 1:2 R8:AZM coassembly,
three peaks of lesser intensity were detected at approximately 13.74°
(6.4 Å), 19.70° (4.5 Å), and 20.25° (4.4 Å),
suggesting its amorphous nature obtained by cation–π
and hydrogen bonding. In the 1:3 coassembly, three sharp and intense
peaks were observed at 13.82° (6.4 Å), 20.21° (4.4
Å), 23.66° (3.8 Å), and 24.92° (3.6 Å), along
with other smaller peaks highlighting semicrystalline characteristics
of this coassembly associated with strong cation–π and
hydrogen bonding. The 1:4 coassembly displayed sharp peaks at 13.84°
(6.4 Å), 19.74° (4.5 Å), 20.29° (4.4 Å),
22.44° (4 Å), 26.15° (3.4 Å), and 27.11°
(3.3 Å) along with few small peaks corresponding to cation–π,
hydrogen bonding, and π–π interactions controlling
the crystalline nature of this assembly. The additional peaks observed
for various R8:AZM complexes are listed in Table S2. The 1:5 coassembly exhibited four sharp peaks at 13.86°
(6.4 Å), 19.72° (4.5 Å), 22.46° (4 Å), and
26.92° (3.3 Å) correlated to cation–π, hydrogen
bonding, and π–π interactions to maintain its strong
crystalline characteristics.
We examined the FTIR spectra of
the complexes to assess bonding
interactions stabilizing the R8:AZM coassembly. R8 displayed characteristic
vibrational bands at 3175, 1657, and 1633 representing guanidine,
terminal amide I, and backbone amide I vibrations ( ). The amide I peak originates
from CO stretching appearing in the range of 1600–1800 cm–1, while amide II and amide III relate to C–N
stretching and N–H in-plane in the range of 1470–1570
and 1230–1350 cm–1, respectively. The peaks at 1657 and 1633 cm–1 denote terminal and peptide backbone carbonyl groups. The peak at
3175 cm–1, with a hump at 3379 cm–1, signifies the guanidine NH of the peptide side chain and the terminal
primary amine (NH2) bond, respectively. The FTIR spectra
of R8, AZM, and different R8:AZM coassemblies are shown in . For AZM, characteristic
peaks were observed at 3291, 3175, 1363, and 1173 cm–1, corresponding to the asymmetrical and symmetrical stretching frequency
of the sulphonamide NH2 and asymmetrical and symmetrical
frequencies of the SO2 bond, respectively. The peak at 1678 cm–1 is attributed to
the amide I band vibrational frequency, while the peak at 3090 cm–1 is likely due to the N–H amide vibration.
Other major peaks appearing at 1542 and 1434 cm–1 are associated with the ring C=N asymmetric and symmetric
stretching modes, while the hump at 1573 cm–1 is
due to the N–H in-plane deformation.
 The 1:2 R8:AZM coassembly showed peaks at 1367
and 1166 cm–1, corresponding to the asymmetric and
symmetric stretching
of the SO2 group, implying its involvement in the coassembly
process through hydrogen bonding. The asymmetric and symmetric stretching
peaks of the sulphonamide NH2 group appeared at 3327 and
3196 cm–1, respectively, highlighting the strengthening
of the sulphonamide NH2, further supporting the participation
of the SO2 group of AZM in the 1:2 coassembly formation.
The hypsochromic shift of the NH2 band of the peptide at
3327 cm–1 and the disappearance of the guanidium
amine band are associated with strong participation of the free amine
and the guanidium amine of the peptide toward the 1:2 coassembly ( and Table S3). The disappearance of the terminal
carbonyl peak and no alteration of the backbone carbonyl stretching
indicate the engagement of only the former in the 1:2 coassembly.
The bathochromic shift of the carbonyl and C=N bond of the
AZM at 1689 and 1554 cm–1 suggests the indirect
involvement of these groups. These results point to the direct involvement
of the SO2 group of AZM with the free amine, guanidinium
amine, and terminal carbonyl groups of the R8 peptide via hydrogen
bonding and van der Waals interactions. Details of the FTIR bands
corresponding to different functional groups in AZM, R8, and the R8:AZM
coassemblies are described in Table S3.
For the 1:3 coassembly, shifting of the SO2 peak and
peptide free amine peaks at 1166 and 3324 cm–1,
respectively, and the disappearance of the guanidium amine and terminal
carbonyl indicated significant involvement of these groups in 1:3
R8:AZM coassembled structures. The bathochromic shift of the sulphonamide
amine, carbonyl CO, and the C=N groups of AZM at 3324 cm–1 (asymmetric), 3206 cm–1 (symmetric),
1689 cm–1, and 1554 cm–1 indicates
the participation of the corresponding groups toward the 1:3 coassembly
( ). A similar
trend was observed for the 1:4 R8:AZM coassembly with the shifting
of the SO2 and free amine bands at 1166 and 3333 cm–1. The indirect participation of the sulphonamide amine
and the carbonyl group toward the 1:4 coassembly is also evident from
the bathochromic peak shifting at 3333 cm–1 (asymmetric),
3225 cm–1 (symmetric), and 1699 cm–1, respectively, for these groups. For 1:5 coassembly, peak shifting
of the SO2 and free amine bands was observed at 1166 and
3329 cm–1. Moreover, red shifting of the corresponding
sulfonamide amine and carbonyl bonds at 3329 cm–1 (asymmetric), 3214 cm–1 (symmetric), and 1691
cm–1, respectively, suggests an indirect participation
of these groups toward the 1:5 R8:AZM coassembly.
The combination
of PXRD and FTIR results for R8:AZM complexes suggests
precise association of the constituent components into distinctive
architectures. We assessed the morphology of the R8:AZM complexes
by a FESEM. The SEM micrograph of the bare peptide displayed a spherical
morphology, while the 1:2 R8:AZM complex showed the formation of flat
sheet-like structures ( ). Increasing the proportion of AZM further resulted in a
dense network of ribbons in the 1:3 complex. This was followed by
a noticeable shortening and stiffening into stick-like architecture
in the 1:4 complex. The 1:5 complex displayed thin sheets embedded
in one another. The formation of ribbons, sheets, and stick-like structures
for various proportions of AZM in the R8:AZM coassembly points to
the ability of the small molecule to coordinate with the peptide systematically
and periodically. The structures observed in SEM justify the inferences
of crystalline behavior from PXRD results and the participation of
well-defined functional groups on the R8 and AZM moieties.
 We performed DSC to compare the thermal behavior
of R8:AZM vis-à-vis
bare R8 and AZM. The DSC thermograms of R8, AZM, and R8:AZM (1:5 w/w) coassembly are shown in . The DSC data of AZM revealed
a sharp endothermic peak at 262.29 °C. Interestingly, the R8:AZM
complex (1:5 w/w) showed a single
sharp peak at 259.94 °C. Considering the DSC thermogram of R8
with a peak at 310.98 °C, the thermal behavior of R8:AZM (1:5 w/w) is clearly dominated by the bare drug.
These results align with the greater crystallinity of the complex,
as inferred from XRD and SEM results.
 We next measured the UV–visible spectra
of w/w R8:AZM complexes in water.
The absorbance at
264 nm increases progressively from 1:2 R8:AZM to 1:5 R8:AZM (Figure S6). This absorbance band is characteristic
of AZM. Bare R8 shows an absorbance maximum
at 189 nm, corresponding to the peptide backbone. The steady increase
in absorbance at 264 nm confirms the increasing AZM content in the
complexes with w/w ratios of 1:2
to 1:5.

## MIC Assay of R8:AZM Complexes
As part of the assessment
of functional performance of the complexes, we first investigated
the effect of AZM and R8:AZM complexes on the growth of E. coli. Notwithstanding reports of AZM use against
pathogenic strains, , the drug is not considered as
a classical antibiotic. As shown in , AZM in water achieves ∼36% cell
killing at 500 μg/mL. The 1:3, 1:4, and 1:5 R8:AZM complexes
display comparable MIC profiles to that of bare AZM in water, while
the 1:2 complex displays a superior ∼46% cell killing (Table S4). The comparison of antibacterial behavior
of R8:AZM coassemblies with bare AZM should factor in the relatively
lower amount of AZM present in the coassemblies. The lower proportion
of AZM in all the w/w coassemblies
does not diminish the observed antibacterial activity. Thus, the efficiency
of the R8:AZM coassemblies is clearly superior compared to bare AZM
solvated in water. Compared to bare AZM, the R8:AZM complexes result
in greater increases in % inhibition over the concentration range
tested. Interestingly, each of the R8:AZM complexes displays a unique
dose-dependent % inhibition of E. coli. For example, the % inhibition of E. coli increases from 23% at 125 μg/mL to 47.17% at 500 μg/mL
upon treatment with 1:2 R8:AZM. In contrast, the % inhibition only
increases from 18.68% at 31.25 μg/mL to 23% at 125 μg/mL.
On the other hand, treatment with 1:5 R8:AZM results in increase in
% inhibition of E. coli from 14.72%
at 31.25 μg/mL to 18.64% at 125 μg/mL and thereafter to
35.4% at 500 μg/mL, implying a sharper change across both low
and high ranges of concentrations of the complex. The pattern of bacterial
inhibition displayed by the R8:AZM complexes suggests an underlying
mechanism that is strongly connected to the singular disposition of
R8 in each structure and the ability of the overall superstructure
to interact with the bacteria. Further, the comparable % inhibition
observed for all the complexes especially at the higher concentrations
(>125 μg/mL) cautions against proclaiming the 1:2 complex
as
being most potent toward E. coli. We
studied the effect of the R8:AZM complexes on the growth of S. aureus, to obtain additional perspective on the
interaction of R8:AZM complexes with bacteria possessing different
membrane and cellular architecture (Figure S7). Interestingly, R8 displays a dose-dependent inhibition of S. aureus with nearly 75–80% inhibition at
concentrations of 125–500 μg/mL. Such behavior of R8
against S. aureus has been reported
previously. The 1:2 and 1:4 complexes
of R8:AZM achieve nearly 85–88% inhibition of S. aureus. In contrast, the 1:3 and 1:5 complexes
remain mostly ineffective across a broad concentration range. The
superior inhibition of S. aureus by
specific w/w R8:AZM complexes highlights
the emergent behavior of the coassembled structures. The high efficacy
of the 1:2 and 1:4 complexes could be rationalized based on optimal
structural characteristics of each complex that enable sufficient
membrane disruption combined with the delivery of AZM. Conversely,
the 1:3 and 1:5 complexes likely preclude favorable cell penetration
by the constituent R8 along with ineffective delivery of AZM.
 

## Treatment of E. coli with R8:AZM
Complexes
The presence of CPP R8 in the coassembly raises
the prospects of changes in the cell morphology of E. coli upon treatment with the complexes. The untreated
control group of E. coli exhibits smooth
surfaces and rod-shaped microstructures confirming the integrity and
intact morphology of the cells ( a). The treatment with R8 ( b) results in modest membrane disruption
and roughness. Singular changes were observed upon treatment with
AZM and various w/w ratios of the
R8:AZM complexes. E. coli treated with
AZM displays roughness on the cell surface suggesting some alterations
in the membrane structure ( c). SEM images of E. coli treated with the 1:2 ( d) and 1:3 ( e) complexes reveal numerous tiny vesicles on the bacterial
surface called blebs or outer membrane vesicles. , These vesicles are intracellular contents of E. coli that have been released through blebbing but without significant
deformation of the bacterial cell membrane. − Treatment with
the 1:4 ( e)
and 1:5 ( f)
complexes results in membrane shrinkage and the emergence of prominent
pores. Three different outcomes are evident from the SEM of E. coli treated with AZM and R8:AZM complexes: (1)
the introduction of surface roughness on the membrane without significant
structural distortion, (2) the appearance of blebs, and (3) the formation
of large indentations and pores. Notably, the blebbing and large pore
formation are observed for R8:AZM complexes with specific w/w proportions of the constituents. Thus,
each R8:AZM complex likely places a unique set of constraints on the
efficacy of its constituent components. The results of treatment of E. coli with R8:AZM coassembly suggest an approach
for modulation of hitherto unreported membrane disruptive potential
of AZM. We also measured SEM of S. aureus upon treatment with bare R8, bare AZM, and the w/w R8:AZM complexes. The smooth surface and intact
morphology of untreated S. aureus was
disrupted to varying extent upon treatment with bare R8, AZM, and
the different complexes (Figure S8). While
treatment with AZM results in a slight surface roughness, more pronounced
morphological damage is evident upon treatment with R8. Further, treatment
with the lower-ratio AZM complexes (1:2 and 1:3) results in membrane
ruffling, while the 1:4 and 1:5 complexes lead to the formation of
pores and dramatic changes in membrane shape.
 

## Bacterial Viability Staining
We next performed a live/dead
cell assay via a CLSM. The live/dead visualization using the BacLight viability kit relies on the ability of the dye
SYTO 9 to cross all cellular membranes and stain live cells green,
and the dye PI to permeate disrupted cell membranes and stain dead
cells red after displacement of SYTO 9. The results of BacLight-aided visualization for E. coli treated with AZM and R8:AZM complexes are
shown in .
Cells treated with AZM displayed green and red fluorescent signals
in the SYTO 9 and PI channels, respectively, indicating the bactericidal
effect of the drug compared to the untreated cells. Interestingly,
the cells treated with 1:2 and 1:5 R8:AZM complexes displayed a progressively
greater proportion of dead/live cells in comparison to the treatment
with AZM alone. We detected strong green fluorescence intensity in E. coli cells upon treatment with the R8:AZM coassemblies.
The more pronounced appearance of red fluorescence intensity upon
treatment with 1:5 R8:AZM suggests the successful replacement and
quenching by PI in this case. The live/dead
cell assay is a more sensitive albeit indirect assay, indicating inhibition
of bacterial growth compared to the MIC experiment. The assay relies
on the suitable permeability of membranes for the dyes SYTO 9 and
PI to manifest their presence. While R8, AZM, and R8:AZM complexes
are all responsible for varying extent of membrane disruption, the
results of the live/dead cell assay on E. coli clearly indicate a pronounced membrane disruption and cell killing
effect of the 1:5 R8:AZM complex. These observations also align with
the findings from the SEM images of complex-treated cells and support
the significant disruption in bacterial membrane integrity by 1:5
R8:AZM compared to bare R8 or AZM.
 

## CA Enzyme Inhibition Assay
We next investigated the
performance of the w/w R8:AZM complexes
toward the inhibition of enzyme CA. The enzyme inhibitory activity
of each w/w R8:AZM complex was studied
by using a CA II inhibitor screening kit. As shown in , the % relative inhibition
of CA II by all of the R8:AZM complexes is on par with the inhibition
observed with bare AZM. The % relative inhibition was calculated compared
to a standard inhibitor provided with the CA inhibitor screening kit.
The effective inhibition observed upon treatment with the 1:2 R8:AZM
is superior compared to bare AZM, considering the lower proportion
of AZM present in the complex. CA inhibition by AZM is based on the
blockage of active-site zinc, a mechanism that is unlikely to be affected
by the presence of R8. While the observed inhibition of CA by different w/w R8:AZM complexes does not indicate
an explicit negative effect of R8, the greater percentage of CA inhibition
achieved by the 1:2 R8:AZM in water suggests an optimum dosage of
AZM that is afforded by the corresponding complex. In this regard,
CA inhibition by AZM in DMSO is observed to an extent comparable to
that by the R8:AZM complexes in DMSO (Figure S4).
 

## Glucose Uptake by E. coli upon
Treatment with R8:AZM Complexes
CA inhibition is likely to
disrupt the intracellular pH balance, impairing the functioning of
transport proteins responsible for glucose uptake. In this regard,
we studied the uptake of glucose by E. coli treated with bare AZM and the different w/w complexes of R8:AZM. The complexes are membrane-responsive
and potent inhibitors of CAs and thus likely to directly and indirectly
affect glucose uptake by bacteria. The glucose consumption was assayed
by the phenol-sulfuric acid assay, and the results are depicted in . Compared to the
treatment with bare AZM, treatment with the R8:AZM complexes with
a greater proportion of AZM showed progressively lower glucose uptake.
The lower glucose uptake observed for bacteria treated with various w/w R8:AZM complexes is likely due to the
ability of these complexes to effect superior membrane disruption
and bacterial CA inhibition compared to bare AZM. The significantly
lower glucose uptake upon treatment with 1:5 R8:AZM could also be
correlated with the pronounced membrane disruption through pore formation
in E. coli observed for the complex.
Interestingly, bare R8 affects the glucose uptake to an extent comparable
to that of the 1:2 and 1:3 complexes. While AZM has not been explicitly
established as a disruptor of the E. coli membrane, it may possibly inhibit glucose uptake by E. coli based on its CA inhibition. These results highlight the distinctive convergent effects
of R8:AZM coassembly toward E. coli, in terms of bacterial membrane disruption and CA inhibition.
 

## Membrane Integrity of E. coli upon Treatment with R8:AZM Complexes
Next, we used the
NPN assay to investigate the integrity of the outer bacterial membrane
after treatment with the R8:AZM complexes. NPN displays enhanced fluorescence
in case of outer membrane disruptions, resulting in its permeation
into the periplasmic space and interaction with phospholipids accessible
therein (Figure S5). The increase in NPN
fluorescence can be expressed as a percentage uptake, reflecting the
extent of outer membrane disruption that has occurred. The % NPN uptake
recorded at 6 h manifests uniquely for each R8:AZM complex ( ). The % NPN uptake
observed upon treatment with R8 is significantly less compared with
treatment with AZM or any of the R8:AZM complexes. Interestingly,
the % NPN uptake observed upon treatment with the 1:3 R8:AZM is greater
than that observed with the 1:2 and 1:4 complexes. Two aspects are
evident from the results of the % NPN uptake. First, the % NPN for
the 1:3 and 1:5 complexes are more than that observed with bare R8
and AZM. Considering the indirect nature of the NPN assay, and the
varying membrane disruption observed across all the agents, a distinctive
facet of action of the 1:3 R8:AZM complex is likely manifested in
these results. Second, the high % NPN uptake observed for the 1:5
R8:AZM is consistent with the pronounced membrane disruption observed
across our other experiments.
 

## Hoechst Accumulation Assay
Next, we used Hoechst H33258
to evaluate the efflux activity of E. coli. H33258 is widely used as a fluorescent probe and can report the
bacterial efflux pump function. We compared the effect of bare AZM
and R8:AZM coassemblies in different w/w ratios with a known efflux pump inhibitor CCCP, via monitoring of
H33258 accumulation in E. coli. Treatment
with R8 alone is accompanied by negligible change in Hoechst H33258
fluorescence intensity over the first 30 min with a gradual decrease
in fluorescence intensity thereafter. Treatment with the 1:2 R8:AZM
complex is accompanied by a rapid rise in H33258 fluorescence. The
behavior of the 1:3 R8:AZM complex closely mirrors that of the 1:2
complex. Bare AZM produces the lowest overall change in H33258 accumulation
( ). While
the known inhibitor CCCP is slower than the 1:2 and 1:3 R8:AZM, it
ultimately results in a greater accumulation of H33258, indicating
superior long-term inhibitory activity. As a positive control, heat-inactivated
bacteria showed rapid and substantial H33258 accumulation (data not
shown). The gradually increasing H33258 accumulation profile displayed
upon treatment with the 1:5 R8:AZM complex is consistent with the
slower, yet stronger, bacterial membrane disruption observed for this
construct across other experiments. The unique efflux pump inhibitory
effect of the R8:AZM complexes cannot be attributed simply to the
presence of the CPP R8 in each case. Instead, the unique structures
of the R8:AZM coassemblies likely enable distinctive interactions
with the bacterial membrane, resulting in a modulation of the overall
effects.
 

## Mechanism of R8:AZM Coassembly and Interaction with Bacteria
The well-known cation–π interactions between guanidinium
of arginine and the π ring of tetrodotoxin in voltage-gated
sodium channels served as a motivation for exploring the supramolecular
coassembly of R8 with AZM. We hoped to
exploit potential cation–π interactions between the guanidinium
group of R8 and the thiadiazole group of AZM, and hydrogen bonding
between sulfonamide SO2 of AZM and free amine of R8, toward
coassembly. However, the guanidinium groups that are projected to
interact with AZM as part of such coassembly are not isolated moieties,
being side chain residues of peptide R8. The combination of (1) bonding
associations between guanidinium and AZM, (2) proportion of AZM with
respect to guanidinium groups, and (3) structural constraints of a
peptide likely results in the remarkable pattern of coassembly observed
between R8 and AZM (Figure S9).
The
R8:AZM complexes possess unique combinations of the following: (1)
disposition of R8 based on the structure of the coassembled complex,
(2) quantity and stability of AZM present in the complex, and (3)
propensity of the complex to interact with the bacterial membrane.
These factors can be invoked to rationalize the interaction of each w/w R8:AZM complex with E. coli. The 1:2 R8:AZM complex likely renders a
suitable disposition for R8 to exert cell-penetrating action and movement
of AZM into the cells. The optimum disruption of the bacterial membrane
by 1:2 R8:AZM, without saturating the bacterial surface, is manifested
in the form of blebs (observed in SEM, d). In contrast, bare AZM increases the surface
roughness without achieving substantive pore formation. Similarly,
the 1:4 and 1:5 R8:AZM complexes likely possess dimensions and geometry
of structures that can create pronounced pore formation in the bacterial
membrane. The significantly greater pore formation likely disrupts
the functioning of membrane proteins or transporters, such as those
engaged in glucose uptake. While AZM is primarily known as a CA inhibitor,
the availability of a high proportion of AZM in the 1:5 complex may
be responsible for the direct interference with glucose transporters.
Interestingly, the 1:2 R8:AZM complex restricts glucose uptake to
a somewhat intermediate level between that exerted by R8 alone and
AZM alone ( ). Nevertheless, while the 1:5 complex generates greater outer membrane
disruption (as also indicated by a higher % NPN uptake, ), its overall
bacterial inhibitory effect is lower compared to that of the 1:2 complex.
Each w/w R8:AZM complex thus manifests
a unique combination of the three parameters cited earlier, toward
their interaction with bacteria.

## Comparison with Previous Reports
We examined literature
reports on the antibacterial activity of AZM to provide perspective
on our results. These are summarized in . Interestingly, in all prior reports, AZM
was used upon solvation in an organic medium. The poor water solubility
of AZM is known to adversely impact its bioavailability and efficacy. While the apparent MIC values for the use of
AZM dissolved in organic solvent may be superior to the MIC of R8:AZM
observed in the present work, our results suggest that complexation
with R8 results in improved bioavailability from aqueous solutions.
Considering the relative ease of physical complexation compared to
chemical modification and conjugation-based efforts for enhancing
solubility of AZM, the present work offers a promising strategy for
enhancing therapeutic performance of AZM and potentially other BCS
class IV drugs.
 

## Broader Implications and Limitations of the Present Strategy
In this work, we sought to investigate the structure–function
correlations in physical complexes of AZM with R8. While the strategy
can be applied toward complexation of any established pharmaceutical
agent with a CPP, we would like to highlight a few aspects of the
work that connect with drug design and pharmaceutical formulations.
First, the approach could offer meaningful solutions for executing
multitarget-directed therapeutics. Multitargeting seeks to reduce
or eliminate side effects by use of single compounds that can strike
their cognate targets. However, discovery of such multitarget ligands
poses unique and additional challenges beyond those encountered by
a traditional drug discovery paradigm. Simultaneous administration
of multiple drugs appears as a straightforward solution but is fraught
with mismatches and incompatibilities in their pharmacokinetics. The
present approach offers a relatively straightforward strategy for
assessing performance of two or more drugs via physical complexation
with CPPs. Second, and on a related note, the present strategy offers
compelling lines of investigation toward intracellular targeting of
drug-resistant bacteria. Several novel approaches for carrying and
delivering two or more drugs have been reported in this regard. − Agents that can cross eukaryotic membrane barriers before exerting
bacterial killing action are well-placed for countering the ability
of the microorganisms to evolve and bypass disruptive circumstances.
The distinctive topologies of physically complexed CPPs with suitable
small molecules could exert membrane disruption across eukaryotic
and bacterial membranes and address inaccessibility of antimicrobial
resistant (AMR) strains. In this context, the small molecule component
could possess additional targeting capabilities that can bypass specific
AMR mechanisms.
The present work is constrained by three main
limitations. First, the work indicates a novel correlation of coassembled
structures of R8:AZM with functional behavior in the form of bacterial
membrane disruption and bacterial inhibition. However, AZM is not
a classical antibiotic, and its behavior as part of the R8:AZM complexes
cannot be generalized toward small molecule antibacterial agents.
Second, while the formation of coassembled structures by R8:AZM and
the engagement of those structures with bacteria can be rationalized post facto, more information is necessary for being able
to predict the activity of such coassembled structures. Third, the
ability of drugs to coassemble with R8 (or any other charged peptide)
cannot be easily ascertained beforehand. While the presence of specific
functional groups such as π rings on the drug is likely to benefit
association with the charged peptide, each drug/peptide complex would
need to be individually scrutinized.

## Conclusions
In this work, we have prepared coassemblies
of AZM with octaarginine
(R8) in different weight ratios and characterized the complexes using
a combination of PXRD, FTIR, SEM, and DSC. The R8:AZM coassemblies
display progressively greater crystallinity with an increasing proportion
of AZM. Coassemblies of AZM with R8 relied on association between
SO2 and sulphonamide NH2 groups of AZM with
the guanidinium amine, free amine, and terminal carbonyl groups of
R8. The coassembly of R8 with a lower proportion of AZM results in
more flexible ribbon-like architectures, in contrast to shorter stick-like
structures at higher proportions of AZM. While the coassemblies retain
the properties of the constituent R8 and AZM, they manifest into distinctive
patterns of interaction with E. coli. Notably, while the 1:2 R8:AZM complex displays superior inhibitory
activity on E. coli, the 1:5 complex
results in greatest restriction on glucose uptake. The R8:AZM complexes
inhibit CA II with superior efficacy compared to bare AZM. The treatment
of bacteria with the 1:5 complex resulted in pronounced membrane damage
that persisted over time. Such disruptions may also be responsible
for adversely affecting glucose uptake by the bacteria.
The
novel findings that emerge from this work are (1) the ability
of R8 and AZM to coassemble into a distinctive set of structures based
solely on differences in their relative proportions, (2) the engagement
of R8:AZM complexes with E. coli as
more than the sum of their parts, and (3) the emergent behavior of
the R8:AZM complexes vis-à-vis interaction with E. coli likely based on their distinctive supramolecular
architectures. To the best of our knowledge, such effects have not
been previously demonstrated with the use of CPPs in general and octaarginine
in particular.
Currently, we are examining variations in the
CPP motif. Among
arginine-rich CPPs, peptides possessing between 7 and 15 arginine
residues are suggested to possess the most effective cell penetration
ability. Considering the reliance of
our approach on establishment of soft forces between the guanidinium
group of arginine and suitably placed hydrogen bonding and π
rings of the pharmaceutical agent, we are studying the effect of varying
the lengths of arginine-rich peptides toward formation of peptide–drug
superstructures and their corresponding functional effects. In the
same context, we are exploring antimicrobial peptides and the potential
modulation of their behavior upon complexation with specific drugs.

## Acknowledgments
B.D. is grateful to CSIR for financial support through
grant no. 02(0342)/18/EMR-II. The authors are grateful to the Central
Instrumental Facility (CIF) of IIT Gandhinagar for their support toward
this work.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.4c06800.
Solid-phase peptide synthesis of R8; MALDI mass spectral
characterization of octaarginine; circular dichroism spectral characterization
of octaarginine; chromatogram of R8 peptide purified by preparative
HPLC; purity of peaks in HPLC chromatogram; assessment of CA inhibition;
schematic of membrane damage as measured by NPN fluorescence; 2θ
values of R8:AZM complexes; FTIR values of AZM coassemblies with R8;
UV–visible spectrum of R8, AZM, and R8:AZM complexes in ethanol–water;
% inhibition of E. coli with AZM and
coassemblies; MIC plot of AZM, R8, and coassemblies against S. aureus; SEM of untreated and R8-, AZM-, and coassembly-treated S. aureus; and potential cation–π and
hydrogen-bonding interactions in coassembly and illustration of the
possible route to coassembly (PDF)

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
ao4c06800_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
ao4c06800_si_001.pdf