4638plantbiojPlant Biotechnology JournalPlant Biotechnol JWileyPMC1075401110754011113739363775066110.1111/pbi.14177
SlERF.G3‐Like mediates a hierarchical transcriptional cascade to regulate ripening and metabolic changes in tomato fruit
YouShengjie WuYu LiWen LiuXiaofeng TangQinlan HuangFengkun LiYan WangHsihua LiuMingchun ZhangYang 
1
Key Laboratory of Bio‐resource and Eco‐environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's Republic of China
2
Sanya Nanfan Research Institute of Hainan University, Hainan Yazhou Bay Seed Laboratory, Sanya, China
3
College of Tropical Crops, Hainan University, Haikou, China*

Correspondence (Tel +86 28 85470795; fax +86 82 85412571; email yang.zhang@scu.edu.cn)
✉Corresponding author.
2692023221165165–18029122023© 2023 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

## Summary
The tomato ripening process contains complex changes, including ethylene signalling, cell wall softening and numerous metabolic changes. So far, much is still unknown about how tomato plants precisely coordinate fruit maturation and metabolic regulation. In this paper, the ERF family transcription factor SlERF.G3‐Like in tomato was found to be involved in the regulation of ethylene synthesis, cell wall degradation and the flavonoid pathway. We show that the master ripening regulator SlRIN was found to directly bind to the promoter region of SlERF.G3‐Like to activate its expression. In addition, we managed to increase the production of resveratrol derivatives from ~1.44 mg/g DW in E8:VvStSy line to ~2.43 mg/g DW by crossing p35S: SlERF.G3‐Like with the E8:VvStSy line. Our data provide direct evidence that SlERF.G3‐Like, a hierarchical transcriptional factor, can directly manipulate pathways in which tomatoes can coordinate fruit maturation and metabolic changes. We also attest that SlERF.G3‐Like can be used as an effective tool for phenylpropanoid metabolic engineering.
Keywords: tomato, ERF, phenylpropanoid, ripening, metabolic engineering

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2023 Jul 25; Received 2023 Mar 14; Accepted 2023 Sep 2; Collection date 2024 Jan.

## Introduction
The ripening of tomatoes, the representative climacteric fruit, is controlled by the plant hormone ethylene, a range of transcription factors and other developmental cues (Bapat et al.,  ). During tomato fruit ripening, ethylene production and signalling, fruit softening and metabolic changes take place under the tight control of a regulatory network (Giovannoni,  ; Seymour et al., ). This regulatory network of transcription factors collectively determines the expression of downstream ripening‐related genes (Li et al.,  ).
During tomato ripening, various genes are differentially expressed and the fruit undergoes several physiological and biochemical changes, including hardness, flavour, colour and aroma (Giovannoni,  ; Karlova et al.,  ; Qin et al.,  ). At the onset of ripening, like other climatic fruits, tomato fruit experiences a burst of respiration and a surge in ethylene production (Alexander and Grierson,  ). The ethylene biosynthetic pathway has been well characterized and involves the action of two key enzymes, ACC synthase (ACS) and ACC oxidase (ACO) (Hoffman,  ). Researchers demonstrated that SlACS2 and SlACS4 were consistently expressed in increasing amounts during ripening and were the central genes expressed during tomato ripening and that, among the six ACOs, SlACO1 and SlACO4 appeared to be more important (Liu et al.,  ). To date, a rich literature confirms the involvement of transcription factors in the regulation of ethylene biosyntheses, such as RIPENING‐INHIBITOR (RIN) (Vrebalov et al.,  ), COLORLESS NONRIPENING (CNR)(Manning et al.,  ) and NON‐RIPENING (NOR) (Giovannoni,  ). There are certain differences between SlRIN mutants induced by CRISPR/Cas9 and natural mutant rin, but SlRIN is still essential for the maturation process (Ito et al., ; Li et al.,  , ; Vrebalov et al.,  ). SlRIN significantly impacts genes involved in maturation within this regulatory network. Master regulator modulation often involves direct regulation, interactions and feedback regulation. A better understanding of the function of master transcription factors in tomato is gained through the study of hierarchical transcriptional cascades.
Fruit softening is also a prominent feature during the ripening of climacteric fruit (Karlova et al.,  ; Shi et al.,  ). Hemicellulose and pectin in the cell wall are solubilized and depolymerized by various cell wall‐related enzymes, leading to softening fruits (Karlova et al.,  ; Wang et al.,  ). The early report showed that polygalacturonase (PG) activity in tomatoes could be reduced by antisense RNA (Smith,  ). After silencing SlPG, no difference in the firmness of tomato fruit was detected by vertical pressing compared with controls, although the inhibition of the expression of SlPG did improve its storage life (Schuch et al.,  ). However, simultaneous inhibition of LePG and LeEXP1 expression caused significantly firmer tomato fruit (Powell et al.,  ). Also, silencing SlPL enhanced fruit firmness (Yang et al.,  ). These studies suggest that softening is a complex process involving the synergistic action of multiple enzymes.
In addition, the ripening process involves many metabolic changes that affect not only the texture of the fruit but also its taste, colour and aroma (Gao et al.,  ; Qin et al.,  ; Shi et al.,  ). The change in carotenoids has been thoroughly studied, and it significantly increases during the maturation process (Klee and Giovannoni,  ; Seymour et al.,  ). In addition to carotenoids, phenylpropanoids, such as flavonoids, are also involved in the process of colour change in tomato fruit (Zhang et al.,  ), but little has been reported on the relationship between the ripening process and flavonoid metabolism.
Numerous studies have reported transcription factors involved in the regulation of ripening. To comprehend the process of fruit ripening regulation, it is crucial to investigate the connections between higher level regulatory genes, intermediate regulators and downstream effectors. Ethylene Responsive Factor (ERF) is conservatively widespread in plants. It is involved in the control of plant growth and developmental programmes, response to abiotic stress and plays a dynamic role in primary and secondary metabolic regulation (Bailey‐Serres et al.,  ; De Boer et al., ; Licausi et al.,  ; Yang et al.,  ). The crucial role played by ERF TFs in the ripening of tomato fruit was revisited and defined (Julien Pirrello et al.,  ). Increasing numbers of ERF TFs have been characterized by fruit ripening regulators and are involved in regulating a specific aspect of fruit ripening (Cao et al.,  ; Deng et al.,  ; Lee et al.,  ; Liu et al.,  , ).
Due to its high yield and high contents of various metabolites, tomato is an ideal chassis for metabolic engineering (Fan et al.,  ; Li et al.,  , ). In addition to introducing biosynthetic genes, the use of transcription factors can significantly enhance the production of valuable compounds in tomato fruit (Fu et al.,  ; Jian et al.,  ; Sun et al.,  ). For example, overexpression of CYP76AD6 in the background of AtMYB12 results in further accumulation of L‐DOPA (Breitel et al.,  ). And simultaneously, overexpression of SlWRKY35 and SlLCYE further enhances lutein production from 290 to 422.6 μg g−1 DW in tomato (Yuan et al.,  ). Resveratrol (3,4′,5‐trihydroxystilbene) is a non‐flavonoid polyphenolic compound naturally synthesized in only a few plant species (Vannozzi et al.,  ). Its potential value in the nutraceutical, medicinal and cosmeceutical fields is extensively characterized (Valletta et al., ). The master transcription factor AtMYB12, which regulates the flavonoid pathway, was reported to obtain tomatoes enriched with high resveratrol by crossing with the transgenic line overexpressing VvStSy (stilbene synthase) (Zhang et al.,  ). Given the high demand for the production of valuable compounds, new metabolic engineering tools are needed.
In this study, we comprehensively characterize the roles of SlERF.G3‐Like in regulating tomato ripening and metabolism. SlERF.G3‐Like is expressed explicitly during tomato fruit ripening, which also predicts its vital role in the ripening process. Stable knockout mutants of slerf.g3‐like by CRISPR/Cas9 and stable overexpressing transgenic lines under a constitutive promoter of 35S were generated. Phenotypical characterization indicated that SlERF.G3‐Like also participates in regulating the ripening process in tomatoes. Comprehensive transcriptomic and metabolic analyses showed that SlERF.G3‐Like could promote fruit ripening as well as affect fruit softening by regulating the expression of ripening‐related and cell wall‐related genes. Our study complements the link between the ripening process and flavonoid metabolism. Furthermore, our findings show that SlRIN, a master regulator during tomato fruit ripening, can bind to two CArG motifs upstream of the promoter of SlERF.G3‐Like and induce its expression. SlERF.G3‐Like is a key TF responding to master regulator RIN and controls multiple ripening‐related processes. In addition, co‐expression of SlERF.G3‐Like with the resveratrol biosynthetic gene VvStSy can significantly enhance resveratrol production in tomato fruit. Altogether, this study reveals the coordinated maturation and metabolic model of SlERF.G3‐Like as a hierarchical transcriptional factor in fruit ripening that can be applied to future breeding.

## Results

## 

SlERF.G3‐Like
 positively regulates tomato fruit ripening
We previously screened SlERF.G3‐Like as a potential flavonoid biosynthesis regulator in tomato fruit (Li et al.,  ). To further investigate the function of SlERF.G3‐Like in tomatoes we generated slerf.g3‐like knockout mutants in the MicroTom background using CRISPR/Cas9, as well as overexpression lines driven by the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter.
We genotyped 14 gene‐edited seedlings by PCR amplification and sequencing over the edited site in the T0 generation. In total, we obtained two homozygous lines named CR‐slerf.g3‐like‐3 (CR‐3) and CR‐slerf.g3‐like‐8 (CR‐8), respectively. CR‐3 harboured a 4‐bp deletion, while CR‐8 carried an 8‐bp deletion (Figure  ). Both lines have premature stop codons compared with the WT. We grew the CR‐3 and CR‐8 into the T2 generation. Individual plants containing the homozygous mutation but no T‐DNA insertions were selected for subsequent analyses (Figure  ).
On the other hand, we obtained 16 independent 35S: SlERF.G3‐Like‐OE lines in the T0 generation (Figure  ). Two lines, OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like‐K (OE‐K) and OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like‐S (OE‐S), with representative phenotypes and expression levels, were selected for further phenotypic and molecular analyses (Figures  and ).
 To analyse SlERF.G3‐Like related phenotypes, knockout mutants, overexpression lines and WT were sown and grown together. There was no significant difference between CR and WT in the period of vegetative growth (Figure  ). However, significant differences were observed during the fruit ripening process (Figure  ). Compared with the WT fruits, which reached the breaker stage at 39 days post anthesis (DPA), the CR‐slerf.g3‐like fruits displayed a significant delay in ripening (breaker stage at 41 DPA), while the OE fruits were significantly earlier (breaker stage at 36 DPA) (Figure  ).
In addition, we assessed the fruit hue angle, which indicates colour saturation. Compared with WT, the fruit hue angle was significantly increased in OE‐K and OE‐S fruits, which eventually show an orange phenotype in OE lines (Figures  and ). The fruit hue angle was not significantly different between CR and WT fruits at the Br + 15 stage (Figures  and ). All these results indicate that SlERF.G3‐Like is a positive regulator of tomato fruit ripening.

## Alternation of 
SlERF.G3‐Like expression levels significantly affects the expression of ripening‐related and metabolic genes
To elucidate how SlERF.G3‐Like affected the ripening process of tomato fruits, we analysed global gene expression profiling by RNA‐seq of CR‐slerf.g3‐like, OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like and WT fruits at 39 DPA (Figure  ). A principal component analysis (PCA) showed that OE‐K and OE‐S lines shared a similar transcriptome quite distinct from the control (Figure  ).
To determine differentially expressed genes (DEGs), we selected only genes with a false discovery rate P‐value correction ≤0.05 for each line. In total, we detected 1383 DEGs, of which 678 were upregulated and 705 were downregulated between the CR‐slerf.g3‐like and WT lines (Figure  ). In addition, we identified 1667 upregulated genes and 2982 downregulated genes in OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like lines compared with the WT (Figure  ). Among all the DEGs, we screened out 488 DEGs that displayed an opposite expression pattern in CR‐slerf.g3‐like and OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like fruits. Among these 488 DEGs, 210 genes were co‐upregulated in OE lines but co‐downregulated in CR lines and 288 genes were co‐downregulated in OE lines but co‐upregulated in CR lines (Figure  ).
 The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation of these 488 DEGs indicated that multiple metabolic pathways are significantly affected by the expression of SlERF.G3‐Like (Figure  ). A series of vital genes involved in ethylene biosynthesis and signalling, the cell wall, the carotenoid pathway and some TFs relating to the ripening of fruit were affected (Figure  ). Gene ontology (GO) analysis also indicated that loss of SlERF.G3‐Like function affected multiple metabolic pathways, including the secondary metabolic process, cell wall organization or biogenesis, phenylpropanoid metabolic process, flavonoid metabolic process, pigment metabolic process, polysaccharide metabolic process and terpenoid biosynthetic process (Figure  ). In summary, SlERF.G3‐Like plays a vital role in tomato fruit ripening by affecting the transcription of ripening‐associated genes as well as metabolic genes. It seems like SlERF.G3‐Like can significantly regulate the ripening and metabolic networks.

## 
SlERF.G3‐Like affects ethylene production by regulating the expression of 
SlACO1
 and 
SlACS2

Ethylene plays a crucial role in regulating the climacteric fruit ripening process. According to the currently accepted model, ethylene biosynthesis comprises two steps catalysed by 1‐aminocyclopropane‐1‐carboxylic acid synthase (ACS) and 1‐aminocyclopropane‐1‐carboxylic acid oxidase (ACO) (Yang and Hoffman,  ). The previous studies confirmed that ACS2 and ACS4 are the primary family members expressed during ripening while pointing to ACO1 and ACO4 as the central ACO genes supporting ripening‐associated ethylene production (Liu et al., ; Nakatsuka et al.,  ; Theologis et al.,  ). In our RNA‐seq data, a series of important ethylene biosynthesis and signal transduction pathway genes were significantly affected in the transgenic lines. We examined the expression level of 14 ACS genes and 6 ACO genes that had previously been reported (Liu et al.,  ). Only ACS2, ACO1 and ACO3 are differentially expressed in CR and OE lines. Other fruit ripening‐related ethylene biosynthesis genes, such as SlACS4 and SlACO4, were not present in the DEGs. Two ethylene biosynthesis genes, ACO1 and ACS2, attracted our attention because they are required for tomato fruit ripening. They all showed decreased transcript abundance in CR‐slerf.g3‐like fruits compared with the WT and displayed an opposite expression pattern in OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like (Figure  ). Supplementary reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT‐qPCR) analysis proved the consistent results (Figure  ).
 Ethylene production was investigated in CR‐slerf.g3‐like, OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like and WT fruit by gas chromatography (GC). We monitored ethylene production from 35 to 51 DPA. The peak of climacteric ethylene production shifted from 41 DPA in the WT to 43 DPA in CR‐slerf.g3‐like fruits (Figure  ) and occurred 1 day earlier in OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like fruits than in the WT. Compared with WT fruit, the amount of ethylene produced was significantly increased in the OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like lines but decreased in the CR‐slerf.g3‐like lines (Figure  ).
A dual‐luciferase assay was performed to understand whether SlERF.G3‐Like directly regulates the transcription of SlACS2 and SlACO1 during tomato fruit ripening. The relative LUC/REN ratio in tobacco leaves is co‐transformed with CaMV35S‐SlERF.G3‐Like and CaMV35S‐REN/pSlACS2‐LUC or CaMV35S‐REN/pSlACO1‐LUC were significantly higher than in leaves co‐transformed with CaMV35S‐Empty and CaMV35S‐REN/pSlACS2‐LUC or CaMV35S‐REN/pSlACO1‐LUC (Figure ), indicating that SlERF.G3‐Like could activate the promoter activity of SlACS2 and SlACO1 in vivo. Further, we explored the sites where SlERF.G3‐Like binds to the SlACO1 promoter. The SlACO1 promoter contains a GCC‐like motif, and we mutated it. In addition, we truncated the promoter fragment (Figure  ). The results of the Dual‐Luc experiments showed no significant differences among these fragments (Figure  ). This indicated that the actual binding site might be present on the −547 bp to −1 fragment of the proSlACO1. Then, we performed further truncation, and the assay results showed that the activation activity of SlERF.G3‐Like on the SlACO1 promoter decreased substantially at −129 bp to −1 fragment of the proSlACO1 (Figure  ). The yeast one‐hybrid assay indicated SlERF.G3‐Like directly interacts with the proSlACO1 from −547 bp to −305 bpfragment (Figure  ). Given all these data, SlERF.G3‐Like can activate the promoters of SlACS2 and SlACO1, in which SlERF.G3‐Like can specifically bind to a fragment of from −547 bp to −305 bp on the SlACO1 promoter region.
We further investigated whether the expression of SlERF.G3‐Like is under the control of ethylene. RT‐qPCR results indicated that the expression of SlERF.G3‐Like was significantly induced in mature green (MG) fruits treated with exogenous ethylene (Figure ). On the other hand, SlERF.G3‐Like expression level was significantly inhibited under the treatment of 1‐methylcyclopropen (1‐MCP), an ethylene perception inhibitor (Figure ). The results indicated that SlERF.G3‐Like showed some response to exogenous ethylene and increased its expression upon ethylene treatment.
To investigate whether the change in ethylene production in the fruits of OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like plants persisted in their non‐fruit tissues, OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like and WT tomato seedlings were treated with exogenous ethylene. However, upon treatment with exogenous ethylene, hypocotyl elongation was significantly decreased in OE seedings, and root elongation showed no apparent difference between WT and OE, probably suggesting a higher sensitivity to the hormone for the OE lines (Figure ). Taken together, these results demonstrated that SlERF.G3‐Like positively regulate ethylene biosynthesis in tomato fruit by directly targeting the promoters of SlACS2 and SlACO1.

## 
SlERF.G3‐Like directly regulates the softening of tomato fruit by regulating the expression of 
SlPG2a
 and 
SlPL

The softening of tomato fruit is a significant physiological change during the ripening process (Giovannoni,  ; Seymour et al.,  ). To evaluate the effect of the SlERF.G3‐Like on tomato fruit softening, the firmness of CR, OE and WT fruits at the Br + 15 stage was measured by a texture analyser. CR‐K and CR‐S mutant fruits were significantly firmer than the WT at the Br + 15 stage examined. In contrast, the overexpressed lines showed the opposite trend (Figure  ). Furthermore, histological sectioning from the fruit epicarp indicated compact cells and increased cell numbers in the exocarp of CR fruit compared with WT fruit. In comparison, the exocarp cells are more loosely arranged in OE fruit (Figure  ). On the other hand, the cuticle thickness of the OE lines was also significantly thinner than the WT lines (Figure  ).
 Softening is one of the irreversible features of ripening fruits. Extensive studies on softening during fruit ripening in tomatoes showed that softening is a complex process with multiple enzymes working consecutively and synergistically, contributing to altering fruit texture (Wang et al.,  ). Silencing SlPL, the only gene confirmed in tomatoes, was shown to increase fruit firmness and improve fruit shelf life (Yang et al.,  ). GO enrichment analysis of the DEGs showed that SlERF.G3‐Like regulates cell wall organization or biogenesis pathways (Figure  ). To investigate the molecular mechanism of SlERF.G3‐Like in regulating tomato fruit softening, transcriptome analysis was performed. Functional annotation of the DEGs indicates that the expression levels of SlPG2a and SlPL were downregulated in CR‐slerf.g3‐like fruits but upregulated in OE‐SlERF.G3‐Like lines (Figure ). To confirm the regulatory role of SlERF.G3‐Like in the expression of cell wall‐related genes, we assessed their transcript levels in CR, OE and WT fruits by RT‐qPCR (Figure  ).
A dual‐luciferase assay was performed to detect whether SlERF.G3‐Like could directly regulate the promoter activity of SlPG2a and SlPL. The results showed that SlERF.G3‐Like could bind to the promoters of SlPG2a and SlPL in vivo and activate their expression (Figure ). Furthermore, a total of 14 cell wall‐related genes, including endo‐glucanase 2 (SlCEL2), expansin1 (SlEXP1), β‐galactosidases (SlTBG), xyloglucan endotransglycosylase/hydrolase (SlXTH), endo‐β‐mannanase (SlMAN), xylosidase (SlXY) and xylanase (SlXyn) were downregulated in both CR‐K and CR‐S fruits (Figure  ). Collectively, these results imply that SlERF.G3‐Like positively regulates the cell wall by targeting SlPG2a and SlPL.

## 
SlERF.G3‐Like positively regulates the phenylpropanoid pathway
The phenylpropanoid metabolic pathway is an essential secondary metabolic pathway in plants and is synthesized from phenylalanine produced by the shikimate pathway as a substrate (Jacobowitz and Weng,  ). Many important phenylpropanoids, such as coumarins, anthocyanins, flavonoids and lignins, have vital roles in plant growth and development, disease and antioxidant capacity and pigment formation (Dong and Lin,  ; Jacobowitz and Weng, ; Zhang et al.,  ). The GO terms of the secondary metabolic process were dominantly enriched in the biological process group, especially the phenylpropanoid metabolic process. Our previous study suggests that SlERF.G3‐Like can directly regulate the expression of SlCHS1 (chalcone synthase 1), SlFLS (flavonol synthase) and SlF3H (flavanone‐3‐hydroxylase) (Li et al.,  ). SlCHS1 is responsible for the first committed step in the flavonoid pathway, and most of the downstream genes were upregulated in OE lines and downregulated in CR lines, suggesting enhanced activity of this branch of the pathway (Figure  ). On the other hand, overexpression of SlERF.G3‐Like in tomatoes increased transcript levels of genes involved in primary metabolism. Compared with WT fruit, nearly all of the genes encoding enzymes of glycolysis and the shikimate pathways were expressed more highly in p35S: SlERF.G3‐Like tomato fruit than control fruit. And both primary and secondary metabolisms promote flavonoid biosynthesis in tomatoes (Figure  ).
Lignin is a major component of the secondary cell wall and can provide mechanical strength for plants. Formation, movement and polymerization of monolignols are all aspects of lignification and this process results from the coordinated expression of several enzymes (Boerjan et al.,  ; Boudet et al.,  ). Monolignols are derived from the general phenylpropanoid pathway, and the related enzymes have been well‐characterized in Arabidopsis and poplar (Shi et al.,  ; Vanholme et al.,  ). It is worth mentioning that p‐coumaric acid acts as the common precursor for both flavonoid and monolignol biosynthesis (Figure  ). By sequence alignment of key enzymes with verified functions, it was found in our data that cinnamyl CoA reductase (CCR), caffeic acid O‐methyltransferase (COMT) and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) showed significant upregulation in CR lines and downregulation in OE lines. The last major steps in lignin synthesis are catalysed by laccase (LAC) or peroxidase (PRX). Putative genes, including 10 PRXs and two LACs, showed the same trend as other monolignol biosynthesis genes. And all of them offer an opposite trend to the key genes of the flavonoid pathway. SlERF.G3‐Like is involved in regulating the flavonoid pathway, and increased flavonoid biosynthesis reduces the availability of these precursors, thereby directing a change in the direction of metabolic flow and thus reducing lignin biosynthesis (Figure  ). The redistributed metabolic flow also contributes to the softening phenotype of p35S:SlERF.G3‐Like fruits.
 

## 
SlRIN directly activates the expression of 
SlERF.G3‐Like
 during tomato ripening
Our data indicate SlERF.G3‐Like can regulate multiple ripening‐related pathways. Interestingly, the expression level of SlERF.G3‐Like is significantly co‐expressed with the master ripening regulator RIN in the Tomato Expression Atlas (TEA; http://tea.solgenomics.net/) database (Figure  ). Previously, analysis data revealed that MADS‐box proteins could bind to the specific DNA sequences known as CArG‐box, including C(C/T)(A/T)6(A/G)G, C(A/T)8G or C(C/T)(A/T)G(A/T)4(A/G)G (Fujisawa et al.,  ; Ito et al.,  ). As shown in Figure  , the 1.5 kb promoter of SlERF.G3‐Like contains five CArG‐box motifs, which are putative binding motifs of MADS proteins. A ChIP‐seq dataset that predicted direct RIN targets showed significant fragment enrichment at the promoter of SlERF.G3‐Like (Zhong et al.,  ) (Figure  ). Furthermore, the expression level of SlERF.G3‐Like was markedly reduced by 98% in the rin mutant compared with WT (Zhong et al.,  ) (Figure  ). RT‐qPCR data showed the same result (Figure  ). Based on these results, SlRIN is a potential upstream factor of SlERF.G3‐Like.
 To verify this hypothesis, we tested whether SlRIN can directly activate transcription from the SlERF.G3‐Like promoter with transient expression assays in N. benthamiana leaves. Luciferase (LUC) activity derived from proSlERF.G3‐Like: LUC was approximately 25–30 fold higher than the control (Figure  ). Although SlRIN appears to promote SlERF.G3‐Like transcription, the specific binding site is unknown. Since there are five CArG motifs within −1425 bp, and we also predicted two possible binding sites at −30 bp and −280 bp by data analysis, we truncated the promoter region to confirm the actual binding site further. We divided the SlERF.G3‐Like promoter into five fragments, designated P1 to P5, with the P2 fragment containing the three CArG‐box motifs: CArG‐box2, located 1033‐1023 bp, CArG‐box3, located 948‐938 bp and CArG‐box4, located 913‐903 bp upstream of the translational start codon (the first nucleotide of the ATG start codon being designated as 1), respectively (Figure  ). The rest of the fragment information is shown in Figure  . From the results (Figure  ), the truncated P2 and P3 fragments still have a strong activation, and the P2 fragment has a more significant activation than the full‐length fragment. This result indicated that the CArG‐box1 motif might be invalid.
Next, an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) revealed that the GST–SlRIN fusion protein directly bound to SlERF.G3‐Like CArG‐box2 and CArG‐box5 motifs (Figure  and ). Moreover, yeast one‐hybrid (Y1H) analyses indicated that SlRIN binds to the two fragments containing the 3* CArG‐box2 and CArG‐box5 elements (Figure  ). The data showed that overexpression of SlRIN strongly activated the promoter of SlERF.G3‐Like, whereas mutation of the CArG‐box2 and CArG‐box5 motifs in the SlERF.G3‐Like promoter significantly reduced its activity (Figure  ). Notably, the activation capacity of SlRIN was not wholly lost, implying that there may be other remaining binding sites. The results indicated that SlRIN could bind directly to the CArG motif upstream of the SlERF.G3‐Like promoter to induce its expression, and all of the CArG motifs, the CArG‐box2 and CArG‐box5 motifs, were critical binding sites.

## Application of SlERF.G3‐Like in metabolic engineering
Previous studies indicate that increasing the demands of particular metabolic pathways would redirect the metabolic flux towards the pathways of interest (Morandini,  ). In addition, the expression levels of genes involved in the glycolysis pathway (SlENO et al.), the shikimate pathway (SlDAHPS, SlEPSPS2 et al.) and the phenylpropanoid pathway (SlPAL, Sl4CL et al.) are significantly induced in the p35S:SlERF.G3‐Like lines (Figure  ). These genes dominate in guiding metabolic flux into the phenylpropanoid pathway (Ying et al.,  ; Zhang et al., ). Therefore, we hypothesize that SlERF.G3‐Like can significantly increase the demands of flavonol biosynthesis to guide the metabolic flux into phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. And it might be a new tool for engineering phenylpropanoid compounds in tomato fruit. We then attempted to use SlERF.G3‐Like to redirect metabolism to produce specialized metabolites. Resveratrol is a natural polyphenolic antioxidant widely known for its potential health benefits (Vestergaard and Ingmer,  ). Therefore, it is a promising target for metabolic engineering using plant chassis. Previous data showed that the p35S: VvStSy tomato, although producing resveratrol compounds in its fruit, showed poor fertility and stress tolerance. This was probably due to the side effects of resveratrol overexpression in vegetative tissues (Ingrosso et al., ). To engineer new tomato lines with resveratrol production without yield penalties, we overexpressed VvStSy, the key resveratrol biosynthetic gene, under the fruit‐specific E8 promoter and selected line#9 to cross with p35S: SlERF.G3‐Like tomato (Figures  and ). Both the F1 generation hybrids and the p35S: SlERF.G3‐Like showed orange phenotype compared with WT fruits at the Br + 10 stage (Figure  ). We further analysed the contents of resveratrol and its derivatives, including resveratrol, piceid (resveratrol glycosides, Res‐Glc), piceid isoform, methylated resveratrol‐glycosides (MeRes‐Glc) and resveratrol‐di‐glycosides (Res‐Glc‐Glc) (Zhang et al.,  ). LC–MS analysis indicated simultaneous overexpression of VvStSy and SlERF.G3‐Like in F1 hybrid tomato plants improved the production of resveratrol derivatives from ~1.44 mg/g DW in E8:VvStSy tomato fruits to ~2.31 mg/g DW in E8: VvStSy x p35S: SlERF.G3‐Like line and ~2.43 mg/g DW in p35S: SlERF.G3‐Like x E8:VvStSy line (Figure  ; Figures  , ; Table  ). Further enhanced resveratrol production indicates the potential of SlERF.G3‐Like as an efficient tool with potential for metabolic engineering
 

## Discussion
SlERF.G3‐Like was initially identified as a positive regulator for the flavonoid pathway in tomato fruit (Li et al.,  ). Changes in carotenoids are widely characterized during maturation (Klee and Giovannoni,  ; Seymour et al.,  ), while several studies have reported the regulation of the flavonoid pathway during the tomato ripening process (Adato et al.,  ; Li et al.,  ; Zhang et al.,  ). In tomatoes, naringenin chalcone was significantly lower in fruits of FUL1/FUL2‐suppressed lines than in wild‐type fruits (Fujisawa et al.,  ). The previous study reported the regulation of SlERF.G3‐Like in the flavonoid pathway (Li et al.,  ), and in this research, new evidence is provided for the accumulation of flavonoids during the process of maturation. Notably, a yeast two‐hybrid assay observed an interaction between FUL1 and SlERF.G3‐Like proteins (Figure  ). These results predict that, in addition to directly activating the expression of key structural genes of the flavonoid pathway, SlERF.G3‐Like may be involved in the regulation of the flavonoid pathway by interacting directly or indirectly with FUL1 in fruit ripening.
SlERF.G3‐Like is also found to be involved in the regulation of ethylene synthesis and the hardness of cell walls during tomato fruit ripening. Overexpression of SlERF.G3‐Like under constitutive promoter 35S activated the expression of SlACO1 and SlACS2, which play a significant function in the ethylene synthesis pathway (Liu et al.,  ), resulting in increased ethylene production. The cell wall phenotype and DEGs suggest that SlERF.G3‐Like directly affects cell wall texture. The promoter of SlPL, which by far has the most determined impact on the hardness of the cell wall, is positively regulated by SlERF.G3‐Like and can be activated in vitro (Yang et al.,  ). SlPG2a is another gene involved in the cell wall that SlERF.G3‐Like can directly activate. Other reported cell wall‐associated enzymes, such as SlEXP1, SlTBG, SlMAN, SlXY and SlXyn are significantly increased in OE lines while showing the opposite trend in CR lines. Whether these genes are direct targets of SlERF.G3‐Like needs further confirmation. SlLOB1 was reported to target SlEXP1 in tomato directly, and the transcript and protein levels of SlEXP1 were strongly repressed in RNAi lines (Shi et al.,  ). SlLOB1 was a DEG in RNA‐seq data, with decreased expression in CR lines and increased expression in OE lines. In addition, these two genes have different tissue expression profiles and functions. SlLOB1 was initially induced at the mature green (MG) stage, is highly expressed during the BR stage and has the highest non‐fruit expression in stems (Shi et al.,  ). SlERF.G3‐Like expression occurs specifically at the fruit ripening stages. Unlike SlERF.G3‐Like, SlLOB1 did not affect other tomato ripening phenotypes, including the maximum ethylene production and the onset of ripening. According to our findings, p35S:SlERF.G3‐Like has a significantly shorter time to induce ethylene production and a higher maximum ethylene production than WT. This result suggests that SlLOB1 has more specific functions for cell wall changes, while SlERF.G3‐Like has a broader pleiotropic effect on the maturation process.
In the wild‐type tomato fruit, the peel is orange predominantly due to flavonoids, while the flesh is red mainly due to carotenoids (Adato et al.,  ; Fernandez‐Moreno et al.,  ; Wang et al.,  ). However, when TFs regulating flavonoid biosynthesis were overexpressed throughout the fruit, the tomato fruit pericarps were enriched with flavonoids and turned yellow (Luo et al.,  ; Ying et al.,  ). Our data support the idea that overexpression of SlERF.G3‐Like affects the onset of ripening. Eventually, OE fruits show an orange colour mainly due to the enrichment of flavonoids. We examined the carotenoid content (mainly lycopene, lutein, zeaxanthin, a‐carotene and β‐carotene) in fruits at the Br + 10 stage, and there was no change in the total carotenoid content in OE and WT lines (Figure  ). In contrast, there was a tendency for the total carotenoid content to increase in the CR line compared with WT, but the changes were different for each compound specifically. For example, lycopene was elevated in CR fruits relative to WT fruits, but β‐carotene was decreased in CR lines and increased in OE lines (Table  ). The increasing carotenoid contents in CR fruit could be due to the reduction of flux into flavonoid biosynthesis. The previous data indicate that the induction of carotenoid biosynthesis by SlWRKY35 could lead to decreased flavonoids, suggesting that both pathways could compete for substrates (Yuan et al.,  ). Although carotenoid accumulation was present in the final fruits of CR lines, unlike direct targeting of SlPSY1 and thus affecting carotenoid content, this could be a cascade change resulting from the redistribution of metabolic flow caused by the induction of flavonoid biosynthetic genes by SlERF.G3‐Like (Fu et al.,  ). We previously analysed the expression profile of carotenoid biosynthesis genes in transcriptomic data of E8:SlERF.G3‐Like lines, and no significant changes were observed among those lines (Li et al.,  ). In addition, the Dual‐Luc assay verified that SlERF.G3‐Like does not activate the promoters of SlPSY1 and SlPDS (Figure  ). All these data suggest that SlERF.G3‐Like does not directly affect carotenoid biosynthetic genes.
As a climacteric fruit, the ripening process of tomato fruit involves complex changes in morphology and metabolites, triggered by the strong ethylene production during the ripening process (Seymour et al.,  ). Several master regulators have been identified, such as RIN, a MADS‐box transcription factor identified and characterized by an originally cloned rin tomato mutation (Vrebalov et al.,  ). The rin mutant led to a ripening‐inhibition phenotype, indicating the central role of RIN during tomato ripening (Fujisawa et al.,  , ; Vrebalov et al., ). Recent studies showed that rin is a gain‐of‐function mutant, and there are differences between the phenotypes of the RIN knockout and rin mutant (Ito et al.,  ; Li et al.,  ). However, there is no doubt that RIN is required for the progression of ripening and plays a central role in tomato fruit ripening (Li et al.,  ).
Considering the central role of RIN during ripening, there should be a hierarchical transcriptional cascade for the accurate regulation of various downstream morphologic and metabolic changes. Similar regulatory networks have been established in other plant hormone signalling pathways. For example, OsDREB1C, a transcriptional regulator belonging to the AP2/ERF family, can be involved in the regulation of both photosynthesis and nitrogen utilization (Wei et al.,  ). In the JA signalling pathway, the master regulator MYC2 and its downstream MYC2‐targeted transcription factors (MTFs) form various MYC2‐MTF modules, which initiate and amplify specific aspects of the JA‐signalling transcriptional output: the MYC2‐JA2L module mediates the wound response while the MYC2‐ERF.C3 module regulates the pathogen response (Du et al.,  ).
Transcriptomic data and phenotypes suggest that SlERF.G3‐Like is an intermediate regulator influencing the most physiological subdomain of the maturation transition. Combining Dual‐Luc, Y1H and EMSA assays, we verified that SlRIN is an upstream regulator of SlERF.G3‐Like. SlERF.G3‐Like is an essential intermediate component of the SlRIN regulatory network. Systematic elucidation of regulatory networks at all levels contributes to further understanding of the molecular mechanisms of master regulators.
Notably, many known intermediate TFs in the RIN hierarchical transcriptional cascade regulate a single aspect of ripening. For instance, our previous studies indicate that SlRIN can directly activate the expression of SlWRKY35, an inducer of SlDXS1, to guide carbon flux towards the MEP pathway and enhance downstream carotenoid biosynthesis (Yuan et al.,  ). In the meantime, SlRIN can also inhibit the expression of SlGCR, an inducer of SlLCYE, to suppress the production of lutein from the main carotenoid pathway (Ren et al.,  ). Together, the SlRIN‐WRKY35 and SlRIN‐SlGCR modules accurately regulate the significant induction of carotenoid biosynthesis during tomato ripening. The current SlRIN‐SlERF.G3‐Like module, however, is at least associated with ethylene production, cell wall degradation and phenylpropanoid metabolism. The hierarchical transcriptional cascade of plant hormone signalling seems more complicated than expected. More intermediate TFs are yet to be identified.
Due to their medicinal functions, tomato fruit enriched with specialized metabolites is suitable for processing purposes rather than fresh consumption (Li et al.,  ). Therefore, normal, even fast, softening is an ideal trait for such types of varieties. However, when TFs such as AtMYB12 and Del/Ros1 were used as metabolic engineering tools, fruit ripening and over‐ripening were significantly delayed due to the increased antioxidant capacity by flavonoid enrichment (Zhang et al.,  , ). Our study indicates SlERF.G3‐Like can positively regulate tomato ripening by activating the expression of genes involved in ethylene synthesis, cell wall degradation and phenylpropanoid pathway. Therefore, it can be an ideal tool for engineering high antioxidant compounds in tomato fruit while maintaining the ordinary ripening and over‐ripening processes.
To summarize, our results suggest that SlERF.G3‐Like drives functionally diverse transcriptional programmes that regulate ethylene synthesis, cell wall degradation and the phenylpropanoid pathway during tomato ripening. And SlRIN, which plays a global regulatory role in tomato fruit ripening, can control its expression. The conservative role of the SlERF.G3‐Like remains to be further explored. Overall, our data revealed the comprehensive roles of SlERF.G3‐Like, and, in particular, provided new evidence linking the ripening and the phenylpropanoid pathway during the maturation of tomato fruits. This work offers new insights into how plants control intricate biological processes despite limited genomic information. Since targeting global regulators like SlRIN causes many phenotypic changes, including some adverse effects such as flavour (Osorio, Carneiro et al. 2020), these hierarchical transcriptional regulators can act as better breeding targets and offer a theoretical foundation for precision breeding. We also attest that SlERF.G3‐Like can be an effective tool for phenylpropanoid metabolic engineering in processing tomatoes.

## Materials and methods

## Plant materials and growth conditions
A tomato (Solanum lycopersicum cv. MicroTom) was purchased from PanAmerican Seed™. Tomato plants were grown in a greenhouse with standard conditions (16/8 h of light/dark cycle at 24 °C in 60% humidity and under 250 μmol/m−2/s−1 intense luminosity) and watered daily. Nicotiana Benthamiana was grown in appropriate greenhouses for the dual‐luciferase reporter assay.

## Plasmid construction and plant transformation
The overexpression vector was assembled by the GoldenBraid2.0 cloning strategy (Sarrion‐Perdigones et al.,  ). The full length of the coding sequence (CDS) of SlERF.G3‐Like was introduced into the entry vector PUPD2, and one transcriptional unit was constructed using the 35S promoter‐transcription factor 35S terminator and the kanamycin resistance gene under the control of NOS promoter and NOS terminator as an additional transcriptional unit. The CRISPR/Cas9 vector was kindly provided by Dr. Li Zhengguo (College of Life Sciences, Chongqing University). A target site was designed for the SlERF.G3‐Like based on the online tool CRISPR‐P 2.0 (http://cbi.hzau.edu.cn/crispr/). These constructed vectors were used for Agrobacterium‐mediated tomato plant transformation and were introduced into Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain EHA105 (Ying et al.,  ).

## 
RNA extraction and RT‐qPCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted from tomato fruit using the Fastpure Plant Total RNA Isolation Kit (Vazyme Nanjing, China; RC401‐01) following the instructions. First‐strand cDNA was reverse transcribed from 1 μg of total RNA using the PrimeScript™ RT reagent kit (AK4201; Takara Bio, Kusatsu, Japan) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RT‐qPCR was performed using AceQ Universal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme, Nanjing, China; Q511‐02) on a Bio‐Rad CFX384 Real‐Time PCR System (Initial incubation at 95 °C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s and 60 °C for 30 s,   and added melting curve analysis during the 65–95 °C). The primer sequences used in this study are listed in Table  .

## Transcriptome profiling
Total RNA was extracted from the fruits at 39 DPA for WT, overexpression and gene‐edited lines. RNA‐Seq library construction and high‐throughput sequencing were conducted by Novogene (Beijing, China). The library preparations were sequenced on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 platform, and 150 bp paired‐end reads were generated. Transcriptome analysis was carried out as previously described (Yuan et al.,  ). DEGs were found using a significance threshold of a log2 fold change of ±1. RNA seq data reported in this paper have been deposited in the Genome Sequence Archive (Chen et al.,  ) in National Genomics Data Center, China National Center for Bioinformation/Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (GSA: CRA009040) and are publicly accessible at https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/gsa.

## Ethylene production measurements
Ethylene production was measured as specified previously (Deng et al.,  ) with a few minor adjustments. Before measurement, fruits gathered at different stages were placed in 120 mL open jars. After 0.5 h, the jars were sealed and incubated at room temperature for 2 h until measurement (Agilent 7890B gas chromatography). The final ethylene production was obtained by comparing it with the peak area of ethylene at known concentrations.

## Fruit firmness
More than twenty fruits from each line were harvested at the Br + 15 stage, and the firmness was measured with a TA.XTC‐18 texture analyser (BOSIN, Shanghai) with a P/2 columnar probe (2 mm diameter). The test parameters were set as follows: pre‐test speed 5 mm sec−1; test speed 1 mm sec−1; post‐test speed 5 mm sec−1; penetration depth 5 mm; trigger force 5 g. The value of firmness was calculated by BosinTech TAS.

## Colour measurement
The colour values are measured with a Konica Minolta chromameter (CR‐400) at various stages of ripening. The exact calculation method has been described in a previous study (Deng et al.,  ). At least 20 fruits were measured for each line.

## Analysis and identification of carotenoids and resveratrol
For LC–MS analysis of compounds, fruits were harvested at the Br + 10 stage and immediately placed in liquid nitrogen, then lyophilized and ground into a fine powder for extraction.
The carotenoids were extracted as described previously. All the above operations must be carried out away from bright light. And the carotenoids were determined by LC–MS (the Sciex TRIPLE QUADTM 5500 platform in Life Science Core Facilities, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University) using a YMC C30 chromatographic column (Thermo Accucore™ C30 chromatographic column, USA) and controlled by Analyst 1.6.3 software (AB Sciex). Mass spectrometry was performed using an atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) source operating in a negative ion mode. The carotenoids were identified with standards and quantified by integrating the peak areas. Standards were purchased from Sigma‐Aldrich (St Louis, MO; https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/). The detection was performed for lutein, zeaxanthin, α‐carotene, β‐carotene and lycopene. Three independent replicates were used for the analysis.
Resveratrol was extracted as previously described (Zhang et al.,  ) with slight modifications. An amount of 0.01 g of dry powder was extracted with 1 mL 80% MeOH at 4 °C by ultrasonic extraction. The sample was then centrifuged at 3000 
g
 at 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatant was taken. The supernatant was then centrifuged at 18 000 
g
 at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was further diluted 20 times with 80% MeOH. The samples were filtered through a 0.45 mm filter before injection. For each line, three biological replicates were analysed. Moreover, resveratrol was determined by LC–MS using a C18 chromatographic column (Thermo Scientific™). Mass spectrometry was performed using an Electron Spray Ionization (ESI) source operating in a negative ion mode.

## Cytological assessment of fruit pericarp
The fresh fruits were trimmed from the target tissue with a scalpel and put into fixative (G1101, Wuhan Servicebio Technology Co., Ltd, China) for more than 24 h. After dehydration with gradient alcohol, the tissue is embedded in paraffin wax at 65 °C. The slice transverse sections of 4 μm thickness were cut with the paraffin slicer and stained with Safranin O‐Fast Green staining solution (G1031, Servicebio). Oil‐Red solution (G1015, Servicebio) stained slices were chosen for cuticle observation. Multiplex slice images were acquired through a whole slide imaging system (Olympus VS200) at 20× objective. Cytological assessment, including cuticle thickness, cell size and cell number, was performed using ImageJ software.

## Luciferase reporter assay
The full‐length CDS of SlERF.G3‐Like and SlRIN under the control of the 35S promoter were used as effectors and constructed into the destination vector pEAQ‐HT‐DEST1 using Gateway Cloning. The remaining promoters involved the promoters of SlACS2, SlACO1, SlPG2a, SlPL and SlERF.G3‐Like; each promoter fragment was cloned upstream of the LUC (luciferase) CDS using the GoldenBraid 2.0 cloning strategy. The internal control REN (Renilla luciferase), driven by the 35S promoter, was also constructed to act as an internal reporter at the same level as the transcriptional unit. The pEAQ‐HT‐DEST1 empty vector was used as a negative control (CK), and specific steps were performed as described previously (Ying et al.,  ). The LUC and REN activities were assayed using the Dual‐Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; E1910) by a Synergy™ H1 hybrid multimode microplate reader (BioTek). At least 3 independent biological replicates were performed for each experiment. Results were expressed as relative values of LUC/REN. For the Luciferase reporter assay, two different detection methods were used in this study. Another transactivation assay to test the regulation of SlERF.G3‐Like on the SlACS2 and SlACO1 promoters, using D‐Luciferin (Solarbio, D9390) as substrate, was performed using an IVIS Lumina Series III Pre‐clinical In Vivo Imaging system (PerkinElmer), and the luminescence intensity was detected by a luminometer.

## Yeast One‐Hybrid assays
The yeast onehybrid assay was performed as described previously (Ying et al.,  ) with modifications. DNA fragments consisting of three copies of the proSlERF.G3‐Like (−1214 to −1184 bp) were chemically synthesized and cloned into the pHis2‐Leu‐GW through Gateway Cloning. And another upstream fragment (−688 to −589 bp) of the SlERF.G3‐Like was cloned into the pHis2‐Leu‐GW reporter vector. A full‐length CDS of SlRIN was introduced into the pDEST22 vector. The pDEST22‐EV (empty vector) was used as a negative control. Then, different combinations of effector and reporter were co‐transformed into the Y187 yeast strain. The transformants were grown on the SD/−Leu/−Trp selection medium, and the positive yeast cells were diluted with a 10 × dilution series and dotted on SD/‐Leu/‐Trp/‐His medium with different concentrations of 3‐AT as screening pressures.

## Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
The full‐length coding sequence of SlRIN was amplified by PCR and cloned into pGEX‐4 T‐1–GST named pGEX‐4 T‐1–GST–SlRIN (Yuan et al.,  ). Oligonucleotide probes were synthesized and labelled with 5′ biotin (Sangon Biotech, China). EMSAs were performed as previously described (Hellman and Fried,  ; Yuan et al.,  ). Briefly, biotin‐labelled probes were incubated with GST‐fusion proteins at room temperature for 20 min, and free and bound DNAs were separated in an acrylamide gel. Unlabelled wild‐type probes were used as competitors. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay binding reactions were detected according to the manufacturer's instructions (Chemiluminescent Nucleic Acid Detection Module Kit, Thermo Scientific). The probes used for EMSA are listed in Table  .

## Conflicts of interests
All authors declare no competing interests.

## Author contributions
YZ and SJY designed the experiments. SJY, YW, WL, XL, QT, FKH, YL and HW conducted the experiments. ML helped to analyse the data and contributed to supervising this study. SJY and YZ wrote the paper with the input of all the authors. All authors have approved this manuscript.

## Supporting information

Figure S1 Identification and sequencing of CRISPR/Cas9‐SlERF.G3‐Like lines.

Figure S2 The expression levels of SlERF.G3‐Like in p35S:SlERF.G3‐Like lines.

Figure S3 Phenotypes of CR, OE and WT lines.

Figure S4 Analysis of transcriptome data for CR, OE and WT lines.

Figure S5 SlERF.G3‐Like directly regulates the expression of SlACO1.

Figure S6 Response of SlERF.G3‐Like to ethylene and ethylene triple‐response.

Figure S7 Validation of RNA‐seq results by RT‐qPCR.

Figure S8 SlRIN is a potential regulator for SlERF.G3‐Like gene expression.

Figure S9 SlRIN directly binds to the promoter of SlERF.G3‐Like.

Figure S10. Screening of E8:VvStSy overexpression plants.

Figure S11. PCR identifies hybrid tomato plants concurrently overexpressing SlERF.G3‐Like and VvStSy.

Figure S12 The different expression levels of SlERF.G3‐Like and VvStSy were tested by RT‐qPCR in different lines.

Figure S13 Identification of resveratrol and its derivatives.

Figure S14 Y2H assays for the interactions between SlERF.G3‐Like and SlFUL1.

Figure S15 Carotenoid contents in CR, OE and WT fruits.

Figure S16 Trans‐activation effects of SlERF.G3‐Like on promoters of SlPDS and SlPSY1.

Table S1 Primers used in this study.

Table S2 Carotenoid contents of tomato fruit in WT, OE and CR lines.

Table S3 The detailed contents of resveratrol and other derivatives in the hybrid tomato fruit.

Data S1 All sample_RNA‐seq_TPM.

Data S2 Expression levels of genes upregulated in OE fruits but downregulated in CR, or genes downregulated in OE fruits but upregulated in CR lines.

## Acknowledgements
This study was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province, China (2023NSFSC1991), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32100213), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (SCU2023D0003) and the Institutional Research Fund of Sichuan University (2020SCUNL106). We acknowledge the Mass Spectrometry Core Facility in the College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, for assistance in metabolic analysis.

## Data availability statement
The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the supplementary material of this article.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Figure S1 Identification and sequencing of CRISPR/Cas9‐SlERF.G3‐Like lines.

Figure S2 The expression levels of SlERF.G3‐Like in p35S:SlERF.G3‐Like lines.

Figure S3 Phenotypes of CR, OE and WT lines.

Figure S4 Analysis of transcriptome data for CR, OE and WT lines.

Figure S5 SlERF.G3‐Like directly regulates the expression of SlACO1.

Figure S6 Response of SlERF.G3‐Like to ethylene and ethylene triple‐response.

Figure S7 Validation of RNA‐seq results by RT‐qPCR.

Figure S8 SlRIN is a potential regulator for SlERF.G3‐Like gene expression.

Figure S9 SlRIN directly binds to the promoter of SlERF.G3‐Like.

Figure S10. Screening of E8:VvStSy overexpression plants.

Figure S11. PCR identifies hybrid tomato plants concurrently overexpressing SlERF.G3‐Like and VvStSy.

Figure S12 The different expression levels of SlERF.G3‐Like and VvStSy were tested by RT‐qPCR in different lines.

Figure S13 Identification of resveratrol and its derivatives.

Figure S14 Y2H assays for the interactions between SlERF.G3‐Like and SlFUL1.

Figure S15 Carotenoid contents in CR, OE and WT fruits.

Figure S16 Trans‐activation effects of SlERF.G3‐Like on promoters of SlPDS and SlPSY1.

Table S1 Primers used in this study.

Table S2 Carotenoid contents of tomato fruit in WT, OE and CR lines.

Table S3 The detailed contents of resveratrol and other derivatives in the hybrid tomato fruit.

Data S1 All sample_RNA‐seq_TPM.

Data S2 Expression levels of genes upregulated in OE fruits but downregulated in CR, or genes downregulated in OE fruits but upregulated in CR lines.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the supplementary material of this article.