379blackwellopenWiley Interdisciplinary Reviews. Nanomedicine and NanobiotechnologyWiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed NanobiotechnolPMC1172556211725562117255623980078310.1002/wnan.70000Pulmonary Delivery of Nonviral Nucleic Acid‐Based Vaccines With Spotlight on Gold Nanoparticles
Araujo CirneCarolina FoldvariMarianna 
1
School of Pharmacy and Waterloo Institute of Nanotechnology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada*

Correspondence:
 
Marianna Foldvari (foldvari@uwaterloo.ca)

✉Corresponding author.
1212025171e70000e700001412025© 2025 The Author(s). WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT
Nucleic acid‐based vaccines are leading‐edge tools in developing next‐generation preventative care. Much research has been done to convert vaccine gene therapy from an invasive to a noninvasive administration approach. The lung's large surface area and permeability make the pulmonary route a promising noninvasive delivery option for vaccines, with systemic and local applications. This review summarizes the challenges and the approaches that have been carried out to optimize the delivery of nucleic acids through the pulmonary route for vaccination purposes in recent years, with a spotlight on gold nanoparticles (AuNPs). Nonviral delivery systems have been widely explored, and AuNPs with their unique properties are emerging as promising tools for nucleic acid vaccines due to surface functionalization with mucus‐penetrating polymers and targeting moieties that can bypass the barriers in pulmonary delivery and successfully deliver nucleic acids to the cells of interest. However, while promising, several challenges remain including selectively overcoming the lungs' immunological surveillance and adhesive mucus.
Keywords: gold nanoparticles, nonviral delivery system, nucleic acid vaccines, pulmonary delivery

Nucleic acid‐based vaccines are leading‐edge tools in developing next‐generation preventative care. The pulmonary route is a promising noninvasive delivery option for vaccines, with systemic and local applications. Nonviral delivery systems have been widely explored, and gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) with their unique properties are emerging as promising tools for nucleic acid vaccines due to surface functionalization with targeting moieties that can bypass the barriers in pulmonary delivery and successfully deliver nucleic acids to the cells of interest.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2024 Nov 15; Received 2024 May 28; Accepted 2024 Dec 6; Issue date 2025 Jan-Feb.

1.

## Introduction
Gene therapy is defined as the therapeutic use of nucleic acids, viruses, bacterial vectors, or genetically engineered microorganisms to alter or manipulate genes through genome editing, changes in gene expression, or gene silencing (Wirth, Parker, and Yla‐Herttuala  ; FDA  ). Thus, gene therapy offers a precise and long‐lasting approach to treating various illnesses including genetic‐based diseases, chronic diseases, and cancer.
Recently, nucleic acids (DNA plasmids, mRNA, oligonucleotides) emerged as ground‐breaking vaccines, playing an essential role in generating microbial antigens in situ in the body to stimulate and boost the immune response (Alcon et al.  ; Kim, Eygeris, Gupta, and Sahay,  ; Kowalski et al.  ; Kuo et al.  ). Nucleic acid‐based vaccines are leading‐edge tools in developing next‐generation preventative care, as are the necessary delivery system technologies to guarantee their effectiveness.
Many gene delivery systems have been investigated to date. These delivery systems are either (i) viral when the system consists of a modified viral material or (ii) nonviral when composed of engineered complexes or nanoparticles (Foldvari et al.  ). Nonviral delivery systems have been widely explored for their many advantages over viral ones (Thomas, Ehrhardt, and Kay  ). While viral delivery systems may be oncogenic and immunogenic, nonviral approaches represent a safer alternative and are generally easy to produce. This is due to the design flexibility in producing nonviral delivery systems in which numerous complexing agents, targeting moieties, and other components may be chosen according to the therapy goal (Foldvari et al.  ). Several nonviral gene delivery platforms, including nanoparticles composed of lipids, polymers, and inorganic materials, are currently being explored (see Table  for comparative properties with gold nanoparticles).
 Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are versatile carriers with several advantages in drug delivery, such as: (i) possibility of synthesizing various types of nanostructure materials on large scale (nanorods, nanospheres, nanotubes, nanowires, nanoribbons, nanoplates, nanostars, nanohexagons and nanotriangles) by different synthesis methods (e.g., seed growth, template method) and by tuning synthesis parameters; (ii) controlling the size of the synthesized nanoparticles between 2 to 500 nm, depending on the production settings and application goal (Thambiraj, Hema, and Shankaran  ); (iii) negatively charged surface, which enables easy modification due to its strong interaction with biomolecules (e.g., nucleic acids, peptides; Cao‐Milán and Liz‐Marzán  ); (iv) unique optical and electrical properties, especially for biosensor applications (Sperling et al.  ); (v) biocompatibility and low toxicity (Pan et al.  ); (vi) nonimmunogenic properties, meaning that AuNPs do not induce carrier‐specific antibodies following administration (Wang et al.  ); (vii) immunostimulatory effect upon uptake into cells of the immune system, leading to the production of pro‐inflammatory cytokines (e.g., interleukin‐1β (IL‐1β), tumor necrosis factor‐α (TNF‐α)) and T helper type 1 (Th1) cytokines [e.g., interferon gamma (IFN‐γ), interleukin‐2 (IL‐2)], which could be an asset for vaccine applications (Dykman and Khlebtsov  ). Therefore, the importance of AuNPs as therapeutic agents and drug carriers continues to rise because of their unique properties.
Apart from the viral or nonviral nature of the delivery system, much research has been done to convert vaccines from an invasive to a noninvasive administration approach (Foldvari et al.  ). The noninvasive route presents several key advantages: practical administration, specific localized immunity (mucosal immunity), pain‐free methods for higher patient compliance, and reduced needle waste (Kurono  ). Pulmonary administration is a well‐established method for drug delivery, commonly recognized for the nebulization and inhaler‐based distribution of bronchodilators, anti‐inflammatory agents, and antimicrobial medications, which millions of patients administer daily (Sorino et al.  ). The lung's massive surface area and permeability make the pulmonary route a promising noninvasive vaccine approach for systemic or local applications (Merkel, Rubinstein, and Kissel  ; Taratula et al.  ), depending on the cell‐targeting strategy. Furthermore, inhalable gene therapy could be a game‐changing tool for treating lung diseases caused by single gene defects (e.g., α1‐antitrypsin deficiency, cystic fibrosis) and multifactorial lung disorders (e.g., lung fibrosis, cancer, asthma, and acute respiratory distress syndrome) (Alton, Davies, and Geddes  ). Lung delivery is also a promising vaccine approach due to the activation of both mucosal and systemic immunity (Buschmann et al.  ). In fact, there are currently various inhalable genetic adenovirus‐vector vaccines (Afkhami et al.  ; Wu et al.  ), and a pulmonary gene therapy candidate for cystic fibrosis (Heartlein et al.  ) undergoing clinical trials.
This review explores the important potential of nucleic acids and associated delivery challenges as vaccines, particularly when administered through the lung while emphasizing the use of AuNPs as delivery systems.

2.

## Nucleic Acids as Vaccines
Nucleic acids became a group of compounds now considered ‘pharmaceuticals’ being developed as therapeutic agents and vaccines like other bioactive compounds. DNA plasmids, RNA (mRNA, siRNA), oligonucleotides (ODN), and clustered, regularly interspaced, short palindromic repeat/associated protein (CRISPR/Cas) represent nucleic acids employed in vaccines (Figure  ). Their unique advantages are related to the precise coding for gene inhibition, addition, replacement, or editing, for example, the production of an antigen of interest in situ (Kulkarni et al.  ). Specifically, the expression of these host‐synthesized molecules can provide for the development of a long‐lasting and broad‐spectrum immune response to the encoded antigen.
 The first use of “naked” plasmid DNA as a therapeutic agent and as a vaccine was reported in the early 1990s for human and animal applications (Wolff et al.  ). The combination of gold particles and genetic material was also reported then for vaccine applications, with the use of “gene gun” technology. Also, as early as 1993, plasmid DNA vaccines were proven effective in a variety of routes of administration, including parenteral, epidermal “gene gun” and mucosal (to nostrils and trachea), with the “gene gun” DNA‐coated gold beads being the most effective in expressing immune response upon human growth hormone‐DNA exposure as an immunogen (Tang, DeVit, and Johnston  ). Injectable DNA vaccines were also reported for livestock immunization, providing effective and long‐term immunity (Babiuk et al.  ). The advantages of combining the nucleic acid vaccine with mucosal administration to provide local and systemic immunity have been suggested since then (Babiuk et al.  ). In subsequent years, DNA vaccines have been further developed, (Blakney and Bekker  ; Rajapaksa et al.  ) resulting in clinical trials for humans and licensed products for veterinary applications (Hobernik and Bros  ; Khobragade et al.  ; Kutzler and Weiner  ; Tebas et al.  ). To date, 17 nucleic acid‐based products have already been approved by the FDA for human gene therapy (FDA  ). However, achieving efficient nucleic acid delivery remains challenging, especially for extrahepatic tissues (Roberts, Langer, and Wood  ).
Furthermore, genome‐editing systems based on CRISPR/Cas are a ground‐breaking technology for genome editing. They could be used as a potential treatment for various genetic diseases, including pulmonary ones. However, demonstrating the aerosol delivery of genome‐editing materials for lung genetic conditions is still pending (Wan and Ping  ). The CRISPR/Cas nuclease system has been utilized as a powerful genome editing tool for Plasmodium species, the parasites that cause malaria. It has also been used as a gene drive to control the Anopheles vector mosquito population. This technology has the potential to produce transgenic malaria parasites and mutant strains of Anopheles, which could provide a better understanding of malaria pathogenesis and potentially lead to the production of future vaccines (Nourani et al.  ). Most commonly, vaccines are produced from live‐attenuated or heat‐inactivated organisms, as exposure to foreign material induces an immune response (Shah, Hassett, and Brito  ). However, novel research points out nucleic acid vaccines as a safe, effective, and easy‐to‐produce alternative to conventional vaccines (Kim, Eygeris, Gupta, and Sahay,  ). Indeed, the fast spread of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2), which caused the pandemic coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19), dramatically impacted global human health and pushed forward ground‐breaking vaccine technology: the protein‐encoding vaccines.
The recent success of injectable mRNA COVID‐19 vaccines (Chaudhary, Weissman, and Whitehead  ) was the fruit of many years of research and efforts to reduce RNA immunogenicity and improve their bioavailability (Dolgin  ). First, the groundbreaking discovery of the pseudouridine modification on the RNA material to suppress Toll‐like receptor recognition, reducing dendritic cell activation (Kariko et al.  ), which enabled the RNA to pass undetected through the innate immune system and successfully express its effect. Second, the breakthrough of efficient delivery systems, such as lipid nanoparticles, in which the combination of four lipids (phospholipid, cholesterol, PEG‐lipid, and ionizable lipid) guaranteed the stability of the nucleic acid vaccine while showing low toxicity in the body, thus, essential in developing mRNA vaccines (Cullis and Hope  ). Further, mRNA is a potentially valuable tool in treating genetic diseases and protein replacement therapies. Its success, however, still depends on the improvement of delivery systems (Kowalski et al.  ). At present, there are ongoing efforts to use this innovative vaccine technology for mucosal applications, with the goal of inducing both systemic and mucosal immunity (Lavelle and Ward  ; Mao et al.  ; Sunagar et al.  ).
2.1.

## Delivery of Nucleic Acid Vaccines by Inhalation—Clinical Studies
To date, four inhalable COVID‐19 vaccines are undergoing clinical trials, three in phase I, and Ad5‐nCoV‐IH, developed by CanSino, in phase IV (Table  ). Ad5‐nCoV‐IH is an aerosolized replication‐defective adenovirus type‐5 vector vaccine that encodes the SARS‐CoV‐2 spike protein. Briefly, the vaccine generates the spike S protein of SARS‐CoV‐2 in situ to stimulate the human immune system to produce antibodies and cellular immune responses against the virus and prevent COVID‐19 (Wu et al.  ). Recently, this inhalable vaccine, also known as Convidecia Air, was approved as a booster by the National Medical Products Administration of China (Cansinotech  ).
 The COVID‐19 outbreak also prompted pharmaceutical companies to research small interfering RNA (siRNA) as a possible inhalable treatment against SARS‐CoV‐2 (Gatta and Josyula  ; Shaffer  ; Ullah et al.  ). siRNA functions with a high degree of specificity through RNA interference (RNAi) or post‐transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS), where it degrades mRNA sequences and thereby reduces the expression of a specific gene (Gatta et al.  ; Gatta and Josyula  ). The naked siRNA, MBS‐COV (SNS812), developed by Oneness Biotech, has recently received FDA's greenlight to start its phase I clinical trial after exciting results in vitro and in vivo inhibiting the production of infectious virions in multiple COVID‐19 variants, including the widely spread Delta variant (Chang et al.  ).
Remarkably, all inhalable vaccine formulations currently in clinical trials have viral‐based delivery systems, while the nonviral formulations already effectively in use are all injectable vaccines (Verdecia et al.  ). Thus, nonviral protein‐encoding materials are still just promising prospects in mucosal and pulmonary vaccine development, waiting for a chance to thrive (Tang, Zhang, and Zhu  ).

2.2.

## 
DNA‐Based Immunomodulatory Agent
One interesting mechanism of the immune system detecting foreign material is distinguishing the host genome from the pathogen. Vertebrates' genomes typically suppress or highly methylate CpG motifs, while bacteria have unmethylated CpG motifs and greater frequency of cytosine–phosphate–guanine (CpG) dinucleotides. Thus, the host immune system is tailored to be triggered by unmethylated CpG motifs in bacterial DNA (Krieg  ). Bacterial CpG motifs activate a Toll‐like receptor (TLR) expressed within human plasmacytoid dendritic cells and B‐lymphocytes (TLR9), which triggers a Th1 type of pro‐inflammatory response (Kayraklioglu, Horuluoglu, and Klinman  ; Sarkar, Garg, and van Drunen Littel‐van den Hurk  ). Also, zinc finger antiviral protein (ZAP) (Gao, Guo, and Goff  ), found in the lungs as isoform A549 (Li et al.  ), plays a crucial role in protecting cells from viral infections. It does so by recognizing viral genomes based on their CpG dinucleotide content and activating T cells. As part of their evolutionary process, viruses such as SARS‐CoV‐2 have removed CpG nucleotides from their genome, which may help them evade their host's defense mechanisms (Subramanian  ). Nevertheless, ODN containing CpG motifs can mimic most of the immunomodulatory effects induced by bacterial DNA (Gupta and Agrawal  ) and may thus be used as a vaccine adjuvant (Arunachalam et al.  ).

3.

## Lung Delivery—Challenges and Strategies
A prime aspect of drug delivery design is an in‐depth understanding of the organ of interest for delivery, with attention to the clearance pathways to be bypassed (Figure  ) (Jain  ). The airway is constantly exposed to environmental hazards such as microorganisms, pollution, and allergens. Hence, the respiratory tract holds a complex immune defense mechanism to contain foreign particles and deliver purified gases to peripheral alveoli (Shen and Minko  ; Torres et al.  ).
 First, the anatomical barrier constituted by the lung epithelial cells orchestrates the mucociliary clearance, which constitutes the first line of innate defense and the first delivery challenge to be bypassed. The main cells responsible for secreting airway mucins and producing respiratory mucus are Goblet cells. Mucins form an antimicrobial mucous gel layer in the airway, capable of binding external delivery vectors and microbes and wrecking bacterial aggregation. Once bound to the mucus, foreign particles are carried by the cilia movement of ciliated columnar cells. These cells move the external particles from the airway towards the esophagus, where the particles are swallowed (Whitsett and Alenghat  ) or eliminated through coughing (Lloyd and Marsland  ).
Depending on the airway diameter, the presence of different epithelial cell types varies, contributing to diverse defense mechanisms. Mucus‐secreting cells, such as Goblet cells, are more prominent in the upper and larger airways. In comparison, in the smaller airways, there are more watery secretory cells, such as Club cells that produce the anti‐inflammatory protein uteroglobin (Iwasaki, Foxman, and Molony  ), and pulmonary neuroendocrine cells that secrete several neuropeptides (Noguchi, Furukawa, and Morimoto  ). Additionally, Tuft cells respond to the secretion of bacterial products through the taste transduction system and stimulate ciliated epithelial cells to secrete antimicrobial products (Carey and Lee  ; Sell et al.  ). In fact, epithelial cells in the conducting airways secrete several antimicrobial products, such as surfactant proteins A and D, defensins, lysozyme, and cathelicidin LL37 (Whitsett and Alenghat  ). In the alveoli, there are two different types of alveolar cells: type 1 cell that is responsible for gas exchange, and type 2 cells which release pulmonary surfactant (Iwasaki, Foxman, and Molony  ). The surfactant can move from the lower airways into the upper airways through the mucociliary escalator, which facilitates clearance of the lower airways (Hidalgo, Cruz, and Perez‐Gil  ; Watson et al.  ). In the alveoli, there are also alveolar macrophages, which play a vital role in regulating the pulmonary immune response (Schneider et al.  ).
If threatening particles enter the respiratory bronchioles, an ordered defense mechanism of resident and recruited cells takes place (Torres et al.  ). Epithelial cells express pattern‐recognition receptors (PRRs), such as the TLR, that recognize pathogen‐associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) (Whitsett and Alenghat  ). Thus, these cells also play a role in this next line of defense by the secretion of cytokines and chemokines that trigger cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems (Lloyd and Marsland  ; Schneider et al.  ). Innate immune cells include alveolar macrophages, neutrophils, antigen‐presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells, and natural killer (NK) cells (Zhang et al.  ). In contrast, antigen‐specific T and B lymphocytes and antibodies carry out the adaptive immune response (Lange and Karol  ). Thus, mucosal immunity involves sites that recognize and process antigens (inductive sites) and sites that produce immunoglobulins (Ig) (effector sites) (Kurono  ). Because effective lung delivery systems must pass undetected through all these cells, nonimmunogenic carriers are highly preferred.
The airway branching structure itself also plays a role in innate immunity by preventing particles larger than 3 μM in diameter from reaching the lower airways (Whitsett and Alenghat  ). Depending on size distribution, particles have three paths when entering the airways: impaction, sedimentation, or diffusion (Dolovich and Dhand  ; Liu et al.  ). Large particles (> 5 μm) typically suffer impaction, getting trapped in the upper airways (mouth, pharynx, or larynx) and being removed by swallowing (Calderon‐Nieva  ). Particles between 1 and 5 μm can settle in the smaller airways and respiratory bronchioles (Chaurasiya and Zhao  ). Finally, particles that are smaller than 1 μm, including nanoparticles ranging from 1 to 100 nm, usually settle in deeper alveolar regions through Brownian diffusion. On the other hand, particles that are smaller than 0.5 μm are either exhaled out or, if they are less than 34 nm in size, they enter the bloodstream and are later eliminated via renal filtration (Kreyling, Hirn, and Schleh  ; Kreyling et al.  ). Targeting the alveolar region with an interface to the blood‐air barrier is highly desirable since systemic effect could be just as necessary as a local effect for vaccines.
3.1.

## Overcoming the Mucus Barrier
The airway surface liquid (ASL) in our lungs is comprised of two distinct layers. The first layer is the mucus layer that traps inhaled particles and pathogens. This layer is responsible for removing these harmful agents from our lungs through the movement of cilia (Adivitiya, Kaushik, Chakraborty, Veleri, and Kateriya  ; Frey et al.  ; Zierden et al.  ). The second layer, known as the periciliary layer (PCL), plays a vital role in enabling functional ciliary movement and lubrication of the cell surface (Button et al.  ). Airway mucus is a viscoelastic gel (Jeanneret‐Grosjean et al.  ; Rubin et al.  ) with a near‐neutral pH and porous structure (Jeewandara et al.  ), composed of a dense network of entangled and crosslinked mucin fibers (Song, Cahn, and Duncan  ), inorganic salts, lipids, proteins, DNA, and predominantly, water (> 95%) (Huck et al.  ). The PCL is an underlying fluid layer made up of membrane‐spanning mucins and large mucopolysaccharides. This layer forms an extracellular brush that is anchored to cilia, microvilli, and epithelial surfaces. It plays a crucial role in preventing foreign particles and mucins from penetrating the mucus layer (Button et al.  ).
The ASL can hinder effective particle diffusion through two primary trapping mechanisms. First, noncovalent adhesive interactions, such as electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions, may trap inhalable delivery systems in the airway mucus gel layer, depending on the particles' surface composition. For example, the dense negatively charged glycan coating on mucin fibers may inhibit the penetration of positively charged particles (Duncan et al.  ) and pathogens (Wardzala et al.  ) through the mucus gel layer. Second, there are tiny pores, smaller than 100 nm in diameter, spread throughout the airway mucus gel. These pores are in the range of tens to hundreds of nm (Schuster et al.  ), which makes it difficult for particles with sizes much larger than 100 nm to diffuse through the mucus gel layer. In summary, the mucus adhesiveness and tight porous structure are the main challenges inhalable delivery systems must overcome.
Gene vectors that can penetrate or exploit the airway mucus barrier are preferred for successful gene transfer throughout the airway epithelium and for achieving significant therapeutic outcomes (Duncan et al.  ). Mucoadhesive particles have been extensively studied for pulmonary drug delivery because, theoretically, they could increase particle residence in the lungs by adhering to the airway mucus instead of being quickly eliminated through exhalation (Alpar et al.  ; Prasher et al.  ). As the mucus contains a high amount of negatively charged groups, cationic nanoparticles or the encapsulation of nanoparticles by a cationic layer would enable adhesion to the mucosa by electrostatic association (Liu et al.  ). For example, delivery systems based on cationic polysaccharides like chitosan can stick to the mucus layer and release the nucleic acid vaccine cargo when the carrier polysaccharides degrade at the target site (Bivas‐Benita, Franken, et al.  ; Nielsen et al.  ). However, mucociliary clearance may limit the mucoadhesive strategy (Prasher et al.  ). Conversely, particles that penetrate mucus have diameters smaller than mucus mesh pores and do not stick to mucus, making it easier to deliver drugs and genes to mucosal tissues without compromising the protective function of mucus (Ensign et al.  ).
Surface engineering is critical to formulating either mucoadhesive or mucus‐penetrating particles. For instance, when polystyrene particles with a high density of 2 kDa poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) coating are used, they penetrate mucus rapidly. This is because the PEG corona protects the hydrophobic polystyrene core from sticking to the mucus. On the other hand, when particles coated with a high density of 10 kDa PEG are used, they tend to stick to mucus due to added intermolecular interactions with mucins, such as hydrogen bonding (Wang et al.  ). Also, mucoadhesive and mucus‐penetrating particles were compared based on their behaviors in the lungs following inhalation in vivo and ex vivo. The particles were formulated in a broad range of sizes (60–1000 nm in diameter) and based on either polystyrene or a biodegradable polymer, poly(lactic‐co‐glycolic acid) (PLGA), where particles conjugated to 5 kDa PEG were considered mucus‐penetrating while non‐pegylated particles were considered mucoadhesive. The mucoadhesive particles, regardless of particle size or polymer type, were poorly distributed throughout the airways, leading to rapid lung clearance. In contrast, mucus‐penetrating particles as large as 300 nm, regardless of the polymer used, exhibited uniform distribution, and distinctly enhanced retention compared to mucoadhesive particles of the same size. Furthermore, PLGA‐mucus‐penetrating particles loaded with dexamethasone sodium phosphate substantially reduced inflammation in a mouse model of acute lung inflammation compared to both carrier‐free dexamethasone and dexamethasone‐loaded mucoadhesive particles (Schneider et al.  ). Other studies also reported better performance associated with mucus‐penetrating particles than their mucoadhesive counterparts, which suggests that PEGylation facilitates pulmonary delivery through the mucus and that mucus‐penetrating particles are a better alternative to mucoadhesive formulations (Huang et al.  ; Kim et al.  ; Mastorakos, Chisholm, et al.  ). In mice, high transgene expression was observed in the lungs following intratracheal administration of mucus‐penetrating PEGylated nanoparticles in a hypotonic vehicle. This further facilitated the particles' endocytic uptake via the osmotically driven regulatory volume decrease (RVD) mechanism (Chen et al.  ). Similarly, inhalable DNA vaccine nanoparticles were designed to rapidly penetrate airway mucus following intratracheal administration in mice by containing a mixture of poly(β amino ester) and PEG‐conjugated poly(β amino ester) at an optimized ratio, used to enhance the delivery of ovalbumin‐expressing plasmids as an inhaled model DNA vaccine (i.e., ovalbumin‐expressing plasmids) to pulmonary dendritic cells. This formulation led to robust and durable local trans‐mucosal and systemic immunity. In contrast, conventional mucus‐impermeable particles, formulated with poly(β amino ester) only, carrying ovalbumin‐expressing plasmids were poorly taken up by pulmonary dendritic cells following inhalation (Kim et al.  ).
In the case of AuNPs, mucoadhesive properties were achieved through thiol groups coupled to the surface and metallic core (Ouellette et al.  ). As mucins are rich in cysteines (Thornton et al.  ), AuNPs muco‐adhesiveness could be explained by the formation of gold–sulfur bonds (Au—S) with the AuNPs gold core, and disulfide bonds (S—S) with the AuNPs thiol groups. Therefore, mucins deeply interacted with the AuNPs containing only internal thiol groups, perturbing AuNPs core via both Au—S and S—S bonds; whereas mucins remained at the periphery of AuNPs with both internal and peripheral thiol groups, interacting mainly via S—S bonds. The quantitative results suggested that more mucins were adsorbed in AuNPs with both internal and peripheral thiol groups (96% ± 6%) than in AuNPs containing only internal thiol groups (55% ± 2%). This mucoadhesive property of AuNPs and their delivery ability could increase particle residence in the mucosa (Ouellette et al.  ).
Also, AuNPs can be synthesized with mucus‐penetrating functionalization (e.g., PEG) and in a wide range of sizes, including diameters small enough to penetrate the mucus mesh pores (Lee, Choi, and Heo  ). Moreover, pulmonary delivery of AuNPs has excellent potential for treatment and diagnostics (theragnostic) due to their optoelectronic properties and localized effect with minimal translocation through the air‐blood barrier. Additionally, surface functionalization of AuNPs enables precise cell targeting, including alveolar macrophage targeting (Konduru et al.  ). The specifics of AuNPs formulations for nucleic acid delivery to the lungs will be explored further in this article.

4.

## Pulmonary Vaccines
Lower respiratory infections are a global concern, ranked as the fourth leading cause of death over the past two decades (WHO  ). Currently, the most effective tools for combating respiratory infections are injectable vaccines, but mass immunization efforts require complex logistics and trained personnel to administer them to the public (Alcon et al.  ; Kersten and Hirschberg  ; Kunda et al.  ).
Inhalable pulmonary vaccines offer a promising alternative to injectable vaccines (Alcon et al.  ; Kunda et al.  ). First, because pulmonary vaccines are administered directly to the entryway of pathogen infections (Lavelle and Ward  ), they can trigger adaptive mucosal immunity by activating TRM cells, memory alveolar macrophages, and antigen‐specific secretory IgA on mucosal lung surfaces, which is rare with injectable vaccines (Lavelle and Ward  ). Second, mucosal immunization has the unique ability to induce similar antigen‐specific immune responses at various effector sites, independent of the inductive site, because of the interrelated circulation of lymphocytes in the CMIS (Kurono  ). Finally, from a healthcare perspective, this needle‐free technology provides a more patient‐friendly administration method without the need for trained personnel and removes the challenges of safe needle disposal and the risk of infection at the injection site (Kurono  ; Micoli et al.  ). Despite the enormous potential of inhalable vaccines, research to date has mainly focused on injectable ones because inhalable vaccines require additional delivery strategies to overcome biological barriers in the lungs (e.g., macrophage uptake and physical barriers).
The three main in vivo administration methods for pulmonary delivery include intratracheal instillation, inhalation (intranasal, pulmonary), and nebulization. Inhalation is advantageous over instillation because it is noninvasive, and mimicks the physiological route of airborne particles entering the body. However, during inhalation, the aerosolized particles may interact with the upper respiratory tract enroute to the lower airways, while intratracheal instillation bypasses the upper respiratory tract (i.e., the. nasal cavity and larynx) and its defense mechanisms. Nebulization is also a noninvasive inhalation method for larger volumes of liquid for lung deposition of microparticles generated by a nebulizer device. In this case, due to the generation of droplets by jet or ultrasonication, formulation stability issues may arise. While delivery methods and devices can affect the integrity of nanoparticles in general and can cause stability issues due to the stress during the delivery process, for example, particle aggregation formulation design steps and specific excipients can overcome these issues (Montefusco‐Pereira  ).
Several studies compared the immunity induction of injectable and inhalable vaccines. A few decades ago, a randomized trial compared schoolchildren's immune responses to booster administration of subcutaneous (s.c.) and aerosol measles vaccines. The inhalable vaccine induced better humoral and mucosal immunity when compared to the injectable vaccine, considering the higher seroconversion rate and long‐lasting immunity (Dilraj et al.  ). A recent study on tuberculosis immunization in mice obtained better activation of APCs and innate myeloid response after intramuscular (i.m.) prime dose followed by intrapulmonary booster than i.m. and intrapulmonary administrations alone (Thakur et al.  ), indicating the need for a combined approach in this case. Further, influenza vaccines were tested in mice showing higher cell‐mediated, systemic humoral (IgG), and mucosal (IgA) responses with an inhalable powder vaccine than with liquid inhalable and i.m. vaccines (Amorij et al.  ). A chitosan‐DNA vaccine formulation for tuberculosis tested in mice presented higher maturation of dendritic cells and following immune signaling when administered through the lungs than through i.m. injection. This study also compared the administration of solutions of the adjuvant (chitosan with a 93.2% degree of deacetylation) and the antigen (DNA) alone and found that the most successful formulation combined the two components (Bivas‐Benita, Franken, et al.  ). These findings demonstrate how significant formulation development is to vaccine efficiency.
Recently, engineered filamentous bacteriophages (phages) were genetically modified to contain spike protein epitopes in their genome as a novel aerosolized vaccination approach against SARS‐CoV‐2. Immunogenicity in mice was enhanced in the presence of a lung targeting dual‐display peptide ligands (prototype epitope 4/CAKSMGDIVC) in phage and adeno‐associated virus/phage (AAVP) particles as a translational candidate for pulmonary vaccination (Staquicini et al.  ).
Also, an inhalable vaccine was developed utilizing hyperbranched poly (beta‐amino esters) nanopolyplexes as a delivery system for a model mRNA. After 24 h of inhalation, mice showed a localized and uniform luciferase mRNA distribution throughout all lung lobes. After a single dose of the vaccine, 24.6% of the total lung epithelial cell population was transfected, and repeat dosing generated consistent localized protein production without any local or systemic toxicity. The level of epithelial targeting required for correcting phenotypic diseases varies depending on the specific disorder being treated. For example, in vitro studies of CFTR gene correction, where cells expressing CFTR were combined with cells that have not been corrected, suggested that low levels of CFTR expression (6%–28% corrected cells; Farmen et al.  ; Johnson et al.  ; Patel et al.  ; Potash et al.  ) within an epithelial sheet were sufficient to normalize the regulation of transepithelial chloride which could alleviate symptoms of cystic fibrosis.
Another strategy available for delivering genes to the lungs is electroporation. Electroporation is a physical technique that involves the use of mild to moderate electrical pulses to create pores in the cell membrane for introducing genetic material (Young and Dean  ), for example, a DNA vaccine (INO‐4800) targeting full‐length spike antigen has been tested through intradermal injection of INO‐4800 followed by electroporation injected intradermally followed by in vivo electroporation, offering the induction of humoral and cellular immunity (Kraynyak et al.  ).

5.

## 
AuNPS Properties and Clinical Studies
Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) possess unique characteristics that make them useful for gene delivery and nucleic acid vaccines. Those properties include high stability, biocompatibility, ease of surface functionalization, photostability, and the potential to be used as markers in biosensing assays (Conde et al.  ; Mitchell et al.  ; Sperling et al.  ) to early diagnose diseases such as HIV (Gulati et al.  ) and cancer (Guinart et al.  ; Singh et al.  ), for example. AuNPs can be customized for various applications by controlling their size, shape, and dimension using modern synthesis methods (Fan, Cheng, and Sun  ; Sztandera, Gorzkiewicz, and Klajnert‐Maculewicz  ). In turn, the size and shape of AuNPs directly and profoundly influence the formulation stability, mobility, compatibility, and feasibility, which can be optimized according to the desired application. For drug delivery, AuNPs should be small enough to reach the target site and large enough for appropriate drug loading, conjugation, or binding of a biological moiety (Talamini et al.  ; Yue et al.  ). The possibility of tailored surface functionalization of AuNPs, especially with amine and thiol groups, provides an opportunity for critical biomedical applications by increasing the particles' specificity for diagnostics, imaging, and drug delivery (Fan, Cheng, and Sun  ; Giraldez‐Perez et al.  ; Gulati et al.  ). Additionally, when uptaken into cells of the immune system, AuNPs present an interesting immunostimulatory effect, inducing pro‐inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL‐1β and TNF‐α) and Th1 cytokines (e.g., IFN‐γ and IL‐2; Dykman and Khlebtsov  ), which may be specifically useful for vaccine design strategies.
AuNPs have unique optical properties, including a characteristic plasmonic band that is size and shape‐dependent, which, in turn, highly influences AuNPs delivery performance (Ferrari  ). A strategy for in vivo DNA vaccination using electrically activated plasmonic AuNPs has been reported. The electrical excitation of these nanoparticles triggered vibrational and dipole‐like oscillations that effectively disrupted nearby cell membranes, leading to enhanced cell poration and improved uptake of DNA vaccines, including a model for hepatitis C virus DNA. This technique, termed “oscillating plasmonic nanoparticle‐based vaccination,” utilized short direct current electric pulses to activate the AuNPs. They effectively concentrated and amplified electric fields on cell surfaces, significantly boosting gene expression. Mice immunized using this method showed an impressive up to 100‐fold higher gene expression compared to control treatments that did not incorporate nanoparticles, along with significantly strengthened antibody and cellular immune responses. The method can be adjusted for targeted delivery of various therapeutic molecules into cells and living animals (Carabineiro  ; Draz et al.  ). Also, a method for synthesizing AuNPs using a self‐assembling bottom‐up conjugation approach was developed, achieving about 90% peptide conjugation yield while keeping the particles under 80 nm in diameter. These AuNPs were optimized using dendritic‐to‐splenocyte interferon‐γ enzyme‐linked immunosorbent spot assays and were effectively taken up by dendritic cells with minimal toxicity. This allowed for better processing of vaccine peptides and enhanced stimulation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes compared to free peptides. Dark‐field imaging showed greater scattering in dendritic cells loaded with AuNPs, while hyperspectral analysis indicated a spectral shift towards 550 nm, matching the absorbance peak of the AuNPs. This suggests that the scattering enhancement was due to the AuNPs, with shifts in plasmon resonance likely caused by the cellular environment. These high‐peptide density AuNPs have potential as carriers for various vaccines, offering an improved immune response (Lin, Lunsford, et al.  ). To evaluate the size‐dependent carrier capabilities of AuNPs, a synthetic peptide mimicking foot‐and‐mouth disease virus protein was conjugated to AuNPs of varying diameters (2–50 nm). The synthesis was monitored by UV absorbance, which indicated shifts in surface plasmon band peaks with different peptide concentrations. Mice injected with AuNPs (2, 5, 8, 12, and 17 nm) generated specific antibodies against the peptide, showing a three‐fold increase in antibody response compared to controls. As maximized antibody binding occurred with AuNPs of 8–17 nm, these sizes were optimal for obtaining a focused antibody response against the synthetic peptide (Chen, Taratula, et al.  ). The effect of chitosan‐reduced AuNPs of varying sizes and association temperatures on the structure and function of the tetanus toxoid vaccine has been investigated. AuNPs were synthesized in the sizes 20 ± 3, 40 ± 5, and 80 ± 7 nm, followed by vaccine binding. The vaccine binding to 40 and 80 nm AuNPs did not significantly alter the vaccine's secondary structure or function. Thermodynamic studies showed an increase in the association constant with temperature. Ex vivo analysis of the vaccine‐AuNPs interaction with both tetanus toxoid positive and negative sera showed that particle size and association temperature are crucial factors affecting the vaccine's structure and function. The AuNPs demonstrated stability for at least one year post‐synthesis, as confirmed by particle surface plasmon resonance. Stability assessments indicated by unaltered surface plasmon resonance, without peak broadening, confirmed the absence of particle aggregation (Barhate et al.  ).
Also, the optical properties and intense electromagnetic fields generated by AuNPs through Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance (LSPR) make these particles promising for diagnostics and photothermal therapeutic applications (Azharuddin et al.  ; Tai et al.  ). The surface area that is available is also a critical factor in these situations. In photothermal therapy, light is absorbed by the AuNPs and converted to heat to destroy target cells (e.g., cancer); thus, smaller nanoparticles are preferred to augment specificity. In photo imaging, larger nanoparticles are ideal for achieving higher light scattering efficiency (Eustis and el‐Sayed  ; Singh et al.  ).
AuNPs provide several benefits over organic nanoparticles (e.g., lipid nanoparticles), yet only a few AuNP formulations have been translated into the clinic (Table  ) (Sibuyi et al.  ). To date, only one AuNP formulation was fully approved by the FDA: Sebacia Microparticles—approved for photothermal treatment of moderate‐to‐severe inflammatory acne vulgaris (FDA  ; Paithankar, Hwang, et al.  ; Paithankar, Sakamoto, et al.  ). FDA recently rejected the approval for CNM‐Au8, a gold nanocrystal product developed for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) by Clene Nanomedicine, as phase II findings on reduction of nerve damage biomarkers were insufficient to support accelerated approval (Vucic et al.  ; Wire  ). Nonetheless, a later press release by Clene Nanomedicine reported that CNM‐Au8, in a long‐term extension phase of the pivotal VISIONARY‐MS trial, enhanced progressive vision and cognition in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis (Wire  ).
 The studies presented in Table  further indicate the versatility and immense potential of AuNPs in the clinic. However, only one study involves nucleic acid delivery by AuNPs. Spherical nucleic acids (SNAs) are tiny particles made of gold nanoparticles (AuNP) that are covalently linked to siRNA oligonucleotides. These siRNA molecules are arranged radially and densely packed around the AuNP core. They are designed to target the Bcl2Like12 (Bcl2L12) gene, which is known to be involved in the development of glioblastoma, a type of brain cancer. In clinical trials, siBcl2L12‐SNAs were used to treat glioblastoma, resulting in a significant reduction of Bcl2L12 protein expression in glioma cells when compared to untreated tumors (Kumthekar et al.  ).

6.

## 
AuNPS for Pulmonary Delivery
Due to all their outstanding properties, AuNPs have been explored as carriers for pulmonary delivery (Table  ). A decade ago, AuNPs were already well known for their high cellular uptake (Giljohann et al.  ) and resistance to enzymatic metabolism (Rosi et al.  ). Because of those advantages, a delivery system combining cisplatin and polyvalent oligonucleotide AuNPs was developed for lung cancer applications. The study utilized AuNPs decorated with thiolated oligonucleotides (28mer) containing a terminal dodecyl amine for conjugation with platinum (IV). This conjugate was found to be more effective than cisplatin alone in killing various types of cancer cells (Dhar et al.  ). A recent report presented outstanding results in treating lung tumors by developing aptamer‐targeted AuNPs nanocages containing doxorubicin and siRNA. Thus, this formulation combined photothermal activity, chemotherapy, and genetic therapy, which resulted in gene silencing and 90% of tumor inhibition (Yang et al.  ).
 The impact of four distinct shapes of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs)—spherical, box, icosahedron, and rod—on a model lung surfactant monolayer's structure and dynamics was examined through coarse‐grained molecular dynamics simulations. The simulations were conducted in two states: the compressed state (inhalation) and the expanded state (exhalation). According to the findings, when in a compressed state, all AuNPs resulted in a reduction of the monolayer thickness by pulling the surfactant molecules into the water phase. This effect was less pronounced in the expanded state. Therefore, in general, the compressed state was more impacted by AuNPs than the expanded state (Hossain et al.  ).
Nano‐in‐micro formulations are an exciting approach for lung delivery. Similarly, Silva et al. incorporated AuNPs into inhalable microparticles. Initially, researchers created gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) with fluorescent oligo(2‐oxazoline)‐based coatings and a laminin peptide (YIGSR) to specifically target lung cancer. Next, the modified AuNPs were combined with a chitosan microsphere matrix solution (with a viscosity of 5–20 mPa s, 0.5% in 0.5% acetic acid at 20°C) using supercritical CO2‐assisted spray drying, resulting in a powder formulation where the nanoparticles were contained within the microspheres. The resulting powder could successfully reach the lower airways, with adequate morphology and aerodynamic sizes ranging from 3.2 to 3.8 μm. Also, upon coming into contact with the cancerous cells in the lungs, the particles attach themselves to the membranes of those cells, showing optimal biodegradation and sustained release profile (Silva et al.  ). Hence, the success of many AuNP formulations depends on the engineered modifications in the particles' surface (Figure  ).
 
7.

## 
AuNPS' Modifications for Gene Delivery and Lung Targeting
7.1.

## Covalent Attachments
Many studies have considered modifications in AuNPs for gene delivery, specifically targeting the lungs. Two main mechanisms can be used to functionalize nanoparticles with ligands on their surface: (1) physical adsorption or (2) covalent attachment, usually through thiol linkages (Figures  and ; Sztandera, Gorzkiewicz, and Klajnert‐Maculewicz  ). In a study conducted by Seydoux et al. the impact of surface charge modification on the behavior of colloidal AuNPs was evaluated. The AuNPs were functionalized with molecules using thiol–gold bonds and were introduced into the airways. The study found that the AuNPs coated with poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) containing positively charged functional groups (NH2) were taken up by APCs to a greater extent than the particles containing negatively charged groups (COOH). In comparison to the negatively charged particles and the polymer by itself, the positively charged AuNPs induced a higher level of CD4+ T‐cell proliferation in draining lymph nodes. These findings suggest that (1) the surface charge plays a crucial role in the trafficking of APCs to the lung‐draining lymph nodes and subsequent downstream T‐cell activation and (2) the AuNP core is also essential in triggering these immune responses (Seydoux et al.  ). Similarly, AuNPs were fluorescently tagged and coated with PVA that was functionalized with either negative (—COO—) or positive (—NH3
+) surface charges, and with DC‐SIGN antibody on the particle surface for dendritic cell targeting. The formulation was tested in a three‐dimensional (3D) co‐culture model consisting of lung epithelial cells, and immune cells (macrophages and dendritic cells). The PVA‐NH2 AuNPs were found to have higher cell uptake than PVA‐COOH AuNPs, although predominantly taken up by macrophages, as per flow cytometry results. The DC‐SIGN AuNPs were found to have significantly higher uptake by dendritic cells compared to AuNPs without the antibody conjugation, regardless of surface charge. These findings suggest that targeting and activating immune cells using an immune‐engineering approach may yield a more specific cell uptake profile than particle charge functionalization alone (Fytianos et al.  ).
 Attaching a pentapeptide ligand, CALNN, to AuNPs via thiol–gold covalent bonds improved the system's stability. This peptide attachment improved AuNPs hydrophilicity and provided chemical properties such as those of proteins. Additionally, the peptide‐capped AuNPs were feasible for freeze‐drying, enabling the storage as powders that can be dispersed in aqueous preparations for administration. When comparing CALNN particles with different peptides, the particle stability conferred by the peptide ligands depended on their length, hydrophobicity, and charge, indicating that peptide capping ligands could be rationally designed and tailored depending on the intended application (Lévy et al.  ). A formulation conjugating siRNA and AuNPs modified with the Arginine–Glycine–Aspartate (RGD) targeting peptide could target tumor cells in a lung cancer mouse model and reduce the tumor cell proliferation and, thus, tumor size (Conde et al.  ). Later, the same author conjugated siRNA and M2 peptide to AuNPs through thiol–gold bonds for targeted immunotherapy of inflammatory tumor‐associated macrophages, using intratracheal administration in a mouse lung tumor model. Gene‐silencing effects were observed in targeted macrophages, resulting in a significant reduction (95%) in tumor size and an increase (75%) in animal survival rates (Conde et al.  ).

7.2.

## 
PEGylation
PEG is one of the most used compounds for functionalizing AuNPs, attached via covalent bonds with the surface gold atoms of the nanoparticles. As previously mentioned, an actual application of PEG in pulmonary delivery is in developing mucus‐penetrating particles. Also, over the past few decades, PEG has been vastly used in drug delivery systems to improve bioavailability and stability (e.g., avoiding particle self‐aggregation). To investigate how PEGylation can help in avoiding phagocytosis of AuNPs, Quach et al. conducted a study on the effect of various molecular weight PEG ligands (1, 2, 5, and 10 kDa) and AuNPs of different sizes (10, 20, 40, and 80 nm) on complement activation. Although PEGylation did not eliminate complement activation, it significantly reduced this immune response, regardless of the size of AuNPs and the molecular weight of PEG. The researchers attributed these results to the increased hydrophilicity of AuNPs due to PEGylation, which resulted in less adsorption of complement proteins on AuNPs, thereby reducing the activation of complement and detection by macrophages (Quach, Kong, and Kah  ). Further, in a study where folic acid was attached to AuNPs and different PEG backbones (PEG‐diamine 2000 kDa and 10,000 kDa, PEG‐tetramine 20,000 kDa, and PEG‐dithiol 2000 kDa), AuNPs functionalized with folic acid successfully targeted tumor cells expressing folate receptors. These results represent an excellent potential for cancer‐targeting drug delivery (Bhattacharya et al.  ).

7.3.

## Alternatives to PEGylation—Noncovalent Bonds
Even though PEGylation aims to improve drug delivery, currently, it is known that PEG may activate an immune response that generates anti‐PEG antibodies (Hoang Thi et al.  ). In turn, administering PEGylated products to patients who have developed anti‐PEG antibodies may result in faster clearance and, therefore, lower therapeutic effect; while also generating the risk of hypersensitivity and severe side effects (Hoang Thi et al.  ; Shiraishi and Yokoyama  ). Additionally, PEGylation may result in diminished bioactivity of proteins with large binding targets due to the amphiphilic nature of PEG that contributes to nonspecific interactions with the proteins and the proteins' binding targets (Han et al.  ).
As an alternative to PEGylation, zwitterionic polymers have been considered. As a result, zwitterionic poly(carboxybetaine) AuNPs (gold nanoparticles) were more stable in the bloodstream than PEG (5 kDa) coated nanoparticles. This is because they did not agglomerate or underwent nonspecific protein adsorption, unlike PEGylated AuNPs which tended to foul and aggregate. Moreover, zwitterionic AuNPs had a longer circulation time in the bloodstream than PEGylated AuNPs (Yang et al.  ).

7.4.

## 
AuNPs and RNA

AuNPs have been highlighted as excellent pulmonary delivery systems for siRNA due to their many advantages, including biocompatibility, easy preparation process, scalability, and versatile surface modification (Bardoliwala et al.  ). An extensive review of siRNA therapeutics revealed inorganic–organic hybrid nanoparticles as the most promising modification and surface engineering of AuNPs for siRNA delivery. The approach uses a gold inorganic core and an organic coating (e.g., biocompatible lipid or polymer) to enhance cellular uptake and facilitate endosomal escape (Shen et al.  ). A versatile siRNA delivery system termed auropolyplexes, consisting of thiolated linear PEI chemisorbed onto AuNPs, resulted in cationic particles. Then, the siRNA was combined with cationic AuNPs through electrostatic interaction and further condensed with polycation or PEG‐polycation conjugates. The effectiveness of this technique was demonstrated through in vitro gene knockdown assays, which showed efficient cell uptake, successful endosomal escape, and 80% knockdown of the reporter gene. In in vivo biodistribution studies, the auropolyplexes were administered intratracheally in mice, achieving approximately 25% of the siRNA dose staying in the lungs after 24 h. Additionally, in vivo, siRNA was released from AuNPs, and a portion of it crossed the air‐blood barrier, followed by clearance via the kidneys. Meanwhile, over 97% of AuNPs were retained in the lungs (Taschauer et al.  ). Thus, the combination of chemisorption and complexation in auropolyplexes hints at a promising approach due to its delivery efficiency and biocompatibility profile.
Also, an innovative formulation of protamine‐capped gold nanoclusters has been developed as a nanocarrier for the CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology. This technology is directed by an engineered single‐guide RNA (sgRNA), Cas9‐sgRNA plasmid, which is used for targeted gene disruption in cancer cells. The cationic protamine enables the release of Cas9‐sgRNA plasmids into the cellular nucleus, allowing AuNPs to promptly assemble with the plasmids. This process leads to successful gene editing in cells, including the knock‐out of the oncogenic E7 gene, which suppresses the proliferation of cervical cancer cells (HeLa cell line). Additionally, this system may also simultaneously act as an imaging agent due to its fluorescence properties (Tao et al.  ).
Shaabani et al. developed a new method to improve the efficiency of siRNA delivery using chitosan‐coated AuNPs. This was achieved through a layer‐by‐layer self‐assembly process, where positively charged chitosan‐AuNPs were coated with a layer of siRNA molecules, followed by a final layer of chitosan (with low molecular weight and degree of deacetylation of 80%). The final layer not only protected the siRNA, but also gave the particles a net positive charge, making them more effective in interacting with cells. Studies conducted on lung epithelial cells showed that this formulation prevented siRNA from being enzymatically degraded, facilitated cell uptake through endocytosis and endosomal escape of siRNA, and led to a better silencing effect (with a maximum gene silencing of 76%) compared to commercial transfection reagents made from chitosan alone (with a maximum gene silencing of 49%) (Shaabani, Sharifiaghdam, et al.  ).

8.

## 
AuNPS for Vaccine Delivery
8.1.

## Pulmonary Vaccines
Due to their biocompatibility, AuNPs have been suggested as vaccine carriers (Mateu Ferrando, Lay, and Polito  ; Salazar‐Gonzalez, Gonzalez‐Ortega, and Rosales‐Mendoza  ) with efficient antigen functionalization for immunostimulatory effects (Dykman and Khlebtsov  ). However, AuNPs have not yet been applied as carriers for the novel nucleic acid vaccines, nor in clinical pulmonary vaccine delivery.
As an example of the AuNP pulmonary vaccine, an AuNP glycoconjugate vaccine was developed for Glanders disease, an infectious disease caused by the bacterium Burkholderia sp., in a rhesus macaque disease model. The vaccine did not provide survival benefits upon the glanders challenge. Nonetheless, after 80 days, surviving vaccinated animals showed significantly higher serum‐specific IgG titers compared to vaccinated animals that died. Additionally, vaccinated survivors' organs did not show any bacteria load 30 days after the challenge. This pioneering study establishes the AuNP glycoconjugate vaccine as both immunogenic and effective in clearing bacteria in nonhuman primates challenged with Burkholderia sp., marking a crucial step forward in vaccine development for Glanders disease (Torres et al.  ).
A DNA vaccine encoding the SARS‐CoV‐2 spike protein was delivered intranasally with gold‐chitosan to immunocompetent mice. The vaccine produced a strong and consistent increase in antibodies (IgG, IgA, and IgM) and TRM cells in the lung mucosa, which indicates long‐lasting protection and immunity at the site of virus entry. The vaccine also successfully neutralized pseudoviruses expressing spike proteins of various SARS‐CoV‐2 variants (Wuhan, beta, and D614G) in a protection model (Kumar et al.  ).

8.2.

## Cytosine‐phosphate‐guanine ODN AuNPs

As previously mentioned, CpG ODN is a nucleic acid that can mimic the immunomodulatory effects induced by bacterial DNA (Gupta and Agrawal  ), hence, it has been considered for vaccine development as an adjuvant (Arunachalam et al.  ). CpG ODN conjugated to AuNPs have also been studied. In a study conducted on mice, Dykman et al. investigated the impact of the size and shape of AuNPs (gold nanoparticles) and their combination with CpG ODN (a synthetic DNA molecule) on the immune response to intraperitoneal injection of a model antigen, Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA). The researchers tested various particles, including 15 and 50 nm diameter gold nanospheres, nanorods, nanoshells, and nanostars. The results showed that gold nanospheres, irrespective of their size, were the most effective delivery system and adjuvant for immunization. Moreover, mice that were immunized simultaneously with BSA‐AuNPs and CpG ODN‐AuNPs conjugates showed the highest titer of anti‐BSA antibodies in their blood serum samples (Dykman et al.  ). Moreover, AuNP‐CpG conjugates were encapsulated in hepatitis B core protein (HBc) virus‐like particles (VLPs) using electrostatic interactions. These monodispersed and uniformly sized particles were tested in mice via intraperitoneal injection and showed a better cell‐mediated immune response than hepatitis VLPs adjuvanted with conventional Freund's adjuvant. The use of AuNPs improved the immunogenicity of CpG and HBc VLPs on both humoral and cellular immune pathways, indicating their potential for future prophylactic and therapeutic applications (Wang et al.  ). Furthermore, an influenza A vaccine was developed by binding a portion of the matrix 2 protein of the influenza A virus to AuNPs. The vaccine was given intranasally to mice in a challenge model of influenza and compared with a version of the same vaccine that had been enhanced with a CpG adjuvant. The results showed that mice vaccinated with the nonadjuvanted vaccine were only partially protected, whereas mice that received the CpG vaccine were fully protected. This was because the levels of IgG serum antibodies significantly increased upon vaccination with soluble CpG as an adjuvant (Tao, Ziemer, and Gill  ).
Studies indicate that using a triethylene glycol (TEG) spacer in addition to the traditional poly‐thymidine spacer increased CpG immune‐stimulatory effects without reducing cellular uptake (Lin, Mattos Almeida, et al.  ; Lin et al.  ). Also, AuNPs were found to enhance the effectiveness of TEG‐modified CpG both in vitro and in vivo. They were able to stimulate macrophage and dendritic cell infiltration into tumors, which resulted in significant inhibition of tumor growth and improved survival rates in mice. It was also observed that the immune response generated by the modified CpG depended on the size of the core particle, with 15 nm AuNPs producing the most significant effect (Lin, Lunsford, et al.  ). Recently, Lin et al. conjugated TEG‐modified class B and class C CpG to AuNPs to improve their delivery and anti‐tumor immune response to treat various types of lymphoma via intratumor injections. The CpG modification in this study would allow improved rotation and binding to TLR9. As a result, both classes of modified CpG AuNPs decreased lymphoma cell viability without toxic effects on dendritic cells compared to unmodified CpG (Lin et al.  ).
Therefore, CpG ODN is a versatile and potent nucleic acid to be employed in either or both prophylactic and therapeutic applications, for illnesses and infections. The pulmonary administration of CpG ODN also seems promising, mainly when conjugated to a nanoparticle delivery system, such as AuNPs (Wei et al.  ).

9.

## 
AuNPS Pulmonary Clearance Mechanisms and Toxicology Studies
9.1.

## Influence of Protein Corona
As nanoparticles are inhaled, they move through the lining fluid of the respiratory tract, obtaining a biomolecular corona. Kumar et al. conducted a study to examine the composition of the corona at the molecular level. They discovered that the corona is primarily made up of innate immunity proteins, such as surfactant protein A, napsin A, and complement (C1q and C3) proteins. These findings suggest that the corona formation in the respiratory tract lining fluid prepares particles for phagocytosis and lung clearance by establishing opsonization (Kumar et al.  ). However, even though the formation of a protein corona around inhaled particles is considered an endogenous clearance mechanism, Kah et al. explored the corona as part of the delivery system itself, where DNA oligonucleotides and doxorubicin were adsorbed in the protein sponge‐like layer around gold nanorods, improving their carrier properties (Kah et al.  ). Long‐lived protein corona can provide nanoparticles with their biological identity, which may mute interactions or switch on the cellular machinery, preventing or inducing particles' endocytosis (Lynch, Salvati, and Dawson  ).

9.2.

## Influence of Size, Shape, and Charge
Ding et al. conducted a study to investigate how the size, shape, and protein corona of AuNPs affect their cellular uptake and clearance mechanisms. They discovered that rod‐shaped and spherical 15 and 45 nm AuNPs enter cells through a receptor‐mediated endocytosis pathway, while star‐shaped AuNPs use both clathrin and caveolin‐mediated endocytosis pathways. On the other hand, spherical 80 nm AuNPs enter the cells through the macropinocytosis pathway due to their large size. Additionally, the presence of a protein corona can alter the cellular uptake mechanisms of the AuNPs. Star and spherical‐shaped 15 and 45 nm AuNPs changed their uptake pathway to macropinocytosis, while rod‐shaped particles switched to clathrin and caveolin‐independent pathways. In terms of exocytosis, all particles were released through the lysosomal exocytosis pathway, regardless of their size, shape, or protein corona. However, smaller AuNPs showed a faster exocytosis rate (Ding et al.  ).
Additionally, Chithrani et al. conducted a study to determine how the size and shape of transferrin‐coated AuNPs affect cellular uptake and exocytosis. Their findings showed that all particles were taken up by cells via the clathrin‐mediated endocytosis pathway. However, larger particles (over 50 nm) took longer to be wrapped by cells and fewer particles were taken up. For particles that were 50 nm in size, a single AuNP was enough to enter the cell, while particles that were 14 nm required several AuNPs to gather before they could be taken up. On the other hand, the exocytosis of AuNPs was found to be directly proportional to their size. Smaller AuNPs were exocytosed faster and at a higher percentage rate than larger ones. The study also found that the shape of AuNPs played a role in their uptake and exocytosis rates. Rod‐shaped AuNPs showed a lower uptake rate and higher exocytose rate compared to spherical‐shaped nanoparticles. Therefore, the choice of AuNPs can affect their clearance in cells. However, it is important to note that these results are specific to transferrin‐coated AuNPs and may not directly apply to other types of particles (Chithrani and Chan  ).
Han et al. conducted a study to investigate how the size of inhalable AuNPs (13 and 105 nm) affects their distribution in Sprague–Dawley rats. The study found that all AuNPs, regardless of their size, were mainly deposited in the lungs and did not cause any toxic response in the animals. However, the smaller AuNPs were detected in the liver, spleen, brain, testes, and blood, while the larger AuNPs were only found in the blood. This indicates that the smaller AuNPs were able to translocate faster from the lungs, resulting in a shorter elimination half‐life from the lungs when compared to the larger AuNPs (Han et al.  ). These findings indicate that for a longer‐lasting localized effect in the lungs, one should aim for larger AuNPs instead of smaller AuNPs.
To evaluate the impact of particle size and agglomeration of AuNPs on their toxicity in the lungs, lung inflammation was used as a toxicity marker. The study found that the solutions containing 50 and 250 nm particles, as well as their agglomerates, showed only mild lung inflammation. Therefore, the study concluded that agglomeration and the slight difference in size did not impose a significant difference in toxicity in the lung inflammation model used (Gosens et al.  ).
To evaluate the role of macrophages in the biodissolution of AuNPs, an in vitro dissolution assay was performed. The assay compared the dissolution of AuNPs in cell medium with and without macrophages at 24 h. The AuNPs analyzed were spherical, either 5 or 20 nm in size, and coated with either PEG or citrate. The results showed that AuNPs dissolve primarily extracellularly, with a significantly higher rate in the presence of macrophages than in the cell medium alone (approximately fivefold higher). The study indicated that peroxynitrite, an oxidative species produced by macrophages, initiated the oxidation of the gold, and dissolved small AuNPs in the cell medium. The dissolution was particularly notable for 5 nm AuNPs and was not dependent on the coating. Therefore, it is important to consider AuNP dissolution processes during development, as these processes can alter properties and reduce the size of administered AuNPs (McCarrick et al.  ).
AuNPs biokinetics in the lungs was assessed by intratracheally instilling a group of 198Au‐radiolabeled negatively charged AuNPs with five different sizes (1.4, 2.8, 5, 18, 80, and 200 nm) and 2.8 nm AuNPs with positive surface charges in rats. The biodistribution of the AuNPs was assessed by gamma‐spectrometry at 1, 3, and 24 h. Results showed that smaller AuNPs were more likely to cross the air‐blood barrier, with 1.4 nm AuNPs translocating the most and 80 nm AuNPs translocating the least. However, 200 nm particles did not follow the size relation, translocating substantially higher than 80 nm AuNPs. Regarding AuNPs that had crossed the air‐blood barrier, size did not affect their staying in most secondary organs and tissues. Only renal filtration, retention in blood, and excretion via urine depended inversely on AuNPs core diameter. Translocation of 5, 8, and 80 nm AuNP was virtually complete after 1 h, while 1.4 nm AuNP continued to translocate until 3 h. Regarding charge, the translocation of negatively charged 2.8 nm AuNP was much higher than that of positively charged AuNP of the same size. Thus, size and the surface charge may impact translocation across the air‐blood barrier and accumulation and retention in secondary organs and tissues (Kreyling et al.  ).

9.3.

## Toxicity Studies
Recently, the effect of AuNPs in cortical actin remodeling and intercellular gap formation between vascular endothelial cells was investigated. It was found that lung exposure to AuNPs could result in an unsought increase in the permeability of endothelial cells, which can cause fluid and other substances to leak from the circulatory system into the surrounding lung tissue. This can potentially lead to undesired health outcomes. However, when coated with different materials, such as a BSA pretreatment, the AuNPs' colloidal stability was improved while diminishing the polyelectrolytes' harmful effects on endothelial cells (Sinclair et al.  ). Thus, although there is still debate regarding AuNPs' safety, further studies are still needed to confirm whether the modifications on AuNPs' surface would prevent or not oxidative damage effects (Sani, Cao, and Cui  ). Interestingly, Chen et al. utilized polypropyleneimine (PPI) dendrimers in combination with AuNPs to construct and bundle DNA/siRNA into nanoparticles. Since they wanted to prevent any oxidative effects from the AuNPs, they chose to eliminate them from the nucleic acid complexes before delivering them to cells. They found that the nucleic acid particles prepared by this innovative technique had higher cellular uptake and efficiency of mRNA silencing than structures composed with the dendrimer alone (Chen, Hung, et al.  ).
In a study, genotoxic endpoints such as alkaline Comet assay in lung tissue and micro‐nucleation in polychromatic erythrocytes of the bone marrow were analyzed 72 h after the tracheal instillation of 18 μg AuNPs to adult Wistar rats. The results showed that AuNPs of different particle sizes (2, 20, and 200 nm) did not cause any significant DNA damage. Furthermore, clinical pathology tests conducted on blood and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid did not indicate any local reactions in the lungs or systemic adverse effects. Although minor histopathological findings were observed in the lung of rats exposed to 20 and 200 nm AuNPs. The study indicated that the evaluated AuNPs were nongenotoxic and showed no systemic or local adverse effects (Schulz et al.  ).

10.

## Conclusions
The past few decades were critical in the growth of nanotechnology and nanoscience, leading to the development of a vast diversity of particles of varied sizes, shapes, and structures. Because of their unique properties, AuNPs are particularly interesting for medical applications, especially gene delivery. The availability of several different AuNPs synthesis methods allows for high specificity of the delivery system design, depending on the goal of the application. Moreover, their physicochemical characteristics enable flexible modification and functionalization, which further improves bioavailability and expands the scope of therapeutic applications of AuNPs. The versatility of AuNPs distinguishes them from other nanoparticles, although their application to lung delivery must be further explored.
The methods for synthesizing AuNPs must be further improved to reduce potential toxicity and side effects in in vivo applications. It is crucial to have precise control over the synthesis process, particularly regarding the size and shape of the nanoparticles, as any changes can impact their properties, and specific modifications, such as auropolyplexes, can enable great delivery systems.
Lung delivery has much potential for vaccination due to all the features described in this review, such as the lung's massive surface area and permeability characteristics allowing systemic and local applications. Even though the use of AuNPs in pulmonary delivery must still be explored, inhalable AuNPs are a prominent approach for vaccine development. Through all current research, it is a matter of time before pulmonary AuNPs become a valuable immunization system (Box  ).
BOX 1

## Gold nanoparticle pulmonary delivery of nucleic acid‐based therapeutics and vaccines.
Nucleic acid‐based vaccines are leading‐edge tools in developing next‐generation treatments and preventative care.
The pulmonary route is a promising noninvasive drug delivery option with systemic and local vaccine applications.
Nonviral delivery systems have been widely explored, and gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) with their unique properties are emerging as promising tools for gene delivery and nucleic acid vaccines due to surface functionalization with targeting moieties that can bypass the barriers in pulmonary delivery and successfully deliver nucleic acids to the cells of interest.

## Author Contributions

Carolina Araujo Cirne: conceptualization (equal), writing – original draft (lead). Marianna Foldvari: conceptualization (equal), funding acquisition (lead), resources (lead), supervision (lead), visualization (equal), writing – review and editing (supporting).

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Related WIREs Articles

Materials‐based vaccines for infectious diseases

Pulmonary delivery of nano‐particles for lung cancer diagnosis and therapy: Recent advances and future prospects

## Acknowledgments
The research in this article was supported by operating and equipment grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR; MOP‐126097), and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC; RGPIN‐06002‐2020). The generous support of the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI), the Ontario Research Fund (ORF), and the Canada Research Chairs Program is also gratefully acknowledged (M. Foldvari).

Co‐Editor‐in‐Chief: Fabiana Quaglia

Funding: This study was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR; MOP‐126097), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC; RGPIN‐06002‐2020), the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI), the Ontario Research Fund (ORF), and Canada Research Chairs Program (to M. F.).

## Contributor Information
Carolina Araujo Cirne, Email: caraujoc@uwaterloo.ca.
Marianna Foldvari, Email: foldvari@uwaterloo.ca.

## Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.