Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1569347PMC1569347.1156934715693471NIEHS Third Science SeminarAbstracts
10198352134705277300011019831809200605022017pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
Vol. 52, pp. 277-300, 1983 
 
NIEHS Science Open House Poster Sessions: 
Abstracts 
 
Methods for Detecting Mutagenic Exposures 
and Genetic Damage in Man. RICHARD B. 
EVERSON, Epidemiology Branch, Biometry and 
Risk Assessment Program National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Traditional epidemiologic studies for genetic toxicity have 
been generally limited to reliance on measurement of sponta- 
neous abortion, congenital defects, or malignancy as indica- 
tors of genetic damage. These measures, however, are not 
specifically related to genetic damage, may occur only after 
long latency or are likely to be observed rarely and thus 
require very large populations for effective study. In addition, 
there is frequently considerable uncertainty about the iden- 
tity, number, and dose of compounds to which humans are 
exposed. 
 
Tbxicologic studies have the power of the experimental 
method, but they can be difficult to interpret in terms of 
relevance to human exposure and potential for human dam- 
age. Reasons include species specificity, uncertainty in extrap- 
olating dose-response relationships, and difficulty in dealing 
realistically with effects of multiple exposures or competing 
risks as they might apply to man. 
 
To complement traditional epidemiologic and toxicologic 
methods, we are developing laboratory assays to help define 
human exposures, susceptibilities, and outcomes, as well as 
the mechanisms by which they are related. 
 
This presentation catalogs potential clinical studies and 
laboratory tests for detecting mutagenic exposures and ge- 
netic damage in man. The catalog includes rough estimates of 
likely population sizes required to use these assays, latency 
between exposure and the first observable effects, as well as 
the period it is likely that the effects can continue to be 
identified, feasibility, and cost. 
 
In addition, results from three studies involving the devel- 
opment or application of these techniques are presented. One 
of these studies, involving use of an autoradiographic assay, 
showed that substantially more peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells from patients receiving chemotherapy for breast cancer 
than from controls were resistant to 6-thioguanine (6-TG) after 
short-term culture. These resistant cells, however, could be 
accounted for by cells not requiring stimulation by phyto- 
haemagglutin. The high proportion cells resistant to 6-TG 
that do not require phytohemagglutin (about 5%) suggests 
that quantitating resistant cells does not specifically estimate 
genetic damage. A second study confirmed the previously 
reported presence of mutagenic substances in urine of smok- 
ers, but found no evidence to support a recent study suggest- 
ing the presence of mutagenic substance in urine of patients 
with cirrhosis. We suspect that residual histidine (causing 
growth of the background lawn and increased number of 
spontaneous revertants) rather than mutagenic materials 
may have been responsible for results initially observed 
 
among specimens from cirrhotics, and suggested techniques 
that could exclude this possibility in future studies of urine 
mutagenicity. The third study sought evidence of mutagenic 
material in urine of subjects with bilharzial associated blad- 
der cancer in Egypt. The presence of mutagenic substances in 
these assays could only be excluded by devising tests for 
quantitating bacterial growth in the background lawn of 
plates used in the Ames assay. Taken together, these three 
studies demonstrate that interpreting laboratory tests for 
mutagenic exposures or genetic damage in man requires un- 
derstanding and careful investigation of methodological and 
technological issues affecting these assays. 
 
Implication of Nonlinear Kinetics on Risk 
Estimation in Carcinogenesis. DAVID G. HOEL 
and NORMAN L. KAPLAN, Biometry and Risk As- 
sessment Program, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709 and MARSHALL W. ANDERSON, Labora- 
tory of Pharmacology, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
For chemicals whose metabolites interact with DNA, it may 
be biologically more meaningful to relate tumor response to 
the cellular levels of these adducts rather than to applied dose. 
Substantial experimental data suggests that this relationship 
is linear. An implication of such a linear relationship is that 
the nonlinearities of the dose-response curve for tumor induc- 
tion are due to the kinetic processes involved in the formation 
of carcinogen metabolite-DNA adducts. Of particular impor- 
tance is the possibility that the kinetic processes may exhibit 
nonlinear "threshold"-like behavior which results from satu- 
ration of detoxification or DNA repair processes. 
 
NIEHS Data Communication. JAMES F. DIX, 
Biometry and Risk Assessment Program, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
During the past five years, data communication at NIEHS 
has grown in primarily a linear fashion. For example: the 
number of modems installed on local computers has increased 
from zero to more than 48; the number of local terminals has 
increased from three to more than 75; the number of local and 
remote computers has increased from three to more than ten; 
and terminal access has changed from acoustic couplers at 30 
characters per second to dial modems at 120 characters per 
second. Recent analysis has shown that more linear growth 
will not allow NIEHS to overcome the limitations of its 
 
current data communication methods. More sophisticated and 
complex methods using more modern technologies will be 
required. 
 
Analysis has also shown that the desired improvements can 
be divided into six distinct projects, providing improved re- 
mote job entry capability from the NIEHS computer to various 
remote mainframe computers, access to local computers with 
local terminals, access to remote computers with local termi- 
nals, access to local computers with remote terminals, a data 
communication network of local laboratory minicomputers 
and a data communication network of remote laboratory mini- 
computers. 
 
The six projects will be accomplished with a variety of new 
technologies in mind including a digital private branch ex- 
change, an intelligent port selector, portocol converters, con- 
centrators, limited distance modems, direct leased lines, and 
auto dialers. The implicatios of these new technologies on 
three of the six projects are discussed. 
 
The Early Pregnancy Study. ALLEN J. WILCOX, 
Epidemiology Branch, Biometry and Risk Assess- 
ment Program, National Institute of Environmen- 
tal Health Sciences, Research 7riangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
The purpose of this study is to develop a method for measur- 
ing early human pregnancy loss, in order to detect damage 
that might be inflicted on the early fetus by environmental 
toxins. Very early pregnancy loss can end in a flow similar to 
menses and thus be undetected. There is evidence to suggest 
that a third of all pregnancies end in this way. The extent to 
which this early loss may be related to environmental insult is 
unknown. Observation of experimental animals has shown 
that early reproductive processes are sensitive to environmen- 
tal toxins, but it has not been possible to observe early human 
pregnancy so directly. 
 
This study will measure the monthly occurrence of concep- 
tion and subsequent early fetal loss by analyzing daily urine 
specimens collected by women who are planning to become 
pregnant. Trophoblastic tissue of the conceptus begins to pro- 
duce human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) about 7 to 10 days 
after conception. Recent laboratory developments have led to 
a hCG radioimmunoassay that is far more sensitive and 
specific than any previously available. By using this new 
assay, we can document the risk of early fetal loss with 
considerable accuracy. In the pilot phase of this study, daily 
urines will be collected from about 30 women until the women 
are clinically pregnant. A subsequent study will enroll several 
hundred women, among whom common exposures such as 
smoking and alcohol consumption can be examined for possi- 
ble effects on early pregnancy. Eventually, it may be possible 
to extend this method to high-risk groups of women in occupa- 
tional or other settings where toxic effects on early pregnancy 
are suspected. 
 
Patterns of Tumor Incidence and False-Posi- 
tive Rates in Two-Year Carcinogenesis Bioas- 
says. JOSEPH K. HASEMAN, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Patterns of tumor incidence in 25 of the National Toxicology 
Program's (NTP) two-year cancer bioassay feeding studies in 
Fischer 344 rats were investigated. It was found that the 
overall frequencies of statistically significant (p < 0.01) in- 
 
creases and decreases in organ-specific tumor incidence in 
treated groups relative to controls were approximately the 
same. The decreases were due primarily to mammary gland 
fibroadenomas in females (which were clearly associated with 
decreased weight gain in the treated groups) and leukemia/ 
lymphoma in both sexes (which were frequently associated 
with increased liver tumor incidences in the treated groups). 
A clear explanation for this latter association was not appar- 
ent. 
 
False-positive rates in the NTP two-year carcinogenesis 
bioassay were also examined. Previous studies that have 
reported unacceptably high (20-50%) false-positive rates for 
these bioassays were reviewed. It was shown that the decision 
rules used in many of these earlier investigations were far 
different than the procedures actually employed by the NTP 
in the interpretation of bioassay data. Data from recent NTP 
feeding studies were examined, and the statistical significance 
of observed tumor increases were compared with the final 
interpretations regarding the carcinogenic effect of the chemi- 
cals under study. Based on this examination, a more realistic 
decision procedure was formulated. By using this procedure 
and updated historical control tumor rates, it was shown that 
the actual overall false-positive rate in NCI/NTP bioassays 
appears to be no greater than 7-8%. 
 
Analysis of Variability in the International 
Collaborative Study on Genetic Drift in Ames 
Tester Strains. BARRY H. MARGOLIN and KEN- 
NETH J. RISKO, Biometry and Risk Assessment 
Program, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709, and MICHAEL D. SHELBY and ERROL 
ZEIGER, Toxicology Research and Testing Pro- 
gram, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Data from 38 laboratories using five Salmonella strains 
(TA98, TA100, TA1535, TA1537, and TA1538) to determine 
the mutagenic effects of 4-nitroquinoline-N-oxide were ana- 
lyzed to answer a number of questions regarding test data 
variability. Each laboratory conducted tests according to a 
common protocol, using both its in-house cultures and a set of 
reference cultures provided to all laboratories. It was found 
that plate-to-plate and day-to-day variability within a labora- 
tory did not differ substantially between the in-house and 
reference cultures for any strain; this indicated no difference 
in the laboratories' handling of the two cultures. As expected, 
plate-to-plate variability was substantially less than day-to- 
day variability, which, in turn, was substantially less than 
inter-laboratory variability. The solvent DMSO was found to 
have a small (6-7%) depressive effect on the spontaneous 
mutant frequency for the two plasmid-containing strains, 
TA98 and TA100, but not for the other three. When the mean 
value and variance of all laboratories for the in-house culture 
at each test dose and strain were compared with the corre- 
sponding reference culture values, no major differences were 
seen. Any increase in mean or variance in the distribution of 
laboratory means in one of the two cultures could be ascribed 
largely to a small number of laboratories. As a rule, laborato- 
ries that reported "high" or 'low" levels of spontaneous or 
induced revertants per plate tended to deviate in the same 
direction for most strains and for both in-house and reference 
cultures. If "genetic drift" contributed to the interlaboratory 
variability in this collaborative study, it was a minor compo- 
nent. 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
278 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
The Breast Milk and Formula Project. W. J. 
ROGAN and B. C. GLADEN, Biometry and Risk 
Assessment Program, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Persistent fat-soluble pesticides and industrial chemicals 
that have become widespread environmental pollutants ap- 
pear with high prevalence in human milk. The best known of 
these are the pesticide DDT and the industrial insulators, the 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). In 1978, we began a pro- 
spective birth cohort study to see if there was illness in 
children attributable to the presence of these chemicals in 
human milk. About 850 children from three North Carolina 
institutions are being followed. We enroll families at or near 
term, examine the child and obtain a medical history at birth, 
and see the child periodically during the first years of life. In 
addition to history and physical, we do a standardized (Bra- 
zelton) behavioral assessment at birth, developmental (Bay- 
ley) scales at age two, and a "school readiness" (McCarthy) 
scale from age three on. We collect placenta, maternal and 
cord blood, and breast milk over the course of lactation. All 
biological and 10% of formula samples are analyzed for PCBs, 
DDE, and total organic chlorine and bromine. There are 
detectable amounts of PCBs and DDT (as DDE) in virtually 
all breast milk samples. Amounts decline over the course of 
lactation. Using amount of chemical in breast milk as an 
indicator of transplacental exposure, we see no evidence of 
toxicity at birth; however, cord blood values are lower than 
maternal blood, and thus little exposure may take place this 
way. Women with higher DDE levels (but not PCB levels) tend 
to breast feed for shorter lengths of time; this is not accompa- 
nied by any major difference in weight gain or illness fre- 
quency in the children and may be a maternal effect. 
 
2,6-Xylidine-Induced Nasal Cancer in Rats. 
C. A. MONTGOMERY, MARY KORNREICH and 
JERRY HARDISTY, Toxicology Research and Test- 
ing Program, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, 
27709. 
 
2,6-Xylidine is a chemical intermediate used principally in 
the production of dyes. It is also a component of tobacco smoke, 
a degradation product of aniline based pesticides, and a me- 
tabolite of certain drugs, particularly the xylide group of local 
anesthetics. A carcinogenesis bioassay was conducted by the 
National TIxicology Program by administration of 2,6-xyli- 
dine in the diet to groups of 56 male and 56 female Charles 
River F1 generation CD rats at dose levels of 0, 300, 1000 and 
3000 ppm for 102 weeks. The Fo parents of these animals 
received the test diet at the same doses before breeding, 
during pregnancy, and through the lactation period. 
 
On chronic exposure, the epithelium of the nasal cavity was 
the primary target organ for both neoplastic and nonneoplas- 
tic lesions. The incidence of both carcinomas and papillary 
adenomas of the nasal cavity were statistically increased in 
high dose male and female rats when compared to controls. 
Carcinomas occurred in 50% of the high dose males, 43% of the 
high dose females and 2% of the medium dose females. Most of 
these malignant epithelial tumors appeared to arise from the 
submucosal glands in the dorsal posterior portion of the nasal 
turbinates. The carcinomas were highly invasive and fre- 
quently destroyed the nasal turbinate and nasal septum. 
Metastasis to the brain was present in 9% of the male and 13% 
 
of the female high dose rars. Papillary adenomas occurred in 
18% of the high dose males, 4% of the medium dose males and 
11% of the high dose females. 
 
A striking result was the presence of malignant mesenchy- 
mal tumors of the nasal cavity. Two rhabdomyosarcomas 
occurred in high dose male rats and two in high dose female 
rats. Malignant mixed tumors with features of adenocarci- 
noma and rhabdomyosarcoma were present in one high dose 
male and one high dose female rat. One undifferentiated 
sarcoma was seen in a high dose female rat. 
 
Nonneoplastic lesions observed in the nasal cavities of dosed 
rats included acute inflammation, epithelial hyperplasia, and 
squamous metaplasia. There was a dose-related increase in 
the incidence of acute rhinitis among control and treated 
groups. 
 
The National Toxicology Program Pathology 
Working Group and Its Evaluation of Chemi- 
cal Bioassays. C. MONTGOMERY and G. BooR 
MAN, Toxicology Research and Testing Program, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sci- 
ences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The NTP pathology working group is a vital part of the 
pathology peer review system. It consists of five or six patholo- 
gists, one-half or more composed of NTP staff, and the remain- 
der from industry, academia, private consultants or other 
branches of the government. These experts in rodent pathol- 
ogy review the quaiity and accuracy of pathologic data for 
each chemical. Emphasis is on use of proper neoplastic termi- 
nology, proper identification of the target organs of subchronic 
or chronic toxic exposure and clarification of the pathogenesis 
of toxic induced injury in the host. 
 
Microslides are read in a blind fashion by the pathology 
working group without knowledge of the identity of the ori- 
ginal pathologist, dose group or other data subject to bias. The 
quality of work performed by the original pathologist and 
quality assessment pathologist and the quality of histotechni- 
que performed by the contract laboratory are all assessed by 
the work group, and specific recommendations are made. 
 
In reviewing subchronic studies, the pathology work gorup 
makes an interpretation of each toxic lesion as to its life- 
threatening potential and by using these data recommends 
doses to be used in the chronic bioassay. Discrepancies in 
diagnosis are cited, and those slides are returned to the 
original pathologist for reconsideration and update of individ- 
ual animal data records for compliance with the good labora- 
tory practice act. The original pathologist has the ultimate 
responsibility for the study and therefore makes the final 
decision on micropathology diagnoses. However, if the work- 
ing group disagrees with the final diagnosis, a separate set of 
data documenting this difference of opinion may be generated 
for inclusion in a NTP technical report. The NTP pathology 
working group is a highly respected, thorough, peer review 
system with one primary goal: that the pathology portion of 
NTP contracted chemical studies be accurate and scientifi- 
cally sound. 
 
Differential Estrogenic Response of the Pitui- 
tary and Uterus to Kepone (Chlordecone) in 
the Fischer-344 Rat. J. C. LAMB IV, M. D. Ross, 
K. M. ALLEN, M. M. DOZIER and J. R. REEL, 
Toxicology Research and Testing Program, Na- 
tional Toxicology Program, National Institute of 
 
279 
 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Trian- 
gle Park, 27709 and Research Triangle Institute, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The insecticide, Kepone (K), has profound estrogenic effects 
on the reproductive system of birds and mammals. The obser- 
vation that diethylstilbestrol (DES) implanted sc in Silastic 
tubing induced prolactin-secreting pituitary tumors and uter- 
ine growth in Fischer-344 rats suggested a useful animal 
model in which to further evaluate the estrogenic activity of 
Kepone. In the initial study, adult F-344 rats were ovariecto- 
mized and implanted SC with Silastic tubing containing ses- 
ame oil, 5 mg DES in oil, or 50, 100 or 200 mg Kepone in oil. 
Groups of rats were scheduled for bleeding and necropsy at 2, 
4, 8, 12 and 16 weeks. In the second study, ovariectomized rats 
were implanted SC with tubing containing sesame oil, 0.5 or 
5.0 mg DES in oil, or 50 or 100 mg Kepone in oil. Groups were 
scheduled for bleeding and necropsy at 2, 4 and 8 weeks. From 
2 weeks to the conclusion of these studies there was a sus- 
tained evaluation of uterine peroxidase activity and a 3- to 6- 
fold increase in uterine weights in groups implanted with 0.5 
or 5 mg DES or 100 mg Kepone, whereas animals that 
received 50 mg Kepone showed uterine responses about 50% 
that of the 100 mg Kepone group. Within 24 hr after SC 
implantation of 200 mg Kepone, all animals developed severe 
nervous tremors and died 3 to 4 days later. By 8 weeks many 
of the rats that received 5 mg DES developed pyometritis 
which was associated with a high incidence of mortality. In 
addition, liver weights increased progressively from 2 to 8 or 
16 weeks in those animals treated with 5 mg DES or 100 mg 
Kepone. Further, 0.5 or 5.0 mg DES stimulated marked and 
progressive increases in pituitary weight and prolactin secre- 
tion, commencing at 2 weeks and persisting to the end of the 
studies. In contrast, neither 50 nor 100 mg Kepone increased 
pituitary weights; however, there was a transient elevation of 
plasma prolactin levels at 2 and 4 weeks. In conclusion, 
Kepone mimics at least two well known effects of DES on the 
uterus, but is largely devoid of the stimulatory effects of DES 
on the pituitary. 
 
Proliferative Lesions of the Exocrine Pan- 
creas in the Fischer 344/N Rat. G. A. BOORMAN 
and S. L. EUSTIS, Chemical Pathology Branch, 
Toxicology Research and Testing Program, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
There is concern that an increasing incidence of pancreatic 
cancer in man may be related to increasing exposure to 
environmental carcinogens. Experimental models of pancre- 
atic carcinogenesis in rodents show that certain chemicals 
induce or enhance exocrine pancreatic cancer and that dietary 
factors modify the progression of pancreatic cancer. When a 
high incidence of proliferative lesions of the exocrine pancreas 
in male Fischer 344/N rats was observed in several recent 
carcinogenicity bioassays, a histopathologic review was initi- 
ated to develop diagnostic criteria and standardized nomen- 
clature for those lesions. Since diets high in unsaturated fat 
enhance pancreatic carcinogenesis in experimental rodent 
models, pancreatic tissue from untreated control rats and 
control rats receiving corn oil were examined by light micros- 
copy. 
 
Lesions of the exocrine pancreas were classified as focal 
cellular change, focal acinar hyperplasia, acinar adenoma and 
acinar carcinoma. Foci of cellular change affect a small por- 
tion of the pancreatic lobule, are characterized frequently by 
 
cellular hypertrophy, enlarged nuclei, and altered staining 
properties, and do not compress adjacent parenchyma. Foci of 
hyperplasia compress adjacent tissue, show mild alteration of 
acinar architecture, and are continguous with unaffected 
acini. Acinar adenomas are discrete rounded nodules that 
usually are not contiguous with unaffected parenchyma. Car- 
cinomas have typical changes indicating malignancy such as 
cellular anaplasia, altered growth pattern, invasion, and me- 
tastasis. 
 
Preliminary results of our review indicate that proliferative 
lesions of the exocrine pancreas were more frequent in control 
rats receiving corn oil by gavage than in untreated control 
rats. There was a 10-fold greater incidence of focal acinar 
hyperplasia and almost a 3-fold greater incidence of adenoma 
in rats receiving corn oil compared to untreated controls. 
However, when the data are broken down by individual bioas- 
says, the incidence of proliferative lesions was not consistent 
between groups of corn oil control rats. Although proliferative 
lesions of the exocrine pancreas apparently are associated at 
times with corn oil treatment, the variability between studies 
indicates that factors other than corn oil may be involved. 
Investigation of the cause(s) of these findings is currently in 
progress. 
 
Purification and Quantitation by Radioim- 
munoassay of Two Forms of Cytochrome P- 
448. J. A. GOLDSTEIN, P. LINKO, R. LAWSON and 
M. I. LUSTER, Systemic Toxicology Branch, Toxi- 
cology Research and Testing Program, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A second form of cytochrome P-448 has been isolated from 
livers of rats treated with 3,4,5,3',4',5'-hexachlorobiphenyl 
(3,4,5-HCB), a methylcholanthrene (3-MC) type inducer. The 
purified cytochrome (referred to as P-448HCB) had a specific 
content of 18.8 nmole/mg and migrated as a single band on 
SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Two other forms of cytochrome P- 
450, P-450PB and P-448MC, were isolated from phenobarbital- 
and 3-MC-treated rats, respectively. Cytochrome P-448HCB 
had a molecular weight of 52,000, similar to that of P-450PB, 
but different from P-448MC (55,000). The maxima of the core- 
duced difference spectra for cytochromes P-450PB, P-448Mc, 
and P-448HCB were 450, 447.5 and 448 nm, respectively. The 
three forms could also be distinguished by their catalytic 
activities, immunological properties, and peptide maps. An 
RIA was developed specifically for cytochromes P-448HCB and 
P-448MC for quantitation in the nanogram range in biological 
samples. This RIA indicated that both forms of cytochrome P- 
448 are induced markedly by 3-MC, 3,4,5-HCB and Aroclor 
1254 in rat liver microsomes. 
 
Changes in the Distribution and Excretion of 
Two Hexachlorobiphenyls in Senescent Rats. 
L. S. BIRNBAUM, Systemic Toxicology Branch, 
Toxicology Research and Testing Program, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are industrial chemicals 
which have become widespread environmental pollutants. 
Their toxicity and persistence have made them a major health 
hazard, with PCB residues being detected in essentially all 
human populations. PCBs tend to accumulate in adipose tis- 
 
280 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
sue with the rate of metabolism being the prime determinant 
of their persistence. Since both body composition and drug 
disposition have been reported to change with age, we investi- 
gated the distribution, metabolism, and excretion of two hex- 
achlorobiphenyls (HCBs) in senescent rats. 2,3,6,2',3',6'-HCB 
(236) and 2,4,5,2',4',5'-HCB (245) are symmetrical isomers 
whose disposition in young rats has previously been studied in 
our laboratory. In the present study, senescent (23-24 month) 
male Sprague-Dawley rats were treated IV with 14C-HCBs at 
0.6 mg/kg, sacrificed from 1 hr to 21 days after treatment, and 
tissue distribution of 14C-HCB-derived radioactivity deter- 
mined. Urine and feces were collected daily and analyzed for 
radioactivity. The radioactivity in the major tissue depots- 
blood, liver, muscle, skin and adipose tissue-were extracted 
and chromatographed to determine parent HCB/metabolite 
ratios. 236 was distributed to all body tissues, concentrated in 
the liver and fat, rapidly metabolized, and excreted in the 
feces with a half-life of approximately 1 day. 245 was ex- 
tremely persistent with less than 3% of the dose being ex- 
creted in the feces in 21 days. 245 redistributed from the body 
tissues to be stored primarily in adipose tissue. For both 
compounds, the radioactivity excreted was primarily metabo- 
lites of HCBs. By day 1, more of the tissue radioactivity in the 
old animals was metabolite than in young rats, suggesting 
slower elimination of metabolites in the senescent rats. Tis- 
sue/blood ratios were also decreased in the old relative to the 
young animals. Although tissue half-lives did not show any 
age-related change, the pool sizes increased for both com- 
pounds in the old animals. In all cases, the effects of aging 
seemed to be more pronounced upon the disposition of 245 
than of 236. Thus, senescence may differentially affect the 
distribution, metabolism and excretion of different PCBs. 
 
Chemical Disposition under the National 
Toxicology Program: Purpose and Function. 
H. B. MATTHEWS, Systemic Toxicology Branch, 
Toxicology Research and Testing Program, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Chemical disposition under the National Toxicology Pro- 
gram is designed to provide both applied knowledge to facili- 
tate the choice of optimum doses to be used in NTP bioassays 
and basic knowledge on those chemical structure and property 
relationships which determine chemical disposition. The ulti- 
mate goal of each study of chemical disposition is to improve 
the extrapolation of laboratory data to man. This work is 
achieved through contract, interagency and inhouse research 
programs. Most studies utilize the adult male rat and radiola- 
beled chemicals, but studies may be designed to utilize most 
laboratory species, unlabeled compounds and any anticipated 
route of human exposure as the need arises. Individual studies 
have been designed to address chemical classes such as the 
benzidine- and benzidine congener-based dyes, single chemi- 
cals in several species such as TCDF or chemical types such as 
highly insoluble organics. However, most studies are designed 
to study the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excre- 
tion of individual chemicals. Nomination of chemicals, chemi- 
cal classes or chemical types to be the subjects of chemical 
disposition studies is open to all interested individuals both 
within and outside the NTP. 
 
An in Vitro Approach for Studying the Organ 
and Species Specificities of Chemical Car- 
cinogen/Mutagen Activation. R. LANGENBACH, 
 
Toxicology Research and Testing Program, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, L. OGLESBY, 
Northrop Services Inc., Research Triangle Park, 
NC 2 7709, and C. BAKER and J. ALLEN, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research 7ri- 
angle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Cell structure techniques are being developed in an attempt 
to study the organ specificity of chemical carcinogen metabolic 
activation to genotoxic intermediates. Primary liver, lung, 
kidney and/or bladder cells from rat, hamster and/or bovine 
have been used for metabolic activation. Mutation and sister 
chromatid exchange (SCE) induction in Chinese hamster V79 
cells and mutation of Salmonella typhimurium were the ge- 
netic endpoints measured. Rat liver, lung, bladder and kidney 
cells showed different metabolic capabilities in the activation 
of benzo(a)pyrene, 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene, 2-acety- 
laminofluorene, aflatoxin B1 and dimethylnitrosamine. For 2- 
acetylaminofluorene, SCE induction and mutation of S. typhi- 
murium were found to be more sensitive endpoints than V79 
cell mutagenesis. Therefore when developing techniques to 
study the relative abilities of liver and bladder cells to acti- 
vate several aromatic amines, S. typhimurium was used as the 
endpoint. Also, to insure sufficient bladder cells for conducting 
the experiments, methodologies for obtaining and utilizing 
liver and bladder cells from bovine were developed. Bovine 
bladder cells were more active than liver cells in activating 
the carcinogens aminofluorene, 2-acetylaminofluorene, benzi- 
dine, 4-aminobiphenyl and 2-naphthylamine to mutagens for 
S. typhimurium. The noncarcinogen, 1-naphthylamine, was 
not mutagenic with either cell type. The data show that the 
relative metabolic activation abilities of cells from various 
organs and/or species can be studied by the cell-mediated 
approach. 
 
Fine Structure Analysis of Retroviral Long 
Terminal Repeats: Implications for Induced 
Gene Transpositions in Mammalian Cells. 
LAWRENCE R. BOONE and RAYMOND W. TENNANT, 
Toxicology Research and Testing Program, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research 7riangle Park, NC 27709, and WEN K. 
YANG, Biology Division, Oak Ridge National La- 
boratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37830. 
 
A very important question in genetic toxicology is the role 
that mobile genetic elements play in mutagenesis and carcino- 
genesis. Structure and sequence analysis has recently drawn 
attention to the parallels between the proviral structure of 
retroviruses and bacterial and eukaryotic transposable ele- 
ments. A prominent feature of retroviruses is the long termi- 
nal repeat (LTR), which is structurally analogous to bacterial 
insertion sequences and which is thought to play a similar 
role in integration. In addition, this region contains sequences 
that are common to eukaryotic genes and appear to be in- 
volved in regulation of gene expression. 
 
Retroviruses are known to be involved in carcinogenesis 
through recombination with other retroviral genes, and nor- 
mal cellular genes (proto-oncogenes) and also by "downstream 
promotion" of cellular genes at novel integration sites. We 
have therefore investigated the possibility that endogenous 
proviruses act as transposons and may be targets for genotoxic 
agents. A model system of particular interest is the RFM/Un 
mouse radiogenic myeloid leukemia. This strain has a single 
 
281 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
endogenous ecotropic retrovirus (RFV) that is expressed spon- 
taneously in certain hematopoietic tissues throughout the 
animal's life. The strain is unique in expressing a strong 
inhibition that blocks virus infection and is therefore poten- 
tially an important model for studying intragenomic transpo- 
sition of proviral sequences. 
 
We have molecularly cloned and analyzed the RFV genome 
that was chemically induced from cultured fibroblasts. The 
restriction endonuclease map indicates that this virus is indis- 
tinguishable from the other murine endogenous ecotropic 
retroviruses. The LTR region has been sequenced, and the 
structural features characteristic of transposons were evident. 
 
A small region of the env gene has been subcloned and used 
as a hybridization probe that specifically recognizes the eco- 
tropic provirus. Comparison of normal and leukemic tissues 
by restriction enzyme digestion and hybridization with the 
"eco-specific" probe reveals that novel proviral integrations 
are found in the leukemias which may have arisen by transpo- 
sition. The proximity of these sequences to activated onc genes 
and the expression of such genes by the proviral LTR are 
currently under study. Fine structure anlaysis of a population 
of viral LTRS reveals a sequence variability in a region that 
has been implicated in gene expression. The biological conse- 
quences of these variants are under study. A better under- 
standing of the structure/function relationship of the LTR may 
come from further study of these variants. 
 
The Role of Mitotically Defined Repair Func- 
tions in Meiosis. MICHAEL A. RESNICK and 
TERRY CHOW, Toxicology Research and Testing 
Program, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709, JOHN NITISS, NIEHS and Illinois Institute 
of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616, PETER MOORE, 
NIEHS and University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60637 and JOHN GAME, University of California at 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720. 
 
Several genes identified with DNA repair functions in mi- 
totic cells in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae have been 
examined for their role in meiosis. Representatives of excision 
repair (radl), mutagenesis (rad6) and double-strand break 
repair (rad52) pathways are able to undergo premeiotic DNA 
synthesis. Since radlmutants exhibit normal meiosis while 
others lack to varying degrees recombination, viability and 
sporulation, some dispensable (in the absence of DNA dam- 
age) mitotic repair functions are essential in meiosis and 
others become essential only when cells are exposed to DNA 
damage. 
 
The RAD52 gene product becomes essential beginning with 
premeiotic DNA synthesis as evidenced by a concommitant 
loss of survival in rad52 mutants. Coincident with loss in 
survival is the appearance of single-strand interruptions (SSI) 
in parental and newly synthesized DNA. Since at comparable 
times the RAD + cells exhibit a commitment to recombination 
that is absent in rad52 mutants, the gene product is concluded 
to be essential in intermediate stages of recombination. 
 
Alkaline single-strand deoxyribonuclease (SS-DNAse) has 
been examined in extracts from mitotic and meiotic cells of 
wild-type and rad52 mutants. No noticeable difference is 
observed in total alkaline SS-DNAse level between logarith- 
mically growing cells of these strains. However, differences 
are observed when rabbit antiserum raised against a purified 
SS-DNA-binding endoexonuclease from Neurospora crassa (a 
nuclease implicated in recombination and/or repair) is added 
 
to extracts. Of the alkaline SS-DNAse activity in wild-type 
extracts, 30-40% exhibits immunocrossreactivity; in contrast, 
no immunocrossreactivity is observed with the extracts of 
rad52 strains. 
 
Unlike the RAD52 gene product, RADI is essentialy during 
meiosis only when cells are UV-irradiated. No other excision 
repair mechanism is detected during meiosis. In the absence of 
RADI, cells can tolerate a limited amount of DNA damage at 
early stages of meiosis due to the ability to synthesize DNA 
past pyrimidine dimers. However, the DNA damage affects 
recombination; a dose of 4 J/m2 at the beginning of meiosis 
results in a 2 to 3-fold depression in meiotic intragenic recom- 
bination; intergenic recombination is nearly abolished. These 
results indicate that meiotic intragenic and intergenic recom- 
bination can be separated by UV at the beginning of meiosis 
and that the lack of intergenic recombination and presumably 
normal disjunction can account for the death of cells at late 
stages of meiosis. 
 
The observation that DNA synthesis occurs past DNA dam- 
age within cells is being pursued to determine the nature of 
the synthesis. Extracts of cells are being examined for their 
ability to synthesize DNA in vitro on normal and damaged 
DNA templates; coding properties, if any, of the damage are 
also being examined. We have shown that cell extracts allow 
synthesis up to pyrimidine dimers. We are now attempting to 
determine whether there are conditions which will allow 
synthesis past dimers and whether extracts from cells at 
various times during meiosis will permit such synthesis. 
 
Evaluation of Genetic Toxicity Assay Results 
on Twenty Chemicals: Implications for Ani- 
mal Assays. JUDSON W. SPALDING and RAYMOND 
W. TENNANT, Cellular and Genetic Toxicology 
Branch, Toxicology Research and Testing Pro- 
gram, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Twenty chemicals were tested for genetic toxicity in five 
classes of in vitro short-term tests. These tests represent a 
broad range of potential mechanisms of genetic toxicity and 
reflect the ability of chemicals to directly damage DNA or to 
alter gene expression. The specific tests selected were chosen 
because the protocols have received some form of previous 
evaluation or validation. The chemicals represent a wide 
range of structural classes and were tested and evaluated as 
coded compounds. The short-term tests used were: class I, 
microbial mutagenesis, the Salmonella/microsome (SAL) test; 
class II, mammalian cell mutagenesis, the (L5178Y) mouse 
lymphoma cell TK + / - forward mutation assay; class III, chro- 
mosome damage in mammalian cells, in vitro cytogenetics 
assay, in Chinese hamster ovary cells for the detection of 
chromosomal aberrations (CA) and sister chromatid exchange 
(SCE); class IV, mammalian cell transformation: the chemical 
enhancement of DNA virus transformation of Syrian golden 
hamster embryo cells by Simian adenovirus SA-7 (SHE-SA7); 
and the Balb/C 3T3 in vitro transformation assay; and class V, 
DNA damage/repair: the in vitro unscheduled DNA synthesis 
(UDS) in rat liver primary cell culture assay; and the in vivo- 
in vitro unscheduled DNA synthesis (HA-UDS) in rat liver 
primary cell culture assay. In the SAL, in vitro cytogenetics 
and L5178Y assays, chemicals were tested both with and 
without the presence of an exogenous metabolic activation (S- 
9) system. The S-9 fraction was prepared from liver homoge- 
nates of Aroclor 1254 induced male rats. In addition, the SAL 
test was performed with S-9 from Aroclor 1254 induced male 
Syrian hamsters. Concurrent positive and solvent or medium 
controls were performed in each test. 
 
282 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
Interactions of 1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane 
with the Male Reproductive System. ARNOLD 
GREENWELL, FRANK HARRINGTON, BHOLA GUPTA, 
ROBERT MARONPOT, JAMES C. LAMB, IV and 
WILLIAM KLUWE, Toxicology Research and Test- 
ing Program, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
The nematocide 1,2-dibromo-3-chloropropane (DBCP) is a 
nephrotoxicant and gonadotoxicant in several mammalian 
species and has recently been shown to cause testicular atro- 
phy and infertility in male pesticide formulators. Further 
toxicity studies were conducted in male, Fischer 344 rats to 
characterize the nature of the sterilizing effect, including 
gonadal sites of injury, age- and dose-response relationships, 
chronicity, and potential reversibility. 
 
Single subcutaneous exposures to 40-100 mg/kg DBCP 
caused progressive testicular atrophy secondary to seminifer- 
ous tubular degeneration. Sperm concentration in the cauda 
(tail) epididymis was reduced in a temporal fashion commen- 
surate with the testicular atrophy. A rapidly reversed vacuo- 
lar degeneration of the tubular epithelium was detected in the 
initial segment of the caput (head) epididymis. Moderate to 
severe testicular atrophy appeared to be essentially irrevers- 
ible. Prolonged (70 day) oral studies indicated little cumula- 
tive toxic potential for DBCP. 
 
Male rats treated at 6 days of age were equisensitive to 
adults with regard to the lethal potency of DBCP, but more 
susceptible to the gonadal effects, as indicated by irreversible 
testicular injury at doses as low as 20 mg/kg. Twenty-four day 
old rats were less susceptible to both the lethal and the 
gonadotoxic effects of DBCP than were adults. 
 
Infertility occurred in male rats almost immediately after a 
single DBCP exposure, in contrast to a lack of effect on sperm 
concentration until much later. This effect appears to be due to 
an inhibition of sperm energy metabolism, as the ability of 
sperm to metabolize glucose to CO2 was reduced by DBCP 
both in vivo and in vitro. 
 
These results indicate that DBCP may cause sterility by two 
mechanisms: an immediate inhibition of sperm energy metab- 
olism and a progressive testicular atrophy secondary to semi- 
niferous tubular degeneration. 
 
Renal Function Tests and Chemical Ne- 
phropathy. FRANK HARRINGTON, ARNOLD 
GREENWELL and WILLIAM KLUWE, Toxicology Re- 
search and Testing Program, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Urinalyses and other noninvasive renal function tests have 
obvious advantages over invasive tests, such as direct morpho- 
logical examination. Noninvasive tests can be performed se- 
quentially on the same subjects, allowing for an evaluation of 
the development, progression and repair of kidney lesions. 
Moreover, functional assessments may be more realistic indi- 
ces of nephropathy than microscopic aberrations. The quanti- 
tative urinary excretions of fluid, proteins, glucose, electro- 
lytes, creatinine, renal cell enzymes and other substances in 
rats were monitored sequentially after single or repeated 
treatments with nephrotoxicants such as mercuric chloride, 
halogenated hydrocarbons or biphenyl. The results were com- 
pared with morphological changes in the kidney. The quanti- 
tative urinalyses were more sensitive and accurate indicators 
 
of nephropathy than were strictly qualitative procedures, and 
urinalyses or other renal function tests, in general, were more 
sensitive indicators of chemical insult than were morphologic 
examinations. Microscopic examination of the kidney, how- 
ever, was useful in identifying the target cells within the 
kidney and often detected residual morphologic abnormalities 
despite return of renal function to normal. It is recommended 
that urinalyses or other noninvasive kidney function tests be 
used to monitor nephropathy during chemical treatment and 
recovery, and that morphologic examinations of the kidneys 
be conducted at termination to detect the site(s) of injury and 
possible residual effects. 
 
Effects of Dimethyl Methyl Phosphonate on 
the Reproductive System of the Male Fischer 
344 Rat. JUNE K. DUNNICK, BHOLA N. GUPTA, 
MARTHA W. HARRIS and JAMES C. LAMB, IV. Toxi- 
cology Research and Testing Program, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Dimethyl methyl phosphonate (DMMP), a nerve gas simu- 
lant, has been used by the U.S. Armed Forces in a variety of 
experimental situations. The National ?lbxicology Program 
was asked to investigate the toxic properties of this substance 
and this study was conducted to determine reproductive toxic- 
ity. DMMP was administered to male Fischer 344 rats by 
gavage for 90 days at doses of 0, 250, 500, 1000 and 2000 mg/ 
kg. At day 84 the rats were mated to untreated female Fischer 
344 rats. There was a dose-related decrease in sperm count, 
sperm motility and the male fertility index. The male fertility 
index was 70%, 75%, 60%, 40% and 0% in the 0,250,500, 1000 
and 2000 mg/kg dose groups. DMMP acted like a dominant 
lethal mutagen as demonstrated by an increase in the number 
of resorptions with increasing doses of the drug. The percent 
resorptions in the control group was 6.1% and increased to 
14.9%, 37.8% and 79.1% in the 250, 500, 1000 mg/kg groups, 
respectively. 
 
The testes of the male rat were examined histologically to 
determine the relationship between reproductive function and 
pathologic abnormalities. DMMP altered reproductive func- 
tion at all dose levels, while histologic abnormalities were 
seen only in the high dose group. Changes in the testes of the 
high dose animals were characterized by lack of spermato- 
genesis or by degeneration, vacuolization and necrosis of 
spermatogenic cells. Histopathologic abnormalities of the kid- 
ney were seen in some animals from each of the dosed groups 
and microscopic changes of the epididymis and prostate were 
seen in some of the high dose animals. 
 
Dimethyl methyl phosphonate is a representative of the 
organophosphorus chemicals, a class of compounds generally 
known for their neurotoxic properties. This particular or- 
ganophosphorus compound had marked toxicity for the repro- 
ductive system of the male rat, toxicity that was not accompa- 
nied by overwhelming clinical or neurological toxicity. Such 
compounds may pose an unrecognized hazard in our environ- 
ment. 
 
Comprehensive Safety Evaluation of Di(2- 
ethylhexyl) Phthalate and Other Phthalate 
Esters by the National Toxicology Program. 
WILLIAM M. KLUWE, Toxicology Research and 
Testing Program, National Institute of Environ- 
 
283 
 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
Chronic toxicity testing of di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate 
(DEHP) by the National Tbxicology Program (NTP) has re- 
vealed hepatocarcinogenic effects in both rats and mice. Esti- 
mates of current U.S. production of DEHP, the major plasti- 
cizer for poly(vinyl chloride) products, are in excess of 2 x 108 
kg/ yr. At a conference convened by the NTP and the Intera- 
gency Regulatory Liaison Group (IRLG) to discuss these and 
other relevant data on health aspects of phthalate ester plasti- 
cizers, it became clear that a number of interested groups were 
performing or considering research or testing programs con- 
cerning the phthalates. The NTP has prepared and is cur- 
rently conducting the program designated below as an initial 
step in the comprehensive safety evaluation of phthalate 
esters and related compounds: genetic toxicity: mutagenicity, 
clastogenicity, DNA damage; tumor promoting abilities: liver 
and skin models; teratology: in-depth analysis for DEHP, 
screens for others; comparative dermal absorption: structure/ 
activity relationships; testicular toxicity of DEHP; carcinoge- 
nicity testing: diallyl phthalate, butyl benzyl phthalate, di- 
ethyl phthalate; hepatic effects of DEHP; hypolipidemic effects 
of DEHP. 
 
The major objectives of this program are to characterize the 
toxic effects and risks associated with DEHP exposure, and to 
screen other phthalates for toxic potential. 
 
Thansposable Elements in Mendelian Popu- 
lations. I. A. Theory. CHARLES H. LANGLEY and 
JOHN F. Y. BROOKFIELD, Laboratory of Animal 
Genetics, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709, and NORMAN KAPLAN, Biometry and Risk 
Assessment Program, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Transposable elements are DNA sequences, found through- 
out eukaryotes, that transpose replicatively and cause numer- 
ous genetic and developmental effects on their hosts. A model 
of the evolution of transposable elements in Mendelian popu- 
lations is proposed. From its analysis, formulae for the mean 
copy number and frequency spectrum are obtained. 
 
Protein Structure and cDNA Cloning of 
Mammalian Lactate Dehydrogenase Isozy- 
mes A4 (Muscle), B4 (Heart) and C4 (Testis). S. 
S.-L. Li, Y. -C. E. PAN, F. S. SHAREIF, K. AKAI, M. 
OKABE, M. SHIMIZU, H. F. TIANO, R. J. FELDMANN, 
W. M. FITCH and R. A. JUNGMAN, Laboratory of 
Animal Genetics, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
The amino acid sequences of lactate dehydrogenase isozy- 
mes (LDH-X; subunit C) specified to the testes of the mouse 
and rat have been determined. Of the 330 residues, 10% differ 
between the two LDH-X isozymes; most of these changes can 
be accounted for by single nucleotide changes. Two-thirds of 
the differing residues are located on the surface of the mole- 
cules and may be involved in the antigenic determinants 
unique to the LDH-X isozymes. A computer graphic system 
 
has been used to visualize the three-dimensional structure of 
the molecules and establish atomic relationships related to 
the amino acid sequence. The LDH-X isozymes are used by 
other groups at NIEHS as the basis for detecting mutations in 
single sperm cells. Mutations that modify the mouse LDH-X 
so that it is recognized by antibodies to the rat enzyme can be 
detected by fluorescence microscopy. The development of this 
mutation monitoring scheme depends upon knowing the 
three-dimensional structure of the isozymes and the types of 
mutational changes that can be detected antigenically. 
 
Lactate dehydrogenase isozymes from mouse muscle (subu- 
nit A) and heart (subunit B) have also been studied, along 
with those from human heart, bovine heart, rabbit muscle and 
horse muscle. The tryptic peptide maps, amino acid composi- 
tions and partial sequences have been determined, and it is 
evident that the muscle and heart subunits show a closer 
relationship to each other than to the testis specific subunit. 
Since the evolutionary relationships among the subunits and 
among species groups are emerging, we may be better able to 
understand the types and amounts of genetic diversity that 
exist and how this diversity has played a role in the evolution- 
ary process. 
 
Amino acid sequence data provide a direct approach to the 
cloning of the LDH genes using recombinant DNA techniques. 
From the amino acid sequence, a short nucleotide sequence 
(approximately 14 nucleotides) that is not redundant and is 
unique to the gene encoding a specific LDH isozyme has been 
synthesized. This oligonucleotide is being used to identify the 
cloned recombinant DNA. Several cDNA clones have been 
isolated and the partial nucleotide sequences determined. 
Analysis of the DNA sequence encoding the protein and those 
flanking the structural gene is expected to yield important 
information about the gene's regulatory signals and to allow 
evaluation of mutational events that perturb the regulatory 
mechanisms as well as those that modify the protein coding 
sequence itself. 
 
Human Mitochondrial DNA. C. F. AQUADRO 
and B. D. GREENBERG, Laboratory of Genetics, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sci- 
ences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, and N. 
KAPLAN and K. RISKO, Biometry and Risk Assess- 
ment Program, National Institute of Environmen- 
tal Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
We have analyzed nucleotide sequence variation in an ap- 
proximately 900 base pair region of the human mitochondrial 
DNA molecule encompassing the heavy-strand origin of repli- 
cation and the D-loop. Our analysis has focused on nucleotide 
sequences available from seven humans. We have detected a 
high frequency of multiple (repeated) nucleotide substitutions 
and insertions/deletions. Two substitution biases are appar- 
ent, one favoring transitions by a factor of 32:1 over transver- 
sions, and the other favoring a high rate of turnover of purines 
relative to pyrimidines on the heavy strand of the mitchon- 
drial DNA. The occurrence of these biases in coding and 
noncoding regions as well as rRNA and tRNA genes suggests 
that these phenomena may result from biases in the muta- 
tional pathways. In addition, the rate of substitution is signifi- 
cantly nonuniform throughout the D-loop region suggesting 
differing selective constraints or susceptability to mutation in 
various parts of this noncoding region. We have also modeled 
the dynamics of the substitution process. The results support 
the hypothesis that while a portion of the mitochondrial DNA 
molecule is relatively free to change at a very rapid rate, the 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
284 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
majority of the molecule is under very strong selective con- 
straints as to base substitutions and other types of sequence 
alterations. 
 
Insertion and Deletion Variation in Drosoph- 
ila. C. F. AQUADRO, M. BLAND, C. H. LANGLEY, 
E.A. MONTGOMERY, and W. F. QUArrLEBAUM, La- 
boratory of Genetics, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Restriction map variation has been determined in a 12,000 
base pair region around the alcohol dehydrogenase structural 
gene (Adh) in 48 lines of D. melanogaster from several geo- 
graphically distinct populations and several closely related 
species. The most striking result is the high level of insertion 
and deletion variation within species, and the low level be- 
tween species. Significantly, no insertion/deletion variation 
occurred within the Adh coding block. These observations, 
together with the geographically restricted distribution of 
individual insertions or deletions, in the face of evidence for 
free gene exchange between localities, suggest many of these 
variations are deleterious. In addition, we have evidence that 
most of the large inserts are transposable elements and that 
at least one is correlated, if not responsible for, an altered 
level and pattern of expression of the Adh gene. We have also 
screened the same 48 lines for variation in a 40,000 base pair 
region around the dopa decarboxylase (Ddc) gene. The prelim- 
inary impression for this region is quite different from Adh, in 
that there are fewer insertions and deletions. However, one of 
them occurs within the Ddc transcript. 
 
Cloning and Genetic Analysis of Hybrid Dys- 
genesis-Induced Alleles at an RNA Poly- 
merase II locus in Drosophila melanogaster. 
ROBERT A. VOELKER, S. M. HUANG, H. 
GYURKOVICS, G. B. WISELY, and PAUL M. 
BINGHAM, Laboratory of Genetics, National Insti- 
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709, and LILLIE L. SEARLES, 
ROBERT S. JOKERST and ARNO L. GREENLEAF, 
Duke University, Durham, NC 27710. 
 
The L5 locus, an allele of which (RpIIC4) confers a-amanitin 
resistance on RNA polymerase II of Drosophila melanogaster, 
maps at division 10C on the polytene X-chromosome and is 
lethal-mutable. Lethal alleles of this locus were generated by 
hybrid dysgenesis, a phenomenon in which a mobile DNA 
sequence known as the P-factor is mobilized and caused to 
insert at numerous places throughout the genome. One of 
these lethal alleles was shown by in situ hybridization to have 
a P-factor insertion in the 10C region (as well as other inser- 
tions at other sites). Probable causality between the P-factor 
insertion and the resulting lethality was indicated by the 
observation that in several independent reversions of the 
lethal the P-factor insertion at 10C was lost. A whole-genome 
charon-30 phage library of P-factor-containing mutant DNA 
was constructed and screened with P-factor. DNAs from the P- 
factor-containing phage were then hybridized in situ to wild 
type polytene chromosomes to identify those phages which 
contained unique sequences from the 10C region. One phage 
was identified which carried 11 kb of Drosophila DNA which 
included a 1.3 kb P-factor insert near one end. Subcloned 
 
fragments of the DNA were used to recover clones containing 
nearly 25 kb of DNA from wild type libraries. Subclones of 
this region were used to identify six different polyadenylated 
messages produced by this region; one (ca. 7 kb) of these 
messages has been identified as that encoding the a-amanitin 
resistance-conferring subunit. Efforts are being made to corre- 
late the other polyadenlyated messages with other genetically 
detected functions in the region. 
 
Mutation Detection in Mice. F. M. JOHNSON, S. 
E. LEWIS and L. C. SKOW, Mammalian Mutagene- 
sis Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National Insti- 
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709 and D. P. LOVELL, MRC 
Laboratory Animals Centre, Carshalton Beeches, 
Surrey, England. 
 
Heritable alterations in DNA and chromosomes may be 
induced as a result of exposure to certain agents in the 
environment. We are interested in applying various tech- 
niques for the purpose of identifying induced and spontaneous 
mutations in mice that can in turn serve as a basis for 
understanding the biological consequences of and biochemical 
phenomena involved in mutational alterations in man. 
 
Techniques being investigated include electrophoresis, iso- 
electric focusing, and morphological/anatomical examinations 
of eye, skeleton, and other regions of the body. The methods 
have provided for the identification of abundant variation. 
Using classical genetic approaches, variation is investigated 
to determine if it is attributable to heritable factors. When 
heritable factors are involved, studies are conducted to deter- 
mine their origin, i.e., newly induced mutation, newly arisen 
spontaneous mutation, or genetic variation originating in the 
past. Induced mutations are produced by exposing mice to 
mutagenic agents and by subsequently examining parents, F1 
offspring, and later generations for the characteristics of in- 
terest. 
 
Having available a number of mutations in specific gene 
products makes it possible to explore many questions of funda- 
mental and practical importance. Thus, one can utilize genetic 
errors to better understand normal genetic organization and 
regulation, as well as a wide range of functions subject to 
genetic control. Furthermore, with mutagen exposures of 
mice it may be possible to provide models of particular genetic 
diseases that are not now available in mice or other experi- 
mental mammals. Such animal models are useful for investi- 
gating techniques that may ultimately cure or lessen the 
severity of genetic diseases in man. 
 
The degree to which human populations may be subject to 
an increased burden of genetic disorders as a result of in- 
creased mutation rates is presently uncertain. When mice are 
exposed to measured doses of specific mutagens, the frequency 
and type of various mutational events can often be deter- 
mined. By combining such data with information on the 
functional effects associated with the mutations in homozy- 
gous and heterozygous condition, it may be possible to gain 
improved understanding of a potentially serious health prob- 
lem. 
 
Mutagenesis Associated with Bacterial Con- 
jugation. B. A. KUNZ and B. W. GLICKMAN, La- 
boratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute 
 
285 
 
of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A single DNA strand of the F plasmid is passed from donor to 
recipient during bacterial conjugation. DNA synthesis pro- 
duces complementary strands using the transferred and re- 
tained strands as templates. This conjugal DNA synthesis 
occurs in cells that have been heavily irradiated to abolish 
vegetative replication. Thus, conjugal DNA synthesis appears 
able to circumvent blocks to vegetative DNA replication. A 
mechanism that enables DNA synthesis to bypass template 
damage might be expected to alter the fidelity of DNA re- 
plication. To test the fidelity of conjugal DNA synthesis we 
employed the E. coli lad system which permits the detection of 
nonsense mutations at 65 independent sites within the lad 
gene. Knowledge of the DNA sequence and location of the 
nonsense mutations allows one to correlate each mutation with 
a specific base change. In this system the lad gene is situated 
on the F' plasmid carried by donor cells and the homologous 
chromosomal gene is deleted in donors and recipients. For our 
study, lad mutations were selected subsequent to conjugal 
transfer of the F'. We found that the frequency of lad nonsense 
mutations is 10-fold higher after conjugation than in the ab- 
sence of transfer. Mutational spectra revealed that this in- 
crease is due to both transitions and transversions. Moreover, 
recA -dependent error-prone processes appear not to be respon- 
sible for the increase in mutation. These results suggest that 
conjugal DNA synthesis may be inherently less accurate than 
vegetative DNA replication. Alternatively, spontaneous dam- 
age occurring in F' DNA may not be repaired once conjugation 
is initiated, leading to fixation of mutations during conjugal 
DNA synthesis and so to the enhanced recovery of nonsense 
mutations. 
 
The Role of DNA Secondary Structure in 
Mutation. L. S. RIPLEY and B. W. GLICKMAN, 
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Insti- 
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709 
 
Palindromic sequences provide inherent self-complementar- 
ity and hence permit the formation of unusual DNA struc- 
tural intermediates. A general model based on the processing 
of these intermediates predicts a wide range of mutational 
outcomes in both quasipalindromic and palindromic DNA 
sequences. 
 
In quasipalindromic sequences, self-complementarity is not 
perfect, and processing of imperfectly paired intermediates 
leads to more perfect palindromes and hence the production of 
base substitutions, additions, deletions or inversions. For ex- 
ample, production of these mutations may be viewed as a 
mismatch correction event within a hairpin structure. The 
unpaired bases within the hairpin in the noncomplementary 
portions of the quasipalindrome may either be removed or 
serve as templates for the insertion of DNA bases. 
 
In both quasiplaindromic and palindromic DNA sequences, 
deletion and duplication events are predicted outcomes of the 
formation of aberrant DNA structures. Within these struc- 
tures, normally distant base pairs are brought into immediate 
proximity and eventually define the end points of deletion or 
duplication mutations. 
 
Di-2-ethylhexyl Phthalate as a DNA Precur- 
sor. PHILLIP W. ALBRO, Laboratory of Environ- 
 
mental Chemistry, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
Feeding di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) at a very high 
level in the diet continuously for two years reportedly caused 
an uncreased incidence of hepatocarcinoma in rats and mice. 
Radioactivity from C-1 of the ethylhexyl portion of DEHP or of 
the corresponding monoester (MEHP) becomes covalently as- 
sociated with liver DNA in vivo. The present studies indicate 
that the phthalate portion of DEHP or MEHP does not bind to 
liver DNA in vivo. Moreover, C-1 of the ethylhexyl portion 
associates with DNA, apparently because it is a metabolic 
precursor of carbamyl phosphate, in turn a precursor of nor- 
mal DNA bases. No evidence for the formation of a DNA- 
ethylhexanol adduct could be obtained. However, the possible 
association of any or all of the other seven carbon atoms of the 
ethylhexyl unit with DNA remains to be investigated. 
 
Application of High-Performance Liquid 
Chromatography to the Analysis of Peptide 
Hormones. 0. HERNANDEZ, K. DERMOTr and 
L. H. LAZARUS, Laboratory of Environmental 
Chemistry, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
The application of reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chro- 
matography (RP-HPLC) to the isolation and purification of 
unprotected peptides is a well established technique. The 
combined use of RP-HPLC and radio-immunoassay (RIA) has 
evolved as a powerful tool for the identification of peptides in 
tissues. The potential crossreactivity problems inherent to the 
RIA techniques are virtually eliminated when coupled to the 
high resolving power of RP-HPLC. This latter analytical pro- 
cedure discriminates between structurally related peptides 
differing by a single amino acid residue or even stereoisomers. 
The combination of these two procedures provides a selective 
and highly sensitive-quantitative at the picogram level- 
method for the identification of peptides. A requirement for 
compatibility is the use of volatile buffers in RP-HPLC to 
avoid interferences in the RIA. 
 
An active area of research is the mechanisms(s) by which 
peptides are separated under RP-HPLC conditions. The infor- 
mation available underscores the importance of hydrophobic 
interactions between the peptide and the RP-HPLC column. 
Empirical correlations have been developed in which the 
retention time of a peptide in RP-HPLC may be predicted 
based on the sum of the hydrophobic constant values for the 
amino acid residues present. By utilizing these observations 
we explored ways of enhancing the information available from 
routine RP-HPLC experiments. Our approach was based on 
the premise that the retention of a peptide in a RP-HPLC 
column is determined by the extent of hydrophobic binding. If 
it were possible to modify nondestructively, the intrinsic hy- 
drophobicity of the molecule this would be reflected in shorter 
or longer retention times depending on the nature of this 
modification. Because of our interest in bombesin our initial 
efforts were focused on this peptide. On a first attempt we 
decided to use pH as a variable to alter the ionic character of 
the peptide molecule and hence the hydrophobic surface avail- 
able for binding to the RP-HPLC column. By observing the 
behavior of bombesin under acid (pH 4) and neutral (pH 7) 
conditions the extent of ionization of the histidine residue at 
position 11 would determine the ionic nature of this peptide. 
Other peptides with and without histidine residues were also 
 
286 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
examined. The solvent strength was maintained constant so 
as to isolate the effect of pH. Isocratic chromatographic condi- 
tions were selected for expediency and to avoid pH fluctua- 
tions due to increasing organic modifer concentrations as 
found under gradient conditions. The resulting methods pro- 
vide diagnostic procedures for the identification of bombesin 
and have potential application for rapid clinical analysis of 
tissue samples. 
 
Application of Fast Atom Bombardment 
Mass Spectrometry to the Analysis of Biolog- 
ically Important Molecules. D. J. HARVAN, H. 
J. WALTHER and J. R. HASS, Laboratory of Envi- 
ronmental Chemistry, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Of the many possible mechanisms for chemical carcinogene- 
sis, the formation of covalent bonds between the carcinogen 
and some part of DNA is likely an important step. The study 
of such adduct formation has been limited by the experimen- 
tal difficulties associated with the identification and quantita- 
tion of such compounds. The recent development of ionization 
techniques which allow the analysis of highly polar com- 
pounds by mass spectrometry opens new possibilities for the 
study of DNA constituents. In this paper is described the 
results of applying one of these (fast atom bombardment, FAB) 
to low molecular weight polynucleotides. 
 
Sample volalitilization and ionization results from interac- 
tion with an energetic beam of rare gas atoms which are 
produced by resonance charge exchange neutralization of an 
appropriate rare gas ion beam which is formed in an electrical 
discharge. It is important to have the sample dissolved in a 
suitably viscous, polar material, such as glycerol. The mecha- 
nism of ionization is poorly understood at present, but intense, 
stable ion beams which give molecular weight and fragmenta- 
tion reaction information result. 
 
Some of the samples that have been ionized by this method 
have been methyl benzanthracenes bound to various nu- 
cleosides, underivatized di- and tri- nucleotides, and unde- 
rivatized peptides. The method usually gives rise to ions 
corresponding to [M + H] +, [M + sodium] +, and [M + 
glycerol] +. Some fragmentations of the samples are often 
observed, and may provide structural information. Spectral 
interpretation is simplified by means of B/E linked scanning of 
the mass spectrometer to elucidate fragmentations of selected 
ion species. 
 
The technique has proven to be quite useful for the ioniza- 
tion of previously difficult biological samples. The sample 
requirements are in the range of 10-8-10-6 g for scanned 
mass spectra. Future experiments involve the study of higher 
molecular weight species, and different types of bombarding 
reagents. 
 
Amphibian Peptides in Health and Disease, 
LAWRENCE H. LAZARUS, OSCAR HERNANDEZ, GLO- 
RIA D. JAHNKE, MICHAEL D. ERISMAN, RICHARD 
P. DIAUGUSTINE, CATHY M. SOLDATO, WILLIAM E. 
WILSON, and LAURA J. STONE, Peptide Neuro- 
chemistry Workgroup, Laboratory of Behavioral 
and Neurological Toxicology, and Laboratory of 
Environmental Chemistry, National Institute of 
 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Small-cell carcinoma of the lung is a highly lethal and 
metastatic neoplasm in humans which can be attributed to the 
effect of environmental carcinogens, such as those found in 
cigarette smoking. Frequently, patients with this disease 
have elevated levels of certain peptide hormones in their 
blood which are produced and secreted by the tumor. To this 
growing list of tumor-associated hormones, we recently dis- 
covered the presence of both amphibian peptides bombesin 
and physalaemin in the tumor grown in athymic (nude) mice. 
This discovery was confirmed by two other laboratories and 
bombesin is now being touted by the medical community as a 
potential peptide marker for this type of tumor. Through a 
series of chemical modifications, we have identified the pres- 
ence of the amino acids pyroglutamic acid, arginine, histidine 
and the amidated terminal residue as methionine in tumor 
bombesin as being the same in the amphibian peptide. Tumor 
physalaemin, like its amphibian homolog, contains pyroglu- 
tamic acid, lysine and amidated methionine. 
 
Another molecular species of mammalian bombesin is cur- 
rently being investigated by us in milk which normally con- 
tains a large array of hormones in addition to other nutrients. 
Its concentration in milk is sufficient to bring about a rise in 
hormone levels and gastric acid secretion in both neonates 
and adults. In fact, the hormones influence by the infusion of 
bombesin in humans and by the peroral consumption of milk 
in neonates are identical. Furthermore, the use of milk in 
ulcer therapy is now seriously questioned by investigators in 
San Diego due to the acid content in stomachs of ulcer patients 
drinking milk. 
 
Chrysotile Asbestos Inhalation in Rats: Dep- 
osition Pattern and Reaction of Alveolar Epi- 
thelium and Pulmonary Macrophages. 
ARNOLD R. BRODY, LILA H. HILL, BERNARD 
ADKINS, JR. and ROBERT W. O'CONNOR, Labora- 
tory of Pulmonary Function and Toxicology, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The initial deposition and subsequent translocation of 
chrysotile asbestos were studied in the lungs of rats exposed 
for 1 hr in inhalation chambers. Using scanning and transmis- 
sion electron microscopy of tissue fixed by vascular perfusion, 
we determined that the majority of fibers that pass through 
the conducting airways deposits at the bifurcations of alveolar 
ducts. The farther an alveolar duct bifurcation was from its 
terminal bronchiole, the less asbestos was observed. The 
amount of asbestos present on the alveolar duct surfaces was 
significantly decreased 5 h after cessation of the 1-hr expo- 
sure. Some fibers were taken up by Type I epithelial cells 
during the first hour of dusting, and this process continued 
through the 8-day period in which the animals were studied. 
As early as 24 hr after exposure, there was an accumulation of 
macrophages at the sites of initial asbestos deposition. This 
may be a significant cellular response in the early pathogene- 
sis of asbestosis. 
 
Interstitial Accumulation of Inhaled Chryso- 
tile Asbestos Fibers and Consequent Forma- 
tion of Microcalcifications. ARNOLD R. BRODY, 
and LILA H. HILL, Laboratory of Pulmonary 
 
287 
 
Function and Toxicology, National Institute of En- 
vironmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Previous studies have shown that inhaled chrysotile asbes- 
tos impacts initially at the bifurcations of alveolar ducts in the 
lungs of rats. Asbestos fibers are transported through alveolar 
epithelial cells at these bifurcation regions at the interstitium 
during the 24-hr period after a 1-hr exposure. To further these 
studies, white rats were exposed to an aerosol of chrysotile 
asbestos for 1 hr. Animals were sacrificed, and the lungs were 
fixed by vascular perfusion immediately after and 1 month 
after exposure. Blocks of tissue were prepared for light and 
electron microscopy. At 1 month after exposure, numerous 
asbestos fibers had accumulated within the lung interstitium 
at alveolar duct bifurcations. Many of these interstitial fibers 
were found in the center of intracellular microcalcifications. 
The presence of calcifications was proven by X-ray energy 
spectrometric analysis of the inclusions in situ. Clear X-ray 
peaks for calcium and phosphorus were demonstrated. It is 
proposed that 1 month after a 1-hr exposure to chrysotile 
asbestos, fiber-induced membrane injury in cells of the lung 
interstitium leads to formation of microcalcifications. This 
may represent the presence of early cell injury in the initial 
pathogenetic sequence of asbestosis. 
 
Intra- and Extracellular Distribution of Sur- 
factant Phospholipids in the Lungs of Rab- 
bits. L. A. DETHLOFF and G. E. R. HOOK, Labora- 
tory of Pulmonary Function and Toxicology, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sci- 
ences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Pulmonary surfactant phospholipids may be considered to 
exist within at least two anatomically distinct pools. The 
intracellular pool, located within Type II alveolar epithelial 
cells, is comprised of storage structures called lamellar bodies. 
The extracellular pool resides in the alveoli where surfactant 
prevents alveolar collapse by reducing surface tension at low 
lung volumes. Methods are presented for the isolation and 
quantitation of these two pools. Alveolar lavage was employed 
to obtain the extracellular pool, while the characteristic den- 
sity of lamellar bodies was exploited to isolate the intracellu- 
lar pool. As determined by thin-layer chromatography, the 
phospholipid compositions are quite similar and indicate that 
these pools may accurately represent intracellular and extra- 
cellular surfactant. Estimates for the intra- and extracellular 
surfactant pool sizes in the New Zealand White rabbit are 1.65 
+/- 0.45 mg/g and 2.77 +/- 0.49 mg/g of lung tissue, 
respectively. 
 
Oxidation of 2-Aminofluorene by Prostaglan- 
din Endoperoxide Synthetase. JEFF A. BOYD, 
DONALD J. HARVAN and THOMAS E. ELING, La- 
boratory of Pulmonary Function and Toxicology, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sci- 
ences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
We have examined the prostaglandin endoperoxide synthe- 
tase (PES)-dependent metabolism of the arylamine carcino- 
gen 2-aminofluorene (2-AF). Ram seminal vesicle microsomes 
fortified with arachidonic acid metabolize 2-AF to products 
covalently bound to microsomal macromolecules, water solu- 
ble metabolites, and two organic extractable metabolites. The 
organic extractable metabolites were identified by co-chroma- 
 
tography (HPLC), UV-VIS spectrophotometry, and mass spec- 
trometry as 2-nitrofluorene and 2,2'-azobisfluorene. Hydrogen 
peroxide also supports 2-AF metabolism to the same products, 
suggesting that the hydroperoxidase activity of PES is respon- 
sible for the cooxidation. Ibtal metabolism of 2-AF at 50 ItM is 
50%. Several experiments indicate that molecular oxygen is 
not utilized in the reaction. The highly reactive oxygenated 
metabolites of 2-AF, N-hydroxy-2-AF and 2-nitrosofluorene, 
are metabolized by PES to one major product, 2-nitrofluorene. 
The metabolism of 2-AF, N-hydroxy-2-AF, and 2-nitroso- 
fluorene is extremely rapid, reaching completion in less than 
30 sec. The horseradish peroxidase/H202 system also metabo- 
lizes 2-AF to 2-nitrofluorene and 2,2'-azobisfluorene. These 
results suggest that 2-AF is oxidized to an electrophilic inter- 
mediate by PES, presumably N-hydroxy-2-AF, 2-nitroso- 
fluorene, and/or free radical intermediates which either bind 
to macromolecules or are rapidly further oxidized to 2-nitro- 
fluorene and 2,2'-azobisfluorene. 
 
Quantitative, Clonal Studies of Neoplastic 
Progression of Rat Thacheal Epithelial Cells. 
 
DAVID G. THOMASSEN, PAUL NETTESHEIM, 
THOMAS E. GRAY, S. BALAKRISHNA PAI, MARC J. 
MASS and J. CARL BARRETr, Laboratory of Pulmo- 
nary Function and Toxicology, National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709. 
 
We have developed a system for quantitating early carcino- 
gen-induced changes of rat tracheal epithelial (RTE) cells and 
their subsequent progression to neoplasia. Methods are de- 
scribed for growing normal RTE cells in culture and for 
selecting and quantitating the appearance of enhanced 
growth (EG) variants. Normal RTE cells were isolated by 
pronase treatment of Fischer 344 rat tracheas and grown on 
lethally irradiated 3T3 cells in Ham's F12 medium with 5% 
fetal calf serum, insulin (1 gg/mL), and hydrocortisone (0.1 Jg! 
mL). Colony forming efficiencies were 5-10% for at least five 
passages (>20 population doublings). MNNG (0.1-0.6 gg/mL 
in Hepes buffered F12) treatment resulted in dose-dependent 
reductions in colony forming efficiencies. At 1 to 7 days after 
MNNG treatment, EG variants were selected by removing 
feeder cells and refeeding cultures with complete medium or 
by replating RTE cells onto dishes without feeders. After 4 
weeks, large colonies of small hyperchromatic cells with in- 
creased nuclear: cytoplasmic ratios were observed. Frequen- 
cies of altered cells increased in a dose dependent manner 
yielding a maximum frequency of about 4% per surviving 
colony forming cell at doses of 0.3-0.6 pg MNNG/mL which 
gave relative survivals of 10-50%. Similar results were ob- 
tained with a variety of carcinogens including y-radiation, 
B(a)P, B(a)P diol epoxide, and nickel salts. The induced fre- 
quencies of EG variants obtained were similar to those re- 
ported for the induction of morphological transformation of 
fibroblasts in culture. Control cultures of RTE cells yielded 
frequencies of EG variants of <0.1% per colony-forming cell. 
 
Continued propagation of cultures of EG variants resulted 
in the accumulation of cells capable of growing in semisolid 
agarose medium. These colonies when isolated had high col- 
ony forming efficiencies in agarose medium (=40%) and were 
nontumorigenic in nude mice. After extensive propagation in 
vitro, EG variants developed neoplastic potential and formed 
squamous cell carcinomas when injected into nude mice. This 
work provides a system for characterizing and quantitating 
the frequency of early carcinogen-induced changes and the 
development of neoplasia in respiratory epithelial cells. 
 
288 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
Pulmonary Macrophages Exhibit Morpho- 
logical, Functional and Biochemical Changes 
after One Hour of Exposure to Chrysotile 
Asbestos in Vivo. D. B. WARHEIT, I. Y. CHANG, I. 
H. HILL, and A. R. BRODY, Laboratory of Pulmo- 
nary Function and Toxicology, National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Chronic inhalation of asbestos clearly has been associated 
with interstitial fibrotic lung disease. The pulmonary macro- 
phage is a cell-type which has been implicated in the develop- 
ment of this disease. Our in vivo data show that the earliest 
macrophage response to asbestos inhalation is the recruit- 
ment of these cells to the sites of original asbestos deposition 
with subsequent phagocytosis of these fibers. Accordingly, we 
are studying the effects of inhaled asbestos on macrophages 
recovered by lavage, using morphological, biochemical and 
functional approaches. 
 
No significant differences were found in cell numbers and 
viabilities of macrophages recovered from asbestos-exposed 
and sham-exposed animals at 24 hr, 48 hr, and 8 days after a 
1-hr exposure. Asbestos-exposed macrophage injury was 
quantified by ultrastructural assessment of surface morphol- 
ogy. Correlated studies of iron bead phagocytosis were carried 
out using backscattered electron imaging. We detected small 
but significant changes in the morphology and phagocytic 
capacity of asbestos-exposed macrophages at the earlier two 
time periods. Using biochemical measurements, we found 
increased intra- and extracellular levels of acid hydrolases in 
the cells of asbestos-exposed animals following a 24-hr culture 
period. These data correlate with cytochemical findings which 
show an increased degree of acid phosphatase staining in 
asbestos-exposed macrophages. Utilizing electron microscopic, 
X-ray analytic techniques established in our laboratory, we 
found that 25-30% of the lavaged, cultured macrophages con- 
tained asbestos fibers. Our data indicate that a brief, 1-hr 
exposure to chrysotile asbestos elicits subtle, but measurable 
changes in functional, morphological and biochemical param- 
eters exhibited by pulmonary macrophages. These changes 
could signal the development of cellular alterations which 
play a role in the pathogenesis of asbestos-related lung dis- 
ease. 
 
Free Radical Formation by Hepatic Micro- 
somal Cytochrome P-450. R. P. MASON, W. G. 
HARRELSON and C. MOTTLEY, Laboratory of Envi- 
ronmental Biophysics, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
In the past, studies of the anion radical metabolites formed 
by microsomal one-electron reduction implicated one-electron 
donation from NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase. Investi- 
gations of nitro, azo, and quinone anion radical metabolites 
formed by this enzyme have been described. NADPH-cyto- 
chrome P-450 reductase also reduces quinoneimines, such as 
actinomycin D and dichloroindophenol, to semiquinonimine 
free radicals. More recently, cytochrome P-450 has been found 
to transfer one electron to toxic chemicals such as carbon 
tetrachloride, gentian violet, sulfur dioxide and molecular 
oxygen. 
 
When gentian violet is metabolized under a nitrogen atmo- 
sphere by rat hepatic microsomes supplemented with 
NADPH, a single line ESR spectrum is obtained. The g value 
 
of the gentian violet free radical metabolite was measured as 
2.0028, which is in agreement with the reported value of the 
photochemically produced tri(p-dimethylaminophenyl)methyl 
radical. Either CO or metyrapone inhibits radical formation 
by 50%, implicating cytochrome P-450 involvement. 
 
In an atmosphere of nitrogen, rat liver microsomal incuba- 
tions containing bisulfite (aqueous sulfur dioxide) and 
NADPH also form a free radical with a single-line ESR 
spectrum (g = 2.0056). When the N2 atmosphere was replaced 
by CO this ESR signal decreased by more than 90%. Metyra- 
pone also totally suppresses the ESR signal. These results 
imply that cytochrome P-450 reduces bisulfite to the sulfur 
dioxide anion radical. Oxygen completely inhibited the forma- 
tion of this radical as is consistent with oxygen being a 
competitive inhibitor for the reduced heme of cytochrome P- 
450. 
 
We have used the spin trapping technique to demonstrate 
the microsomal reduction of oxygen to superoxide, which is 
also inhibited by CO and metyrapone. Whether cytochrome P- 
450 or its reductase will donate an electron to an electron- 
accepting xenobiotic can not be predicted a priori. 
 
In Vitro Effects of Microwave Radiation on 
Rat Liver Mitochrondria. M. J. GALVIN, M. S. 
DUTrON and D. I. MCREE, Laboratory of Environ- 
mental Biophysics, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
Liver mitochondria were exposed in vitro at 30?C to micro- 
wave radiation (2.45 GHz) during the various states of res- 
piration (resting, state 1; substrate-dependent, state 2; ADP- 
stimulated, state 3; and ADP-depleted, state 4). At 10 or 100 
mW/g, with succinate as substrate, no effect was observed on 
the resting, respiration rates, 2, 3, or 4, or the respiratory 
control ratio (state 3/state 4). With glutamate as substrate, no 
effects occurred at 10 mW/g, however, 100 mW/g caused an 
increase in respiration states 2 and 4 and a decrease in the 
respiratory control ratio. In addition the influence of micro- 
wave exposure on the in vitro response of mitochondria to 
endotoxin was determined. Mitochondria were simultane- 
ously exposed to comparable levels of microwave radiation 
and to endotoxin concentrations which caused a 50% reduction 
in ADP stimulated respiration (state 3). State 2, 3 and 4 
respiratory rates were determined 5 min post treatment. At 
SAR's of 10 and 100 mW/g there was a potentiation of the 
endotoxin actions on the mitochondria which was exhibited by 
a complete rather than a 50% inhibition of state 3 respiration. 
 
The results demonstrate that high levels (100 mW/g) of 
microwave radiation can affect certain aspects of mitochon- 
drial function in the absence of measurable thermal gradi- 
ents. In addition, levels of microwave radiation at an SAR as 
low as 10 mW/g, can act as a potentiators of biological stres- 
sors such as endotoxin. 
 
Latent Effects of Microwave Radiation in 
Japanese Quail Exposed during Embryo- 
geny. D. I. McREE, M. J. GALVIN and J. P. THAX- 
TON, Laboratory of Environmental Biophysics, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sci- 
ences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Fertile Japanese quail eggs were exposed to 2.45 GHz CW 
microwave radiation for the first 12 days of embryogeny to an 
incident power density of 5 mW/cm2 (SAR = 4.03 mW/g). The 
 
289 
 
exposed and nonexposed chicks were 6 or 12 weeks of age for 
the hematological studies and 6, 12, or 22 weeks of age for the 
immunological studies. In the hematological studies, red blood 
cell (RBC) numbers, pack cell volumes (PCV), total hemoglo- 
bin levels, and mean cell volumes (MCV) were significantly 
greater in the exposed group for both the 6 and 12 old quail. 
Mean corpuscular hemoglobins and mean corpuscular hemo- 
globin concentrations were not changed. Hemorrhagic stress 
at 3-day intervals (3, 6 and 9 days) produced no effects differ- 
ent from that of the control quail. These results indicate that 
microwave exposure during embryogeny causes increased 
numbers of RBC in adult quail, but a normal erythropoietic 
ability following hemorrhage. 
 
In the immunological studies, the quail were evaluated for 
humoral immune responsiveness to chuker red blood cells, 
delayed hypersensitivity to phytohemagglutinin, and total 
and absolute circulating levels of leucocytes. All parameters 
were equivalent in exposed and nonexposed controls at 6- 
weeks of age. However, in 12- and 22-week old quail, delayed 
hypersensitivity was reduced in exposed females. These data 
show that exposure of Japanese quail during embryogenesis 
reduced cell mediated immune potential and induced a gen- 
eral leucocytosis in females. 
 
Ototoxicity of Cis-Dichlorodiammine Plati- 
num (II) in Guinea Pigs. TERUZO KONISHI, La- 
boratory of Environmental Biophysics, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709, and BHOLA N. 
GUPrA, Toxicology Research and Testing Program, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sci- 
ences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Effects of cis-dichlorodiammine platinum (II), an agent with 
potent antineoplastic activity, were studied in guinea pigs. 
With multiple treatment with daily dose of 1.5 mg/kg of cis- 
dichlorodiammine platinum, the cochlear microphonics were 
suppressed. Suppression of the cochlear microphonics was 
greater in the basal turn than in the third turn of the cochlea. 
There was a close correlation between loss of the cochlear hair 
cells and suppression of the cochlear microphonics. The endo- 
cochlear potential was decreased in the basal turn but re- 
mained unchanged in the upper turn of the cochlea. The 
sodium, potassium and chloride concentrations in both endo- 
lymph and perilymph were not affected. Slight and moderate 
congestion and regeneration of tubular epithelium of kidney 
were observed in treated guinea pigs. 
 
Electrochemical Profile for Potassium Ions 
across the Cochlear Hair-Cell Membranes of 
Normal and Noise-Exposed Guinea Pigs. T. 
KONISHI and A. N. SALT, Laboratory of Experi- 
mental Biophysics, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
The electrochemical driving force for movement of K+ ions 
across the hair cell membranes was determined in normal and 
noise-exposed guinea pigs. The measurement of the electrical 
potential and potentiometric determination of K+ activity 
difference across the cell membranes were accomplished with 
double-barreled K + -sensitive microelectrodes. The results 
suggested that the resting potential of hair cells was mainly 
generated by the K+ diffusion across the basolateral mem- 
 
branes and contact of the apical membranes of hair cells with 
K+ -rich endolymph served as a mechano-electric transducer. 
Although the cochlear microphonics recorded extracellularly 
were severely suppressed in guinea pigs exposed to noise at 
115 dBA for 7 days, the electrochemical profile for K+ across 
the cell membranes of serviving hair cells did not show 
marked changes. The ratio of intracellular ac receptor poten- 
tial to extracellular cochlear microphonics was much greater 
in surviving hair cells of noise exposed guinea pigs. 
 
Identification of the Free Radicals Produced 
during the Photolysis of 4-tert-Butyl-3- 
methoxy-2,6-dinitrotoluene (Musk Ambrette). 
A. G. MOTrEN, C. F. CHIGNELL and R. P. MASON, 
Laboratory of Environmental Biophysics, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Musk ambrette, a common component of perfumes, soaps 
and some food flavorings, can cause cutaneous photosensitiza- 
tion reactions including photo-allergy. These may be mediated 
through free radicals formed during photolysis. When musk 
ambrette was photolyzed in basic methanol, two distinct nitro 
anion radicals were identified by electron spin resonance. One 
radical was centered on a nitro group in the plane of the 
aromatic ring, while the other was centered on a nitro group 
twisted out of the plane of the ring due to steric hindrance by 
bulky substituents on either side of the group; the two radicals 
appeared to interconvert and maintain an equilibrium con- 
centration ratio. Two closely related compounds which are also 
used in perfumes, but have not been reported to cause photo- 
sensitizing reactions, also produced free radicals during pho- 
tolysis. Musk xylene (2,4,6-trinitro-1,3-dimethyl-5-tert-bu- 
tylbenzene) generated two nitro anion radicals, both of which 
were centered on twisted nitro groups, while musk ketone 
(3,5-dinitro-2,6-dimethyl-4-tert-butylacetophenone) produced 
only one nitro anion radical which is also twisted. Although 
these nitroanion radicals are probably the first step in the 
photolysis of these nitroaromatic molecules it seems likely 
that they will undergo further reduction to produce more 
reactive species including nitroso compounds. 
 
Single Fiber Scheme for Measuring Physio- 
logical Membrane Motions, R. 0. COOK and C. 
W. HAMM, Laboratory of Environmental Biophy- 
sics, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The dimensions (- 100 Ri in width) and restricted access 
(cannot be approached perpendicularly) to the basilar mem- 
brane have long frustrated attempts to perform a frequency 
analysis at the primary auditory system transduction site. 
Newly developed optic fiber fusion and etch technology allows 
light traveling in several fibers to be efficiently coupled into a 
single small (40-120 ,um) fiber. This development, coupled 
with the fact that light can be forced to exit a fiber at 900 by 
cleaving the fiber at 450 and sputtering a reflective gold 
coating on the cleaved face, suggested that useful measures of 
membrane motion might be obtained by directing light from a 
single 50 ,um fiber onto the vibrating membrane and measur- 
ing the differently reflected light at a photosensor. Even when 
extremely bright (2-200 W/cm2) electroluminescent sources 
are used as illuminators, the small fiber size (- 50 p.m) and 
low reflectivity (- 0.2%) of the basilar membrane result in 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
290 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
return of only - 10 - 7 W dc or less to the photosensor. By use 
of state-of-the-art electro-optic detection circuitry, < 1A/ \H4z 
resolution over a 20-kHz bandwidth has been demonstrated 
against reflective targets, and < 75 A/ N/Hiz from the third 
turn of the basilar membrane of a guinea pig cochlea. 
 
Influence of 17-n Estradiol on Hepatic Pro- 
tein Synthesis: Analysis by Two-Dimensional 
Gel Electrophoresis. CLAUDIA THOMPSON, OTE- 
LIA MCDANIEL and GEORGE W. LucIER, Labora- 
tory of Pharmacology, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
In an attempt to more precisely characterize estrogen influ- 
ences on hepatic function, we have employed two-dimensional 
gel electrophoresis to analyze the protein synthetic profile of 
liver cells. Our results have shown selective alterations in 
hepatic protein synthesis following estrogen treatment. In 
particular, several estrogen-dependent proteins (F1-F7) were 
observed in female liver. Following ovariectomy, the expres- 
sion of proteins F1-F5 and F7 were significantly reduced, 
whereas the expression of protein F6 was enhanced. Treat- 
ment of ovariectomized animals with either 17B-estradiol or 
the nonsteroidal estrogen DES was capable of partially re- 
storing the protein synthetic profile. Comparison of hepatic 
protein profiles between males and females revealed several 
sex-related differences. Proteins Ml-Ml0 were either not ex- 
pressed in females or were present in much lower amounts 
relative to total protein synthesis. Furthermore, proteins F2 
and F4 present in intact females were not observed in male 
liver cells. The general influence of either 170-estradiol or 
DES on male liver protein synthesis resulted in selective but 
marked suppressions of certain proteins (M1-M3 and M7- 
M10). Since estrogen receptors are present in both male and 
female livers, the results of our study suggest, in part, that 
modulation of protein synthesis for specific proteins could be 
mediated through a receptor mechanism. 
 
Studies on the Mechanism of 2,3,7,8-Tetra- 
chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin Toxicity: Nutrient 
Assimilation. CAROL M. SCHILLER, RAMSEY 
WALDEN and CHON R. SHOAF, Laboratory of Phar- 
macology, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a highly toxic 
contaminant of organochlorine herbicides, produces a starva- 
tion syndrome in laboratory animals. Seven days after TCDD 
treatment (52 p.g/kg, gavage) lipid assimilation is altered in 
adult Fisher rats. After a corn oil meal (1 mL gavage), large 
lipid droplets aggregate in the absorptive intestinal cells and 
remain longer than the lipid in control cells. Twenty-four 
hours later, small lipid droplets remain in the basal regions of 
the absorptive cells of the TCDD-treated rats. One week after 
TCDD treatment, the serum glucose levels were 1/2 to 1/3 of the 
control values, while serum triglyceride levels were 3 to 4 
times higher than the control values. Transport of amino acid 
and monosaccharide, as determined by in vitro active trans- 
port of radiolabeled leucine and 3-O-methylglucose by isolated 
intestinal rings, was not physiologically different in the con- 
trol and TCDD-treated rats. The time course, optimum con- 
centration and net rate of active transport of amino acid and 
 
monosaccharide were similar in both groups of rats. These 
results suggest that TCDD alters lipid assimilation and, possi- 
bly the conversion of lipid to carbohydrate. 
 
Protein Synthesis in Isolated Rat Intestinal 
Tip and Crypt Cells, DENNIS E. CHAPMAN, RAM- 
SEY WALDEN and CAROL M. SCHILLER. Laboratory 
of Pharmacology, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
The intestinal mucosa presents a cell line that is differenti- 
ating as it migrates from the crypt to the tip regions of the 
villus. The relative rates of net protein synthesis in these two 
cell types are investigted by differential radiolabeling, 3H- 
leucine-crypt and 14C-leucine-tip, in vitro. The radiolabeled 
proteins of the two cell types are mixed and separated by 
differential centrifugation into subcellular fractions (SCF), 
cell debris/nuclei, mitochondria, microsomes and supernate. 
When normalized to the 3H/14C ratio of the whole cell homoge- 
nate (WCH), the microsomes and mitochondria have ratios 
similar to the WCH, but the ratio of cell debris is higher, and 
that of the supernate lower. The SCF are then analyzed by 
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis to determine any re- 
lationship between molecular weight and relative SCF net 
protein synthesis in the tip and crypt cells. All SCF exhibit 
variable rates of net synthesis. The mitochondrial and super- 
natant fractions exhibit the greatest heterogeneity with re- 
spect to 3H/14C (crypt/tip) ratio. This result indicates evolu- 
tion of mitochondrial and soluble proteins as the crypt cell 
differentiates to tip. The supernate also exhibits a decreasing 
molecular weight to decreasing crypt/tip ratio correlation. The 
phenomenon of decreasing molecular weight correlating with 
decreasing rate of turnover, observed in liver cytosol in vivo 
pulse-chase experiments, is not a generalized one but varies 
with cell type and with differentiation. 
 
Effect of Butylated Hydroxyanisole (BHA) on 
Dose Response for Benzo(a)pyrene Metabo- 
lite-DNA Adducts in Mice. MARSHALL W. 
ANDERSON, CATHERINE M. WHITE, and PETER I. 
ADRIAENSSENS, Laboratory of Pharmacology, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The phenolic antioxidant, BHA, has been shown to be a 
potent inhibitor of the neoplastic effects of benzo(a)pyrene 
(BP) in mouse lung and forestomach. We previously showed 
that BHA treatment of mice inhibited BP metabolite-DNA 
adduct formation in the lung to the same degree that BP- 
induced pulmonary adenoma formation was inhibited. 
 
In this study the formation of BP metabolite-DNA adducts 
in lung, liver, and forestomach of control and BHA-treated (5 
mg/g diet) female A/HeJ mice was examined as a function of 
BP dose (PO) ranging from 2 to 1350 ,mole/kg. The major 
identified adduct in each tissue at each dose was the 713, 8a- 
dihydroxy-9a, 10a-epoxy-7,8,9,10-tetrahydro-BP (BPDEI)-de- 
oxyguanosine adduct. The 713,8ao-dihydroxy-9B,1013-epoxy- 
7,8,9,10-tetrahydro-BP (BPDEII)-deoxyguanosine adduct and 
a BP-phenol-oxide-DNA adduct were also observed. In un- 
treated animals, the dose-response curves for these adducts 
were sigmoidal in each tissue. In forestomach the dose-re- 
sponse curve for BPDE-DNA adducts levels in BHA-treated 
mice was parallel to the curve for control animals and, thus, 
 
291 
 
th,;e inhibition (45%) of adduct formation was independent of 
I$P dose. In contrast, BHA treatment diminished the curvili- 
near nature of the dose-response curves for BPDE adducts in 
lung and liver. The dose-response curves in lung and liver of 
treated animals were approximately linear. The inhibition in 
lung (70%) and liver (80%) was highest at a BP dose of 0.3 
mmole/kg. As BP dose approached zero, the inhibition of 
BPDE-DNA adduct formation decreased with BP dose and 
approached values of 40% (lung) and 55% (liver). These results 
suggest that BHA treatment will also inhibit the neoplastic 
effects of BP at environmentally relevant doses. 
 
Developmental Correlation between Rat Cy- 
tosolic Androgen Binding Protein and An- 
drogen-Inducible Microsomal Monooxy- 
genase Activity. R. C. RUMBAUGH, T. SLOOP, G. 
W. LUCIER and Z. McCoY, Laboratory of Pharma- 
cology, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
Previous investigations have demonstrated the presence in 
male rat hepatic cytosol of one or more proteins which bind 
both androgens and estrogens with high affinity. Further- 
more, this protein was shown to be regulated by a complex 
interaction of gonadal hormones. This hepatic steroid-binding 
protein may function as an androgen receptor whose ligands 
control its level with androgen-stimulating and estrogen- 
repressing receptor synthesis. Many hepatic microsomal, 
drug- and steroid-metabolizing enzymes are steroid-respon- 
sive in a manner analogous to the hepatic androgen-binding 
protein (ABP). The present study was designed to determine 
the functional role of hepatic ABP and whether its presence 
correlates with the presence of androgen-inducible micro- 
somal drug metabolism. Analysis of hepatic ABP was per- 
formed using 3H-5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) as the ligand in 
intact and hypophysectomized rats of both sexes. Hepatic 
cytosol from male rats prelabeled with DHT showed a time- 
dependent translocation of radioactivity to purified hepatic 
nuclei in a cell-free system. Hepatic ABP of male rats bound to 
columns of denatured DNA cellulose and was eluted by a salt 
gradient in three peaks. This DNA binding ability was absent 
in livers of female rats and reduced in livers of hypophysecto- 
mized rats. Hepatic ABP is absent in immature male and 
mature female rats. In hypophysectomized rats of either sex, 
the levels of hepatic ABP are greater than those of female rats 
but less than those of normal males. The presence of hepatic 
ABP correlated with the ability of androgen to induce hepatic 
microsomal ethylmorphine N-demethylase (EM). EM activity 
was high in males, low in females, and low in hypophysecto- 
mized animals. Ireatment of hypophysectomized animals with 
testosterone did not induce either hepatic ABP or EM de- 
methylase. Treatment of male rats with estradiol feminized 
levels of both hepatic ABP and EM. The results suggest that 
the presence of hepatic ABP coincides developmentally with 
androgen induction of microsomal mixed-function oxidase. 
The presence of an intact pituitary is required for expression 
of normal male levels of both hepatic ABP as well as EM 
demethylase. These observations are consistent with the con- 
cept that androgen action in the liver occurs through a recep- 
tor mechanism analogous to other steroid-responsive tissues. 
 
Characterization Studies of Renal Brush 
Border Membrane Vesicle Uptake of Lead. W. 
W. VICTERY and B. A. FOWLER, Laboratory of 
 
Pharmacology, National Institute of Environmen- 
tal Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
The mechanism by which lead (203Pb) is transported into 
renal proximal tubule cells was studied in vitro using rat 
kidney brush border membrane vesicles (BBMV). Incubation 
of BBMV with carrier lead over a concentration range of 0.05- 
100 ,M did not alter the fractional 203Pb uptake rate, indica- 
ting that 203Pb is primarily bound to high capacity sites. 
BBMV incubated with 203Pb showed greater retention of ra- 
dioactivity when washed with a buffer containing 1 mM Pb 
acetate in comparison with 1 mM LaCl2 or 1 mM mannitol. 
203Pb efflux studies conducted at various time points following 
incubation demonstrated that this effect occurred because the 
1 mM Pb wash reduced 203Pb release from BBMV. Studies 
conducted to distinguish between intravesicular uptake and 
membrane binding of 203Pb showed extensive membrane bind- 
ing. BBMV preloaded with 200 ,uMPb acetate also displayed 
only a 50% reduction in 203Pb uptake indicating uptake across 
the vesicle membranes against a concentration gradient. In 
addition, incubation of vesicles at 0?C significantly reduced 
203Pb to 50% of the value found at 25?C, thus demonstrating a 
temperature-sensitive component of the uptake process. These 
studies indicate extensive 203Pb membrane binding to BBMV 
but also the presence of an intravesicular uptake mechanism. 
 
Mechanisms Controlling Excretion of Ben- 
zo(a)pyrene and Its Metabolites by the South- 
ern Flounder, Paralichthys lethostigma. JOHN 
B. PRITCHARD, MARIAN E. FRECH and JOHN R. 
BEND, C. V. Whitney Laboratory, National Insti- 
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, St. Augus- 
tine, FL 32084. 
 
Marine teleosts extensively metabolize polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAH) via the cytochrome P-450 mixed-function 
oxidase system. In contrast to mammals, a much greater 
fraction, approximately 60%, of the metabolism of the model 
PAH, benzo(a)pyrene (BP), occurs at the benzo ring. Metabo- 
lism in this region of the molecule yields metabolites which 
have been shown to be toxic, i.e., carcinogenic, mutagenic. 
Following injection of 2.5 ?mole/kg radiolabeled BP, BP-7- 
phenol, BP-1-phenol, or BP-7,8-trans-dihydrodiol, the clear- 
ance of each compound exceeded the simultaneously measured 
glomerula-filtration rate, thus, demonstrated net tubular se- 
cretion. Clearance of label following BP-7,8-diol administra- 
tion exceeded that following the phenol metabolites by 10-fold 
and was more than 30 times the initial clearance after injec- 
tion of BP itself. Analysis of the urine by TLC and HPLC 
indicated that 90% of the urinary radioactivity was found in 
polar metabolites of the initial compound, predominantly glu- 
curonide and sulfate conjugates. Secretion was blocked by 
probenecid, the classical inhibitor of the organic anion trans- 
port system. Finally, it was shown that other organic anions, 
including the herbicide 2,4 D, were very effective inhibitors of 
the secretion of these PAH metabolites, suggesting that these 
"less toxic" anions might potentiate PAH toxicity by prolong- 
ing their retention and promoting bioconcentration. 
 
Proton-Coupled LrLysine Uptake by Renal 
Brush Border Membrane Vesicles From Mul- 
let (Mugil cephalus). SOON-Ho LEE and JOHN B. 
PRITCHARD, Whitney Laboratory, National Insti- 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
292 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, St. Augus- 
tine, FL 32084. 
 
The uptake of the basic amino acid, L-lysine, was studied in 
brush border membrane vesicles isolated from mullet kidney. 
The uptake of lysine was not significantly stimulated by a 
Na + gradient, and no overshoot was observed. However, when 
a proton gradient (pHo = 5.5; pHi = 8.3) was imposed across 
the membrane in the absence of Na+, a transient overshoot 
was produced. When the proton gradient was short circuited 
by the proton ionophore, carbonylcyanide p-fluoromethoxy- 
phenyl hydrazone, proton gradient dependent uptake of lysine 
was abolished. Kinetics of lysine uptake determined under 
equilibrium exchange conditions indicated that the Vmax in- 
creased as available protons increased (2.1 nmole/min/mg 
protein at pH 7.5 to 3.7 nmole/min/mg at pH 5.5), whereas the 
apparent Km (4.9 + 0.6 mM) was not altered appreciably. 
When membrane potential (inside negative) was manipulated 
by K+ diffusion via valinomycin, a similar (but smaller) 
stimulation of lysine uptake was observed. Furthermore, 
when the membrane potential and the proton gradient were 
imposed simultaneously, a much higher overshoot in lysine 
uptake was shown, and the uptake of lysine was approxi- 
mately the sum of the components measured separately. 
These results indicate that the uptake mechanism for basic 
amino acids is different from that of neutral or acidic amino 
acids and that the protonmotive force can provide the driving 
force for the uptake of L-lysine into the isolated brush border 
membrane vesicles. 
 
Bicarbonate-Gradient-Driven Sulfate Trans- 
port by Marine Teleost Renal Tubule Epithe- 
lial Membrane Vesicles. J. LARRY RENFRO, WIIu 
LIAM A. PARKINSON and JOHN B. PRITCHARD, C. V. 
Whitney Marine Research Laboratory, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, St. 
Augustine, FL 32084. 
 
An inside > outside, 25 mM HCO3- gradient stimulates 
S042- uptake into membrane vesicle preparations predomi- 
nantly enriched in brush border membranes. At 5 S this 
gradient produced a five-fold "overshoot" in S042- uptake 
compared to equilibrium (10 min). The concentrative uptake 
was unaffected by short-circuiting with 2 Rg/mL valinomycin 
and 100 mM KCl on both sides. It was also uninfluenced by an 
inside negative electrical potential generated by 100 mM KCl 
gradient (in > out) in the presence of valinomycin. S042- 
efflux from these vesicles was stimulated by 25 mM HCO3 - in 
the incubation medium. Other anions stimulate S042- uptake 
in the following sequence: S042- > HC03- > SCN- > Cl-. 
HCO3- inhibits S042- self-exchange. HCO3- stimulation of 
S042- uptake can be inhibited by Hg2+, 4,4'-diisothiocyano- 
2,2'-disulfonic acid, stilbene and, partially, by probenicid. 
From a previous study we have identified a 2H + :SO42- sym- 
port process in basolateral membranes of the telecost kidney. 
The combined results suggest a tentative model of S042- 
secretion by renal tubules as follows: peritubular S042- is 
taken into the cells by 2H+:SO42- driven by an H+ electro- 
chemical gradient. S042- exits the cell across the brush 
border in a neutral exchange with lumenal HCO3 -. The latter 
seems to be an anion-exchange mechanism. 
 
Metabolism of Xenobiotics by Clara and 
Type II Cells Isolated From Rabbit Lung. T. 
 
R. DEVEREUX, R. M. PHILPOT, J. D. DILIBERTO, J. 
R. BEND, B. R. SMITH and J. R. FOUTS, Laboratory 
of Pharmacology, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
Freshly isolated cell fractions containing 80-90% alveolar 
type II or 50-70% Clara cells were obtained by proteolytic 
digestion of lung followed by centrifugal elutriation and Per- 
coll density gradient separation of cells. Clara cells metabo- 
lized 7-ethoxycoumarin (7-Ec) to umbelliferone at a rate of 180 
pmole/mg protein/min, while the 7-Ec deethylation rate in 
type II cells was 83 pmole/mg/min. Benzo(a)pyrene hydroxy- 
lase and epoxide activities were also higher (3-5 times) in 
Clara cells than in Type II cells. Coumarin hydroxylase activ- 
ity seemed to be specifically localized in the Clara cell-rich 
fractions. However, glutathione transferase (benzo(a)pyrene 
4,5-oxide as substrate) was about the same in the two cell 
types. Experiments conducted to examine electron transport 
in xenobiotic metabolism revealed qualitative as well as quan- 
titative differences between the Clara and Type II cells. Anti- 
bodies to cytochrome P-450 reductase and cytochrome P-450 
form 2 inhibited 7-Ec deethylation in Clara cell microsomes 
by only about 50-60%. These experiments indicated that cyto- 
chrome b5 may be involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics in 
Clara cells to a greater extent than in Type II cells. Also, there 
may be another (other) cytochrome P-450 isozyme(s) present 
in Clara cells which has not been identified previously in 
rabbit lung. 
 
Stereoselectivity and Regioselectivity of Rat 
Liver Glutathione Transferases with Styrene 
7,8-Oxide (SO) as Substrate. C. HARRIS, A. BHA- 
TIA, B. YAGEN and J. R. BEND, Laboratory of Phar- 
macology, and 0. HERNANDEZ, Laboratory of En- 
vironmental Chemistry, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Rat hepatic glutathione transferases (GT) were studied for 
their stereoselectivity and regioselectivity in the enzymatic 
reaction of glutathione with radiolabeled (R)-SO and (S)-SO. 
Stereoselectivity was determined for GT forms AA, B, C, D 
and E. Apparent Km values for (S)-SO varied over a wide 
range (4.8-29.1 mM) and appeared to increase with the isoelec- 
tric point of the enzyme used while (R)-SO values were much 
less variable (0.8-2.6 mM) and showed no patterns of increase. 
Km values were higher for the (S)-SO enantiomer for each of 
the enzymes relative to the (R)-SO. Determination of the 
parameter kcat also showed that the (S)-SO was higher than 
(R)-SO for each GT tested. At (R, S)-SO concentrations of 0.1 
and 1.0 mM, the (R)-SO enantiomer was preferentially con- 
verted to the benzylthioether product (1-phenyl-2-hydroxy- 
ethyl glutathione) relative to the nonenzymatic reactions. At 
these same concentrations the (S)-SO enantiomer was prefer- 
entially converted to the benzyl alcohol product (2-phenyl-2- 
hydroxyethyl glutathione). When the substrate concentration 
was raised to 10 mM SO, the (S)-SO showed a mixed prefer- 
ence for product formation, and the (R)-SO converted to show 
preference for benzyl alcohol product formation. Stereoselec- 
tivity of this class of enzymes for SO, determined by product 
formation, depended on the GT isozyme used, while the re- 
gioselectivity of the reaction is a function of the enantiomer 
and its concentration. Insights into the catalytic mechanisms 
for individual GTs, based on established epoxide chemistry, 
suggest that the rat hepatic GT enzymes are more involved in 
 
293 
 
catalysis than can be explained by a proximity effect or 
enhancement of thiol nucleophilicity. 
 
Biochemical Characterization Studies on the 
11,500 and 63,000 Dalton m3Pb-Binding Com- 
ponents of Rat Kidney Cytosol. P. MISTRY and 
B. A. FOWLER, Laboratory of Pharmacology, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Previous studies from this laboratory have demonstrated 
the presence of soluble 11,500 and 63,000 dalton 203Pb-bind- 
ing components in kidney and brain but not lung or liver of 
control rats. In the present investigations, saturation analysis 
of the whole cytosol and the two partially purified proteins 
disclosed an apparent dissociation constant Kd of approxi- 
mately 3 x 10-8 M for these components. The binding capac- 
ity was 43 pmole/mg cytosolic protein and 430 pmole/g kidney. 
Sucrose density gradient analysis (SDG) of the 63,000 dalton 
component disclosed a sedimentation coefficient of 4.6 S. Com- 
petition studies with other divalent cations on SDG showed a 
marked (40-80%) displacement by Cd2 + and Zn2 + and little or 
no displacement by La2 +, Cu2 +, Ca2 + and Mg2 +. Further- 
more, the displacement of bound 203Pb by Cd2 + and Zn2 + was 
greater with an increase in incubation time. The results of 
these studies indicate that the previously reported cytosolic 
Pb-binding proteins of rat kidney are saturable and possess a 
high affinity for Pb. In addition, the affinity may be altered by 
the presence of some divalent cations. 
 
Estrogenicity of Zearalenone Mycotoxins in 
Liver. C. MASTRI, W. POWELL-JONES and G. W. 
LUCIER, Laboratory of Pharmacology, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
This study investigates binding characteristics of three 
derivatives of the estrogenic mycotoxin zearalenone by compo- 
nents of liver cytosol. Cytosol from male and female rats 
contains similar amounts of specific estrogen receptors which 
sediment in the 8-9 S regions of 5-20% sucrose gradients. In 
addition, male liver cytosol contains a second class of "Nonre- 
ceptor" estrogen-binding sites sedimenting in the 4-5 S region 
of sucrose gradients. Sedimentation analyses show that each 
of the mycotoxin derivatives (P-1496, P-1502 and P-1506) 
behave in an analogous manner to the synthetic estrogen 
DES, in that they compete effectively for 8 S receptor sites 
while they bind poorly to 4 S "Nonreceptor" sites. 
 
Relative binding affinities for receptor sites were deter- 
mined by competition studies. During a short (90 min) incuba- 
tion period the relative binding affinities of P-1496, P-1502 
and P-1506 for receptor sites were 30%, 17% and 12%, respec- 
tively, of that exhibited by estradiol-170. The relative binding 
affinity of estradiol-17B and P-1496 did not change as a 
function of time at 40C. However, the relative binding affini- 
ties of P-1502 and P-1560 decreased to 6.8% and 4.2%, respec- 
tively, during an extended (18 hr) incubation period at 4?C. 
Each derivative exhibited similar relative binding affinities 
towards liver and uterine receptors during the extended incu- 
bation period. Dissociation rate constants were obtained indi- 
rectly by measuring the rate of exchange of the unlabeled 
ligand with [3H]-estradiol at 25?C. Treatment of rats with 
zearalanol (P-1496) resulted in a pronounced increase in he- 
patic synthesis of circulating triglycerides associated with 
 
very low density lipoproteins. Moreover, zearalanol treatment 
affected protein synthesis in liver in a manner similar to 
estradiol, as assessed by two-dimensional electrophoresis and 
autoradiography of proteins newly synthesized by isolated 
hepatocytes. 
 
These studies show that the mycotoxin derivatives have the 
potential for modulating liver function through interaction 
with specific estrogen receptors. The estrogenic potential of 
the derivatives may depend upon the formation of a stable 
slowly dissociating ligand-receptor complex. 
 
Epidermal Cell Differentiation and Xeno- 
biotic Metabolism. R. J. POHL, M. W. COOMES, R. 
J. SPARKS and J. R. FOUTS, Laboratory of Pharma- 
cology, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
Epidermal basal cells differentiate into sebaceous cells and 
into the cells of the upper epidermis, which elaborate keratin 
(differentiated keratinocytes) and are eventually exfoliated 
from the stratum corneum. Sebaceous cells are readily identi- 
fied by their lipid inclusions, and may be separated into two 
types of different density (heavy and light). Basal (undifferen- 
tiated) cells are small in size and have a low protein/DNA 
ratio due to a paucity of cytoplasm. Differentiated keratinocy- 
tes are larger and have a higher protein/DNA ratio. We have 
found a relationship between stage of differentiation and 
metabolism of xenobiotics. Heavy sebaceous cells are more 
active in metabolism of xenobiotics than are light sebaceous 
cells, and differentiated keratinocytes are more active than 
undifferentiated basal cells. 
 
Characterization of an Oyster Cadmium- 
Binding Protein: Structural Studies. B. A. 
FOWLER, K. S. SQUIBB, and C. F. CHIGNELL, La- 
boratory of Pharmacology and Laboratory of En- 
vironmental Biophysics, National Institute of En- 
vironmental Health Sciences. Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
A soluble, low molecular weight (7,400 daltons) cadmium- 
binding protein (CdBP) has been isolated from cadmium- 
treated American oysters (Crassostrea virginica) and partially 
characterized. Unlike metallothionein, the predominant 
amino acids of CdBP are aspartic (12.9 mole-%) and glutamic 
(9.7 mole-%). Furthermore, the cysteine content of CdBP is 
only 7.6 mole-% as compared to 30 mole-% for metallothionein 
and CdBP contains the aromatic amino acids, phenylalanine 
(3.5 mole-%), tyrosine (2.6 mole-%) and tryptophan. Although 
isolated CdBP normally contains only one g-atom of Cd/mole 
of protein, the addition of excess CdC12 to the supernatant 
during isolation maximally increased the amount of bound Cd 
twofold. At pH 7.35, CdBP exhibits a positive circular dichroic 
band at 259 nm which is abolished at pH 3.0. This band has 
been attributed in metallothionein to an extrinsic Cotton 
effect originating from the Cd-sulfur bond. The circular di- 
chroism of CdBP in the 200-220 nm range indicates that 50% 
of the protein exists in a a-pleated sheet conformation while 
the remainder (-40%) is random. These data indicate that 
although the Cd-S metal-binding sites of this oyster CdBP 
appear similar to those present in metallothionein, the more 
ordered structure of CdBP and its lower metal-binding capac- 
ity provide further evidence that this protein is not a true 
metallothionein but represents a distinctly different class of 
low molecular weight Cd-binding proteins. 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
294 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
Research on Chlordecone (Kepone). CLIFFORD 
L. MITCHELL, Laboratory of Behavioral and Neu- 
rological Toxicology, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Over the last two years, the Laboratory of Behavioral and 
Neurological Ibxicology has developed a research program to 
study the neurobiological substrates for chlordecone neurotox- 
icity. Eventually, such information should be applicable to the 
study of other chemically related insecticides and to the devel- 
opment of effective therapeutic strategies for the organo- 
chlorine class of insecticides. Research in our laboratory has 
centered on three main themes: Tremor, neuroendocrine ef- 
fects, and the neurobehavioral consequences of exposure dur- 
ing development. The most prevalent neurotoxic effect ob- 
served in humans following exposure to chlordecone is tremor. 
We have found that this manifestation can be quantified in a 
rodent species. 
 
Pharmacological studies suggest that chlordecone may pro- 
duce tremor by affecting sites in the brain stem and/or spinal 
cord. Chlordecone and chemically related insecticides have 
been reported to have effects on endocrine function. Our 
research suggests that the estrogenic-like activity of chlorde- 
cone interferes with the function of the hypothalamo-pituitary 
system. Chlordecone has a weak affinity for central nervous 
system estrogen receptors and partially mimics the effects of 
estrogen in modulating serum levels of LH and prolactin. 
Chlordecone decreases pituitary enkephalin levels in a man- 
ner similar to estrogen. The estrogenic nature of chlordecone 
may be responsible for alterations in the ontogeny of the 
pituitary enkephalinergic system when exposure occurs dur- 
ing neuroendocrine differentiation. Chlordecone produces 
vaginal estrus with a time course similar to that of estrogen. 
However, chlordecone cannot substitute for estrogen in prim- 
ing behavioral receptivity and in fact reduces sexual behavior 
in steroid primed, ovariectomized females. 
 
Long-term functional alterations that may follow exposure 
to chlordecone during development have not been extensively 
evaluated. However, data generated in this laboratory have 
demonstrated that exposure to chlordecone during develop- 
ment affects several neurological functions having survival 
value for the organism. Reactivity and emotionality charac- 
terized by changes in startle responsiveness and serum steroid 
levels have been observed in chlordecone-exposed animals. 
Such changes may be responsible for subtle alterations in the 
ability of chlordecone-exposed animals to perform certain 
types of learned tasks. In addition, our research has demon- 
strated that neonatal exposure to chlordecone results in subtle 
long-term alterations in neurological functioning. Adult ani- 
mals exposed as neonates to chlordecone may appear rela- 
tively normal under some types of testing conditions, but 
underlying neurological deficits can be unmasked by various 
environmental conditions or stressors. Future studies will 
attempt to (1) determine the site(s) and mechanism(s) for 
chlordecone-induced tremor, (2) characterize in greater detail 
its effects on hypothalamo-pituitary function, and (3) examine 
the possible mechanism(s) by which chlordecone affects the 
development of neurobehavioral functioning. 
 
Quantification and Mechanism of Action of 
Chlordecone-Induced Temor in Rats. HUGH 
 
A. TILSON, JAMES M. GERHART, THOMAS J. WALSH 
 
and J. S. HONG, Laboratory of Behavioral and 
Neurological Toxicology, National Institute of En- 
 
vironmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709 
 
In humans, tremor is a frequent sign of exposure to insecti- 
cides and other environmental toxicants. Our laboratory has 
developed an animal model to study tremor using a prototypic 
organochlorine insecticide, chlordecone (Kepone). Male Fis- 
cher-344 rates were given chlordecone by intraperitoneal in- 
jection and tremor measured by a noninvasive technique 
utilizing a spectral analyzer. Tremor produced by chlordecone 
was found to be dose- and time-related and had a peak fre- 
quency of approximately 11.9 cycles/sec. The tremor produced 
by chlordecone could be differentiated from that produced by 
pharmacological tremorgens (harmine and oxotremorine) or 
an agent that produces stereotypic behavior (apomorphine). 
Pharmacological studies were then initiated to study the 
possible neurobiological substrate underlying chlordecone-in- 
duced tremor. Extrapyramidal systems (caudate and cerebel- 
lum) that control motor movement and posture did not appear 
to be necessary for the expression of chlordecone-induced 
tremor, while spinal and supraspinal pathways are required. 
Exposure to chlordecone appears to activate higher CNS proc- 
esses which may contribute to the manifestation of tremor. 
Serotonergic, gabaminergic, and cholinergic, but not catecho- 
laminergic, systems appear to contribute to chlordecone-in- 
duced tremor. Studies are now underway to define more pre- 
cisely the role that higher CNS processes may play in the 
control of this neurological manifestation. 
 
Estrogen-like Activity of Chlordecone on the 
Pituitary Enkephalin System of Rats. J. S. 
HONG, K. YOSHIKAWA and P. M. HUDSON, Labora- 
tory of Behavioral and Neurological Toxicology, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sci- 
ences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
It has been clearly demonstrated that chlordecone exerts 
estrogen-like effects on the reproductive system. However, the 
extent to which the estrogenic activity of this neurotoxicant 
may contribute to its central nervous system effects are not 
clear. The purpose of this study was to compare the estrogenic 
activity of chlordecone and estrogen on the rat hypothalamo- 
pituitary axis (HPA) by using the pituitary enkephalin sys- 
tem as a model. It was found that the enkephalin system of the 
anterior pituitary is regulated by circulating estrogen. Ovari- 
ectomy caused an increase in the pituitary content of 
enkephalin and this increase was prevented by estrogen treat- 
ment. Administration of estrogen reduced the pituitary con- 
tent of this peptide in intact male rats. Similarly, chlordecone 
treatment reduced the pituitary content of enkephalin in a 
manner identical to that of estrogen. A single injection of 
chlordecone (75 mg/kg, IP) caused a delayed decrease in the 
enkephalin level of the anterior lobe (but not the posterior 
lobe) of the pituitary. This effect of chlordecone was selective 
to male rats since the pituitary enkephalin level of females 
was not altered by such treatment. Levels of other pituitary 
hormones, such as ,B-endorphin or vasopressin, were not de- 
creased. Further studies revealed that the similarities be- 
tween chlordecone and estrogen could be extended to other 
pituitary hormones. For example, implantation of estrogen or 
of chlordecone to ovariectomized rats caused similar changes 
in serum prolactin and luteinizing hormone levels. Thus, this 
study demonstrates a clear estrogenlike action of chlordecone 
on the HPA. Moreover, due to the similarity of both estrogen 
and chlordecone to antidopaminergic agents in altering 
[met5]-enkephalin levels in both the pituitary and caudate 
 
295 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
nucleus, it is speculated that a dopaminergic mechanism may 
be responsible for their actions on enkephalin system. 
 
Neurobehavioral Consequences of Develop- 
mental Exposure to Chlordecone. C. F. MAC- 
TUTUS, H. A. TILSON, and K. L. UNGER, Labora- 
tory of Behavioral and Neurological Toxicology, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sci- 
ences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The developing organism is typically regarded as poten- 
tially more susceptible to xenobiotic compounds than the 
mature adult. The relative persistence of chlordecone in the 
environment and its detection in human milk suggests a 
continuing source of exposure for the developing human. The 
present study investigated the potential risk of developmental 
exposure to this organochlorine compound for appropriate 
maturation of behavioral and neural function. We have shown 
that neonatal exposure to chlordecone produces a toxicological 
syndrome in preweaning rats similar to that observed in 
exposed humans. Analogous measures in adulthood indicated 
little evidence for any residual effects, with the exception of a 
sex-dependent alteration in body weight. However, the use of 
pharmacological manipulations revealed that long-term al- 
terations were indeed present in adulthood. Collectively, these 
results indicate the persistence through adulthood of altera- 
tions in each component of the preweaning toxicological syn- 
drome. 
 
DNase I Hypersensitive Sites and Si Nucle- 
ase-Sensitive Sites in and around the Seminal 
Vesicle Secretion Gene IV in Nuclei from Cas- 
trate Rats and Rats Treated with Testoster- 
one. S. HARRIS and C. TENG, Laboratory of Repro- 
ductive and Developmental Toxicology, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The rodent seminal vesicle, one of the male sex accessory 
glands, is dependent upon androgens for maintenance of its 
structure and function. The secretory proteins and fluid of the 
seminal vesicle make up the bulk of semen. We have been 
working the past several years on two of these testosterone- 
dependent secretory proteins referred to as seminal vesicle 
secretion IV and V (SVS IV and SVS V). The genes for these 
proteins have been isolated from a k rat gene library by using 
radioactive probe derived from their respective messenger 
RNAs. The entire SVS IV gene (or more properly, "transcrip- 
tion unit") and some 5W-flanking and some 3'-flanking DNA 
have been completely sequenced. A region about 110 base 
pairs (bp) upstream (5') from the initiation site for transcrip- 
tion (CAP site) can potentially form a palindromic structure 
(inverted repeat) consisting of a 9 bp stem and a 7 base loop. It 
is DNA and RNA structures similar to these inverted repeats 
which have been shown to have high potential as specific 
binding sites for various regulatory macromolecules. The posi- 
tion of this palindromic structure ( - 110 bp from the CAP site) 
in the SVS IV gene has been shown in other eukaryotic gene 
system (- 50 to - 500 bp) to be of some importance in proper 
gene expression. A plasmid, referred to as pSVS 3.3, contains 
a 3.3 kb Eco RI fragment cloned into the Eco RI site of 
pBR325. On that 3.3 Kb Eco RI fragment are the entire 
transcription unit (1950 bp) for SVS IV precursor mRNA, 
about 150 bp of 5'-flanking, and 1200 bp of 3'-flanking, DNA. 
 
In the supercoiled plasmid of pSVS 3.3 conditions under which 
the DNA is under a state of B Z configurational change 
(stressed), the palindrome at - -110 bp upstream seems to 
form, as assayed by the loop becoming Si nuclease sensitive. 
We also present data on sites in chromatin structure which are 
Si nuclease-sensitive and DNase I-hypersensitive. These sites 
seem to vary whether the animal has seen testosterone or has 
been castrate for several weeks. The suggestion is various 
chromosomal proteins may specifically interact with struc- 
tures similar to the palindrome discussed above and alter the 
transcriptional properties of these genes whose expression is 
dependent upon androgens. 
 
Expression of V-ras Oncogene in a Primary 
Human Prostate Cell Line LnCap. D. CARTER, 
J. HOROSZWEICZ, and D. MICKEY, Laboratory of 
Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The risk of prostate cancer in man increases exponentially 
after age 60. Thus far the basic mechanism involved in the 
genesis of prostate cancer has not been elucidated. Recently it 
has been shown that human bladder carcinoma DNA trans- 
fers a gene homologous to the transforming gene of the Har- 
vey murine sarcoma virus oncogene, v-ras, in transfection 
experiments. 
 
We have investigated the expression of this gene or of a gene 
homologous to the v-ras gene in prostate carcinoma cell lines 
which were derived from primary and metastatic tumors. In 
addition we have investigated protein synthetic patterns in 
the cell lines. The protein spectra observed do not show the 
synthesis of major differentiated products. One of the cell lines 
is responsive to androgens however. The RNA from the andro- 
gen responsive cell line, LnCaP (primary tumor cell line) 
appears to contain hybridizing sequences for the v-ras probe. 
The RNA from benign hyperplastic tissue or the metastatic 
cell lines appeared to contain non-detectable levels of the v-ras 
sequences. It is apparent from the protein synthetic patterns 
that the cell lines differ in the spectra of gene products 
expressed. 
 
The detected expression of the v-ras gene in the LnCaP cell 
line may indicate a mechanism of transformation in common 
with the other urogenital cell lines already known to express 
this gene. 
 
Allelic Variation in the SVS IV Gene Result- 
ing from an Intronic Insertion. B. DICKSON 
and S. HARRIS, Laboratory of Reproductive and 
Developmental Toxicology, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The seminal vesicle secretion IV (SVS IV) gene in rats 
shows two variant patterns in restriction enzyme digests of 
genomic DNA. The variants differ by the presence of a 200 
base-pair insertion in certain restriction fragments, although 
no variation has been detected in the cDNA or the secretory 
protein. Phage clones for two forms of the gene have been 
recovered from a rat genomic library. Restriction maps of the 
various clones compared to the cDNA have localized the 
insertion to the second intron of the gene. The DNA sequence 
of the insertion is composed of 8-10 direct repeats of 20 base 
pairs. Two phage clones for the SVS IV gene were recovered 
from a single, plaque purified, hybridization signal using 32p- 
cDNA SVS IV as a probe. The clones differ only in the 
 
296 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
presence of the 200 base-pair insertion. Otherwise identical 
restriction maps and DNA sequence data indicate the shorter 
clone was derived from the longer clone by excision of the 200 
base-pair fragment. Ten inbred rat strains and a random bred 
population have been examined for the presence of these DNA 
variants. All the inbred strains were fixed for the variant 
containing the insertion. Heterozygous rats from the random 
bred population were crossed and the progeny showed segre- 
gation of the alleles in single gene Mendelian fashion. The 
repeated sequence insertion thus causes a stable allelic vari- 
ant in the SVS IV gene. 
 
Use of Human Embryonic Palatal Mesen- 
chyme Cells (HEPM) to Study the Effects of 
Environmental Chemicals on Cell Prolifera- 
tion. W. WILLIS, R. GROVE, and R. PRATT, Labora- 
tory of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicol- 
ogy, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Thiangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Testing for potential teratogenicity using the FDA-segment 
II protocol is expensive, time consuming and capable of han- 
dling only a small percentage of the environmental chemicals 
which need to be investigated. A rapid, sensitive and inexpen- 
sive means to prescreen potential teratogens, such as using 
embryonic cells in culture, is needed. The development of the 
mammalian secondary palate offers a number of developmen- 
tal events which could be used in such an assay. We have 
established a human embryonic palatal mesenchyme (HEPM) 
cell line and find that these cells represent the undifferenti- 
ated fibroblast-like cells from the palatal shelves. Their 
growth in culture is rapid and occurs well with added growth 
factors in the absence of serum. Potential teratogens are 
introduced at various concentrations one day after initial 
plating and the final cell number is determined after 3 
days of growth. The HEPM cells are extremely sensitive to 
teratogens which inhibit DNA synthesis or mitosis which 
results in reduced cell number. Teratogens such as glucocorti- 
coids, colchicine, or 5-fluorouracil inhibit growth in a dose- 
dependent manner. HEPM cells can be generated in large 
numbers at a minimal cost, and the endpoint (cell number) 
can be easily determined. These cells display unique sensitivi- 
ties of a number of human tissues or organs which are com- 
monly malformed including the lip, palate, limb and heart. If 
the HEPM cells are used in conjunction with Braun's tumor 
cell attachment assay for teratogens in order to detect those 
teratogens not screened by the tumor cell assay, this system 
may fulfill the requirements of a rapid, inexpensive screening 
assay for potential environmental teratogens. 
 
Growth and Differentiation of Secondary 
Palatal Epithelial Cells in Culture. R. I. GROVE 
and R. M. PRArr, Laboratory of Reproductive and 
Developmental Toxicology, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The role of the epithelium in the development of the second- 
ary palate is crucial, since it functions in the recognition, 
adhesion, and programmed cell death steps which result in the 
fusion of the apposing palatal shelves. Certain hormones and 
growth factors have been proposed to play a role in secondary 
palate development. In order to more easily investigate the 
morphological and biochemical effects of these hormones and 
 
growth factors on the palatal epithelium, we have developed 
conditions which permit growth and differentiation of mouse 
secondary palatal epithelial cells in vitro. In the presence of 
Ham's F-12: Dulbecco's modified Eagles medium (1:1) plus 
10% fetal bovine serum and epidermal growth factor (EGF, 20 
ng/mL), dissociated day 13 mouse palatal epithelia adhere to 
plastic culture dishes and begin to spread within 24 hr. By 
3-4 days, the cells differentiate into ciliated nasal epithelium 
and stratified, keratinized oral epithelium. The medial-edge 
epithelial cells appear to undergo terminal differentiation and 
cell death by day 4 of culture. Epithelia were also cultured in 
the presence of serum-free, hormone-supplemented medium 
which consists of Ham's F-12 plus insulin (10 [Lg/mL), transfer- 
rin (10 gg/mL), selenium (10 ng/mL), and EGF (20 ng/mL). In 
this defined medium, the epithelial cells differentiate nor- 
mally but growth is substantially reduced compared to epithe- 
lial cells cultured in serum containing medium. Our results 
have shown for the first time that growth and differentiation 
of the palatal epithelium can be studied in culture in the 
absence of the mesenchyme. EGF appears to be essential for 
palatal epithelial cell growth and differentiation in culture. 
 
Diethystilbestrol Metabolites and Analogs: 
Biochemical Probes for the Study of Differ- 
ential Uterine Estrogen Responses. K. S. 
KORACH and C. Fox-DAVIES, Laboratory of Repro- 
ductive and Developmental Toxicology, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Estrogen stimulation of the uterus elicits a spectrum of 
biochemical responses which are customarily linked together. 
DES and certain structural analogs, indenestrol A (IA), in- 
denestrol B (IB), indanestrol (I), and pseudo DES (PD) were 
used as probes to investigate various hormonal responses 
previously considered interrelated, most notably the events of 
DNA synthesis and mitosis. These compounds have been 
shown to have poor uterotrophic activity, except for I, they 
interact specifically with mouse uterine estrogen receptors 
(ER) with high affinity. All translocate stoichometrically simi- 
lar amounts of ER complex to the nucleus. During ER replen- 
ishment IA and IB cause recycling but no ER synthesis. PD 
showed a delayed recycling and synthesis some 10-12 hr after 
DES. Induction of mouse uterine G-6-PD by these compounds 
gave responses ranging from 80-185% control with the follow- 
ing pattern of relationship: I < PD < IA - IB S DES. 
Induction of cytosolic progesterone receptor (PR) was quanti- 
fied after stimulation with the analogs and gave a range of 
stimulation of 2-12 pmole/mg protein with the indenestrol 
compounds being most effective and showing this rank order: I 
< PD < DES < IA S IB. Stimulation of DNA synthesis by 
these compounds ranged from 100-150% control with the 
following rank order: I << PD z IA < IB << DES. Thymidine 
autoradiography indicated nuclear labeling was occuring pri- 
marily in luminal epithelium (LE). Uterine mitotic index was 
determined for the analogs using colchicine arrest. Hyperplas- 
tic effects were seen in LE with none in the stroma. The 
mitotic index ranged from 2/section for PD to 42/section for 
DES with the following order: PD << I << IB < IA < DES. 
Use of PD has indicated the stimulation of mitosis and DNA 
synthesis are not necessarily correlated as previously thought 
for hormone responses and may require two separate receptor 
interactions. Such a probe should be useful in studying the 
individual events involved in estrogen induced uterine 
growth. Secondly, these data indicate that induction of protein 
synthetic events as evidenced by ER, PR, and G-6-PD are not 
 
297 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
coupled as observed by the differential stimulation. Therefore, 
stimulation of certain uterine responses may depend on the 
particular ligand receptor complex formed and its interaction 
may be regulated by specificity at the genomic acceptor site. 
 
Potentiation of 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p- 
dioxin-Induced Prostatic Aryl Hydrocarbon 
Hydroxylase Activity by DNA Modifiers. I. P. 
LEE, Laboratory of Reproductive and Develop- 
mental Toxicology, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
Enzyme induction is one mechanism by which organisms 
respond to exposure to drugs and other environmental chemi- 
cals. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is known to 
alter gene expression in various tissues and is a useful model 
to study underlying biological mechanisms. We have previ- 
ously reported that aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase (AHH) in 
rats can be induced 200-fold by a single dose of TCDD. This 
paper reports the effects of DNA-modifying agents on the 
induction of prostatic AHH by TCDD. Male CD rats were 
pretreated with a single IP dose of either procarbazine (100 
mg/kg), busulfan (43.5 mg/kg), methyl methanesulfonate (90 
mg/kg) or triethylenemelamine (1.5 mg/kg) prior to a single 
oral dose of TCDD (10 pg/kg). Pretreatment with any of these 
agents potentiated the normally observed TCDD-induced 
AHH activity by approximately 5-fold (approximately 500 to 
1,000-fold that of controls). When pretreatment with any of 
these agents was not followed by TCDD administration, AHH 
activity was either inhibited or not significantly altered from 
that of controls. 
 
In order to elucidate possible mechanisms of actions, tran- 
scriptional activity of AH-structural gene was studied follow- 
ing treatment of animals with either TCDD or TCDD-plus 
DNA modifying agents. Cytochrome P1-450 mRNA was mea- 
sured by hybridization to a pAhP-2.9[32P]DNA probe which 
was derived from EcoR I digestion of pAhP-1, a 15.5K BP 
fragment of mouse cytochrome P1-450 structural gene. This 
2.9K BP fragment represents 5' region of the P1-450 gene, 
subcloned in pBR322. In prostate glands, 23S and 21S mRNA 
were found to hybridize with a pAhP-2.9[32P]DNA probe. 
Prostatic P1-450 mRNA levels 24 hr after either TCDD alone 
or TCDD-plus procarbazine were 18 and 30 times that of 
control, respectively, and thus reflected well the magnitude of 
AHH induction. 23 mRNA in control, TCDD and TCDD-plus 
procarbazine treated animals were 2-fold greater than that of 
21S mRNA. Because of extensive homology between the 21S 
mRNA and pAhP-2.9, as well as differential induction of the 
21S mRNA and P1-450 mRNA by TCDD or TCDD-plus procar- 
bazine, it is suggested that the 21S mRNA encodes an induc- 
ible P-450 protein other than P1-450. Further studies are 
needed to fully understand the mechanisms of potentiation of 
TCDD-induction of AHH activity by DNA modifying agents. 
 
Normal and Abnormal Development of the 
Rodent Embryo in Culture. E. H. GOULDING, L. 
D. MCNEW, E. L. PERRY, C. S. KIM and R. M. 
PRAlrr, Laboratory of Reproductive and Develop- 
mental Toxicology, National Institute of Environ- 
mental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
The culture of postimplantation rodent embryos in vitro 
offers several unique advantages in that it eliminates the 
 
complex interactions among the maternal-placental-embry- 
onic tissues and teratogenic agents can be tested in order to 
ascertain their ability to directly interfere with embryonic 
development. Techniques have now been refined so that 
growth and development of early cultured embryos compares 
quite favorably to growth in vivo. Presomite rat embryos (day 
9.5) or early (3-5) somite mouse embryos have been used for 
most of our studies on in vitro teratogenicity. Embryos were 
cultured for 48 hr in rat serum and then examined by a 
recently developed scoring system consisting of 17 morpholog- 
ical features which provide a quantitative estimation of em- 
bryonic growth and development. The steroidal alkaloid Jer- 
vine, found in various plants, produced a dose-responsive 
increase in forebrain malformations in the absence of overall 
growth retardation. Embryos exposed to the anticonvulsant 
valproic acid in vitro exhibited a statistically significant de- 
crease in all growth parameters as well as a high percentage 
of dysmorphogenesis of the neural tube (exencephaly). The 
synthetic glucocorticoid triamcinolone, a potent cleft palate 
inducer in vivo, produced a high percentage of cleft lip when 
exposed to day 10 mouse embryos for 48 hr in culture. In 
contrast, a high percentage of cardiac malformations were 
observed when day 8 embryos were treated for 48 hr in 
culture. Whole embryo culture offers an exciting approach in 
which to investigate numerous parameters of normal as well 
as abnormal embryonic development under highly controlled 
conditions. 
 
Differences in Peroxidase-Mediated Metabo- 
lism Among Structural Analogs of Diethyl- 
stilbestrol (DES). G. H. DEGEN and J. A. 
MCLACHLAN, Laboratory of Reproductive and De- 
velopmental Toxicology, National Institute of En- 
vironmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
DES has been shown to induce neoplastic transformation in 
Syrian hamster embryo fibroblasts in culture. DES is metabo- 
lized by these cells. The metabolic profile is consistent with 
peroxidase mediated oxidation found in estrogen target tissue. 
Structural analogs of DES have varying transforming capaci- 
ties in this cell system. To evaluate the role of metabolism in 
the carcinogenicity of DES, the peroxidase mediated metabo- 
lism of these analogs was studied. Thus, appropriate com- 
pounds (0.01 mM/0.1 mM) were incubated for 1 hr with 300 
mU horseradish-peroxidase and H202 (0.02 mM/0.33 mM) at 
pH 7.2. Extracts of incubations were analyzed by HPLC and, 
in some cases, HPLC/MS. Under these conditions DES, tetra- 
fluoro-DES, Z, Z-dienestrol and dimethylstilbestrol were enzy- 
matically oxidized (80, 87, 39, and 72% of parent compound 
converted). On the other hand, hexestrol, dimethoxy-DES, 
and E,E-dienestrol were not appreciably oxidized under the 
same incubation conditions (9, 5, 5%, respectively). These 
experiments clearly demonstrate differences in the metabo- 
lism among these DES analogs. It is noteworthy that those 
compounds which are extensively oxidized by peroxidase in 
vitro also transform Syrian hamster embryo fibroblasts, while 
those for which peroxidase-mediated oxidation could not be 
demonstrated, do not. 
 
Susceptibility of Testicular Tissues to Early 
Postnatal Treatment With Antineoplastic 
Agents. R. DIXON, R. BECHTER, M. MArrER, H. 
WEBER and R. ErrLIN, Laboratory of Reproductive 
 
298 
 
1982 NIEHS SCIENCE OPEN HOUSE POSTER SESSION 
 
and Developmental Toxicology, National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Unique susceptibility to chemical toxicity is critical to defin- 
ing hazards and analyzing risks. Testicular development, be- 
cause it involves both pre- and post-natal periods and includes 
the differentiation of various tissues, offers a number of poten- 
tial targets for chemicals capable of perturbing biological 
processes. Thus, we undertook to determine whether antican- 
cer agents, selected for their mechanisms of action, would 
produce differential toxic effects on spermatogenic (Sp), Ser- 
toli (S) and Leydig cells (L) if administered acutely on selected 
postnatal days. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were treated IP 
once with doses of anticancer drugs (cyclophosphamide-C, 
cytosine arabinoside-CA, vincristine-V, procarbazine-P or dox- 
orubicine-D) on postnatal day 6, 16, 24 or 45. Preliminary 
data indicate that: V (all four treatment days) and C (day 16, 
24, 45) delay puberty; C (16, 45); CA (16, 24, 45) and V (6) 
increase reabsorptions; V (45) reduces sperm counts; C (16) 
and V (16, 24, 45) cause sterility in some of the animals. 
Reduced epididymal weight is found with C (16, 24) and V (24, 
45). Histologic evaluations suggest an association between 
damage to a particular developing cell type and an observed 
dysfunction. 
 
Differential Regulation of Protein Synthesis 
by Estrogens in Component Tissues of the 
Reproductive Tract. V. E. QUARMBY and K. S. 
KORACH, Laboratory of Reproductive and Devel- 
opmental Toxicology, National Institute of Envi- 
ronmental Health Sciences, Research Iriangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
The rodent uterus contains three main tissue compart- 
ments: Epithelium, stroma, and myometrium. These tissues 
differ qualitatively and quantitatively in their responses to 
estrogen stimulation. Studies using the entire mouse uterus 
have shown that estrogens induce de novo protein synthesis in 
this target organ. In order to determine the influence of 
estrogen on the different uterine tissues the following proce- 
dure was used: Control and estrogen-stimulated uteri were 
incubated with 35S-methionine for 2 hr.; the three tissues were 
separated using nonenzymic procedures; proteins from the 
tissues and the incubation medium were analyzed individu- 
ally by one and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis; labeled 
proteins were visualized by fluorography and examined in two 
ways. Firstly, to determine hormonal influences on individual 
tissues, a comparison was made between protein patterns 
from control and estrogen treated preparations. Estrogen 
treatment enhanced synthesis of three proteins within the 
stroma (Molecular weight in kdaltons/isoelectric point) (30/ 
5.5; 32/5.5; 33/5.5), one epithelial protein (54/5.2), and a series 
of proteins in the incubation media (79/6.1; 79/6.2; 79/6.3; 62/ 
5.8). Estrogen treatment did not enhance specific protein 
synthesis in the myometrial fraction. Synthesis of several 
proteins within the epithelial, stromal, and myometrial prepa- 
rations appeared to be depressed by estrogen treatment. Sec- 
ondly, protein patterns from the various tissues were com- 
pared. This showed that the above mentioned proteins were 
predominantly found in certain tissue compartments. Pre- 
vious studies of estrogen-induced protein synthesis in whole 
mouse uterus have yielded conflicting results. However, using 
a tissue separation procedure we have shown that estrogen 
sensitive proteins are present. Furthermore, it appears that 
estrogens stimulate the synthesis of different intracellular 
 
proteins in each compartment. Several labeled proteins were 
found in the media, indicating that the uterus may also 
respond to estrogen stimulation by rapidly synthesizing and 
secreting certain proteins. Studies of the interrelationships 
between these intracellular and secreted proteins should en- 
hance our understanding of estrogen action in the component 
tissues of the uterus. 
 
Cell Culture Model for the Study of Diethyl- 
stilbestrol (DES) Carcinogenicity. A. WONG, J. 
C. BARRETT, and J. A. MCLACHLAN, Laboratory of 
Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, Na- 
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A normal diploid mammalian cell culture system was used 
as a model to study the carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, estro- 
genicity, and metabolism of DES. Syrian hamster embryo 
(SHE) fibroblasts treated with 0.1, 1.0 and 10 gg/mL of DES 
gave rise to morphologically transformed colonies at a fre- 
quency up to 0.3% of the surviving colonies. The transformed 
clones were isolated after 20 passages, injected into weanling 
hamsters, and became tumorigenic after a latency period of 6 
to 16 weeks. When SHE cells were treated with benzo(a)py- 
rene (BaP) at 1.0 and 10 gg/mL, colonies that were morpholog- 
ically transformed at a frequency up to 0.9%, were isolated 
and subsequently became tumorigenic. Although the DES and 
the BaP lines were morphologically indistinguishable in the 
transformation assay, a concomitant study of somatic muta- 
tion at the hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase 
and the Na+/K+ ATPase loci resulted in no induction of gene 
mutation with DES-treated cells, whereas induction was seen 
with BaP-treated cells. This in vitro transformation assay was 
used to evaluate other DES analogs and natural estrogens to 
elucidate the active structural metabolite which causes neo- 
plastic transformation. Tetrafluoro-DES, Z,Z-dienestrol and 
estradiol catechol transformed these cells, but hexestrol, di- 
methoxy DES, dimethyl-DES, and E,E-dienestrol did not. 
Under the transformation culture conditions, cell prolifera- 
tion was not enhanced by DES. In fact, DES was cytotoxic at 
10 jig/mL. Growth curves using submaximal concentrations of 
fetal calf sera also indicate that DES does not enhance SHE 
cell proliferation. Thus, these results suggest that, in this 
model system, DES and related compounds are carcinogenic 
without any enhanced growth promotion. 
 
Exposure of Diethylstilbestrol during Preg- 
nancy Permanently Alters the Ovary and 
Oviduct. R. R. NEWBOLD and J. A. McLACHLAN, 
Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental 
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
Tb determine the effects of transplacental exposure to dieth- 
ylstilbestrol (DES) on the ovary and oviduct of the CD-1 
mouse, timed pregnant mice were injected subcutaneously 
with DES (100 jg/kg) on days 9 through 16 of gestation and 
female offspring sacrificed from 4 weeks to 10 months of age. 
Following DES exposure, ovarian alterations such as inflam- 
mation, a prominant interstitial compartment composed of 
medullary tubulelike structures, intra- and para-ovarian 
cysts from mesonephric remnants, and changes in steroido- 
genesis were observed. In addition, there were oviductal ab- 
normalities including malformation. As reported previously, 
the oviduct was closely adherent and coiled around the ovary 
 
299 
 
300 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
in a similar position to that seen in the fetal mouse. This 
malformation was termed developmental arrest of the oviduct 
(DAO) and was a consistent finding in female offspring ex- 
posed prenatally to DES (100 jig/kg). Increased prevalence of 
salpingitis and microscopic alterations in the oviduct were 
also observed. Oviductal epithelium was mostly secretory type 
with basal vacuoles. In some cases, oviductal epithelium was 
hyperplastic and formed mucosal folds resembling glands 
which extended through the muscularis (diverticulosis). The 
extent of the adenomatous mucosal folds and the degree of 
extension through the muscularis increased with the age of 
 
the animal (100% at 10 mos.). Some characteristics of this 
abnormality resembled salpingitis isthmica nodosa, a lesion 
described in women which is associated with ectopic pregnan- 
cies and subfertility. Gross and microscopic changes in the 
oviduct were more consistent than were the changes among 
other portions of the reproductive tract of DES-treated mice 
previously reported. Since subfertility has been described in 
this mouse model as well as in prenatally DES-exposed 
women, the data presented in this report may help in evalua- 
tion of the reported reduced fertility in exposed patients as 
well as other infertility patients.