pmcVirol SinVirol Sin3534virosinVirologica Sinica1674-07691995-820XWuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of SciencesPMC13215961PMC13215961.113215961132159614182569310.1016/j.virs.2026.03.002S1995-820X(26)00037-41Research ArticleMetatranscriptomics uncovers host immune and microbiome signatures specific to and shared between human metapneumovirus and respiratory syncytial virus infections in children
ZhaoHongwei YinJu DongYingdong FengQianyu LiuHuifang HanShuaibing XieZhengdexiezhengde@bch.com.cn XuLilijustinexull26@163.com aBeijing Key Laboratory of Core Technologies for the Prevention and Treatment of Emerging Infectious Diseases in Children, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, National Key Discipline of Pediatrics (Capital Medical University), Beijing Research Center for Respiratory Infectious Diseases, Beijing Pediatric Research Institute, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing 100045, ChinabResearch Unit of Critical Infection in Children, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 2019RU016, Beijing 100045, ChinacDepartment of Respiratory, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing 100045, ChinadVision Medical Center for Infectious Diseases, Guangzhou 510300, China⁎Corresponding authors. xiezhengde@bch.com.cnjustinexull26@163.com1Hongwei Zhao, Ju Yin, and Yingdong Dong contributed equally to this work.
420261132026412514457276292272025632026110320262905202629052026© 2026 The Authors2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) is a prevalent respiratory virus in children with acute lower respiratory tract infections that is highly homologous with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), the primary etiological agent of pediatric upper and lower respiratory tract infections. Although hMPV and RSV are the only human pathogens within the Pneumoviridae family and share similar clinical manifestations, the mechanisms underlying their divergent pathogenicity remain poorly understood. In this study, we performed transcriptomic analysis on clinical respiratory samples collected between 2017 and 2019 from 61 children: including hMPV-infected, RSV-infected and healthy controls. This analysis revealed a shared upregulation of antiviral response pathways, including neutrophil activation and signaling mediated by interferons and interleukins. Conversely, cilium organization and assembly pathways were commonly downregulated in both infections. hMPV infection uniquely upregulated pathways associated with extracellular component activity, ion channel complexes, and neuroactive ligand‒receptor interactions. In contrast, pathways related to membrane rafts and membrane microdomains were uniquely downregulated in hMPV-infected patients. Analysis of differentially expressed immune-related and interferon-stimulated genes revealed significant hMPV-specific increases in EGF and FCGR1A, alongside decreased EPAS1 expression. The genes that were uniquely upregulated during hMPV infection were enriched in cytokine production regulation, cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, and PI3K/AKT signaling, whereas those that were uniquely downregulated involved the viral entry and endocytic vesicle pathways. Both hMPV infection and RSV infection significantly increased the proportions of M1 macrophages and neutrophils but decreased the proportions of M0 and M2 macrophages. Notably, hMPV infection resulted in a significant increase in monocytes and activated NK cells coupled with a decrease in resting memory CD4+ T cells, compared with RSV infection. The results also revealed a significantly greater relative abundance of Prevotella salivae in the hMPV infection group, whereas Streptococcus salivarius and Streptococcus mitis were enriched in the RSV group. These distinct immune and microbial signatures provide novel insights into the pathogenesis of pediatric hMPV and RSV infections.

## Highlights
•Comparative transcriptomic analysis characterized shared and virus-specific host response to hMPV and RSV infection.
•Extracellular component activity and ion channel complex interactions play significant roles in hMPV pathogenesis.
•hMPV recruits monocytes and NK cells, upregulates EGF and FCGR1A, and increases Prevotella salivae in the microbiome.

## Keywords
Human metapneumovirus (hMPV)Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)Host immune profileMicrobiomepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Human metapneumovirus (hMPV), which was discovered in 2001, has been frequently found to be associated with respiratory tract illnesses among infants and children worldwide and usually causes mild and self-limiting infections ( ). Almost all children are infected by hMPV before they reach five years of age, and adults can be reinfected throughout their lives ( ). Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) was first isolated in 1955 in the United States; it causes more than 30 million lower respiratory tract illnesses per year worldwide and is a leading cause of infant pneumonia mortality ( ). Both RSV and hMPV are single-stranded negative-sense RNA viruses belonging to the Pneumoviridae taxon, which was reclassified in 2017 as a family with two genera, Orthopneumovirus and Metapneumovirus ( ). The RNA genomes of both viruses encode N (nucleocapsid), P (phosphoprotein), M (matrix), F (fusion), M2 (matrix 2), SH (small hydrophobic), G (glycoprotein) and L (large) proteins ( ). However, the RSV genome also includes the NS1 and NS2 genes, which encode two nonstructural proteins, and the genomes of hMPV and RSV also differ in the order of the F, M2, SH and G genes ( ).
Despite the similarities between hMPV and RSV in terms of both genomic characteristics and clinical expression, the immune response triggered by the two viruses is different, and the mechanisms by which hMPV escapes host immune surveillance are still unclear. A lack of knowledge still exists with respect to the differences in gene interaction networks between the two viruses and their hosts and the different cell-signaling pathways associated with interactomes ( ; ; ). Metatranscriptomics is a powerful method that describes the specific transcriptome response to viral infection and characterizes active antiviral resistance genes to reveal the upregulation of the host innate immune system, interferon signaling, and antiviral response during viral infection ( ). There are currently few studies on host expression profiles for hMPV and RSV infection, and most of these studies are limited to systemic transcriptional profiles in peripheral blood cells ( ; ). These comparisons are unable to reflect immune cell composition changes in the respiratory tract, which is directly infected by viruses. Moreover, few studies have focused on the different host responses in the respiratory tract after hMPV and RSV infection ( ). Therefore, analysis of the transcriptome of respiratory samples has the potential to provide valuable insights into the infection mechanism of these two viruses.
Here, we applied transcriptome sequencing to profile the transcriptome and microbiome of respiratory samples from pediatric patients infected with hMPV, RSV and nonrespiratory infections. Shared and virus-specific host response characteristics to hMPV and RSV infection were identified. In addition, we analyzed the active microbiome and identified specific biomarkers of different groups. Host-microbe network interference was performed to explore the relationship between the host immune response and microorganisms during virus infection.

## Results

## Host gene expression profiles of the hMPV, RSV, and control groups
We processed 61 sputum samples collected from hMPV-positive children (n = 21), RSV-positive children (n = 25) and healthy children (n = 15) according to the previously mentioned enrollment criteria. The demographic and clinical data of the patients are shown in . To confirm the infection status and assess the viral load in our sequenced samples, we aligned the non-host reads to reference genomes of hMPV and RSV. In the hMPV group, reads mapping to hMPV constituted an average of 7.29% (SD = 18.25%) of the total non-host reads. In the RSV group, reads mapping to RSV represented an average of 20.49% (SD = 25.54%) of non-host reads. These results confirm the presence of substantial viral RNA in the respective groups and support the subsequent host-focused analyses. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) and volcano plots of the genes expressed at the global level revealed that patients with different viral infections presented distinct transcriptional signatures ( A and B). PCoA revealed greater heterogeneity within the hMPV-infected group, whereas RSV-infected samples were more tightly clustered. 

## Identification of DEGs shared between the hMPV and RSV groups
RNA-seq revealed 4918 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with a |log2FC| of ≥ 2 and an adjusted P value of < 0.05 between the hMPV group and the healthy control group ( ). Differential expression analysis revealed 3312 DEGs between the RSV group and the healthy control group ( ). To identify a statistically significant set of genes that were shared between patients with hMPV and those with RSV, we compared the two groups of DEGs ( ). A total of 2138 genes overlapped and were determined to have similar gene signatures between the hMPV and RSV groups ( A). Among these DEGs, 1250 genes were consistently up-regulated in both groups, and 885 were consistently down-regulated. These 2135 genes showing concordant expression trends were subsequently subjected to GO, KEGG, and Reactome pathway enrichment analyses ( B–D) to identify their related pathways. 
For the upregulated genes, GO analysis revealed significant enrichment in neutrophil activation, the neutrophil degranulation and the regulation of inflammatory response in biological processes (BPs); the secretory granule membrane and granules in cellular components (CCs); and receptor ligand and activator activity in molecular functions (MFs). KEGG analysis showed enrichment in cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions and with viral protein interaction pathway. Neutrophil degranulation, Formation of the cornified envelope, and Interferon (IFN) signaling were enriched in the Reactome database.
For the downregulated genes, GO analysis revealed enrichment of cilium activation in BPs, cytoplasmic regions and plasma membrane-bound cell projections in CCs and tubulin binding in MFs ( E). In the Reactome analysis, the enriched downregulated genes were associated mainly with the cilium assembly signaling pathway ( F).

## Identification of specific DEGs in the hMPV group
Differential gene analysis of the transcriptome responses of the hMPV infection group and RSV group was then conducted. A total of 3413 DEGs were identified between the hMPV and RSV groups ( ). The results revealed that 2054 DEGs overlapped between the hMPV and healthy control groups and between the hMPV and RSV groups ( A). These genes were referred to as the “hMPV signature”, which contained 1752 consistently overexpressed and 74 consistently downexpressed genes in both compared groups. 
All 1826 (1752 + 74) hMPV-specific DEGs were subjected to pathway enrichment analysis. For the upregulated genes, GO analysis revealed enrichment associated with extracellular component activity in BPs such as extracellular structure organization, extracellular matrix (ECM) organization, and modulation of chemical synaptic transmission. In CCs, differential expression was revealed in the synaptic membrane, transmembrane transporter complex, and ion channel complex. In MFs, genes associated with ion channel activity and metal ion transmembrane transport activity were screened ( B). KEGG analysis highlighted the involvement of calcium signaling pathway, focal adhesion, cell adhesion molecules, and ECM-receptor interactions. ( C). The significantly enriched annotations for the Reactome pathway analysis were related to the neuronal system, ECM organization, transmission across chemical synapses, L1CAM interactions, collagen formation, collagen biosynthesis and modifying enzymes ( D).
Based on GO enrichment analysis, the downregulated genes were significantly enriched in five distinct categories: cell-substrate junction, costamere, T-tubule, uropod, and cell trailing edge ( E). Additionally, Reactome analysis showed enrichment of RHO GTPase activate PAKs ( F), while no pathways were enriched in the KEGG databases.

## Differential expression of immune-related genes (IRGs) and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) during hMPV infection
To investigate the differences in host immune responses among the hMPV, RSV, and healthy control groups, IRGs and ISGs were screened. A total of 38 genes were significantly differentially expressed according to the heatmap and boxplot of differentially expressed IRGs and ISGs among the three groups ( A and B). Among the IRGs, HGF, TNFSF4 (P < 0.01), EGF and PDGFRB (P < 0.05) were markedly more highly expressed in the hMPV-infected group than in the RSV-infected and healthy control groups, whereas EGFR (P < 0.05) was significantly downregulated ( B, ). Among the ISGs, HLA-E (P < 0.001), BUB1 and FCGR1A (P < 0.01) and ENPP1, HPSE, UPP2, SLC16A1, ABCA9, and CYP1B1 (P < 0.05) were markedly more highly expressed in the hMPV-infected group than in the RSV-infected and healthy control groups, whereas SPSB1 (P < 0.001), CCDC92 (P < 0.01), CD74, SSPB3, EHD4, CD9, TRIM14, GALNT2, TRIM56, EPAS1, and LIPA (P < 0.05) were significantly downregulated ( B, ). Further validation by quantitative PCR (qPCR) revealed that the transcription levels of EGF and FCGR1A were significantly increased after hMPV infection in LLC-MK2 cells, whereas the EPAS1 level was decreased ( C). 
We subsequently performed pathway enrichment analysis of all the IRGs and ISGs specifically expressed after hMPV infection. The results revealed enrichment of distinct activation patterns in PI3K/AKT signaling, interferon‒gamma signaling, endocytic vesicles, coated vesicle membranes, receptor activator activity, and cytokine‒cytokine receptor interaction pathways between hMPV infection and RSV infection. ( A–C). Among them, hMPV-specific upregulated immune genes were enriched in cytokine production regulation (GO pathway) and cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions (KEGG analysis), whereas Reactome analysis revealed an association with PI3K/AKT signaling in cancer pathways ( D‒F). Conversely, GO analysis revealed that genes downregulated in the hMPV-infected groups compared with the RSV-infected groups were significantly enriched in viral entry-related biological processes and endocytic vesicle pathways ( G). Additionally, Reactome analysis indicated that these downregulated genes were significantly associated with the signaling by PTK6 and signaling by non-receptor tyrosine kinases pathways ( H). 

## Similar and specific immune cell infiltration in hMPV and RSV infections
We used CIBERSORT to estimate the proportions of 22 immune cell types associated with bulk gene expression in respiratory samples ( ). Compared with those in the RSV and control groups, the proportion of monocytes from the innate immune system was significantly greater in the hMPV-infected group; the proportions of monocytes from the adaptive immune system, activated NK cells, naïve CD4+ T cells, and follicular helper T cells were also significantly increased, but the proportion of resting memory CD4+ T cells was significantly lower.
We also found that the numbers of M1 macrophages, activated dendritic cells, and neutrophils simultaneously increased in both the hMPV- and RSV-infected groups compared with those in the healthy control group, whereas the numbers of M0 macrophages, M2 macrophages, and resting NK cells simultaneously decreased ( A and B). 

## Microbial diversity of the active microbiome among hMPV-infected patients, RSV-infected patients, and healthy controls
Next, we characterized the microbiome diversity of respiratory samples collected via RNA-seq. The alpha diversity calculations (Shannon, evenness and Simpson indices) revealed no significant differences among the hMPV, RSV, and healthy control groups, whereas the richness calculations (richness, ACE and Chao1 indices) revealed that the microbiota alpha diversity of the hMPV group was significantly greater than that of the healthy control and RSV groups ( A). There was no significant difference in alpha microbiome diversity between the healthy control and RSV groups. However, the total microbial composition (β-diversity) analysis revealed significant differences among the hMPV, RSV, and control groups ( B; P = 0.001; permutational multivariate analysis of variance [PERMANOVA] test). We utilized linear discriminant analysis (LDA) to investigate specific species within distinct groups. Prevotella salivae, Campylobacter concisus, Atopobium parvulum and Enterococcus faecalis were significantly enriched in the hMPV group, whereas Streptococcus salivarius and Streptococcus mitis were more prevalent in the RSV group ( C; LDA score > 3) The abundance of the significantly differently enriched microorganisms in the hMPV and RSV groups in each sample is shown in D. Streptococcus salivarius and Streptococcus mitis were significantly more abundant in the RSV group compared to the hMPV and control groups. In contrast, Enterococcus faecalis showed higher abundance in both the hMPV and control groups. 

## Interaction between the active respiratory tract microbiome and host gene expression
To better understand the relationships among hMPV, the microbiome in the upper respiratory tract, and the host response induced by diverse viral infections during infection, we examined host genes and species that were expressed and active in hMPV-infected clinical samples. We eliminated correlation scores above 0.3 and Padj values below 0.05. The results revealed complicated interactions (including correlations) between IRGs, ISGs, hMPV, and upper respiratory tract microorganisms, enabling the inference of gene-microbe connections within an integrated network. hMPV is strongly linked to numerous IRGs and ISGs, such as CYP1B1, HLA-E, FCGR1A, BUB1, HPSE, EGF, SLC16A1 and ABCA9. Intriguingly, three species significantly upregulated in the hMPV group, Prevotella salivae, Enterococcus faecalis, and Atopobium parvulum, were found to interact with hMPV directly via ABTB2 ( A). Because all these IRGs and ISGs showed significant changes in our transcriptome analysis, we hypothesized that hMPV may alter the microenvironment of the upper respiratory tract by altering the expression of immune genes in patients; otherwise, the presence of specific microbes colonizing the upper respiratory tract might affect the expression of specific immune genes to favor hMPV infection. In the context of RSV infection, Streptococcus salivarius and Streptococcus vestibularis, two species that were significantly increased, were found to interact with RSV indirectly via IL36G and DUSP5, respectively. Similarly, in the context of RSV infection ( B), network inference based on co-occurrence analysis revealed a distinct set of interactions among RSV, IRGs, and respiratory microbiome members. RSV (represented by both subtypes A and B) showed direct correlations with several host genes, such as IL23A, CXCL5, MET, CD274, OAS1, OAS3, and CEACAM1. Notably, two bacterial species significantly enriched in the RSV group showed distinct patterns: Streptococcus salivarius showed frequently direct link to RSV, whereas Streptococcus mitis appeared to interact with RSV indirectly through intermediary host genes: TGFB3, IL23A and RPL22. This pattern suggests that, as observed for hMPV, RSV may influence or be influenced by the respiratory microbiota via modulation of specific host immune pathways, rather than through direct microbe-virus contact. 

## Discussion
hMPV and RSV are the only human pathogens within the Pneumoviridae family; however, the mechanisms underlying their divergent pathogenicity remain poorly understood. Lamballerie et al. performed a comparative analysis of the transcriptomic signatures of infection among influenza virus, RSV and hMPV in a reconstituted airway epithelial (HAE) model in humans. Infection with all three viruses leads to several common features, such as the innate immune response or antiviral defense, and the evaluation of mucociliary clearance ( ). However, their characteristic differential gene expression profiles were not analyzed. Rouka et al. investigated the biological pathways associated with the host-RSVB and host-hMPV gene interaction networks via a bioinformatics approach. Eleven genes were identified as common members in the interaction networks of both viruses with the host. Nine of the eleven genes were enriched in the kit receptor pathway, followed by the growth hormone receptor signaling pathway ( ). However, these findings rely exclusively on in silico analysis and lack further experimental validation.
In this study, we identified 2138 DEGs in both the hMPV- and RSV-infected groups compared with the healthy control group. Most of these DEGs presented patterns of upregulation. These genes were subjected to pathway enrichment analysis, and the majority were enriched in antiviral response pathways such as neutrophil activation, IFN signaling, and cytokine and receptor activity. SARS-CoV-2 infection is associated with epithelial apoptosis and functional impairment characterized by surfactant loss and mucus hypersecretion, which ultimately compromise gas exchange and contribute to hypoxemia. Transcriptomic analyses of SARS-CoV-2–infected squamous epithelial cells show elevated ISG expression and enrichment in pathways such as “response to virus,” “response to type I interferon,” and “response to hypoxia” ( ; ). Similarly, in bronchial epithelial cells infected with rhinovirus A16, reported upregulation of transcription factors related to antiviral and inflammatory processes, viral sensing molecules, and epithelial remodeling genes, all of which correlated with viral load ( ). In influenza virus–infected mice, strong activation of type I/II interferon signaling and the NF-κB pathway was observed, along with increased expression of keratin genes such as Krt5, which has been linked to injury and repair processes following infection ( ). Consistent with these findings, transcriptomic studies of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) during respiratory viral infections also reveal enrichment of pro-inflammatory and antiviral pathways, including type I interferon responses ( ; ). Collectively, these studies suggest that diverse respiratory viruses trigger a common set of immune and inflammatory pathways. Although the magnitude of pathway activation may differ across viruses, direct comparative inference remains challenging due to methodological variations—such as differences in sample types, sequencing platforms, and analytical workflows. These observations underscore the need for future studies designed to systematically compare host responses across multiple respiratory pathogens, which would help distinguish shared antiviral mechanisms from virus-specific immunological signatures.
The downregulated genes in both the hMPV- and RSV-infected groups were enriched mainly in pathways related to cilium movement and the cytoplasm. The mucociliary clearance system builds the first line of defense against microbe infection in the respiratory tract by mechanical removal of pathogens through mucus secretion of the respiratory epithelium ( ; ). Bronchiolitis caused by hMPV and RSV infection is characterized by mucus plug formation in bronchiole lumens, which is partially due to loss of function of the mucociliary clearance system ( ; ; ). Dead or detached ciliated cells that accumulate in the lumen of conducting airway ducts can cause sloughing and shedding of apical airway epithelium cells (AECs), which can obstruct the lower airways in infected individuals ( ). In our study, no DEGs related to mucociliary movement were identified as hMPV-specific signatures. Geiser et al. used three-dimensional tissue cultures to compare the replication kinetics and cilia beating of RSV and hMPV infections and reported that hMPV was less pathogenic and replicated less efficiently than RSV in tissues infected with the same MOI of viruses. Moreover, hMPV does not block cilia beating and is more sensitive to IFNs ( ). These results suggest that cilium movement functions more in RSV infection than in hMPV infection. The lack of significant differences in cilia beating between the hMPV-infected group and the control group may be associated with the upregulation of ECM-reducing genes. Previous studies have demonstrated that the ECM contains regulatory components that are critical for the physiological activities of cilia and that reduced ECM levels may impair cilia motility ( ). However, the mechanisms underlying hMPV-mediated ECM regulation and its potential impacts on cilia function require further investigation.
Both hMPV and RSV share a similar genomic organization of structural proteins; however, RSV is distinguished by the presence of the NS1 and NS2 genes. These NS proteins are known to modify host type I and III interferon responses and inhibit apoptosis ( ; ; ; ; ). Previous studies have indicated that the deletion of NS genes reduces RSV replication in IFN-competent environments ( ), and that hMPV is inherently more sensitive to IFN pretreatments than RSV ( ).
In our study, we found that EGF and FCGR1 genes were specifically upregulated in the hMPV group. EGF, an epidermal growth factor, mediates its biological effects through the transmembrane protein EGF receptor (EGFR), which is necessary to restore respiratory barrier function after severe infections. ( ). Fiore-Gartland et al. reported a lower serum concentration of EGF in patients who required intensive care or hospitalization ( ). Another study on COVID-19 revealed a similar phenomenon: EGF gene expression levels increased depending on disease severity ( ). These findings indicate that EGF expression may increase in response to infection and lung damage to promote the barrier repair.
FCGR1A encodes a high-affinity Fc‒gamma receptor, commonly known as CD64, which plays an important role in the immune response. This receptor is mainly distributed on the surface of myeloid lineage cells, such as macrophages, monocytes, and dendritic cells (DCs), to provide the first line of recognition and defense against invading microorganisms. CD64 expression on the surface of neutrophils can be stimulated by bacterial components such as LPS, and its potential for accurately distinguishing bacterial and acute viral infections has been indicated in many studies ( , ). In our study, the high expression of FCGR1A is consistent with the increased monocyte infiltration observed. Similarly, Fjaertoft et al. evaluated CD64 expression on neutrophils and monocytes via flow cytometry in the peripheral blood of influenza virus-infected patients and healthy controls and reported that the proportion of CD64-positive neutrophils obtained from patients with influenza virus infections was increased ( ). In patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, high expression of CD64 is also observed on the membranes of neutrophils, with severe cases showing higher expression levels than mild cases ( ). This suggests that FCGR1A may serve as a marker for the distinct inflammatory response in hMPV infection. Conversely, the expression of EPAS1 was lower in the hMPV group compared to the control group. This gene encodes a transcription factor involved in the induction of oxygen-regulated genes, which is induced as oxygen levels decrease ( ). While EPAS1 is often upregulated during hypoxic conditions or severe lung injury, such as in fatal COVID-19 cases ( ), its downregulation in our hMPV cohort is intriguing. This suppression might reflect a specific viral interference with the host's hypoxic adaptation mechanisms or a dysregulation of metabolic homeostasis distinct from the typical hypoxic response seen in other respiratory infections. Although EPAS1 has been linked to ferroptosis in other contexts (e.g., carcinoma), its specific role as a downregulated host factor in hMPV infection remains a novel finding that warrants further investigation.
In the present study, enrichment analysis of downregulated IRGs and ISGs in the hMPV infection group compared with the RSV group was performed, which revealed viral entry into host cells and the clathrin-coated vesicle membrane pathway, whereas another group of genes that showed more pronounced expression in the hMPV group than in the RSV group were enriched in PI3K/AKT signaling. siRNA screening was performed in previous studies and revealed that the knockdown of genes involved in endocytosis, e.g., the β-matrix subunit of reticulin adapter complex 1, significantly inhibited RSV replication. RSV requires reticulin-mediated endocytosis rather than endosomal acidification to infect cells, and at neutral pH, RSV can drive syncytium formation and has been shown to have a pH-insensitive infection mechanism in Hep-2 cells ( ). In contrast, hMPV particles are internalized into human bronchial epithelial cells in a dynamin-dependent manner via molecular sieve-mediated endocytosis, and the low pH in the endocytosed body affects the efficiency of infection in host cells ( ). A bioinformatics study based on the Viruses STRING database (http://viruses.string-db.org/) revealed 9 hMPV-specific genes enriched in the activation of PKB, also known as AKT, which is considered the pivotal junction in the cell signaling of higher eukaryotes, downstream of growth factors, cytokines, and other cellular signals ( ). The NS proteins of RSV are capable of delaying host cell apoptosis by activating the PI3K/AKT pathway and inhibiting apoptosis by suppressing many proapoptotic proteins and activating antiapoptotic proteins, ultimately leading to the activation of prosurvival and proinflammatory genes dependent on NF-κB ( ). Another in vitro experiment also revealed that IC87114, an inhibitor of PI3Kδ, inhibited viral replication in PBECs. However, genes associated with this pathway did not significantly differ between the RSV group and the healthy control group in the present study, and the activation process of PKB during hMPV infection is independent of NS ( ). Different subtypes of RSV and hMPV elicit distinct immune responses ( ; ). As subtyping was not performed for either virus in the study, subsequent analyses utilizing samples infected with different subtypes are required for validation.
Whole-blood RNA transcriptional profiling revealed the upregulation of genes associated with inflammation and innate immunity and the downregulation of genes related to adaptive immunity in both hMPV- and RSV-infected young children compared with uninfected individuals ( ). The different cell populations between the infected and uninfected groups in our data were associated mainly with innate immunity, such as neutrophils and macrophages. Neutrophils release neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) in response to exogenous invading bacteria, viruses, or other pathogens ( ). NETs can capture and kill viruses, such as influenza viruses, COVID-19, rhinovirus and RSV, thus contributing to host defense ( ; ; ; ). During RSV infection, excessive infiltration of neutrophils and other granulocytes is a hallmark symptom of severe disease in children ( ). Although neutrophils may limit viral replication, this occurs at the cost of developing airway obstruction, which might lead to bronchiolitis. Another harmful effect of neutrophils in the context of infection is their ability to release large amounts of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in a process called an oxidative burst, which nonspecifically oxidizes biomolecules surrounding the cell. The proinflammatory milieu elicited by RSV is capable of promoting an oxidative burst in neutrophils in vitro ( ). Although NETs have not been reported in hMPV infection, a study performed in hMPV-infected mice revealed that neutrophils represented the highest percentage of the immune cells evaluated that were present in the lung infiltrate, peaking neutrophilic infiltration at 1 d.p.i. and decreasing over the course of infection ( ; ). The presence of neutrophils can be observed up to 25 d.p.i. ( ). Macrophages are among the first cells that protect the host against viral infection ( ). They represent one of the foremost and only sources of IFN-I in RSV, contributing to the establishment of an antiviral state in neighboring cells ( ). Depletion of macrophages leads to more severe disease in murine models and leads to airway obstruction, weight loss, and increased viral loads in the lungs ( ; ). In sharp contrast to RSV infection, macrophages seem to contribute to the pathogenesis caused by hMPV rather than protecting against infection. Studies in mice have demonstrated that macrophages reach the lungs at 3 d.p.i. and are present until 7 d.p.i. ( ), and when macrophages are depleted, hMPV infection causes a decrease in the weights and pathology scores of infected mice compared with those of nondepleted mice ( ). The detrimental role of macrophages might be explained by the secretion of IL-1, an important enhancer of inflammation in the lungs ( ). The secretion of IL-1β is able to generate an inflammatory response by itself, promotes the secretion of more proinflammatory cytokines, and plays no role in the clearance of the virus ( ).
Notably, hMPV infection significantly increased the number of activated NK cells compared with RSV infection. NK cells are innate lymphoid cells that mediate important antiviral responses as well as responses against bacteria and cancer cells. Little information exists concerning NK cells and their role in hMPV infection, and most reports present conflicting results ( ). Some studies have suggested that the lack of these cells does not affect the viral load, whereas others indicate that the viral load increases in their absence ( ; ). Wen et al. infected C57BL/6 mice with hMPV, and the number of lung NK cells in hMPV-infected animals increased significantly by Day 1 post infection and peaked on Day 3; however, the lung viral titers and histopathology of NK cell-depleted mice did not differ from those of control mice ( ). The mechanisms underlying the differential changes in monocyte and resting memory CD4+ T-cell populations between the hMPV- and RSV-infected groups observed in our study remain to be elucidated.
Several virus-specific immune cell populations were identified: such as elevated levels of monocytes, T cells CD4 naive, and NK cells for hMPV-infected patients; RSV-infected patients exhibited increased B cells naive and decreased T cells CD8. However, these alterations may be associated with the intergroup age disparity in our cohort, as the immune system may undergoes dynamic development stages across different age. Investigations with more comprehensive age coverage and larger sample sizes will be necessary to conduct more accurate analyses in the future.
The respiratory tract microbiome has been hypothesized to influence host immune responses to respiratory viral and bacterial infections ( ). Moreover, viral infection in the airway may promote bacterial pathogens by liberating nutrients, exposing adhesion molecules, inducing or enhancing bacterial virulence gene expression, and priming the host environment and immune responses to increase susceptibility to infection ( ). Here, we investigated the respiratory tract microbiome of hMPV- or RSV-infected individuals, together with that of healthy children. The results revealed that hMPV infection significantly increased the richness of Prevotella salivae, whereas Streptococcus salivarius and Streptococcus mitis were more prevalent in the RSV group. Bradley et al. reported that decreased abundance of Prevotella salivae species was strongly associated with the need for respiratory support in patients with COVID-19 infection ( ). An increased abundance of Prevotella salivae was protective against symptomatic infection from a close household member, highlighting a potential role for this organism in symptomatic respiratory virus infection ( ). Moreover, the relative abundance of Prevotella salivae was significantly greater in smokers than in nonsmokers ( ). Larsen et al. collected C57/BL mouse lungs after bacterial suspension inhalation to determine the association of P. salivae with lung health, as it is well tolerated in murine airways due to inducing limited neutrophilia and chemokine and cytokine production and provoking no detectable lung immunopathology ( ). In the present study, hMPV-infected children presented a relatively high abundance of Prevotella salivae, which has been shown to stimulate TLR2 ( ). The relationships among the abundance of bacteria, patient symptoms and the host immune response, whether harmful or beneficial during the course of a disease, still require more in-depth research. Similar to the analysis of immune cell populations, these differences may be attributed to the limited sample size and age disparities between the groups.
Several limitations of this study are noteworthy. Firstly, the inclusion of three pediatric cohorts of different ages may introduce variability due to differences in immune system maturation stages and respiratory tract colonizing flora. Secondly, the relatively small sample size limited the statistical power to detect significant differences between groups. Thirdly, the application of stringent criteria (|log2FC| ≥ 2, Padj < 0.05) prioritized high-confidence targets but may have excluded subtle functional changes. Thus, our findings highlight the most robust transcriptional alterations rather than the complete landscape of host responses. Fourthly, the use of sputum samples presents inherent constraints, including potential contamination by oral commensal microorganisms, a high proportion of host RNA, and limited representation of the lower respiratory tract. Fifthly, although CIBERSORT analysis using the blood-derived LM22 signature matrix has been widely employed in prior studies ( ; ; ; ; ), its application to sputum samples may not fully capture the tissue-specific immune landscape of the respiratory tract. Therefore, the results should be interpreted as reflecting broad compositional trends rather than absolute quantifications. Sixthly, while LLC-MK2 cells were selected for in vitro validation due to their high permissiveness to hMPV compared to standard human lines (e.g., A549), their rhesus monkey kidney origin may not fully recapitulate human respiratory physiology. Furthermore, in vivo models were not pursued in this study because they are often semi-permissive and lack physiological fidelity, particularly for hMPV, where findings across mouse strains have been inconsistent. Future corroboration using primary human airway epithelial cells, organoids, or advanced in vivo systems is therefore warranted to confirm these host-pathogen interactions. Lastly, although both hMPV and RSV can be classified into subgroups A and B, each with distinct pathogenic and immune profiles, we did not perform viral subtyping to compare differential gene expressions or related pathways across subgroups. As our study primarily focused on host transcriptional and microbial responses, viral reads were utilized solely to confirm infection status rather than for de novo genome assembly or detailed strain-level investigation. Consequently, the generalizability of the findings must be considered in light of these limitations.

## Conclusions
Overall, we performed a comparative transcriptomic study of the host response to hMPV and RSV infections in children and determined shared and virus-specific differences in the host response at the molecular level. This study highlights the significant roles of extracellular component activity, ion channel complex and host-microbiome interactions in hMPV pathogenesis. Additionally, hMPV infection preferentially recruits monocytes and activated NK cells to the respiratory tract and uniquely upregulates EGF and FCGR1A expression while increasing the abundance of Prevotella salivae.

## Materials and methods

## Subjects and clinical samples
Sputum samples (SPs) were collected from children diagnosed with pneumonia via the National Multicenter Pneumonia Pathogen Surveillance Program organized by Beijing Children's Hospital. Samples were collected in sterile, DNase/RNase-free containers and processed immediately upon receipt to minimize nucleic acid degradation and microbial overgrowth. Sputum samples were mixed with a dedicated liquefaction reagent. The reagent contained a combination of a chaotropic salt (e.g., 3–5 M Guanidine Thiocyanate), a detergent (e.g., 0.1%–0.5% SDS), and a reducing agent (e.g., 0.1%–3% N-Acetyl-l-cysteine or Dithiothreitol (DTT)) in a Tris-HCl buffer (pH∼7.5). The mixture was vortexed vigorously for 5 min to ensure complete homogenization. A total white blood cell count less than 12 × 109/L, a C-reactive protein concentration in the serum less than 20 mg/L, a procalcitonin concentration in the serum less than 0.5 ng/mL, and negative sputum culture were considered to rule out bacterial infection on the first routine blood test after admission ( ). For potentially virus-positive samples, nucleic acids were extracted using the NucliSens easyMAG system (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The Luminex xTAG respiratory viral panel (RVP) assay and Luminex 200 instrument (Luminex, Austin, TX) were used to detect common respiratory viral pathogens and subtypes in the nucleic acid samples, including hMPV, influenza A, influenza A subtype H1, influenza A subtype H3, 2009H1N1, influenza B, human adenoviruses (HAdVs), human parainfluenza virus (HPIV) 1–4, RSV A and B, enteroviruses and rhinoviruses (EVs/RhVs), human coronavirus (HCoV) HKU1, 229E, NL63 and OC43, and human bocavirus (HBoV). An internal positive control (MS2) was added into each specimen before the nucleic acid extraction, and a positive PCR control (Lambda DNA) was added in every PCR batch run, following the manufacturer's manual instruction. To establish a strict mono-infection cohort, patients with detected co-infections involving pathogens other than hMPV or RSV were excluded (Supplementary ). Other inclusion criteria were an age of less than 18 years and the presence of a parent or guardian capable of providing informed consent. The exclusion criteria included any underlying medical condition that required regular medical care, receipt of immunosuppressive medications, including corticosteroids, within the preceding 30 d or receipt of antibiotics within 7 d. Children hospitalized for selected surgeries (such as hypospadias or hydronephrosis) and those with no signs of infection were enrolled as the control group. Demographic and laboratory parameters were obtained for each enrolled patient.

## Metatranscriptomic sequencing and data processing
Based on the manufacturer's recommendations, 1 μL of sample was processed with Turbo DNase (Life Technologies, USA) to deplete the host DNA background. RNA was extracted via a QIAamp UCP pathogen minikit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), reverse transcribed, and amplified via an Ovation RNA-Seq system (NuGen, CA, USA). Following fragmentation, the library was constructed via the Ovation Ultralow system v2 (NuGen, CA, USA), and the sequencing was performed on an Ilumina NextSeq 550 system (75 bp single-end) ( ). The raw sequencing data were processed via fastp ( ) to remove reads containing adapters or ambiguous "N" nucleotides and low-quality reads (RNA-seq quality control metrics have been provided as Supplementary ). To identify and remove potential contaminants, we compared the relative abundance of taxa between background bronchoscope controls and BALF samples. Taxa were considered probable contaminants and excluded if they met both of the following criteria: (1) their median relative abundance was higher in the background controls than in the BALF samples; and (2) they were present in more than 50% of the negative controls with an average relative abundance exceeding 0.1%. All clean data were mapped to the human genome hg38 via HISAT2 ( ) with default parameters. Feature counts ( ) were used to quantify expression at the gene level. Read count normalization and differential expression analyses were performed via the DESeq2 package ( ) using “age” as the covariate. DEGs were determined based on an adjusted P value of < 0.05 and an absolute log fold change (log2 FC) of ≥ 2. The clusterProfiler package ( ) was used for gene ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), and Reactome pathway enrichment analyses of the DEGs. Benjamini‒Hochberg-adjusted P values of < 0.05 indicated significant enrichment. The immune-related gene (IRG) list was downloaded from the ImmPort database, and interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes (ISGs) were retrieved from the study of . Based on the gene expression profiles of the IRGs and ISGs, the Kruskal‒Wallis test was used to select genes with expression that was significantly different from that of the other two groups in the RSV group, and the results were visualized via the pheatmap package ( ). To infer the composition of immune cells, the CIBERSORT algorithm ( ; ) with the original CIBERSORT gene signature file LM22 and 1000 permutations was used to examine the relative proportions of 22 invasive immune cell types in each sample.

## Microbial taxonomy assignment and host‒microbial network interaction
Taxonomic assignment of the respiratory tract microbiome was performed via Kraken 2 v.2.0.7 ( ) (https://ccbjhu.edu/software/kraken2/) with the standard database (https://benlangmead.github.io/aws-indices/k2). The taxonomic relative abundance was calculated via Bracken (version 2.5). The alpha diversity was calculated via the Shannon index, richness, and the Chao1 and ACE estimators. For β diversity analysis, the principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) plot was generated based on Jensen‒Shannon divergence (JSD) ( ). A PERMANOVA was used to determine the overall community composition differences among the three groups (999 permutations). LefSE assessed the difference between each group's bacterial species and then a generalized linear model (GLM) was applied to test whether the abundance of each LEfSe-selected species was significantly associated with the infection group after adjusting for age (P < 0.2). These calculations and visualizations were implemented via the R package vegan ( ). To elucidate the microbial and host co-occurrence patterns, species with frequencies greater than 40% were retained for correlation calculations via the SparCC algorithm ( ). Only significant (P < 0.05) and robust (SparCC |r| > 0.3) correlations were retained for further co-occurrence network analyses. The networks were then visualized via Cytoscape ( ).

## Cells and viruses
Adult rhesus monkey kidney cells (LLC-MK2) (CCL-7) were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). The cells were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM; HyClone) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and 1% penicillin‒streptomycin solution (Gibco) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The hMPV clinical strain was isolated from a bronchoalveolar lavage fluid sample from a pediatric patient with pneumonia and subsequently serially passaged in LLC-MK2 cells to obtain a stable cell-adapted strain. The RSV-A2 strain (VR-1540) was obtained from ATCC. Viral titers were calculated as the 50% tissue culture infective dose (TCID50).

## Cell infections and qPCR
All in vitro infection experiments were performed with a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1. In vitro samples were collected at 24, 48, and 72 h postinfection; the cells were subsequently lysed with RLT buffer; and RNA was extracted via a Qiagen RNeasy Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). cDNA was reverse transcribed from RNA extracts (500 ng) via a PrimeScript one-step reverse transcriptase PCR (RT‒PCR) kit version 2 (TaKaRa, Japan). qPCR was carried out via TB Green premix Ex Taq (Tli RNase H Plus) (TaKaRa, Japan). The fold changes in the expression of the target genes in the infected samples were calculated via the threshold cycle (ΔΔCT) method and normalized to the ACTB (actin beta) mRNA level ( ). The experiment was conducted with three biological replicates. Statistics were performed with GraphPad Prism 8 software using unpaired t-test. P values of 0.05 (∗), 0.01 (∗∗), and 0.001 (∗∗∗) were considered significant. Bars in the figure panels show means and standard errors of the means (SEMs).

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 8 software (GraphPad Prism Software Inc., San Diego, CA) ( ) via an unpaired t-test. P values < 0.05 (∗), < 0.01 (∗∗), and < 0.001 (∗∗∗) were considered significant. The bars in the figure panels show the means and standard errors of the means (SEMs).

## Data availability
The meta-transcriptomic sequencing data were deposited in the Genome Warehouse of the National Genomics Data Center (National Genomics Data Center Members and Partners, 2021) under project PRJCA014022, which is publicly accessible at https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/.

## Ethics statement
This study was performed in strict accordance with the human subject protection guidance and was approved by the Ethical Review Committee of Beijing Children's Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from the participants' parents or guardians.

## Author contributions
Hongwei Zhao: data curation, formal analysis, investigation, writing-original draft. Ju Yin: resources, investigation. Yingdong Dong: formal analysis, investigation, writing-original draft. Qianyu Feng: data curation, formal analysis, investigation. Huifang Liu: software, validation. Shuaibing Han: formal analysis, investigation. Zhengde Xie: conceptualization, writing-review & editing. Lili Xu: funding acquisition, project administration, writing-review & editing, visualization.

## Conflict of interest
The authors have no potential conflicts of interest to declare. Prof. Zhengde Xie is editorial board member for Virologica Sinica and was not involved in the editorial review or the decision to publish this article.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Beijing Research Center for Respiratory Infectious Diseases Project (BJRID2025-008), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (5242007, L222076), the High-level Public Health Technical Talents Project by the Beijing Municipal Commission of Health (Key discipline personnel-02-05), the Reform and Development of the Beijing Municipal Health Commission, and the Respiratory Research Project of the National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases (HXZX-202106).
Peer review under the responsibility of editorial board of Virologica Sinica.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virs.2026.03.002.