822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1150363711503637115036373938021310.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00244Aggregation-Induced
Emission Luminogen: Role in Biopsy
for Precision Medicine
DuoYanhong HanLei YangYaoqiang WangZhifeng WangLirong ChenJingyi XiangZhongyuan YoonJuyoung LuoGuanghong TangBen Zhong †Department
of Radiation Oncology, Shenzhen People’s Hospital, The Second
Clinical Medical College, Jinan University, The First Affiliated Hospital, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518020, Guangdong China‡Department
of Laboratory Medicine, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410000, Hunan, China§Wyss
Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts 02138, United States∥Department
of Chemistry and Nanoscience, Ewha Womans
University, 52 Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03760, Korea⊥School
of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen Institute of Aggregate Science
and Technology, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172, Guangdong China#College of
Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Qingdao
Agricultural University, 700 Changcheng Road, Qingdao 266109, Shandong China∇State
Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China○Department
of Urology, Henan Provincial People’s Hospital, Zhengzhou University
People’s Hospital, Henan University
People’s Hospital, Zhengzhou, 450003, China*B.Z.T.:
email, tangbenz@cuhk.edu.cn.
*Y.D.: email, yanhongduo@g.harvard.edu.
*Z.X.: email, xiangzhongyuan@csu.edu.cn.
*G.L.: email, lgh0506@126.com.
*J.Y.: email, jyoon@ewha.ac.kr.
9102024124201124211242–1134726102024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Biopsy, including tissue and liquid biopsy, offers comprehensive
and real-time physiological and pathological information for disease
detection, diagnosis, and monitoring. Fluorescent probes are frequently
selected to obtain adequate information on pathological processes
in a rapid and minimally invasive manner based on their advantages
for biopsy. However, conventional fluorescent probes have been found
to show aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) properties, impeding greater
progresses in this area. Since the discovery of aggregation-induced
emission luminogen (AIEgen) have promoted rapid advancements in molecular
bionanomaterials owing to their unique properties, including high
quantum yield (QY) and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), etc. This review seeks to present the latest advances in AIEgen-based
biofluorescent probes for biopsy in real or artificial samples, and
also the key properties of these AIE probes. This review is divided
into: (i) tissue biopsy based on smart AIEgens, (ii) blood sample
biopsy based on smart AIEgens, (iii) urine sample biopsy based on
smart AIEgens, (iv) saliva sample biopsy based on smart AIEgens, (v)
biopsy of other liquid samples based on smart AIEgens, and (vi) perspectives
and conclusion. This review could provide additional guidance to motivate
interest and bolster more innovative ideas for further exploring the
applications of various smart AIEgens in precision medicine.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Apr 3; Accepted 2024 Sep 17; Revised 2024 Sep 11; Collection date 2024 Oct 23.

1.

## Introduction
Beyond accidents and natural
disasters, various diseases, including
neurodegenerative diseases (NDs), metabolic
diseases, immune disturbances, cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), orthopedic diseases, infections, mental disorders, rare diseases, cancer, and so on, contribute to high rates of mortality around
the world. These diseases, and especially chronic disorders, create
a heavy burden on individuals and societies and pose a serious threat
not only to individual and family life but also to social development. Under these circumstances, countless endeavors
from researchers and clinicians have been devoted to the fields of
diagnosis and therapeutics, aiming for early prevention and improved
treatment outcomes. Despite significant achievements that represent
a major leap toward expected outcomes, numerous obstacles persist
and several key questions remain unanswered, preventing the effective
clinical management of a plethora of clinical disorders. Currently,
the prevailing strategy in clinical trials within the field of precision
medicine involves the integration of prevention and therapeutics. , Therefore, diagnosis at an early stage is extremely important in
the journey from disease discovery to diagnosis, treatment, surveillance,
and ultimately cure.
Disease pathogenesis is usually accompanied
by the dysregulation
of various biological molecules and its biological properties of cells
and tissues that are associated with vital biological processes, including DNA, RNA (e.g., mRNA, miRNA, siRNA,
circRNA, ceRNA, lncRNA, and piRNA), lipid, carbohydrates, protein,
small molecules, cytokines, ions, and among others. These alterations
not only play a role in disease progression but also serve as diagnostic
and therapeutic targets, offering specific insights into disease mechanisms
and avenues for disease treatment and management. − Therefore, the precise detection
of these targets at an optimal limit of detection (LOD) with high
specificity and sensitivity is now necessary. Numerous novel technologies
have emerged for this purpose. These include magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), digitized radiography (DR), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), ultrasonic imaging (UI), digital
subtraction angiography (DSA), radionuclide
imaging, photothermal imaging (PTI), fluorescence imaging (FLI), Raman imaging (RI), photoacoustic
imaging (PAI), polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based methods, enzyme linked immunosorbent
assays (ELISAs), and so on. Other techniques
that evaluate various health-related parameters, such as the pressure-strain
loop, heartbeat/pulse rate, temperature, blood oxygen saturation,
and respiration rate, have also been developed and refined. , − Tools and techniques such as HPLC-MS, GC-MS, NMR, commercial ELISA kits, , and so on, are commonly
employed for the high-sensitivity and high-specificity analysis of
tissues and clinical samples. However, inadequate diagnostic targets,
methods, and tools contribute to poor clinical outcomes in a significant
population of patients. In addition, factors such as cost and convenience
remain significant considerations for clinical application. Therefore,
more effective strategies that provide optimal results while reducing
costs are urgently required.
To address these challenges, invasive
diagnostic techniques are
gradually being replaced by noninvasive and minimally invasive methods,
enabling cost reduction and minimizing the potential damage. These
noninvasive, minimally invasive, or invasive methods include biopsy
( ), , which can be divided into tissue biopsy and liquid biopsy according
to the type of samples and can also be further classified as needle
biopsy, endoscopic biopsy, surgical biopsy, skin biopsy, and bone
marrow biopsy according to the sampling method. Recently, many sophisticated
types of biopsies, such as MR/ultrasound fusion-guided biopsy, ultrasound-guided
biopsy, etc., − have been proposed to achieve even better diagnostic outcomes, leading
to great improvements in clinical trials. , Liquid biopsies, in particular, have revolutionized tissue biopsy-based
clinical diagnosis and surveillance. Liquid biopsies offer a slew
of advantages such as easy sample collection, the continuous surveillance
of multiple targets through repeated sampling, and low costs and can
be used to screen for treatment resistance. Biopsies of muscle tissues,
lymph nodes (LNs), blood (plasma and serum), sweat, saliva, urine,
stool, pancreatic fluid, pleural effusion, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),
ascitic fluid, bile, tear, earwax, nasal discharge, synovial effusion,
bone morrows, exhaled breath, etc., have been identified
and studied as part of both fundamental research and clinical trials.
These biopsies are used to test for diagnostic targets such as various
types of cells and biomolecules, including circulating tumor cells
(CTCs), cell free DNA (cfDNA) (including
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA)), − circulating cell-free RNA (cfRNA,
including small RNAs/miRNAs), − disease cell-derived extracellular
vesicles (EVs) and their inclusions (nucleic acids, proteins, lipid,
and so on), , including exosomes, tumor-educated platelets (TEPs), , circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA), metabolites, ions, gas molecules, and so on ( ). For biopsy, the key processes include
the isolation methods and analytic tools ( ). Advancements in technologies such as gene
sequencing, artificial intelligence (AI), − single-cell sequencing, and multiomics
technologies have enhanced the efficiency
and accuracy of biopsies in analytic process, facilitating improved
detection, monitoring, and treatment through precision medicine. Therefore,
biopsies serve as a crucial tool not only for detection and surveillance
but also for treatment and marker screening as part of precision medicine
approaches. − The global biopsy market, especially in China, holds immense potential,
demonstrating the significant impact of biopsy on healthcare improvement.
Therefore, the focus and endeavor in biopsy are still urgent.
 As mentioned previously, an ideal diagnostic method
should possess
characteristics such as ease of operation, affordability, a wide concentration
range, high specificity and sensitivity, a high signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), rapid response speed, superb accuracy, excellent anti-interference
capability, and applicability both in vitro and in vivo. Among the various currently available methods,
fluorescence-based diagnostics often appear to be the most suitable
choice due to their versatility and effectiveness across various conditions. − Many fluorescent dyes and probes have been used in diagnostics due
to their significant advantages, including good sensitivity, rapid
response speed, ease of operation, and inexpensive nature. These probes
have been useful in obtaining temporal and spatial information regarding
physiological alterations under pathological conditions. In addition, several commercial biopsy kits
based on fluorescent probes have also been introduced into the market.
Unfortunately, these conventional probes often exhibit aggregation-caused
quenching (ACQ) effects and are hindered by their intrinsic properties
of expected fluorescence efficiency and biocompatibility. As a result,
their application in disease detection is often hindered. Recently,
with the rapid development in interdisciplinary research, nanomaterial-based
medicines, better known as nanomedicines, have been developed. These
nanomedicines have offered great advantages in reversing ACQ effects,
thus promoting the improved application of conventional fluorescence
probes in basic research and clinical trials. Following the approval
of Doxil for treating various malignancies by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), immense attention has been dedicated to nanomedicine
development. This has revolutionized the diagnostic and therapeutic
landscape for a host of diseases, bringing hope to patients and clinicians
alike. Moreover, nanomedicines have created avenues for precision
diagnosis and treatment − as well as personalized medicine, , promoting improvements in human life and health. Although nanotechnology
has improved the application of traditional fluorescent dyes and probes
in disease biopsy, the ACQ effect remains an inevitable challenge.
Thus, there is a pressing need for more effective fluorescent probes
to achieve better diagnostic outcomes with the desired sensitivity
and specificity.
Fortunately, Prof. Ben Zhong Tang uncovered
a novel fluorophore
that exhibits an aggregation-induced emission (AIE) effect in 2001,
which is the opposite of the ACQ effect ( ). , AIE luminogen (AIEgen)
emits minimal or no light when in their individual molecular state
but emits substantial amounts of light in concentrated solution or
solid states. This unique phenomenon results from restricted intramolecular
motions (RIMs), including restricted intramolecular vibration (RIV)
and intramolecular rotation (RIR) that prevent radiative decay but
enhance nonradiative decay ( A–C), thus averting the ACQ effects caused by
detrimental π–π stacking within the confined spaces
of nanoparticles. Notably, the molecular
mechanism underlying the fluorescence emission of AIEgens is based
on D,E, where fluorescence, thermal deactivation transition,
and nonradiative intersystem crossing are generated due to the direct
radiative decay from S1 to the ground state (S0) after photoactivation,
according to Jablonski diagram. Accordingly, AIEgens show potential
for a range of different biological applications. Importantly, due to these properties, AIEgen possess several
advantages, such as large Stokes shifts, high photostability, high
SNR, high fluorescence yield (QY), lack of ACQ, broad emission range
from NIR-I to NIR-IIa and NIR-IIb, no concentration limit for diagnosis,
and excellent biocompatibility and biosafety. Today, AIEgens are widely
employed in fundamental research, clinical trials, and clinical settings
to improve the quality of life and health of human patients. − Key milestones in the development of AIEgens and their application
in life science and healthcare have been reviewed previously. Up to nowadays, clinical correlative data and
a plethora of preclinical studies in mouse and human models of various
diseases have shown that the great potential of AIE in biopsy that
numerous smart AIEgen-based diagnostic strategies with high aggregation-enhanced
diagnosis (AED) efficiency have been developed to date. , In addition, over 1000 AIEgens have been produced using chemical
synthesis methods or discovered from natural sources, leading to progress
in various scientific fields. , Among the different
kinds of AIEgens, tetraphenylethylene (TPE) stands out as one of the
most commonly used due to its ease of synthesis and functionalization
along with its excellent AIE properties. Moreover, a public online
database named ASBase for AIEgen entries has also been established, and it is continuously updated to make the
system more intelligent and add more detailed specifications. In addition,
many newly developed AIEgens have been employed for disease diagnosis
and detection. − However, due to the insolubility and nonspecificity of most AIEgen
probes, a rational design strategy tailored to specific purposes is
required. A brief design strategy that improves the efficiency of
disease biodetection based on an AIEgen is shown in . 
 Several studies have focused on AIEgen-based imaging
and diagnosis. , − For example, in 2020, Tang and colleagues penned a review regarding
the mechanism through which AIEgens can detect a plenty of biomarkers
of various diseases in biofluids such as urine, saliva, and sweat. Subsequently, an overview of enzyme-targeted
diagnosis based on AIEgens using biofluid samples was presented. More recently, Dokyoung Kim and collaborators
published a comprehensive summary of fluorescent probes, including
AIEgens, and their use in detecting disease biomarkers such as biothiols,
creatinine, biogenic amines, albumins, nucleotides, amino acids, enzymes,
carbohydrates, bilirubin, carbamides, neurotransmitters, and ions
in biological fluids such as blood (plasma and serum), saliva, urine,
sweat, CSF, synovial fluid, and so on. In another paper, Frank Biedermann and colleagues reviewed sensing
systems that offer optical detection for biomarker detection in biofluids
based on molecular probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors. Their review
concentrated on the various components of water and biological fluids. In addition, the development of immunoassays
have laid the foundation for the application of AIEgens as signaling
molecules, bolstering strategies for AIEgen-based diagnosis. Efforts are needed to explore and exploit the
potential of AIEgen nanotechnology in biopsy procedures to further
advance diagnostic capabilities and improve healthcare outcomes. However,
so far, there has been no comprehensive review providing broad insights
into the application of AIEgen nanotechnology in biopsy.
This
review seeks to provide a comprehensive overview of biopsies
conducted utilizing AIEgen-based strategies in real and/or artificial
samples, which have greater complexity than standardized solutions
and are thus more representative of clinical specimens ( ). This review of the literature
is organized into several subsections based on sample sources and
diagnostic targets. Tissue biopsy based on smart AIEgens is introduced
first, followed by blood sample biopsy based on smart AIEgens and
then urine sample biopsy based on smart AIEgens. Subsequentially,
the biopsy of saliva samples, sweat samples and other liquid samples
based on smart AIEgens is summarized and discussed. In each section,
the operation mechanisms, rational design, properties, and advantages
of the AIEgens are further elaborated based on their relevant applications.
Finally, the future prospects and expected hurdles in this field of
AIEgen-based biopsy are highlighted and deliberated. This review aims
to offer more nuanced understanding of AIEgens to promote their application
in clinical biopsy procedures. Further, it strives to inspire greater
interest and foster new and innovative ideas for the use of various
smart AIEgens across a broad range of biomedical applications in the
realm of precision medicine.
 
2.

## Tissue Biopsy Based on Smart AIEgens
Tissue biopsy, a common medical technique, has been adopted for
procuring and analyzing spatial and temporal pathological information
from cellular or tissue samples for over 1000 years. Tissue biopsy has been the gold standard for the diagnosis
of several diseases. Generally, procedure used for tissue biopsy is
simple, avoiding the need for complex surgical procedures to obtain
tissue samples. Therefore, tissue biopsy is often utilized for making
a definite diagnosis in combination with various tests such as next-generation
sequencing (NGS), polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunofluorescence
(IF) analysis, immunohistochemistry (IHC), LC-MS/MS, PET, and other
molecular technologies. , − Typically, tissue biopsies are collected through incisional or excisional
methods (core needle biopsy [CNA]) or fine needle aspiration (FNA).
In contemporary clinical trials, tissue biopsies remain the gold standard
for biomarker development, as the collection of solid tissues is frequently
warranted for patient stratification and for testing patient eligibility.
Notably, the diagnostic results of tissue biopsy depend upon both
the quantity of acquired tissues and the analytic methods applied.
Unfortunately, the sensitivity and specificity of current imaging
technologies is often insufficient to make a definitive diagnosis
clearly and precisely, and therefore, tissue samples must be acquired in vivo and excised samples must be subjected to sequential
analysis. To address this challenge, the combination of different
methods is commonly employed in the clinic. For instance, tissue biopsy
for tumor diagnosis can provide clear genetic and molecular information
in combination with other clinical tests, such as DNA/RNA/protein
sequencing and IHC. Nevertheless, even though these methods can help
in disease diagnosis, they cannot provide personalized pathological
information for precision therapy. Among the commonly used methods,
fluorescence staining is a simple and effective strategy in most cases
owing to its low costs, ease of operation, and rapid results. As mentioned previously, in contrast to conventional
dyes or probes and the invasive surgical procedures traditionally
associated with tissue biopsies, AIEgens exhibit great advantages
with respect to their good photostability, high QY and SNR, potential
for wash-free or equipment-free applications. − 
Meanwhile, as described in our previous literature, there is unique and definite name of diseases
arise from their parts of the body involved, etiology, pathology,
clinical manifestations, and so on. In this section, tissue biopsy
has been subclassified based on its application for specific diseases,
CVDs, tumors, NDs, orthopedic diseases, metabolic diseases, and inflammatory
diseases, based on the 11th edition of the WHO International Classification
of Diseases (ICD-11). Here, we summarize AIEgens use for tissue biopsy
across various fields of biomedicine.
2.1.

## Tissue Biopsy for Cardiovascular Diseases
Based on Smart AIEgens
CVDs is the primary and largest contributor
to mortality globally and also has a
high morbidity around the world. , It is estimated
that CVDs affects over 0.33 billion patients in China alone and is
responsible for around 40% of the total deaths in the country. The symptoms of CVDs are often not apparent
initially but subsequently appear in an abrupt manner, leading to
medical emergencies and serious harm. Importantly, several factors
have been identified to promote the development of CVDs, including
smoking, unhealthy diet, obesity, lack of exercise, and poor mental
state. However, the precise pathogenesis of CVDs is yet to be elucidated.
Therefore, early diagnosis and interventions are necessary to improve
the outcomes of CVDs. Currently, the group of CVDs includes a host
of disorders such as ischemic heart disease (IHD), rheumatic heart
disease, hemorrhagic stroke (HS), ischemic stroke (IS), hypertensive
heart disease, aortic aneurysm, myocarditis, and myocardial disease.
Currently, electrocardiograms, coronary CT scans, coronary arteriograms
and ultrasonic cardiograms are usually employed to diagnose CVDs.
Nevertheless, more detailed pathological diagnoses with a definite
confirmation are still needed. In this context, we aim to provide
a comprehensive summary of “turn-on” biopsy for CVDs
based on AIEgen technology in combination with pathological characteristics.
To perform high-quality fluorescence bioimaging-based biopsy of
atherosclerosis (ALS) with adequate brightness and photostability,
Ding et al.developed a series of novel AIEgen-based
probes with dicyanomethylene-substituted rhodamine, named TPE-T-RS,
TPET-RO, and TPE-T-RCN. A high yield was achieved while obtaining
these probes via the McMurry reaction, Suzuki–Miyaura
coupling reaction, and Knoevenagel condensation ( A). In these synthesized probes,
to achieve the skeleton for excellent AIE effect and electron-donating
unit (donor), the twisted methoxy-substituted TPE was selected. Meanwhile,
the electron-withdrawing units (acceptor) were gained using rhodamine
derivatives with different substituents (O, S, or dicyanomethylene
unit [CN]). Finally, the thiophene (T) localized between the donor
and acceptor served as the second donor and electronic π-conjugator
to generate intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) and extend the length
of conjunction. The obtained AIEgens owned D-π-A structure and could be applied for receiving the purpose
of the early detection of atherosclerotic plaques and the screening
of antiatherosclerosis drugs precisely, sensitively, and rapidly.
Among the three AIEgens of TPE-T-RS, TPET-RO, and TPE-T-RCN, TPE-T-RCN
exhibited the highest molar extinction coefficient (2.95 × 104 L/mol·cm), the best charge transfer ability, and the
largest PL QY (18.9%). It also showed the largest red-shift in the
absorption/emission spectra (emission peak at 652 nm) due to the CN
units, which exhibited an obvious emission redshift from 652 to 662
nm after encapsulation with DSPE-PEG2000. To fabricate
an ALS-detecting nanosystem, TPE-T-RCN was encapsulated with DSPE-PEG2000 and DSPE-PEG2000-COOH, and the anti-CD47 antibody
was used for surface modification to increase specificity. The obtained
anti-CD47 nanoparticles (NPs) could thus identify the elevated CD47
expression in ALS. Accordingly, the
fluorescence imaging of anti-CD47 NPs could be used to recognize atherosclerotic
plaques both at an advanced stage ( B) and a very early stage (III). This method
could overcome the drawbacks of CT and MRI, which failed to detect
early plaques both in a mouse model ( C) and freshly resected human carotid plaque
specimens ( D,E). 
 Alternatively, beyond elevated CD47 expression,
ALS is also characterized
by abnormal levels of lipids and other
biological components. These molecules can also serve as targets for
diagnosis. Therefore, other strategies based on AIEgens have also
been developed for tissue biopsy in CVDs diagnosis. For instance, TQ-BPN( ) and TPETPAFN can be used to detect blood–brain barrier
(BBB) damage and MeTTI, TTM/MeO-TTM, LFP, and DPBT are used for ALS diagnosis. In addition, TPETPAFN can be
used to assess vascular integrity; BTF,
brain thrombosis; TTVP, subarachnoid
hemorrhage; and BPBBT, myocarditis. Collectively, AIEgen-based probes for tissue
biopsy offer promising avenues for the fluorescence-based diagnosis
of various CVDs. More efforts should be dedicated to expand their
application to the diagnosis of other types of CVDs.

2.2.

## Tissue Biopsy of Tumor Based on Smart AIEgens
Cancer ranks as the second leading cause of death worldwide and
is also associated with high morbidity. , , Thus, it has emerged as a major threat to human being
health and social development. At the molecular level, cancer is characterized
by various hallmarks, including self-sufficiency in growth signals,
apoptosis evasion, sustained angiogenesis, insensitivity to antigrowth
signals, limitless growth potential, dysregulated cellular energetics,
tissue invasion and metastasis, immune evasion, tumor-promoting inflammation,
genome instability, and mutations. These
alterations in biomolecules serve as effective diagnostic and therapeutic
targets for cancer management in the clinic. , However, the precise targeting of tumors is still in its infancy
and specific cancer biomarkers are yet to be discovered, often leading
to late-stage identification. As described above, imaging-based diagnostic
modalities often lack the required sensitivity and can be expensive.
Thus, fluorescence-based methods appear to be the best choice for
the diagnosis and cascaded treatment of tumors. The AIE effect of
AIEgens can be used to identify tumors. Here, we present a summary
of tissue biopsies of tumors based on AIEgens, highlighting specific
examples.
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is among the most deadly malignancies.
PC is challenging to treat and has a dismal survival rate, earning
it the moniker “King of Tumors.” These challenges often
arise because current diagnostic methods are ineffective at diagnosing
PC at an early stage, and the accuracy and penetrability of fluorescence
imaging are also limited. In this context, Prof. Zhu and colleagues
constructed an AIEgen-based nanoplatform, named QM (quinoline-malononitrile)-HSPCPP,
for the tissue biopsy of PC using a specific cathepsin E (CTSE)-responsive
strategy ( A). , First, ethyl bromoacetate was introduced into quinoline-malononitrile
(QM-OH, AIE fluorophore) to obtain QM-COOH. Then, short CTSE-responsive
peptide HSP was linked to QM-COOH, and a CTSE enzyme-specific fluorescence
probe (QM-HSP) was fabricated for on-site monitoring. Finally, a hydrophilic
biocompatible cell penetrating peptide (CPP) was introduced to guarantee
the dispersion properties of the system and prevent the “always-on”
effect in the hydrophilic and lipophilic biosystem ( B). Typically, QM-HSP-CPP had
an emission range of 525–750 nm, exhibiting peak emission at
590 nm. When solution containing QM-HSP-CPP was added to CTSE, the
cleavage induced the generation of AIE signals in situ. These signals were highly specific, dose- and time-dependent, and
could be monitored over a prolonged period. During the intraoperative
diagnosis of PC, QM-HSP-CPP-based biopsy could detect PC with greater
simplicity, speediness, and precision than conventional methods such
as H&E and IHC ( C–F). Thus, it could be applied for fluorescence-based
diagnosis in vivo ( G). 
 In another study, Bao, Tang, and Qin constructed
an AIE dye (TPE-IQ-2O)-based
mitochondrion-targeted histological stain for diagnosing localized
colorectal cancer and its metastasis tracks ( A). The selective accumulation of the TPE-IQ-2O
probe inside tumor cells was attributed to the hyperpolarized mitochondrial
membrane potential of cancer cells (ΔΨm, ∼
−210 mV) versus normal cells (−108 to −159 mV)
and their dense arrangement. TPE-IQ-2O exhibited maximum and typical
absorption and emission peak at about 430 and 625 nm, respectively.
In fresh clinical tissue sections (8 μm), TPE-IQ-2O could identify
cancer cells with a high SNR and could also distinguish the cancer
morphologies (classical honeycomb shape) clearly ( B). In addition, TPE-IQ-2O
could stain the vascular structures in the cross-section of tumors
and bind to collagen to provide higher imaging contrast ( C). Moreover, due
to the abundance of collagen fibers, TPE-IQ-2O could label the nonlinear
migration tracks of colorectal cancer, but it was not specific to
thyroid, prostate, or breast cancer ( D). Furthermore,
other agents like DPE-TPE-OH (liver cancer) and DPA-TPE-DCM (early tongue squamous cell carcinoma) were also developed for tumor tissue biopsy.
However, one of the main barriers preventing the expansion of tumor
tissue biopsy is the lack of available biological indicators or biomarkers
of cancer, especially early stage biomarkers.
Thus, collaboration across various scientific fields is necessary
to address this challenge.
 
2.3.

## Tissue Biopsy for Neurodegenerative Diseases
Based on Smart AIEgens
NDs, characterized by the progressive
loss of neuronal structure or function, were first recognized by Alois
Alzheimer in the 1980s. Over the past few decades, as global population
aging has worsened, the threat of NDs has increased, earning them
the epithet “hidden killer.” Generally, NDs are classified into two categories based on their
phenotype, motor function-associated diseases, such as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis and cerebellar ataxia, and cognition-associated
diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Based on disease
duration, NDs can also be classified into acute NDs, such as cerebral
ischemia (CI), stroke, epilepsy, traumatic brain injury (TBI), and
chronic NDs, such as Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s
disease (PD) and AD. NDs share several typical characteristics at
the molecular level, including inflammation, DNA and RNA defects,
cytoskeletal abnormalities, aberrant proteostasis, altered energy
homeostasis, synaptic and neuronal network defects, pathological protein
aggregation, and neuronal cell death. Countless efforts have been made in this field to discover effective
biomarkers, , diagnostic methods, , and good therapeutic strategies for NDs. , However, the lack of effective diagnostic targets and methods persists.
As a result, diagnosis often relies on bioimaging results and the
expertise of medical professionals, particularly in the early stages
of disease. In this context, tissue biopsy could provide more detailed
pathological information about NDs. 
Fluorescence has emerged as a valuable tool in disease diagnosis,
leading to the rapid development and application of fluorescent probes. AIE probes, based on protein aggregation that
facilitates enhanced fluorescence emission, have also been developed. − In comparison to traditional fluorescent probes, AIEgens show immense
advantages, providing better diagnostic results. In a previous study,
Zhu et al. succeed to map Aβ plaques and thereby
detect AD by synthesizing an AIE-active probe (QM-FN-SO3) via a “step-by-step” strategy to
overcome the inherent drawbacks of commercial ThT ( A). First, a lipophilic π-conjugated
thiophene-bridged unit was introduced into DCM-N, and it served to
extend the π-conjugated backbone for NIR emission (720 nm) and
provide the lipophilicity required for BBB penetrability. Accordingly,
DCM-FN was obtained. Then, quinoline-malononitrile (QM, AIE building
block) was introduced to promote the quenching effect (from DCM-FN
to QM-FN) and a sulfonate group was added to ensure that the AIE probe
remained in a fluorescence-off state before activation to minimize
the background signal. After QM-FN-SO3 was added into a
suspension of Aβ42 aggregates, an obvious concentration-dependent
enhancement of fluorescence intensity of QM fluorophore in QM-FN-SO3 was observed because of the reduced conformational freedom
and rotation attributed to the binding to the amyloid fibrils through N,N′-dimethylamino and the hydrophobic
pockets. In a previous study, QM-FN-SO3 was employed for
the tissue biopsy of AD model (APP/PS1 transgenic) and wild-type mice
brain tissue slices. QM-FN-SO3 identified more Aβ
plaques than ThS and also showed greater fluorescence intensity ( B). Similarly, in vivo, stronger fluorescence was observed after QM-FN-SO3 application in AD mice, suggesting that Aβ plaques
had been successfully detected. This study created a major breakthrough
for Aβ plaques detection in a high-fidelity feedback manner,
providing advantages over commercial probes to established a new diagnostic
method for brain diseases. , Furthermore, other
AIEgens, including DNTPH, TPET, QMTCBT, and TPA-BT-SCP, were also demonstrated to be valuable in tissue
biopsy for NDs. However, the clinical validation of these proposed
AIEgen-based strategies is still warranted, especially given the mystery
surrounding NDs. Thus, additional research efforts are required.
 
2.4.

## Tissue Biopsy for Orthopedic Diseases Based
on Smart AIEgens
The skeletal system plays a basal role in
supporting body weight, body shape, and movement. The different joints
in the skeletal system act as a bridge, enabling the execution of
motor activity and bone functionality. Therefore, bone and joint abnormalities
can lead to severe consequences, particularly mobility disabilities
and the associated mental health issues. The umbrella of orthopedic
diseases include frozen shoulder, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), osteoarthritis
(OA), cervical spondylosis, ankylosing spondylitis, femoral head necrosis,
and lumbar disc herniation. These conditions have become increasingly
prevalent due to various factors, and a significant burden of orthopedic
diseases is faced by countries around the world. In the future, the
burden of orthopedic diseases is only expected to rise globally. , At present, orthopedic diseases are usually diagnosed based on bioimaging
techniques. Herein, more detailed pathological
information can be acquired from tissue biopsy. When compared with
bioimaging modalities and ELISA, fluorescent probes offer several
advantages, including its cost-friendly nature, rapid outcomes, and
ease of operation. So far, a few AIEgens have been developed and applied
in tissue biopsy for orthopedic diseases. For example, given the enhanced matrix metallopeptidase 13 (MMP-13)
expression observed in OA, Bian et al. constructed an AIEgen-based specific and sensitive
method for the early diagnosis of this orthopedic disorder. First,
an AIEgen was synthesized and conjugated with an MMP-13-sensitive
peptide via the “click chemistry” conjugation to obtain
an azide-functionalized AIEgen with an alkyne-functionalized MMP-13-sensitive
peptide (AIEgen-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-Lys-Gly-Gly-Ac, or AIEgen-PLGVRGKGG-Ac)
that was named Cy-Py-N3 ( A). In the presence of MMP-13, the as-prepared
MMP-13-sensitive peptide was cleaved, releasing the water-soluble
AIE probe and producing off–on fluorescence at 550 nm in a
highly sensitive manner ( B,C). When applied in vivo, Cy-Py-N3 could diagnose the severity of OA in knee joints based on
MMP-13 activity in a real-time manner ( D). This seminal AIEgen probe for tissue
biopsy paved the way for more effective diagnostic strategies for
orthopedic diseases. 
 Recently, Li and colleagues developed phosphonate-containing
Ir(III)
AIEgen-based probes for tissue biopsy in cases of orthopedic diseases.
They first incorporated aminopropyl phosphonate at both the para positions
of 2,2′-bipyridine via amide bonds and coordinated the molecule
with iridium precursors to fabricate the AIEgen probes (Ir-BP1 and Ir-BP2) ( A,B). Both AIEgens had high QY (15.3% and 12.2%) at
560 nm. When treated with hydroxyapatite (Hap) particles, Ir-BP2 exhibited selective turn-on AIE phosphorescence with a higher SNR
sensing property due to phosphonate-Ca2+ chelation. At
the cellular level, Ir-BP2 could nondestructively monitor
osteogenic differentiation via a wash-free procedure. Subsequently, Ir-BP2 was applied for the structural tissue biopsy of bone
tissue ( C)
and eosinophilic granuloma (EG) in the C4 spine vertebra ( D) to achieve a
precise and clear diagnosis of bone fractures. These findings underscore the clinical potential of AIEgen-based
probes for tissue biopsy in cases of orthopedic diseases.
 
2.5.

## Tissue Biopsy for Metabolic Diseases Based
on Smart AIEgens
Metabolic processes are essential for sustaining
the body’s overall functioning, and any abnormalities in metabolism
can lead to not only individual diseases but also cascading health
issues. Diseases such as obesity, diabetes, hypercalcemia, fatty liver,
uremia, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD), and so on, fall under the umbrella of metabolic diseases.
These diseases, especially obesity, have created a heavy public health
burden in several parts of the world.
All metabolic disorders
involve an imbalance in cellular metabolism. The scientific field of metabolic diseases has emerged as a hotspot
for research, and several mysteries need to be unraveled. The technologies
currently adopted for the diagnosis of metabolic disorders include
IF assays, electrochemical sensing assays, ELISA, mass spectrometry,
chromatography, radioimmunoassay, and bioimaging, among others. However,
in addition to definite diagnostic targets, methods to enhance the
sensitivity and specificity of tissue biopsy for metabolic disease
are also currently lacking.
Similar to conventional fluorescent
probes and other nanotechnologies, − AIE probes have also
gained traction for tissue biopsy in metabolic
diseases, demonstrating great effectiveness and several advantages.
For example, in one study, three AIEgens named ISO-LD1, ISO-LD2, and ISO-LD3 were synthesized for NAFLD detection based
on the important role of lipid droplets (LDs) in hepatic metabolism.
Of these probes, ISO-LD3 exhibited a longer fluorescence
emission wavelength at 591 nm, representing a red-shift from that
of ISO-LD1 and ISO-LD2 ( A) (650 nm), as well as a
higher QY. In addition, ISO-LD3 could effectively target
LDs via a rapid “wash-free” procedure,
providing a high SNR and good spatial distribution. When applied for
the tissue biopsy of chronic liver disease, ISO-LD3 exhibited
high specificity and sensitivity toward LDs through this rapid “wash-free”
procedure within 10 s. Moreover, this probe was capable of discerning
mild and severe fatty liver from a normal liver and was even more
effective that the commercial probe Oil Red O ( B,C). Moreover,
TB-BChE, DPXBI, and TPA-BQD-Py AIE-dots were
also developed and applied for the tissue biopsy of metabolic diseases.
Despite the promising potential of AIEgen-based probes in this field,
further research efforts are warranted to fully exploit their capabilities.
 
2.6.

## Tissue Biopsy for Inflammatory Diseases Based
on Smart AIEgens
In the body, the balance of inflammation,
which can be triggered by infection, endogenous lesions, and aging,
is crucial for normal physiological functioning and disease defense.
Over the years, several studies have revealed that inflammation is
closely associated with almost all diseases, with many conditions
identified as being directly caused by inflammation. − Therefore, inflammation is widely regarded as a key diagnostic and
therapeutic target. Notably, the number of inflammation-related diseases
is considerably high, and their prevalence appears to be increasing
at a rapid rate. At present, bioimaging
technologies such as PET, CT, and MRI are necessary for in
vivo tissue biopsy. However, they have several shortcomings,
including their cumbersome and time-consuming operation and the lack
of real-time and dynamic monitoring, among others. Compared to these
methods, fluorescence-based diagnosis can provide advantages such
as rapid results, high accuracy, and convenient operation. Here, we
aim to provide an overview of AIE probes for tissue biopsy in cases
of inflammatory diseases.
Fibrosis is a chronic inflammatory
disease that usually originates from persistent inflammation and includes
renal fibrosis and liver fibrosis. , To improve
biopsy outcomes in renal fibrosis, Tang et al. fabricated
a AIEgen-based nanoplatform (AIE-4PEG550) that was water-soluble for
diagnosing renal fibrosis via PAI and SWIR fluorescence ( ). First, Wittig
reaction and Suzuki coupling reaction was adopted for synthesizing
AIE-4COOH that owned a typical D (triphenylamine derivative)-A (DPTQ)
structure. Then, a facile condensation reaction was adopted for synthesizing
AIE-4COOH using PEG-NH2 (0.55 kDa) that coupled to the
carboxylic acid groups ( A). AIE-4PEG550 was capable of dissolving in water
solution and exhibited a maximum emission peak at 910 nm in the SWIR
region, interesting, the emission tail stretched into the second near-infrared
window (NIR-II, 1000–1700 nm) for deep imaging. AIE-4PEG550
had acceptable photostability and a high QY of 1.26% in water. After
intravenous administration for 24 h, the renal clearance efficiency
AIE-4PEG550 NPs was calculated to be 93.1 ± 1.7%, as well as
rapid and high targeting capabilities (4 min) due to its small nanoparticle
size. This enabled rapid and distant discrimination through SWIR FLI/PAI
with a negligible liver retention signal, facilitating the detection
of fibrosis in a folic acid-induced mouse model of nephropathy using
a 1000 nm long pass filter. Furthermore, the kidneys exhibited high
definition in the NIR-II region, enabling clear visualization ( C). Through evaluations
of the alterations in fluorescence intensity/PAI intensity in response
to urinary excretion, the severity of renal fibrosis could be determined.
More importantly, the AIE-4PEG550 NPs could be applied for tissue
biopsy to distinguish progressive renal fibrosis (interstitial fibrosis
area) at an earlier stage than is possible with Masson’s trichrome
staining, H&E staining, and blood biochemistry tests. Meanwhile, previous studies have also suggested
that AIEgen probes are capable of achieving tissue biopsy for inflammatory
diseases. For example, TL, 2TT-oC6B, and TPE-DMAB can be employed to monitor sites of inflammation
and BPN-BBTD and QY-SN-H2O2 can be used for the early
diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease.
 
2.7.

## Tissue Biopsy in the Field of Bioengineering
Based on Smart AIEgens
Tissue engineering is an important
scientific field in clinical medicine, particularly in the realms
of tissue transplantation and tissue regeneration. Hence, the monitoring
of tissue engineering processes is of paramount importance. Currently,
imaging techniques such as ultrasound, X-ray angiography, CT, MRI,
and radionuclide imaging are commonly employed to evaluate and supervise
biomedical processes. Unfortunately, these methods often fall short
of expectations due to their limitations in real-time monitoring and
tracking and their cumbersome and time-consuming operation. Importantly,
biopsies can serve as a valuable tool for assessing the ongoing processes.
However, their use in clinical trials is limited due to their invasive
nature and susceptibility to false negative results as a result of
limited tissue size and site heterogeneity. Under these conditions,
fluorescence imaging technology has emerged as a useful approach for
tissue biopsy in tissue engineering. At same time, owing to the inherent properties of biological systems,
fluorescent probes with absorption and emission spectra that fall
within the NIR-II region (1000–1700 nm) are highly desirable.
This makes AIEgen probes highly advantageous over conventional ones.
For instance, for the real-time monitoring of post-transplant immune
responses, Xie and Tang et al. first synthesized
a family of AIEgens (HBTTPIP, HBTTPAP, and HBTTPEP) via the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction and the Knoevenagel
condensation reaction ( A). Then, they used a simple one-step incubation reaction
to construct biomimetic glucan particles (GPs) with AIE characteristics,
named HBTTPEP/GPs, for the real-time noninvasive monitoring of the
post-transplant immune response ( B,C). Within the confined space of GPs,
the as-prepared positively charged near-infrared AIEgen (HBTTPEP)
could effectively aggregate and exhibit a turn-on AIE effect, with
typical emission at 650 nm and a high QY (34%). When incubated with
RAW264.7 cells, HBTTPEP/GPs showed obvious fluorescence for a week
without damages to cellular bioactivity. After oral administration,
HBTTPEP/GPs strictly targeted macrophages by mimicking yeast and migrated
to the site of transplant rejection. They could be observed via fluorescent
imaging, revealing macrophage infiltration and the severity of allograft
rejection ( D). Moreover, a single oral dose of HBTTPEP/GPs kept the dynamic
evaluation of the therapeutic response after immunosuppressive therapy
( E). Similarly, an AIEgen (CSMPP) with high selectivity
and pH reversibility was also developed for monitoring tissue regeneration. DIPT-ICF, with its longer absorption and emission
wavelength, was prepared for monitoring the entire process of kidney
transplantation, including the blood retention time, graft perfusion,
and its vascular complications, the ureterovesical junction of transplantation,
and kidney quality. All these results
demonstrate the remarkable potential of AIEgen in tissue engineering,
although more endeavors are also needed in this field.
 On the other hand, although AIEgens have exhibited
great potential
in noninvasive tissue biopsy, more extensive and long-term trials
are required before their clinical application can be possible.

3.

## Smart AIEgen for Blood-Targeted Liquid Biopsy
Tissue biopsy provides limited amounts of tissue and is also invasive.
Thus, there is growing interest in the development of more convenient
and effective methods for disease diagnosis. − This has become a focal point in both fundamental research and clinical
trials, with nanotechnology playing a significant role in advancing
biopsy techniques. , − In the past few years, the analysis of biological fluids, referred
to as liquid biopsy since 1948, , , has garnered increased attention. Instead of using whole tissues,
liquid biopsy uses body fluids such as blood (plasma and serum), pleuroperitoneal
fluids, CSF, bile, sweat, saliva, urine, stool, pancreatic fluid,
pleural effusion, ascitic fluid, bile, tear, earwax, nasal discharge,
bone marrow, and exhaled breath ( ). Notably, the use of liquid biopsy for
early cancer detection has gained immense prominence in the past few
years. , , The body
fluids used for tissue biopsy play key roles in a range of biological
processes and can offer pathological information regarding specific
diseases. − The analytes for liquid biopsy include CTCs,
cfDNA, cfRNA, and EVs that contain exosomes, TEPs, proteins, carbohydrates,
metabolites, ions, and hormones, among other biomolecules. The analytes
examined in liquid biopsy can provide clear information regarding
important features of disease. Moreover, liquid biopsies are noninvasive
and can be repeated, enabling monitoring throughout the course of
the disease. Compared to tissue biopsy, liquid biopsy is more appealing
because of its low invasiveness, minimal sample volume, high sensitivity,
low cost, rapid operation, capability of revealing spatiotemporal
disease heterogeneity, real-time monitoring capacity, and drug response
monitoring capacity. , , So far, liquid biopsy has not only been used to obtain information
on genomic mutations and copy number alterations but also to gain
data on the proteome, , transcriptome, epigenome, , and metabolome , and for multiomics analysis. Therefore,
liquid biopsy offers enhanced sensitivity and specificity in diagnosis
and allows for repeated sampling throughout treatment in a much more
convenient and noninvasive manner. The findings can be utilized to
guide treatment decisions, evaluate the treatment response, monitor
disease progresses after cancer treatment, diagnose suspected disease, and enable screening at an early stage. In fact, numerous clinical trials focused on
oncological liquid biopsies are currently underway in collaboration
with the industrial sector for early disease detection, therapy guidance,
residual disease monitoring and therapy, and outcome monitoring and
other medical fields. According to clinicaltrials.gov,
565 clinical trials related to liquid biopsies have been recruited,
conducted, or completed. Hence, we seem to be entering the age of
liquid biopsy in neuro-oncology. 
The diagnostic process of liquid biopsy includes the isolation
of diagnostic targets − and diagnostic analysis using specific method, and both of these
phases are vital for obtaining accurate results. Current diagnostic
methods for liquid biopsy include PCR, digital PCR assays, NGS, , IHC, and MS (GC-MS,
MS-MS, LC-MS/MS, and MALDI-TOF MS). Moreover,
the Guardant360 CDx (Guandant Health) and FoundationOne Liquid CDx
(Foundation Medicine) NGS platforms have been approved for clinical
application by the FDA, and some commercial products and kits have
also been approved by China. However,
due to the inherent limitations in the number of targets, sensitivity,
cumbersome operation, and high cost, there is an urgent need for innovation
in these methods. As described previously, fluorescent dyes or probes
could be more suitable for liquid biopsy. − In fact, AIEgen can provide multifold advantages in liquid biopsy.
More importantly, the aggregation properties of AIEgen guarantee a
broader concentration of targets, and its fluorescence ensures low-limit
detection for diagnosing diseases at extremely early stages. Below,
we summarize the AIEgens applied in liquid biopsy. This section is
divided into various subsections according to the diagnostic targets
and diseases for different types of samples.
Blood is estimated
to account for 7–8% of the weight of
the human body. It serves as an effective and high-speed delivery
route for nutrients and waste and contains various cells and biological
molecules ( )
that are reflective of the body’s normal or pathological state.
The availability of blood is much higher than that of other biofluids.
Thus, blood is the primary specimen used in liquid biopsy. − Here, we first focus on biopsies of blood samples used for evaluating
a range of specific targets.
 Blood is the most abundant fluid in the human body
and contains
a dynamic range of components, including various kinds of cells, nucleic
acids, carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, enzymes, small molecules,
ions, and metabolites. Whole blood is composed of serum and plasma.
The diverse types of cells in the bloodstream are valuable indicators
of key biological processes and thus offer opportunities for disease
diagnosis. Furthermore, blood samples can also be used to diagnose
diseases associated with the dysregulation of blood components and
specific blood cells, including leukemia, hemophilia, anemia, thalassemia,
and so on. Liquid biopsies of blood samples involve the isolation
and analysis of disease-derived or disease-associated components circulating
in the bloodstream for disease diagnosis. In particular, blood-based
liquid biopsy techniques for cancer have been explored in depth and target CTCs, circulating leukocytes, as well as
tumor-derived circulating nucleic acids, such as cfDNA and cfRNA, , TEPs, EVs (including exosomes), , carbohydrates, and protein markers, among others. However, due to the short bioavailability
of blood sample, there is an urgent need for more effective analysis
and storage methods. , Here, we review the applications
of AIEgens in liquid biopsy for various targets and diseases.
3.1.

## AIEgen Probes Targeting Circulating Cells
Blood serves as a transport pathway, allowing different cells to
access various parts of the body. Therefore, blood vessels contain
a large mixture of cells. Changes in cell numbers and types are usually
indicative of pathological processes and are often a result of disease
progression. For example, the CTCs, which detach from primary tumor
tissues, circulate loosely, form clusters, or lodge themselves in
other tissues. These CTCs carry the characteristics and information
on their parent tumors and serve as seeds for distant metastasis.
In general, only 5–50 CTCs are typically detected per teaspoon
of blood, accounting for a minor proportion of blood cells. Nevertheless,
CTCs still provide critical information for cancer diagnosis and can
guide treatment. For example, the number of CTCs in the blood is associated
with the prognosis in patients with cancer, , with the thresholds for CTCs counts differing based on the type
of cancer. 
Currently, the two
challenges in blood cell-targeting liquid biopsy are the efficiency
of isolation and the lack of suitable diagnostic methods. Various
isolation methods have been discussed in depth in previous review
articles, such as those by András Telekes and colleagues (2019), Toner Mehmet and colleagues (2022), and Liang Cheng and colleagues (2023), among others. Flow cytometry, immunofluorescence
analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),
RT-PCR, and NGS are common diagnostic modalities for the clinical
evaluation of blood cell-targeting liquid biopsy. However, the accuracy
of diagnosis based on these methods is seriously limited by the inherent
biological properties of CTCs. The use
of fluorescent probes is also associated with various challenges,
including unpredictable selectivity and sensitivity for biofluid samples.
To address these challenges, several AIEgen-based nanoplatform have
been developed and utilized for the identification of disease-specific
circulating cells in blood samples.
In 2020, to improve the
selectivity and sensitivity of CTCs detection
in early diagnosis of tumors, Janus micromotors (JMs) was developed
by Li et al., which was able to achieve motion-enhanced
CTCs capture and obtain a sequenced capture-induced ratiometric fluorescence
signal for tumor diagnosis ( ). This strategy could be effective even when the abundance
of CTCs was low. Within the JMs, the McMurry reaction was adopted
based on 4-methylbenzophenone and benzophenone to produce the AIE
unit (PE-CH3), and it was then conjugated with thymine
to obtain TPE-T. Meanwhile, FITC was coupled with Boc-guanine to obtain
FITC-G. Then, Janus fibers were prepared via side-by-side electrospinning,
and JRs were constructed via the cryosection of aligned Janus fibers,
which exhibited catalytic decomposition of H2O2 to generate a power source. Subsequently, a series of JMs (JM-0.4,
JM-1, JM-2, and JM-5) were synthesized via catalase
grafting with different aspect ratios and these JMs showed random,
spiral, rotational, and linear motion trajectories. Notably, JM-2
possessed rotational motion and significantly larger mean-square-displacement
(MSD) values than the other JMs. Further, TLS11a aptamers (5′-ACAGCATCCCCATGTGAACAATCGCATTGTGATTGTTACGGTTTCCGCCTCATGGACGTGCTG-3′),
labeled with TPE-T and FITC-G via base-pair interactions,
were conjugated on the other side of the JRs to enable the specific
capture of tumor cells ( A). When the competitive binding of tumor cells with
JMs occurred, the release of TPE and FITC from JMs induced the AIE
effect (TPE) and ACQ effect (FITC). This led to apparent ratiometric
fluorescence changes from blue (I450)
to green (I526), which were subsequently
measured to detect the amounts of CTCs ( B). By using JM-2, an excellent LOD could
be achieved around 25 cells/mL along with a high speed of detection
(less than 1 min) and no interference ( C–E). More importantly, the recovery
rate in blood samples with addition of HepG2 cells was over 95% ( F). Thus, this
AIEgen-based nanosystem provided a promising tool for the real-time,
rapid, and sensitive detection of CTCs in laboratory, hospital, and
remote settings. 
 The quality of CTCs deteriorates due to cell fixation
and penetration,
decreasing the sensitivity of CTCs detection. However, living CTCs
provide more information on specific diseases. Thus, Zheng and Tang et al. constructed a mitochondria-targeted AIEgen named
TPN ( A) for
the noninvasive identification of tumor cells in the blood based on
the mitochondrial aberrations. TPN, which consisted of TPE and a pyridinium
group, showed a typical absorption characteristics at 405 nm and a
maximum emission peak at 636 nm in DMSO. When various kinds of cancer
cells were treated with TPN, the TPN could easily cross the cell membrane
and stain living cancer cells due to its high selectivity for their
mitochondria, showing enhanced fluorescence intensity in these cells
than in white blood cells ( B,C). Importantly, TPN had minimal impact on cell quality,
facilitating DNA or RNA-based analysis at the single-cell level with
improved performance. When applied in patient samples (blood and pleural
effusion), TPN enabled the targeted biopsy of cancer cells with excellent
results ( D–F). These findings suggested that AIEgens can improve the
detection of CTCs in liquid biopsy. In
another study, an AIEgen (TPE)-based nanosystem was constructed by
using PEI, PEG, and Au nanorods (GNRs-PEG-TPEI). Due to the high rate
of glycolysis in these cells, the surface of cancer cells is negatively
charged, it benefited the efficient recognition of tumors cells of
the GNRs-PEG-TPEI system to induce specific fluorescence signals,
which allowed it to interact with the negatively cancer cells. In
addition, this system showed minimal background interference. Thus,
GNRs-PEG-TPEI exhibited great potential for CTCs detection, although
its application for detecting CTCs in clinical liquid biopsy specimens
was not evaluated. 
 Apart from CTCs, which can be used for tumor detection,
other circulating
cells have also been identified as diagnostic markers. For example,
circulating endothelial cells have been linked to hematological diseases,
and they have been adopted as a novel biomarker for these diseases. − In addition, DNA in red blood cells has been linked to lung cancer. Although several studies have revealed that
AIE probes are capable of evaluating bloodstream. , , Unfortunately, there are no
reports that focus on the diagnosis of other circulating cells in
the bloodstream using AIEgens.
Developing fluorescent probes
for the detection of circulating
cells is crucial. As mentioned above, AIEgen probes are rarely developed
for the detection of circulating cells. Moreover, there is limited
focus on the use of AIEgen probes for noncancerous diseases. Therefore,
further endeavors are required to assess the clinical effectiveness
and utility of AIEgen probes in diverse disease contexts.

3.2.

## cfDNA-Targeting AIEgen Probes
Similar
to circulating cells, cell-free nucleic acids, such as DNA (cfDNA,
including ctDNA) and RNA (cfRNA, including microRNA, lncRNA, circRNA,
ceRNA, signal recognition particle RNA [srpRNA], mRNA, etc.), contain key genetic information. These important hubs can also
serve as targets for liquid biopsy. , cfDNA, a
type of degraded DNA molecular fragment released into the blood from
various cells, ranges in length from 0.18 kb to 23 kb base pairs derived
from apoptotic cells, necrotic cells, and excreted exosomes. − It is continuously and rapidly cleared from the bloodstream (the
half-life of cfDNA is 5–150 min), and its levels and copy number
in the blood are typically low in healthy individuals. However, these
values show an obvious increase under pathological conditions. So
far, several different kinds of cfDNA, including ctDNA, mitochondrial
DNA (cf-mtDNA), , and fetal DNA (cffDNA), have been isolated from human blood for diagnostic
purposes, which exhibits great sensitivity and specificity toward
various diseases, especially in tumors. , Up to now,
there are a lot of factors, such as enrichment methods and analytic
methods, that have been proved to be capable of affecting diagnostic
outcomes of cfDNA. By using technologies
such as RT-PCR (also known as qPCR), drop digital PCR (ddPCR), and
allele-specific PCR (AS-PCR) and genomic analysis through whole-genome
sequencing (WGS), whole-exon sequencing (WES), and omics technologies,
genetic information such as mutations, aberrant amplifications, and
deletions can be obtained from cfDNA. Thus, cfDNA can provide pathological
information. − Although the methods applied for genomic
analysis in the clinic are comprehensive, sensitive, and accurate,
they are expensive, time-consuming, and complex to perform and interpret.
Moreover, the PCR methods lack sensitivity and accuracy.
Due
to their noninvasive nature, high selectivity, and high sensitivity,
fluorescence-based methods have been broadly applied for nucleic acid
detection. − Interestingly, the helical structure of
DNA can cause the ACQ effect but enhance the activity of AIEgens. − Therefore, AIEgens appear to be a more suitable option for DNA-targeted
liquid biopsy. To date, several AIEgens
have been successfully developed and applied for DNA-targeted liquid
biopsy. For instance, Han and Zhang collaboratively developed an AIEgen-based
probe named TPE-DNA for ctDNA biopsy via a free click
reaction SPAAC between azide-functionalized TPE-N3 and
dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO)-functionalized DNA ( A,B). This probe exhibited no fluorescence
emission at 480 nm in the absence of DNA fragments. However, when
applied for ctDNA target detection ( C), TPE-DNA exhibited a significant enhancement
of its fluorescence signal, and there was a good linear relationship
(R2 = 0.968) between the concentrations
of target ctDNA (100 pM to 1 μM) and the fluorescence signal
intensity ( D). The LOD was estimated to be 39 pM, and the method showed a rapid
detection speed as well as high sensitivity and selectivity in a series
of simulated blood samples (R2 = 0.98)
( E,F). 
 Meanwhile, another AIEgen named TPBT, developed
by Tang and co-workers,
was synthesized via a Suzuki coupling reaction between
four 1-methylpyridinium groups and pyridine-4-boronic acid, conjugated
to compound 3, followed by a subsequent reaction with
methyl iodide. In this problem, a Heck reaction was adopted between
triphenylamine moiety 2 and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (served
as an electron acceptor) to obtain compound 3 with a
typical D–A–D core structure. As a result, the introduction
of 1-methylpyridinium groups endowed TPBT with water solubility and
DNA-binding affinity, and TPBT showed a typical maximum absorption
peak at 440 nm, however, due to the active intramolecular motions
with positive charge, TPBT exhibited a weak fluorescence peak at 635
nm in water with a low QY (0.03 ± 0.01%). In a polar solvent
(ethanol/water mixtures), TPBT exhibited gradual enhancement of fluorescence
intensity (90%, 30 times) and its fluorescence peak blue-shifted from
635 to 620 nm. Due to its positive charge, which occurred due to the
presence of multiple cations, TPBT could bind to bovine serum albumin
(BSA) (635 nm), heparin (684 nm), PAA (644 nm), ssDNA (641 nm), and
dsDNA (ctDNA, 645 and 537 nm), exhibiting a turn-on effect and high
photostability. The appearance of fluorescence at 537 nm was caused
by the binding interaction between TPBT and a duplex DNA groove (CGCGAATTCGCG),
which led to a conformational change in TPBT. Moreover, TPBT could
detect single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a dsDNA sequence
and detect DNA damage caused by UV light in a standard DNA sample
and real blood samples with ultrahigh sensitivity and specificity
( ). 
 In another study by Tang’s group,
a “seesaw”
strategy was implemented for the label-free and enzyme-free visual
detection of nucleic acids. The hybridization chain reaction (HCR)
technique was combined with an AIE (TPE-TA)-based fluorometric assay
and a gold-nanoparticle-based colorimetric assay (TPE-TAs) to avoid
tedious chemical labeling and enzyme-based signal amplification ( A). TPE-TA was
positively charged and had good water solubility, which enabled its
interaction with DNA through electrostatic interactions. This turned
on the enhanced fluorescence signals of TPE-TA at 480 nm, and the
aggregation of Au NPs caused an alteration in solution tonality. By
using TPE-TAs, HCR products could be detected across a wide concentration
range, from 100 fM to 10 μM, via colorimetric
analysis. The LOD was estimated to be as low as 37.2 fM for ssDNA,
demonstrating the great sensitivity of the probe to target DNA ( B–E). Not
only could the probe detect HCR products across a wide concentration
range, it could also detect single nucleotide mismatches at different
positions and identify nucleotide deletions and insertions. In addition,
TPE-TA could also be applied for miRNA detection combined with HCR
in the concentration range of 10–100 nM ( F,G). Interestingly, TPE-TAs
exhibited minimal impact on the stability of DNA-protected Au NPs
but significantly reduced the efficiency of the HCR process due to
the presence of large biomolecules in serum samples. After the removal
of large biomolecules, a wide range concentration (100 pM to 1 μM)
could be detected effectively in clinical samples using TPE-TAs. summarizes the different AIEgens currently utilized for the
fluorescence-based detection of cfDNA in blood samples, demonstrating
the broad application of AIEgens in this area.
 Beyond fluorescence-based detection methods, electrochemiluminescent
(ECL) and electrochemical (EC) detection strategies have also proven
effective for cfDNA detection due to advantages, such as no additional
light source requirement, low background signal, high sensitivity,
easy miniaturization, and low cost. − However, traditional
ECL/EC technologies are currently inadequate for the ultrasensitive
detection of cfDNA due to its low abundance in blood samples. By leveraging
the aggregation properties of AIEgens, the combination of AIEgens
and ECL could be used to achieve aggregation-induced electrochemiluminescence
(AIECL), a technique that demonstrates
significant potential for the sensitive detection of trace biomolecules.
Under this paradigm, several AIEgens have been developed for AIECL-based
cfDNA detection. For example, Qin and colleagues constructed an AIECL
biosensor for the ultrasensitive detection of ctDNA via an exonuclease III (Exo III)-assisted target recycling strategy.
They exploited the AIE effect of 4,4′-(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole-4,7-diyl)bis(N,N-diphenylaniline) (TPA-BT) and integrated it with the electrochemical
activity and ECL-quenching properties of ferrocene (Fc) ( ). TPA-BT exhibited
maximum absorption at 460 nm and maxmimum emission at 620 nm, respectively,
along with high QY (17.79%) and an excellent luminescence intensity.
On a molecular level, the ECL intensity of TPA-BT dots was quenched
by Fc after the introduction of the hairpin H1 to form an Fc attachment,
and this was facilitated by H1 connecting to the Au electrode via
the Au–S bond. Exo III-mediated cyclic amplification generated
a W1 sequence solution, which targeted and activated H1 to decrease
the electrochemical signal of Fc and increase the ECL signal of TPA-BT
dots, thereby the signal was amplified based on the concentration
of the target molecule. Importantly, the amount of W1 generated by
Exo III-mediated target cycling amplification could guarantee signal
detection. When this nanosystem was employed to detect ctDNA (KRAS
gene) in solution, a linear relationship between ECL intensity and
the target concentration was noted between 50 aM and 100 pM (R2 = 0.98). In addition, a linear relationship
was also detected between the EC signal of Fc and the target concentration
within 100 aM to 100 pM (R2 = 0.98). Thus,
collectively, a linear relationship was observed between the IECL/IEC ratio and
the ctDNA concentration within the range of 100 aM to 100 pM. The
LOD was estimated to be 11.2 aM, and the system showed excellent selectivity.
Finally, spiked recovery experiments conducted in real serum samples
yielded good results, with the recovery rate ranging from 90.60% to
101.17% and RSDs ranging from 2.32% to 6.53%. This study indicated that AIE combined with ECL/EC is an
innovative strategy with great potential for cfDNA-based diagnosis.
 As discussed above, the utilization of AIEgen-based
nanosystems
for cfDNA identification through fluorescence and ECL/EC detection
strategies demonstrates several advantages and has immense potential
for clinical application. However, as reported in the study by Tang
and colleagues, the sensitivity, selectivity,
solubility, and recovery rate of probes toward cfDNA have not been
thoroughly tested in large-scale clinical samples, and the extremely
low abundance of cfDNA at early disease stages continues to pose a
significant challenge. Meanwhile, the
accuracy of cfDNA diagnosis in the clinic remains a serious concern
due to the potential contamination of cfDNA from native lymphocytes
and the presence of native-derived components. , In addition, in blood sample biopsies, ctDNA may be detected either
in plasma (the most commonly analyzed sample) or serum. Therefore, further research and trials are required
to explore more effective strategies for cfDNA detection.

3.3.

## cfRNA-Targeting AIEgen Probes
cfRNA,
similar to cfDNA, represents another significant focus in the realm
of blood sample-based liquid biopsy. , − cfRNA is released into the circulation by various cells to induce
diverse biological effects in recipient cells. Following disease onset,
the aberrant change of disease-specific transcripts can lead to the
amplification or decrease of disease-derived RNA in the blood. Primarily,
studies on cfRNA have centered on various types of RNA molecules such
as miRNA, piRNA, tsRNA, rsRNA, lncRNA, circRNA, ceRNA, signal recognition
particle RNA (srpRNA), and mRNA, among others. It is well-known that
miRNAs are stable and relatively abundant in plasma, and numerous
studies have demonstrated disease-associated changes in miRNA expression. Therefore, the cfRNA is often employed as a
biomarker for disease diagnosis via liquid biopsy. − Similar to cfDNA, cfRNA is also clinically analyzed using PCR and
sequencing methods. However, cfRNA-targeted
diagnosis typically involves hypothesis-driven approaches, with the
analysis focusing on mutations or expression changes in previously
identified oncogenes. However, the presence of numerous transcripts
from various cell types complicates the identification of subtle and
specific expression changes, particularly at the early stages of a
disease. Endowed with the properties and advantages of nanoplatforms,
fluorescence-based diagnosis appears to be a promising tool for liquid
biopsy, offering high selectivity and sensitivity. Thus, AIEgens have
become highly popular in this field. , 
To
address challenges such as unstable structure, low fluorescence QY,
high labeling costs, and stringent reaction conditions and to take
complete advantage of their simplicity, convenience, sensitivity,
and selectivity, Li and colleagues constructed an ultrasensitive label-free
AIEgen-based fluorescence biosensor. By subjecting the AIEgen to a
hemin/G-quadruplex-catalyzed oxidation reaction, they constructed
a fluorescence biosensor called TPE-M ( A). This biosensor exhibited a good AIE
effect, with maximum emission at 480 nm in response to l-cysteine.
Then, an l-cysteine/TPE-M-based fluorescence biosensor was
constructed for DNA detection. In the presence of G-rich DNA as well
as K+ and hemin, the l-cysteine molecule was destroyed
because of the oxidation reaction induced by hemin/G-quadruplex. In
contrast, l-cysteine/TPE-M retained its capacity to activate
TPE-M fluorescence because the oxidation reaction failed to transform l-cysteine into cystine ( B). Accordingly, the highly sensitive fluorescence-based
detection of G-rich DNA was achieved within a concentration range
of 0.1 to 100 nM. Within this range, a good linear relationship was
observed between fluorescence intensity and concentration (R2 = 0.9988), and the LOD was determined to be
33 pM ( C).
When combined with a target-triggered cyclic amplification reaction,
the l-cysteine/TPE-M system was capable of ultrasensitive
microRNA detection. There was a linear relationship between let-7a
concentration at 0.1–10000 fM and fluorescence intensity (R2 = 0.9994), and the system showed high selectivity
and sensitivity against let-7b and let-7c. The LOD was determined
to be as low as 35 aM ( D), and a good recovery rate (97–105.1%) was
observed when the system was used to evaluate diluted human serum
samples. 
 Acute pancreatitis (AP) is a major cause of pancreatic
cancer (PC), and its early diagnosis
and prevention are
of great significance for preserving health in human beings. To this
end, Tang and colleagues recently constructed a magnetic single-drop
microextraction (SDME) system for the simultaneous fluorescence detection
of miRNA-196a (associated with PC) and miRNA-155 (associated with
AP) with spatial confinement to enhance the AIE effect ( ). For the fabrication
of this platform, AIEgen (TAIN; (E)-N,N-diphenyl-4-(2-(1,3,3-trimethyl-3H-1λ4-indol-2-yl)vinyl)-aniline) was first synthesized that
“slurry” TPA moiety acted as donor and a positively
charged indole derivative acted as acceptor. Then, hairpin probes
were coupled with magnetic beads (MBs) served as selectively recognizer
toward targeted miRNAs. Next, by initiating nucleic acid amplification
reactions via the exposed ends, a multilevel nucleic acid structure
containing G-quadruplex was introduced onto the MBs. Owing to this
design, G-quadruplex was connected with the AIEgen through an intermolecular
force, and MBs in the reaction system could accumulate to spontaneously
form a single drop under the action of a magnetic rod device. Thus,
an AIE effect, with maximum emission at 565 nm, was generated from
TAIN and was enhanced significantly within this single-drop system.
In this system, the hairpin probe selectively targeted miRNAs, triggering
a DNA amplification reaction. The DNA strands, along with two independent
probes of G-quadruplex/TAIN and Cy5, were present on the surface of
the MBs, and the SDME process could be completed within 10 s. When
applied for targeted miRNA detection (miRNA-155 [666 nm] and miRNA-196a
[565 nm]), a good linear relationship from 10 aM to 10 nM and from
25 aM to 10 nM was observed for miRNA-196a and miRNA-155, respectively.
In addition, the LOD was estimated to be 2.1 aM and 8.1 aM, respectively.
In real clinical serum samples diagnosis, including healthy individuals
and six patients with AP, picomolar levels of miRNA could be detected,
and the results showed that the serum expression of these miRNAs was
almost double in patients with AP than in healthy individuals. The
recovery rate (95.6– 104.8%) was also better than that of commercial
RT-PCR methods. 
 In 2023, another AIEgen-based fluorescent probe
for miRNA liquid
biopsy was developed by Mohammadnejad and co-workers. In their study, a fluorescent DNA-functionalized
hydrogel was constructed based on the AIE of AgNCs for the detection
of miRNA-141 ( A), which was associated with prostate cancer (PC) recurrence as
a predictor of greater risk and could be an effective biomarker for
PC. With this system, the introduction
of miRNA-141 could induce the formation of a closed cytosine-rich
loop of the three-segment branched DNA structure. This served as a
template for fluorescent silver nanoclusters (AgNCs), and enhanced
fluorescence was achieved in a polyacrylamide hydrogel. Unmodified
penta-adenine (A5) DNA strands were used to replace the acrylate-modified
DNA, and improved fluorescence intensity was detected. The intensity
increased with an increase in miRNA-141 levels in a concentration
range of 5 pM to 100 nM (R2 = 0.9745)
( B–D).
The LOD was 2 pM, and the system showed high selectivity and sensitivity
in real human serum plasma samples. In
addition, TPE-Z was also developed for the effective detection of
miRNA-141. 
 Beyond fluorescence-based detection, AIEgen-based
ECL biosensors
for miRNA detection have also been developed successfully. Yuan and
Liu synthesized a Zn2+-induced gold cluster aggregate (Zn2+-GCA) to construct an ECL biosensor for the ultrasensitive
detection of miRNA-21 for diagnosing various diseases, where the Zn2+-GCA served as a high-efficiency ECL emitter. Within Zn2+-GCA, Zn2+ caused the aggregation of monodispersed
gold clusters (Au NCs) to restrict the ligand vibration of Au NCs
and further enhancement of ECL emission. Furthermore, it served as
a coreaction accelerator to catalyze the dissociation of the coreactant
S2O82– into sulfate radicals
(SO4•–), which further improved
the interaction efficiency between Zn2+-GCA and S2O82– for further ECL emission (QY: 10.54%).
Meanwhile, the introduction of poly adenine (polyA)-modified DNA generated
from enzyme-free target recycling amplification into the surface of
Au NPs to address the drawbacks of low stability and cumbersome operation.
By using this Zn2+-GCA system and enzyme-free target recycling
amplification, miRNA-21 could be detected with high sensitivity and
selectivity across a broad concentration range of 100 aM to 1 nM,
and a low LOD (44.7 aM) ( ). Although the Zn2+-GCA system was not
tested using clinical blood or serum samples, this study suggested a potential strategy for miRNA detection
based on the combination of AIE and ECL.
 In addition to the aforementioned systems developed
for cfRNA liquid
biopsy based on AIEgens, other AIEgen-based tools have also been produced
for miRNA detection. For example, dUrk has been used
to detect miRNA 24-3P. In addition,
several AIEgens have been applied for mRNA detection, including AIE-MB, PyTPA-DNA, and silole-R bioprobes, and TPE-R-DNA. Although previous studies have suggested that these AIEgen-based
systems exhibit high sensitivity and selectivity, unfortunately, the
analytical efficacy of some AIEgen nanosystem has not been validated
in clinical samples. Furthermore, isolation methods to enhance the
efficiency and the short lifetime of isolated cfRNA also need to be
developed. Alarmingly, current research
mainly centers on miRNA but not on other cfRNA. Thus, comprehensive
endeavors are required in both fundamental and clinical domains to
address this gap.

3.4.

## Extracellular Vesicle-Targeting AIEgen Probes
EVs are lipid-enclosed structures that facilitate intercellular
communication between donor cells and recipient cells through the
transmission of cargoes. EVs are ubiquitously found across species
and can mediate a range of physiological effects depending on the
type of cargo they carry, including nucleic acids, proteins, lipids,
carbohydrates, and small molecules. − During disease processes, the
abundance of EVs is dynamically altered depending on the site of pathogenesis. Thus, in addition to their role as therapeutic
platforms, EVs can also serve as diagnostic biomarkers, , − especially for liquid biopsy. , , Generally, EVs can be classified
into microvesicles (MVs), exosomes, and apoptotic bodies based on
their size.
With their diverse sources and relatively prolonged
half-life, EVs have garnered significant attention in the research
domain. Currently, isolation methods for EVs include ultracentrifugation,
size exclusion chromatography, microfluidic technology, density gradient
centrifugation, magnetic activated cell sorting, and asymmetrical
flow field-flow fractionation. In addition, the diagnostic methods
for EV detection include nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), electron
microscopies (EM), atomic force microscopies (AFM), high-resolution
flow cytometry, and resistive pulse sensing (RPS). Techniques such
as PCR and ddPCR are usually applied for nucleic acid analysis in
EVs, whereas NMR, MS, flow cytometry, surface plasmon resonance (SPR),
EC immune sensing, omics technology, Western blotting (WB), ELISA,
and others are applied for EVs protein, lipid, and metabolite analysis. These methods offer accurate spatial and temporal
biological information regarding EVs. However, more effective, inexpensive,
and user-friendly operation strategies still need to be developed
and applied clinically due to the evident variability of EVs and their
contents across different diseases. 
Recently, some fluorescent probes that leverage the properties
of AIEgen have been developed for analyzing EVs, promoting advances
in liquid biopsy techniques. For example, Geng constructed an AIEgen
(TABD-Py)-based fluorescent probe (AIMIP) for detecting exosomes via the self-assembly property of imprinted polymers. Intact
exosomes were directly used as a template, and exosome-binding 3D
cavities were generated on the surface of magnetic particles ( ). In AIMIPs, lysozyme
(Lyz) from exosomes was selected as the analyte, while the AIEgen,
mediated by an aptamer, acted as a selectively fluorescent indicator
upon Lyz capture. The fluorescence of the AIEgen at 485 nm reflected
its binding to exosomes. AIMIPs could qualitatively and quantitatively
reveal the presence of Lyz based on its turn-on fluorescence intensity.
This system showed high sensitivity and selectivity, good reproducibility,
and a linear relationship between fluorescence intensity and the essencece
of the Lyz in serum was observed in the concentration range of 2.10
× 10–4 to 2.38 × 10–2 mM (R2 = 0.9948). The LOD was calculated
to be 1.58 μM, and the recovery rate was high. Furthermore,
after optimizing TABD-Py toward the aptamer, the LOD was calculated
to be 1.3 × 106 particles/mL in diluted fetal bovine
serum, with superb selectivity and sensitivity, and a good linear
relationship between 2.1 × 106 particles/mL and ∼7.9
× 107 particles/mL (R2 = 0.9823). When applied for detecting exosomes in clinical serum
samples from patients with breast cancer, AIMIPs exhibited a higher
level of fluorescence than AIE-labeled cancer-related exosomes to
enable the reliable differentiation of healthy donors from individuals
with breast cancer. 
 Two other AIEgen (TPE-TA)-based nanosystems were
constructed by
Zheng’s group. , In the first study, to enable
point-of-care testing (POCT) for tumor-derived exosomes in blood samples
at a low cost, the researchers constructed a homogeneous magneto-fluorescent
exosome (hMFEX) nanosensor based on AIEgens for rapid and on-site
tumor-derived exosome analysis ( ). The hMFEX nanosensor was constructed
by incorporating two vital modules: (1) antibody (GPC-1)-functionalized
magnetic beads for targeting exosomes and (2) aptamer-induced DNA
TWJs with AIEgens (TPE-TA) and GO for enhancing fluorescence by tuning
supramolecular interactions. With the aid of the hMFEX nanosensor,
tumor-derived exosomes were captured immunomagnetically, with high
capture efficiency and selectivity. This capture initiated the aptamer-triggered
assembly of DNA three-way junctions in a homogeneous solution containing
TPE-TA and graphene oxide, resulting in an amplified fluorescence
signal. Therefore, a fitting nonlinear relationship between exosome
concentration in the range of 7.8 × 104 to 3.9 ×
109 particles/μL (R2 =
0.997) was detected, along with a low LOD (6.56 × 104 particles/μL). These indicators were superior to those of
some other exosome detection methods. When tested against plasma samples,
the hMFEX nanosensor exhibited obvious differences in fluorescence
signal between plasma samples derived from healthy controls and plasma
samples derived from a breast cancer cohort with good efficacy (AUC:
0.950), high sensitivity (86.11%), and high specificity (90%). 
 In another study by Zheng’s group, a facile
fluorescent
aptasensor was constructed by incorporating aptamers that served as
recognition elements. The AIEgen (TPE-TA) served as a fluorescent
dye and GO served as a quencher, and the system was designed to detect
exosomal tumor-associated proteins ( ). In particular, TPE-TA bound to the aptamer
and formed aggregates to rapidly amplify the fluorescence signal.
On the contrary, in the absence of tumor-derived exosomes, GO absorbed
the TPE-TA/aptamer complex to induce fluorescence quenching. In contrast,
targeted exosomes bound to the aptamer preferentially to form TPE-TAs/aptamer
complexes that induced detachment from the GO surface and created
a “turn-on” fluorescence signal. Under the optimized
conditions of the aptasensor, the fluorescence signal showed a linear
relationship with target exosomes in the concentration range of 4.07
× 105 to 1.83 × 107 particles/μL
(0.68–30.4 pM). The LOD was estimated to be 3.43 × 105 particles/μL (0.57 pM), and the sensitivity was found
to be high. In clinical samples, the sensory could differente patients
with prostate cancer from healthy individuals (AUC: 0.9790) with excellent
sensitivity (88.46%) and specificity (100.00%). Furthermore, the presence
of three tumor-associated protein markers on exosomes, human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), was also profiled
in a breast tumor cohort with high efficiency (AUC: 0.9845) and sensitivity
(97.37%) to identify malignant breast cancers as well as early stage
(I) cases (92.31% sensitivity). 
 Although the studies mentioned above showcase the
efficacy, sensitivity,
and selectivity of AIEgen-based nanosystems in exosome-targeted liquid
biopsy, the number of studies in this field remains highly limited.
In addition, studies focused on noncancerous diseases are rare. Hence,
here is an urgent need for further research in the realm of EV-targeted
liquid biopsy.

3.5.

## Lipid-Targeting AIEgen Probes
Lipids
serve as crucial storage biomaterials and maintain the biological
balance within the body. Maintaining a proper proportion of lipids
is essential for human health, as deviations from this balance can
lead to various diseases such as obesity, diabetes, tumors, CVDs,
and more. − Abnormal lipid levels have been identified
as biomarkers in clinical trials and
have been demonstrated to show significant differences between blood
plasma samples from patients versus healthy controls. Currently, the clinical diagnostic biomarkers
for lipids in blood samples include total cholesterol (TC), phospholipids
(PL), triglycerides (TG), lipoproteins, and free fatty acids (FFA),
which can be further categorized into high-density lipoprotein (HDL),
chylomicrons (CM), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and very low-density
lipoprotein (VLDL). Detecting and monitoring these targets is crucial
for disease prevention and therapeutics. However, traditional diagnostic
methods such as colorimetric assays, chromatography, immunoelectrophoresis,
immunodiffusion, radioimmunoassay, and ELISA are often time-consuming,
involve cumbersome steps, involve the requirement of large amounts
of sample, high background interference, and lack sufficient sensitivity
and selectivity. In this context, fluorescence detection offers a
flexible approach to lipid-associated diseases. By leveraging the advantages of the AIE effect in polar
solvents and viscous media, AIEgens can serve as excellent indicators
for the presence of lipids, particularly in subcellular organelles
such as lipid droplets. They can thus aid in disease diagnosis and
treatment. − However, despite the potential of AIEgen,
only a few studies so far have focused on lipid-targeted liquid biopsy
using blood samples.
Tang and Zhang collaboratively developed
a series of AIEgens (SQBT-TPE, SQBT-DMA, and SQBT-TPA) for early HDL
detection ( A). First, these three AIEgens were synthesized by introducing TPE,
triphenylamine (TPA), and N,N-dimethylaniline
(DMA), respectively, as the electron acceptor, a zwitterionic unit,
and the donor units and molecular rotors. The D–A structure
of AIEgens was thus achieved to enable the AIE and TICT effect. SQBT-TPE,
SQBT-DMA, and SQBT-TPA showed maximum absorption peaks at 500–600
nm and maximum emission in the NIR-I to NIR-II region. SQBT-DMA, in
particular, demonstrated the highest red-shift in emission, and its
fluorescence spectra extended to 2100 nm. Meanwhile, SQBT-TPE displayed
the highest QY of 20% in glycerol, followed by SQBTTPA (7.5%) and
SQBT-DMA (5.7%) in a 90% glycerol fraction. When applied for diagnosis
in a serum mouse model of hyperlipidemia (HLP), SQBT-TPE exhibited
significantly higher fluorescence in HLP mouse serum than in control
serum samples. SQBT-DMA, known for its excellent cell impermeability
and molecular stability, also showed increased fluorescence in response
to HLP and could be employed for long-term in vivo studies. Subsequently, when tested in clinical blood samples ( B–D), low
fluorescence levels were observed in all healthy groups, while high
fluorescence levels were detected in most patient samples, demonstrating
the outstanding accuracy (96%) and selectivity (80%) of the system,
with minimal background interference. A strong linear relationship
between fluorescence intensity and various lipid parameters was observed
(HDL [apoB] [R2 = 0.86], LDL-C [R2 = 0.8], and sdLDL-C [R2 = 0.82]) due to the electrostatic interaction between SQBT-TPE
aggregates (negative charge) and LDL particles (positive charge) ( E). This study presented a novel and rapid fluorescence
indicator for HLP. However, there is a need for further exploration
in this scientific field.
 Cholesterol is a waxy and hydrophobic molecule.
As a type of lipid,
cholesterol plays a range of pivotal roles in pathophysiological processes.
Cholesterol can be synthesized in the body from acetyl coenzyme A
(acetyl-CoA) through approximately 30 enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
Cholesterol travels through the bloodstream by binding to proteins
called “lipoproteins”. Typically, the concentration
of total cholesterol in healthy individuals is less than 5.18 mM.
Therefore, the excess generation and retention of cholesterol can
serve as an indicator of health. For
example, hypercholesterolemia is among the major causes of CVDs due
to the enhanced low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels. Thus, the detection and monitoring of cholesterol
levels is critical for disease diagnosis and treatment. Currently,
the ultracentrifugation method established by John Gofman is commonly
utilized for lipoprotein separation in plasma. Subsequently, enzyme
strip-based methods are commonly used for cholesterol detection. In
the past few years, fluorescent and electrochemical biosensors for
cholesterol have also been developed. Owing to their hydrophobic properties, AIEgens can serve as ideal
candidates for cholesterol detection. For example, Sakhuja et al. developed AIEgen carbon nanodots (CDs) through a
one-pot method in an organic medium. The nanodots showed emission
from 400 to 500 nm (CDorg). Using a novel bile acid hydrazone-based
organogel ( A), OgTOam-CDorg was synthesized by refluxing Og in a
9:1 ratio with THF/Oam at 100 °C ( B) to restrict the molecular motion by poor
solvent to induce nanoaggregates and further fluorescence. The addition
of cholesterol to CDorg could induce emission ( C). When cholesterol
was added into the CDorg solution, a good linear relationship
between cholesterol concentration (0.05 μM to 0.5 mM) (R2 = 0.97153) and the turn-on fluorescence intensity
( D,E) was
observed. The LOD and limit of quantification (LOQ) were estimated
to be 1.09 and 3.64 μM, respectively, with high sensitivity
and selectivity. These values were lower than the “healthy”
threshold of cholesterol in the body. When employed for cholesterol
sensing in clinical serum samples, OgTOam-CDorg enabled the direct quantification of cholesterol concentrations
effectively. Meanwhile, another AIEgen
called CD-P was developed for cholesterol detection and had a LOD
of 300 μM in vitro and in clinical samples. Collectively, these studies suggested that
AIEgens are capable of detecting lipid levels in blood samples.
 
3.6.

## Carbohydrate-Targeting AIEgen Probes
Carbohydrates, one of the four primary organic compounds in biological
systems, consist of polyhydroxy aldehydes and ketones. Carbohydrates
can be subdivided into mono-, di-, oligo-, and polysaccharides based
on the number of monomers they contain and are involved in almost
all biological processes. Glucose acts as a direct source of energy,
and polysaccharides such as glycogen and starch serve as cellular
energy stores in all living organisms. Moreover, as building blocks,
carbohydrates can also act as structural constituents, forming the
framework of RNA and DNA, the cell membrane, and other important cellular
components. In addition, carbohydrates also mediate cell–cell
and cell–pathogen recognition processes. , Thus, imbalance in carbohydrate levels is often an indicator of
poor health, including conditions such as infections, cancer, CVDs,
and aging, among others. − It is well-known that excessive consumption of carbohydrates is
directly linked to diseases such as type 2 diabetes, hypertension,
obesity, metabolic syndrome, and so on, which affect tissues throughout
the body. Abnormal carbohydrate metabolism and metabolites are observed
in almost every type of disease, with the most famous example being
the Warburg effect in tumors. , Therefore, carbohydrate
are recognized as both diagnostic and therapeutic biomarkers. , 
In the past few years, carbohydrate detection has emerged
as an important field of research, with microarrays, probes, chemosensors,
and biosensors being developed for carbohydrate detection. − These methods have become indispensable, driving significant progress
in diagnostic medicine. However, the selectivity of diagnostic methods
and the solubility of carbohydrates create several challenges, preventing
optimal outcomes. Traditionally, carbohydrates were detected based
on changes in solution properties. For example, Fehling’s test
was used to detect carbohydrate levels using copper salts. Another
common method involved Tollens’ reagent; in this reaction,
silver nitrate was reduced to elemental silver by saccharides, aiding
in carbohydrate detection.
The novel probe-based methods for
carbohydrate detection offer
better efficiency, lower complexity, and improved sensitivity and
repeatability over traditional methods. Several probes have been designed
and developed for selective carbohydrate sensing, and among them,
fluorescence-based signal transduction probes are used commonly. One
study showed that the boronic acid moiety can be combined with different
fluorophores to realize the fast and easy detection of carbohydrates. , Due to advantages such as high photostability, a high SNR, and high
QY, AIEgens are believed to be excellent candidates for carbohydrate
sensing ( ). Interestingly, the disaccharide maltose possesses AIE properties
and shows room temperature phosphorescence. Thus, it can be used for
various different biological applications, including Fe3+ detection as a biosensor and in anticounterfeiting display. 
 Glucose concentration is a key index in diabetes
diagnosis and
management. Currently, there is no cure for diabetes. Therefore, the
continuous monitoring of blood glucose levels is indispensable to
prevent patients from experiencing hypo- or hyperglycemia. Accordingly,
minimally invasive and noninvasive technologies are urgently required
in diabetes patients for the continuous monitoring of blood glucose.
Paper-based sensors present an appealing solution due to their
versatility and cost-effectiveness for biomedical applications. Over time, there have been significant advancements
in paper-based sensors for glucose detection. The combination of paper-based sensors with AIEgens appears
to be a feasible and effective strategy. In 2018, Li’s group
produced a paper-based sensor for the effective detection of glucose
using an AIEgen ( A). They synthesized TPE-M-L to achieve glucose detection
via a reaction catalyzed by glucose oxidase (GOx), resulting in the
production of H2O2. In this reaction, l-cysteine was oxidized into cysteine, decreasing the fluorescence
intensity. In the absence of glucose, no H2O2 was generated, and the fluorescence intensity of TPE-M-L remained
constant. However, the addition of glucose induced strong fluorescence
intensity at 460 nm due to the reaction between H2O2 and l-cysteine. These reactions could be exploited
to perform a convenient and sensitive assay for both H2O2 and glucose levels. Under optimal experimental conditions,
TPE-M-L was used for glucose and H2O2 detection,
the relationship between the H2O2 concentration
within the range of 0.01–1.0 μM, and the fluorescence
intensity exhibited a good linear correlation (R2 = 0.9966) was determined ( B,C). In addition, the LOD was estimated
to be 10 nM. For the paper-based fluorescence sensor, the linear relationship
with H2O2 concentration was observed between
0 and 25 mM, and the LOD was estimated to be 2.5 μM. Furthermore,
these changes could be detected with the naked eye. Meanwhile, fluorescence
intensity and glucose concentration from 0.05 to 1.0 μM exhibited
a good linear correlation (R2 = 0.9928),
and the LOD was found to be 50 nM. After TPE-M-L was applied for a
paper-based fluorescence assay, the linear relationship with glucose
concentration was detected in the range of 10 μM to 50 mM, and
the LOD was estimated to be 10 μM when visualization was performed
with the naked eye ( D). In addition, this reaction had high sensitivity. Finally,
when TPE-M-L was applied for the detection of glucose in human serum
samples, both solid-state and paper-based fluorescence sensors yielded
good concentration estimates and recovery rates (93.9–103.4%)
( E). Moreover,
the visual detection of glucose levels in serum samples was also achieved
using the paper-based fluorescence sensor ( ). 
 In 2022, Zhang et al. constructed
an enzyme-based
AIEgen (AIE-type glutathione [GSH]-protected AuNCs) in which smart
ZIF-8 acted as the signal transduction platform for glucose detection
( A). The
GOx and AIE-type glutathione (GSH)-protected AuNCs were synthesized
via the hot GSH reduction method and coprecipitated through the in situ growth of ZIF-8. This process resulted in the formation
of nanocomposites emitting yellow light, with enhanced stability in
organic solvents, particularly methanol, due to the core–shell
structure of ZIF-8, which restricted the intramolecular motion of
AuNCs and induced a 10-fold increase in the AIE effect at 565 nm after
excitation at 365 nm. Moreover, the porosity and weak interactions
of ZIF-8 facilitated the enrichment and retention of target analytes,
conferring the system with high sensitivity. Within the GOx/AuNCs@ZIF-8
system, GOx catalyzed the specific production of H+ and
H2O2 from glucose. Hence, the generation of
H+ (fluorescence quencher) and H2O2 was leveraged to test the fluorescence response. Accordingly, the
fluorescence intensity of GOx/AuNCs@ZIF-8 was negatively correlated
with the glucose concentration. Based on this correlation, two linear
relationship curves could be established, accounting for glucose concentrations
ranging from 0 to 1000 μM (R2 =
0.98685) and 1–20 Mm (R2 = 0.99522)
( B,C). The
LOD was low at 4.7 μM, and the system exhibited high selectivity
against some biomolecules and ions. When integrated into a microwell
paper sensor by embedding within the paper matrices, this system enabled
the use of small liquid volumes, operated under mild testing conditions,
and facilitated rapid sensing. Thus, the concentration of glucose
in human serum could effectively be tested using GOx/AuNCs@ZIF-8 ( D). 
 An important requirement for disease
diagnosis is the availability
of detection equipment; thus, methods that do not require specialized
equipment are extremely appealing. To develop an equipment-free and
visual biosensing strategy, Li’s group, who also developed
the above-mentioned AIEgens, constructed
an AIEgen (TPE-BTD)-based equipment-free biosensor for the sensitive
detection of multiple biomarkers based on a target-induced oxidation
reaction. First, TPE-BTD was synthesized through a palladium-catalyzed
Heck reaction between BTD-2Br and TPE-V ( A). It was then integrated with dopamine
to induce strong fluorescence emission at 550 nm. Subsequently, H2O2 and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) or HRP-mimicking
DNAzyme were added to the TPE-BTD/dopamine solution ( B), and dopamine was oxidated
to generate dopachrome, activating the inner filter effect (IFE) due
to the absorption curve and emission spectra overlap of TPE-BTD. This
led to a decrease in fluorescence intensity and induced a sensitive
and rapid response to G-quadruplex DNA and H2O2. When this system was employed for H2O2 detection,
a linear relationship between fluorescence intensity and H2O2 concentrations of 0.01–5.0 μM (R2 = 0.9847) was observed, along with a LOD of
4.7 nM. In addition, in the presence of hemin, H2O2 was detected in the concentration range of 0.5–80
nM, and the LOD was 0.21 nM. Finally, the linear relationship between
glucose concentrations and fluorescence intensity was observed in
the range of 0.05 to 5 μM (R2 =
0.9902). The LOD was 0.016 μM, and the system showed excellent
sensitivity and selectivity. This method was also applied for DNA
adenine methylase (Dam MTase) detection within the concentration range
of 0.02 to 20 U/mL, with the LOD estimated to be 0.0076 U/mL. A TPE-BTD-based
paper biosensor was subsequently developed. When this sensor was used,
the minimum H2O2 concentration was found to
be 0.6 μM. The signal of RGB values of TDH-PS could be recorded
using a color picker tool on a mobile phone, such that there existed
a linear relationship between R/B values and H2O2 concentrations ranging from 0.6 to 200 μM (R2 = 0.9630), with a LOD of 0.23 μM. Meanwhile, the
linear relationship with glucose was observed within a concentration
range of 2–260 μM (R2 = 0.9671),
with a LOD of 0.84 μM. This system was validated using clinical
serum samples from patients with diabetes; glucose, G-quadruplex DNA,
and Dam MTase were detected in these samples using the naked eye ( D). This equipment-free and visually intuitive
detection strategy laid a solid foundation for further exploration
and application.
 Similar to monosaccharides, oligosaccharides and
polysaccharides
also play important roles in biological systems. For instance, glycogen
serves as the primary storage unit of carbohydrates in animals, maintaining
the balance of energy supply. Heparin, recognized as the most negatively
charged polysaccharide in biological systems, can interact with different
proteins (including antithrombin and fibroblast growth factor) via
electrostatic interactions to execute their biological functions.
Hence, heparin is also a commonly used clinical agent and is widely
utilized as an anticoagulant for the prevention and treatment of thrombotic
diseases. , Therefore, ensuring the proper
dosage of heparin and monitoring its levels are critical for disease
treatment. At present, indirect measures of coagulation, such as the
activated clotting time (ACT), antifactor Xa levels, and activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), are commonly used to evaluate
the concentration of heparin. However, these methods lack specificity,
are relatively cumbersome, and the EC method requires skilled operation.
Owing to progress in colorimetric and fluorescence-based approaches,
including AIEgen strategies, more cost-effective
and simpler methods for detecting serum heparin levels are now emerging.
Li’s group constructed AIEgen (TPE)-based electrospun fibrous
strips for the straightforward visual observation of ratiometric color
changes with the naked eye to detect serum heparin and urine trypsin
levels. In their system, the TPE derivative synthesized via a four-step
reaction was grafted onto polystyrene-co-maleic anhydride
(PSMA) fibers along with phloxine B (PMSA-PhB + TPE). Then, protamine
was adsorbed onto the biosensor to induce the static quenching of
phloxine B and activate the AIE effect of the TPE derivative (PMSA-PhB
+ TPE). Under these conditions, the fluorescence restoration of phloxine
B at 574 nm (I574) and the relief of emission
of the TPE derivative at 472 nm (I472)
were observed upon the introduction of introduced heparin or trypsin,
which removed the protamine. The results were determined by evaluating
the grafting densities of phloxine B and the TPE derivative (I574/I472) ( A–C). When
PMSA-PhB + TPE was applied to detect elevated concentrations of heparin,
the fluorescence intensity of PhB increased simultaneously with the
decrease in the fluorescence intensity of TPE derivative 5, demonstrating a linear relationship (R2 = 0.999) and a low LOD of 0.02 U/mL ( D,E). Notably, these changes were observable
by the naked eye, as the color of the fibrous mats shifted from cyan
to green and then to bright yellow after incubation with 0.4 and 0.8
U/mL of heparin under an ultraviolet lamp, indicating high sensitivity,
selectivity, stability, and reusability. Similarly, in the presence
of increased concentrations of trypsin, an obvious color change was
observed by the naked eye within the range of 0–8 μg/mL.
Finally, the concentration of serum heparin levels was tested during
postoperative and long-term care in patients who had undergone cardiovascular
surgery. A good recovery rate (95%) was achieved for heparin and trypsin
detection ( F), demonstrating that that the sensitivity of the system was suitable
for therapeutic supervision. 
 In addition to these AIEgens, other AIEgen-based
strategies have
also been developed for carbohydrate detection. The notable ones are
summarized in . These studies suggest that AIEgens are good candidates for carbohydrate
detection. However, their use for the detection of disaccharides,
oligosaccharides, and polysaccharide is still in the nascent stage,
and additional studies are required.
 
3.7.

## Protein-Targeting AIEgen Probes
Proteins,
as executors of genetic instructions, play critical roles in all pathophysiological
processes within the human body. Variations in genetic information,
altered splicing, gene mutation, post-translational modifications,
and intracellular or extracellular transportation collectively contribute
to the diverse array and ubiquitous nature of protein molecules. Any
dysfunction or imbalance in protein levels can have lethal consequences. , For example, CA-125/MUC-16, CEACAM5/CEA, HGF, IGFBP-1, IGFP-2, TNFRSF6B,
TNFRSF13B, CXL17, GDF-15, and SCF serve as regulators in tumor-related
processes like invasion, metastasis, proliferation, inflammation,
and angiogenesis. These proteins are upregulated in the bloodstream
in patients with cancer and can serve as biomarkers for early lung
cancer diagnosis. Given that blood is
the primary conduit for protein distribution and circulation, dynamic
changes in protein levels can be detected using blood samples. Thus,
noninvasive liquid biopsies targeting blood proteins (i.e., disease
and tumor biomarkers) have emerged as a significant focus in both
basic and clinical research. − The two classic methods that were used traditionally for protein
detection were the Biuret method and the Kjeldahl nitrogen determination
method. In the Biuret method, the peptide bonds in protein molecules
were reacted with bivalent copper ions under alkaline conditions to
produce purple-red compounds. In the Kjeldahl nitrogen determination
method, protein content was calculated as 6.25 times the nitrogen
content. At present, modern techniques such as colorimetry, electrophoresis,
chromatography, immunoassays, biosensor-based detection, and fluorescence-based
detection are commonly used for the qualitative and quantitative evaluation
of proteins, and these methods exhibit high selectivity and efficacy.
However, low sensitivity is a major drawback of these methods. In
this context, AIEgens present a promising alternative for blood protein
detection due to their enhanced sensitivity. , Here, we present a comprehensive overview of blood protein detection
via AIEgen-based liquid biopsy.
Human serum albumin (HSA), a
single-chain polypeptide with 585 amino acid residues, is a clinically
important protein. This protein plays a key role in processes such
as the maintenance of plasma osmolality and immune regulation and
can also be exploited for drug delivery. HSA is the most abundant
protein in human plasma and changes in its levels are associated with
various pathological conditions, including coronary heart disease,
chronic renal disorders, and sepsis. Hence, the early stage detection
of HSA levels in the blood can enable the successful prevention of
various diseases. The polypeptide chain of HSA contains three α-helical
domains, with each domain being divided into two subdomains. The two
hydrophobic pockets present between these subdomains function as ligand-binding
sites for nutrient transport. Importantly, site I of HAS can interact
with its ligands via hydrophobic interaction. In contrast, site II
exhibits a more intricate binding mechanism, involving not only hydrophobic
interactions but also hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions.
This complexity arises from the abundance of positively charged amino
acid residues within site II.
Recently, Duan and Li devised
a method to control the aggregation
state of an AIEgen-based probe in order to detect a specific target.
They constructed an acoustic streaming tweezer (AST) through a gigahertz
bulk acoustic wave resonator to manipulate the aggregation state of
an AIE probe (1-(anthracen-2-yl)-3-(naphthalen-1-yl) urea) (ANU) for
HSA detection, which was generated via the modified Senjuti Halder
method ( A).
In this method, a mixture of ANU and HSA was incorporated into a polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) microchannel modified with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrimethoxysilane
(PFDMS) ( B). The introduction of PFDMS prevented the nonspecific adsorption
of proteins. Within this system, the size of the AST trap matched
the dimensions of the ANU, inducing the enrichment and accumulation
of ANU nanoparticles. The ANU aggregates dispersed in the solution
in the microchannel formed aggregates and exhibited an aggregation-dependent
brightness (ADB) effect, which then induced a strong increase in fluorescence
intensity ( C). When this system was used for HSA detection, the LOD was estimated
to be 0.5 μg/mL, far below the threshold of proteinuria in the
human body ( D–F). In another study targeting
HSA, Wu et al. synthesized a series of superbranched TPE derivatives
(P1-COOH, P2-COOH, P3-COOF, PL-COOH, P-OH, and P-NH2) ( A) with different branching structures and terminal
groups to enable the highly sensitive and specific recognition and
detection of HSA. The introduction of hyperbranched structures into
TPE improved solubility and amplified steric hindrance and electrostatic
repulsion, thus preventing aggregate formation. Compared to linear
TPE-based amphiphilic molecules, the as-prepared branched AIEgens
had much higher critical micelle concentrations (CMCs), which promoted
the formation of dense aggregates. This enhanced the SNR, leading
to improved detection ( B). Among these AIEgens, P3-COOH exhibited the highest CMC and the best SNR.
After binding to HSA through hydrophobic interactions, P3-COOH showed restricted molecular
movement and was less vulnerable to attack by quenchers. This greatly
altered its fluorescence intensity at 448 and 576 nm. When applied
for HSA detection in vitro, the fluorescence intensity
exhibited a linear relationship with different HSA concentrations
of 0.25–10 μM, 0.1–5 μM, and 0.1–2.5
μM, with a low LOD of 165, 63, and 56 nM, respectively. Moreover,
the method demonstrated high selectivity and accuracy with a good
HSA recovery rate in diluted serum samples (98.8–101.5%). 
 Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is a typical serum marker
for the clinical
diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Thus, the accurate detection of AFP levels
has an important role in HCC diagnosis, prognostication, and management.
Therefore, several researchers have attempted to develop AIEgen probes
for AFP diagnosis. For instance, Ma’s research group constructed
an AIEgen probe for detecting AFP by combining a silver nanoparticle
(AgNP)-linked immunoassay with an AIEgen (TPE-4TA). This strategy
capitalized on the ability of Ag+ ions to induce efficient
precipitation, thereby triggering the AIE effect at 504 nm. This probe
exhibited a robust linear relationship between fluorescence intensity
and the concentration of Ag+ within the range of 300 nM
to 10 μM (R2 = 0.9924) and enabled
high-specificity detection. This probe addressed the intrinsic limitations
of enzymes, which cause the dissolution of AgNPs and the generation
of large amounts of Ag+, demonstrating a distinctive turn-off/on
effect driven by tetrazolate-Ag+ complexation. When used
for detecting AFP, it displayed excellent linearity over a concentration
range of 0.1 ng/mL 1 to 5 μg/mL, and the LOD was calculated
to be 42 pg/mL. Given the specificity and sensitivity of the TPE-4TA-amplified
fluorescence immunoassay in vitro, this probe was
also used to detect AFP in 19 unrelated clinical serum samples of
HCC patients. The results of double-blind evaluation revealed that
this TPE-4TA-based enzyme-free amplified fluorescence immunoassay
was capable to detect AFP levels successfully, exhibiting strong good
agreement with the clinical results obtained with a chemiluminescence
immunoassay. The area under the ROC curve was higher than 1.0, suggesting
the excellent discrimination capability of this probe ( ). 
 Recently, the advancement of POC biochemical sensors
has significantly
contributed to the field of clinical diagnostics. To address the challenge
of poor sensitivity in POC settings, in 2022, Jiang, Tang, and Liu
constructed a metal–organic framework (MOF) in which the AIEgen
(TCPE) served as a ligand (MAFs) for ultrasensitive POC biochemical
sensing. The probe had two sensors, including hydrogel digital sensors
(HDSs) and sensors for lateral flow immunoassays (LFIAs). First, Zr@TCPE
MAFs were fabricated without regulators (MAF-1) or with
regulators (MAF-2, MAF-3, and MAF-4, containing different mass ratios of TCPE:ZrCl4). The emission spectra
of these MAFs ranged from 400 to 700 nm ( A). Then, HDSs and LFIAs were synthesized
by introducing different cross-linked polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) hydrogels
(MAF-4@QDs-PVP hydrogel complex, integrating quantum
dots [R-QDs, red emission at 604 nm] and MAF-4 [B-MAF-4, blue emission at 465 nm]) ( B) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) and antibodies.
All of these MAFs possessed unique luminescent mechanisms of structural
rigidity-enhanced emission. In the optimization experiments, a 102–103-fold enhancement of sensitivity was
observed in the hydrogel-based POC digital sensor and LFIA by using
MAFs. More importantly, fast and sensitive POC detection was achieved
with the naked eye using the hydrogel-based POC digital sensor, and
quantitative digital RGB analysis could be completed within a few
minutes. Given the high affinity between MAFs and proteins, MAF-5 (similar to MAF-1, but obtained via differential
centrifugation) was coated by antibodies to obtain an LFIA sensor
for immunoassays ( C). By using this MAF-based LFIA, serum samples could be tested
in POC settings for clinical protein detection, with enhanced sensitivity.
A good linear relationship between AFP concentration (1 pg/mL to 20
ng/mL) and fluorescence intensity was observed (R2 > 0.99), and the LOD was 0.6 pg/mL ( D). Moreover, the method showed
high sensitivity and selectivity and required a low serum volume.
Interestingly, when LFIA was used for serum-based clinical diagnosis
in a cohort of HCC patients, the results of MAF-based LFIA demonstrated
a high correlation (R2 > 0.91) with
the
results obtained through the clinical chemiluminescence immunoassay
(CLIA) method (R2 > 0.91). In addition,
it was also capable of AFP detection in urine samples with high efficiency,
further highlighting its versatility and clinical potential ( E). 
 C-Reactive protein (CRP), produced by the liver,
typically shows
elevated levels under conditions of inflammation and other diseases.
Hence, the detection of CRP levels is beneficial for disease diagnosis.
To enable the effective detection of CRP and address the limitations
of fluorescent lateral flow immunoassays (LFAs), such as invisibility
under room light, the need for additional fluorescent readers, and
limited adaptability to diverse application scenarios, Zhang and colleagues
constructed an AIEgen (AIENB)-based lateral flow assay for CRP detection.
First, the AIENB synthesized from a lipid-soluble AIEgen (AIE RED620)
( C) was doped
with polymer nanobeads via a mini-emulsion and solvent
evaporation technique ( A). As a result, the AIENB was entrapped with AIE RED620
within the amphiphilic polymer shell. AIENB showed an excitation peak
at 333 nm (UV light) and an emission peak at 480 nm (blue light) while
also demonstrating superior fluorescent and absorbent stabilities
( B). Subsequently,
the AIEgen (AIENB)-based lateral flow assay was designed by covalently
conjugating AIENB with a CRP antibody via their respective
carboxyl group and amino group under EDC activation. Then, this conjugate
was coated onto the conjugate pad. Next, the capture antibody was
immobilized on a nitrocellulose (NC) membrane to form the test (T)
line, the control (C) line was set with rabbit IgG. After sample loading,
the AIENB-antibody conjugates were captured on the T line when the
target protein CRP was present in the sample. Meanwhile, the independent
C line, which served as a quality control indicator for the test strips,
was always generated owing to the capture of AIENB-rabbit IgG conjugates
by goat antirabbit IgG ( D). This AIENB-based LFA, CRP levels as low as 8.0
mg/L could be qualitatively detected in the naked-eye mode, with the
linear relationship spanning from 0.2 to 100 mg/L (R2 = 0.956). Meanwhile, in the fluorescent mode, the quantitative
measurement of high-sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP) demonstrated a lower
limit of 0.16 mg/L ( E). This system was used to test 40 different human plasma
samples. The AIENB-based LFA yielded a good area under the curve (AUC)
for qualitative and quantitative analysis (1.00 and 0.945, respectively),
and the results showed a high correlations with those of the immunoturbidimetry
method (R2 = 0.992), validating the reliability
of the AIENB-LFA CRP assay ( F,G). 
 Early stage biomarkers play a pivotal role in diagnosis
and treatment
monitoring. To enable the specific and
sensitive detection of VEGF165, a known biomarker of different
conditions (such as the angiogenic stage of cancer), Rahaie et al.
constructed a bivalent aptamer-Cu nanocluster nanobiosensor (B-Apt-CuNC-VEGF165) with a turn-on AIE effect. In this system, B-Apt-CuNC-VEGF165 was integrated with a multimerized VEGF165 aptamer
and ssDNA-based linker in the middle, flanked by polythymine sequences
on both the 3′ and 5′ ends. Here, the ssDNA was used
as a template for Cu-nanocluster supraparticle formation. On a molecular
level, VEGF165 caused self-assembled aggregation in the
system after binding to the VEGF165 adapter. After VEGF165 was added into B-Apt-CuNC-VEGF165 contained
solution, the fluorescence intensity at 463 nm after excitation at
332 nm was enhanced in a concentration-dependent manner due to the
self-assembly induced emission and AIE effect. Importantly, the aggregation
caused a red-shift in absorption and emission to 390 and 524 nm, respectively,
because of the restricted intramolecular rotation and vibration of
Cu-NC ligands ( ). Under these conditions, a linear relationship between aptasensor
concentration (ranging from 10 to 800 pM) and fluorescence intensity
(R2 = 0.9943) was observed, and the aptasensor
exhibited excellent stability, sensitivity, and a decent response
rate. The LOD was estimated to be 12 pM. In serum samples from healthy
individuals and patients with colorectal cancer, VEGF165 levels of 150 pM and 680 pM were identified using this system, surpassing
the detection performance of commercial kits. 
 In addition, there has also been significant progress
in utilizing
AIEgens for blood sample liquid biopsies targeting various other proteins. presents a summary
of blood protein detection using AIEgen-based nanosystems. However,
several of these reports use AIE fluorescent probes for detecting
various proteins associated with different diseases using similar
approaches, such as LFIA. The selectivity, sensitivity, and recoveries
of AIEgen nanosystems have not been determined in a suitable range
of clinical samples. These studies must be conducted to enable the
clinical transformation of these AIEgen-based liquid biopsy tools.
 
3.8.

## Enzyme-Targeting AIEgen Probes
Enzymes
are a family of proteins and RNA molecules with catalytic activity
and induce the transformation of their substrates into new substances
with extremely high efficiency. According to the International Enzyme
Commission (EC), enzymes can be classified into six categories based
on the type of reaction they catalyze: transferases, hydrolases, oxidoreductases,
isomerases, lyases, and ligases. In the body, enzymes are involved
in almost all biochemical processes, including gene expression, cell
growth/differentiation/migration, metabolic pathways, signal transduction,
etc. Moreover, enzymes have also been implicated in pathological processes. − Therefore, any dysregulation or aberrant expression of enzymes,
including a variation in their concentration and activity, can serve
as a potent indicator of health and potentially fatal outcomes.
Enzyme are involved in various physiological and pathological processes
owing to their regulatory function. , However,
gene mutations, errors in translation and post-translational modification,
and mislocalization evens can have deleterious consequences in the
body. For example, aldehyde dehydrogenase 2, a type of mitochondrial
enzyme, is sometimes inactivated due to gene mutations (ALDH2-rs671),
it causes the increase of cholesterol synthesis and the decrease of
the production and secretion of HDL-C, leading to metabolic chaos.
Therefore, this gene mutation has been linked to several CVDs, including
alcohol-induced cardiac dysfunction, heart failure, coronary artery
disease, pulmonary hypertension, and so on. Telomerase, a well-known enzyme involved in the regulation of telomere
length, is closely involved in the biogenesis and growth of cancer
and can serve as a therapeutic target in malignant diseases. Therefore, enzymes not only hold significant
potential as biomarkers for disease diagnosis but can also serve as
promising targets for therapeutic interventions. , 
Given the importance of enzymes in clinical diagnosis, many
novel
methods, including fluorescence, colorimetry, EC, ECL, photoelectrochemistry,
HPLC, and MR, have been developed for the selective and sensitive
detection of enzymes, leading to amazing advances in fundamental and
clinical research. Among them, fluorescent biosensors exhibit greater
advantages than other methods owing to their accuracy, sensitivity,
and cost-effectiveness. AIEgens are
thus a popular option for enzyme detection, and their use in enzyme
detection has been comprehensively reviewed by several scholars, including
Yi (2022), Li (2018), Tang (2019), and Xia (2020). Here, we will provide a comprehensive review
of enzyme-targeted blood-based liquid biopsy using AIEgen nanosystems.
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is a type of hydrolase, which refers
to a group of isoenzymes that catalyze the transphosphorylation and
hydrolysis of biomolecules like nucleic acids, proteins, and carbohydrates.
ALP expression is mainly concentrated in the liver, placenta, intestine,
and bone. , Under healthy conditions, the
content of ALP in human serum ranges from 46 to 190 U/L. However,
ALP levels are elevated in various pathological conditions, such as
bone disease (250 U/L in rickets patients), breast and prostate cancer,
liver dysfunction, and diabetes. Therefore, it is of great importance
to develop an effective method for ALP detection. In this context,
Li’s group constructed a ratiometric assay for ALP activity
detection on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) fibers after the covalent
immobilization of fluorescein. This was followed by the electrostatic
adsorption of the bisquaternary ammonium salt of tetraphenylethene
(TPE-2N+) on this conjugate, resulting in the fabrication
of PET-Flu-PO4/TPE. In the absence of ALP, phosphorylated
fluorescein formed a complex with TPE-2N+, resulting in
AIE at 471 nm due to the TPE. However, after ALP was added, the hydrolysis
of the phosphoesters resulted in the gradual removal of TPE-2N+, restoring fluorescein emission at 514 nm. This change in
fluorescence increased with the concentration of ALP, enabling ALP
detection ( A). Upon the surface modification of fibers with an amine density
of 30 nM/mg, a notable and nearly linear enhancement in I514/I471 ratios (R2 = 0.99) was observed, ranging from 0.73 to 3.05 as the
ALP concentrations increased from 0 to 100 U/L ( B,C). More importantly, the
fibrous strips underwent a color change from blue (TPE-2N+) to green (fluorescein) under ultraviolet light within minutes,
enabling the detection of ALP levels ranging from 0 to 80 U/L with
the naked eye. This method was also successfully applied for ALP detection
within the concentration range found in human serum, with appropriate
dilutions if necessary, and it showed excellent selectivity and accuracy
while remaining resistant to interference from other serum components
( D). The
ALP activity in serum samples was estimated to range from 67.0 to
134.7 U/L, which is within the normal range of serum ALP levels. High
recovery rates ranging from 96% and 105% were detected, and the RSD
was below 4.4%. Thus, this system was simpler and more effective than
ELISA. 
 Hyaluronidase (HAase) is a type of extracellular
matrix-digesting
endoglycosidase that degrades high molecular-weight hyaluronan (HA)
into lower molecular weight fragments, thereby maintaining cellular
function and the redox balance. Therefore, both HAase and HA are considered
disease indicators. To determine the activity of HAase, Wu and Zeng
constructed a novel ratiometric fluorescent nanosensing system based
on the AIE and ACQ effects ( ). First, they synthesized the AIEgen TPE-2N+, a tetraphenylethylene derivative that exhibits a positive charge
on both ends, and the ACQ molecule AN-N+, an anthracene
derivative with a positive charge at only one end. Subsequently, TPE-2N+ and AN-N+ were mixed with negatively charged HA
via electrostatic complexation. In this process, TPE-2N+ acted as a cross-linker to induce the aggregation of the compounds
as well as the nanoparticles. In molecular level, the aggregation
led to strong fluorescence emission from TPE-2N+ (474 nm)
and the quenching of AN-N+ fluorescence (414 nm). Consequently,
the introduction of HAase led to an enzymatic reaction, causing the
breakdown of HA, which triggered the disassembly of the nanoparticles.
This restored the fluorescence emission of AN-N+ but suppressed
TPE-2N+ fluorescence. Accordingly, the ratio of fluorescence
intensity (I414 to I474) could be used to effectively detect HAase activity. Moreover,
within this system, HA served not only as a substrate for enzymatic
reaction but also as a scaffold for nanoparticle formation. A good
linear relationship was observed between the I414/I474 ratio and HAase activity
within the concentration range of 0.005 to 0.2 U/mL in aqueous medium,
and the LOD was very low (0.0017 U/mL). When applied for the detection
of HAase in biological fluids, the HAase levels in urine and undiluted
serum samples were calculated to be 5.12 × 10–3 U/mL and 0.317 U/mL, respectively, showcasing high selectivity,
accuracy, and reliability. 
 In recent years, the rapid development of spatial
omics technologies
has demonstrated the key role of biomolecule modification in disease
development, progression, diagnosis, and therapy. − Consequently, the detection of the biomolecules responsible for
these modifications (i.e., enzymes) has emerged as an effective method
for diseases diagnosis. Histone deacetylases
(HDACs) is a kind of hydrolytic enzymes with the biofunction to remove
the acetyl groups from the ε-N-acetylated lysine residues of
histones and other cellular proteins, thereby influencing the biological
pathways of cancer and various other diseases. The detection of HDAC
activity is thus of great importance. Currently, the methods employed
for HDAC activity detection include HPLC, MR, EC, ECL, fluorescence
biosensing, and so on. To improve the detection of the HDAC activity
of Sirt1, Wu et al. developed a hyperbranched polyester-based
one-step fluorescent assay (H40/TPE-2SO3– complex) based on an AIEgen (TPE) ( ). Within H40/TPE-2SO3– complex, the hyperbranched polyester was coupled with the negatively
charged TPE derivative bearing two sulfonic acid groups and acetylated
lysine groups (H40-Lys(Ac)). Sirt1 caused the deacetylation of the
H40-Lys(Ac) lysine groups, turning the electroneutral polymer into
a positively charged one. Further, it induced the complexation of
the polymer with TPE-2SO3–. Collectively,
these steps led to the formation of nanoaggregates via electrostatic
interactions, enhancing the fluorescence intensity at 465 nm. When
used in vitro for Sirt1 activity detection, the H40/TPE-2SO3– complex system could detect Sirt1 concentrations
ranging from 0 to 10 μg/mL, reaching a low LOD of 25 ng/mL.
When H40/TPE-2SO3– was validated in diluted
human serum samples, it yielded results comparable to those of ELISA
(8.8 vs 8.2 μg/mL), with a recovery of 91%. Notably, this assay
was easier to operate than ELISA. Together, these findings showcased
the accuracy and reliability of the H40/TPE-2SO3– complex for HDAC determination. 
 Substantial efforts have been dedicated toward
the development
of AIEgen-based detection probes for enzyme activity sensing. summarizes the key
advances in AIEgen probes for detecting enzyme activity in blood samples.
Although many AIEgen-based nanosystems have been developed for enzymatic
activity detection, a significant portion of these systems have not
been tested in clinical samples but instead only in vitro or in vivo in animal models. Some notable examples
include Z-HBC for m6A methylase and demethylase, TB-BChE for butyrylcholinesterase, TPE for γ-glutamyltranspeptidase, compound P1 for lipase, SiNPs@GSH-AuNCs for protease, PFS for acetylcholinesterase, and the examples listed in ref ( ). This has limited their clinical translation.
Nevertheless, the literature shows that different mechanistic approaches
are being employed to design novel molecules for the detection of
enzyme activity. However, more sensitive strategies are required to
address the problem associated with the short lifetime of targeted
enzyme activity.
 
3.9.

## Ion-Targeting AIEgen Probes
Ions,
including cations and anions, serve as both nutrients and bioregulators
in biological systems. Ions enable the proper functioning of proteins
by acting as cofactors and are thus important for maintaining cell
growth and survival. Disruptions in ion concentrations, including
a sharp/sudden decrease or increase, can lead to cellular dysfunction
and contribute to various diseases or cytotoxicity. , So far, several important ions in the body have been identified,
including sodium (Na), potassium (K), phosphorus (P), calcium (Ca),
chlorine (Cl), sulfur (S), magnesium (Mg), selenium (Se), magnesium
(Mg), iron (Fe), molybdenum (Mo), manganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), copper
(Cu), and so on. The dynamic homeostasis of these ions is critical
for normal biomolecule, organelle, cell, tissue, and organ function
and to maintain physiological homeostasis throughout the body. − For instance, ions like K+ and Ca2+ are essential
for maintaining cell morphology, structure, and function. Thereby,
imbalances in these ions can contribute to adverse or lethal consequences,
including heart disease, CVDs, NDs, and cancer. , Similarly, changes in Fe concentrations can lead to anemia. These
issues are compounded by adverse environmental conditions, which can
introduce hazardous ions into the human body, particularly as humans
are on the top of the food chain. Thus,
ionic imbalances can serve as a hallmark for a range of diseases. For example, zinc ions, as trace elements,
play pivotal roles in biological processes such as gene expression,
DNA repair, cell division, and apoptosis, and their dysfunction is
noted in diseases such as cancer, CVDs, autoimmune disease, infectious
disease, and NDs, among others. Similarly,
copper ions are involved in energy supply, connective tissue maturation,
and vascular system formation. Thus,
the detection of ion content can offer predictive insights into diseases. While various methods are employed for ion
detection, including colorimetry, chromatography, ion selective electrode,
enzyme-based method, atomic absorption spectrophotometry, radionuclide
dilution MS, IC-MS, and so on, these methods lack sensitivity and
selectivity and can also be expensive and operationally complex. Fluorescence
methods, particularly those based on various AIEgens, offer distinct
advantages in this context. So far, a range of AIE-based systems have
been developed in order to sense specific ions of interest, as summarized
in our previous review as well as in
the work by Tang’s group and
Zhao’s group. In this section,
we will discuss AIEgen-based nanosystems for ion-targeted liquid biopsy
using blood samples in greater detail.
In 2022, to address the
issue of excessive Cu+/Cu2+ intake, Fu and co-workers
constructed an AIEgen-based probe for the sensitive detection of Cu+/Cu2+ in biofluids. The probes comprised two key
components: ssDNA sequence (A31, 5′-ACCCGAACCTGGGCTACCACCCTTAATCCCC-3′)
and AgNCs, wherein the A31 served as a template for synthesizing
AgNCs in the presence of NaBH4 in PB buffer ( A). After Cu+/Cu2+ was introduced to the A31-templated
AgNCs, aggregates were formed, enhancing the fluorescence intensity
of AgNCs at 626 nm after excitation at 546 nm in a concentration-dependent
manner. Accordingly, a label-free and signal-on fluorescence-based
sensing platform was developed and applied for detecting Cu+/Cu2+ in biological samples and enabling the intracellular
imaging of Cu+/Cu2+ in cells with high sensitivity
( B,C). When
the concentration of Cu+ and Cu2+ ranged from
2.0 to 20 μM, a good linear relationship between fluorescence
intensity and Cu+/Cu2+ concentrations were obtained,
with an extremely low LOD of 0.1 μM ( D). The process was characterized by minimal
time consumption (within 30 min), high selectivity, and sensitivity
under optimal experimental conditions. Upon application in cellular
fluids and human serum, the probe demonstrated specific detection
capabilities, achieving an excellent recovery rate of 90–104%
with no interference. 
 Zn2+ and Al3+ are involved
in biological
processes such as gene transcription, biocatalysis, energy metabolism,
and neural signal transmission. In another study, Li and Qin constructed
a novel multifunctional fluorescent probe (HL) for specifically detecting
Zn2+/Al3+ using 3,4,5-tribenzyloxybenzoylformylhydrazine
and salicylic aldehyde in methanol solution, achieving an 83% yield
( A). After
Zn2+ and Al3+ were added to the HL solution
in the aqueous media/ethanol mixture, fluorescence was enhanced (λex,
400 nm/385 nm, λem, 510 nm/450 nm) due to the AIE effect arising
from the constriction of the three benzyl groups within HL. The complex
formed at a ratio of 2:1 and inhibited the PET process. AI3+ interacted with HL at a 1:1 ratio to form a stoichiometric L-Al
complex, which also caused the inhibition of the PET process ( B,C). This difference
in fluorescence made it possible to image Zn2+/Al3+ in PC3 cells. When applied to serum from prostate cancer (PCa) patients,
the probe identified serum Zn2+ levels of 8.58 ± 1.14
μM, 12.85 ± 0.97 μM, and 12.88 ± 1.31 μM
in patients with PCa, NCL or healthy individuals, respectively, providing
supporting information to serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels
for accurate PCa diagnosis. Furthermore,
Cui et al. discovered that xanthan gum, a natural
product, could serve as a novel AIEgen for detecting Fe3+ and Cu2+ in the range of 5–300 μM and 5–200
μM, respectively, with a LOD of 0.0545 and 0.0345 μM,
respectively. The detection ranges aligned with those found in healthy
serum, demonstrating significant potential for clinical application. Another noteworthy discovery was the use of PIQPy for Cu2+ detection in chicken blood (LOD
= 37.69 nM). 
 Although plenty of AIEgens have been developed
for ion sensing,
one critical limitation remains with respect to the validation of
these systems in clinical samples. Efforts should be dedicated to
promote the translation of fundamental research into clinical settings.

3.10.

## Microorganism-Targeting AIEgen Probes
Microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and viruses, are ubiquitously
present and show a high range of diversity. These microbes can cause
infectious diseases, such as malaria, severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS), Ebola, smallpox, coronavirus disease (COVID-19), and monkeypox,
among others. These diseases pose a great threat to public health
and can increase the risk of other noninfectious diseases like cancer. − However, some microorganisms, such as probiotics also play a beneficial
role in maintaining health. For example, the brain–gut microbiome
axis has been found to regulate NDs via various pathways. , Blood infections caused by pathogenic bacteria is a leading cause
of sepsis, contributing to high mortality and morbidity rates. Thus,
microorganisms can also serve as biomarkers for disease, , − although understanding this relationship
remains a complex and ongoing challenge.
Numerous methods and
tools have been developed for the identification of specific pathogenic
microorganisms, such as bacterial culture, PCR/RT-PCR, gene microarray,
target-specific immunoassays, high-throughput sequencing (HTS), ELISA,
fluorescence staining, etc. Unfortunately, many of these methods suffer
from limitations such as low sensitivity and selectivity, time-consuming
procedures, and high costs. Meanwhile, fluorescence probes combined
nanotechnologies offer a promising avenue for rapid and accurate diagnosis
due to their advantages. − AIEgens can be applied for the detection
of pathogenic microorganisms under a series of conditions. Currently, research on the AIEgen-based detection,
bioimaging, and treatment of microbial infections represents a burgeoning
area of interest, akin to the prominence of cancer research in the
field of nanomedicine. − Here, we offer a comprehensive overview of microorganism-targeted
liquid biopsies based on blood samples. Surprisingly, only one study
used blood samples for microorganism detection.
Since 2019,
COVID-19 has inflicted widespread devastation across
the globe. Despite the introduction of vaccines, which have helped
mitigate the ongoing spread of COVID-19, the need for rapid and effective
detection of the virus responsible for this disease remains urgent.
Li et al. designed a straightforward, speedy, and
highly sensitive serological diagnostic technique using AIEgen nanoparticles
(AIE810NP, λem = 810 nm) in a LFA for the early detection
of immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) against SARS-CoV-2
in clinical serum samples ( ). Within this LFA, a BPBT dye with NIR emission properties
was chosen as the fluorescent unit. Additionally, to enhance the fluorescence
signal further, polystyrene (PS) nanoparticles sized 300 nm were loaded
with 3.18 × 106 dye particles (AIE810NP)
and utilized to tag the detection ligand. The LOD of this LFA was
low at 0.236 and 0.125 μg/mL for IgM and IgG, respectively,
and the sensitivity was high (78% and 95%, respectively). The performance
of this novel assay was thus comparable to that of ELISA (LOD of 0.040
and 0.039 μg mL–1 and sensitivity of 85% and
95%) and better than that of AuNP-based test strips (41% and 85%).
Notably, the AIE810NP-based test strip could identify IgG
and IgM at 1–7 days after symptom onset, much earlier than
the AuNP-based test strip (8–15 days). Overall, the AIE810NP-based test strip appeared to be a promising tool for
the early detection of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical serum samples. Subsequently,
a commercial 2019-nCoV Antigen Kit (AIE FICA) based on AIEgens was
developed by Prof. Tang, and its production was scaled for improving
COVID-19 testing ( ). Furthermore, AIEgens have
also been applied for detecting antibodies against COVID-19, , α2,6SL-TPE for sensing influenza virus, and TBTCP for sensing bacterial sepsis. 
 These examples show that AIEgens are standout fluorescent
probes
for microorganism testing. However, the stringent requirements for
acquiring clinical blood samples, given the potential for diffusion
and propagation, pose a significant challenge that must be addressed
to advance research in this field.

3.11.

## AIEgen Probes Targeting Other Biorelevant
Components
In addition to the biomolecules discussed above,
blood also contains a variety of other substances with concentrations
within the nanomolar to millimolar range. Despite advancements in
sensing technologies, many of these biorelevant components, listed
in , have not
been effectively and comprehensively detected. Although methods such
as MR, HPLC, ELISA, and others have been utilized to quantify the
levels of various biomolecules, these methods are often expensive,
time-consuming, and require specialized equipment. In comparison,
fluorescence-based methods offer distinct advantages, including noninvasiveness,
high sensitivity, selectivity, and repeatability. In this section,
we highlight a few examples of blood-based liquid biopsy strategies
that already demonstrate some of the required performance parameters
for practical application.
Insulin, a 5.8 kDa hormone that consists
of two α-helical chains (A and B) linked by disulfide bonds,
is a regulator of blood glucose levels. Thus, this hormone is intricately
linked with diabetes mellitus. , Consequently, the
precise identification and ultrasensitive detection of insulin levels
hold paramount significance for the early diagnosis and management
of diabetes. In pursuit of effective detection methods, Li constructed
a label-free turn-on fluorescence aptasensor for insulin detection
based on an AIEgen. First, the insulin recognizer (guanine-rich aptamer
IAG3 aptamer, 5′-GGTGGTGGGGGGGGTTGGTAGGGTGTCTTC-3′)
was assembled on the surface of GO via hydrogen bonds
and π–π stacking interactions. The positively charged
AIEgen (TPE-Z) synthesized from TPE-MB was complexed with the negatively
charged molecule IGA3 through strong electrostatic interactions of
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) from TPE-Z to GO to
generate an aptasensor that caused the efficient fluorescence quenching
of TPE-Z. Insulin could specifically bind with IGA3, caused its detachment
from the GO surface, which induced the fluorescence recovery of TPE-Z
at 475 nm after excitation at 325 nm. Under optimized conditions,
the fluorescence aptasensor exhibited a broad linear range for insulin
detection from 1.0 pM to 1.0 μM, with a LOD of 0.42 pM and excellent
sensitivity and selectivity ( B,C). Thus, this method yielded analytical performances
better than CDs/Apt, NIR-QDs/Apt, and FAM-labeled Apt for insulin
detection. When this aptasensor was used to detect insulin in human
serum samples under optimized experimental conditions, it provided
spiked recoveries of 96.06–104.26%, underscoring its potential
for clinical application. Furthermore,
immune-modified semiconductor quantum dots (SQDs) and graphene quantum
dots (GQDs) were also fabricated for sensing insulin, providing an
LOD of 0.045 ng/mL within 5 min. These tools could also be used for
insulin detection in human serum samples. In addition, PG-1 and PG-2 were also developed for sensing progesterone,
providing LODs of 1.21 μM and 38.1 nM, respectively. 
 Antibiotics are drugs that are commonly used to
prevent bacterial
infection. However, given the risk of antibacterial resistance, the
precise dose of antibiotics needs to be examined effectively. To this
end, Shi et al. constructed a dual-emission fluorescence
biosensor platform consisting of a peptide (G(propargylamine)K(Ac)AA)
conjugated with a blue-emitting AIEgen (TPE) and aptamer (5′-NH2-CGAGGGTACCGCAATAGTACTTATTGTTCGCCTATTGTGGGTCGG-3′)-modified
red-emitting gold nanoclusters (AuNCs-apt) to detect vancomycin (Van).
Here, both the peptide and aptamer showed high affinity to Van, and
after binding to Van, their fluorescence intensity at 470 and 650
nm changed. Using this nanoplatform, an excellent linear correlation
between the fluorescence response and Van concentrations of 0.01–100
mg/mL (R2 = 0.9917) was achieved, with
a LOD of 2.79 ng/mL. Notably, 1 mg/mL Van could be detected with the
naked eye, demonstrating the ease and effectiveness of the biosensor.
Furthermore, this platform could distinguish Van from glycopeptide
antibiotics and allowed for its detection in rabbit serum samples. 
GSH is a vital endogenous antioxidant
with a host of physiological
roles. Notably, GSH is indispensable for the maintenance of a cellular
redox balance. As shown in , the normal concentration of
GSH in the blood is 8.23–17.4 μM. However, aberrant changes in these levels can lead to disruptions
in biological tissues and contribute to disease onset. To sense GSH in human blood serum samples,
Qu et al. synthesized a TPE derivative (1,2-bis[4-(3-sulfonatopropoxyl)-phenyl]-1,2-diphenylethene
sodium salt 3, TPE3) that acted as an AIEgen and also constructed
a fluorescent probe (MnO2–SiO2 NPs-AIE).
Briefly, the negatively charged MnO2 was first employed
as both a positive charge protector for SiO2 NPs and a
recognition unit for GSH. In the presence of GSH, Mn2+ was
released, and the positive charges of SiO2 NPs were exposed,
enabling the binding and aggregation of TPE3. This led to enhanced
emission. Under optimized experimental conditions, a robust linear
relationship (R2 = 0.992) between the
fluorescence intensity of MnO2–SiO2 NPs-AIE
and GSH concentrations of 0.5 to 100 mM was obtained, with a LOD of
200 nM. When this system was used to examine clinical serum samples,
the original GSH concentrations in the two serum samples were evaluated
to be 4.12 and 3.44 μM, with satisfactory recoveries and precision
values of 94.3% to 104.2% and 1.80% to 3.91%, respectively. Further details on biothiol detection using
AIEgens can be found in the earlier literature. 
 Creatinine, a waste product in urine produced due
to the breakdown
of a creatine in muscle tissue, is usually filtered by the kidney.
However, its levels in urine are linked to muscle function and renal
status. Generally, under normal physiological conditions, creatinine
concentrations in the serum range from 35 to 40 mM. However, changes
in serum creatinine levels can indicate diseases such as muscular
dystrophy or renal failure. Typically, urinary protein and creatinine
concentrations are common indicators of renal function. In 2019, Khataee et al. designed a fluorescent probe using glutathione-capped
copper nanoclusters (CuNCs) and Al3+ for sensing creatinine.
In the presence of Al3+ ions, the CuNCs could form aggregates
via glutathione–Al3+ interactions, inducing enhanced
fluorescence emission at 585 nm. However, when creatinine was present,
it caused quenching in a concentration-dependent manner due to its
coordination with Al3+ ions, which resulted in the disaggregation
of the CuNCs-Al3+ complex. Hence, a good linear relationship
(R2 = 0.997) between fluorescence quenching
and creatinine concentrations in the range of 2.5–34 mg/L was
achieved, with a LOD of 0.63 mg/L. In clinical serum samples, the
recoveries ranged from 95.6% to 105.7%, indicating satisfactory performance. 
Several of the currently available AIEgen-based
probes and sensors
can specifically recognize certain biomolecules owing to their masterful
design strategies. As a result, many scientists (ourselves included)
involved in biological and material science have directed immense
focus and efforts toward these liquid biopsy targets to improve diagnostic
outcomes. However, it is worth noting that several of these diagnostic
targets have not been identified in clinical samples, and many targets
remain unexplored with AIEgen labeling. Nevertheless, we remain optimiztic
that AIEgens can be designed to selectively target more existing biomolecules,
creating a framework for future practical applications in diagnostics.

4.

## Smart AIEgens for Urine-Targeted Liquid Biopsy
Urine is an excretory waste product produced by the kidneys and
expelled from the body via the ureters and the urinary bladder. It
is primarily composed of water, alongside small quantities of other
constituents, such as protein, dead blood cells, DNA, toxins, carbohydrates,
and ions ( and ). , , Changes in the composition of
urine can serve as a direct indicator of various diseases. , Similar to the blood samples used for liquid biopsies, urine samples
are easy to obtain and allow testing for a large range of disorders,
enabling easier diagnosis. Urine tests are valuable in the realm of
precision medicine, especially for urothelial carcinoma. − Various components such as cells, urinary tumor DNA (utDNA), cfDNA,
cfRNA, exosomes, protein, enzyme, carbohydrate, and ions have been
investigated as surrogates for urinary liquid biopsies, addressing
many challenges encountered by clinicians. , − In some cases, urine samples can outperform blood samples for the
diagnosis of certain diseases. 
The analytic procedures involved in urinary liquid biopsy include
the isolation and characterization of urinary components. The main
detection methods include histochemical examinations, omics profiling,
microfluidic techniques, chemosensor-based methods, fluorescent probe-based
methods, and so on. During testing, the specificity and sensitivity
of these methods must be taken into consideration. , , , Compared to costly and time-consuming methods that have unpredictable
outcomes, fluorescence-based methods have emerged as the preferred
choice for urinary liquid biopsy due to their sensitivity and selectivity. − In this context, AIEgens possess great potential over conventional
fluorescent probes. However, some components in urinary samples remain
to be identified and detected using AIE probes. Herein, we comprehensively summarize the latest progress
in the application of AIEgens for the evaluation of real urinary liquid
biopsies.
4.1.

## cfRNA-Targeted Urinary Liquid Biopsy with
Smart AIEgens
Nucleic acids, including DNA and RNA, are common
targets for disease diagnosis. The presence of nucleic acids in urine
samples can provide important insights into disease progression. When
combined with sequencing technologies, urinary liquid biopsies for
nucleic acids appear extremely promising in the diagnosis, staging,
and prognostication of urothelial carcinoma, as well as in monitoring
the response to therapy, detecting minimal residual disease, and performing
disease surveillance. However, the low abundance of nucleic acids
limits the sensitivity of detection methods, hampers sensitivity,
while the complexity of components undermines selectivity during sequencing.
Therefore, Lou’s group constructed a cfRNA (miR-21) detection
system (TPEPy-LDNA, Cy3-MBDNA, and FAM-LDNA) via an
enzyme-aided recycling amplification strategy using an AIEgen as the
fluorescence indicator ( A). TPEPy-LDNA contained two segments: the recognition
component (DNA, 5′-CAGTCTGATAAGCTA-3′) and
the fluorescence signal component (AIEgen, TPEPy). miR-21 induced
the formation of the hydrophilic aggregate of duplex DNA-RNA with
a blunt 3′ terminus, resulting in weak fluorescence intensity
at 560–620 nm. Then, Exo III caused the cleavage of the recognition
segments, causing the release of both miR-21 and AIEgens. The miR-21
could bind to another probe and trigger the second phase, and the
hydrophobic AIEgens formed aggregates in a hydrophilic environment
to emit fluorescence. TPEPy-LDNA could achieve a low LOD of 1 pM for
miR-21 detection, with high selectivity and specificity. Its LOD was
lower than the LOD of FAM-LDNA and Cy3-MBDNA (10 pM and 7 pM, respectively) in vitro and in live cells ( B–E). In clinical samples, the probe
could effectively detect miR-21 levels and distinguish between urine
samples from cancer patients and healthy individuals, demonstrating
its excellent specificity. In addition, TPEPy-LDNA could also be used
to detect miRNA-21 in live cells. 
 Unfortunately, no studies so far have focused on
the use of AIEgens
for urinary CTCs, ctDNA, and EVs. Thus, additional endeavors are required
to achieve advancements in this area of clinical diagnostics.

4.2.

## Protein-Targeted Urinary Liquid Biopsy with
Smart AIEgens
Proteins are one of the most important components
of urine biopsy. Under normal physical conditions, proteins with medium
or high relative molecular weights, such as albumin and globulin,
are retained by the body and do not enter the urine due to the pore
size and charge barrier of the glomerulus. Meanwhile, proteins with
small relative molecular weights can successfully pass through the
glomerulus, although over 95% of filterable proteins are ultimately
reabsorbed by the renal tubules. Generally, the kidneys produce 600–1800
mL of urine each day. Water accounts for 95% of water, with the other
major components being urea, chloride, sodium, and potassium salts,
and other biorelevant molecules. The mean concentration of urinary
protein is 30–130 mg/day. However, a urinary protein content
of over 150 mg/day indicates proteinuria, which is associated with
various pathological states. Proteinuric kidney diseases, such as
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) and diabetic kidney disease
(DKD), are a group of biological disorders known by the presence of
excess protein in the urine. As mentioned
previously, the concentration of urinary protein is significantly
different under healthy and diseased conditions. For instance, a higher
albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) is observed in patients with a higher
severity of DKD. Although urine is an
unstable and dynamic fluid because its composition can change with
ingested nutrients and the frequency of urination, urinary proteins
are considered stable. The abnormal modifications of these proteins
are associated with diseases, making them valuable biomarkers for
early detection and disease monitoring. − Therefore, the accurate detection of urinary proteins is crucial
for early diagnosis and intervention, particularly in patients requiring
lifelong renal replacement therapy for end-stage kidney disease. Currently,
24 h urinary protein analysis remains the gold standard for the diagnosis
of proteinuria. In this context, the commonly used protein detection
methods include chemiluminescence immunoassays, LC-MS/MS, HPLC, ELISA,
colorimetry, fluorescent probes, omics, and so on. However, several
of these methods required long timeframes, are cumbersome and lack
sensitivity. Moreover, these methods often fail to detect disease
biomarkers at early stages. Thus, more effective methods are urgently
required.
To address this challenge, Hong’s group construed
a fluorescent probe TC426, which had AIE characteristics,
for the sensitive and specific detection of HSA in urine. TC426 was synthesized via the Knoevenagel condensation
reaction. The reaction between 1,3-indandione and 4-(diethylamino)salicylaldehyde
yielded intermediate compound 2; meanwhile, the subsequent
alkylation of the hydroxy group of compound 2 with 1,3-propane
sultone to generate a sodium sulfonate group enabled the synthesis
of TC426 ( A). In an aqueous solution, TC426 showed
no obvious fluorescence emission. However, after HSA was added, TC426 showed bright fluorescence at 535 nm upon interacting
with HAS. This was because peripheral functional groups such as sulfonate,
pyridinium, carboxylate, trialkyl-ammonium, and tetrazolium groups
facilitated the entry of TC426 into the interior domain,
inducing in-solubilization and RIM in water ( D). The fluorescence intensity of TC426 exhibited a robust linear correlation with HSA concentrations
within the microalbuminuria range (0–1000 mg/L, R2 = 0.9954), and the LOD was calculated to be 0.253 mg/L
(3.74 nM). Hence, the performance of TC426 was comparable
to that of the BSPOTPE and TPE-4TA probes.
More importantly, TC426 also possessed excellent anti-interference
abilities and sensitivity toward creatinine and other major components
of urine. Upon excitation with visible light, TC426 exhibited
a good linear relationship between fluorescence intensity and concentration
(0–200 mg/L) in clinical urinary samples, as well as satisfactory
recovery rates of 81.3–129.9% ( B,C). 
 In 2019, Tang and co-workers developed a tetrazolate-tagged
TPE
derivative (TPE-4TA)-based anionic fluorescent probe for the effective
detection of urinary albumin. This method was designed to be more
cost-effective and sensitive. In their study, (E)-TPE-2TA
and (Z)-TPE-2TA were first synthesized. TPE-4TA ( A) was found to
exhibit the best solubility in neutral-to-basic buffers and formed
aggregates after albumin addition. Single molecules of TPE-4TA formed
noncovalent bonds with albumin at specific sites via hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions, which enhanced
the binding affinity ( B,C,F) and fluorescence emission at 490 nm. The linear dynamic
ranges (LDR, defined as R2 > 0.98)
of
TPE-4TA, (Z)-TPE-2TA, and (E)-TPE-2TA
extended to 230, 80, and 130 mg/L, respectively, with extremely low
LODs in the range of 0.21–0.31 nM (0.21, 0.26, and 0.31 nM,
respectively) ( D,E). The sensitivity and solubility of TPE-4TA enabled accurate
quantification across the range of albumin concentrations typically
found in biological samples. In tests on clinical samples, an excellent
linear correlation was observed between TPE-4TA fluorescence detection
results and turbidimetric inhibition immunoassay results (R2 = 0.99) for all 15 samples. This demonstrated
the good performance of the TPE-4TA fluorescence detection assay for
quantifying urinary albumin levels within the range corresponding
to microalbuminuria ( G). 
 POCT is an effective method for clinical diagnosis.
Several types
of nanomaterials have been proposed and developed for enhancing the
efficiency of POCT. Targeting chronic kidney disease, Situ and Zheng
constructed a synergistic TTVP-based POCT device for the simultaneous
quantification of microalbuminuria and leukocytes using a single drop
of urine ( B). A linear relationship between the fluorescence intensity of TTVP
( A) and HSA
concentration was observed in the concentration range of 0 to 800
mg/L, with the LOD being 6.96 mg/L. Hence, TTVP fully covered the
detection range for microalbuminuria (30–300 mg/L). TTVP also
demonstrated high affinity to the hydrophobic pockets of HSA, enabling
the concentration of HSA toward the contact line in urine droplets
via the coffee-ring effect upon evaporation. However, gravitational
sedimentation resulted in a uniform distribution of most leukocytes
on the contact surface. As a consequence, the content of both HSA
and leukocytes could be determined with high sensitivity and selectivity
by analyzing the fluorescence intensity of the rings and the fluorescence
scatters at 645 nm, respectively. By leveraging the coffee-ring effect
postsample evaporation, the TTVP-based POCT device could detect HSA
levels within the range of 9.375 to 300 mg/L, with a robust linear
concentration-dependent relationship, and the LOD was estimated to
be 9.375 mg/L. Meanwhile, the number of leukocytes in the droplets
was associated with the number of emissive spots in the range of 25–400
cells/μL, and the method demonstrated excellent selectivity
in this regard. More importantly, the integration of a smartphone
fluorescence microscope facilitated the one-step POCT determination
of urine albumin and leukocyte content within 20 min. Hence, a device
containing a sample loading chip, an excitation filter, an emission
filter, two blue light-emitting diodes (LED), a lens, and a rechargeable
battery was constructed based on this method. This device could detect
HSA concentrations of 18.75–300 mg/L and leukocyte counts of
25–400 cells/μL ( C). In a cohort of 120 clinical samples, the concentrations
of HSA and counts of leukocytes determined using the TTVP-based device
were well-correlated with those obtained using classical methods such
as immunoturbidimetry (R2 = 0.883) and
flow cytometry (R2 = 0.9145). In addition,
this study was the first to report the identification of cells in
urinary samples using AIEgen ( ). 
 TC426, TPE-4A, and TTVP enable
the effective detection of urinary proteins. provides a summary of AIEgen-based nanosystems
for the detection of human urinary proteins. Notably, much of this
research has focused on HSA and not on other urinary proteins. Nevertheless,
this area of research has great potential and could improve the efficiency
and cost-effectiveness of disease diagnosis. Thus, it warrants additional
attention.
 
4.3.

## Enzyme-Targeted Urinary Liquid Biopsy with
Smart AIEgens
Enzymes are also important components of urine,
as listed .
Many urinary enzymes serve as biomarkers for disease. For example,
α-amylase is a common diagnostic indicator in urinary tests,
and HAase is a urinary marker for the early diagnosis of bladder cancer. Telomerase, a ribonucleoprotein that adds a
specific sequence (TTAGGG) to the 3′-end of telomeres, is also
a sensitive biomarker and can enable early cancer detection. Meanwhile, proteases, acting as protein regulators
within cells, are implicated in numerous diseases such as respiratory
disease, cancer, bowel disorders, renal dysfunction, infection, autoimmune
disorders, and CVDs. Thus, protease is also a biomarker for several
diseases. , Therefore, urinary enzymes represent
another promising target for urine liquid biopsies, complementing
the focus on utDNA, ctDNA, cfRNA, and protein.
As for biopsies
of blood samples, AIEgens also show great advantages in urinary biopsies.
A previous literature review by Yi summarized enzyme detection methods
based on bioprobes with AIE characteristics. However, this review did not include studies that examined clinical
urine samples. Here, we provide a summary of urinary enzyme detection
based on AIEgen in , along with some typical examples. For instance,
Xia et al. designed a ratiometric fluorescent AIEgen-based
bioprobe for detecting telomerase activity in urine, aiming to enhance
reproducibility and robustness ( ). This bioprobe was designed by taking
advantage of electrostatic forces. Positively charged silole-R could
spontaneously bind to the negatively charged DNA backbone, leading
to enhanced fluorescence intensity and an increase in the length of
the DNA strand. As telomerase induced primer extension, silole-R bound
to the negatively charged sites only and demonstrated aggregation,
enhancing blue fluorescence intensity at 478 nm. Meanwhile, the fluorescence
intensity of Cy5 at 665 nm remained constant, serving as an internal
control. The ratiometric emission intensity ratio (I478/I665) of this bioprobe
correlated with the concentration of telomerase, demonstrating good
specificity, reproducibility, and a linear relationship (R2 > 0.9) between fluorescence intensity and the amount
of cancer cell lysate. When this bioprobe was applied to distinguish
telomerase extracts from bladder cancer blood samples and normal urine
specimens, the bioprobe exhibited practical reproducibility and a
100% positive result rate with high fluorescence intensity ( ). Meanwhile, Wang et al. synthesized
a novel AIEgen called 4,4′,4″,4′′′-(ethene-1,1,2,2-tetrayltetrakis(benzene-4,1-diyl))tetrakis(1-(4-bromobenzyl)pyridin-1-ium)
bromide (TPE-4N+). They then constructed an AIE fluorescent
sensor based on TPE-4N+. TPE-4N+ could bind
to HA via electrostatic adsorption to form TPE-HA.
This led to effective emission recovery in the yellow-green region
(blue-shifted from 580 to 536 nm). However, when HAase was present,
the enzymatic digestion of HA caused depolymerization and fluorescence
quenching ( A). This “on–off” change could be applied for
analyzing HAase activity with high sensitivity and specificity using
two consecutive linear equations: y = 0.009–0.418×
(R2 = 0.985) in the range of 0.05 to 2
U/mL, and y = 0.001–0.036× (R2 = 0.998) in the range of 2.75 to 5 U/mL. The LOD was
0.02 U/mL, and the method showed high selectivity ( B,C). HAase concentrations
in normal healthy individuals were found to be lower than reported
when this probe was applied for testing clinical urine samples. Moreover,
TPE-4N+ exhibited good average recoveries of 97–108%,
meeting the requirements for practical use ( ). 
 Collectively, previous studies have revealed that
AIEgens are excellent
candidates for the detection of urinary enzyme activity. Thus, their
clinical application for disease diagnose should be attempted with
great focus.

4.4.

## Carbohydrate-Targeted Urinary Liquid Biopsy
with Smart AIEgens
Urinary carbohydrate content is an important
indicator of diabetes, offering effective insight into diabetic pathology.
In addition, it can also serve as a biomarker for other pathological
conditions. For example, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a characteristic
component of bacterial outer membranes, is regarded as a good biomarker
for urinary tract infections ( ). In this regard, Wang et al. synthesized
a TPE-based AIEgen named TPEPyE that bore a positively charged pyridinium
pendant. The synthetic cascade was as follows: TPE → TPE-Br
→ Py-TPE → TPEPyE ( A,B). Notably, TPEPyE showed maximum emission
at 519 nm following excitation at 415 nm. The electrostatic interactions
between LPS and TPEPyE caused the formation of TPEPyE aggregates,
causing enhanced (22-fold) maximum emission at 515 nm. This represented
a blue-shift from the emission maxima of pure TPEPyE (519 nm) and
was linearly correlated with the concentration of LPS in the range
of 0 to 0.5 μM (R2 = 0.995) ( C,D). In addition,
the LOD was 370 pM. When used to detect LPS in artificial urine samples,
TPEPyE exhibited increased fluorescence intensity as the concentration
of LPS increased, although the fluorescence intensity was lower (4-fold)
than that observed with an LPS standard solution with the same concentration
(R2 = 0.992) and the LOD (400 pM) was
slightly higher. Nevertheless, the method continued to show high sensitivity
and selectivity. Subsequently, TPEPyE was employed for LPS detection
in clinical urine samples from patients with urinary tract infections
( E). During
this test, TPEPyE exhibited bright yellow-to-greenish emission in
infection samples, while a weak emission peak was observed in normal
samples. This suggested that TPEPyE could selectively identify Gram-negative
bacteria but not Gram-positive bacteria. Hence, the findings showed that AIEgen-based fluorescent probes
can be used to clinically diagnose urinary tract infections.
 In 2023, Xiong et al. developed
a “fluorescence@magneto”
core–shell nanostructure (MANP), where the AIEgen was closely
packed as the core. A compact-discrete spatial arrangement was achieved
using discrete magnetic materials (Fe3O4) ( ). The core–shell
configuration led to high fluorescence intensity, which could be attributed
to the AIEgen’s stacking-enhanced photoluminescence and the
simultaneous reduction of photon loss from the thin magnetic shell.
In addition, the significant magnetic activity of the magnetic shielding,
coupled with modification using a double antibody, was used to design
a sandwich immunoassay. As a result, the dual-functionalized MANP
showed immunochromatographic sensing capabilities. Upon application
for procalcitonin detection in standard solutions, MANP signals showed
a robust linear relationship with procalcitonin concentrations of
0.0018–62.5 ng/mL (R2 = 0.9977),
with the LOD being 0.0012 ng/mL. This FLIA for POCT showed high sensitivity
and selectivity. Moreover, when the assay was used to test real human
plasma samples, a strong positive correlation was observed between
the results of the MANP-FLIA method and the standard CLIA method (R2 = 0.966), demonstrating the effectiveness
of this assay in clinical sample detection. In another application,
MANP was utilized for detecting lipoarabinomannan, a promising tuberculosis
(TB) biomarker, in standard solutions. MANP showed a good linear relationship
with lipoarabinomannan concentrations from 0.01 to 20 ng/mL (R2 = 0.997), with a LOD of 0.0016 ng/mL and high
sensitivity and selectivity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis
H37Rv and other TB mycobacterial strains for POCT using the
FLIA method. Furthermore, in real human urine samples, MANP could
effectively distinguish TB-positive patients from healthy individuals
( ). This AIEgen-based nanoplatform thus offered
an alternative method for the early diagnosis of TB in resource-limited
settings. Subsequently, another AIEgen ((TPE)-cored diboronic acid
[1]) was also developed in 2010 for the specific detection
of d-glucose in artificial urine samples, although it was
not testing in clinical samples. Other
researchers developed a new AIEgen (MTPE-FCyP)-based system called
AIEzyme/LUM/ZIF@FL for bacteria detection in urine samples, with an
LOD of 1.74 CFU/mL. This method was based on the generation of persistent
reactive oxygen species from AIEzyme-associated cyclic energy transfer
between the AIEzyme and luminol, which catalyzed the chemiluminescence
of luminol. 
 Given the key biological roles of various carbohydrates,
more attention
is warranted in the area of AIEgen-based carbohydrate detection.

4.5.

## Urea-Targeted Urinary Liquid Biopsy with Smart
AIEgens
Urea is the primary nitrogenous end-product of protein
metabolism and is excreted from the body via urine. Abnormal levels of urea in the urine usually result from
pathological conditions such as severe dehydration, lung disease,
hepatic failure, kidney failure, acute nephritis, and sepsis, among
others. Thus, it is vital to detect urea levels in urine samples.
The high sensitivity and selectivity of fluorescent probes make them
promising candidates for detecting urea levels in clinical samples.
Therefore, AIEgen have been developed for urea detection, and we summarize
the advances in the area of urea detection via AIEgen-based liquid
biopsy.
In 2020, an AIEgen called perylene diimide, functionalized
with imidazole (PDI-Hm), was synthesized by Lee et al. PDI-Hm was insoluble in polar solvents and quickly aggregated under
these conditions, causing obvious emission at 542 nm due to its perylene
backbone. However, the introduction of ionizable imidazole groups
retarded the aggregation of perylene through repulsive electrostatic
forces. After urease was incorporated into the nanosystem, it induced
the hydrolysis of urea to generate hydroxides, which caused the aggregation
and fluorescence quenching of PDI-Hm. Briefly, the hydroxides generated
from the enzymatic hydrolysis of urea deprotonated the imidazole groups
in HCl/methanol mixture, reducing the electrostatic repulsion between
PDI-Hm molecules. As a result, aggregation and fluorescence quenching
was achieved ( A,B). PDI-Hm enabled the effective and rapid (<1 min) detection
of urea within the range of 0–10 mM, with high sensitivity;
additionally, the LOD was estimated to be 0.4 mM ( C,D). When PDI-Hm was applied
for testing clinical urine samples, it yielded results comparable
to those of currently used clinical methods, with 93.4% of consistency.
This suggested that PDI-Hm exhibited considerable selectivity for
urea in urine samples ( E). Moreover, the fabrication of PDI-Hm gel films allowed
the rapid screening of excessive urea levels in urine samples ( ). 
 Another AIE probe, the copper nanoclusters@Al3+ complex,
was also fabricated by Han et al. for the detection
of urea after the incorporation of urease. Urease-catalyzed hydrolysis
induced the generation of ammonia from urea, and further hydrolyzation
yielded OH–, thereby increasing the pH of the immediate
environment. This hydrolysis caused linear concentration-dependent
(20–150 μM of urea) fluorescence quenching at 585 nm
after excitation at 340 nm, and the LOD was estimated to be 5.86 μM.
The method showed higher sensitivity, selectivity, and reproducibility
than other reported methods. When this probe was applied for analyzing
clinical urine samples, the concentration of urea in human urine was
found to be 15.90 μΜ after 10 000-fold dilution,
indicating a healthy range (155–388 mM). The performance of
this method was comparable to that of ELISA, and the recoveries ranged
from 99.23 to 101.4%. In addition, amines
and ammonia were detected using 2-(2-hydroxy-5-methyl) benzothiazole
(HBT) derivates (HPT) via colorimetric and fluorescence-based detection. 

4.6.

## Small Biomolecules-Targeted Urinary Biopsy
with Smart AIEgens
As shown in and , urine contains numerous small molecular weight biomolecules
that are metabolized and excreted by various organs. These biomolecules
are associated with various diseases. For example, pyrophosphate (PPi)
is a biomarker for joint disease, 1-hydroxypyrene
(1-OHPy) can reflect exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs), and metabolites included within
urinary exosome are linked to membranous nephropathy. In general, urine contains a few species of
small chemical compounds that provide genetic and proteic information
and can be used as biomarkers for disease diagnose. To aid the detection
of these compounds, various AIEgens have been developed.
In
one study, protamine-templated gold nanoclusters (PRT-AuNCs) exhibiting
the AIE effect (AIE-PRT-AuNCs) were fabricated via a step reaction process by Wang and colleagues. The AIE-PRT-AuNCs
exhibited maximum emission at 595 nm after 300 nm laser excitation.
The introduction of 1-hydroxypyrene (1-OHPy) caused Au–N bond
cleavage in AIE-PRT-AuNCs and induced the generation of hydrogen bonds
between the −OH groups in 1-OHPy and the N atoms and/or carboxylic
anions in protamine. This led to electrostatic interactions among
AIE-PRT-AuNCs, which carried a highly positive charge, and 1-OHP,
which was negatively charged, resulting in the generation of inter-
and/or intra complexes. This caused the aggregation-induced photoluminescence
enhancement of AIE-PRT-AuNCs ( A,D). Therefore, 1-OHPy could be quantitatively detected
across a wide linear range of 0.924 to 74.1 nM under optimal experimental
conditions, with an LOD of 0.277 nM and high sensitivity and selectivity
( B,C). While
applied to four human urine samples, the recovery results were comparable
to those obtained with the HPLC method ( ). 
 PPi is a compound of interest due to its role in
multiple cellular
processes. In 2018, Fan’s group synthesized a Schiff base AIE
probe (N,N′-bis (salicylidene)-1,4-diaminobenzen)
( A) for detecting
PPi. The as-prepared probe could bind to Al3+ to form a
probe-Al3+ complex by providing the N and O donor center,
inducing aggregation, and enhancing fluorescence intensity. Probe-Al3+ disaggregates after the addition of PPi because PPi showed
stronger binding ability to the probe than Al3+. This caused
a reduction in probe fluorescence ( B). The presence of Al3+ was
detected (0–180 μM) via a good linear relationship (R2 = 0.9908), a LOD of 0.39 μM, excellent
sensitivity, and selectivity over metal ions, anions, and biomolecules.
Moreover, the probe could detect PPi over concentrations of 0–60
μM, and there was a robust linear relationship (R2 = 0.9904) between the gradual decrease in fluorescence
intensity and PPi concentration (LOD = 0.75 μM). The probe was
utilized to analyze clinical urine samples; the recoveries of Al3+ and PPi in the diluted samples were found to be 94–101%
and 97–101%, respectively, demonstrating the potential of the
probe for clinical application. 
 In 2019, another fluorescent bioprobe was designed
for the selective
and sensitive detection of PPi. For this probe, which was constructed
by Wang et al., the AIEgen TPE was synthesized via a Michael addition reaction between TAEA and TPE-epoxide.
It was subsequently embedded within rigid hyperbranched poly(amido
amine) (HPA) to produce TPE-HPAs, including the P1, P2, and P3 variants.
The large number of amine moieties in TPE-HPAs facilitated a “turn-on”
fluorescent detection mechanism for PPi anions ( A). This was mediated by two
mechanisms, the first being electrostatic attraction and the second
involving the neutralization of positive charges on TPE-HPAs. These
mechanisms caused the HPA framework to become less rigid, releasing
TPE units. Among the three TPE-HPA variants, P2 exhibited excellent
linearity with PPi concentrations of 0–1.0 mM, with an LOD
of 6.5 nM and excellent selectivity and sensitivity ( B). P2 was also capable of
accurately detecting PPi concentrations in human urine, with excellent
recoveries of 95.5–102.1% ( C). 
 Iodide, an essential micronutrient, is required
for the normal
functioning of the thyroid gland and for normal neurological activity.
Both the deficiency and excessive intake of iodine can lead to thyroid
disorders (hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism, respectively) and other
health concerns. To detect iodide levels, Singh et al. synthesized an AIEgen probe named compound 6 ( A), which formed
aggregates in a 50% HEPES buffer (HB) fraction mixed with a THF solution.
After iodide was added to the mixture, the fluorescence intensity
was selectively enhanced owing to the strong binding affinity of compound 6 with iodide than with the other organic anions. In addition,
with the increase in HB buffer concentration, more aggregates were
formed, and the fluorescence increased. Compound 6 was
titrated against increasing iodide concentrations. This resulted in
the gradual quenching of the twin emission bands at 380 and 399 nm
up to a concentration of 0.371 mM (92.06%) ( B) with high selectivity ( C). When compound 6 was applied for detecting iodide levels in the clinical urine samples,
it exhibited a promising performance with a LOD of 49.3 μg as
well as a good recovery rate (87.12–98.68%). These results
demonstrated the effectiveness and potential of compound 6 in detecting iodide. In addition,
other AIEgens, including 1-(2-hydroxynaphthylmethylene)-2-(2-hydroxybenzylidene)
hydrazine for Zn2+ (LOD: 46 nM) and TPE-QN for Hg2+ (LOD: 71.8 nM), were developed for ion detection in urine sample, highlighting
the excellent performance of AIEgens in this context.
 In another study, N,N′-bis(salicylidene)-p-phenylenediamine (BSPD), N,N′-bis(4-hydroxylsalicylidene)-p-phenylenediamine
(BSPD-OH), and N,N′-bis(4-methoxylsalicyli-dene)-p-phenylenediamine (BSPD-OMe) were developed as new matrices
for the analysis of small molecules in urine samples via matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). These compounds were employed for analyzing
low molecular weight compounds, owing to their low matrix ions and
limited background interference, which effectively decreased matrix
interference during analysis. This study
suggested that AIEgens could not only serve as fluorescent probe for
chemical compound sensing but also help in the identification of new
biomarkers.
The detection of chemical compounds with small molecular
weights
in urine via AIEgen-based fluorescent probes remain a challenge. Another
key factor impeding the development of urine sample biopsies is the
lack of urinary biomarkers for several diseases. Thus, the integration
of fundamental research and nanomedicine is warranted to address this
gap.

4.7.

## Drug-Targeted Urinary Biopsy with Smart AIEgen
Drug abuse is a serious threat to both individuals and social development.
Thus, drug screening can be useful for interventions against drug
addiction. Nevertheless, drugs are also an indispensable part of healthcare
and disease management. The pharmacokinetic features of drugs (e.g.,
bioavailability, circulation lifetime, and duration of action) as
a function of time often need to be analyzed with rapid speed and
high accuracy in various biofluids. At present, urinary tests are
a common tool for drug screening. The standard drug analysis techniques
employed at present include immunoassays, mass spectrometry, and chromatography.
However, these techniques are cumbersome and often expensive. Therefore,
fluorescent probes have emerged as a valuable option for drug detection.
Among these fluorescent probes, AIEgens appear to be the most useful
due to their resistance to interference and high stability, among
other advantages. Excitingly, a commercial kit for the simultaneous
detection of MOP-MET-KET-COC-MDMA-THC has been developed by the AIE
Institute and brought to the market. This kit has low LODs of 0.2,
0.2, 0.2, 0.5, 0.2, and 0.05 ng/mL, respectively. Despite this progress,
there are few reports focused on the forensic detection of drugs in
urine samples. To this end, Huang and colleagues synthesized an AIEgen
(BA-TPE) containing both a phenylboronic group and double bonds ( A). Based on this
AIEgen, they constructed molecularly imprinted polymer (MIPs) sensors
(AIE-MIPs) via reflux precipitation polymerization for the fluorescence-based
detection of cathinone (CAT). This sensor exhibited selectivity toward
CAT over other compounds, such as DIC, COD, COC, and MOR. Therefore,
the introduction of CAT induced a significant increase in probe fluorescence
intensity at 467 nm ( B). In forensic urine samples, a linear relationship between
the fluorescence intensity of this AIE-MIP sensor and CAT concentrations
of 2–12 μM (R2 = 0.9939)
was observed ( C), with a LOD and LOQ of 0.32 μM and 1.07 μM, respectively. In other studies, Zn-BTEC MOF materials, trypsin-AuNCs, and AuNCs@SiO2-MIPs were
applied to effectively detect urinary chlortetracycline (CTC, LOD:
28 nM), carbidopa (LOD: 6.5 nM), and erythromycin levels (ERY, LOD:
12 nM), respectively. These studies demonstrated the excellent performance
of AIEgen in urinalysis.
 
4.8.

## Urinary Biopsy for Other Compounds Using Smart
AIEgens
In addition to the biomolecules mentioned above,
several other compounds are required at low levels for normal biochemical
and physiological functions in living organisms and are subsequently
metabolized and excreted. These biocomponents can also provide valuable
information for disease diagnose and monitoring. This section summarizes
the progress in the application of AIEgens for detecting various urinary
components.
ATP has pivotal intra- and extracellular functions,
serving the direct energy source for almost all biological processes.
Both low and excessive amounts of ATP are associated with a series
of diseases, such as NDs, nephropathy, CVDs, and so on. , , Therefore, ATP is a key biomarker
for various diseases. For example, ATP
levels in red blood cells can serve as a marker for sepsis, and CSF ATP levels are associated with encephalopathy,
stroke-like episodes (MELAS), mitochondrial myopathy, lactic acidosis,
and so on. Interestingly, urinary ATP
has been identified as a novel biomarkers for bladder cancer and interstitial
cystitis/bladder pain syndrome. , In 2019,
Guo’s group designed and constructed an AIE probe based on
glutathione-modified silver nanoclusters (AgNCs/GSH) for ATP detection
( A). Zn2+ enhanced the fluorescent emission of AgNCs/GSH at 650 nm
by forming AgNCs/GSH/Zn2+ aggregates. When ATP was added,
the stronger binding affinity of ATP toward Zn2+ via strong
Zn–O–P bonds led to the dissociation of Zn2+ from AgNCs/GSH. Thus, the fluorescence intensity of AgNCs/GSH was
negatively correlated with the ATP concentration. Using AgNCs/GSH,
ATP concentrations within the linear range of 1–110 mM could
be monitored, with the LOD being 0.8 mM ( B,C). The AgNCs/GSH probe was also successfully
applied for analyzing ATP levels in human urine samples, with good
recoveries of 97.6% to 103%, comparable to the performance of HPLC. 
 Adenosine, an endogenous purine ribonucleoside,
can be detected
in all human cells and has important functions in different physiological
processes. One study demonstrated that
adenosine can accumulate at abnormally high concentrations in solid
tumors, supporting their growth before being excreted via the urine. Therefore, urinary adenosine has emerged as
an important biomarker for cancer. To
this end, Xie et al. developed a fluorescent probe
called TPE-ABA by combining 1,2-bis[4-(triethylammoniomethyl)phenyl]-1,2-diphenylethenedibromide
(TPE-2N+, an AIE molecule) with an adenosine-specific aptamer
(ABA, 5′-ACCTGGGGGAGTATTGCGGAGGAAGGT-3′)
to detect adenosine. ABA could bind to adenosine with high binding
affinity via hydrophobic interactions, and this binding
induced a conformational change (random to G-quadruplex) that restricted
the free rotation of phenyl rings in TPE-2N+. The TPE-ABA
nanosystem achieved a linear adenosine detection range spanning from
10 pM to 0.5 mM (R2 = 0.996), with a LOD
of 10 pM and good sensitivity and selectivity ( C,D). When applied in human urine samples,
the nanosystem displayed satisfactory recoveries and precision rates
of 96.8–90.0% and 1.2–2.0%, respectively. 
 Dopamine is neurotransmitter that is
involved in a host of brain
functions and controlled behavioral characteristics. Abnormalities
in dopamine balance can result in NDs and autism disorder. Therefore, Ilanchelian’s and Kailasa’s groups developed two unique AIE fluorescent probes for dopamine
sensing. In Ilanchelian’s study, glutathione-protected silver
nanoclusters (GSH-AgNCs) that served as red-emissive nanoprobes at
645 nm were synthesized. The hydrogen bonding interactions between
the carboxyl groups of GSH-AgNCs, and the amino groups of dopamine
caused probe aggregation to enhance fluorescence intensity. Therefore,
GSH-AgNCs could detect dopamine in the linear range of 20–200
nM with an LOD of 0.35 nM and good sensitivity and selectivity. When
GSH-AgNCs were applied in real human urine samples, the recovery amounts
of dopamine ranged from 96% to 98%. In
Kailasa’s study, which involved the preparation of a trypsin-AuNCs
nanoplatform, a higher LOD of 0.41 nM was reached. Their probe was
also successfully applied for testing human urine samples and demonstrated
high recovery and precision. 
Citrate
is a crucial urinary metabolite and is associated with
kidney dysfunction and cancer. Citrate abnormalities have a high predictive
value. In previous studies, three AIE probes, DPP-Py1 and DPP-Py2, DTPA-TPY-Zn, and TPE-Py, have been developed for the detection of urinary citrate, achieving
low LODs (18 μM, 35 μM, and 10 μM, respectively)
along with good sensitivity and selectivity. As described earlier,
creatinine is a useful disease biomarker. Tang et al. developed IDATPE for sensing creatinine levels in artificial urine
samples and found that their probe had good selectivity. However, these AIE probes were tested using
artificial urine samples but not validated in clinical samples. Thus,
further tests are required to confirm the applicability of these probes
to clinical samples.
Spermine is a type of polyamine that is
associated with tumors. Thus, many methods
have been proposed to detect
the content of spermine in biological fluids. , The advantages of AIEgens make them valuable candidates for sensing
spermine levels effectively. In 2021, Chatterjee and colleagues developed
a TPE-based fluorescent probe 1@CB[7] from tetrameric TPE amphiphiles
(TPEHP), cucurbit[7]uril (CB[7]), and HAp NPs ( A). When spermine or spermidine was added to the probe, it
dislodged CB[6]OH from the assembly because its affinity to CB portal
was much stronger than that of the pyridyl headgroup. This caused
the release of the soluble molecule TPEHP, which, owing to its good
solubility, caused weaker fluorescence emission, mirroring the behavior
observed with spermidine. Hence, spermine or spermidine could be detected
based on the amount of fluorescence quenching ( A). 1@CB[7] exhibited good sensitivity and
selectivity toward spermine and spermidine within the linear range
of 0.1–1.0 μM and 0.25–10.0 μM, respectively,
(R2 = 0.990 and 0.994, respectively) ( B–E). The
LOQ was 0.1 μM for spermine and 0.25 μM for spermidine,
and the LOD was 0.014 μM for spermine and 0.036 μM for
spermidine. Most importantly, 1@CB[7] could detect spermine and spermidine
in urine and serum samples, meeting the requirements for early cancer
diagnosis ( F,G). Therefore, this fluorescent probe
holds potential for further clinical applications. In the same year,
another fluorescent chemosensor based on TPE) conjugated with pentiptycene
(SS-1) was constructed for detecting spermine in the
linear range of 1–15 μM with a LOD of 0.3 μM. In another study, fluorescent chemosensor 1 generated from TEP was applied to detect spermine and spermidine
with LODs of 0.70 μM and 1.17 μM, respectively, in human
urine samples ( ). 
 These findings underscore the significant potential
of AIEgens
in urinary liquid biopsy, demonstrating their high sensitivity, selectivity,
and cost-effectiveness. These innovative and effective strategies
have boosted research and clinical translation in the field of AIEgen-based
diagnostics. Additional advances in the identification of urinary
biomarkers and AIEgens could lead to more achievements in this area,
facilitating improved healthcare.

5.

## Smart AIEgens for Saliva Sample-Targeted Liquid
Biopsy
Saliva is primarily secreted by three major glands
in the oral
cavity along with some minor salivary glands. It is an odorless, foamy,
slightly cloudy, and milky hypertonic solution with a weakly acidic
pH (pH = 6.6–7.1). Water makes up about 94–99% of saliva.
However, as a complex fluid, saliva also consists of gingival crevicular
fluid, leukocytes, oral mucosal exudate, epithelial cells, several
microorganisms, several biorelevant molecules, and other important
substances. The main organic compounds present in saliva (listed in and depicted in ) include mucin, salivary
amylase, lysozyme, cortisol, carbohydrates, amino acids, ions, and
bicarbonate phosphate. In healthy adults,
saliva production ranges from 1.0 to 1.5 L of saliva each day, with
an average flow rate of 0.3–0.5 mL/min. 
 Salivary secretion is easily influenced by external
factors as
it is directly exposed to the environment. The functions of saliva are as follows: (1) cleansing the mouth
by washing away food residues and microbes, (2) primary digestive
conversion of macrobiomaterials into microbiomaterials, (3) serving
as the first line of nonspecific immuno-protection against pathgens,
and (4) preventing enamel demineralization and promoting remineralization
to maintain the dynamic balance of the enamel. Therefore, alterations in the components of saliva can
serve as biomarkers for various diseases. − Due to its noninvasive nature and the rich content of saliva, salivary
testing is an appealing diagnostic method. Therefore, saliva has been
adopted as a novel source for liquid biopsy. , − At present, the diagnostic targets in saliva-based
biopsies include DNA (cfDNA, ctDNA, telomere, DNA methylation), RNA (lncRNA, microRNA, circRNA, mRNA, piRNA,
etc.), proteins, enzymes, hormones, carbohydrates,
ions, metabolites, and EVs. , The process of saliva-based liquid biopsy involves: (1) the collection
of salivary samples, (2) salivaomic detection and analysis, and (3)
the clinical application of results for disease diagnosis, early diagnosis,
prognosistication, precision therapy, and therapeutic monitoring.
Based on the diagnostic target, different strategies are adopted to
analyze saliva liquid biopsies. For example, genomic and epigenomic
analysis is performed using PCR, microarrays, NGS, and FISH, whereas
proteomic analysis is performed using Western blots, ELISA, electrophoresis,
MS, Raman spectroscopy, and so on. Meanwhile, information on the genome,
epigenome, transcriptome, and proteome is collected from exosomes.
However, these current clinical methods are expensive, time-comsuming,
and cumbersome. In contrast, fluorescence detection is more sensitive,
selective, easy to operate, and cost-effective. Thus, intelligent
fluorescence-based biosensors and devices have immense potential in
advancing salivary diagnostics. , Given that
AIEgens exhibit multiple benefits over conventional fluorescent probes,
in this section, we provide a comprehensive summary of saliva-based
liquid biopsy using AIEgens.
5.1.

## Protein-Targeted Salivary Liquid Biopsy with
Smart AIEgens
In general, the normal concentration of salivary
proteins is 1–2 mg/mL. Abnormal
salivary protein content is an indicator of diseases such as Sjögren
syndrome, Down’s syndrome, MS, and diabetes. For example, under
normal conditions, saliva shows HSA concentrations of <0.5 g/L.
However, higher concentrations of this protein in the saliva can be
indicative of type 2 diabetes mellitus, stomatitis, or other serious
health problems. In this context, salivary
protein detection can be immensely valuable in the realm of diseases
diagnosis and monitoring. In 2018, Bhattacharya et al. developed a fluorescent probe (compound 1) for salivary
HSA detection via a self-assembly method. This probe
exhibited strong luminescence and pH sensitivity and formed thermoreversible
nanoaggregates in pure water via the self-assembly of carbazole-based
amphiphiles. The self-assembly of compound 1 constrained
the intramolecular movement of the molecules, inducing an AIE-related
change in fluorescence emission from blue (400 nm) to cyan (454 nm).
When HSA was present, the compound 1 was encapsulated
into the hydrophobic cavity of site-IIA in HSA. Here, the motion-induced
change in emission (MICE) in the microenvironment of the embedded
dye restricted the molecular motion of the flexible fluorescent probe
but not its aggregation ( A). Therefore, compound 1 could detect HSA with high selectivity and showed a robust
linear relationship between fluorescence intensity (I454/I400) and HSA concentrations
of 0–25 mg/L, with a LOD of 0.27 mg/L. Meanwhile, with compound 1 + the HSA complex, the LOD of trypsin was estimated to 0.15
mg/L. In titration studies conducted on clinical serum, urine, and
saliva samples diluted in PBS, the estimation of HSA levels using
compound 1 yielded results comparable to those obtained
using the Bromocresol green method, albeit with a 15% variation ( B). Interestingly,
varying amounts of dilution were required for the plasma, urine, and
saliva samples, suggesting that a small amount of sample was sufficient
for HSA quantification. 

5.2.

## Ion-Targeted Salivary Liquid Biopsy with Smart
AIEgens
Ions play a crucial regulatory role in oral health
through various pathways. For example, Ag+ acts as a protector
in the oral environment, while thiocyanate (SCN–) can regulate the metabolism of salivary bacteria and its levels
are associated with smoking habits. Bu et al. designed
a fluorescent probe based on an AIEgen named DIPIP (phenanthro[9,10-d]-imidazole derivative) for the sequential detection of
SCN– and Ag+/AgNPs in aqueous solution
and saliva samples. DIPIP showed distinct absorption
peaks at 313, 355, and 360 nm and emission peaks at 400 nm. Under
aqueous conditions, DIPIP formed a two-dimensional sheet
structure, which restricted its intramolecular rotation and induced
enhanced emission. In the presence of Ag+, DIPIP showed a better recognition capacity for Ag+ than for
other ions. The DIPIP-Ag+ complex underwent
aggregation to form three-dimensional rose-like particles sized about
4.0 μm. These aggregates had a tendency to form crystalline
particles with reduced molecular restriction, resulting in quenched
fluorescence intensity. When SCN– was introduced,
it broke down the DIPIP-Ag+ complex and enabled the recovery
of fluorescence intensity ( A). As such, DIPIP showed a robust linear relationship (R2 = 0.9948) between decreasing fluorescence intensity and increasing
Ag+ concentrations over 0.075 to 1.0 μM, with a LOD
of 74.5 nM ( B). Subsequently, the DIPIP-Ag+ complex was
successfully applied for SCN– detection (range,
0–0.2 μM) with recovered fluorescence intensity (R2 = 0.9922) and an LOD as low as 7.8 nM ( C). When the DIPIP-Ag+ complex was employed for SCN– detection in diluted saliva samples from one nonsmoker and three
smokers, the DIPIP-Ag+ complex showed higher
fluorescence intensities in the smoker samples than in the nonsmoker
samples, with favorable recoveries (99.8–108.5%). This report, despite being the only one in
its field, demonstrates that AIEgen-based fluorescent probes can be
reliable for detecting ions in salivary samples.
 
5.3.

## Microorganism-Targeted Salivary Liquid Biopsy
with Smart AIEgens
Throughout human history, numerous pathogen
outbreaks have posed serious threats to human health. More recently,
the outbreak and global spread of COVID-19 and monkeypox inflicted
serious damage around the world. Therefore, the timely and accurate
detection of pathogens, especially viruses, is crucial for preserving
public health.
Given its role as the first/second line of defense
in the body, saliva is as an ideal biofluid for disease detection. AIEgen-based probes have thus been developed
for this purpose. In 2018, Tang and collaborators developed a dual-modality
readout immunoassay platform for the ultrasensitive detection of human
enterovirus 71 (EV71) based on a multifunctional AIEgen (TPE-APP)
( A). This platform involves capturing EV71 virions using
immunomagnetic beads (IMNs) and subsequently binding them with biotinylated
Abs (BAbs), rabbit polyclonal antibodies (P-Abs), and the signal tags
streptavidin-ALP (SA-ALP) to construct a dual-modality readout immunoassay
nanoplatform. Within this framework, the incorporation of the ALP
enzyme catalyzed TPE-APP hydrolysis through the removal of its phosphoryl
groups, leading to the production of water-insoluble and aggregated
TPE-DMA, resulting in obviously enhanced fluorescence levels. Termed
“Channel I,” this fluorescence enhancement exhibited
remarkable accuracy and extremely high sensitivity toward virions.
Meanwhile, “Channel II” involved the followed processes:
TPE-APP hydrolysis simultaneously reduced Ag+ to generate
a silver nanoshell surrounding gold nanoparticles (AuNP), leading
to a pronounced plasmonic color change that enabled the preliminary
screening of virus particles with the naked eye ( B). Under the fluorescence
modality, owing to the immunomagnetic enrichment and high sensitivity
and selectivity, the LOD for EV71 virions was 1.4 copies/μL
and the detection range was 1.67 × 103 to 2.505 ×
105 copies/mL (R2 = 0.992).
Moreover, the semiquantitative screening of EV71 virions was also
achieved with the naked eye in the range of 1.3 × 103 to 2.5 × 106 copies/μL (R2 = 0.996), with a LOD of 868.4 copies/μL. When
applied in 24 throat and cloacal swab samples from patients with hand,
foot, and mouth disease, the probe provided a diagnostic accuracy
of 100% when compared to RT-PCR ( C). By changing the conjugated antibody,
H7N9 and Zika virus could also be identified effectively using this
immunoassay platform. Furthermore, this immunoassay platform did not
require complex sample preparation procedures or costly equipment,
underscoring the convenience and high efficiency of AIEgens in virus
detection. 
 In 2022, Fujimaki et al. developed
another quick
and sensitive virus detection method based on AIEgens and enzymatic
reactions in conjunction with immunomagnetic beads, achieving a remarkable
concentration of 1 × 108 particles/mL in subpicoliter
microwells for salivary virus detection ( ). By using this method with an AIE reagent (silole derivative
with two targeting ligands), influenza A virus could be detected with
a LOD of 3 × 105 copies/mL within 3 min. However,
the high-concentration immunomagnetic beads method yielded a lower
LOD of 1 × 102 copies/mL within 33 min. In clinical
saliva samples, the LOD in diluted samples was estimated to be 3 ×
106 and 1 × 103 copies/mL with the AIEgen
and beads, respectively. Notably, both methods performed better than
previous methods such as immunochromatography, PCR, and ELISA. The
lower sensitivity of AIEgens when compared to the immunomagnetic beads
could be attributed to the concentration applied. 
 In addition to viruses, probes were also developed
to detect other
pathogens. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.
tuberculosis), which is difficult to detect as it typically
hides in macrophages and remains in a dormant state, was effectively
detected in human sputum samples using an AIEgen (TPAPy-S-d-Ala). By exploiting the metabolic
properties of the peptidoglycan (PG) layer of M. tuberculosis, Lu et al. developed an AIEgen (TPAPy-S-d-Ala) for the metabolic labeling of PG and the subsequently high-throughput
diagnosis of M. tuberculosis infection ( ). Here, the key motiety of S-d-Ala was a specific
pentapeptide (l-Ala-d-iso-Gln-m-DAP-d-Ala-DAla).
This peptide could form crossed-links with the N-acetylmuramic
acid (MurNAc) in the PG layer of the M. tuberculosis cytoderm vial,d-transpeptidases
catalysis to fluorescently label it. In the TPAPy-S-d-Ala
platform for M. tuberculosis detection, the external d-Ala molecules, which were a part of the AIEgen, integrated
into PG and aggregated on the cytoplasmic membrane to induce fluorescence
emission, and the fluorescence intensity could be measured via a microplate
reader to reach a diagnosis of TB. This process enabled the visual
observation of M. tuberculosis replication and discrimated
live M. tuberculosis cells from dead bacterial cells.
TPAPy-S-d-Ala exhibited good metabolic labeling efficiency
as well as high sensitivity and specificity toward M. tuberculosis. When TPAPy-S-d-Ala was applied in a cohort of 26 clinical
sputum samples (TB, 22’ healthy control, 4), TPAPy-S-d-Ala labeling showed excellent accuracy (95.7%), sensitivity (95.5%),
and specificity (100%) compared to acid-fast staining (65.2%, 63.3%,
and 100%, respectively) for TB diagnosis. Given these satisfactory
results, a well-planned randomized controlled trial with a suitable
sample size is required to acquire substantial evidence for the prospective
clinical utilization of TPAPy-S-d-Ala. 
 
5.4.

## Drug-Targeted Salivary Liquid Biopsy with
Smart AIEgens
Durg testing is crucial aspect of clinical
trials, disease monitoring, and inspection scenarios, providing invaluable
insights under different situations. In 2019, Wang’s group
constructed an AIEgen-based probe, named POSS-TPE, for the detection
of synthetic drugs using salivary biopsy ( A). POSS-TPE exhibited a typical emission peak at at 407 and
430 nm. When the water fraction increased to over 90%, an obvious
AIE effect, accompanied by molecular self-assembly, was observed.
This was because the aqueous environment restricted the intramolecular
motions of POSS-TPE and increased π–π stacking
interactions. While the former boosted fluorescence emission, the
latter caused a shift in the emission spectra toward longer wavelengths
and suppressed emission. The interplay between these two phenomena
contributed toward the final emission characteristics of POSS-TPE.
When POSS-TPE was applied for detecting methamphetamine and ketamine
in artificial saliva, the small drug molecules entered the 3D self-assembled
structures of the aggregates via noncovalent interactions, providing
additional pathways for exciton migration. This facilitated the nonradiative
annihilation of the aggregates by the drug quenchers, and an obvious
quenching effect was observed with high sensitivity. Therefore, POSS-TPE
could be used for the rapid on-site detection of methamphetamine and
ketamine in artifical saliva ( ). However, POSS-TPE
remains to be validated in clinical saliva samples, which show greater
complexity than artifical saliva samples. Needless to say, there is
enormous scope for develping more AIEgen-based probes for disease
detection with saliva biopsy.
 Given that salivary liquid biopsy is a new field
of research, the
number of reports is fairly limited. With ample room for progress
in this field, we remain optimistic about the future advancements
in salivary biopsy facilitated by AIEgen-based technologies and their
applications in the improvement of healthcare.

6.

## Smart AIEgens for Sweat Sample-Targeted Liquid
Biopsy
Sweat is produced by eccrine and apocrine glands and
flows onto
the surface of the skin and hair follicles to help maintain thermal
homeostasis during physical or mental exertion and exposure to high
temperatures. In addition, it aids in the excretion of various chemicals
and metabolites from the body, and this process is modulated by the
sympathetic nervous system in an adaptive, closed-loop manner. Sweat
is the most readily available bodily fluid and can be obtained in
the most noninvasive manner. Thus, sample collection can be done without
causing any infection, irritation, or inconvenience. However, despite
its potential, the widespread use of sweat for routine diagnostics
has been limited by requirements for specialized equipment, skilled
technicians, and strict protocols. Recently, the development of wearable
biosensors has emerged as a solution for this challenge. − 
The constituents of sweat include water, mineral electrolytes
(sodium,
potassium, calcium, and magnesium, etc.), lactic acid, urea, proteins
(immunoglobulins and glycoproteins), glucose, hormone, and drugs.
The components of sweat maintain its pH between 4.5 and 7.0. Notably,
these components have been identified as biomarkers associated with
various diseases, making sweat a promising source for liquid biopsy. , For example, the levels of K+ and Na+ in the
sweat serve as vital markers of metabolic status in humans, while lactate is an important marker of physiological
stress, reflecting the switch between aerobic and anaerobic metabolism. Thus, sweat has been recognized as a new window
into health. , In the clinic, sweat-based liquid
biopsy is only applied for the detection of chloride concentrations
during the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis in infants. However, in fundamental
research, sweat sampling is much more widespread. Notably, sweat can
be sampled easily via various methods beyond wearable biosensors. − 
Despite the widespread development of AIEgens in the field
of diagnosis,
there have been few reports on their application in the detection
of sweat analytes. In 2017, Ng et al. developed an
AIEgen probe named TPE-HPro to determine l-lactate levels
in sweat and saliva. TPE-HPro was constructed by combining TPE with
LOx. Here, LOx catalyzed the oxidation of l-lactate, leading
to H2O2 production, which could be measured
by TPE-HPro via fluorometry owing to the oxidation of phenylboronic
pinacol ester on TPE-HPro, which released a p-quinone
methide. The final remaining product emitted bright fluorescence at
530 nm ( A). TPE-HPro demonstrated a good performance
in protein-rich specimens, yielding a stable fluorescent signal for
60 min. It could detect l-lactate in the linear concentration
range of 0–200 μM (R2 = 0.999),
with high sensitivity and selectivity and a superb LOD of 5.5 μM
( B). Thus,
TPE-HPro performed better than other methods, as listed in B, demonstrating
its potential for l-lactate detection in clinical samples. 
 Fingers represent an important route of sweat secretion
and AIEgens
have been identified to effectively reveal latent fingerprints, as
described in our previous literature review. Fingers can also offer important pathological information. Thus, the noninvasive detection of disease
targets in sweat from the finger could be of great value and may someday
be widely used in the real-time monitoring of human body functions.

7.

## Smart AIEgens for Lavage Fluid Sample-Targeted
Liquid Biopsy
Routine bronchoscopy is a standard clinical
approach for diagnosing
lung-associated diseases, including cancer. In particular, lavage
fluid contain a series of biomarkers crucial for early disease diagnosis, − making it a novel and effective source of liquid biopsy. , Compared to diagnostic methods involving sequencing and other methods,
fluorescence probes offer greater sensitivity and are less cubersome.
In 2020, Zheng and Tang developed a density-responsive AIEgen-based
bioprobe named MASPB for discrimating cancer cells based on differences
in nuclear density between cancer cells and normal cells. MASPB ((E)-4-(4-(dimethylamino)styryl)-1-(3(trimethylammonio)propyl)pyridin-1-ium
bromide) was fabricated via the Knoevenagel condensation
reaction ( A). It could enter the nucleus, exhibiting red fluorescence at 621
nm. The fluorescence intensity depended on the amount of nuclear condensation,
as nuclear condensation restricted the motion of MASPB ( B). When cells
were stained with MASPB, distinct structural nuclear differences between
tumor cells and normal cells become apparent, enabling the differentiation
of rare tumor cells. When MASPB was applied to distinguish cancer
cells using a fluorescence microscope, it achieved 100% accuracy in
identifying cancer cells in malignant pleural effusion samples from
10 cancer patients ( C(a–c)). Moreover, MASPB could also differentiate between
cancerous and normal regions in various tissue specimens (lung adenocarcinoma,
colorectal cancer, liver cancer, cervical cancer, and squamous lung
carcinoma) ( C(d,e)). This pioneering study showcased the utility of AIEgens in
lavage fluid liquid biopsy. 
 TB is caused by the bacterium M. tuberculosis (Mtb),
which primarily resides within macrophages and spreads as an infectious
disease through aerosols. TB is the second most common cause of pathogen-related
death worldwide. Notably, the increase
in multidrug-resistant M. tuberculosis variants has
considerably exacerbated the TB pandemic. Traditional TB diagnosis
methods such as acid-fast staining, smear microscopy, microbial cell
culture, and nucleic acid amplification are usually hindered by the
high bacterial load requirement (at least 5000 bacilli/mL). These
methods are often cubersome, time-comsuming, and offer poor sensitivity.
To tackle this challenge, Zheng et al. developed
a cytoderm-orthogonal AIEgen (TPAPy-D-Ala) for the rapid
detection of M. tuberculosis ( A). TPAPy-D-Ala consisted of a functional AIE motif
(TPAPy) with ROS generation capabilities and a metabolic motif (d-Ala) with specific PG metabolic labeling properties. The two
motifs were conjugated via click a chemistry reaction
and azide–alkyne cycloaddition ( B). The probe exhibited an absorption peak
at 468 nm and an emission peak at 601 nm. At a molecular level, TPAPy-d-Ala was remodeled by l,d-transpeptidase
to serve as an exogenous substrate for PG biosynthesis, and it was
cross-linked into the pentapeptide side chains. This resulted in the
metabolic labeling of the M. tuberculosis cytoderm,
allowing the probe to effectively identify living bacteria. When applied
for M. tuberculosis detection, TPAPy-d-Ala
achieved the wash-free, rapid (10 min), and selective metabolic labeling
of live M. tuberculosis, with a superb LOD of 102 CFU/mL and a 50-fold better diagnostic sensitivity for TB
than acid-fast staining. When applied for M. tuberculosis detection in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and sputum samples
from TB patients, TPAPy-d-Ala exhibited a high accuracy (97.1%
and 96.8%), sensitivity (96.4% and 96.2%), and specificity (100% and
100%) for clinical TB diagnosis ( C). Moreover, TPAPy-d-Ala was capable
of killing M. tuberculosis via photodynamic therapy. These two reports demonstrated the good performance
of AIEgen-based lavage fluid liquid biopsy.
 
8.

## Smart AIEgens for Nasal Discharge Sample-Targeted
Liquid Biopsy
Nasal discharge, a waste product secreted from
the nose, contains
many biorelevant molecules and often presents in various colors. Nasal
discharge can also serve as a clinical sample for disease diagnosis. , , Nasopharyngeal–oropharyngeal
swabs are also as useful as throat and cloacal swabs for SARS-CoV-2
detection. To easily and effectively detect SARS-CoV-2 RNA, in 2023,
Gupta et al. developed an AIEgen complex (Ir1 and Ir2) for a simple, highly sensitive, and single-step
fluorescence assay ( A–D). Here, Ir1 and Ir2 were produced by incorporating an iridium core that coordinated
with one N,N-donor bipyridine ligand
and two cyclometalating phenyl quinoline ligands. The ancillary bipyridine
ligand was further linked to a unique ASO sequence (ASO1 or ASO2),
which acted as the specific targeting element for SARS-CoV-2. After
SARS-CoV-2 RNA was introduced, the ASO sequences bound to this RNA
due to their comparable binding energies, promoting the propensity
of aggregation. Thus, Ir1 and Ir2 exhibited
“turn-on” fluorescence at 610 nm after excitation at
430 nm when SARS-CoV-2 RNA was present, yielding specific results
at room temperature within 10 min, with an estimated LOD of 1.84 genome
copies/reaction. When applied to 20 clinical nasopharyngeal–oropharyngeal
swab samples, this assay showed a sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy
of 90%, 80%, and 85%, respectively, and was thus comparable with RT-LAMP
and chip-/paper-based POCT for COVID-19 detection ( E). Additional exploration and research into the analysis of nasal discharge
liquid biopsies could lead to improvements in healthcare.
 
9.

## Smart AIEgen for Synovial Fluid Sample-Targeted
Liquid Biopsy
Bones support the structure of the body and
enable movement. Articulations
connect various bones, and conditions affecting these joints, including
RA, OA, gout, meniscus injury, and others, pose significant health
challenges. For instance, OA is a chronic degenerative bone and joint
disease characterized by joint pain, the swelling of joint effusions,
joint stiffness, joint friction, bone erosion, and impaired joint
mobility. OA affects the cartilage, subchondral bone, and synovial
membrane tissue of the knees, knuckles, and hips and is associated with aging, obesity, trauma, strain,
and joint deformity, among other factors. Orthopedic disorders like
OA are serious and chronic diseases that affect a large number of
people and hamper their daily lives. Unfortunately,
there is still no effective biomarker for the early diagnosis of these
disorders.
Synovial fluid, a joint lubricant, is produced by
the synovial
membrane and enters the joint cavity. Recently, synovial fluid has
been recognized as a useful source for liquid biopsy in orthopedic
diseases. − When compared to current diagnostic methods, including MR, ultrasonography,
X-ray, CRP, and ESP, fluorescence-based diagnosis exhibits great advantages
owing to the intrinsic properties of fluorescent probes. Notably,
AIEgens have immense potential in diagnosing orthopedic disorders.
For instance, to address the low sensitivity and complexity associated
with existing technologies for detecting monosodium urate (MSU) crystals
in gout, Hua et al. conducted affinity analysis experiments
for MSU using seven TPE-containing luminogens (i.e., TPE-COOH, TPE-2COOH,
TPE-4COOH, TPE-NH2, TPE-2NH2, TPE-4NH2, and TPE-ketoalkyne). Among these, TPE-ketoalkyne exhibited high
selectivity and sensitivity, demonstrating maximum fluorescence emission
at 503 nm following excitation at 353 nm. TPE-Ketoalkyne exhibited
the strongest fluorescence emission and the highest binding sensitivity
toward MSU crystals among all the AIEgens, differentiating it from
HAP crystals. When applied to clinical samples, including human synovial
fluid and tophi, TPE-ketoalkyne exhibited a high diagnosis efficiency
toward MSU crystals among patients with gout, yielding results within
1 min. In another study, Sato and colleagues
developed an AIEgen probe (TPE-X7) for detecting HA given its role
in orthopedic inflammation and its potential as a pathophysiological
biomarker for inflammation. TPE-X7 was constructed by attaching the
N-terminal of X7 peptide (RYPISRPRKR) to TPE, nitrobenzoxadiazole
(NBD), and thiazole orange (TO) ( ). The binding
of HA to the HA-recognition motif within the X7 peptide caused enhanced
emission at 477 nm, and this enhancement was dependent on the molecular
weight of HA. The LOD for HA was estimated to be 1500–1800
kDa (33 μg/mL). The probe exhibited excellent specificity for
HA and did not respond to other members of the glycosaminoglycan family.
When TPE-X7 was applied to test synovial fluid samples from patients
with OA, the concentration of HA in the original synovial fluid was
found to be 309 ± 50 μg/mL, comparable with ELISA results. These two studies demonstrated the potential
of AIEgens in synovial fluid sample-targeted liquid biopsy. However,
more effective strategies and validation in clinical samples are urgently
needed.
 
10.

## Smart AIEgen for Exhaled Breath-targeted Biopsy
Breathing is an essential and regular function of the human body,
facilitating the intake of necessary gases and expelling unnecessary
gases and metabolites ( ). In healthy individuals,
exhaled breath contains more than 3500 compounds, including volatile
organic compounds (VOCs, such as ethane, pentane, aldehyde, isoprene),
inorganic compounds (O2, NO, CO2, H2S, NH3, and so on), and exhaled breath condensates (EBCs,
cytokines, H2O2, isoprostanes, leukotriene,
H2O, and so on). − In patients with certain diseases,
the components of exhaled breath can be altered, serving as biomarkers
( ) that provide useful clues for clinical management. − These compounds have thus attracted attention from scientists and
clinicians alike. Numerous assays have been developed to analyze exhaled
breath samples. Of note, the exhaled nitric oxide (eNO) test is used
to detect eosinophilic airway inflammation, asthma, COPD, etc.; the 13C-urea breath test (UBT) is used to detect Helicobacter
pylori (HP) infection, and the hydrogen breath test is used
to detect bacterial overgrowth in the small bowel. So far, numerous methods, including colorimetric assays,
electrochemical sensing, and MS, have been utilized for detecting
these volatile components. − Although these methods can detect diseases with high sensitivity,
they are expensive and their results are easily affected by extrinsic
factors. In contrast, fluorescent probes offer a promising alternative
and could be used to achieve big strides in this diagnostic field. − Given the complexity of exhaled breath ( ), AIEgens appear to be better for this
purpose than conventional fluorescent probes, as described earlier.
Some excellent literature reviews on this topic have been published
previously, with a notable example being
the overview of gas-associated disease detection published by Lee
et al. in 2022. Here, we aim to summarize
gaseous biopsies of clinical samples based on AIEgens. However, as
summarized in ref ( ), several AIEgens have been developed for gas detection in
vitro and in vivo (animal model and food),
TPE-2E N-oxide, TPE-4NE-O, and Pt-TPP, for
oxygen, BTCV-CO, MTIPIM-AF-CO/MTPIM-AE-CO, and THBTA-CO (61) for CO; PyDA-NP, QY-N, and TPE-2NH2 for NO; TPE-Az, HPB-based
probe 2, HL-H2S, HBT-based probe 1, TPA-based probe 1, TPE-indo, AIE-S, Indo-TPE-Indo, TPE-BODIPY-Cl, TPE-3, TPE-NP, TPE-NBD-D, TPANF, DNBS-DCM-SP, CLBZ, TPP-PDCV, Cya-NO2 (1)/Cya-N3 (2), and
probe 1( ) for H2S; TPE-PEI, Lys-PEG-TPE, TPP-TMAE, and
HPQ-Ac, for CO2; DPA-CN and TCMn for
SO2; Zn-Py-TPE and AIE-FA for formaldehyde; ZnMOF/CoMOF, [OMe]x-TzDa, and
BOY-TPE/HBIY-TPE for HCl; and TPE-Py-coated
fiber, [OMe]x-TzDa, CHMPBA, and
BOY-TPE/HBIY-TPE for amines. However,
the validation of these probes in human samples remains limited.
 Volatile formaldehyde present in exhaled breath serves
as a biomarker
for lung cancer. To diagnose lung cancer
effectively, Liu et al. synthesized an AIEgen (tetrakis(4-pyridylphenyl)ethylene,
Py-TPE)-based zinc MOF. This probe enabled the absorption and selective
detection of formaldehyde in exhaled breath ( A). The porous Zn-Py-TPE acted as a gaseous confinement cavity
for the adsorption of formaldehyde from exhaled breath samples. Surprisingly,
the aggregation of Zn-Py-TPE on paper induced AICE triggered by bis(2,4,6-trichlorophenyl)oxalate
(TCPO). In the absence of H2O2, the AIECL of
Zn-Py-TPE-TCPO was greatly enhanced at 530 nm after the introduction
of formaldehyde, leading to the production of Zn-Py-TPE aggregates
and the augmented generation of singlet oxygen on paper due to halogen
bonding between formaldehyde and Zn-Py-TPE. This mechanism ensured
excellent selectivity ( B). Hence, the Zn-Py-TPE-paper system could quantitively
detect formaldehyde in the range of 1.0–100.0 ppb (R2 = 0.997), with an LOD of 0.3 ppb and excellent
selectivity, repeatability, and stability under optimal experimental
conditions. When applied to exhaled breath samples from three healthy
volunteers, this assay provided results that were consistent with
HPLC–MS and GC–MS results ( C), demonstrating the value of this probe
for diagnosing lung cancer. However, further studies with a larger
number of real exhaled breath samples are warranted to validate its
clinical utility and promote its clinical translation. 
 
11.

## Perspectives and Conclusion
Tissue
and liquid biopsies have remained important tools in clinical
trials, , , , indispensable for the management of diseases. In
this context, improved detection methods are vital for achieving more
precise and effective diagnostic results. However, the limitation
of diagnostic targets and existed technologies impedes the accuracy,
sensitivity, and specificity of biopsy obviously. , , , Therefore, A myriad of advanced technologies for biopsy analysis
have been developed, and several others are currently under development. , Among these innovations, AIEgens stand out as a prominent class
of luminescent nanomaterials, overcoming the shortcomings associated
with ACQ effect in traditional fluorescent molecules. Given the host
of intrinsic advantages they offer, AIEgens have significantly promoted
the development of molecular probes. Thus, AIEgens can be considered
valuable toolboxes for disease detection with simple and complicated
sample. , , , , − As detailed in this review of the literature, the marriage between
AIEgens and biopsies has yielded excited outcomes.
This review
attempts to deliver an updated synopsis of AIEgens
and their use in biopsy analysis. We have focused our attention toward
nanosystems that are already capable of detecting biorelevant molecular
targets because we believe that these functional molecular analytical
assays, when applied for clinical and at-home tests, could become
game changers in the field of medical diagnostics in future. Upon
reviewing the plethora of nanosystems and studies based on AIEgens,
we are optimistic that this review could provide a wealth of data
and a detailed understanding behind the principles of these nanosystems,
motivating additional advances in clinical science.
Despite
the remarkable progress in the field of AIEgen-based biopsy,
several challenges and limitations remain to be addressed for the
further advancement and widespread application of these probes. First,
several other sample sources could potentially be applied for AIEgen-based
biopsy in clinical settings. For example, CSF contains several biomarkers
associated with different brain diseases. − Hence, CSF may be better choice than other liquid and tissue biopsy
samples, offering more clinically relevant results. But also other sample source, including ascites, bile, tear, , , stool, earwax, uterine/vaginal lavage, seminal
fluid, and bone marrow. Moreover, the diverse array of target molecules
within these sample sources remains to be explored thoroughly.
Second, even prior to the analytical process, several key obstacles
that hinder the outcomes of AIEgen-based analytic assays remain. These
include the absence of standardized methods for isolating diagnostic
targets, the lack of well-defined study populations and controls,
insufficient consideration of variables from both biological and environmental
perspectives, and notably, the scarcity of effective biomarkers. These
challenges need to be addressed.
Third, existing AIEgen-based
biopsy methods require thorough validation
using a sufficient number of clinical samples. A significant disjunction
exists between standard solutions and clinical samples, and these
differences are compounded by inherent variations among individuals.
At present, the majority of AIEgen-based liquid biopsy methods remain
in the nascent stages of method establishment and preclinical research
with several challenges associated with the collection of clinical
samples. Consequently, we emphasize the necessity for enhanced communication
and collaborative efforts among researchers, clinicians, and patients.
Fourth, due to the high heterogeneity and abundance of diagnostic
targets and the strict recognition capability of AIEgen, liquid biopsies
often yield false negative or false positive results. , More effective and smart strategies that achieve precise diagnosis
are currently lacking, calling for urgent efforts toward interdisciplinary
research in this area.
Fifth, although AIEgen-based fluorescence
biopsies exhibit great
sensitivity, specificity, and recovery that serve as the main indexes
of liquid biopsy, exploring more quantitative analysis approaches
is essential for accurate disease staging and monitoring. , 
Sixth, the broad emission and aggregation-dependent brightness
of AIEgens prevents their practical performance in multiple areas
of biomedicine when combined with other fluorescent probes for simultaneous
detection. Hence, more convenient and
effective detection strategies characterized by narrow emission spectra
and aggregation-independent brightness are still urgently needed to
address these challenges.
Seventh, artificial intelligence (AI)
algorithms, particularly
deep learning, have led to remarkable progress, efficacy, and convenience
in clinical diagnostic tasks of biopsy and histopathology. , , − Notably, the marriage of AI and AIEgens holds promise for bolstering
therapeutic effectiveness in different diseases-treatment fields. − Therefore, incorporating AI into biopsy procedures utilizing AIEgens
could offer a solution across various diseases, enhancing efficiency
across large clinical sample cohorts and facilitating the data mining
of diagnostic results.
Eighth, the biosafety and biocompatibility
are inevitable issues
with further researches and clinical application because the importance
of in situ diagnosis is still urgent. Under this
circumstance, more attention should be comprised in future.
Finally, the commercialization of liquid biopsy diagnostic methods
has garnered widespread attention globally. The size of this market
was estimated to be $10.42 billion in 2023 and is projected to grow
at a compound annual growth rate of 11.60% between 2024 and 2030. Despite this growth, this market remains relatively
underpenetrated, particularly in the case of rare diseases. Therefore,
fostering greater interactions between academia and industry is of
great value. The knowledge and scientific flexibility of academia
in tandem with the organizational capabilities of industries could
be leveraged to streamline biomarker development and liquid biopsy
frameworks and bring them to market, leading to advances in the field
of diagnostics and healthcare.
Overall, this review encapsulates
the progress in smart AIEgen-based
tools for clinical tissue biopsy and liquid biopsy. In addition, it
discusses the future perspectives of their applications in detail.
Collectively, we hope that this review ignites further interest, stimulates
innovative ideas, and serves as a guiding beacon for researchers,
ultimately advancing biopsy development to benefit both fundamental
research and clinical trials.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the National
Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2023YFA1008600), National
Natural Science Foundation of China (82102904), the Science, Technology
& Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality (JCYJ20210324113405014),
Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project (2021SK5001),
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea
government (No. 2022R1A2C3005420), Youth Taishan Scholars Program
of Shandong Province (No. tsqn202408237), Youth Innovation Team Project
for Talent Introduction and Cultivation in Universities of Shandong
Province (No. 096-1622002) and National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grant No. 22376111). We thank all the reviewers who participated
in the review and MJEditor (www.mjeditor.com) for its linguistic assistance during the preparation of this manuscript.

## Glossary

## Abbreviation
AIEaggregation-induced
emission
AEDaggregation-enhanced
diagnosis
NDsneurodegenerative
diseases
CVDcardiovascular
diseases
ACQaggregation-caused
quenching
FLIfluorescent
imaging
PAIphotoacoustic
imaging
ELISAenzyme
linked immunosorbent assay
HPLChigh-performance liquid chromatography
MSmass spectrometry
CSFcerebrospinal fluid
CTCscirculating tumor cells
ctDNAcirculating tumor
DNA
cfDNAcirculating
cell-free DNA
cfRNAcell free RNA
AIartificial intelligence
SNRsignal-to-noise rate
RIMsrestricted intramolecular motions
RIRrestricted intramolecular rotation
RIVrestricted intramolecular
vibration
QMquinoline–malononitrile
QYfluorescence yield
TPEtetraphenylethylene
NGSnext-generation
sequencing
PCRpolymerase
chain reaction
HPLC–MSliquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
GC–MSgas chromatography–mass
spectrometry
ICTintramolecular charge transfer
ADAlzheimer’s disease
PDParkinson’s disease
EVsextracellular vesicles
TEPstumor-educated
platelets
GSHglutathione
ATPadenosine triphosphate
ALPalkaline phosphatase
DBCOdibenzocyclooctyne
HCRhybridization chain
reaction
ECLelectrochemiluminescent
ECelectrochemical
AIECLaggregation-induced
electrochemiluminescence
LODlimit of detection
HSAhuman serum albumin
AFPalpha-fetoprotein
POCTpoint-of-care testing
LFAlateral flow immunoassay
HAasehyaluronidase
HDACshistone deacetylases
NIRnear-infrared
IFimmunofluorescence analysis
IHCimmunohistochemistry
ALSatherosclerosis
RArheumatoid arthritis
OAosteoarthritis
MMP-13metallopeptidase
13
CDscarbon nanodots
LOQlimit of quantification
HRPhorseradish peroxidase
CRPC-reactive protein
LPSlipopolysaccharide
TBtuberculosis
BBBblood–brain barrier
TICTtwisted intramolecular
charge transfer
LFAsfluorescent lateral flow immunoassays
GOgraphene oxide
NPsnanoparticles

## Biographies
Yanhong Duo received
her Ph.D. degree from Tsinghua University
and Lanzhou University (joint training), and she conducted her postdoctoral
study at Karolinska Institutet. She is currently a distinguished professor
in Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, and a guest
professor in Shenzhen People’s Hospital and The Eightth Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Major project partner of Peking
University Shenzhen Hospital. Her research focuses on the design of
AIEgens for biological applications.

Lei Han received his master and Ph.D. degrees from University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences. He Joined Qingdao Agricultural University
in 2016, where he is currently a full professor in the College of
Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences. Her research interests include
the exploration of new bionanomaterials, new molecular recognition
elements, and their applications on medical diagnosis and intelligent
agriculture.

Yaoqiang Yang is
a Ph.D. candidate in Neurosurgery at Jinan University.
His research focuses on the application of bionanomaterials in neurosurgery.

Zhifeng Wang received his Ph.D.
degree from Southern Medical University
in 2015. Later, he was engaged in the clinical and scientific work
of urology in Henan Provincial People’s Hospital (The Affiliated
People’s Hospital of Zhengzhou University). He was appointed
chief physician in 2022. His research focuses on the diagnosis, treatment,
and basic research of Urogenital System Tumors.

Lirong Wang received her Ph.D. degree from the Department
of Chemistry
and Engineering, Xiamen University, in 2018. She conducted her postdoctoral
research with cosupervisor of Anjun Qin and Ben Zhong Tang in South
China University and Technology (SCUT) in 2018–2021. After
that, she continued her research as an assistant researcher in SCUT.
Her current research focuses on development of dual-modal imaging
guided phototherapy based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
aggregation-induced emission (AIE).

Jingyi Chen received her Bachelor’s degree in Polymer Science
and Engineering from Case Western Reserve University in 2022. After
completing undergraduate studies, she joined Prof. David A. Weitz’s
group as a Ph.D. student in applied physics at Harvard University.
Her research is now focusing on the biophysical properties of polysaccharide
modified liposomes for drug delivery.

Zhongyuan Xiang received his Ph.D. degree from Central South University
in 2016. He is currently a professor in the Department of Laboratory
Medicine, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University. His
research focuses on Research on New Materials and Methods in Laboratory
Medicine.

Juyoung Yoon is the
distinguished professor at the Department of
Chemistry and Nanoscience, Ewha Womans University. He received his
Ph.D. (1994) from The Ohio State University and conducted his postdoctoral
work at UCLA and Scripps Research Institute. His research interests
include investigations of fluorescent probes, activatable photosensitizers,
and phototherapy. He is selected as a “Highly-Cited Researcher”
by Clarivate Analytics/Thomson Reuters since 2014.

Guanghong Luo received his Ph.D. degree from
Shanghai University
in 2018. Later, he conducted his postdoctoral work at Jinan University
in collaboration with Profs. Xianming Li and Prof. Zhenyou Jiang.
He is currently an assistant researcher in Shenzhen People’s
Hospital (The Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan University, The
First Affiliated Hospital, Southern University of Science and Technology).
His research focuses on the designation and biological applications
of AIEgens.

Ben Zhong Tang
received his Ph.D. degree from Kyoto University
in 1988. He conducted his postdoctoral research at the University
of Toronto in 1989–1994. He Joined HKUST in the 1994 and was
promoted to Chair Professor in 2008 and Stephen K. C. Cheong Professor
of Science in 2013. He was elected to the Chinese Academy of Sciences
in 2009. In 2021, he joined the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen.
In 2001, he coined the concept of aggregation-induced emission (AIE).
His research interests include the exploration of new advanced materials,
new luminescent processes and new polymerization reactions.

## Author Contributions
◆ Y.H. Duo and G.H. Luo contributed equally to this work. CRediT: Yanhong Duo conceptualization, writing - original draft; Lei Han investigation and funding acquisition; Yaoqiang
Yang investigation and data curation; Zhifeng Wang investigation; Lirong Wang software; Jingyi Chen data curation; Zhongyuan Xiang funding acquisition,
project administration, writing - review & editing; Juyoung
Yoon conceptualization, funding acquisition, writing - review
& editing; Guanghong Luo conceptualization, funding
acquisition, investigation, project administration, software, visualization,
writing - original draft, writing - review & editing; Ben
Zhong Tang conceptualization, supervision, writing - review
& editing.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References