3954cellrepsmedCell Reports MedicineCell Rep MedElsevierPMC1151385311513853115138533936638510.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101756Gene therapy for chronic pain management
LiYi-ze JiRu-Rong 1Center for Translational Pain Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA2Departments of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA3Departments of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA∗Corresponding author ru-rong.ji@duke.edu
310202451010175610175629102024© 2024 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Despite significant advances in identifying molecular targets for chronic pain over the past two decades, many remain difficult to target with traditional methods. Gene therapies such as antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), RNA interference (RNAi), CRISPR, and virus-based delivery systems have played crucial roles in discovering and validating new pain targets. While there has been a surge in gene therapy-based clinical trials, those focusing on pain as the primary outcome remain uncommon. This review examines various gene therapy strategies, including ASOs, small interfering RNA (siRNAs), optogenetics, chemogenetics, and CRISPR, and their delivery methods targeting primary sensory neurons and non-neuronal cells, including glia and chondrocytes. We also explore emerging gene therapy tools and highlight gene therapy’s clinical potential in pain management, including trials targeting pain-related diseases. Advances in single-cell analysis of sensory neurons and non-neuronal cells, along with the development of new delivery tools, are poised to accelerate the application of gene therapy in pain medicine.

## Graphical abstract
 
In this review article, Li et al. discuss various gene therapy strategies and their delivery methods targeting primary sensory neurons and non-neuronal cells, including glia and chondrocytes. They also highlight recent advances in gene therapy, including CRISPR-Cas and RNA-based techniques, as well as clinical trials targeting pain-related diseases.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2024 Oct 15.

## Introduction
Chronic pain affects up to 30% of adults worldwide and often results from diseases like arthritis, diabetes, and cancer, or trauma. , Notably, opioid use disorder contributes to hundreds of deaths daily in the US. Therefore, novel non-opioid treatments for common pain conditions, such as knee, back, and neck injuries, as well as neuropathic pain, are urgently needed.
Gene therapy began in the mid-20th century with an improved understanding of DNA’s structure and function. By the 1970s, recombinant DNA technology had revealed the potential for gene therapy to correct genetic diseases. The 1990s saw the first human gene therapy trial, opening a new era of clinical applications. As of April 2024, there are 2,606 clinical studies registered on the ClinicalTrials.gov. Searching the PubMed website for research on “gene therapy” from Jan 2004 to March 2024 yielded a total of 26,904 studies, including 705 clinical studies registered on ClinicalTrails.gov ( A). The emergence of gene editing techniques, especially CRISPR-Cas9, in the 21st century has injected new momentum into the field. Gene therapy primarily targets tumors, rare diseases, genetic disorders, chronic diseases, and conditions lacking effective medication. A PubMed search for “gene therapy and pain” from Jan 2004 to July 2024 revealed a total of 386 studies, including 18 clinical studies registered on ClinicTrails.gov ( B). However, trials focusing on pain as the primary outcome are rare, and there is a lack of approved gene therapy for pain.
 

## Targeting nociceptive neurons in the PNS and CNS by gene therapy
Most gene therapy approaches for pain have been conducted to target primary sensory neurons in the peripheral nervous system (PNS), including dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) and trigeminal ganglia (TG). Some studies also focused on nociceptive neurons in the central nervous system (CNS), including the spinal cord and brain ( ). Nociceptors are specialized sensory neurons that detect harmful thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli, , and their sensitization (or peripheral sensitization) is the most direct cause of chronic pain and the most appropriate target for pain therapies. Nociceptors are characterized by their molecular and functional diversity, comprising both unmyelinated C-fibers and myelinated Aδ-fibers in DRG, TG, and glossopharyngeal ganglion. In addition to thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli, light stimuli can induce or suppress pain when nociceptors express light-sensing ion channels using optogenetics. Recent progress in transcriptional profiling at the population and single-cell levels has revealed molecular diversity in mouse , and human sensory neurons, , providing novel targets and cell types for gene therapy. In parallel with peripheral sensitization, central sensitization is mediated by the enhanced pain processing within the spinal cord and brain. It can manifest as an increase in excitatory neurotransmission and reduction or loss of inhibitory synaptic transmission (also called disinhibition) in the CNS pain circuits. Accumulating evidence suggests that central sensitization in chronic pain can open the spinal cord “gate,” enabling low-threshold Aβ-fiber stimulation (e.g., light touch) to induce mechanical allodynia, or tactile allodynia. 
 Gene therapy delivery tools encompass viral vectors, such as adenoviruses, adeno-associated viruses (AAVs), herpes simplex virus (HSV), rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG), and lentiviruses (LVs), and non-viral vectors including lipid nanoparticles, polymer carriers, and nanoparticles, as well as physical methods like electroporation, gene gun, sonoporation, and microneedle delivery. Each method has its advantages and limitations. Choosing the appropriate delivery tool requires considering various factors, including the therapeutic target, delivery efficiency, safety, and cost. , , Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) target RNA for gene regulation. These tools collectively push the boundaries of gene therapy, aiming for safer and more effective treatments. Gene editing tools have evolved significantly to provide more precise and efficient means for treating genetic disorders. Some key tools include CRISPR-Cas9, a revolutionary gene editing tool derived from a bacterial defense system. It utilizes a guide RNA and the Cas9 enzyme to make precise cuts in DNA, facilitating the removal, addition, or alteration of specific genetic sequences. CRISPR-Cas9 is renowned for its simplicity, speed, and accuracy compared to older gene editing methods. 

## ASOs and RNA interference
ASOs and RNA interference (RNAi) therapies are among the most feasible and promising approaches for gene therapy targeting pain. ( A and 2B). Starting from the 1990s, antisense DNA or RNA oligonucleotides have been extensively utilized for the discovery and validation of pain targets. ( ). The short DNA or RNA molecules can bind to specific RNA sequences, leading to the degradation or alteration of the target RNA ( A). The neuropeptide galanin was among the first neuronal messenger molecules found to be regulated by nerve injury. It is also specifically expressed in small-sized nociceptive primary sensory neurons of the DRG. One of the earliest applications of gene therapies in pain research demonstrated that local delivery of galanin ASOs to the axotomized sciatic nerve not only reduced galanin expression in DRG neurons but also induced autotomy, a pain-related self-mutilation behavior in rats following peripheral nerve injury. The tetrodotoxin (TTX)-resistant sodium channel subunit NaV1.8 is among the earliest identified markers for nociceptors. Intrathecal administration of ASOs was used to study the function of the channels present in the peripheral terminals of primary afferent neurons. It was found that intrathecal ASOs knockdown of NaV1.8, but not NaV1.9, in DRG neurons reduced nerve injury-induced neuropathic pain in rats. Reduced expression of NaV1.8 in DRG neurons by ASOs not only prevented the redistribution of the channel in the sciatic nerve but also reversed neuropathic pain in rats. Intrathecal knockdown of transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) by ASOs in primary afferent nociceptive nerve fibers reduced hypotonic stimulus-induced nociception. , Ionis Pharmaceuticals developed ASOs containing locked nucleotides, which exhibited a long half-life (months) and improved potency. However, they also showed liver toxicity following systemic injection. Additionally, in the spinal cord, ASOs-mediated knockdown of the post-synaptic density protein PSD-95 disrupted its binding to N-methyl-D-aspartate NMDA receptors (NMDARs) and prevented the development of morphine-induced antinociceptive tolerance. 
 RNAi is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism for silencing gene expression by targeted degradation of mRNA ( B). RNAi has been broadly used for targeting gene expression in the pain pathway (e.g., DRG and spinal cord). Still, this approach is limited by cellular membrane permeability to negatively charged nucleic acids. , Various carriers, including polymers, lipids, and peptides, have been employed to enhance the delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA) into cells, including neurons and glial cells. Intrathecal administration of matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) siRNA mixed with polymer polyethylenimine (PEI) was shown to prevent nerve injury-induced upregulation of MMP-9 in mouse DRG and the development of neuropathic pain after spinal nerve ligation. However, PEI as a delivery system is limited by its specificity for tissues and cell types. Alternative methods were developed for siRNA delivery to the nervous system. Notably, the RVG peptide can deliver siRNA to the neuronal cells following intravenous injection, resulting in specific gene silencing in the brain. This method was modified to deliver siRNA to DRG neurons by peri-sciatic injection of a mixture of RVG peptide and siRNA via retrograde axonal transport. Peri-sciatic injection of RVG peptide together with siRNA targeting caspase-6 or programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) not only reduced the target protein expression in DRG neurons but also altered nociception mediated by target proteins in these sensory neurons. , , Notably, high-dose siRNA may produce off-target analgesic effects through Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated type-1 interferon responses in the spinal cord. 
Increasing evidence suggests a critical role of noncoding RNAs and epigenetic regulation of gene expression in primary sensory neurons in pain regulation. Nerve injury was shown to increase the activity of histone-lysine N-methyltransferase-2 (G9a) to enhance neuropathic pain via epigenetic silencing of potassium channels. Intrathecal treatment of siRNA targeting G9a using the transfection agent i-Fect, a cationic lipid formulation designed for efficient siRNA delivery into a wide variety of cell types, not only reduced nerve injury-induced G9a upregulation and neuropathic pain but also reversed nerve injury-induced downregulation of multiple potassium channels in DRG. Interestingly, a sensory neuron-specific long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) was found to be primarily expressed in small DRG neurons and significantly downregulated after nerve injury. This lncRNA may alleviate neuropathic pain through the regulation of KCNN1 expression in injured DRG neurons. Furthermore, another lncRNA is upregulated after nerve injury and knockdown of this lncRNA with ASOs reduced neuropathic pain. Primary sensory neurons also express the miR-183 cluster, which controls 80% of neuropathic pain-regulated genes. Absence or downregulation of miR-183 led to upregulations of the neuropathic pain genes encoding the voltage-gated calcium channel subunits α2δ-1 and α2δ-2, which are molecular targets of the neuropathic pain drug gabapentin ( ). 

## AAV, HSV, and LV
The AAV delivery system is a crucial development in gene therapy for both loss-of-function and gain-of-function gene manipulations. Targeted delivery is key to optimizing AAV, with the capsid’s protrusions being essential for targeting. The interaction between protrusions and specific receptors is crucial for designing capsid mutations. AAV vectors are available in multiple engineered serotypes, each of which can respond to different cell types with different tropisms. AAVs are also limited by packaging capacity and their ability to transfect undesirable tissues and cells. Viruses containing AAV5, AAV6, AAV8, AAV9, and AAV9-derivate have been used to target primary sensory neurons. 
AAVs can infect peripheral sensory neurons by local and systemic delivery in rodents. Intra-ganglion (DRG) delivery of AAV5 carrying a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting NaV1.3 partially reduced neuropathic pain in rats. A long noncoding antisense RNA against potassium channel Kcna2 is present in sensory neurons and upregulated by nerve injury. Intra-ganglionic delivery of AAV5 to knock down this antisense RNA rescued nerve injury-induced downregulation of Kcna2, leading to altered neuronal excitability and sustained relief of neuropathic pain in mice. Serpina3n, a serine protease inhibitor, is upregulated in injured DRG neurons of mice and rats to protect the development of neuropathic pain after nerve injury. In mice with spinal nerve ligation, AVV2/8 virus carrying a recombinant gene for Serpina3n not only increased the protein expression of Serpina3n in mouse DRG but also attenuated neuropathic pain. Intrathecal administration of AAV9-mCherry could infect most of sensory neurons in mouse DRG of adult mice. Intravenous AAV9 has been shown to be more potent than other AAV serotypes to infect neuronal neurons in the CNS. 
To overcome the package limitations of AAV, HSV-1 and LVs have been used in pain research. HSV-1 has a large packaging capacity and the natural ability to target sensory neurons in discrete dermatomes via retrograde axonal transport. HSV-based expression of human proenkephalin gene in rat DRG neurons following intradermal injection produced antinociception in the formalin model. HSV-based gene therapy for pain was achieved by carrying different genes, including the gene encoding the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-4, or through delivery of shRNA that targets the NaV1.7 sodium channel. , Carbonic anhydrase-8 (CA8) expression in DRG neurons was shown to mediate analgesia through control of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Replication-defective herpes simplex virus (rdHSV)-mediated expression of vHCA8WT in cultured DRG neurons activated KV7 and decreased neuronal excitability, offering a gene therapy strategy for pain control. Lentiviral vectors are a gene therapy alternative to AAV and HSV-1 vectors, because they can integrate into the host genome, allowing for stable and long-term expression in neurons (up to 6 months or longer). Subcutaneous administration of a lentiviral vector encoding a microRNA (miRNA)-30-based shRNA resulted in a sustained reduction in NMDAR subunit NR1 expression in DRG neurons and reduced inflammatory pain. β-arrestin-2 plays an important role in G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling and negatively regulates opioid receptor signaling and opioid analgesia. Strikingly, a single intraspinal injection of a lentiviral vector encoding the β-arrestin-2 gene reversed spinal nerve injury-induced mechanical allodynia for more than three months in mice. 

## CRISPR-Cas9
The CRISPR-Cas9 system is emerging as a powerful tool for gene therapy and has shown therapeutic efficacy in multiple animal models of human diseases. Given a protective role of pain, permanent genome editing, leading to permanent alteration of pain perception, may not be desirable. Considerable efforts are on the way to improving and broadening CRISPR systems for better efficacy and safety, including tweaking regulatory sites in the genome or CRISPR interference systems using catalytically inactive Cas9 enzyme (dead Cas9 [dCas9]) with a repression domain, which inhibits or increases transcription without altering the DNA sequence in the genome. A recent study examined epigenetic repression of NaV1.7 in primary afferents via epigenome engineering approaches through CRISPR-dCas9 and zinc-finger proteins, and the construct was delivered using an AAV9 vector via an intrathecal route. This approach has several advantages over the conventional approaches, as it permits the use of minimal viral loads and reduces the possibility of systemic immunogenicity. Importantly, only the mRNA expression of the target gene is reduced without changing the original genome. While it is still far from being applicable to humans, the CRISPR-based gene-silencing technology offers promise for managing chronic pain that can persist for months or even years. 

## Optogenetics and chemogenetics
Optogenetics is a novel biotechnology combining optical and genetic technology that enables precise intervention in a specific group of neurons or a specific neurocircuit by light stimulation. When applied to living animals, optogenetics is a useful tool to investigate the neural circuits related to a certain behavior. Peri-sciatic injection of AAV6 was utilized to express excitatory and inhibitory opsin in TRPV1+ nociceptors. It was found that activation of different opsins by blue light (ChR2) and yellow light is sufficient to elicit pain or induce analgesia. Using a transgenic rat line in which ChR2 is selectively expressed in Aβ afferent fibers in tactile end organs elicits pain-like behaviors and aversion, together with excitation of neurons in the superficial dorsal horn and amygdala in rats with nerve injury. However, optogenetic activation of cutaneous Vglut1-expressing afferent A-fibers alone may not be sufficient to produce pain-like behavior. Optogenetic approaches of both gain-of-function (using blue light) and loss-of-function (using yellow light) together with AAV-based gene therapy have revealed multiple neural circuits for the control of chronic pain and its comorbidities (e.g., depression, anxiety, aversion, negative reward, anhedonia, etc), involving the parabrachial nucleus, dorsal raphe nucleus, ventral tegmental area, and anterior cingulate cortex. , , Thus, optogenetic controls of specific neurons or brain circuits with high spatiotemporal precision allow for rapid manipulation of the associated behaviors. By targeting specific ion channels or receptors in specific neurons to map, monitor, and control neuronal activity in the PNS and CNS, together with the development of more effective and safer gene delivery methods, the light-based gene therapy will open a new avenue for pain management.
Chemogenetics are based on designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDs), which have been developed to precisely control various types of GPCR signaling (i.e., Gq, Gs, Gi) using biologically inert agonists. DREADDs, such as clozapine-N-oxide (CNO), the most frequently used DREADD for chemogenetics, have been widely used to modulate neuronal activity and interrogate neural circuitry of behaviors. For instance, activation of Gi DREADD in TRPV1+ DRG sensory neurons decreased neuronal excitability and elicited analgesia, while activation of Gi DREADD in spinal dorsal horn GABAergic interneurons induced robust spontaneous nocifensive behaviors. Spontaneous pain is a primary complaint in patients suffering from chronic pain and remains a treatment challenge. Nerve injury induces cluster firing of DRG neurons, which is triggered by activity of sympathetic nerves sprouting into the DRG with axonal injury. Chemogenetics manipulation of sympathetic activity via intrathecal AAV9-mediated gene therapy is sufficient to modulate DRG cluster firing and spontaneous pain behavior in mice with neuropathic pain. Collectively, DREADD approaches offer a powerful tool for investigating and interfering pain transduction and transmission. Although optogenetics and chemogenetics have been widely applied in neuroscience research and contributed substantially to understanding pain mechanisms, their clinical use is limited by the need to combine gene therapy, optical activation equipment, and drug co-administration.

## Targeting non-neuronal cells by gene therapy
The past decade has also seen significant progress in the cell biology of pain, highlighting the crucial involvement of non-neuronal cells in pain processing. Bidirectional signaling between the immune and nervous systems plays an important role in the onset, persistence, and resolution of chronic pain. Notably, immune-related genes are among the most significantly altered genes in the spinal cord after nerve injury. Neuroinflammation, characterized by the activation of glial cells in the PNS and CNS—such as Schwann cells, satellite glial cells (SGCs), microglia, and astrocytes—and the activation and infiltration of immune cells like macrophages and T cells, plays a pivotal role. In the PNS, neuroinflammation leads to peripheral sensitization, while, in the CNS, it contributes to central sensitization and the development of widespread chronic pain conditions. , The interactions among neurons, glial cells, and immune cells offer new insights into chronic pain pathogenesis and are promising targets for novel pain treatment strategies.
Prior research targeted several glial cell types, including microglia, astrocytes, and SGCs, as well as immune cells, keratinocytes, chondrocytes, and stem cells, by employing gene therapy strategies. Intrathecal IL-10 gene therapy was effective in attenuating paclitaxel-induced mechanical allodynia and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in rats. Interestingly, this technique targeted the spinal cord meninges, enriched with endothelial cells and immune cells. The IL-10-based gene therapy is associated with increased IL-10 levels in the meninges following intrathecal injection of the IL-10 plasmid. 

## Glial cells
Chemogenetics, optogenetics, and gene therapy have proven crucial in elucidating the roles of glial cells such as microglia, astrocytes, and SGCs in pain processing.
Chemogenetic and optogenetic modulation of spinal cord microglia has been shown to effectively control pain sensitivity. For instance, AAV9-mediated expression of DREADD under the CD68 promoter was initially used to activate or inhibit microglia through intrathecal administration. Chronic opioid exposure significantly enhanced the severity and duration of allodynia after chronic constriction injury in rats. However, intrathecal treatment with the inhibitory DREADD successfully prevented and reversed morphine-induced pain sensitization for weeks to months. Furthermore, intrathecal administration of Gq DREADD induced mechanical allodynia in males, whereas inhibitory Gi DREADD reduced nerve injury-induced neuropathic pain symptoms in male animals. Additionally, chemogenetic manipulation of CX3CR1-expressing microglia with inhibitory DREADD reduced spinal nerve transection-induced microglial reactivity and neuropathic pain in both male and female mice. Chemogenetic manipulation of CX3CR1-expressing microglia with Gi DREADD through intrathecal CNO injection produced male-specific attenuation of mechanical allodynia in mouse models of neuropathic pain. Recent research has demonstrated that optogenetic activation of spinal microglia, achieved by inducing red-activated channelrhodopsin in CX3CR1-expressing microglia, can lead to persistent pain via IL-1 signaling. Notably, CX3CR1 is also expressed by macrophages, and transmembrane protein 119 (TMEM119) has been identified as a more specific marker for microglia than CX3CR1. Activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in spinal cord microglia is pivotal in the development of neuropathic pain. ASOs containing locked nucleotides, developed by Ionis Pharmaceuticals to target the alpha isoform of p38 MAPK, demonstrated that intrathecal delivery effectively suppresses mechanical pain associated with chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) and TLR4 activation in male mice, echoing the male-dominant pain inhibition observed with small-molecule inhibitors of p38. 
The role of astrocytes in pain regulation has also been explored using optogenetics and chemogenetics. Light stimulation of ChR2-expressing spinal astrocytes not only triggered glial activation but also led to the production of proalgesic mediators and increased pain sensitivity. Furthermore, the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (vlPAG) neurons are critical for descending pain modulation. Interestingly, activation of vlPAG astrocytes by Gq DREADD in naive male rats resulted in neuropathic pain-like symptoms and pain-related aversion. Conversely, activation of Gi-DREADDs in vlPAG astrocytes alleviated neuropathic pain. 
SGCs are the most prevalent non-neuronal cells in DRG and intimately surround sensory neurons that detect painful stimuli. GPR37L1, an orphan GPCR, is highly expressed in SGCs of mouse and human DRG. Notably, GPR37L1 surface expression is downregulated in neuropathic pain conditions, such as diabetes and chemotherapy. Overexpression of GPR37L1 in DRG, achieved via intra-ganglionic microinjection of SGC-targeting AAV9-Gpr37l1 (using the SGC-specific Fabp7 promoter), resulted in a sustained relief of neuropathic pain in mice. Thus, targeting SGC-GPR37L1 in the PNS via gene therapy could offer a new approach for pain relief and disease modification.

## Immune cells
Adoptive transfer of various immune cell types, including macrophages, T cells, B cells, and neutrophils, has proven effective in promoting the resolution of inflammatory and chronic pain, serving as a novel cell therapy for pain management.
GPR37-expressing macrophages contributed to the resolution of inflammatory induced pain, and adoptive transfer of GPR37-expressing macrophages protected against sepsis following bacteria and parasite infection. Activation of GPR37 by neuroprotection D1—a specialized pro-resolving mediator endogenously produced during inflammation resolution—or by artesunate, an anti-malarial drug, enhances macrophage phagocytosis and phenotypic change, leading to increased production of IL-10 and transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1). CD200-expressing macrophages promote the resolution of inflammatory pain by transferring mitochondria to sensory neurons in mouse DRG, which express non-canonical CD200R-ligand iSec1 for interaction with macrophages. Furthermore, adoptive transfer of CD8+ T cells was found to prevent and resolve pain after CIPN via the secretion of IL-10. CD8+ T cells also promote the resolution of CIPN through IL-13, which acts on macrophages to induce IL-10 production. CD4+ T cells are required for the analgesic effects induced by adenosine receptor (A3AR) agonist. Activation of A3AR on these T cells triggers indirect IL-10 release. Adoptive transfer of CD4+ T cells to mouse DRG restored the A3AR agonist-mediated inhibition of neuropathic pain in T cell-deficient mice with nerve injury. Moreover, neutrophils, the most abundant immune cells in the blood, can also play a significant role. Peripheral injection of neutrophils has been found to prevent the development of long-lasting pain induced by inflammation and an anti-inflammatory drug. 
Current therapeutic strategies for treating autoimmune diseases often focus on modulating the immune functions of B cells or entirely eliminating B cell populations. In randomized controlled trials, rituximab infusion, which depleted B cells, can significantly improve rheumatoid arthritis symptoms, including pain. The importance of B cells is also illustrated in the tibial fracture and casting model of postoperative pain; depletion of B cells with intravenous anti-CD20 antibody (a murine analog of rituximab) one week after a tibial fracture reduces the severity of mechanical allodynia and vascular changes to the injured paw after cast removal. CRISPR-Cas9 system has been employed to knock out endogenous genes in primary human B cells using an AAV6 vector. These autologous B cells can be engineered to express therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) before being matured into plasma cells and reintroduced back to the host. This process allows for the continuous secretion of therapeutic mAbs into the serum, potentially eliminating the need for the repeated injections that are currently necessary in mAb therapies. 
Administration of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) via intravenous or intrathecal route has been shown to provide long-term relief of arthritic pain through macrophage recruitment, and of neuropathic pain through neuroimmune regulation, such as the production of TGF-β1 and the inhibition of neuroinflammation and glial activation. Additionally, conditioned serum medium, characterized by elevated levels of secreted exosomes and anti-inflammatory mediators (e.g., IL-1Ra), has demonstrated effectiveness in resolving neuropathic pain after CIPN. Human MSCs derived from adipose tissue and their conditioned medium are valid treatment options for controlling osteoarthritis (OA)-related hypersensitivity. These treatments offer rapid and sustained pain relief by modulating neuroinflammation in both the PNS and CNS, thereby controlling both peripheral and central sensitization. 

## Keratinocytes and chondrocytes
Gene therapy targeting keratinocytes and chondrocytes was shown effective in alleviating clinical pain in conditions such as OA and sickle cell disease ( ). Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, a rare genetic skin disease characterized by blistering, results from mutations in COL7A1, which codes type VII collagen (C7). Beremagene geperpavec (B-VEC), an engineered, non-replicating HSV-1 vector containing COL7A1, restored C7 expression in keratinocytes and fibroblasts. This restoration promotes wound healing and alleviates pain in patients with dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. , A recent study revealed NaV1.7 expression in chondrocytes, and selective deletion of NaV1.7 in chondrocytes was shown to reduce OA-associated pain. Thus, gene therapy strategies targeting chondrocytes to suppress NaV1.7 expression could mitigate OA and arthritic pain.
 

## Emerging technologies for gene therapy

## Neuron-targeting serotypes of AAV
In the field of neuroscience, AAV9 is widely used as a viral vector due to its efficient neuron transduction. Recent research highlights that intravenous injection of the novel AAV9-derived AAV-MaCPNS1/2 efficiently transduces peripheral sensory neurons in rodents and non-human primates (NHPs). Compared to AAV9 and AAV-PHP.S, MaCPNS1/2 demonstrates higher transduction efficiency in the PNS while limiting liver transduction. For adult mice, MaCPNS1/2 can be administered via intravenous injection; but in newborn mice, it can be directly delivered through intraperitoneal injection, achieving noticeably higher transduction efficiency than in adults. The use of the MaCPNS1 capsid to mediate jGCaMP8s transduction enables the visualization of calcium dynamics in vagal neurons, facilitating calcium imaging studies in species lacking transgenic models. Additionally, both MaCPNS1 and MaCPNS2 showed reliable transduction effects in the CNS and PNS of marmosets and neonatal macaque, displaying a preference for the PNS. This addresses the critical demand for effective gene delivery vectors that target the nervous system across different species, potentially revolutionizing numerous applications in both basic science and clinical medicine. Notably, AAV-based gene therapy was shown to produce DRG pathology in NHPs after intrathecal or intravenous injection. This pathology appears to be transient, recovering after 6 months. 

## Virus-like particle and lipid nanoparticle
Virus-like particles (VLPs) are multi-protein structures that mimic the shape and structure of actual viruses but are non-infectious as they lack the viral genome. They offer the advantages of both viral and non-viral delivery systems, establishing them as safe carriers for therapeutic macromolecules. , Several VLP-based vaccines are already in the market, such as Engerix-B and Recombivax HB for hepatitis B virus (HBV), Gardasil and Cervarix for human papillomavirus (HPV), and Hecolin against hepatitis E virus (HEV). Nerve growth factor (NGF) plays a critical role in promoting inflammatory pain and cancer pain. Although clinical trials using anti-NGF mAbs effectively reduced pain in OA patients, they failed to gain Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval due to detrimental effects on the joints and overall health. , Notably, VLPs derived from the cucumber mosaic virus are coupled with expressed recombinant NGF to produce vaccines. Preclinical studies have shown that VLP-based NGF vaccines can effectively control pain associated with rheumatoid arthritis and OA in mice. Importantly, this vaccination strategy does not trigger a long-lasting antibody response and requires regular boosts to maintain titers. This approach may prevent the tissue damage associated with the prolonged activity of mAbs used in previous trials. 
Lipid-based nanoparticles (LNPs) are categorized into five types based on their properties and formulations: liposomes, niosomes, transfersomes, solid lipid nanoparticles, and nanostructured lipid carriers. LNP particles are effective drug carriers, with enhanced protection, sustained release, and higher bioavailability. LNPs have found commercial success in pain management for the delivery of local anesthetic drugs, such as EXPAREL (bupivacaine liposome injectable suspension), which significantly reduces pain within 72 h after surgery. DepoDur is a liposomal for the extended release of epidural morphine, approved by the FDA for pain relief after major surgery. Furthermore, LNP-based therapies such as Onpattro and mRNA vaccines for SARS-CoV-2 have shown clinical efficacy. Despite their success in delivering analgesics and vaccines, gene therapy for pain using LNPs has not commenced, mainly due to challenges in targeting and potential inflammatory responses. However, modifications with targeting ligands offer promising research directions for pain gene therapy, improving specificity and stability. Additionally, FDA approvals of certain LNP formulations could expedite the development and approval of new therapies, enhancing LNPs' clinical application in pain gene therapy.

## Pharmacologically selective actuator modules
While CNO is widely used in chemogenetics and cell target validation, it lacks drug properties. Chemogenetics involves artificially activating or deactivating cells by expressing an engineered receptor. A new option, pharmacologically selective actuator modules (PSAMs), modulate ion channels directly to decrease or increase neuronal activity, enabling precise control over neurons with a drug. The PSAM4-GlyR system was developed to create a chloride channel that responds to specific agonists of α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors—uPSEM792 and the FDA-approved drug varenicline—at single nanomolar concentrations ( D). Such a design achieves high selectivity for sensory neurons over existing tools. Transfection of PSAM4-GlyR has been shown to silence neuronal activity and reduce pain hypersensitivity in mouse models of pain following tissue and nerve injuries. Additionally, varenicline treatment in mice with cancer and PSAM4-GlyR expression in NaV1.8+ sensory neurons reversed cancer pain. Using chemo-functional magnetic resonance imaging, researchers demonstrated that changes in functional connectivity between the dorsal hippocampus, thalamus, and somatosensory regions correlated with relief from tactile allodynia. These studies underscore the potential of PSAM4-GlyR for both studying and potentially treating chronic pain.

## Programmable addition via site-specific targeting elements
Programmable addition via site-specific targeting elements (PASTE) is a new CRISPR-based technology that enables the insertion of large DNA sequences without causing double-stranded DNA breaks, unlike traditional CRISPR-Cas9. This method has demonstrated its versatility in gene tagging, replacement, delivery, and protein production and secretion. PASTE has facilitated multiplexed gene integration by thoroughly characterizing integrase attachment sites, allowing the specific fusion of different genes with unique fluorescent cargos. It can perform insertions at nine different endogenous sites with 13 cargos, ranging from 779 bp to 36,000 bp. This capability allows for the insertion of over 99.7% of human cDNAs as transgenes. Offering more precise editing without double-stranded DNA breaks, PASTE enhances the safety and efficiency of gene editing, potentially making it a significant tool for pain gene therapy. 

## Cell access through RNA sensing by endogenous adenosine deaminases acting on RNA
Cell access through RNA sensing by eEndogenous adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (CellREADR) introduces a new class of RNA-programmable protein translation technology. This method allows for bypassing DNA-based transcription to target and manipulate cells identified by their mRNA markers. In 2023, this method was successfully used to express multiple proteins including GFP, GCaMP6s, and ChR2 in specific neuron types in the mouse brain. Furthermore, it was applied to human cortical ex vivo tissues to specifically label neuronal subpopulations by targeting RNA sensors for human Foxp2 and vesicular GABA transporter (vGAT) mRNA. , CellREADR also offers potential for understanding pain etiology by developing RNA sensors to target specific cell types, including neurons (hSyn+), microglia/macrophage (Tmem119/CD11b+), and astrocytes and SGCs (Fabp7/Aldh1l1/Gpr37L1+). With its ability to program cellular physiology flexibly, CellREADR is poised to advance the development of diagnostic and therapeutic tools, particularly for identifying cell subpopulations affected by gene mutations or altered mRNA expressions linked to chronic pain.

## Clinical implications
As of 2024, the FDA has approved several dozens of gene therapies, each with different vectors, plasmids, side effects, and limitations. (https://www.fda.gov).
These products include three siRNA-based therapies for genetic transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis, acute hepatic porphyria, and primary hyperoxaluria type 1, highlighting the expanding market for siRNA treatments. Additionally, two ASO-based therapies have been approved, including nusinersen for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and tofersen for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Several AAV-based gene therapies targeting various genetic diseases have been approved. For instance, Zolgensma (onasemnogene abeparvovec-xioi) uses an AAV9 vector to introduce a functional SMN1 gene for SMA patients, with common side effects including elevated liver enzymes and vomiting, and is only suitable for patients under 2 years old. Luxturna (voretigene neparvovec-rzyl) employs an AAV2 vector carrying the RPE65 gene to treat Leber congenital amaurosis, with common side effects such as intraocular inflammation and retinal tears. Lenmeldy (atidarsagene autotemcel) uses an LV carrying the arylsulfatase (ARSA) gene to treat metachromatic leukodystrophy, with side effects including fever and leukopenia, and requires high-dose chemotherapy to clear the bone marrow. Casgevy and Lyfgenia represent the first cell-based gene therapies for the treatment of sickle cell disease in patients 12 years and older. Casgevy is the first FDA-approved therapy utilizing CRISPR-Cas9, signaling an innovative advancement in the field of gene therapy. These therapies come with specific side effects and limitations, such as immune reactions and infection risks, requiring long-term monitoring and management, depending on individual circumstances. (https://www.fda.gov).
Our recent search through PubMed revealed 18 gene therapy trials related to pain management ( ). Most trials treated pain as a secondary indication, linked to primary diseases associated with pain, and demonstrated pain relief. Only a few trials primarily focused on pain outcomes. One such trial is a phase 1 clinical study using NP2, a replication-defective HSV-based vector expressing human preproenkephalin, for subjects with intractable focal pain due to cancer. NP2 was injected intradermally into the dermatomes corresponding to the radicular pain distribution, suggesting potential effectiveness in pain reduction and meriting further investigation. In rheumatoid arthritis treatment, intra-articular injections of a retrovirus expressing IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) increased IL-1Ra levels, reducing MMP-3 and IL-1β expression to achieve analgesic effects. Additionally, IL-10 gene therapy has shown promise in alleviating chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain in mice and OA pain in dogs. Another trial (NCT03477487) involving intra-articular injection of XT-150, a plasmid DNA with a variant of human IL-10 transgene, to elevate articular IL-10 expression for managing osteoarthritic pain has been conducted, though its results remain unpublished.
Studies have explored the combination of gene therapy and cell therapy for disease management. For instance, the TissueGene-C study employed a cell and gene therapeutic approach for knee OA, using a mix of non-transformed and transduced chondrocytes (3:1 ratio) retrovirally engineered to overexpress TGF-β1. This therapy, administered via intra-articular injection (NCT03477487, NCT02072070), demonstrated that TGF-β1 in modified chondrocytes could stimulate cartilage growth. , Another investigational therapy involved the infusion of autologous CD34+ cells transduced with the BCH-BB694 lentiviral vector. This vector carries a shRNA targeting BCL11A mRNA embedded in a miRNA (shmiR), facilitating erythroid lineage-specific knockdown of mutant BCL11A and reducing sickle cells. This approach has validated the inhibition of BCL11A as an effective strategy for inducing fetal hemoglobin and has provided preliminary evidence that shmiR-based gene knockdown might offer a favorable risk-benefit profile in treating sickle cell disease and associated pain (NCT03282656). 
In treating dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, one study utilized autologous keratinocytes transduced with a retrovirus carrying the full-length human COL7A1 gene, which were then processed into gene-corrected autologous epidermal sheets. Patients receiving these transplanted epidermal sheets reported improved pain, itch, and wound durability. Additionally, beremagene geperpavec-svdt (VYJUVEK), a topically applied, redosable gene therapy using a live, (rdHSV-1 vector, is being developed by Krystal Biotech. This therapy aims to deliver the functional collagen type VII alpha 1 chain (COL7A1) gene to both dominant and recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa patients. It has shown efficacy in transducing keratinocytes and fibroblasts and restoring functional COL7 protein. , , By targeting COL7A1, beremagene geperpavec is the first topical, redosable gene therapy made in the market. The advantage of this delivery strategy is for local gene therapy, making it possible for diseases such as diabetic peripheral neuropathy, CIPN, and post-herpetic pain.
Multiple clinical studies have employed gene therapy to treat painful peripheral artery disease, using non-viral plasmids DNA to express genes coding various growth factors including hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), , , , , HGF732, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), VEGF165, , and FGF-1. This approach increased ischemia reperfusion by inducing angiogenesis, leading to decreased pain induced by ischemia ( ). This approach does not require a viral vector, minimizing the risk of virus-induced neuropathy and inflammation. Notably, the cost of gene therapy in the United States is extraordinarily high, with some treatments reaching millions of dollars per dose. For example, Hemgenix (etranacogene dezaparvovec) for hemophilia B costs approximately $3.5 million per treatment, while Zolgensma (onasemnogene abeparvovec-xioi) for SMA is priced at approximately $2.1 million per dose. To manage these high costs and ensure patient access, various payment models have been implemented. , 

## Concluding remarks and future directions
Chronic pain affects billions worldwide, significantly increasing the risk of suicide among those with severe conditions. Current treatments such as anti-inflammatories, opioids, antidepressants, and anticonvulsants often provide only partial and temporary relief, coupled with substantial side effects. Consequently, gene therapy emerges as a promising long-term solution. Utilizing techniques such as ASOs, RNAi, virus-based technologies, chemogenetics, and optogenetics, has significantly advanced pain research, demonstrating analgesic efficacy through various administration routes ( ). The therapeutic era of in vivo gene editing in humans has begun, exploring the clinical potential of gene therapy for pain management. Advances in CRISPR-Cas technologies have produced robust gene editing tools, including programmable nucleases, base editors, and prime editors, with numerous in vivo applications from proof of concept in animal models to therapeutic outcomes in humans.
Current in vivo delivery methods allow gene editing agents to be administered directly to liver cells via intravenous injection, eye cells via intraocular injection, and cells in young individuals via intraperitoneal injection. However, efficiently targeting non-liver tissues remains a challenge for most delivery vehicles. Employing naturally occurring and engineered AAV capsids shows promise for reaching tissues like the PNS and CNS. Similar strategies might improve VLP targeting using different envelope glycoproteins, and emerging techniques for attaching targeting moieties to LNPs could enhance cell-type-specific delivery within tissues. It is crucial that in vivo gene editing targets only somatic cells to avoid ethical concerns associated with germline editing. , Additionally, addressing the immunogenicity of gene editing agents remains complex, emphasizing the need for delivery methods that support a potent, transient, and one-time therapeutic gene delivery. , These concerns can also be mitigated by local administration of gene therapy products ( E).
Recent advancements have enabled the generation of human nociceptors from reprogrammed fibroblasts, serving as a model for “pain in a dish” and potentially recapitulating human disease phenotypes. Targeting ion channels, such as sodium channels, calcium channels, and TRP channels, in primary sensory neurons has shown promise in gene therapy for pain. Preclinical studies targeting NaV1.7 and NaV1.8 in primary sensory neurons have demonstrated significant analgesic actions in neuropathic pain models ( ). Selective inhibitor for NaV1.8 has shown efficacy in human trials for acute postoperative pain. Gene therapy represents a promising avenue for persistent knocking down of both NaV1.7 and NaV1.8 for greater pain relief.
Gene therapy could also be employed to overexpress novel painkillers in sensory neurons. PD-1 and its ligand PD-L1 constitute an immune checkpoint pathway and serves as a previously unrecognized endogenous pain inhibitory system. , This system could be harnessed by gene therapy-mediated PD-L1 overexpression in sensory neurons to alleviate pain. Moreover, targeting chondrocytes to over-express anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1Ra, IL-10, and TGF-β1 could address OA and related pain. Similarly, targeting glial cells such as SGCs in the PNS with gene therapies that over-express GPR37L1 and KCNJ3/10 might control disease progression and restore homeostasis, aiding in the resolution of neuropathic pain post-diabetes and post-chemotherapy.
Gene editing- and RNA editing-based therapeutic approaches have largely focused on correcting mutations in monogenic diseases. However, chronic pain, stemming from multi-genic predispositions that disrupt the functional wiring of central and peripheral nerve systems, might require a broader strategy. Modifying and tuning affected cell types and circuits present rational approaches to treating such disorders. CellREADR will facilitate research toward elucidating the principles of biological information flow from genotype to phenotype across cell types and make possible a new generation of programmable cell-specific RNA medicine. VLPs are a promising area of research in vaccine and therapeutic development, and their application in pain management and gene therapy is an expanding field of interest. Notably, combining cell therapy and gene therapy has shown promising results for pain relief in patients with knee OA and sickle cell disease ( ). , 
In conclusion, gene therapy has advanced from rare diseases to general disorders. Recent progress in single-cell analysis has led to the discoveries of cell-type-specific markers and novel therapeutic targets. Leveraging insights into specific cellular targets in both neuronal and non-neuronal cells, gene therapies employing both loss-of-function and gain-of-function strategies offer unprecedented opportunities for future pain management. These advances underscore the evolving landscape of gene therapy as a pivotal approach to treating chronic pain comprehensively. Despite high enthusiasm for AAV in preclinical studies, all the clinical trials in did not involve AAV delivery. AAV delivery of multiple genes, although exciting, could be a real challenge and increases manufacturing costs, complexity of data interpretation, and possible adverse effects. Furthermore, COL7A gene therapy is restricted to local cells and may not be suitable for infecting sensory neurons. Use of larger capacity vectors is helpful to reduce complexity and improve efficiency. We believe all these alternatives will be tested and validated in the near future.

## Acknowledgments
R.-R.J. was supported by Duke University Anesthesiology Research Funds, NIH grants R01NS13181201A1 and R61NS138215, and DoD grants W81XWH2110885, W81XWH2110756, W81XWH 2210645, and W81XWH2210646.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## References