pmcMol TherMol Ther902molther100890581Molecular Therapy1525-00161525-0024American Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC11184335PMC11184335.111184335111843353856641410.1016/j.ymthe.2024.03.036S1525-0016(24)00214-41Original ArticleAn innate immune response to adeno-associated virus genomes decreases cortical dendritic complexity and disrupts synaptic transmission
SurianoChristos M.surianoc@montclair.edu KumarNeerav VerpeutJessica L. MaJie JungCaroline DunnConnor E. CarvajalBrigett V. NguyenAi Vy BoulangerLisa M.lboulang@princeton.edu 1Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Washington Road, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA2Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Washington Road, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA3Department of Biology, Montclair State University, 1 Normal Avenue, Montclair, NJ 07043, USA4Sokol Institute for Pharmaceutical Life Sciences, Montclair State University, 1 Normal Avenue, Montclair, NJ 07043, USA∗Corresponding author: Christos M. Suriano, PhD, Department of Biology, Montclair State University, 1 Normal Avenue, Montclair, NJ 07043, USA surianoc@montclair.edu∗∗Corresponding author: Lisa M. Boulanger, PhD, Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Washington Road, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA. lboulang@princeton.edu5Present address: Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, 950 S. McAllister Ave., Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
0562024014202432646504717211738312024283202405062025050620251906202405062025© 2024 The Authors2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Recombinant adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) allow rapid and efficient gene delivery to the nervous system, are widely used in neuroscience research, and are the basis of FDA-approved neuron-targeting gene therapies. Here we find that an innate immune response to the AAV genome reduces dendritic length and complexity and disrupts synaptic transmission in mouse somatosensory cortex. Dendritic loss is apparent 3 weeks after injection of experimentally relevant viral titers, is not restricted to a particular capsid serotype, transgene, promoter, or production facility, and cannot be explained by responses to surgery or transgene expression. AAV-associated dendritic loss is accompanied by a decrease in the frequency and amplitude of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents and an increase in the proportion of GluA2-lacking, calcium-permeable AMPA receptors. The AAV genome is rich in unmethylated CpG DNA, which is recognized by the innate immunoreceptor Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9), and acutely blocking TLR9 preserves dendritic complexity and AMPA receptor subunit composition in AAV-injected mice. These results reveal unexpected impacts of an immune response to the AAV genome on neuronal structure and function and identify approaches to improve the safety and efficacy of AAV-mediated gene delivery in the nervous system.

## Graphical abstract
 
Suriano and colleagues uncover unexpected impacts of adeno-associated virus (AAV) on neuronal morphology and synaptic transmission. They find that these circuit disruptions are triggered by a TLR9-mediated innate immune response to the AAV genome and identify strategies to improve the safety and efficacy of AAV-mediated gene delivery.

## Keywords
AAVneuronToll-like receptor 9dendritic arborsynaptic communicationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Clinical and basic neuroscience has been revolutionized by recombinant viral technology. Recombinant adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) are among the most commonly used viruses to deliver genes to the nervous system, in part because they are non-pathogenic and non-replicative, have broad tropism, and drive strong gene expression in postmitotic neurons. In basic and preclinical neuroscience research, AAV is commonly used to drive expression of exogenous proteins, including circuit tracers, calcium indicators, and optogenetic ion channels, or to edit endogenous genes using CRISPR-Cas9. AAV is also used clinically to restore endogenous protein function in the nervous system to treat Leber’s congenital amaurosis 2 , and spinal muscular atrophy, , and AAV-based clinical trials are under way to treat numerous other disorders of the nervous system, including Alzheimer’s disease, Canavan’s disease, late infantile Batten disease, Parkinson’s disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In the periphery, AAV-mediated gene delivery can elicit humoral, cellular, and innate immune responses to features including the viral capsid, expressed transgene, and impurities from the viral preparation, , leading to upregulation of major histocompatibility complex class I (MHCI) and MHCII proteins, activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes, and engagement of B cell-mediated antibody responses. , , , , As a result, AAV-mediated transgene expression is often limited by previous exposure to naturally occurring or engineered AAVs. In contrast, the immune-privileged status of the central nervous system (CNS) enhances long-term persistence of transduced cells and transgene products, contributing to the rapid rise of AAV as a tool for gene delivery to the CNS.
Although the AAV genome is not rapidly cleared by the immune response in the CNS, neuroinflammation is emerging as an important consideration in AAV-mediated gene delivery in the brain. CNS-directed AAV delivery has been associated with an increase in inflammatory mediators, including neutralizing antibodies, circulating CD45+ leukocytes, natural killer cells, and CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. , , , , , , It is increasingly clear that changes in immune signaling in the nervous system can manifest in ways that do not resemble a classical inflammatory response, in part because many immune proteins have non-immune roles in the healthy nervous system, where they are required for normal neuronal development, dendritic morphology, and synaptic transmission. For example, proteins of the complement cascade (including C1q, C3, and C4) and members of MHCI (including H2-K and H2-D) contribute to synapse elimination in the developing visual system. , , , , , H2-K and H2-D also negatively regulate dendritic complexity and the frequency and amplitude of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) in hippocampal and cortical neurons and limit the levels of Ca2+-permeable α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors in the lateral geniculate nucleus. , , , , , The central roles of these and other immune proteins in neuronal homeostasis raises the possibility that an immune response to AAV-mediated gene delivery could disrupt neuronal structure and/or function, even in the absence of classical signs of inflammation.
Here we report that an immune response to the AAV genome reduces dendritic complexity and disrupts synaptic transmission in mouse cortical neurons. Dendritic loss is apparent 3 weeks after injection and is accompanied by an increase in the proportion of calcium-permeable, GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors. AAV-associated dendritic loss is dose dependent, does not require transgene expression, and is not limited to a particular capsid serotype, encoded transgene, or promoter. AAV-associated dendritic loss and AMPA receptor subunit changes are both prevented by blocking Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9), an innate immunoreceptor that detects unmethylated CpG DNA motifs like those found in the AAV genome.

## Results

## AAV-mediated gene delivery reduces dendritic complexity in cortical pyramidal neurons
To determine whether AAV-mediated gene delivery affects neuronal morphology, we used DiOlistic labeling to visualize individual neurons from mouse primary somatosensory cortex (S1) of C57BL/6J mice. Brains were harvested 21 days post injection (21 dpi), roughly when many AAV-based basic and preclinical studies are performed, and individual neurons in injected ipsilateral and non-injected contralateral hemispheres were visualized in 100-μm-thick fixed sections ( A). To sample a diverse population of cortical pyramidal-like neurons, cells with a prominent apical neurite and pyramidal soma in cortical layers IV–VI were selected for analysis. All data collection and analysis were performed by observers who were blinded to treatment.
Following unilateral injection of vehicle alone, dendritic length and Sholl intersections in injected hemispheres are indistinguishable from untreated controls, which did not receive any surgery or injection ( A and 1C–1F). Injection of 4 × 1010 viral genomes (vg) of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry into S1 drives robust mCherry expression, demonstrating successful viral transduction ( A, 1B, G, and A). In the non-injected contralateral hemispheres, total dendritic length and Sholl intersections are indistinguishable from untreated controls ( B–S1D and S1F). Therefore, to control for biological or technical variation across animals, morphological data were represented as an ipsilateral/contralateral ratio within animals unless otherwise noted. In striking contrast to the contralateral hemisphere, total dendritic length and Sholl intersections are significantly reduced in the ipsilateral hemisphere of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry-injected animals relative to both untreated control animals and vehicle-injected hemispheres ( C–1F; for distributions of individual cells see H). Dendritic loss in AAV-injected but not vehicle-injected animals suggests that dendritic simplification is not caused by surgery or vehicle injection but rather is specifically associated with the presence of AAV. 
The effects of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry on dendrites could be a consequence of several factors, including viral dose, expression of mCherry, or host responses to the viral capsid, genome, promoter, or preparation contaminants. To determine whether reducing the number of viral genomes can ameliorate the effects of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry on dendritic arbors, we injected the same volume of a 1:20 dilution (2 × 109 vg) of the same virus. Loss of dendritic length and Sholl intersections are significantly reduced with this lower dose compared to 4 × 1010 vg, and both measures are indistinguishable from those seen in untreated controls ( C–1F). While similar or lower doses have been used successfully with other viruses and systems, 2 × 109 vg was not sufficient to drive strong mCherry expression in a cohort of animals with this combination of promoter, transgene, and route of administration ( B). Thus, reducing the dose of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry prevents impacts of AAV-mediated gene delivery on dendritic complexity but also compromises transgene expression.
Because lowering the dose of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry diminished transgene expression, it is possible that the effects on dendritic complexity seen with the higher dose were a consequence of mCherry expression. Indeed, previous studies have shown that mCherry can cause developmental abnormalities in the Xenopus retina and reduce the viability of cultured rat hippocampal neurons. To test the importance of transgene expression and other features of the AAV gene delivery system in dendritic loss, we unilaterally injected a lower dose (4.2 × 109 vg) of a different virus, AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (made at the University of Pennsylvania [UPenn] Viral Vector Core), into the brains of wild-type mice. EGFP protein has also been associated with toxicity in specific cell types (reviewed in Ansari et al. ), but the LoxP sites in the FLEX plasmid require CRE recombinase for efficient recombination, and therefore the AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP virus should not drive strong EGFP expression in the absence of CRE. However, a low level of CRE-independent recombination can occur during DNA amplification and viral vector production (∼0.01%–0.03% of viral vectors for a typical production protocol), potentially allowing CRE-independent transgene expression , . To assess this possibility, EGFP expression was monitored in injected hemispheres in the absence of CRE. EGFP fluorescence could not be detected in injected S1 by confocal fluorescence microscopy ( A, 1B, and G) or after using immunoblotting to amplify EGFP signals ( A). Despite the lack of appreciable transgene expression, AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP still causes a significant reduction in total dendritic length and Sholl intersections, closely matching what is seen after AAV8-hSyn-mCherry ( C–1F). Compared to the AAV used above, this virus has a different encoded transgene (EGFP vs. mCherry), demonstrating that dendritic loss is not restricted to a specific encoded transgene. These viruses also differ in their capsid serotype (AAV1 vs. AAV8), promoter (pCAG vs. hSyn), and production facility (UPenn Viral Vector Core vs. Princeton Viral Vector Core), demonstrating that dendritic loss is caused by AAVs with diverse features. To independently test whether the production facility is associated with AAV-associated dendritic loss, the AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP virus that was originally obtained from the UPenn Viral Vector Core was recreated at the Princeton Viral Vector Core. AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP manufactured at either facility caused nearly identical loss of dendritic length and Sholl intersections ( I and S1J). Injecting AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (PNI) into a single brain region (S1) also produced changes in dendritic length and Sholl intersections comparable to those seen after injecting the same amount into three different brain regions (motor cortex, somatosensory cortex, and cerebellum; K and S1L), suggesting that injecting other brain regions does not exacerbate the phenotype in S1. Together, these results show that AAV-mediated gene delivery can cause dendritic loss in cortical pyramidal neurons. Furthermore, dendritic loss does not require detectable transgene expression and is not specific to a particular capsid serotype, promoter, encoded transgene, or production facility but is triggered by AAV-based gene delivery systems that differ in all these parameters.
The reduction in dendritic length and Sholl intersections by AAV8-hSyn-mCherry and AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP could reflect either shortening or elimination of dendritic segments. To determine whether entire dendritic segments were being lost, the total number of nodes (branch points) per neuron were counted, since nodes are only lost when entire segments are eliminated. After injection of either AAV8-hSyn-mCherry or AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn), the number of nodes in cells from injected ipsilateral hemispheres, but not non-injected contralateral hemispheres, is significantly reduced relative to untreated controls ( G and E), and node loss is evenly distributed between the apical and basal dendritic compartments ( H). Thus, AAV-mediated gene delivery is associated with loss of entire branches throughout the dendritic arbor in the injected hemisphere. To further characterize the morphological effects of AAV-mediated gene delivery, Strahler order (SO) analysis was performed. The maximum SO reached by a cell, termed its Strahler number (SN), is a measure of branching depth, where higher numbers represent more extensively branched arbors ( A). In untreated controls, 29% of sampled pyramidal neurons in S1 reach SN4. Similarly, 24%, and 32% of cells in the contralateral hemispheres reach SN4 after injection of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry or AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn), respectively. In contrast, for cells from the injected ipsilateral hemisphere, only 4% (after AAV8-hSyn-mCherry) or 7% (after AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn)) reach SN4 ( B and S2D). After injection of the lower dose of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry (2 × 109 vg), which did not significantly affect total dendritic length or Sholl intersections ( C–1F), 14% of pyramidal cells in the ipsilateral hemisphere reach SN4 ( E). These results reveal a drop in branching depth after administration of AAV that accompanies loss of dendritic length and complexity.

## Dendritic loss begins soon after AAV administration and is associated with a modest decrease in cortical thickness
We examined dendritic arbors at 21 dpi because many AAV-based experiments wait ∼21 days after injecting AAV to ensure sufficient transgene expression, but it is important to understand how quickly AAV-induced dendritic loss occurs and how long it persists. Four days after administration AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (PNI) (1 × 1010 vg) ( A), a modest loss of Sholl intersections is already detectable near the neuronal soma in the ipsilateral hemisphere ( F), which spreads throughout the dendritic arbor by 21 dpi ( B, 2C, and 2G). By 70 dpi, dendritic length and Sholl intersections between ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres are indistinguishable ( B, 2C, and 2H). However, unlike all other conditions, at 70 dpi the non-injected contralateral hemisphere also shows significant loss of dendritic length and Sholl intersections compared to contralateral hemispheres at 4 and 21 dpi (8–10 and 11–13 weeks old) ( D and 2E). Thus, the eventual equalization of dendritic arbors in ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres by 70 dpi does not represent dendritic recovery but rather reflects a similar loss of dendritic complexity in both injected and non-injected hemispheres at this later time point. To determine whether dendritic loss observed at 70 dpi was a consequence of AAV injection or was part of the normal aging process, we examined dendritic morphology in untreated age-matched control mice that received no surgery (18–20 weeks old). Untreated animals at 18–20 weeks old showed no significant loss of dendritic length or Sholl intersections relative to younger adults ( I and 2J), implicating some aspect of surgical delivery of AAV to the brain in more widespread neuropathology at 70 dpi. Overall, these studies indicate that AAV-mediated gene delivery causes rapid and persistent dendritic loss that begins within days and progresses within the first few weeks after injection.
Paralleling loss of dendritic length, cortical thickness in AAV-injected hemispheres is slightly reduced from 4 to 21 dpi ( K). It is possible that in addition to dendritic loss, cell death contributes to cortical thinning in AAV-injected animals, since AAV-mediated gene delivery has been associated with loss of cone outer segments in the retina and cell death in the dorsal root ganglion. , , Cells from AAV1-injected animals that were traced in the above experiments ( and ) had somatic morphology that closely resembled that of untreated controls ( M and S1N), suggesting they were unlikely to be apoptotic. Loss of dendritic complexity in AAV-injected S1 is accompanied by a modest but persistent drop in cell density from 4 to 21 dpi that is still apparent at 70 dpi ( L). Levels of caspase-3, a marker of apoptotic cell death, are also increased in the ipsilateral hemisphere at 21 dpi ( M). Together, these results show that in addition to causing dendritic loss, AAV-mediated gene delivery can cause modest cortical thinning and cell death in mouse cortex.

## AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP disrupts synaptic transmission
The reduction in dendritic length and complexity after administration of AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP significantly reduces the area over which affected neurons can receive synaptic inputs. If AAV-induced dendritic loss is associated with a decrease in the number of functional synapses, this should be apparent as a reduction in the frequency of mEPSCs, which are a postsynaptic response to the spontaneous release of neurotransmitter at individual synapses. Consistent with this prediction, whole-cell patch-clamp recordings show that mEPSC frequency is reduced and inter-event interval is increased in pyramidal cells from the AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn)-injected hemisphere relative to untreated (no surgical procedure) controls at 21 dpi ( A–3C). mEPSC amplitude is also decreased in AAV-injected hemispheres compared to untreated controls ( D). The smaller amplitude of mEPSCs recorded in neurons from AAV-injected animals are unlikely to be caused by smaller dendritic arbors but could occur if there was a change in AMPA receptor subunit composition. AMPA receptors are heterotetramers and receptors containing the GluA2 subunit are Ca2+ impermeable, while GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors allow Ca2+ influx. GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors, which are typically in low abundance in the mature brain, produce currents with smaller amplitudes and faster rise and decay kinetics. , , Consistent with an increase in GluA2-lacking, Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors, recordings of spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSCs) showed a non-significant trend toward steeper rise slopes and shorter decay time constants in neurons from AAV-injected animals ( E–3G). To more directly assess the fraction of the whole-cell current that is mediated by Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors, we bath applied 1-naphthylacetyl spermine (NASPM), a synthetic analog of Joro spider toxin that selectively blocks GluA2-lacking, Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors in a use- and voltage-dependent manner. Most of the AMPA receptors in the adult CNS contain GluA2 subunits, are calcium impermeable, and are not blocked by NASPM. As expected, NASPM blocked only a small fraction (5.1%) of the sEPSCs recorded at −70 mV in 11- to 14-week-old untreated controls. In contrast, NASPM blocked 21.8% of the sEPSCs in AAV-injected hemispheres at the same age ( H and 3I), indicating a more than 4-fold increase in the fraction of the current carried by Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors after AAV injection. To independently assess the fraction of GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors, we measured relative levels of GluA1 vs. GluA2 subunits in cortical lysates via western blot. No-primary controls show lack of non-specific labeling ( B). Following injection of AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn), levels of GluA2 are significantly reduced relative to GluA1 ( J), consistent with a shift toward more GluA2-lacking, Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors. Taken together, these data suggest that AAV-mediated gene delivery causes a decrease in synapse number that parallels the loss of dendritic length and complexity and disrupts synaptic transmission at remaining synapses.

## AAV triggers persistent increases in immune gene expression
Several immune proteins regulate neuronal morphology and synaptic transmission, including the complement protein C3, the classical MHCI proteins H2-K and H2-D, and the tyrosine kinase Fyn. , , , , , , , , , , , , , To determine whether any of these known pleiotropic immune molecules are rapidly upregulated in response to AAV8-hSyn-mCherry (1.2 × 1011 vg), mRNA levels for H2-K, H2-D, C3, and Fyn were measured in samples of somatosensory cortex via RT-qPCR. Samples were collected at 4 dpi, when dendritic loss is ongoing ( D–2F). The presence of mCherry mRNA in injected but not non-injected samples confirmed successful viral transduction at this time point ( A and A). In extracts from AAV8-hSyn-mCherry-injected hemispheres, mRNAs encoding H2-K, H2-D, and C3 are all significantly elevated relative to untreated controls at 4 dpi, revealing an early transcriptional response to AAV-mediated gene delivery. Like dendritic loss, increases in immune gene mRNA levels are restricted to the injected hemisphere ( B–S3E). Thus, AAV-mediated gene delivery rapidly upregulates the expression of multiple immune genes that can regulate dendritic complexity and synaptic transmission.
To determine whether AAV persistently upregulates these same immune proteins, we performed western blotting on lysates of injected somatosensory cortex at 21 dpi, when dendritic loss is more severe. Sham surgery has no effect on the levels of these immune proteins, while vehicle injection modestly reduces levels of H2-K ( B–4D). In contrast, both AAV8-hSyn-mCherry (1.2 × 1011 vg) and AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn) (4.2 × 109 vg) significantly upregulate H2-K and H2-D relative to untreated and vehicle controls at 21 dpi ( B and 4C). Fyn is persistently upregulated by AAV8-hSyn-mCherry but not AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn), while C3 is not increased by either virus at 21 dpi. Levels of H2-D (and, to a lesser extent, H2-K) protein inversely correlate with dendritic length across four conditions (untreated, vehicle, AAV8-hSyn-mCherry, or AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP [UPenn]) at 21 dpi. In contrast, C3 and Fyn levels do not correlate with dendritic length at this time point ( E). Persistent upregulation of immune proteins following AAV injection is not a unique feature of somatosensory cortex, because injection of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry into motor cortex and cerebellum (but not sham surgery) upregulates H2-K, C3, and Fyn protein levels in both areas at 21 dpi relative to untreated and vehicle controls ( ). A small amount of mCherry fluorescence is detectable in fibers outside the injected areas, including in caudal regions of contralateral S1 and ipsilateral hippocampus within the stratum lacunosum moleculare ( A and S5D), likely reflecting diffusion of mCherry protein within the axons of transduced neurons. However, mCherry was not associated with changes in the levels of H2-K, H2-D, Fyn, or C3 in either region ( B, S5C, S5E, and S5F), indicating that the presence of mCherry protein is not sufficient to upregulate immune proteins in non-injected brain regions. Together, these results show that dendritic loss induced by AAV-mediated gene delivery is associated with rapid and persistent upregulation of multiple immune molecules with known roles in neuronal homeostasis.
The similar dendritic loss and upregulation of immune molecules seen after exposure to AAVs with different capsid serotypes, encoded transgenes, and promoters ( , , I, and S1J) suggest that these phenotypes may be responses to a core feature of AAV. One feature that is shared by essentially all AAVs is a genome that is rich in unmethylated CpG DNA motifs, which are detected by the innate immunoreceptor TLR9. The TLR9 gene is expressed by microglia, astrocytes, and neurons in the CNS, and responses to unmethylated CpG DNA have been detected in CNS cells. , , To determine whether TLR9-associated cytokine signaling is elevated in the CNS following AAV injection, an unbiased ELISA-based array was used to simultaneously monitor the levels of 40 different cytokines, chemokines, and acute-phase proteins at 21 dpi. After injection of AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn), multiple cytokines and chemokines are upregulated in injected S1 relative to untreated controls, including IFN-γ, CD54 (sICAM-1), complement component C5a, CXCL9 (MIG), CXCL10 (IP-10), CXCL13 (BLC), CCL2 (JE), and CCL5 (RANTES) ( F and 4G). Notably, all of the AAV-induced cytokines and chemokines can be upregulated by activation of TLR9 in the periphery using synthetic CpG-rich oligonucleotides. , , , , , , , , , , , Furthermore, a subset of the upregulated proteins (CD54 [sICAM-1], CXCL10 [IP-10], CCL2 [JE], and CCL5 [RANTES]) are upregulated specifically in astrocytes and microglia after TLR9 activation in vitro. Together, cytokine arrays, RT-qPCR, and western blots demonstrate that AAV administration in the CNS causes increases in multiple innate and adaptive immune molecules that are consistent with AAV-induced activation of TLR9.

## Dendritic morphology and synaptic transmission are preserved by limiting detection of the AAV genome by TLR9
The current results show that AAV-mediated gene delivery is associated with significant loss of dendritic complexity, changes in the functional properties of synapses, and upregulation of many immune proteins that maintain normal neuronal structure and function in the healthy nervous system, raising the possibility that AAV disrupts multiple neuroimmune homeostatic pathways. If this is the case, targeting individual upregulated immune proteins is unlikely to fully prevent AAV-induced dendritic changes. A unifying feature of the many upregulated immune proteins is that they are all upregulated following activation of TLR9. Therefore, a TLR9 antagonist could be the most effective, most direct, and simplest approach to prevent AAV-induced dendritic loss.
TLR9 activation is an early and transient event in the immune response to the AAV genome. To limit detection of unmethylated CpG DNA in AAV’s genome via TLR9, a commercially available oligonucleotide antagonist of TLR9, CpG ODN 2088, was administered 1 h before and 24 h after injection of AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn) (4.2 × 109 vg). In AAV-injected animals, systemic administration of either an inactive analog of ODN 2088 or the TLR9 antagonist ODN 2088 does not alter dendritic length or complexity in cortical pyramidal cells of non-injected contralateral S1 (not shown), suggesting that these oligonucleotides alone do not alter dendritic arbors. Injection of AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn) in the presence of control oligonucleotide (ODN CTL) still reduces dendritic length and complexity at 21 dpi in ipsilateral S1 in a manner that closely resembles changes caused by the virus alone. In striking contrast, injecting AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (UPenn) in the presence of the TLR9 inhibitor ODN 2088 fully prevents dendritic loss. In animals treated with the TLR9 inhibitor, total dendritic length and Sholl intersections in AAV-injected hemispheres are significantly increased relative to AAV-injected hemispheres in the presence or absence of ODN CTL and are indistinguishable from untreated controls at 21 dpi ( A–5E). To determine whether TLR9 blockade can also prevent AAV-induced changes in AMPA receptor subunit composition, the fraction of the whole-cell current that is blocked by NASPM was compared in untreated animals and in AAV-injected animals in the presence or absence of the TLR9 inhibitor ODN 2088. As in previous experiments ( H and 3I), the fraction of the sEPSCs that is inhibited by NASPM, representing calcium-permeable AMPA receptors that lack the GluA2 subunit, is small in control animals and increased in AAV-treated animals. However, this increase in response to NASPM is prevented in AAV-treated animals that received the TLR9 blocker ODN 2088 ( F–5H). Together, these results suggest that AAV’s genome is rapidly detected by TLR9 in the CNS and that transient administration of a TLR9 inhibitor around the time of injection can protect against AAV-induced changes in dendritic morphology and excitatory synaptic transmission. 

## Discussion
Here, we show that an immune response to the AAV genome significantly reduces dendritic complexity and disrupts synaptic transmission in adult rodent cortex. Dendritic loss in pyramidal neurons of somatosensory cortex is apparent at 21 dpi and is accompanied by a decrease in the frequency and amplitude of mEPSCs and an increase in the relative contribution of Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors. Dendritic simplification is dose dependent, does not require transgene expression, and is not restricted to a specific AAV capsid serotype, promoter, preparation facility, or encoded transgene. Disrupted neural structure and function in AAV-injected animals is associated with rapid and persistent upregulation of multiple downstream targets of TLR9, and blocking immunodetection of the AAV genome via TLR9 preserves dendritic arbors and maintains normal AMPA receptor responses in AAV-injected animals. These results reveal that an innate immune response to AAV’s genome significantly impacts circuit structure and function and suggest approaches to improve the safety and efficacy of viral gene delivery to the nervous system.
Recombinant AAVs are powerful tools for gene delivery and have emerged as the vector of choice in the nervous system. Studies examining the safety of AAV-mediated gene delivery in the CNS have largely focused on cell death and classical hallmarks of neuroinflammation, including the presence of infiltrating immune cells and neutralizing antibodies, viral clearance, and cell death. A growing number of studies have identified localized cell death or suppression of neurogenesis associated with AAV-mediated gene delivery in the nervous system (e.g., Xiong et al., , , , , , Hinderer et al., , , , , , Guo et al., , , , , , Chan et al., , , , , , Savani et al., , , , , , Johnston et al. , , , , , ), although the specific causal features, and the receptors that detect them, remain largely unknown. The current study identifies previously unsuspected impacts of AAV on dendritic morphology and synaptic transmission and finds that both are triggered by a TLR9-mediated response to the AAV genome.
A major finding of this study is that in response to AAV, dendritic arbors of cortical pyramidal neurons become significantly less complex, losing entire segments. Dendritic morphology powerfully influences integration and other emergent properties that arise due to the electrical separation of synapses, suggesting that AAV-driven dendritic loss is likely to have a potent effect on the computations and outputs of cortical pyramidal neurons. The drop in dendritic size after AAV is accompanied by a drop in mEPSC frequency and amplitude, suggesting fewer and/or weaker synapses. In addition, there is an increase in the fraction of the sEPSCs that is mediated by Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors and a concomitant decrease in expression of the AMPA receptor subunit GluA2, a subunit which renders AMPA receptors Ca2+ impermeable. The combination of broad dendritic loss, decreased mEPSC amplitude and frequency, faster current kinetics, and altered AMPA receptor subunit composition together suggest significant functional changes in cortical circuits following administration of AAV. Some AAV serotypes have been associated with disrupted short-term plasticity in hippocampus and cerebellum, but the underlying mechanisms are unknown. The AAV-induced changes in dendritic morphology and synaptic transmission seen here have likely gone undetected in most studies due to the widespread use of AAVs encoding fluorescent tracers or unexpressed transgenes as negative controls, since AAV genomes are present in both experimental and control conditions. True empty capsids, without DNA content, could be powerful controls for the effects of viral DNA, but empty capsids are an impurity that can themselves be toxic, complicating the interpretation of such experiments. Comparing impacts of vectors that do not express a transgene to vehicle controls allows isolation and assessment of the effects of AAV itself.
Despite an overall strong safety profile, AAV-mediated gene delivery has been associated with neurotoxicity in specific cell populations, some of which can be attributed to the overexpressed transgene. For example, AAV-mediated gene delivery into the CNS of pigs or non-human primates causes dorsal root ganglion toxicity that is alleviated by reducing or deleting transgene expression. , , Additionally, overexpression of SMN1 in a spinal muscular atrophy mouse model causes a toxic gain of function. These and other studies suggest that controlling the level and distribution of transgene products is important for avoiding neurotoxicity after AAV-mediated gene delivery. However, several lines of evidence suggest that the AAV-associated changes seen here are not due to overexpression of a foreign or toxic transgene. First, AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP causes severe deficits in the absence of detectable transgene expression. Second, in AAV8-hSyn-mCherry-injected animals, cells that expressed readily detectable mCherry were not traced (see ), but significant dendritic loss was still observed. Third, dendritic complexity in contralateral S1 at 21 dpi is indistinguishable from untreated controls, despite the presence of mCherry that is trafficked from the injected hemisphere. Together, these findings demonstrate that transgene expression is neither necessary nor sufficient for AAV-associated dendritic loss. The fact that dendritic loss is linked to the presence of AAV genomes, not transgene products, is particularly important given that spatiotemporal targeting of transgene products is often achieved using restrictive gene-regulatory elements, including promoters, enhancers, and microRNA target sites as well as CRE-dependent transgenes and genetic switches. These methods limit transgene expression but do not similarly constrain AAV genomes, which appear to be the triggering signal for dendritic loss and synaptic disruption. In contrast, using capsids with tropism for specific brain cell types , , , has the potential to constrain both transgene and AAV genome distribution.
A handful of recent studies have associated AAV neurotoxicity with elements of the viral genome, although the specific triggering features and the mechanisms that link them to toxicity have not been identified. Broadly active cis-regulatory elements are correlated with dose-dependent, cell-type-specific toxicity after subretinal injection of AAV8, AAV5, or AAV2 in mice, and toxicity is still observed with AAVs that encode no transgene. A recent study showed that electroporating only AAV’s single-stranded DNA inverted terminal repeats (ITRs) into progenitor cells in vitro recapitulates dose-dependent loss of neural progenitor cells and immature adult-born dentate granule cells following injection of AAV into dentate gyrus. This ITR-driven toxicity does not require Sting, a TLR9-independent pathway for detecting foreign DNA. It will be of interest to determine whether this AAV-induced impairment of neurogenesis, like AAV-associated cell death in the retina and AAV-induced dendritic loss and changes in AMPA receptor subunit composition in cortex seen here, can be improved by inhibition of TLR9.
A key innovation of the current study is that it identifies an unexpected role for TLR9 in regulating dendritic morphology and synaptic transmission. A growing number of immune proteins have been identified that play central roles in neuronal homeostasis, where they negatively regulate neurite length, dendritic complexity, and synaptic transmission, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and many are upregulated by TLR9. We see AAV-induced upregulation of several immune proteins that act downstream of TLR9 and can regulate dendritic complexity, including H2-K, H2-D, and C3. These findings from mouse cortex align well with previous studies showing upregulation of MHCI protein 4 days after striatal injection of AAV9 or AAV2 in rats , and upregulation of MHCI mRNA in mouse cortical microglia 3 days post AAV injection. In addition to this rapid response, we see continued upregulation of H2-K and H2-D proteins 3 weeks after injection of AAV in somatosensory cortex, motor cortex, and cerebellum. Finally, we see persistent upregulation of multiple immune proteins that act downstream of TLR9, including CD54, CCL2, CCL5, IFN-γ, CXCL13, and CXCL10, in injected S1. Future studies will be needed to individually define the roles of each of the many upregulated immune proteins in AAV-associated disruption of dendritic and synaptic function. It will also be of interest to determine whether other commonly used viral vectors, such as lentivirus and pseudorabies virus, which have RNA genomes that are detected by TLR7, also trigger innate immune signaling that disrupts dendrites, given that TLR7 and TLR9 have partially convergent downstream signaling. Overall, our studies show that upregulation of immune gene expression after AAV transduction is associated with structural and functional changes in pyramidal neurons and that immunodetection of AAV’s genome by TLR9 is the triggering event.
It remains unknown whether the AAV-induced dendritic loss seen here in mice also occurs in other mammalian species, including non-human primates and humans. Prominent differences in TLR responses exist across mammals, including differences in the timing and magnitude of TLR-mediated signaling. For example, rabbits and rats are more sensitive than monkeys to the TLR3 agonist rintatolimod, while mice are far more tolerant than humans to several TLR agonists, including the TLR4 ligand endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide). Notably, many of the deleterious and efficacy-limiting immune responses to AAV in clinical trials were not predicted by preclinical work in animal models. One clue to the poor predictability of animal models for human innate immune responses may lie in the finding that innate immune pathways in apes are markedly more sensitive than those in African and Asian monkeys. 
The neuronal effects of AAV that we see are TLR9 dependent, suggesting they are caused by unmethylated CpG motifs, which are TLR9 ligands. Since unmethylated CpGs are a core feature of the AAV genome, the current results suggest that most if not all AAV genomes have the potential to disrupt circuit structure and function. Indeed, while the AAVs used here differ in many ways, they are nearly identical in their predicted ability to activate TLR9, using a metric (RF3) that takes into account several known TLR9 agonist and antagonist motifs. A variety of common contaminants, such as endotoxin, are unlikely to cause AAV-associated changes that are prevented by TLR9 blockers, because these contaminants are detected by other members of the TLR family. Because TLR9 can detect unmethylated CpG DNA from diverse sources, it is imperative that AAV preparations be treated with broad-spectrum endonucleases, as ours were, to remove product-associated impurities, including residual viral, host, and plasmid DNA. AAV preparations for clinical use (made following Good Manufacturing Practices, or GMP grade) must undergo additional purification steps. The current studies highlight the importance of careful virus preparation, purification, and handling to avoid further TLR9 activation and identify a need to determine whether AAV-induced TLR9 responses are present in the primate CNS and, if so, to define their magnitude, readouts, and temporal dynamics.
It will be important to determine whether the effects of AAV occur only in neurons that are transduced with AAV or involve direct or indirect interactions between neurons and other central or peripheral cell types, including microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, T cells, B cells, and natural killer cells. In the current studies using AAV8-mCherry, we exclusively imaged DiO-labeled neurons that did not show detectable mCherry expression, due to the sparseness of both labels and the low frequency of overlap. While we cannot rule out the possibility that some neurons were transduced but expressed undetectably low levels of mCherry, it is likely that many non-transduced neurons were included in the analysis, suggesting that the effects of AAV on dendritic morphology and synaptic transmission are unlikely to be cell autonomous. A recent study found that intraparenchymal administration of high doses of AAV9, which causes significant neuronal death, causes titer-dependent infiltration of peripheral immune cells. Cell death associated with high concentrations of AAV was partially attenuated by repeated treatment with antibodies against cytotoxic T lymphocytes. However, a synthetic TLR9 agonist causes neurite loss in organotypic cortico-hippocampal slices, which lack a source of infiltrating immune cells, suggesting that the mechanisms of TLR9-induced structural and functional changes in circuits and TLR9-induced cell death may involve different cell types and downstream pathways.
We have identified several approaches to minimize or avoid AAV-induced dendritic simplification. First, the protection conferred by diluting the virus suggests that lowering the number of viral genomes administered is the most straightforward strategy to reduce the negative impacts of AAV on dendritic morphology. Relatively high doses of AAV are often used to ensure robust transgene expression. The doses of AAV used here to assess impacts on neuronal morphology and synaptic function (2 × 109 to 4 × 1010 vg per brain region) fall within the range reported for intraparenchymal delivery to the CNS in rodents in a 2016 review (∼1.75 × 107 to 1.2 × 1011 vg). In the clinic, doses are generally higher, ranging from ∼1.2 × 1010 to 4 × 1012 for intraparenchymal delivery in the same review. We find that reducing the dose of AAV can largely prevent dendritic simplification. Other studies find that lower doses can also reduce AAV-induced cell death. For example, injection of a large volume of concentrated AAV (1 μL of 1 × 1013 vg per mL) can cause infiltration of cytotoxic T cells and associated neurotoxicity, changes that are averted by injecting the same volume of a lower titer virus (1 × 1011 vg per mL). However, a lower number of vg may, in some cases, be insufficient to drive robust transgene expression. It is likely that dose windows can be found, particularly with strong promoters, that are low enough to avoid dendritic impacts but still sufficient to drive functionally relevant levels of transgene expression. The appropriate multiplicity of infection will vary depending on each unique combination of capsid serotype, promoter, encoded transgene, model, and route of administration.
A second approach to protect neurons is to inject AAV into areas that are connected to the target of interest and allow the transgene to travel intracellularly to achieve local expression, while the genome remains in the cell body. We see transgene expression in fibers in contralateral S1, which does not show upregulation of immune genes or changes in dendritic structure at 21 dpi, suggesting that remote injection can prevent dendritic damage while permitting local transgene expression in projection fibers. Consistent with our findings, a recent study that identified AAV-induced loss of neurogenesis in dentate gyrus was able to achieve safe hippocampal transgene expression by injecting an AAV-retro serotype into downstream targets and allowing the virus to back-propagate through axonal projections. It will be important to determine whether recently developed neurotropic AAVs that can be administered intravenously , , , are able to avoid dendritic impacts while achieving robust transgene expression. Finally, we show that AAV-induced dendritic simplification can be avoided by systemic administration of a TLR9 antagonist, ODN 2088. Because ODN 2088 and many other TLR9 inhibitors are short oligonucleotides, they can be introduced into host cells as part of the viral genome, in cis, an approach that has recently been used to reduce or delay AAV-induced toxicity in the retina in pigs and macaques, respectively. It will be useful to determine whether systemic administration of anti-inflammatories that inhibit specific aspects of downstream TLR9 signaling, such as dexamethasone, can protect against TLR9-mediated AAV toxicity in the nervous system. It is also possible that modifying the AAV genome to be less effective at activating TLR9, e.g., by methylating or depleting , , CpG motifs, would protect against AAV-induced dendritic and synaptic changes. Together, these studies reveal unexpected effects of AAV-mediated gene delivery on neuronal structure and function and identify the immune response to the AAV genome as the triggering event. These studies also identify TLR9 inhibitors as important tools to avoid AAV-induced dendritic loss and changes in synaptic transmission to improve the safety and efficacy of AAV-mediated gene therapy in the nervous system.

## Materials and methods

## Animals
Male C57BL/6J mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). All mice were acclimated for at least 1 week in the Princeton Neuroscience Institute vivarium before injections were performed. All AAV injections were performed on animals 8–10 weeks old, and tissues were harvested at 4 dpi, 21 dpi (11–13 weeks old), or 70 dpi (18–20 weeks old). Animals were group housed in Optimice cages (Animal Care Systems, Centennial, CO) with blended bedding (The Andersons, Maumee, OH) and enrichment (paper nesting and heat-dried virgin pulp cardboard hut). All mice were maintained on a 12:12-h light-dark cycle with ad libitum access to food (PicoLab Rodent Diet food pellets; LabDiet, St. Louis, MO) and water. All procedures were performed in accordance with protocols approved by the Princeton University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and in accordance with the animal welfare guidelines of the National Institutes of Health.

## AAV administration
Surgeries were performed in accordance with previously published procedures. Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (5% for induction, followed by 1%–2%, in oxygen; 1 L/min; Viking Medical, Medford, NJ) and mounted into a stereotaxic instrument (David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA). Body temperature was maintained and monitored using the Kent Scientific PhysioSuite (Kent Scientific, Torrington, CT). An osmotic diuretic drug (15% D-mannitol in Dulbecco’s PBS, 0.25 mL) was administered via intraperitoneal injection 10 min prior to craniotomy.
Viruses were prepared using endotoxin-free plasmid prep kits, and virus preps were endotoxin negative. Virus preps were treated with turbonuclease to minimize viral, host, and plasmid DNA impurities. Unless otherwise noted, 4 × 1010 or 2 × 109 total vg of AAV2/8-hSyn-mCherry-WPRE-hGH-pA (serotype AAV8, using AAV2 ITRs; Princeton Viral Vector Core, Princeton, NJ), 4.2 × 109 vg of AAV2/1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP-WPRE (serotype AAV1, using AAV2 ITRs; UPenn, Addgene #51502), or 1 × 1010 vg AAV2/1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (Princeton Viral Vector Core) (see ) were unilaterally injected into individual brain regions using borosilicate glass capillaries pulled on a Sutter Micropipette Puller (Model P-2000; Sutter Instrument Company, Novato, CA). Animals that received the AAV2/1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP-WPRE virus did not receive any form of CRE recombinase and therefore should not express EGFP. Lack of EGFP was confirmed by both confocal immunofluorescence microscopy ( B and G) and by using immunoblotting to amplify EGFP signals ( A). Injections of 67 nL were made at three depths (500, 250, and 150 μm below the dura; 200 nL total) in regions corresponding to the motor (+2.46 to +1.42 mm from bregma) and somatosensory cortex (+0.2 to −0.8 mm from bregma and 2 mm lateral) and cerebellum (−5.40 to −8.24 mm from bregma) of the left hemisphere, unless otherwise noted. For the S1 single-region injection study, mice received injections only into somatosensory cortex. For rescue experiments, 100 μg/25 g body weight of the TLR9 antagonist, CpG oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN 2088; Invivogen #tlrl-2088-1) or of control oligonucleotide (ODN CTL; Invivogen #tlrl-2088c-1) were dissolved in sterile, endotoxin-free water and injected intraperitoneally 1 h before and 24 h after AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP injection. All mice received a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, carprofen (Zoetis, Florham Park, NJ), immediately after surgery and 24 h post surgery (0.2 mL, 50 mg/mL, subcutaneous). Vehicle and sham surgery animals underwent the same procedures. Vehicle-injected animals received 200 nL of buffer used to deliver AAV (PBS, 35 mM sodium chloride, 0.001% pluronic F-68, and 5% glycerol), and sham surgery mice did not receive any buffer injection. Untreated controls received no surgery, drug administration, or injection.

## Diolistic labeling and Sholl analysis
Diolistic labeling and Sholl analyses to quantify pyramidal cell morphology were performed at 4, 21, and 70 dpi. Mice were anesthetized and intracardially perfused with 1.5% paraformaldehyde (PFA) diluted in PBS (Millipore Sigma #P3813-10PAK), and whole brains were removed. Brains were then postfixed for 1 h in 1.5% PFA and stored in cold PBS until used (usually 1–2 weeks). Brains were sectioned by vibratome (Leica Biosystems, Deer Park, IL) at 100 μm, and sections were stored in cold PBS. Brains that were injected with vehicle, AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP, or a 1:20 dilution of AAV8-hSyn-mCherry were notched with a scalpel after fixation on the lower half of the injected hemisphere to allow for identification of the injected hemisphere in the absence of transgene expression. Notching fixed sections does not alter dendritic complexity because both vehicle control and AAV8-hSyn-mCherry 1:20 titer cohorts were notched, and dendritic complexity is not different from untreated controls in these groups. Tungsten particles, coated with the carbocyanine dye DiO, were delivered to cells in slices using the Helios Gene Gun System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) at 60–80 psi of helium gas pressure. Sections were then kept at 4°C for 24 h on a shaker and postfixed in 4% formalin for 1 h. Sections were counterstained with DAPI (1:1,000 in PBS) for 5 min, washed, and coverslipped with ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant (Invitrogen #P36961). Slides were imaged using a spinning-disk confocal microscope (3I/Zeiss), and images were gathered using Slidebook software (3I). Images were captured within 3 days of DiO delivery to minimize dye diffusion.
Most of the traced cells were from layers IV and V, but cells from layer VI were not excluded. Cells were selected by morphology and cortical layer; only cells with pyramidal-like somas in cortical layers IV–VI with a prominent apical neurite, adjacent to the mCherry band and within ∼2 mm of the injection area, were collected. At least two factors could be significant sources of treatment-independent variability in dendritic morphology in these samples: sampling of a heterogeneous cell population and truncation of dendrites as an unavoidable consequence of tissue sectioning. However, these factors cannot explain the differences we see between AAV-injected hemispheres and untreated and vehicle-injected animals, or non-injected contralateral hemispheres in the same animal. To minimize the contribution of cells that were truncated by the sectioning process, cells that lacked a prominent apical dendrite were excluded from analysis, and, in general, the most complex neurons from each animal were selected for imaging. Thus, the reported values could be an underestimate of the extent of the dendritic loss caused by AAV. The similarity of dendrites in untreated animals and in the contralateral hemisphere of AAV-injected animals suggests that consistent morphology can be obtained across animals despite sampling a heterogeneous cell population and small differences in the plane of section for each brain. The presence of significant dendritic loss throughout the broad cell population sampled ( H) further suggests that AAV-induced dendritic loss affects multiple cell types in S1.
In our samples, due to the sparseness of both mCherry and DiO label in the imaged regions, cells that strongly expressed mCherry were infrequently labeled with DiO, and therefore cells with readily detectable mCherry expression were not sampled. After image collection, cells were selected for analysis. Selected cells had the most complete and bright DiO labeling among the cohort and ideally did not have overlapping or surrounding labeled cells that would complicate tracing of an individual neuron. The contralateral and ipsilateral cells that were selected for tracing were randomized into a cohort and labeled as “Cell 1,” “Cell 2,” and so forth before being uploaded to a single folder for blinded investigators. No more cells were added after the blinded investigator received access to the tracing folder, and the blinded investigator did not send any traced data to be analyzed until all cells were fully uploaded to the folder. An investigator blinded to treatment traced cells, quantified total dendritic length and total nodes, and performed Sholl analyses on labeled neurons using the Simple Neurite Tracer Plugin in ImageJ FIJI. Concentric circles for Sholl analysis were done using a 10 μm radius. All tracing started at the center of the soma; however, the soma was not drawn in each tracing. After tracing, the blinded tracer identified any cells that met the criteria to be excluded, based on the presence of more than one labeled cell in close proximity that prevented confident tracing of an individual neuron. Dendritic length, nodes, and Sholl intersections for cells in the contralateral hemisphere at 21 dpi were indistinguishable from untreated controls, indicating that AAV8-hSyn-mCherry and AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP do not alter the morphology of pyramidal cells within the contralateral hemisphere at this age ( ). Therefore, data are presented as a ratio of ipsilateral/contralateral within animal, unless otherwise noted, to avoid influences from inter-animal variability in baseline brain structure or minor differences in DiO intensity across bead batches.

## Strahler order
Cortical neuron tracings generated for Sholl analysis of cells from AAV-injected animals were used to further quantify changes to dendritic morphology using SO, similar to Vormberg et al. For SO analysis all neurite tips are labeled “1,” and moving toward the soma, when two segments of the same SO meet, the resulting bifurcation (node) is labeled “n + 1”. When two segments of different SO meet, the node is labeled with the higher of the SO numbers. The SN of a given neuron is the highest SO that is reached by that neuron. All SO analyses were performed by investigators blinded to condition.

## Cell density and cortical thickness
Samples were collected at 4, 21, and 70 dpi. Sections (100 μm) were stained with DAPI (1:1,000 in PBS) for 5 min, washed, and coverslipped with ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant, (Invitrogen #P36961). Slides were imaged by a Nanozoomer S60 (Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan) using NDP.view2 software. Three investigators blinded to treatment counted DAPI+ cells within a consistently sized boxed area using ImageJ in layers I, II/III, IV, V, and VI. Total DAPI+ cell counts in the sample boxed area from layers I–VI were summed, and ipsilateral values were rooted in their respective contralateral hemisphere values. Cortical thickness was quantified using ImageJ by measuring the distance from layer I to the ventral floor of layer VI. For cell counts, cortical thickness values for the ipsilateral hemisphere were rooted in the contralateral hemisphere.

## Electrophysiology

## Slice preparation
Acute coronal cortical slices were prepared from 11- to 14-week-old C57BL/6J mice, with or without injection of AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP (in the absence of CRE). Animals were anesthetized via inhalation of isoflurane, and brains were rapidly dissected out. Slices (350 μm) were prepared using a Vibratome Series 1000 (Technical Products International) in ice-cold sucrose slicing solution, containing 240 mM sucrose, 2.5 mM KCl, 10 mM Na-HEPES, 10 mM glucose, 1 mM CaCl₂, 4 mM MgCl₂, and 0.2 mM ascorbic acid (pH 7.3), bubbled with 100% oxygen. Slices were transferred to an incubation chamber containing 32°C high Mg2+ artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) (124 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 26 mM NaHCO₃, 1.25 mM NaH₂PO₄, 10 mM glucose, 1 mM CaCl₂, and 3 mM MgCl₂, equilibrated with 95% O2/5% CO2), and the temperature was allowed to gradually fall to room temperature. Slices were incubated at room temperature for 1–3 h before recording. For recordings, slices were transferred to an open recording chamber, submerged, and perfused at 2 mL/min with standard aCSF (124 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 26 mM NaHCO₃, 1.25 mM NaH₂PO₄, 25 mM glucose, 2 mM CaCl₂, and 1.3 mM MgCl₂, equilibrated with 95% O2/5% CO2) at room temperature. Pharmacological agents were introduced by switching the perfusion reservoir.

## Whole-cell patch clamp
Pipettes (4–8 MΩ) were filled with intracellular solution containing 108 mM cesium gluconate, 20 mM HEPES, 0.4 mM EGTA, 2.8 mM NaCl, 5 mM tetraethylammonium chloride, 4 mM Mg-ATP, 0.3 mM Na-GTP, 10 mM phosphocreatine, and 6.5 biocytin HCl (pH 7.3), 290 mOsm. Currents were detected using a Multiclamp 700 B amplifier (Axon Instruments, Foster City, CA), conditioned with a 2-kHz Bessel filter, and digitized at 5 or 10 kHz with a Digidata 1322A (Axon Instruments). Whole-cell input resistance and series resistance were monitored by hyperpolarizing voltage test pulses (−5 mV) delivered before and after record acquisitions. Cells were excluded from analysis if the holding current (Ihold) exceeded −100 pA, or if Rs was >30 MΩ or changed by >30% during the recording. mEPSCs were recorded from L4/5 pyramidal neurons of primary somatosensory cortex in the presence of 1 μM tetrodotoxin (Hello Bio, Princeton, NJ) and 100 μM picrotoxin (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium). Each recording lasted a minimum of 5 min. Data were analyzed offline using MiniAnalysis software (Synaptosoft, Fort Lee, NJ) and Origin 6.0 (Microcal Software). The detection threshold was set at 6 pA. A total of 300 events were analyzed for each cell. For cumulative probability plots, 200 consecutive events were sorted. Spontaneous AMPA receptor-mediated excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSCs) were continuously recorded for 15 min in the presence of 50 μM DL-APV (Tocris, Minneapolis, MN) and 100 μM picrotoxin. QX-314 (10 mM, Sigma) was added into the intracellular solution to block Na+ channels. To block Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors in some experiments, NASPM trihydrochloride (Tocris) was introduced into the recording chamber (final bath concentration, 100 μM) after 5 min of stable recording using a 100-μL micropipette. Before adding NASPM into the recording chamber, aCSF perfusion was stopped either at the beginning of the recording or after 5 min of stable recording. aCSF perfusion was resumed after 15 min of recording. The degree of inhibition of AMPA receptor sEPSC amplitude was calculated by comparing sEPSCs recorded during the first 5 min (prior to addition of NASPM) and from 5 to 10 min after addition of NASPM. A subset of experiments also included a washout period to confirm that sEPSC amplitude recovered after removing NASPM.

## RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis
For mRNA analysis, performed 4 days after viral injection, mice were anesthetized with 5% isoflurane (inhaled), and brains were immediately dissected for RNA extraction. Injected and non-injected brain regions were excised and flash frozen in dry ice. RNA was extracted from desired brain regions using the Promega SV RNA isolation kit (Promega #Z3100), following the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the tissue was homogenized in SV RNA lysis buffer, SV RNA dilution buffer was added, and the sample was vortexed and centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to 95% EtOH, mixed, and transferred to a spin-column assembly. This assembly was centrifuged for 1 min and the flow-through was discarded. DNase and then MnCl2 were added to yellow core buffer, following the manufacturer’s instructions. This solution was added to the pellet, and the sample was incubated for 15 min at room temperature. SV DNase stop solution was added, the sample was centrifuged for 1 min, and the flow-through discarded. The sample was then washed in SV RNA wash solution and centrifuged twice. Flow-through was again discarded and the spin basket was transferred to an elution tube. The sample was left standing for 5 min at room temperature and centrifuged for 1 min. RNA samples were aliquoted and immediately frozen at −80°C. An aliquot was used to check for proper RNA extraction and quality by electrophoresis and nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific #ND-2000).
For cDNA synthesis, sample RNA, 5× First Strand Buffer (Fisher Scientific #18064022), and DNase were combined and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. The sample was heated to 65°C for 15 min, Anchored Oligo (dTvN)22 primer (Integrated DNA Technologies, San Diego, CA) was added, and the sample was cooled to 37°C for 20 min. Deoxynucleotide triphosphate (Fisher Scientific #A25741), RNAsin (Fisher Scientific #PRN2511), and SuperScriptII-RT (Fisher Scientific #18064022) were added, and the sample was incubated at 37°C for 1 h before being stored at 4°C until needed.

## Primer design and RT-qPCR
For RT-qPCR, H2-K and H2-D primers were designed using the IDT primer quest tool. Iba-1, C3, and Fyn primers for qPCR were taken from Qvartskhava et al., Riihilä et al., and Lim et al., respectively. After viral infection, Kuchipudi et al. found that 18s rRNA was the least affected among tested genes, and we therefore used 18s rRNA as a reference gene for this study. Primer sequences can be found in . For primer testing, some reactions were run with all reagents but no cDNA sample as a negative control. Lack of bands in these lanes indicates absence of primer dimers ( A).
A Master Mix of SYBR green (Fisher Scientific #A25741), GoTaq polymerase (Fisher Scientific #PRM3001), and RNase-free H2O (Thermo Fisher #10977-015) was made in advance and added to centrifuge tubes for each brain region. Two microliters of cDNA per region was added to their respective tubes. Master Mix plus cDNA was added to each well in a 96-well plate, followed by 1 μL of primer mix containing both forward and reverse primers. The RT-qPCR program was then run in an Applied Biosystems Quant Studio3 System for 50 cycles. Melt curves were calculated to establish the quality of the data, and any flagged data were omitted. There was no detectable mCherry mRNA in untreated or sham surgery samples, so the lowest possible CT values (50) were assigned to these samples. Data were exported to Excel for analysis and analyzed using standard methods. When referring to the gene, the name is italicized, and when referring to the protein, the name is not italicized.

## Western blotting and cytokine arrays
For protein analysis, mice were lightly anesthetized by 5% inhalation isoflurane and immediately decapitated for brain extraction 3 weeks post injection. Motor and somatosensory cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum of both hemispheres were excised. Samples were homogenized, and protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) analysis (20 μg of protein per lane) (Thermo Fisher #23225). Samples were diluted in sample buffer and boiled for 1 min. SDS-PAGE electrophoresis was run at 100 V for 1 h. Proteins were transferred from the gel to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (Millipore Sigma #IPVH00010, Bio-Rad #1620174) at 350 mA for 30 min to 1 h. Strips were cut and blocked in 5% BSA in Tween 20 with Tris-buffered saline (TBST) (80.6 g Na+Cl− with 24.23 g Tris base and pH to 7.6 with HCl for 10× TBS; add 1 mL Tween 20 to a 1:10 dilution in H2O for 1× TBST) for 1 h at room temperature. Primary antibodies were applied in 5% BSA blocking buffer at several dilutions to determine the optimal concentration (see ) for 18–24 h at 4°C on an orbital shaker. Membranes were washed three times for 5 min in TBST, and secondary antibodies were applied in 5% BSA in TBST for 1.5 h at room temperature. Membranes were washed five times for 5 min in TBST, then immersed in SuperSignal West Pico Substrate (Thermo Fisher #34080) for 5 min. Because the molecular masses of C3 and the reference protein were similar, the membrane was stripped (Millipore Sigma #2504) and reprobed for reference protein detection after labeling for C3. No-primary controls show lack of non-specific secondary antibody binding in lanes containing protein samples for all of the secondary antibodies used ( B). In all blot images, black lines are for clarity to distinguish between conditions run on a single blot. If images were cropped, white spaces are present between conditions in the resulting image.
A mouse cytokine array panel A (R&D Systems #ARY006) was used to assess cytokine responses to AAV1-pCAG-FLEX-EGFP at 3 weeks post injection. Cytokines included in the array (including alternative names) were BLC/BCA-1/CXCL13, C5/C5a, G-CSF, GM-CSF, I-309/CCL1, Eotaxin/CCL11, ICAM-1/CD54, IFN-γ, IL-1α/IL-1F1, IL-1β/IL-1F2, IL-1ra/IL-1F3, IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-10, IL-13, IL-12 p70, IL-16, IL-17, IL-23, IL-27, IP-10/CXCL10, I-TAC/CXCL11, KC/CXCL1, M-CSF, JE/CCL2/MCP-1, MCP-5/CCL12, MIG/CXCL9, MIP-1α/CCL3, MIP-1β/CCL4, MIP-2/CXCL2, RANTES/CCL5, SDF-1/CXCL12, TARC/CCL17, TIMP-1, TNF-α, and TREM-1.
The manufacturer’s instructions were followed, with 300 μg of total protein loaded into each well. All cytokine measurements include two technical replicates on the same membrane. For both western blotting and cytokine arrays, images were taken by an Optimax X-ray film processor (model #1170-4-0000), and film was scanned for analysis using ImageJ. Multiple exposures were taken, and appropriate exposures were used to quantify densitometry within the linear range of assay sensitivity.

## Statistics
For all datasets, a Shapiro-Wilk test was performed to ensure data were normally distributed, and a two-tailed Grubb’s test was used to identify outliers. Two-tailed unpaired t tests assuming equal variance were used for all comparisons. All technical replicates were averaged.
With regard to DiO analysis, in B and 2C, curve fits are polynomial trendlines fitted to the data (y = 0.0003x2 − 0.0207x + 0.9588 for dendritic length and y = 0.0003x2 − 0.0209 + 0.9565 for Sholl analysis).
For electrophysiology, a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used for analysis of cumulative curves (∗p < 0.01).
For qPCR, to adjust for differences in sample size and mRNA levels, relative expression (ΔCT) values for each gene were defined by subtracting the reference gene CT value from the target gene’s CT value. Values were then taken out of log by raising the CT value by 2(−CT) and multiplied by 100,000. To reduce type I errors arising from multiple comparisons, only virus-untreated, virus-sham, and sham-untreated comparisons were performed. One-tailed t tests were used to analyze exogenous mCherry mRNA levels because changes in only one direction (rises) are possible from baseline.

## Data and code availability
The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon request.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6 and Tables S1–S3

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Esteban Engel, the Princeton Viral Vector Core, the UPenn Vector Core, Martin Rosenfeld, and Elise Cope for their technical assistance during these experiments. Research reported in this publication was supported by 10.13039/100000002NIH awards T32MH065214-11 (C.M.S.), TL1TR003019 (C.M.S.), and T32GM007388 (C.E.D.) and by the Innovation Fund for New Ideas in the Natural Sciences (L.M.B.). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. Some images were created in BioRender.

## Author contributions
C.M.S. and L.M.B. conceived the study and wrote the paper. J.L.V. and C.J. performed AAV injections, and J.L.V., C.J., C.E.D., B.V.C., and C.M.S. collected tissue for analysis. C.M.S. designed figures and performed data analysis and western blots. C.M.S., B.V.C., and C.E.D. performed DiOlistic labeling and confocal fluorescence imaging. N.K., C.E.D., and B.V.N. performed blinded dendritic length, Sholl, and SO analysis. J.M. performed electrophysiology experiments. N.K., B.V.C., and A.V.N. performed blinded quantification of cell density in cortical micrographs.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.03.036.