pmcChem Bio EngChem Bio Eng4697cbebeChem & Bio Engineering2836-967XAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC11835263PMC11835263.111835263118352633997580210.1021/cbe.4c001221ReviewEngineered Extracellular
Vesicles as a New Class of
Nanomedicine
WenXiaowei HaoZerun YinHaofan MinJie WangXueying SunSihan https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0826-9138RuanGang †Institute
of Analytical Chemistry and Instrument for Life Science, The Key Laboratory
of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of Education, School
of Life Science and Technology, Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 710049‡Wisdom
Lake Academy of Pharmacy, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool
University, Suzhou, China 215123§Jiangsu
Province Higher Education Key Laboratory of Cell Therapy Nanoformulation
(Construction), Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool
University, Suzhou, China 215123∥Xi’an
Jiaotong-Liverpool University & University of Liverpool Joint
Center of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Suzhou, China 215123*Gang.Ruan@xjtlu.edu.cn.*Xiaowei.Wen@xjtlu.edu.cn.281020242301202521482468322130720242010202419102024281020241902202522022025© 2024 The Authors. Co-published by Zhejiang University and American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are secreted from biological
cells
and contain many molecules with diagnostic values or therapeutic functions.
There has been great interest in academic and industrial communities
to utilize EVs as tools for diagnosis or therapeutics. In addition,
EVs can also serve as delivery vehicles for therapeutic molecules.
An indicator of the enormous interest in EVs is the large number of
review articles published on EVs, with the focus ranging from their
biology to their applications. An emerging trend in EV research is
to produce and utilize “engineered EVs”, which are essentially
the enhanced version of EVs. EV engineering can be conducted by cell
culture condition control, genetic engineering, or chemical engineering.
Given their nanometer-scale sizes and therapeutic potentials, engineered
EVs are an emerging class of nanomedicines. So far, an overwhelming
majority of the research on engineered EVs is preclinical studies;
there are only a very small number of reported clinical trials. This
Review focuses on engineered EVs, with a more specific focus being
their applications in therapeutics. The various approaches to producing
engineered EVs and their applications in various diseases are reviewed.
Furthermore, in vivo imaging of EVs, the mechanistic
understandings, and the clinical translation aspects are discussed.
The discussion is primarily on preclinical studies while briefly mentioning
the clinical trials. With continued interdisciplinary research efforts
from biologists, pharmacists, physicians, bioengineers, and chemical
engineers, engineered EVs could become a powerful solution for many
major diseases such as neurological, immunological, and cardiovascular
diseases.

Cell therapyexosomeextracellular vesiclecell engineeringstem cellimmunotherapydrug deliveryNatural Science Foundation of Nantong Municipality10.13039/100016806JC2019045Xiâ an Jiaotong-Liverpool University10.13039/501100006683RDF-21-02-007Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province10.13039/501100004608BK20171259Natural Science Foundation of Nantong Municipality10.13039/100016806JC2019049pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9be4c00122document-id-new-14be4c00122ccc-price1

## Introduction
All biological cells release
vesicles, namely, extracellular vesicles
(EVs). These vesicles, which enclose their molecular contents within
membranes, were initially thought to be merely a form of waste of
the cells. In 2007, a groundbreaking paper from Jan Lötvall’s
group at Göteborg University showed that exosomes, a type of
EVs, can transport functional nucleic acids between
different cells. Since then, numerous
papers have been published demonstrating that this is in fact a general
phenomenon. It appears that EVs can work
as mediators of communication between cells. Among different types
of EVs, exosomes are of particular interest because their cellular
generation involves a distinct intracellular regulatory process which
likely dictates their composition and functions, after being released
into the extracellular environment. , As fundamental
research into the biology of EVs continues, efforts to apply EVs as
tools to diagnose or treat diseases have also flourished. For disease
diagnosis, exosomes are attractive because they could be used as minimally
invasive liquid biopsies with the potential for longitudinal sampling
to follow disease progression. , For disease treatment,
exosomes and other EVs are being investigated as drug delivery vehicles
or/and therapeutics themselves. , , This review article focuses on the disease treatment aspect.
In the efforts to treat diseases with EVs, a new trend is emerging,
i.e., modifying the structures of EVs to enhance certain functions
or to integrate with additional functions. The resulting EVs, called
engineered EVs here, are analogous to engineered organisms, e.g.,
genetically modified rice with vitamin enrichment or genetically modified
corn with insect resistance. Yet, the sizes of engineered EVs are
at nanometer-scale, which are much smaller than those of engineered
organisms. Thus, engineered EVs can also be considered as a new class
of nanomedicine (nanometer-scale matters as medicine). This article
reviews the burgeoning field of engineered EVs as nanomedicine, discussing
how to generate engineered EVs, their medical applications, probing
their biological fates, and their clinical/industrial translation.

2

## EVs
Cells release many different types of EVs. In general,
these EVs
can be classified into two major categories, namely, ectosomes and
exosomes. Ectosomes are vesicles generated by the direct outward budding
of the plasma membrane. Ectosomes include microvesicles, microparticles,
and large vesicles in the size range of ∼50 nm to 1 mm in diameter.
On the other hand, exosomes originated from endosomes in the cell
and in a size range of ∼40 to 160 nm in diameter. Exosomes
are of particular interest because of their generation involves a
distinct intracellular process, which is thus tightly regulated and
likely determines their composition and functions. , , This Review focuses on exosomes, unless
stated otherwise.
As mentioned above, the biogenesis of exosomes
is linked to endosomal
pathways. More specifically, the exosome biogenesis process involves
the following steps: (1) Invagination of the plasma membrane forms
a cup-shaped structure that includes cell-surface proteins and soluble
proteins associated with the extracellular milieu. (2) This leads
to de novo formation of an early sorting endosomes
(ESE), which may merge with a preexisting ESE. The trans-Golgi network
and endoplasmic reticulum can also contribute to the formation of
the ESE. (3) ESEs mature into late-sorting endosomes (LSEs) and eventually
generate multivesicular bodies (MVBs). This process gives rise to
MVBs containing several intraluminal vesicles (ILVs), which are future
exosomes. 4) The MVBs can either enter the degradation pathway (usually
by fusing with lysosomes or autophagosomes), or fuse with the plasma
membrane to release the ILVs as exosomes to the extracellular environment. − Interestingly, recent research has found that autophagy can also
lead to exosome secretion, in a process termed secretary autophagy. The exosome biogenesis pathway intersects with
other molecular pathways associated with the trafficking of intracellular
vesicles. Rab GTPases, a large family of small GTPases, play central
roles in ensuring precise transport in these vesicles. The ESCRT (endosomal sorting complexes required
for transport) machinery plays a key role in the generation of ILVs
in MVBs. The fusion of MVBs with the
plasma membrane to release exosomes is mainly mediated by SNAREs (soluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors). Other important molecular players in the exosome
biogenesis include Sytenin-1, TSG101 (tumor susceptibility gene 101),
ALIX (apoptosis-linked gene 2-interacting protein X), syndecan-1,
phospholipids, tetraspanins, ceramides, and sphingomyelinases. − Exosome surface proteins include tetraspanins (e.g., CD63, CD9,
and CD81, commonly used as biomarkers of exosomes), integrins, immunomodulatory
proteins, and others. Exosomes can contain different types of cell
surface proteins, intracellular protein, RNA, DNA, amino acids, and
metabolites. , shows a schematic illustration of the biogenesis
process and molecular content of exosomes.
 The fact that exosomes contain many molecular contents
from the
source cells gives rise to exosomes’ diverse biological functions.
The molecular contents can be further altered by environmental or
innate (e.g., oncogenic) changes. , The inherent
properties of exosomes in regulating complex intracellular pathways
offers their potential utility as therapeutics of a wide range of
diseases, such as immunogenic diseases, tissue damage, neurodegenerative
diseases, and cancers. For therapeutic
purposes, exosomes are sometimes called “cell-free cell therapeutics”,
because they can impart the therapeutic functions of the source cells
while bypassing the potential problems (e.g., tumorigenesis and mutagenesis
risks) associated with using live cells. 
Exosomes have been used to regulate immune responses. Exosomes
from distinct source cells, e.g., immune cells, epithelial cells,
and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), contain molecular cargos that can
influence the activities of recipient cells of both the innate and
adaptive immune system. These molecular cargos include but are not
limited to miRNAs, antigenic peptides, DNAs inducing cGAS-STING (cyclic
GMP-AMP synthase stimulator of interferon genes) signaling, and surface
ligands inducing various signaling pathways. For example, exosomes
from antigen-presenting cells (APCs) carry p-MHC-II (major histocompatibility
complex II with antigenic peptide) and costimulatory signals, and
directly present the peptide antigen to specific T cells to induce
their activation. MSCs-derived exosomes
can suppress the pro-inflammatory M2 macrophage phenotype, suppress
pro-inflammatory Th17 cells, and cause T-regulatory cell polarization. , Thus, these exosomes have been explored as immunomodulatory therapeutic
for inflammatory diseases, autoimmune diseases and graft-versus-host
diseases. − In an asthma mouse model, EVs generated from adipose-derived
MSCs (AMSCs) were found to enhance the FoxO1 signaling pathway, by
inhibiting miR-183–5p, thereby inhibiting the M1 macrophage
marker iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase). In a mouse model of bacterial pneumonia and COVID-19 infection,
MSCs-derived EVs promoted the polarization of macrophages to an anti-inflammatory
M2 phenotype when delivered via inhalation. MSCs-derived EVs reduced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines,
increased the expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines, and improved
pathological scores in acute lung injury.
Exosomes have also
been used for tissue repair and regeneration
of various organs. Exosomes can reduce
cell apoptosis and tissue inflammation while increasing cell proliferation,
survival, angiogenesis, and lineage specific differentiation. The
most popular option as the cell source of exosomes is so far MSCs.
Other reported cell sources of exosomes for tissue regeneration include
embryonic induced pluripotent and tissue-specific stem cells, primary
precursor cells and mature cells from the tissue to be regenerated
or from immune/endothelial origin. − For example, intravitreal
administration of MSCs-derived EVs 24 h after the ischemic event resulted
in improved functional recovery, reduced neuro-inflammation, and decreased
apoptosis. In another example, a phase
II clinical trial of COVID-19-associated acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) showed that intravenous administration of MSCs-derived
EVs significantly reduced the 60 day mortality rate of critical patients.
In this trial it was also reported that allogenic MSCs-derived EVs
caused no significant increase in treatment-related serious adverse
events compared to the placebo. 
In addition to functioning as therapeutics themselves, EVs have
also been explored as delivery carriers for pharmaceuticals. Potentially,
EVs can circumvent several key problems associated with synthetic
nanoparticles (e.g., liposomes, lipid nanoparticles, and polymer nanoparticles)
as drug delivery carriers. Compared with these synthetic nanoparticles,
EVs are less immunogenic, less toxic, and are more capable of crossing
biological barriers such as the blood-brain barrier and extracellular
matrix. The advantages of EVs in low
immunogenicity and low toxicity largely originate from the fact that
they are derived from biological cells. Interestingly, it has been reported that CD47 on exosomes derived
from normal fibroblast-like mesenchymal cells results in a “don’t-eat-me”
signal, protecting them from phagocytosis and limiting their clearance
from circulation. In another important
mechanistic study, it has been shown that the reasons why EVs (from
mouse mesenchymal stromal cells) can traverse dense extracellular
matrix (with pore sizes smaller than those of EVs) are likely because
(1) matrix stress relaxation allows EVs to overcome the confinement,
and (2) water permeation through aquaporin-1 mediates the EV deformability. 
There are many unanswered questions regarding
the biology of EVs.
For example, the exact roles of EVs in communications between cells
within the same organ and between organs remains unclear. Also, it
is unclear whether the biogenesis and molecular content of EVs change
with age. Answers to these questions would help guide the design of
EVs-based therapies.

3

## Production of Engineered EVs
Modification of the
content and structure of EVs, for enhanced
or integrated or new functions, can be achieved by many different
methods. Here, these methods are broadly categorized into three classes,
namely, cell culture condition control, genetic engineering, and chemical
engineering. is a schematic summarizing the various methods under the three broad
classes.
 3.1

## Cell Culture Condition Control
The
content and secretion rate of EVs can be influenced by the external
environment of the source cells. Culturing the source cells in stress-inducing
conditions, e.g., hypoxia, serum starvation, or inflammation, has
been widely used. For example, a short-term
hypoxia treatment on MSCs yielded EVs with increased levels of several
therapeutically important miRNAs such as miR-103 (with apoptosis inhibition
function), miR-210 (with pro-angiogenesis and cardio-protection functions),
and miR-17 (with fibrosis inhibition, pro-proliferation and pro-angiogenesis
functions). Preconditioning adipose-derived
stem cells with endothelial differential medium increased the secretion
of microvesicles and enhanced the angiogenic effect of the secreted
microvesicles in vitro. Gorgun et al. conducted a study to dissect the effects of preconditioning
with inflammatory cytokines and hypoxia on the two different portions
of MSC secretome, namely soluble factors and EVs. It was found that
the inflammation stimuli strongly inhibited the pro-angiogenic capacity
of the soluble factors, but did not significantly affect that of the
EV portion. 
Liao et al. showed
that treating MSCs with metformin, a widely used oral antihyperglycemic
drug for diabetes, promoted the release of EVs from MSCs. Further mechanistic studies found that the increased
EV secretion occurred via an autophagy-related pathway. Proteomics
analysis revealed that metformin increased the protein content of
EVs involved in cell growth. Yang et al. reported that heat shock
treatment on bone marrow MSCs (BMSCs) led to upregulation of the 70
kDa heat shock protein (HSP70) in BMSC-derived exosomes, and alleviation
of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity in mice. Multiple reports indicated that 3D culture of the source cells could
significantly change the contents (including miRNAs and proteins)
and amount of EVs. − 

3.2

## Genetic Engineering of EVs
The source
cells can be genetically modified to produce EVs with a specific content
enriched or added. For example, Tao et al. transduced human synovial
MSCs with lentivector miR-140–5p. The EVs derived from the
thus-formed miR-140–5p-overexpressing MSCs were found to improve
cartilage tissue regeneration and prevented osteoarthritis of the
knee in a rat model. The content of therapeutic
proteins in EVs can be modified in a similar way as for therapeutic
miroRNAs. Yu et al. transduced bone marrow MSCs with the protein GATA-4
by a retroviral expression system. GATA-4 is a transcription factor
important for the regulation of angiogenesis and cell survival. EVs
derived from these GATA-4-overexpressing MSCs were shown to reduce
apoptosis, restored cardiac contractile functions and reduced infarct
size in a regional myocardial ischemia/infarction rodent model. 
Yang et al. reported a modified electroporation
treatment on the source cells (called “cellular nanoporation
method” in the paper). The cellular
nanoporation was achieved with a custom-designed biochip, which permits
a monolayer of source cells to be cultured above the chip surface
containing an array of nanochannels (approximately 500 nm in diameter).
These nanochannels enables the passage of focal and transient electric
pulses to the source cells, to load nucleic acids (e.g., mRNA and
DNA plasmids) into the cells. Remarkably, it was shown that, compared
with conventional “bulk” electroporation treatment,
the cellular nanoporation method yielded a large increase in production
rate of exosomes containing the above-mentioned nucleic acids. Mechanistically,
it was found that the increase in exosome biogenesis was the result
of a stress response. More specifically, it was caused by thermal
shock through increased production of heat-shock proteins via the
p53–TSAP6 signaling pathway. The cellular nanoporation method
was successfully applied for gliomas treatment and for collagen replacement therapy in small animal models. 
Fusion of the genetic sequence of a selected
protein with that
of a protein abundantly present on an EV membrane has become a successful
strategy to load the selected protein on an EV membrane. This strategy
has been employed to achieve targeted delivery of EVs to difficult-to-reach
tissues. − A limitation of this strategy is that usually only
a fraction of the EV population is labeled by the selected protein,
thus, limiting the targeting ability to just a subset of EVs. To overcome
this limitation, Gupta et al. conducted a systematic screening of
EV-loading protein moieties, which resulted in optimization of the
joint display of two different therapeutically relevant protein receptors
on EVs namely cytokine-binding domains derived from tumor necrosis
factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) and interleukin-6 signal transducer (IL-6ST). The optimization of surface display of EVs led
to enhanced targeting ability and improved therapeutic efficacy of
anti-inflammation in three different inflammatory mouse models.
In a sophisticated utilization of genetic engineering for EV production,
Stranford et al. successfully integrated three complementary functional
components into EVs, all by genetic engineering of the source cells
of EVs. This work addressed several problems
in genome editing of T cells for immunotherapy, including lack of
endocytosis in T cells, targeting to T cells, loading of Cas9-based
genome editing tools, and release of molecular cargo to cytoplasm
of T cells. The authors termed their platform technology GEMINI (genetically
encoded multifunctional integrated nanovesicles). In this work, the
source cells used for EV production were HEK293FT producer cells;
multiple populations of EVs were collected and used for delivery of
Cas9 ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) into T cells.
GEMINI incorporates
the following three main components. First,
to enhance targeted binding of EVs with T cells, antibody single-chain
variable fragments (scFvs) were genetically engineered on the surface
of EVs to facilitate specific interactions with CD2, a costimulatory
receptor that is highly expressed on T cells. The authors optimized
the coding sequence of the scFv display construct for expression in
human cells using a sliding window algorithm. This optimization led
to a >100-fold increase in EV binding to CD2+ Jurkat T cells over
nontargeted EVs. Second, to both enhance cargo protein loading and
increase the likelihood that a given EV will incorporate both a cytosolic
cargo protein and the membrane-bound scFv, the authors designed a
small molecule dimerization-based loading system. This loading system
is based on the plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA)-inducible interaction
between truncated versions of the abscisic acid insensitive 1 (ABI)
and pyrabactin resistance-like (PYL) proteins. This loading system
has several benefits: the association is rapid; the dimerization is
reversible, presumably allowing for cargo release in recipient cells;
ABA is inexpensive and nontoxic; and small-molecule-regulated loading
is readily applicable to biomanufacturing. Third, to enhance EV uptake
and cargo release in T cells, fusion proteins were genetically engineered
on the EV surface. Two fusion proteins, namely vesicular stomatitis
virus glycoprotein (VSV-G) and T cell-specific measles virus glycoproteins
hemeagglutinin (H) and fusion (F), showed positive outcome in enhancing
EV fusion with T cells. By combining the above three genetic engineering
methods, the authors achieved EV-mediated Cas9 editing of the CXCR4
locus (which encodes the HIV coreceptor CXCR4) in primary human T
cells.

3.3

## Chemical Engineering of EVs
In addition
to treating the source cells, EV engineering can also be achieved
by treating the EVs after they are generated from the source cells.
These methods include loading therapeutic molecules into EVs, loading
nanomaterials into EVs, surface modification of EVs, and the encapsulation
of EVs into hydrogels.
3.3.1

## Loading Therapeutic Molecules into EVs
The first report of exogenous drug loading into EVs was published
in 2011, in which therapeutic siRNA was loaded by electroporation
of exosomes. Delivered by exosomes, the
siRNA exhibited enhanced ability of crossing the blood-brain barrier
and led to significant downregulation of an Alzheimer-associated gene
in a mouse model. Electroporation was later also used for exogenous
loading of small molecule drugs into EVs. Fuhrmann et al. performed a systematic study on several different
methods of exogenous loading of small molecule drugs, using hydrophobic
porphyrins as the model drugs. The examined
drug loading methods included electroporation, surfactant, extrusion,
and dialysis. These “active loading” methods were found
to be up to 11-fold more efficient in drug loading than the passive
loading method, i.e., simply incubating the drug with the EVs.
Dehghani et al. conducted another systematic study on different methods
of exogenous loading of tofacitinib (TFC), a janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor
for treating psoriasis (overactive immune system causing skin cells
to overgrow). The authors evaluated five
different methods to load tofacitinib into exosomes of keratinocytes
(the primary cell type found in the epidermis): (i) TFC incubation
with donor cells of exosomes, (ii) TFC incubation with exosomes, (iii)
freeze–thaw cycles of exosomes, (iv) probe sonication of exosomes,
and (v) ultrasonic bath of exosomes. After particle size, zeta potential,
drug loading efficiency, and release efficiency were compared, the
probe sonication method was selected. The thus-prepared TFC-loaded
exosomes showed a significant therapeutic effect in a mouse model
of psoriasis.
In an effort to treat lung cancer and promote
systemic immunity,
Liu et al. loaded IL-12 mRNA into human embryonic kidney cell-derived
exosomes (HEK-Exo) through electroporation, yielding IL-12-Exo. IL-12 (interleukin-12) stimulates interferon-γ
(IFNγ) production, turning “cold” tumors to “hot”
ones to augment the cytolytic potentials of immune cells. Liposomes
loaded with IL-12 mRNA (IL-12-Lipo) were used as a control for comparison.
The authors delivered the exosomes by inhalation into mice with lung
tumors. Remarkably, compared with IL-12-Lipo, IL-12-Exo showed superior
performance in tumor microenvironment (TME) biodistribution and minimized
toxicity. The inhaled IL-12-Exo promoted IFNγ-mediated immune
activation, systemic immunity, and immune memory, culminating in lung
tumor suppression and heightened resistance against tumor rechallenges.

3.3.2

## Loading Nanomaterials
Nanomaterials,
such as quantum dots (QDs), magnetic nanoparticles, liposomes, and
polymer nanoparticles, possess functional or/and structural properties
that can enhance the utility of native EVs. For example, QDs, if incorporated
in EVs, can emit bright and stable fluorescence for the long-term
tracking of EVs. On the other hand, polyester nanoparticles, with
hydrophobic internal structure, can be used to load a large amount
of hydrophobic drugs into EVs.
Peng et al. reported a multifunctional
EVs, which incorporated curcumin-loaded superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles (SPIONs) in MSC-derived exosomes, to treat Parkinson’s
disease (PD) in a mouse model. MSC-derived
exosomes have inherent ability to treat PD, given their miRNA and
protein contents, particularly miR-188–3p, miR-106b, and miR-133b.
The magnetism of SPIONs offered two new functions to the exosomes:
first, enhanced delivery into the brain guided by a magnet; second,
tracking by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The curcumin loaded
on SPIONs helped PD treatment by reducing α-synuclein aggregates.
The curcumin-loaded SPIONs were incorporated into the exosomes by
passing both of the SPIONs and exosomes in an extruder ( ). After treatment with these
multifunctional EVs, PD model mice showed significant improvement
in movement and coordination ability.
 Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease that
involves several
factors, namely, immune tolerance breakdown, local synovial inflammation,
and tissue destruction, gradually leading to systemic and chronic
disability. These factors act cooperatively, creating a vicious cycle.
The current clinical treatment, which is based on anti-inflammatory
drugs, can relieve only symptoms. MSCs-derived EVs could help to restore
normal immune functionality but lack the ability to offer immediate
suppression of inflammatory symptoms. Koo et al. developed a hybrid
structure to provide both immune function normalization and immediate
inflammatory suppression. In this hybrid
structure, ceria nanoparticles were conjugated to MSCs-derived vesicles
by the thiol-maleimide reaction. The ceria nanoparticles (Ce NPs)
can provide immediate inflammatory suppression, due to their ability
to remove reactive oxygen species (ROS) by cycling between two reversible
ionic states, Ce3+ and Ce4+, to scavenge overproduced
ROS in RA-inflicted knee joints, and to induce M1-to-M2 macrophage
polarization. In a mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis, this
hybrid structure was shown to successfully treat and prevent rheumatoid
arthritis by both relieving the main symptoms and restoring the immune
system through the induction of regulatory T cells.
Liposomes
have been integrated with EVs to form hybrid structures
in multiple reports. − Sato et al. used a freeze–thaw method to fuse
liposomes with EV membrane, forming a hybrid nanoparticle. The EVs were genetically engineered to overexpress
HER2. By doing so, the authors showed that genetic modification can
be combined with EV membrane engineering for rational design of engineered
EVs. Ma et al. utilized dexamethasone-loaded liposomes (Dexlip) to
tackle the limitations of MSCs in treating systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). Dexlip were coincubated with MSCs
for 24 h. Dexlip was found to induce a shift in MSCs toward an anti-inflammatory
phenotype by triggering the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) signaling
pathway. It was further found that these MSCs released exosomes (Dex-MSC-EXOs)
with elevated levels of expression of the anti-inflammatory protein
CRISPLD2. In a mouse model of SLE, the combined method was shown to
be more effective in treating SLE than Dexlip or MSC alone

3.3.3

## Modifying the Surface of EVs
Wang
et al. reported chemical conjugation of lung-derived exosomes to a
recombinant SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain (RBD), forming an inhalable
COVID-19 vaccine. The RBD antigen was
first conjugated with (1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-poly(ethylene-glycol)-N-hydroxysuccinimide) (DSPE-PEG-NHS) to form RBD-PEG-DSPE.
Then, RBD-PEG-DSPE was incubated with exosomes derived from lung spheroid
cells (LSCs) for 24 h, resulting in RBD-decorated exosomes. In mice,
the vaccine elicited RBD-specific IgG antibodies, mucosal IgA responses,
and CD4+ and CD8+ T cells with a Th1-like cytokine
expression profile in the animals’ lungs and cleared them of
SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus after a challenge. In hamsters, two doses of
the vaccine attenuated severe pneumonia and reduced inflammatory infiltrates
after a challenge with live SARS-CoV-2.
Chemical conjugation
to the functional groups of proteins in the EV membrane is a common
strategy used for the surface modification of EVs. However, this strategy
is limited by the low density of protein molecules in the EV membrane.
Bhatta et al. developed a metabolic glycan tagging approach to address
this issue ( ). A common metabolic labeling agent,
tetraacetyl N-azidoacetylmannosamine (Ac4ManAz), was synthesized and used for metabolic labeling of various
types of cells. The cells were treated with Ac4ManAz for
3 days and further incubated with DBCO-Cy5 for 30 min. EVs from Ac4ManAz-treated cells showed significantly higher Cy5 fluorescence
intensity, confirming the successful surface tagging of EVs (with
Cy5 as the model here). The authors showed that this chemical tagging
approach was applicable for many different cell types including cancer
cells, MSCs, dendritic cells, and T cells. They also showed that,
in the context of tumor vaccines, toll-like receptor 9 agonists could
be conjugated onto EVs, thereby enabling timely activation of dendritic
cells and generation of superior antitumor CD8+ T cell
response.
 In the context of heart repair and regeneration
post infarction,
in order to improve the targeting ability of MSCs-derived EVs to ischemia-injured
myocardium, Zhang et al. modified their surface by membrane fusion
with monocyte mimics. Taking advantage
of the recruitment feature of monocytes after MI-RI (myocardial ischemia-reperfusion
injury), the thus-formed modified EVs exhibited enhanced targeting
efficiency to injured myocardium, and improved therapeutic outcome
in a mouse MI/RI model
An interesting surface engineering method
for EVs was reported
by Chen et al., who modified the EV surface with spherical nucleic
acid (SNA). The authors mixed natural
EVs with cholesterol-modified oligonucleotides; driven by hydrophobic
interaction, the cholesterol-modified oligonucleotides coassembled
with the natural EVs, forming an oligonucleotide shell on the EVs.
The thus-formed new nanostructure, called extracellular vesicle spherical
nucleic acid (EV-SNA), showed programmability: EV-SNA can respond
to AND logic gates to achieve vesicle assembly manipulation. EV-SNA
also displayed superior cellular delivery ability compared with liposome
SNA.

3.3.4

## Encapsulation in a Hydrogel
The
native environment of EVs is often an extracellular matrix (ECM),
which has a hydrogel structure. Cells receive feedback from the ECM
and use intracellular processes to regulate the biogenesis of EVs.
After secretion, various biochemical and biophysical factors determine
whether EVs are locally incorporated in the matrix or transported
out of the matrix. In principle, understandings of how EVs and ECM
interact could be used to develop engineered hydrogels in which EV
production, retention and release can be precisely controlled to yield
desirable therapeutic outcomes. 
Lenzini et al. examined the transport of EVs, in comparison with
synthetic nanoparticles, in ECM. It was found that EVs can readily
transport through nanoporous ECM, in contrast to synthetic nanoparticles.
The mechanisms of this transport phenomenon were revealed to have
two aspects. First, matrix stress relaxation
allows EVs to overcome the confinement of pores in the ECM. Second,
water permeation through aquaporin-1 (AQP1) mediates the deformability
of EVs, which further supports EV transport in the ECM.
Encapsulating
EVs in a hydrogel, forming an EVs-In-Gel structure,
can be beneficial for the applications of EVs in several different
ways. First, after local injection, EVs are often washed out, resulting
in a large loss of the therapeutic agents. Encapsulating EVs in a
hydrogel can help to immobilize the EVs in a desired site. − Second, a main limiting factor of the current EV-mediated therapies
is the need for the prolonged presence of EVs at a specific location.
This translates to multiple injections over the course of several
weeks, which not only is disadvantageous in terms of patient compliance
but also causes varying concentration over time. Encapsulating EVs
in a hydrogel can offer sustained release of EVs, thereby yielding
desirable efficacy, minimized side effects and improved patient compliance. − Third, the stability of EVs is of concern; loss of EV functionality
occurs fairly quickly upon storage, likely due to membrane instability
or degradation of proteins and RNAs in EVs. Encapsulating EVs in hydrogel
can enhance the EV stability, as indicated in several reports. − 
The polymers used for the hydrogel often include natural biopolymers,
such as hyaluronic acid, alginate, chitosan, collagen, and amphiphilic
peptides. − The considerations for the design of the polymer composition include
the biomedical history, degradation, gelation kinetics, mechanical
properties, and EV release kinetics. The pore size of a hydrogel is
crucial to EV release. Because the diameter of exosomes is between
50 and 150 nm, the hydrogel needs to be nanoporous or microporous
to allow efficient exosome release. On the other hand, if the applications
of EVs are tissue regeneration, the pores of hydrogel need to be large
enough to allow for ingrowth of cells.
In general, there are
two different ways to encapsulate EVs into
a hydrogel, as illustrated in . In the first approach,
the polymers and EVs are mixed together; subsequently gelation is
initiated by addition of a cross-linker or by activating an external
trigger. In the second approach, polymers, cross-linkers and EVs are
mixed together in solution, which is injected by a syringe (often
a dual chamber syringe) at a specific site (e.g., the site of injury);
subsequently in situ gelation occurs. Compared with
the first approach, the second approach (injectable gel) is preferred
in terms of the noninvasiveness of treatment. The driving forces of cross-linking for injectable gels usually
involve intermolecular forces (rather than covalent bonds), including
guest–host interactions, ionic interactions, and hydrophobic
interactions.
 In addition to hydrogel encapsulation, other methods
have been
used to achieve a sustained release of EVs for improved therapeutic
outcomes. In one example, Hu et al. coated stents with MSCs-derived
exosomes, forming exosomes-eluting stents, to overcome limitations
of drug-eluting stents as implants after ischemic injury. Through a series of reactions, the surface of
the stents was conjugated with 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(DSPE). Further incubation with exosomes led to insertion of DSPE
into the lipid membrane of exosomes via hydrophobic interaction, yielding
exosomes-coated stents. The exosomes showed a sustained release profile
over several days. The release was accelerated by ROS accumulated
in the ischemic site due to a ROS-responsive linker used in the above-mentioned
surface conjugation. In rats with renal ischemia-reperfusion injury,
compared with drug-eluting stents, the exosome-eluting stents showed
more rapid reendothelialization and reduced in-stent restenosis 28
days after implantation. In another example, Bao et al. encapsulated
EVs with microcapsules made of the common biodegradable polymer poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), for treatment of vitreoretinal
diseases. In a mouse model of retinal
ischemia-reperfusion injury, intravitreal injection of MSCs-exosomes-encapsulated
PLGA microcapsules gave rise to prolonged release of exosomes for
over one month and restoration of retinal thickness to nearly that
of the healthy retina.

4

## Imaging and Mechanistic Understanding of Biological
Fate of EVs
Many
of the beneficial features of EVs for therapeutic efficacy
bring challenges to characterization and understanding of how EVs
work in a therapeutic context. EVs are heterogeneous, multicomponent,
and dynamic. These features render the following analytical techniques
particularly useful: dynamic bioimaging (tracking), single-particle/single-molecule/single-cell/single-vesicle
analysis, and multiplexed bioanalysis (omics and others). With these
techniques, researchers attempt to answer the following fundamental
questions: (1) What are the trajectories, modes, and rates of transport
of EVs at organ, tissue, cell, and subcellular levels? (2) What are
the molecular mechanisms behind these motions? (3) What are the molecular
contents of EVs? (4) What are the molecular mechanisms of the therapeutic
effects of EVs? (5) What are the molecular mechanisms of the undesired
side effects of EVs? Answers to these questions are imperative for
guiding the development of EVs (including engineered EVs) in the clinic.
Animal imaging is typically used to understand the transport of
EVs at the organ and tissue levels. In vivo animal
imaging techniques of nanomedicines usually include fluorescence imaging,
bioluminescence imaging, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), X-ray computed
tomography (X-ray CT), ultrasound imaging, positron emission tomography
(PET), and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Virtually
all of these imaging techniques have been adopted for imaging and
tracking EVs in live animals. Each of these techniques has its unique
benefits and limitations. For example, fluorescence and bioluminescence
imaging are easy to perform and have good spatial resolution; but
they do not offer high sensitivity and absolute quantification. On
the other end of the spectrum is nuclear imaging techniques such as
PET and SPECT. These techniques provide high sensitivity with minimal
background noise and ability of absolute quantification; but they
are very expensive and their availability is often limited by lack
of access to instrument or/and lack of expertise. Bimodal/multimodal
imaging strategies have been employed to combine the benefits and
overcome the limitations. Below are several representative examples
from the literature of applying imaging techniques to the study of
EVs in live animals.
Lai et al. designed a sensitive and versatile
probe that enables
bimodal EV imaging in live animals, and tracking EV biodistribution
and clearance over time ( ). The authors genetically
engineered EVs to display a membrane reporter called EV-GlucB, consisting
of Gluc (Gaussia luciferase) fused to a biotin acceptor domain, which
is metabolically biotinylated when expressed in mammalian cells in
the presence of biotin ligase. When incubated with the Gluc substrate
coelentrazine (CTZ), these engineered EVs exhibit a strong bioluminescence
signal. Furthermore, biotin on the surface allows EVs to be conjugated
to any labeled streptavidin, which can then be imaged in vivo using different techniques, including but not limited to fluorescence-mediated
tomography (FMT). Ex vivo analysis of tissue, blood,
and urine with the Gluc assay permits evaluation of biodistribution
and clearance of EVs. The bimodal imaging capacity originates from
the combination of Gluc and biotin. Gluc emits flash bioluminescence
(480 nm peak); meanwhile biotin allows another imaging modality such
as MRI, SPECT/PET, and FMT.
 A PET/MRI platform was reported by Banerjee et
al. to track EVs in vivo. Cu2+ was
selected as the radiotracer because it can be produced on a large
scale with high specific activity. Cu2+ was conjugated
to EVs in two steps. First, the EV surface was conjugated with the
metal chelator 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclodode-cane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic
acid (DOTA), using the free thiol groups in the EV membrane. Second,
DOTA was complexed with Cu2+. The stability of the EV-DOTA-Cu
complex was evaluated in serum, PBS, and animal blood to be stable
for at least 24 h. The potential influence of Cu labeling on the bioactivity
of EVs was also examined. It was found that the prosurvival activity
of EVs with Cu labeling against ischemic endothelial cells was higher
than those without Cu labeling.
Nanoparticles have also been
loaded to EVs for in vivo imaging, as shown in a
study by Betzer et al. For X-ray CT,
exosomes were incubated with glucose-coated
gold nanoparticles for 3 h at 37 °C, achieving labeling of exosomes
with gold nanoparticles (contrast agent for X-ray imaging). In a mouse
model of stroke, the gold nanoparticle-labeled exosomes were delivered
into the brain by intranasal administration. The gold nanoparticles
permitted X-ray CT imaging and tracking of the exosomes in the mouse
brain. In vivo CT imaging revealed the selective
accumulation of exosomes in the stroke region.
A comprehensive
comparative study was conducted by Lázaro-Ibáñez
et al. to examine whether imaging probes would alter the biodistribution
of EVs. The following imaging probes
(and the associated imaging modalities) were investigated: a noncovalently
labeled fluorescent dye DiR, a covalently labeled nuclear imaging
probe 111Indium-DTPA, a genetically engineered fluorescent
label mCherry, and genetically engineered bioluminescent label Firefly
(Fluc) and NanoLuc (Nluc) luciferases. It was found that 111Indium-DTPA and DiR provided the most sensitive in vivo imaging of the EVs. The biodistribution study revealed that NanoLuc
fused to CD63 altered the EV biodistribution, resulting in high accumulation
in the lungs.
Visualizing the behaviors of EVs at the cellular
and subcellular
level is usually conducted by fluorescence/bioluminescence microscopy.
The results in the literature so far appear to indicate that the cellular
uptake mechanisms of EVs are usually endocytosis, and a large portion
of the endocytosed EVs is colocalized in intracellular vesicles such
as lysosomes. − In addition to endocytosis, membrane fusion was also found to be
involved in some studies. EVs have been
found to cross the blood-brain barrier by transcytosis. More detailed and systematic studies are clearly
needed. It is challenging to image both the EVs and their molecular
contents (e.g., mRNAs, miRNAs) simultaneously. It is also challenging
to image the biological impacts of EVs at the molecular level (e.g.,
translation of the mRNA cargos of EVs in the recipient cells). Lai
et al. developed a genetically engineered probes-based imaging platform
technology to address these challenges. To generate fluorescent reporters of EVs (including all the subpopulations),
a palmitoylation signal was genetically fused in-frame to the N terminus
of fluorescent proteins (EGFP or tdTomato), forming PalmGFP or PalmtdTomato,
respectively. The palmitoylation enables association of proteins with
cellular membranes and thus all EV membranes. These reporters permitted
multiphoton intravital microscopy of the EV dynamics in tumor tissue.
It was observed that the lowest EV densities were typically in the
areas of the highest tumor cell density at the core of the tumor parenchyma;
in contrast, more peripheral regions, where the tumor parenchyma interfaces
with the tumor stroma, showed the highest densities of EVs. In order
to simultaneously visualize EV-packaged mRNAs and EVs, a dual-function
reporter was designed. In this reporter scheme, PalmtdTomato protein
was used for EV visualization, while its transcript was tagged with
a repeated MS2 RNA binding sequence in the 30 UTR (PalmtdTomato-MS24X)
for EV-RNA detection by bacteriophage MS2 coat protein fused with
EGFP (MS2CP-GFP) expressed in the same cells. In order to detect and
monitor translation of EV-delivered mRNA in parallel with EV uptake,
fluorescent (PalmtdTomato) and bioluminescent (EV-GlucB) reporters
were multiplexed. If the recipient cells translate EV-delivered GlucB
mRNA, an increase in the GlucB signal would be observed, whereas treatment
with cycloheximide (a protein translation inhibitor) would prevent
GlucB mRNA translation and reduce any increase in the signal. Notably,
an increase in the intensity of the GluB signal was observed as early
as 1 h post-EV exposure, indicating that translation of EV-delivered
GlucB mRNA started shortly after EV uptake by the recipient cells.
In an effort to address the challenge of distinguishing EVs-generating
cells and EVs-receiving cells, Zomer et al. developed a Cre/LoxP-based
imaging scheme, in which EV uptake led to Cre-induced red-to-green
color conversion. , This color switch occurred specifically
in reporter-expressing cells that take up EVs released from cells
expressing Cre recombinase (Cre+ cells). With this EV imaging scheme,
the authors were able to identify tumor cells that take up EVs in vitro and in vivo in a mouse model (using
intravital fluorescence microscopy). It was found that EVs released
by malignant tumor cells were taken up by less malignant tumor cells
located within the same and within distant tumors and that these EVs
carried mRNAs involved in migration and metastasis. It was further
shown that the less malignant tumor cells that take up EVs displayed
an enhanced migratory behavior and metastatic capacity.
CD63
has often been used to label and track exosomes and MVBs.
However, it is challenging to observe the fusion events of MVBs with
the plasma membrane, because the fluorescence emitted by the endosomes
and MVBs labeled by CD63-fluorescent proteins is extremely bright,
leading to poor signal-to-noise ratio during the fusion events. To
solve this challenge, Sung et al. employed a pH-sensitive GFP derivative,
pHluorin, to image the vesicle fusion events. pHluorin is virtually nonfluorescent under acidic conditions
but fluoresces at neutral pH, making it an ideal reporter to observe
the fusion of acidic late endosomal MVBs with the plasma membrane.
The authors developed a pHluorin-tagged CD63 reporter and used it
to show that MVB fusion precedes adhesion formation in spreading cells
by 1–2 min. Later, the same research group further improved
the stability and brightness of pHluorin-CD63 by incorporating a single
amino acid mutation, M153R. Using this
construct, they were able to track multiple aspects of the exosome
lifecycle including MVB motion within cells before fusion, endocytosis
of extracellular exosome deposits, and acidification of exosome-containing
endocytic compartments.
Each EV contains numerous molecular
species, and this is a main
reason why EV therapy can mimic cell therapy as a conventional drug
only contains one (or a very small number of) molecular species. Given
this feature of EVs, omics-based analysis has become invaluable for
understanding molecular compositions of EVs and molecular mechanisms
of the physiological functions of EVs. − Transcriptomics has been widely
used in studying EVs, offering comprehensive information about mRNAs,
miRNAs, lncRNAs, and circRNAs. Meanwhile, proteomics permits the comprehensive
identification and quantification of proteins. Primarily due to the
heterogeneity of EVs and limited detection sensitivity of omics, reproducibility
(biological reproducibility or technical reproducibility) is currently
a major challenge in using omics for studying EVs. , Thus, multiomics analysis and validation by other analytical methods
are often needed. , 
EVs are heterogeneous.
Techniques that can analyze single vesicles
are thus highly valuable in unraveling the heterogeneity of EVs. Some
of these techniques are label-free methods, while others need labeling
(e.g., fluorescence labeling) on the vesicles. Label-free methods
can circumvent the potentially undesirable influence of labels on
EVs, but these methods often produce weak signals. The most commonly
used single-vesicle analysis techniques for EVs are nanoparticle tracking
analysis (NTA) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). In NTA,
individual vesicles are detected by scattering the light of a laser
beam; the trajectories of diffusing vesicles are tracked and analyzed
to yield the hydrodynamic sizes of individual vesicles. In TEM, individual
vesicles are directly visualized, producing information about morphology
and size. Raman tweezer microspectroscopy (RTM), also known as laser
tweezer Raman spectroscopy (LTRS), can be employed to investigate
the chemical content of single EVs. RTM utilizes a tightly focused
laser beam for both optical trapping of single (or a very small number
of) vesicles in water and excitation for subsequent Raman scattering,
which offers a vibrational chemical fingerprint from the trapped constituent
biomolecules. This technique can be used to analyze both the surface
and the interior of single EVs, revealing specific molecular signatures
of proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and carotenoids. , Other less frequently used, label-free methods include atom force
microscopy (AFM) and single-particle interferometric reflectance imaging
sensor (SP-IRIS). , 
Label-based methods are
dependent on the detection of signals from
fluorescent molecules or signal-enhancing nanoparticles. High-resolution
flow cytometry (hrFC) has been extensively used to analyze single
EVs. This technique permits the quantification of the size distribution
and diversity of EV populations by detecting multiparametric scattered
light and fluorescence emitted by the labeled EVs. Using antibody-fluorophore
conjugates, this technique can be used to profile the protein or nucleic
acid content of a EV population at single vesicle level. Fluorescence microscopy has been widely used
for localizing fluorescently labeled targets. In particular, total
internal reflection fluorescent microscopy (TIRF) is now commonly
used for single vesicle analysis. This technique can be used in an
aqueous environment to image fluorescent molecules located near a
highly refractive solid substance. TIRF allows for fluorescence tracking
of single EVs in live cells. It should be noted that in TIRF the fluorophores
can be excited only within a few hundred nanometers from the solid
substrate. Another particularly useful
fluorescence-based imaging technique is fluorescence (or Förster)
resonance energy transfer (FRET) imaging. The phenomenon of FRET occurs
via resonance energy transfer at distances <10 nm. FRET imaging
is capable of producing single-vesicle fluorescence information very
fast. This imaging technique offers unique abilities for assessing
kinetic and structural dynamics of EVs (e.g., lipid-mixing process). − Super-resolution microscopy (SRM) is a group of advanced microscopy
techniques that enables visualization of biological features smaller
than the optical diffraction limit (typically ∼250 nm axial
and ∼500 nm lateral resolution). This feature is especially
useful for imaging single EVs and investigating their biological functions. − Finally, the applications of microfluidics have great potential
in single EV analysis. , 

5

## Applications of Engineered EVs in Therapeutics
The
therapeutic applications of engineered EVs are being pursued
in a large number of diseases and the number is growing. Thus, this
section is not meant to be exhaustive but rather aims to provide representative
examples, in which key methods and main findings are highlighted. and briefly summarize reported preclinical studies and clinical
studies of engineered EVs, respectively.
 5.1

## Cardiovascular Diseases
EVs have
been reported to be involved in many physiological and pathological
processes in cardiovascular system, such as angiogenesis regulation,
blood pressure control, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, apoptosis, survival,
and cardiac fibrosis. In preclinical
research, therapeutic potential of EVs has been demonstrated in cardiovascular
regeneration and protection. 
The
therapeutic functions of EVs have been enhanced by EV engineering
in many studies in the literature. Hypoxia preconditioning of olfactory
mucosa MSCs was reported to produce EVs with improved ability of angiogenesis
promotion, via enrichment of miR-612. Forced overexpression is another commonly used approach for improving
therapeutic efficacy. In one study, forced Tcf21 overexpression suppressed
transforming growth factor-β signaling and myofibroblast differentiation,
in the context of myocardial fibrosis treatment. In another study, miR-126, as a critical regulator of angiogenesis,
was overexpressed to promote vascular endothelial cell repair. 
Surface modification of EVs with targeting
ligands has been used
to enhance the targeting ability of EVs for improved efficacy in cardiovascular
diseases. For example, Wang et al. engineered exosomes with ischemic
myocardium-targeting (IMT) peptide on the surface, and showed that
the IMT peptide significantly increased the accumulation of exosomes
in ischemic heart area, and improved the therapeutic efficacy. Embedding EVs in hydrogels has been used to
enhance the efficacy of treating cardiovascular diseases. For example,
Hu et al. found that incorporating MSC-derived exosomes in a class
of angiogenin-1 hydrogel stents increased the efficacy, by prolonging
the residence time of exosomes at the site of cardiac damage in the
ischemic microenvironment. Chen et al.
showed that incorporating endothelial progenitor cell-derived EVs
into shear-thinning hydrogels improved angiogenesis and promoted function
after myocardial infarction, by sustained release of the EVs from
the hydrogel. 

5.2

## Neurological Diseases
Neuronal cells-derived
EVs have been identified as vehicles for transferring misfolded proteins
or coding materials between neurons. Transporting these disease-associated
cargos may transform healthy cells into dysfunctional cells, contributing
to the progression of neurological diseases such as Alzheimer’s
dementia (AD), PD, Huntington’s disease, and prion diseases. , Because of the inherent ability of EVs to cross the blood-brain
barrier, they have been employed as a delivery vehicle or/and a therapeutic
agent to treat diseases in the brain. , For example,
EVs isolated from human blood and loaded with dopamine have been shown
to deliver dopamine to the central nervous system through the transferrin
receptor. EVs derived from murine dendritic
cells containing siRNAs targeting α-synuclein have resulted
in reduced levels of mRNA and protein of α-synuclein in the
brains of mouse models of Huntington’s disease. EVs also showed protective capability for the
encapsulated biomolecules, such as enzymes. Surface modification of EVs with the brain-tumor-targeting cyclic
RGDyK peptide has been shown to enhance drug delivery across the blood-brain
barrier. Finally, MSCs-derived EVs have
been shown to promote neuronal repair and regeneration; engineering
these EVs (e.g., by loading a drug) could further enhance the functions. 

5.3

## Cancers
A landmark paper of using
engineered EVs for cancer treatment was published in 2017. In this article, clinical-grade exosomes derived
from normal fibroblast-like mesenchymal cells were engineered to carry
siRNA or shRNA specific to oncogenic KRASG12D, a common mutation in
pancreatic cancer. The engineered exosomes were found to target oncogenic
Kras with an enhanced efficacy (compared with liposomes) that is dependent
on CD47. In multiple mouse models of pancreatic cancer, the engineered
exosome treatment suppressed cancer and significantly improved overall
survival. In other studies, chemotherapeutic drugs, sonosensitizers,
and photoacoustic imaging agents were loaded to EVs for enhanced anticancer
therapeutic efficacy. − It is worth noting that tumor cells-generated
exosomes can be a cause of cancer metastasis. − 

5.4

## Dermatology
In a recent report, human
dermal fibroblasts-derived EVs were loaded with mRNA encoding for
extracellular-matrix α1 type-I collagen (COL1A1), and induced
the formation of collagen-protein grafts and reduced wrinkle formation
in the collagen-depleted dermal tissue of mice with photoaged skin. In another study, human adipose MSCs-derived
EVs were loaded with miR-21–5p, and exhibited potent promotion
effect on diabetic wound healing. Similarly,
MSCs-derived EVs loaded with pioglitazone promoted collagen deposition
and ECM remodeling by regulating P13K/AKT/eNOS pathway and enhancing
neovascularization, thereby accelerating wound healing in diabetes. In employing EVs for treating diabetic wound
healing, silk fibroin patches or hydrogels − have been utilized for EV immobilization and prolonged release at
the wound site.

5.5

## Immunological Diseases
EVs can be
functional in immune regulation, likely due to the transfer and presentation
of antigenic peptides, delivery of DNA-inducing cGAS-STING (cyclic
GMP-AMP synthase stimulator of interferon genes) signaling in recipient
cells, gene-expression manipulation by exosomal miRNA, and induction
of different signaling pathways by surface ligands present on the
EVs. , Engineered EVs have been successfully used
to elicit adaptive and innate immune reactions, suggesting their utility
as therapeutics. In one example, a hybrid nanoparticle of ceria and
vesicles was prepared to modulate both innate and adaptive immunity
in a collagen-induced arthritis model. The individual components of
the hybrid structure worked synergistically to alleviate inflammation
and modulate the tissue environment into an immunotolerant-favorable
state, by bridging innate and adaptive immunity. 

5.6

## Reproductive System
Engineered EVs
are being investigated to treat reproductive disorders including premature
ovarian insufficiency (POI), polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), recurrent
spontaneous abortion (RSA), intrauterine adhesion (IUA), and endometriosis
(EMS). The molecular mechanisms of the
therapeutic efficacy have been attributed to the molecular cargos
of the EVs, including miRNAs, circRNAs, lncRNAs, proteins, and small
molecules. − Combining EVs with a scaffold has been shown
to enhance the therapeutic functions. In one study, a collagen scaffold
was loaded with human umbilical cord-derived MSCs (CS/UC-MSCs) and
was applied for treating IUA. CS/UC-MSCs showed EVs-mediated endometrial
regeneration in a model of endometrial damage, by promoting endometrial
stromal cell proliferation and apoptosis inhibition. In another study, a collagen scaffold was laden with MSCs-derived
exosomes for treating IUA. In a rat endometrium-damage model, the
treatment was found to promote endometrium regeneration and restore
fertility through macrophage immunomodulation. 

5.7

## Respiratory Diseases
Multiple studies
have been reported on applying engineered EVs for treating respiratory
diseases. In one study, Tu et al. constructed an engineered EV system
by loading miR-511–3p into exosomes derived from HEK293T cells,
and then decorating the exosome surface with the RNA nanoparticle
PRNA-3WJ (three-way junction of the bacteriophage phi29 motor packaging
RNA) with mannose surface modification. The mannose decorated EVs were designed to target macrophages through
the mannose receptor Mrc1. In a mouse model of asthma, intratracheal
inhalation of these engineered EVs effectively penetrated the airway
mucus barrier, delivered functional miR-511–3p to lung macrophages,
and successfully reversed the increased airway inflammation. Complement
C3 (C3) was identified as a major target of miR-511–3p. In
another study, Xie et al. developed an engineered EV system as a COVID-19
therapy. By fusing the S-palmitoylation-dependent
plasma membrane targeting sequence with ACE2 (a key cell surface receptor
interacting with the viral spike protein), we engineered EVs enriched
with ACE2 on their surface were engineered. The engineered EVs showed
neutralization potency against SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus-2) in human ACE2 transgenic mice and efficiently
blocked viral load of SARS-CoV-2, thereby protecting the host against
SARS-CoV-2-induced lung inflammation.

5.8

## Ophthalmic Diseases
Engineered EVs
have shown remarkable potential in treating ophthalmic diseases, including
both anterior (front-of-the-eye) and posterior (back-of-the-eye) diseases.
In order to treat corneal damage (a major anterior eye disease), Tang
et al. used a thermosensitive chitosan-based hydrogel to encapsulate
exosomes generated by induced pluripotent stem cell-derived MSCs (iPSC-MSCs). The hydrogel permitted sustained release of
exosomes, which effectively promoted repair of damaged corneal epithelium
and stromal layer, downregulating expression of mRNAs coding for the
three most enriched collagens in the corneal stroma and reducing scar
formation in vivo. Mechanistically, it was found that the therapeutic
effect was via miR-432–5p in the exosomes, which suppresses
translocation-associated membrane protein 2 (TRAM2), a vital modulator
of the collagen biosynthesis in the corneal stromal stem cells, to
avert the deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM). In order to treat
retinal ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) (a major posterior eye disease),
Yu et al. studied the effects of exosomes derived from gingival MSCs. Exosomes from gingival MSCs were isolated by
ultracentrifugation and were injected into the vitreous of mice. It
was found that TNF-α stimulation of the source cells enhanced
the neuroprotective effects of exosomes in IRI. Mechanistic studies
revealed that the enhancement effect was due to enrichment of miR-21–5p
in the exosomes.

5.9

## Kidney Diseases
Increasing evidence
in preclinical models demonstrates the potential of using EVs, especially
those derived from stem cells, to treat kidney diseases such as acute
kidney injury (AKI) and chronic kidney diseases (CKD). Engineered EVs can further augment therapeutic
performance, as suggested by multiple reports. Tang et al. developed
interleukin-10 (IL-10)-loaded EVs by engineering macrophages for treating
ischemic AKI. The utilization of EVs
enhanced not only the stability of IL-10, but also the targeting
to the kidney due to adhesive components on the EV surface. In a mouse
model, the treatment with IL-10-loaded EVs ameliorated renal tubular
injury and inflammation caused by ischemia/reperfusion injury, and
prevented transition to CKD. In an effort to use hydrogel encapsulation
to enhance therapeutic efficacy of EVs, Zhang et al. developed a hydrogel
based on RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) peptide. RGD
peptide binds strongly to integrins, which are present on the membrane
surface of MSC-derived EVs. The EVs-encapsulated hydrogel increased
the retention and stability of the EVs. After intrarenal injection
into a mouse AKI model, the EVs-encapsulated hydrogel showed superior
performance in rescuing renal function in early stages of AKI and
in antifibrosis in chronic stages.

6

## Translation Aspects
As a new class
of nanomedicine as well as a new class of cell therapy,
EVs (native EVs and engineered EVs) face important challenges in 
translation to the clinic and industry. A major challenge comes from
the manufacturing of EVs on a large scale with satisfactory quality
control to meet the needs of clinical trials and industry production.
This is due to the inherent complexity of EVs, size heterogeneity,
and natural batch-to-batch variations in the production. In the source
cell culture step, the methods can include multilayered culture flasks,
bioreactors, and hollow fiber cartridges. Small-scale manufacturing
can be performed in shake flasks, spinners, roller bottles, wave bags,
and bioreactors. Large-scale cell culture can be conducted in stainless
steel bioreactors (up to 20,000 L scale), platform-rocker wave bags
(up to 500 L scale), or disposable bioreactors (up to 2000 L scale).
Genetic drift and contamination need to be monitored closely. In the
EV harvesting and isolation step, the commonly used method, namely,
ultracentrifugation, poses difficulties for large-scale production.
Many other methods are being examined such as tangential flow filtration,
size exclusion chromatography, affinity chromatography, and magnetic
isolation. In the drug loading step, sonication, surfactant, etc. have been used to facilitate the diffusion of drug
molecules into EVs. The EV products are often stored at 4 °C
or −80 °C. Lyophilization has been tested for long-term
storage of EVs; but its impact on EV integrity needs to be carefully
studied. Quality control by characterizing the critical quality attributes
(CQAs) is needed. These include but are not limited to viability and
surface marker expression of the source cells, quantity, size, and
surface marker expression of the EVs, microbial contamination (for
example, detection of endotoxin and mycoplasma), and functional activities
specific to the applications.
Further, for clinical translation
of EVs as therapeutics, “biological
unknowns” and “pharmacological unknowns” need
to addressed. Addressing the biological
unknowns includes resolving the functional ambiguity of EV action
and elucidating the subpopulations and payloads of EVs. Addressing
the pharmacological unknowns includes mapping out the optimal dose,
mode of administration, systemic distribution, and pharmacokinetic,
pharmacodynamics, and other properties of EVs. To address these issues,
developing advanced characterization techniques (e.g., multiomics
analysis, single-cell analysis, dynamic imaging, and super-resolution
microscopy) for EVs is essential. Finally, standardization efforts
are highly important. An example of such efforts is the standardization
of EV isolation and characterizations by the International Society
for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV), resulting in the publication of
“MISEV” (Minimal information for studies of extracellular
vesicles). So far three editions of MISEV have been published (publication
year: 2014, 2018, 2023). 

7

## Conclusions and Perspectives
Many difficult-to-treat
diseases, such as neurological diseases
and immunological diseases, lack single targets to effectively treat
by conventional drugs. EVs, with a large number of molecular species,
could potentially be an ideal solution to these diseases. Furthermore,
EVs exhibit an excellent capacity to cross delivery barriers. To realize
the full potential of EVs, many techniques have been developed to
modify native EVs, forming engineered EVs. These engineered EVs have
shown great efficacy and minimal toxicity in treating an array of
major diseases, demonstrating potential as both a new class of nanomedicine
and a new class of cell therapy.
Looking forward, interdisciplinary
and collaborative work is needed
to tackle challenges in the following aspects to translate this potential
to the clinic and industry. First, quality control and scale up of
production are challenging for all nanomedicines and especially so
for engineered EVs. In addition to the complexity and heterogeneity
of engineered EVs, these challenges arise from the fact that the production
process involves steps that are difficult to control. In the upstream
of the production process, EV biogenesis is difficult to control.
In the downstream of the production process, isolation of EVs based
on ultracentrifugation (the dominant method used in the current practice)
is difficult to control and scale up. Second, clinical translation
requires systematic and deep understanding of the transport behaviors
and molecular mechanisms underlying the efficacies and toxicities
of engineered EVs. Gaining this understanding needs application-specific
development of advanced analytical techniques.

## Author Contributions
X.W., Z.H.,
H.Y., J.M., X. W., and S.S. wrote the first draft of the manuscript.
G.R. supervised and edited the writing.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the financial support from
Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation (No. BK20171259), Nantong Natural
Science Foundation (No. JC2019045, No. JC2019049), and XJTLU Research
Development Funding-RDF-21-02-007.