pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC12507249PMC12507249.112507249125072494102679910.1371/journal.ppat.1013545PPATHOGENS-D-25-012751Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensOpportunistic PathogensBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesImmunoblottingResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesImmunoblottingBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyDigestive SystemPharynxNasopharynxMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyDigestive SystemPharynxNasopharynxBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyRespiratory SystemPharynxNasopharynxMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyRespiratory SystemPharynxNasopharynxMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensVirulence FactorsBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensBacterial PathogensMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensBacterial PathogensResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsAnimal ModelsMouse ModelsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryRibosomesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesRibosomesResearch and Analysis MethodsSpectrum Analysis TechniquesSpectrophotometryCytophotometryFlow CytometryCommensal to pathogen switch in Streptococcus pneumoniae is influenced by a thermosensing master regulator
Thermosensing master regulatorApteShrutiData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draft Bonifacio-PereiraGreicy K.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigation GhoshSouravData curationFormal analysisInvestigationValidationVisualization MandalSrijit KumarData curationInvestigationValidation BadgujarLeenaData curationFormal analysisInvestigation GosaviKrithikaConceptualizationInvestigation PohlerElizabethInvestigation BartonThomas E.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodology PottengerSianInvestigation BlakeAliceInvestigation PIPradeepkumarMethodology NeillDaniel R.Formal analysisProject administrationResourcesValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4229-5981BanerjeeAnirbanConceptualizationFormal analysisProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India2
Division of Molecular Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom3
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India4
Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United KingdomWessels,MichaelEditor , ]. The complexities of such interactions are especially apparent for the nasal microbiota, where mutualistic, commensal and pathogenic lifestyles can be observed, with many species able to transition between these states [ ]. Bacterial species prevalent in this niche include prominent opportunistic pathogens, responsible for significant global mortality. The ability to switch from a commensal to a pathogenic state is well established for these pathobionts [ – ]. However, the underpinning molecular mechanisms triggering this transition are poorly characterized.
The primary lifestyle for opportunistic pathogens, including Streptococcus pneumoniae (SPN, pneumococcus), is one of quiescence, with most infections associated with only sub-clinical inflammation [ ]. However, SPN is frequently found to cause symptomatic infections in individuals with heightened inflammation, resulting from allergy, viral or bacterial co-infection, genetic disorders, or an immature or senescent immune system [ – ]. The switch to a pathogenic state under such conditions requires rapid integration of multiple environmental stimuli, to achieve coordinated phenotypic change, analogous to Listeria monocytogenes manages the transition from a saprophytic to a pathogenic lifestyle via coordinated changes in the global transcriptional landscape. These changes are orchestrated by 50 non-coding RNAs containing riboswitches and thermosensors, and a series of novel regulatory RNAs, including several long antisense RNAs that control the virulence phase [ ]. Efficiency of regulation is ensured through the actions of master regulators, controlling pleiotropic phenotypes in response to changes in diverse environmental inputs. In bacterial pathogens, such global changes are typically regulated via two-component signaling systems (TCS) [ ]. These systems intercept and respond to altering environmental change, including host-generated stimuli, such as varying osmolarity or pH, presence of toxic chemicals, nutrient deprivation, and changes in temperature [ ]. TCS signaling pathways promote stress adaptation or resilience in bacteria. For instance, the PhoPQ system in Salmonella spp. senses cytoplasmic or extracellular Mg2+, imbalance in osmolarity or mildly acidic pH, antimicrobial peptides, and long-chain unsaturated fatty acids. The resulting changes in gene expression modulate antigens on the cell surface [ – ]. SPN possesses 13 two-component systems, responding to multiple stimuli, and this elaborate repertoire of signaling systems is a prerequisite for establishment of its niche in the human nasopharynx, given the variable nature of the upper airway environment, both in terms of physical conditions and nutrient availability [ – ]. The CiaRH TCS senses surface-borne stress and imparts antibiotic tolerance to SPN, but the precise signal that triggers the response is yet to be deciphered [ – ].
Host-facing bacterial factors are major contributors to virulence. These include surface proteins, adhesins, invasins, and secretory enzymatic proteins. Collectively, these factors contribute to successful establishment of infection by mediating adhesion to host cells and in certain cases, promoting cellular invasion, as well as ensuring delivery of essential nutrients to the bacterial cell. In most SPN lineages, the surface is covered with a thick layer of polysaccharide capsule, through which projections of teichoic acids protrude out, providing docking points for several choline-binding proteins that act as virulence factors [ ]. These teichoic acids are also decorated with a neutral chemical moiety, phosphorylcholine (PCho), levels of which are controlled by the CiaRH TCS [ ]. PCho displayed on the surface is essential for growth, division and virulence, and yet, phase variation is associated with varying surface PCho abundance, facilitating the generation of mixed populations [ ]. SPN invasion into host cells is predominantly controlled by PCho, which by virtue of having molecular mimicry to Platelet Activating Factor (PAF), binds to PAF receptor (PAFR) [ ]. PAFR is a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) that functions to mediate inflammatory signaling in the host upon ligand sensing [ ]. Incidentally, the expression of PAFR is highest in lung epithelium, amongst other body sites [ ] and smoking, obstructive pulmonary diseases like COPD or bronchial asthma, as well as respiratory viral infections trigger further upregulation of PAFR expression [ , ]. Surface decoration of PCho on the other hand is exclusively observed in bacterial species associated with the respiratory tract, including Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae, Acinetobacter spp., and Pseudomonas aeruginosa [ ]. This points to adoption of a common virulence mechanism by phylogenetically diverse microbes sharing the specific respiratory niche, which is notably absent in skin or gut opportunists.
Respiratory pathologies predispose to, and are complicated by, secondary bacterial infections. Such infections make significant contributions to mortality in those with allergy, asthma or COPD [ , ]. It has also been established that a preceding viral infection plays a significant role in the transition of SPN from a commensal to invasive lifestyle [ ]. However, molecular mechanisms underlying this lethal synergy are lacking, preventing development of therapeutic strategies to combat the adverse outcomes. Notably, several respiratory pathologies have been associated with upregulation of PAFR expression in the respiratory epithelium [ ]. This might provide SPN a platform for improved interaction with and subsequent invasion of respiratory epithelium. In this study, we demonstrate that post-transcriptional thermoregulation of the CiaRH two component system elevates surface PCho levels on SPN, promoting virulence. We provide evidence that elevated temperature is an environmental determinant which promotes the commensal-pathogen switch and progression of SPN infection.

## Results

## Temperature shift could serve as the cue for the commensal to invasive switch for S. pneumoniae
Cellular adhesion and invasion are pivotal to pathogenic infections and since the PCho-PAFR interaction is a key driver of invasive SPN infection, we reasoned that PCho levels in SPN might be elevated in pathologic respiratory conditions, mirroring the increased PAFR, and thereby facilitating pneumococcal infection. Indeed, SPN isolated from the lungs of mice, in a pneumonia model, had significantly higher surface PCho levels than those isolated from nasopharynx in an asymptomatic colonization model ( ). We have previously demonstrated that short-term exposure of mice to high temperatures promotes the dissemination of SPN from the upper to the lower airways in the nasopharyngeal colonization model [ ]. Under these conditions, we were able to isolate SPN from both nasopharynx and lungs of individual animals. PCho surface abundance was higher on SPN recovered from nasopharynx of mice that had undergone short-term exposure to 40°C than in those housed under a constant temperate of 21°C, although this difference was not significant (P = 0.09) ( ). Furthermore, lung SPN showed greater PCho abundance than paired populations isolated from nasopharynx of the same animal ( ), confirming that descent through the airways is associated with increased PCho levels. To determine the possible factors driving increased PCho expression in lower airways, we next examined PCho levels in SPN in vitro, under a range of conditions designed to capture aspects of the stressed respiratory environment. Immunoblotting assays demonstrated that SPN PCho levels were upregulated by ~3 fold at temperatures associated with a febrile response (39°C), as compared to a nasal temperature (33°C) or as compared to levels measured in response to respiratory stress signals like ATP or the secreted cytokine TNFα ( – ). The increase in PCho that we observed at febrile temperature was confirmed to be surface-associated by flow cytometry analysis ( and ). Interestingly, higher PCho levels at the febrile temperatures commonly associated with respiratory inflammation correlated with improved (~2-fold) cellular invasion ability of SPN ( ), irrespective of chain length alteration ( and ). Together, these findings indicate that SPN utilize a robust host physiological symptom associated with respiratory pathologies, for modulation of surface properties. Notably, the link between temperature change and surface modifications has potential to contribute to infection progression and the commensal to pathogen switch.
 

## Thermosensing behavior of the CiaRH system dictates PCho levels in SPN
In SPN, PCho biogenesis and surface decoration is controlled by the lic operon. We profiled temperature-dependent expression of licA, a gene controlling the uptake and processing of choline residues from the environment [ ], as well as htrA, a heat-responsive chaperone and protease that is reported to be induced during heat stress, as a positive control [ , ]. qRT-PCR analysis showed significant increases in both licA and htrA expression (~2-fold and 4-fold, respectively) upon exposure to febrile temperature ( ). The pneumococcal lic operon is positively regulated by the two-component system CiaRH. To understand the role of ciaRH in temperature-dependent increase in PCho levels, we created a ciaRH deletion strain. The ΔciaRH mutant failed to grow at higher temperature (39°C) due to the involvement of CiaRH in heat stress management ( ). Also, licA transcript levels were reduced in the ΔciaRH strain ( ) at 37°C. We also observed significant downregulation (~33%) of PCho surface abundance upon ciaRH deletion which could contribute to the almost complete loss of cellular invasion ability (~90-fold reduction) in this strain ( – ). Importantly, the abolishment of invasive ability was not attributed to any alteration in bacterial chain length in ΔciaRH ( ). Collectively, this points to the central role of CiaR in regulation of PCho levels and the resultant invasive capability of SPN.
Multiple two-component systems, including CiaRH, are partially regulated by a positive feed-forward loop that increases their expression upon signal stimulation. Since PCho expression is raised at higher temperatures (via positive regulation of the lic operon by CiaR), we hypothesized that CiaR levels may increase by thermoregulation to kick start the positive feedback loop or meet the demand of increased PCho biogenesis in response to temperature related stress. We therefore examined the transcript and protein levels of ciaR at 33 and 39°C, to determine whether levels are positively regulated as a function of temperature. Intriguingly, we observed that although CiaR protein levels increased ~3-fold at higher temperatures in WT SPN ( and ), ciaR transcript levels remained unchanged between 33 and 39°C ( ). Moreover, we found that CiaR levels were elevated only when pneumococcus was exposed to febrile temperature (39°C), but not at normal body temperature (37°C) ( and ). This pattern of elevated protein levels with no apparent change in transcript abundance might be explained by the presence of RNA thermosensing elements at the 5’-untranslated region (5’-UTR) of ciaR. Indeed, the secondary structure of the 5’-UTR of ciaRH, modelled using an in silico RNA structure prediction tool, mFold [ , ], suggested occlusion of the ribosome binding site (RBS) [ ], implying presence of a putative RNA thermosensor (RNA-T) ( ). Thermosensing elements function by intra-RNA base pairing that leads to mRNA secondary structures occluding the RBS. To determine whether the ciaRH mRNA sequence alone was sufficient to confer thermoregulation of gene expression, we expressed the full-length gene along with native promoter sequence in E. coli. We consistently observed significantly increased abundance (~35-fold) of CiaR at febrile temperature (39°C) compared to 33°C ( and ). Next, we generated GFP-based reporter strains carrying the promoter regions of ciaRH (PciaRH) or a housekeeping gene, enolase (Penolase), from SPN. In the engineered E. coli strains, the normalized amount of GFP (PciaR/Penolase) was found to increase ~6 fold at higher temperature ( and ), demonstrating that the 5’-UTR sequence of ciaRH alone is sufficient to confer thermoregulation of a different ORF in a heterologous system. To further eliminate involvement of host-dependent factors in the thermoregulation, an in vitro (cell-free) protein synthesis system was adopted, using the same constructs, where we observed ~4-fold increased GFP levels at 39ºC, compared to 33ºC ( and ). Similar increments in the CiaR protein levels were observed when the in vitro transcription-translation reaction was decoupled to generate first the RNA, followed by translation using equal amount of transcripts ( ). The structural topology for the 5’-UTR ciaRH sequence was substantiated by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy [ ]. CD melting studies performed with the chemically synthesized 5’-UTR sequence indicated formation of a hairpin structure with a Tm of 34 ± 0.14°C ( ). This implied opening up of the ciaRH RNA structure during the transition of temperature from 33 to 39ºC, exposing the RBS and thereby promoting enhanced ribosome binding to facilitate improved translation. We therefore measured the binding affinities of the purified 30S ribosomal subunit for its cognate Shine-Dalgarno sequence (5’-AGGAGG-3’) in the 5’-UTR of ciaRH mRNA using microscale thermophoresis (MST). We observed enhanced binding of the ribosomes to the 5’-UTR of ciaRH at 39°C compared to 33°C ( ). The mean equilibrium dissociation constant, KD, of the 30S ribosomal subunit, for the 5’-UTR of ciaRH was found to be 195 nM at 33°C, which reduced to 2.36 nM at an elevated temperature of 39°C ( ). This showcases higher affinity of the 30S ribosomal subunit for the 5’-UTR of ciaRH at febrile temperature. Together, these results demonstrate the presence of an RNA-T like cis-regulatory element in the 5’-UTR of ciaRH, which is pivotal for thermal sensing.
 SPN is classified into multiple serotypes based on variations of capsular polysaccharides and in all serotypes the CiaRH system plays a critical role in their lifecycle [ ]. In-silico analysis indicates that irrespective of serotypes, the 5’-UTR of ciaRH remains perfectly conserved across a set of 336 SPN genomes, covering 39 serotypes ( ). Pneumococcus is an atypical member of the mitis group of Streptococci, otherwise composed of commensal bacteria. Evidence from phylogenetic studies suggests that Streptococcus mitis, the closest relative of SPN, evolved from a virulent ancestor resembling SPN and then lost virulence genes to adopt a more commensal lifestyle [ – ]. Despite such changes, S. mitis and several other streptococcus species, including species with opportunistic pathogenic potential, such as S. pseudopneumoniae [ ] and S. toyakuensis [ ] were found to harbor a conserved 5’-UTR ciaRH sequence ( and ). The S. mitis ciaR 5′-UTR was predicted to form a RNA-T like secondary structure, as predicted by mFold ( ). When investigated experimentally, CiaR levels in S. mitis showed ~15-fold increase at febrile temperature compared to nasal temperatures ( and ). These results illustrate presence of a functional temperature-regulated CiaRH TCS in S. mitis that could contribute to its occasional infectivity in immunocompromised patients [ ]. Alternatively, the CiaRH regulon in this species might facilitate non-virulent resilience to temperature change. CiaRH belongs to a conserved subclass of OmpR regulators, which are widely present among microbes [ ]. We used pBLAST to look for CiaR-like systems in Neisseria meningitidis (Nm), another pathogen occupying the same respiratory niche. We found >33% identity for CiaR with a response regulator MisR. Since MisRS is one of the crucial regulators in the virulent lifestyle of Nm [ , ], we investigated the role of thermoregulation of this locus. The secondary structure of the 5’-UTR of misR, predicted using mFold, shows an occluded Shine-Dalgarno (SD) region, suggesting presence of a potential thermosensor similar to that of ciaRH ( ). Indeed, abundance of GFP, driven by the 5’-UTR of misR, increased significantly (>2 fold) at 39ºC compared to 33ºC, providing evidence for the presence of a putative RNA-T ( and ). Importantly, invasive N. meningitidis displays PCho attached to its pili, whereas in commensal Neisseria spp. it is found on lipopolysaccharides (LPS) [ , ]. Although MisRS is reported to be involved in virulence and our findings suggest it to be a thermosensor, its role in regulation of PCho expression in Neisseria spp. remains to be explored.

## PCho surface abundance and pneumococcal invasion efficiency are tunable by altering the permissiveness of ciaRH mRNA to translation
To further understand the role of ciaRH in temperature-dependent incorporation of PCho into the cell wall, we engineered SPN with altered ciaR thermosensing ability. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed to modify the original 5’-UTR of ciaRH to generate translation-restrictive (5’-UTRClosedciaRH) and translation-permissive (5’-UTROpenciaRH) SPN strains ( and ). These engineered SPN strains, bearing more accessible (open) or restricted (closed) forms of the ciaRH 5’-UTR, relative to WT, displayed consistent CiaR levels at 33 or 39ºC ( and ), indicating loss of thermal sensing, unlike their WT counterpart. Additionally, the level of CiaR was significantly increased for 5’-UTROpenciaRH at 33°C compared to that of WT and was found to be similar to the elevated levels of CiaR in WT at 39°C, whilst CiaR levels for 5’-UTRcloseciaRH was found to be ~ 2–3 fold lower, even at 39°C, with respect to WT ( ). We also generated GFP-based reporter strains carrying 5’-UTROpenciaRH and 5’-UTRClosedciaRH sequences. In the engineered E. coli strains, both of the variants showed consistent GFP levels at 33°C vs 39°C. The expression of GFP was significantly higher in the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain compared to the 5’-UTRCloseciaRH strain in both temperatures ( ). Growth patterns, expression of major virulence factors (SpxB and Pneumolysin) and chain length of these engineered strains were unaffected, relative to WT ( – ). We also analyzed the binding efficiency of purified ribosome to these engineered in vitro synthesized 5’-UTRs by MST analysis. The dose-response curve indicated enhanced binding of ribosomes to 5’-UTROpenciaRH template over that of 5’-UTRClosedciaRH RNA template, at both the analyzed temperatures. No significant temperature-dependent change in ribosome binding was observed for either of the RNA templates, confirming loss of thermoregulation ( ). We also observed that the expression of licA transcript ( ) and surface as well as total PCho levels in SPN ( , and ) were ~1.5-2 fold increased in translation-permissive and ~2–3 fold reduced in translation-restrictive SPN strains, respectively, when compared with WT. Consequently, higher number of intracellular bacteria were detected for the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain, compared to the 5’-UTRClosedciaRH strain, when they were used to infect lung epithelial cells ( and ), with the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain showing ~3-fold higher invasiveness ( ). These data substantiate that superior adherence and invasion of SPN is fostered by increased PCho levels.
 

## PAFR expression upregulation is critical for improved pneumococcal invasion
Along with increased PCho levels, a concomitant rise in the host cellular expression of PAFR, the cognate ligand of PCho, is key for efficient pathogenic invasion. To determine the importance of PAFR in this process, we carried out an invasion assay by blocking PAFR with antibody as well as downregulating its expression using gene-specific siRNA ( ). In both cases, we observed a ~ 50% reduction in invasion efficiency of SPN compared to isotype control antibody or control siRNA-treated A549 cells ( and ). This suggests a dominant role of PAFR in facilitating pneumococcal invasion in epithelial cells over other receptors. Similarly, blocking PCho moieties from SPN lowered the invasion by ~74%, underlining the importance of the PCho-PAFR axis in pneumococcal invasion ( ). Of note, and in contrast to PCho, cell surface as well as total PAFR expression in host cells remained unaffected by increase in temperature ( , and ). However, treatment of lung epithelial cells with TNF-α, a key mediator of inflammatory cascades, led to a significant increase in PAFR expression ( , and ). Expectedly, TNF-α induced-PAFR expression upregulation facilitated ~3 and ~4-fold increase in WT SPN invasion at 33 and 39ºC, respectively ( – ) [ ]. We then checked the invasion ability of strains with altered ciaRH 5’-UTR in the experimental scenarios when PAFR levels were either upregulated or downregulated. Both 5’-UTRClosedciaRH and 5’-UTROpenciaRH strains exhibited equivalent invasion efficiencies with TNF-α treatment in comparison to mock at 33 or 39ºC ( and ). Comparable invasion efficiencies were also observed with the engineered strains upon siPAFR treatment at 33 or 39ºC ( and ). These results indicate that regardless of enhancement or reduction in PAFR levels, elevated invasion at febrile temperature is largely controlled by PCho regulation by CiaRH, suggestive of an influential role of the CiaRH thermosensing element on pneumococcal invasiveness at higher temperatures.
 

## Engineered pneumococcal strains exhibit different outcomes in in vivo infection models
To further determine the extent to which thermal regulation via the 5’-UTR of ciaRH contributes to virulence and infection outcomes, mice were infected with WT, 5’-UTRClosedciaRH or 5’-UTROpenciaRH at a dose that induces invasive pneumonia when the WT strain is used. Strikingly, whilst the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain displayed comparable virulence to WT in survival analysis, the 5’-UTRClosedciaRH strain failed to establish any symptomatic infection ( ). SPN numbers in lungs and blood were high in all mice that succumbed to infection, whilst those surviving until the experimental endpoint had cleared infection or retained only low CFU in organs ( and ). To determine whether the pronounced phenotype of the 5’-UTRClosedciaRH strain resulted from a failure to establish colonization of the lung, mice were infected and then tissues were collected at 24 h post-infection. Whilst those mice infected with WT or the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain displayed high lung bacterial burdens and evidence of developing bacteremia, those infected with the 5’-UTRClosedciaRH strain had already cleared infection by this time point ( and ). Histopathological assessment of lungs harvested at 24 h post-infection showed extensive inflammatory infiltrate and gross pathology in WT and 5’-UTROpenciaRH infection, with lungs from 5’-UTRClosedciaRH infected mice retaining normal lung architecture ( – ). To rationalize the reduced potential of 5’-UTRClosedciaRH strain in causing infections, we assessed its colonization potential in the lower temperature environment of nasopharynx in an asymptomatic upper airway colonization model. Colonization density in nasopharynx with the 5’-UTRClosedciaRH strain was comparable to that of WT and 5’-UTOpenciaRH at 7 days post-infection, but improved relative to other strains at 14 days post-infection ( ). Together, the findings from the disease and colonization models suggested that the 5’-UTRClosedciaRH strain retained an ability to establish a niche within the host upper airways, but that its infectivity was reduced in the higher temperature environment of lungs. It is unclear whether this reduced fitness in lungs is attributable to lower levels of PCho, decreased expression of virulence factors under CiaRH control or a combination of these factors. Spontaneous transition to invasive disease is rare in the nasopharyngeal colonization model used here, but microaspiration of low numbers of bacteria into the lower airways is observed. Despite similar nasopharyngeal bacterial burdens, we observed lower numbers of bacteria in trachea and lungs of 5’-UTRClosedciaRH infected mice, relative to those infected with the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain (S7A Fig). Correspondingly, inflammatory cytokines in both nasopharynx and lungs were lower in 5’-UTRClosedciaRH infected mice (S7B and S7C Fig), suggesting that inflammation is driven predominantly by bacteria in the lung or that the reduced expression of CiaRH-regulated factors in the 5’-UTRClosedciaRH strain limited inflammation in the upper airways.
 As the PCho-PAFR axis contributed to the increased cellular invasiveness mediated by CiaRH ( ), we sought to block this interaction as a means of limiting SPN disease progression. We therefore treated animals with phosphorylcholine intranasally, two hours prior to infection with a pneumonia-inducing dose of SPN. Pre-administration of PCho led to delayed kinetics of disease progression in WT D39-infected mice (median survival time 62 h), relative to untreated mice cohort (median survival time 40 h, p = 0.096) ( ). By contrast, PCho treatment did not influence infection outcomes for mice infected with the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain. However, although no difference in virulence between WT D39 and the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain had been observed in previous experiments ( ), PCho treated mice infected with WT D39 (median survival time 62 h) showed a survival advantage relative to PCho treated mice infected with the 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain (median survival time 32 h) (p = 0.044) ( ). Bacterial burden in lung and blood samples from 24 h post-infection with both WT D39 and 5’-UTROpenciaRH strain suggested that the delayed disease progression in PCho treated animals may have resulted from delayed seeding into blood ( and ). These effects likely result from a combination of PAFR blockade and the immunomodulatory effects of PCho on the host [ ].

## Discussion
Host-microbe crosstalk can trigger the commensal to pathogen switch by stimulating bacteria to escape their original niche and invade deeper tissues, leading to acute or chronic infections [ ]. The interplay between the host, the microbe, and their environment is crucial in determining whether commensal bacteria remain harmless or undergo the changes necessary to cause symptomatic infection. In fact, microbes couple the recognition of mammalian signals with regulation of virulence properties. Most virulence factors are not constitutively expressed, and their expression depends on the environmental conditions the pathogen encounters [ ]. Such regulation helps the pathogen utilize energy sources efficiently and subject to their availability.
A crucial component of these intricate control networks are RNA-based systems. Recent studies revealed a large repertoire of conserved and species-specific riboregulators, including numerous cis-and trans-acting non-coding RNAs and sensory RNA elements (RNA thermometers, riboswitches) that regulate colonization factors, toxins, host defense processes, and virulence-relevant physiological and metabolic responses. All of these are important cues for pathogens to sense and respond to fluctuating conditions during infection [ – ]. An important aspect of thermosensing elements is the complex nature of stem and loop, which is a function of sequence length. Although most known thermosensors have long 5′-UTRs (comprising on average 100 bp), studies show that delicate thermodynamic control of thermosensor could be regulated by much simpler structures, including in SPN [ , ]. Smaller stem-loop structure would result in faster melting, allowing quicker sensing and response to thermal changes. For opportunistic pathogens, such as SPN, fast response to environmental signals is key to successful establishment of infection. Moreover, this mechanism of post-transcriptional gene regulation imparts phenotypic plasticity to the bacterial population, allowing generation of subpopulations, geared variously towards niche maintenance or more pioneering behaviors. The latter phenotypes might prove beneficial for invasion of deeper tissues. A further unusual feature of the ciaRH RNAT stem loop structure is the base pairing of the Shine Dalgarno sequence with sequence downstream of it. The effect of this is to position the stalled ribosome on the opposite side of the hairpin loop to that of the coding sequence. The potential functional significance of this observation should be a focus of future studies. In SPN, capsular biosynthesis and Factor H binding protein (PspC) have been previously identified to be regulated by presence of RNA-T elements in the 5’-UTR of their respective genes [ ]. Coincidentally, PspC, is a choline binding protein that binds to PCho for surface display, where it prevents complement binding. We presume elevated levels of PspC at higher temperature would require more PCho residues for binding, supporting our findings which demonstrate higher PCho levels with increasing temperatures. Thus, elevated PCho levels can serve dual purposes for SPN, preventing complement binding and promoting interaction with PAFR, both of which augment invasive SPN disease ( ).
 Among several regulatory proteins, CiaRH is a cardinal stress-responding two-component system in SPN that controls multiple bacterial nodes, including several small non-coding RNAs, the serine protease HtrA, the proteins of the cell wall modifying Lic and Dlt operons, as well as metabolic genes and stress response factors. We and others have demonstrated that a pH-induced change in CiaR driven by SpxB (Pyruvate oxidase), rather than the cognate histidine kinase, CiaH, induces acid tolerance when SPN is confined in a late endosomal or lysosomal vacuole [ ]. CiaRH has also been linked to the induction of antibiotic resistance and tolerance [ ]. Of note, CiaRH-deficient cells lysed quickly under normal growth conditions as well as under those of choline deprivation [ ], supporting the role of CiaRH in choline uptake and regulation. The CiaRH system also serves as an exemplar for hierarchical decoding of signals by a single sensor. CiaRH responds to an array of environmental inputs that include pH, and the host sialic acid profile [ ], irrespective of or in addition to, presumably, as yet undefined ligands for the sensor kinase, CiaH itself. These signals could act at different levels to achieve modulation of CiaRH activity in addition to thermal control as shown in this study. A limitation of our study is that we have not determined whether phenotypic change, mediated through thermal regulation of ciaRH, also requires a second signal through a CiaH ligand. However, it is notable that thermally regulated and CiaRH-mediated changes in PCho levels were observed here even in in vitro assays conducted in bacterial growth media. Furthermore, as the CiaRH TCS regulates multiple downstream genes, the effect of thermal shock is likely pleiotropic, and observed effects on invasion and virulence likely result from the combined action of one or more downstream gene products and not exclusively PCho. Of note, overexpression of htrA in a ΔciaR background can compensate for the reduced infectivity at high temperatures [ ], suggesting CiaRH-mediated virulence is not attributable only to PCho and that multiple regulatory signals can impact the infection progress. Future study to tease apart a layer of regulation by other ligands or/and role of downstream genes in invasion is warranted to carefully delineate the network of CiaRH in SPN. In contrast to our findings, ciaRH was found to be downregulated by 2-fold at 40ºC in previous microarray-based study [ ]. Our studies at 39ºC, employing several specific and sensitive methods to directly quantify ciaR mRNA, did not detect any change in its expression at elevated temperature. Additionally, previous work demonstrating htrA upregulation at 40ºC in WT but not a ΔciaRH strain [ ] is consistent with either transcriptional or post-transcriptional regulation of ciaRH at high temperatures, or a combination of the two. These data also suggest that HtrA might be an important contributor to CiaRH-driven virulence at high temperatures. The heat responsive nature of ciaRH mRNA was found to be perfectly conserved across serotypes of SPN as well as in S. mitis, an evolutionary descendent of SPN. Though typically considered as part of the oral microbiota, S. mitis has been identified as an emerging cause of bacteremia and infective endocarditis (IE) in immunocompromised individuals [ ]. However, the CiaRH regulon of S. mitis has not been fully defined functionally and needs to be inspected in future. Broadly, the CiaRH TCS belongs to a class of OmpR regulators which are involved in sensing and managing surface stress in almost all microbes. Bacteroidetes, actinobacteria, clostridia, and bacilli contain variants of CiaH and CiaR proteins with varied regulation and functions [ ]. Thus, thermal sensing of CiaRH-like systems in other bacteria is plausible and requires further exploration. In this context, the MisRS system of N. meningitidis was proved crucial for maintaining virulence in an in vivo infection model [ ]. Though a detailed study is needed, our preliminary observation implies a stress-related role of the MisRS regulon upon heat exposure could be pivotal in such a scenario.
In conclusion, we show an elegant yet delicate mechanism of microbial virulence repertoire rewiring upon sensing temperature oscillation by a two-component system, that behaves as a thermosensor. The effect of elevated temperature promotes surface decoration by PCho, facilitating improved cellular invasion and ultimately resulting in virulence phenotypes.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
Animal experiments were performed at the University of Dundee and University of Liverpool, with prior approval of the UK Home Office and the relevant Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Boards. Experiments were performed under project license PP2072053. The principles of the Declaration of Helsinki were observed throughout. Mice were housed in individually ventilated cages, with access to food and water ad libitum. Environmental enrichment was provided in all cages and mice were acclimatized to the animal unit for at least 10 days before use. Mice were randomly allocated to cages on arrival in the animal unit by staff with no role in study design. For experiments reported in this manuscript, individual mice were considered as the experimental unit. Sample sizes, controls and statistical analyses are detailed in the figures and accompanying legends.

## Bacterial strains and growth conditions
Streptococcus pneumoniae (SPN) strain D39 (serotype 2, encapsulated) was kindly provided by Prof. E. Tuomanen (St. Jude Children’s Hospital, USA). The wild type (WT) and mutant strains were grown in C + Y synthetic media at 37⁰C in 5% CO2. Glycerol stocks were prepared by mixing 900 µl of mid-exponentially grown SPN culture (OD600nm ~ 0.4) with 600 µl of 80% sterile glycerol (32% final glycerol concentration) and stored in -80⁰C deep freezer. These glycerol stocks were used as starting inoculum for all experiments. The following antibiotics were used to grow SPN cultures when required: Spectinomycin (100 µg/ml) and Chloramphenicol (4.5 µg/ml). Escherichia coli (E. coli) DH5α was routinely grown in Luria Broth (LB) at 37⁰C with constant agitation (150–200 rpm). The following antibiotics were used for E. coli cultures when required: Ampicillin (100 µg/ml), Spectinomycin (100 µg/ml), Chloramphenicol (20 µg/mL), and Kanamycin (50 µg/ml). All bacterial strains used in the study are listed in .

## Cell culture
Human lung alveolar carcinoma (Type II pneumocyte) cell line A549 (ATCC No. CCL-185) were routinely cultured in DMEM (HiMedia, AT186) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (GIBCO, 38220090) at 37°C and 5% CO2.

## Mouse models of nasopharyngeal carriage and pneumonia
CD1 female mice (4–6 weeks old, Charles River, UK) were intranasally infected under light anaesthesia (oxygen and isoflurane) with 1x105 colony forming units (CFU) in 10 μl PBS (nasopharyngeal colonisation model) or 2 × 10⁶ CFU in 50 μl PBS (pneumonia model). Disease severity was regularly monitored using a scoring system evaluating appearance, behaviour, breathing, and weight loss. Mice were euthanized via CO₂ and cervical dislocation either at pre-determined time points or when they reached severity endpoints. Blood was collected by cardiac puncture under terminal anaesthesia, and nasopharynx, trachea and lungs were harvested in PBS for CFU determination or 4% paraformaldehyde for histology. In some experiments, bacteria were isolated from nasopharynx by nasal wash and from lungs by post-mortem bronchoalveolar lavage using 100 μl and 1 ml PBS, respectively, containing 100 μg/ml gentamicin (Sigma). In these experiments, bacteria were subsequently stained with TEPC-15 (Sigma M1421), at a 1:100 dilution in 1% bovine serum albumin, to label PCho, for 1 h 30 min, under rotation. Bacteria were then washed once in PBS before addition of anti-mouse IgG, Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen-A21202), at a 1 in 200 dilution in 1% BSA) for 30 minutes, under rotation. Nasopharynx sample staining was performed in 50 μl volumes, lung samples in 1 ml. For experiments aiming to block PAFR, mice were administered 2 mg phosphorylcholine oil (Cambridge Bioscience, UK), dropwise, under light anaesthesia, allowing each drop to be inhaled before adding the next. For determination of CFU in blood and organs, ten-fold serially diluted tissue samples were plated onto blood agar plates (Oxoid) containing 5% defibrinated horse blood and 40 μg/ml gentamicin (Sigma). Plates were incubated overnight at 37⁰C in an anaerobic jar, and bacterial colonies counted the next day.

## Histology and imaging
Intact lung samples were rinsed in ice-cold PBS to remove residual blood and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, with transfer to 70% ethanol after 24 h. The tissues were then embedded in paraffin, sectioned with a microtome into 5 µm slices, and stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Tissue processing and imaging were performed by the University of Dundee Imaging Facility, with images captured using Axioscan 7 (Zeiss).

## Cytokine quantification in tissue homogenates
Levels of mouse CXCL1 (KC) and TNF-α were determined in tissue homogenates from day three post-infection, in the nasopharyngeal carriage model. Undiluted nasopharynx samples and a 1:5 dilution of lung samples were used with the ELISA MAX Deluxe mouse CXCL1 and mouse TNF-α kits (Biolegend, UK), according to manufacturer’s instructions.

## Identifying conserved 5′ untranslated regions proximal to ciaR orthologues across bacterial genomes
Bacterial species containing a ciaR gene were identified by running a nucleotide BLAST using the S. pneumoniae D39 ciaR nucleotide sequence against all bacterial genomes. For each hit, 300 bases upstream of the gene were extracted, and a local BLAST database was constructed from these sequences. The D39 5′ untranslated region (UTR) sequence, “AATAAGGAGGAGTTTCTC,” was then used as the query in a nucleotide BLAST against this upstream database to identify strains containing a similar UTR. The resulting matches were divided into two groups: S. pneumoniae genomes and other bacterial genomes. For the S. pneumoniae genomes, serotypes were assigned using PneumoKITy [ ] (v1.0.1). For the other bacterial species, the most common UTR variant in each species was identified and selected as the representative sequence. This yielded one consensus UTR per species, which, together with the pneumococcal UTR, was aligned using Clustal Omega [ ] (v2.3.0). The alignment was visualised and adjusted in Jalview [ ] (v2.11.5.0). All custom bioinformatics scripts are available at: https://github.com/thomasebarton/Thermosensor-bioinformatics.

## GFP based reporter strains in E. coli
All recombinant plasmids generated and primers used in the study are mentioned in and , respectively. In order to assess the role of promoter, a gfp ORF (open reading frame) without start codon was amplified from another gfp containing plasmid and cloned within BamHI and XhoI restriction sites in pBluescript SK+ (pBSK+) to generate pAB309. Promoter regions comprising of 41 bp and 221 bp upstream of ciaRH operon and enolase (eno) gene, respectively, were amplified from genomic DNA of D39 were cloned in pAB309 to generate pAB414 and pAB372, respectively, to drive the transcription and translation of gfp. SacI and BamHI sites were used to clone PciaR, while XbaI and BamHI were used for Penolase. Additionally, the 5’-UTROpenciaRH and 5’-UTRClosedciaRH was amplified from pAB377 (5’-UTRclose) and pAB376 (5’-UTRopen) (using primer set: pciaRopen-SacI-FP, pciaRopen-ATG-BamHI-RP, pciaRclosed-SacI-FP, and pciaRclosed-ATG-BamHI-RP) and were cloned in pAB309 using SacI and BamHI sites, to generate pAB1202 (5’-UTROpenciaRH -GFP) and pAB 1203 (5’-UTRCloseciaRH-GFP).

## Heterologous expression of CiaR in E. coli
For expression of CiaR in E. coli, ciaR gene along with its promoter (150 bp upstream of the start codon) was amplified from genomic DNA of D39 and cloned using XhoI and EcoRI restriction enzymes in pBSK+ to construct pAB382.

## Construction of D39ΔciaRH
For deletion or insertion of modified genetic element/gene into native locus, allelic exchange by homologous recombination was employed. Regions (500 bp) flanking ciaRH operon and an chloramphenicol resistance cassette (Cmr) amidst these regions were assembled in a pBSK+ vector (pIB168) [ ] and used for pneumococcal transformation. A positive clone was confirmed by PCR using ciaRH-Flnk-F and ciaRH-Flnk-R primer sets and western blot (using CiaR antiserum, gift from R. Bruckner, University of Kaiserslautern, Germany).

## Construction of D39 5′-UTRClosed/OpenciaRH strain
For introducing mutations in 5’-UTR of ciaRH we used a previously made plasmid pAB368 [ ] which possess both ciaR and ciaH ORF sequence flanked by upstream and downstream regions with a Spectinomycin resistance cassette (Spr) inserted in between. Site directed mutagenesis was employed to create nucleotide modifications in pAB368 (using primer set: closed-F, closed-R and open-F, open-R) to generate pAB377 (5’-UTRclose) and pAB376 (5’-UTRopen). Introduced mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing and these plasmids were used for SPN transformation followed by selection of Spr colonies.

## RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR
Total RNA from SPN culture was isolated using TRIzol reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, 15596026) using RNA isolation kit (Qiagen,70104) as per manufacturer’s protocol. For RNA isolation, bacterial culture was homogenized in a bead beater in 1 ml TRIzol containing 0.1 mm glass beads. RNA was treated for 15 min with DNaseI (ThermoFisher Scientific,18047019) to remove any contaminating DNA and processed for reverse transcription. Approximately 5 μg of RNA was reverse transcribed using SuperScript First-Strand Synthesis System (ThermoFisher Scientific,18091050). The cDNA was further used for quantitative-PCR (q-PCR) for desired genes and 16S rRNA transcript abundance using iTaq Universal SYBR Green supermix (Biorad, 1725121). A relative change in the expression of gene was analyzed by 2-ΔΔCt method.

## Western blotting
Overnight grown E. coli cultures or mid-log phase grown SPN were re-suspended in lysis buffer (PBS containing 0.5 mM EDTA and 1 mM PMSF) and lysed by sonication. For lysing eukaryotic cells (A549s), monolayers of cells were washed several times with PBS and lysed in ice-cold RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.89, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% Sodium deoyxycholate, 1% SDS, 10 mM NaF and 5 mM EDTA. The cell suspension was incubated at 4⁰C overnight and centrifuged to collect cell lysates. Crude extracts (both bacterial and eukaryotic cell lysates) were collected following centrifugation (15000 rpm, 30 min, 4˚C) and the total protein concentration was quantified using Bradford’s reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, 23236). Approximately, 20 µg of total protein was separated on 12% SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to activated PVDF membrane (Biorad, 1620177) for 2 h in cold. Following transfer, the membrane was blocked in 5% skimmed milk made in TBST (Tris Buffer Saline, 0.1% Tween-20) for 2 h. Membrane was then probed with appropriate primary antibody solution followed by respective secondary antibody solution for 1 h. The immunoblot was developed using ECL solution (Biorad, 1705061).

## Antibodies and reagents
Following antibodies were used in the study: Anti-Enolase serum, Anti-CiaR serum, were gifts from Prof. S. Hammerschmidt, University of Greifswald, Germany; J.N.Weiser, NYU Langone Health, USA; respectively. Antibodies specific for GFP (Invitrogen, A11122), His6-tag (Invitrogen, MA1–21315), Pneumolysin (Santacruz, sc-80500), GAPDH (Millipore MAB374), TEPC-15 (Sigma M1421), anti-PAFR (Cayman chemical, 160602) were procured. The following secondary antibodies were used: HRP tagged anti-rabbit (Biolegend 406401), HRP tagged anti-mouse (Biolegend 405306), Biotin conjugated anti-mouse IgaA (Life Tech. M31115), Anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen A21202), Anti-goat Alexa Fluor 633 (Invitrogen A21082). Recombinant Human TNF-α Protein (R&D systems 210-TA-020/CF) was used for induction of PAFR expression in A549 cells.

## In vitro transcription/translation
To in vitro transcribe and translate reporter GFP protein, S30 cell free extract system (Promega, L1030) was used as per manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, ~ 4 µg of plasmid DNA (pAB414 containing PciaR-gfp or pAB372 harboring Penolase-gfp) was added in the mixture and incubated at 33⁰C and 39⁰C for 2 h. The reaction was then stopped by placing it in ice for 5 min. Additionally, to generate mRNA transcripts using in vitro transcription, DNA templates for PciaR-gfp and Penolase-gfp were amplified using PCR from pAB414 and pAB372. RNA was produced from 1 μg of DNA utilizing T3 RNA polymerase (Promega, 2500 U, P4024) following the manufacturer’s guidelines. The RNA was then treated with Turbo DNase (Invitrogen, AM2238) to eliminate any leftover DNA template. Equal amounts of RNA (~10 μg) were subsequently translated using E. coli S30 Extract System (Promega, L1030), at different temperatures as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Total protein was precipitated by adding chilled acetone and centrifuged for 10 min at 4⁰C. Protein samples were prepared in 1X Laemmli buffer and equal amount was electrophoresed by SDS-PAGE. GFP expression was verified by immunoblotting with anti-GFP antibody.

## Circular dichroism (CD) melting
CD melting studies were performed using the JASCO J-1500 CD spectrophotometer consisting of temperature control module. The spectra were obtained using 1 mm path length quartz cuvette at 260 nm from 5 to 95 °C temperature range, with a heating rate of 1 °C/min. 10 µM of CiaRH wild type (WT) RNA dissolved in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (33 mM KH2PO4, 17 mM K2HPO4), pH 6.5 was annealed by heating to 95°C for 5 min followed by gradual cooling to room temperature over 4–5 h. The sample was then kept at 4°C. The spectra were recorded and melting temperature (Tm) was evaluated by analyzing the CD spectra in Origin software (version 9.65) using the Boltzmann function.

## Flow cytometry
For flow cytometry, mid-exponentially grown SPN cultures (OD600nm ~ 0.4) were washed twice with PBS and 108 bacteria were incubated with TEPC-15 antibody (anti-PCho) (1:100) for 60 min at room temperature (RT). Following two washes with PBS, bacteria were incubated with goat anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 488 tagged secondary antibody (1:100) for 60 min at RT. Finally, bacterial cells were washed thrice with PBS and checked by flow cytometry using a BD-FACS Aria-Fusion flow cytometer utilizing forward and side scatter parameters. Results were analyzed using FlowJo software and data was represented as percent of gated bacterial population positive for fluorescence marker compared to control unstained cells.

## Bacterial invasion assay
SPN strains grown till mid log phase (OD600nm 0.4) in C + Y media at specified temperature were pelleted and re-suspended in 3 mL assay medium for infection of A549 monolayers. 500 µl of bacterial suspension was used for infection yielding a MOI in the range of 50–100. Following 1 h of infection, the monolayers were washed with PBS and incubated with assay medium containing penicillin (10 µg/ml) and gentamicin (400 µg/ml) for 2 h to kill extracellular SPN. Cells were then washed with PBS and lysed with 0.025% Triton X-100. Lysates were spread plated on Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) agar plates to enumerate viable SPN. Percent invasion was calculated as (CFU in the lysate/ CFU used for infection) X 100. Fold change in invasion efficiency was represented as the ratio of invasion of the test relative to that of control.
In certain set of experiments, cultured bacteria were treated with TEPC-15 antibody (anti-PCho) (1:100) for 2 h prior to infection or A549 cells were incubated with anti-PAFR antibody (Cayman chemical, 160602) (1:100) for 2 h or TNFα (30 ng/ml) for 8 h before infection with SPN.

## siRNA directed gene knockdown
For RNAi mediated knock-down of PAFR (siPAFR, Dharmacon ON-TARGET SMARTpool L-005709-00-0005-20 pmol), A549 cells grown till ~70% confluency were transiently transfected with siPAFR or scramble (siControl) using Lipofectamine 3000 as per manufacturer’s instructions. 24 or 36 h post transfection, cells were processed for western blotting or bacterial invasion assays.

## Pneumococcal chain length analysis
SPN D39 WT and mutant strains were grown in C + Y media until an OD600nm of 0.4. Cells were washed with PBS and fixed by the addition of 4% PFA for 15 min. Following washing and resuspension in PBS, a smear was made on glass slides. The coverslip was mounted with the addition of VectaShield with DAPI. The samples were imaged using a Nikon Eclipse Ti epifluorescence microscope and images were analyzed using ImageJ software; 60- to 100-pixel area was given as the measurement for a single coccus.

## Microscale thermophoresis (MST) to determine ribosome binding to 5’-UTR of ciaRH
For assessing the affinity of ribosomes to 5’-UTR of ciaRH, microscale thermophoresis was employed. First, RNA of 5’-UTR of ciaRH was synthesized using MEGAscript in vitro RNA synthesis kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, AM1334) as per manufacture’s protocol. Briefly, 1 µg of DNA template (bearing T7 promoter, 5’-UTR of ciaRH including the RBS till start codon ATG) was utilized to synthesize 22 bp RNA stretch using the kit. The reaction was mixed and incubated for 16 h at 37°C. Next, the reaction was treated 1 µl TURBO DNase and incubated for 15 min at 37°C. Finally, RNA was purified using sodium acetate precipitation and concentration was checked by Nano spectrophotometer.
For the interactions, purified ribosomal protein complex was mixed with 50 nM of Monolith NT His-tag labelling Kit Red Tris-NTA (L008; Nanotemper Technologies, Germany) for 30 min. Labeled 30S ribosomal unit was then mixed with increasing concentrations of 5’UTR of ciaRH RNA, in HEPES-based buffer (200 mM HEPES, 1 M KCl, 100 mM MgCl2, 5% Glycerol and 1 mM ATP) and kept at 33°C or 39°C for 15 min. The sample was then loaded into standard treated capillaries and assessed by Monolith NT.115 (NanoTemper Technologies, Germany). The data was analyzed using MO Control software (NanoTemper Technologies Germany) to determine the affinity of the interaction.

## Immunofluorescence
For immunofluorescence assay, A549 cells grown on glass cover slips were pre-treated with TNFα (as described above) and infected with different strains of SPN at MOI ~ 25 for 1 h followed by antibiotic treatment for 2 h. Post infection, cells were washed with DMEM, and fixed with ice-chilled Methanol at -20°C for 10 min. Further, the coverslips were blocked with 3% BSA in PBS for 2 h at RT. Cells were then treated with anti-microtubule (for host cell) and anti-enolase (for SPN) primary antibody in 1% BSA in PBS for overnight at 4ºC, washed with PBS and incubated with suitable secondary antibodies in 1% BSA in PBS for 1 h at RT. Finally, coverslips were washed with PBS and mounted on glass slides along with VectaShield without DAPI (Vector Laboratories) for visualization using a Laser Scanning Confocal microscope (LSM 780, Carl Zeiss) under 63X oil objectives. The images were acquired after optical sectioning and then processed using Zen lite software (Version 5.0.).

## Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism version 9 was used for statistical analysis. Statistical tests undertaken for individual experiments are mentioned in the respective figure legends. p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. Data are presented as mean ± standard error (SEM) of at least 3 replicates unless otherwise stated.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Febrile temperature exposure doesn’t affect the chain length in SPN.
A. Representative Immunofluorescence image displaying SPN stained with Hoechst dye to quantify chain number. The temperature that they were exposed to before imaging is indicated in the left right corner. Scale bar, 5 μm. B. Bar graph displaying quantification bacterial chain number in WT SPN exposed to 33°C and 39°C. ImageJ (Fiji) software was used to quantify chain numbers and their frequency. C. qRT-PCR analysis of htrA and licA transcript levels in WT SPN exposed to different temperatures. 1 µg of total RNA isolated from SPN grown at different temperatures was reverse transcribed to synthesize cDNA and equal amount of cDNA from each test sample was used for analyzing Ct values using 2–∆∆Ct method. Transcript levels of each gene were normalized to 16S rRNA and expressed as fold change compared to 33°C. D. Immunoblot demonstrating CiaR levels in SPN exposed to 33°C, 37°C and 39°C. Enolase act as a loading control. E. Bar graph depicting fold change in CiaR levels at other temperatures compared to 33°C. CiaR levels at each temperature is normalized to corresponding Enolase levels. F. Immunoblot showcasing levels of GFP expressed under PciaR or Penolase promoters by after in vitro transcription, followed by in vitro translation at 33°C and 39°C. gfp mRNA was prepared first using DNA templates PciaR-gfp and Penolase-gfp and T3 RNA polymerase. Equal amounts of RNAs (~10 μg) were further translated using E. coli S30 Extract System at different temperatures. Statistical significance was assessed by two-tailed unpaired student’s t-test (B and C) or one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s test (E). ns, non-significant; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.005. Data are mean ± SEM of 3 independent biological replicates.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## CiaRH mutant strain of SPN demonstrates reduced PCho uptake and invasion.
A. Growth curve comparing growths of WT and ΔciaRH SPN strain at 33°C and 39°C. B. Bar graph depicting abundance of licA transcript in WT and ΔciaRH SPN strains using qRT-PCR analysis. 1 g of total RNA was reverse transcribed to synthesize cDNA and equal amount of cDNA from each test sample was used for analyzing Ct values using 2–∆∆Ct method. 16S rRNA transcript level was used to normalize the Ct values of each test transcripts and represented as fold change with respect to 33°C. C. Immunoblot demonstrating PCho levels in WT and ΔciaRH SPN. Enolase was used as a loading control. D. Densitometric quantification of ‘C’. E. Fold change in invasion efficiency of WT and ΔciaRH SPN in A549 cells at 37°C. Fold change was calculated as ratio of intracellular bacterial CFU of the ΔciaRH to that of WT SPN. F. Bar graph demonstrating the chain number of WT and ΔciaRH strain. ImageJ (Fiji) software was used to quantify chain numbers and their frequency. Statistical significance was assessed by two-tailed unpaired student’s t-test (D, E and F). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.005. Data are mean ± SEM of 3 independent biological replicates.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Conserved thermosensing unit in 5’-UTR of ciaRH shows hairpin structure.
A. Sequence alignment of 5’-UTR ciaRH RNA-T like sequences in Streptococcus species and other bacteria. B. mFold predicted secondary structure of 5’-UTR of ciaRH of S. mitis marked with predicted Transcription Start Site (highlighted in yellow), Ribosome Binding Site (marked in orange) and Start codon (marked in green). C. Immunoblot demonstrating CiaR levels in S. mitis at 33°C and 39°C. Enolase served as loading control. D. Densitometric quantification of CiaR in ‘C’. E. mFold predicted secondary structure of 5’-UTR of misRS in Neisseria meningitidis marked with predicted Transcription Start Site (highlighted in yellow), Ribosome Binding Site (marked in orange) and Start codon (marked in green). F. Immunoblot of GFP expressed under the promoter of misRS operon. 20 g protein was loaded for each sample and β-lactamase served as loading control. G. Graph representing densitometric quantification of ‘F’. Statistical significance was assessed by two-tailed unpaired student’s t-test (D and G). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.005. Data are mean ± SD of 2 independent biological replicates.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## Characterization of mutated 5’-UTR ciaRH SPN strains.
A. Immunoblot showcasing levels of GFP expressed at different temperatures from reporter strains carrying gfp gene under 5’-UTROpenciaRH and 5’-UTRClosedciaRH stretches. Ponceau S stained blot showcases equal protein loading. B. Plot displaying growth curve of WT and 5′-UTRClosed/Open
ciaRH SPN strains at 37°C. C. Immunoblot depicting expression of SpxB and Pneumolysin in 5′-UTRClosed/Open
ciaRH strains compared to WT SPN. 20 g of total protein was loaded in each sample and enolase was used as loading control. D. Bar graph quantifying chain length and their frequency in mutated 5′-UTR ciaRH strains. Fiji software was used for marking and quantifying the pneumococcal cells and chains. E. qRT-PCR analysis of licA transcript level in 5′-UTRClosed/Open
ciaRH and WT SPN strains. 1 g of total bacterial RNA was used for reverse transcribed to cDNA and equal amount of cDNA from each test sample was used for analyzing Ct values. 16S rRNA transcript level was used to normalize the Ct values of each test transcripts using 2–∆∆Ct method. F. Representative immunoblot displaying PCho levels in WT and 5’-UTR ciaRH mutated strains of SPN. Enolase served as loading control. Statistical significance was assessed by two-tailed unpaired student’s t-test (C) and one-way ANOVA (Dunnett’s test) (D). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.005. Data are mean ± SEM of 3 independent biological replicates.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## Platelet Activating factor Receptor (PAFR) is crucial for pneumococcal uptake.
A. Immunoblot displaying PAFR levels in siControl and siPAFR treated A549 cells. Fold change in normalized PAFR levels with respect of GAPDH levels is mentioned below the blot. B-C. Graph depicting fold change in invasion efficiency of WT SPN in A549 cells treated with either siPAFR (20 pmol) for 24h (B); or blocked with anti-PAFR antibody (1:1000) for 2h prior to infection (C). Scrambled and isotype control antibody served as controls, respectively. Fold change was calculated as ratio of intracellular bacterial CFU of the test to that of control. E-F. Immunoblot of PAFR levels in A549 cells exposed to 33°C and 39°C (D) or treated with 30 ng/ml TNFα (E). Fold change in levels of PAFR in comparison to GAPDH in each test sample is denoted below the blot. G. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrating PAFR levels in A549 cells exposed to 33°C and 39°C for 6 h or following treatment with 30 ng/ml TNFα for 12 h. n ≥ 10000 cells were analyzed in 3 independent expts. and histogram reflects results obtained of one single expt. H. Graph depicting fold change in MFI (Mean Fluorescence Intensity) in PAFR signal in A549 cells exposed to 33, 37 and 39°C (H) or treated with TNFα (I) as acquired by flow cytometry. Fold change was calculated with respect to A549 cells grown at 37°C (unexposed) in H or mock treated in I. Statistical significance was assessed by two-tailed unpaired student’s t-test (B, C, D and I) and one-way ANOVA (Dunnett’s test) (H). no non-significant; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.005. Data are mean ± SD of 3 independent biological replicates.
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## Pre-treatment of mice with phosphorylcholine influences disease progression in pneumococcal pneumonia.
A. Mice were administered 2 mg PCho intranasally and two hours later were infected intranasally with 2x106 CFU and monitored for signs of disease over 96 h. Mice were culled when they reached pre-determined disease severity endpoints. n = 10, *p < 0.05 in Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. B-C. Bacterial burden in lungs (B) and blood (C) at 24 h post-infection. Statistical significance was achieved by Mann-Whitney test and mentioned in each graph.
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## A closed ciaRH 5′ untranslated region limits pneumococcal survival in the lower airways and attenuates inflammation.
A. Mice were infected intranasally with 1x105 colony forming units (CFU) and tissues were collected at three days post-infection. CFU in tissues was quantified by serial dilution onto gentamicin blood agar. B-C. CXCL1/KC (B) and TNF-α (C) were quantified in tissue homogenates by ELISA. ns = not significant, * = P < 0.05 and ** = P < 0.01 in two-way ANOVA analysis with Sidak’s multiple comparison testing.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## List of strains.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## List of plasmids.
(DOCX)
S3 Table

## List of primers.
(DOCX)
S1 Dataset

## BLAST analysis of upstream sequences of ciaR homologues in different bacterial species.
(XLSX)

We acknowledge the “Bio-safety Level 2 Facility”, “Confocal Microscopy Facility” and “FACS Facility (SR/FST/LSI-572/2013)” at IIT Bombay.
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013545.r001Decision Letter 0
OrihuelaCarlosAcademic Editor© 2025 Carlos Orihuela2025Carlos Orihuelahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
30 Jun 2025

Commensal to pathogen switch in Streptococcus pneumoniae is governed by a thermosensing master regulator
PLOS Pathogens
Dear Dr. Banerjee,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Pathogens. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Pathogens's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days Aug 29 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plospathogens@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/ppathogens/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Carlos J. Orihuela, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Wessels
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

Additional Editor Comments:

There are valid experiments recommended by the reviewers, as well as suggested alterations to the text. Both would improve the rigor of the paper and help to justify the authors conclusions. These should be completed.

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Leena Badgujar. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) We ask that a manuscript source file is provided at Revision. Please upload your manuscript file as a .doc, .docx, .rtf or .tex. If you are providing a .tex file, please upload it under the item type u2018LaTeX Source Fileu2019 and leave your .pdf version as the item type u2018Manuscriptu2019.
3) Please upload all main figures as separate Figure files in .tif or .eps format. For more information about how to convert and format your figure files please see our guidelines: 

https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/figures

4) We have noticed that you have uploaded Supporting Information files, but you have not included a list of legends. Please add a full list of legends for your Supporting Information files after the references list.
5) Please amend your detailed Financial Disclosure statement. This is published with the article. It must therefore be completed in full sentences and contain the exact wording you wish to be published. Please ensure that the funders and grant numbers match between the Financial Disclosure field and the Funding Information tab in your submission form. Note that the funders must be provided in the same order in both places as well.
- State the initials, alongside each funding source, of each author to receive each grant. For example: "This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (####### to AM; ###### to CJ) and the National Science Foundation (###### to AM)."
- State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.".
If you did not receive any funding for this study, please simply state: u201cThe authors received no specific funding for this work.u201d

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: Apte and colleagues present a compelling story on a thermosensory RNA element located upstream of the ciaR gene, which encodes a master regulator in Streptococcus pneumoniae. Their findings demonstrate that elevated temperatures lead to increased CiaR levels. This induces the production of the surface adhesin phosphorylcholine (Pcho), which promotes host invasion and enhances virulence. In an extension of previous research on temperature-dependent capsule biosynthesis, this work uncovers another link between temperature change and bacterial surface modification.
The manuscript contains a substantial body of rigorously conducted work, well within the scope of PLoS Pathogens. It is clearly written and well-illustrated. I have only a few minor comments and questions.
Reviewer #2: Apte and colleagues investigate the functional significance of an RNA thermosensing (RNAT) element within the 5’ untranslated region (UTR) of the ciaR mRNA in Streptococcus pneumoniae (SPN). CiaR, a two-component system (TCS) response regulator (RR), is highly conserved in the streptococcus genus. Previous studies have established that CiaR controls phosphorylcholine (PCho) biogenesis and surface deposition in SPN via positive regulation of the lic operon. PCho is an important surface determinant of SPN adhesion and invasion: PCho interacts with host Platelet Activating Factor Receptor (PAFR), whose surface expression is highly on the respiratory epithelium and upregulated under inflammatory conditions. It follows that CiaR-dependent control of surface PCho may control SPN invasiveness. Here, the authors test the hypothesis that temperature-dependent control of ciaR mRNA translation dictates surface PCho levels which, in turn, controls the switch from colonization to invasive disease.
The authors have generated a good set of tools to probe their hypothesis. The manuscript and its figures are generally clear, but sometimes results are overstated.
The novelty of this work lies in the identification of the RNAT element in the 5’UTR of the ciaR mRNA . Whilst the findings presented convince that the 5’UTR of the ciaR mRNA is an RNAT element, the claim that it governs the commensal to pathogen switch is not substantiated by their in vivo infection data. Additionally, the discussion section reads more like a second introduction to the manuscript: there is a lack of interpretation of their results; explanation of mechanism, or any acknowledgement of limitations of the work. Some important experiments and a revision of the discussion section could be included to substantially strengthen the manuscript.
Reviewer #3: This manuscript describes the identification of an RNA termosensor affecting a characterized two component system (TCS) in the pneumococcus. Through a series of biophysical, cellular and in vivo experiments, the authors examine the functional consequences of the thermosensor and its effects on surface PCho and host:pathogen interactions.
The manuscript is well written, logically presented, and data support the conclusions.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: none
Reviewer #2: 1. The claim that the RNAT element governs the commensal to pathogen switch hangs on the data presented in Figure 6I. The authors reason that the increased abundance of the 5’UTRClosedciaRH strain compared to the WT and 5’UTROpenciaRH is due to the inability of the 5’UTRClosedciaRH strain to transition from commensal to virulent lifestyle. It follows that the authors are implying that the WT and 5’UTROpenciaRH strains are indeed transitioning from the nasopharynx, but they do not demonstrate that this is occurring. Could the authors perform an infection experiment that determines the fate of the three strains – i.e to show that they are, indeed, transitioning to invasive disease.
2. The authors have looked for the RNAT element in the 5’UTR of ciaR mRNA in 6 SPN serotypes, and from this, have concluded that “The heat responsive nature of CiaRH was found to be perfectly conserved across serotypes as well as in S. mitis, an evolutionary descendent of SPN” – Lines 631-2. To date, 107 serotypes have been identified and thousands of SPN genome sequences are available for analysis. From the data presented, it is clear that translation of ciaR mRNA is regulated by temperature in the serotype 2 strain D39. Can the authors do more extensive analysis of the conservation of the RNAT element, which would help the impact of the paper (i.e broaden its scope)? There is great diversity in the propensity for certain serotypes to colonize or cause invasive disease, and if the authors wish to claim that thermal regulation of ciaR translation is one of the most important factors that dictates this switch, better defining its conservation across serotypes would greatly reinforce this idea. Furthermore, CiaR is highly conserved in streptococcal species, again, for which sequences are in abundance. Conservation beyond S. mitis should be explored and discussed.
3. As it stands, the discussion section reads like an expansion of the introduction and lacks interpretation of the authors results, explanation of mechanism, or acknowledgement of limitations of the work. Every paper has flaws. One example is the 5’UTRClosedciaRH strain. Although the approach of mutating the RNAT is an elegant one, the resulting 5’UTRClosedciaRH strain has roughly half the amount of protein than WT. Although this could be considered a small change, transcription factors (TF) are often present at low copy numbers per cell compared to other proteins; therefore, small changes in the amount of a TF can have far reaching consequences, particularly if the regulon is large. This is nicely illustrated in this work, where, for example, their 5’UTR mutants, which have ~1.4-fold/0.5 fold change in CiaR protein (open/closed, respectively), display statistically significant differences in surface PCho levels (Fig 3C/D/F/G). CiaR regulates a number of genes in SPN and the effect of the authors RNAT mutations are likely pleiotropic. It has been shown previously that a ciaR deletion mutant is attenuated in infection models, which can be relieved by overexpression of htrA. Have the authors considered how the likely reduced htrA expression in their 5’UTRClosedciaRH strain may confound interpretation of their results in Figure 6? Another example is the finding that ciaR transcripts do not change with temperature. This conflicts with previous studies looking at the effect of temperature on the transcriptome of SPN (see below). This is another example of an important point that should be discussed.
Reviewer #3: The CiaR RNAT appears to be composed by base pairing of four pairs of nucleotides, which is a rather minimal structure compared with the S mitis and Nm RNATs presented here and with other thermosensors. Of note, the S mitis RNA thermosensor includes more 5' sequence, while the Spn ciaR 5' UTR is short in comparison. I cannot find data on mapping of the 5' UTR of the ciaR mRNA in the literature or the paper; if this is not available, the authors should confirm the TSS experimentally. This will provide more confidence that their predicted structure represents what happens in vivo.
The open and closed ciaR RNATs have been incompletely characterized. Analysis using a GFP reporter or in vitro translation should be performed.
Findings with in vitro transcription/translation do not distinguish between the effects of these processes. The authors can simply decoupleth them by generating mRNA in vitro, then adding fixed amount of transcript to transcription/translation assays to discriminate between effects due to transcription, or as proposed, translation initiation.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: 1. Pcho levels are elevated in the lungs of infected mice (Fig. 1A), presumably reflecting a physiological body temperature of 37°C. However, most of the experiments in the manuscript were conducted at 33 and 39°C. This raises the question of whether a normal mammalian body temperature (37°C) is sufficient to trigger the CiaR-mediated response, or if an elevated, febrile temperature is necessary. A melting temperature of 34°C suggests that 37°C should elicit a substantial response.
2. Fig. 2D: The RNA-T upstream of ciaR possesses several intriguing features that merit some discussion, e.g. in the context of discussing Fig. 6. With a hairpin of only four base pairs, it is unusually short, yet remarkably efficient (Fig. 6 should reflect this unusual feature instead of showing nine base pairs). Additionally, it exhibits an uncommon structural arrangement: The sequence that base-pairs with the SD sequence is located downstream of it. In most cases, the base-pairing nucleotides are positioned upstream of the SD sequence. Here also, Fig. 6 should be corrected by positioning the ribosome to the left side of the hairpin.
3. Fig. 3A: What was the rationale for constructing a “closed” variant with six nucleotide substitutions, including four mutations in the tetraloop? The predicted structure of this variant introduces a bulge within the SD sequence, which could potentially reduce the overall hairpin stability. At first glance, a single mutation (T15C, or better U15C, because the sequence is RNA) might have been sufficient to stabilize the hairpin.
4. Fig. 3D: “ciaR levels” on the Y-axis should be “CiaR (= protein) levels”.
5. “Expression” is typically defined as the process by which information from a gene is used in the synthesis of a functional gene product, a protein or non-coding RNA. The authors often use “expression” in a sense that is no compatible with this definition, e.g. labeling of the Y-axis in Fig. 1D “Pcho/Enolase expression” needs to be changed to “Pcho/Enolase levels”. The same applies to Fig. 2B and F. Another example: “Pcho expression2 in lines 167 and 177. Please check the text carefully.
6. Line 560: V. cholerae
7. Lines 631 and 636: Statements like the “heat responsive nature of CiaRH” or “thermosensing activities of CiaRH” are not correct because the mRNAs rather than the proteins respond to temperature.
Reviewer #2: 1. Can the graphs in Figure 1 A and B be combined to facilitate comparisons between the two temperatures? I understand that for this to occur, the data will have to be presented in the same way as A. If you think the paired data are more important and do not wish to combine the graphs, then I do not think comparisons should be made between the two sets of data, as they are in the text (lines 172-174).
2. The focus of the manuscript is the RNAT element, but CiaR is a TCS RR which is also subject to regulation by its cognate histidine kinase, CiaH. Although the signal(s) that CiaH senses directly are not known, this layer in the regulation of CiaR activity (following translation) is ignored. This is an aspect of the mechanism that could be discussed in the discussion. Should we expect higher CiaR protein levels to lead to greater activation/repression of the promoters it regulates in the absence of CiaH’s signal? Could the authors expand on what is known about CiaRH signaling in the introduction to facilitate a wider audience gaining a greater mechanistic understanding of their findings?
3. Some of the language used is overly strong, or not appropriate, and does not always reflect the data:
a. Line 1: “Commensal to pathogen switch in Streptococcus pneumoniae is governed by a thermosensing master regulator” – influenced would be more appropriate.
b. Line 160: “Temperature shift is the cue for the commensal to invasive switch for S. pneumoniae”. The data that follows supports that temperature is a cue, but does not show that it is the cue.
c. Line 177: The key factor is not being determined here – only 3 factors are being tested (temperature, ATP, and TNF). You are asking if increased temperature is a key factor, or rather, if changes in temperature are sufficient to drive changes in PCho expression.
4. Additional notes on the text and figures:
a. Figure 1C: Can the authors comment on the bands at 15 kDa in the western blot and why they are absent in the temperature samples? Were all the blots performed separately, as presented? This would not allow for reliable quantification.
b. Figure 2C: Can the authors please comment on their finding that ciaR transcripts do not change with temperature, which conflicts with a previous study that used a microarray to investigate changes in the transcriptome at different temperatures: Gazioglu O, Kareem BO, Afzal M, Shafeeq S, Kuipers OP, et al. Glutamate Dehydrogenase (GdhA) of Streptococcus pneumoniae is required for high temperature adaptation. Infect Immun 2021;89:e0040021.
c. Line 115: SPN has 13 TCSs, not dozens.
d. Lines 139-142: Can the authors change the emphasis from nasal dwelling to the respiratory tract. Pseuomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp., can be found colonizing the nasal cavity in certain circumstances, they are not true nasopharyngeal commensals, like N. meningitidis and H. influenzae.
e. Line 196: “Pneumococcal expression of phosphorylcholine and consequent invasiveness in in-vivo and in-vitro is triggered by a temperature shift.” In vivo invasiveness is not tested here.
Reviewer #3: A key aspect of this work is linking the effects of temperature on surface expression of PhoC and the CiaRH TCS. For this, data in Supplementary Fig 2 are critical, and I suggest incorporating this in the text of the main manuscript.
The discussion is very broad in most part, and more should be devoted to critical appraisal of work presented in the manuscript, than the rather general review of regulation by pathogens in response to host signals that currently occupies a lot of the discussion. What else does this TCS control in Spn? What are the strengths/limitations of the study? Could the effect of the closed ciaR promoter (which reduces translation irrespective of temperatue) in vivo be mediated by effects on other genes regulated by the CiaRH TCS? How can the authors differentiate between this and effect on PhoC; the effect on PhoC is the major focus of the cellular studies and explored in vivo by the addition of exogenous PhoC?
49 and elsewhere: umbrella system. I dont like this. why not just delete act as umbrella systems, and just say dictate pleiotropic phenotypes?
65 The nasopharynx
88 the underpinning
Fig 1B How can you be sure these results are from Spn as the samples appear to be just washes?
220 You cannot use SEM with such a sample sample size. Please do more replicates if you want to calculate SEM.
247 This is looking at protein levels and not a levels of translation per se.
255 what is the predicted Tm of this structure? There is little base pairing, and could unfold at temperatures lower than are relevant for a bacterium at or around 37oC.
280 It is unusual for the interaction between mRNA and ribosomes to be measured by Kd given it is a multistep complex interaction... usually delta G is employed. Also affinities are extremely high.
362 Similar to the wt RNAT, what is the rpredicted Tm. These changes seem to have very little effect on the predicted structure (esp for close, although these are all GC pairs)
448 Please show data for 4A in supplementary data
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

?>
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013545.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
2 Sep 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers_PPATHOGENS-D-25-01275.docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013545.r003Decision Letter 1
WesselsMichaelSection Editor© 2025 Michael Wessels2025Michael Wesselshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
10 Sep 2025

Dear Dr. Banerjee,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Commensal to pathogen switch in Streptococcus pneumoniae is influenced by a thermosensing master regulator' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Michael Wessels
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064
***********************************************************
Reviewer #1:
Reviewer #3:
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: The authors performed additional experiments to clarify some of the open questions. I am satisfied with the revision.
Reviewer #3: The authors have addressed my concerns, and this will make a valuable addition to the literature.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013545.r004Acceptance letter
WesselsMichaelSection Editor© 2025 Michael Wessels2025Michael Wesselshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Dear Prof. Banerjee,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Commensal to pathogen switch in Streptococcus pneumoniae is influenced by a thermosensing master regulator," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064