Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1474450PMC1474450.1147445014744501ArticlesAbstracts of Poster Session
Abstracts11198775131511123150011119870906200610062006pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
Vol. 75, pp. 123-150, 1987 
 
Abstracts of Poster Sessions 
 
Laboratory of Biochemical Risk 
Assessment 
 
Ras Gene Activation in Rat Tumors Induced by Var- 
ious Benzidine-Derived Dyes. S. H. REYNOLDS,* M. 
W. ANDERSON,* R. M. MARONPOT,t J. H. MENNEAR,t 
and S. A. AARONSON. ? *Laboratory of Biochemical 
Risk Assessment, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709, tChemical Pathology Branch, NIEHS, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709, 4Carcinogenesis and 
Toxicology Evaluation Branch, NIEHS, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709, and ?National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, MD 20892. 
 
Dimethoxybenzidine (DMO) and dimethylbenzidine (DM) are used 
to synthesize dyes such as C.I. Direct Blue 15 and C.I. Acid Red 114, 
respectively. These commercially used dyes are metabolically de- 
graded to DMO or DM in the intestinal tract of rodents, and subse- 
quentially, DMO and DM are absorbed into the bloodstream. Animals 
were exposed to DMO, DM, or the dyes in the drinking water. Tumors 
obtained from treated animals were examined for the presence of 
activated oncogenes by the NIH/3T3 DNA transfection assay. Acti- 
vated oncogenes were detected in 79% (15/19) of the squamous cell 
carcinomas, basal cell neoplasias, clitoral gland neoplasias, and pre- 
putial gland neoplasias tested to date. Southern blot analysis of trans- 
fectant DNA showed that the transforming properties of the rat tumor 
DNA were due to the transfer of an activated cellular homologue of 
either the H-ras or N-ras oncogene. Radioimmunoprecipitation and 
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed that the ras proteins 
from the transfectants exhibited altered electrophoretic mobilities 
characteristic of point mutated ras genes. The altered electrophoretic 
mobilities of the ras proteins indicated that different structural mu- 
tations are responsible for activation of the H-ras gene within the 
same tumor type. These data suggest that activation of cellular ras 
genes by point mutation is an important step in the induction of 
tumors, at least in rodents, by this class of environmental chemicals. 
 
Placental Markers of Exposure to Toxic Halogenated 
Aromatics and Cigarette Smoke. G. I. SUNAHARA,* 
K. G. NELSON,* G. W. LUCIER,* R. M. PHILPOT,t R. 
B. EVERSON,t T. TIERNAN,? and T. WONG.* *Lab- 
oratory of Biochemical Risk Assessment, NIEHS, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709, tLaboratory of Phar- 
macology, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, 
tEpidemiology Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709, and ?Wright State University, Day- 
ton, OH 45431. 
 
We have evaluated placental cytochrome P450 enzyme activities 
and epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor binding kinetics and 
phosphorylation in individuals exposed to cigarette smoke and con- 
 
taminated rice oil as biochemical markers of exposure to halogenated 
aromatics. Yu-Cheng (oil disease) is a clinical and metabolic syndrome 
reported in Taiwanese who consumed rice oil contaminated with large 
amounts of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and polychlorinated di- 
benzofurans (PCDFs). Placental homogenates and microsomes from 
Yu-Cheng and smoking subjects showed marked elevation of arylhy- 
drocarbon hydroxylase (AHH) activities compared to control samples. 
Western blot analysis of placental microsomes taken from Yu-Cheng 
patients and smokers revealed a protein which cross-reacted with 
antibody raised to rabbit cytochrome P-450 form 6, an isozyme induced 
by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Toxic halogenated aromatics 
that bind to the Ah receptor such as TCDD induce not only AHH 
activities but also decrease EGF receptor binding and autophosphor- 
ylation in animal models. Therefore, we have investigated placental 
EGF receptor characteristics in human subjects. The Yu-Cheng sub- 
jects showed significantly lower placental EGF-stimulated receptor 
autophosphorylation than the unexposed controls, an effect which was 
correlated to the decrease in birth weight. Surprisingly, no significant 
alteration in placental EGF receptor binding kinetics was observed 
in the Yu-Cheng compared to control subjects. A marked elevation 
of placental total PCB and PCDFs concentrations was found in the 
placentas of Yu-Cheng patients compared to controls; however, these 
tissue concentrations were not significantly related to the biochemical 
changes in AHH or EGF receptor phosphorylation. In smokers, the 
placental high affinity-low capacity EGF receptor binding site was 
significantly altered compared to the nonsmoking controls. This effect 
was dose-dependent with smoking exposure as measured by maternal 
thiocyanate levels. Our studies indicate that the placental AHH ac- 
tivity is the most sensitive biochemical marker of exposure to toxic 
halogenated aromatics. At present, we are undertaking further stud- 
ies to determine whether modification of placental EGF receptor char- 
acteristics may also be a reliable biochemical marker. 
 
Low Dose Accumulation of 06-Methylguanine in 
Lung Following Multiple Dose Administrations of 
the Tobacco-Specific Carcinogen 4-(N-Methyl-N-Ni- 
trosamino)-1-(3-Pyridyl)-1-Butanone (NNK). S. A. 
BELINSKY,* C. M. WHITE, * T. R. DEVEREUX,* M. W. 
ANDERSON,* and J. A. SWENBERG.t *Laboratory of 
Biochemical Risk Assessment, NIEHS, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709 and tChemical Industry Insti- 
tute of Toxicology, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Previous studies have shown that treatment of rats with NNK (100 
mg/kg) for 12 days resulted in accumulation of the promutagenic ad- 
duct 0-methylguanine (OfMG) in lung. The purpose of this study 
was to determine the molecular dosimetry of OfMG in DNA from 
lung and specific cell populations isolated from this organ so that low 
dose estimation of the carcinogenic potential of this environmental 
chemical can be more accurately assessed. O6MG accumulated with 
doses of NNK ranging from 0.1 to 100 mg/kg/day. The dose response 
for NNK was nonlinear; the ratio of O6MG to dose, an index of al- 
kylation efficiency, increased dramatically as the dose of carcinogen 
decreased. These data suggest that low and high Km pathways may 
exist for activation of NNK to a methylating agent. Marked differ- 
ences in OfMG concentration were observed in specific lung cell pop- 
ulations. The Clara cell, although accounting for only 1% of the pul- 
monary cell population, was found to possess the greatest concentra- 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
tion of O6MG. Moreover, as the dose of NNK was decreased from 
100 to 0.3 mg/kg, the alkylation efficiency in this cell population in- 
creased 38-fold, suggesting that the low Km pathway for activation 
of NNK is localized predominately within the Clara cell. These data 
indicate that the localization of a high affinity pathway for activation 
of NNK in the Clara cell, one of the possible progenitor cells for NNK- 
induced neoplasia, may be an important factor in the strong tumori- 
genicity of this carcinogen in the rodent lung (ESO5292). 
 
Induction of Chromosomal Damage in Human Lym- 
phocytes and CHO Cells by a-Naphthoflavone: The 
Role of Metabolic Activation. C. THOMPSON, K. 
LUNDGREN, M. ANDRIES, and G. W. LUCIER. Lab- 
oratory of Biochemical Risk Analysis, NIEHS, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Our laboratory has developed a modified SCE assay where whole 
blood cultures are incubated in the presence or absence of a-na- 
phthoflavone (ANF). ANF significantly increases the frequency of 
sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) in lymphocytes of smokers, but 
has little effect in nonsmokers. There is a good correlation between 
smoking dose and ANF-induced increases in SCEs. Moreover, lym- 
phocytes isolated from PCB-exposed persons or TCDD-treated rats 
demonstrate an increased sensitivity to ANF similar to that observed 
in smokers, suggesting that a common mechanism responsible for 
SCE induction may involve altered metabolism of ANF. Our studies 
using mitogen-stimulated cultures of whole blood and isolated lym- 
phocytes incubated with (3H) ANF demonstrate that these cells have 
the capacity to metabolize ANF to reactive forms which apparently 
bind DNA. At ANF concentrations of 3 x 10' to 10-8 M approxi- 
mately 3 and 35% of the ANF was metabolized, respectively. To 
further investigate the role of metabolism an in vivo-in vitro approach 
was undertaken. Rat liver microsomes prepared from TCDD-induced 
and noninduced rats were incubated with exponentially growing CHO 
cells in the presence of ANF, and ANF metabolism and chromosomal 
damage assessed. Our studies demonstrate that ANF induced both 
chromosomal aberrations and SCEs in CHO cells only when TCDD- 
induced rat liver microsomes and a NADPH-generating system were 
used. The observed chromosomal effects were dependent on both the 
concentration of ANF and microsomal protein. There was a good 
correlation between the rate of metabolism and the extent of damage 
observed in CHO cells. Furthermore, analysis of CHO DNA revealed 
a predominant ANF-DNA adduct, similar to that observed in human 
lymphocytes. These studies demonstrate that the chromosomal dam- 
aging affects of ANF appear to depend on metabolism by specific P- 
450 isozymes. Our modified SCE assay may be very useful in iden- 
tifying human population exposed to chemicals which induce the cy- 
tochrome P-450 isozyme(s) responsible for the metabolic activation of 
ANF. 
 
Repression of Cytochrome P-450 2c and Its mRNA by 
3,4,5,3',4',5'-Hexachlorobiphenyl (HCB), 3-Methyl- 
cholanthrene (3-MC) and Phenobarbital (PB) in Liv- 
ers from Male Rats. H. N. YEOWELL,* P. LINKO,* 
J. A. GOLDSTEIN,* and D. J. WAXMAN.t *Laboratory 
of Biochemical Risk Assessment, NIEHS, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tDana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115. 
 
Rat liver cytochrome P-450 2c is a constitutive, male-specific, P- 
450 enzyme which oxidatively metabolizes both steroid hormones and 
lipophilic foreign compounds. Earlier studies have indicated that ex- 
posure of adult male rats to some xenobiotics leads to a decrease in 
the expression of hepatic P-450 2c. The present studies were under- 
taken to examine the mechanism of this decrease. Treatment of adult 
male rats with 3-methylcholanthrene (3-MC) produced a 50 to 60% 
 
decrease in liver microsomal P-450 2c and its associated steroid hor- 
mone 2cx- and 16a-hydroxylase activities. These effects were accom- 
panied by a parallel decrease (55-65%) in the translatable mRNA for 
P-450 2c. Phenobarbital produced a transient decrease in the trans- 
latable mRNA for P-450 2c (41% decrease at 17 hr), which resulted 
in a 14% decrease in P-450 2c by 3 days. The most striking suppression 
of P-450 2c was produced by 3,4,5,3',4',5'-hexachlorobiphenyl (HCB), 
a polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) isomer. HCB (50 mg/kg) decreased 
liver microsomal P-450 2c and its associated steroid hydroxylase ac- 
tivities by 40% within 2 days and virtually eliminated expression of 
this P-450 enzyme by 7 days. HCB also produced parallel decreases 
in the translatable mRNA for P-450 2c. In contrast, HCB produced 
a two- to threefold induction of P-450 3(P-450a)-dependent andros- 
tenedione 7a-hydroxylation and -150-fold induction of P-450c, the 
major 3-MC-inducible P-450 enzyme in rat liver. Doses of HCB re- 
quired to decrease P-450 2c and its mRNA paralleled those that in- 
duced P-450c. However, the time course for the decrease in P-450 2c 
(maximal response at 7 days) was slower than that for induction of 
P-450c (maximal by 3 days), suggesting that the decrease in P-450 2c 
might be a secondary effect. HCB decreased serum testosterone lev- 
els dramatically by 5 days in male rats at a dose of 50 mg/kg (> 98% 
decrease), but had little effect at lower doses. 3-MC also decreased 
testosterone levels 50% by 5 days, while phenobarbital had little ef- 
fect. These findings establish that the decrease in P-450 2c produced 
by administration of HCB and other xenobiotics is the result of a 
decrease in the translatable mRNA for this enzyme and suggest that 
chemicals such as HCB may interfere with synthesis of P-450 2c, at 
least in part, by disrupting the hormonal regulation of the mRNA 
levels for this male-specific P-450 enzyme. 
 
Published in Fed. Proc. 65: 962 (1986). 
 
Increased Blood Pressure in Rats with Long-Term 
Lead Exposure. W. VICTERY, R. Hu, C. R. MILLER, 
and R. A. GOYER. National Institute of Environmen- 
tal Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
A relationship between exposure to lead and hypertension has been 
suggested for many years, but results of study of lead-exposed pop- 
ulations and experimental animals have not been consistent. Reasons 
for this are that this effect of lead seems to occur only with certain 
levels of exposure and is influenced by many of the confounding factors 
that affect blood pressure regulation. 
 
Analyses of data collected by the most recent (1976-86) National 
Health and Nutrition Evaluation Survey (NHANES II) conducted by 
the U.S. Center for Health Statistics found positive relationships 
between blood lead level and blood pressure in adult males. This 
appeared to apply across the entire range of blood lead found in the 
general population, whereas the finding of an earlier British popu- 
lation study suggested a relationship in mid-aged men between lead 
and hypertension, mainly at blood lead levels over 37 ,ug/100 mL, but 
not at lower concentrations more typical of the general population. 
Also, on the basis of EDTA mobilization tests, Batuman et al. (1983) 
have suggested that lead-related hypertension may be secondary to 
lead-induced renal disease. 
 
In view of results of previous studies in our laboratory showing 
that lead produces renal disease in rats, we conducted an experiment 
to determine if the lead-induced renal disease in rats was related to 
increased blood pressure. In the study, it was found that rats exposed 
to lead via the drinking water, for periods of 1 to 1.5 years, had 
significantly elevated blood pressure as measured by direct cannu- 
lation of the principal artery in the neck. Systolic pressure (the pres- 
sure in the vascular system during the heart's contraction) was meas- 
ured with the animals fully anesthetized and averaged 145 mL of 
mercury in lead-exposed rats compared with 128 mL in age-matched 
controls. A similar elevation in diastolic pressure (the pressure be- 
tween heart beats) was also observed. The number of heart beats per 
minute was also elevated in the lead-exposed animals. 
 
The extent of body lead burden from the drinking water was de- 
 
124 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
termined by measurement of blood and kidney lead concentrations. 
Blood lead averaged 46 pig/100 mL of blood, while kidney lead av- 
eraged 44 ,ug/g of organ weight. These levels are above the averages 
generally found in nonoccupationally exposed humans. 
 
Lead is known to alter kidney function and microscopic appearance 
in a number of ways, including overall kidney cell swelling and de- 
creased mineral and small-sized solute reabsorption by proximal tu- 
bular lining cells in the first portion of the renal tubule. In these lead- 
exposed rats, kidney weight (which reflects the degree of cell swelling) 
was significantly elevated. Pathological changes observed in the kid- 
ney included degeneration of the lining cells of the renal tubule, en- 
larged cells in this region, with an increase in cell division, and the 
presence of large inclusion bodies (lead-protein complexes) in the cell 
nuclei. Between the cells, there was an increase in fibrotic connective 
tissue. All of these are signs of progressive kidney disease that may 
be contributory to the development of hypertension. 
 
Additional physiological systems contributing to blood pressure 
regulation have also been shown to be affected by lead exposure at 
low to moderate levels, but these were not specifically studied in this 
experiment. These systems include important blood-pressure regu- 
lating hormones, neural activity, and the response of smooth muscle 
cells in the blood vessel wall to vasoactive agents. It is now known 
that many of these systems are influenced by the distribution of metal 
ions across the cell membrane, particularly sodium, calcium, and po- 
tassium. Lead ion is known to decrease the activity of ion pump 
regulating enzymes and to affect calcium ion-regulated function in 
experimental situations. Further research will be necessary to de- 
termine the mechanisms by which lead exposure affects blood-pres- 
sure regulating systems. 
 
Epidemiology Branch 
 
Environmental Determinants of DNA Adducts in Hu- 
man Placenta Measured by the 32P-postlabeling As- 
say. R. B. EVERSON,* E. RANDERATH,t T. A. Av- 
ITTS,t and K. RANDERATH.t *Epidemiology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tDe- 
partment of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medi- 
cine, Houston, TX 77030. 
 
Sensitive methods for detecting exposures causing in vivo chemical 
damage to human DNA should provide important tools for investi- 
gating biological and health effects of environmental exposures. We 
are investigating the use of one such assay, 32P-postlabeling. This 
highly sensitive assay is performed by extracting DNA, digesting it 
to nucleotides, labeling the nucleotides with 32P, and separating nor- 
mal from adducted nucleotides using thin-layer chromatography. Pla- 
centa was used for these initial studies because of our interest in 
transplacental carcinogenesis and because large amounts of tissue 
were available from individuals about whom we had a great deal of 
information, including detailed questionnaire data, biochemical mark- 
ers for smoking exposure (cotinine, thiocyanate, and carboxyhemo- 
globin), and biochemical measurements of enzymatic activity induced 
by smoking or other environmental exposures. Assays of 53 specimens 
of placenta, conducted using carrier-free [-y-32P]ATP under substrate 
limiting conditions to intensify the relative labeling of adducts, re- 
vealed a total of 7 different DNA adducts in human placenta. There 
were strong qualitative and quantitative associations between two of 
these adducts (adducts 1 and 3) and maternal smoking during preg- 
nancy. The same adducts were observed in specimens of experimental 
animals treated with cigarette smoke condensate and upper airway 
tissues from smokers. Strategies for identifying the chemicals causing 
DNA adducts detected by the 32P-postlabeling assay and the ap- 
proaches by which the assay could be used in epidemiologic or clinical 
research studies will be discussed. 
 
Dysmorphic and Neurologic Changes in Children Ex- 
posed Transplacentally to Polyhalogenated Aromatic 
Compounds. W. J. ROGAN* and B. C. GLADEN. t 
*Epidemiology Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709 and tStatistics and Biomathematics 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) occur as contaminants in human 
tissue worldwide, and have been involved in at least two epidemic 
poisonings. We have been following a cohort of children in North 
Carolina who are exposed to PCBs and DDE (a DDT metabolite) 
transplacentally and through breast milk; we have also surveyed chil- 
dren in Taiwan whose mothers were poisoned by PCBs and similar 
chemicals in a food borne outbreak in 1979. 
 
In the North Carolina study, we identified about 900 pregnant 
women prior to term and then followed their infants medically and 
developmentally. We measured the amount of PCBs and DDE in 
breast milk, maternal and cord blood, and placenta. From these data 
we are able to construct a summary index of transplacental exposure. 
Birthweight and neonatal jaundice were not related to PCB/DDE 
exposure. We also administered the Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral 
Assessment Scale (BNBAS), which is a psychological and neurologic 
scale designed for newborns and which is known to be sensitive to 
perinatally administered drugs and to prematurity. Children with 
higher PCB exposures tended to be more hypotonic and hyporeflexic; 
those with higher DDE exposures tended to be hyporeflexic. The 
mechanism of this association is not known, but may involve CNS 
depressant or thyromimetic properties of the PCBs or their ability 
to cause glial peninsulas associated with severe disorders of muscle 
tone. 
 
In the Taiwan study, we examined 117 children who were in utero 
during or after the 1979 poisoning. These children had been exposed 
transplacentally to a complex mixture of PCBs, polychlorinated di- 
benzofurans, and polychlorinated quatraphenyls. They had been born 
between June 1978 and March 1985 and had escaped direct exposure 
themselves, since they were all less than 5 months old when the 
contaminated cooking oil had been removed from the market. The 
mothers had been unable to excrete the contaminants, and thus con- 
tinued the exposure of their children both transplacentally and 
through breast milk. Compared to neighborhood control children, the 
exposed children had higher rates of abnormal pigmentation, dys- 
plastic nails, acne, conjunctival cysts, and hirsutism, findings con- 
sistent with an acquired ectodermal dysplasia. There is some evidence 
of a slight hepatic porphyria in some of the children. These findings 
expand the previously described transplacental PCB syndrome. 
 
Mortality Associated with Household Exposure to 
Cigarette Smoke. D. P. SANDLER,* K. J. HELSING,t 
D. L. SHORE,* and G. W. COMSTOCK. t *Epidemiology 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
and tSchool of Hygiene and Public Health, Johns Hop- 
kins University, Hagerstown, MD 21740. 
 
Death rates for persons living with smokers were compared with 
those for persons in smoke-free households to evaluate disease risk 
associated with passive exposure to tobacco smoke. Total 12-year 
mortality and mortality from specific causes were determined for 48, 
342 white adults aged 25 and older who participated in a private census 
conducted in July 1963 in Washington County, MD. 
 
The private census provided information on 98% of the households 
in the county. Information included race (only 3% were nonwhite), 
sex, birthdate, marital status, years of education, and housing char- 
acteristics for each individual. Information on cigarette, pipe, and 
cigar smoking habits was also recorded for each household member 
over age 16, allowing us to calculate a passive smoke exposure score 
for each individual which equaled the sum of the amounts smoked by 
all other household members. 
 
Death certificates of all county residents who died between July 
 
125 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
15, 1963, and July 15, 1975, were matched against the 1963 census 
and were coded according to the seventh revision of the International 
Classification of Diseases. Twelve-year death rates were calculated 
using an estimate of the midpoint (1969) population at risk. 
 
Preliminary data analysis suggests that mortality from all causes 
was increased among nonsmokers living with smokers. This was par- 
ticularly true for individuals younger than 45 in 1963, with a relative 
risk of death of 1.3 for married females and 2.3 for married males 
with any household smoke exposure. After adjusting for age, years 
of education, and marital status, the relative risk of death for non- 
smoking males was 1.1, 1.4, and 1.3 for light, moderate, and heavy 
exposure. For nonsmoking females, the corresponding relative risks 
were 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5, all of which were statistically significant. Non- 
smoking males who lived with smokers were at increased iisk for 
death from all cancers and nonsmoking females who lived with smok- 
ers were at increased risk for death from smoking related cancers. 
Ischemic heart disease mortality was also elevated for exposed males 
and females after adjusting for potential confounding factors. Find- 
ings are consistent with other reports of increased cancer mortality 
from passive exposure to tobacco smoke and suggest that noncancer 
mortality might also be affected. 
 
An Ecologic Study of the Association Between 
Groundwater Radon Concentration and Cancer Mor- 
tality. G. W. COLLMAN, D. P. LooMis, D. L. SHORE, 
and D. P. SANDLER. Epidemiology Branch, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Exposure to radon has been associated with excess risk of lung 
cancer in underground uranium miners and the general population. 
We studied the risk of eight selected types of cancer using mortality 
data collected between 1978 and 1982 and measurements of ground- 
water radon concentration collected by the EPA and the North Car- 
olina Department of Human Resources. Cancers of the upper respi- 
ratory tract such as nasopharynx, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and 
nasal sinuses, and cancer of the larynx were chosen because of po- 
tential exposure through inhalation of aerosolized radon from house- 
hold water sources. Gastrointestinal cancers were thought to be as- 
sociated with exposure through the ingestion of radon in drinking 
water. Sites studied included esophageal, stomach, and colon cancer. 
Bone cancer, female breast cancer, and the leukemias were studied 
because of previous evidence of an association with radiation. Mean 
levels of radon for each county were calculated using a log transfor- 
mation of the water supply measurements. County mean radon values 
ranged from 0 to 10,692 pCi/L, with an average value of 1373 pCi/L. 
Radon measurements were ranked and divided into quintiles. Age- 
adjusted mortality rates were calculated for each cancer site in each 
radon group. In the total population and in males, relative risks for 
bone cancer were elevated at higher radon exposure, although the 
trend was not statistically significant. In females, cancer of the larynx 
was significantly associated with high radon exposure. Future analy- 
sis will focus on controlling for confounding variables such as cigarette 
smoking and socioeconomic status. Radon levels in North Carolina 
groundwater may not have been high enough to detect elevated risks 
at all cancer sites. Similar studies in geographic regions with higher 
radon levels may be more productive. 
 
Statistics and Biomathematics Branch 
 
The Statistical Analysis of In Vivo Genotoxicity 
Data: Case Studies of the Rat Hepatocyte UDS and 
Mouse Bone Marrow Micronucleus Assays. B. H. 
 
MARGOLIN and K. J. RISKO. Statistics and Biomathe- 
matics Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
Data from a recent World Health Organization-sponsored collabo- 
rative study provide a unique data base for studying statistical prop- 
erties of two in vivo assays for genetic toxicity: unscheduled DNA 
synthesis in rat hepatocytes and micronuclei in mouse bone marrow. 
A number of statistical issues are addressed for one or both assays. 
Among these are the assessment of sources of assay variability, mod- 
eling the distribution of control data, investigation of the utility of 
historical control data, documentation of the sizable strain/species/ 
laboratory differences in control rates, formulation of sensitive sta- 
tistical tests for dose response, and exploration of a simple measure 
of potency as a useful research tool. These issues are widely applicable 
to most in vivo assays for genetic toxicity; therefore, these issues 
form a suitable basis upon which to build statistical analyses for these 
other assays. 
 
Altitude, Radiation, and Mortality from Cancer and 
Heart Disease in 80 U.S. Cities. C. R. WEINBERG, 
K. G. BROWN, and D. G. HOEL. Statistics and Bio- 
mathematics Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
The variation in natural background radiation levels is an important 
source of information for estimating human risk to low levels of ion- 
izing radiation. Studying either specific regions with abnormally high 
background radiation levels or general variation in regional radiation 
levels allows one to obtain the large population sizes necessary to 
detect possible health risks at low environmental levels of exposure. 
Correlation studies have been conducted in the U.S. which attempt 
to relate mortality rates for several cancer types with measured or 
estimated background radiation levels. In these studies an inverse 
relationship was found, in particular with cancers of the respiratory 
system and total cancers. An explanation that has been put forth is 
one of hormesis, where low levels of a normally toxic exposure may 
stimulate natural defense mechanisms and thus provide a paradoxical 
protective effect. 
 
Based on 1960 mortality rates for 80 U.S. cities, we find a significant 
negative correlation between altitude and age-adjusted mortality 
from several cancer types. Since altitude and cosmic radiation are 
correlated this is to be expected. However, when ionizing radiation 
is also included in the linear models, one finds that when adjustments 
are made for altitude there is a weak but consistently positive asso- 
ciation between low levels of neutron radiation and some tumor types 
(leukemia, breast, lung, and intestine) and arteriosclerotic heart dis- 
ease for white males and females. Nonneutron radiation is not related 
to mortality from any of the eight causes studied following adjustment 
for altitude. Interpreting these results is problematic. One explana- 
tion for the apparent effects of altitude has to do with known toxic 
effects of oxygen on living organisms. We conclude that the cancer 
correlational studies carried out in the U.S. using vital statistics data 
do not in themselves demonstrate a lack of carcinogenic effect at low 
radiation levels, and that low oxygen pressure of inspired air may 
reduce the risk of mortality from certain causes. 
 
Applications of the Coalescent Process to Problems 
in Population Genetics. R. R. HUDSON and N. L. 
KAPLAN. Statistics and Biomathematics Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The availability of samples of DNA sequences from populations has 
motivated the study of a stochastic process called the coalescent pro- 
cess. The coalescent process generates the genealogical relationships 
of genes randomly sampled from a population evolving according to 
 
126 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
any of several classical population genetics models, including the neu- 
tral Wright-Fisher model. By considering the coalescent process, a 
number of useful results concerning the sampling properties of the 
infinite-alleles and the infinite-sites models are easily obtained. With- 
out much modification, the coalescent process can be applied to more 
complicated situations. The coalescent process can be applied to the 
sampling theory for nonrandom (stratified) samples, to multigene fam- 
ilies with gene conversion, to transposable element evolution, to 
highly repeated interspersed sequences, to inferring recombination 
events, to studying the distribution of linkage disequilibrium, and to 
the development of a test of the neutral model of molecular evolution. 
 
Use of Dual Controls to Estimate False Positive 
Rates in Laboratory Animal Carcinogenicity Studies. 
J. K. HASEMAN,* J. S. WINBUSH,t and M. W. O'DON- 
NELL, JR.t *Statistics and Biomathematics Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tDi- 
vision of Mathematics, Center for Food Safety and Ap- 
plied Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration, Wash- 
ington, DC 20204. 
 
Tumor incidence data from 18 recently completed carcinogenicity 
studies utilizing male and female mice and rats were examined to 
determine if the frequency of significant (p < 0.05) pairwise differ- 
ences between the two concurrent control groups employed in these 
experiments exceeded chance expectation. Although marked study- 
to-study variability was observed for some tumors, no evidence of 
extrabinomial, intrastudy variability between the two concurrent con- 
trol groups was found. The total number of observed significant 
(p <0.05) paired-control differences was virtually identical to what 
would be expected from the usual binomial model assumptions; the 
corresponding overall observed (44%) and expected (47-50%) false 
positive rates were essentially the same. While one should not ov- 
ergeneralize the implications of these findings, these results should 
lessen concerns that elevated false positive rates resulting from ex- 
trabinomial, intrastudy variability might be adversely affecting the 
interpretation of long-term laboratory animal carcinogenicity studies. 
On the other hand, these results reaffirm the conclusions of other 
investigators that (particularly for commonly occurring tumors) more 
stringent evidence than an isolated p < 0.05 effect should be required 
before an increased tumor incidence is regarded as biologically sig- 
nificant; otherwise, the study may have an unacceptably high false 
positive rate. 
 
A recently published paper (Haseman, J. K., Winbush, J. S., and O'Donnell. 
M. W., Jr. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 7: 573-584, 1986) describes these results in 
more detail. 
 
Statistical Evaluation of Association Between Lab- 
oratory Animal Carcinogenicity and Short-Term Test 
Results for 73 NTP Chemicals: Preliminary Find- 
ings. J. K. HASEMAN,* B. H. MARGOLIN,* R. W. 
TENNANT,t J. SPALDING,t S. STASIEWICZ,t E. ZIE- 
GER,t M. SHELBY,t J. MASON,t M. RESNICK,t and R. 
MINOR.: *Statistics and Biomathematics Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, tCellular 
and Genetic Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709, and *tInfornation Systems and 
Networks, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The objective of this study was to evaluate the association between 
laboratory animal carcinogenicity and short-term test (STT) results 
for a random cross-section of chemicals studied by the National Tox- 
icology Program (NTP). The carcinogenicity results from 73 NTP 
studies were compared to STT results for Salmonella, chromosome 
 
aberrations, mouse lymphoma, and sister chromatid exchanges. Al- 
though evaluation of this data is not yet completed, the results to 
date suggest the following general conclusions: 
 
There is little difference among the four STTs with respect to the 
overall concordance with carcinogenicity test result. A negative STT 
result is not predictive of lack of carcinogenicity for any of the four 
STTs. A positive STT result (particularly for Salmonella) is predictive 
of a positive carcinogenicity outcome in laboratory animals. No bat- 
tery of STTs (i.e., use of two, three, or all four tests in combination) 
produces a significant improvement in concordance or predictivity 
beyond that obtained by using Salmonella alone. If one considers 
various subsets of carcinogenicity outcome as the targeted response 
(e.g., high potency carcinogens; multisite carcinogens; nonliver-tumor 
carcinogens), then the overall concordance for Salmonella is improved. 
Negative predictivity is increased, but positive predictivity is de- 
creased; however, once again, no battery of STTs provides significant 
improvement over Salmonella alone. 
 
Laboratory of Genetics 
 
Accuracy of Reverse Transcriptase During In Vitro 
DNA Synthesis. J. D. ROBERTS,* L. A. JOHNSTON,t 
B. PRESTON,t L. LOEB,t and T. A. KUNKEL.* *Lab.- 
oratory of Genetics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709 and tDepartment of Pathology, Washington 
University, Seattle, WA 98195. 
 
The reverse transcriptases are retrovirus-encoded enzymes that 
have the ability to synthesize DNA using either DNA or RNA as a 
template. Recent investigations into the mechanisms of oncogenesis 
have suggested that specific mutations in oncogenes are correlated 
with transformed phenoytypes. Thus, reverse tanscriptase-directed 
mutagenesis may be an important contributing factor in the gener- 
ation of the transformed state in mammalian cells. Moreover, these 
enzymes are used by researchers either to generate cDNA molecules 
from mRNA isolated from cells, or to create site-specific mutations 
in DNA sequences under investigation. During these processes, the 
propensity of the enzymes to misincorporate an incorrect nucleotide 
during synthesis is a crucial feature of the reaction. 
 
Using a special gapped DNA molecule as the template and a genetic 
assay for polymerase-induced mutations, we have measured the ten- 
dency of reverse transcriptase to generate mutations during DNA 
synthesis. DNA sequencing is underway to determine the exact na- 
ture of the errors made by reverse transcriptase. 
 
We find that the error frequency of reverse transcriptase during 
DNA synthesis is about 1/20,000 nucleotides for three independent 
preparations of avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase. The 
Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase shows a similar 
error rate. This value suggests that in a population of 2 kb cDNA 
molecules generated in vitro by reverse transcriptase, -10% of the 
cDNA molecules will carry a mutation created during the copying of 
the mRNA by the enzyme. 
 
We have also investigated the enzyme's ability to synthesize DNA 
from a mismatched 3'-OH terminus, as would be required during site- 
directed mutagenesis. The results indicate that frameshift mutations 
occur during the attempt to generate certain base substitutions, de- 
pending on the neighboring template sequences. Thus, a careful prod- 
uct analysis of DNAs synthesized using reverse transcriptase may be 
required prior to utilization of the product. 
 
In conclusion, these results begin to define the degree of involve- 
ment of reverse transcriptase in the processes of transformation and 
mutagenesis in animal cells. An analysis of the type of mutations 
generated by this enzyme should provide additional insight into the 
molecular mechanisms of mutational events within the cell. 
 
127 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
DNA Replication Errors in Escherichia coli and 
Their Control by Mismatch Correction. R. M. SCHA- 
APER and R. L. DUNN. Laboratory of Genetics, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
We have determined by DNA sequence analysis the nature of 487 
spontaneous mutations in the N-terminal part of the lacI gene in 
mutH, mutL and mutS strains of Escherichia coli. These strains 
display elevated spontaneous mutation rates based on a deficiency in 
the process of postreplicative mismatch correction. As a consequence 
the mutational spectrum may be regarded as the spectrum of in vivo 
DNA replication errors. The spectrum consists largely of base sub- 
stitutions (75.5%) and single-base frameshifts (22.5%). Among the 
base substitutions transitions (AT -* GC and GC-* AT) are strongly 
favored over transversions (96% vs 4%). Among identical base sub- 
stitutions large site-to-site differences are observed, presumably re- 
flecting the modulating effects of neighboring bases. The single-base 
frameshift spectrum is dominated by a large hotspot at a run of ad- 
jacent identical base pairs, implying that a slippage-type of mechanism 
is responsible for their occurrence. The comparison with a previously 
recorded wild-type spectrum furthermore allows a determination of 
the specificity of the mismatch repair system. Both base substitutions 
and frameshift mutations are corrected efficiently (several 100-fold). 
Among the base substitutions however a discrepancy is observed 
between transitions (efficiently corrected) and transversions (poorly 
corrected). These results are consistent with the notion that the spec- 
ificity of the mismatch repair system matches that of DNA replication, 
i.e., it is most effective for those errors that are produced most fre- 
quently during DNA replication. 
 
Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics 
 
Effect of Environmental Chemical Contaminants on 
Protein Kinase. R. R. SHUKLA and P. ALBRO. Lab- 
oratory of Molecular Biophysics, NIEHS, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Experimental studies have well-documented carcinogenesis as a 
multistep process of which promotion is an important stage. Using 
skin tumor promotion model and phorbol ester as the tumor promoter, 
the role of protein kinase C (PKC) in tumor promotion has been 
suggested. However, these studies have been restricted to skin or in 
established cell lines. A number of environmental pollutants, e.g., 
chemical contaminants viz phthalate esters, polychlorinated and poly- 
brominated biphenyls, and dioxins have been reported to be hepa- 
tocarcinogenic or promoters in animal studies. However, their precise 
mechanism of action is not known. Furthermore, involvement of pro- 
tein kinase C in liver tumor promotion, if any, also has not been 
studied. Therefore, an attempt has been made to investigate the 
effects of a few chemical contaminants on partially purified rat brain 
protein kinase C and also on the binding of 3H-phorbol dibutyrate 
(3H-PdBu) to primary rat hepatocytes. Results indicate that the in 
vitro effect of these chemicals correlated with their reported pro- 
motional effects. Binding of 3H-PdBu to hepatocytes and their trans- 
location from soluble to particulate fraction was also affected. The 
results do indicate PKC as a possible factor in the mode of action of 
the above chemicals on cells, though their relation to liver tumor 
promotion needs to be further investigated. 
 
2,3,7,8-TCDD and Lipid Peroxidation. P. W. ALBRO, 
 
J. CORBETT, and J. SCHROEDER. Laboratory of Mo- 
lecular Biophysics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
The hypothesis that toxic effects of 2,3,7,8-TCDD are mediated 
through lipid peroxidation in vivo is supported by some, and refuted 
by other, published data. Since a conspicuous feature of the pro data 
versus the con is in the techniques used to measure lipid peroxidation, 
the present study was performed to address the question more di- 
rectly. '4C-Linoleic acid was administered to rats at specific times 
after dosing with TCDD (50 jg/kg) and the fate of the 14C during the 
ensuing 30 min determined. Carbon tetrachloride (CTC) was given 
as a positive control for comparison. Parameters measured included 
label bound to protein, water- versus lipid-soluble products, distri- 
bution of 14C among lipid classes, production of oxygenated fatty 
acids, incorporation of 14C into arachidonate, changes in the concen- 
tration of arachidonate and other fatty acids, and formation of con- 
jugated double bonds. All studies to date have been limited to the 
liver, a target organ for TCDD toxicity in the rat. 
 
While TCDD had significant effects on linolate metabolism, the 
changes observed were generally quite different from those caused 
by CTC. The effects on labeling of arachidonate and on binding to 
proteins were in opposite directions for the two toxins. Oxygenated 
fatty acids were produced in response to CTC, but were not detectable 
in response to TCDD. TCDD may increase the susceptibility of mem- 
branes to oxidative damage more than it actually increases lipid per- 
oxidation in vivo, or TCDD and CTC may stimulate different oxidative 
pathways. Further work will be needed to clarify these possibilities. 
 
A System for Direct Coupling of Open Tubular Liquid 
Chromatography with Mass Spectrometry. J. S. M. 
DE WIT,* J. W. JORGENSON,* C. E. PARKER,t and K. 
B. TOMER.t *University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27514 and tLaboratory of Molecular Bio- 
physics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A system for direct coupling of open tubular liquid chromatography 
with mass spectrometry has been developed. In this system the cap- 
illary column is introduced into the mass spectrometer through a 
heated probe, using the solid probe inlet. The end of the column can 
be heated over a 1-inch length in the copper probe-tip, the temper- 
ature of which is accurately monitored with a thermocouple. 
 
This system has been used with both glass and fused silica capillary 
columns, with inner diameters of 16 and 10 ,um, respectively. With 
flow rates down to nanoliters per minute, the entire eluent can be 
introduced into the mass spectrometer. 
 
Finnigan 3300 quadrupole mass spectrometers were operated in 
both the EI and CI modes, since this system can be used for both 
methods of ionization. The capillary column tip was tapered very 
finely, creating a submicron exit orifice. The interface design has 
similarities to both direct liquid introduction and thermospray. The 
performance of the system was evaluated for a variety of compounds 
using both reversed and normal phase chromatographic systems. 
 
Application of Fast Atom Bombardment and Tandem 
Mass Spectrometry to the Differentiation of Isomeric 
Molecules of Biological Interest. C. GUENAT, S. J. 
GASKELL, and K. B. TOMER. Laboratory of Molecular 
Biophysics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
The advent of fast atom bombardment (FAB) and related tech- 
niques of secondary ion mass spectrometry has brought new possi- 
bilities to the analysis of a variety of polar and involatile compounds 
not previously amenable to direct mass spectrometric analysis. While 
molecular weight information is often readily available, conventional 
 
128 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
FAB mass spectra are frequently devoid of structurally diagnostic 
fragment ions. Information may also be obscured by ions arising from 
the matrix and/or additives used to enhance [M + H]+. The use of 
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) may assist in these respects by 
producing fragment ion spectra derived from selected parents via 
monitoring of unimolecular decompositions or collision-activated dis- 
sociation (CAD) occurring in a field-free region. This technique has 
been applied to the differentiation of isomeric compounds of biological 
interest using a tandem double-focusing mass spectrometer of BE- 
EB configuration. The fragmentations of a parent ion selected with 
B1E, were observed in the third field-free region by performing a 
linked scan at constant B2/E2. 
 
Two isomeric pregnan-triol-one-3-glucuronides can be differen- 
tiated unambiguously by the unimolecular fragmentation of the 
[M + HI+ ions (m/z 527). Indeed, in the case of 5p-pregnan-3ot, 17ot,21- 
triol-20-one-3-glucuronide, the spectrum presents an intense ion at 
m/z 351 corresponding to the intact aglycone. This fragment is absent 
from the spectrum of 5f-pregnan-3a,11l,21-triol-20-one-3-glucuron- 
ide. These compounds can also be easily distinguished by their CAD 
spectra. The relative abundances of the ions corresponding to the 
intact aglycone and those resulting from subsequent water losses are 
quite different. 
 
On the other hand, the unimolecular fragmentation spectra of the 
[M + HI' ions (m/z 467) from the 5ct- and 5r-androstan-3ax-ol-17-one- 
3-glucuronide do not permit one to distinguish between the isomers. 
But the CAD spectra show clear and reproducible differences between 
the relative abundances of the aglycone ion (m/z 291), and those de- 
rived from additional water losses (m/z 273 and 255). 
 
The collisionally activated MS/MS spectra of the [M - H]- anions 
of steroid sulfates and bile salts have been found to be a sensitive 
probe of stereochemical and structural differences at the end of the 
molecule remote from the charge-bearing moiety. 
 
Isomers coming from other classes of compounds such as carnitines 
or branched peptides have also been differentiated using tandem mass 
spectrometry. In the latter case, no information was obtained from 
the [M + H]+ ions, but the technique has been successfully applied 
to smaller fragment ions produced in the ion source. These examples 
show the usefulness of FAB/MS in differentiation between isomeric 
biomolecules and that the appropriate conditions may vary with an- 
alyte compounds. 
 
Tandem Mass Spectral Studies Of Oligonucleotides. 
J. J. DINO, JR.,*t C. R. GUENAT,* S. J. GASKELL,* 
and D. G. KAUFMAN. t *Laboratory of Molecular Bio- 
physics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
and tDepartment of Pathology, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27514. 
 
Mass spectral studies were performed on oligonucleotides possess- 
ing a variety of chain lengths and base compositions. This work is 
part of a study to isolate and identify previously uncharacterized polar 
products of interactions between benzo[a]pyrene (BP) metabolites and 
DNA. Previous investigations have indicated that these products may 
consist of oligonucleotides of indeterminate lengths modified with me- 
tabolites of BP. As a prelude to the above-mentioned study the cur- 
rent work examines mass spectral behavior of unmodified oligonu- 
cleotides. This is believed to be a logical first step in the examination 
of modified material. 
 
Initial studies examined oligonucleotides in double-focusing or MS/ 
MS modes with positive ion fast atom bombardment (FAB) analysis 
on a VG ZAB 4F mass spectrometer with BEEB configuration. Using 
glycerol/oxalic acid as matrix, oligonucleotides gave protonated mo- 
lecular ions: 5' TTC 3' (m/z 836), 5' AGCT 3' (m/z 1174), 5' TCTAGA 
3' (m/z 1791). [M + H + Na]+ ions were low or nonexistent. Little 
usable fragmentation occurred from [M + H] + or [M + H + Na] + ions. 
 
Collisionally activated dissociation (CAD) experiments were per- 
formed on protonated molecular ions using the collision cell between 
MS1 and MS2 (in the third field-free region). Glycerol/oxalic acid was 
used as matrix. The collision gas was helium at a pressure which gave 
approximately 50% attenuation of the parent ion beam. Fragment 
 
ions of 5' AGCT 3' included m/z 950 (loss of dT), m/z 940 (loss of dA), 
m/z 661 (loss of CpT) and m/z 611 (loss of ApG). Fragment ions of 5' 
TTC 3' included m/z 612 (loss of dT) and m/z 529 (loss of dCMP). 
 
With dithiothreitol/dithioerythritol (5:1) as matrix, oligonucleotides 
gave clusters with sodium, whose sizes corresponded to the number 
of phosphate groups. This is a diagnostic tool, since it gives the oli- 
gonucleotide chain length. When combined with the molecular weight, 
this allows predictions of base compositions. 
 
A major concern of this work is the small amounts of carcinogen 
modified material produced by in vitro and in vivo systems. To that 
end, experiments were done to optimize the glycerol/oxalic acid ma- 
trix using 5' TTC 3' as test compound. Judgment criteria were the 
signal-to-noise ratio of (M + H)+ and the ratio of (M + H)+ to 
(M + H + Na)+ (where present). It was found that these ratios could 
be optimized by adding 0.04 g aliquots of oxalic acid to 9.25 mL 
glycerol. 
 
The optimized matrix was then used to determine a practical lower 
detection limit, using 5' AGCT 3' as test compound. 25, 12.5, and 
6.25 jig were applied to the probe. Positive ion FAB analysis was 
used. The lower limit was between 6.25 and 12 ,ug of 5' AGCT 3'. 
When 6.25 ,ug 5' AGCT 3' were applied in dithiothreitol/dithioery- 
thritol (5:1), an intense sodium ion cluster (maximum S/N = 10:1) was 
observed, indicating that even less material might be needed with 
this matrix. 
 
The Enzymatic and Photolytic One-Electron Reduc- 
tion of Uroporphyrin I: An Electron Spin Resonance 
Investigation. K. M. MOREHOUSE, S. N. J. MORENO, 
and R. P. MASON. Laboratory of Molecular Biophys- 
ics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The formation of the porphyrin anion radical of uroporphyrin I 
by enzymatic reduction, in the absence of light, is reported. Uro- 
porphyrin I, which accumulates in body tissues of congenital ery- 
thropoietic porphyria patients, undergoes a photochemical one-elec- 
tron reduction to the porphyrin anion radical when a suitable reducing 
agent is present. We have demonstrated that, in the absence of light, 
anaerobic microsomal incubations containing NADPH and uro- 
porphyrin I give an electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrum consist- 
ent with the enzymatic formation of a porphyrin anion free radical. 
The porphyrin anion radical undergoes a second order decay 
(k2-105M 's-1) associated with nonenzymatic disproportionation of 
the radical. Aerobic incubations were also investigated for oxygen 
consumption with an oxygraph and ESR experiments with the spin 
trap 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide. These experiments demon- 
strate that electron transfer from the porphyrin radical to molecular 
oxygen does occur, but due to the slow formation of the radical anion 
no oxygen consumption above the basal level could be detected in the 
microsomal incubations. The effects of light on aerobic and anaerobic 
incubations, in the presence and absence of microsomes, was also 
investigated. We also present the one-electron reduction of uropor- 
phyrin I to its radical anion by ferredoxin-ferredoxin:NADP+ oxi- 
doreductase. The stimulation of enzymatic superoxide formation by 
uroporphyrin I further supports the reduction of molecular oxygen 
to the superoxide anion radical by the porphyrin anion radical. 
 
Halocarbon-Derived Free Radicals in the Perfused 
Rat Liver: Detection and Toxic Effects. L. B. 
LACAGNIN,*t H. D. CONNOR,t R. P. MASON,t and R. 
G. THURMAN.* *Department of Pharmacology, Uni- 
versity of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27514 and 
tLaboratory of Molecular Biophysics, NIEHS, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
It has been demonstrated previously that the carbon dioxide anion 
radical (CO2-) is a free radical metabolite of CM4 in the perfused rat 
liver. The objectives of this study were to demonstrate the formation 
 
129 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
of C02; from CBrCl3 and to determine if there is a relationship be- 
tween CO27 production and halocarbon toxicity in the liver. The me- 
tabolism of CBrCl3 to C02 was studied by perfusing livers from 
phenobarbital-treated rats simultaneously with the spin trap phenyl- 
N-t-butyl-nitrone (PBN) or 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide 
(DMPO) and with either 12CBrCl3 or 13CBrCl3. Perfusate samples 
and CHCl3:CH3OH extracts of liver were analyzed by electron spin 
resonance (ESR) spectroscopy for PBN or DMPO radical adducts of 
reactive free radicals. In the organic extracts of liver, hyperfine cou- 
pling constants and 18C isotope effects observed in the ESR spectra 
indicated the presence of the PBN or DMPO radical adduct of the 
trichloromethyl radical produced from CBrCl3. ESR analyses of 
aqueous extracts of liver and effluent perfusate produced CBrCl3- 
derived radical adduct spectra. These radical adducts were identified 
as PBN/CO2 and DMPO/CO2 based on hyperfine coupling constants 
and 13C isotope effects identical to those of chemically generated PBN 
and DMPO radical adducts of C02 . Toxicity in the perfused liver 
was assessed by the measurement of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 
release in the effluent perfusate. Time-course studies measuring PBN/ 
C027 concentration and LDH release always resulted in the free 
radical concentration reaching a maximum before the onset of LDH 
release. In addition, perfusion conditions that enhanced halocarbon 
metabolism to free radical metabolites, i.e., increased ESR signal 
intensity, resulted in increased liver damage. Therefore, free radical 
generation is highly correlated to halocarbon-induced hepatotoxicity. 
 
Generation of Radical Anions of Nitrofurantoin, Mi- 
sonidazole, and Metronidazole by Ascorbate. D. N. 
 
RAMAKRISHNA RAO, L. HARMAN, A. MOTTEN, J. 
SCHREIBER, and R. P. MASON. Laboratory of Molec- 
ular Biophysics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
Nitrofurantoin, misonidazole, and metronidazole were reduced to 
their corresponding nitro anion radicals by ascorbate in anaerobic 
solutions at high pH. The nitrofurantoin anion radical could be de- 
tected at neutral pH. In neutral solutions, the nitro anion radicals of 
misonidazole and metronidazole were too unstable to be observed by 
electron spin resonance spectroscopy. At neutral pH, solutions con- 
taining ascorbate, nitrofurantoin or misonidazole consume oxygen. 
The addition of superoxide dismutase, catalase, or both superoxide 
dismutase and catalase decreased the rate of oxygen consumption. 
These results show that nitro anion radicals are formed by reduction 
with ascorbate, and superoxide anion radical and hydrogen peroxide 
are produced by reactions of these radicals with oxygen. 
 
Published in Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 255: 419-427 (1987). 
 
Thyroxine Nuclear Receptor Shows the Expected 
Structural Specificity and Sensitivity for Possible In- 
volvement in the Mechanism of Toxicity of Dioxin 
and Related Compounds. J. MCKINNEY, R. FANNIN, 
 
S. JORDAN, K. CHAE, U. RICKENBACHER, and L. PED- 
ERSEN. Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Thyroid hormone analogs, PCBs, and their derivatives were shown 
to bind specifically to thyroxine-specific binding sites in rat liver nu- 
clear extracts. The structure-binding relationship for thyroxine bind- 
ing prealbumin was qualitatively similar to that for the nuclear re- 
ceptor. In general, for both binding proteins, 'increased binding 
affinity was seen for the more linear and in some cases rectangular- 
shaped (as opposed to the angular-shaped thyroid hormones) chlori- 
nated aromatic hydrocarbons with chlorine concentrated in lateral 
positions (3,3',5,5'-substitution on biphenyl nucleus). However, two 
groups of compounds showed distinct quantitative differences. The 
 
relatively less polar and more lipophilic nonhydroxylated PCBs bound 
the nuclear receptor with significantly lower affinities, whereas two 
compounds that are structurally related by the potential for equilib- 
rium interconversion to a rigid planar structure bound with signifi- 
cantly higher affinities. This latter class of compounds represents 
soluble dioxin (TCDD) approximate isosteres and has an extended 
(polarizable) wr system brought about by a planar structure (or con- 
version to the same) and lateral halogenation. These structure re- 
quirements are maximally expressed in 3,3',5,5'-tetrachlorodiphen- 
oquinone (TCDQ), which shows a remarkably high affinity 
(Ka = 1.84 x 1011 M-1) for the nuclear receptor. Thus, the nuclear 
receptor shows the expected structural specificity and sensitivity for 
possible involvement in the high toxicity of these classes of com- 
pounds. The physiological significance of these binding results is sup- 
ported by the dose-dependent regulation (increase) of the thyroxine 
nuclear receptor number by dioxin, although the mechanism respon- 
sible for this increase is not clear. The nuclear binding component 
was further analyzed by sucrose density gradient centrifugation and 
was found to have a sedimentation coefficient of 4.3 S under high salt 
conditions. A crude estimate of the molecular weight (45,200) was 
obtained from a linear plot of standard globular protein fraction num- 
ber (sedimentation coefficient) versus log molecular weight. Although 
direct evidence is not provided, the thyroxine nuclear receptor may 
cooperate with a second receptor in binding the TCDQ-type ligand 
or exist as a multimeric species with binding properties of both preal- 
bumin and the dioxin (or Ah) receptor. 
 
Macromolecular Binding of the Thyroid Carcinogen 
3-Amino-1,2,4-Triazole (Amitrole) Catalyzed by 
Prostaglandin H Synthase, Lactoperoxidase, and 
Thyroid Peroxidase. R. S. KRAUSS and T. E. ELING. 
Laboratory ofMolecularBiophysics, NIEHS, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
3-Amino-1,2,4-triazole (amitrole) is a thyroid carcinogen and goi- 
trogen when chronically fed to rats and mice, as well as an inhibitor 
of thyroid peroxidase in vivo and in vitro. Amitrole is also negative 
in a wide variety of short-term mutagenicity assays both alone or 
with rat liver S-9. This lack of genotoxicity, in conjunction with its 
antithyroid properties, has led to the conclusion that amitrole is car- 
cinogenic by virtue of its ability to induce a hormone imbalance in the 
thyroid-pituitary-hypothalamus feedback system. However, amitrole 
induces gene mutations and morphological transformation in Syrian 
hamster embryo fibroblasts, cells known to carry out the prostaglan- 
din H synthase (PHS)-mediated peroxidative metabolism of other 
carcinogens. Therefore, we have investigated the peroxidase-me- 
diated binding of ["4C]-amitrole to macromolecules in vitro. We report 
here the PHS- and lactoperoxidase-catalyzed binding of [14C]-amitrole 
to protein and tRNA, as well as protein binding by rat and hog thyroid 
peroxidase. Under the conditions used, PHS was an order of mag- 
nitude more active than lactoperoxidase and two orders of magnitude 
more active than thyroid peroxidase. The low levels of binding ob- 
served with thyroid peroxidase could be explained by the rapid and 
potent inhibition of this enzyme by amitrole. Although the thyroid 
peroxidase-mediated binding of amitrole was quite low, it was not 
inhibitable by compounds that would be expected to be competing 
substrates in vivo (i.e., I-, monoiodotyrosine, diiodotyrosine). These 
data suggest that PHS may be responsible for conversion of amitrole 
to a mutagenic intermediate in Syrian hamster embryo cells. Fur- 
thermore, the generation of reactive metabolites of amitrole by thy- 
roid peroxidase and/or PHS may contribute to the complete carcin- 
ogenicity of this compound by adding a mutagenic response to its 
potent hormonal effects. 
 
Prostaglandin H Synthase-Mediated Bioactivation of 
the Amino Acid Pyrolysate Product TRP P-2. I. W. 
 
130 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
PETRY, R. S. KRAUSS, and T. E. ELING. Laboratory 
of Molecular Biophysics, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
We report evidence that the mutacarcinogen 3-amino-1-methyl-5H- 
pyrido(4,3b)indole (Trp P-2) is a substrate for cooxidation by pros- 
taglandin H synthase (PHS) contained in ram seminal vesicle (RSV) 
microsomes. Trp P-2 serves as a reducing cofactor for the hydroper- 
oxidase activity of PHS as evidence by the concentration-dependent 
inhibition of the hydroperoxidase-catalyzed incorporation of molecular 
oxygen into phenylbutazone. Spectral data suggest this metabolism 
results in disruption of the double bond conjugation within the het- 
erocyclic nucleus of the molecule. A single metabolite peak was sep- 
arated from the parent compound by HPLC following incubation with 
RSV microsomes. Formation of this metabolite peak was dependent 
upon arachidonic acid and upon substrate concentration. Cooxidation 
of Trp P-2 produced reactive intermediates that bound covalently to 
microsomal protein (9 nmole/mg) and to calf thymus DNA (475 pmole/ 
mg). Binding was inhibitable by indomethacin and supported by sub- 
stitution of hydrogen peroxide for arachidonic acid. These data sup- 
port a possible role for PHS in the in situ activation of Trp P-2 to its 
ultimate carcinogenic/mutagenic form in extrahepatic target tissues 
that contain significant levels of PHS and relatively low cytochrome 
P450 activity. 
 
Generation of Free Radicals During the Photolysis 
of the Photoallergens Bithionol and Fentichlor: A 
Spin Trapping Study. A. S. W. Li and C. F. CHIG- 
NELL. Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
When photoallergens bithionol [2,2'-thiobis(4,6-dichlorophenol)] or 
fentichlor [2,2'-thiobis(4-chlorophenol)] were irradiated (X > 300 nm) 
in the presence of spin traps 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide 
(DMPO), 2-methyl-2-nitrosopropane (MNP), or N-t-butyl-a-phenyl- 
nitrone (PBN), free radical spin adducts were detected by electron 
spin resonance. In the absence of air, a carbon-centered radical was 
trapped that was capable of abstracting a hydrogen atom from cys- 
teine, glutathione, ethanol, and formate. This radical was identified 
as an aryl radical derived from the light-induced homolytic cleavage 
of the carbon-chlorine bond. Under aerobic conditions, the hydroxyl 
radical, as well as the aryl radical, was trapped. The presence of free 
hydroxyl radical was confirmed by kinetic experiments employing 
hydroxyl radical scavengers (formate, ethanol). Oxygen-07 experi- 
ments indicated that the hydroxyl radical was derived exclusively 
from dissolved oxygen. The precursor is postulated to be an aryldioxyl 
intermediate (ArOOG) formed by reaction of the aryl radical with mo- 
lecular oxygen according to the following scheme: 
 
hv 
 
ArCl -- Ar + Cl' 
 
Ar. + 02 > ArOO0 
 
H 
 
ArOO -> ArOOH 
 
hl, 
 
ArOOH - ArO + 'OH 
 
The inability of superoxide dismutase and catalase to inhibit hydroxyl 
radical production suggests that neither superoxide nor H202 is in- 
volved. The yield of the hydroxyl radical relative to the carbon-cen- 
tered radical was significantly higher from bithionol than from fen- 
tichlor. Both bithionol and fentichlor photoionized only when excited 
into the UVC region (X < 290 nm). 
 
These studies have shown for the first time that upon UVB-irra- 
diation, bithionol and fentichlor undergo photodehalogenation to form 
the corresponding aryl radicals. Aryl radicals are highly reactive 
chemical species that readily abstract hydrogen atoms from suitable 
donors. In vivo these radicals may be expected to initiate lipid per- 
oxidation and oxidize glutathione. The secondary free radicals formed 
 
from macromolecules may react with the aryl radicals to form covalent 
complexes, which could act as antigens and elicit an allergic response. 
The hydroxyl radical generated from both fentichlor and bithionol 
under aerobic conditions is a strong oxidant that can also initiate lipid 
peroxidation. In addition hydroxyl radicals are known to cause the 
nicking of DNA. Bithionol and fentichlor photoionize only when ex- 
cited at 270 nm. However, since UVC is relatively weak in the solar 
spectrum, photoionization may be relatively unimportant for photo- 
sensitization involving these compounds. 
 
Type II Photosensitization in Erythrocyte Mem- 
branes: Preliminary Studies Utilizing the Singlet 
Emission of Molecular Oxygen at 1268 nm. R. D. 
HALL,* A. W. GIROTTI,t J. P. THOMAS,t and C. F. 
CHIGNELL.* *Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tDe- 
partment of Biochemistry, The Medical College of Wis- 
consin, Milwaukee, WI 53226. 
 
It has been suggested that many phototoxic agents promote re- 
actions between tissue components and molecular oxygen through an 
energy transfer mechanism that produces the highly reactive singlet 
excited state of oxygen (102). Moreover, cell membranes are often 
the targets of phototoxic reactions. We have therefore used a sensitive 
spectrometer to observe the weak phosphorescence of 102 at 1268 nm 
as a means of investigating the presence of 102 in a test membrane 
system, the human erythrocyte ghost. We have studied the '02-gen- 
erating capabilities of a number of photosensitizers having important 
roles in environmental chemistry and photomedicine: hematopor- 
phyrin derivative (HPD), a mixture of porphyrins currently being 
tested for use in photodynamic therapy for neoplastic disease; an- 
thracene, a coal-tar derivative of both environmental and photomed- 
ical importance; eosin-isothiocyanate and eosin-maleimide, strong 
generators of '02 and specific labels of amino and sulfhydryl moieties 
on biological macromolecules. These agents strongly partition into the 
erythrocyte membrane, and 102 can be detected during their irra- 
dition. This technique may prove useful as a simple and rapid method 
of screening drugs and environmental agents for their capacity to 
produce '02 in natural membranes. 
 
Cytosolic Free Calcium Levels During Ischemia 
Measured By Flourine NMR In Perfused Rat Heart. 
E. MURPHY, C. STEENBERGEN, L. LEVY, S. GABEL, 
and R. E. LONDON. Laboratory of Molecular Bio- 
physics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The determination of cytosolic free calcium, Ca,, is of interest for 
the elucidation of the role that elevated Ca, levels play in the devel- 
opment of irreversible cell injury. Fluorine nuclear magnetic reso- 
nance (NMR) can be used to monitor cytosolic free calcium by meas- 
uring the NMR chemical shift of the intracellularly loaded calcium 
chelator, FBAPTA. This chelator is similar in structure to the flu- 
orescent calcium chelators (e.g., quin2), and it can be loaded intra- 
cellularly as the acetoxymethyl ester in a manner analogous to the 
loading of the fluorescent indicators. The potential advantages of the 
NMR spectroscopic approach include: the ability to carry out mea- 
surements on cells, such as erythrocytes in which hemoglobin inter- 
feres with the fluorescence; the ability to carry out studies on perfused 
organs; and the ability to measure Ca, without interference from 
heavy metals. 
 
To determine the role of Ca, in the development of cardiac cell 
injury, Langendorf perfused rat hearts were loaded with 5FBAPTA 
by perfusion with 500 mL of a solution of Krebs-Henseliet buffer 
containing 5 ,uM of the acetoxymethylester of 5FBAPTA. After load- 
ing, the heart was weakly beating and the mean level of Ca,, reflecting 
a time-average of systolic and diastolic Ca,, was 630 ? 97 nM. When 
the heart was arrested with either 15 mM MgCl2 or 25 mM KCI, the 
 
131 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
level of Ca, fell to an average value of 252 ? 25 nM. We were inter- 
ested in determining the level of Ca, during ischemia. After a 30-min 
 
control period, the heart was made totally ischemic for 15 min by 
clamping off the aortic cannula. This was followed by 30 min of reflow. 
19F spectra accumulated between 10 and 15 min of ischemia show an 
approximate fivefold increase in Ca, to a level of 3.5 to 4.0 ,M. This 
increase in Ca, is largely reversed upon reflow, consistent with re- 
versible ischemic damage. In addition there is no low of 5FBAPTA 
into the extracellular space. Comparing 31P spectra accumulated dur- 
ing reflow to those of the control period, we find an increase in in- 
organic phosphate levels, a decrease in nucleotide phosphate levels, 
and a recovery to -100% in the phosphocreatine level, consistent 
with reversibly injured ischemic tissue. 
 
In summary, these data suggest that Ca, reversibly rises to a level 
of at least 3.5 to 4.0 pM by 15 min of ischemia. These data demonstrate 
that prior to the onset of irreversible injury, Ca, rise to a level that 
could activate degradative enzymes. 
 
In Vivo NMR Studies of the Hepatic Metabolism of 
Xenobiotics. S. R. E. LONDON, B. SELINSKY, S. GA- 
BEL, E. MURPHY, L. JEFFREYS, and A. FUNK. Labo- 
ratory of Molecular Biophysics, NIEHS, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Since the discovery of the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) effect 
in 1946 by Bloch, Purcell and co-workers, this technique has become 
an important tool of analytical chemistry. NMR spectra provide one 
of the least equivocal fingerprints which can be used to identify un- 
known organic and inorganic molecules. The scope of the technique 
has been greatly expanded over the past decade with the advent of 
multinuclear methods; nearly all of the elements in the periodic table 
possess at least one isotope with nuclear spin. In the early 1970s, 
several groups began to carry out studies on cell suspensions and 
were able to obtain useful proton, carbon, and phosphorus spectra. 
Such spectra typically exhibit signals arising from lipid molecules 
present in membranes or triglycerides and small metabolites such as 
glucose, lactate, glutamate, inorganic phosphate, and adenosine tri- 
phosphate (ATP). In 1980, Ackerman and co-workers [Nature 283: 
167-170 (1980)] discovered that phosphorus-31 NMR spectra could be 
obtained from intact experimental animals using a surface coil, a small 
tuned rf circuit placed directly over the region to be studied. Our 
group at the NIEHS has sought to evaluate and develop this approach 
for use in studying the metabolism of various xenobiotics in various 
living systems, particularly the liver of the anesthetized rat. In gen- 
eral, direct observation of the spectra produced by various adminis- 
tered chemicals and the corresponding metabolites can be obtained if 
sufficient concentrations are used. In addition, effects of such chem- 
icals on various parameters of cellular metabolism (high energy phos- 
phate compounds, levels of various cations, intermediary metabolism) 
can also be evaluated. Examples include: 19F NMR studies of the 
hepatic metabolism of fluorinated anesthetics; studies of the effects 
of ethionine, the S-ethyl analog of methionine, on cellular ATP levels 
and on the metabolism of methionine; and the use of 2H NMR to study 
the metabolism of other chemicals such as toluene. 
 
Role Of Phosphodiesters As Markers For Tissue Dif- 
ferentiation. C. T. BURT,* F. JUNGAWALLA,t B. 
CHEN,? C. H. HILL,t J. LEVINE,t R. E. LONDON,* 
AND H-M. CHENG.* *Laboratory of Molecular Bio- 
physics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, 
tE. Kennedy Shriver Institute, Waltham, MA, *De- 
partment of Poultry Science and School of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC 27607, and ?Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, 
Boston, MA. 
 
Clinical spectroscopic NMR has examined acute changes in energy 
state for various organs when they are challenged. However, one of 
 
NMR's strengths should be longitudinal studies that involve compar- 
isons over weeks or months for an individual case. This should be 
particularly true for such changes that long-term environmental chal- 
lenges may stimulate. In these studies, a marker, particularly for 
humans, that might change on this time scale as a state of differen- 
tiation is called for. Phosphodiesters glycerolphosphorylcholine (GPC) 
and glycerophosphoryl ethanolamine (GPE) in humans, serine etha- 
nolamine phosphodiester (SEP) in avians, and threonine ethanolamine 
phosphodiester (TEP) in fish might well fit such a category. These 
compounds should be related to changes in the cell membranes. Al- 
ready, in vitro NMR results have highlighted how differentiation in 
the kidney, induced differentiation in rabbit muscle, and the devel- 
opment of sperm show changes in phosphodiesters. Furthermore, two 
general papers have appeared that relate phosphodiester change to 
general lipid metabolism (C. T. Burt and H. J. Ribolow, Biochem. 
Med. 31: 21, 1984; J. P. Infante, FEBS Letters 1986: 205, 1985). 
 
Three different types of tissue were chosen to highlight the wide 
range of organs and species where phosphodiesters could be of im- 
portance. Calf brain was obtained from an abattoir and divided into 
gray and white matter. Each type cranial tissue was run at 109 MHz 
(for 31P) in 10-mm NMR tubes. Chick breast and leg muscle were 
analyzed with a surface coil (1 cm diameter) over either the upper 
leg or chest in a home-built probe run at 144 MHz (for 31P). Fish 
lenses were dissected out and run in a multitune coil at 144 Hz for 
 
31p. 
 
We found that the white matter of brain has more GPC than gray; 
chick leg has more SEP than breast; and the major resonance in fish 
lens is TEP. The assignment of TEP in fish lens is based on the 
literature and can be considered tentative until extract work is done. 
However, as such it is the first NMR demonstration of this compound. 
 
The data point out two things. First, the phosphodiesters can exist 
as markers to discriminate between different states of development 
in a tissue, e.g., white versus gray matter and red muscle (leg) versus 
white (breast). As MRS becomes more precise in spatial location, 
biochemical differentiation will become increasingly important. Sec- 
ond, the assignment of phosphodiesters as just lipid breakdown prod- 
ucts is seen as too facile, since SEP in the chick marks differentation 
in muscle tissue and, like TEP in the fish lens, must be specifically 
synthetized. 
 
Laboratory of Pulmonary Pathobiology 
 
Chemotactic and Growth Factor Production by As- 
bestos-Exposed Pulmonary Macrophages. A. R. 
BRODY, L. H. OVERBY, R. BENNETT, and M. BAUMAN. 
Laboratory of Pulmonary Pathobiology, NIEHS, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The basic cellular mechanisms through which toxic inhaled particles 
cause interstitial fibrotic lung disease remain poorly defined. To ad- 
dress this issue, we have established animal models (rats and mice) 
in which the initial deposition patterns and earliest events of particle 
translocation and clearance can be studied. Using brief (1-5 hr) ex- 
posure to aerosolized chrysotile asbestos, we have learned that the 
vast majority of fibers small enough to pass through the conducting 
airways deposits at the bifurcations of alveolar ducts. At these sites, 
the fibers are internalized by alveolar lining cells within the first hour 
of dusting. This activity continues over the next 8 days, and numerous 
fibers are phagocytized by interstitial fibroblasts. Within 48 hr, after 
a 1-hr exposure to chrysotile, the alveolar duct bifurcations became 
hypercellular and were significantly increased in volume and cross- 
sectional area. This was mainly due to accumulation of significant 
numbers of pulmonary macrophages at the sites of original asbestos 
deposition (i.e., duct bifurcations). One month after the 1-hr exposure, 
the cellularity of the lesions persisted in the interstitial compartment 
 
132 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
and intrafibroblast asbestos-containing microcalcifications (suggesting 
membrane injury) commonly were found in the interstitium of bifur- 
cations. Now we have shown that the inhaled asbestos fibers activate 
a complement-dependent chemotactic factor for macrophages on al- 
veolar surfaces, thus mediating the accumulation of these cells at duct 
bifurcations. In addition, we have demonstrated that macrophages 
lavaged from the lungs of rats produce a growth-stimulating factor 
for rat lung fibroblasts. Whether inhaled fibers induce the prolifera- 
tion and alteration of interstitial fibroblasts through direct effects or 
through the stimulation of factors from other cell types (such as mac- 
rophages) remains to be clarified. 
 
Activation of c-Ha-ras in DNA from Chemically In- 
duced Hepatomas of the B6C3F1 Mouse. R. W. WIS- 
EMAN,* S. J. STOWERS,* E. C. MILLER,t B. C. STEW- 
ART,t D. GRENIER,t M. W. ANDERSON,* and J. A. 
MILLER.t *Laboratory of Pulmonary Pathobiology, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tUni- 
versity of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706. 
 
Activation of the c-Ha-ras proto-oncogene has been examined in 
DNA from well-differentiated hepatomas initiated by a single IP dose 
of a carcinogen to male B6C3F1 mice at 12 days of age (R. W. Wis- 
eman, et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 83: 5825-5829, 1986). DNA from 
32 of 39 hepatomas (7/7 induced by vinyl carbamate, 4/4 from N- 
hydroxy-2-acetylaminofluorene, 11/11 from 1'-hydroxy-2',3'-dehy- 
droestragole, and 7/14 from diethylnitrosamine) demonstrated trans- 
forming activity in the NIH 3T3 transfection assay. Southern analysis 
of 3T3 focus DNA from 31 of 32 of the positive hepatomas revealed 
amplified and/or rearranged restriction fragments homologous to a 
Ha-ras probe; the other tumor contained an activated c-Ki-ras proto- 
oncogene. Immunoprecipitation of 3T3 foci demonstrated expression 
of a p21 protein that had increased mobility on SDS-PAGE analysis. 
The activating mutations were characterized at the DNA sequence 
level by selective oligonucleotide hybridization or restriction-frag- 
ment-length polymorphism analyses; each of these tumors contained 
one of three different base substitutions at the first or second position 
of codon 61 in the c-Ha-ras gene. These results have been extended 
to the direct analysis of base changes in codon 61 for tumor DNA 
from 65 additional B6C3F1 hepatomas induced by the following car- 
cinogens: 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene, benzo[a]pyrene, aflatoxin 
B,, ethyl carbamate, vinyl carbamate, safrole, estragole, N-hydroxy- 
4-aminoazobenzene, and N-hydroxy-2-acetylaminofluorene. At least 
80% of these hepatomas also contained point mutations at the first or 
second position of the 61st codon. The distinct patterns of c-Ha-ras 
mutations observed in these hepatomas for each chemical imply that 
these alterations can be a direct result of the interaction of electro- 
philic ultimate carcinogens with this gene in vivo. These observations 
are also consistent with the hypothesis that c-Ha-ras activation is 
frequently an early event of hepatocarcinogenesis in the B6C3F1 
mouse. 
 
Silica-Induced Hyperplasia and Hypertrophy of Al- 
veolar Type II Cells in the Lungs of Rats. B. E. 
MILLER*t and G. E. R. HOOK.* Laboratory of Pul- 
monary Pathobiology, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709 and tCurriculum in Toxicology, Uni- 
versity of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC. 
 
Deposition of silica dust in the lung causes pulmonary inflammation 
and ultimately silicosis. Much of the attention in studying the response 
of the lung to silica has been focused on changes in alveolar macro- 
phages and fibroblasts, because these cell types are thought to play 
a critical role in the development of fibrosis. Very little is known 
about the responses of other cell types and their roles in the devel- 
opment of pulmonary fibrosis. 
 
Several investigators have described alterations in alveolar Type 
 
II cells in experimental animals following exposure to silica. Altera- 
tions in the Type II cell population probably underlie the large in- 
creases in surfactant which occur in response to silica. We have in- 
vestigated the proliferative response of Type II cells to a single 
intratracheal injection of silica (10 mg), as well as the ultrastructural 
changes which occur in these cells in response to silica. 
 
Type II cell hyperplasia was quantitated by using alkaline phos- 
phatase histochemistry to identify Type II cells at the light micro- 
scopic level. The number of Type II cells, at all time points examined, 
was significantly elevated above control values. The increase in Type 
II cells was linear and by 28 days following silica treatment, Type II 
cells had increased to (252 ? 16) x 106 cells per pair of lungs compared 
to a control value of (141 ? 32) x 106 cells. 
 
The morphological appearance of Type II cells indicated that many 
of the Type II cells in silica-treated lungs were larger than those in 
control lungs. To better examine these cells, lung cells were dispersed 
by trypsin digestion, and centrifugal elutriation was used to separate 
normal Type II cells from the larger or hypertrophic variety. Four- 
teen days following silica treatment, 35 to 40% of the Type II cells 
from silica-treated lungs were recovered in the hypertrophic popu- 
lation. In contrast, only 10 to 15% of the Type II cells from control 
lungs were recovered in the hypertrophic population. The separated 
cells were processed for electron microscopy, and a detailed mor- 
phometric analysis was performed. Hypertrophic Type II cells were 
50% larger than normal Type II cells, and in addition, the lamellar 
body compartment was markedly altered. Lamellar body volume den- 
sity nearly doubled from 11% in normal Type II cells to 19% in hy- 
pertrophic Type II cells. The average size of lamellar bodies increased 
from 0.32 ,um3 in normal cells to 0.66 p.m3 in hypertrophic cells. The 
number of lamellar bodies/cell was also increased, from 96/cell in nor- 
mal Type II cells to 131/cell in hypertrophic Type II cells. The changes 
we have observed in the Type II cell population are consistent with 
the changes observed in surfactant levels following silica exposure. 
The ability to isolate and separate the hypertrophic Type II cells from 
normal Type II cells will allow us to investigate the biochemical and 
metabolic changes which have occurred in these unusual cells. 
 
Laboratory of Behavioral and Neurological 
Toxicology 
 
Ganglioside Interactions with the Dopaminergic Sys- 
tem in Rats. H. A. TILSON,* G. J. HARRY,t K. 
NANRY,* P. HUDSON,* and J. S. HONG.* *Laboratory 
of Behavioral and Neurological Toxicology, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tBiological Sci- 
ences Research Center, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27514. 
 
Rats were given unilateral injections of 6-hydroxydopamine (6- 
OHDA) into the substantia nigra (10 ,ug/0.5 ,uL). Some animals were 
dosed at the time of surgery and for 14 days after surgery with 30 
mg/kg, SC, of mixed gangliosides (GM), while others received vehicle. 
On the day after the last injection of GM, the rats were given 1 mg/ 
kg apomorphine, SC, and their motor activity was measured for 60 
min; 7 days later they were challenged with 0.5 mg/kg of apomorphine. 
Supersensitivity to apomorphine was attenuated in rats receiving GM; 
HPLC analysis of the neostriatum found that GM attenuated 6-OHDA 
induced decreases in dopamine and DOPAC by approximately 50%. 
Another group of rats was implanted with chronic indwelling cannulas 
in the lateral cerebroventricles at the time 6-OHDA was injected into 
the substantia nigra. Some rats received 25 or 50 jig of GM for 10 
days after surgery, while others received 2 plL of buffered vehicle. 
Two weeks after surgery, the rats were challenged with 1 mg/kg of 
apomorphine and activity was measured for 1 hr. Treatment with GM 
 
133 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
attenuated the supersensitivity to apomorphine resulting from injec- 
tion of 6-OHDA. Striatal depletions of dopamine and DOPAC were 
also attenuated in GM-treated rats. 
 
A separate experiment sought to determine the effects of GM1 on 
the development of receptor supersensitivity produced by repeated 
exposure to a dopamine receptor antagonist. Rats were injected with 
1 mg/kg of haloperidol, SC, for 8 or 16 days; some rats were coad- 
ministered 20 mg/kg of GM1, SC. Four days after the last dose, the 
rats were challenged with 1 mg/kg of apomorphine and activity was 
counted for 60 min. Treatment with GM1 decreased the behavioral 
supersensitivity to apomorphine induced by repeated exposure to 
haloperidol. 
 
These experiments suggest that treatment with GM can have a 
protective effect against 6-OHDA-induced depletion of dopamine if 
treatment with GM begins at the time of lesioning. These studies also 
support receptor binding data reported by other laboratories, indi- 
cating that treatment with GM1 can affect processes responsible for 
up-regulation of dopamine receptors. 
 
Association Between Wet Dog Shakes and Changes 
in Hippocampal Levels of Opioid Peptides, GABA, 
and Glutamine. C. L. MITCHELL,* L. GRIMES,t S. 
 
RAHMAAN,* M. J. BARNES,* B. SCARLETT,* P. M. 
HUDSON,* and J. S. HONG.* *Laboratory of Behav- 
ioral and Neurological Toxicology, NIEHS, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tCurriculum in Toxi- 
cology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27514. 
 
Several lines of evidence suggest that endogenous opioid peptides 
play an important role in the regulation of brain excitability, especially 
with respect to limbic system epileptogenic phenomena. Moreover, 
electrophysiological studies have indicated that iontophoretically ap- 
plied opioid peptides have potent effects on hippocampal pyramidal 
cells. However, attempts to demonstrate such effects by electrical 
stimulation of endogenous opioid peptide-containing pathways have 
not been successful. 
 
One explanation for this inability to demonstrate opioid effects by 
stimulation of endogenous opioid peptide-containing pathways is that 
the stimulation parameters used may not elicit release of the opioids. 
The major purpose of this investigation was, therefore, to determine 
the stimulus conditions necessary to demonstrate release of opioid 
peptides from the hippocampus. A secondary purpose was to deter- 
mine whether or not levels of any of the putative amino acid trans- 
mitters present in the hippocampal formation might also be altered 
by these conditions. 
 
Forty male Fischer 344 rats between 12 and 15 weeks of age were 
implanted with bilateral perforant path electrodes. Forty-eight hr 
after surgery all animals were stimulated to determine the threshold 
for eliciting wet dog shakes (WDS). Seven to ten days following 
threshold determination the animals were divided into 4 groups of 10 
animals each: (1) nonstimulated control, (2) animals stimulated to the 
point of exhibiting approximately 25 WDS, (3) animals stimulated to 
the point of exhibiting at least 75 WDS, and (4) a stimulated, but non- 
WDS group yoked to the preceding group. Immediately following 
testing, the animals were killed by decapitation and their brains re- 
moved. The hippocampus was dissected free for biochemical analyses. 
Met-enkephalin (ME) and dynorphin (DYN) were measured by ra- 
dioimmunoassay. Tissue levels of taurine, aspartate, glutamate, glu- 
tamine, glycine, and -y-amino-butyric acid (GABA) were determined 
by HPLC. 
 
The results demonstrated that stimulation of the perforant path 
under conditions that elicit WDS in rats produced a significant de- 
crease in hippocampal levels of ME, DYN, and glutamine, and an 
increase in GABA. Levels of these substances were not altered by 
stimulus parameters insufficient to elicit WDS. These results lend 
support to the notion that endogenous opioid peptides play a role in 
regulation of hippocampal excitability, but may only be released under 
relatively intense stimulus conditions. The increase in GABA levels 
 
suggests that GABA release is reduced. This is consistent with re- 
ports that iontophoretically applied enkephalin exerts its apparent 
excitatory effects via an inhibitory action on inhibitory neurons in the 
hippocampus. 
 
Laboratory of Reproductive and 
Developmental Toxicology 
 
Regional Changes in Multiple Molecular Forms of 
the LHRH Prohormone in Rat Brain. W. C. WET- 
SEL, C. A. JOHNSTON, M. D. CULLER, and A. NEGRO- 
VILAR. Laboratory of Reproductive and Develop- 
mental Toxicology, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
A 92-amino acid peptide containing the sequence for luteinizing 
hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) has been deduced recently from 
cDNA libraries derived from human and rat hypothalami [Adelman 
et al., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.) 83: 179, 1986]. Sequences for both 
LHRH and a 56-amino acid peptide, designated gonadotropin-releas- 
ing hormone associated peptide (GAP), reside within this prepropep- 
tide. We have recently developed specific antisera and a radioim- 
munoassay procedure for GAP. When both LHRH and GAP levels 
are quantitated concurrently, insights can be gained into biosynthesis, 
processing, transport, secretion and/or degradation. The purpose of 
this study was twofold. First, we correlated changes in plasma lu- 
teinizing hormone (LH) with alterations in LHRH- and GAP-like 
immunoreactivities (IR) in the cell body [medial preoptic nucleus 
(MPO)], the fiber [arcuate nucleus (AN)], and the terminal [median 
eminence (ME)] regions of LHRH neurons throughout the estrous 
cycle. Second, we characterized different molecular weight forms of 
LHRH- and GAP-IR in the LHRH cell body and fiber-containing 
regions [preoptic-hypothalamic areas (POH)] and compared them to 
those species contained within the axon-terminal region (ME). Plasma 
LH was low during all stages of the estrous cycle except for the surge 
on the late afternoon of proestrus. Concentrations of both LHRH and 
GAP were lowest in the MPO, higher in the AN, and highest in the 
ME. In the MPO, levels of GAP-IR were fairly stable except for 
fluctuations seen on estrus and metestrus. LHRH-IR showed a similar 
pattern except for an additional increase on proestrus, which peaked 
3 hr prior to the preovulatory LH surge. The GAP content of the AN 
was at least 7.8-fold higher than LHRH throughout the estrous cycle, 
and both were augmented prior to the LH surge. In the ME, similar 
qualitative changes were seen in LHRH and GAP levels throughout 
the cycle. A progressive increase in both LHRH and GAP occurred 
during the afternoon of proestrus, followed by a precipitous decline 
at the time of the LH surge. In order to characterize the possible 
different LHRH- and GAP-IR species, POH and ME extracts were 
run on a high-performance gel permeation column under denaturing 
and reducing conditions, and the fractions were screened for LHRH- 
and GAP-IR. Only one major peak of LHRH-IR was seen, which had 
a molecular weight (MW) of 1200. Approximately twofold more 
LHRH-IR was found in the ME than in the POH. Peaks of GAP-IR 
were observed at MWs of 16,000; 14,500; 6500; and less than 1000; 
the major peak was at 6500. The 14,500 and the 6500 MW forms of 
GAP-IR were more prominent in the ME than in the POH. Taken 
together, these data demonstrate that regional levels of LHRH- and 
GAP-IR are enhanced just prior to the LH surge; some processing 
of the proLHRH begins within the cell body region such that LHRH 
and GAP are cleaved from this precursor; some additional processing 
of LHRH and GAP may occur as they are transported out of the cell 
bodies, through the fibers, and to the terminals where they accu- 
mulate. At the time of the LH surge, secretion and/or degradation 
of both LHRH and GAP may occur. These results further demon- 
strate the usefulness of using GAP and LHRH antisera to evaluate 
 
134 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
the dynamics of biosynthesis, processing, transport, secretion and/or 
metabolism of proLHRH during various physiological states. 
 
How Does the Gonad Affect LHRH Secretion? Ef- 
fects of Gonadectomy on LHRH Release from Me- 
dian Eminence Nerve Terminals Incubated In Vitro 
and on LHRH Concentration in Hypophyseal Portal 
Blood. M. M. VALENCA, M. CHING, C. MASOTTO, and 
A. NEGRO-VILAR. Laboratory of Reproductive and 
Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Gonadal steroids and peptides have an important role in the reg- 
ulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Gonadectomy leads to a 
rise in plasma gonadotropin levels, caused by the removal of the well- 
known inhibitory influence of gonadal hormones (sex steroids, inhibin, 
etc.) over this axis. Our studies were designed to evaluate the changes 
in secretion of LHRH and LH that might occur after orchidectomy 
(ORDX), using both in vivo and in vitro approaches. These studies 
were performed in adult, male, Sprague-Dawley rats that were 
ORDX 1 to 10 days prior to the experiment. The enhancement of 
plasma LH and FSH levels in the castrated animals was accompanied 
by a substantial decrease in the LHRH content of the preoptico- 
mediobasal hypothalamic region. This result has been interpreted by 
many laboratories as an indication of an increased secretion of LHRH 
into the hypophyseal portal circulation which would, in turn, account 
for the enhanced secretion of the gonadotropins. Evaluation of LHRH 
secretion from median eminence (ME) nerve terminals incubated in 
vitro in a Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate glucose buffer showed a decrease 
in basal LHRH secretion after ORDX, such that by 3 days postcas- 
tration LHRH release was significantly lower than that of the intact 
controls. The lowest levels were achieved on day 10 post-ORDX. To 
corroborate this unexpected finding, other experiments were de- 
signed to obtain an in vivo measure of the changes in LHRH secretion 
after ORDX. Hypophyseal portal blood was collected from intact and 
10-day ORDX rats, and the LHRH concentration in these samples 
was evaluated by RIA. The results indicate that, in castrated rats, 
significantly lower levels of LHRH in portal plasma are observed, 
suggesting that ORDX diminishes the rate of LHRH secretion in 
vivo, a result which agrees with the in vitro studies. On the other 
hand, dihydrotestosterone pellets, when implanted SC at the time of 
ORDX, reversed such an effect. Additional preliminary studies in- 
dicate that both intact and ORDX animals show a pulsatile pattern 
of LHRH secretion, but that ORDX reduces the mean levels of LHRH 
in portal blood without, however, significantly changing the pulse 
peak amplitude, at least during the interval examined in this study. 
Changes in pituitary responsiveness after ORDX were evaluated in 
vitro by incubating hemipituitaries obtained from 10-day post-ORDX 
or intact rats. Basal LH secretion was twofold higher in ORDX rats, 
and responsiveness to LHRH was enhanced fivefold over that of intact 
rats. The data indicate that the elevated LH levels detected after 
several days of ORDX are not the result of a sustained, increased 
secretion of LHRH into the portal circulation, but rather, may pri- 
marily reflect an enhanced sensitivity of the gonadotroph to the action 
of the decapeptide. In addition, the data also suggest that, contrary 
to current thinking, removal of gonadal steroids and possibly other 
gaonadal factors may result in a decreased neuroendosecretion of 
LHRH from ME nerve terminals into the hypophyseal portal vessels. 
Additional studies to determine synthesis and processing of the 
LHRH prohormone molecule, in intact and gonadectomized animals, 
may help clarify this issue. 
 
Computer-Controlled Perifusion: Studies of Intra- 
cellular Events Leading to Pulsatile Hormone Se- 
cretion. M. D. CULLER, M. VALENCA, F. ROMA- 
 
NELLI, and A. NEGRO-VILAR. Laboratory of 
Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
It is now known that all of the pituitary hormones are secreted in 
a rhythmic, pulsatile manner. This mode of secretion is believed to 
be caused by the pulsatile release of various pituitary regulating pep- 
tides from the hypothalamus of the brain. Despite this realization, 
little is known about how the characteristics of a pulsatile hormone 
signal (pulse shape, frequency, amplitude, etc.) effect the final target 
cell repsonse, and even less is known about the role of intracellular 
messengers in mediating the response to a pulsatile signal. A major 
reason for this lack of information has been the limitations of con- 
ventional perifusion systems in producing a pulsatile signal. Recently, 
however, a computer-assisted perifusion system was developed that 
can be programmed to control and/or manipulate any and all param- 
eters of a pulsatile hormone signal. Using this system to explore the 
regulation of pulsatile luteinizing hormone (LH) secretion by lutein- 
izing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH), we have designed an 
LHRH pulse that rises from 0 to peak LHRH concentration in 30 sec 
and then decays exponentially according to the perifusion flow rate. 
The LH secretory response was characterized in detail by stimulating 
perifused hemipituitaries from intact, male rats with three, 10-ng total 
mass priming pulses of LHRH followed by a 50-ng total mass LHRH 
pulse of the described design. Both the LHRH signal and the LH 
response were measured in the perifusate fractions by radioimmu- 
noassay. A sharp and immediate rise in LH secretion, which would 
reach 300% baseline within 10 min, was evident within the first frac- 
tion in which the LHRH signal was detected. During the approximate 
60-min decay of the LH response to baseline levels, LH appeared to 
be secreted in episodic waves. The protracted LH response to the 
LHRH pulse could be rapidly attentuated (within 6 min) by the gen- 
eration of a similarly designed, 25 ,g pulse of the LHRH antagonist, 
[D-pGlu1, D-Phe2, D-Trp3' ]-LHRH, 30 sec after the initiation of the 
50-ng LHRH pulse. Generation of a similarly designed pulse of phos- 
pholipase-C (PL-C), after three LHRH priming pulses, produced an 
LH secretory response that closely mimicked the response produced 
by the LHRH pulse. In the presence of 5 mM EGTA, pulses of either 
LHRH or PL-C failed to induce the normal LH secretory response, 
but rather produced only a small, initial increase in LH secretion 
during the first few minutes. Addition of the lipoxygenase inhibitor, 
nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA, 20 ,uM), did not significantly alter 
the pattern of the LH secretory response, but it did reduce the mag- 
nitude by about 50%. The ability of PL-C to mimic the effects of 
LHRH suggests that PL-C may be an intracellular mediator of 
LHRH-stimulated LH secretion. The results also indicate that both 
LHRH and PL-C require extracellular Ca2e in order to stimulate LH 
release. Arachidonic acid, metabolized through the lipoxygenase path- 
way, may play a role in LHRH-stimulated LH release by ampl&iying 
the stimulatory action of the peptide. The ability of a pulse of LHRH 
antagonist to attenuate the LH secretory response initiated by a pulse 
of LHRH raises intriguing questions as to the requirements of con- 
tinued LHRH receptor occupancy for the protracted LH secretory 
response and/or the possibility of inhibitory receptors or intracellular 
pathways which mediate the inhibitory effects of the antagonist. As 
demonstrated by these studies, computer-controlled perifusion is a 
powerful approach to advance our understanding of the intracellular 
events involved in mediating pulsatile hormone secretion. 
 
Role of Central Epinephrine on the Regulation of 
Corticotropin-Releasing Factor and ACTH Secre- 
tion. C. A. JOHNSTON,* E. SPINEDI,t A. CHISARI,t 
and A. NEGRO-VILAR.* *Laboratory of Reproductive 
and Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709 and tCentro de Referencia de 
Radioinmunoensayo, CEAB-I, FBPBA 1900 La Plata, 
Argentina. 
 
Epinephrine (EPI) has been described to stimulate the hypotha- 
lamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. However, whether central EPI neuronal 
 
135 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
systems play a major physiological role in the regulation of ACTH 
secretion and whether that role is primarily stimulatory or inhibitory 
in nature is still controversial. The present study addressed these 
questions using inhibitors of the enzyme responsible for the formation 
of EPI, phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase (PNMT), which 
were either only active peripherally or were both peripherally and 
centrally active. Male rats received either vehicle or a PNMT inhibitor 
12 hr prior to further experimental procedures. Such treatment pro- 
duced a large decrease in hypothalamic EPI levels in rats given central 
PNMT inhibitors and a much smaller decrease in animals given the 
peripheral PNMT inhibitor. Neither of these treatments affected hy- 
pothalamic norepinephrine (NE) levels. Plasma EPI was decreased 
to similar levels following treatment with either peripheral or central 
PNMT inhibitors, whereas plasma NE was not significantly affected 
by any of the PNMT inhibitors. Basal plasma ACTH was not altered 
following either peripheral or central PNMT inhibition. However, 
central, but not peripheral, inhibition of PNMT significantly de- 
creased the plasma ACTH response to ether vapor stress at 5 and 15 
min. This effect was apparently not due to a change in responsiveness 
of the pituitary to CRF, as the increases in plasma ACTH in response 
to an IV bolus injection of CRF (1 ,ug/rat) was indistinguishable in 
rats pretreated with central PNMT inhibitors versus those treated 
with vehicle at both 5 and 15 min post-CRF injection. Furthermore, 
the hypothalamic content of CRF, but not of arginine vasopressin 
(AVP), another potent ACTH secretagogue, was significantly de- 
creased 12 hr following inhibition of central PNMT. This effect was 
not observed in rats treated with the peripheral PNMT inhibitor, nor 
was it caused by manipulation of the animals 12 hr before sacrifice. 
 
The data demonstrate that central inhibition of PNMT which pro- 
duces a selective decrease in hypothalamic EPI levels also causes a 
decrease in CRF content and in the response of plasma ACTH to 
ether vapor stress. Furthermore, the altered ACTH response to ether 
vapor stress is not due to a change in responsiveness of the pituitary 
to CRF or to an alteration in AVP levels. Thus, an endogenous EPI 
neuronal system(s) appears to be involved in the regulation of CRF 
neurons responsible for the increase in ACTH following ether vapor 
stress, and that regulation appears to be primarily stimulatory in 
nature. 
 
Transmembrane Signals and Intracellular Messen- 
gers Mediating LHRH Secretion: Interaction be- 
tween Norepinephrine and Estradiol at the Neuronal 
Nerve Terminal. C. MASOTTO, M. VALENCA, and A. 
NEGRO-VILAR. Laboratory of Reproductive and De- 
velopmental Toxicology, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Many studies indicate that the neurotransmitter norepinephrine 
(NE) is involved in the regulation of LHRH. Gonadal steroids, par- 
ticularly estradiol, modulate the interaction between NE and LHRH. 
Previous studies from our laboratory, using an in vitro system, have 
shown that NE acts through an a-adrenergic receptor to enhance 
LHRH release from median eminence (ME) nerve terminals and that 
PGE2 is an important intracellular mediator of the action of NE. 
Circulating estrogen levels determine the neuronal sensitivity to NE, 
and indeed, the steroidal milieu of the donor animals determines the 
degree of responsiveness in vitro to the stimulatory effect of NE. We 
have applied this in vitro system to evaluate the NE-LHRH-estrogen 
interaction and the possible involvement of intracellular messengers 
in mediating LHRH release. The purpose of this study was to de- 
termine possible nongenomic effects of estradiol (E2) on LHRH nerve 
terminals; to investigate the effect of intracellular messengers in me- 
diating LHRH release; and to evaluate the presence of desensitization 
to the stimulatory response in vitro and, if present, the effect of E2 
in this phenomenon. ME fragments (containing only nerve fibers and 
terminals and no cell bodies) were obtained from adult male rats or 
adult rats 1 week after ovariectomy and incubated in a Krebs Ringer 
buffer (KRB). NE was added (10 puM) in each of three separate 30 
min incubation periods, separated by 90-min recovery periods. In 
certain groups, 1713-E2 (10-' M) was added to the KRB throughout 
 
the entire incubation period. NE increased LHRH release during the 
first period from ME's incubated in KRB or KRB + E2, and the degree 
of this stimulation was not affected by estrogen. During the second 
and third test periods, NE was no longer able to stimulate LHRH 
release, suggesting the presence of a refractory situation. The ME's 
incubated with KRB + E2 recovered the capacity to respond to NE 
during the third test period. PGE2 release was consistenly stimulated 
by NE and was not affected by the presence of E2. Addition of ex- 
ogenous PGE2 (0.5 FLM) at each of the three test periods resulted in 
an enhancement in LHRH release and the degree of this effect was 
not affected by the presence of E2. The activation of the protein kinase 
C by a phorbol ester [43-phorbol-12,3, 13a-dibutyrate (PDBu)] in- 
duced a dose-dependent release of LHRH, as well as release of PGE2. 
PDBu (50 nM) induced a consistent release of LHRH, which was not 
affected by the presence or absence of E2. A dose-dependent release 
of LHRH and PGE2 was also obtained using phospholipase C (PLC), 
suggesting that diacylglycerol may represent an important intracell- 
ular messenger involved in LHRH release (Endocrinology 119: 2796- 
2802, 1986). In conclusion, our results indicate that desensitization of 
the NE effect on LHRH may be observed in vitro and that this effect 
is not strictly related to activation of PGE2 release. Moreover, these 
results suggest that, since the response to PGE2 remains unaltered, 
an inhibitory factor and/or mechanism involved in LHRH secretion 
may play a role in the desensitization process. The effect of estrogen 
in vitro in a nerve terminal preparation devoid of cell bodies suggests 
some nonnuclear effect of the steroid. Lastly, the observed involve- 
ment of protein kinase C and PLC in LHRH release suggests that 
several intracellular pathways may be involved in these events. 
 
A Hepatic Plasma Membrane Antigen of the Junc- 
tional Complex. L. M. CHAPMAN and E. M. EDDY. 
Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental Toxi- 
cology, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Cell-cell attachments are maintained by modifications of the con- 
tiguous cell membranes and the associated cytoplasm. One such spe- 
cial modification in epithelial cells is the junctional complex. The junc- 
tional complex and the cytoskeletal components associated with it are 
involved in maintenance of the polarity of epithelial cells. This study 
examines an antigen of the junctional complex in hepatocytes that is 
detected by monoclonal antibody BG9. 1. 
 
Monoclonal antibody BG9. 1 recognizes a plasma membrane antigen 
by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) as two discrete parallel lines 
with organized branching over the surface of intact mouse liver cells 
and on isolated hepatic cell plasma membranes (HPMS). The IIF 
pattern seen on frozen sections indicates that the antibody reacts with 
the canalicular surface and possibly with the sinusoidal and lateral 
surfaces of hepatocytes. These results and studies involving differ- 
ential extraction of HPMS imply that the antigen is an integral mem- 
brane protein extending from the cytoplasmic surface to the external 
face of the membrane. In addition, BG9.1 recognizes intermediate 
filament proteins associated with the junctional protein. The antibody 
reacts with 5 major bands on Western Blots of HPMS with approx- 
imate molecular weights of 150/160kD, 105/115kD (doublet), 5OkD, 
45kD, and 4OkD. 
 
The lower three bands appear to be intermediate filament proteins 
which can be partially extracted from HPMS by phosphate-buffered 
citrate (pH 3) or Triton X-100 (TX). It also appears that the upper 
band of the doublet is extracted by the citrate buffer and the lower 
band of the doublet is extracted by TX. Most significant, however, 
is that both proteins of the doublet, as well as the intermediate fila- 
ment proteins, are extracted from HPMS treated with deoxycholate 
(DOC), while the 150/160 kD protein is not extracted, and the IIF 
pattern is retained. It has been reported that tight junctions are not 
soluble in DOC, and BG9.1 also recognizes a single stripe in other 
epithelial cell types. In addition, BG9.1 recognizes intermediate fila- 
ments in NOR-10, 3T3, and Sertoli cells. These results suggest that 
BG9. 1 detects an antigenic determinant common to some junctional 
and intermediate filament proteins. 
 
136 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
Preliminary Characterization of a Leydig Cell Sur- 
face Protein Defined by Monoclonal Antibodies. M. 
P. HEDGER and E. M. EDDY. Laboratory of Repro- 
ductive and Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Normal spermatogenesis and the maintenance of the male repro- 
ductive tract and secondary sex charateristics are dependent upon 
androgens, which are secreted by the Leydig cells in the testicular 
interstitial tissue. In order to obtain specific markers for the inves- 
tigation of Leydig cell ontogeny and heterogeneity, monoclonal an- 
tibodies were prepared from adult female BALB/c mice that had been 
immunized with collagenase-dispersed, Percoll density gradient-pur- 
ified adult rat Leydig cells. By IIF (indirect immunofluorescence), it 
was found that monoclonal antibodies LC-1C6 and LC-6H6 (both IgM 
class, but from separate mice) label the surface and cytoplasm of 
Leydig cells exclusively in mixtures of isolated rat testicular cells. 
Reactivity declined following protease-treatment of the cells, but not 
after periodate oxidation, as assessed by ELISA. Both monoclonal 
antibodies recognized a major antigen of Mr 58,000, pI 6.7 to 6.9 in 
two-dimensional Western blots of extracts of rat Leydig cells and 
were weakly reactive with antigens (55K and 40K) in seminiferous 
tubule extracts. LC-1C6 did not react with adrenal or liver extracts, 
although LC-6H6 recognized several minor bands in liver. In Leydig 
cell homogenates, the antigen was associated with 600 x g and 
15,000 x g pellets, with no activity in the 15,000 x g supernatant frac- 
tion. Strong reactivity with both monoclonal antibodies was localized 
over the Leydig cell surface and cytoplasm in paraffin sections of 
adult rat and mouse testes, by avidin-biotin-peroxidase immunocy- 
tochemistry. There was considerably weaker reactivity with Sertoli 
cells, and no label of other testicular cell types. Mouse 3T3 cells were 
not labeled by either LC-1C6 or LC-6H6, as determined by IIF or 
Western blot procedures. In the adult rat, hypophysectomy only 
slightly reduced binding by either monoclonal antibody in the short- 
term (10 days) as determined by ELISA, although there was a sub- 
stantial decline in binding by both monoclonal antibodies at 6 months 
posthypophysectomy. The data suggest that both monoclonal anti- 
bodies recognize the same proteinaceous antigen associated with Ley- 
dig cell plasma membrane expressed on the cell surface. The antigen 
appears to be a constitutive molecule of the Leydig cell, and not under 
acute hormonal regulation, indicating the usefulness of LC-1C6 and 
LC-6H6 as Leydig cell markers in animals of different hormonal sta- 
tus. 
 
Ultrastructural Studies of Embryonic Mouse Palatal 
Epithelia Exposed In Vitro to Retinoic Acid and 
EGF. B. D. ABBOTT and R. M. PRATT. Laboratory 
of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The mechanism by which retinoids (RA) induce cleft palate is not 
known. During normal palatogenesis, the medial epithelia of opposing 
palatal shelves cease DNA synthesis, come into contact, adhere, and 
undergo programmed cell death (PCD). In organ cultures of day 12 
embryonic mouse palatal shelves, EGF blocks programmed cell death 
and DNA synthesis continues. In the present study, the effects of 
trans-RA, 13-cis-RA, EGF, and combinations of EGF + RA on sur- 
face morphology, DNA synthesis, and cellular ultrastructure are de- 
termined for CD-1 embryonic mouse palatal shelves cultured on day 
12 of gestation. DNA synthesis in the medial cells was sustained and 
PCD was blocked by EGF, trans-RA, and 13-cis-RA. Exposure to 
trans-RA, but not to 13-cis-RA, induced the epithelia to undergo 
hyperplasia, and addition of EGF enhanced the effect. In the presence 
of RA, particularly trans-RA, medial epithelial cells acquired nasal 
cell characteristics, and EGF enhanced this effect. Treatment with 
trans-RA, but not 13-cis-RA, produced large lamellar bodies and 
blocked expansion of the mesenchymal extracellular spaces. The RA- 
induced alterations in normal epithelial and mesenchymal cell differ- 
 
entiation may be relevant to the etiology of RA-induced cleft palate 
in vivo. 
 
This abstract was presented at the 20th Meeting of the American Society for 
Cell Biology and was published in J. Cell Biol. 103: 488A (1986). 
 
The Role of Laminin in Embryonic Mesenchymal 
Cell Adhesion In Vitro. K. S. MORGAN and R. M. 
PRATT. Laboratory of Reproductive and Develop- 
mental Toxicology, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
Laminin is a major component of basement membranes which sep- 
arate epithelial and mesenchymal cells. Material immunoreactive with 
polyclonal antilaminin sera has been found associated with human 
embryonic mesenchymal cells in vivo and in vitro. We have examined 
the expression of laminin by human embryonic palatal mesenchyme 
(HEPM) cells in vitro to determine the function of mesenchymal lam- 
inin. Antilaminin did not interfere with initial cell attachment to plas- 
tic or glass surfaces with or without laminin or fibronectin coating. 
Continuous culture in the presence of antilaminin at 10 ,uL/mL me- 
dium (DMEM + 10% FBS) suppressed the rate of growth but did not 
affect cell viability or morphology in subconfluent cultures. At culture 
days 6 and 7, HEPM cells plated at 5 x 104 cells per 35-mm dish were 
confluent and were becoming bilayered. During this interval, cultures 
in the presence of antibody had extensive regions of cellular detach- 
ment whether the antibody was present continuously or added at day 
2, 3, or 4. In such cultures it was possible to rescue the cells which 
had not yet detached by changing to antibody-free medium; detached 
cells did not reattach. Cell-to-cell adhesion was maintained in detached 
cells which came off the dish in large sheets and aggregates, as well 
as single cells. Antifibronectin serum interfered with initial cell at- 
tachment or caused cellular detachment by day 2, depending upon 
the culture substrate. Antilaminin bound to cells in culture was de- 
tected by incubating fixed cultures with FITC-conjugated goat anti- 
rabbit immunoglobulin. The intensity of fluorescence increased with 
culture age and the concentration of antilaminin in the culture me- 
dium. From these results, it appears that laminin functions in cell- 
to-substrate adhesion in embryonic mesenchyme cells. This work was 
supported by NRSA Fellowship 1-F32-ES05299. 
 
This abstract was presented at the 20th Annual Meeting of the American 
Society for Cell Biology and was published in J. Cell Biol. 103: 95a (1986). 
 
Normal and Abnormal Development in Whole Em- 
bryo Culture. E. H. GOULDING, T. WATANABE, and 
R. M. PRATT. Laboratory of Reproductive and De- 
velopmental Toxicology, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
The culture of postimplantation rodent embryos offers several 
unique advantages in that it eliminates the complex interactions 
among maternal-placental-embryonic tissues. In this way, teratogenic 
agents can be utilized in order to determine the mechanisms by which 
they interfere with embryonic development. Culture techniques have 
been refined to the point that growth and development of early cul- 
tured embryos compare quite favorably to growth in vivo. Day 8 or 
10 CD-1 mouse embryos have been used for most of our studies on 
in vitro teratogenicity. Embryos are normally cultured for 48 hr in 
either rat serum or 50% fetal calf serum, depending on the embryonic 
age, and then examined for growth and development. Day 8 embryos 
exposed to the anticonvulsant drug valproic acid for 48 hr exhibited 
a statistically significant decrease in all growth parameters, as well 
as a high percentage of dysmorphogenesis of the neural tube (a con- 
dition known as exencephaly). The synthetic glucocorticoid, triam- 
cinolone, a potent cleft palate inducer in vivo, produces a high per- 
centage of facial anomalies when day 10 mouse embryos are exposed 
 
137 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
for 48 hr in culture. In contrast, nearly all (92%) day 8 embryos exhibit 
cardiac defects when treated for 48 hr. Recent clinical observations 
strongly suggest that isotretinoin [13-cis retinoic acid (cRA)] is a 
human teratogen. Day 8 mouse embryos exposed to cRA in culture 
show a very specific defect of the visceral arches, which give rise to 
the maxilla, mandible, and ear. These malformations would be ex- 
pected to result in defects similar to those observed in the human, 
such as cleft palate. Day 10 embryos treated with cRA for 48 hr in 
vitro exhibit a high percentage of limb defects and median cleft lip. 
Whole embryo culture offers an exciting approach with which to in- 
vestigate the mechanisms of normal and abnormal embryonic devel- 
opment under highly controlled conditions. 
 
Effect of Retinoic Acid on Cell Proliferation in Hu- 
man Embryonic Palatal Mesenchymal Cells in Cul- 
ture. T. WATANABE and R. M. PRATT. Laboratory 
of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
We have previously shown that 13-cis-retinoic acid (cRA) inhibits 
proliferation of the craniofacial mesenchymal cells from mouse em- 
bryos in primary culture. We determined here the characterization 
of cytokinetic and growth effects of retinoic acids (cRA, 4-oxo-13-cis- 
retinoic acid, and all-trans-retinoic acid) using human embryonic pal- 
atal mesenchymal (HEPM) cells. HEPM cell cultures were maintained 
with DMEM containing 10% FBS for 4 days. Cell proliferation kinetics 
and sister chromatid exchange (SCE) frequences in HEPM cells were 
examined using the FPG (Fluorochrom plus Giemsa) method. HEPM 
cells were labeled for 16 hr with 3H-TdR on day 2 or 3 of culture. 
When HEPM cells were grown in the presence of BrdU for the last 
2 days, 65.2% of the control cells were in M3 (mitoses in the third 
replication cycle), and the percentages of cells in M3 decreased with 
retinoic acids with or without a metabolic activation system (S-9 mix). 
This indicates a longer cell cycle time for the treated cells. An estimate 
of cell proliferation time in cRA-treated cells (10-' M) was approxi- 
mately 25 hr, compared with 20 hr in the control cells, which agrees 
well with that examined by flow cytofluorometry [22 hr, Welsch et 
al., Teratog. Carcinog. Mutagen. 6(5): 383-392, 1986]. Labeling in- 
dices in cRA-treated cells (10- M) were significantly reduced to 43.0% 
compared to 50.8% observed in the control cells. Also, cRA (10-' M) 
caused a significant dose-dependent decrease in 3H-TdR incorporation 
into HEPM cells. However, the treatment with retinoic acids induced 
no increase in SCE in HEPM cells with or without the addition of S- 
9 mix. These results suggest that retinoic acids or their metabolites 
interfere with DNA synthesis and decrease the proliferation ability 
in HEPM cells. 
 
This abstract was presented at the 20th Annual Meeting of the American 
Society for Cell Biology and was published in J. Cell Biol. 103: 170a (1986). 
 
Molecular Processing of the Mouse Uterine Nuclear 
Estrogen Receptor. T. S. GOLDING AND K. S. 
KORACH. Laboratory of Reproductive and Develop- 
mental Toxicology, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
Previous studies in this laboratory on mouse uterine estrogen receptor 
(ER) have demonstrated three forms with molecular weights (MW) 
of 65K, 54K, and 37K. In ovariectomized mice (OVEX), standard 
SDS gel electrophoretic analysis followed by immunoblot detection 
with ER monoclonal antibody (H-222) showed that the 65 K form was 
predominant for ER of both cytosolic (ERJ) and nuclear compartments 
(ERn). However, under modified gel conditions, the 65 K form of the 
total nuclear ER appeared as a closely spaced doublet of MW 66.4 K 
and 65 K. No such doublet was seen in either crude or purified ER, 
 
from uterine tissue or nuclear ER from MCF-7 tumors. The appear- 
ance of the ERn doublet was dependent on the hormonal status of the 
 
mouse; in OVEX mice injected IP with estradiol (10 ,g/Ekg mouse), 
the 65 K doublet was clearly evident; however, under an injection of 
saline vehicle no doublet was visible. In addition, the appearance of 
the ER, doublet displayed a time-dependent formation following the 
administration of estrogen, with the amount of the 66.4 K band being 
maximized by 1 to 2 hr relative to the 65 K, along with a subsequent 
parallel decrease for both bands up through 24 hr. Weak estrogen 
agonists such as estriol and 16a-estradiol, following a 1 hr intraluminal 
injection, gave a different profile compared to estrogen or diethyl- 
stilbestrol, with the 65 K band becoming proportionally greater to the 
66.4 K band. The apparent regulation of the 65 K doublet by hormone, 
in conjunction with an exclusive nuclear localization, suggests a rel- 
evant and important physiological role in the mechanism of hormone 
action. Further experimentation is currently being conducted to de- 
termine if the doublet is a product of proteolytic cleavage or some 
other kind of protein modification. Preliminary experiments utilizing 
32P protein incorporation and one-dimensional gel electrophoresis 
have indicated that the ERn doublet may be phosphorylated in vivo, 
thus providing supportive evidence for physiological importance. 
 
Isolation, Characterization, and Molecular Cloning 
of an Estrogen Responsive Gene from the Mouse 
Uterus. C. T. TENG, R. P. DIAUGUSTINE, B. T. PEN- 
TECOST and J. A. MCLACHLAN. Laboratory of Repro- 
ductive and Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The mouse uterus has provided a system for study of estrogen 
action as it contains estrogen receptors and depends on estrogen 
stimulation for maintenance of physiological functions. We have pre- 
viously identified an estrogen-stimulated mouse uterine secretory pro- 
tein by in vitro 35S-methionine labeling experiments. This protein was 
further purified from the uterine luminal fiuid of 24-day-old, estrogen- 
stimulated mice by CM-Affi-Gel Blue column chromatography and 
reverse-phase HPLC. This protein has an apparent molecular mass 
of - 70 kD both by SDS/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (with or 
without mercaptoethanol) and by gel fitration column chromatogra- 
phy, indicating that it exists as a single-chain polypeptide. Further 
analysis of the protein revealed that it is highly basic (pI 3 10) and is 
a glycoprotein. The N-terminus of the 70 kD protein is blocked by 
Edman degradation. In order to obtain partial amino acid sequence, 
the 70 kD protein was cleaved with cyanogen bromide, and the re- 
sulting fragmnents were separated by HPLC. One of the fragments 
yielded an amino acid sequence. Rabbit polyclonal antibody raised 
against the purified 70 kD protein demonstrated specificity for the 70 
kD protein by western blot analysis. The uterine 70 kD protein was 
induced by estrogen but not by testosterone or progesterone and was 
observed in the luminal and glandular epithelium only by immunol- 
ocalization technique. Slot blot analysis and the immunoenzyme-Jinked 
method were used to examine the tissue distribution of the 70 kD 
protein. Tissues such as brain, submaxillary gland, liver, muscle, and 
intestine of adult female mice did not have measurable amounts of 70 
kD protein. Uterine, vaginal, oviduct, lung, mammary gland, lymph 
node, spleen, ovary, and kidney tissue gave positive -reactions. A 
cDNA to the message for this protein has now been isolated, se- 
quenced, and found to be a member of the transferrin gene family. 
A comparison of the properties of the uterine protein and serum 
transferrins indicates that they are distinct proteins. This has been 
confirmed by isolation of a cDNA to authentic mouse serum trans- 
ferrin. 
 
Part of the results have been published in J. Cell Biol. 99: 215 (1984); J. Cell 
 
Biol. 101: 349 (1985); J. Cell Biol. 103: 311 (1986); and Biochem. J. 240: 413- 
422 (1986). 
 
Estrogen Receptor Stereochemistry: Receptor Bind- 
ing and Hormonal Responsiveness. K. S. KORACH, 
 
138 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
K. CHAE, and J. AKKERMAN. Laboratory of Repro- 
ductive and Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Indenestrol A (IA) is a diethylstilbestrol (DES) analog and metab- 
olite which we have shown interacts with high affinity with the uterine 
estrogen receptor (ER) but possesses weak uterotropic activity. Due 
to its chemical structure, IA possesses a single chiral carbon atom 
and therefore exists as a mixture of enantiomers (ENT). We inves- 
tigated whether the poor biological activity of IA could be explained 
by differential activity of the ENT. We also utilized these compounds 
as probes to determine the extent of stereochemical sensitivity in the 
ER ligand binding site. The IA ENT were separated to > 98% purity 
using a chirally active HPLC column. Their enantiomeric structures 
were confirmed by GCIMS and NMR, eliminating the possibility that 
the two compounds were different metabolic forms. The IA enan- 
tiomer column peaks, designated IA-1 and IA-2, were assyed by com- 
petitive binding to cytosolic ER. The competitive binding index was 
estradiol (100), DES (286), IA-racemic (143), IA-1 (13), and IA-2 (285) 
and showed that ER demonstrates a stereochemical chiral preference. 
The IA ENT binding was shown to be due to competitive interactions 
by Lineweaver-Burke analysis of saturation binding of estradiol to 
ER in the presence of 1, 5, and 10 M excess of competitor. Differences 
in binding affinity of the En could be partially explained by differences 
in the association rate constant (k + 1) determined by association rate 
inhibition studies where IA-2 was 15 times more active than IA-1. 
Nuclear ER levels were measured at lhr after in vivo treatment with 
10 ,ug/kg dose. The IA-racemic produced only 60% of the levels com- 
pared to DES. Nuclear ER levels were checked every 30 min up to 
2 hr, with no apparent difference, indicating the low early levels were 
not due to a delayed ER retention. When the ENT were tested in- 
dividually, only a 10 ,ug/kg dose of IA-2 translocated ER to a level 
comparable to DES, while IA-1 showed low levels at several doses. 
These results suggest that the poor biological activity of IA may be 
related to the differential ER interaction of its enantiomers. By using 
these compounds we have shown that the ER ligand binding site 
demonstrates significant high affinity stereochemistry for nonsteroi- 
dal compounds, which influences its nuclear form. These findings may 
be relevant in explaining some of the agonist/antagonist properties 
of other types of nonsteroidal estrogens and hormonally active en- 
vironmental chemicals. 
 
stromal sarcoma, and one complex stromal sarcoma. The etiology of 
these two rare classes of tumors is not completely understood; how- 
ever, direct stimulation of the corresponding embryonic rudiments is 
likely to be a contributing factor. For example, the mesonephric tub- 
ules, which are considered the anlage of the rete testis, can be shown 
to have enhanced proliferation and morphological stimulation in the 
fetal mouse treated with DES. Likewise, the Muillerian duct, which 
normally regresses in the male mouse by day 16 of gestation, is re- 
tained and hyperplastic in the DES-treated male fetuses. These data 
suggest that perturbation of normal differentiation of critical em- 
bryological structures may result in abnormal growth regulation in 
the mature organ system. Studies to define these relationships are 
currently underway. 
 
Determination of Estradiol 2- and 4-Hydroxylase Ac- 
tivity in Mouse Liver Microsomes by Liquid Chro- 
matography/Electrochemistry. C. BUNYAGIDJ and 
J. A. MCLACHLAN. Laboratory of Reproductive and 
Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
A sensitive, selective, and nonradiometric assay for estradiol 2- and 
4-hydroxylase activities using high performance liquid chromatog- 
raphy with an electrochemical detector (LCEC) has been developed. 
The assay relies on a liquid-solid extraction of the catechol estrogens 
onto alumina, followed by their elution with dilute acid. Chromato- 
graphic separation was accomplished on a C18 reverse-phase column 
with an isocratic system consisting of 0.05 M sodium acetate in meth- 
anol/water/acetic acid: 34/56/10 (v/v). Using this assay, we have stud- 
ied the estrogen 2- and 4-hydroxylase activities contained in the mi- 
crosomal fraction of liver from adult female mice. The assay was 
optimized with regard to pH, substrate or enzyme concentrations, 
and time. The apparent Km and Vma, of the 4- and 2-hydroxylase were 
22. 5 M and 35.9 pmole/mg protein/min and 64.7 M and 206.2 pmole/ 
mg protein/min, respectively. 
 
Submitted to J. Chromatogr. Sci. 
 
Presented in part at the 67th Endocrine Society Meeting. 
 
Embryological Basis for Genital Tract Tumors in 
Male Mice Treated Prenatally with Diethylstilbestrol 
(DES). R. R. NEWBOLD and J. A. McLACHLAN. Lab- 
oratory of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicol- 
ogy, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Exposure to DES in utero has been associated with genital tract 
neoplasia in the female offspring of both experimental animals and 
humans. Genital tract abnormalities have also been reported in the 
male offspring of both species. The neoplastic potential of prenatal 
DES exposure in the male remains to be determined. Thus, timed 
pregnant CD-1 mice were treated SC with daily doses of DES (100 
,ug/kg/day) on days 9 through 16 of gestation. In adult male offspring 
(10-18 months of age), 23 of 96 (24%) controls had mild focal hyper- 
plasia of the rete testis; in the corresponding DES-treated males, 130 
of 233 (56%) had extensive hyperplasia of this structure. Rete testis 
adenocarcinoma was observed in 11 of 233 (5%) of the DES-exposed 
males. The prevalence and severity of rete hyperplasia were much 
less in control animals as compared to DES-treated animals, and no 
tumors were noted in rete testis of control animals. Rete testis car- 
cinoma is extremely rare in both experimental animals and man. In 
addition, all the males exposed to DES in utero retained portions of 
the MOillerian (female) duct system; in 8% of these DES-exposed 
males, tumors were seen in these Millerian remnants. These tumors 
included: a carcinoma, an adenocarcinoma, two stromal tumors, one 
 
Comparative Medicine Branch 
 
Coronavirus Induced Cardiomyopathy. J. D. 
SMALL,* R. E. WILSON,t and R. D. WOODS.t *COm- 
parative Medicine Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709, tChemical Pathology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, and 4Na- 
tional Animal. Disease Center, Agriculture Research 
Service, USDA, Ames, IA 50010. 
 
Rabbit coronavirus (RbCV) was apparently first encountered in 
1961 when Scandinavian investigators observed occasional mortality 
in rabbits used to propagate the Nichols strain of Treponema palli- 
dum. Mortality rates reached 50% by 1968 and 75% by 1970. Con- 
taminated samples of T. pallidum were brought to the Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, a World Health Organization center 
for the study of treponematoses. There it was established that the 
responsible agent was filterable, the heart was the target organ, and 
the agent was visualized by electron microscopy and determined to 
be a coronavirus. Also, complement fixing antibodies to the human 
coronaviruses 229E (two-way cross) and OC43 (one-way cross) were 
demonstrated in surviving rabbits. Immunofluorescent staining with 
anti-229E sera localized fluorescence in the interstitial tissue of the 
myocardium. 
 
139 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
Antiserum to RbCV cross-reacted with coronaviruses of three other 
diseases, feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), canine coronavirus (CCV), 
and transmissible gastroenteritis (TGE), in a radioimmunoassay. In 
plaque neutralization tests, a partial reduction was observed against 
TGE (17-29%) and CCV (19-36%), but not against FIP. Antiserum 
to 229E, CCV, and FIP, and to a lesser degree, TGE, partially blocked 
the clinical course of the disease and reduced the number of deaths. 
Slight protection was afforded rabbits by vaccination with, in de- 
scending order of survivors, CCV, FIP, and TGE. Vaccination with 
calf diarrhea coronavirus (CDCV) provided no protection. Blood from 
infected rabbits exhibited decreased platelet and red blood cell counts, 
hematocrits, and hemoglobin levels. Leukopenia followed by leuko- 
cytosis with a left shift was seen. Prothrombin time increased from 
9.1 seconds to greater than 150 seconds 4 days following infection. 
Serum creatine kinase (CK) levels increased as much as 217 times 
preinoculation values on day 4 postinfection. 
 
Ultrastructure of PVM Infection in Athymic Nude 
Mice. C. B. RICHTER,* C. S. RICHTER,t E. H. LE- 
BETKIN,* M. L. DAWES,* J. E. THIGPEN,* D. FLYNN,t 
and J. M. MACKENZIE, JR.t *Comparative Medicine 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
and tNorth Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 
27695. 
 
Fatal pneumonia with terminal emaciation was observed as a spon- 
taneous event in athymic nude mice used as sentinel animals in an 
animal room which contained mice known to be infected with Pneu- 
monia Virus of Mice (PVM). Lesions in the lungs of the nude mice 
bore a strong resemblance to experimental PVM infection. Trypsin- 
ized, formalin-fixed paraffin sections of the lungs were stained by the 
indirect IFA method using FITC-labeled secondary antibody and rat 
anti-PVM as primary antibody. Specific staining was observed in Type 
II alveolar epithelium, and to a lesser extent in septal lining cells and 
bronchial epithelium. Filamentous virus growth characteristic of PVM 
and related viruses was observed on Type II epithelium under elec- 
tron microscopy. Desquamation of Type II and Type I epithelium was 
common, and along with activated alveolar macrophages made up the 
mononuclear cell exudate that characterized the infection. Septal dam- 
age consisted of loss of Type I epithelium, endothelial swelling, and 
capillary stasis. Parenchymal damage and repair obliterated the nor- 
mal pulmonary architecture in many areas, and a variety of forms of 
connective tissue and epithelial cell proliferation resulted in fibrosis 
or polypoid growths. The disease was reproduced experimentally in 
nude mice with index case lung suspensions and with ATCC strain 
15 PVM grown on BHK-21 cells. Two patterns of mortality were 
observed: acute death 5 to 9 days postinfection, and late death oc- 
curring 2 to 4 months postinoculation and characterized by terminal 
emaciation and cyanosis. Virus replication occurred in Type II cells; 
however, the most abundant virus growth occurred on thickened or 
cuboidal cells which were probably replacement epithelium repopu- 
lating desquamated Type I epithelium. Virus filaments grew extra- 
cellularly as tangled "hairy" masses, but clearly defined inclusion bod- 
ies consisting of densely packed viral nucleocapsids were common in 
the replacement epithelium. Extracellular filaments contained one- 
six linearly arranged nucleocapsids, but virus structures were not 
visible in the cytoplasm adjacent to budding virus. Immunogold label 
was limited to the external surface of budding virus filaments. PVM 
and related RSV present a bizarre morphological appearance when 
grown in vitro, and the appearance of PVM in vivo is equally as 
bizarre as these studies show. The principal target organ for pul- 
monary PVM infection in the nude mouse is the Type II epithelial 
cell and replacement septal lining epithelium. 
 
The Influence of Purified and Natural Ingredient 
Diets on Uterine Weight in Weanling CD-1 Mice. J. 
E. THIGPEN, E. H. LEBETKIN, M. L. DAWES, and C. 
 
B. RICHTER. Comparative Medicine Branch, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A major source of exogenous estrogenic substances, which may 
affect laboratory animals, comes from the diet. To test the possibility 
that commercially available rodent diets may significantly influence 
mouse uterine weights and uterine:body weight (U:BW) ratios, a 
standardized procedure was developed for conducting the mouse 
bioassay for detecting estrogenic activity in rodent diets. Estrogen 
bioassays were performed using female CD-1 mice weaned at 15 days 
of age and randomly assigned to a variety of commercial test diets, 
a negative control diet (Certified Rodent Chow #5002) or to positive 
control diets [Certified Rodent Chow #5002 containing 4 or 6 ppb 
added diethylstilbestrol (DES)] for comparison. Mice were housed 
five per cage and given deionized water and feed ad libitum. Uter- 
ine:BW ratios from 15 mice per diet were determined after 3, 5, and 
7 days of feeding. Mice fed The American Institute of Nutrition pur- 
ified diet (AIN-76A), or the Purina #5015 natural ingredient breeder 
diet, had significantly (p < 0.05) increased U:BW ratios at 3, 5, and 
7 days postweaning when compared to those of mice fed the negative 
control diet. This increase in U:BW ratios was similar to the U:BW 
ratios observed in mice fed the positive control diet containing 6 ppb 
of DES. 
 
A second study was conducted to determine whether fat and car- 
bohydrate content contributed to the unexpected uterine growth pro- 
moting activity observed in mice fed the AIN-76A diet. Test diets 
were prepared by adding corn starch, sucrose, dextrose, corn oil, or 
soybean oil to the negative control diet at the 10% w/w concentration. 
Estrogen bioassays were performed using mice fed the test diets, the 
negative control diet, or the positive control diets. The uterine 
weights and the U:BW ratios of mice fed the test diets containing 
dextrose, corn starch, or corn oil were significantly (p < 0.05 or 
greater) increased after 7 days of feeding over those of mice fed the 
negative control diet. The uterine weights and U:BW ratios of mice 
fed the test diets containing sucrose or soybean oil were also increased 
over those of mice fed the negative control diet. These increases in 
uterine weights and U:BW ratios were similar to the increases in 
uterine weights and U:BW ratios of mice fed the positive control diet 
containing 4 ppb DES. 
 
It was concluded that commercial diets significantly differ in their 
ability to increase the uterine weights and U:BW ratios of mice during 
bioassays. The fats and carbohydrates tested caused preferential in- 
creases in uterine weights and in U:BW ratios and may account for 
the estrogenlike uterine growth promoting activity observed in mice 
fed the purified AIN-76A diet. 
 
These data have been submitted to Lab. Anim. Sci. for publication. 
 
Chemical Pathology Branch 
 
Demonstration of Residual Bone Marrow Effect in 
Mice Exposed to Ethylene Glycol Monomethyl 
Ether. H. L. HONG, M. SILVER, M. I. LUSTER, and 
G. A. BOORMAN. Chemical Pathology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (EGMME) has been reported 
to cause hematopoietic abnormalities in man. Mice exposed to 
EGMME postnatally have depression of bone marrow cellularity and 
progenitor cells 8 weeks postexposure, with return to normal values 
by 16 weeks. Studies were designed to determine whether EGMME- 
exposed mice that recovered had evidence of residual marrow stem 
cell injury. B6C3F1 mice were injected SC with EGMME on days 1 
through 5 after birth at doses of 0, 100, 200, and 400 mg/kg/day. Mice 
 
140 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
were allowed to recover for 15 weeks, at which time they were 
stressed with 200 rads whole body irradiation and again at 21 weeks 
postexposure. Bone marrow functions were examined during the re- 
covery period. This study demonstrated that mice that had previously 
been exposed to EGMME were more sensitive to irradiation, and 
recovery of marrow cellularity and progenitor cells occurred more 
slowly than in unexposed controls. Irradiation stress shows that 
EGMME exposure in B6C3F1 mice caused significant residual mar- 
row damage at a time when marrow cellularity and peripheral blood 
counts have apparently recovered. A second series of experiments 
evaluated the effect of EGMME exposure during the perinatal period. 
Offspring from mice that had been dosed during pregnancy and lac- 
tation showed marked depression of hematopoiesis. This indicated 
that in mice EGMME can cross the placenta and/or be present in the 
milk in sufficient amounts to cause myelotoxicity. 
 
This abstract has been published in Fed. Proc., March 1987. (71st Annual 
Meeting of FASEB, Washington, DC.) 
 
Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors in F344 Rats and B6C3F1 
Mice. R. H. ALISON,* R. R. MARONPOT,* C. A. 
MONTGOMERY,* and K. T. MORGAN.t *Chemical Pa- 
thology Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709 and tChemical Industry Institute of Toxicology, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Primary ovarian germ cell tumors from 39,851 female F344 rats 
and 41,102 female B6C3F1 mice are described. Only two germ cell 
tumors, a choriocarcinoma and a yolk-sac carcinoma, were observed 
in rats. Ninety-seven germ cell tumors, including 7 choriocarcinomas, 
14 yolk-sac carcinomas, and 76 teratomas, were seen in B6C3F1 mice. 
Choriocarcinoma is one of the rarest ovarian tumors in any animal 
species, and we are not aware of previous reports of ovarian chorio- 
carcinoma in rodents. These tumors were composed of hematocysts, 
intercellular hemorrhage, and cytotrophoblasts, syncytiotrophob- 
lasts, and/or trophoblastic giant cells. The authors are aware of only 
one previous spontaneous case of primary ovarian yolk-sac carcinoma 
in rodents. Yolk-sac carcinomas were characterized histologically by 
a copious hyaline, PAS and laminin positive matrix in which the neo- 
plastic cells were embedded. The cells were round to oval, with single 
nuclei with deeply basophilic granular chromatin. The cytoplasm was 
amphophilic, granular, and sometimes finely vacuolated. The yolk-sac 
carcinomas replaced all the normal ovarian tissue and invaded or 
destroyed the bursa. The most common germ cell neoplasm was the 
teratoma, and both benign and malignant forms were seen. 
 
The Validation and Application of a HPLC Post-Col- 
umn Enzymatic Assay for Bile Acids in Rats. M. B. 
THOMPSON and P. C. BLAIR. Chemical Pathology 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Increases in the concentrations of serum bile acids are a sensitive 
and specific indicator of impaired hepatobiliary function. Measure- 
ment of the concentrations of individual bile acids can improve the 
ability to distinguish between different types of disease processes in 
the liver. Because the liver is a frequent target organ in toxicology 
studies, this technique could be useful for the detection and diagnosis 
of hepatic diseases in laboratory animals. To identify and quantitate 
individual bile acids in serum of rats, a HPLC technique using re- 
versed-phase separation and a post-column enzymatic reaction (3a- 
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase) with fluorescence detection was es- 
tablished and validated. Using multiple concentrations of individual 
bile acids in serum (rat) and in methanol, the assay was linear (p = 
0.0001, r2 > 0.996), accurate (recoveries of an average of 90.3% for 
200 ,ug/L and 92.0% for 100,000 ,ug/L of serum), and precise (average 
CV for bile acids in a serum pool, 20, 200, and 2000 ng standards of 
12.2, 11.5, 4.4, and 5.7%, respectively). This method was also specific 
 
and very sensitive (minimum detection of 10 ng). To examine the 
effects of hepatotoxins, bile duct obstruction, and alteration of intes- 
tinal microflora on the serum proffles of bile acids, rats were treated 
for 3 days with a-naphthylisothiocyanate (ANIT), carbon tetrachlo- 
ride (CCI4) or neomycin sulfate (NS), or anesthetized and the common 
bile duct ligated (TBDL). Blood was collected for analysis. Compared 
to values in control rats, NS, CCI4, ANIT, and TBDL increased the 
total concentrations 3, 28, 102, and 77 times, respectively. 
 
Discriminant analysis of the relative concentrations of the individual 
bile acids is being performed. Until analysis is complete, observation 
of the relative concentrations of bile acids reveals distinct patterns 
for each treatment. While total understanding of these changes awaits 
identification of unknown bile acids, application of the assay in animals 
with abnormalities in the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids can 
clearly be used to identify specific lesions and treatment effect. 
 
Clinical Features of Mononuclear Cell Leukemia in 
the Fischer 344 Rat. P. C. BLAIR, R. R. MARONPOT, 
and M. B. THOMPSON. Chemical Pathology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The Fischer 344 rat is one of two species of animals used in studies 
for the National Toxicology Program (NTP). This inbred rat was 
originally chosen because of its small size, vigor, good survival, and 
relative disease resistance. However, the high incidence of mono- 
nuclear cell leukemia (MCL) in the F344 rat is a major disadvantage 
in 2-year carcinogenicity studies. MCL is an important cause of mor- 
tality in male and female F344 rats 19 months of age and older. By 
26 months of age, up to 40% of all natural deaths in this strain have 
been related to MCL, and at that age, up to 23% of the surviving 
animals have the disease. 
 
The leukemia begins in the spleen, which can be enlarged 20-fold, 
and often spreads to the lymph nodes, liver, adrenals, brain, and 
lung. In later stages MCL can involve the kidneys and bone marrow. 
Weight loss, anemia, and generalized weakness are consistent clinical 
signs. The leukemic cells appear in the blood about 5 weeks before 
death, and a noticeable icterus and severe anemia develop a few days 
before death. 
 
In the initial characterization of this disease, the leukemic cells 
were described as a mononuclear cell type of unknown origin. Some 
believe that the leukemic cells closely resemble monocytes due to 
their erythrophagocytosis, adherence, morphology, and cytochemis- 
try. Others believe that the leukemic cells are large granular lym- 
phocytes because of their morphological resemblance to natural killer 
cells and their cell surface markers, which indicate a lymphoid lineage. 
The details of the cell of origin of this spontaneous mononuclear cell 
leukemia, however, are still incomplete. 
 
The clinical hematological picture is striking. White blood cell 
counts frequently exceed 200,000/,uL, and up to 90% of these may be 
leukemic cells. The decreased red blood cell count, hematocrit, and 
hemoglobin are accompanied by a comparable reticulocytosis. This 
anemia is believed to be produced by an autoimmune hemolytic mech- 
anism mediated by IgG class immunoglobulins bound to the surface 
of the red blood cells. The blood smears exhibit a marked polychro- 
masia, anisocytosis, and an increase in nucleated red blood cells in- 
dicating active regeneration. The leukemic cells are large, approxi- 
mately 15 to 20 ,um in diameter. The eccentrically located nucleus, 
which can be round, ovoid, or lobular, consists of a heterogeneous 
chromatin pattern that resembles that of a monocyte or lymphocyte. 
The often abundant blue-gray cytoplasm may contain red granules of 
variable size and number (commonly seen in the centripetal area sur- 
rounding the nucleus). Cytoplasmic vacuoles and erythrophagocytosis 
are also commonly seen. 
 
Treatments with various chemicals can cause significant increases 
or decreases in the incidence of MCL that appear to be dose-related. 
Also, different modes of chemical treatment affect the incidence. Re- 
search involving MCL is continuing at NIEHS. Major areas of em- 
phasis are to define essential diagnostic criteria for characterizing and 
evaluating the disease, to investigate its cause, whether mediated by 
oncogene activation or viral infection, and most importantly, to un- 
 
141 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
derstand the variation in the chemical-induced incidence of MCL in 
the NTP studies. 
 
Pathologic Features of Abdominal and Thoracic 
Paragangliomas in F344/N Rats. LEROY B. HALL, 
K. YOSHITOMI, and G. A. BOORMAN. Chemical Pa- 
thology Branch, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Seventeen paragangliomas were identified in a retrospective review 
of 200 NTP/NCI carcinogenicity studies in rats. These paragan- 
gliomas were found in male and female F344/N rats that served either 
as control or treated animals in these studies. The majority of the 
tumors were grossly visible and located in the retroperitoneum ad- 
jacent to the vertebrae and aorta in the vicinity of the kidneys. Three 
microscopically detected paragangliomas were found at the base of 
the heart. 
 
Microscopically, the neoplastic cells were arranged in nests sepa- 
rated by reticulin fibers and capillaries. Argyrophil granules were 
present in the cytoplasm of the retroperitoneal and mediastinal par- 
avertebral tumors. Dense granules similar to those in the nonnal 
retroperitoneal and carotid body paraganglia were found in the one 
tumor examined ultrastructurally. Some tumors had areas of necrosis 
and tumor emboli were present in the lumen of the abdominal aorta 
and vena cava adjacent to the tumor with metastases present in pul- 
monary vessels. The incidence of retroperitoneal neoplasms was three 
times more frequent in the male rats than in the female F344/N rats. 
 
Published in Vet. Pathol. 24: 315-322 (1987). 
 
Demonstration of Antigen Sites in GMA Embedded 
Tissue Using an Immunogold Method. K. L. DIT- 
TRICH. Chemical Pathology Branch, National Insti- 
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709. 
 
There has been an increased emphasis in clinical and research lab- 
oratories on antigen labeling since the application of the technique to 
formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissue. Attempts have been made 
to apply these techniques to glycol methacrylate (GMA) embedded 
tissues, but they have failed to gain acceptance because of technical 
complexities. By using McDowell's fixative and a gold-labeled sec- 
ondary antibody, kappa and lambda light chain proteins have been 
labeled in 2-,m GMA sections of spleen. This procedure was also 
demonstrated to label thyroid-stimulating hormone in pituitaries. The 
development of these immunogold techniques for plastic sections al- 
lows for precise localization of antigen sites, as well as superior pres- 
ervation of morphology with a simpler tissue processing technique. 
 
Carcinogenesis and Toxicology 
Evaluation Branch 
 
Application of Microencapsulation for Toxicology 
Studies: Stability, Bioavailability, and Toxicity of 
Microencapsulated Trichloroethylene. R. L. MEL- 
NICK, C. W. JAMESON, and T. GOEHL. Carcinogenesis 
and Toxicology Evaluation Branch, NIEHS, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The National Toxicology Program is exploring the feasibility of 
using microencapsulation as a means of incorporating volatile, reac- 
 
tive, and/or unpalatable chemicals into rodent feed for toxicologic 
studies. Trichloroethylene (TCE) was encapsulated in gelatin-sorbitol 
microcapsules by the centrifugal extrusion process. The concentration 
of TCE in the microcapsules ranged from 40 to 43% (w/w) and most 
particles (-85%) were between 300 and 420 ,um in diameter. Under 
optimum storage conditions, loss of TCE from the microcapsules is 
less than 1% per month. Less than 2.0% of the TCE was lost from 
the microcapsules stored in an uncovered Petri dish at room temper- 
ature for 14 days. The microencapsulated TCE was mixed with NIH- 
07 rodent feed at a level of 50 mg microcapsules/g feed and stored at 
room temperature for 7 days in an open container or for 21 days in 
a sealed container. There was no detectable loss of TCE from the 
feed blends stored under these conditions. Bioavailability of the mi- 
croencapsulated TCE was determined in male F344 rats gavaged with 
either a corn oil solution of TCE or a suspension of microencapsulated 
TCE in corn oil. The rate and extent of absorption of TCE from these 
two preparations were nearly equivalent. The toxicity of microen- 
capsulated TCE was determined by providing NIH-07 diet containing 
the microcapsules at concentrations of 0 (untreated control), 1.25, 2.5, 
5.0, or 10% (equivalent to 0, 0.6, 1.1, 2.2, or 4.4% TCE, respectively) 
to groups of 10 male F344 rats for 14 days. An additional group 
received diets containing 5% empty capsules. For comparisons, TCE 
dissolved in corn oil was administered by gavage to additional groups 
of 10 male rats at dose levels comparable to those in the feed study. 
Deaths occurred only in the highest dose group of the gavage study. 
Body weight gain and feed consumption were reduced in high dose 
groups of both the feed and gavage studies. There was no measurable 
loss of TCE in feed sampled from the cages during the study. Dose- 
related increases in organ (liver and kidney) weight/body weight ra- 
tios, individual cell necrosis in the liver, and hepatic peroxisomal 
palmitoyl CoA oxidase and microsomal NADPH-cytochrome c reduc- 
tase activities were found in both the dosed-feed and gavage groups. 
The demonstration of no significant loss of TCE from the feed and of 
similar toxic effects produced by microencapsulated TCE via feed and 
TCE in corn oil via gavage indicate that microencapsulation can pro- 
vide an alternative exposure route for studying the oral toxicological 
properties of volatile chemicals such as TCE in rats. 
 
Mechanism of Di(2-Ethylhexyl)Phthalate-Induced 
Hepatotoxicity: Involvement of Peroxisome Prolifer- 
ation. K. TOMASZEWSKI and R. MELNICK. Carcino- 
genesis and Toxicology Evaluation Branch, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The plasticizer di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) is hepatocarcin- 
ogenic in F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice. Since DEHP does not bind 
covalently to DNA and is not mutagenic but induces peroxisome pro- 
liferation, it has been suggested that DEHP is hepatotoxic due to an 
increase in cellular oxidative stress. We have investigated the effects 
of DEHP on hepatic peroxisomes in treated male F344 rats and female 
B6C3F1 mice. Peroxisomal acyl CoA oxidase, the first enzyme in the 
,8-oxidation sequence, was established as the most suitable marker 
for hepatic peroxisomal changes induced by DEHP. Using this en- 
zyme as a marker, it was found that the maximal peroxisomal induc- 
tion by DEHP occurred at a dose of about 2 g/kg/day. The no-ob- 
servable-effect-level dose was about 0.6 g/kg/day. Kinetic data on the 
rates of formation of H202 by peroxisomal acyl CoA oxidase, and of 
degradation of H202 by catalase were used to estimate in tritro steady- 
state H202 concentrations during peroxisomal 1-oxidation. Increases 
in steady-state [H202] in liver homogenates of rats treated with 
DEHP, di(2-ethylhexyl)adipate (DEHA), or nafenopin, a hypolipi- 
demic drug, correlated well with the carcinogenic potential of these 
chemicals determined in previous carcinogenicity studies, and are 
consistent with, but not definitive evidence for, the involvement of 
peroxisome proliferation in the hepatocarcinogenesis of these com- 
pounds. Similar peroxisomal changes have been produced in primary 
culture of rat hepatocytes. 
 
142 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
Mechanism of 1,2-Dibromo-3-Chloropropane-In- 
duced Male Infertility: Inhibition of Intermediary 
Metabolism in the Male Reproductive System. A. 
GREENWELL, R. L. MELNICK, K. E. TOMASZEWSKI, 
and W. M. KLUWE. Carcinogenesis and Toxicology 
Evaluation Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709. 
 
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane (DBCP) produces a rapid decrease in 
male fertility in laboratory animals after acute exposure. Fertility 
was reduced in male Fischer 344 rats 2 to 7 days after a single SC 
treatment with 100 mg/kg DBCP. Mating frequency was not affected 
by this treatment. Daily doses of 10, 20, or 40 mg/kg DBCP given 
SC for 7 consecutive days caused a dose-dependent reduction in the 
metabolism of glucose to CO2 and a marked increase in lactate pro- 
duction by isolated epididymal sperm. In sperm isolated from un- 
treated rats, DBCP produced a concentration-dependent increase in 
lactate concentration and a decrease in CO2 formation, indicating that 
intermediary metabolism was inhibited at a step post-glycolysis. 
14CO2 generation from epididymal sperm, isolated from Fischer 344 
rats, was measured with radiolabeled tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle 
intermediates: acetyl CoA, citrate, a-ketoglutarate, or succinate as 
substrates. There was a 0 to 30% inhibition of CO2 generation at 0.5 
mM DBCP and a 65 to 99% inhibition at 3 mM DBCP, with all four 
substrates. The similarity in effect of DBCP on metabolism of TCA 
cycle intermediates and the finding that the activities of NAD-de- 
pendent dehydrogenases (a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, pyruvate 
dehydrogenase, malate dehydrogenase, or lactate dehydrogenase) 
were not inhibited by DBCP, raised the possibility that inhibition 
occurred during mitochondrial respiration. DBCP (3 mM) inhibited 
oxygen consumption resulting from metabolism of endogenous sub- 
strates, and a-ketoglutarate or malate oxidation was inhibited about 
80% by 3 mM DBCP. Oxygen consumption was not inhibited when 
succinate, a FAD-dependent oxidation, was used as a substrate. 
These results were similar to those observed using rotenone, an in- 
hibitor of complex 1. Thus, it is concluded that DBCP inhibits sperm 
carbohydrate metabolism at the NADH dehydrogenase step in the 
mitochondrial electron transport chain. The inhibitory effect of DBCP 
on the electron transport chain may be the cause of the nearly im- 
mediate infertility produced in male rats. 
 
Toxicological Studies of Chemical Mixtures of En- 
vironmental Concern at the National Toxicology Pro- 
gram. R. S. H. YANG and E. J. RAUCKMAN. Carcin- 
ogenesis and Toxicology Evaluation Branch, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Under an interagency agreement between the Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) and the National Toxi- 
cology Program (NTP), the NTP is participating in Public Health 
Service activities related to the Comprehensive Environmental Re- 
sponses, Compensation and Liability Act (Superfund Act) by con- 
ducting toxicology testing on chemicals that were identified in priority 
hazardous waste sites for which adequate toxicology data may not be 
available. As part of this endeavor, a project was initiated on toxi- 
cological studies of chemical mixtures of environmental concern, spe- 
cifically groundwater contaminants derived from hazardous waste dis- 
posal. As an initial attempt, three areas of research will be pursued: 
health effects of groundwater contaminants; investigation of fre- 
quency of occurrence of toxicological interactions; and mechanistic 
approaches to the study of toxicological interactions. The first ex- 
perimental protocol, centered on the health effects of groundwater 
contaminants, is at the stage of contract initiation at an NTP Master 
Agreement laboratory. Twenty-five chemicals (19 organics and 6 in- 
organics), selected from over 1000 known groundwater contaminants 
in and around hazardous waste sites, are to be given to Fischer 344 
rats and B6C3F1 mice in drinking water for up to 3 or 6 months. Dose 
 
levels are determined on the basis of 1 x, 10 x, 100 x, and 1000 x 
the average concentrations found in analytical surveys of groundwater 
or 90% of the saturation levels and their respective 10 x, 100 x, and 
1000 x dilutions. Toxicological end points to be measured/observed 
include clinical signs, mortality, water and food consumption, body 
and organ weights, clinical pathology analytes (i.e., hematology, clin- 
ical chemistry, and urinalysis), gross and histopathology, neurobe- 
havioral tests, SMVCE (sperm morphology and vaginal cytology eval- 
uation), and cytogenetics. The second area, the investigation of 
frequency of occurrence of toxicological interactions, is at the protocol 
formulation stage. Toxicological studies (14-day repeated dose stud- 
ies) on individual chemicals, as well as all or part of the mixtures from 
systematic combinations (i.e., binary, tertiary, etc.), among eight 
frequently detected groundwater contaminants (Aroclor 1260, arsenic 
trioxide, benzene, chloroform, 1,2-trans-dichloroethylene, lead ace- 
tate, phenol, trichloroethylene) are contemplated. The third area is 
still at the idea formulation stage. 
 
This abstract has been published in part in Toxicologist 6(1): 279 (1986), 7(1): 
209 (1987); Toxicology, in press. 
 
Spy Dust: Detecting a Chemical Tracking Agent. C. 
W. JAMESON,* R. F. MOSEMAN,t N. D. HOOPER,t and 
B. J. COLLINS.t *Carcinogenesis and Toxicology 
Evaluation Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709 and tRadian Corporation, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
Use of a chemical "spy dust" to monitor the activities of U.S. Em- 
bassy personnel in Russia has recently received public attention. The 
news reports have alleged that 5-(4-nitrophenyl)2,4-pentadien-1- 
al(NPPD) has been used to track employees of the Embassy. The 
"spy dust" is believed to have been sprayed or deposited in places 
that Embassy personnel frequently touched such as their car seats, 
steering wheels, and doorknobs. The material could be applied in such 
small concentrations that it was essentially invisible. It would then 
be transferred to anything the employee touched, leaving a trail that 
could be used to monitor his or her activities. 
 
In conjunction with the toxicity studies performed by the Toxicol- 
ogy Research and Testing Program of the National Toxicology Pro- 
gram, a quick and simple field sampling and analysis method for the 
detection of nanogram quantities of NPPD was developed. The 
method is based on qualitative organic chemistry principles for the 
identification of a,3-unsaturated and aromatic aldehydes. Methanol 
is used as the solvent, naphthoresorcinol is the color reagent, and 
HCl is used to catalyze the color reaction. Naphthoresorcinol reacts 
with NPPD, which is colorless at low concentrations in methanol, to 
give a pink to red-violet color proportional to increasing concentra- 
tions of NPPD. The simple procedure for detecting NPPD consists 
of wiping the object to be tested with a cotton swab moistened with 
methanol and treating the swab with a drop of 0.1% naphthoresorcinol 
in methanol and a drop of concentrated HCI to give the pink to red- 
violet color. As little as 150 ng NPPD/100 cm2 can be detected with 
this procedure. 
 
This method has been used to detect the "spy dust" in the auto- 
mobiles of U.S. Embassy personnel stationed in Moscow. The detec- 
tion method has been further developed to detect nanogram levels of 
NPPD from cotton swipe samples. In addition, it has also been used 
for the routine analytical procedures required to support NTP's tox- 
icity studies. 
 
Short-Term Test for Chemical Treatment Effects on 
F344/N Rat Mononuclear Cell Leukemia: Altered 
Expression of Transplanted Leukemia in Fischer 
344/N Rats Treated with Pyridine (PYR) and 2- 
Ethoxyethanol (2-EE). J. E. FRENCH,* M. P. DIE- 
 
143 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
TER,* and S. A. STEFANSKI.t *Carcinogenesis and 
Toxicology Evaluation Branch, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709 and tChemical Pathology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A transplant model for F344 rat mononuclear cell leukemia in young 
rats demonstrated expression of this tumor in 3 months that normally 
occurs in 30 to 35% of the rats at 18 to 24 months of age. We have 
studied the potential of this short-term test model to detect chemical 
effects on F344 rat leukemia. PYR and 2-EE were chosen because 
PYR treatment was associated with an increased incidence of leu- 
kemia and 2-EE was associated with a complete absence of leukemia 
in 2-year toxicology and carcinogenesis studies, and these chemicals 
are both water soluble. Male F344/N rats (16 weeks old) were given 
ad libitum either 0, 0.5, or 1.0 mg/mL PYR or 0, 2.5, or 5.0 mg/mL 
2-EE in the drinking water for 90 days. One-half of all control and 
treatment groups then received leukemic spleen mononuclear cells (2 
x 107 cells/rat, SC) from syngeneic donors. All animals continued on 
their respective treatments throughout the remainder of the study. 
Water consumption studies indicated that these concentrations would 
approximate the doses administered per day in the 2-year studies. 
At 65 and 95 days after transplantation, the effects of PYR and 2- 
EE treatment on the expression of leukemia were evaluated against 
appropriate control groups. PYR alone was toxic at these dose levels 
as indicated by increases in spleen weights or spleen to body weight 
ratios and changes in hematology and serum chemistry. Average 
spleen weight in rats with leukemia transplants increased 341% above 
those without leukemia transplants. At 65 days, spleen weights of 
PYR-treated leukemia recipients averaged 534% (0.5 mg/mL) and 
955% (1.0 mg/mL) greater than the leukemia recipients without chem- 
ical treatment. These differences persisted at 95 days posttransplan- 
tation. Treatment with 2.5 mg/mL 2-EE reduced the average spleen 
weights to 102% above controls without chemical treatment, while 
5.0 mg/mL 2-EE completely ameliorated the effect. However, at 95 
days posttransplantation, there was a progression of leukemia in the 
2-EE treated animals. At that time the dose-related changes in hem- 
atology and serum chemistry indicative of leukemia progression were 
greater in PYR-treated leukemia recipients than untreated leukemia 
recipients. Evaluation of selected tumor cell marker enzymes (ace- 
tylcholinesterase, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, and malate 
dehydrogenase) in spleen and blood mononuclear cells verified that 
PYR exacerbated the pattern of biochemical responses indicative of 
leukemia progression at 65 and 95 days, whereas 2-EE completely 
ameliorated leukemic responses at 65 days. At 95 days posttrans- 
plantation the biochemical responses in the mononuclear cells were 
indicative of early leukemic changes. These indices, diagnostic in this 
tumor transplant model for a preleukemic state, were confirmed by 
histopathological examination at 65 and 95 days. 
 
The NTP/NIEHS Studies on Methyl Isocyanate. J. 
R. BUCHER,* E. E. MCCONNELL,t B. A. SCHWETZ,t 
and M. D. SHELBY.? *Carcinogenesis and Toxicologic 
Evaluation Branch, tDivision of Toxicology Research 
and Testing, tSystemic Toxicology Branch, and ?Cel- 
lular and Genetic Toxicology Branch, National Insti- 
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Prior to the December, 1984, release of methyl isocyanate (MIC) 
in Bhopal, India, few toxicologic studies had been performed on MIC, 
and the human health consequences for the exposed population were 
unknown. Because of this, the U.S. National Toxicology Program and 
the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences performed 
studies with rats and mice to characterize respiratory injury and to 
assess the potential for systemic toxicity through histopathologic 
studies and assessments of immune, reproductive, and genetic effects. 
 
MIC inhalation in single, 2-hr exposures or in repeated, 6-hr ex- 
posures over 4 days resulted in immediate and delayed deaths, both 
 
attributed to respiratory distress. Immediate deaths were associated 
with sloughing of the epithelium of the respiratory tract to the level 
of the bronchioles. In survivors, the nasal mucosae rapidly healed, 
but small airways remained occluded with mucus, fibrin, desquamated 
cells, and fibroepithelial scars. Function studies demonstrated severe, 
persistent obstructive lung disease with secondary complications of 
pulmonary hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias. However, little 
evidence of direct systemic effects was found. MIC-exposed mice 
showed transient decreases in bone marrow cellularity and hemato- 
poietic progenitor cells, but no functional deficits in host resistance 
to bacterial, viral, or malarial challenge were seen. Exposure during 
late pregnancy resulted in increased fetal and neonatal deaths, but 
no evidence of reduced fertility or teratogenic effects was found. 
Results of in vitro and in vivo genetic toxicity assays were mixed, 
and the conclusion that MIC is weakly genotoxic was based primarily 
on increases in chromosomal aberrations and sister chromatid ex- 
changes both in cultured mammalian cells and in bone marrow of 
exposed mice. Despite the fact that the exposures in these animal 
studies were to pure MIC, whereas the Bhopal exposures presumably 
were to MIC and various reaction products, these experimental find- 
ings are consistent with published reports of the medical conditions 
of survivors of the Bhopal disaster. 
 
Office of Health and Safety 
 
Development of an Improved Fingertip Dosimeter for 
Beta Radiation. NELSON W. CROUCH,* PHILLIP E. 
HAMRICK,* and JAMES E. WATSON, JR. t Office of 
Health and Safety, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709 and tUniversity of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27514. 
 
Many occupations involve potential exposures, directly or indi- 
rectly, to sources of beta radiation. The region of highest exposure, 
in many cases, will be the extremities, and in particular the fingertips, 
for people handling the beta sources. Currently used extremity do- 
simeters can significantly underestimate the beta dose due to reasons 
outlined in this study. As a solution to the problem of monitoring beta 
doses to the fingertips, an improved fingertip beta dosimeter was 
developed. The dosimeter employs a multi-element, multifilter con- 
cept by stacking four 0.13-mm LiF-teflon thermoluminescent dosim- 
eters (TLDs) to form the beta detector element. The entire dosimeter 
is approximately 1-mm thick (thinner than a Band-Aid), flexible, and 
rugged enough for field use without interference with the manual 
dexterity of the user. The fingertip dosimeter provides data for de- 
termining the beta energy of each exposure. The beta energy can be 
used to determine the TLD response factor for correcting the TLD 
output to beta dose in mrad. The data can be used to reconstruct the 
beta depth dose curve due to single beta or mixed beta exposures. 
For mixed beta/gamma exposures, the addition of a gamma measuring 
element would provide data for separating the gamma component 
from the beta component. The depth dose curve can be used to cal- 
culate the beta doses in tissue at 7 mg/cm2, for legal reporting pur- 
poses, or at any other desired depth within the range of the beta 
radiation. The fingertip dosimeter was used to monitor extremity beta 
doses for research lab personnel. The results showed higher fingertip 
beta doses than had previously been expected. The average monthly 
beta dose was shown to be approximately 0.5 rad/month. Some lab 
procedures produced intermittent beta doses ranging from 1.6 to 3 
rad in a single day. The potential to exceed 10% of the Nuclear Reg- 
ulatory Commission extremity dose limit is certainly present. Moni- 
toring is strongly encouraged if the extremity dose is expected to 
exceed 10% of the annual dose limit. The fingertip dosimeter provides 
a means of monitoring the extremities at the point of highest exposure 
 
144 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
as recommended in the draft Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, 
Part 20. 
 
Paper submitted to Health Phys. 
 
Systemic Toxicology Branch 
 
Studies on the Mechanism of Antifolate Induced Im- 
munosuppression. G. J. ROSENTHAL, G. W. WIE- 
GAND, and M. I. LUSTER. Systemic Toxicology 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Methotrexate (MTX) is an antimetabolite commonly used in the 
treatment of neoplastic disease; trimetrexate (TMQ) is an investi- 
gational "nonclassical" antifolate currently advocated as an alternative 
to MTX. These two drugs were examined with respect to their effects 
on murine B-cell activation and differentiation. Both drugs were po- 
tent suppressors of Mishell-Dutton cultures. While TMQ appeared to 
be more immunosuppressive than MTX in vitro, the converse ap- 
peared to be true in vivo. In vitro blastogenesis studies demonstrated 
marked suppressive effects on mitogen-induced 3H-uridine and 3H- 
deoxyuridine incorporation into lymphocytes following addition of 
either drug at concentrations 3 10-9 M, suggesting effects on both 
RNA and DNA synthesis. Hypoxanthine, but not thymidine, com- 
pletely reversed the in vitro antibody-forming cell suppression. Of 
the purines adenine and guanine, adenine alone (but not guanine) 
similarly restored the antibody-forming cell response following ad- 
dition of highly suppressive concentrations of MTX. Acridine orange 
cell-cycle analysis similarly demonstrated marked antifolate induced 
antipurine as well as antithymidylate effects. Cumulatively, these 
studies suggest that immune function, as measured by antibody-form- 
ing cell production, is particularly susceptible to the antipurine effect 
of antifolates, while lymphocyte proliferative events are sensitive to 
antifolate induced inhibition of both RNA and DNA synthesis. 
 
Depression of Natural Killer Cell Activity by Ochra- 
toxin A. D. R. GERMOLEC, G. R. BURLESON, C. W. 
JAMESON, M. F. ACKERMANN, K. R. LAMM, H. T. 
HAYES, and M. I. LUSTER. Systemic Toxicology 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Ochratoxin A (OA), a naturally occurring mycotoxin produced by 
several species of Aspergillus and Penicillium, is considered a major 
environmental contaminant. In laboratory animals, OA causes renal 
toxicity, hepatotoxicity, and teratogenic effects, and has recently 
been reported to be a carcinogen in rodents. OA has also been shown 
to inhibit division of rapidly proliferating cells of the immune system, 
including both hematopoietic stem cells and B-lymphocytes. The pres- 
ent studies examine the effects of OA on immune mechanisms asso- 
ciated with tumor resistance in B6C3F1 mice. OA was shown to spe- 
cifically inhibit natural killer (NK) cell activity and allow for the 
increased growth of transplantable tumor cells. T-cell and macro- 
phage-mediated antitumor activity were unaffected. Total serum pro- 
tein levels were slightly increased in OA treated animals. In contrast, 
poly I:C-induced interferon was significantly reduced following ex- 
posure to OA. Thus, ochratoxin appears to suppress NK cell activity 
by inhibiting production of basal interferon. These findings also sug- 
gest a possible role for altered NK cell function in the development 
of mycotoxin-induced carcinogenesis. 
 
This abstract was published in Cancer Res. 47: 2259-2263 (1987). 
 
Arsine: Toxicity Data from Acute and Subchronic 
Inhalation Exposures. M. P. MOORMAN,* C. R. 
MOORMAN,t J. F. HARDISTY,t S. L. EUSTIS,* R. E. 
MORRISSEY,* H. R. SANDERS,* and B. A. FOWLER.* 
*Chemical Pathology Branch, NIEHS, Research Tri- 
angle Park, NC 27709, tNorthrop Services, Inc., Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709, and tExperimental 
Pathology Laboratories, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
A series of short-term inhalation exposures has been conducted to 
study arsine toxicity in rats and mice. Male and female rats and female 
mice were exposed to 0.01 to 50 ppm arsine 6 hr a day for 14 con- 
secutive days. Male and female rats were exposed 5 days a week for 
4 weeks to concentrations of 0.5 to 5.0 ppm. All groups exposed to 
10 ppm or higher experienced 100% mortality within 4 days or less, 
while those exposed to less than 5.0 ppm showed no overt signs of 
toxicity. There were no dose-dependent differences in body weights 
with the exception of male rats exposed to 5.0 ppm for 4 weeks. Packed 
cell volumes were depressed in rats at a 2.5 ppm and in mice at 5.0 
ppm. Both species showed a linear increase in relative spleen weight 
with increasing exposure concentration ranging from 110% of control 
at 0.5 ppm to 260% of control at 5.0 ppm. Microscopic examination of 
the spleen from exposed male and female rats showed sequestration 
of erythrocytes within the red pulp, hemosiderin accumulation within 
macrophages, and increased erythropoiesis. The increased spleen 
weights are attributed to the increased number of erythrocytes and 
erythrocyte progenitor cells relative to those in spleens in control 
animals. 
 
Arsine: Alterations in the Hematopoietic System of 
Rats and Mice. P. C. BLAIR,* M. B. THOMPSON,* C. 
R. MOORMAN,t M. P. MOORMAN,* P. L. GOERING,* 
and B. A. FOWLER.* *Chemical Pathology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, and 
tNorthrop Environmental Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
The effects of prolonged exposure to arsine gas on the hematopoietic 
system of rats and mice were studied. In a brief pilot study, male 
and female Fischer 344 rats and B6C3F1 mice, all two months of age, 
were exposed to arsine gas at the following concentrations: 0, 0.5, 
2.5, 5, 10, 25, and 50 ppm. Packed cell volumes and differential cell 
counts were performed on whole blood samples collected from all 
animals that survived 14 days of exposure. Animals in the 10, 25, and 
50 ppm groups died after 1 to 4 days of exposure. A marked decrease 
in packed cell volumes, an increase in reticulocyte counts, and a mild 
increase in immature neutrophils were produced. These significant 
hematologic findings in this pilot study led to a more detailed exper- 
iment in which male and female rats were exposed to arsine gas for 
90 days at lower concentrations: 0, 0.025, 0.500, and 2.500 ppm. Ex- 
amination of the hematopoietic system performed in this latter study 
included complete blood cell counts, differentials, reticulocyte counts, 
and 8-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase activities. Decreases in num- 
bers of red blood cells, hemoglobin concentrations, and packed cell 
volumes occurred. Mean corpuscular volumes, mean corpuscular 
hemoglobins and platelet counts increased; there was no change in 
mean corpuscular hemclglobin concentrations. Increased activities of 
8-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase coincided with increased numbers 
of immature red blood cells (reticulocytes). Examination of peripheral 
blood smears demonstrated a mild shift to the left, as well as a mod- 
erate polychromasia, moderate anisocytosis, low numbers of nu- 
cleated erythrocytes, and an increased occurrence of Howell-Jolly 
bodies. The presence of these DNA fragments indicates either an 
increase on the rate of red blood cell division and/or decreased splenic 
function. These observations are consistent with a regenerative re- 
sponse following a hemolytic episode. The data from these studies 
 
145 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
also indicate a similar hematological response of rats and mice to 
arsine and suggest that arsine, at well-tolerated concentrations, pro- 
duces a dose-related stress on the hematopoietic system characterized 
by a regenerative anemia. 
 
Arsine and Gallium Arsenide (GA): Developmental 
Toxicity Studies. R. E. MORRISSEY,* M. W. HAR- 
RIS, * E. HASKINS, * J. ALLEN, * M. Ross, * B. A. Fow- 
LER,* B. ADKINS,* M. P. MOORMAN,* and C. R. MOOR- 
MAN. t *Systemic Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tNorthrop Ser- 
vices, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Studies were initiated to characterize the potential of arsine and 
GA, used in the semiconductor industry in the manufacture of com- 
puter chips, to produce developmental toxicity. Intratracheal admin- 
istration of a single 50, 100, or 200 mg/kg dose of GA on gestational 
day 4 to groups of 14 to 16 pregnant F344 rats produced no maternal 
or developmental toxicity compared to saline or particulate control 
groups. In contrast, a dose of the trioxide of arsenic (48 mg/kg) or 
gallium (52 mg/kg) equimolar to the 100 mg GA dose caused significant 
postimplantation mortality and low fetal body weight. Arsine range- 
finding developmental toxicity studies conducted with inhalation con- 
centrations of 10 ppm resulted in 100% mortality of females within 3 
days of beginning a 6 hr/day exposure. Arsine exposures of 0.5 to 5.0 
ppm on gestational days 6 through 17 produced a decrease in corrected 
maternal body weight gain, a decrease in packed cell volume values 
similar to those observed in nonpregnant rats, and an increase in 
relative liver weight and spleen size. In the 5.0 ppm group, there 
were 6/14 exposed rats pregnant, compared to 12/15 in the control 
group. Exposure on gestational days 3 through 17 also resulted in 
fewer pregnant rats than expected. A definitive teratology study is 
in progress. 
 
Published in Toxicologist 7: 75 (1987). 
 
Alkaline Phosphatase Histochemistry Discriminates 
Peritubular Cells in Primary Testicular Culture. R. 
E. CHAPIN,* J. L. PHELPS,* B. E. MILLER,t and T. 
J. B. GRAY.t *Systemic Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, tLaboratory of 
Pulmonary Pathobiology, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709, and tBIBRA, Carshalton, Surrey, 
England. 
 
All primary cultures derived from complex tissues are composed 
of more than one cell type. To fully interpret the results of studies 
of such cultures, one must know the relative numbers of the different 
cell types. 
 
In primary testicular cell cultures, it can be difficult to distinguish 
between peritubular cells and Sertoli cells. During a search for a 
histochemical method to differentiate these two cell types, we ob- 
served that alkaline phosphatase activity is restricted to peritubular 
cells. The assay (Miller et al., Exper. Lung Res., in press) is based 
on the method of Burstone. We also counterstained for lipid using Oil 
Red 0; in vivo, the Sertoli cells contain lipid droplets, while the 
peritubular cells lack lipid. 
 
Staining of tubule fragments during isolation showed that alkaline 
phosphatase (AP)-positive cells were restricted to the outside of the 
tubules, corroborating data from frozen sections of testis. Following 
previous methods for producing enriched fractions of peritubular cells, 
ca. 50 to 60% of the cell stained for AP activity. In Sertoli-enriched 
fractions, 2 to 6% of cells stained for AP. The levels of cells showing 
AP activity did not rise with time in culture, suggesting a lack of 
peritubular cell division and a lack of expression of AP-activity in the 
 
Sertoli cells. Over the course of 30 preparations, more than 40,000 
cells were counted; of these, 0.013% stained for both AP and lipid. 
 
The data above suggest that AP histochemistry is useful for dis- 
tinguishing between peritubular cells and Sertoli cells in primary 
testicular cell culture from rats. Preliminary studies with Deborah 
O'Brien have indicated that AP is not useful for mouse tissues; mouse 
Sertoli cells contain a phosphatase that is active at pH 9. 
 
The Toxicity of Mono-(2-ethylhexyl)-Phthalate in 
Sertoli Cells in Primary Culture. R. E. CHAPIN,* J. 
L. PHELPS,* and T. J. B. GRAY.t *Systemic Toxicol- 
ogy Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709, and tBIBRA, Carshalton, Surrey, England. 
 
Esters of phthalic acid with specific chain lengths have been shown 
to be toxic to the liver and testes. It is currently thought that the 
Sertoli cells, somatic cells that provide a supportive role in germ cell 
maturation, are the target of phthalate toxicity. Our aim is to un- 
derstand, at the subcellular level, the site and mechanism of action 
of phthalate toxicity. Because Sertoli cells comprise only about 2 to 
5% of the cells in the mature testis, we have used primary cultures 
enriched for Sertoli cells to examine this toxicity. 
 
Exposure to MEHP (0.0, 0.003, 0.01, 0.03, 0.1 mM) increased in a 
dose-dependent manner the amount of neutral lipid present in the 
Sertoli cells, as visualized by staining with Oil Red 0. Over a 24-hr 
period, the cells showed a dose-dependent increase in lactate output, 
a decreased pyruvate output into the medium, and no change in pro- 
tein synthesis. Cellular ATP levels were decreased by about 15%. 
Krebs cycle activity was monitored by measuring the conversion of 
"4C-acetate to CO2, and was found to be decreased by 15 to 20%; this 
change was not dose-dependent. 
 
The decrease in Krebs cycle activity and the decrease in ATP sug- 
gested an effect on mitochondria. Previous studies with hepatic mi- 
tochondria had found inhibition of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH). 
We examined SDH in mitochondria isolated from Sertoli cells treated 
in vitro and found no change in SDH activity after 4 or 24 hr exposure. 
 
Overall, the above data are consistent with a mild mitochondrial 
effect. Krebs cycle activity and ATP levels are decreased, deficits 
that the cells apparently try to counteract by an increase in glycolysis. 
This increased glycolysis results in increased lactate output, while 
the pyruvate is stored as lipid. The precise site(s) of action of MEHP 
in the Sertoli cells awaits further investigation. 
 
Hematotoxicity of 2-Butoxyethanol (BE): Effects of 
Age, Metabolism, and Tolerance Development. B. 
I. GHANAYEM, L. T. BURKA, M. B. THOMPSON, R. R. 
MARONPOT, and H. B. MATTHEWS. Systemic Toxi- 
cology Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709. 
 
Acute gavage administration of a single dose of BE to male F344 
rats caused severe hemolytic anemia as evidenced by a decrease in 
the number of circulating red blood cells, hemoglobin concentration, 
and hematocrit. The hemolytic effects of BE were found to be dose 
dependent. BE also caused hemoglobinuria, as well as liver and kidney 
changes, which were considered secondary to the hemolytic effects 
of BE. We have found that BE toxicity is age dependent, with young 
rats being significantly less sensitive than older rats. Gavage dosing 
with 125 mg/kg BE for 1 or 2 days resulted in a significant increase 
in BE hematotoxicity in rats treated for 2 days. However, continued 
daily administration of BE beyond 2 days resulted in a gradual de- 
crease in the BE-induced hematotoxicity, which is indicative of tol- 
erance development. Investigation of the metabolic basis of the BE- 
induced hematotoxicity suggested that metabolic activation via the 
alcohol dehydrogenase enzymes is a prerequisite for the development 
of BE toxicity. Finally, there were no changes in BE metabolism with 
multiple dosing, which indicated that metabolism modulation was not 
involved in tolerance development. 
 
146 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
Teratogenicity of Polychlorinated Dibenzofurans 
(PCDFs) in Mice. L. S. BIRNBAUM, M. W. HARRIS, 
and R. E. MORRISSEY. Systemic Toxicology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
PCDFs are widespread environmental contaminants that have been 
detected in human tissues and implicated in several poisoning inci- 
dents. Their toxic effects are similar to those observed with the re- 
lated halogenated aromatic hydrocarbon TCDD. The teratogenic ef- 
fects of three PCDFs, 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (4-PeCDF), 
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (1-PeCDF), and 1,2,3,4,7,8-hex- 
achlorodibenzofuran (HCDF), were examined in C57BL/6N mice. 
Pregnant mice were exposed on gestation days 10 to 13 to 10 mL 
corn oil/kg containing PCDFs. The dams were sacrificed on gestational 
day 18, and maternal and fetal toxicity were assessed. All three com- 
pounds were highly teratogenic, with very steep and parallel dose- 
response curves. 4-PeCDF was the most teratogenic, with an EDW 
for cleft palate of approximately 40 jig/kg. A similar response was 
obtained for 1-PeCDF and HCDF at doses of approximately 100 and 
400 ,ug/kg, respectively. Hydronephrosis occurred at doses below that 
causing cleft palate. No maternal or fetal toxicity was detected at 
these doses. A NOEL was 1 ,ug/kg for 4-PeCDF. Thus, these furans 
cause similar teratogenic insults to that observed previously for 
TCDD, but are approximately 1/10 to 1/100 times as potent. 
 
Published in Pharmacologist 28: 179 (1986). 
 
Glucuronidation Changes with Age Measured Both 
In Vivo and In Vitro Using 4,4'-Thiobis(6-t-butyl-m- 
cresol) as a Model Compound. S. J. BORGHOFF and 
L. S. BIRNBAUM. Systemic Toxicology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Age-related changes in glucuronidation may potentially lead to a 
decrease in excretion of reactive compounds, leading to enhanced toxic 
effects. 4,4'-Thiobis(6-t-butyl-m-cresol) (TBBC) was selected as a 
model compound to assess alterations in glucuronidation with age on 
the basis of its metabolism which leads to a glucuronide of the parent 
compound. The use of TBBC in evaluating glucuronidation with age 
eliminates alterations in oxidative metabolism that usually occur prior 
to glucuronidation. Male F344 rats, 2.5, 16, and 26 months of age, 
were administered 5 mg 14C-TBBC/kg (10 ,uCi/kg), IV. Urine and 
feces were collected up to 72 hr after dosing. Bile duct cannulations 
were performed on animals of the same age groups at doses of 5 mg/ 
kg and 25 mg/kg 14C-TBBC, and bile was collected up to 6 hr after 
treatment. Total radioactivity was determined in all samples, and the 
metabolic profile in bile was analyzed by HPLC. There was a decrease 
in the older animals' ability to excrete TBBC-derived radioactivity in 
bile, feces, and urine. An even further decrease in the elimination of 
TBBC-derived radioactivity in bile was observed when the 26-month- 
old animals were given the higher dose of 25 mg/kg. The metabolic 
profile suggested an increase in the percent of the dose excreted as 
glucuronide with age, with a corresponding decrease in the minor 
metabolites. In vitro, the glucuronyltransferase activity in micro- 
somes using TBBC as a substrate decreased in the senescent animals. 
The concentration of the cofactor UDPGA also decreased from 2.5 to 
28 months of age. Analyses of the kinetic parameters of the UDPGT 
that conjugates TBBC show a decrease in the Vm,,., with the Km for 
UDPGA remaining the same with age and a decrease in the Km for 
TBBC in the 26-month age group. These data suggest that with the 
decrease in the activity of the enzyme and a decrease in the available 
UDPGA, the senescent animals' capability to conjugate and excrete 
TBBC may be altered. Thus, the in vitro decline in TBBC glucuron- 
idation is compatible with the decreased excretion of TBBC-derived 
radioactivity observed in vivo in old rats. 
 
Absorption and Metabolism of Spydust. L. T. 
BURKA, J. M. SANDERS, C. P. KOOL, Y. C. KIM, and 
 
H. B. MATTHEWS. Systemic Toxicology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
5-(4-Nitrophenyl)-2,4-pentadienal (NPPD) was recently alleged to 
have been used as a tracking agent to monitor the activities of U.S. 
citizens in the Soviet Union. In order to better assess human risk 
from possible exposure to this compound, the absorption and metab- 
olism of [14C]-NPPD has been investigated in male F344 rats. These 
studies have revealed that NPPD was readily and quantitatively ab- 
sorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, distributed throughout the 
tissues, metabolized, and rapidly excreted, primarily in urine. NPPD 
was sparingly absorbed following dermal administration of 0.01, 0.1, 
and 1.0 mg/cm2. The amount absorbed increased as the dose increased, 
but the percent of the dose absorbed decreased as the dose increased, 
e.g., 50% (5 ,ug of 10 ,g applied) of the low dose was absorbed, but 
only 5% (50 ,g of 1000 ,ug applied) of the high dose was absorbed. 
The material absorbed after dermal administration was rapidly ex- 
creted and the distribution and metabolism of the dermally admin- 
istered compound was no different from oral administration. A total 
of five metabolites, 4-nitrocinnamic acid, 4-acetamidobenzoic acid, 4- 
nitrohippuic acid, 4-acetamidocinnamic acid and 4-nitrobenzoic acid, 
were identified by cochromatography with authentic standards and 
comparison of UV spectra. These metabolites are formed by oxidative 
metabolism of the pentadienal side chain, reduction of the nitro group, 
and/or conjugation of the resulting amino group with acetate or car- 
boxylic acid with glycine. 
 
This work has been published in abstract, Toxicologist 6(1): 253 (1986), as 
well as in full, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 87: 101-126 (1987). 
 
Effect of TCCD on B-Lymphocyte Activation and 
Differentiation. G. CLARK, M. SILVER, G. WIEGAND, 
D. GERMOLEC, and M. LUSTER. Systemic Toxicology 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
The prototypical chlorinated aromatic hydrocarbon 2,3,7,8-tetra- 
chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) has been shown to have potent im- 
munosuppressive effects on the humoral immune response both in 
vivo and in vitro. The current studies were undertaken to determine 
if TCDD directly effects B-lymphocytes. To investigate this possi- 
bility, we assessed the effect of TCDD on the plaque-forming response 
of purified B-lymphocytes to the T-independent antigen TNP-LPS. 
TCDD was found to cause a dose-dependent suppression of the TNP- 
LPS plaque-forming response, suggesting that TCDD has a direct 
effect on B-lymphocytes. 
 
Previous studies on the kinetics of TCDD's effect on the plaque- 
forming response of SRBC have shown that TCDD must be present 
within the first 24 hr of culture to maximally suppress the response. 
This observation led us to investigate if TCDD altered some early 
events associated with B-lymphocyte activation. We investigated the 
effect of TCDD on anti-Ig and LPS-stimulated RNA and DNA syn- 
thesis, on expression of Ia, and on the phosphorylation of membrane 
proteins. TCDD did not significantly alter anti-Ig or LPS-stimulated 
RNA and DNA synthesis, or the expression of Ia. However, in vitro 
TCDD exposure followed by stimulation with PMA, anti-Ig, or LPS 
resulted in changes in protein phosphorylation patterns, with TCDD 
inhibiting a number of stimulation-dependent phosphorylations. 
 
In conclusion, these data suggest that TCDD directly affects B- 
lymphocytes by altering maturation and final differentiation to an 
antibody producing cell. The only early activation event affected was 
protein phosphorylation, which may contribute to TCDD's inhibition 
of differentiation of B-lymphocytes. 
 
2,3,4,7,8-Pentachlorodibenzofuran (PCDF): Toxi- 
cokinetics and Metabolism in the Rat. D. W. BREW- 
 
147 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
STER and L. S. BIRNBAUM. Systemic Toxicology 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
PCDF is a highly toxic environmental contaminant that accumu- 
lates in human tissues. Its disposition was studied in the male Fischer 
rat after oral or IV administration. Greater than 70% of an oral dose 
was absorbed. Absorption and elimination were linear between 0.1 
and 1.0 pumole/kg. PCDF was rapidly eliminated from the blood and 
was distributed mainly to the liver and adipose tissue. Skin and muscle 
were found to be minor depots. Route of administration had little 
influence on tissue distribution of PCDF. TLC analyses indicated 
greater than 99% of the radioactivity accumulating in the fat and liver 
 
was unmetabolized PCDF, which was eliminated very slowly (t?2 = 
 
193 and 69 days, respectively). Excretion occurred primarily via the 
feces; no radioactivity was detected in expired air, and less than 0.02% 
ever appeared in the urine. The whole body half-life was calculated 
to be 64 days. Pretreatment with 500 ,ug PCDF/kg for 3 days doubled 
the excretion of polar metabolites compared to nonpretreated animals. 
Enzymatic hydrolysis of bile had little effect on chromatographic pro- 
file. It is concluded that PCDF is readily absorbed, concentrates pri- 
marily in the liver, and is slowly eliminated from the body as polar 
metabolites. Consequently, chronic low level environmental exposure 
could cause bioaccumulation at critical target sites. 
 
To be published in Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., Vol. 89. 
 
Cellular and Genetic Toxicology Branch 
 
Genetic Control of Sister Chromatid Recombination. 
A. CHAUDHURY and M. A. RESNICK. Cellular and 
Genetic Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
Sister chromatid recombination (SCR) may play an important role 
in DNA repair and in generating genomic rearrangements. We would 
like to understand the genetic control and molecular mechanism of 
SCR and to determine how it relates to other DNA metabolic pro- 
cesses such as DNA repair, replication, and recombination between 
homologous chromatids. As a preliminary step toward that goal we 
initiated studies to investigate the effects of DNA damage and various 
existing rad mutations on SCR and to identify new mutations that 
alter wild-type levels of recombination between sister chromatids. To 
measure SCR, we have utilized the construction of M. Fasullo and 
R. Davis (in preparation, also called SCR-construction); it consists of 
a rearranged split gene (HIS3) with a region of homology integrated 
in a strain that is deleted for the original HIS3 gene. The split gene 
fragments are arranged so that only recombination between sister 
chromatids can generate His' colonies. 
 
The rates of SCR generated in haploid and diploid cells are 7.4 x 
10-6 and 3.9 x 10-6, respectively. There is no increase in SCR during 
meiosis, although recombination between this construction on ho- 
mologous chromosomes does increase. Ultraviolet light causes a dose- 
related increase at nonlethal doses. The result for ionizing radiation 
for which there is no dose-related increase could be due to physical 
constraints on SCR in the centromeric region where the SCR-con- 
struction is integrated; this may also explain the absence of meiotic 
SCR. We have examined various rad mutations for their effects on 
SCR. The spontaneous SCR levels of rad52 and rad54 (at the re- 
strictive temperature) are low compared to that of Rad+, implicating 
the corresponding gene products in SCR. The mutants radl and radl8 
have wild-type levels of spontaneous sister chromatid recombination. 
 
Mutants for SCR were isolated after ethyl methanesulfonate (EMS) 
treatment followed by the identification of colonies that showed either 
elevated (esr) or decreased (dsr) levels of SCR. Among the esr mu- 
 
tants, approximately 10-fold increases in rates over wild-type are 
observed; for the dsr mutants the rates are reduced approximately 
10-fold. Three complementation groups have been identified for esr 
mutation and two for dsr. The esrl mutant is somewhat UV and X- 
ray sensitive and enhances the appearance of CanR mutants; it also 
shows heightened mitotic gene conversion. The esr3 mutation is cen- 
tromere-linked. Investigations are underway to define further the 
characteristics of these mutants and to clone the esrl, esr2, and esr3 
genes by complementation. 
 
Published in Yeast 2: 559 (1986). 
 
The Genetic Detection and Estimation of Multicopy 
Plasmids Containing a Functional CEN. M.A. RES- 
NICK,* J. WESTMORELAND,* A. HILL,t and K. 
BLOOM.t *Cellular and Genetic Toxicology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 and tDe- 
partment of Biology, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27514. 
 
The CEN region of yeast chromosomes confers mitotic and meiotic 
stability to autonomously replicating plasmids, resulting in approxi- 
mately one plasmid per cell. To address several of the issues con- 
cerning centromere function, including maintenance of copy number, 
structural relationships, and mutations affecting function, we have 
developed a genetic system that allows an approximate determination 
of number of CEN plasmids per cell, the selection of high copy func- 
tional CEN plasmids, and a means for inducing high copy number. 
 
The circular plasmid which we have constructed for these studies 
has the following arrangement: GALl promoter-CEN3-CUP1- 
ARS1-TRP1 (the CUP1 locus was kindly provided by S. Fogel and 
J. Welch). Single colony isolates arising after transformation and se- 
lection on medium lacking tryptophan exhibited various levels of re- 
sistance to copper (up to 100 ,uM), although most of the colonies had 
sensitivities corresponding to one to two copies of the CUP1 gene/ 
cell. These levels were maintained following subsequent growth. The 
levels of resistance were correlated with the average number of plas- 
mids/cell. Induction of the GALl promoter next to the CEN turns off 
centromere function, thus resulting in an ARS type plasmid that 
malsegregates. This leads to cells with high copy number and high 
resistance to copper (> 250 ,uM). When the centromere is subse- 
quently turned on (i.e., cells are returned to glucose) the resistance 
remains high, as does the plasmid number (> 10 per cell), indicating 
that the cells can tolerate a large number of functioning centromere 
plasmids. We have not detected a return to low resistance or Trp- 
segregants lacking plasmids. 
 
We conclude that there is variability in the frequency of CEN 
plasmids within a population and this can be detected genetically. 
Cells can be conditioned to tolerate large numbers of functional CEN 
plasmids. The system may provide the opportunity of selecting lines 
with differing numbers of plasmids. It will aid in the isolation of 
structures involved in CEN function and provide a means for obtain- 
ing in vivo mutations for CEN activity. 
 
Published in Yeast 2: 5319 (1986). 
 
Comparison of Human and Rat Hepatocyte Metab- 
olism and Mutagenic Activation of 2-Acetylaminoflu- 
orene. K. RUDO and R. LANGENBACH. Cellular and 
Genetic Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A method has been developed to assess the metabolism and mu- 
tagenic activation of carcinogens using hepatocytes in vitro. A slicing 
technique was used to prepare human and rodent hepatocytes. The 
technique was especially useful for nonperfusable biopsy and resected 
 
148 
 
NIEHS ANNIVERSARY 
 
surgical human liver tissue with the model carcinogen AAF used to 
develop the technique. AAF metabolites produced by human and rat 
hepatocytes were similar and consisted primarily of AF, with ring 
hydroxylated products, and N-hydroxy-AAF. Sulphate and glucu- 
ronide conjugates of ring hydroxylated metabolites and AF were de- 
tected. Levels of metabolism and cell-mediated Salmonella mutagen- 
icity illustrated interindividual variation with human hepatocytes, but 
were generally higher when compared to rat hepatocyte results. A 
relationship appearad to exist between increasing levels of AF pro- 
duction and increased AAF mutagenesis on a case-by-case basis by 
human hepatocytes. Understanding differences and similarities be- 
tween human and rodent carcinogen activation capabilities should be 
useful in the extrapolation of rodent carcinogenesis data to humans. 
 
Treatment of Mouse Zygotes with Germ Cell Muta- 
gens Results in Developmental Abnormalities and 
Fetal Death. J. B. BISHOP,* M. D. SHELBY,* W. M. 
GENEROSO,t and J. C. RUTLEDGE.: *Cellular and 
Genetic Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709, tOak Ridge National Laboratory, 
Oak Ridge, TN 37831, and tDepartment of Pathology, 
Children's Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75235. 
 
The zygotic stage of embryogenesis has been considered refractory 
for induction of developmental defects by noxious agents, whereas 
the period of organogenesis, which is between days 7 and 13 of ges- 
tation for mice, is generally regarded as a sensitive period for this 
response. However, in recent studies by Generoso et al. [Mutat. Res. 
176: 269-274 (1987)], a high incidence of morphological abnormalities 
was observed among both the dead and surviving fetuses of female 
mice exposed to inhaled ethylene oxide (ETO) at 1 or 6 hr after mating, 
about the time the sperm enters the egg or during the early pronuclear 
stage of the zygote, respectively. Congenital defects have now also 
been observed following IP injection of females with ethylnitrosourea 
(ENU) or mitomycin C (MC) as well as with acrylamide (AA) or ethyl 
methanesulfonate (EMS). In addition to an increase in mortality 
among conceptuses of females examined at midgestation, many of 
their fetuses exhibit developmental anomalies such as eye or limb 
defects, omphalocele, ectopia cordis, hydropia, and exencephaly. The 
frequencies of these effects are marginal or nondetectable when fe- 
males are treated with ETO at 9 hr after mating or later. Further- 
more, the peaks in the response to induction of developmental defects 
with ENU, MC, EMS and AA, as with ETO, appear to be concomitant 
with their peaks for fetal mortality, which occur at the time of sperm 
entry to early pronuclear stage. The stage-dependent sensitivity and 
the varied nature of congenital defects suggest a genetic basis for the 
response. 
 
The Role of Free Radicals in the Mutagenic Response 
of Sodium Bisulfite in Salmonella Typhimurium 
Strains. D. A. PAGANO and E. ZEIGER. Cellularand 
Genetic Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, Research Trian- 
gle Park, NC 27709. 
 
We have previously shown that bisulfite is mutagenic in strains of 
Salmonella typhimurium containing the G46 and D6610 mutations. 
These results suggested that the mechanism of bisulfite mutagenesis 
was nonspecific since the hisG46 locus is sensitive to base-pair sub- 
stitutions and the hisD6610 locus is sensitive to frameshift mutations. 
More current data suggest that the bisulfite mutagenesis is also ex- 
posure-time dependent. As the exposure (preincubation) time is in- 
creased from 30 to 120 min, the peak mutagenic response increases, 
while the dose at which this response occurs shifts to a lower dose 
level. After 30 min of exposure of TA97, the peak mutagenic response 
is obtained at a bisulfite concentration of 0.08 M. As the preincubation 
time is increased from 30 to 120 min, the peak response shifts to 0.06 
M at 60 min, 0.04 M at 90 min, and 0.008 M at 120 min. This shift in 
 
the activity of bisulfite to lower doses suggests the possible role of 
free-radicals in the mutagenic response of bisulfite [A. F. Gunnison, 
Fd. Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 667-682 (1981)]. Additional data will be 
presented to show this possibility in greater detail. 
 
Published in Environ. Mutagen. 8 (Suppl. 6): 64 (1986). 
 
Germ Line Effects of a Mutator in Drosophila. J. 
M. MASON. Cellular and Genetic Toxicology Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A mutator has been described in Drosophila that potentiates the 
recovery of terminal deletions, a type of chromosomal aberration that 
is extremely rare in the absence of the mutator. When mature oocytes 
are irradiated the mutation frequencies at loci close to chromosome 
tips are increased greatly in the mutator compared with the wild- 
type control. All of the recovered mutations encompass the entire 
body of the resultant offspring, indicating that the mutations are fixed 
at about the time of fertilization. In males, on the other hand, there 
is no increase in the frequency of radiation-induced deletions. 
 
The frequency of mutations recovered from mutator females de- 
creases slowly to the control level in metabolically active oocytes, 
suggesting that repair of radiation-induced damage is inhibited, but 
not completely blocked. In oocytes whose development has been de- 
layed, however, there is no decrease in the mutation frequency during 
the period of the delay, suggesting that the lesions responsible for 
producing the deletions have to be actively removed, and that without 
the metabolic activity the lesions remain in the chromosomes until 
fertilization, when they are converted to terminal deletions. 
 
Meiotic recombination, which occurs at about the same time as the 
repair of the radiation-induced lesions, is also affected by the presence 
of the mutator gene. In mutator females the frequency of meiotic 
recombination is decreased by about 25%, and the frequency of non- 
disjunction is increased accordingly. 
 
Relationships Between Rodent Carcinogenicity and 
In Vitro Genetic Toxicity. E. ZEIGER,* R. W. TEN- 
NANT,* B. H. MARGOLIN,t J. K. HASEMAN,t M. D. 
SHELBY,* M. A. RESNICK,* W. A. CASPARY,* J. W. 
SPALDING,* J. M. MASON,* R. MINOR,t S. STASIEW- 
ICZ,* and B. ANDERSON.* *Cellular and Genetic Tox- 
icology Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709, tStatistics and Biomathematics Branch, 
NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, and 4In- 
formation Systems and Networks Corporation, Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
A total of 83 chemicals tested for carcinogenicity in rats and mice 
by the NCI or the NTP with a final sacrifice December 1976, or later, 
were peer-reviewed by the NTP between July 1981 and January 1985 
and approved for publication as NTP Technical Reports. Ten of these 
chemicals were not tested in the genetic toxicity assays because their 
physical properties were not suitable for the tests used (e.g., they 
were insoluble or gaseous), or not obtainable in sufficient quantities 
of acceptable purity. The remaining 73 chemicals were tested under 
code, using standardized protocols in four in vitro genetic toxicity 
assays: mutation in Salmonella typhimurium (SAL); mutation in 
mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells (ML); chromosome aberrations in CHO 
cells (AB); and sister chromatid exchanges in CHO cells (SCE). In 
addition, 44 of the chemicals were tested using an in vitro assay for 
unscheduled DNA synthesis in rat primary hepatocytes (UDS), and 
27 chemicals were tested in the Drosophila sex-linked recessive lethal 
assay (SLRL). Sixty percent (44) of the chemicals were carcinogens. 
The nine equivocal carcinogens were considered noncarcinogenic for 
the purposes of this analysis. The results of the testing were analyzed 
to address a number of questions, including responses of the carcin- 
 
149 
 
ABSTRACTS 
 
ogens and noncarcinogens in the different assay systems (sensitivity 
and specificity), the predictive value of each test (and test combina- 
tions), the relation of patterns of carcinogenicity to predictivity, and 
the relation of assay potencies to carcinogenicity. UDS and SLRL 
produced few positives and were highly insensitive; however, six of 
seven UDS positives and all four SLRL positives were carcinogens. 
The other assays have sensitivities ranging from 0.45 (SAL) to 0.73 
(SCE); the corresponding specificities ranged from 0.86 to 0.45. SAL 
had the highest predictivity for carcinogens (0.83). The predictivity 
of a negative for noncarcinogenicity was the same in all four tests. 
No assay complemented SAL, and no combinations of assays im- 
proved on the predictivity of SAL alone. 
 
Development of a Retrovirus Packaging Vector Sys- 
tem to Study Host Control of Retrotransposon Rep- 
lication/Integration. L. R. BOONE, P. L. GLOVER, 
C. L. INNES, and R. W. TENNANT. Cellular and Ge- 
netic Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle 
Park, NC 27709. 
 
We have been interested in the role of endogenous retroviruses 
and related tranposable elements in cellular responses to genotoxic 
chemical exposure and in the mechanisms that control their mobility. 
There is little known about host cell factors that control the movement 
of transposable elements. One of the most important host factors 
controlling endogenous retrovirus in mice, and consequently a major 
factor influencing viral leukemogenesis, is the Fv-1 gene. Alleles of 
this gene restrict the replication of certain host range classes of mu- 
rine retrovirus. The mechanism of action is unknown, but it is clear 
that the sensitive step involves the synthesis and maturation of viral 
DNA circular forms required for integration. We have previously 
mapped the coding region responsible for Fv-1 sensitivity to the p30 
gag protein, the major structural core protein. 
 
Currently we are constructing a packaging/vector system to study 
the mechanism of this block in replication/integration. To eliminate 
many of the variables in infectious virus assays previously used to 
study host range restriction, we have employed a replication defective 
retrovirus construct. The events measured represent a single suc- 
cessful integration of an antibiotic-selectable vector. In preliminary 
experiments, G418-resistant colony formation was shown to be Fv-1 
sensitive following rescue of the vector with N- and B-tropic helper 
virus. Fv-restriction is not absolute, usually 1000- to 10,000-fold re- 
duction in titer, and can be abrogated by high multiplicities of infec- 
tion. This abrogation is thought to be the result of translation of virion 
RNA into target molecules that titrate out the available Fv-1 product. 
Our system is designed to directly test this by infection with a con- 
struct that does not contain viral RNA capable of coding for the target 
molecule. Target molecules will be phenotypically donated by an un- 
packagable mutant retrovirus. In order to construct a packaging- 
deficient mutant N-tropic MuLV, we have deleted sequences required 
for genomic RNA to be packaged into the virion. Fluorescent antibody 
analysis of cells transfected with this mutant has demonstrated its 
ability to synthesize viral-specific protein. Currently we are using this 
system to study the requirement for viral RNA in Fv-1 abrogation 
and to determine whether the functional target is mature p30 or a 
precursor molecule that includes the pol gene product, perhaps 
Pr1809a9-"?'. 
 
Molecular and Cytological Analysis of Meiotic Chro- 
mosome Behavior. C. N. GIROUX, M. E. DRESSER, 
and H. TIANO. Cellular and Genetic Toxicology 
Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709. 
 
New methods of cytology for yeast meiosis have been developed 
and used to demonstrate that meiotic chromosome behavior in yeast 
 
closely parallels that in higher eukaryotes. Chromatin condensation 
and decondensation proceed in step with chromosome pairing, syn- 
apsis, and desynapsis. In concert, these produce the classical stages 
of leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, and diplotene. 
 
A general selective system has been developed and was used to 
clone the SPOll gene of yeast, which is required for meiotic levels of 
recombination and reductional chromosome segregation. This rep- 
resents the first molecular cloning of a meiosis-specific gene from any 
organism. 
 
The DNA sequence of the SPOll gene has been determined, and 
a candidate polypeptide coding sequence of 398 amino acids has been 
identified and confirmed by hybrid gene fusions. This sequence pre- 
dicts a strongly basic amino terminal domain. 
 
An in vitro engineered gene disruption has been used to demon- 
strate that the SPOll gene is essential for meiosis but is not required 
for vegetative growth or normal progression through the cell cycle. 
Thus, mutation in a single gene is sufficient to disrupt meiotic differ- 
entiation and proper chromosome behavior, giving rise to mostly in- 
viable or grossly aneuploid products. 
 
A combination of cytological and molecular cloning methods has 
demonstrated that the SPOll gene product is required for chromo- 
some pairing and/or synapsis during meiosis. Recent studies of mam- 
malian synaptonemal complexes have suggested that they are very 
sensitive targets for chemical damage during meiosis. Together, these 
results suggest that interference with the meiotic structures that 
operate on chromosomes either directly (by mutation) or indirectly 
(by chemical pertubation) can have severe genotoxic consequences 
for germ line cells. 
 
A Comparative Study of In Vitro and In Vivo DNA 
Damage/Repair in Rodent Hepatocytes of Seven Ro- 
dent Carcinogens. J. W. SPALDING,* J. C. MIR- 
SALIS, t and D. A. CASCIANO. t *Cellular and Genetic 
Toxicology Branch, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27709, tSRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025, 
and :tNational Center for Toxicological Research, Jef- 
ferson, AR 72079. 
 
Seven rodent liver carcinogens [bis-(2-chloro-1-methylethyl)ether; 
2,6-dichloro-p-phenylenediamine; H. C. Blue No. 1; 4,4'-methylene- 
dianiline dihydrochloride; methapyrilene hydrochloride; polybromi- 
nated biphenyl (Firemaster FF-1); and trichloroethylene] and one 
rodent noncarcinogen (H. C. Blue No. 2) were evaluated for their 
ability to induce in vitro DNA damage/repair (UDS) in male F344 rat 
primary hepatocytes. Only 4,4'-methylenedianiline-2HCl, H. C. Blue 
No. 1, and the noncarcinogen H. C. Blue No. 2 induced an in vitro 
UDS response. The eight chemicals were also evaluated in the short- 
term in vivo-in vitro UDS and the preproliferative scheduled DNA 
synthesis (S-phase) assays. None of the chemicals induced an increase 
in in vivo-in vitro UDS, even though they were tested in the same 
sex/species (F344 rat or B6C3F1 mouse) in which they were identified 
as hepatocarcinogens. However, all seven hepatocarcinogens did in- 
duce a significant increase in S-phase, a response associated with 
hepatotoxicity and subsequent necrosis. The increase in S-phase ap- 
peared to correlate well with the carcinogenicity of the chemical, 
especially for those chemicals that were hepatocarcinogens in the 
B6C3F1 mouse. These results suggest that some rodent liver carcin- 
ogens may be inducing liver tumors by mechanisms other than direct 
interaction with DNA. The possibility of an indirect, alternative mech- 
anism for liver tumor induction merits further study. 
 
A paper that included much of these data was presented at the Tissue Culture 
Association Meeting, 1986, and is published as "In vitro cellular and develop- 
mental biology," 22 (Part II) 140.3: 15A (1986). 
 
150