822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC1065517110655171106551713785261810.1021/acsnano.3c06803Red Blood Cell-Derived
Extracellular Vesicles Display
Endogenous Antiviral Effects and Enhance the Efficacy of Antiviral
Oligonucleotide Therapy
JayasingheMigara
K GaoChang YapGracemary YeoBrendon Zhi Jie VuLuyen Tien TayDouglas Jie Wen LohWen Xiu AwZhen Qin ChenHuixin PhungDai Cao HoangDong Van PrajogoRebecca Carissa HooiLissa LimFang Qing PirisinuMarco MokChee Keng LimKah Wai TangSze Jing TanKai Sen ChowEdward Kai-Hua ChenLeilei PhanAnh Tuan ChuJustin Jang Hann LeMinh TN †Institute
for Digital Medicine and Department of Pharmacology, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, 16 Medical Drive, Singapore 117600, Singapore‡Department
of Surgery, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 1E Kent Ridge Road, Singapore 119228, Singapore§Infectious
Diseases Translational Research Programme and Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 16 Medical Drive, Singapore 117545, Singapore∥Biosafety
Level 3 Core Facility, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 14 Medical Drive, Singapore 117599, Singapore⊥Cancer
Science Institute, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 16 Medical Drive, Singapore 117599, Singapore#Department
of Biomedical Sciences, Jockey Club College of Veterinary Medicine
and Life Sciences, City University of Hong
Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China■Division
of Physics & Applied Physics, School of Physical & Mathematical
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371, Singapore●Department
of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 16 Medical Drive, Singapore 117594, Singapore▲Institute
of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673, Singapore*Email: phcltnm@nus.edu.sg. Tel: (65) 6516 8475. Fax: (65) 6873 7690.
1810202317212163921639–2166117112023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in a large number
of fatalities
and, at present, lacks a readily available curative treatment for
patients. Here, we demonstrate that unmodified red blood cell-derived
extracellular vesicles (RBCEVs) can inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection in
a phosphatidylserine (PS) dependent manner. Using T cell immunoglobulin
mucin domain-1 (TIM-1) as an example, we demonstrate that PS receptors
on cells can significantly increase the adsorption and infection of
authentic and pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2 viruses. RBCEVs competitively
inhibit this interaction and block TIM-1-mediated viral entry into
cells. We further extend the therapeutic efficacy of this antiviral
treatment by loading antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) designed to
target conserved regions of key SARS-CoV-2 genes into RBCEVs. We establish
that ASO-loaded RBCEVs are efficiently taken up by cells in
vitro and in vivo to suppress SARS-CoV-2
replication. Our findings indicate that this RBCEV-based SARS-CoV-2
therapeutic displays promise as a potential treatment capable of inhibiting
SARS-CoV-2 entry and replication.
Keywords: extracellular vesicles, SARS-CoV-2, antisense
oligonucleotides, viral inhibition, apoptotic mimicry

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Jul 24; Accepted 2023 Sep 20; Collection date 2023 Nov 14.

## Introduction
The severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
has caused the largest pandemic in recent history. Despite the success
of vaccines, there are still no widely accessible treatments that
can efficiently suppress COVID-19 infection. Although Remdesivir,
monoclonal antibodies, and various other drugs have shown promise,
the emergence of new variants of concern (VOC) threatens to make these
treatments less effective. Thus, there is an urgent need for the development
of therapeutics that are able to effectively neutralize SARS-CoV-2
and any of its mutants. , 
Given that the principal
canonical receptor that mediates successful
cellular entry for SARS-CoV-2 is Angiotensin Converting Enzyme-2 (ACE2),
several recent studies have suggested the application of extracellular
vesicles (EVs) containing endogenous or overexpressed ACE2 from cell
lines as a potential therapeutic strategy against SARS-CoV-2. − These have consistently been shown to outperform soluble forms of
the recombinant ACE2 receptor and are less likely to be evaded by
mutant forms of the virus, given that most VOCs require ACE2 for viral
entry. However, the translation of this approach is challenging due
to the limited production of EVs from cell lines and the risk of transformation,
which is associated with oncogenic factors in cell-line-derived EVs.
Moreover, there are conflicting reports regarding the role of ACE2-expressing
EVs in SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
We
have previously shown that red blood cell-derived extracellular
vesicles (RBCEVs) are a safe, efficient, and scalable platform for
therapeutic delivery. RBCs are the most
abundant type of primary cells and can be conveniently collected on
a large scale in routine procedures from universal donors. Moreover,
they do not pose any risk of oncogenesis and produce EVs abundantly
upon induction. Here, we report that RBCEVs exhibit consistent endogenous
antiviral effects against SARS-CoV-2, despite lacking ACE2 expression.
We established that RBCEVs are capable of inhibiting pseudotyped and
authentic SARS-CoV-2 infection in a dose-dependent manner by competitively
blocking PS-receptor-mediated pathways of viral entry. Our findings
are in agreement with those from several recent reports, which demonstrate
that SARS-CoV-2 (and many other enveloped viruses) utilize PS receptors
such as TIM/TAM family members to increase their tropism and overall
infectivity in a process termed apoptotic mimicry. 
We further verified the ability of RBCEVs to inhibit
viral replication
via PS receptor T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1 (TIM-1),
also known as HAVCR1/KIM-1. TIM-1 is a PS receptor, which is expressed
abundantly on certain epithelial cells, as well as on CD4+ T cells
and other immune cells. TIM-1 has been
well reported to play a major role in enhancing viral infection of
a broad range of viruses and increasing tropism of certain viruses. Via the use of TIM-1 blocking antibodies and
overexpression or knockdown studies of TIM-1, we demonstrated that
EVs are able to inhibit viral infection in a TIM-1 dependent manner.
We also discovered that TIM-1 most likely works in concert with other
receptors to facilitate SARS-CoV-2 viral entry, suggesting that TIM-1
and other PS receptors may serve as secondary receptors and work to
enhance viral infectivity rather than mediate viral entry independently.
We also validated the antiviral effects of RBCEVs in vitro utilizing major variants of authentic SARS-CoV-2. In addition, we
demonstrated that EVs from multiple sources display comparable viral
neutralization effects. Interestingly, we observed a clear correlation
between PS exposure and the neutralization ability of EVs. Taken together,
this indicates that EVs from multiple sources can broadly inhibit
the entry of enveloped viruses into cells.
We leveraged this
endogenous antiviral property of RBCEVs together
with their excellent ability to deliver RNA therapeutics in an effort
to develop a potent EV-based antiviral therapy capable of efficiently
suppressing SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication. One of the most
promising directions in this respect has been the use of RNA interference
(RNAi) and antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs). These allow the targeted
degradation of viral genomic RNA and/or subgenomic mRNA, thereby halting
viral infection and the production of new virions. Several studies
have already demonstrated the potential use of this approach in suppressing
SARS-CoV-2 infection, via the use of siRNAs, circRNA, and ASOs against
key SARS-CoV-2 genes. − However, these studies utilized naked RNA/ASO/siRNA
molecules or synthetic liposomal formulations that either have limited
efficacy in delivery or pose the risk of toxicity and immunogenicity,
respectively. The excellent nucleic acid delivery capabilities of
RBCEVs we have described previously, coupled with the safe and biocompatible
nature of RBCEVs can circumvent both of the aforementioned problems. , , 
In this study, we designed
locked nucleic acid (LNA) gapmers targeted
to key conserved regions of four SARS-CoV-2 genes that are essential
for viral replication: helicase, 3-chymotrypsin like
protease (3CLpro), papain-like protease (PLpro), and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). We demonstrated that RBCEV-mediated delivery of these ASOs is
far superior to the delivery of naked ASOs and is capable of efficiently
inhibiting high titers of authentic SARS-CoV-2 infection in
vitro. Moreover, we demonstrated that RBCEVs can be efficiently
administered via intratracheal delivery to K18-ACE2 mice, whereupon
they accumulate in ACE2-positive epithelial cells and suppress SARS-CoV-2
infection, thus improving treatment outcomes and the overall survival
of these animals.
Taken together, our data show that ASO-loaded
RBCEVs present a
potent and effective approach for suppressing the SARS-CoV-2 infection.
The safe and biocompatible profile of EVs along with their endogenous
antiviral properties and capacity for efficient ASO delivery offers
a host of advantages over existing SARS-CoV-2 therapeutics. In summary,
our findings indicate that EV-based RNAi therapeutics show great promise
as a therapeutic strategy and could guide the development of SARS-CoV-2
therapeutics for improving the prognosis of COVID-19 patients.

## Results and Discussion

## Unmodified RBCEVs Display Endogenous Inhibitory Effects toward
SARS-CoV-2 Infection
RBCEVs were purified from human red
blood cells according to our previously established protocol (Supplementary Figure S1a). A combination of filtration, ultracentrifugation, sucrose cushion,
and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was used to obtain a pure
population of RBCEVs. Purified RBCEVs were characterized according
to the guidelines set by the International Society for Extracellular
Vesicles (ISEV). Nanoparticle tracking
analysis (NTA) revealed a homogeneous population of vesicles of ∼172.8
nm in diameter (Supplementary Figure S1b). RBCEV and cell lysates were also analyzed side-by-side using Western
blot, revealing the enrichment of EV markers (i.e., Alix, TSG101)
and RBC lipid raft associated membrane proteins (i.e., Flotillin-2,
Stomatin), as well as the presence of RBC specific proteins (i.e.,
hemoglobin A) in RBCEVs (Supplementary Figure S1c).
To assess the effect of RBCEVs on viral infection,
a pseudotyped virus modeled after SARS-CoV-2 was developed by replacing
VSV.G in a third-generation lentiviral system with the SARS-CoV-2
wildtype (w/t) spike protein (Supplementary Figure S1d). The pseudotyped virus also carried a mCherry reporter
gene, which allowed fluorescence-based assessment of viral infection.
The resulting viruses were produced in HEK-293T cells, purified, concentrated,
quantified, and subsequently titrated in Vero E6 cells based on the
expression of mCherry (Supplementary Figure S1e, f). A 100-fold dilution resulted in ∼90% of mCherry
positive cells, and this dilution was used for subsequent experiments
(Supplementary Figure S1g). To assess the
neutralization efficiency of RBCEVs on SARS-CoV-2 viral infection,
RBCEVs at a concentration of 0.2 mg/mL were preincubated for 1 h at
37 °C with an appropriate quantity of virus. A mock vehicle control
was included where an equivalent volume of PBS was incubated with
the virus. Following this, the suspension was layered over cells and
assessed for viral infection ( a). Flow cytometric analysis of pseudotyped viral infection
revealed that RBCEVs inhibited viral replication by up to 80% ( b, c). Fluorescent
imaging of mCherry expression revealed a similar trend with a significant
reduction of mCherry protein following treatment with RBCEVs ( d, e). A comparable
inhibitory effect of RBCEVs was observed against the authentic SARS-CoV-2
virus using a plaque assay ( f). We also verified the neutralization efficiency
of RBCEVs against the authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus, by immunolabeling
the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (N protein). We found that there
was a significantly lower expression of N protein in Vero E6 cells
when the virus was preincubated with RBCEVs, indicating efficient
neutralization of authentic SARS-CoV-2 infection ( g, h).
 

## RBCEVs Display Consistent and Dose-Dependent Viral Neutralization
Effects
To further characterize the neutralization ability
of RBCEVs, we prepared and performed titration and neutralization
assays on pseudotyped viruses displaying SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins
from four major VOCs in addition to w/t SARS-CoV-2 in Vero E6 cells
(Supplementary Figure S2a). We observed
comparable neutralization efficiencies for each variant in the presence
of RBCEVs, with a mean IC50 of 0.016 μg/μL
against the w/t pseudotyped virus ( a, Supplementary Figure S2b). This value corresponds to an EV concentration of ∼5.95
× 1010 EVs/mL. We also observed a clear dose response
effect as the concentration of RBCEVs increased from 0.125 to 0.4
μg/μL, resulting in significantly improved neutralization
efficiencies. However, at RBCEV concentrations >0.1 mg/mL, the
increase
in inhibition began to plateau with only minimal improvements in neutralization
efficiency.
 Since all our experiments thus far had been performed
in Vero E6
cells, we wanted to determine if RBCEVs might also inhibit SARS-CoV-2
infection in other susceptible cell types, such as human lung epithelial
cells and hepatocytes. Thus, in addition to Vero E6 cells, we repeated
these experiments in three other cell lines: A549-ACE2 (human lung
epithelial carcinoma overexpressing ACE2), HuH-7 (human hepatocellular
carcinoma), and 293T-ACE2 (immortalized human embryonic kidney cells
overexpressing ACE2) and demonstrated varying levels of neutralizing
ability across each cell line ( b). Vero E6 cells displayed the highest neutralization
efficiency, whereas A549-ACE2 and HuH-7 cells showed moderate levels
of neutralization (i.e., ∼50%). In contrast, 293T-ACE2 cells
did not show any significant decrease in infection following incubation
with RBCEVs at any of the doses tested.
Plaque reducing neutralization
test (PRNT) performed with the authentic
virus reflected similar neutralization efficiencies across wildtype
and Delta strains of SARS-CoV-2 when performed in Vero E6 cells, comparable
to that obtained with the pseudotyped viruses ( c). We repeated the neutralization assay
in A549-ACE2 cells using authentic Omicron SARS-CoV-2. RBCEVs displayed
a similar dose dependent neutralization of authentic Omicron SARS-CoV-2
in A549-ACE2 cells as determined using PRNT, demonstrating the efficacy
of RBCEVs in neutralizing authentic SARS-CoV-2 infection in multiple
models of infection ( d). We subsequently repeated the neutralization assay in human
Nasal Epithelial Cells (hNECs), a more relevant model for studying
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our data revealed significant levels of inhibition
of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the presence of RBCEVs, indicating that
EV-mediated neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 infection is translatable
to physiological COVID-19 infection in vivo ( e).
To further
characterize the potency of RBCEV-mediated neutralization
effects, we assessed the relative neutralization efficiency of a fixed
dose of RBCEVs (0.2 μg/μL) against increasing titers of
pseudotyped or authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus in Vero E6 cells. We observed
that the same concentration of RBCEVs was able to efficiently neutralize
increasing titers of either the authentic or pseudotyped virus ( f–g). Notably,
there was no significant difference in neutralization efficiency observed
even at a 10-fold increased viral titer of pseudotyped virus (10 ×
dilution) or authentic virus (5000 PFU). However, further increases
in viral titer resulted in slightly lower neutralization efficiencies
( f–g).
We also verified the batch-to-batch consistency of RBCEVs in neutralizing
SARS-CoV-2 infection using RBCEVs purified from 16 different donors
( h). Our results
revealed that RBCEVs isolated from each donor had comparable neutralization
effects with no significant difference from each other.

## RBCEV Mediated Viral Neutralization Is Not Restricted to SARS-CoV-2
To determine the mechanism of RBCEV-mediated viral neutralization,
we performed a series of experiments to identify the component of
RBCEVs that was responsible for the inhibitory effects. We initially
compared the effect of RBCEVs to either intact RBCs or Hemoglobin
(Hb). Previous reports had indicated that Hb and its metabolites could
exert SARS-CoV-2 inhibitory effects. However,
in our experiments, neither RBCs nor Hb had a significant effect in
inhibiting pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2 infection ( a). We next examined the relative neutralization
ability of individual components of RBCEVs—the luminal extract
(3–150 kDa fraction from the lumen of the RBCEVs) and the RBCEV
membrane devoid of luminal contents. Our data revealed that the RBCEV
membrane displayed potent viral neutralization effects comparable
to those of intact RBCEVs ( b). The luminal extract in contrast had no significant
effect, suggesting that a molecule on the RBCEV membrane was responsible
for the observed SARS-CoV-2 inhibitory effects. Intact RBCEVs were
subsequently treated with either proteinase K (to digest all surface
proteins) or a cocktail of glycosidases (to remove all N- and O-linked
glycosylation) to determine the nature of the molecule on the RBCEV
membrane that was mediating the antiviral effects. Notably, both proteinase
K-treated and deglycosylated RBCEVs showed efficient viral neutralization
effects comparable to those of unmodified EVs ( c). Hence, the viral neutralization function
of RBCEVs is unlikely to be mediated by proteins or glycans on the
EV membrane.
 A number of reports have described the development
of EV-based
SARS-CoV-2 therapies that make use of ACE2-expressing EVs for SARS-CoV-2
neutralization. , , Thus,
to further investigate the mechanism of RBCEV-mediated SARS-CoV-2
neutralization, we analyzed our RBCEVs to determine if they might
express ACE2 on the surface. However, we could not detect the presence
of ACE2 on the surface of RBCEVs as assessed by bead-assisted flow
cytometric analysis ( d). This finding is supported by previously published mass
spectrometry data of RBCEVs where no ACE2 was detected. We also conducted an S1 binding assay, where
the binding of the SARS-CoV-2 spike (S1) protein to Vero E6, A549-ACE2
and 293T-ACE2 cells was assessed in the presence or absence of RBCEV
preincubation. In this assay, if RBCEVs inhibited the interaction
between the S1 protein and ACE2 on the cell, we would expect S1 binding
to decrease. However, for all of the cell lines tested, the RBCEVs
had no effect on S1 binding, which suggests that RBCEV mediated virus
neutralization was not due to a disruption of S1-ACE2 binding ( e–f). Moreover,
we tested the expression of ACE2 in the cell lines used in our study,
and we did not observe a correlation between ACE2 expression and the
neutralization effect of RBCEVs in these cells (Supplementary Figure S3a). Of note, overexpressing ACE2 on
A549 cells, while leading to an increase in relative infection, had
no effect on the neutralization effect of RBCEVs as both A549 and
A549-ACE2 displayed ∼55% neutralization in the presence of
RBCEVs (Supplementary Figure S3b–e).
To further exclude the possibility of any other molecules
on the
EV surface binding the virus and/or acting as a decoy, we performed
pull-down assays whereby RBCEVs immobilized on magnetic beads were
used to detect binding to purified spike protein. Subsequent flow
cytometric analysis failed to reveal detectable binding of RBCEVs
with the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (Supplementary Figure S3f). Lastly, we performed an experiment where GPA antibody-bound
magnetic beads were used to pulldown RBCEVs (and anything they interacted
with) from a mixture of RBCEVs and pseudotyped virus. The resulting
flow through was then incubated with Vero E6 cells and assessed for
viral infection. Our data revealed that removing the RBCEVs from the
mixture of RBCEVs and the virus led to the abrogation of the neutralization
effect, suggesting that RBCEVs did not bind to the virus ( g).
Thus, far,
all of the neutralization assays were conducted using
authentic or pseudotyped viruses bearing a SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.
However, the lack of binding of RBCEVs to S1 protein or the SARS-CoV-2
virus suggested that the antiviral effects may not be specific to
SARS-CoV-2. To determine if the EV-mediated viral neutralization effect
was exclusive to SARS-CoV-2 and/or viruses displaying its spike protein,
we conducted neutralization assays with a lentivirus displaying the
VSV.G viral fusion protein on its surface instead of the SARS-CoV-2
spike protein (Supplementary Figure S3g). Interestingly, significant neutralization effects were also obtained
with this VSV.G pseudotype virus (albeit less than those observed
in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein), suggesting that the mechanism of
viral neutralization by RBCEVs is not exclusive to viruses displaying
the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein ( h). We also repeated the neutralization of VSV.G displaying
lentiviruses in A549-ACE2, HuH-7 and 293T-ACE2 cells and observed
a similar trend as seen with the SARS-CoV-2 pseudotyped virus, where
the highest neutralization effects were seen in Vero E6 cells ( i). A549-ACE2 and
HuH-7 displayed moderated neutralization effects and the viral infection
in 293T-ACE2 could not be inhibited at any dose. Taken together, this
suggests that RBCEV-mediated neutralization is more dependent on the
characteristics of the cell than the viral entry protein and indicates
a potential interaction between RBCEVs and the cell as being responsible
for the antiviral effects.

## EVs Broadly Inhibit PS Receptor-Mediated Viral Infection Pathways
by Competing for PS Receptor Binding
As our experiments thus
far indicated that RBCEVs could neutralize viral infection despite
not interacting with or disrupting the binding of the SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein to cellular receptors, we considered the possibility that
the RBCEVs may not need to directly interact with the virus but rather
interact with other receptors on the cell to exert inhibitory effects.
To this end, we performed a neutralization assay where we compared
the neutralization efficiency of RBCEVs when they were added directly
to cells for a short period of time and then washed off prior to infection
with the virus. In this case, the RBCEVs would interact with the cells
prior to viral infection rather than interact with the virus directly.
Interestingly, we found that incubating the RBCEVs for either 10 min
or 1 h at doses >0.1 μg/μL resulted in the significant
neutralization of viral infection, despite the fact that the virus
was only added to the cells after any free RBCEVs were washed away
( a). Moreover,
when RBCEVs and the virus were added to cells together, there was
no significant improvement in the neutralization efficiency when compared
with preincubating the two together for an hour before they were applied
to the cells. Of all the tested conditions, directly adding the RBCEVs
to the cells at the same time as the virus had the best neutralization
effect. This suggests that viral inhibition was mediated by the direct
interaction of the RBCEVs with the cells. It should also be noted
that adding RBCEVs 5 h postinfection had no effect on inhibiting viral
infection.
 To test our hypothesis that RBCEVs were capable
of interacting
with cells directly to exert their antiviral effects, we performed
an EV-cell association assay where the ability of RBCEVs to bind to
the surface of cells was determined. Briefly, Vero E6 or A549-ACE2
cells were incubated with RBCEVs for 30 min at 4 °C before being
stained with an anti-GPA antibody to detect the presence of RBCEVs
bound to the surface of cells, as GPA is a marker specific to human
RBCEVs. We showed that RBCEVs bound readily to Vero E6 cells and to
a lesser extent to A549-ACE2 cells ( b). Moreover, the extent of binding was dose
dependent, reflecting the same trend observed in the neutralization
assays (Supplementary Figure S4a). We also
performed live-cell imaging of Vero E6 cells following incubation
with fluorescently labeled RBCEVs. When incubated under physiological
conditions (i.e., at 37 °C), we found that CFSE-labeled RBCEVs
(in green) were highly colocalized with the cell membrane of Vero
E6 cells (labeled with CellMask stain; in red). At the 15 min time
point, a large number of RBCEVs were shown to be interacting with
the surface of the cells. However, by the 1-h time point, they had
largely been taken up and were accumulating in endosomal vesicles
( c).
Given the broad antiviral effects of RBCEVs and their inability
to inhibit S1-ACE2 interactions in models of SARS-CoV-2 infection,
we subsequently explored alternate modes of viral infection that might
amplify or work alongside the canonical viral infection pathways.
One previously reported mode of viral infection involves PS receptors.
In this case, enveloped viruses displaying PS on their outer leaflet
bind to PS receptors expressed on cells, and in this way, they increase
their infectivity and tropism via a process termed apoptotic mimicry.
Exosomes and EVs in general are also known to display high levels
of PS on the outer leaflet of their lipid bilayer. More relevantly, we have previously demonstrated that RBCEVs
express high levels of PS. Our data revealed
that the pseudotyped viruses utilized in this study also expressed
high levels of PS on their surface (Supplementary Figure S4b). This suggests that EVs might compete with viruses
for binding to PS receptors and thereby inhibit PS-receptor mediated
viral infection in a dose dependent manner. This hypothesis also agrees
with our current data which suggested that a molecule present on the
RBCEV membrane, but not the RBC membrane, that was not a protein or
a glycan was mediating the antiviral effects. Of note, fresh RBCs
do not expose high levels of PS on their outer leaflet, while RBCEVs
have high levels of PS exposure due to the action of flippases and
floppases. 
We first used an EV-cell
association assay to determine whether
the interaction between RBCEVs and cells was mediated via PS receptors.
To this end, we incubated RBCEVs with Vero E6 or A549-ACE2 cells with
or without PS liposomes or with control phosphatidylcholine (PC) liposomes.
Our data showed that for both cell types, the presence of PS liposomes
significantly decreased the binding of RBCEVs to cells ( d, Supplementary Figure S4c). In contrast, the PC liposomes had little to no
significant effect on disrupting EV-cell interactions, confirming
that RBCEV-cell binding is dependent on the presence of PS on the
EVs. Taken together, our data suggest that RBCEVs bind to cells in
a PS-receptor dependent manner. We repeated this experiment in the
context of viral adsorption to cells, assessing the ability of PS
liposomes, PC liposomes, or RBCEVs to inhibit viral binding to Vero
E6 or A549-ACE2 cells. In both cell lines, the presence of either
PS liposomes or RBCEVs significantly inhibited viral adsorption onto
cells (Supplementary Figure S4d). In contrast,
the PC liposomes were significantly less potent (in the case of Vero
E6 cells) or exhibited no significant effect (in the case of A549-ACE2
cells) on viral adsorption. Notably there was no significant difference
in the inhibition observed between PS liposomes and RBCEVs, indicating
that the antiviral effects mediated by RBCEVs are mostly dependent
on PS exposure. We also further determined the relative efficacy of
equal particle concentrations of PS liposomes or EVs in neutralizing
viral infection. Our data revealed that equivalent doses of EVs or
PS liposomes resulted in comparable levels of viral neutralization,
indicating that EVs have sufficient PS to efficiently compete with
viruses for PS receptor binding ( e). While PS liposomes would have a higher
density of PS, the density of PS in a single liposome/EV appears not
to be a significant contributing factor to neutralization efficacy.
These findings suggest that the antiviral effects observed thus
far might be displayed by EVs from various sources rather than being
exclusive to human RBCEVs. To further investigate this phenomenon,
we isolated and purified EVs from mouse RBCs, 4TO7 mouse breast cancer
cells, and human plasma to determine their ability to inhibit viral
infection. Following purification, basic characterization was performed
on these EVs to determine their size distribution and their proteomic
content as per MISEV2018 guidelines. Our NTA data revealed the presence
of clear EV populations while our Western blot data confirmed that
the purified EVs were free of cellular/plasma protein contamination
and were enriched in relevant EV associated markers (i.e., Alix, TSG101,
CD81) (Supplementary Figure S5a,b). We
utilized the NTA data to obtain the concentration of EVs in our purified
samples, and these were in turn used to obtain a fixed number of EVs
(i.e., 1.3 × 1010; corresponding to approximately
5 μg of RBCEVs) from each source for the neutralization assay.
Our data revealed that EVs from all the sources could neutralize the
SARS-CoV-2 wild-type pseudotyped virus in Vero E6 cells, albeit with
varying efficiency ( f). The human RBCEVs showed the best neutralization efficiency,
followed closely by the 4TO7 EVs, whereas human plasma derived EVs
and mouse RBCEVs were less efficient. A more in-depth analysis of
the level of PS exposure across the EVs from each of these sources
revealed a correlation between PS exposure and antiviral effect ( g). In particular,
EVs with higher PS exposure (i.e., human RBCEVs and 4TO7 EVs) showed
high efficiency at viral neutralization whereas those with lower levels
of PS exposure (i.e., mouse RBCEVs and human plasma derived EVs) exhibited
poorer antiviral effects. It should be noted that none of the purified
EVs had any detectable surface ACE2 as analyzed using bead-assisted
flow cytometry, confirming that any antiviral effects displayed by
these EVs were not due to the expression of ACE2 (Supplementary Figure S5c). Taken together, our data suggest
that EVs in general can broadly inhibit PS-receptor-mediated pathways
of viral infection.

## EV-Mediated Viral Neutralization Is Dependent on TIM-1 Expression
To more accurately ascertain the mechanism by which EVs inhibit
PS-receptor mediated viral entry, we studied TIM-1, one of the best
studied PS receptors, which has been well established to broadly mediate
viral infection. An initial screening
revealed that all the cell lines that displayed significant viral
neutralization effects (i.e., Vero E6, A549-ACE2, and HuH-7 cells)
also all expressed high levels of TIM-1 ( a). Moreover, cells that expressed TIM-1
also showed significant levels of EV binding ( b). Notably, the level of TIM-1 expression
corresponded to the maximal neutralization efficiency observed and
the relative extent of EV binding. For example, Vero E6 cells displayed
the highest level of TIM-1 expression, the highest amount of EV binding,
and the best neutralization efficiency. In contrast, A549-ACE2 and
HuH-7 cells expressed lower levels of TIM-1 and demonstrated only
moderate levels of EV binding and neutralization. Moreover, 293T-ACE2
cells had no detectable levels of TIM-1, displayed poor EV binding,
and showed no decrease in viral infection in the presence of EVs.
 To confirm this association between TIM-1 expression
and EV binding/neutralization,
we performed blocking assays using a human-specific TIM-1 blocking
antibody designed to prevent TIM-1 from binding to PS. Preincubation with the TIM-1 antibody (but not
an isotype control antibody) significantly decreased RBCEV binding
to A549-ACE2 and HuH-7 cells ( c). Notably, the TIM-1 blocking antibodies also exhibited
similar neutralization effects as RBCEVs against pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2
viral infection; they displayed dose dependent inhibition of infection
in A549-ACE2 and HuH-7 cells but had no effect on 293T-ACE2 cells.
Moreover, the maximal neutralization effect observed with TIM-1 blocking
antibodies or RBCEVs was similar for each cell line, suggesting that
in these cellular models, the EVs blocked TIM-1-mediated viral entry
by preventing TIM-1 from interacting with viral PS ( d).

## Knockdown or Overexpression of TIM-1 Significantly Impacts EV
Binding, Viral Infection, and Neutralization Ability
To further
investigate the role of TIM-1 in EV-mediated viral neutralization,
we performed knockdown or overexpression studies to examine the effect
of TIM-1 levels on EV binding, viral infection, and EV-mediated viral
neutralization efficiency. With regard to the knockdown studies, an
siRNA against TIM-1 was screened in Vero E6 and A549-ACE2 cells and
validated for use in further experiments (Supplementary Figure S6a). Our initial observations revealed that siRNA-mediated
knockdown of TIM-1 in Vero E6 and A549-ACE2 cells resulted in a concurrent
decrease in EV binding ( a, Supplementary Figure S6b) and
significantly lower levels of pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2 infection ( b). In contrast,
a negative control siRNA (NC siRNA) had no significant effect on EV
binding or viral infection. Notably, we noticed that the RBCEVs’
ability to neutralize viral infection was attenuated in TIM-1 knockdown
cells ( c).
This supports the hypothesis that RBCEVs inhibit TIM-1 mediated viral
entry. However, other pathways of infection including the canonical
ACE2-mediated viral entry would be unaffected, resulting in a decreased
neutralization ability. Similar effects on viral infection and RBCEV-mediated
neutralization ability were observed when using the authentic SARS-CoV-2
virus upon knockdown of TIM-1. Indeed, TIM-1 knockdown in Vero E6
or A549-ACE2 cells led to a decrease both in authentic viral infection
and the percentage of EV-mediated neutralization, confirming the applicability
of our results to authentic SARS-CoV-2 viral infection ( d–e).
 In our overexpression studies, we used 293T-ACE2
cells that displayed
low levels of TIM-1 expression and poor RBCEV binding. Overexpressing
TIM-1 in 293T-ACE2 cells led to a concurrent increase in both EV binding
and pseudotyped viral infection ( f–g, Supplementary Figure S6c). Interestingly, we also observed a significant
increase in the EV-mediated neutralization ability in the cells overexpressing
TIM-1 ( h).
This is particularly interesting when taking into consideration the
fact that EVs could not neutralize viral infection in 293T-ACE2 cells
transfected with a control plasmid. Similar results were also obtained
when repeated with the authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus, where TIM-1 overexpression
in 293T-ACE2 cells led to an appreciable increase both in viral infection
and ability to neutralize viral infection ( i–j).
After confirming the ability
of RBCEVs to inhibit PS-receptor mediated
viral entry in vitro, we designed an experiment to
determine if these effects were translatable in vivo. Based on our in vitro data and our understanding
of the mechanism of EV-mediated inhibition of viral neutralization,
we recognized that using the K18-hACE2 mouse model to study the effects
of EV-mediated neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 was not feasible. This
was because the K18-hACE2 mouse model has been engineered to express
unnaturally high levels of hACE2 under a keratinocyte promoter in
epithelial cells, which facilitates an unnaturally high rate of viral
infection in a PS-receptor independent manner. This means that PS-receptor
mediated enhancement of infection would not be a significant factor
contributing to the infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 in K18-hACE2 mice. This
is in line with previous reports of SARS-CoV-2 utilizing PS receptor-associated
pathways in cells with low levels of surface ACE2. This negates any inhibitory effects that unmodified EVs
may exert in vivo. However, in a more physiological
model, the basal levels of natural ACE2 expression would mean that
TIM-1 and other PS receptors may have a higher contribution to infection,
which could be neutralized by EVs. However, we are unable to perform
SARS-CoV-2 infectivity experiments in wild-type mice as the SARS-CoV-2
spike protein is unable to bind to mouse ACE2. Thus, we developed
an in vivo viral neutralization assay in NOD SCID
Gamma (NSG) mice where the ability of RBCEVs to inhibit the infection
of VSV.G pseudotyped lentivirus carrying a luciferase reporter was
assessed. Our in vivo imaging data revealed that
coadministration of EVs and VSV.G displaying lentiviruses resulted
in significantly lower levels of infection as compared to administration
of the virus with a vehicle PBS control, indicating that unmodified
EVs can effectively inhibit viral infection in vivo ( k–l).

## RBCEVs Facilitate Delivery of Therapeutic ASOs Designed against
SARS-CoV-2
To further enhance the anti-SARS-CoV-2 effects
of RBCEVs, we loaded these EVs with antisense LNA gapmers designed
against conserved regions of key SARS-CoV-2 genes. We chose four target
genes, as follows: helicase, 3-chymotrypsin like
protease (3CLpro), papain-like protease (PLpro), and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) and designed multiple ASOs against each target. We subsequently
screened the ASOs for each target by transfecting them into 293T cells
expressing the gene of interest. We discovered that Helicase ASO1, 3CLPro ASO2, PLpro ASO4,
and RdRp ASO2 resulted in the best knockdown of their
respective target genes and so these ASOs were selected for subsequent
experiments (Supplementary Figure S7a).
We then loaded the optimal ASOs into RBCEVs using REG1 (outlined
in a) and assessed
the loading efficiency. As shown in b, we could load ∼85% of the input
ASOs into RBCEVs as determined by native PAGE analysis of the ASO-loaded
RBCEVs when compared with a standard curve of free ASOs (Supplementary Figure S7b). After verifying that
RBCEVs could be loaded with the ASOs, we determined if RBCEVs could
deliver functional ASOs into cells. We transfected Vero E6 cells with
a plasmid encoding the target viral gene and assessed knockdown of
the gene using RT-qPCR upon treatment with either EVs loaded with
the optimal ASO against each target or an equivalent amount of free
ASOs. We also included a positive control of lipofectamine transfected
ASOs. Our data revealed that in each of the four targets that were
evaluated, RBCEVs loaded with the targeting ASO achieved significantly
higher knockdown when compared with either a mock PBS treatment or
negative control ASO-loaded EVs (NC ASO-EVs) ( c). We also observed significantly improved
knockdown of helicase, PLpro, and RdRp in the ASO-EV treatments when compared with the free
ASOs, indicating that loading ASOs into RBCEVs enhances their cellular
delivery. Of note, the data revealed a general trend wherein the ASO-loaded
EVs displayed comparable or better knockdown efficiency as compared
to the positive control of Lipofectamine transfected ASOs.
 Upon verifying the ability of RBCEVs to enhance
the functional
delivery of ASOs into cells, we repeated this experiment with optimal
ASOs using the authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus. In brief, cells were pretreated
with ASO-loaded EVs, after which the cells were infected with 25,000
PFU/mL of authentic SARS-CoV-2 (corresponding to a MOI of 0.1) and
the cells were incubated for 3 days to facilitate viral infection.
Following this, the level of SARS-CoV-2 infection was quantified based
on RT-qPCR of nascent virions in the culture supernatant or by immunolabeling
the N protein in cells. Of note, to exclude any inhibitory effects
mediated by endogenous EV PS, we followed a modified experimental
outline from that used for assessing the neutralization efficacy of
EVs. Briefly, EVs were added to cells 24 h prior to viral infection
and the medium containing the EVs was removed prior to infection with
the virus ( a). This negated interactions between EV PS and PS receptors, allowing
us to solely observe the effects of ASO delivery on viral inhibition.
Our data revealed that the ASO-loaded EVs against all four target
genes more efficiently suppressed viral infection when compared with
either mock PBS control or NC ASO-loaded EVs ( d). The Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs resulted in the
best neutralization effect and thus were selected for use in subsequent
experiments.
We further investigated the effect of Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs on the infection and replication of authentic SARS-CoV-2
using RT-qPCR of the viral E protein RNA, comparing it to an equivalent
dose of free Helicase ASO1. In agreement with our
previous experiments, we were able to demonstrate that the Helicase ASO1-loaded RBCEVs displayed superior anti-SARS-CoV-2
effects compared with the naked ASO ( e). Importantly, REG1-ASO complex in the
absence of EVs (REG1-Helicase ASO1) were shown to
be unable to induce significant levels of viral neutralization, demonstrating
the necessity of EVs as a carrier for the REG1-ASO complex. We further
validated the enhanced anti-SARS-CoV-2 efficacy of Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs by immunofluorescent imaging of N protein which
revealed significantly higher levels of viral load in cells treated
with EVs only, naked Helicase ASO1 or NC ASO-loaded
EV treatments, as compared to Helicase ASO1-loaded
EV treatments ( f, g). As shown in g, there was a striking decrease in the number of primary
infected cells (identified by the intense cytoplasmic N protein staining
(in magenta) and the smaller, denser nuclei (in cyan)) and secondary
infected cells (identified by the punctate N protein staining present
at low levels in the cytoplasm) following treatment with Helicase ASO1-EVs as compared to PBS/EV/Helicase ASO1 or
NC ASO-EV treatments, indicating the superior inhibitory effects of Helicase ASO1-EV treatments.
We also performed a dose
response analysis to assess the relative
inhibitory capability of Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs
as compared with free Helicase ASO1 and Lipofectamine-mediated
transfection of Helicase ASO1. Our data revealed
that Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs consistently resulted
in significantly improved authentic SARS-CoV-2 suppression at all
tested doses, further solidifying the superiority of EV-based ASO
delivery ( h).
The efficacy of EV-mediated delivery of anti-SARS-CoV-2 ASOs was also
assessed in hNECs to confirm whether the therapeutic effects could
be observed in cellular models that are more physiologically relevant
to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our data revealed comparable neutralization
effects in these primary airway cells following treatment with Helicase ASO1-EVs, indicating the translatability of this
EV-mediated ASO delivery approach for therapeutic use. Importantly, Helicase ASO1-EVs induced superior inhibition of SARS-CoV-2
as compared to that of naked Helicase ASO1 or NC-ASO-loaded
EVs, reflecting our previous observations in Vero E6 cells.
After confirming that ASO delivery mediated by EVs was capable
of efficiently inhibiting viral infection and replication, we assessed
the relative contribution to viral neutralization contributed by EV
PS-based inhibition of viral entry and ASO delivery-mediated inhibition
of viral replication. To do so, we determined the inhibitory capacity
of Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs as compared to unmodified
EVs or NC ASO-loaded EVs when equivalent doses of EVs were added to
cells together with the virus in a typical neutralization protocol
illustrated in a. Our results demonstrate that endogenous EVs inhibit SARS-CoV-2
at levels similar to those of NC ASO-loaded EVs ( j). However, we observed that Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs demonstrated superior inhibition
of SARS-CoV-2 as compared to both unmodified EVs and NC ASO-loaded
EVs, presumably mediated by the effects of the Helicase ASO1, demonstrating that these two strategies of viral inhibition
can work synergistically to achieve enhanced antiviral effects.

## Intratracheal Administration of ASO-Loaded RBCEVs Efficiently
Suppresses SARS-CoV-2 Infection In Vivo
After validating the efficacy of Helicase ASO1-EVs
in suppressing authentic SARS-CoV-2, we decided to test our treatment in vivo using the K18-hACE2 transgenic mouse model, which
expresses high levels of human ACE2 in epithelial cells under a keratin
18 (K18) promoter. We have previously validated intratracheal delivery
as a suitable method to administer EVs into mouse lungs with an even
distribution capable of complete lung coverage in a single dose. In this study, we verified the ability of EVs
to colocalize with ACE2-positive lung epithelial cells, as these are
a major site of SARS-CoV-2 infection. We administered a single dose
of 400 μg CellTrace Deep Red-labeled EVs intratracheally and
assessed cellular uptake at 8 h postadministration. Immunofluorescence
analysis revealed that the EVs became distributed evenly throughout
the lung, showing a high level of colocalization with ACE2-positive
epithelial cells as evidenced by the superposition of red CellTrace-EV
signals with green ACE2 staining ( a, Supplementary Figure S8a).
 We subsequently conducted an in vivo treatment
to assess the efficacy of ASO-loaded RBCEVs in suppressing authentic
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Mice were administered with a single dose of
RBCEVs and then 24 h postadministration they were infected with the
virus. They were then administered a second dose of RBCEVs 24 h after
viral infection ( b). The mice were sacrificed 3 days postinfection and the viral infection
levels were determined via RT-qPCR of SARS-CoV-2 E protein to measure
the viral titer in lung homogenates or immunolabeling of SARS-CoV-2
N protein to quantify the expression of N protein in lung sections.
Treatment with Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs significantly
suppressed viral infection in the lungs of authentic SARS-CoV-2 infected
mice compared to untreated mice, NC ASO-EV treated mice, mice treated
with EVs alone or naked Helicase ASO1 treated mice
( c–e).
Treatment with an equivalent dose of naked Helicase ASO1 did not result in significant decreases in E protein expression
as compared to the PBS control ( c), indicating that naked ASO administration is inferior
to EV-mediated delivery. As expected, we did not observe significant
inhibitory effects mediated by unmodified EVs or NC ASO-EVs—a
fact attributed to the unnaturally high levels of hACE2 expression
in the K18-hACE2 mouse lung cells. These conclusions were supported
by the representative images of lung sections in e, which display striking decreases
in N protein expression in lung cells in the mice treated with Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs as compared to treatment with EVs,
naked ASO or NC ASO-loaded EVs, indicative of the efficient anti-SARS-CoV-2
effect mediated by Helicase ASO1-loaded EVs ( d–e).
We repeated the experiment, this time maintaining the infected
mice until they succumbed to SARS-CoV-2 infection or experienced a
20% decrease in body weight. Daily monitoring of body weight, clinical
scoring, and symptom-free survival was carried out for the duration
of the study. Our data revealed that treatment with Helicase ASO1-EVs resulted in an overall improvement in the maintenance of
body weight and clinical scoring for the duration of the treatment,
resulting in significantly improved survival of mice when compared
with the control treatments ( f–g, Supplementary Figure S8b). Notably, two of the mice in the Helicase ASO1-EV treatment group completely recovered from the SARS-CoV-2
infection and were still alive at the end point of the experiment
(Day 14).

## Conclusions
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic,
the severe and potentially
life-threatening symptoms caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection have brought
antiviral research to the forefront in the past couple of years. Efforts
to combat this disease have been compounded by the emergence of several
VOCs that have enabled the virus to evade immune responses, negate
the effects of drugs, and cause more severe and easily transmissible
infections. Despite the ongoing emphasis on SARS-CoV-2 research, many
preclinical trials for new and existing drugs have not been successfully
translated to the clinic. This is mainly due to shortcomings in their
safety and/or efficiency, or their questionable effectiveness against
newer VOCs. 
From a therapeutic standpoint,
our findings regarding ASO-loaded
RBCEVs resolve many of the aforementioned problems. This study establishes
that RBCEVs enhance the delivery of antisense gapmers to recipient
cells, displaying significantly greater efficacy than the administration
of naked/free ASOs alone. Upon uptake of ASO-loaded EVs by recipient
cells, the ASOs are released from endosomal compartments reminiscent
of late endosomes/lysosomes into the cellular cytoplasm where they
are able to bind to complementary viral RNA (either the genomic or
subgenomic mRNA). Our modified oligonucleotide
gapmers then initiate RNase H-mediated cleavage of the viral RNA,
which results in degradation of the RNA strand ( ). The ASOs utilized in this project were
carefully screened and specifically designed against key conserved
regions that are well preserved across the major SARS-CoV-2 VOCs,
to ensure their effectiveness across multiple strains. In addition,
should these target sites be mutated, then a simple change in the
ASO sequence can re-enable effective complementarity and neutralization.
 A caveat of our in vivo treatment
study was that
we administered the ASO treatments 1 day prior to infection and 1
day after, thereby straying from a typical treatment outline that
is used in clinical practice. The reason for this experimental design
was because we took into consideration the extraordinarily fast progression
of COVID-19 infection in K18-hACE2 mice as a result of the unnaturally
high levels of hACE2 expressed in the epithelium which cause the mice
to succumb to infection in under a week if left untreated—a
phenomenon which is very different from more physiological models
of infection where the progression of COVID-19 would be much slower,
allowing sufficient time for treatment. Nevertheless, the data from
our in vivo treatment experiments convincingly demonstrate
that EV-based delivery of ASOs can induce suppression of SARS-CoV-2
infection, whether this is administered prophylactically (via delivery
of these ASOs to high-risk individuals) or therapeutically (to individuals
who have already been diagnosed with COVID-19).
The use of RBCEVs
as a nanoparticulate carrier brings with it a
host of advantages over synthetic nano formulations such as liposomes
in terms of immunogenicity, toxicity, and biocompatibility. , , We and other groups have previously
demonstrated that RBCEVs are biocompatible, safe, nontoxic, nonimmunogenic
and free of any cellular DNA, thus ensuring that the addition of this
vector does not introduce any adverse effects. , Our data here also reflect that RBCEV-mediated delivery of ASOs
is superior to the delivery of free ASOs or the REG1-ASO complex alone,
substantiating the advantage of RBCEV-based ASO delivery. We also
demonstrate that upon intratracheal administration, EVs are delivered
directly to ACE2-positive epithelial cells in the lung, the primary
site of SARS-CoV-2 infection, avoiding rapid clearance by macrophages
of the reticuloendothelial system that is typically observed with
intravenous administration. We also previously demonstrated that intratracheal
delivery can distribute EVs evenly throughout the lung, including
in the lower extremities, ensuring comprehensive suppression of viral
infection. 
Our data also demonstrate
that RBCEVs (and EVs in general) display
broad antiviral effects against authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus and various
pseudotyped viruses, an effect attributed to the high phosphatidylserine
(PS) content on their outer leaflet. Although the use of PS receptor-mediated
entry by viruses has been well characterized by previous studies,
EVs have not been previously reported to inhibit viral entry via PS
receptor-associated pathways. Notably,
we demonstrate that the virus neutralization ability presented here
is also applicable to endogenous EVs from other sources (including
human plasma-derived EVs and cancer cell line-derived EVs). Furthermore,
this EV-mediated antiviral effect is not limited to SARS-CoV-2, but
is also applicable to enveloped viruses and certain select nonenveloped
viruses that utilize PS receptors for cellular entry/infection. Further mechanistic studies suggested that TIM-1
and other PS receptors might serve to increase viral adsorption and
thus enhance infectivity but they are unlikely to present a functional
mode of entry by itself, at least in the context of authentic SARS-CoV-2
infection. After adsorption and uptake, the viruses still appear to
require ACE2 to functionally infect the cell.
However, our data
also indicate that the PS receptor-mediated neutralization
effect of EVs only occurs in cells with high levels of PS receptor
expression. While this prevented us from demonstrating the neutralization
ability of EVs against SARS-CoV-2 in K18-hACE2 mice due to the unnaturally
high levels of hACE2 expressed in the epithelial cells of these mice,
we were able to demonstrate that EVs were able to significantly decrease
infection of VSV.G pseudotyped viruses in the lungs of NSG mice, indicating
that EV-mediated inhibition of PS receptor-based viral entry pathways
is applicable in vivo. The first implication of this
discovery is that exogenous administration of EVs could serve as an
antiviral therapeutic to suppress viral entry. Indeed, the IC50 value of RBCEVs lies within a similar range as those reported
for other EV-based antiviral therapeutics (such as the ACE2-expressing
EVs for COVID-19 treatment) and our PS receptor blocking strategy
is independent of the SARS-CoV-2 strain. In addition, RBCEVs have the advantage of not having to be engineered
unlike other similar EV-based antiviral agents such as ACE2-expressing
EVs. Despite this, EV-based inhibition of PS-mediated viral entry
is functional only in certain models of infection or certain cells,
where the virus in question relies heavily on PS receptor-mediated
pathways of viral entry. ACE2-expressing EVs, however, engage the
SARS-CoV-2 virus directly and are less dependent on the expression
pattern of cellular receptors. However, given the fact that ACE2-expresssing
EVs bind viruses, some reports indicate that ACE2-expressing EVs can
also act as a trojan horse and enhance infection by increasing viral
delivery into cells—a phenomenon that would not affect EV PS-mediated
viral inhibition. 
Our discovery
of EV-mediated viral inhibition has a further implication,
suggesting that endogenous EVs present naturally in plasma and tissue
fluid might also play a significant role in preventing viral infection
by acting as a natural antiviral defense mechanism. For example, we
measured IC50 values as low as 5.95 × 1010 for Vero E6 cells; this is comparable to the concentration of EVs
known to be present naturally in the plasma of humans. Moreover, other
biological fluids such as interstitial fluid have been reported to
have EV concentrations 10-fold higher than that found in plasma. This suggests that EVs present naturally in
body fluids might constitutively block PS-receptor mediated pathways
of viral infectivity and thus provide a certain degree of antiviral
protection. However, more pertinent data in this regard are required
before any definite conclusions can be reached.
Collectively,
our data indicate that PS receptors might work in
concert with ACE2 and other reported SARS-CoV-2 receptors, such as
NRP1, to facilitate viral infection. While the EV-based viral inhibition
strategy reported here does not involve all the entry pathways being
blocked in their entirety, the models used in this study do demonstrate
the potency of PS-mediated viral entry and how endogenous or exogenously
administered EVs can play a role in suppressing viral infection. The
mechanisms of viral suppression reported here also differ significantly
from other EV-based viral inhibition studies reported in the literature. − 
Lastly, we demonstrate that inhibition of viral entry via
EV PS
synergizes with the inhibition of viral infection and replication
mediated by ASO delivery to achieve superior viral neutralization.
These two therapeutic strategies complement one another, wherein EVs
competitively inhibit the binding and entry of viruses, decreasing
viral infection, while at the same time enhancing EV uptake and ASO
delivery via PS receptors. ASO delivery into cells via uptake of EVs
via PS receptors or other endocytic mechanisms results in degradation
of viral gRNA and sgmRNA which inhibit primary infections and decrease
viral replication, respectively. Thus, ASO-loaded EVs are able to
suppress viral infection by comprehensively targeting multiple key
steps in the viral infectivity process.
Taken together, via
the use of models of authentic and pseudotyped
SARS-CoV-2 infection, we report here a versatile and efficient EV-based
antiviral approach that can serve as an effective antiviral agent
capable of consecutively inhibiting viral entry and replication. The
EV-mediated ASO delivery approach we describe is highly versatile,
as it can be applied to most other viruses by simply changing the
sequence of the ASO to match a conserved region in the desired virus.
Moreover, we report that this EV-mediated ASO-delivery approach is
superior in efficacy to the administration of equivalent doses of
free ASOs. This was demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo by the efficient suppression of the virus and improved
survivability of SARS-CoV-2 infected mice treated with helicase-ASO1-EVs. Moreover, we demonstrate that EV-based inhibition of PS-mediated
viral entry pathways synergizes with the delivery of antiviral ASOs
to achieve superior antiviral effects.

## Methods

## EV Purification

## Purification of Human RBCEVs
Blood samples were collected
from healthy donors with informed consent by Innovative Research Inc.
(USA). Human RBCEVs were purified from fresh human red blood cells
(RBCs) with help from ESCO Aster (Singapore), as described in our
previous study. In brief, RBCs were isolated
from fresh blood using several rounds of centrifugation and washing
in PBS (1000g for 8 min at 4 °C) to remove platelets
and plasma. The resulting RBCs were resuspended in PBS and passed
through a leukoreduction filter (Nigale, China) to remove leukocytes.
The resulting RBC suspension was collected in Nigale buffer (0.2 g/L
citric acid, 1.5 g/L sodium citrate, 7.93 g/L glucose, 0.94 g/L sodium
dihydrogen phosphate, 0.14 g/L adenine, 4.97 g/L sodium chloride,
14.57 g/L mannitol), diluted in CPBS (PBS containing 0.1 mg/mL calcium
chloride), and incubated overnight with calcium ionophore (Sigma-Aldrich,
USA) at a final concentration of 10 μM, at 37 °C with 5%
CO2 to induce vesiculation. Human RBCEVs were isolated
from the resulting suspension by following a series of differential
centrifugation steps to remove cell debris and filtration via a 0.45
μm filter, followed by ultracentrifugation to concentrate the
EVs. Ultracentrifugation with a sucrose cushion was used to remove
protein contaminants, and the resulting EV pellet was washed twice
in PBS. Following isolation and purification, human RBCEVs were resuspended
in PBS, supplemented with 4% trehalose (Sigma-Aldrich) and stored
at −80 °C. All experiments in this study, unless otherwise
stated, utilized human RBC-derived EVs (RBCEVs).

## Purification of Mouse RBCEVs
All animal experiments
were conducted with the approval of (and following guidelines set
out by) the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the National
University of Singapore. Mouse blood was collected from C57BL/6 mice
in citrate-phosphate-dextrose adenine (CPDA-1) via cardiac puncture.
RBCs were isolated from whole blood via leukoreduction filters and
several rounds of centrifugation (1200g for 8 min
at 4 °C). The resulting RBC pellet was resuspended in additive
solution-7 (AS-7) buffer containing 3 μM calcium ionophore and
0.8 mM calcium chloride, after which it was incubated at 37 °C
for 4 h. The mouse RBCs were collected into falcon tubes and centrifuged
at 1600g for 10 min, followed by 4000g for 5 min to remove cells and cellular debris. The resulting supernatant
was filtered through a 0.45 μm filter and concentrated by using
ultracentrifugation. Isolated mouse RBCEVs were washed twice by centrifugation
at 21,000g for 30 min. The purified pellet was resuspended
in PBS supplemented with 4% trehalose and stored at −80 °C.

## Plasma EV Purification
Cell-free human plasma was obtained
from consenting donors at the Singapore Health Sciences Authority
and subjected to several rounds of differential centrifugation to
remove cellular debris, platelets, and other contaminants. The resulting
supernatant was diluted 1:2 in PBS and subjected to sucrose cushion
ultracentrifugation at 100,000g for 16 h. The interface
containing the EVs was collected, diluted in PBS, and washed using
ultracentrifugation. The resulting EV pellet was subjected to size
exclusion chromatography prior to use in experiments. The purified
EV pellet was resuspended in PBS supplemented with 4% trehalose and
stored at −80 °C.

## 4TO7 EV Purification
4TO7-derived EVs were purified
as described previously from the conditioned media of 4TO7 cells using
a sequential purification protocol consisting of differential centrifugation,
sucrose-cushion ultracentrifugation, and size exclusion chromatography. The final EV suspension was concentrated using
centrifugal filters with a 100 kDa molecular weight cut off (Millipore,
Sigma, USA). The purified EV pellet was resuspended in PBS supplemented
with 4% trehalose and stored at −80 °C.

## EV Labeling
For tracking RBCEV uptake in vitro and in vivo, EVs were labeled with carboxyfluorescein
diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE) or CellTrace dyes, which result
in well-retained fluorescent signals. CellTrace dyes or CFSE (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, USA) were reconstituted in DMSO to achieve a stock
concentration of 5 mM. RBCEVs were resuspended in PBS to a final concentration
of 1 mg/mL and CFSE/CellTrace stock was added to achieve a final concentration
of 20 μM. The RBCEVs were incubated with the dye for 1 h at
37 °C, after which they were centrifuged at 21,000g. The resulting RBCEV pellet was washed once at 21,000g for 30 min, resuspended in PBS to a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL and
incubated overnight at 4 °C to allow any unbound dye to diffuse
out. The RBCEVs were subsequently centrifuged at 21,000g for 30 min and resuspended in 300 μL PBS. This RBCEV suspension
was passed through a qEV-original SEC column (Izon, New Zealand),
after which the fractions containing RBCEVs (fractions 7–9)
were collected and washed twice with PBS via centrifugation at 21,000g at 4 °C for 20 min.

## EV Characterization
Human RBCEVs were quantified based
on their hemoglobin content, measured using a NanoDrop 2000 system
at isosbestic wavelengths of 420 and 586 nm. All other EVs were quantified
based on nanoparticle tracking analysis obtained using a Zetaview
NTA Instrument (Particle Metrix, Germany). EV parameters, including
hydrodynamic diameter, size distribution, and concentration, were
obtained using this system.

## Generation and Maintenance of Cell Lines
Vero E6, A549,
HuH-7, and HEK-293T cells were obtained from the American Tissue and
Cell Collection (ATCC). HEK-293T and A549 cells were transduced with
a lentiviral vector encoding human ACE2 (Plasmid #155295 and Plasmid
#25870, Addgene, USA). Transduced 293T-ACE2 and A549-ACE2 cells were
selected by using puromycin (4 μg/mL) and blasticidin (10 μg/mL),
respectively. Subsequently, fluorescently activated cell sorting was
used to establish stable cell lines. All of the cell lines used in
this study were maintained in DMEM or RPMI (Biowest, France) supplemented
with 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Biowest) and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cells were
maintained under optimal conditions in a humidified incubator at 37
°C with 5% CO2.

## Flow Cytometry
For flow cytometric analysis of endogenous/reporter
fluorescent proteins, cells were washed twice with FACS buffer (1%
BSA in PBS) prior to flow cytometric analysis. For the detection of
surface proteins, cells were washed with FACS buffer and incubated
with one of the following fluorophore-conjugated antibodies: anti-his
tag-APC (Cat #362605) or anti-human CD235ab-APC (Cat #306608; BioLegend,
USA). The following unconjugated primary antibodies: anti-TIM-1 (Cat
#353902, BioLegend), anti-hTIM-1 (ab228973, Abcam, UK), or anti-ACE2
(MAB9332–100, R & D Systems, USA) were incubated under
similar conditions followed by a washing step and staining with the
appropriate Alexa Fluor-tagged secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
The cells were incubated for 30 min on ice, after which they were
washed with FACS buffer three times at 400g for 5
min before flow cytometric analysis. Viability staining was performed
using SYTOX Blue dead cell stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or propidium
iodide (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
For the analysis of phosphatidylserine
(PS) or proteins on the EV surface, aldehyde/sulfate latex beads (4
wt %, 4 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were incubated for 2 h
at room temperature with 2 × 1010 EVs (i.e., in excess).
The beads were then centrifuged to remove unbound EVs and incubated
with 1% BSA (Cytiva, USA) to block any free binding sites prior to
being probed with fluorophore-conjugated probes or antibodies. The
EV-bound beads were subsequently washed three times with FACS buffer
prior to flow cytometric analysis.
Flow cytometric analysis
was performed with a CytoFLEX LX system
(Beckman Coulter, USA). Cells or beads were initially gated using
forward scatter or side scatter plots. Events in this gate were sequentially
gated to exclude doublets and dead cells, and single cells were used
for analysis. The mean fluorescence or percent of fluorescence-positive
cells was utilized as a readout, and FACS histograms and dot plots
were created with FlowJo v10 Software (BD, USA).

## RNA Extraction and RT-qPCR
Samples for RNA extraction
were resuspended in TRIzol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at
−80 °C until RNA extraction was carried out. RNA extraction
was conducted by following the manufacturer’s protocol. For
RT-qPCR, RNA was first converted to cDNA using a high-capacity cDNA
reverse transcription kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the
manufacturer’s instructions. mRNA levels were subsequently
quantified using the Ssofast Green qPCR kit (Bio-Rad, USA) via a QuantStudio
6 Flex Real-Time PCR System (Life Technologies) or a CFX96 Touch Real-Time
PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad). When appropriate, the levels were
normalized to GAPDH. Primer sequences are provided in Supplementary Table S1.

## Immunofluorescence Analysis
Cells were preseeded on
chamber slides and allowed to recover for 24 h. Following treatment
and infection, the cells were stained with CellMask Deep Red (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The cells were washed twice with PBS, after which they were fixed
for 15 min with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
and then blocked for 1 h with 1% BSA. For antibody staining of intracellular
targets, the cells were incubated with permeabilization buffer (PBS
containing 0.1% BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100) for 30 min at room temperature.
The cells were subsequently stained with an anti-SARS-CoV-2 N protein
primary antibody (NB100–56576, Novus Biologicals, USA) overnight.
The following day, excess primary antibody was washed off and the
cells were stained with a donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated
secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch, USA) for 2 h at room temperature.
The cells were subsequently rinsed three times, stained with Hoechst
33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 10 min, and mounted with antifade
mounting medium. The cells were imaged by using an FV3000 confocal
microscope (Olympus, Japan).

## Pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2 Production and Titration
HEK-293T
cells (5 × 106 cells per dish) were seeded onto 10
cm tissue culture dishes coated with 50 μg/mL poly-d-lysine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated overnight at 37
°C with 5% CO2. The next day, 5 μg of pLenti-mCherry-luc,
1.5 μg of RSV-REV, 3.25 μg of pMDL-RRE, and 1.5 μg
of pCG1-Spike plasmids were mixed in a tube and topped up to 562.5
μL using Opti-MEM (Gibco, USA). Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351),
Delta (B.1.617.2), or Omicron (B.1.1.529/BA.1) pLV-spike2, pLV-spike3,
pLV-spike8 or pLV-spike11 plasmids were obtained from Invivogen (USA)
to produce pseudotyped viruses displaying spike protein variants.
In a second tube, PEImax (Polysciences Inc., USA) was diluted
with Opti-MEM. The two solutions were then combined, mixed, and incubated
at room temperature for 15 min to facilitate complex formation. 1.12
mL of the transfection complexes were added to each tissue culture
dish containing 8 mL DMEM and 1% FBS, and the cells were incubated
at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 24 h. The medium was then
removed and replaced with 9.5 mL of DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin, and the cells were maintained in a humidified
incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 40 h to allow for
virion formation. The supernatant, containing the nascent virions,
was collected and centrifuged at 1,000g at 4 °C
for 10 min to pellet any cell debris. The supernatant was then transferred
to a new falcon tube and kept at 4 °C. The HEK-293T producer
cells were cultured in fresh medium (9.5 mL per dish) for a further
6 h for the second virus harvest. The supernatant from this harvest
was similarly centrifuged and combined with the supernatant from the
first harvest. The combined supernatant was filtered through 0.45
μm filters (Millipore, USA) and concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15
centrifugal filter units (Millipore) at 2400g and
4 °C for 1 h or until the volume in the column was approximately
250 μL. The concentrated virus was mixed with 4% trehalose,
aliquoted into cryovials, and immediately stored at −80 °C.
The titer of the pseudotyped virus was determined by serially diluting
the virus in DMEM (2-fold serial dilution) and incubating 200 μL
of the diluted virus with 100,000 preseeded Vero E6 cells in a 24
well plate for 5 h to facilitate viral entry. Five hours postinfection,
the medium was topped up to 500 μL of DMEM supplemented with
10% heat inactivated FBS. The cells were maintained for another 19
h to allow mCherry reporter expression, after which they were trypsinized
and the relative level of mCherry expression was quantified using
flow cytometry. For subsequent experiments using pseudotyped viruses,
a suitable dilution that resulted in approximately 50–70% mCherry-positive
cells was selected.

## Authentic SARS-CoV-2 Virus Culture and Propagation
Vero E6 cells were seeded in T25 flasks and incubated overnight at
37 °C with 5% CO2. The following day, the medium was
replaced with serum-free DMEM, and the cells were transported to the
NUS BSL-3 facility using secondary containment where a vial of SARS-CoV-2
virus was thawed and added to the cells. The cells were maintained
at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator and
the cytopathic effect (CPE) was observed under a microscope every
day. The virus was harvested when around 80% Vero E6 had CPE. The
medium from the infected cells was transferred into 15 mL falcon tubes
and centrifuged at 3000g for 10 min at 4 °C
to pellet cell debris. The supernatant was then aliquoted into cryotubes
and immediately stored at −80 °C. The GISAID EPI_SET IDs
of the clinical isolates used for expansion of virus stock were EPI_ISL_420103
(ancestral SARS-CoV-2); EPI_ISL_2621925 (Delta VOC) and EPI_ISL_7195620
(Omicron VOC). Low passages of not more than four passages of the
expanded virus stock were used. All the virus work conducted in the
BSL-3 facility adhered to established protocols approved by Singapore
Ministry of Health to ensure safe handling of the pathogen. All experiments
involving the authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus were performed in a biosafety
level 3 (BSL-3) laboratory, and all protocols were approved by the
BSL-3 Biosafety Committee (BBC) and the Institutional Biosafety Committee
(IBC) of the National University of Singapore (NUS).

## Authentic SARS-CoV-2 Viral Titration
Vero E6 cells
(5 × 105 cells/mL) were seeded in 6-well plates and
incubated overnight at 37 °C with 5% CO2. The next
day, the medium was replaced with DMEM and the flasks were transported
to the NUS BSL-3 facility using secondary containment, where the SARS-CoV-2
virus was serially diluted 10-fold (10–1 to 10–6) in DMEM and added to the cells. The cells were incubated
at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 1 h, after which the supernatant
was discarded, and the cells were washed with PBS. An overlay of 1.2%
microcrystalline cellulose (MCC; Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each
well and the cells were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for a further 3 days. The overlay was then discarded, and 4% PFA
was added to each well and incubated overnight to inactivate the virus
and fix the cells. The next day, the PFA was removed, and 0.05% crystal
violet (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each well and the cells incubated
for 10 min at room temperature to stain the cells. The excess crystal
violet was then discarded, and the cells were washed with water. The
number of plaques was counted, and viral titer in plaque forming units
(PFU) per mL was calculated according to the following equation:
 

## Binding Assays

## EV-Cell Association Assay
To quantify the binding of
RBCEVs to cells, trypsinized cells were washed, counted, and incubated
at 4 °C for 30 min with a fixed quantity of RBCEVs. Following
incubation, the cells were washed to remove any unbound EVs by centrifugation
at 400g for 5 min. The resulting cell pellet was
resuspended in FACS buffer and stained for 30 min in the dark on ice
with anti-human CD235ab-APC antibody (BioLegend Cat #306608). The
cells were then washed three times to remove any unbound antibody
before being subjected to flow cytometric analysis. In the PS receptor/TIM-1
blocking assays, the cells were preincubated with either PS/PC liposomes
or TIM-1 blocking antibody/isotype control antibodies prior to RBCEV
incubation.

## Pseudotyped Virus Adsorption Assay
The binding of pseudotyped
viruses to cells was determined in a manner similar to the RBCEV-cell
association assay described above. A known titer of the pseudotyped
virus was incubated with cells at 4 °C for 30 min. The cells
were subsequently washed to remove any unbound virus, and the resulting
cell pellet was resuspended in TRIzol and subjected to RNA extraction
and RT-qPCR to determine the relative amount of virus that had bound
to the cells.

## S1 Binding Assay
To determine if EVs could block the
binding of spike (S1) protein to cells, cells were incubated with
RBCEVs as described above, after which 0.25 μg of recombinant
S1 protein with a polyhistidine-tag was added, and the cells were
incubated for a further 30 min in the dark on ice. The cells were
then washed to remove any unbound S1 protein and stained with an APC-conjugated
anti-his tag antibody (BioLegend Cat #362605), after which they were
washed and analyzed for spike protein binding using flow cytometry.

## EV-Virus Binding Assay
To determine if pseudotyped
SARS-CoV-2 viruses or recombinant S1 protein could bind to EVs, RBCEVs
were immobilized on Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) using a biotinylated anti-human CD235ab antibody (BioLegend
Cat # 306618) and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min with 10 μL
of pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2 or 1 μg of recombinant S1 protein
with a polyhistidine tag. The beads were then washed three times using
a DynaMag-5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the presence of pseudotyped
SARS-CoV-2 or S1 protein was determined using RT-qPCR or flow cytometric
analysis, respectively.

## ASO Design and Synthesis
ASOs were designed against
conserved residues of key SARS-CoV-2 genes. They followed a typical
gapmer composition comprising 2 short RNA sequences flanking an inner
DNA sequence and 1–3 LNA at each end. The ASO sequences used
in this project are listed in Supplementary Table S2. ASOs were either purchased from IDT or synthesized and
purified in-house. Briefly, syntheses were performed on an ABI 394
DNA/RNA synthesizer with DNA and LNA phosphoramidites (Glen Research)
using phenylacetyl disulfide (ChemGenes Corporation) as the sulfurizing
reagent. Cleavage and deprotection were carried out with concentrated
aqueous ammonia at 55 °C for 16 h. The ASOs were purified either
by HPLC or using Poly-Pak II cartridges (Glen Research) and desalted
(Glen Pak 2.5 desalting column) and dried by lyophilization. The ASOs
were characterized by a JEOL SpiralTOF MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer.

## ASO Loading into RBCEVs
ASOs were loaded into RBCEVs
using REG1 (Carmine Therapeutics, Singapore) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. In short, 1 μg of RNA and 7 μL of REG1 were
mixed together in a total volume of 100 μL of OptiMEM and incubated
for 10 min to allow for complex formation. Following the incubation,
50 μg of RBCEVs was added into the RNA-REG1 complexes and the
mixture was incubated at room temperature for 30 min to facilitate
the loading of the REG1-ASO complex into EVs. The EV suspension was
subsequently spun down to remove free unloaded ASOs and REG1 and washed
twice by centrifugation at 21,000g for 30 min before
being used for downstream experiments. REG1-ASO controls were prepared
in a similar manner in the absence of the addition of RBCEVs.
To assess the loading efficiency of ASOs into RBCEVs, loaded EVs
were lysed using 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich). The lysate was
mixed with 6 × Gel Loading Dye, Purple (New England Biolabs,
USA) and loaded into a 12% native PAGE gel. The gel was electrophoresed
in 1 × TBE for 1 h and then stained with GelRed (Biotium, USA)
and imaged using a ChemiDoc XRS+ imager (Bio-Rad).

## Knockdown and Overexpression Studies
For knockdown
studies, siRNAs against TIM-1 were obtained from GenePharma (China).
The siRNAs were transfected into cells using Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
In brief, siRNA-Lipofectamine complexes were incubated with cells
in OptiMEM for 24 h before being replaced with DMEM supplemented with
10% FBS. siRNAs were screened to determine the optimal siRNA sequence
and the optimal time point post-transfection to achieve maximal knockdown
of TIM-1 in each cell line. For overexpression studies, plasmids encoding
human TIM-1 (Cat #49207) and mouse TIM-1 (Cat #49205) were obtained
from Addgene (USA). The plasmids were expanded using a miniprep and
transfected into cells using Lipofectamine 3000 following the manufacturer’s
instructions. The expression level of TIM-1 in each cell line following
knockdown or overexpression was determined using flow cytometric analysis
after staining for TIM-1.

## Neutralization Assays

## Pseudotyped Virus Neutralization Assay
Vero E6, A549-ACE2,
293T-ACE2, or HuH 7 cells were seeded in 24-well plates (100,000 cells
per well) and maintained overnight at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The next day, freshly washed RBCEVs at the desired dilution were
mixed with the pseudotyped virus, the volume was topped up to 200
μL with DMEM and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C
on an end-over-end shaker. The mixture was then added to the Vero
E6 cells and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 5
h, after which the total volume of media was topped up to 500 μL
and the cells were incubated for a further 19 h before flow cytometry
analysis to quantify the expression of the mCherry reporter. For neutralization
assays involving the use of blocking antibodies or liposomes, the
respective antibody/liposome was used in place of the RBCEVs. Pseudotyped
virus neutralization assays conducted on cells with overexpressed
or knocked down TIM-1 were also conducted using a similar protocol
after verifying TIM-1 overexpression or knockdown using flow cytometry.

## Plaque Reduction Neutralization Test (PRNT) for Authentic SARS-CoV-2
Vero E6 cells were seeded in 12-well plates at a density of 2.5
× 105 cells/mL and incubated overnight at 37 °C
with 5% CO2. A vial of virus was thawed and diluted to
the desired concentration (i.e., 1 PFU/μL) using DMEM. Similar
to the neutralization assay conducted with pseudotyped virus, the
diluted virus was mixed with the desired quantity of RBCEVs and incubated
at 37 °C for 1 h. The mixture was then added to the Vero E6 cells
and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C, after which the supernatant was
discarded, and the cells were gently rinsed with PBS. MCC (at 1.2%)
was overlaid on top of the PBS and the cells were incubated for 3
days at 37 °C. They were then fixed with 4% PFA and stained with
crystal violet as described above for the plaque assay.
To assess
the neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 via ASO-loaded RBCEVs, Vero E6 cells
(2.5 × 105 cells/mL) were pretreated with ASO-loaded
RBCEVs for 24 h prior to infection. The cells were then infected with
authentic virus at a 0.1 multiplicity of infection (MOI). Viral infection
was assayed via PRNT, immunofluorescence imaging of cells for N protein,
or by collecting the supernatant 3 days postinfection and quantifying
the nascent viral titer using RT-qPCR for E protein.

## Primary Human Nasal Epithelial Cell Culture and Differentiation
at Air–Liquid Interface (ALI)
Primary human nasal
epithelial cells (Epithelix) were expanded in DMEM/F12 (Gibco, #11320033)
supplemented with 10 ng/mL human epithelial growth factor (EGF; Gibco),
5 μg/mL insulin (Sigma), 0.1 nM cholera toxin (Sigma), 0.5 μg/mL
hydrocortisone (Sigma), 2 nM 3,3′,5-triiodo-l-thyronine (T3;
Sigma), 1× N-2 supplement (Gibco), 1× antibiotic-antimycotic
(Gibco), 1 μM A83–01 (Stemcell Technologies), 5 μM
Y-27632 (Stemcell Technologies) and 3 μM isoprenaline hydrochloride
(MedChemExpress). The expanded cells were seeded onto 24-well 0.4 μm
polyester transwell inserts (Corning) and grown to confluence as submerging
cultures (1–2 days). Once confluent, media from the apical
and basal chambers were removed, and 500 μL of PneumaCult-ALI
medium with supplements (Stemcell Technologies) was added to the basal
chamber to initiate differentiation at ALI. The basal media was changed
every 2–3 days, and the cells were cultured at ALI for at least
28 days. Fully differentiated human nasal epithelial cells were used
for the SARS-CoV-2 infection.

## Animal Studies
All in vivo experiments
were conducted according to protocols approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee under the National University of Singapore.
NSG-SGM3 mice were obtained from the Jackson Lab (USA) and bred in
our facilities. Mice of similar ages were tagged and grouped randomly
for control and test treatments. Experiments were performed in a blinded
manner. To assess effects of unmodified RBCEVs on viral neutralization,
50 μL of undiluted stock VSV.G pseudotyped virus carrying a
firefly luciferase reporter was administered intratracheally to mice
with or without the presence of 100 μg of RBCEVs. After 3 days,
relative infection was determined by measuring the bioluminescence
signal using a Lumina II in vivo imaging system (IVIS)
(PerkinElmer, USA) following an intraperitoneal injection of 150 mg/kg
D-luciferin (PerkinElmer).
K18-hACE2 transgenic mice were obtained
from InVivos and grouped randomly for experiments. To study the biodistribution
of RBCEVs, 500 μg CellTrace Red labeled RBCEVs in a total volume
of 50 μL were administered intratracheally into the mice, as
described in our previous study. 
For the in vivo treatment of SARS-Cov-2 infected
mice, 500 μg of ASO-loaded RBCEVs in a total volume of 50 μL
of PBS was administered to mice intratracheally 24 h prior to viral
infection. The mice were subsequently administered intranasally with
1,000 PFU of authentic SARS-CoV-2 virus in a volume of 25 μL.
To assess viral infection in the lung, mice were treated with an additional
dose of ASO-loaded RBCEVs after a further 24 h before being sacrificed
at 3 days postinfection. The lungs were excised, and the left and
right lung were separated at the bronchi. The right lung was homogenized,
and the supernatant was collected and processed for RT-qPCR analysis.
The left lung was fixed overnight in formalin and subsequently used
for immunohistochemistry.
For survival studies, mice were administered
with an additional
dose of EVs 4 days postinfection and then monitored for up to 14 days.
Scoring and weight measurements were conducted daily, and the mice
were sacrificed when their symptoms reached the criteria for symptom-free
survival. Our scoring rubrics are provided in Supplementary Table S3. All animal experiments were conducted
in a Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) facility in accordance with protocols
approved by the animal ethics committee at the National University
of Singapore.

## Immunohistochemistry
Following viral infection or treatment
with EVs, mouse lungs were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde formalin solution
(Sigma-Aldrich) for at least 19 h before removal from BSL-3 for immunohistochemistry
analysis. The lung tissues were then dehydrated though a graded (i.e.,
70%, 80%, 90%, and 100%) ethanol series using a TP1020 tissue processor
(Leica, Germany). The samples were then cleared in three baths of
Histo-Clear (National Diagnostics, USA), and incubated in two baths
of paraffin wax at 62 °C (each incubation lasting for 1 h), after
which they were embedded in paraffin.
The formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) blocks were cooled and sectioned at 5 μm using an RM2255
microtome (Leica). The sections were collected on slides and dried
at 42 °C. They were then dewaxed in three baths of Histo-Clear
and incubated sequentially in two baths of absolute ethanol and one
bath of 70% ethanol for 10 min each, before being rehydrated in 90%,
75%, and 50% ethanol, each for 5 min. The slides were left under running
tap water for 10 min before being subjected to antigen retrieval in
a Tris-EDTA (pH 9.0) buffer at 95 °C for 30 min. The sections
were blocked, permeabilized, and stained as described above. Images
of intact parasagittal lung sections were acquired using a Leica Thunder
imaging system (Leica), after which quantification and further analysis
were conducted using ImageJ v1.8.0.

## Statistical Analysis
GraphPad Prism 8 was used to conduct
statistical analyses and prepare graphs and histograms. The one-tailed
Student’s t test was used to assess significant
differences between the controls and experimental samples. One-way
ANOVA with multiple comparisons was used to analyze the significance
levels between the multiple treatment groups. Throughout this study,
a P value < 0.05 was considered to be statistically
significant. In the graphs, data are represented as the mean ±
standard deviation. Each data point corresponds to an independent
replicate performed using different batches of EVs and/or cells from
different passages. Animal experiments were performed on groups of
4 to 6 mice.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to express their gratitude
to H. Lodish (MIT/Whitehead Institute) for his valuable advice. The
authors also thank F. Wong, J. Wong, T. Tran, G. Dawe, D. Ho, and
D. Tenen (National University of Singapore) for their support. Special
thanks to the team at Carmine Therapeutics Singapore for sharing their
technical expertise and reagents. The authors also value contributions
by W. Liao, W. Chng, P. Gan, B. Lam, X. Dang, A. Hsu, and P. Rai (National
University of Singapore). We are also grateful to the National University
of Singapore, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine BSL-3 Core Facility’s
Facility operation staff and BSL-3 Core Facility’s scientific
service and strategic research team (S3RT) for their support with
this work. We would also like to thank W. Linfa from Duke-NUS Medical
School for providing the A549-ACE2 cell lines. We are also grateful
to the NUS Infectious Diseases Translational Research Program (IDTRP)
and the National Centre for Infectious Diseases (NCID), Singapore
for providing the seed stocks of SARS-CoV-2 viruses from clinical
isolates for expansion. We also thank S. Ho (Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology) for proofreading the manuscript. The schematics
and figures were generated at BioRender.com. The authors appreciate the financial support from the Ministry
of Education (Tier 1 grant NUHSRO/2020/136/T1/AD-HOC/1 and Ph.D. fellowships
for C. Gao and B. Yeo), Ministry of Health (MOH-000643), Institute
for Digital Medicine (Seed grant WisDM/Seed/001/2021), Singapore National
Medical Research Council (Centre Grant Program – Diabetes,
Tuberculosis and Neuroscience NMRC/CG/M009/2017 NUH/NUHS), and National
University of Singapore (NUS Reimagine Research Grant). M. Jayasinghe
is supported by the SINGA Ph.D. fellowship, funded by Singapore A*STAR.
G. Yap is supported by the Growth & Resilient Postdoctoral fellowship,
funded by the Singapore National Research Foundation.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.3c06803.
Additional experimental data including characterization
of EVs, viruses, cell lines and screening of ASOs used in this study
are provided along with sequences of primers/ASOs and mortality scoring
criteria (PDF)

## Author Present Address
⊗ Jotbody
Ltd., Science Park, New Territories, Hong Kong

## Author Present Address
∇ A*STAR Infectious Diseases Laboratories (A*STAR ID Laboratories),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 8A Biomedical
Grove, Immunos #05–13, Singapore 138648, Singapore

## Author Contributions
¶ M.K.J. and C.G. contributed equally.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
nn3c06803_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
nn3c06803_si_001.pdf