Neural Plast478neuralplastNPNeural Plasticity2090-59041687-5443WileyPMC2565426PMC2565426.1256542625654261471282910.1155/NP.2003.1791ArticleAbstracts of the 12th Annual Meeting of
Israel Society for Neuroscience
20031031730161792411610200810012013Copyright © 
2003
.2003pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 179
Abstracts of the 12th Annual Meeting of
Israel Society for Neuroscience
Eilat, Israel, December 14 16, 9.003
Mutation in the glucocerebrosidase gene in Ashkenazi
Jewish patients with Parkinson disease
/Aharon-PeretzJ.TM, dRosenbaum H.2'4
Gershoni-Barch R.3'4
Cogniave Neurology andMovement Disorder Umt, aDept, of
Hematolo_gy andBoneMarrow Transvlanta#on, 3Dept. of
Human Gdnetics, Rambam Medical ,enter; 4Rappaport
Faculty ofMedicine; Technion Haifa
Background: The association of Parkinsonism with type
Gaucher disease (GD) has recentlv been repeatedlv reported.
The objective of the present study'was to evaluate'the mpact
of glucocerebrosidase (GBA) mutations on idiopathic
Parkinson disease (PD). Methods: We screened for five GBA
mutations (N370S, LA44P, 84GG, IVS+I, V394L) a
clinic-based cohort of 30 consecutive Ashkenazi patients
diagnosed with idiopathic. Results: Ten PD patients carried
either one or two GD alleles. Five N370S heteroz),gotes, four
84GG heterozygotes, and one N370S homozyg0te were
identified. GD carriers did not differ from non-carriers with
regard to initial motor manifestations, initial response to
levodopa or doparninergic agonists, development of motor
dyskinesias or positive family history of PD in a first or
second-degree relative. GD carriers had a significantly
younger age of PD onset. All 84GG carriers had noticeable
cogmtive deterioration. Conclusions: One in three Askhenazi
PD patients carriers a GD mutation. The nature of this
remai'kable association, reported here for the first time,
remains elusive. A possible explanation would involve
deficient proteolysis of misfolded proteins deposited and
aggregated in excess in dopaminergic neurons. Our result
suggests that heterozygosity to a non-neuropathic GD mutation
may not be absolutely considered an asymptomatic state.
Amygdalar GABAergic involvement in extinction of
conditioned taste aversion and possible relevance to post
traumatic stress
Akirav I. and Dudai Y.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute ofScience, Rehovot
Experimental extinction is the decline in frequency or intensity
of the conditioned response following the withdrawal of
reinforcement. It does not reflect forgetting but rather
relearning, in which the new association of the conditioned
stimulus with the absence of the original reinforcer comes to
control behavior. It has been suggested that in post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), an anxiety disorder that may develop
following exposure to extreme emotional trauma, persistent
re-experience of the traumatic event is a consequence of
diminished capacity to extinguish emotional conditioned
responses Thus, the initial emotional reaction to the extreme
event does not decay properly with time. This may involve
use-dependent alterations in inhibitory circuits in the
amcgdala, a brain area known to control emotional valence
anti response.
Here, we examined the possible involvement of the GABAA.
(gamma aminobutyric acid) receptors in the basolateral
amygdala (BLA) in the acquisition and extinction of
conditioned taste aversion (CTA) in the rat. In CTA, the
subject learns to associate a taste with delayed malaise. Rats
were subjected to CTA training to a novel taste (saccharine)
followed by repeated presentation of the conditioned taste in
the absence of the malaise-inducing agent. Infusion of a
GABAA agonist (muscimol, 0.05 ttg/ttl) into the amygdala
following retrieval in an extinction mode blocked extinction of
CTA. In contrast, infusion of a GABAA antagonist
(Bicuculline, 0.005 lg/lal) into the amygdala facilitated CTA
acquisition without a significant effect on extinction. The data
indicate that GABAergic neurotransmission plays a role in
extinction, and suggest that GABAergic mechanisms may
contribute to pathological emotional response following
trauma.
Supported by the lsraeli Science Foundation
Genetic correlational analysis of glycogen synthase
kinase-3 and prepulse inhibition in inbred mice
Amar S.1, Jones B.C. Belmaker RI-I and Agam G.
Stanley Foundation Iesearch Center and Dept. ofClinical
Biochemistry Faculty ofHealth Sciences Ben Gurion
Untverstty Ofthe Negev, Beersheva, Israel. "Dept. of
BiobehavioralHealth, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA. USA
One of the kev characteristics of schizophrenia is difficulty
with sensorim&or gating. Thus, those afflicted are less able t'o
shut out non-consequential stimuli that others are able to filter
out as "noise". Prepulse inhibition (PPI) is a diagnostic
method by which the amplitude of an elicited reflex (e.g.
acoustic or tactile startle, eyeblink etc.) can be dampened by
another stimulus delivered immediate!y before the
reflex-eliciting stimulus (prepulse). Unaffllcted individuals
show substantial prepulse dampening of the reflex; however,
those diagnosed with schizophrenia produce the leflex with
diminishedprepulse inhibition. PPI can also be measured in
animals and in rodents it shows genetic-based variability in
expression. The enzyme glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3)
has also been shown to have decreased activity in the frontal
cortex ofschizophrenics. The question then is whether GSK-3
is merely a marker for schizophrenia or is there a functional
relationshio? In order to address this question, we sought to
start by examining the association between PPI and GSK-3 in
genetically defmed mice. In this way we can capture the
genetic ,ariability in these two pai'ameters without the
necessity ofmeasuringboth in the same animals. We searched
the literature for PPI in inbred mice (Crawley, et al.,
Psychopharmacology 132: 107-124, 1997), orderedthe same
10 strains from the supplier and measured GSK-3 protein
levels and total GSK-3 (ct+13) activity in the frontal cortex.
Genetic correlational analysis, using the Pearson
product-moment coefficient revealed statistically significant
associations between GSK-3 activity and acoustic-pulsed
tactile startle PPI (r=0.779, p<0.005) and acoustic-pulsed
acoustic startle (r=0.727, p<0.01). Abundance of the enzyme
protein was not significantly correlated with PPI of either
method. These prehmmary results showing enzyme activity to
be related to a sensorimotor gating function is consistent with
GSK-3 having a functional role in neurobiology. Thus, low
expression of the enzyme and PPI may point to
neuropathology related to schizophrenia.
Nerve epithelial interaction in chemical ocular injury:
Morphological and biochemical study
Amir A., Fshbine E., Cohen M., Dachir S., Gutman H.,
Shalem Y., Cohen L., Sahar R. and Kadar T.
Dept. ofPharmacology, lsraelInstituteforBiological
Research, Ness Ziona.
The cornea is a highly innervated tissue, richly supplied by
sensory nerve fibers deriving from the ophthalmic division of
the tngeminal nerve. These sensory fibers exert important
trophic influences on the corneal epithelium and contribute to
the maintenance of a healthy ocular surface. Chemical trauma
to the eye stimulates ocular nerve fibers and playsa role in the
acute neurogenic inflammation mediated mostly by substance
P and CGRP.
The possible involvement of sensory nerve damage in the
pathogenesis of chemical ocular injury, rabbit eyes were
exposed to sulfur mustard (SM) vapor. A clinical follow-up
was carried out for up to 3 months. Blinking response, using a
Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer, tested corneal sensitivity.
Animals were sacrificed at different time points, eyes
enucleated and frozen. The morphology of corneal nerves was
visualized in whole mount corneal preparations stained by
cholinesterase histochemistry. Biochemical analysis of
neuromediators was conducted in aqueous humour (AQ) and
cornea for detection ofneurogenic inflammation.
Initial changes in CGRP content of AQ and cornea were
measured within the first 24 hrs after exposure. Corneal
erosions (epithelial loss) were observed during the in'st 3 days
after exposure and then healed spontaneously. During this time
and for weeks afterwards, corneal nerves underwent a slow
retrograde degeneration, concomitant with alterations in
180
corneal sensitivity. Following a latent period, 50-90% of
corneas displayed delayed cl-inical symptoms Consisting of
blood vessels ingrowth and recurrent corneal erosions.
Regeneration of nerve fibers took place, if at all, months after
exposure. It is suggested that tlae impairment in corneal
innervation following SM exposure contributes to the
development ofprolonged corneal injuries through the lack of
neurotrophic mediators.
Supported in part by the U.S. ArmyMedical Research and
Materal Command under contractNo. DAMD17-03-C-006J
7brafish serotonin-N-acetyltransferase-2 gene regulation"
Pineal-restrictive downstream module consisting of a
functional E-box and PCE
lbaumL..and GothilfY.
Fac-i-gf-Sciences, BarBan University Ramat-Gan
:Faculty ofLife Sciences, TelAviv University, TelAviv
The expression of a battery of specific genes in the pineal
gland is mandatory for proper transduction of photoperiodic
information and rhythmic melatonin secretion by the pineal
gland. Serotonin-N-acetyltransferase (AANAT), the key
enzyme in the melatonin synthesis is specifically expressed in
the pineal gland and retinal photoreceptors in all vertebrates. In
vivo transient expression analyses of promoter-reporter
constructs, in which fluorescent proteins are driven by
regulatory regions of the zebrafish (zf) AANAT-2 gene,
indicated that pineal-specific expression of this gene requires a
257bp fragment, located more than 6kb downstream of the
structural gene. .,,This fragment was desi,gnated
Pineal-Restrictive Doxnstream Module (PRDM). Anal)ses of
PRDM in the context of the zfAANAT-2 promoter and
heterologous promoters indicated that this module serves lwo
functions: One is the enhancement of promoter activity in the
pineal and the second is inhibition of promoter activity in
non-pineal tissues. The former is an autonomic property of
PRDM while the later is accomplished bv cooperation with the
upstrean regulatory region of the zfAANAT-2 gene.
Functional analyses Ofthe PRDM sequence revealed that three
photoreceptor conserved elements (PCE, TAATC) and a single
perfect E-box (CACGTG) are crucial for PRDM function.
These results propose a new mechanism for pineal-specificity
that includes a novel function and interaction of downstrearh
E-box and PCEs.
The lipophilic transition metal chelator DP-b99 modulates
intracellular zinc
Ariell, R.,Friedman J.E.,Hershfinkel M.,Moran A.,
ekie:I/'i Shapiro I.,Kozak A.z and Angel I.
Physiology Ben (_burion University of the Negev Beer Sheva
I -Pharm Ltd. Rehoog
Zinc plays an essential role in mammalian development and
function. Following brain ischemia or injury, massive amounts
of zinc are released into the extracellular niiiieu. This zinc can
then enter neurons via various routes including AMPA and
calcium channels. The result is a rapid elevation in free
intraceilular zinc activating pathways leading to cell injury and
death. Thus, maintenance of normal intracellular Zn levels
while preventing a massive increase during periods of stress
must be achieved and would be beneficial in preventing
zinc-induced neurodegeneration. A family of lipophilic
analogues of BAPTA, which exerts its activities in the
membrane region is described. A member of this family
DP-b99, preferentially chelates Zn/
and Cu"'+
as compared t
calcium. Recently, DP-b99 has successfully completed a Phase
Ila stroke study. The present study tested whether DP-b99 can
reduce excess free zinc levels in the intracellular environnent.
Min-6 ceils were loaded with the fluorescent zinc probe Zn-2F
DA and monitored using fluorescence microscopy. An influx
of Zinc (100 tM) was stimulated by potassium-induced
depolarization, demonstrated bv increased fluorescence.
Subsequent addition of DP-b99 resulted in a decrease in
fluorescence, showing that DP-b99 chelates cytoplasmic zinc
and reduces its free intracellular concentration. This occurred
in both the absence and presence of extracellular calcium. The
rate of drop in fluorescence correlated with the concentration
of DP-b99 (10-50 tM) used. Additional studies examiring
zinc toxicity in primary cortical neurons found that 20
DP-b99 reduced zinc-induced toxicity by 50%. We suggest
that the efficacy of DP-b99 could be due to its ability to
chelate excess zinc and help restore zinc homeostasis to
neurons. This ability to modulate zinc should be beneficial in
the treatment of neurological degenerative disorders such as
Alzheimer's disease.
Support ContributedByD-Pharm Ltd
Isolation and characterization of neuronal stem cell
progenitors from human umbilical cord blood (UCB) for
putative use in elltherapX
Arien-Zakav H.-, Galski lq.", Nagler A. and Lazarovici P..
-fit.-.[-t-a-macology, School ofPharmacy, The Hebrew
UniverdO ofJerusalem 21)ezt. ofHematolo93 andBone
Marrow Transplantation2, (\hC'ai, Sheba MetcaI Center, Tel-
Hashomer
Neuroprotection towards neurodegenerative disorders involves
modern technologies of cell and gene therapies. The
rate-limiting factor in these technologies is the lack of neuronal
tissue for transplantation. Recent reports suggested that
non-hematopoietic progenit.ors .deriving from umb.ilica.1 cord
therapy of central nervous system disorders. In the present
study we have cultured "(on collagen coated plates)
non-hematopoietic precursors from mononuclear cells (MNC)
of UCB. These MNC progenitors were highly adherent to
collagen similarly to control neuronalcell lines as
pheochromocytoma PC12 and neuroblastoma. During 14 days
of culture using unique conditioning combinations, we found
populations of progenitors that smwive, proliferate and
generate a neuronal-like morphological phenotype (cells
showing "neurite" outgrowths of different length). We have
further characterized these neuronal-like prog.emtor cells using
immunofluorescent antibodies against dfferent neuronal
markers. Some of progenitor populations were specifically
stained with anti trl-A, anti mcrotubule-associated-protein 2
(MAP-2), and anti nestin. Additional neuronal markers are
evaluated by PCR reactions and immunofluorescence. Some of
the neuronal progenitors were cloned and we attempt to
develop optimal conditions for their proliferation and
differentiation. As these neuronal progenitors were positively
immuno-stained to the nerve growth factor (NGF)-trk-A
receptor, experiments are performed to investigate the cellular
effects ofNGF on UCB progenitor fate. Our main rational goal
is to establish, characterize and optimize cell culture conditions
for the proliferation and differentiation of UCB neuronal
progenitors that will be of therapeutic relevance in
tr,'msplantation against neurodegenerative disorders.
[1]. Bicknese AIL, Henderson V, Sinclair-Goodwin HS, et al.
(2001) Cell derived from human fetal cord blood express
markers for neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. /)cp.
Neurol. 170, 199; [2]. Zigova T, Song S,, Willing AE, et al
(2002) Human umbilical cord blood cells express neural
antigens after transplantation into the developing rat brain. Cell
Tryms. 11,265-274.
Estimation ofthe tension in deviated white matter tracts
caused by brain lesions measured by diffusion tensor
imagin
ASsIf'.I'2 Pianka p.1. Rotshtein p.1. Sigal M. and Hendler T.
f"unctiondl Brain Ima'ging Ul7it, Te[Aviv 5buraskyMedical
Center; School ofChemistry, 7'el Aviv University, ?'el Aviv
Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) is used to estimate the tension
of deviated white matter caused by brain lesions. DTI is a
recent development in MRI that is used for specific white
matter mapping. It is based on the tmique diffusmn properties
of water in wlute matter. While parallel to neuronal fibers the
diffusion is relatively free, perpendicular to them it is hindered.
This diffusion anisotropy s measured by DTI and quantified
by the fractional anisotropy index. In addition, DTIprovides
the architecture and 3D alignment of the fibers. DTI was
recently shown to be very helpful in delineating .white matter
both within brain lesions and surrounding them. Displacement
of white matter fibers may be one o(the consequences of
tumor growth adjacent to white matter and may lead to
significant disability to the patient. We found that the
fi'actionai anisotropff (FA) is increased by 38% in areas of
shifted white matt6r fibers. By contrast, the trace apparent
diffision coefficient values in "those areas were found to be
similar to normal control values. Analysis of the three
diffusion eigenvalues revealed that the" increase in the
fractional amsotropy is a result of two processes. The first is
the increase in the diffusion parallel to the fibers lambdal
(by 18%) and the second is the decrease in the diffusion
perpendicular to fibers lambda3 (bv 34%) as compared with
the contralateral side. These opp6sing changes cause an
increase in the diffusion anisotrop'v" but no change in the trace
ADC. It is suggested that the pressure caused by the lesion
may lead to an increase in white matter fiber tension thus
causing an increase in lambdal. On the other hand, the same
pressure causes increased fiber density per unit area leading to
a higher degree of restricted diffusion in the extra-cellular
space and hence a reduction in lambda3. We propose a new
image index given by the ratio lambda3 lambda that seem to
be highly sensitive t tension in white matter.
The voltage gated Ca2+
channel is modified by syntaxin 1A
in a cooperative manner
Atlas D.
Dept. ofBiological Chemistry, Inst. of'Life S'cience The
Hebrew Umversty of.lerusalem, Jerusalem 91904
Sy0taxin 1A (SxlA) modifies the activity of voltage-gated
Ca channels acting via the cytosolic and the two vicinal
transmembrane (TMD) cysteines (271,272) (Cohen et al,
2003; Trus et ql. 2001). Here we show that SxlA modulates
the Lc-type Ca channel, Ca,.1.2, in a cooperative manner and
explore whether channel clustering or SxlA homodimer is
responsible for this activity. SxlA formed homodimers, but
when mutated at the two vicinal TMD cysteines, was unable to
either dimerize or modify the channel activity. Also
application of a vicinal thiol-rea.gent, phenyl arsine oxide
(PAO), abolished SxlA action indicating the accessibility of
Cys271, 272 thiols (Arien et al., 2003). However, the
supralinear mode of channel inhibition was correlated to the
monomeric form of SxlA and was apparent only when the
three-channel subunits al.2/a261/[2a..were present. This
functional demonstration of eooperatvlty suggests that the
three-subunit channel responds as a cluster and SxIA
monomers bind to a dimer (or more) of a three-subunit Caz+
channel. The rapid transduction of a channel conformational
change, driven by Caz+
entry to the exocytotic machinery, is
consistent with the formation of a channel/SxlA cluster. This
non-linear relationship could convey the co-operativity that is
the hallmark ofthe process of neurotransmitter release.
Arien et al., J Biol Chem. (2003) 278(31): 29231-9; Cohen R,
Elferink LA, Atlas D. J Biol Chem. (2003) 278(11): 9258-66;
Wiser, O., Cohen, R. and Atlas, D. Proe Natl Acad Sei U S
A 99 (6): 3968-3973 (2002).
A novel therapeutic vaccination for protection against
toxicity of aggregated 13-amyloid in the central nervous
system
Avidan .,Butovskv O., Kipnis J., Schori H. and Schwartz M.
Neurobiology, Weiz'mann Institute, Rehovot
Alzheimer's disease is a devastating neurodegenerative
disorder in which extracellular deposits of fibrillar [3-amyloid
form plaques in the brain. Using a mouse model of neuronal
loss induced by local injection ofaged (aggregated) 13-amyloid
peptide, we show that the physiological ability to fight off the
toc effects of aggreg.ated 13-amyloid is T-cell depende.nt,
varies among strains, Is suppressed by naturally oecumng
CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells, and is amenable to boosting
by vaccination with an immunodominant antigen residing in
the site of toxicity or with a synthetic antigen that cross-reacts
with such self-antigens. Vaccination with the 13.-amylgid
eptide was not protective. Ex-vivo experiments using mce
ippocampal slices showed that microglia become cytotoxic on
encountenng aggregated [-amyloid but protective when they
encounter a T cell-derived cytokine such as interferon (IFN)-'.
These findings suggest that immunodominant self-antigens
residing in the site of plaque formation, or nonself-antigens
that weakly cross-reacts with the relevant self-antigens,,should
be considered as potential T cell-based therapeutic vaccines for
neurodegenerative conditions.
Local circuit alterations in rat model for PTSD
Avital A. and Richter-Levin G.
Dept. ofPsychology and The Brain & Behavior Research
Centerl University ofHaifa. Haifa 31905
We have recently shown that exposure of rats to juvenile +
adulthood stress results in long-term behavioral symptoms.
This behavioral protocol was suggested as a rat model for
PTSD.
Previous studies have demonstrated that stress impairs LTP.
Several years ago we have demonstrated that High-Frequency
Stimulation (HFS) to the perforant pathwav (PP), which
induces LTP in the Dentate Gyrus (DG), resul[s in alterations
also in local circuit activity.
The present study was aimed to assess whether in addition to
affecting the abifity to induce LTP, the exposure to juvenile +
adulthood stress would also affect local circuit a&ivity and
plasticity.
Rats were exposed to the combination of juvenile and
adulthood stress and hrpost-adulthood stress were prepared
for acute recording of field potentials in response to PP
stimulation. In the COMM group, an additional stimulating
electrode was positioned in the contra-lateral DG to activate
the commissural pathway. Local circuit was examined by
applying two stimulating protocols: the paired-pulse
stimulatmn and the commissuralstimulation protocols.
The results showed that the exposure to juvenile + adulthood
stress was associated with suppression in" the ability to induce
LTP. In addition, juvenile + adulthgod stress .was found to be
assiated with a significant tncrease in paired-pulse
181
resumably feed-back) and commissural (presumably
-forward) -induced inhibition.
HFS, which failed to induce long-lasting LTP, significantly
reversed feed-back but not feed-forward inhibition. These
results suggest that the exposure to juvenile + adulthood stress
is associated with specific impairments in local circuit activity
and plasticity. These impairments may be of relevance to our
understanding ofstress-related disorders such as PTSD.
orted by a grantfrom The Israel Foundations Trustees
000) to G. R..L.
Neuronal synchronization and the transmission ofsensory
information in visual cortical neurons
Azouz R.
Dept. ofPhysiology, Faculty ofllealth Sciences, Ben-Gurion
University, Beer-Sheva 84105
Neuronal synchronization has been proposed as the mechanism
underlying the transient formation of cell assemblies. Although
abundant evidence indicates that synchronization is present in
many. brain regions, its role in sensory informationprocessing
is stall controversial. Using intracellular recordings from visual
cortex in vivo, we find that the generation of action potentials
in response to visual stimuli is associated predominantly with
transient depolarization of the membrane potential. Cellular
conductance measurements suggest that these transient
depolarizations arise from the temporal interplay between
synchronous excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs
,,on,-erging onto cortical neurons. The magnitude and time
course ofthese depolarizations are influenced by voltage-gated
conductances and-are tightly tuned for stimulus orientation.
Finally, using numerical simulations we show that adaptive
spike threshold mechanism dynamically maintains the
temporal correlation between cellular input and output.
Together these findings suggest that neuronal synchronization
plays a critical role in the processing and transmission of
sensory information in the visual cortex.
The amygdalar circuits that subserve consolidation oftaste
memory are not essential for its reconsolidation
Bahar A., Dorfman N. and Dudai Y.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Ifie Weizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot.
Even though evidence now exists for the occurrence of a
renewed consolidation process after retrieval of long-term
memory, the question whether reconsolidation recapitulates
consolidation is unresolved. We have previously reported in a
double dissociation study (Bahar et al., Eur. J. Neurosci. 2003,
17:1527) that whereas inhibition of protein synthesis in the
amygdalar central nucleus (CeA) disrupts consolidation of a
newly acquired conditioned taste averston (CTA) memory in
the rat, a similar intervention in the basolateral nuclei (BLA)
has no affect. Conversely, inhibition ofprotein synthesis in the
BLA, but not in the CeA, blocks experimental extinction of
CTA memory. We have set out to investigate whether the
amygdalar nuclei that are involved in the consolidation of the
newly acquired memory (CeA) or in its experimental
extinction (BLA), are also involved in reconsolidation. Toward
this end we microinfused into the CeA or the BLA theprotein
synthess inhibitor amsomvcin during retrieval of CTA
memory. Retrieval was performed under conditions that lead to
reconsolidation of the retrieved CTA memory. No effect was
observed on the trace after retrieval, under the conditions that
block consolidation (CeA) or experimental extinction (BLA).
These results suggest that both amygdalar nuclei are not
involved in the process of reconsolidation of CTA memory,
and moreover, even if they do subserve reconsolidation in e
intact brain, the molecular mechanisms involved n
consolidation and reconsolidation, respectively, are different.
All in all these data are incongruent with the hypothesis that
reconsolilation recapitulates consolidation.
Upported by the Israefi Science Foundation, The Human
ontiers Program, and the Volkswagen Foundation.
Mode of inhibition of phospholipase A2 activity of
l-bungarotoxin by a characteristic library-derived peptide
Balass M., Kalef E. and Katchalski-Katzir E.
Dept. ofBiological Chemistry. Weizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot 76100
1 -bungarotoxin (1 -BTX), one of the major neurotoxins in the
venom of the snake Bungarus multicinctus, is targeted to the
pre-synaptic membrane at the neuromuscular junction, p-BTX
Is a laeterodimer protein that consists of two chains, chain A
(phospholipase A: subunit) and chain B (targeting subunit that
interacts with certain types ofpotassium channels), that are
linked together by a single disulfide bond. Employing a
combinatorialphage peptide-library, we selected, by mans of
13-BTX, four different peptides having a consensus sequence
WD(E)xLxxL. We show that a library-derived peptide
182
(CAEVSTWEMLQQLNTTRMPPPC) binds to chain A of the
toxin and inhibits its phospholipase A2 (PLA2) activity. This
peptide inhibits PLA2 activity '13 -BTX fraction as well as the
PLA2 activity of the whole venom. Moreover, when this
peptide was injected into mice concomitantly with I -BTX, it
ully neutralized the toxin's lethality. Following HPLC analysis
of the total isoforms of I] -BTX on a hv,trophobic column
(C-8), we obtained five peaks (designated PI to P5) which
represent the known five fractions ofthe majo isoforms of the
ton. The PLA_ activity of each of the five 13 -BTX major
peaks is inhibited by the above peptide to a different degree.
We further purified a single 13 -BTX isoform (1 1-BTX) and
showed that the peptide inhibits non-competitively the purified
isoform. As compared with some other snake toxins that have
PLA2 activity and a pancreatic PLA2 e__nyme as well, we
demonstratedthat the above peptide inhibits to a different
extent th.e enzymatic activity of the various PLA2 protein
preparations.
Perceptual training generalizes to verbal working memory
Banai K. and Ahissar M.
fNeurobiology andPsychology2, Hebrew University,
Jerusalem
Psyehoacoustic discrimination abilities and verbal working
memory are significantly correlated, in a subpopulation of
dyslexics with additional learning problems. Yet tile direction
of causality is not clear. Furthermore, the relations between
mechanisms underlying verbal and non-verbal functions of
working memory are not clear. In this study we first compare
frequency discrimination thresholds of learning disabled 8
grade students on two tasks of 2-tone frequency
discrimination: same/different vs. higher/lower pitch
judgments. Students with poor high/low judgments also had
poor verbal working memory scores, though they had no
deficits in same/different judgments. We concluded that the
deficit of these individuals is not at the level of signal
representation but rather at the working memory level. To test
this conclusion, we trained the group of learning disabled
students with poorest frequency discrimination thresholds
(n=12) on the higher/lower task :.:... on other simple
psychoacoustic tasks (e.g. longerLorter in duraUon
discrimination) for 8 weeks. Trained students improved greatly
on all trained tasks. Improvement transferred uniquely to
verbal working memory but not to other cognitive tasks or
reading. This improvement lasted at least 5 months post
training. We propose that the deficit of LDs in 2-tone
frequency discrimination reflects a generalized working
memory deficit. Practicing this task generalizes to improved
working memory functions also with verbal material indicating
that common mechanisms underlie the processing of verbal
and non-verbal stimuli.
Synaptic dynamics and efficacy estimated in a
biologically-realistic model of a spiny stellate cell of cat
visual cortex.
,anitt Y. London M., Martin K.A.C. and Segev I.
lns#tutejbrLfe Science, Hebrew UniversityJerusalem,"
University College, London; Institute ofNeuroinformatics,
Zurich.
Spiny stellate cells (SSC's) are the most common cell type in
layer 4 (L4) of sensory cortex and are the major recipients of
input from the sensory thalamus. Virtually all SSCs in cat
visual cortex have simple receptive fields (Martin &
Whitteridge, J. Physiol. 353:463-504, 1984). Although
traditionally, models of simple cells use only feedforward
input from the lateral gemculate nucleus (LGN) of the
thalamus, not all excitation is from the LGN: SSC:; are excited
by other L4 SSCs and by layer 6 pyramidal neurons (L6)
(Stratford et al., Nature 1996). Inhibition comes mainly from
small basket cells in layer 4. A biologically-realistic
compartmental model for a SSC was built, which incorporated
all four synaptic inputs. Based on morphological data, we
distributed 360 LGN boutons, 1440 L4 boutons, 3108 L6
boutons and 357 inhibitory boutons over the dendritic surface
of the SSC model. Modeled synapses were activated
individually to match synaptic perameters (amplitudes, shape
indices and dynamics) of the corresponding PSPs measured
in-vitro. The model predicts a large synaptic conductance per
LGN svnapse. The information efficacy of LGN svnapses
decays significantly (up to 10 fold) as a function )f their
distance from the soma. The mcxlel prelicts a long-lasting
inhibitory conductance with a large peak. It also shows that,
paradoxically, a facilitator3,, conduc!ance underlies the
apparently depressing IPSP atnplitudes observed
experimeiatally. The LGN contributes less than 10% of the
excitatory synapses. The model shows that the contribution of
the LGN synapses to the total excitatory current diminishes
rapidly with time. If the entire LGN input produces an
uncorrelated (random) barrage, only a few sp"kes are evoked in
the SSC, because the LGN synapses depress sharply. The
inhibitory input, which is relatively more proximal, is powerful
and capable of effectively controlling the gain of the recurrent
cortical component ofthe total excitation.
The neuroprotective activity of rasagiline and its propargyl
moiety is dependent on activation/gene expression of
protein kinase C (PKC)
Bar-Am O., Amit T., Weinreb O., Yogev-Falach M,
Chiliag-Taimor O. and Youdim MBH.
Eve Topfand USNational Parldnson 's Foundation Centers of
ExceltenceforNeurodegenerative diseases andDept.s of
Pharmacology, Technion, Haifa.
Rasagiline (N-propargyl-(1R)-aminoindan), a highly potent
selective irreversible monoamine oxidase (MAO)- B inhibitor,
has been shown to suppress apoptosis induced by neurotoxins
and oxidative stress not related to its MAO-B inhibitory
activity. It has finished its final phase III clinical trials for
Parkinson's disease (PD) and submitted to FDA for approval.
In the present study, we show that rasagiline (0.1-1 tM)
significantly reducedcell death induced by serum deprivation
in rat PC12 cells and in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells after 24
h 48 h (30%). Similar effects were also demonstrated for
the propargyl moiety present in rasagiline.
ince PKC plays a key role in many cellular events, including
regulation of apoptoss, we further investigated the effects of
rasagiline on PKC activation andgene expression. Rasagiline
dose-dependently (0.1-10 lsM) induced PKC phosphoryIation
(using p-PKC (lan) Ab, detecting PKCtx, 13, 13n, ,e, rl and 6
isoforms), as well as translocation of the isoforms PKC and
PKCe to the membrane. These effects were blocked by the
PKC inhibitor, GFI09203X. Moreover, propargylamine
similarly and significantly increased p-PKC (pan) levels.
Additionally, using real-time RT-PCR, we show that rasagiline
elevated PKCx and PKCe gene expression after 24 h of serum
deprivation.
These results indicate that the neuroprotective activity of
rasagiline, which is linked to Bcl-2 family proteins at
mitochondrial permeability transition pore, is mediated by
modulation of PKC activation and gene expression.
Furthermore, by comparing the actions of rasagiline with
propargylamine, we have been able to demonstrate that the
propargyl moiety of rasagiline has the crucial role in these
effects.
PRS-211375, a novel selective CB2 receptor agonist,
demonstrates analgesic activity in several animal models
Bar-Joseph A., Fink G., Richstein A., Dar D.E., Amselem S.,
Bar-llan A., Avidor B., Yacovan A., Weksler A. and Meilin S.
Pharmos Ltd, Kiryat Weizmann, Rehovot 76326
Cannabinoid receptor agonists inhibit responses to painful
stimuli by activation ofthe CB receptor, located mainly in the
CNS, and the CB2 receptor, expressed maird .by
inflammatory and immune cells. PRS-211,375, a selectave
CB2 receptor agonist (CB2 affinity IC5o-1 nM) was tested for
its analgesic effect using 3 experimental animal pain models.
The models were: (i) the tail-flick in mice for noxious pain; (ii)
carrageenan-induced thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia in
the rat hind paw for inflammatory pain; (iii) IP acetic acid
induced visceral pain in the mice. PRS-211,375 showed
relatively little analgesia in the tail flick test. However,
PRS-21 i,375 administered either IP or PO showed significant
dose-dependent analgesia (a decrease of more then 50%;
p<0.05) in the carrageenan-induced inflammatory paw test
(both in the thermal and mechanical stimuli). The compound
also reduced paw edema volume in a dose-dependent manner
(30 mg/kg POreduced the edema by 50%). Pre-treatment with
PRS-211,375 significantly reduced visceral pain as assessed by
a reduction in writhing counted during 5 minutes (0.1+/-0.1
compared with 25.7+1.3 in vehicle-treated control animals;
p<0.01). PRS-211,375 proved to be much more potent than
NSAIDs tested in the visceral pain model (Ketoprofen,
Diclofenac and Celecoxib). Administration of a CB2, but not
CB1 antagonist significantly reversed the effect of
PRS-211,375 in both the inflammatory and visceral pain
models suggesting that the analgesic activity of PRS-211,375
is mediatedby the CB2 receptor.
These data indicate that PRS-211,375, a CB2 selective agonist
may be a potent analgesic compound for treatment of
inflammatory related pain.
Neuronal recruitment in adult zebra finch brain during a
reproductive cycle
Barkan S.,Avali A.t,Nottebohm F. and Barnea A.
Zoology, .Tel-Aviv University, Israel," 2The
Rockefeller University, Field research center, NY, USA;
Dept. ofNatural Sciences, The Open University ofIsrael
The occurrence of neurogenesis (birth of new neurons) and
new neuronal recruitment
in adult brains is by now a well known phenomenon, found in
several warm-blooded vertebrates, including humans. The
hypothesis is that this phenomenon serves adaptive functions
and contributes to the cellular basis of brain plasticity and
ability to acquire new long-term memories. Accordingly,
regulation of new neuron survival by extent of circuit use may
be a general mechanism for ensuring that neuronal
replacement is closely attuned to environmental change and to
the need to store novel information.
Previous studies in our laboratory support this hypothesis and
show that in adult birds, increase In information load is
associated with an increased recruitment ofnew neurons: when
adult birds are exposed to a new complex social setting, more
neurons are recruited in parts of their brains that process
auditory and visual information, than in brains of other birds
which were exposed to a simple setting. These findings
indicate that social complexity might affect neuronal survival.
Along this line, the present work s designed to further test the
hypothesis that times when new and heavy memory loads have
to be handled coincide with the recruitment of new neurons.
To do this, we use an estrildid songbird zebra finch
(Taeniopyga guttata) as a model system. This species is
highly social and in nature it nests colonially and forages in
large flocks of up to several hundred individuals. Nestlings
remain in the nest for about two weeks and during this period
they depend exclusively on their parents. After fledging when
the young birds leave the nest and join with other juveniles in
the colony, their parents keep feeding them for two more
weeks until they reach independence. This suggests that prior
to this stage parents must learn to recognize fheir offspring.
Recognition can be elicited via visual as well as auditory or
even olfactory cues. The hypothesis to be tested is that changes
in hormonal profile during egg laying, incubation or rearing of
the young, and attendant changes in experience, may trigger a
sharp increase of new neurons into relevant parts ofthe brain,
to enable parents-offspring recognition when the voung have
to be fed until they reach independence.
To do this, we inject adult breeding birds (males and females)
with [3]H-thymidine, a cell birth marker, during different
stages oftheir reproductive cycle, as follows:
1. control: birds are treated and then kept singly; these birds do
not engage in reproduction. 2. birds are treated and two weeks
later are paired and alloved to breed. 3. birds are paired
allowed to breed and treated after the last egg is laid. 4. bird
are paired, allowed to breed and treated when their juveniles
fledge from the nest.
Forty day.s later we record the number of new neurons in two
brain regions: neostriatum caudale (NC; a forebrain region that
processes auditory and visual information) and the olfactory
bulb. A comparison between experimental groups will be
presented and discussed.
Explicit and implicit aspects of Kanizsa figure detection
and discrimination
Barlasov A. and Hochstein S.
Neurobiology Dept.. Institute ofLife Sciences' & Neural
Computation Center, University ofJerusalem, 91904
Jerusalem
Previous studies suggested that perception of an illusory
contour, such as a Kanizsa-type figure, might involve
temporal sequence of stages (Reynolds, 1981 Perception 10:
107; Ringach & Shapley, I996 Vision Res 36: 3037).We were
interested in the corhcal level(s) of these stages, in reference to
Reverse Hierarchy Theory (RHT; Hochstein & Ahissar, 2002
Neuron 36: 791). We presented subiects with four inducing
figures ("pacmen"), which were arran}ed as if at the comers of
a 60-degree parallelogram. The opemngs of the pacmen were
aligned so as to induce an illusory" Kanizsa parallelogram (25%
of trials), a Kanizsa equilateral triangle (25%), or neither
(50). Non-inducing pacman openings were unaligned or
faced outward. Presentations were brief and backward-masked
(SOA of 50-200ms). Subjects reported whether they perceived
a Kanizsa figure (detection) and which shape" they saw
(discrimination) -"'guessing" the shape even when it was not
explicitly perceived. Performance improved with SOA, as
expected. Surprisingly, for longer SOAs, even when subiects
did not explicitly perceive the figure, they were signifieintly
above chance a't guessing which shape had been presented
(d'>l), suggesting implicit figure perception. An alternative,
that figure discrimination without awareness depends on
detection of local features was ruled out by the following
183
control: For triangle-shaped figures, when the fourth inducer
faced outward, this local cue was used as a signal of a triangle
shape only when the figure was perceived explicitly and for
longer SOAs. These findings support the RHT view that
associates focused attention to local cues with late explicit
processing at low-level cortical areas.
Support: Israel Science Foundation (ISF) "Center of
Excellence" Grant; US-Israel Binattonal Science Foundation
(BSF)
Social change affects the turnover of new neurons in the
forebrain ofadult sonbirds
Bamea A.,Mishal A.,Rado R. and Nottebohm F.
tNatural andLfe Sciences, The Open University oflsrael,
3Tla D t7, II
Zoology, Tel-.viv University,srae;, ,,e ,,ocxeje,,er
University, NY, USA
Many new neurons are added to the adult avian brain. Most of
them die 3-5 weeks after they are born. Those that survive
replace, numerically, older ones that have died. It has been
suggested that the new neurons enhance the brain's ability to
acquire new long-term memories. Previous work in our
laboratory support this hypothesis and show that in adult birds
increase in information load is associated with an increased
recruitment of new neurons: when adult birds (Taeniopygia
uttata) are exposed to a new complex social setting and tested
0 days later, more neurons are recruited in parts oftheir brain
that process auditory information, than in brains of other birds
,,hi,'h were exposed to a simple setting and tested at the same
time. 7his finding indicates that social complexity might affect
neuronal survival. Along this line, the present work was
designed to test whether social complexity also affects the
longevity of these new neurons. To do this, we treated adults
I3]
bird's with H-thymidine immediately before introducing them
into one oftwo new social settings: complex (40 strange birds)
or simple (isolation). We tested their brains, in addition to 40
days later, also at 60 and 150 days after treatment. The results
show that the higher level ofrecruitment found in the complex
social setting after 40 days is followed by a higher rate of
neurons disappearance than that seen in the simple one. In this
light social setting seems like a dynamic situation that calls for
many new neurons which, in turn, tend to be replaced
so that overall there is a greater turnover of neurons
the more complex social setting. These results further
support the hypothesis that regulation of new neuron survival
by extent of circuit use may be a general mechanism for
ensuring that neuronal replacement is closely attuned to
environmental change and to the need to store novel
information.
Sex differences in response to neurofeedback treatment
Barnea A.,RassisA. and Zaidel E.
Bio-Keshdv Clinic, Kibutz Givat Chaim Ichud, Israel: :Dept.
ofPsychology, UCLA, USA
Methods:. Human subjects can learn to control their brain
waves parameters (Neurofeedback or NF) when given
reinforcement via instantaneous feedback. The parameters we
used for giving feedback were spectral powers in different
frequency bands. We applied a Neurofeedback training
protocol that rewarded reducing the power in the theta (4-7
Hz) band and enhancing the power in the SMR (12-15 Hz)
band at central sites of 20 Israeli children aged 10-12, half
bovs and half girls. Half of the subjects received C3 training
anl the other half C4 training. Training consisted of 20
half-hour sessions. We assessed the effects of training on
lateralized lexical decision in Hebrew, on dichotic listening to
nonsense stop consonant-vowel syllables, as well as on
computerized cognitive tasks, including the IVA CPT, Spatial
Orientation, Nonverbal IQ, Picture Memory and Word
Memory. Results." There were surprising sex differences in the
effects bf training. In lateralized lexica[decision, both C3 and
C4 feedback affected both hemispheres, though differently in
boys and girls. Thus, in boys C3 training impoved fight
hemisphere accuracy of word recognition, and C4 training
improved left hemisphere accuracy, whereas in girls both C3
and C4 training improved left hemisphere accuracy. In the
dichotic listening test, NF increased the fight ear dvantage
(REA) in girls, signaling increased left hemisphere
specialization for phonetic perception, but NF decreased the
REA in boys, thus shifting the greater asymmetry from boys to
girls. He?e, NF on either side Mfected hemispheric
ecialization (in girls) as well as callosal transfer (in boys).
feedback improved the IVA Auditory. Speed in girls,
whereas C3 feedback improved it in bovs. Conclusion:
Lateralitv ofNF can affect asymmetric control networks (as in
lexical decision), while feedback on either side can affect the
same lateralized processing modules or the same callosal
channels (as in dichotic listening). We suggest that the NF
protocol activates hemispheric control.circuits that are
organized differently in boys and girls.
184
Intrinsic protein synthesis regulation by eukaryotic
elongation factor 2(eEF2) is correlated with memory
consolidation
Belelovsky K.1, Elkobi A.1, Nairn A.C. and Rosenblum K.
Centerfor Brain and Behavior, Haifa University, Haifa,
Israel; 'Yale UniversiOSch. Meal, New Haven, CT, USA.
One of the most intriguing questions in neurobiology is to
tmderstand the neural mechanisms of long-term memory
formation. Studies have shown that the initial stage of memory
formation, a consolidation process, is dependent on protein
synthesis ]n a number of species, following different learning
paradigms. The necessity of intact protein synthesis machinery
for memo consolidation, suggests that regulation of protein
synthesis in neurons is a crucial component of the
consolidation process. However, it is not clear whether
neurons regulate protein translation during memory.
consolidation, and if so, what proteins are involved in this
process. This study was conducted in order to learn ,,hether
active regulation of protein synthesis plays a role in memory
consolidation. We report here that phosphorylation of
eukaryotic elongation factor-2 (eEF2) on Thr56 by eEF2
kinase in the insular cortex is correlated with taste memory
consolidation. We found a significant increase (22%) in eEF2
phosphorylation 20 min following learning, but not at other
time points. The temporal pattern of eEF2 phosphorylation is
similar to ERKI/II activatmn. The phosphorylation of both
proteins is specific to the taste cortex. In addition, eEF2
phosphorylation during memory consolidation is detected in a
synaptosomal fraction made from taste cortex. The results
prowde for the first time possible evidence for the involvement
of active synaptosomal translation regulation during the
formation of long-term memory trace.
Di-isopropylfluorophosphate (DFP) subtoxic exposure at
early postnatal critical period impairs performance and
acquisition of passive avoidance in female, but not male
adult mice
Ben Bashat G. and Kofman O.
Dept. ofBehaqoral Sciences andZlotowski Centerfor
Neurosciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer 5,]aeva
Background." ACh plays a major role in encoding, attention
and regulation of cortical development, and sex differences
were found for behavioral effects of AChE-I's.
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEI) are widely used as
pesticides, exposing a substantial population to the risk of
neurological damage. A single exposure to AChEIs in 3-10
day old mice caused down-regulation of muscarinic receptors,
impaired spatial learning and altered motor behavior in
females only (Dam et al. 2000). The present study examined
the effect of chronic developmental exposure toAChEI on
passive avoidance (PA) learning.
Methods: C57BL/65 mice of both sexes were injected with
lmg/kg sc DFP or saline on postnatal days 4-10 or PND 14-20
in a second experiment or, in a third experiment, on PND
30-36. Step-do,,aa PA was conditioned at 4 months using 0.5
mA footshock for 5 sec and tested after 24 hr and 72 hr.
Results: After treatment at PND 4-10, DFP females, but not
males showed no impairment in acquisition, but a significant
impairment in retention at 24 hr (F2, 104=4.30, p<0.02).
Treatment on days 14-.20 imp.aired acquisition in females and a
trend towards an impairment n retention at 24 hr, but not at 72
hr, suggesting latent learning of PA. No difference between
male DFP and control mice was seen after 24 hr, but 72 hr
after acquisition, step down latencies in control, but not DFP
males declined significantly. DFP on PND 30-36 did not
impair acquisition or retentaon in either sex.
Conclusions: The results suggest that in females DFP affects
the rate of acquisition or retention differentially when
administered at different time points during development.
The Mz and M muscarinic G-protein-coupled receptors
are voltage sensitive
Ben-Chaim Y., Tour O.,m Dascal N., Parnas I., and Parnas H.
7"Ihe Otto Loewi Minerva Centerfor CelIular andMolecular
Neurobiology, the Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904,
Israel; :Presently at the Dept. ofPharmacology, University of
CalJ_brma San Diego, La Jolla. CA 92093-0647, USA," I)bpt.
ofPhysiology and Pharmacology, Tel Aviv University, Tel-
Aviv 69978, Israel.
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs), involved in the majority
of signal transduction processes in the body, act mainly by
activation of second messengers within the c611. The regulhtioh
of the GPCRs activity is not considered to be affected by
membrane potential. Here, using Xenopus oocytes, we show
that the M and the M muscarinic receptor (m2R and mlR)
are voltag sensitive. The m2R-mediated potassium channel
(GIRK) currents were used to assay the activity of the m2R.
We fotmd that the apparent affifiity of the m2R toward
acetylcholine (Ah) was reduced upon depolarization. Binding
experiments of [ H]-ACh to individual oocyte expressing m2R
confirmed the eleetrophysiological findings. We further found
that the voltage sensitivity ofbinding of [H]-ACh to ooeytes
expressing m2R was greatly diminished following
pretreatment with pertussis toxin. In contrast to the m2R, the
apparent affinity of the mlR was increased upon
depolarization. However, when the third intracellular loop of
the mlR was replaced by the same loop of the m2R, the
receptor lost its voltage sensitivity. The cumulative results
suggest that the mlR and m2R are, by themselves, voltage
sensitive. Furthermore, the voltage sensitivity does not reside
in the ACh binding site, rather it most likely resides in the
receptor region that couples to the G-protein.
These finding may be of significant physiological importance
as they imply that membrane potential may affect the
regulatory activity of GPCRs.
Adult human bone marrow stromal cells express
transcription factors following in vitro induction
Ben-Zur T.1Levy Y.S.Burshtein A. 1!Barhum Y.,
--e-i-d-nq--d.', Bulvik S. "., and Offen D.
Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Dept. ofNeurology,
Rabin Medical Center, Sackler School ofMedicine, TelAviv
University; 2LaniadoMedical Center, ATatanya
Human mesenchymal stem cells present in adult marrow can
develop into bone, cartilage, fat, tendon and muscle. In this
study, we demonstrate that human bone marrow stromal cells
(hBMSc) isolated from human iliac crest can be induced to
differentiate into dopaminergic neural-like cells. The hBMSc
were analyzed by flow-cometry and were found negative for
lymphohematopoietic cell surface markers such as CD5,
CD1 b, CD20, CD34 and CD45. However, they express CD90
aprotein that plays a role during synaptogeness. A few hours
after hBMSc were incubated with N2 supplements, retinoic
acid, butylated hydroxyanisole, isobutylmethylxanthine and
dibutyryl-cyclic-AMP, the cells changed theirphenotype to
neural-like cells, spindle shaped, with cell bodies and long
branches. Using protein/DNA array (Panomics Inc.) we
purified and incubated the nuclear proteins with labeled DNA
and probed the bound DNA to transcription factors consensus
sequences microarray. In the differentiated hBMSc, using this
array technology, we showed induced expression of several
neuron-specifi transcription factors such as
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) and the neural zinc finger factor
(NZF-3). The characterization of specific transcription factors
is the key for successful induction of hBMSc to become
neural-like cells.
Functional integration oftransplanted embryonic stem
cell-derived urons
Benni1'', Beck H.2. Wernig M. Tucker K.L. Brtstle
0-.d Scheffler B.
lnstitute ofReconstructive Neurobiology and Dept.s of
Epileptology and 'Neuroflatholog); University o/fBonn
Medical Center, D-5310. Bonn, Germany, and
4Interdisci linary CenterfirNeurosciences University of
P
Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
The generation ofneurons and glia from pluripotent embryonic
stem (ES) cells represents a promising strategy for the study of
central nervous system (CNS) development and repair. ES
cell-derived neural precursors have been shown to develop into
morphologically mature neurons and glia when grafted into
brain and spinalcord. Yet, there is a surprising shortage ofdata
concerning the functional integration of ES cell-derived
neurons (ESNs) into the host CNS tissue. Here, we use ES
cells engineered to express enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) only in neuronal progeny to study the functional
roperties of ESNs upon integration into long-term
ippocampal slice cultures. Following incorporation into the
dentate gyrus, EGFP donor neurons display a gradual
maturation of their intrinsic discharge behavior and a
concomitant increase in the density of voltage-gated Na and
K channels. Integrated ESNs express AM'PA and GABAa
receptor subunits. Most importantly, neurons derived from ES
cells receive functional glutaratergic and GABAergic
Sspnapsesfrom host neurons.
ecfically, we demonstrate that host perforant path axons
form synapses onto integrated ESNs. These synapses between
host and ES cell-derived neurons display pronounced
paired-pulse facilitation indicative of intact presynaptic
short-term plasticity. Thus, ES cell-derived neural precursors
generate functionally active neurons capable of integrating into
the brain circuitry.,.
Enriched environment in mice: Elevates natural killer cell
activity and attenuates psychological stress res.onse
Benaroye)-Milshtein N.t, Hollander ]q.2, Apter A.3",Wilf A.t,
Yaniv,I. "and Pick C.G.
Deps "Anatomy, eHumanMicrobiology, Tel Aviv University,
Deps 3Psychiatry4Hemato-Oncology,hneider Children's
Medical CenterofIsrael
The importance of the environment in the regulation of brain,
behavior and physiology, has long been recognized in the
biological, social and medical sciences. Animals from enriched
conditions clearly have better learning abilities than animals
from standard conditions. However, the effects of
environmental enrichment on immunology and emotionality
are less documented and remain questionable. Moreover, mice
are less investigated regarding enriched environment.
Therefore, we investigated the influence of enriched
environment on natural killer cell activity, psvchological stress
response and behavioral parameters. Male'C3H mice were
raised either in enriched or standard conditions for 6 weeks.
At2erwards, NK cell activity was measured and mice behavior
was tested in the staircase test and Elevated plus maze. In
addition, electric shock with reminders was gwen. in each
reminder freezing time was measured. The C3H mce in the
enriched condition had higher cytolytic activity than did the
standard group (p<0.001). The C3H mice in the enriched
condition showed lower freezing time in the reminders
(p<0.05), decreased anxiety and higher activity conpared to
standard. For instance, greater percentage of time spending in
the open arms (p<0.01) in the Elevated plus test, and higher
rate 0f stair chmbing in the staircase test (p<0.05). The
beneficial effect of enriched environment on NK cell activity
in C3H mice is clear. Enriched condition reduces anxiety as
seen in the elevated plus test and in lower freezing time after
psychological stress. It is still unclear which component of the
enriched environment is responsible for these changes.
Sniffing with the mind's nose: Olfactomotor activity during
imagery mimics that during perception
Bensafi M., Khan R. and SobelN.
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA
Neural representations created in the absence of appropriate
external events are referred to as mental imagery. Imagery may
be augmented by reenactment or "playback" of sensory-motor
processes. For example in vision,'occulomotor responses
during imagery are correlated with those during perception.
Furthermore, this occulomotor activity functionally contributes
to the quality ofvisual mental imagery. Like visual perception,
odorperception requires a sensory (smelling) and a motor
(sniffing) integration that is mediated by dissociable neural
networks. Here we set out to ask whether the olfactomotor
response (sniffing) is enacted during olfactory mental imagery.
We measured nasal airflow in 30 human subjects who were
imagining sights, sounds, and smells. Subjects were unaware
of airflow measurement. Only during olfactory imagery,
humans spontaneously enacted the sensory-motor component
of olfaction, that is, they. sniffed (F3,87=22.290,P<0.0001).
Moreover, as in perception, imagery of pleasant odors
involved larger sniffs than imageD, of unpleasant odors
(F49=4.854,P<0.029). Finally encouraging or preventing
sn'fing, increased or decreas'd the vividness of olfactory
mental imagery respectively (Flw=6.192,P<0.023). These
findings suggest that sniffs play' a functional role in the
creation ofolfactory percepts.
Development of a bioassay ofexposure to environmental
hazardous agents
Berman-Shlomovich T. and Wormser U.
Hebrew University ofJerusalem, Faculty ofNatural Sciences
One of the major limitations of current methods of biologic.al
detection of exposure to hazardous environmental agent
their inability to detect long-term exposures, and exposures
that occurred in the past witfiout immediate clinical eltects. In
the current study we examined the potential of a new bioassay
that is based on the hypothesis that serum of exposed
individuals contains a toxi6 factor or factors produced by an
affected cell or tissue in response to an exposure. In the present
study PC12 cell cultures were exposed to serum samples of
rats treated with the organophosphate chlorpvrifos. We
observed a decrease of up to 31.8% and 40% in cell viability
and nerve growth factor-induced neurite outgrowtli,
respectively, in PCI2 cells treated with serum of
chlorpyrif0s-exposed rats, in comparison to cells treated with
serum of control rats. Maximal effect was observed for both
parameters 4 weeks after exposure whereas motor activity and
cholinesterase activity returned to normal levels within one
week after the exposure; thereafter the rats showed no signs of
toxicity, including 4 weeks post-exposure. These results
demonstrate the potential of the proposed method to detect
environmental exposures long after they have occurred.
185
Behavioral analvsis of multiple memory tasks in monkevs
Bernacchia A.,{akovlev V.,Hochstein S.,Orlov T. and
Amit DJ 'z
Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904 Israel; 2Universita' di
Roma, La Sapienza, 00185 Italy;
We investigated primate performance in a behavioral task that
requires holding several visual images simultaneously in
working memory. Two Macaque monkeys were trained on a
delayed-match-to-sample task with multiple samples. In each
trial, a sequence of 1-7 different images servedas samples.
These were followed by a match stimulus, which was a
repetition of one of the samples, (the cue). The length of the
sequence and the position of the cue in the sequence were
chosen at random on each trial. The monkey's task was to
recognize the appearance of a repetition of an), one of the
s.amples and therefore it needed to hold in working memory all
the majes ofthe sequence. Two type oferrors occurred:
"Misses': a failure to detect the/eetition. We found that the
distribution ofthese errors depended on the position of the cue
in the sample sequence: The greater the cue-match separation,
the poorer the performance. Surprisingly, for fixed
cue-to-match separation, performance mproved with
increasing sequence length, i.e. with the number of items in
working memo_.
"False positives ': a response erronously reporting repetition,
folowing a sample stimuluspresented for the first time in the
current trial. Dstribution ofthese errors increased with the
time and number of stimuli since the beginning ofthe trial.
Our findings are consistent with a model (Amit et al., Cerebral
C,ortex, 2003) suggestn,g that noise, associated with neural
d)namics, spontaneousl) erases items from working memory
(leading to misses) and induces "ghost" memories of familiar,
unseen stimuli (leading to false positive errors).
Supported by the Israel Science lbundation (ISF) Grant #8009.
Modeline the BOLD MRI flow signal
Bick A.'r and Goelman G.
ARI/MRS lab, HBRC, Medical biophysics andnuclear
edicine dept., Hadassah --Hebrew University Hospital;
ICNC, Hebrew University
In order to achieve a better understanding of the processes
underlying blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) MRI
we conducted a simulation. Its aim was to achieve a reliable
tool for testing and generating hypotheses about brain
connectivity seen with MRI. We utilized the Monte Carlo
simulation first presented in Ogawa et al (Biophys, 64, 803
,1993) and developed further in Boxerman et al (MRM 34, 555
,1995). This model calculates the expected signal attenuation
due to phase dispersion in a voxel that contains an assembly of
vessels. It uses a random walker proton to simulate diffusion.
The signal is the average of the collected phase <e ,<when
the averaging is done over the organization of the vessels in
the voxel and the poss.ible paths of the random walker in the
medium. The averaging s done using MC methods by
averagingthe signal ofN random protons.
This method was developed to calculate the signal at a given
time in a single voxel, however it is too slow to allow the
simulation of many oxels in different times needed for
simulating flow. We therefore chose to apply an analytic
method that calculates statistically the approxiinate value of
the desired averages. The Analytical method (Kisele," & Posse,
MRM 41, 499 ,1999) is based on solving the Torrey-Bloch
equation (Torrey, Phys Rev 104, 563, 1956) and calculating
the mean assuming random distributions. The means were
calcuIated numerically resulting in full analytic forms of the
signal. There is good agreement between the results from both
methods, and therefore the analytical method can substitute for
the MC method. Simulating cormectivity requires adding floyd,
to the model. The parameters in the model that can va3' as a
distribution of radii of vessels m the voxel. The simul'ation
necessitates understanding the regularities that underlie the
dynamics between voxels and the structure of the vascular
system These are our current goals.
Regional modulation of NMDA receptor density by age
and brain injury
Fry P. and Paden C.
eePt.
Imaging, LBNL, CA USA and Dept. Cell biology and
uroscience; Montana State Univ. Bozeman. MT USA
Non-fatal brain injury is often associated with long lasting
cognitive deficits and is recognized as a highly significant risk
factor for Alzheimer's disease. Glutamate acting through
NMDA receptors (NMDAR) is thought to be important in
memory formation and is also implicated in the
pathophysiology oftraumatic and ischemic brain injury.
We have investigated age related changes in NMDAR density
in normal control rats as well as in rats subjected to a
186
penetrating (knife cut) brain injury. Regional receptor density
was measured by quantitative autoradiography; using
radioactive MK801 as a ligand. Male rats were subjected to the
surgery at 7 weeks of age and groups of 3-6 killed3 days, one
month or 2 months later; in parallel with normal age-matched
controls. Normal animals exhibited modest but statistically
significant age-dependent loss of NMDA receptors in most
brain regions studied. Injury produced large and statistically
significant decreases in NMDAR density after 3 days; which
were mostly but not ex.-clusively limited to the ipsilateral
hemisphere and to regions sm'rounding the knife track.
Significant partial or even full recovery was observed 30 days
after the lesion, such that NMDAR density in the injured
animals was not significantly different from age matched
controls. However, this was followed by a dramatic, bilateral
reduction in NMDAR relative to age matched controls;
suggesting that early brain injury sensitizes the brain to later
age-dependent receptor loss. These changes, if relevant to
humans, may contribute to the long-term cognitive deficits
following brain injury as well as to the effect ofhead injury on
the risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Endogenous 5-HT released from thalamic axons induces
local disinhibition in developing layer 4 of mouse barrel
cortex
Binshtok A.M.. Fleidervish I.A. and Gutnick M.J.
Koret School ofVeterinaryMedicine, The Hebrew University
ofJerusalem, Rehovot 76100
During the first two postnatal weeks, as thalamocortical (TC)
axons grow into somatosensory cortex, arborize, form
napses in Layer 4 and orchestrate segregation of neurons
nto discrete "barrels", TC cells transiently express the
serotonin transporters responsible for 5-HT uptake from the
extracellular space and concentration in synaptic vesicles.
Since these cells are not serotonergic, it has been suggested
that they use 5-HT as a "borrowed" neurotransmitter. We
reviously demonstrated that in Layer 4 of mice younger than
14, exogenous 5-HT completely and reversibly blocks
stimulus-elicited IPSCs and induces all-or-none epileptiform
discharges that are similar to those induced by GABAA
blockers. We also showed that these effects are mediated by
presynaptic 5-I-/T2A receptors. Here, using thalamocortical
slices from Pd-P13 mice, in which the ventrobasal (VB)
nucleus of thalamus, the TC axons and the "barrel" cortex are
all present, we show that endogenous 5-HT released from TC
axons mimics the effect of exogenous 5-HT Repetitive,
low-intensity VB stimulation evoked long-lasting negative
shifts in field potential (fp) recorded in the correspond!ng
"barrel". Whole cell recordings from single Layer 4 spiny
stellate cells revealed that these negative fps were
accompanied at the cellular level by bursts of action potentials
that appeared with varying latencies (200-800 ms) following
VB stimulation. Both the ne/ative fps and the tmderlying
neuronal activities were completely and reversibly abolished
by bath application of ketanserine tatrate (20 pM), a specific
5-HT2A receptor antagonist. VB stimulation in slices from
animals older than P14 did not elicit negative tq s.
Our data support the hypothesis that during te time window
when 5-HT becomes concentrated in presynaptic TC terminals,
thalamic discharge causes co-release of 5-HT along with
glutamate, and thereby produces local disinhibition and
consequent population bursts of synchronous cortical
discharge. Such a feed-forward excitation mechanism may
play a critical role in specific TC circuit maturation.
Supported by grant 449/00from the Israel Science Foundation
T-, Tz- and diffusion MRI ofpig spinal cord in
experimental allergic encephalomvelitis
13
Biton I.E. Mayk A., AssafY. ', {ohen Y.
Schoo of?-hemistrv, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv; "Teva
Pharmaceutical Inaru'stries Ltd. Netanya; b-hnctional Brain
Imaging Unit, Tel Aviv SouraskyMedical Center
Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is an
immune-mediated inflammatory demelinating animal model
affecting the central nervous system. EAE pathology has
similarities to multiple sclerosis (MS) in humans that takes a
relapsing-remitting or a progressive course.
Tissue samples of control (N=3)and EAE diseased (N=10)pig
spinal cords (cervical) were used in this study. The EAE model
was induced in the pigs by immunization with bovine m,elin
basic protein, complete Freund's adjuvant and M. tuberculosis.
The in vitro magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) protocol
included saggital and trans,verse T,-weighted images
(TR/TE=700/20ms), T-weighted images (TR/TE=3500/50ms)
and diffusion-weighted images (DWI) (T,R/TE=1000/46ms,
D/d=200/10ms Gm,=12 G//zm b,=2xl0 s/cm, qmx=511
cm'), in which' the diffusion was measured perpendicular and
allel to the long axis of the spine. Image analysis of the
data set was performed using a Matlab program to
produce q-space displacement maps.
In seven from the ten EAE diseased spinal cords we found well
defined plaques in the white matter, which were characterized
by areas of increased intensity in the T-weighted images.
T-weighted images were also capable of identifying the
lesions and demonstrated lesion heterogeneity in many cases.
In nine from the ten EAE diseased spinal cords the q-space
displacement maps, obtained from DWI, were differ,nt from
that ofthe control maps both in the laques (p<2xl0") and in
the "normal appearing white matter' (p<dxl0-') of the EAE
diseased spinalcords. The tenth case that did not showed any
MRI abnormalities had less significantly clinical signs as
compared to the other nine EAE diseased pigs.
This study provides the first identification of EAE
abnormalitiesin pig spinal cords using MR1. The q-space
displacement maps showed abnormalities in the white and gray
matter that T and T.-weighted images could not identify.
"To boom or not to boom" '7 BOOM' as a novel test in
the diagnosis of ADHD
Biran I. and Gal A.
Dept. ofNeurology, Hadasssah UniversityMedical Center,
Jerusalem
AIM: To establish the validity of the '7 Boom' ,task in the
diagnosis of Attention Deficit Hyperactivit Disorder
(ADHD). Introduction: Subjects with ADHD show a pattern of
both inattention and impulsivity/hyperactivitv. The diagnosis
is based on the history, nbur3|ogical xamination and
neuropsychological testing which demonstrate difficulties with
tasks that reqmre sustained attention and response inhibition.
We adapted the game '7 Boom' which depends heavily on
attention and compared the performance of ADHD patients in
this task to that of normal controls. Methods: 11
normal controls (age 27.5 years + 10, education 14.5 years
+ 3.0)" 8 ADHDpatients (age 26.1 years + 9, education
13.6 3)ears + 3.6). The diagnosis was based on the DSM
criteria and the performance in the Test of Variables of
Attention (TOVA). Task- Based on the children's game '7
Boom' subjects coun---alternating with the examiner from
to 10b'. Wh,e,n,ever a nur,ber with the figure '7' (e.g. 27) or a
multiple of 7 (e.g. 49) as reached the subjects were asked to
say. 'boom' instead of the number. The task was administered
twice in the first the examiner counted the odd numbers and
the subject the even numbers and vice versa in the second.
Results: ADHD subjects performed worse than the control
subjects (14.6 errors + 4.9, 6.5 errors + 2.9 respectively,
p=0.004). Conclusion: The '7 Boom' task reflects the
behavioral pattern of subjects with ADHD and can help in the
diagnosis ofthis syndrome.
Convergence and "small world network" organization of
dendrites in cultured networks: Effect on synaptic
distribution and clustering
Blinder P. and Baranes D.
Dept. ofLife Sciences, The InstituteforAppliedResearch, Ben
Cmrion University ofthe Negev.
Dendrites of hippocampal neurons in culture form complex
network morphologies. We implemented graph theory to study
such networks; we defined contacts between dendrites as
vertices and dendritic segments between two vertices as edges.
The mean distance from each vertex to all others vertices (path
length (L)), and the level of contact among vertices neighbor.s
(connectivity (C)) showed that the dendritic network
architecture belongs the Small World Network (SWN) tgpe.
SWNs combine elements ofrandom and regular networks n a
way that strongly lowers L and increases C, yielding a highly
connected network with small degree of separation among
dendrodendritic contact sites. This s utilized by axons when
they. fascicu.la.te .o.n dendrites and turn to switch targets at the
vertices, mmmzng the growth length_ required to connect
distant cells. Around 15% of the vertices clustered due to
convergence of multiple dendrites into single sites of up to
351am m in diameter. Such dusters were rare in random
simulations of network formation. While clustering had a
minor effect on L and C in graphs including only dendrites, it
significantly affected these parameters when we added new
edges that simulated axonal owing..S.uch axonal .behavior.
was observed in the culture where it led to accumulation
synaptic connections at the clusters. Hence, multiple-dendritic
convergence leads to synaptic clustering and may serve as a
mechanism of plasticity since it was found to be
activity-dependent.
Pattern generating circuitry and sacrocaudai afferent
pathways are differentially modulated by exogeneous
opioids in spinal cords of neonatal rats
Blivis D. and Lev-Tov A.
Dept. of_A_natomy & Ceil Biology, The Hebrew University
Medical School, Jerusalem
The possible involvement of nociceptive pathways in
generation of rhythmic patterns and the modulation ofthese
patterns by activation of opioid receptors was examined in the
isolated spinal cord of the neonatal rat. Coordinated motor
activity can be induced in the isolated spinal cord by bath
applied neurochemieals and by stimulation of saerocaudal
afferent (SCA). In the present work we show that the rhythm
induced by stimulation of SCA at various intensities is
completely blocked by bath application of morphine, or the
mu-opioid receptor agonist DAMGO, but not by the
delta-opioid receptor agonist SNC80. Addition of the opioid
receptor antagonist naloxone (ltM) restored the rhythmic
actixity within 5-10 minutes. By contrast, bath application of
5HT/NMDA or alphal-adrenoceptor agonist methoxamine,
induced a robust rhythmic activity in the thoracolumbar and
sacrococcygeal cord in the presence of morphine or DAMGO.
This rhythm was characterized by a slower cycle time
compared to the untreated control preparations and by a
regular alternating pattern. It is suggested that opioid receptors
may be used as potent modulators of motor rhythmic patterns,
that nociceptive pathways may play a role in pattern generation
but that the pattern generating circuitry of the thoracolumbar
and sacrococcygeal segments can be activated effectively even
when the SCA pathway-interneurons are blocked by bath
applied opioids.
Organophosphate-induced brain damage in rats:
Alterations ofprotein kinase C isozymes
Bloch-Shilderman E., Gilat E., Kadar T. and Levy A.
Dept. ofPharmacology, Israel Institute forBiological
Resea:bh, Ness Ziona
Organophosphates (OP) produce robust convulsions and
subsequent brain damage. They are potent inhibitors of
cholinesterase (ChE), which activate cholinergic mechanisms,
leading to extensive excitation of the glutamatergic system.
This excitation is essential for the maintenance of convulsions
and for the associated brain pathology. It has been shown that
soman, an irreversible ChE inhibitbr, increased the level of
inositol phosphate and IP3, and thus might interfere with
calcium homeostasis and protein kinase C (PKC) activities in
rat brain. PKC signaling pathway has been associated with
modulation of motor behavior, learning and memory, all of
which are severely impaired in OP intoxication. Nevertheless,
the role of PKC in OP intoxication is largely unknown. Thus
we characterized the alterations in brain PKC isozymes in rat
hippocampus and fi'ontal cortex following sarin (lxLDso)
exposure, and evaluated the neur0protective effect of selective
peptide regulators for PKCs aftbr such insult. The results
indicated that: 1) A significant down-regulation (up to 50% of
control) of membrane cPKC immunoreactivity was observed
from 30 min up to 5 days post satin exposure in frontal cortex.
2) An up-r,eg,ulaion (45-85%), of membrane cPKC
immunoreacti it) as found 10 da)s after sarin exposure in
hippocampus. 3) A significant reduction in expression of the
non-conventional zeta:PKC was seen in frontal cortex up to 24
hrs post satin. This was in contrast to the increase in
expression seen in the hippocampus. 4) betalI-PKC peptide
(380 n.g/kg), which inhibits PKC transloeation, and thus
activatton, attenuated convulsion related neuropathology
induced by satin. This is the first report identifying a role for
both conventional and non conventional PKC isozymes in OP
exposure in the rat, suggesting that betaII-PKC, as well as
zeta-PKC, might be invol,ed in the functional and or structural
modifications in the brain that occur after OP-induced
convulsions.
A new neurobiological theory on primate (man and
monkey) posterior parietal (IPL) function
Blum B. and Israeli
Dept. ofPhysiology & Pharmacology and Dept. of
Neurology, Beilinson Medical Center,Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978
We proposed (ECVP, 2002) primate IPL feedback control of
'state ofbody' in external and internal environment. In support
microelectrode recordings in awake monkey operant behavior
hand reaching to targets HR), elucidate IPL role as
reward-oriented behavior in extrapersonal space (EPS);
entitling IPL to multimodality, it's neurons to multi duty
encoding of monkey's and trainer's hand movements in
monkey EPS. In visual and non visual HR, IPL multi-duty
parametric summation is revealed; salience of visual
component is hinted by it's absence when reaching is out of
187
cell's receptive field (r.f). Tactile cells of PF show same cell
r.f. linkage of tip of fingers and palm of hand, coherent with
,ip behavior, & with construing body scheme. IPL neurons
learn" to respond to stimuli, de novo, in course of experience.
"Touch response" is to "learnt", none to "unlearnt target",
suggesting Involvement of attentionalgating. IPL control also
over internal environment is proposed-on account of parietal
lesion cases r,e,ported to show body scheme disturbances,
"feeling unreal'; we report "as if" cardiac and/ or gastric
disturbances, not verifiedas organic but linked to anxiety and
to a loss of feeling of well being. It isproposed that such a
feeling', a biologacal parameter aimed at homeostasis, is
operative in IPL mechanisms for holistic whole-body-state
awareness; it's reduction releasing a corrective action moment.
Possibly parietal interactions with autonomic pathways
mediat this internal environment feedback control of 'whc;le
body' physiologic state, an interaction presumably decoupled
in parietal lesion cases.
Modeling connectivity patterns ofthe primary visual
cortex from spontaneous neuronal activity and feature
maps
Blumenfeld B., Bibitchkov D., Naaman S. and Tsodyks M.
RDeeot.ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute of Science,
vot 76100
Population activity across the surface of the primary visual
cortex exhibits well-known regular patterns. The location and
the shape of activity patches depend on features ofthe stimulus
such as orientation. Recent studies have shown that activity
patterns generated spontaneously are similar to those evoked
by different orientations of a moving grating stimulus [Kenet,
et. al., Nature 2003]. This suggests tile existence of intrinsic
preferred states ofthe cortical network in this area of the brain.
We deduce possible connect!ons i.n such a network from a set
of single condition orientation maps obtained by
voltage-sensitive dye imaging. We assume the maps as
attractor states of a recurrent neural network and model the
connectivity using a modified version of the pseudo-inverse
rule of the Hopfield network. The results suggest a local
distance-dependent Mexican-hat shaped connectivity.
Long-range connections also exist and depend mainly on tlie
diff6rence in orientation selectivity of the connected pixels.
The strength of connections correlates strongly with
orientation selectivity of the neurons. The dependence of the
obtained synaptic weights on the distance between neurons
correlates with the pattern of correlations in the spontaneous
activity, sug.esting that intrinsic connectivity in neuronal
networks in mis area of the brain underlies the activity in both
spontaneous and evoked re;:!jmes.
Early traumatic experience alters metabolic brain activity
in the rodent limbic system
Book J. and Braun K.
Dept. Zoology Neurobiology, Otto von
Cntericke UniversiO; 39118Magdc/;urg, Germany.
How does thejuvenile brain respond to acute emotional stress?
Early deprivation and traumatic experiences can interfere with
the establishment and maintenance of synaptic networks in the
developing brain. Based on a previous study we applied the
2-fluorodesoxyglucose (2FDG)-technique to "look for changes
in metabolic activity of thalamic, hypothalamic andprefrontal
cortical brain areas during stress in 8 day old Octodon degus
pups. Metabolic activation, densitometrically measured as
2-FDG uptake, was compared between four experimental
_groups: i) pubs, that were left undisturbed with their parents in
the home cage, ii) pups, that were separated as a _group of
littermates iiO pups, that were individually separated for 45
minutes from the parents, iv) pups, treated as group iii but
during separation exposed to maternal vocalizations. We found
significant alterations of metabolic brain activity in all
separated groups in thalamic and h,vpothalamic brain areas and
in the orbitofrontal cortex. In gereral, a strong reduction of
brain activity was seen in the separated animals compared to
the pups with parents. However, there were also differences
between the animals of the three separated groups. The
individually isolated animals (group i) showed a more
pronounced reduction of 2-FDG uptake than the degu pups
separated together with their littermates (group ii) and the degu
pups stimulated with maternal vocalizations during separation
(group IV). Since neuronal activation regulates the
development of synapses during postnatal brain maturation
the disturbed activation during stressful situations may
interfere with the refinement of limbic connectivity patterns,
resulting in altered processing of emotional stimuli in
adulthood.
Supportedby SFB 426/DFG.
188
Deciphering thegenetic program undelying transmitter
phenotype in Pl9developing neurons
Bozoch .,Tayar S. and Linial M.
Deft. ofBiological Sciences, Institute ofLife sciences, The
Hebrew University, Jerusalem
The generation of a specialized neuron relies on induction of
an intrinsic gene regulation program and on responding to
environmental cues. P19 cells are mouse originated embryonal
cells that serve as a model for studying differentiation
processes. Neuronal induction is performed by aggregating the
cells to embryonic bodies like structures in the presence oflow
concentration ofretinoic acid for 4 days. The potential ofthese
ceils to mature and efficiently release neurotransmitter (NT)
was established in our lab. We discovered that several
variables, most notably, cell densi' and various neurotrophic
factors, most notably NGF and CNTF affects neuronal
maturation, survival and most surprisingly, the choice of NT
phenotype. Upon plating the cells at a low cell density (Sparse)
a cholinergic phenotvpe dominates the culture while the same
culture when plated Ai high density (Dense) becomesprimarilv
glutamatergic. We hypothesized that key genes that determin'e
the phenotypic identity should be under a strict regulation and
furthermore that the acquisition of a phenotype is an early
event of neuronal differentiation. A differential analysis of a
large number of genes allows us a global view ofthe processes
leading t.o p.henotype determination. Results from several
Affymetnx mlcroarray experiments (12,000 genes/array) were
analyzed using advanced bioinformatical methods. Only 2.5%
of the genes tested were differentially expressed between the
Sparse and Dense culture. Individual genes (-10) that whose
expression was maximally changed as well as a set of genes
that share a common biological pathway were selected for
further investigation. One set ofsuch pathway-related genes is
the Nedd4A, Uba3 and Cullins that are part of tlie SCF
ubiquitination process. By manipulating thephysiological state
of the cells, we are able to change the Culhn xpression level
while other candidate genes are unaffected.
We suggest that Cullins and specifically Cullin3 is a key factor
in linking gene expression and protein degradation by
changing the balance of the two conflicting regulatory
mechanism in early differentiation. The involvement of
additional genes such as doublecortin and several of the genes
that are involved in Wnt and I]-catenin pathway are discussed.
Analysis ofthe effects ofoxidative stress and potential
neuroprotective agents in early differentiating neurons
12
Boutboul O. ', Bledi Y.. Weinstock M. and Linial M.
Dept. ofBiological Sciekces Institute ofLfe Sciences and
"Dept. ofPharmacology, Faculty ojMedWme, Hebrew
University, Jerusalem
Oxidative stress is a pivotal factor in neuronal degeneration.
Following trauma, damaged tissue liberates large amounts of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). These can cause lipid
peroxidation, DNA damage, protein modification and
denaturation. We have examined the conditions for inducing
oxidative damage in a mouse embryonic carcinoma cell line
P19 that can be induced by retinoic acid to show the behavior
of functional neurons that fficiently release neurotransmitters.
PI9 cells in the form embryonic body-like structures were
treated with retinoic acid for 4 day to induce terminal
differentiated neurons. Following trypsinization and
mechanical disruption, the derived cells were plated and
rapidly extended neurites, forming a layer of highly connected
neuronal networks. To induce ROS we exposed the cells to
HzO2 (5-2001xM). Cell damage was quantified using propidium
iodide (PI), an indicator for membrane integrity, JC-1, a probe
of mitoch0ndrial membrane potential and Alamar Blue, a
redox fluorescent indicator of mitochondrial metabolic
function. Neuronally-differentiated ceils showed a dose-related
cytotoxicity with [q202 (4-16tM). Approximately" 80% cells
lost their membrane potential within 40-60 rain ofexposure to
15 laM. The damage was irreversible as 30 rain later the
membrane was fully permeable to PI. Pretreatment with
TV3326, (0.1-11xM) a propargylamine-containing
cholinesterase inhibitor significantly decreased the
ROS-induced cvtotoxicity induced by 4-81aM HzO, but not by
16tM or more.'The mechanism ofprotection is currently bein
studied by the application of specific markers of early
apoptosis such as Annexin V and DNA fragmentation dyes.
We conclude that neuronally-differentiated P19 cells are a
suitable model for studying the mechanisms underlying
ROC-indueed damage and potential neuroprotective agents.
Salt appetite is not dependent upon taste-related sensory
variables
Bracha A. Pormoy F, Zach G. and Leshem M
Dept. ofPsychology and Brain & Behavior Center, Univetwity
oJ'ttaiJa
Genetic sensitivity to the taste of PROP, lingual papilla
density, and inten;ity and hedonics of basic tastes, have been
postulated to influence dietary intake and BMI. It is not known
if these variables also determine salt appetite PROP taster
status, intensity and hedonics of four tastes (NaC1, sucrose,
citric acid and quinine HCI), densi.ty of anterior lingual
fungiform papilla, dietary and activity questiotmaires., and
measures of salt appetite were examinedin 82 students. PROP
responses correlated with hedonics of NaC1, and correlated
negatively with hedonics of sucrose. No relationships were
fotind between PROP sensitiviW, densiW of papilla, and
responses to citric acid or quinine, and none of these variables
predicted salt appetite, dietary intake or BMI. However, salt
appetite correlated with level of physical activity. Since salt
ite has been related to exercise, our findings may support
notion that salt intake is influenced by physioloffical need
rather than taste sensor), variables.
Supportedby ISFGrant 902/00-2 to Micah Leshem
Modeling human eye injury on psychophysical and
tercetual erformance using simulated scotomas
ra__nfei_sR;rPeri D.,Egoz I.,Sapiens N. and Turetz j.3
Dept. ofPharmacoloev, lsrael InstituteforBiological
V'2
Research, Ness Ziona; tl-Op, Ness Ziona; Dept. of
Ophthalmology. AssafHarofeh Medical Center. Zerifin
Macular scotomas, affecting visual functioning, characterize
many eye and neurological diseases like AMD (Acquired
Macular Degeneration), diabetes mellitus, multiple sclerosis
and others. In this work, foveal and parafoveal visual field
defects were modeled, and their effects were evaluated on
atial contrast sensitivity and target recognition performance.
e modeled occludin scotomas, of different size, were
superimposed on the target stimuli presented on the computer
display, and were stabilized on the retina using a mono
Pkinje Eye-Tracker. Spatial contrast sensitwity was
evaluated using square-wave grating stimuli, whose contrast
thresholds were measured using the method of constant stimuli
with "catch trials". In the target recognition task the visual
search display was coniunctive, the targets of which shared
three features: size, con'ixast and position. Search accuracy as
well as R.T. measures were used for performance evalua{ion.
The artificial scotomas suppressed spatial contrast sensitivity
in a size dependent manner, similar to previous studie.
Deprivation effect was dependent on spatial frequencv,
consistent with retinal inhomogeneity models. Target
recognition was impaired as a function of size and retinal
location of the artificially generated scotomas. The data
suggest that modeling retinal damage, simulating visual field
deficits, is an efficient method for estimating the relationship
between retinal lesion characteristics and visual functioning.
Asynchrony between visual and auditory modalities as a
possible explanation of dyslexia
Breznitz Z.
LaboratoryforNeurocognitive Research. Brain and Behavior
Center. University ofHaiJb
A theory is proposed suggesting that asynchronv between the
processing rates of the visual and audito.'y odalities; and
stages of brain activity may be an underlying cause of
dyslexia. This research 13roject investig'ated whether
aynchrony of speed of proc'ssing (SOP) betseen the
-isual-orthographic and auditor),-phonological modalities, can
account for word recoggition deficits among dyslexic readers.
SOP among adult developmental dysl-exc readers was
compared to that of chronologically age-matched regular
readers. SOP was assessed using norlinguistic and linguistic
auditory and visual low-level tasks and higher-level lexical
decisioh, orthographic and phonological tasks. Behavioral and
electrophvsiological (ERP and LORETA measures were
obtained." Data indicated that dyslexic readers were
significantly slower than controls on raost of the experimental
tasks. Moreover, dvslexics revealed a systematic SOP gap
between the auditOry-phonological and'visual-orthographic
modalities. This gal was found in both P200 andP300
latencies. Among dyslexic as compared to normal readers data
also revealed a ldrger time gap between P200 and P300
components. Data anabcsis revealed that the between
modalities gap scores, and the processing time gap between
P200 and P300 explained most of the variance in word
recognition. Significant differences were also found between
the two groups of subjects in the intensity and in the
localization sources of brain activity. On "most of the
experimental tasks in the control group Irain activity was more
intense and involved activation n more areas of the brain as
compared to the dyslexic group.
Brain activity of regular and dyslexic readers while
reading Hebrew as compared to English sentences
Breznitz Z., Oren R. and Miller-Shaul S.
LaboratoryforNeurocognitive Research, Brain andBehavior
Center, Umversity ofHaiJh
The aim of the present study was to examine differences
among 'regular' and dyslexic adult bilingual readers when
processing reading and reading related skills in their first (LI
Hebrew) and second (L2 English) languages. Brain activity
during reading Hebrew and English unexpected sentence
endings was also studied. Behavioral and electrophysiological
measures including Event-Related Potentials (ERP) and
LORETA methodology were employed. Results indicated
discrepancies in the processing profiles of dyslexic and regular
bilingual readers in both first and second languages. In general,
the amplitudes of the evoked potentials were higher and the
latencies longer among dyslexic readers during processing of
information in first and second languages (L1 and L2), but
were more pronounced in English (L2).
LORETA (Pascual-Marqui et al., 1994) analysis indicated
evidence that the source of brain activity measured by current
density ofbrain activation is different when reading Hebrew as
compared to English sentences mainly among dyslexics and
not among regular readers. The date from the present study
supports the 'dominant bilingual' hypothesis for defining
bilinguals. A discrepancy between achievement in performing
various L1 and L2 tasks was consistent across groups. Both
groups were better in there mother tongue, which was Hebrew
as compared to English.
AHP reduction after odor learning is caused by reduction
in slam,, but not by expression chanes of SK channels
Brosh I., Rosenblum K. and Barka '.
'ZlotowsM centerfor neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University,
Beer-Sheva," :CenterJbrBrain andBehavior, Haij[h University
We have previously shown that learning-induced enhancement
in neuronal excitability is mediated by reduction in one or
more of the calcium-dependent potassium currents that control
neuronal frequency adaptation. The purpose of the present
research was to identify which of these currents is reduced
after learning. Rats were trained in an olfacto discrimination
task to distinguish betweenpairs of odors until demonstration
of rule learning. Two days after training completion,
intracellular recordings were made frompyramidal neurons in
layer II of piriform cortex brain slices. As previously shown,
AHP amphtude was significantly smaller in neurons from
trained rats, compared with neurons from pseudo trained and
naive rats (-4.98+0.30 n=32 trained, -6.79+0.38 n=23 pseudo
trained, -6.76+0.37 n=24 naive). In the presence of specific
IAne blocker apamin (50nM), AHP amplitude remained
significantly smaller in neurons from trained rats (-2.76+0.41
n=20 trained, -4.67_+0.59 n=16 pseudo trained, -4.73_+0.30 n=9
naive), and the reduction in AHP amplitude was similar in all
three groups. In order to test the possibility that changes in
SK1, 2 and3 channels expression is mediating the reduction in
AHP, we used western blot analysis. :xpresslon of SKI, 2 and
3 did not change after trainin In the presence of
noradrenaline (10 raM) which blocl the SIAm, and increases
the ai-n,, AHP amplitude was similar in neurons from all
groups (-6.32-+0.71 n=14 trained, -5.20-+0.54 n=12 pseudo
trained, -5.64_+0.40 n=24 naive). These results indicate that the
reduction in AHP amplitude after learning is due to secondary
messengers affecting the slow IArn, and not to SK channels
modulation ofexpression.
Effects ofchronic oral homocysteine on mice behavior
Buskila E. and Levine J.
Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva
Homocysteine is an amino acid not included in protein
synthesis. It participates in the single carbon cycle that
provides methyl groups to multiple metabolic functions in the
body. It is present normally in human plasma in very low
concentrations being converted enzymatically rapidly to
methionine. A recent study found highly elevated plasma
levels of homocysteine in patients with schizophrenia and this
study was replicated in an independent sample. Homocysteine
has been shown to activate apoptotic processes via NMDA
receptors and elevated homoc,csteine in schizophrenia could
therefore be a mechanism fr the cognitive deterioration
"known to occur in schizophrenia. We therefore decided to try
to develop a model of homocysteine neurotoxicity in mice.
Mice were fed homocysteine in water at a concentration of
200mg/kg mouse (calculated final dose) Water was changed
daily. Independent samples of animals were studied at
month, 2 months, 3 months 4 months 5 months and 6
months for behavioral tests having face value similarities to
defects in human schizophrenia such as pre-pulse inhibition,
visual memo in the Morris Water Maze, apomorphine
189
induced sterotopy, and roto rod neurological integrity.
Animals were sacrificed after behavioral testing and carotid
blood taken for homocysteine levels. Homocysteine levels
were elevated between 300 and 400% by this procedure. No
homocysteine induced defects were found in any behavioral
test until month 5 when a mild but statistically significant
abnormality in the Morris Water Maze was detected.
Effect ofchronic D9-THC on gene expression in the rat
brain
Butovsky .E.., Goncharov I., Zangen A., Juknat A., Elbaz J.,
Nevo I. and Vogel Z.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Insntute ofSceince, Rehovot
The use of cannabinoids (most notably Dg-THC, the active
component in marijuana) has been widespread throughout
history. Carmabinoids have a multitude of physiological and
therapeutic properties, but are especially known for their
rewarding effects. Several brain regions have been implicated
in the rewarding effects of cannabinoids, and in theprocess of
addiction to drugs of abuse. There is also evidence that
cannabinoid treatment can affect gene expression. The advent
of the DNA microarray allows the analysis of thousands of
genes in parallel. We have used the Affymetrix GeneChip
Sstem to identify the changes in gene expression induced by
D -THC (1.5 mg/kg/.day i.p. for 7 days) in specific regions of
the rat brain, which have been sliown to play a role in
cannabinoid reward (such as the nucleus accumbens). The
expression of 60,, genes was found to be affected by more
than 2 fold by this treatment, with most of these genes (50,,)
having beeh upregulated, while only a few were
downregulated. Among the upregulated genes were various
receptors, channels, neurotrophic and growth factors, and
molecules related to apoptosis, cytoskeleton, and cell adhesion.
The results for genes found to be of interest have been
corroborated by other methods (such as quantitative real-time
PCR). Subsequently, we used various immunological
approaches (immunohisto-chemistry, Western blotting) to
follow the changes in expression of some of these genes. This
study should advance our understanding ofthe genes regulated
by eannabinoid treatment, and of the role of thei gene
products in regulating the rewarding properties of the
cannabinoids, and will eventually lead to a better
ugderstanding of the adaptive changes that take place during
chronic exposure to these widely abused drugs.
Supported by the Nelta andLeon Benoziyo Centerfor the
Neurosciences
Aggregated 13-amyloid mimics bacterial behavior by
rendering microg!ia cytotoxic phenotype and impairing
antigen presentation:Implications for AIzheimer's disease
Butovsky 0., Talpalar A.E.and Schwartz M.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute ofScience, Rehovot
Inflammation has often been blamed for deleterious effect in
the central nervous system (CNS). Using rat microglia and
organo.typie hippocampal slice cultures we show here that
mcrogha activated by aggregated I-amyloid or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) are demmental to neuraltissue. In
contrast, interferon (IFN)-/ rendered microglia a protective
phenotype to neural tissue. In addition, expression of
cell-surface class II major histoeompatibility complex antigens
(MHC-II) was impatred in detrimental mieroglia. The
impairment occurred at the level of expression of mRNA
encoding the invariant chain (Ii, a key participant in the
presentation by MHC-II of small peptides to helper CD4+
lymphocytes). The results suggest that self-agents which play a
role in neurodegenerative diseases, like invading
microorganisms, induce microglia to adopt a neurotoxie
phenotype that evades, at least transiently, the adaptive
immune mechanism needed to maintain the CNS by fighting
offtoxic self-compounds.
Isoforms specific effects of ApoE on lipid uptake and
nthesis and on neurite outgrowth and synaptogenesis
L., Cn'undland A. Ashery U., Devir A. and Michaelson
Dep. Neurobiochemistry, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
Apolipoprotein E (apoE), is the major brain lipoprotein. There
are three apoE isoi'orms (apoE2, apoE3, apoE4) of which
apoE4 is a main risk factor of Alzheimer's disease. In the
present study we investigated the possibility that apoE affects
neuronal hpid metabolism and synaptogenesis in an
isoform-specific manner. In the presence of Intralipid (an
exougenous lipid solution), ApoE3 inhibited lipid uptake and
increased lipid synthesis by Neuroblastoma N2a, whereas
apoE4 had no such effects. ApoE4 binds more avidly to
Intralipid than apoE3 but both bind similarly to N2a cells. This
suggests that the isoform specific effect of apoE3 and apoE4
on lipid uptake and synthesis may be related in part to
190
differences in apoE binding to N2a cells and to the extent of
apoE lipidation. Morphological experiments revealed that
apoE4 inhibited neurites outwrowth compared to apoE3 and
control. The finding that ApoE3 enhanced neurites outgrowth
and inhibited lipid uptake suggests that factors additional to
lipid uptake may mediate the effect on neurites outwrowth. In
order to learn about possible differential effects on synapses'
formation and function, we established a system of cultured
hippocampal neurons derived from ApoE dficient mice. The
neurons are exposed to Glia Condition Medium obtained from
transgenic mice expressing human ApoE3 or ApoE4 and
neurites elongation, synapse formation and synaptic
transmission are measured using electrophysiology and
lmmunocytochemistry. The effects of. ApoE isoforms on
synapse formation and function is currently under
investigation.
Expression of genes and proteins in rat frontal cortex in
response to chronic administration of haloperidol plus
fluvoxamine versus clozapine: Differential effects on
GABA system
Chertkow y.1, Weinreb 0.1, Youdim MBH. and Silver H.
Eve Topf& USNational Parkinson's Foundation Centers of
ExcellenceforNeurodegenerative diseases, Rappaport Faculty
ofMedicine, Technion, Hail'a; 2MolecularNeuropsychiatry
Unit, ShaarMenasheMI-ICBrain Behavior Laboratory.
Faculty of'medicine Technion
Recent research has shown that 'negative symptoms' of
schizophrenia, which do not respond to standard
antipsychotics, can be improved by adding serotonin selective
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) to the treatment. The molecular and
biochemical mechanisms underlying the efficacy of the
combined treatment have not been studied. We proposed that
chronic treatment with SSRI combined with typical
antipsychotics produces a 'net effect', different from that of
the individual drugs and common to that of the atypical
antipsychotic, clozapine which also ameliorates negative
symptoms. The purpose ofthis study was to identify, in the rat
frontal cortex, gene and protein cascades whose expression is
altered by treatments, Which ameliorate negative symptoms.
cDNA arrays and real-time PCR were used to identify and
validate gene expression alterations following 30 days
administration of haloperidol (lmg/kg), fluvoxamine
(llmg/kg), combination of fluvoxamine and haloperidol,
clozapine (1 lmg/kg) and saline. Genes of interest were also
examined at the protein level by using the western-blotting
technique. We found that the combined treatment affected
ene and protein expression differently than fluvoxamine or
aloperidol alone despite similar drug concentrations in the
brain. Some ofthe changes unique to combined treatment were
similar to those following clozapine administration. Notable
was the differential effect on GAD67 and PKCb proteins that
were increased following treatment with halopendol, but not
after combined treatment or clozapine. These results suggest
that gene and protein candidates from the GABAergic system
may be involved in mechanisms alleviating negative
symptoms. Effective treatments may act by reducing the "nef'
relative overactivity of the GABA system m the frontal cortex,
which may characterize schizophrenia.
Do olivar subthreshold oscillations 3mindthegap?
Chorev E. De Zeeuw C.I., Manor Y. Sohl G.Willecke
K. and Yarom Y.
1Dept. ofNeurobiolog Life Sciences Hebrew University
.,
Jerusalem, Israel: "De t. ofNeurosctence, Medical taculty,
Erasmus MC, 3000Dti Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Dept. of
loCe sciences & Zlotows CntrforNeuroscience, Ben-Gurion
G., Beer-Sheva. Israel; lnstitu.te ofGenetics, Division of
Molecular Genetics, University ofBonn, 53117, Germany
Neurons in the oliarv nuclei exhibit subthreshold oscillations
(STOs) of their membrane potential. Many evidences support
the hypothesis that gap-junctions between oliva.ry neurons are
essentml for the generation of STOs. To test this hypothesis,
we used a strain of knockout mice that lack Connexin 36 (KO
Cx36), the protein that forms gap junctions in the olive and
other brain areas. Except for small deficits in vestibuloocular
reflex (VOR) gain learning; the phenotype of KO Cx36
appears normal. Furthermore, despite the absence of
electrotonic coupling, neurons from KOCx36 mice maintained
the ability to oscillate. However in contrast to the STO in WT
neurons, the STO in KO neurons were voltage dependent.
Hence, knocking out the coupling transforms qmescent olivary
neurons into oscillatory neurons. This transformation involves
an increase in input resistance, due to higher specific
membrane resistance, and an increase in the low-threshold
calcium conductance. Using the dynamic clamp, we
demonstrated that these changes in membrane properties are
sufficient to explain the transformation of a quiescent WT
neuron into a KO-like neuron. These results suggest that the
lack of Cx36 proteins triggers compensatory mechanisms,
which transform the olivary neurons from quiescent to
auto-rhythmic. Further support for this hypothesis comes from
developmental studies, which show .that the differences
between WT and KO emerge during the maturation of the
olivo-cerebellar system. The voltage dependence of these
oscillations provides a mean to control thetr appearance: by a
common inhibitory input for instance. We propose that the
ability of olivary neurons to produce STOs using different
strategies call attention to the importance of these oscillations
to the normal function ofthe animal.
Experimental analysis ofparameters determining the
electrical couplingbetween neurons and transistors
Cohen A.,Shappir J), Yitzhaiek S. and Spira M.E.
Depts. ofNeu/oiology, :Engeneering, and Chemistry The
Hebrew University ofJerusalem.
The use of field effect transistors (FETs) to detect action
potentials generated by cultured neurons, progressed in recent
years. The recorded signals are nevertheless highly variable in
shapes and amplitudes
Usihg isolatedAptysia neurons and FETs produced by us we
analyzed the parameters that determine the shape and
amplitude ofthe FETs output signals.
We found that the critical parameters for recording action
potentials by FETs are the generation of current flow across a
seal resistance (R) formed between the FET sensing area and
the solution around it. Current flow across R is generated
under two conditions (a) The formation ofa voltage drop along
a non-isopotential neuron with a space constant significantly
lger than the dimensions of the sensing area. Or (b), polar
distribution of the ionic channels that generate action
potentials in isopotential neurons. These principals were
experimentally demonstrated. For example, The FET's
recordings of propagating action potentials generated by a
non-isopotential neuron with a long axon are abolished when
the axon is transected, and the neuron continues to generate
action potentials, but becomes isopotential. Another parameter
is the values of R and the currents generated across it. To
assess the contribution of R to the shape and amplitude of
action potentials recorded by FETs, we mechanically forced
the cellbody or an axonal segment against the sensing area of
a FET, while injecting different forms of current pulses into
the neuron. The resulting voltage drop across the neuron's
membrane and the potentmls were recorded by the FET. This
allowed us to calculate the seal resistances produced by the
mechamcal pressure, and to relate it to the amplitude and
shapes of the voltage outputs and action potentials of the
FETs. The insights gained by this study simplify the
interpretation of recorded signals by transisto and enables us
to designing more sophisticated neuron-transistorjunction.
Acetylcholine modulates dentate gyrus neurogenesis in the
adult mouse 23
1, Dori A. ", Friedman A. and Soreq H."
Zlotowski Center ofNeuroscience. Ben-Gurion University.
Beer Sheva; :Neurosureery, SorokaMC, Beer Sheva;
Biological Chemistry,tlebrew University ofJerusalem
In the adult mammalian dentate gyrus (DG), neurogenesis
proceeds continuously, producing functional granule cells,
with pivotal roles in learning and memory. Both memory and
stress, which involve cholinergic neurotransmission, influence
DG neurogenesis. To test the possibility that the
morphogenical[y active acetylcho|ine (ACh) hydrolyzing
enzyme ac.etylcholinesterase (ACHE) part.icipates in DG
neurogeness, we employed fluorescent ln-situ hybridization.
Proliferating cells at the sub-granular layer (SGL) were
intensely positive for AChE mRNA. Furthermore, DG cells
intenselypositive for AChE mR2qA were immunolabeled for
TUJ1 0I/I tubulin) but not NeuN (Neuron specific nuclear
protein), identifying them as immature granule neurons. To
quanti_fy the AChE effect on these cells mice were injected i.p.
with Bromo-deoxy-Uridine (BrdU) and sacrificed 3 weeks
post-injection. Proliferating cells in the SGL, positive for the
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA); and surviving
BrdU neurons in the anular cell layer (GCL) were counted,
and the ratio of GCL BrdU cells to SGL PCNA cells was
defined as the "survival index". TgSin mice, overexpressing
catal)ically inactive "synaptic" ACHE, preserted a significant
(P<0.01) increase in SGL proliferation compared to either
FVB/N controls, TgS transgenics overexpressmg catalytically
active "synapti" AChE or TgR transgenics withexcess
"readthrohgh" ACHE. In contrast, TgS mice showed a higher
number of surviving cells (P<0.05) compared with FVB/N
controls. Also, brain AChE hydrolytic activity which was
lowest in TgSin and highest in TgS mice, was associated with
the survivalindex of GCL neurons. Our findings support the
notion that ACh induces proliferation and reduces survival in
DG neurogenesis, whereas AChE promotes stuwival of
maturing GCL neurons.
Reconstitution ofvoltage-dependent exocytosis in xenopus
laevis oocytes
Cohen R. and Atlas D.
-ept. ofBiological Chemistry, 7he Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904
Voltage dependent exoeyosis is a complex mechanism,
assembled by several steps that are carried out by various
proteins. Some of these proteins are essential for the final
steps of vesicle fision while others play a modulatory
function. In the present study we suggest to determine the
minimal set of proteins that is essential for triggering
depolarization evoked secretion. For that purpose we suggest
to reconstitute the process ofsecretion in Xenopus oocytes and
monitor changes n capacitance directly as a measure of
exocyosis. Xenopus Laevis oocyes are broadly' used as a
heterologous expressing system to study the function and
activity of proteins such as ion channels, transporters and
receptors. Previously we showed interactions between
voltage-gated calcium channel and synaptic proteins (1,2,3)
and here we monitor changes in capacitance that result from
the fusion of oocytes vesicles in response to depolarization.
Total membrane capacitance is a known technique used to
determine changes n membrane surface as a measure for
endo/exocytosis processes. We employ the "Paired Ramp"
technique for whole cell capacitance to monitor online analysis
of exocytosis events in the Xenopus oocytes according to
Schmitt et al., 2002 (4). We show that co-expression of
synaptic proteins implicated in exocytosis along with voltage
gated calcium channels is sufficient for induction
voltage-dependent vesicle fusion as revealed by whole cell Cm
changes. Our data demonstrates that the Xenopus oocyte
system can be used to faithfully mimic voltage-dependent
exocytosis. We propose a stepwise reconstituting of the
exocytotic machinery from its elements to further understand
the role ofeach component in this complex process.
1. Cohen R, Elferink LA, Atlas D. (2003) JBC
278(11):9258-66" 2. Wiser O Cohen R, Atlas D. (1999) PNAS
U S A. 99(6):368-73; 3. /:iser O, Bennett MK, Atlas D.
(1996) EMBO J. 15(16):4100-10; 4. Schmitt BM, Koepsell
(2002) Biophysical J. 82:1345-1357
ERK activation is correlated with maintenance of
learning-induced enhancement ofynaptic transmission
Cohen-Matsliah SI.1, Rosenblum K.- and Barkai E.
Zlotowsla centerfor neuroscience, Ben Gurion Umversitv,
Beer Sheva; 2Centerfor brain & behavior, University of[la/h
We have shovcn previously that olfac.to..ry learning is
accompanied by enhanced neuronal excitabihty of piriform
cortex pyramidal neurons, manifested by reduced post-burst
after-hyperpolarization (AHP), and enhanced synaptic
transmission between these cells, manifested by reduced
paired-pulse facilitation (PPF). Extra cellular regulated kinase
(ERKUII) are thought to play major role in learning and
memory as well as synaptic llasticity in cortical areas. The
purpose ofthe present study was to determine whether ERKUII
has a role is maintaining olfactory-learning induced cellular
modifications. Intracellular recordings frompyramidal neurons
were performed in piriform cortex brain slices. The specific
MEK inhibitor PD98059 (40 M) caused a significant increase
in PPF amplitude in neurons from trmned rats only.
Consequently, the difference in PPF amplitude between trained
and pseudo trained rats was diminished (from 1.22_+0.25, n=21
to 1.56+ 0.29, n=7 in trained and from 1.34+0.20, n--6 to
1.44-+0.18, n=5 in pseudo trained). PD98059 did not have an
effect on post-burst AHP amplitude in any group on neurons
(from 6.25-+2.29, n=44 to 6.53_+ 2.72, n=19 in trained and from
7.82+1.74, n=20 to 7.31+1.74, n=8 in pseudo trained). We
concl-ude that ERKI/II is i-nvolved with long-term modulation
of synaptic transmission in the piriform cortex of trained rats
but not in learning-induced enhancement of neuronal
excitability'.
Prosaposin increases density and glutamate receptor R1
content ofspines dependent on MAPK and synaptic
activity,
Cove j.i,2,3, Morales C.R. and Baranes D.I'2'3
Dept. ofLife Sciences, Ben Gurion U.. Beer Sheva, Israel:
Zlotowsla CenterforNeuroscience. Ben Cmrion U.. Beer
Sheva, lsrael; The InstituteforAppliedResearch, Ben
Gurion U., BeerSheva, lsrael; lJdpt, ofAnatomy & Cell
Biology, McGill U., Montreal, Canada.
Syaptic plasticity involves strengthening of synaptic efficacy'.
This can occur via increasing _the density of synapses, or
elevating the concentration of synaptic neurotransmtter
receptors. We found a deficiency in the Glutamate Receptor
(GIuR1) subunit of the AMPA receptor in hippocampi of
knockout mice for prosaposin, a secreted neurotrophic factor.
In hippocampal cultures, inhibition of extracellular prosaposin
191
activity with a specific antibody reduced both spine density
and the level o GluR1 but not of N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor (NR1) in dendrites or in spines. Similarly, elevation
of prosaposin activity by application of exogenous prosaposin
increased the content of GIuR1 but not of NR1 in spines.
Inhibitors of synaptic activity and of the MAPK pathway
blocked prosaposin's effects. Hence, prosaposin increases
spine density and targeting of GIuR1 to spines in an
activity-dependent manner, suggesting that prosaposin
promotes synaptic plasticity.
Mean-field theory for a network of spiking neurons with
slow learning ofworking memory
_Curti E., Mongillo G. andAmit DJ
INtM,, dip. di Fisica, Universita' di Roma, La
_pienza; Racah
Institute bfPhysics, Hebrew Umversity, Jerusalem dip di
Fisiologia Umana, Universita' di Roma, La Sapienza
Mean-field (MF) theory (a description in terms of average
spike rates in homogeneous neural populations) is extended to
realistic networks ofexcitatory and inhibitory spiking neurons
embedding working memory ofp randomly chosen stimuli of
a given coding level f. The underlying synaptic matrix is a
result ofgeneric, slow synapticplasticity oftwo state synapses,
upon repeated presentation of a fixed set of an arbitrary
number ofexternal stimuli. The theo.ry is develgped in terms of
neural subpopulations each responsive to a given number of
stimuli in the training set (multiplicity). The structure of the
synaptic matrix is also determined by this classificationl. The
resulting number ofMF equations would have been 2p+l. The
effective number is reduced to 2(pf)l/2, by an automatic
process which produces very precise results and reduces ve_ry
significantly the computational complexity.The mean,field
results for the bifurcation diagrams and the rate distributions in
stationary states of the network agree well with microscopic
imulations ofthe full network ofspiking neurons.
"N. Bnmel, E Carusi and S. Fusi (I998) Slow stochastic
{Hebbian} learning of classes in recurrent neural networks,
Network 9:123-152
orted by the lsrael Science Foundation (1SF) Grant
9, andand the Center ofExcellence Grant "'Statistical
Mechanics and Complexity" ofthe 1Nb-M, Roma-1.
Salt preference, dietary intake, taste papillae, PROP
response, and taste responses in Ethiopian immigrants
Dally Farah R., Khair A., Shalev E., Yonas A. and Leshem M.
Dept. ofPsychology and Brain & Behavior Center, University
oftlaifi7
Sensory variables, physiological need, and cultural
preferences, may influence dietary_ intake .agd BMI. T.o
determine how these variables might contributes to salt
appetite, we examined taste sensory variables (PROP
(6-n-propylthiouracil response, density of anterior lingual
fungiform papilla, intensity and hedonics of NaC1, sucrose,
citric acid and quinine HCL), and dietary and activity
questionnaires, in a sample of 30 Ethiopian students
(13. l+/-l.0y (4-'22) in Israel). Overall, salt appetite was eater
than sweet preference, salt appetite correlated with number of
cigarettes/day, and there was a gender difference preference
for salt snacks was greater in men than in women. Compared
to a group of native-born Caucasian students, Ethiopian
students had lower dietary sodium intakes, were more sensitive
to the taste ofsalt and sug.ar: preferred higher concentrations of
these tastes, reported qmmne as more aversive, and had a
lower BMI. However, salt appetite was similar. Dietary. intake
of macronutrients, other than carbohydrates and sodium, was
inversely related to time since immigration, as was level of
activity, probably accounting for the stability of BMI. No
relationships were found between PROP response, papilla
density, taste sensitivity or hedonics, and these variables did
not predict salt appetite, dietary intake, or BMI. Thus sodium
intake is stable whilst intake of other macronutrients and
activity levels change over length of stay in Israel. Taken
together, the findings suggest that sodium intake is largely
independent of taste sensory responses and eultm,al
preferences, and therefore may be physiologically regulated by
need.
Supported byIsrael Science Foundation Grant 902/00-2 to
Micah Leshem.
FMRI BOLD resnonses elicited by sound location chanees
12 2 2 2
Deouell L.Y. I-feller A., D Esposito M. and Knight R.T.
The Hebrew U'niverstiyofJerusalem. lsrael; 2Umversityof
California. Berkeley. USA
An unattended change in the acoustic environment elicits a
neural response registered as the mismatch negativity event
related potential. Electric and magnetic dipole analyses suggest
close but non-overlapping sources in response to changes in
various attributes. However, EEG and MEG are inherently
192
ill-posed to portray the full spatial extent of activity.
Functional MRI has been recently used to delineate active
brain areas in response to deviations in frequency, duration,
and phonetic structure. Responses to changes in spatial
location of sound were more elusive. We used a 4T fMRI
scanner to measure responses to changes in virtual sound
locations in 13 subjects. Outside the scanner, broad-spectrum
sounds were played from speakers surrounding the subjects,
and recorded using miniature microphones placed in the
entrance of the ear canal of each subject. In the scanner, the
sounds were played back via MRI compatible headphones.
Prior to scanning, subject judged the relative positions of 5
sounds positioned at +60, +15, and 0 degrees with over 90%
accuracy. To prevent masking by scanner noise, we used a
"sparse' fMRIdesign MRI scans were spaced 12 seconds
apart, and sounds were presented between scans. Blocks of
standards alternated with blocks of standards and deviants. In
separate runs, standards and deviants were 15 and 60 degrees
to the right of the subject, respectively, or vice versa
(counterbalanced within subjects). Subject ignored the sounds
while watching a movie. Random effect analysis contrasting
standards-and-deviant blocks with standat:d-only blocks
showed robust bilateral activation in Heschl's gyms extending
posteriorly into the planum temporale. In addition, small
activated clusters were found in the left inferior parietal, right
cingulate, and right middle frontal gyrus. Spatml mismatch
response is generated mostly in the primary and secondary
auditory cortices, with possible contribution from extra
auditory loci.
Dissociated roles for the basolaterai and lateral nuclei of
the amygdala in classical conditioning: Differential
involvement in contextual and tone fear conditioning
Desmedt A., Calandreau L., Decortes L. and Jaffard R.
Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, CNRS UMR 5106,
Universit' de Bordeaux I, Talence, France.
Although the basolateral amygdala complex (BLC) is required
for both elemental and contextual conditmned associations (i.e.
discrete conditioned stimulus (CS)-unconditional stimulus
(US) and context-US association), anatomical and
electrophysiological studies suggest a differential involvement
ofthe lateral (LA) and basolateral (BLA) nuclei components of
the BLC in these two kinds of associations. Using a classical
fear conditioning paradigm, thepresent study investigated this
hypothesis by comparing the effects of inactivation of either
the BLA or the LA during training on subsequent conditioned
freezing responses to the elemental (tone) CS and to the
context. Results showed that inactivation of the BLA impaired
conditioning to the context while sparing conditioning to the
tone CS. In contrast, inactivation of the LA dsrupted
conditioning to the tone CS but also impaired or enhanced
contextual conditioning as a ftmction of the training protocol
(CS-US unpairing vs. pairing). Therefore, these findings reveal
dissociated roles for these two amygdaloid nuclei in fear
conditioning. They indicate a selective involvement of the
BLA in contextual conditioning and suggest that, beyond its
requirement for elemental CS-US assocmtions, the LA could
modulate the processing of BLA-mediated context-US
associations depending on the predictability of the discrete CS
for the occurrence ofthe US.
Dynamic imaging of brain function: Relating imaging
signals to underlying physiology
Devor A. Dunn A.K., Andermann M.L., Ulbert I., Narayanan
S.N., Jones S.R., Einevoll G.T., Bower J.M., Boas D.A. and
Dale A.M.
MGH-NMR Cntr, HarvardMedical School, Charlestown, MM
Neuronal activity changes are coupled to changes in blood
flow, blood volume, and blood oxygenation, collectively
referred to as the hemodynamic response. Coupling betmeen
the hemodynamic response and brain electrical activity is of a
great importance for interpreting fMRI. We address this
question by employing simultaneous optical and
electrophysiological recordings from rat cerebral and
cerebellar cortex using multiple stimulus conditions.
During reflectance imaging of intrinsic signals, the
illuminating light was filtered at 6 wavelengths (560-610 nm)
using a rotating filter wheel. The raw optical data was
corrected for wavelength-dependent path length differences.
These multiwavelength maps were used- to calculate
oxyhemoglobin (HbO) and deoxyhemoglobin (Hbr)
concentration changes in the response to stimulation. During
laser speckle-contrast imaging the cortex was illuminated with
a diode laser (785 nm), and the raw speckle images were
converted to blood flow maps. Using both spectral and speckle
data, we calculated oxygen consumption (CMRO2) maps.
Electrophysiological recordings were performed using either
single metal electrodes or laminar multi-electrodes. In the
cerebrum, the electrode was placed in the center of the barrel
as determined by the optical activation. In the cerebellum, the
signal was mapped along crus IIA. The signals were filtered at
0.1-500 Hz to record population field and at 150-5000 Hz to
record multi-unit actiwty.
We demonstrate a non-linear relationship between the
hemodynamic signal and the underlying electrical activity.
Earliest hemodynamic response gives better localization ofthe
neuronal activity. During the positive phase of Hbr, blood
volume gives the best andblood flow the poorest localization.
Neuregulin rescues PCI2-ErbB4 cells from cell death
induced by i':-amyloid involvement of PI3K
Di Segni A.(Stien R., Pinkas-Kramarski R.
Dept. ofNeurobJochemistry, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
Neuregulins (NRGs), which are highly expressed in the
nervous system, bind and activate two receptor tyrosine
kinases, ErbB-3 and ErbB-4. We previously showed that NRG
mediates survival ofPC12-ErbB4 cells from apoptosis induced
by serum deprivation, TNFa treatment or H202. These effects
of NRG are mediated by the PI3K signaling pathway. In the
present study we show that NRG induces a significant
protective effect from b-amyloid 25-35 peptide induced cell
death. The PI3K signaling pathway mediates this effect of
NRG since NRG failed to rescue cells from b-amyloid insult in
the presence of the PI3K inhibitor, LY294002. Furthermore,
the downstream effector of PI3K, PKB/AKT, is activated by
NRG in the presence ofb-amyloid and PKB/AKT activation is
inhibited by LY294002. In addition, our results demonstrate
that b-amyloid-induced cell death is reduced by expression of
activated PI3K. These results suggest that PI3K dependent
pathways may reg,,late the toxic effect of b-amyloid. In
addition, b-amylod induced alteration in apoptotic protein
levels (elevation in Bax and reduction in BclXL). NRG
treatment however, induced BclXL and reduced Bax levels.
The results suggest that NRG may affect cell viability by
increasing the anti-apoptotic proteinBClXL levels and reducing
the pro-apoptotic protein Bax levels.
Closed head iniury induces up regulation of Beclin 1 at the
site ofinjury
Diskin T., Erlich S
Pinkas-Kramarski .!
Tal-Or P. Shohami E. and
:Dept. ofNeurobochemistry. Tel-Avv University, Tel-Avv;
Dept. bfPharmacolog), the Hebrew Universi. Jerusalem
Autophagy, a bulk degradation of sub-cellular constituents, is
activated-in several neurodegenerative conditions. Beclin 1, a
Bcl2 interacting protein, was found to promote autophagy. The
closed head injury model was used to investigate the possible
role of Beclin in neurodegeneration. It is demonstrated that
levels of Beclin-1 are dramatically increased near the site of
injury. Time course analysis of Beclin expression after CHI
show an elevation ofprotein levels in the cortical region at the
site of injury, starting at 4 hours following injury. Elevated
Beclin levels were observed up to 4 weeks after the injury.
Neurons and astrocvtes constitute the major population of cells
with th.e highest Bclin levels near the site o injury. Beclin
expression was not detected in activated
mlcroglia/macrophages. In addition Beclin-1 expression 4
hours, 24 hours and3 days after injury is elevated also in CA1
and CA2 regions of the hippocafiapus. Confocal microscopy
analysis suggests that the high level of Beclin protein in part of
the cells, is accompanied by DNA degradation and cell death.
These findings show for the first time that Beclin may play a
role in brain responses to head trauma. Overexpresslon of
Beclin may be important for autophagy at the lesion site and
may serve as a mechanism to discard injured cells and reduce
damage to cells by disposing injured components.
Isoform specific effects apoE on the deposition and
cleareness ofbrain [ amyioid following inhibition of
neprylisin
Dolev I. and Michaelson DM.
Dept. ofNeurobiochemis.try, TelAviv University, TelAviv
Apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4), a major risk factor of Alzheimer's
disease (AD), is associated with an earlier age of disease onset
and with an increase in the number of 13 A.myloid (13A)
containing plaques. Studies of transgenic mice, which express
mutant human APP together with either human apoE4 or
apoE3, which is the benign apoE isoform, revealed that IA
deposition is enhanced isoform specifically in aged apoE4
transgenic mice. The mechanisms underlying these effects and
the extent to which they are related" to either enhanced
aggregation or impaired i'emoval of [A by apoE4 are yet
unknown. In the present study we inhibited [he [A degrading
enzyme, neprylism, by continuous application of thiorphan
into the lateral ventricle of control and apoE transgenic mice
for up to one month, and examined the resulting effects of
apoE4, apoE3 and of apoE deficiency on the rates and extents
of I3A deposition and on the subsequent clearance of these
deposits. Immunohistochemical examination of the brains
revealed time dependent deposition of IA which was maximal
at 1-month and which was more than three fold higher in the
apoE4 transgenic mice than in the apoE3, control and ap,oE
deficient mice. The apoE transgenic mice also had fibnllar
thioflavin-S positive deposits, whose levels were about 25
percent ofthe total. Examination of the brains ofmice a month
after the application of thiorphan was terminated revealed a
decrease in the cortical and hippoeampal levels of [3A deposits
of the apoE3 transgenic and control mice. In contrast, the
levels ofhippocampal I3A deposits of the apoE4 transgenic
mice did not decrease whereas their corresponding cortical
deposits did. These findings suggest that apoE4 accelerates the
deposition and slows down the dissolution of [3A isoform
specifically.
Excitatory- and inhibitory-like serotonin-mediated
accumbal dopamine release: Alteration in an animal model
of depression is reversed by anfidetressant treatment
Dremencov E.1, Herman-Gispan I., inor N.1, Gefen-Aricha
R.*,Weizman y.1, Blatman-Jan G.10verstreet D.H. and
Yadid G.
1FacultofLife Sciences, Bar-IIan University, Ramat-Gan,
Israel," Dept. ofPsychiatry, Umverstty ofNorth Carolina,
ChapelHill, North Carolina, USA
The aim of the current study was to determine the
pharmacological mechanism of alterations in
serotonin-induced accumbal dopamine release in an animal
model of depression, Flinder sensitive line (FSL) rats. We
previously found that FSL rats are characterized by absence of
accumbal serotonin-dopamine interaction and
antidepressant-induced restoration of this interaction directly
correlated with improvement of their depressive-le behavior.
In the current study, using in-vivo mcrodialvsis, we found
that: (a) 5HT2c receptor blocking resulted in'an increase in
accumbal dopamine levels, which was significantly higher in
FSL than n control rats; (b) 5HT3 receptor agonist
administration resulted in elevation of accumbal dopamine
levels, which was significantly lower in FSL than in control
rats; (c) antidepressant treatment of FSL rats resulted in a
decrease in 5HTzc antagonist-induced and 5HT3 agonist-
induced dopamine release; (d) the onset time for each
antidepressant treatment for normalizing 5HTc- and
5HT3-mediated dopamine release was equal to that needed to
improve depressive-like behavior of FSL rats. We concluded
that: (a) the absence of accumbal serotonin-dopamine
interaction in FSL rats can be explained by increased
inhibitory.-like activity of 5I-ITzc- and decreased excitatory-like
activity of 5HT3 receptors; (b) repetitive antidepressants
decrease 5HTzc- and increase 5HT3 receptor activity; (c)
antidepressants with more rapid effect on 5HTzc and 5HT
receptor activity are characterized by a faster onset of
behavioral effect ofthe treatment.
Directional tuning of motor cortical neurons during
continuous and reaching movements
Drori R., Ben-Shaul Y. and Abeles M.
Hadasah Medical school and the Interdisciplinary CenwrJbr
Neural Computanon, Hebrew University ofJerusalem
Arm related neurons in the motor cortex are thought to
represent the direction of arm movements. This is expressed bv
the tendency ofneurons to elevate the firing rate mostly before
and during a movement in a preferred drection (PD). This
result was described when studying reaching movements. The
p_urpose of this study was to check whether the same holds
when continuous mo(ements are performed.
Two monkeys were trained to perform various types of
movements in the horizontal plane holding a 2-joint
manipulandum Each monkey alternated between the
center-out (CO) task that yielded straight trajectories in six
equally-spaced directitns, and another task
(scribbling/free-tracing) that yielded curved, pro,longed
trajectories. During a scribbling'trial the monkey moed the
manipulandum freely in the horizontal plane until hitting an
invisible position rdndomlv chosen out of 19 positions that
tiled the plane. Then anoiher position was chosen and the
monkey continued to move. During a free-tracing (FT) trial it
followed one out of 40 predefined paths that were designed to
ield prolonged trajectories with a uniform distribution of
irections.
Neural activity was recorded from arm related areas in primal"
and pre motor cortices during task performance. Preferred
directions of well isolated units were obtained from CO
trajectories. Segmentation of continuous trajectories was
carried out basedon the corresponding velocity profiles so that
relatively straight segments were extracted. For each cell. the
PD from CO trajectories was compared to the PD obtained
from continuous trajectories' segments. PDs obtained from FT
segments were often similar to those obtained from CO
193
trajectories. Unlike that, PDs obtained from scribbling
segments tended to differ from those of CO trajectories. These
results may therefore suggest that directional tuning of arm
related neurons in the motor cortex tend to change when the
context ofmovement is changed.
SupportedbygrantsfromISFand GIF
Extrasynaptic acetylcholine receptor repression deficit in
dystrophin-deficient musclgs of mutant (mdx) mice
Durrant A.R., Salpeter M.M.", Anlister L..
Dept. Anatomy and Cell Biology, Hebrew Univ. Meal Sch.,
Jerusalem
The regulation and distribution of acetylcholine receptors
(AChRs) are critical for proper function ofthe neuromuscular
junction (nmj), and are influenced by specialized elements of
muscle membrane, cytoskeleton and basal lamina and by nee
released compounds. Previously we showed that m
dystrophin-deficient mutant (mdx) mice the nmj's are
structurally distorted and their AChR degradation rate is
pathologically altered. The present study examines AChR
distribution to determine whether these abnormal muscles are
able to repress their extrasynaptic AChRs and maintain the
high concentration &junctional AChRs as in normal muscles.
AChRs in sternomastoid muscles of mdx and control adult
mice (2 age groups; mdr strain confirmed by elevated serum
creatine kinase levels) were labeled in vivo with
125
I-ot-bungarotoxn. Muscles were then excised; junctional
and extrajunctional regions were separated and measured for
radioactivity. AChR densities were calculated from the
corrected radioactivity per muscle weight. In the mature group
(43-52 wk old) extrajunctional AChR density in mdx muscles
was 9325 + 1652 compared with 2051 + 732 fmoles/g in the
controls (mean + SEM, 4-5 fold increase, P<0.01). An
extrajunctional AChR increase (3-4 fold) was also observed in
mdx muscles of the young adults (16-17 wk old). In both age
groups the densiw of junctional AChRs in the mdx muscles
decreased to 65-0% of normal. These findings suggest that
there is a deficit in the signaling pathway for extrasynaptic
repression of AChRs in the mdx muscles. Further studies will
determine the relative contributions of nerve and muscle to this
deficit in AChR regulation and help clarify whether this deficit
is common to other neuromuscular diseases.
yp_l?orted by Israel Sct. lbund 685/01
A.M.Salpeter (CorneH Univ.) died on 24 October, 2000
DP-155, a phospholipid derivative of Indomethacin,
exhibits an improved therapeutic index in fever, analgesia
and animal models Aizheimer's disease
Duvdevani R., Friedman ,I.E.. Dvir E. Lee J.Y.'. Koh J.Y..
Younis F.,Raz S.,Bello L.,Polyak M.,Shapir6 I.1, Kozak
A. and Angel I.
ID-Pharm itd. Rehovot. Israel," :(L ofUlsan, SeouL Korea.
Although Indomethacin (lndo) is a widely used, potent,
anti-inflammatory drug, its use is limited by the high risk of
unwanted gastrointestinal (GI) and renal side effects. To
address this issue D-Pharm designed a novel, phospholipid
derivative of Indo, DP-155. This is a comparative study of
Indo and DP-155, at equimolar doses, assessing the in vtvo
efficacy., toxic.ity a.nd.pharmacokinetics (PK).
The antpyretc activity of Indo and DP-155 was studied in rats
following induction of fever by SC injection of Brewer's
Yeast. Analgesic efficacy was assessed using the Writhing and
Formalin tests in mice. DP-155 showed a delayed onset of
action as compared to Indo. DP-155 and Indo administered
orally had similar analgesic and anti-p3.'etic efficacy starting at
2 and 3 hours, respectively.
The effect of oral administration for 3 days of DP-155 or Indo
on AI3-processing was tested on aged fmale hAPP- Tg2576
mice. Soluble AI3 was extracted and analyzed using sandwich
ELISA. Indo and DP-155 both significantly reduced the levels
of AI342 (29.7 % and 23.6%, respective[(;) without affecting
AI340 levels.
Total serum radioactivity measurements and HPLC analysis
showed that DP-155 has a high bioavailabilitv following bral
administration in mice. The PK profile "of lndo, when
administered as DP-155 orally to rats, was different from the
one obtained following admifiistratiori of Indo; demonstrating
longer absorption time, broader Cmax and longer elimination
half-life. PK studies of twice daily orally administered
[H3]-DP-155 to mice showed a longer retention of
radioactivity in the brain post-dosing than for other organs.
Following t3oth single and multiple (3 days) dosing, renal mad
G! toxicity parameters indicated that DP-155 is 5-10 fold safer
than Indo. In conclusion, the data suggest DP-155 as a superior
derivative of Indo, potentially suitable for chronic treatment of
Alzheimer's disease and peripheral inflammatory disorders.
Support Contributed By. D-Pharm Ltd
194
Retrograde transport of nerve growth factor (NGF) at the
single molecule level
charte M.M.t, Pietrasanta L.I.t, Jovin T.M.2.
Centro deMicroscopoasAvanzadas, FCEyN, Universidadde
Buenos Aires; 2Dept. ofMolecularBiology. Max Planck
InstituteforBioph-ysical Chemistry
NGF is a peptide responsible for the regulation of stu'vival,
differentiation and maintenance of responsive neurons. It is
released from the target tissue and interacts with receptors on
the axon tips (Levi-Montalcini, 1987).
For neurotrophins to mediate survival effects, they must have
the ability to transduce a series of complex signalling events
from the nerve terminal plasma membrane to the nucleus
situated in the cell body. NGF was the first neurotrophic factor
shown to be retrogradely transported (Hendry et al., 1974).
To exert its effects, NGF interacts with two different
receptors: TrkA and p75. Both receptors have been shown to
be internalized and retrogradely transported in a signaling
endosome, formed by the clathrin-mediated endoc)ic
pathway. Based on their different kinetics of traffic and
internalization, Bronfman et al. (2003) suggest that the
signaling endosome containing the TrkA-NGF complex may
be temporally and spatially different from that containing the
p75-NGF complex.
Our work is aimed to study the kinetics of the retrograde
transport of NGF. To achieve our proposes, we plan to follow
the internalization and traffic of NGF inside the PC12 ceil, by
using NGF coupled to biotin and quantum dots conjugated to
streptavidin.
Quantum dots are nanometer-scale crystal of semiconductor
material. Their high photostabiIity and the fact that they are
conjugated to streptavidin make them ideal probes for celltlar
imaging over long time. Thepossibility of visualizing NGF by
conjugation with quantum dots, may allow us to track the
motion of single molecules in real time in living cells. We
have been able to visualize specific binding of quantum dots to
differenciated PCI2 cells membranes that have been
preincubated with NGF-biotin. Current experiments are
directed at visualizing the endocytic and internal trafficking
stages.
In the context ofa collaboration with Dr. Michael Fainzi/her
ofthe Weizmann Insatute ofScience.
Cyclin S: A new member ofthe cyclin family plays a role in
long-term passive avoidance memory in the one-day-old
chick
Edelheit S. and Meiri N.
Institute ofAnimal Science, Agriculture Research
Organization, The Volcani Center. Bet Dagan 50250
Memory is thought to be subserved by structural and
functional alteration in synaptic connectivity.. But although
neuronal plasticity requires gene expression, the identity of the
proteins involved is largely un:nown. Using the chick
one-day-old passive avoidance learning paradigm and
differential display RNA fingerprinting we identified 13
candidate genes which are up-regulated in the internediate
medial hyperstriatum ventrale (IMHV), an area that has been
correlated with the initial processing of memory formation.
Among the genes induced in correlation with passive
avoidance memory are N-CAM, HSP 90, EIF-2B epsilon,
(phosphorylase kinase, delta) (CALM 1) and
neurotensin/neuromedin N precursor (NT/NMN). One of the
induced genes is a new member of the cyclin family which was
named cyclin S, with high homology to cyclin L (nia-6a).
Analysis of the expression pattern of this gene after training,
revealed tvo time waves of induction: the first correlated with
learning and initial memory process in the IMHV (a 2.5-fold
induction); the second, correlated with memory consolidalion,
first in the IMHV (a two fold induction, 24 hours after
training), and then in the lobus paraolefactoris (LPO) (a
10-fold induction 48 hr after induction). There is a correlation
between methylanthranilate (MeA) concentrations (The
malaise substrate in the passive avoidance training procedure),
the duration of memory., and the expression level of cyclin S.
While training chicks on low concentration of MeA cause
short-term memory and low expression level of cyclin S, high
concentration of MeA induces long-term memory and high
expression level of cyclin S in the IMHV. The role of cyclins
in regulation of neuronal-plasticity-related gene. expression
was overlooked, and it might serve as a key step n long-term
memory, formation.
Effects of dexamethasone on neural differentiation and
sproutin,: implications for stress and depression
Eick I., rarry R., Klein E. and Ben-Shachar D.
L-'b'-brdtoryfPsychobiology andDept. ofPsychiatry,
Rambam Medical Center and B. Rappaport Faculty of
Medicine..Techmon
Substantial clinical and preclinical evidence implicate
alterations of the stress hormone system in the etiology and
development of depression. Depression is associated With an
impairment of cortcosteroid receptor function that gives rise
to an excessive release of neurohormones, cortisol and CRH,
to which a number of signs and symptoms characteristic of
depression can be attributed. In the past decade, research has
focused on the involvement of long term intracellular
processes in depression and stress leading to abnormal
neuronal plasticity. To examine possible role for the synthetic
glucocomcoid, dexamethasone (DEX) on neuronal
morphology and plasticity htmaan neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y
cells were treated with l'-10"TM of DEX for 24 and 48hrs.
SH-SY5Y cells treated with DEX showed a time and dose
dependent decrease of cell number. Moreover, cells treated
with 10-M showed elongated granular rich cell body and
increased number of neurites when compared with non treated
cells. The decrease in cell number together with the
morphological changes ggests a role for glueocorticoids in
cell differentiation. These changes were accompanied by a
dose and time dependent increase in CREB, the transcription
factor involved n plasticity and implicated in stress and
depression. However, the expression level of two
neurite-outgrowth promoting genes, CAM-L1 and laminin was
decreased. Interestingly, in a previous study we have shown
that the expression of both CAM-L1 and laminin, was
increased while that of CREB was unchanged by
norepinephrine. The diverse effect of glueocorticoid and of
norepinephrine, as well as its relevance to their role in
depression will be discussed.
Reconsolidation blockade in the medaka fish may disrupt
memory retrieval rather than storage
Eisenber M. and Dudai Y.
D-. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute ofScience
All items in long-term memory undergo a period of
stabilization, termed consolidation, immediately after the
acquisition event. The textbook account is that for each item in
memory consolidation starts and ends just once. Recent
evidence casts doubt on this assumption. We have recently
demonstrated, using both conditioned taste aversion in the rat
and fear conditioning in medaka fish, that when conflicting
long-term associations are activated in retrieval, that
association that retains or gains control over behavior
afterwards, becomes susceptible anew to agents that block
consolidation, i.e. reconsolidates (Eisenberg et al. Science
2003, 301, 1102). However, whereas consolidation blockade is
assumed to lead to memory storage deficit, it is yet unknown
whether reconsolidation blockade leads also to storage deficit,
or, alternatively, to retrieval deficit, which means that despite
the apparent amnesia the item is still retained memory, though
in a Iatent mode. We report evidence that in fear conditioning
in the medaka fish, the memory blocked by the reconsolidation
blockers does not recover spontaneously (within 7 days), but
can still be reinstated by presentation of the unconditioned
stimulus (mild electric shock) in the absence of conditioned
stimulus (light). These data, together with our recent trmdings
in conditioned taste aversion in the rat (see Kobilo and Dudai,
these proceedings), suggest that blockade of post-activation
consohdation of long-term memories disrupts retrieval, and
raises the possibility that reconsolidation is required to
reupdate retrieval access to the activated memory.
Supportedby the Israel Science b-bundation, the Volkswagen
Stiffiung and the Humanfrontiers science Program.
Binocular rivalry mechanisms in adults and children
Eisenberg___MM. Hoehstein S. and Kovacs I.
e'-v University ofJerusalem
Binocular rivalry occurs when the brain camot fuse the images
seen by the two eyes because they are two completely different
pictures or differ in one or more features such as: color,
orientation, size, motion velocity or luminance. After an initial
150-200ms attempting to fuse the images, (whereperception is
of the two superimposed), perception alternates between two
percepts, ttsually corresponding to the two eye's views,
respectively. The debate is still open regarding the locus of
binocular rivalry, i.e. what is the neural site of binocular
alternations? wlere is the switch located in the brain? Based
on recent research it seems that a number of different
mechanisms are involved, found at low and high cortical
levels. The consensus is that alternations occur at distributed
sites, following the hierarchy of cortical processing: While
local stimuli induce solutions (and alternations) at early
cortical sites, complex stimulus configurations induce
higher-level percepttml interpretations. If indeed binocular
rivalry- depends on distributed cortical sites, its development
should correspond to their maturational course. To address this
issue, we asked: Do children observe binocular rivalry? What
is the temporal characteristic of rivalry_ alternations in young
children? We presented preschool clfildren with rivalrous
anaglyph images of orthogonal gratings. The children were
inf6rmed that they would see a horizontal and a vertical
grating in alternation, and were asked to press a button
whenever the grating changed its orientation. Most of the
children in the 5-6 year-old group reported alternations. Some
saw no rivalry at all (no alterriations); some had very fast
alternations and some very slow and some reportedpiecemeal
rivalry. The shape of the frequency histogram of dominance
durations resembles that of the adults andcan be fit with a
gamma function. Comparing the two histograms, one notes
that children switch faster than adults. The faster rivalry
alternation found in children could reflect actually, faster
switching, or could be caused by the children experiencing
more piecemeal rivalry and pressing as if local fluctuations
were full alternations. Either hygothesis could be explained by
an immaturity of part of the visual cortex that is involved in
rivalry. Since V develops early, perhaps young children
experience rivalry that corresponds to a V1 mechanism i.e.
local rivalry or patchwork. The integration of parts necessary
for perception of the full p,icture and for "holding the percept
together" happens "higher' in temporal cortex, which develops
later, and therefore is only present in older children and adults.
Supportedby the lsrael Science Founda#on, grant g 8009
Proteomics approach to study the rule of ERKI/II in
learnin and plasticity
Elkobi .1 Kaphzan Iq'.1, Admon A.:, Ziv T. and Rosenblum
K.1"
1University ofHaifa, CenterforBrain & Behavior; :Technion,
protein center, faculty ofbiology, Haifa.
We are interested in the role of the extracellular regulated
kinase I/II (ERKI/II) in the formation of long-term memory
and plasticity. ERK]/II is involved in both early and late
phases LTP (Rosenblum et al. J. Neuroscience [2002]). In
addition, ERKI/II activity is correlated and necessary for the
formation of long-term memories. In order to understand the
molecular details of ERKI/II role in taste memory formation
we aim to identify ERKI/II substrates in the taste cortex that
are involved in taste memory formation (novel taste learning).
We identify ERKI/II substrates using antibody that recognizes
phospho.rylated-Threonine only when followed by the amino
acid Prohne (the favorite phosphorylated site by MAP kinase)
together with proteomics (two dimensional electrophoresis,
mass spectrometry, and bioinformatics). We identified several
proteins phosphorylated on Thr-Pro in synaptosomal fraction
as well as total homogenates made from the insular cortex. We
differ between ERKI/II substrates and other potential kinases
using the MEK inhibitor U0126 on brain slices. Following the
results obtained with the proteomics approach we use regular
Western blot analysis to confirm the protein list. We identified
known ERKI/]I substrates (e.g. synapsinl) and novel proteins
that may explain the role ofERKI/II in plasticity and learning.
Mapping chromosome 18pl to normal oersonalitv
Elhadad (Rosolio) N. Dina C. Zohar A.. Osher .Error.
Reference source not found., Gritsenko I. ,
Bachner-Melman R. Agam G., Birk O., Benjamin J.,
Belmaker RH and Ebstein RP
1Faculty ofHealth Sciences, Ben-Cntrion University,
Beer-Sheva, lsraet: Genetiaue Statistique lnstitut de
Biologic de Lille, UPRES,4 3090Lille, France; The Ruppin
Institute ofHigher Education Emek Hefer, Israel; Dept. of
Research, S. HerzogMemorial Hospital & l)sycholog) Dept.
(Scheinfbld Center), Hebrew University, Israel:
Human beings differ widely in the style, temper, vigor or
emotional expression accompanying their behavior. Use of
self-report questionnaires have characterized several
personality factors, stable over time and across cultures.
Personality traits were suggested to be endophenotypes for
major mental illnesses. Therefore, chromosomal regions (such
as 8p and 18p) linked to mental illnesses are also expected to
be common loci that predispose emotional lability that later
provides a causal link to psychosis. A chromosomal area of
interest for harboring Quantitative Trait Loci (QTLs)
contributing; to normal personality traits is chromosome 18p,
since it both contains a locus for bipolar disorder and is linked
to schizophrenia. We examined a group of 7 closely arranged
(-10-15 cM) microsatellite markers in the 18pll region in
healthy 182 sibling pairs with two parents, 14 sibling pairs
with &e parent and 376 sibling pairs with no parents. Subjects
were both Ashkenazi and non:Ashkenazi Jews who fillet/ota
195
the Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (TPQ)
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral
lood or mouth washes using phenol-chloroform. PCR
products obtained using primer parrs for the microsatellite
markers were separated on an ABI Prism 310 Genetic
Analyzer.
Association of each individual marker within these families to
the four TPQ personality dimensions was examined using the
Quantitative Transmission Disequilibrium Tests (QTDT)
statistical package. Overall global p value was significant only
for the D18sll50 marker (p <0.05 following Bonferroni
correction). Using the MERLIN program to estmaate linkage
between these microsatellite markers and TPQ personality
traits, weak evidence Lod scorel for linkage for Novelty
Seeking was observed.
p53 inhibitor reduces PrPsc acumulation in-vitro, but has
no effect in-vivo
Enelstein R.1. Shaked M.G.,Ovadia H.,Greig N.H),
rLa_goriadis N. and Gabizon R.
Dept. ofNeurologv; The Agnes Ginges CenterforHuman
Neurogeneacs, Ha'assah University Hospital, ierusalem
Israel; 2Laboratory ofNeuroscience, National Institute on
Aging GerontologyReaserch Center, Baltimore, USA," Dept.
ofNeurology AHEPA, Aristotale University Hospital,
Thessalonrki, Greece
The only identified component of the prion infectious agent
(causing scrapie and other neurodegenerative diseases) is the
prion protein (PrP), the abnormal isoform of the normal
protein PrP.As for today, the mechanism of pathogenesis of
prion diseases have not been elucidated. Several investigators
have proposed that apoptosis plays a role in prion disease
pathogenesis. Apoptosis, defined as programmed cell death,
was shown to be mediated by several factors and proteins, and
is easily characterized by the ordered damage in the DNA. In
several diseases, inhibition of apoptosis was shown to affect
disease course.
We show here that Pifitrin a (PFT), a newly synthesized p53
inhibitor, can inhibit the accumulation of PrP in ScN2a cells,
a neuroblastoma cell line
ermanently infected with prions and expressing PrP
ollowing these encouraging in-vitro results, we proceeded to
test the effect of PFT in-vivo. Hamsters infected with scrapie
prions were subsequently treated with PFT or with vehicle
only were observed for symptoms of disease. Incubation time
from inoculation to disease was established for all gropus,
Our results indicate that PFT did inhibit apoptosis in the
treated hamsters, as seen by measuring caspase-3 expression
by both western bloting andimmunohistochemistrv. Howerer,
such inhibition had no affect on disease course; incubation
Sc Sc
time or PrP and accumulation of PrP in the infected
hamstres brains. We conclude that although apoptsis of
neurons seems to play some role in the disease, reduction of
a.poptosis does not aleviate the symptoms or the severity of the
disease.
High frequency local field potentials in the striatum ofthe
halothane-anaesthetized rat
Engler G. Moll C.K.E. Bergman H. and Eneel A.K.
'Institute SfNeurophysio'l-,andPathophysioogy University
Hospital Hamburg-Eppend'rJl Hamburg, Germany: -Faculty
ofMedicine. The HebPew Universi, Jesa&m. Israel
Recent animal studies and human neurophysiological
investigations have placed special emphasis on bo e
physiological and pathophvsiological role of sconization
anoscillations wiin the fiasal ganglia ccttit.
In this context, high-frequency local field potential (LFP)
oscillations in e upper gamma-frequency bd (40-80 Hz)
have been recorded from the subthalamie nucleus (STN) in
pkinsonian patients treated with levodopa (Cassi@ et al.,
2002) and the STN ofe healthy ale rat (Brown et al., 2002).
Together with electrocoicoams from both hemispheres, we
recorded single-and multiit activity as well' as local field
potentials (LFPs) bilaterally using eight microelectrodes
placed in e stfiatum of e healthy halothane-anaesthetized
rat. Here we report on the analysis of the local fields
Field-Potential-Analysis shows that (i) LFPs rerded from the
siat of ae anaesthetized rat have a spectral peak' in the
upper gamma-band (rge 55-75Hz); (ii) pronoced
coherence in the high gamma-band occurs between coaex and
siatum while beta-bd-coherence (15-30 Hz) is low between
codex d striatum but high within the stfiatum; (iii) strong
low-frequency-coherence (<5Hz) occurs within and across the
hemispheres. Our findings suggest that high-frequent
oscillato activity wiin the basal ganglia is physiological
and may" hold a ceain function in infoation rocessing
within the different cortico-basal ganglia-thalamic loops since
it is encotered in different subcoaical stactures.
196
Fthermore it appears to be conserved across different species
and different vigilance states. Further studies are needed to
investigate the origin of this high-frequent subthreshold
activity and its relationship to other brain signals, eg its
correlation with neuronal firing.
Cassidy Met al., Brain 125 (2002):1235-46; Brown Pet al.,
Exp Neurol 177 (2002):581-85.
Supported by BMBF-MOS, Project-No. O1GA0301
Selective capturing oftransported vesicles by
microtubule-basedtraps formed by axotomy
Erez H. and Spira M.E.Error! Bookmark not defined.
Dept. ofNeurobio/ogy. Limb Sciences Institute. ?he Hebrew
University ofJerusalem.
Supp!, targeting and fusion of new membrane with the
growm cone (GC) plasma membrane is necessary to assure
neuronal outgroh.
Usingcultured Aplysia neurons and on line confocal imaging
of MTs, anterogradlly and retrogradlly transported vesicles we
found that axotomy leads to the formation of specialized
"vesicle traps" that localize the supply of vesicles to the cut
ends ofthe proximal and distal axonal segments.
In the proximal axonal segment, the cut end forms two types of
traps. (A) A trap in wlfich all the MTs plus ends point to the
center of the growth cone. This MTs configuration-leads to the
accumulation of vesicles linked to molecular motors that move
towards the MTs (+) ends. With time, new MTs polymerize
centrifugally from the center of the GC, and the trapped
vesicles trafislocate along the MTs towards the (+) ends to fuse
with the plasma membrane and support the growth process.
(B) The second trap is a (-) end trap, located frw micrometers
distally to the (+) end trap. This trap localizes vesicles that are
mobihzed by molecular motors that move towards the (-) ends
of the MTs. The trapped vesicles at this location are gradually
transported retrogrdlly while a GC's lamellipodium extends
from the (+) end trap.
In the distal axonal segment, only a (-) end trap is formed.
Accordingly retrogradlly transported retrieved plasma
membrane, labeled by the fluid phase pinocytotic marker
(sulforhodamin 10 I) is localized to that (-) end trap. With time
new MTs polxnerize from the center of the (-) trap.
Nevertheless, the sulforhodamin 101 labeled vesicles remain
within the trap and the development of a GC structure ceases.
Supportedby the 1SFNo. 556/01 andBSFNo. 2000354
ErbB-4 receptor tyrosine kinase and NRG functions in
neuronal survival and differentiation
Erlich S.,Goldshmit Y., Shohami E. and Pinkas-Kramarski
R.
Dept. ofNeurobiochemistry. Tel-Aviv University, TelAviv;
:Dept. ofPharmacology, the Hebrew University, Jerusalem
The ErbB-4 receptor tvrosine kinase and its ligand neuregulin
(NRG) are widely e,pressed in the nervous systems. To
investigate their lJossible role in neurodegeneration we used
the closed head injury model. We demonstrate that levers of
ErbB-4 are dramatically increased at the site of injury. The
staining patterns indicate that activated microgliaJmacrophagcs
and neurons but not astrocytes, constitute the major population
of cells that highly express the receptor at the injury_ site.
Confocal microscoi3y analysis suggests that the high levels of
ErbB-4 protein in activated microg!iaJmacrophages is probably
due to phagocytosis of neuronal cells. These findings indicate
that ErbB-4 receptors may play a role in brain responses to
head trauma. After brain nsult or trauma, astroeytes become
activated and attempt to restore the brain's fine tuned
microenvironment. Intracerebrally administration of NRG was
used to investigate the possible role of NRG in-vivo. We
demonstrate that direct iniection of NRG into the brain
increases GFAP expression "and alters astrocytes morphology.
This significant effect of NRG on astrocytes activation
persisted for at least 7 days following injection. These findings
show for the first time that in-vivo NRG play a role m
astrocyte activation. In addition, our study demonstrates that
following closed head injury NRG levels increase in astrocvtes
at the site of injury. These findings indicate that NRG might
serve as a potent Activator of astrocytes and that it might be
part of the mechanism of glial activation observed following
CNS injuries and trauma in an autocrine manner.
To examine the possible role of ErbB-4 in neurons we have
used the PC12 cell. Expression of ErbB-4 in PC12 cells
demonstrated that NRG induced signals and neurite outgrowth,
which were indistinguishable of those mediated by NGF. In
PC 12-ErbB-4 cells,NRG induced an initial weaff mitogenic
signal and subsequently neurite outgrowth as well as rescued
from apoptotic cell deai.h. Our results demonstrate that neurite
outgrowth induced by ErbB-4 in PC12 cells, requires MAPK
and PKC signaling networks mad NRG induced survival from
apoptotic ceil death requires PI3K signaling.
Modified cytoarchitecture in glutamatergic neurons under
perioheral site inhibition of acetylcholinesterase
Farclai N.'2, .Dong H.3A, Eilon K.2, Hochner B.,Lu W-Y.3'4
-d--breH.
Dept. of Neurobioloov and Biological Chemistry The
Hebrew University OJerusalem, lsrael; 1)ept. /YAnaesthesia
and 4physiology, University ofToronto, Canada.
Acetylcholinesterase (ACHE) inhibitors serve as Alzheimer's
disease drugs, but their mechanism of action is yet
incompletely understood and their effects are transient. AChE
contributes to neuronal differentiation, cell adhesion and
synaptogenesis through yet unknown celhflar and molecular
processes unrelated to its catalytic properties. Here, we report
that ligands selective for the peripheral site of AChE (e.g.
BW284c51), but not inhibitors selective for its catalfic site
(e.g. physostigmine), trigger in cultured hippocampal neurons
impaired glutamatergic currents associated with
mal-integration of glutamate receptors into the surface
membrane. In BW284c51-treated cells, transcriptional and
alternative splicing responses lead to somatic redistribution of
the synaptic variant AChE-S rnRNA whereas the
stress-indUced AChE-R mRNA translocated into dendrites.
Co-treatment with an antisense agent inducing AChE-R
mRNA destruction abolished this intricate feedback response
to BW284c51 and rescued glutamate currents. RACK1, a
erikaryal PKCII cargo proten which interacts with AChE-R,
ecreased in neuronal processes under BW284c51 with
significantly lower accumulation near the cell membrane.
Moreover, Synaptophysin, Neuroligin and 13-Actin labeling
greatly increased m soma while decreasing in neuronal
contrasts with AChE or MAP2 over-expression.
ur findings attribute to neuronal AChE mRNA redistribution
causal role in the poor surface expression of glutamate
receptors, associated with selectively altered neuritic protein
transport under peripheral inhibition of ACHE. These results
suggest adverse long-term consequences to the administration
ofperipheral AChE inhibitors.
Spectral and temporal response patterns of auditory cortex
neurons under barbiturate anaesthesia
Farkas D., Bar-Yosef0., Ulanovsky N., Las-Ahdut L. and
Nelken I.
Dept. ofphysiology. Hebrew University Hadassah Medical
School. and the Interdisciplinary CentbrforNeural
Computation, Hebrew University.
Anaesthesia is known to strongly affect responses in auditory
cortex. Most studies of auditory cortex neurons have been
done under barbiturate anaesthesia. Under these conditions,
most neurons have mostly onset responses and unimodal,
sharply tuned frequency response areas.
We recorded tone responses of over 1300 neurons from the
pr.imar), auditor), cortex (AI) of 26 cats, anesthetized by a
mxture of OffN20 (30%/70%) with halothane (0.2-1.5%, as
required). This protocol enabled us to keejo the cat
well-anesthetized under a lighter regime than can oe achieved
with barbiturates. Tone bursts (115 ms, with 10 ms linear onset
and offset ramps) werepresented at 8-11 equally spaced levels
(5-10 dB resolution) and45 frequencies equally spaced along a
logarithmic frequency axis (6-12/Oct) over a range covering
the fidl frequency response of the neuron.
We observed a much richer array of tuning curve shapes than
are found under barbiturate anaesthesia, including multi-lobed
FRAs (30%) which were characterised by low compactness
(the total area of the FRA divided by the perimeter of the
tuning curve), wide-band neurons that respond over a large
frequency range (38%, with Q30<0.5) and a large nmnber of
neurons with ve low minimal thresholds (35%, with
threshold<20dB).
We used the mutual information (MI) to quantify the
relalionships belween slimuli and responses. Over 75% of the
neurons had informative responses extending beyond onset. A
substantial number of neurons (25%) had informative activity
extending beyond stimulus offset for at least 100 ms. The
different parameters of the response (compactness, Q30,
threshold, MI, spike count) showed very low correlations
between them. The most pronounced correlations were found
between the mutual information and compactness (r 0.3. df
--1334, p<0.05) and between the mutual information and the
spike coun! (r 0,6, df=1334 p<O05). The large variability of
response properties and the low correlations between the
different parameters suggest low redundancy between the
neurons. Moreover, the reformative response long after the
stimulus offset demonstrate the presence ofshort-term memory
in primary auditor), cortex. Thus, using halothane anaesthesia
is a reasonable compromise for research in auditory cortex,
since tonal responses are rich and varied, and they keep many
of the neuronal properties described in the awake animal.
Presynaptic membrane of inhibitory crayfish axon
terminals is stained by antibodies raised against
mammalian GABAA receptor subunits ,a andf12/
Feinstein N.,Fritschy J.M'. and Parnas 1.1
Otto Loewi Minerva Center]br Cellular andMolecuar
Neurobiolog), Hebrew UniversiO, Jerusalem, lsrael "Institute
ofPharmacology and Toxicology, University ofZurich,
Winterthurerstrasse, Zurich, Switzerland
The opener muscle ofthe dactyl of the walking leg of crayfish
is innervated by one excitatory axon releasing gliatamate and
one inhibitory axon releasing GABA. Functional GABAA
receptors are present postsynaptically on the muscle, and
pres.ynaptically on terminals and release boutons of the
excitatory axon, whereas presynaptic GABAA autoreceptors
have not been rel.ed on terminals or release boutons of the
inhibitory axon. Using antibodies raised against mammalian
GABAa receptor subunits a and 13z/3, we obtained highly
specific staining ofthe presynaptie membrane ofthe inhibitory
bouton and ofthe postsynaptic membrane of the muscle. Using
pre- and post-embedding techniques, staining was localized to
only presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes of synaptic
active zones. We also found near (up to 100nm) to the active
zones extrasynaptic receptor subunit immunoreactivity.
Staining with antibodies for the a and z/3 subunits showed
colocahzation ofparticles ofthe two subunits. We suggest that
presynaptic inhibitory boutons of the crayfish possess
GABAA-like autoreeeptors composed ofat least the a and [:;3
subunits.
Mitochondria and vesicles as calcium regulators
Fendyur A.1, Raveh A.1, Blank p.2, Kaiserman I. Coorssen
j.3, Zimmerberg 3.2and RahamimoffR.
Dezt. ofPhysiology. & BernardKatzMinerva Centre,
Hetrew University, Jerusalem, Israel; NIH, Bethesda, MD,
USA; 3U. Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
Intracellular calcium ions ([Ca ]i,)play a key role in a wide
variety of neuronal functions. They are regulated by
mitochondria, vesicles and the endoplasmic reticulum. We
studied mitochondrial Ca dynamics in neuronalprocesses of
rat hippocampal cultures and vesicle calcium dynamics in
secretory vesicles from sea urchin eggs. Mitochondria.
Cultured hippocampal neurons (4-9 days old) of neonatal
Sabra rats were used to study mitochondrial calcium dynamics.
Using mitochondrial and calcium-specific fluorescent dyes
(Fluo-4 and Mitotracker) we double stained hippocampal
neurons and simultaneously sampled both mitochondrial
location and Ca dynamics'. Three main observations were
made: there is calcium self-talk within the mitochondrion;
there is calcium cross-talk between the mitochondrion and the
OSOl and there is calcium cross-talk between mitochondria.
secretorv vesicles in the nervous system are too small for
calcium imaging. However, the secretory vesicles in sea urchin
eggs are large (l.5tm in diameter), allowing quantitatively
meaningful confocal microscopy. Calcium indicators with
different affinities were used to study calcium dynamics in
different calcium concentrations, while lypophil[e and pH
indicators were used to eliminate artifacts due to vesicles
movements or pH changes, respectively. The secretory vesicles
behave as single units with resoeet to changes in their Ca
fluctuations. Vhile their total [Ca++] is 100mM using
different fluorescent ndcators, the free [Ca of the secretory
vesicles were estimated to be in the micromolar range.
In both organelles calcium waves were observed. In 6% of the
mitochondria and in -2/3 of the vesicles spontaneous point
waves were detected. These results and the distribution of
these two organelles in the presynaptic region reflect their
importance in modulating the presvnaptic fusion process and
other Ca dependent ntracellular functions.
orted bygrantsjkom." BSF, ISFandBernardKatz
nerva Centre.
Early weaning and isolation interact to increase anxiety
and social interaction in adult rats
Ferdman N.,Braun K. and Leshem M.
PsychologyDept. and Brain & Behavior Center,
The University ofHaifa; Israel; "InstituteforBiology,
Otto-von-Guericke-University. Magdeburg Germany
We compared the influence of typical weaning, at
21-days-of-age, with later weaning, at 30-days-of-age, on open
field behavior and a social interaction test in adulthood. After
weaning, pups were reared in individual cages or in groups, to
distinguish the effects of weaning from socal isolation Wistar
pups born in the lab were raised with their dam until 21 or 30
days of age. These early and late weaning pups were further
subdivided into rats reared in individual cages (isolation') or in
group cages. All rats were tested in adulthood (14 weeks) in
the open field and the social-interaction test (3 min each test).
In the open field, early weaning increased peripheral and total
number of crossings. In the social interaction test, isolation
197
increased sniffing of the strange rat, and in the early weaned
rats it increased social grooming of the strange rat. Early
weaned and isolated rats spent more time in the periphery than
group-reared late-weaned rats, that were also more active,
especially in the center of the open field. Our findings suggest
that early weaning and isolation increase anxiety in a novel
situation in adulthood, and increase social interaction with a
strange rat. The anxiogenic effects of isolation appear
irreversible, but the social effects of isolation are mitigated by
late weaning. Thus 9 more days with the dam (late weaning)
apparently protect against the influence of 90 days of
subsequent solation on social responses in adult rats. In turn,
this suggests that weaning is a critical formative period for
adult social behavior.
Activity dependent cell survival in dissociated neuronal
culture
Fishbein I., Maggio N. and Segal M.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100
It is generally believed that spontaneous bioelectrical activity
(SBA) within the nervous system is required for the
development ofthe cerebral cortex. SBA has also been shown
to be a key factor in establishing neuronal network and
synaptic connectivity. In dissociated tissue culture, chronic
suppression of SBA can increase the rate of cortical cell death
(Ramarkers. and Boer Eur. J. Neurosci, 3: 140). To further
characterize the importance of SBA for neuronal development
:nd rnantainance, we used dissociated culture from posterior
cortica; areas. To inhibit SBA, we trea.ted postnatal day 3
cultured neurons with 0.1 uM tetroaotoxn (TTX). We
monitored cell survival rate by staining them with anti NeuN, a
specific neuronal transcription factor. Massive cell death was
detected after 10 days of chronic TTX treatment. Interestingly,
inhibiting SBA by blocking AMPA and NMDA receptors did
not have the same effect. Furthermore, TTX treatment
combined with NMDA and AMPA receptor antagonists was
found to partially prevent TTX-induced cell death. We also
found that the neurotrophin BDNF rescued neurons from
TTX-induced cell death. These results sug.gest a k.ey role for
the presynaptic activity and its possible medmtion by
endogenous BDNF release.
Role ofsomatostatin and corticotropin releasing factor in
regulation of prostaglandin synthesis in glial cells
Fleisher-Berkovich S.,Naama D.
Dept. ofClinical Pharmacology, Faculty ofHealth Science,
Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva
Considerable evidence shows involvement of chronic
inflammation in the pathogenesis ofAlzheimer's disease (AD).
This chronic inflammatory response is characterized, among
other things, by reactive gliosis in which glial cells are
activated and proliferate. Activated glial cells are a major
source of two important mediators of inflammation, namely
prostaglandins (PGs) and nitric oxide (NO). The aim of the
present study was to investigate the role of neuropeptides such
as somatostatin and corticotropin releasing factor in the
regulation of basal and lipopolvsaccharide (LPS)-induced PG
and 9NOproduction in glial clls. Our results show that SS
(10" -10" M) inhibited basal PG synthesis by 64% 68% and
NO production by 46%- 78%. LPS increased PG and NO
synthesis in rat g,lial cell in a dose and time dependent
manner. SS (10 M-10 M) inhibited LPS-induced PG
synthesis by 40%-50% and NO production by 26%-30%.
Interestingly, phosphoramidon, a neutral endopeptidase (NEP)
inhibitor, enhanced prostaglandin Ez synthesis in glial cells
several fold. CRF sigmficantly increased prostaglandin
synthesis but abrogate.d phosphoramidon-enhanced
rostaglandin production. It s tempting to speculate that if
rain PG and NO synthesis that is induced by inflammatory
agents like LPS is"significantly regulated by neuropeptides,
then specific preventive and therapeutic modalities may be
devised to intervene with these mechanisms.
5-1ipoxygenase and cytochrome P-450 pathways of
arachidon.ate metabolism contribute to endogenous
cryoenes|s
1
Fraifld V. Paul L., K,aplanski J. A2srafH. Sagi O.,
Wolfson M. Kozak W.,Kluger M.J. Tchaikovskaya'T.
and Listowskv I.
1Ben Gurion Jniversity, Beer-Sheva, lsrael," :MCG, Augusta,
GA: AECOM, Bronx, NY
Studies on the involvement of the arachidonic acid (AA)
cascade in thermoregulation have primarily focused on
breakdown products ofthe COX pathway, mainly PGE. This
eicosanoid s considered to be the final central" mediator of
fever. Recent data obtained in our laboratories, suggest a
thermoregulatory role for two other pathways of AA,
5-1ipoxygenase (5-LO) and cytochrome P-450 monooxygenase
(epoxygenase).
198
Herein we report that the central, most likely, hypothalamic
leukotrienes (LTs), 5-LO-derived eicosanods, and
epoxygenase-derived eicosanoids (EETs) contribute to the
.roeess of endogenous antip3a'esis or cryogenesis. Several
lines of evidence are in support of this hypothesis: (1)
LPS-induced hypothermia in mice is preceded and
accompanied by an elevation in hypothalarnic cysteinyl-LT
production; (2) the inhibitor of LT synthesis MK-886 injected
into the lateral ventricle or ip, suppresses both of these
processes; MK-886 also prevents the decrease of body
temperature (Tb) during the light period of the day; (3) icv
injections ofLTC4 at nanomolar doses cause a dose-dependent
decrease ofdaytime Tb and reduce the nighttime rise OfTb; (4)
icy injections of EETs, as well as inducers of P-450, suppress
the LPS-induced fever, whereas the inhibitors ofP-450
enhance the fever response in rats; (5) 11,12-EET inhibits the
activity of COX-2; (6) more pronounced hypothermic Tb
response to LPS in older mice correlates with the age-related
increase in the level of brain 5-LO; (7) the expression of
neuronal 5-LO mRNA is down-regulated in mGSTM5 KO
mice compared to the wild-type animals. Accordingly,
mGSTM5 KO mice develop more pronounced fever m
response to low doses of LPS and lesser hypothermia after
high doses. The results obtained highlight the role of 5-LO and
cytochrome P-450 pathways in endogenous cryogenesis.
Supported bygrantsJkom the BSP; Jerusalem, Israel andJkom
the Atran Ibundation, AlbertEinstein College ofMedicine,
Bronx, NE
Inability to suckle after blockade of cannabinoid receptors:
A novel animal mgdel for "failt3re to thrive" in newborns
Fride E.1'2, ETxa D.' and Blau H.
1Dept ofBehavioral Sci. and Molecular Biology. College of
Judea and Samaria, Ariel; Pulmonary Umt, S'neider
Children's Medical Center, Petach Tikva
Children with 'Non-organic failure to thrive' (NOFTT), have
an abnormally low weight and/or height for age without
identifiable organic etiology, except for a putative oral-motor
dysfunction. An unidentified biological vulnerability has been
invoked to explain NOFTT. We have reported that the newly
discovered physiological system comprising endogenous
cannabinoids and their receptors (the "endocannabinoid"
system), play a critical role in milk ingestion and survival of
the newborn. Thus specific blockade of the eannabinoid (CB 1)
receptors in one-day old mouse pups prevented milk intake and
resulted in death within days a,fter birth. Similar deficiencies
were found in (untreated) C]31 knockout pups.
In the present series of experiments, we investigated the
hypothesis that a deficient endocannabinoid system underlies
NOFTT. Therefore we directly studied suckling behavior and
behavioral/physiological mechanisms in mouse pups, which
had been freated with the CBI receptor antagonist
'SR1 ')within 24 h after birth.
uckling with an anesthetized dam was studied on days 2, 4, 6
and 9. Weight gain, ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs) and
axillary temperature were measured daily, in SRl-treated
Sabra, ICR, and CB rec.eptor knockout pups.
Results: 1.80-I00% mortahty was observed within days after
SRI injection 2. Suckling was completely suppressed in day 2
old an(agonist-treated pups and partially in CB knockouts. 3.
Persistent hypothermia and US suppression ffere observed in
SRl-treated pups and in neonatal CBI- knockouts 4.
Hypothermia and reduced USVs were recorded in the
non-surviving SR1 pups already before injection
Conclusions.- a. CB1 receptor blockade interferes with the
ability of the newborn to attract maternal care and b. induces
oral-motor deficiency, thus preventing suckling c. These
symptoms are compatible with the syrnptomatology of NOFTT
d. A deficient endocannabinoid system may underlie NOFTT.
Supported by Danone Research Institute irlsrael
Lasting neuronal dysfunction following cortical
blood-brain-barrier disruption
1.3 i
Friedman A.' Seiffert E. Dreier J.P." and Heinemann U.
Phystology and "ExzertmentalNeuroloev, 6harit, Humbolt
Universi., Berlin, ermany; Zlotowslaenter of
Neuroscwnce, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel
Perturbations in the integrity of the Blood-Brain-Barrier
(BBB) have been reported in both humans and animals under
numerous pathological conditions. However, the effect of BBB
opening on structure and functio.n of the cerebral cortex is not
known. In human patients we found that persistent BBB
disruption mas be detected in neurological patients, and was
foundto be associated with clinical symptoms consistent with
partial seizures and focal EEG slowing. To study directly the
role of compromised BBB on cortical function we fdcallv
induced BBB disruption using low concentrations (<3mM) df
the sodium salts, dehydrocholic acid (DHC) or 7-deoxycholic
acid (DXC). Topical application was done under anaesthesia
following opening a cranial window over the somatosensor).'
cortex ofthe rat. Sham-operated rats were _exAgOsed to a similar
surgical procedure but perfused with artificial cerebrospinal
fluid BBB disruption was confirmed using fluorescent
microscopy and inaage analyses following the injection of the
non-permeable peptide fluorescein isothiocyanate or the
albumin-binding dye Evan's blue. Bile salts application did not
induce signs ofirfi_mediate neuronal toxicity n physiological
experiments in-vitro nor in histological secUons 24 hours after
in-viva application. Intra- and extracellular recordings in-vitro
revealed focal paroxysmal hypersynchronous activity evoked
in BBB-disrupted cortex. This abnormal activity observed in
>90% of treated slices and was rarely (<:15%) recorded m
slices from sham-operated rats. Paroxysmal activity was
distributed over all cortical layers, cotild be trigge: from
neighboring cortical columns but was always limited to the
treated region. Pharmacological experiments suggest
enhancement of both excitatory and inhibitory transmitter
systems in the evoked paroxysmal responses. Our data suggest
that persistent BBB opening may result in cortical dysfunction
and epileptiform activity.
Attenuation of amyloid-l pathology by a lipophilic
transition-metal chelator, DP-109, in organotypic
hippocampal brain slices and human amyloid precusor
transenic mice
riedman J.E. Simmons D.A. ,z,Lee j.y.3, Bi X.,Angel 1..
K0hJ.. H0ffman K.B.. Lynch G. andKozak A.
1Thuris Cdrp., :Univ. CA Ii-vihe, Univ. Ulsan Col.
COS Biotech., Inc. Seoul.Korea, D-Pharm Ltd. Rehovot,
Israel
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the mos! common
neurodegenerative disease causing progressive dementia. The
disease is characterized bv extracellular arnvloid plaques,
formation of neurofibrilla- tangles and by" activation of
cellular components of inflammation. A significant body of
evidence indicates that zinc and copper ions contribut to
aggregation of AI?, peptides, deposition of amyloid plaques and
subsequent production of reactive oxygen species and
activation ofreactive microglia. We examined whether the
lipophilic transition metal chelator DP-109 can inhibit these
events in both in vitro and in viva systems, i.e. organotypic rat
hippocamp,'d slices and transgenic Tg2576 mice. Organot'vpic
slices were exposed to AI1-42 in the presence or absence of
DP-109 and/or the integrm ,antagonist, RGD, which enhances
A[ uptake and subsequent microglial activation. Slices were
immunostained for AI31-42 or reactive microglia (ED1), or
stained with Fluoro-Jade B (FJB) to detect degenerating
neurons. ED1 and A:x staining were markedly increased in
slices treated with A.+RGD compared to AI alone (both
p<0.001). DP-109 dose-dependently reduced the effects of
AI3+RGD on EDI and Al3-stained particles and particle area in
doses ranging from 0.1 to 8gM (p<0.01). DP-109 also reduced
neuronal death elicited by AI+RGD, as shown by decreased
FJB-stained particles (p<0.05). In viva, aged female
hAPP-Tg2576 mice treated with DP-109 (5mg/kg) bv daily
gavage for 3 months had a markedly reduced burden 6f
amyloid plaques as compared to animals receiving vehicle
treatment (21.6 : 1.1 vs. 126.1 +/- _,9.. plaques/sectaon, p
0.001). Moreover, the cerebrum area loaded wit_h amyloid
plaques was decreased by 81'/o in DP-109-treated mice (p <
0.001). DP-109 treatmenl7 also facilitated the transition of A[
from insoluble to soluble forms in the cerebrum Thus, DP-109
reduced inflammation, amyl0id uptake mad neuronal death in
an m vitro model of A13 toxicity as well as reducing the plaque
load in a transgenic model of AD. These results support the
hypothesis that endogenous metals are involved in the
dposition of aggregated AI3 in brain of AD patients and that
lipophilic metalchelators may be useful therapeutic agents in
the treatment of AD and othel;neurodegenerative diseases.
Support Contributed By D-Pharm Ltd
A McGurk effect in schizophrenia: Audio-visual
integration is altered by visual attention
13 12
Fromovitz M. ", Modai I. Nahshon i. and Peled A.'"
"Instimwjbr Psychiatric Studies, Sha "ar Menashe Mental
Health Center, Mobile Post Hefer 38814, Hadera: :Bruce
Rappaport Facul.ty )edicine, Technion. Israel Institute o)c
Technology, Hal,: Dept. ofCriminolog3, BarIlan Univerit),,
Ramat Gan
The illusion of McGurk is obtained when conflicting
audio-visual messages are simultaneously presented. The
McGurk illusion is one approach to study audio-visual
integration in the brain. Schizophrenia has been"described as a
disease of neural integration: specifically auditory visual
integration may' be disturbed m patiehts with "positive
symptoms such as hallucinations. In this study we show altered
auditory visual integration in schizophrenia patients compared
to controls. The audio-visual stimulus was constructed from a
video showing lips pronouncing a set of syllables and
incongruent conflicting auditory visual stimuli were "planted"
into the set ofregular coherent stimuli. Generation of McGurk
effect by the conflicting stimuli was measured. Between
groups and within group comparisons showed that within the
schizophrenia patients group the McGurke effect increased
significantly when subjects attend to the visual modality of the
stimulus.
Oscillations ofADNP in the arcuate nucleus during the
estrus cycle
Furman S. 1, Hill J,M.2, Hauser JM.z, Vulih I. Brenneman
DE, and Gozes I.'
Clinical Biochemistry Sackler School ofMedicine Tel-Aviv
Untverstly, Tel-Aviv, Israel, "SDMP, NIHD, NIH, Bethesda,
MD, USA.
Our laboratory recently cloned the human activity-dependent
neuroprotective protein (ADNP) eDNA. ADNP contains 9 zinc
fingers, a proline rich region, a nuclear bipartite signal, a
nuclear export signal and a homeobox domain profile,
suggesting a transcription factor function. ADNP is a highly
conserved vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) responsive gene
that is expressed abundantly in the brain and in the body. As
VIP shows sexual dichotomy in the hypothalamus, the
potential differential expression of ADNP in male and female
mice was investigated. The expression of ADNP was also
evaluated at different stages of the female estrus cycle.
Northern blot hybridization of mouse hypothalamic RNA
identified increased ADNP mRNA expression in the female as
compared to the male. Furthermore, oscillations in ADNP
mRNA expression levels during the estrus cycle were
observed. Immunohistochemical staining using antibodies
directed against the N-terminal region of ADNP revealed
ADNP-Iike immunoreactivity in the arcuate nucleus. Like
ADNP mRNA, ADNP-Iike immunoreactivity changed with
the estrus cycle, peaking atproestrus and exhibiting minimal
expression during estrus. Even during estrus, ttie female
ADNP
levels were higher than those found in males. Many
factors pla) a role in the control of the rodent female estrus
cycle and show cyclic oscillations with the estrus cycle in the
arcuate nucleus. The arcuate nucleus drives reproductive
cyclicity through the h_lothalamic pulse generator, where
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) s regulated by
afferent neuronal systems that are sensitive to estradiol and
progeseterone. One factor that affects GnRH neurons is VIP
from the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the re.suits present.ed
here suggest that ADNP is one of the factors that regulate the
estrus cycle, possibly being affected by VIP.
Support: The combinedprogram ofthe NIHand the Suckler
Faculty ofMedicine in Women's Health, BSE the Neu.feM
award, the Lily andAvraham Gildor Chair.
Acquisition and extinction of memory in virtual
environment
Furst. and Dudai Y.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute ofScience, Rehovot
Our knowledge of the processes and mechanisms of memory
extinction stems mostly from studies in laboratory animals,
and only little is knova about memory extinction in the human
brain. A paradigm that was occasionally used in investigating
of experimental extinction in htunans is the eyelid reflex
membrane. This choice has been influenced by the advances in
analyzing classical conditioning of eyelid in the cat and the
nictitating membrane in the rabbit. Classical conditioning,
however, is a primitive type of memory and, moreover, being a
fear conditioning type ofparadigm, is inconvenient for routine
use in humans. We have set out to develop behavioral learning
paradigms that could permit the analysis of experimental
extinction, yet do not rely on punishmefit as a reinforcer and,
furthermore, are more representative of the complexity of
human behavior. Toward that end, we have developed a virtual
environment paradigm, in which the subject has to accomplish
a task (room painting) using behavioral rules and causative
associations that are utterly irrelevant to the real world (e.g.
turn on a TV set to mix colors). This ensures that each subject
is indeed a tabula rasa at the beginning of learning as far as
the rules to be learned are concerned. The acquired rules are
then changed without notification and the subject has to
abandon the previous rule to succeed in the task. In a third
phase, the rules are switched again: either back to the first set
of rules, or to a new set. Subjects were found to relearn the
first set faster than learning a new one. These results indicate
that the original trace was not erased, but rather underwent a
relearning, extinction-like process.
Supported by the Israeli Sbience kbundation and the
Volkswagen Foundation.
199
Endocannabinoids and hetatic enceohalopathy
Gabbay E.fAvraham .1,.olotarev O.1, Okun A.,Zilberman
I.t.Fink N. Ganzburg V. Yisraeli E. Ilan Y.3 Mechoulam
R. and Ber E.M.
Dept. o],'Human Nutrition ,Medicinal Chemistry_ :,Liver
disease Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem.
Hepatic Encephalopathy (HE) is a reversible impairment in
neurological function due to liver disease. Its pathogenesis
involves: raised levels of ammonia, gamma-aminobu.tyiric acid
and functional changes in the: opiodergic, serotonergic and
dopaminergic systems.
Endocannabinoids (ECs) are neuro- and immune modulators,
found in the central nervous, gut and immune systems that
function via specific receptors affecting neurological and
cognitive function, appetite and mood.
Studies of chrome hver disease in animals and man have
demonstrated increased levels of (ECs) in peripheral blood
cells. (ECs) were also involved in some of the hemodynamic
changes occurring in cirrhosis however their possible role in
hepatic eneephalopathv has not been explored. We have shown
increased levels of th endoeannabinoid 2AG in the brain of
cirrhotic animals.
Our study aimed at exploring a possible role for (ECs) in the
pathogenesis of(HE). The study involves a model offulminant
hepatic failure in mice, induced by intraperitoneal injection of
the hepatotoxin thioacetamide (TAA) vehicle or CB1
antagonist were daily administered. Neurological and cognitive
function were determined.
The neurological and cognitive performance of mice
administered TAA with SR141716A (ECantagonist)
improved more rapidly than that of mice given TAA alone.
This f'mding along with the finding of elevated 2AG levels in
animal models of both acute and chronic liver disease suggests
that therapy based on modulation of the CB1 antagonist
function may be feasible.
Administration of the antagonist to the CB1 receptor may
alleviate both the neurological and hemodynamic
derangements, associated with liver disease.
Selective initiation of sacrococcygeal rhythmic patterns by
alphal-adrenoceptors agonists in spina| cords of neonatal
rats
Gabbay H. and Lev-Tov A.
Dept. ofAnatomy & Cell Biology, The Hebrew University
Medical School Jerusalem, lsrael
The ability of neurochemicals to selectively activate
rhythmogenic networks in the sacrococcygeal (SC) cord was
examined in isolated spinal cords of neonatal rats. Fast
alternating left-fight rhythmic activity, was produced in the SC
and rostral-lumbar segments by bath-applied noradrenaline
(NA). The rhythm slowed down rapidly and blocked.
The fast rhythm could be produced and maintained for up to
60min by the alphal-adrenoceptor agonist methoxamine and
blocked by the antagonist prazosin, the rhythm was blocked in
surgically detached thoracolumbar cords, but it persisted in
isolated SC cords in the presence of the NMDA
receptor-antagonist APV. A slow non-locomotor rhythmic
pattern accompanied the fast methoxamine-induced rhythm.
This rh.vthm persisted in detached thoracolumbar cords and it
could be blocked bv bath applied APV.
Injection ofcurren(steps into L2 and $2 motoneurons revealed
a 30-40% decrease in input-resistance (R) during troughs of
the fast rhythmic drive. The reduced RN coincided with
contralateral efferent-bursts. The rhhmic fluctuations of R
in L2 motoneurons were abolished, but the alternating
left-right pattern of the efferent bursts was unchanged in
midsagittally split thoracolumbar cords. These intracellular
studies suggested that crossed-inhibitory pathways controlled
the decrease in Ru, that activation of these inhibitory pathways
in rostral-lumbar segments during the rhythm depended on
intact thoracolumbar commissures, and that sacrococcyge.al
projections maintained the alternating pattern n
midsagittally-split thoracolumbar cords.
In summary, activation of alphal-adrenoceptors exhibits
differential effects on spinal neural networks; it initiates
pqattern generation by the SC circuitry, and it modulates the
MDA receptor-mediated rh.vthmicity of the thoracolumbar
pattern-generators.
200
Molecular study of neurodevelopmental animal model of
schizophrenia, as revealed by the analysis of hippocampal
and striatai gene expression profiles by means of eDNA
microarrays and Real-Time PCR
G_ak E.1'2, Koronyo-Hamaoui M.1'2, Zuckerman L. and Weiner
1Danek Gertner Genetics Institute, ShebaMedical Center;
SucklerMedical School and Dept. ofBehavioral Sciences,
TelAviv University, TelAviv
A novel neurodevelopmental model of schizophrenia in rats
developed by Zuckerman and Weiner 2002 demonstrated that
prenatal administration of synthetic cytokine releaser poly I:C
that elicits matemal immune activation, leads to
maturation-dependent disrupted latent inhibition mimicking
that found in schizophrenia, as well as neurochenftcal and
morphological alterataons consistent with pathophysiology of
schizophrenia. We presently report gene expression alterations
in two relevant brain regions of post-pubertal poly I:C treated
offspring using cDNA microarray and gene-specific
quantitative PCR analyses. Our most prominent finding is
5-fold elevated expression ofhippocampal secretogranin I1 and
2.5-fold ofstriatal-secretogranin V in poly I:C treated rats, that
are reproduced by quantitative PCR. Apart from their
established role in secretory granule formation in
neuroendocrine and nervous tissues, secretogaranins were also
associated with schizophrenia. A specific poly I:C
hippoeampal finding is 4-fold reduced expression of catalitic
Na/K ATPase the} is well-documented in schizophrenia,
together with mitochondrial cytochrome-c oxydase COX IV
that is reduced in hippocampal and striatal poly I:C. Several
G-proteins involved in intracellular signal transduction are
consistently elevated in hippocampal and striatal poly I:C.
G-proteins and their regulators were demarcated by recent
microarrays analyses of schizophrenic brain. The myelin basic
protein, an extracellular neuronal matrix component that
conrtibutes to neural connectivity and plasticity, is elevated in
the poly I:C hippocampus and smatum, although marginally
by quantitative PCR standards. These findings may indicate
directions along which the poly I:C model might be further
explored and substantiated as an authentic embodiment of
neurodevelopmental processes underlying schizophrenia.
.Wa.sp uses specialized sensors to probe and inject venom
nsme the brain of its cockroach prey
Gal R., Haspel G. and Libersat F.
Dept. ofLife Sciences and ZIotowski CenterforNeuroscence,
Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva
The parasitoid wasp Amputex compressa stings a cockroach,
Periplaneta americana, directly into the two head ganglia: the
supraesophageal (brain)and the subesophageal (SEG) ganglia.
This sting is precisely targeted and is followed bv the injection
of a venom cocktail which causes the cockrogch to become
okinetic for the next 3 weeks.
hypothesize that the wasp locates the brain and SEG inside
the cockroach head with specialized sensors on its stinger to
discriminate nervous tissue from non-nervous tissue inside the
head cavity of the cockroach. Using Scanning Electron
Microscopy we identified at least 2 different t3qges of
sensilla-like structures on the wasp's stinger. Using retrograde
staining from the cut tip of the stinger we identified the
projections of sensory neurons reaching from the stinger's tip
to the last abdominalganglion of the ventral nerve cord. The
staining revealed approximately 20 axons in 2 pairs ofnerves.
To find whether the wasp can discriminate nervous from
non-nervous tissue, we let wasps sting cockroaches with the
brain or SEG removed. We measured the duration of the
stinging sequence in each case, and compared it to
sham-operated cockroaches, with no neuronal lesions, The
duration of the stinging sequence increased sigrfi_'ficantlv when
wasps stung cockroaches with the brain or SEG rmoved
(8-fold and 4-fold, respectively). In a separate set of
experiments, we inactivated the cuticular receptors on the
wasps' stinger by applying liquid nitrogen on its tip. We then
let these wasps sting untreated coc'ld'oaches. The stinging
duration increased 10-fold after freezing the stinger.
Thus, A. compressa appears to use a sensory feedback from
specialized cuticular sense organs located on'its stinger while
stinging the coc'kroach. The sensory receptor neurons
associated with these cuticular sense organs are able to
discriminate nervous from non-nervous tissue. This enables the
wasp to preciselv locate the brain and the SEG inside the
cockroach head.
The problem of spike-timing-dependent-plasticity for distal
dendritic snapses
Gidon A.A. and Segev I.t'
tlnstituteforLifeScience, Hebrew UniversityJerusalem,
elnterdisciplmary CenterJbrNeural Computation
The spike timing dependent plasticity (STDP) "Hebbian"
mechanism has been shown to operate in synapses of many
neuron types. When the post-synaptic cell fires a spike within a
narrow Ume-window, following an excitatory input, the
conductance of that synapse increases (potentiation). If the
post-synaptic cell firs before the pre-synaptic cell, the
svnaptic conductance is decreased (depression). As long as the
ttal depression is larger than total potentiation there is,
effectively, a competition between synapses over the control of
post-synaptic f'Lring. The degree of competition is determined
by the ratio of the depression to the potentiation parts of the
STDP function. Simulations show that this competition results
in subgroups ofsynapses that become stronger whereas the rest
ofthe synapses get weaker.
When inplementing STDP in a dendritic neuron model with
synapses that receive random asynchronous input, the
following problem arises. Due to cable filtering, distal
napses evoke attenuated somatic EPSPs and, thus, their
efficacy in generating a spike is low. Consequently, these
synapses are weakened due to the STDP mechanism. Starting
with a uniform distribution of synaptic strength, very soon
distal synapses are effectively extinct whereas proximal
synapses become maximally strengthened. This d!stribution of
synaptic strength, however, is not found in in vitro
experiments. On the contrary, in some cases distal synapses
seems to be stronger than proximal ones.
Here we propose several possible STDP-based local
mechanisms that solve this contradiction. One possibility to
Pmartially overcome the weakening of distal synapses is to
plement a biolocally plausible multiplicative model,
whereby the modlficauon of a synapse is inversely
proportional to its current strength. Other possible mechanisms
that equalize the conductmace change of distal versus proximal
synapses are also discussed.
Novel anti-psychotics that display GABAergic activity and
decreased extrapyramidal side effects, for the treatment of
schizoohrenia and rela,ted psychiatric disorders
il-AdI., Rephaeli A.-, Weizman A., Nudelman A.
-)Lab OfBiological Psychiatry, Experimental Oncology,
Felsenstein inst., Tel-AvW [;niversity, Tel Aviv, Dept. of
Chemistry, BarIlan Unwersity. Ramat Gun
Neuroleptics are widely used drugs in the treatment of
schizophrenia and related disorders. Current drugs induce
undesirable side effects such as extra pyramidal symptoms for
typical drugs and weight gain and metabolic disturbances for
atypical agents. Gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA) is the
major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. Recent reports,
suggested that GABA deficiency is involved in the
pathogenesis of schizophrenia. We synthesized the novel
molecules AN-168 and AN-187 and found they display
neuroleptic as well as GABAergic activities. Their effect on
catalepsy (in an extrap)amidal model), sedation and prolactin
release (marker of DA receptor blockade) in young adult male
rats or mice following ip or po administration (2.5-20 mg/kg),
was evaluated. Comparison between AN-168 and AN-187 to
.typical neuroleptics, using equivalent doses and the same
fiarameters, was conducted side by side. Catalepsy was
measured hourly for 6 h. At clinically relevant doses, while the
typical neuroleptics induced significant catalepsy, these
compounds did not induce catalepsy, but did elicit mild
sedation. At high doses, they induced mild catalepsy, while
typical neuroleptics brought about severe catalepsy. At
equivalent concentrations, our compounds and (ypical
antipsychotic drugs stimulated prolactin release to the same
extent following the same time course. While AN-168 and
AN-187 exerted GABA agonistic and classical DA(D2)
antagonistic activities, their extrapyramidal side effects
following treatment were markedly diminished. In conclusion,
the data suggest, that the novel agents display GABAergic as
well as neuroleptic activities and therefore may constitute a
novel type ofneuroleptics.
Lysyl oxidase, the extracellular matrix-forming enzyme, in
amyloid plaque formation
.i!adG.M.t, Kagan H.M. and Gilad V.H.
Research andDevelopment, Laboratory ofNeuroscience,
AssafHarofeh Medical Center, Zrifin 70300, lsrael; :Dept. of
Biochemistry, Boston UniversitySchool ofMedicme, Boston,
MA, USA
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the wide spread
formation of extracellular senile plaques in the human
for:brain. Amyloid beta proteinpolyrner deposits, the primary
constituent of plaques, were foufid to be associated with
various extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in the plaques, but
the precise mechanisms of plaque formation are not yet
resolved. The present study is based on the premise that the
enzyme lysyl oxidase (LO), which catalyzes the crosslinking
of ECM proteins and formation of insoluble matrices, is
secreted by cells at the sites of plaque formation and
participates in ECM modulation, thereby contributing to the
progressive pathology in AD. Experiments were performed on
autopsy brain samples taken from the hippocampus region of
AD, non-Alzheimer's dementia and a control group of
unrelated diseases. The results indicate that LO enzyme
activity, is increased in AD, but also in non-Alzheimer's
dementia as compared to controls. Immunoc)ochemical
staining with specific LO antibodies indicates that the enzyme
is locafized in blood vessel walls and, in the brain parenchvma,
it is associated with plaque formations some of vhich
positively stained with thiotlavin-S. The observed number of
LO-positive plaques in AD was over 2-fold higher as
compared to both non-Alzheimer's dementia and control
groups. These findings indicate that active LO molecules are
associated with senile plaques, thus providingsolid support for
the novel hypothesis implicating LO in ECM modulation
associated with plaque formation in AD.
Agmatine can potentiate and attenuate
1-methyi-4-phenyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
dooammergic toxicity
tGiadV.H.1, Gilad G.,I. and Rabey J.M.
Laboratory ofNeuroscience, Research andDevelopment and
"Dept. ofNeu"ology, AssafHarofehMedical Center, Zrifin
Treatment with agrrmtine, decarboxylated argimne, proved to
be nontoxic and to exert potent neuroprotectwe effects in
several models of neurotoxc and ischemic brain and spinal
cord injuries. Here we sought to determine whether agrnatine
treatment would also prove beneficial in the mouse
1-methyl-4-phen.yl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) model
of Parkinson's disease. MPTP-treated3-4-month-old C57BI/6J
mice (40 mg/kg intraperitoneat, once daily for 2 days) were
subjected to agmatine treatment (100 mg/kg intr.aperitonel,
once daily) commencing either hour prior to the st, 9r 8 hour
after the last MPTP injection and lasting until the 5" MPTP
post-injection day. Dopamine (DA) upthke bv svnaptosomal
preparations from the striatum served as a func[ioffal marker of
dopaminergic axon terminals. Agmatine did not affect
synaptosomal DA uptake, but agmatine treatment prior to
MPTP exacerbated MPTP-related DA uptake reduction [values
inpmol/mg protein/5 min: control 1.63:0.09 (100%), MPTP
0.68+0.03 (42%) and agmatine + MPTP 0.50+0.04 (31%)].
Moreover, prior agmatine treatment completely negated the
preventive effect of the monoamine oxidase B (MAOB)
nhibitor, deprenyl, against MPTP toxicity (deprenyl + MPTP
78 % vs. deprenyl + agrnatine + MPTP 2_- 38% of'control). In
contrast, when agmatine was applied after MPTP it produced
partialprotection against MPTP oxicity (62 % ofcontrol). We
conclude: 1) the coincident presence of systemic agmatine and
MPTP potentiates MPTP-related dopaminergic damage even
in the presence of MAOB inhibition, and 2) agmatine
attenuates MPTP-related dopaminergic damage when applied
well after MPTP treatment. The present findings implicate
agmatine in the initial mechanisms regulating MPTP
neurotoxicity, while reiterating agrnatine's characteristic
neuroprotectie efficacy after application of the insult.
Analysis of gene expression in MOG-induced experimental
autommune encephalomyelitis after treatment with a
novel brain-penetrating antioxidant
Gilun-Sherki Y.- Barhum Y.- Atlas D.. Melamed E.- and
/OftenD.
Dept. ofNeurology andFelsenstem Medical Research Center,
RaVin Medical Center, The Sackler Sc,hool ofMedicine, Tel
Aviv University, Petah Tikva 49100; -Institu"te ofLfe Sciences.
The Hebrew University, Edmond Safra Campui Jdrusalem
Accumulating data from experimental studies indicate that
oxidative stress (OS) has a major role in the pathogenesis of
multiple sclerosis (MS). It has been suggested that local
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), probably by
macrophages, mediates axonal damage in both MS patients
and the mouse model experimental autommune
201
encephalomyelitis (EAE). We have previously shown that
AD4 (N-acetylcysteine amide), our novel brain penetrating
antioxidant, reduces the clinical and pathological symptoms,
including inflammation and axonal damage in myelin
oligodendrocyte glycpprotein (MOG)-induced chronic EAE in
mice. The aim ofthis study was to examine the molecular
mechanism by which AD4 exerts protection in MOG-induced
EAE mice. Therefore, we analyzed gene-expression profile in
the spinal cords of MOG-induced chronic EAE mice and
compared to MOG-induced mice treated with AD4, using a
cDNA microarray. We found that MOG treatment
up-regulated genes encoding growth factors, cytokines, death
receptors, proteases and myelin structure proteins, while
MOG/AD4-treated mice demonstrated gene expression profile
similar to the profile seen in naive-healthy mice. In
conclusion, our study shows that chronic AD4 administration
suppresses the induction of various pathological pathways that
play a role in EAE, and probably in MS.
Focal cortical dysfunction and blood-brain-barrier
disruption in patients with post-concussion syndrome
Golari H.1, K,o,-rn A.z,Melamed I.2, Pascual-Marqui R. and
Friedman A.'
'NuclearMedicine, Rabin Medical Ctr., Golda-Hasharon
Campus, :Zlotowski Co'. ofNeuroscience, Ben-Gurion
University, Beer Sheva, fhe KeyInstituteforBrain-Mind
Research, Univ. ofZurich, 4Inst.forPhysiology, Humboldt
Univ., Berlin.
Post concussion syndrome refers to symptoms and signs
occurring commonly after mild head injury. Although :hte
organicity of the syndrome is well documented, its
pathogenesis is unknown. The aim of this study was to search
for sources of abnormal brain activity as revealed by
quantitative electroencephalographic recordings and correlate
these with imaging. Data from 17 patients following histories
of mild head trauma and diagnosis of post concussion
syndrome was retrospectively analyzed. Digitized
electroencephalography from patients was compared to that
from age-matched healthy volunteers. Low resolution
electrotomography (LORETA) was used for localizing
abnormal rhythms and was correlated with brain imaging.
Normalized quantitative electroencephalography revealed
significantly higher power in the delta band and lowerpower
in the alpha band compared to controls. The generators for the
abnormal rhythms were focally localized in dstinct neocortical
regions. While brain computerized tomography and/or
magnetic resonance imaging did not reveal focal abnormality,
single photon emission computerized tomoaphy showed a
focal reduction in cortical perfusion in 85 (n=l 1) of the
patients, and abnormal blood-brain-barrier following
Tc-DTPA in 73% (n=8). In 75% of these patients, LORETA
analysis showed that the generators for abnormal rhythms were
closely related to the anatomical location of
blood-'brain-barrier lesion. Our data point, for the t'n-st time, to
focal persistent blood-brain-barrier disruption and
hypoperfusion as a. possi.ble pathogenic mechanism in at least
some post concussion patients.
The mouse bHLH transcription factor Nato3 is a novel
floor plate-specific marker
Golan-Lev T. and Ben-Arie N.
Dept. ofCell andAnimal Biology, Institute ofLife Sciences.
The Hebrew University ofJerusalem, Jerusalem 91904
The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptiona! regulatory.
proteins have an important role in developmental processes,
including neurogenesis, myogenesis, hematopo[esis and
pancreatic development.
Our lab has revealed a novel bHLH subfamily, which is similar
to the atonal subfamily of Drosophila, and was therefore
designated nephew of atonal 3 (Nato3). Mouse Nato3
(MNato3) was found to be expressed as early as E7, and as late
as P35 by RT-PCR.
Expression analysis in the mouse spinal cord at E11-16 bv in
situ hybridization revealed that MNato3 is speeifidally
expressed in the floor plate. In comparison to other known
floor plate markers, its expression pattern is more similar to
Slit2 than to F-Spondm.
Interestingly, atE13, but not at E11, the expression domain in
the floor plate is wider at the caudal end and becomes
restricted to the midline towards the rostral end. The
expression domain at the caudal level becomes more localized
to the midline with development (E13.5-E16.5).
Floor plate cells have an essential role in neural cell patterning
and axonal outgrowth in the spinal cord. It is therefore
suggested that MNato3 may have an important role in the
development ofthe spinal cord.
Supported by the US-Israel Binational Abience Foundation
(2001013) and the Roland CenterforNeurodegenerative
Diseases.
202
The dynamics ofGABABleads to frequency-dependent
latency in the paralemiscal response to vibrissa stimulation
.Golomb D.t'2 and Kleinfeld D.
-Depti-OfPhysiology andZlotowstq CenterforNeuroscience,
Ben-Gurion Univ., Be'er-Sheva, israel; eCTBP, Physics Dept.,
UCSD, LaJolla, CA
The latency in the steady-state spiking response of POre
thalamic neurons and cortical L5 neurons, whith constitute the
paralemniscal pathway, increases with increasing frequency of
periodic vibrissa stimulation (Ahissar et al., Nature,2000;
Ahrens et al., PNAS, 2002). In contrast, the latency of the
response of neurons in VPM thalamus of the lemniscal
pathway is essentially constant. We hypothesize that
GABAB-mediated delayed and prolonged inhibition from the
reticular thalamic nucleus (RE) is an essential determinate of
the latency. We test this hypothesis in terms of a firing rate
model that includes excitatory thalamic and cortical neurons in
both pathways and one population of inhibitory nuclear
reticularis (RE) neurons that form reciprocal connections with
POm and VPM cells. The GABAB inhibition of RE neurons is
shown to cause increasing latency with increasing frequency.
The increase in latency in POm is greater than that in VPM
because of the relatively stronger brainstem drive.We predict
that blocking GABAB in the POm will destroy the latency
effects in thalamus and cortex.
Supportedby the ISF, NSF, NIMtL
Long term effects of organophosphates exposure, stress
and their interaction.
Grauer E. and Kapon J.
Dept. ofPharmacology, Israel InstituteforBiological
Research, Ness Ziona.
A possible interaction between stress and organophosphate
(OP) exposure was suggested based on long term follow up of
victims of the sarin terrorist attacks in Japan. This was
supported by a high rate of PTSD, as well as an increase in
stress-related smptoms such as anxiety, restlessness, mood
shifts, sleep dsturbance, depression, attention deficits and
memory loss reported in these victims. The following studies
were performed in an attempt to detect and characterized
possible OP exposure interacUon with stress processes in rats,
with a special emphasis on long term effects. Exoeriment 1:
rats were exposedto satin (0.9LDso) and three veeks later
were tested in a contextual fear conditioningparadigm. In this,
rats undergo a session of fear conditioning followed by three
successive re-introductions to the same environment. Results
suggest that rats previously exposed to satin showed decreased
freezing behavior compared to controls. xperimen.t. 2: satin
exposed rats (0.9LDs0) were subjected to 6 veek of variable,
unprediable stress exposure. Following the termination of
stress, rats were tested in succession of tests. Hypothermia
induced by the cholinergic agonist oxotremorine (0.5 mg/kg,
sc) was used to detect alterations in central cholinergic
receptor sensitivity. Results suggest interaction between the
effect of stress and sarin to produce an increase in the
hypothermic response. Similar interaction was also
demonstrated in animals' weight at the end of the study; Five
months after stress termination the weight of rats exposed to
either sarin or stress was lower than that of controls and the
weight was further decreased by the combined exposures.
Thus, the interaction between the effects of stress and those of
sarin exposure may a.mp!i,.fy the expected long-term effects of
the latter to produce sigmtlcant symptoms even at low doses.
Phase maintenance promoted by the interplay of synaptic
and intrinsic dynamics
Greenberg l., Merbl Y. and Manor Y.
Zlotowski CenterforNeuroscience & Dept. ofLife ScCences,
Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva 84105
Central pattern generators are neuronal networks that produce
multi phasic,rhythms. In many eases, the pattern of neuronal
firing activit) retains an approximately constant structure
despite wide changes in cycle period. In many central pattern
generators pairs of neurons maintain an aoproximatelv fixed
phase, whre the phase is defined as the ratio of firing fnterval
of the two neurons and the cycle period. The mechanisms
underlying phase maintenance are not clear. Previous work
suggesteda simple mechanism for phase maintenance in a
circuit that consisted of an oscillator s_ynaptically coupled to a
follower cell. When the synapse was inhibitory and depressing,
this model demonstrated that the phase between the oscillator
and the follower could be approximately constant over a
relatively wide range of cycle periods. At slow cycle periods,
the syndpse maximally re'covered and its effect bn the firing
interval became insensitive to changes in cycle period. This
effect upper- bounded the range of cycle p_er_iods for which
phase could be maintained in this circuit. We extended this
model and introduced a transient potassium (IA-like) current in
the follower cell. With a proper choice ofparameters, we were
able to tune the dynamics of the IA conductance such that it
delayed the activity of the follower cell on.ly at slow cycle
periods. The existence of an IA conductance did not contribute
much to phase maintenance when the synapse was
non_-d_epressmg. However, when synaptic depression was
combined with an IA conductance n the follower cell, the
interplay between synaptic and intrinsic dynamics dramatically
increased the range of cycle periods for which phase was
maintained.
Supportedby BSF2001 039 (TM).
Brain activation during size invariant face recognition: A
functional ima.gin_g study
Grinfeld A. and G M.
Bioraedwal Engineering, Technion, Haifa
Invariant object recognition can be done by having a
normalized view of the objects in memory a normahzed
representation, transforming the viewed image to the size
format of the stored one, and then testing for a match
(Bundesen, C., & Larsen, A. 1975).
To identify the brain structures implicated in mental
transformataon ofse, and trace the variataon in neural activity
within each of these areas over space and time, we used two
functional imaging methods: fMRI with a spatial resolution of
several millimeters and a temporal resolution of several
seconds, and LORETA- a functional imaging method based on
Event Related Potentials that gives a fair degree of spatial
localization at a superior millisecond resolution. Nine normal
subjects compared randomly presented faces regardless of
variation in size in a one-back, match- to-sample paradigm.
Here, we report different patterns of activation, primarily
located in the dorsal pathways, comprising structures in the
occipital, parietal, and temporal areas. Of these areas, the
fusiform and inferior temporal gyri were more activated by
tasks with different size stimuli than by tasks with same size
stimuli.
We propose that the posterior parts ofthe fusiform and inferior
temporal gyri, are involved in higher level processes that lead
to mental transformation ofsize.
Effects of pre-training on performance in spatial and odor
discrimination tasks
Grossberer T.,Sarig O. Barkai E.2, Cohen H. and
chter-L-evin G.
Dept. ofPsychology, Faculty ofSocial Sciences, University of
Ha['a.; 2Faculty ofscience andscience education, University
ofHaifa; Faculty ofMedlcine, Ben-Gurion University ofthe
Negev.
It is well established that learning new tasks is influenced by
proceeding experiences, as in pro-active and retroactive
interference. However, phenomena of post-training
enhancement are described as well. These phenomena do not
indicate transfer ofknowledge from one task to another; rather,
they implicate a change in the ability to learn a new task. Such
a change may be of interest to the field of rehabilitation, in
which there's an effort to generalize abilities from treatment to
everyday life.
Here, we studied the enhancement of performance in simple
learning tasks following learning of other tasks, while
manipulating two parameters: 1) nature of task (i.e. spatial vs.
odor discrimination), and 2) the motivation to perform the task
(i.e. escape learning vs. appetitive learning).
In order to examine these parameters experimentally, we have
used and designed four learning tasks: the Morris water maze
(a spatial task in which the motivation is to escape, the water),
the Radial maze (a spatial task in which the motivation is to
drink water), an odor discrimination task in the water maze, in
which the rat uses odor to escape the water, and an appetitive
odor discrimination task (in which the motivation is to drink).
In the present paradigm, rats were trained in one task and
immediately afterwards learned another task, so the transfer
from one task to another was examined in 12 pairs of tasks.
Performance in the second task was compared between
pre-trained groups, pseudo pre-trained groups and a naXve
sults show enhancement of the ability to learn spatial and
odor discrimination tasks following learning of appetitivelv
motivated tasks, regardless of their nature. Presently
examine the transfer of ability from any escape task to the
other tasks.
Study of oxidative stress markers in a tissue culture model
ofstretch injury
GurevichA.r'z., Shohami E.t.:andKohen R.
Dept. ofPharmacology and Dept. ofPharmaceutics,
Hebrew University, School ofPharmacy, Jerusalem, Israel
Background: Oxidative stress is one of the deleterious effects
that increases the primary damage after mechanical or
ischemic damage. It is a result of massive production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) that exceeds the capacity of the
endogenous antioxidants to neutralize them. We have adopted
a model system for stretch injury in culture and investigated
the levels of nitric oxide (NO) and the antioxidant uric acid
(UA), as well as the activity of their synthesizing enzymes:
nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and xanthine oxidase (XO).
Methods." Spontaneously transformed epithelial cell line
(HaCaT) was cultured in wells with a flexable silastic bottom.
A cell injury controller was used to produce a rapid pressure of
known amplitude and duration leading to a stretch injury
which deforms the cells and serves as our model system.
Medium was sampled at 9-17 h. UA level was measured by
HPLC-EC, NO by Griess reaction, and cell survival ,by, MTT.
The effects of the inhibitors Oxopurinol (OP for XO) and
NT,'-Nitro-L-Arginine Methyl Ester (L-NAME for NOS) were
studied. Results and Discussion." NO accumulated in the
medium between 9-17h after injury to a significantly higher
levels than in the control culture, (p<0.0001) indicating ROS
p,roduction. This was also evidenced by a ROS-sensitive
/luorescent dye. At the same time, UA levels, which
progressively increased in the control, remained constant in the
njured culture, and were si.gnificantly lower than in the
controls, suggesting consumption of UA by NO. MTT results
indicate about 50% cell death after injury. When L-NAME, OP
or both were added to the culture after injury a significant
reduction in NO and UA were observed (p=0.0049 and
p=0.0004) yet, these treatments did not affect cell survival.
Our findings suggest that stretch injury activates NOS and XO,
however, their role in cell death after injury needs to be further
explored.
Eiectroretinographic characteristics ofthe albino rat
model: Restoration ofvisual pigment
Gurshumov N. and Yinon U.
Physiological Laboratory, Goldschleger Eye Research
Institute, Tel-Aviv University Facul, ofMedicine, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer
Albino mammals have several structural and physiological
abnormalities, resulting in impaired visual functions. A
controversy, however, exists with regard to the visual
sensitivity of albino animals. The present study had
characterized the physiological process of visual pigment
restoration in albino rats as compared to pigmented rats.
15 albino (Wistar) and 15 pigmented (DA) adult rats were
studied. The retinae were exposed to high intensity light source
for a period of 15-20 minutes. The retinal dark-adaptation
process, representing the visual pigment's restoration process,
was observed by a series of flash electroretinographic (ERG)
recordings during an additional period of45 min in the dark.
The results indicate no significant difference (P>0.05) in the
rate of b-wav and a-wave restoration between the albino and
pigmented rats with regards to their amplitude. However,
significant (P<0.05) differences were found between the albino
and pigmented groups with regard to the latency parameters; a
latency values were longer in albino rats.
We concluded that despite the fat that the amplitude of a- and
b-waves in albino and pigmented rats restores almost
identically, the latency parameters of the ERG represent an
important characteristac of the albino rats. The longer latency
in the albino rat shows a delayed procedure, which may
indicate a difference either in their photopigment quality or in
the neural processing.
Control of IPSI- versus contra-laterai axonal turning of D1
roprioceptive interneurons
uy U., Rinski L. and Klar A.
Dept. ofAnatomy and Cell Biology. Hebrew University-
Hadassah MediCal School, Jerusalem
Understanding the neural organization of the spinal cord, and
the way in which its circuits integrate proprioceptive and
descending neural activity to produce movement has
challenged neuroscientists for over a century. Although there
are many well-studied populations of spinal interneurons, there
is still much to be learnt about the roles and cellular properties
ofinterneurons in sensory-motor pathways.
The avian embryo hs many advantages for studying
vertebrate embryonic development and axon p.athfinding. The
embryo is fiat,'develops in ovo, and accessible for surgical
manipulations. We have developed a method of cell
type-specific expression using specific enhancers, in the chick
203
embrvonic spinal cord. Math is a bHLH transcription factor,
expressed in the most dorsally located interneurons in the
spinal cord. Mathl govern the development of multiple
components of the proprioceptive pathway. Utilizing the
Mathl enhancer to drive expression of repgrter .genes, we
studied D1 axonal trajectory. D1 neurons gve rise to two
subpopulations of neurons. One subpopulation projects axons
toward the ventral midline, and eventually crosses to the
contra-lateral side of the spinal cord, while the other projects
ipsi-laterally. The contra and ipsi-lateral axon branches,
fasciculate together at the lateral funiculus. The possible role
of LIM homeodomain protein, and guidance molecule, in
controllin.g the contra versus the ipsi decision will be
presentext.
Assembly of a FET-enzyme bioelectronic hybrid system for
the deection of acetylcholine estcrase activity
Hat A.', Shappir Y. ,Yitzh,aiek S. and Spiral M.E.
Depts. ofNeurobiology, ZEngineering and Chemistry. The
Hebrew University ofJerusalem
We have been successful in assembling a highly sensitive
sensor for agonist and antagonist of acetyl choline esterase
(AchE). The biosensor is based on molecularly modified field
effect transistors (FET) to which AchE was covalently linked.
The link was formulated by a small and highly conjugated
organic coupling agent. The anchoring ofAche by this method
does not modify the ee's properties. Bathed in water,
buffer or ionic solution the enzyme maintains its catalytico
activity for weeks. At present the sensor detects 10 M to 10
M ace.tyl choline (Ach)in the above-mentioned solutions. The
response time of the sensor at room temperature (24C) is
shorter than one sec. The response is totally reversible. The
catalytic activity of the enzyme is blocked by AchE
antagonists (such as eserine) at physiological concentrations.
The Biosensor was developed for use in both water and air
interfaces.
Immunological changes induced during antisense
oligo.deoxynucleotide treatment in experimental
autommune myasthenia gravis
Hamra Y., Sicsic C., and Brenner T.
Dept. ofNeurology Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem
Mvasthenia gravis is an antibody-mediated, autoimmune
nehromuscular disease in which e nicotinic/ acetylcholine
receptor (AChR) is the major autoantigen. The typical
neuromuscularjunction symptoms can be transiently allewated
by acetylcholinesterase (ACHE) inhibitors (such as
pa'idostigmine). Previously we found that long-term treatment
of experimental autoimmune mvasthenia graves (EAMG) rats
with antisense oligodeoxynuc]eotides suppressing muscle
AChE biosynthesis (EN101), improved muscle activity as well
as clinical symptoms of the disease. The aim of the present
study was to determine whether the beneficial influence of
EN101 treatment on the clinical outcome of EAMG results
from amelioration of the immunological processes. Repeated
administration of EN101 for a month reduced the anti-rat
AChR antibody levels bv 90 %. In addition, incubation ofboth
human and rat lymphoytes with EN 101 resulted in a dose
response reduction in the proliferation rate. In the in vitro
experiments, EN101 also lowered total IgG antibody
production by spleen lymphocytes. Our results show the
beneficial effect of oral EN101 treatment on EAMG
immunological parameters and highlight the potential
advantage ofgene-targeted drug therapy.
Cognitive functioning and insomnia among elderly people
Hanuka E.t. Spira T.t, Hadad B.t, Breznitz Z.2. Shefer 0.2.
Breznitz N. and Haimov I.
Dept. ofBehavioral Science. Emek Yezreel Academic College:
CogniFit." MindFimess Solutions. T_ipori
Chronic insomnia and cognitive impairment are both common
complaints among older adults. Even so, only a few studies
have examined the effects of chronic insomnia on cognitive
functioning among the elderly, and the results of these studies
are contradictory. We therefdre examined whether insomnia is
associated with changes in cognitive functioning among
elderly people.
The tudv population comprised two groups: 63 elderly
su.bjects 'ithout sleep disorders, and 35 elderlv insomniacs
exhibiting actigraphicalb confirmed decreases in sleep
efficiency. There was nd significant difference between the
two groups in age and in computer skills.
The cognitive capacity of each subject was tested at the
subject's home usin the computerized "MindFit" test
(CogniFit, Inc.). This enabled us to monitor cognitive
performance and sleep in an objective way, under natural
circumstances, and with minimal distortions.
204
The test consisted of eigl.t different tasks: (1) memory span,
including digit and spatial span; (2) allocating attention to a
target, with and without distraction; (3) selective attention,
with Stroop-like interference; (4) psychomotor skills, i.e.,
tracking; (5) time estimation, both auditory and visual; (6)
executive functioning--planning and working memory; (7)
naming.; and (8) integration of two dimensi's--visutl and
semantic.
A preliminary analysis demonstrated that in five categories of
cognitive functioning, elderly people without sleep disorders
displayed better performance results compared to msonmiacs.
More spe.cificall., the results revealed significant differences
between msomruacs and good sleepers on memory span,
allocating a,.tWntion to a target, time estimation, working
memory and integration oftwo dimensions.
Overall,the findings imply that, at least in some aspects, sleep
disturbances may account for cognitive decline in the elderly.
Axoplasmic importins enable retrograde injury signaling
in lesioned sciatic nerve
Hanz S.,Perlson E.,Willis D.2, Zheng J-O.2, Huerta j.j.3,
Massarwa,R.t, Kohler M.a, va;n-Minnen J., Koltzenburg M.3,
Twiss J.L.", and Fainzilber M.
1Dept. ofBiological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot, lsrael; Neuroscience Research Laboratory, A1
duPont Hospital, Wilmington, DE 19899; Institute ofChiM
Health, University College London, United Kinedom," 4Max
Delbrueck Center, Charite, Berlin, Germany; S'rije
UniversiteitAmsterdam, The Netherlands
Ambron and colleagues have shown that Ap!yia axonal
proteins containing nuclear localization signals (NLS) traffic
retrogradely to the cell body following inj_ury, s_uggesting that
such 'retrograde injury signals' are required ftr successful
neuronal regeneration (Mol. Neurobiol. 13, 61-79 [1996]). We
have examined this hypothesis in the mammalian sciatic
nerve/dorsal root gangha (DRG) system, and based on these
studies can now propose a general mechanism for retrograde
injury signaling in nerve axons. Nuclear import factors from
the importin/karyopherin and 13 families are found in axons
in the sciatic nerve, at significant distances from the cell body.
The expression level of importin ot did not change aRer lesion,
w,hereas in contrast imPortin 13 protein was sigmficantly
elevated, due to local trarislation of axonal mRNA. The newly
synthesized importin B binds to the importin x pre-existi__ng in
the axon, thereby triggering formation of a high affiniW
NLS-binding conplex. The complex traffics retrogradely via
an association withthe motor protein dynein. Use of synthetic
NLS peptide as a competitor of endogenous proteins that may
bind ths complex inhibited the regenerati-ve outgrowth of
axotomised adult DRG neurons in culture. Moreover,
application of synthetic NLS peptide concomitantly, with a
conditional lesioning of the sciatic nerve in vivo inhibited the
subsequent enhanced outgrowth of conditioned IA/L5 DRG
neurons. Thus, lesion-nduced upregulation of axonal
importin-13 enables the formation of an inj.ury signaling
complex and targets it for retrograde transport in inJured nerve.
Theatre ofthe mind: functional selectivity under free
viewing of audio-visual motion pictures
13
assonU,, Nir Y., Levy I, ', Fuhrmann G. and Malach R.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot 76100; 2Debt. ofComputer Science, TelAviv
University 61390;1"he Interdisciplinary CenterforNeural
Computation, Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904
To what extent is the functional organization of the human
visual cortex maintained d.uring natural vision? Here we
explored this question by letting subject freely view an
uninterrupted feature film. Using a new, unbiased, analysis, in
which spatio-temporal activity patterns in one brain were used
to "model" activity in another brain, we found a striking level
of voxel by voxel synchronization in individuals watching the
same mo,ie. Surisingly, the synchronization extended
beyond primary and secondary visual and auditory areas into
associataon cortices. The inter-subject synchronization
consisted of two components: 1. A widespread cortical
activation pattern correlated with emotionallyarousing scenes.
2. A regionally selective component, which fully recovered
known cortical specializations through reverse correlation of
the time-course activation peaks with the corresponding movie
frames. The results reveal a surprising tendency of individual
brains to "tick collectively" durmg natural vision. Finally, we
propose the reverse correlation approach as a robust unbiased
tool for revealing new cortical specializations.
Supported by the Benoziyo Center.
Methy.sergide decreases self-grooming in suckling and
weanling rat pups
Hecht D. and Leshem M.
Dept. ofPsychologyandBrain & Behavior Center; University
ofHafa
Self-grooming behavior develops rapidly in the rat pup
betveen suckling and weaning. Here we examined the role Of
two neural systems believed to mediate suckling in the adult,
oxytocin and methysergide. Wistar rat pups 18-days-of-age
(sucklings) and 30-days-of-age (wean]ings) received IP
injections of saline or 5mg/kg methysergide, 10 min later they
were injected intracerebroventricularly with saline or the
oxytocin antagonist, ornithine vasotocin, 0.5rtg/lll. Ten
minutes later the pups were put in a Y-shaped arena with their
anesthetized dam in one part, a sibling in another, and their
behavior monitored for fbur minutes. Self-grooming was one
behavior found to increase greatly from suckling to weaning.
At both ages, the oxytocn antagonist and methysergide
reduced self-grooming, and their combined effect was not
additive. Wile self-grooming is known to be
0xytocin-mediated, to our knowledge, this is the first
demonstration ofsuppression ofspontaneous self-grooming by
a serotonin antagonist, and the first in suckling pups. Our
findings suggest that serotonin may be no less important than
oxytocin in mediating self-grooming behavior. Serotonin's role
in self-grooming may be related to its role in mediating oral
behavior, nipple attachment and contact with the dam in the
pup. As thb oportunity for these behaviors wanes with
weaning, it may be that self-grooming replaces them, thereby
maintaining the essential role of physical contact in
development.
Supportedby a GIFgrant to K. Braun, &M. Leshem.
Differential effect ofemotional and physical stress on
cortical dendritic spine development and possible role of
5-HT1A-receptor blockade
Helmeke C., Abraham A. and Braun K.
Dept. ofZoologyNeurobiology, Otto yon
Guericke University, 39008Magdeburg, Germany
We compared the effects of emotional mad physical stress on
the development of dendritic spines in somato-sensory cortex
(SS) and limbic anterior cingulate cortex (ACd) of the
trumpet-tailed rat Octodon degus. An involvement of. the
serotonergic system, in particular its 5HT1n-receptor, on these
sess-induced synaptic changes was tested. The densities of
apical and basal dendritic spines of layer IUIII pyramidal
neurons in the ACd and in the SS of 21 days old pups were
quantified in the following animal groups: 1) social controls,
2) parentally separated animals (emotional stress), 3) saline
injected animals (physical stress) 4) emotional stress plus
physical stress, 5) parentally separated animals, which received
injections of 0.1mg/kg or 6) lmg/kg) respectively, of the
5-HT1a antagonist Way-100,635 prior to parental separation.
Emotional and physical stress did not alter synaptic
development in the somato-sensory cortex. /n contrast, spine
development in the limbic anterior cingulate cortex is
modulated by both, emotional and physical stress, but in a
different direction. Emotional stress induced a significantly
higher spine density in the anterior cingulate cortex compared
to the social control group. Physical stress combined with
emotional stress induced .higher spine densities compared to
group 3. Blockade of the 5-FIT a-receptors suppressed
separation-induced spine elevation in the anterior cmgulate
cortex and decreases spine densities in the somato-sensory
cortex. These results indicate that the synaptic development in
the limbic (ACd) but not in the sensory (SS) cortex is sensitive
towards stressful experience durin early postnatal time
windows, and that emotional or physical stress induce different
synaptic changes in the ACd some of which appear to be
medmted by 5-HT a-receptor activation.
upportedbygrants/kom the VolkswagenSt/hmg and the
Grman-lsradi Sciehce Foundation
High-level effects in the search for faces
Hershler O. and Hochstein S.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Institute ofLiJb Sciences, Hebrew
University, Jerusalem
Previously we showed that, contrary to older studies, human
faces do pop out from a background of varied distractors.
These results concur with the reverse hierarchy theory of
vision (Ahissar & Hochstein, 1997, 2002), which proposes that
feature search reflects activity in higher cortical
areas as part of a rapid generalizing visual mode vision at a
glance. The present research focuses on when and how the face
search mechanism is activated. We fmd that the pop out effect
for human faces does not generalize to animal faces, w.hich
generated both longer search times
and steeper and more varied search slopes. This suggests that
the pop-out effect is specific for highly salient categories such
as human faces. A second and third experiment examined
which parts of the human face mediate the pop out effect.
Results indicate that search is mediated by
the configuration of the whole face, rather than specific tce
parts. These and related findings indicate that search for a
human face is indeed a high-level effect, confu'ming the claim
of reverse hierarchy theory. Finally, we investigated the effect
ofsubjective target salience on visual search performance.
upportedby a "Center ofExcellence"grant.from the lsrael
Science Foundation and a grantfrom the US-Israel Bmational
Science Foundation (BSF)
Copper binding to PrPC
may inhibit prion disease
popagation
raijaziN., Shaked Y., Rosenmann H., Ben-Hur T. and
Gabizon R.
Dept. OfNeurology; Hadassah UniversityHospital,
Jerusalem
Although it h been well established that PrPc, the normal
isoform ofPrPc, is a copper binding protein, the role of this
metal in the function of PrPc as well as in prion disease
pathology remains unclear. Here we show that when scrapie
infected neuroblastoma cells we[e cultured in the presence of
copper, the accumulation of PrP in these cells was markedly
reduced. In addition, our results indicate that when normal
neuroblastoma cells were cultured in the presence of gpper
ions, they could no longer bind and internalize PrP '. In
another set of experiments, copper was added to the drinking
water of normal and scrapie infected hamsters. Our results
show that administration of cooper to normal hamsters
induced cerebellar PrPc accumulate'on. Most important, a
significant delay in pdon disease onset as observed when
scrapie infected hamsters were treated with copper. As shown
beftre for neuroblastoma cells, also in-vivo most of the
copper induced accum,uclation of PrPc
was intracellular. We
hvoothesized that PrP internalization by copoer may hinder
PIs interaction with this molecule, and thereby affect prion
disease propagation.
Hemispheric specialization and interhemispheric
interaction in Is;hizophrenia
Hirschmann S.,Lamschtein C., BazBarChani M. Barnea
A.3, Zaidel E.
ShaarMenashe Mental Health Center, Israel; Medical
Faculty, Technion, Israel," Bio-Keshev Clinic, Kibutz Givat
Chaim Ichud, Israel; Dept. ofPsychology, UCLA, USA.
We used a hemifield tachistoscopic lexical decision task in
Hebrew, with lateralized targets and distraetors, to measure (1)
hemispheric specialization (right visual field advantage), (2)
psycholingtfistc strategy (wordness advantage), (3)
anterhemispheric transfer (lexicality priming, i.e., better
decision when the target and distractors are the same response
category, namely, both words or both nonwords), and (4)
spontaneous error adjustment (slowing down and becoming
more accurate following errors) in 23 acute patients suffering
from schizophrenia (Sz) with predominant positive or negative
symptoms. Twenty eight normal adults served as controls.
Conh'ary to previous claims, relative to control, Hebrew
speaking Sz (reading from right to left) showed a larger
right-sided visual field a-symmetry in accuracy (F(1,47)=6.53,
p=.014) and in sensitivity (F(1,47)=4.75, p=.034), signaling
greater left hemisphere specialization for word recognition, (2)
a greater disadvantage in non-word recognition in both
accuracy (F(1,47)=7.0, p=.01) and in latency (F(1,47)=7.64,
p=.0081), (3) increased left hemisphere-to-right hemisphere
transfer (accuracy: F(1,47)=6.24, p=.016), and (4) a similar
pattern of slowing down and a smilar inability to improve
accuracy following errors. These effects were largely, due to a
selective deficit of Sz in the left visual hemifield/right
hemisphere.
The right visual field advantage, lexicality priming, and error
adjustment measures in latency and accuracy were tested for
correlation with positive and negative symptoms. Negative
symptoms were significantly and negativelv correlated-with
the right visual field advantage in accuracy(r=-.525, p<.01)-
implying that higher negative symptoms are associated with
weaker left hemisphere dominance. At the same time, Positive
symptoms were significantly and negatively correlated with
lexicality priming in latency (r= .500, p< .01), indicating that
higher positive symptoms are associated with weaker
(inhibitor),) interhemispheric communication.
These results suggest that the negative symptoms reflect
deficient hemispheric specialization, whereas positive
symptoms reflect deficient interhemispheric communication
205
A comparative genomic study reveals an extreme level of
conservation ofgenes involve in synaptic function between
the fruit fly andhoney bee
Inberg A. and Linial__M_M.
Dept. ofBiological Sciences, Institute ofLife sciences, ]e
Hebrew University, Jerusalem
The Phylum Arthropoda that includes all insects is the most
morphologically diverse animal group on the planet. Since the
appearance of insects they dominate most ecological habitats.
The insects and especially the Drosophila had been used as one
of the most successful genetic model to study neuronal
development, differentiation and simple behavior. Following
sequencing the Drosophila (and later the Anopheles) genomes,
a more remote organism was selected to cover the dwergence
of this phylum. The 135Mbase genome of the honeybee (Apis
mellifera) is being sequenced. Honeybees have a complex
social behavior that was extensively studied. It is hypothesized
that the social behavior will be reflected by the complexity of
genes and their variants. With the availability, of complete
unassembled Apis mellifera DNA fragments and partial eDNA
collection, we search for a direct homology to Drosophila
genes. We selected over 150 neuronal genes that are known to
participate in shaping the synapse, in learning, and memory, in
secretion and endoeytosis and in membrane physiology as our
test set. Among these genes are those associated with
SNAREs, synaptic vesicle, post-synaptic PDZ, ion charmcls
and cndocytosis.
Wc show that all tested 150 genes arc conserved between the
fly and the honeybee. Most notably is the extremely high
dcgrcc ofconservation (>95/'0 identical aa) among the various
Shaker type potassium channels between the two organisms.
The homology with other synaptic proteins is also extremely
high (ranging from 80-95% aa identi,). Mammalian s)aaptic
vesicleprotems such as synaptophysin that are not present in
Drosophila were also missing in Apis genomc. We aimed to
use tlie comparative genomc approach to search for the
diversity in protein families between fly, bee, worm and
mouse. Such a comparative research will provide us with new
insights into the genetic makeup that underlying synaptic
function and complex behavior.
Differential activation of hippocampus and amygdala
under controllable or uncontrollable stress
Ilia Y. and Richter-Levin G.
ofPsychology; Brain and Behavior Research Center,
ifa University.
Stress has multiple modes of influence on learning and
memory, improving or impairing it under different conditions.
The H[ppoeampus is held accountable for explicit memory.
The amygdale s critically involved in mediating stress-related
effects on behavior.
The MAPKs (ERK) are recruited when the brain undergoes
synaptic plastici and remodeling (e.g., during induction of
long-term potentiation, learning and memory consolidation).
It has been suggested that the amygdale involvement will be
greater under condition of uncontrollable VS controllable
stress. To test this possibility four groups ofrats were tested: 1.
Good Learners (controllhble situation)- subjected to
avoidnnce learning protocol in the shuttle box. 2. Bad learners
(controllable situation) subjected to avoidance learning
protocol in the shuttle box, but have not acquired the task well
3. Stressed rats (uncontrollable situation) subjected to
parameters of good learners without the possibility to
avoidance learning. 4. Naive rats. Groups 1, 2, and 3 were
trained in the Stiuttle Box, and 30 minutes after the test
session, the Hippocampus, the Amygdala and the Prefrontal
Cortex were collected for analysis of ERK activation during
Western Blotting procedure.
Differences were found in freezing responses (3 rain freezing
test in shuttle box) between Good learners on one side and bad
learners and Stressed rats on the other side, indicating that
indeed the context of the shuttle box was most aversive to the
Stressed and bad learners. The main finding was a differential
activation of ERK in the amygdala following an exposure to
uncontrollable condition (stressed rats) compared to all other
conditions.
The results confirm our hypothesis that the involvement of the
amygdala is increased when being exposed to an
uncontrollable condition.
Supportedby The Israel Foundation The Charles H. Revson
I;bundaton (no. 582/00-1 to G.R-L).
206
The anti-inflammatory and cholinesterase inhibitor
bifunctional compound IBU-PO protects culture neurons
from AB-induced cytotoxicity by acting on Wnt cell
signaling comtonents
Inestrosa N.C.r,Godoy J.A.,Farias G.C.,Avila j.2,
Ferndndez F.Zg Vfiscmez M.C.,Mufioz F.J. Adani R.
Meshulam H. and mitai G.
*P.U. CatOlica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; eCentro de Biol.
Molecular "Severo Ochoa", U. AutOnoma deMadrid, Sain,"
Cibncies Exper. de la Salut, U. Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona,
Spain. 4pharmacology, IIBR, Ness Ziona, Israel
The eta'rent therapy, of Alzheirner's disease (AD) is based on
cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEI). It was noted that certain
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) retard or
avoid the onset of AD. Therefore, a series of novel
bifunctional compounds have been synthesized based oft the
molecular combination of ChEIs with NSAIDs. The
bifunctional compound Ibuprofen-Octyl-Pyridostigmine
(IBU-PO) displays neuroprotective activity in CNS
inflammation, traumatic brain injury, experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis and brainhypoxia in mice. The
racemic (+/-)IBU-PO and the enantiomer (+)IBU-PO were
tested for their neuroprotective activity against arnyloid
13-peptide (Al3)-mediated cytotoxicity in rat hippocampal
neurons (RHN) and mouse cortical neurons (MCN) in vitro.
IBU-PO increased dose-dependently at sub-micromolar levels
(0.01-1tM) the viability of RHN challenged by A[3(53.
The mechanism of action is related to two key members of the
Wnt cell signaling: 13-catenin and GSK-313. The levels of
13-catenin in RHN reduced by AI3 were recovered completely
by IBU-PO at 0.1-11.tM. Inactivation of GSK-3[3 was studied
by phosphorylation of Ser-9-GSK-313. (+)IBU-PO caused a
dose-dependent increase in the phosphorylation of
Ser-9-GSK-3[3 in MCN from wild type arid GSK-3[
overexpressing mice. The levels of cytoplasmic I-catenin were
stabilized by ()IBU-PO in MCN from both types of mice.
(+)IBU-PO, caused an increase in the phosphorylation of
Ser-9-GSK-313 in neurons from both .types of mice but lower
than with (+/-)IBU-PO. Thus, stabihzation of cytoplasmic
13-catenin and inhibition of GSK-31 were displayed in RHN
and MCN. Moreover, IBU-PO enhanced the
non-amyloidogenic APP cleavage by causing an increase in
the secreted APP level as well as a decrease in A1340 in RHN.
Amelioration ofexperimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis by recombinant human
aipha-fetoorotein
Irony Tur-;inai M., Grigoriadis N. and Brenner T..
Laboratory ofNeuroimmunology, Dept. ofNeurolo,
Hadassah Hebrew Univers#yMedical Center, Jerusalem,
2Aristotle University, Thessalonik Greece.
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is an immunomodulating,
embryo-specific glycoprotein produced by the yolk sac and
fetal liver. AFP concentrations in maternal human serum
increase gradually in the second and third trimesters of
pregnancy and drbp rapidly at the time of delivery. Clinical
remissions during the second half of pregnancy, as well as a
tendency to postpartum relapses, have been described in
several autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis,
mvasthenia gravis, rheumatoid arthritis and thyroiditis, and are
attributed to the immtmosuppressive effect of AFP. Our
previous studies showed that human AFP, isolated from
maternal or fetal serum, and recombinant, human AFP
(rhAFP), cloned and expressed in E.coli, suppress
experimental autoimmtme encephalomyelitis (EAE) and
experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (EAMG).
Recently, following the development of a novel technology
based on the secretion of rhAFP in the milk of transgenic
goats, we tested this preparation in the EAE model. The
goat-derived rhAFP preparations caused marked suppression
of EAE. Under AFP treatment fewer animals developed EAE
and none of them died. CNS tissue from AFP-treated mice
showed a pronounced reduction in the degree of inflammation,
axonal loss and axonal injury" in all the AFP-treated groups, as
opposed to the placebo-treated mice. CNS damage was
prevented or limited in the brain and spinal cord meninges and
parenchyma, and was correlated with disease seventy and
ncidence. Also, treatment of EAMG rats with rhAFP
conferred a beneficial effect, particularly during the chronic
phase of the disease. Our observations further support the role
of AFP in the amelioration of experimental autoimmune
diseases and other autoimmune disorders.
Epileptiform activity and cortical spreading depression in
acute and chronic models ofepilepsy
lvens S.,Heinemann U, and Friedman A.1'2
-Instite ofPhysiology Exp. Neurology, Charit', Humboldt
University, Berlin, Germany_ and Zlotowsla Center of
Neuroscience, Ben Cntrion UniversiO, Beersheva, lsrael
Cortical spreading depression (CSD) is a depolarization wave
propagating at a rate of-3 mm/min in the cerebral cortex. The
phenomenon is triggered by electrical, mechanical or toxic
factors and is considered the best known model for m!graine
aura. CSD was also associated with epilepsy as both migraine
and epilepsy are disorders characttrized by transient
paroxysmalpropagating cortical dysfunction and, m a number
of syndromes, migraine and epilepsy are related. To search for
the sensitivity" of different cortical regions to initiation and
propagation of epileptiform activity and CSD initiation, we
used coronal brain slices maintained in-vitro. Spontaneous or
stimulus-evoked epileptiform activity or CSD were evoked in
the presence of high- K (8-15mM), Low Mg (0-1mM),
4-aminopyridine (10mM) or bicuculin (5mM) in slices from
control rats or from rats with a chronic epileptic focus
following BBB disruotion. Recordings were made using 2-4
K sensitive microeIectrodes. Velocity of the propagating
epileptiform activity and CSD were measured over different
cortical regions (motor, somatosensory-trunk and whisker
region and auditory cortex). Our data shows that under
different models of increased excitability, ictal-like events as
well as CSD generation is more readily triggered in the chronic
epileptic cortex. Moreover, ictal events and CSds had longer
duration and slower recovery in the epileptic cortex compared
to non-treated regions. As glutamate receptor antagonists
blocked and GABA-antagonists enhanced abnormal
hpersynchronous activity, we propose that focal cortical
reorganization with abnormally increased excitatory drive may
prone distinct cortical regions to both CSD and focal
epileptiform activity.
Therole of GABAA receptor subunits in the development
of affective disorders
Jacobson S. and Richter-Levin G.
Dept. ofPsychology, University ofHaifa, Center of'Brain and
Behavior
A new animal model of affective disorders was developed
indicating that expostu'e to both juvenile (26-28 days) and
adult (60 days) stress increases anxiety levels. Profound
evidence indicates that GABAaRs are important in the control
ofthe physiological response to stress and anxiety. There are at
least 19 related GABAaR subunits the GABAaR are best
distinguished by the type of ot sabunit. The localization and
constitution of GABAaR ct subunits varies during embryonic
and postnatal ontogeny. In embryonic and early postnatal
period ofnormal rats the expression of ot, c3 and t5 subunits
is high while oq subumt expression is low. In later
developmental stages there is a rapid increase in the proportion
of subtmit whereas ct2, ct3 and cts subunits disappear from
numerous areas soon after the x subunit appears .In the
present study we began to assess whether in affective disorders
emotional abilities are impaired due to changes occurring in
the GABAergic system. We have utilized the juvenile+adult
exposure to stress model to test potential alterations in the
expression of GABAaR subunits in the amygdala and
hippocampus. We compared two groups: 1) Juvenile+adult
exposure to stress group- rats were exposed to both platform
stress paradigm and acute swim stress paradigm. 2) Control
group- rats were not exposed to stress. Following the adult
exposure to stress we conducted anxiety tests and collected
brain tissues. We used western blottir/g technique for the
detection of specific GABAaR t subunits ( and
Following exposure to stress, we found abnormal patterns of
GABAaR oq and % subunit expression .These patterns
suggest that there is an incomplete switch from the GABA,R
et subtmit highly expressed at the time of birth (ct5) to the
predominant subunit ofthe adult brain (x). In the stress group,_
the functional consequences might be a faulty maturation of
the inhibitory GABAergic system that may lead to increased
anxiety level.
Association between BMP signaling, the cell cycle and
neural crest delamination
Kalchm__C., Stanleigh J. and Burstyn-Cohen T.
Dept. ofA-tomy and Cell Biology_ Hebrew University
Hadassah Medical School. Jerus-alem 91120
We have previously found that delamination of premigratory
netu'al crest (NC) cells from the dorsal neural tube depends
both uoon BMP/nogin signalin and a successful transition
from (31 to the S-phase of he cell cycle. We then investigated
the h59othesis that these two mechanisms are hierarchiclly
related. Inhibiting BMP in the dorsal tube by overexpression of
noggin reduced the proportion ofcells entering S-phase as well
as expression ofcyclin D1 mRNA. This was associated with a
loss of transcripts encoding Wntl, suggesting that Wntl acts
downstream of BMP. To investigate Whether Wnt signaling
links BMP activity to the cell cycle and in turn to NC
delamination we overexpressed by electroporation a mutant
form of dishevelled (Xddl) that abrogates both canonical and
non-canonical Wnt activities. Xddl inhibited both the entry of
nuclei into S-phase and the delamination of NC cells.
Altogether, we suggest that the activity of BMP in the neural
tube is mediated by Wnt signaling which controls cell cycle
progression and consequently the generation of NC cell
movement.
Distribution and 'ole ofproteasome in the transformatio
of' an axon into a growth cone after axotomy
Kamber D. and Spira M.E.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Lib Science lnstttute, 1he ttebre .v
University oferusalem.
Recent studies indicate that protastmes play central roles in
differeut forms of neuroplasticity including turning and
retraction of growth cones (GC) in response to signaling
molecules (Douglas & Holt, 2001, Neuron 32) and in
establishment of short and long term synaptic plasticity (Zhao
et al., 2003, Cuxr. Biol. 13). These r_eports as well as earlier
findings by our laborato" (Gitler & Spira, 1998, Neuron 20)
raise the possibility that p'i'oteasomes pm'ticipate in other forms
ofneuroplasticity such as neuronal regeneration after trauma.
In the present stud)' we use ctdturedAplysia neurons and on
line confocal imaging to examine the distribution and role of
proteasomes in the transformation of a differentiated axon into
a GC after axotomy.
To image proteasome activity we used the
membra:ne-permeable proteasome sub,trate
succinyl-Leu-Leu-ValTyr-7-amido-4-tifluoromethyl
coumarin (suc-LLVY-AFC). Unlike suc-LLVY-AFC its
cleavage product AFC is highly fluorescent. Baseline
proteol-ytic activity was imaged in intact neurons, and was
found to reach a steady state (SS) level -40 min after addition
of tte indicator to tlie bathing solution. Axonal transection
leads to elevation of the product's fluorescence in the most
distal zone (DZ) of the transected axon, reaching a new SS
level that remains higl)..for hours.
lmmunolabeling with anti prosomes p25K (ICN
Pharmaceuticals, Inc) revealed that axotomy ,leads to
proteasomes accumulation at the DZ and to its translocation to
the membrane and submembrane domains of the GC's
lamellipodium. Thus the distribution ofthe proteasome and the
proteolytic product colocalizes within the GC.
To examine whether proteasomes activity play any role in the
transformation of an axon into a GC, we bathed the intact
neuron in 10mM clasto-Lactaeystin b-lactone, a
membrane-permeable proteasome inMbitor. Under these
conditions the proteolysis of Suc-LLVY-AFC and the
formation of a GC's lamellipodimn after axotomy were greatly
inhibited.
Supported by the BSF
Unexpected enhancement ofLTP in brain slices by
drogen peroxide
letA. and Segal-M.
Dept. ofNeurobioIogy, Weizmann Institute ofScience, Rehovot
Hydrogen peroxide (IGOr), a reactive oxygen species, is
assumed to have a detrimental effect on neuronal plasticity.
Indeed, HO suppresses LTP in hippocampal slices of normal
rats and wild-type (wt) mice. Transgenic mice overexpressing
SOD1 (tg-SOD)-, which maintain high ambient HOz, have also
been shown to be impaired in their ability to express
hippocampal LTP. Paradoxically, H.O, at a concentration
(50tM) that blocks LTP in wt mice, actually enhanced LTP in
slices of 2-month-old tg-SOD mice. HzO dependent LTP in
tg-SOD was blocked by the protein phosphatase calcineurin
inhibitor FK-506, but not by rapamycm, an FKBP12 inhibitor
or by H7 a serine-kinase inhibitor. Interestingly, wt and
tg-SOD mice expressed similar levels of the antioxidant
enzyme catalase and similar activity of glutathione peroxidase.
An opposite situation was found n 2 yr old mice. Aged wt
mice were impaired in LTP in a manner that could be reversed
by addition ofH202. Surprisingly, aged tg-SOD mice exhibited
larger LTP than that found n wt mice, but this was now
reduced by 50mM H202. Both young tg-SOD and aged control
mice displayed altered protein phosphatase activity, compared
to that ofyoung controls, moreover, FK506 inhibited LTP in
old tg-SOD as well as in old wt mice treated with HzO2. These
data promote a role for HO2 in the regulation of LTP,
proposes that it is mediated by the protein phosplmtase
calcineurin.
207
Extracellular regulated kinase I/1I (ERKI/II) as a
coincident detector ofneuromodulation and fast
neurotransmission
Kaphzan H., Belelovsky K. and Rosenhlum K.
CenterJbrBrain and Behaviour, Faculty ofScience and
Science Education, University ofttaifa 31905
In order for a particular neural representation to become
consolidated for longer periods, long lasting changes in the
nem'al connectivity should take place, as well as other intrinsic
neural changes. These changes depend upon molecular
processes such as signal transduction, transcription and protein
synthesis.
e h,pothe,size that in order for an afferent ionotropic "fast"
expcr.,euce to be consolidated as a long term memory, it should
come in convergence with another metabotropic "slow"
modatory input This modulatory-metabotropic input ignite a
nolcclar ?rocc;s that when converged with the "fast"
ionotroyic nput, it promotes the possibility for that specific
"f,ff>" mpm to be consolidated into a long term memory. The
moloch.tar convergence sites of the two inputs might serve as
their coincident detectors, and act as a molecular "decision"
point for consolidating current experience to a long term
memory.
One such molecular conv.e.rging site, which is activated by
both types of synaptic actavmes (i.e. "fast" and "sloW') is the
ERK molecule. Io addition ERKI/II was found to be necessary
for memory/synaptic plasticity consolidation in different brain
areas.
In order to test the hypothesis that ERKI/II serve as a
coincident detector of last and slow neurotransmission, we
developed a system that utilized pharmacology with brain
slices. The system eatables us to have a full and accurate
control over tile pharmacological manipulations in means of
time scales and doses, while giving us a close biological
eIvironment as possible to the functioning mature brain in
viva.
Preliminary results with hippocampal slices have shown that
J00tM NMDA (as a "fast" neurotransmitter) induced an
increase in ERKI/II activation within 5 minutes. ERKI/II
activation reanlied to base line levels within 15 minutes,
presumably as a result of significant activation of ERKI/II
specific phosphatase/s. We are currently analyzing the effect of
neuromodulators (e.g. dopamine) on ERKVII activation with
and without the NMDA input.
Urine fi'om scrapie infected hamsters comprises low levels
ofprion infecivi_tY
Kariv-Inbal Z., Staked G.M., Grigoriadis N. and Gabizon
R.
Dept. ofNeurology; Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem
Israel; ZDept. ofNeurologyAHEPA, Aristotale Umversity
Hospital, Thessaloniki Gi"eece
The question of whether prion diseases can be transmitted by
body fluids has important epidemiological and economical
implications. The possibility that pnon-infected urine is
infectious has also environmental implications, such as the
transmition of CWD and scrapie between animals in the field.
However, no infectivity has been reported as for today in
urine.
ollowing our findings suggesting that a protease resistant
isoform of PrP may be present in prion-infected urine, we
tested the urine htfectivity ofscrapie sck hamsters by infecting
normal hamsters with enriched unne samples by several routes
of infection. Following prolonged incubation times, two
animals, each one in a different group succumbed to prion
disease while most of the others in the same groups present
symptoms ofsub-clinical prion disease, including low levels of
PrP in their brains and extensive glyosis. Our results
therefbre suggest that prion-infected urine comprises low
levels of infectivity. We also propose that in general, when
low levels of priori infectivity are expected, it is important to
test the presence ofsub-clinical signs m the infected animals.
Functional properties ofanterior pituitary cells in
hypothalam.o-p.ituitary slices ofthe teleost fish tilapia
Kasher C., Fleldervish I.A., Zakai H., Gutnick M.J., and
Levavi-Sivan B.
Koret School ofVeterinaryMedicine & Dept. ofAnimal
Sciences, Ihe Hebrew University ofJerusalem, Rehovot 76100
The anterior pituitary of the teleost fish contains a variety of
endocrine cells, which, under direct control f'rom
hypohalamus, release somatotrophic and gonadotrophic
hormones and thereby play a major role in fish reproduction,
social behavior and growth. Althou,gh the edoerinological
p;operties of these cells have been extensively studied, little is
knowi about their underlying biophysical prtperties. Here, we
have studied the electrophysiological properties of these cells
208
using a novel in-vitro slice preparation that leaves much of the
hypothalamo-pituitary circuitry intact.
In whole cell current-clamp recordings the cells had membrane
potentials between -65 and -75 mV, and a very- high input
resistance. In response to depolarizing current pulses they
fired single, brief fast-rising action potentials which were
followed by pronounced afterhvo_e(polarization.
Voltage-clamp experiments revealed the NaCaz+, and K
conductances that underlie these activities. In addition, the
cells were found to possess a strongly outwardly rectifying
cation-nonsoecific current which was resistant to classical
blockers of'Na+, ca and K channels. The kinetic properties
of this current were similar to those ascribed in other neuronal
and non-neuronal systems to currents mediated by TRP
channels. We therefore performed Western blots with TRPC
channel-specific antibodies to determine whether TRP
channels are indeed present in the membranes of fish anterior
pituitary cells. We detected high levels of TRPC4 and 6 in the
pituitary homogenate, while TRPC1, 3 and 5 were not present.
When Lucifer Yellow was introduced into a single cell in order
to mark it, the fluorescent dye quickly stained neighboring
cells as well. Since Lucifer Yellow freely passes thrtugh gap
junctions, we recorded simultaneously from pairs of adjacent
pituitary cells and found that they are strongly electrotonically
coupled. These data lead us to hypothesize that the electrical
activities of anterior pituitary cells in tilapia are synchronized
by coupling through gap junctions, and that regulation of this
coupling may play a critical role in determining complex
patterns ofpituitary hormone secretion.
Effect of maternal exposure to hypoxic episode on
postnatal development; possible protective effect by
maternal administration of magnesium sulfate
14 5 2.4 3.
Kashtuts_kv 1. ', Huleihel M. ,allak M. ', Sorokin Y.,
Galili M'-and Golan H.1'4'5
Dept. ofDevelopmental Geneacs,Dep oflmmunologye
Dept. ofObstet. & GynecoL3, Fqcutty Ceatth Sciences,
Zlotowsk ctr. forNeuroscence,BGU 3eer-Sheva, Israel,
Detroit, Michigan,
ofObs. & Gyn. HutzelHospital
Prenatal hypoxic-ischemic .brain injury is believed to cause
permanent neurological deficits in neonates. It was suggested
that the damage to fetus brain involved glutamate toxicity
mediated by the NMDA receptor. We examined the possible
protective effect of magnesium sulfate (Mg) against glutamate
toxicity,. Since NMDA receptor is involved in accurate
neurogenesis, Mg may impair development. Here, we tested
the effect accreted by maternal h)9oxia and possible protective
effect of magnesium sulfate treatment in a mouse model.
Pregnant mouse at gestation day 17 were exposed to: 1.
Hypoxia, following pretreatment with saline (S+H), 2.
Hypoxia, following pretreatment with Mg (Mg+H), 3. Control
group, air breathing, following saline injection (S+A) and 4.
Air breathing following Mg injection (Mg+A). During the first
month, newborns were tested for the development of motor
reflexes and coordination. The development ofS+H newborns
was slow in the fighting reflex, rotarod and locomotion on
inclining slope. Mg pretreatment improved the performance of
newborn in all reflexes, resulting in similar score as the control
group. Thus, hypoxia delay the development of motor function
and pretreatment with Mg compensate for the impairment
caused by hypoxia.
At the age of 3 months mice of all treatment exhibited reduced
number of moves within 5 min (25.6, 24.7, 24.5) in the open
field as compared to the control (31.7). In all treatment groups
33-44% ofmouse develop ataxia as indicated by the hind-paw
footprint, compared to 8% in the control group stride size was
significantly shorter in the Mg+A group, as mpared to the
control. Motor impairment was further addressed by wire
hanging test and vertical pole. All control mice hang to the
wire for 60 sec while in both S+H and Mg+A groups, 25% and
27% of mice fail to hold, and only 12.5% of the Mg+H group.
In a vertical pole 18 mm diameter, 50% of S+A and Mg+A
mice hold for 60see, only 25% of S+H and 38% of Mg+H
could hold. In summary, hypoxia delay the development of
motor function and impair adult mice motor performance,
pretreatment with Mg partially compensate for the impairment
caused by hypoxia.
Low molecular weight heparin but not aspirin ameliorates
the behavioral hyperactivity in an experimental model of
antiphospholipid syndrome
Katzav A.,Pick C.(3.,Korcz,'n A.D.
/4 and Chapman j.l,3
,Depts. of Physiology andPharmacology, Anatomy, and
3Nburoloev, Sackler Faculty ofMedicine, TelAviv University,
Tel Aviv '9978, and 4Dept. ofMedicmeB andResearch Unit
ofAutoimmune Diseases, ShebaMedical Center, Tel
Hashorner 52621
Background: The antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), defined
by the occurrence ofrecurrent thromboembolic events (venous
or arterial), repeated spontaneous abortions, thromboc,vtopenia,
and the presence of elevated titers of crculating
antiphospho/ipid antibodies (aPL), is associated with
neurological manifestations. Animals immunized with
b2-glycoprotein (b2-GPI), a serum protein which is essential
for the binding of pathogenic aPL, develop all the systemic
signs ofAPS as wellas behavioral hyperactivity. Objective: To
investigate the pathogenesis of- CNS involxTement in
experimental APS by modulation of coagulation by
low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH, Clexane) or aspirin in
this model. Methods: Female Balb/C mice were immunized
with b2-GPI in complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) or with
CFA alone. Treatment was started 6 weeks after immunization
and 3 months later the mice behavior was tested in the
staircase test. Results: Immunization ofnaive mice with bz-GPI
resulted in elevated levels of circulating anti-negatively
charged phospholipids, and anti-b-GPI antibodies. The APS
mice exhibited hyperactive behavior compared to controls as
reflected by higher rate ofstair climbing (p<0.008 bv t-test)on
the apparatus. Aspirin treatment (30 mg/mouse) had no effect
on the h)peractive behavior ofAPS mice (p<0.04 by t-test). In
contrast, LMWH treatment (25 mg/mouse) normalized APS
mice behavior. Conclusions: The beneficial effect of LMWH
on the hyperactivity of APS mice implicates vascular
hology and coagulation factors in causing CNS disease.
s effect as well as the lack of efficacy of aspirin may be
relevant to the treatment ofAPS in humans.
A possible function of no in learning that food is inedible in
Aplysia: NO signals that animals have attempted to eat
Katzoff A._Miller N., Hurwitz I., Susswein Y.Z. and Susswein
A.J.
Faculty ofL(fe Sciences, Bar llan University, Ramat Gan
Aplysia feeding is modified by associative learning. Food
contacts the lips, enters the mouth, and elicits attempts to
swallow. If food cannot be swallowed, Aplysia responses are
weakened. Thus, reinforcement arises from success or failure
to swallow. However, a condition for learning is that food
must enter the mouth: food stimulating the lips, without
entering the mouth, causes no learning. Learning is followed
by short and long term memory, which are blocked by
treatment with antagonists of NO during training. Treating
with the NO donor SNAP restores the abili.ty of training to
roduce memo,ry.
erebral ganghon neuron C2 synthesizes and releases NO,
which excites the serotonergic fiaodulatory metacerebral cell
(MCC). C2 is a primary mechano-afferent innervating the
peri-oral zone. Entry" of fdod into the mouth, and pulling at the
food in attempts to swallow activate C2, and thereby excite
the MCC. We examined the hypothesis that NO in learning
signals food entry into the mouth,/.e., reports that the operant
has occurred. When lips were stimulatedwith food, but food
did not enter the mouth, no short- or long- term memory
occurred. However, treating animals with theNO donor SNAP
prior to lip stimulation without food entrv led to both short-
and long-term memory. Thus, NO treatinent mimicked the
effect offood enter', and converted an ineffective procedure in
roducing memory nto an effective procedure.
o examine whether the MCC is activated by SNAP that
support memory formation, extracellular recordings from the
MCC were performed with and without SNAP, in response to
applications of carbamyl-choline (CCh), which elicits fictive
buccal motor programs. SNAP elicited activity in the MCC,
and also amphfied the response to CCh. The increase occurred
with a delay of 10 min, and was maintained for 15-30 min
after washihg out the CCh. These data support the h,pothesis
that NO signals food entry into the mouth and therety causes
an increased firing of MCC. This increase is essential for
learning.
Activity and plasticity in the dentate gyrus and the
amygdala following controllable vs. uncontrollable stress
Kav.ushansky A. and Kichter-Levin G.
DetJt. ofPs);chology, University ofttaifa, Haifa 3t905
We studied the effects of controllable versus uncontrollable
stress on synaptie plasticity in the hippocampus and in the
amygdala. The hippocampus is a brain region involved in the
processing of the cognitive aspects of emotional experiences.
The amygdala is related to variety of emotional functions. We
used the rat model and the eleetrophysiologieal procedure of
long-term potentiation (LTP) induction in both structures
simultaneously, stimulating the entorhinal cortex (EC). EC is
located at a nodal point between the hippocampus and the
amygdala and has reciprocal projections to both brain areas.
The naive group was left tmdisttu:bed until the recording. Rats
ofthe controllable stress group ("platform") were trainedmthe
Morris water maze to locate the hidden tmderwater platform
and so to escape the cold water (19-21+C), immediately before
the recording. The uncontrollable stress group ("no platform")
underwent the same procedure without the platform. Rats were
anesthetized, and after the recording ofbaseline fieldpotentials
in the dentate gyrus and in the basolateral amygdaloidnucleus,
theta-burst stimulation was given to the EC, and recording
proceeded for lb. Similar to previous results from our lab,
stimulation of the EC induced LTP in both the hippocampus
and the amygdala. The stress procedures did not significantly
affect the LTP in the dentate gyms. The baseline in the
amygdala of the "no platform" group was enhanced compared
to the naive group, suggesting uncontrollable stress-induced
plasticity in the amygdala. Future research will assess
plasticity changes in the CA1 area of the hippoeampus
following controllable and uncontrollable stress.
Real-time detection of nitric oxide producing interneurons
in cortical slices by diaminotriazolofluorescein
1 r2
Kimhi S. Buskila Y., Schiller J. and Amitai Y.
DeptofPhysio!ogy, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva and
"Dept ofPhysiology and Biophysics, Technion, Haifa.
Various anatomical methods reveal that only a subset of
GABAergic neurons expresses the enzymic nitric-oxide
synthase in cortical neuronal circuits. However, the production
of nitric oxide by coical neurons has never been explored.
We used the fluorescent indicator for nitric oxide (NO),
diaminotriazolofluorescein (DAF-2T) to reveal NO-producing
neurons in live neocortical slices.
Acute brain slices were incubated for 15 minutes in a ringer
solution containing 2 M of the DAF-2T precursor DAF-2
DA, and then transferred to a slice bath mounted on a
fluorescent microscope equipped with IR/DIC optics, where
we attempted recording from stained cells. Some experiments
were carried out using an upright confocal microscope.
Intensely stained neuronal somata and proximal dendrites were
visible after several minutes of excitation with 488 nm
wavelength. In addition, there was a diffuse punctate staining
in all layers, with particularly high density in layer I. Cells
stained with DAF-2T were read@ identified under IRIDIC.
None ofthese neurons had pyramidal morphology, and most of
them were slightly shrunken and apparently dead. Neighboring
neurons could be patched and displayed normal physiology.
Slices that had Seen incubated in DAF-2 DA and then
illuminated for 5 minutes displayed increased excitability: 1)
field potentials recorded in these slices displayed longer
duration and often had more than one negative peak, 2) the
horizontal spread of electrically-evoked activity in treated
slices was larger than in control slices, and 3) ihe threshold
concentration of the GABAA blocker picrotoxin required to
induce epileptic activity was significantly reduced in treated
slices.
We conclude that NO is produced by a specific subset of
GABAergic neurons. These neurons are damaged during the
process of DAF-2T fluorescence, and their death renders the
remaining cortical tissue with higher excitability, but not
sufficient to induce epileptic phenomena.
Supported bygrantsJkom the ISFand the Israeli Ministry of
Health to YA.
Involvement of regulatory CD4+CD25+ T cells in neuronal
survival after central nervous system injury and mental
stress: Interaction with key neurotransmitters
Kipnis J., Mordechay S., Avidan H., and Schwartz M.
Dpi. ofNeurobiology, Wezmann Institute ofScience, Rehovot
76100.
Autoimmune neuroprotection, a term introduced by our
laboratory and which would confuse scientists just four years
ago, is widely used today world wide. It describes a
physiological phenomenon of involvement of autoimmune T
cells, specific for self-proteins highly expressed at the site of
CNS injury,, in helping the body to withstand the consequences
209
of destructive materials appearing from the injured neural
tissue and causing secondary neuronal death. Strains of rats
and mice differ in their ability to mount a physiological
autoimmune response to CNS injury and therefore differ in
neuronal survival after injury. Strains, able to mount an
autoimmune response will benefit from higher neuronal
survival, whereas autoimmune disease will not be induced in
those animals. The autoimmune system is probably able to
regulate itself, so that autoimmune T cells will protect the
damaged tissue without causing a disease. To tmderstand the
cellular regtl,ato mechanism, which allows an autoimmune
'benefit' without the autoimmune 'risk', we examined the role
of naturally occurring regulatory CD4+CD25 T cells in
recovery after CNS injury. We showed that depletion of these
cells, which predisposes animals to development, of
spontaneous autoimmune diseases, enables betted and. faster
activation of autoimmune T cells and therefore better neuronal
sun,ival. However, injection of these regulatory T cells after
CNS injm3' diminished endogenous ability to withstand
secondary degenerative processes. We also showed that
neurotrafismitters increased after CNS injury deactivate_
regulatory T cells, thus enabling a rapid activation ot-
autoimmune effector T cells. High sensitivity of regulato.ry T
cells to neurotransmitters might represent the 'missing hnk'
between the immune and the nervous systems interactions. A
'fine tuning' on a level of regula.t.ory T cells by
neurotransmtters could be a promising therapy for
autoimmune and neurodegenerative disorders.
Whisking behavior of freely-moving rats in an object
localization task
Knutsen P.M.. Pietr M., Derdikman D. and Ahissar E.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute ofSceince, Rehovot
Vibrissal touch is a major source of information about the
immediate environment for rodents, many of which are
nocturnal by nature. Vibrissae of rats can grow up to -6 cm
long, and their vibrissal touch is characterized by bouts of
rhythmic motions ('whisking') primarily in the range 5-11 Hz
and .up to 90 degrees of angle. The speed and amplitude of
whisking movements, coupled with very rapid head and body
movements, thus enables the rat to sample large regions of
space in short amounts of time. In order to describe the
complex whisking behavior we have devised a method, based
on ultra-fast videography and image-processing techniques,
which enables us to perform automated tracking of the rat's
head and whisker movements, Our algorithm reduced video
images of the rat into simple representations of eye, nose and
whisker positions as well as whisker shape. These data enable
us to precisely quantify the active, self-generated movements
of whiskers and to analyze how the whiskers' trajectories and
shape change upon contact with objects. This method can be
applied to study detailed behavior patterns in normal animals
as well as in animals with known vibrissal or motor deficits.
Also, behavior can be. correlated with neuronal events, such as
local-field potentials and spiking events. W_ give examples of
whisker movements in rats trained in a two-choice
obje_ct-position discrimination task, and show how task
performance correlates with particular patterns of
self-generated movements.
Blockingpost-retrieval consolidation of CTA memory in
the rat induces a retrieval deficit
Kobilo T. and Dudai Y.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, The Weizmann Institute ofScience
Experimental extinction of conditioned taste aversion (CTA) is
a function of the intensity of training. We have previously
shown that increasing the number of CTA training sessions
from one to two is sufficient to render the retrieved trace
significantly more resistant to extraction (Berman et al.
Learn&Memory 10, 16, 2003). Furthermore, we have
demonstrated that when the long-term trace becomes resistant
to extinction, it also becomes upon retrieval sensitive anew to a
consolidation blocker, anisomycin. This provides evidence for
a post-retrieval or post-activation consolidation phase, i.e.
'reconsolidation' (Eisenberg et al. ,Science 2003, 301, 1102).
We have now determined that the CTA trace that is blocked in
reconsolidation does not exhibit spontaneous recove.ry over 11
days. This indicates that the effect of the consolidatirn blocker
in reconsolidation is not merely to transiently suppress the
expression of the long-term memory. However, the question
still remains whether other treatments could unveil a latent
trace. To address this question, we have used a reinstatement
protocol, in which an attempt is made to reinstate a latent
conditioned association by presentation of the unconditioned
stimulus (in CTA, i.p. injection of LiC1, a malaise inducing
treatment), in the absence of conditioned stimulus (in CTA,
taste). We found that reinstatement by such a non-associative
experience can indeed partially reactivate the CTA memory
210
which earlier declined after blockade ofreconsolidation. Taken
together with our data on reconsolidation in the medaka fish
(Eisenberg and Dudai, these proceedings), our findings suggest
that the blockade of post-retrieval conlidation oflong.'-term
memories somehow disrupts retrieval, and does not cause a
tn'e storage deficit.
pported by the Volkswagen Foundation and the lsraeli.
Science t;bundation.
CREB activation in the hippocampns, amygdalz z.nd
entorhinai cortex following learning or stress procedures
Ko,ag_a_nI. and Richter-Levin G.
Dept. ofPsycholog; Brain and Behavior Research Center,
Haifi University
Many .learning paradigms involve also a significant component
of stress. Therefore, .it is important to understand the
differential contribution ofstress and learning to the molecuI.r
mechanisms underlying the coping response ofthe orga.nism.
ha the present study we attempted to separate between leami.og
and stress induced cellular mechanisms by examining the
activation of the transcription factor CREB (a step in the
cascade of events leading to protein synthesis) in the
hippocampus, amygdala and entor.hinal cortex (EC). The
hippoeampus is most associated with neuronal plasticity and
lon-t.erm memory consolidation. There are anatomical and
functional connections between the hippocampus, entorhia!
cortex and the amvgdala which is involved in rno&latmg
hippocampal functi6n.
Tlifec groups of rats ere tested: l. Learning rats- subjected
to massed spatial learning protocol 2. Stressed rats subjected
to the water maze as thelearning group, but without an escape
platform and without a spatial task to acquire 3. Naqve rats.
Learning and stressed rats were trained in the Morris water
maze (in water temperature 23+/- C), and 10 minutes after-the
last session, the dorsal CA of the hippocampus, the amygdala
and the EC werecollected .for an.alyssof CREBactivatioi.
All the areas studied were activated following the behavioral
prczedures. In the dorsal CA1 CREB was activated in the
learning group compared to stressed and naive animals. In the
amygdla elevated levels of phosphorvlated CREB were found
both in learning and stressed Rroups."In the entorhinal cortex
enhanced activation of CREIg was detected in the iea:ifing
group compared to naives. Additional groups of animals will
be tested under more stressfil conditions m order to further
dissociate learning and stress mechanisms in the
aforementioned brain areas.
Supported bv lhe Israel Science bbundation The Char&s H.
Revson Fouhdathm (no.582,.00-1 to G.R-L.).
Calcium dynamics is associated with dendritic spine
morphology
Korkotian E. and Segal M.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100
Dendritic spines have been proposed to constitute a unique
calcium compartment in that they. are able to raise [CaZ]i to
high levels m response to synaptc input independent of lheir
parent dendrites. The great mo.rphological heterogeneity
among spines in the same neuron in&cates that the dimensions
of the spree may be extremely important for .its function as a
calcium compartment. Indeed, we vere able to correlate the
length of the spine with its oossible impact on the parent
dendrite, in term of [Ca ] &ffuson between the two
compartments. In different methods we found heterogeneous
responses that were correlated with spine morphol.og. We
extended these observations to examhae the role o" spine
morphology in its functions using caged molectiles.
Hippocampal neurons, cultured for 2-4 weeks, were used in a
confocal laser scannin microscope. A focused (_<l/m ) UV
laser hght, graded bv ared laser was used to fias photolyse
caged fluorescein, frr estimation of passive diffusion between
spree head and dendritic shaft.. Altemativelv, flash photolysis
ofcaged calcium was used to study the dyndrnics of decay of a
momentary rise in intracellular alcium concentration The
recorded cell was filled with Alexa 546 or was transfected with
red fluorescent protein, to image cell morphologv, ,and with
calcium dye Fluo-4, tO report calcium variatiohs. The results
indicate that the spine-dendrite communication varies amon.
the different spine types. It is apparent that calcium diffusion Is
different from the passive diffusion of fluorescein, and that the
presence of voltage gated calcium channels vary among
different spines as well. These observations illustrate the
importance of spine dimersions for its fimctions; longer sprees
communicate less with the parent dendrite than short ones.
This communication is subject to continuous modulation by
varying spine length.
Supportedby a grant./horn the Israel Academy ofScience..
Retrieving Hodgkin,Huxley like models ofIC and Caz+
conductancesin non.-space-clamped structures
Konreen A., Hehnstiedter M. Sakmann B]" and Schaetr
A.T
Dept. ofLife Science. Bar-Ilan Univ, Israel. De_pt: of
Zellphyiologie, MPIfMeal Res. Heidelberg. Gbrmany
Electrophysiological properties of single neurons are crucially
determined by the number and types of ionic channels
expressed. Thus, for understanding single neuron function it is
essential to determine exact distribution and kinetics of the
relevant ionic conductances. So far the lack of space clamp has
strongly limited the options to obtain correct conductance
estima(es and kinetic details. !:(ere we present an approach that
*2+
retrieves accurate K mad Ca conductance propertes from
voltage-clamp measurements in. non-space-clamped structttres.
Essentially, we have implemented successive 0he-parameter
fitting routines in NEURON to repent previously performed
experiments in a detailed compartmental rnodel of'the recorded
cell. Using recorded current as a template, this paradigm_
extracts correct conductance values over a wide range'of
experimental condition, h partJcula it is capable of
retrieving complete Hodgkin-Huxley.style K -channel
parameters (activation, inactivation" steady-st.ate and
reactivation kinetics) 'i:h high spatial resolution.
2+
e
Ad&tonally, Ca. channel parameters can be extracted w.th
noise levels of up to 70pA rm.s. Complementarilv to the
simulation results, we have corrected voltae--cla.mp
experiments from dendrites of cortical laver-5 pyramTdal cells
(n=--3), illustrating the feasibility of our dpproazh. Finally, we
investigated the physiological role of the increased accuracy in
channel paramrter measurements m full compartmental
neuronal models. Inactivation and activation parameters of K
channels were varied and their influence on physiological
meas.wes such as size and shape of backpropagatin APs was
delermmed. The described approach
wi!l. allow the fast
determination of channel distributions "ndividua neurons
and might contribute to a more complete utderstanding of the
biophysical basis ofneuronal fimction.
Relevance of NMDA receptor signaling pathway to genetic
prediposition to anorexia nervosa: association analysis of
SK3 and NR2B gene polymorphisms in family-based and
case-control population series
Kgygn_n_y_Q-Hamaoui M. '-, Frisch A., Barkai G. ', Weizman
i-and -:-rz
Danek Gertner Genetics Institute, Sheba Medical Center;
:SacklerMedical School, Tel Aviv University.
We investigated possible involevement of NMDA-R signaling
pathway in anorexia n'vosa (AN) on the basis of distribution
of polymorphisms in candidate genes encoding its various
components in 90 AN family trios and case-control series. We
presently report an association of two meaningfid
polvmorphisms to AN a multiallelic coding CAG repeat in the
small-conductance Ca -activated K (SK3-) channelgene and
a biallelic 5073T>G in the 3"UTR of the NR2B subunit of
NMDA-R. Longer SK3 alleles.,., containing above the
population modal of 19 CAG repeats, are significanly
over-represented in AN patients, as s re+ealed b37 matched
case-control analysis (p<0.001)2and a more robust TDT
analysis of AN family trios (x ::11.75 and p<0.001 upon
dichotomization at 19 repeats). The distribution of SK3 alleles
in the general population is distinct from AN and is relatively
homogeneous for at least :four Jewish ethnic groups. Further
USnlgTD a-laB,,ss m A alllly t/oS, ct;a that the .0 3
allle of the NI/2B subunit is preferentially transmitted to AN
(x=5.01, p=0.025). Composite analysis mchding both, SK3
and NR2B, sugRests that these factors independently
contribute to the" overall risk of AN. While attributing
consecutive risk scores to each of the composite SK3/NR2B
genotvpes, indicates thal higher risk scores are significantly
more" pre,'alent in AN (p-0.001). Our findings might be
conclusive as to the existrnce of Consequential link between
SK3 and NR2B as two factors driving towards the same
psychopathological outcome. As SK channels hyperpolarize
m&nbrane potential, they may impose inhibition of the
NMDA-R. Hypofunction of the NMDAoR has been implicated
in the etiology of schizophrenia, however, has not been
sufficiently bstantiated in the context of eating disorders.
Implication of NMDA.-R signaling pathway in AN, might be
meaningful in order to elucidate t.s underlying cause and
appropnate treatmenL
What does it take to make a stable taste memory?
Kuulmann S. and Rosenblum K.
Centerfi)r Brain and Behavior, University ofttafa 30905
The simplest model of memory suggests that sensory
information enters short term memory and later the
information is transferred to long term memory, where it is
permanently stored. The period of conversion short into long
term memory is the consolidation phase. It is labile and highly
sensitive to interference.
Pre-exposure to a novel taste in latent inhibition (LI) procedure
represents a kind of incident,'fl learning. The rats learn the new
taste per se, without associating it with any external reward.
LI, in combflaation with CTA, can be used to assess the
familiarity of a given taste. Reduced aversion for a given taste
due to LI indicates the existence of long term memory trace in
the rat brain.
We aim to understand the temporal ,'rod quantitative constyains
of taste memory consolidation. In the first set of experiments
we determine how much input, is needed to create a stable
memory (i.e. ml of novel taste). The rats were pre exposed to
5ml (n=6), 10ml (n=6) and 15ml (n 11) of saccharin in the LI
paradigm. We found that 5 ml didn't create a memory while 10
ml created memory and 15 ml created stronger memory trace
than 10 ml.
Second set of experiments examined whether few (3)
exposures of sub threshold input (5ml) would differ from one
exposure of the same amount of input (i.e. 15ml). We observed
that 3 pre-exposures during 3 successive days created a weaker
memory trace than one pre-exposure of the same amount.
The third set of experiments identified the time interval of taste
memory consolidation as measured in interference
experiments. The rats (n=8 in each group) were exposed to
saccharin while 5 hr or 5 min later they were exposed to NaC1
O..Yo in tide Li paractgrn. tiaere was a ciear ntererence n
both groups.
We cottclude dmt 5ml exposure of novel taste doesn't induce
stable LTM Repetition of sub-threshold input (5ml) creates
weaker memory than one exposure to the same amount. In
addition, an input that does induce clear LTM is still labile 5 hr
after learning.
Norepinephrine regulates genes involved in synaptic
connectivity:Implications to major deoression
Laifenfeld D. ,Karrv R. Grauer E.., Kein E. and
Ben-Shachar D.'
Laboratory ofPsychohiotogy. Dept. ofPsychiatry, Rambam
Medical Center and B. R.appaport Faculty o.[Medicine
echnton, Hat]'i 31096, "Dept. o.[Pharmacology, Ixrae/
lnstimte fir B'ological Research, Ness-Ziona
A prevailing theory regards major depression as a disorder of
neuronal plasticity, involving corresponding alterations in the
expression ofgenes involved in s,naptic plasticity,. The presen!
study assessed whether norepin'ephrine (NE), hn immediate
target of antidepressants, could initiate events of neuronal
plasticity, and whether these could be involved in the _etiology
and treatment of major depression. NE treatment (10M/48)
resulted in increased neurona! differentiation in SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells, along with an increase in the
cell-adhesion molecule L (CAM-L1), in laminin, and in the
transcription factor cAMP response element binding prote.in
(CREB), all involved in processes of cell sun;ival and neunte
outgrowth. We then examined whether CAM-L1. laminin, and
CREB are altered in animals chronically treated with
antidepr.essants, as well as in rats four onths after the
termination of prolonged stress exposure. Antidepressants
induced increases in mRNA and protein levels of CAM-L l,
laminin, and pCREB, in a brain region specific manner in
chronically treated rats. In contrast, a decrease in mRNA and
PnrOtein le,,e|s of CAM-Ll, laminin and pCREB was obsetwed
stressed rats. Finally, the expression of CAM-LI, laminin,
and CREB was exani'ined in 59 post-mortem specimens of
psychiatric patients obtained from the Stanley Foundation
B(ain Collection, from the ventral parieto-occipifal cortex, and
the prefrontal cortex. Alterations were observed in CAM-L1
specifically in the depressed group in both brain regions, along
with less specific alterations in laminin and pCREB.
Moreover, medicated depressed patients differed from
unmedicated patients in the expression of CAM-Ll, lamium,
and pCREB. Taken together these results strongly implicate
CAM-L in the pathophysiology and treatment of depression.
211
Nitric oxide donors attenuate dopamine- induced apototic
cell deathin by maintaining the mitochondria membrane
ootentiai in a cyclic- GMP independent mechanism.
LamensdorfI.,Agus S.,Premkumar A.2, Gembom E.2,
$imantov R.
'Dept ofNeurology, Hadassah UniveriO Hospital, Jerusalem:
:Dept ofMolecufdr Genetics. Weizmann Inst#ute ofScience,
Rehovot
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a nettrodegenerative disease
characterized by tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, gait
disturbance and postural instability. Tile pathological features
of PD are dopaminergic neuronal cell death in the substantia
nigra pars compacta (SNc) and intracytoplasmic inclusion
bodies (Lewy bodies).
Nitrogen monoxide (NO) is an important biological messenger
affectmg multiple signal transduction pathways. It is reported
to take part in MPTP and 6-hydroxvdopamine (6OHDA)
induced dopaminergic cell death. In "Tiew of evidence that
dopamine (DA) itself can induce neuronal cell death we
exanained the effect ofNO-donors on DA toxicity.
Human neuronal cell line (NMB) was used to examine the
effect of NO-donors on DA induced apoptosis. Two
NO-donors, S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) and
sodium nitroprusside (SNP) reduced DA to,city, both,
however, did not attenuate mitochondrial complexes I-IV
inhibitors-induced cell death.
NO-donors can attenuate apoptotic cell death in a cyclic-GMP
dependent manner and/or via stabilization of mitochondrial
potential. Ha et al (2003)1 demonstrated that SNAP protects
the dopaminergic cell line PC I2 against 6OHDA in a
cGMP-dependent manner
In the NMB cell line, -Br-cyclic-GMP or 1, IH-[1,2,4]
oxadiazolo [4.3-alpha quinoxalin-l-one (ODQ) did not reduce
tiopamine toxicity, suggesting that the protective effect of
Nk')-donors was cGiviP independent. Fio cytomet analysis
with the dve Rhodamine-123 and confocal microscopy
analysis witlq the dye JCI showed that dopamine reduced
mitochondrial membrane potential, and SNAP reversed this
effect.
These results indicate that NO-donors have a protective effect
on DA and 6OHDA reduced apoptosis in this model probably
via direct effect on the mitochondrial membrane potential in h
cGMP independent manner.
Reference: 1. Nitric oxideprevents 6--hvdroxvdopamine-
m&ced apoptoss in PC12 cells througt'cGMP- dependent
PI3 kinase/Akt activation. Ha et al., FASEB J. 2003. 17.
I036-I047.
Induction of plasticity by visual stimulation in the adult
visual cortex revealedby intraceilular recordings
Lampl I.,Ferster D.
Dept. fNeurobiology, Institute ofScience, Rehovot, 76100.
Israel: "Dept. ofNeurobiology and Physiologv Norihwestern
University, Evanston IL 60208 USA
It was assumed that any plasticity dependent on visual
experience, in the primar visual c6rtex (V1), is limited to
development stages, earl3.: in the animal life. This view has
been changed dramatically in the past few years when various
studies have suggested that the receptive'field properties of
neurons, even at early stages of the visual cortex, can be
influenced b; visual stimulation. Hoxever. direct
demonstration bf plasticity in the primary visual cortex was
limited to extracellular rdcordings. On the other hand man,-
intracellular studies have characterized the mechanisms 6f
plasticity in brain slices. To narrow the gap between the in
vitro and the in vivo studies visual stimulation was combined
with inta'acellular recordings of V neurons in anesthetized
cats. Advantaged by the recording technique, spikes can be
elicited by ctwrent njection at desirable times relative to the
onset of (he visual stimulation. Brief presentation (10 ns) of
optimally oriented bar. flashed on the receptive field of simple,
was paired repetitively (20 Hz) for several seconds with a brief
current pulse which induced several spikes of high frequency.
A second bar, which was not paired with current hjcction, ws
used to test the effect of visual stimulaticm by itself. In many
cells the visual s3aaaptic response to th first bar xvds
significantly increased while on average the response to the
unpaired bar was reduced. These effects, that could last more
than 15 minutes, indicate that sustained chancs of synaptic
stren.th in adult primau' visual cortex can de induced by
repetitive visual stimulation.
212
The ascending auditory pathway: from signal detection to
signal representation
Las-Ahdut L.t, Stern E.A.,and Nelken 1.
-1Dept. ofphysiology, Hebrew University- Hadassah Medical
,School, "and the lnterdisctplinary CenterJbrNeura!
(_bmpttation, Hebrew UniversiO.
:Dept. ofNeurology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
HarvardMedical,School, Charlestown, MA, USA
Natural stimuli are often weak and accompanied by
slowly-fluctuating noise. Humans and animals perceive
low-level tones masked by such noise in a highly efficient
manner. Neurons in primary auditory cortex (Al) tend to lock
to the envelope of slowly-fluctuating noise. We have
previously shown that adding low-level tones qualitatively
changes these responses bv suppressing envelope locking,
causing the responses to be inore similar to the responses to a
tone in silence. Here we study the evolution of this
suppression in the asceaading auditory system tusing
intracellular recordings in vivo from A and extracellular
recordings from two preceding subcortical auditory nuclei, the
Medial Geniculate Body (MGB). and the Inferior Colliculus
(IC). Hypersensitive suppression was present in the
subthrehold responses of all A neurons that showed envelope
locking, and n some MGB neurons; suppression often
occurred below tone threshold in silence. In contrast, the
locking of IC neurons was only weakly affected by low-level
tones. These results show that the neuronal representation of
weak tones in strong slowly-fluctuating noise is highly
amplified along the ascending ]C-MGB-A1 auditory axis. We
interpret this hypersensitive suppression as a correlate of the
representation oI the tone as a distinct auditory object, which is
gradually built along the ascending auditory pathway.
Development of an in vitro blood-brain barrier model
using PCI2EN endothelial cells
Lecht S,,Tabakman R..Harriton-Gazall E., Gilon C.z,
Cohen M. ,Ringei I.,Reich R. and Lazarovici P.
Depts. ofPharmacology', S6hool ofPharmacy. Dept. of
Organic Chemistry2, Institute ofChemistry, The A[exah.der
Silberman Institute ofL([ Sciences The Hebrew University of
Jensalem
Blood-brain barrier (BBB) separates the brain parenchyma
from cerebral microvessel blood environment. It ensures that
only vital nutrients and factors will be transported into the
brain, by utilizing a wide variety of transporters i.e. glucose,
nucleosde, large neutral amino acid trans.porters, etc. The
transport from the brain to blood of toxic metabolites or
xenobiotics is mediated by efficient efflux transporlers i.e.
PgP, MRP, etc. Another feature of BBB is represented by its
very low paracellular permeability in contrast to peripheral
calillaries. These important anatomical and phb,siological
characteristics are due to specialized structures oItlae cerebral
microvessels and unique regulatory factors The in vitro BBB
models available to date are disi3utable due to the lack of
harmacological characterization
the present study a tmique PCI2EN cell line, generated by
hybridization (fitsi6n) between rat pheochromocs.oma cell line
(PCI2) and bovine adrenal medullar endothelial cells
(BAME), was used (1,2). The main goal was to develop an in
vitro BBB model using,a commercial double chamber
technology (e.g. Transwell and PC12EN endothelial cells.
To accoplisla this goal, the optimal culture conditions
characterized by measurements of trans endothelial electrical
resistance (TEER), that enable barrier properties, were dened.
The paracellular transport through PC I2EN monolaver was
evaluated with FITC-markers of different molecular" weight
such as bovine serum albumin (BSA, 66 kDa), and fluorescein
(0.3 kDa). The paracellular permeability was low, indicative of
a ugm a,. F];u;acmt histonca, .crc transported with
different kinetics on the apical and basolateral sides of the
endothelial cells with an increased transport from the
basolateral to the apical side of the monolayer. These
experiments indicate the functional asymmetry of PC12EN
monolayer. Phospholipids-based pro-drug DP-524 ith a
shorter fatty cid on C2 position was hiehcr transported
transcellula:ly than DP-487, with a longer ltty acid on C2
position (compounds kindly provided by D-Pharm Ltd.). These
experiments may suggest that EiP phospholipids are
transported differentially by the PC 12EN monolaver utilizing a
specific carrier which deserves further investiga(ion. PC 12EN
represent a novel endothelial cell line for future development
of an in vitro BBB model to be used in CNS drug discovery
lPrograms.
Rasouly D. el. al. (1996) Slaurosporine induces neurite
outowth in neuronal hybrids (PC 12EN) lacking NGF
receptors. J. Cell Biochdm. 62,356-371; 2. Jiang-H. ct. al.
(1997) Expression of human p 140trk receptors n
pl40trk-deficient, PC 12/endothelial cells results in nerve
.wthfactor-induced signal transduction and DNA synthesis.
".ell Biochem. 66,229-244.
Supported by PharmaLogca consortium in theframe of
MAGNETprogram ofthe Zrraeli 4inisoTqfllndustry and
Commerce.
Area-specific deprivation effects in occipito-temporal
cortex of human amblyopes
Lerner Y Pianka P Azmon B Leiba H. Stolovitch C.z'
L-0--ee-inA.z' 5, Irel M.,Hrdler T.-'5 rdMalach R.
Weizmann Insntute ofScience, Rehovot, 76100; "Sourasky
Medical Center, Tel Aiv, 64239; Notal Vision Co., Tel Aviv,
63143," Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, 76100," Tel-Aviv
University, Tel Aviv
Amblyopia is a condition characterized by low visual acuity of
cortical origin, suggestive of a deficit of central visual field
processing, which provides a striking example ofthe influence
of abnornal early visual experience on human vision.
Recently, in normal subjects, we have shown that certain
object iinages, e.g. faces and buildings, could be differentially
associated with central and peripheral visual field biased
representations. Such association predicts that amblyopia could
selectively affect representations of faces compared to building
images. Here we studied this possibility using fMR/,
Amblyopic subjects (n 17) were tested while receiving
monocular stimulation of face and building images through
either eye. In control experiments, a blurred version of the
same images, in which we simulated the level of contrast
sensitivity deficit of the amblyopic condition, was
used.<O:P</O:P
Our results revealed that amblvopia produces a selective
deficit in face-related (posterior: fusiform g3a'us (pFs) and
lateral occipital area (LO)) compared to building-related
(collateral (COS) and transverse-occipital (TOS) sulci) regions.
The ana.blvopic effect depended on both object category_ and
cortical rigion- the face-related amblvopic" effect was found
only in lace-related regions, and ffot in building-related
regions. These findings are compatible with the concept that
face processing depends on high-acuity central vision whereas
building-related processes are more lJeripherally biased. The
results also point to the importance of early visual experience
in establishing proper functioning of high oraer face
representations. Behavioral performance was nicely
compatible with the fMRI results.
Supported by ISFgrant 77/00. Adams Super Centerfor brain
studies, TelAviv University grant and (?enter oft,',xcellence
grant 8009.
Hippocampal damage in offspring that experience
maternal inflammat'on during pregnancy
Lev V. Huleihel M.,Hallak M.3, Sorokin Y.
and.Golan H.
Zlotowski ctr. fqrNeuroscience.Dept. oflmmunol, and Dept.
ofObs. & Gyn,,Fac. ofHealth Sciences and, BGU,
Beer-Sheva and Dept. ofObs. & Gyn. ttutzetHospital'
l)etroit.
Intrauterine inflammation is associated with
neurodevelopmental damage and increased risk for reduced
intelectual achievements m newborns, We have previosly
shown that systemic mattwnal inflammation, induced by
intraperitoneal (i.p) injection of lipopolvsaccharide (LPS, 0.12
microgr/gr) to 17 gestation day n:lice (El7), increased
proinflammato.ry cytokins levels in embryo brains. In the
present study, we used the same inflammation system and
evaluats the histopathological damage in brains of offspring at
postnatal day, 7 (P7), P14, P 180. PFA fixed, paraffin
embedded, sagital sections, 4t thick, were stained with Nissl
tnheesshipyraasSr;,eSg[finatndffpe[,]nceCatAcel,layer
180- no
differences were observed in CA! re.e.ior thickness between
offspring to LPS treated mothers nd control. However,
cearfull'examination of CAI region revealed shrinking of
pyramidal" cells (3.5+4.3 t.control and 16.4+/-1.5 t LPS,
'<0.001) and increased cell density (0.033+/-0.004 celt/t ,and
0.064+ 0.005 cell/.t respectively, P<0.01). In addition, in the
dentate g3.Tus region, the granular cell layer was significantly
thicker and longer in LPS offsprings as compared to control, at
PI4 and P180 (P<0.001). In this region, at P180, no
differences were observed in granular cells size or density,
indicating that the difference in laver thickness and length
resulted from increase in granular ell number. The present
study indicate a distruction of neurogenesis n the
hipp'ocampus of offsprings subject to prenatal inflammatory
response. These results support our previous observations 6f
altered learning and memory in these mice.
,Supported by BSFgrant c<mtract No. 200172
Exposure to Vigabttrin mode/ares refl vepment and
brMn morphoio in newrn mice
ofDeve/ovmentalh4o/ecu/ar (knetic, Facu/ ot'Hea/th
iences and ZlotowsM center..]orNeuroscfence, Ben (rion
ntverstyBeer-heva
Epdepsy s e most coon neoloc! disorder in yog
ns. an-epfiepfc ugs (AEDs), eo to em seizes n
wanted effects of erapy with AEDs is tin,own.
Vigabatfin (VGB) belong to a w cs of anti-epileptic
gs used widely in chfl&en with infantile spasms and is
considered as a safe ap. VGB bl e eme
GABA-aaminase, eby inhibiting GABA deadation.
In e present study we examined the fluence of expose to
VGB n two time perils ding ely posmatal age, on
mohogemc pareters, reflex development d brain
moho[o in newborn balb/c mice. Newborn mice were
injected (subcutanus) daily with VGB (5g)- ing
posmatal days (P1)-P7 (VGB) and P4-P14 (VGB'). Contrd
(CT) newborns were injected with a silar uantit3-ofvehicle
solution, dng simar time periods. By weit gain of
newborns Weated wi VGB was lower compared to CT oups
(0.51, VGB; 0.61, VGB'; 0.66 d 0.73 CTs). Teeming
began two days earlier both eat oups, comped to
CTs, however hair oh was influenceddifferentially by e
two eatments. Exanation of reflex development'showed
that in e righting reflex the perct of newborns succeeding
in the task was e lowest e VGB oup, while e
newborns in e VGB' oup d not fer om e CTs. A
similar tendency w seen m e time required for fighting. On
the rotarod tasK, additional motor reflex developing ffg
CT (held'more than 180 egrAe onto a roa!in r be:inning
at P12 aM the CT at Pl0). The cliff avoidce reflbx was
developed lair m the VGB newbos. Evuation of brmn
moholo on P7 showed simil coaex lends aM wi&hs,
d cereb-el ea in VGB' d CT. In COhOrt, CA1 cell
layer m the hipppus was thiner in e VGB' group
compared to CT (I022 and 782 micro, resctively). The
Demate Gyrus d cell layer was er in e VGB'
group compared to CT (957.6 d 1120 microns, rtively).
In conclusion, ely posmal exse to Vigaba mifies
reflex development d hippocp mohblo, d might
have long term consequences on mce behavior.
The role ofenvironmental stimulation on neuronal
plastici in young ApoE transeenic mice.
Levi O. Jonen-elo A.L. Fedon J. Roses A.D. and
icfiaelon D.
1Dept. ofNeurobochemistr); GeOrge S Wise Facul9, oZb
Sciences, Tel Aviv Universi, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel:
:Dept. ofBiology, LaboratoofBehavioral Neurobiolo
7e Swiss FedbraIInstitute ofTechnolo, Zu'?ich,
Switzerland; 3Depc ofNeurology, ke Universi@, Durham,
NC, LSA
Evidence for stctural mo&fication in e brain following
environmental stimulation has been provided dng the last
decades. These plastic chges e suppos to reflect
reorganization of neonal comections involved in posmatal
developmem and ult justmem involved in the process of
learning and memory. Fuahermore, clinical evidence showing
siation between hi#er educational aainment and
reduced risk for Alzheimer-'s disease (AD) indicates at a
stimulating environment has a positive effect on cerebral
healS. The apolipoproin E4 (apoE4) genote is a major risk
uo. We haw recently prescnt resets showing t
xpos ofyoung mic (l mon old) trsgnic o fl human
5 months resulted in an improvement of lemg d memoD,
abilities in apoE3 ansgenic mice, (as measur by wet T
maze), whereas mice ansgenic -for e human apffE4 were
aft%cted by this environmental stimulation. Thee coitive
effects wereassociated with er hippocpal levels of the
presynaptic protein synapthysin and of NGF in apoE3 but
not in apoE4 ansgenic mice.
In e present work we demonsWate that ese human apoE
isofos diffentially modulate nete outffoh in the
hippocampus of young apoE ansemc mice after expose to
a complex environment. The apoE3 but not the apoE4
sgenic mice showed increased levels of e den&itic
mker MAP-2 d e axonal mker TAU-1. These changes
were acmpani by chges in e levels of e low-density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP). These findings
suggest at apoE4 inhibits these beneficial effects of e
enriched envonment on Hippocampal neite outoih and
that L may have a role in thee phenomena.
213
Activation patterns in visual cortexfollowing optic
neuritis:tn fMRI st.ldy
Levm N ad Zob_an, E
Dept. ofNeurolo., Hadassah Hebrew UnJvers/tv HosnJtal.
3erusalem: "Neurobiology Dept., Hebrew Universi,
3erusalem
Objecaves: To evaluate the distribution of cortical activation in
the visual patiaways m patients alter an acute optic neuritis
ckground: Opti aeaits is a con'anon eordition thai causes
a reversible loss ofvision. Typically, vision deteriorates over a
few days to 2 weeks before spontaneous improvement takes
place, hnprovement in vision is seen up to a year after the
acute episode. Recovery to normal or near normalvisual acuity
is usual, despite the frequent persistence of conduction
abnormalities as evidenced by prolonged visual evoked
potential (VEP) latencies. It is known that remyelination of the
nerves takes place, leading to improvement of visual function
(i.e peripheral effects). However, central reorganization
processes at higher cortical level may also contribute to the
recovery process. Our aim was to assess this. issue, using
fMRI, bv comparing the pattern of activation in the visual
cortex in"the affected and normal eye.
Methods: fMRI was utilized to obtain brain activation induced
by epochs of object stimuli, scrambled objects, and
checkerboard patterns. Activation in primary and higher visual
areas was assessed in 3 subjects suffering from unilateral optic
-,etitis, and prolonged. VEP latencies..
Resuh,: In all patients, reduced activation was seen upon
stimulation of the affected eye in the early retinotopic visual
areas. In contrast, higher object related visual areas showed no
difference in the activation level between the two eyes.
Conclus.ions: An acute episode of optic neuritis ,(vh!ch.!ead ,to
reoucea acuvauon in primary vsua areas) ma not ater tne
response of higher object related areas. This may indicate a
built-in robustness of these areas to disruption of the visual
input. Alternatively, it could reflect an adaptive functional
reorganization ofecortical response to an abnormal input.
Supported by the Israel Science Foundation (ISF) Grant
#8009,
Involvement ofpoly ADP-ribosylation in memory
formation in Aplysia
Levitan D., Susswein A.J., KatzoffA., Schwartz JH.,
Visochek L., Cohen-Arrnon M.
Fac Life ScL Bar Ilan Univ, Ramat Gan 52900, I1; Neufbld
CardRes Inst, Tel Aviv Univ, Tel Avv 69978, 1l; Cntr
Neurobiol Behav, Columbia Univ. New York, NY 10032 USA
PolyADP-ribosylation (pAR) is a transient posttranslational
modification ofDNA-bound proteins that modulates chromatin
structure. It is catalyzed primarily by
polyADP-ribose-pol3nnerase- (PARP-1). We examined pAR
of PARP1 and of linker histone H1 in response to training
causing long term sensitization of the tail and siphon
withdrawal reflexes, and to its neural correlate, long-term
facilitation of sensory to motor neuron synap.s. Training
consisted of 4 spaced shocks to one side of the body wall of
Aplysia, which elicits ipsilateral long-term sensitization of
withdrawal reflexes, and ipsilateral long-term facilitation of
sensory to motor neuron synapses. This procedure caused an
increased pAR of PARP1 in the pleurai and pedal ganglia
ipsilateral, but not contralateral to the shock. Long-term
facilitation elicited by 5 spaced pulses of 5-HT to the isolated
pleural-pedal ganglia also caused increased pAR of PARPI
and of linker histone H1. In contrast, one pulse of 5-HT. which
causes short-term facilitation, did not cause increased pAR.
The increases in pAK were suppressed by pretreatment with
3-ammobenzamide (3-AB), an inhibitor of pAR. tn addition, 5
spaced applications of FMRF-amide, which causes long-term
depression of sensory, to motor neuron synapses, suppressed
R ofPARP1.
e also examined pAR after another form of memory. Aplysm
learn to decrease their responses to inedible food. Training
leads to short- and long-term memory. Immediately after
training, there was an increase in pAR in the cerebral and
buccal ganglia controlling feeding. There was no increased
pAR after animals were stimulated with food (and responded
with feeding movements) for a time equivalent to that needed
for training. Treatment with 3-AB blocked pAR after training,
and also blocked long-term memory without affecting either
the animal's behavior during training or short-term memory.
Thus, pAR is a required step in the formation of long-term,but
not short-term memory.
pAR has previously been associated with cellular responses to
DNA damage. Our results suggest that modification of nuclear
proteins by pAR also has a role in long-term memory,
presumabl by altering chromatin structm'e, and therefy
regulating gene expression.
214
Differential induction ofapoptosis in rat glioma cells:
Evidence for p-c-Jun, Cytochrome -c and Caspase 3
involvement
Levkovitz y.1, Gil-Ad |.1 Zeldich E.,Dayag M. and
Weizanan A.
tLaboratory ofBiologicalPsychiatry, Felsenstem Medical
Research Center, C3nous Rabin, Petah-Tiqva 49100;
eShalvataMental Hea]th Center, andSackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, TelAviv
Antidepressants are drugs widely used for the treatment of
mood disorders. Antidepressants vary on their pharmacology
and neurochemical effects with tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs) being less specific in transporter and receptorblockade
than newer drugs such as the selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRI).
Recent studies have shown that some TCAs and SSRI's have
potent apoptotic activity but, the detailed mechanism and the
major early key players underlying this activity remain
unclear.
In the present study we found that various classes of
antidepressants differentially affect the surwival of rat C6
glioma and human neuroblastoma cells. The SSRI's
(,paroxetine and fluoxetine) and the TCA (chlomipramine) but
not the TCA (imipramine) and the atvpical antideprresant
(mianserin) caused a concentration depehdent cell death. The
potency ol- the effect was in the following order: paroxetine >
chlomiparamine > fluoxetine. Our results strongly imply
involvement of apoptotic mechanism, by the findings that: L
The antidepressant-induced cell death was accompanied by
DNA fragmentation as reflected by the flow cvtometrv of PI
stained C6 cells. 2. The combinedstaining of Ftoechst'and P1
shov a typical PI staining of fragmented nuclei in cells treated
with th selected antidepressants. These apoptotic changes
anticipate bv rapid increased in p-c-Jun levels, cocrome c
release frorffmitochondria and caspase 3 activation."
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that selected
ant)depressant agents belonging to the SSRI's class are potent
inducers of apoptosis in glial and neural cell lines.
We provide evidence which strongly implicates activation of
p-c-Jun and subsequent increasedCyt C release followed by
caspase 3 activation in this apoptotc pathway. More studies
are needed to explore whether this process has a clinical
implication for potential anti-tumor activity in the brain.
Differentiation of stem cells from human bone marrow to
dopaminergic-like neurons
U.3,
S.,Burshtein A.,Bulvik S.,Asherv Barhum
Y. Me|-med E. and Often D.
Neuroscience LaboratotT, Felsenstein ,ledical Research
Center, Dept. ofNeurology, Rabin Medical (?enter, Sackler
School ofMedicine. Tel Aviv University. Tel AviveLaniado
Medical Center, Natanya; Dept. ofNeurobiochemistry Wise
Faculty ofLgfe Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
Human mesenchymal stem cells present in adult marrow are
multipotent stem cells that can differentiate into bone,
cartilage, fat, tendon and muscle. Recently, human bone
marrow stromal cells (hBMSc) have been shown to be able to
differentiate into hepatocvtes, mvocvtes mad neural cells.
our study, we investgatea the pdssiBle use of hBMSc in cell
therapy for Pnrkinson's disease. We incubated cells from
human bone marrow, aspirates from lilac crest, with retinoic
acid, butvlate hvdroxvanisole and increased intracellular cyclic
AMP. We found tfiat hBMSc changed their phenotvlJe to
neural cells after 24 hours and expressed various nduronal
markers. The differentiated ceils demonstrated a resting
membrane potential of-70mV, rectified current in response to
increased voltage, and intra-cellular calcium increase
following potassmm challenge. Moreover, the differentiated
hBMSc expressed tyrosme hvdroxvlase, and dopa
decarboxylase, the key enzymes of'doparhine synthesis. The
Cells also demonstrated other markers for "dopaminergic
neurons such as D2 dopamine receptor, dopamine transporter,
and vesicular monoamine transporter-2. Fttrthermore. a
significant amount of dopamine precursors and metabofites
were secreted to the medium, as measured by HPI,C analysis.
Our results indicate that d0paminergic-lik6 cells migh[ be
derived from human bone marrow and could possibly be used
for autologous transplantation in Parkinsonian patients.
Strain-dependent differences in T ceil-inflammation after
CNS injury: Involvement of microglia
Lewitus G.M., Kipnis J., Avidan lq.,Mordechay S. and
Schwartz M.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute ofScince, Rehovot
It was previously shown bv our group that CNS injur. can
benefit from au{oimmune -cell. Immtme deficient aqimals
showed worse neuronal survival after CNS injur).... A
correlation was found between ability to w'ithstand neuronal
insult and local inflammatory respcnse in terms of onset,
intensity and duration of the response. Strains of mice and rats
were shown to differ in their ability to manifest a spontaneous
T cell-dependent ncuroprotective response after iniurv. An
understanding of the basis for such strain differences is still
missing in terms of antigenic specificity, phenptype or state of
activation. Here we show that the phenot),,pe of T cells homing
to iniured spinal cord differs among strains. T cells were
isolaied from injured spinal cords of two mouse strains
differing in their ability to mount a protective T cell response,
using affinity columns. Among the isolated CD4+ cells, more
than 57% are memory/activated CD4+ (CD44hi CD451o) cells
in both strains, in contrast to the lymph nodes, where the ratio
is 209/o of memory/activated CD4+ T cells and 809/0 naive
CD4+ T ceils (CISJ441o CD45hi). However, mice with better
ability to mount neuroprotective response following injury
show'ed increased abundance of activated cells (CD69-()
among the memory/activated phenotype. The presence of a
higher incidence f activated T cells at the early stage
following the iniury can explain a better control of local
microglia response and thus better recover'.
TRP channels may play a role in the response of layer 5
neocortical neurons to hypoxia
Libman L.. Gutnick M.J., Levavi-Sivan B. and Fleidervish
Koret School o['VeterinatTMedicine & Dept. at'Animal
Sciences, the Hebrew UniversiO, ofJerusalem, "Rehovot
The rapid and devastating consequences of hypoxia for
forebrain function in mammals reflects the sensitivity of
synaptic and intrinsic membrane properties of cortical netirons
to metabolic insult. Because the properties of Transient
Receptor Potential (TRP) channels in Drosophila retina have
been shown to be very Sensitive to metabolic stress, we have
investigated whether these calcium and monovalent
cation-permeable channels may also be involved in the
response of neocortical neurons to hypoxia. TRP channels of
various types are widely distributed in mammalian tissue,
including brain. Using Western blots with TRPC antibodies,
we lbund high levels of TRPC1, 3, 5 and 6 in neocorticaI
microsomes, while TRPC4 was notably absent, ha whole cell
recordings from layer 5 p?Tamidal neurons in neocortical brain
slices, blockade of voltage dependent Na-, K and Ca
channels revealed a large, non-specific cationic current
several of whose properties were similar to those previousb,.'
reoorted for TRP-mediated currents. Thus. the cttrrent was
inhibited by Laa. and displayed a characteristic, outwardly
rectifying 6wrent2voltagc relaiionship. The characteristics 6f
I were rapidly altered during hpoxic episodes, which we
induced by swiiching the gas flo to 95% N2 +/- 5% CO2.
Within 120 seconds of hvpoxia onset, there was a significant
decrease in outward I a depolarizing voltages, and a parallel
marked change in the shape of the current-voltage relation, as
the inward current at negative voltages increased. The effects
were rapidly and completely reversed upon reoxvgenation
when hvpo.ic episodes last less than 5 minute. These
change n the properties of a putative TRP channel-mediated
current indicate a significant increase in persistent inward
cationic conductance at subthreshold voltages:, which would be
expected to contribute to neuronal vulnerability during oxygen
deprivation by providing a route for Na ,and C: entrance.
Characterization ofthe effect of paired associative
stimulation on somatosensory evoked potentials in human
subjects
Litvak V. Schramm A.. Stefan K., Pratt H., Zaaroor M. and
Classen J.
Dept. atBiomedical Engineering, Dept. ofMedicine, Evoked
Potentials Laboratory- 7'chmon-lsrael Institute of
Technolo,v. Ha[a. Israel, Dept. ofiNeurolo,, Human
Cortical hysiology andMotor Cimtrol
Laboratory. University [Wuerzburg, Wuerzhurg, Germany
Pairing protocols combining electrical stimulation of a
peripheralnerve with transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
of the cortex have recently been shown to modit\ the
amplitude of motor evcked potentials (MEPs) and
somatosensorv evoked potentials (SEPs) in health' human
subjects. The:e is experimental evidence that this phenomenon
is related to spike timing dependent svnaptic plasticity at the
cellular level. Ourgoal in thepresent siudv was to characterize
the effect of pmredassociative stimulatio-n (PAS) on SEPs by
means of multichannel clcctroencephalographv(EEG). EE(3
was recorded betbre and alter paired stimulatirn of the fight
median nerve mad left somatosensorv cortex in healthy
volunteers. Shortlasting modification o/" SEP amplitude w
successfully induced in themajorit, of the subjects. The
associated" changes in scal listribution /indspectral
characteristics of the EEG activity were quantified and related
to the SEP changes.
Impairment ofepisodic and spatial memory in rats by
selective inhibition of cerebralcvtochrome oxidase
L.,Magen I.,Shoham S. and Weinstock M.
,pt.-o.--f-Pha/wacolog); Faculty ofiledicine. Hebrew
Univer,(ity; :Research Dept., HerzbgHospitai, Jerusalem
Oxidative stress occurs at an early stage in Alzheimer's disease
(AD) and may be associated with abnormalities in
.rnitochondrial function. Cytochrome oxidase (COx) pl.ay.s an
time,tO,rant role in aerobic energy metabolism and its actavlty is
ced in AD. COx can be selectively inhibited in brain
mitochondria by sodium azide (NaAz) that binds to the electron
carrier ofthe heme prosthetic group. The present study examined
the effect of chromc NaAz a&ninistration on COx m discrete
brain areas and on spatial and episodic memory that are primarily
affected in AD. Male rats (15) weighing 330-350g were
implanted sc with Alzet minipumps containing NaAz released at
the rate of mg/kg/hr. Control rats (11)
wre implanted with
pumps containg saline. Episodic memory as assessed 3 and 5
weeks later by the obiect recognition test, and spatial memory 6
weeks later by the Morris water maze (MWMj test. Rats wre
then deeply anesthetised, perfused transcardially with
paraformaldehyde and brains sectioned COx showed differential
staining in control rats, w4th higher intensity in layers 3 and 5
frontal cortex and in layers 3-4 in temporal cortex. Demitometric
image analysis revedled that NaAz lowered COx activity
significantly in layer 3 in both regions. Cresyl violet staining did
not reveal "a loss of cells in any brain region. COx inhibition
significantly impaired episodic memory 3 and 5 weeks, and
both working and reference memory 6 weeks after instillation
of the NaAz pump. Our findings show that NaAz-indueed
reduction in COx activity can lead to significant impairment in
both spatial and episodic memory in the absence ofdetectable
neuronal loss. Ths may occur through reduction in the ability of
dendrites to process synaptic inputs from subcortical and/or
cortico-cortical pathways. COx inhibition bv NaAz could
provide a relevant animal model for testing otential agents
with neuroprotective effects against the consequences of
mitochondrial dysfunction.
Rivastigmine corrects the episodic and spatial memgry
deficit induced in rats by chronic cerebral hypoerfusion
__a_g#n 1. Shoham S., Poltyrev T. and WeinstocfM.
De-pt. ofPh.rmacology, Faculty ofMedicine, Hebrew
University; Research-Dept., HerzogHospital, Jerusalem
Cerebral hypoperfusion occurs during aging, Alzheimer (AD)
and vascular dementia (VD) and may conixibute to neuronal
damage. Permanent bilateral carotid artery_ occlusion (2VO) in
rats has been proposed as a model of pathological changes in
dementia. It reduces cortical blood flow and glucose
utilisation, causes a progressive impairment in spatial memory
and reduction in hippocampal and cortical acetylcholine,
apparently in the absence of overt neuronal damage. We
investigated the effect of rivastigmine, a cholinesterase
inhibitor ctentlv used for the treatment of AD and VD; on
both spatial and 6pisodic memory impairment induced by 2VO
in rats. A careful histological analyss was performed to see if
any neurodegeneration could be detected. Male rats
(300-350g) were subjected to 2VO or sham operation under
Equithesin anesthesia. Episodic memory that depends on intact
cortical activity was tested 3 weeks after surgery by the object
recognition test, and spatial memory, dependent on
hippocampal function, was tested at 4 and 6 weeks by the
holeboard and Morris water maze tests, respectwely.
Rivastigrnine (lmg/kg) was injected so. 45 min bet'ore each
test. Rats were anesthetised 4 months later and brains fixed by
transcardial perfusion with paraformaldehvde. Astrocytes were
stained by mouse anti-gli.al fibrillarv "acidic protein and
microglia by mouse anti-complem6nt 3-receptor (clone
OX-42). lmage analysis revealed for the first time, activation
f redent mie.rcha (but not atrc.yte-z), in 2VO rat, in
hippocampal CA1-2 field but not in parietal cortex. This may
reflect synaptic loss and impaired hippocampal neuronal
activity under.lying the sig.ificant impairment induced by 2VO
ofboth episodic and spatml working memory, Memory deficits
were corrected in all tests by fivastigmine. The findings
support the suggestion that chronic cerebral hypoperfusion
induces neuronal deficits in cortical and hippocampal
cholinergic transmission that contribute to the memory
deficits.
Spreading depression in-vivo is associated with disturbance
at the blood-brain-barrier
Major S.g
Friedman A.'3 and Dreier J.P.
x erimental Neurology and Johannes-Mfdler-lnstttute oJ
PhYsiology, Chart; Humboldt Umversity, Berlin, Germany;
3Z[otows Center ofNeuroscience, Ben Gurion University,
Beer Sheva, Israel
Cortical spreading depression (CSD) is a depolarization wave
propagating at a rate of .-3 mm/min in the cerebral cortex. The
phenomenon is triggered by electrical, mechanical or toxic
215
factors and isprobably involved in the pathogenesis of focal
ischemia, headtrauma and migraine. Endothelin-1 (ET-l), a
vasoactive peptide and astroglial/neuronal modulator has been
recently shown to disrupt the blood-brain-barrier (BBB) as
well as to potently induce CSD in rat in-vivo. Here we
investigated whether the co-appearance of CSD and BBB
eninis specific for ET-1 or a more general characteristic of
D. l'hus, CSD was triggered by high-K solution in the
o_p_e_n cranial window of anesthesized (thiopental, I00 mg/kg
BW i.p.), tracheotomized and artificially ventilated rats. CSDs
were momtored using a K senstwe nucroelectrode and a
subarachnoid Ag-CI electrode. Cerebral blood flow was
recorded using Laser Doppler floxnetry (LDF). BBB
disruption was quantitatively estimated using image analyses
in brain sections following the peripheral injection of the
non-permeable fluoresceine isbthiocyanate and/or the
albumin-binding Evan's Blue. Increased BBB permeability
was obsera,ed in the cortical region locally superfused with I(
to induce CSD. Moreover, we not only found dye
extravasation in the area where K was topically .applied but
also to a somewhat lesser degree in the other regions of the
same hemisphere undergoing CSD. Our data suggest that CSD
by itself, propagating through na've cortical tls" sue, disrupts
BBB.
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K),
phosphoinositide-specificphospholipase-Cg (PLCg) and
iotein kinase-C (PKC) signal myelin phagocytosis
meoted by complement receptor-3 alone and combined
with scavenger receptor-AIffl in macroohage,s
Makranz C,,Cohen G,BanA,Levidor L1, Kodama T,
Reichert F. and Rotshenker S.
Dept. ofAnatomy & Cell Biology, Hebrew University
Hadassah Medical School Jerusalem, Israel; 2Lab. for
Systems Biology andMedicine, U. ofTokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Complement-receptor-3 (CR_3/MAC-1), scavenger receptor
AI/I1 (SRAEII) and Fcy-receptor (FR) can me&ate
phagocytosis of degenerated myelin in macrophages and
microglia. However, CR3/MAC-1 and SRAI/II, but not FR,
mediate phagocytosis after axonal injury. We tested for PI3K,
PLCy and PKC signaling in myelin phagocytosis mediated by
CR3/MAC-1 alone and by CR3/MAC-1 combined with
SRAI/II. Phagoc3tosis was inhibited by PI3K inhibitors
wortmannin and LY-294002, PLC/ inhibitor U-73122,
classical PKC (cPKC) inhibitor Go-6976, general PKC
inhibitors Ro-318220 and ca!_ohostin-C, and BAPTA/AM
which chelates intracellular Ca+'required for cPKC activation.
PKC activator PMA augmented phagocytosis and further
alleviated inhibitions induced by PI3K and PLC/inhibitors.
Overall, alterhag PKC activity modulated phagocytosis four- to
six-fold between inhibition and augmentation. PLC? activation
did not require tyrosine phosphorylation. Thus signaling of
myelin phagoc}aosis medmted by CR3/MAC-1 alone and by
CR3/MAC-1 combined with SRAI/II involves PI3K, PLC, and
cPKC, the cascade PI3K>"PLCy> cPKC, and wide-range
modulation by PKC. This pathway may thus be targeted for m
vivo modulation, which may "explAin differences in the
efficiency of CR3/MAC-I mediated myelin phagocytosis in
different pathological conditions.
Do We have two different genetic animal models of
childhood depression?
Malkesman O., Braw Y., Maayan R., Yadid G., Shabat-Simon
M,, Kesner Y., Touati D., Overstreet D.H. mad Weller A,
Bar-llan Uiversity, Ramat Gan,, Israel; Tel-Aviv University,
Israel; UNC, USA
Childhood depression has received attention as a distinct
clinical entity only relatively recently. We examined whether
existing geneti animal models of depression used in
psychopharmaeological research in adult rats are also valid for
modeling depression in juvenile rats. Two different
"depressed" lines were studied: the Flinders Sensitive Line
(FSL) and their controls, Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats, and the
Wistar Kyoto (WKY) line and their controls, Wistar rats.
Adults from FSL and WKY lines have been shown to
demonstrate depression-like symptoms, e.g., increased
immobility in the swim test, prevented by chronic
antidepressant treatment, and recently, we fotmd that juveniles
from both "'depressed" lines show also increased immobility in
this test compared to their controls. We hypothesized that FSL
and WKY adolescent rats (about 35 days of age) xvill display
different patterns of cial play compared to their controls, as
observed after 24 hours of isolation juveniles Frequencies of
behaviors were recorded and analyzed during 15-min
observations of within-line pairs. Next'we examined whether
FSL and WKY juveniles have different basal plasma levels of
corticosterone and ACTH, compared to their controls. Blood
from both lines and form their controls was taken after the rats
have been sacrificed.
216
FSL juveniles demonstrated significantly higher levels of
social play behaviors compared to their controls, while WKY
juveniles demonstrated significantly lower levels of social play
behaviors compared to their controls.
Significantly higher plasma levels of corticosterone and ACTH
were found in FSLjuveniles compared to their controls, while
WKY juveniles e.xhibited significantly lower levels of
corticosterone and ACTH compared to their controls.
These restdts may suggest that both FSL and WKY ,are genetic
animal models of depression in adolescent rats, exhibiting
separate patterns of social dysfunction and different
abnormality ofthe hypothalamic- ptuitary-adrenal (HPA) axis.
Subdivision of cultured Aplysia neurons into
sub-compartments by spontaneous and localized calcium
flashes
Malkinson G. and Spira M.E.Error.* Bookmark not defined.
o-e-obiology, Life Sciences Institute, The Hebrew
University ofJerusalem
Recent studies show that the free intracellular calcium
2+
concentration ([Ca ]i) in cultured embrvomc neurons s
spontaneously and lbcally elevated with "well-characterized
frequencies and amplitudes These spontaneous events
("calcium spikes" or "flashes") are thought to play a role in the
differentiation ofthe neurons and in synaptogenesis (Spitzer, J.
Physiol. Paris 96, 2002) and in nerve terminals (Kraus et al., J.
ofBasic & Clin. Physiol. & Pharmacol. 2000; 11, 4),
Cultured adult Apl.ysia neurons, in defined medium, vigorously
extend new neurltes, form chemical and electrical synapses
and reveal short and long term forms of neuroplhsticitv.
Numerous studies of the calcium metabolism in cultured
lysia neurons revealed that non stimulated neurons maintain
e [Ca>]i at steady levels. Here we report however, the
detection of significant spontaneous local fluctuations in the
Ca2+]i The local and transient nature of these spontaneous
'calcium-flashes" subdivides the neurons in time and space
into calcium-compartments.
For the observations, fluo-4 and rhod-2-pentapotassium were
injected into the cultured neurons. Evoked or spontaneous
local "calcium-flashes" were imaged by a confocal system.
In the main axon and cell body local calcium flashes (F/T0
1.5-2) appear at an estimated frequency of 3 per minute. In the
branching neurites, the frequency of the flashes is higher, the
flashes appear to be generated randomly in space and time, and
no quiescent periods are detected. In grovcth cones produced
by axotomy, random local calcium flashes are imaged in the
lamellipodum and filopodia. In the growth cone the
occurrence ofthe flashes is at a higher rate.
As in embryonic vertebrate neurons, the Aplysia's calcium
flashes are blocked when the normal bathing solution that
contains lmM calcium is replaced bv a calcium free 2mM
EGTA solution. This suggests that th6 spontaneous initiation
ofa calcium flash is generated by a calcium influx.
Neuroprotection, neurorescue and neuroplasticity in a cup
oftea
Mandel S. Reznichenko L., Tal L., Amit T. and Youdim
MBH.
Eve Topfand USNPFCentersjbrNeurodegenerative
diseases andDept .ofPharmacology, Facul'oflIedicine,
Technion, Haifa
Tea intake is commordy associated with traditional beverage
rituals and particular lifestyles, especial,y in Japan, China,
India and England. Nevertheless, nowada)s it is considered as
a source of dietary constituents endowed with biological and
harmacological activities with potential benefits to human
ealth, especially in aging and neurodegenerative diseases.
Indeed, accumulating evidence support .the hypothesis that
oxidative-stress (OS), resulting in reactwe oxygen species
(ROS) generation and inflammatory processes, trigger a
cascade of events leading to apoptottc/necrotic cell death in
neurodegenerative disorders, such as Parkinson's (PD)
Alzheimer's diseases (AD). Thus, novel therapeut!c.approaches
aimed at neutralization of OS-induced neurotoxcty, support
the application of ROS scavengers, transition metals (e.. iron
and copper) chelators and non-vitamin natural antiffidant
polyphenols, in monotherapy, or as part of antioxidant cocktail
formulation for these diseases. The major polyphenol
component of green tea, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
and blueberry extract, have been shown to improve age-related
cognitive decline and to be neuroprotective n models of PD,
AD and cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injuries. However,
recent studies indicate that the radical scavenger property of
EGCG is unlikely to be the sole explanation for its
neuroprotective capacity. Our investigation nto the molecular
pharmacological action of EGCG, has clearly shown that this
polyphenol acts through a rapid activation of PKC-a and
PKC-e in PC-12, SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells and mice
hippocampus. This results in do regulation of a
ro-apoptotic gene cascade involving bax, bad, TRAIL, mdm2,
as ligand and GADD45. Thus, it is apparent that EGCG has
anti-apoptotic (cell survival) activity and may induce
PKC-dependent long-term potentiation, resulting in neuronal
plasticity. The latter is evidenced by the ability of EGCG
rescuing and maintaining viable PC-12 cells, in response to
serum neurotrophic factors withdrawal.
Involvement ofthe plasminogen activator system in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
Maravi- Pinto FY. ,Irony-Tur-Sinai M. ,Grigoriadis N. 3.
Higazi AE.IAkk-wi S. and Brenner T..
Depts. ofNeurology andBiochemistr, Hqdassah lv[edica[
Center..Jerusalem andAristotle University,Thessalonili
Greece.
Extracellular proteases such as plasminogen activators (PAs)
and matrix metalloproteinases play an important role in axonal
and myelin damage. These processes are involved in a variety
of CNS disorders such as stroke, encephalomyelitis and
multiple sclerosis (MS). In MS, as well as in nerve njury, PAs
and their inhibitors are upregula.ted. Although, it is not clear
whether this altered expression s a benefimal or deleterious
response of the tissue to the disease. In the present study, we
studied the involvement of the PA system in experimental
au_toimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), using mice lacking tPA
(tPA -/-), uPA. (uPA -/-) and uPAR (uPAR -/-). All the
knockout n'nee tested exhibited severe neurological
dysfunction in comparison with the wild type (wt) group,
while the tPA -/- mice displayed the most severe clinical
symptoms. Histological examination of CNS tissue correlated
with the augmented clinical outcome. Increased axonal injury,
axonal loss and inflammatory loci were found in the tPA -/-
and uPAR -/- mice. On the other hand, specific T- cell
reactivity towards the encephalitogenic antigen MOG and the
response to MOG presentation by professional antigen
presenting cells was markedly reduced in the KO animals bv
40-80% and 60-80% respectively. Our restIs indicate that the
PAs system is involved in the axonal and myelin damage
occurring during EAE and may be a potentml target for
treatment of CNS inflammatory, and demyelinating diseases.
Restoration of cerebral blood perfusion by the Ras
inhibitor FTS is demonstrated by diffusion weighted
imaging in a rat closed head injury model
Marciano D.,Shohami E.2, Kloog y.3 and Goelman G.
Dept ofOrganic Chemistry Israel Institute ofBiological
Researbh, Ness Ziona: Depts ofePharmacologv and
MedicinalBiophysics, Hadasah Medical Center, Jerusalem:
Dept ofNeurobiochemistry, Tel-Aviv University.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) activates cellular and molecular
responses resulting in secondary damages leading to decrease
in cerebral blood flow, neuroir]flammation and neuronal cell
death. A post-traumatic decrease in binding of ligands to
NMDAR, indicative of loss of NMDA-receptive neurons was
observed. TBl-induced activation of NMDAR caused
activation of Ras and its effectors. Previous results showing
that inhibiting Ras activation lead to both, a decrease in loss of
NMDA-receptive neurons and a decrease in the size of the
lesion suggested that the neuroprotective effects of a Ras
inhibitor could be also associated with the activated Ras in
brain blood vessels. This hypothesis was tested by MRI
scamaing, of post-TBI rat brains, treated with FTS, a svnthetic
Ras inhibitor. The MRI protocols include diffusion eighted
imaging from which apparent diffusion coefficients (ADC)
maps and semi-quantitative perfusion maps were compiled,
andanatomical images from which T2 maps were compiled.
The increase in T2, the nuclear magnetic resonance transverse
relaxation time of water, after trauma is usually attributed to
vasogenic edema and infracted areas. The ADC is sensitive to
the cytotoxic edema defined as the relative change in the
volumes of extracellular versus intracellular spaces triggered
by energy faihwe. MRI distinguishes between the water
flowing in capillaries (perfusion), and static water (pure
diffusion of intra and extracellular water).
The results analysis shows that there is a measurable
therapeutic FTS effect in the brain of rats after TBI: From the
day following TBI to one week Iater, ADC values increase as
compared wth baseline. In contrast, control rats exhibit a
pronounced decrease of ADC values. One week after TBI, T2
values of FTS rat brains return to baseline while in the control
rats they are still high. In FTS rats, the perfusion contributes
51% (1 "day) and 26% (1 week) to ttie increase in ADC values.
In control rats, the decrease of the perfusion contributes 57%
(1' day) and 79% (1 week) to the decrease of the ADC values.
From these results, we infer that the FTS rescue of the brain
after TBI can be attributed to an increased cerebral perfusion
beside the assumed decrease in Ras-dependent MAPK
mediated neuroinflammatory responses to TBI.
Characterization of GRK-2 and l-arrestin in mood
disorders
Matttz.y,Ruban A., Schreiber G. and Avissar S.
Dept. Pharmacology, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva
Mental disorders represent a significant share of disability
causes worldwide. The biochemical mechanism underlying the
pathophysiology of mood disorders remain unclear. Basic and
clinical studies have provided evidence that the serotonin and
nor_epinephrine neurotransmitter systems are involved in the
pathoph3siology of mood disorders. Biochemical research has
focused on the cascade of events involved in the signal
transduction mechanisms beyond rec.eptors involving
protein-coupled receptors. Alteration in cychc AMP signaling
have been described in depression, bipolar disorder,
obsessive-compulsive and schizophrenia. Moreover, chronic
administration of antidepressant drugs has been shovcn to alter
this pathway, leading to receptor desensitization and
down-regulation ofthis signal transduction pathway. GRK and
-arrestin are proteins involved in homologous desensitization
of receptors following continuous exposure to agonist. This
study alms at searching for the possible involvement of GRK-2
and 13-arrestin in the regulatory pathways involved mood
disorders. Significant alteration in the immunoreactive levels
ofboth GRK-2 and l-arrestin were detected in mononuclear
leucocytes of patients with mood disorders as compared ,ith
normalsubject. Patients were examined at untreated-acute
state, and following drug treatment that led to mood
normalization. These findings support a possible role for
GRK-2 and 13-arrestin in the molecular mechanisms
underlying the pathogenesis ofmood disorders.
Characterization ofthe neuronal output ofthe peripheral
nervous system ofthe octopus,arm
Matzner H. Sumbre G. Flash T. and Hochner B.
Hebrew University ofJerusalem
In previous studies we have shown that the octopus' reaching
movement is controlled by a motor program that involves
strong feed-forward elements (Gutfreund et al 1998, J.
NeuroscO and that this program is embedded within the
neuromuscular system of the arm itself (Sumbre et al 2001,
Science). In the current work we test whether an isolated arm
nerve cord can generate a fictive extension motor output- a
feature characterizing pure feed-forward control systems.
The dorsal axonal tract of a segment, taken from the arm nerve
cord, was stimulated and the resultingmotor activity was
measured from the lateral roots at two different locations down
the nerve cord (- and 2 cm from the stimulating elec.trgdes).
The lateral roots were confirmed as carrying motor activity by
recording EPSPs in the muscle fibers that were time-locked to
single units recorded en passant in the nerve root. The axonal
tract was stimulated with trains of (50-100Hz, 100-600ms)
stimuli, a paradigm effective in evoking typical arm extensions
in denervated or amputated arms (Sumbre et al 2001). Such
stimulation evoked a prolonged (up to several seconds) tonic
activity in the motor roots and occasionally a burst of activity.
The intensity of these bursts declined along the nerve cord.
Cross-correlation analysis between the two electrode activities
revealed no consistent delay that can match the speed of the
traveling EMG recorded in behaving animals (Gutfreund et al
1998). These results suggest that an solated nerve cord cannot
generate patterns of activity that might be implicated with the
generation of a feed-forward motor output, on the other hand,
we have discovered that the nerve roots conduct afferent
activity when muscles are mechanically stimulated, suggesting
the extstence of a mechano-sensory feedback system. Possibly
this sensorv feedback is essential for the feed-forward-like
propagatiorl ofmuscle activityalong the arm.
Supportedby: ISF, BSFandDARPA grants
Glycosaminoglycan in urine of prion infected animals and
humans
Mayer- Sonnenfeld T.. Halimi M., Dayan Y., Najjar S., Levy
Y. and Gabizon R.
Dept. ofNeurology; Hadassah University Hospital. Jerusalem
Prion diseases are a group of neurodegenerative diseases of
animals and humans. Among them diseases such as CJD,
scrapie and BSE, also knox as the mad cow disease. It is
wellestablished that the key molecule associated with these
diseases and the main component of the orion infectious agent
is the aberrant isoform of the normal"prion protein, PrPc,
denominated PrPso. However, there are different lines of
evidence that connect molecules such as glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs) to the metabolism of the PrP isoforms and the
athological alterations observed in brains affected by TSE.
ince we have found that aberrant isoforms of PrP can be
detected in the urine of prion affected animals and humans,
we decided to investigate whether there are quantitative or
qualitative differences also between the GAGs present in sick
217
individuals as compared to urine samples from normal
controls. To this effect, we isolated and analyzed GAGs from
appropriate urine samples. Enriched urine samples, normalized
fri creatinine, were analyzed by- well established methods for
identifying GAGs such as TLC, agarose-gel electrophoresis
and alcian- silver staining of SDS- PAGE gels. In addition,
the total amount of GAGs in urine was measured by specific
quantitative techniques. Our results show that the totalGAG
concentration of GAGs in prion urine is significantly higher
than in normal controls. In addition, all chromatographic
methods used indicate significant qualitative differences
between GAGs content of urine from sick, as compared to
healthy individuals. These findings are consistent with the
presence of an amyloid seed in prion urine, which may be
composed of GAGs and PrP, and may incorporate other urine
components as well.
Exploring the coordinate system of object related areas
using fMRI
McKyton A. and Zohary E.
Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904
Perception and action necessitates a transformation from a
retinotopic based coordinate system to a world based one. For
instance, eye movements result in displacement of a static
object's image on the retina, although it remains stationary in
the world. On the other hand, tracling a moving object with
the eyes results in displacement of the object in the world
without concomitant movement on the retina. The receptive
fields ofneurons in early visual areas (such as V1) are strictly
retinotopic. Can a world based representation be found in
high.er object related visual areas? We classified these cortical
regions as world (or at least head based) vs. retinal coordinate
based, using the fMRI adaptation technique. This technique is
based on the fact that the fiemodynamic signal in higher order
areas is reduced with repeated presentation of the same visual
stimulus. A change in the stimulus position leads to recovery
from adaptation. It is unknown, however, whether the recovery
is due to the change in the object's retinal position or its
absolute (world) position. We observed robust adaptation in
the lateral occipital cortex (LO) when the object's position was
fixed, although the image of the object on the retina was
alternated between the two visual fields. Furthermore,
recovery from adaptation was seen when the object moved in
the world while keeping its image in the same place on the
retina, by similar eye movements. This indicates that unlike the
early wsual areas, and other object related areas the
representation in LO may be specific to the location of o.bjects
in the world (or at least taking into account the eve positon),
irrespective ofthe position ofthe object's image ori the retina.
The analgesic activity ofCB2 selective cannabinoids in
noxious, visceral andinflammatory pain models
Meilin S., Weksler A., Richstein A., Berckovitch Y., Avidor
B., Yacovan A., Bar-Joseph A. and Fink G.
Phalwtos Ltd, Kiryat Weizmann, Rehovot 76326
Accumulated data suggest that cannabinoids are effective in
relieving pain. Two cannabinoid receptors have been
identified, CB and CB2. The CB receptor is expressed in the
nervous system whereas the CB2 receptor is mainly associated
with the immune system. The analgesic activity of
PRS-211,096, was previously shown in noxious and
inflammatory pain. PRS-211,359 is an ester of PRS-211,096,
with a similar affinity for CB2 (ICs0 of both compounds 1
nM). The analgesic activity of PRS-211,359 was assessed in
experimental animal models of noxious and inflammatory
pare. The ability of PRS-211,359 to reduce noxious pain was
tested using the tail-flick model. ICR mice were injected IP
with the compound, vehicle, saline or morphine, and analgesia
tested 30, 90, 150, 210 and 330 minutes later. The analgesic
effect of PRS-211,359 was dose dependent, as powerful, but
longer lasting than that of morphine (330 rain with
PRS-211,359 vs. 30 min with morphine) and similar to that
seen with PRS-211,096. Inflammatory pain was induced by
intraplanar injection of carrageenan n adult male rats after
which the animals were injected IP with either vehicle or
PRS-211,359. Thermal and mechanical pain threshold was
assessed 180 minutes after injection. The difference between
the carrageenan and contralateral-treated paws was calculated.
PRS-211,359 showed dose dependent analgesia in both
thermal and mechanical stimuli, reducing the pain severity by
more then 50% (p<0.05 vs. vehicle). Visceral pain was
induced by IP injection of 0.6% acetic acid and analgesia
assessed by reduction of writhing over 5 minutes.
Pre-treatment with PRS-211,096 dramatically reduced
writhing compared with vehicle alone (0+0 vs. 26+5
respectively, p<0.01) and was far more efficient than known
NSAIDs. Thus, PRS-211,359 a CB2 selective cannabinoid, is a
potential analgesic agent for noxious and inflammatory pain.
218
Correlates of auditory streaming in auditory cortex ofthe
awake monkey
Melik_wan A., Scheich H., and Brosch M.
Leibniz InstituteforNeurobology, Dept. ofAuditory
Learning and Speech, Magdeburg, Germany
Sequences oftones are often perceived as originating from one
or different sound sources. A recent study in primary auditory
cortex, using sequences of tones of two different frequencies,
suggests that the same neurons are excited when the tones are
perceived as originating from the same sound source whereas
different neurons are excited when the tones are perceived as
originating from different sound sources (Fishman et al., Hear
Res., 2001:151). The goal of thepresent study was to extend
the search for cortical correlates of auditory streaming by using
other tone sequences and including non-primary auditory
fields. We prepared a monkey (Macaca fiascicularis) for
electrophysiological experiments. Multiunit activity was
recorded by advancing seven individual microelectrodes into
the auditorv cortex of the left hemisphere. Stimuli were
recvcling squences of two high and two low frequency tones
froha which we created six different patterns by alternating the
order of the tones (highi-h.ighj-lowm-low,;
highi-lown-highrlown). The patterns give rise to different
perceptual organizations. Tone duration and intertone intervals
were 100 ms and intensity was about 70 dB SPL. For each
tone we calculated peristimulus time histograms with a bin size
of 20 ms and obtamed the bin with the maximal number of
spikes. We found that the high-low-high-low type induced
statistically significant weaker responses than the
high-high-low-low type. The results show that there is more
suppression between tones within streams than across streams.
This suppression may underlie the processes of streaming.
Exocytosis: Threading ofthe partial reactions into a
functional kinetic mechanism
,Mezer A. Nachliel E.1, Gutman M. and Asherv U.
The LaseLaboratoryforFastReactionsn Biblff-gy, Dept of
Btochemistry and 2DptofNeurobiochemistry, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv
The exocytosis of a single vesicle is thought to be mediated by
a sequence of interactmns between cytosolic, vesicular and
plasma membrane proteins. In the last decades, the functions
of.specific proteins in this process have been intensively
studied. However the precise sequence of protein-protein
interactions that drive the exocytotic process is still a debate
and a comprehensive description ofprotein-protein interaction,
based on chemical kinetics had not been attempted. In the
present study, the reactions between the svnaptic proteins were
transformed" into a set of coupled, "non-linear ordinary
differential equations where the rate constants and some of the
proteins concentrations are adjustable parameters. Recent
studies provided some of these parameters, while a search in
the parameters soace for the others led to accurate
2+
reconstructmn of the basc Ca -driven vesicular fusion. In
addition, using the model we were able to reconstruct complex
experimental protocols as a sequence of stimulations and
munc13 overexpression. The model can also give an indication
of the dynamic changes of different intermediate complexes
during exocytosis. For example, it allows identification of the
empirically defined 'Readily Releasable' and the 'Slowly
Releasable' pools of vesicles with precise synaptic protein
complexes formed during the maturation process. The model
allows postulation and prediction of different scenarios
regarding deletion and manipulation of some proteins involved
in the exocytosis process. The strength of the present model is
that we can easily implement another intermediate step
according to n.ewly available data about the concentration of
ecific proten or information about binding kinetics.
erefore, we have created for the first time a comprehensive
kinetic model describing the dynamics of interaction between
key synaptic-proteins that are associated with exoc)osis.
Brain activity intensity location during orthographic and
phonological processing using the LORETA program:
Comparison between adult dyslexic and regular readers
Miller-Shaul S. and Breznitz Z.
LaboratoryforNeurocogmtive Research, Brain and Behavior
Center, University ofHaifa
Consensus exists among different dyslexia researchers that the
origin of the dyslexia deficit is not homorganic. In an attempt
to nvestigate this issue recent studies are investigating the
brain activation of dyslexics as compared to regular readers
when performing various reading tasks. This stucty focuses on
examining the intensitv and the location of activity in the brain
while performing orihographic and phonologigal tasks by
using the LORETA (Pascual-Marqui et al., 1994) program.
The study included 40 subjects all university students: 20
developmental dyslexics and 20 chronological age matched
regular readers.
Phonological and orthographic processing was examined by
using lexical decision tasks Behavioral and
electrophysiological measures were used with evoked potential
methodology (ERP). The EEG records of the experimental
tasks were analyzed with the LORETA program
(Pascual-Marqui et al., 1994.
The findings confirm the hypotheses concerning differences
between the groups at both points in time, P200 and P300, for
orthographic and phonological processing. Differences were
also found between tasks within each group at both points in
time.
Results of the study contribute to our understanding the
differences in brain activity between phonological and
orthographic processing as well as contribute to our
understanding the origin ofdyslexia phenomenon.
Minimal traumatic brain injury produces cognitive deficits
and behavioral disturbances in mice
Milman A.,Weizman R.2'3 and Pick C.G.
Depti o)Anatomy andAnthropology, and 2psychiatry
Tel-Aviv University Suckler Schoo'bfMedwine, Israel.
Tel-Aviv CommunityMentalHealth Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
Background: Victims ofmild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) do
not show clear morphological brain defects, but frequently
suffer lasting cognitive deficits, emotional difficulties and
behavioral disturbances.
Objective: To investigate the effects of mild traumatic brain
injury on cognition and depression in mice.
Methods: Experimental mTBI was produced using the
concussive head trauma device. Different groups of mice were
tested 7, 30, 60 and 90 days post-injury for cognitive function
in the swim T-maze and the passive avoidance test, and for
depression in the forced swimming test.
Results: There were significant differences in behavior
be'een the mTBI mice compared to the controls in the swim
T-maze and passive avoidance test, be.inning 30 days
post-injury. There was a significant dfference in the
depressive behavior between the mTBI mice and the controls,
which showed a depressive state in the injured animals
beginning 7 days post-injury.
Conclusion: Mild traumatic brain injury results in a cognitive
impairment starting a month after the injury, and a depressive
state a week after the inj_ury. These results demonstrate that
persistent deficits of cognitive learningabilities and behavior
m mice, similar to those observed in human post-concussive
syndrome, can follow mTBI.
In vivo imaging of dendritic spines in the hippocampus
Mizrahi A., Crowley J.C., Shtoyerman E., and Katz L.C.
ughesMedical Inst. andDept. ofNeurobiol., Duke
UniversityMedical Center, Durham, NC, 27710, USA
The hippocampus plays critical role in learning and memory
but its deep anatomical locale makes it technically dit/'icult to
image in the intact brain. In order to image the hippocampus,
we have developed a surgical preparation that allows imaging
of dendritic stucture in the adult mouse hippocampus using a
conventional 2-photon microscope (Zeiss LSM 510) When
aplalied to transgenic mice constitutively expressing GFP in a
shfaset of pyrarnqdal cells, this technique enabled visualization
of CA1 dendrites and spines in exquisite detail in vivo.
Individual spines were readily resolved on both basal and
apical dendrites, and could be followed over extended periods.
Hippocampal dendrites of adult mice were imaged for at least
4 hours (n=1082 spines; N=4 mice). To this end, we find a
high degree of structural stability over the 4-hour time window
as the vast majority (>99%) ofthe spines remained stable. We
are currently assessing structural pla.sticity during various
experimental manipulataons ofelecmcal activity:
Thus usin this oreoaration it is now possme to oarecuv
imag hipp-ocampl lendrite and spines. In addition, thfs
method may prove useful to study plasticity in the
hippocampus usmg other imaging techniques.
Auditory evoked potentials and behavioral measures
among dyslexic students in response to linguistic stimuli
discriminated by temooral cues
Moisesco-Yiflac[a T.,'Lamm O. and Pratt H.
rEvokedPotentials Laboratory, Technion, Haifb; :School Of
Education, University ofHaifa
Introduction: Students with phonologic\auditory dyslexia
present high intelligence and normal attentional and visual
skills. Some researchers suggest a specific impairment in
rocessin the temporal aspect of auditory informatmn.
he discr'i'mination of vo{ce/voiceless syllables relies mainly
on the perception of the time differences between the
beginning of the vocal cords vibration and the release of the
stop in the oral cavity- a temporal cue (Voice Onset Time
VOT).
Objectives: To explore the brain activity evoked by linguistic
stimuli that rely on temporal cues among
phonological/auditory dyslexics students. Compensated
dyslectics with years of reading rehabilitation and high
academic achievements were studied. Event-Related Potentials
(ERPs) manifestations of processing, beginning with the early
obligatory components, through the late components and
behavioral overt responses were examined.
Methods: Fourteen dyslectic university students and 14 normal
reading students were tested. The subjects performed an active
discrimination task (Oddball paradigm). Stimuli: pair of
synthetic /ba/-/pa/ monosyllables with a voice onset time
difference of 20msec. The ERPs were recorded from 21
electrodes. In addition to waveform analysis, LORETA source
current density estimation was performed.
Results: Although no significant differences were fotmd in the
behavioral measures (reaction time, accuracy), ERP
components revealed significant differences between subject
groups. Differences were found from the early component
arising from the auditory cortex (N100) via P2 and as late as
P300 that reflects the conscious perception of the stimuli. The
most consistent and significant difference was a prolonged
latency of all the ERP components in t-he dyslectic group.
There were also differences n the scalp distribution of the
potentials. The source current density distributions showed
group differences in the brain structures involved and the time
course oftheir activation. In the control group the typical early
activity (around N100) was characterized by rapid alternations
of maximum activity between the temporal lobes of the two
hemispheres. The late activity around P300) was
characterized by a stable temporal activity in the left
hemisphere. Among the dyslecties the early activity did not
show rapid changes between the two hemispheres, and the late
activity was mainly in the fight temporal lobe.
Conclusions: Phonologic dyslectic students process temporal
cues of linguistic stimuli differently than normally reading
controls. The differences manifest in the speed of processing
and in the brain structures involved.
Storage capacity ofWM in a network of spiking neurons
with randomly chosen stimuli
Mongillo G., Curti E. and Amit DJ.
INFM, dip. di Fisica, Universita' di Roma, La Sapienza; Racah
Institute ofPhysics, Hebrew University, Jerusalem dip di
Fisiologia Umana, Universita' di Roma, La Sapienza
We calculate, in Mean-field the storage capacity of working
memory of realistic networks of excitatory and inhibitory
spiking neurons. The stimuli embedded in the synaptic matrix,
of two-state synapses, are with a coding level $f$, are chosen
at random (hence with overlaps) and the synaptic matrix is
formed by a slow plasticity, upon repeated presentation of the
set ofstimuli to be memorized.
Working memory capacity is the maximal size of the training
set, for which the network can maintain selective delay activity
states.
The results, obtained in MF-theory are compared with
simulations of microscopic networl,Ls of spiking neurons,
monitoring the average rates in neural population samples,
correlations of visual response distribution to delay activity
distribution and rate histograms across the memories.
The storage capacity is studied as a function of the ratio of 1.
the high-to-low synaptic efficacy; 2. the efficacy of inhibitory
to excitatory effic.acy; 3. the of the ratio of
depression-to-potentiation probability in learning; 4. of the
coding level.
Supported by_ the Israel Science Foundation (ISF) Grant
#8009, and the Center ofExcellence Grant "'Statistical
Mechanics and Complety"ofthe 1NFM, Roma-1.
Can physiological strain index (PSI) reflect central
thermoregulatory activity?
Moran D.S.
Heller Institute ofMedical Research, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Saclder Faculty ofAledicine, TelAviv
University, Tel Aviv
Upon subjection to heat stress, the thermoregulatory center,
located in the preoptic area/anterior hypothalamus activates
two major heat defense effectorial loops in a hierarchical
manner: vasodilatation followed by sweating: Non-invasively,
the temperature thresholds (Tsh) for activation of these
physiological responses reflect central thermoregulatory
activity. To assess whether Tsh is also indicative of the heat
strain developed upon subjection to heat stress, in this
presentation differences in peripheral vasodilatation Tsh
(VTsh) in three groups of exercising human subjects differing
in their heat tolerance (heat tolerant, heat intolerant and heat
acclimated) was correlated with the calculated PSI strata index
219
(based on rectal temperature (Tre) and heart rate (HR) online
recordings, Moran et al., Am J Physiol. 1998 275:R129-34.)
upon subjection to exercising in hot environment. The onset of
vasodilatation and VTsh of the non-tolerant group was earlier
and at a higher Tre (37.55'IC) compared to tolerant and heat
acclimated subjects (37.17'IC and 37.01'IC, respectively).
There was a correlation between the onset for a developed
strain and VTsh in the non-heat tolerant group. This was not
the case in the heat acclimated and the heat tolerant groups. In
the later, VTsh lagged behind the onset ofthe developed strain,
suggesting that although PSI is indicative of the developed
stram its multi-factorial dependence make it unsuitable as a
measure ofcentral thermoregulatory activity.
Enhanced temporal non-linearities in human
object-related occiDito-temporal cortex
Mukamel R., Harel M.1, Hendler T.2'3, Malach R.
1Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot 76100; Functional Brain Imaging unit Tel Aviv
SouraskyMedical Center, Tel Aviv 64239; Faculty of
Medicine, TelAviv University, Tel Aviv 69978;
To what extent does neural activation in human visual cortex
follow the temporal dynamics of the optical retinal stimulus?
Sp.ecifi.cally, to what extent does stmaulus evoked neural
activation persist after stimulus termination? In the present
study, we used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(tMRI) to explore the resulting temporal non-linearities across
the entire constellation of human visual areas. Gray-scale
images of animals, houses, and faces were presented at two
different presentation rates- and 4Hz, and fMRI sigr.al was
analyzed in retin.otopic cortex, area MT/V5, and in high order
occipito-temporal wsual areas. In early visual areas and the
motion sensitive area MT/V5, a four-fold increase in stimulus
presentation rate evoked a two-fold increase in signal
amplitude. However, in high order visual areas, signal
amplitude increased only by 25%. A control experiment ruled
out the possibility that this difference was due to signal
saturation ("ceiling") effects. A likely explanation for the
stronger non-linearities in occipito-temporal cortex is a
persistent neuronal activation that continues well after stimulus
termination in the 1Hz condition. These persistent activations
might serve as a short term (iconic) memory mechanism for
preserving a trace of the stimulus even in its absence and for
future integration with temporally correlated stimuli.
Effort related changes in responses to tone pairs: An MEG
study
Nahum M.l'z, Renvall H.1, Haft R.landAhissar M.
tBrain Research Unit, LTL, Helsinki University ofTechnology,
Espoo, Finland; e ICNC, Hebrew University, Jerusalem,
Israel
When sounds are presented in pairs with intervals of less thaq
300 ms, the 100-ms cortical resoonse (N100m) to the 2
stimulus is enhanced compared to the t
(Loveless et al., 1989,
1996). We studied the budd-up of this enhancement effect and
its relationship to task difficulty.
Whole-scalp magnetoeneephalographic (MEG) signals were
recorded from 10 subjects with a 306-channel
neuromagnetometer. Sequences of 5 pairs of 50-ms binaural
tones were presented with stimulus-onset asynchronies (SOA)
of 150 ms, inter-pair intervals (IPI) ofl sec and an
inter-sequence-interval of 10 secs. Subjects were asked to
discriminate inter-pair frequencies under two difficulty
conditions: easy (1000 vs. 1100 Hz) and difficult (1040 vs.
1055 Hz). In 50% of the pairs the tones were of the same
frequency.
All stimuli elicited prominent N100m responses in the auditory
cortices, peaking at 83 + 3 ms to the t
tone and at 130 + 17
ms to the 2 tone of each pair. Re,sponse to the t
tone in a
pair decreased by 52 + 3%.from t
to the following pairs. In
r 11 m
contrast, response to the 2 tone in a pa" gradua y creased
nd th
from the 2 to the 5 pair. Consequently, the ratio between the
nd st
2 & responses in each pair increased throughout the pairs
from 0.53 + 0.03 to 1.22 + 0.04 (p < 0.001). Task difficulty did
no affect response amplitudes, whereas peak latencies of the
2 response in each pair were 11 + 4 ms longer for the
difficult condition (Both hemispheres: p < 0.03). An even
greater difference was found irl the offset ofthe slow shift (SS)
of the response, with the 2 response lasting 93 + 26 ms
longer (p < 0.002) under the difficult condition. Preliminary
results suggest that the source ofthis "effort related" difference
lies in the supratemporal auditory cortex.
Taken together, our findings suggest that the difficulty of
frequency discrimination can affect the N100m response and is
related to the dynamics of response build-up raher than to
response strength as such.
220
The effect ofpre-challenge learning on MK801 induced
psychosis-like behavior in an animal model of
schizophrenia
Naimark A., Barkai E. and Cohen H.
Ben Gurion University ofthe Negev, Beer Sheva
This study aimed to examine whether pre-challenge learning
prevents psychosis-like behavior in an animal model of
schizophrenia, and to describe the leaning-related cellular
mechanisms which attenuate the course of schizophrenia. By
combining behavioral studies with cellular
neurophysiology/morphology we explored how learning
protects against the psychotomimetic effects of the NMDA
receptor antagonist MK801.
Rats were trained to distinguish between pairs of odors in an
olfactory' discrimination task. We examined whether such
olfactory-learning induces protection against the effects of ip
injections of0.1 mg/kg MK801 in a series of behavioral tasks
the Morris water maze, prepulse inhibition and elevated plus
maze. MK801 caused sensorimotor disturbances, spatial
learning acquisition deficit, and swimming strategy alterations
in pseudo trained and naive rats, but caused neither in trained
rats.
Brain slices of the hippocampus were prepared and
intracellular recordings were obtained from hippocampal CA1
pyramidal neurons. Data show paired pulse facilitation is
reduced in neurons from trained rats indicating enhanced
naptic transmission between CA3 and CA1 neurons.
arning-induced protection may occur due to changes that
take place in synapses connecting CA3 with CA1 hippocampal
neurons, as a result of strengthening of the non-NMDA
mediated synaptic transmission. Thus, AMPA-receptor
mediated synaptic connectivity is enhanced after learning in a
manner that allows the hippocampal network to maintain its
function even in the absence ofNMDA-receptor mediated
activity.
Planning of bimanual movements in primary motor cortex
Nathan C., Paz R., Boraud T., Bergman H. andVaadia E.
Dept. ofPhysiology, Hadassah Med. School and The
Interdisciplinary centerforNeural Computation, Hebrew
University, Jerusalem
Recent findings defy the classical view of the primary motor
cortex (M1) as controlling only for contralateral movements.
Bilateral related activity, i.e. significant modulation in relation
to both ipsilateral and contralateral unimanual movements,
was found in high densities in M1 as in 'higher' motor areas
(SMA, CMA, PMd and PPC).
We have previously shown that a large proportion of neurons
in theprimary motor cortex exhibit bimanual related activity as
well. Such activity is defined as one that cannot be explained
from the activities associated with the two uni-movements that
comprise the bimanual movement.
We extend here these results by showing that bimanual related
activity occurs not only during the movement itself but also
during movement preparation and even when the movement
cannot yet be fully planned. Monkeys were gamed to perform
8 directions center-out task either uni-left, uni-rlght or
bimanual. Each trial started' with a laterality signal (i.e.
indicating uni or bi movement) followed by a directional signal
and only then a go signal. We found that a large proportion of
neurons in the primary motor cortex respond to Laterality cue
,and a unique combined population-rate response clearly
differentiate between the three of upcoming movements as
well. moreover, we show that percentage ofblmanually related
neurons increases along the trial performance.
The results strengthen other recent findings showing that M
participates in planning for complex movements and
particularly in planning and executing coordinated movements
ofthe two arms.
Characterizing secondary degeneration and protective
autoimmunity kinetics by diffusion weighted MRI
12
Nevo U. ', Molshanski-mor S. Hauben [. Akselrod S.
/.1 and Schwartz M.
Weizmann Institute ofScience,Rehovot; 2TeIAviv University.
TelAviv
Secondary degeneration folio.wing spingl cord injury (SCI) is,
self-perptuatmg process that contributes to e loss
neuronal cell bodies and axonal fibers. Our group has
ioneered the use of Autoimmune Modulation to protect the
NS from secondary_ degeneration (Moalem G. et al. Nat Med
1999). This approach involvespasslve or active immunization
with self-antigens residing in the site of the lesion. We have
lately suggested 'comprehensive immunity' (Nero U. et al.
Trends in Mol. Med), a possible physiological immune based
neuro.protection mechanism whereby the protection involves a
transient phase oftissue loss.
In this work we use the Diffusion weighted MRI (DW-MRI)
technique to characterize the dynamics of degeneration in rats
that were subjected to SCI. We further use this technique to
test the predictions suggested by our 'comprehensive
immunity' approach. We vaccinated Male adult Lewis rats
with copolymer that boosts the protective autoimmunity. At
four time-points after the injury, rats were sacrificed and the
excised spinal cords were scanhed by DW-MRI (Nevo U. et at.
Magn Reson Med. 2001). Images were then analyzed toyield
the values of the Apparent Diffusion Coefficient, and the
Anisotropy to displacement of water molecules. Values of
these parameters where then averages across slices, and
normalized by the slices area.
Our result quantified the kinetics of the degenerative process,
and showed a transient phase in which the tissue loss in the
vaccinated animals exceeded the loss seen in the control group.
Nevertheless, the overall recover, when the two groups
reached a plateau was better in the vaccinated than in me
control group.
Muncl8ohosphorvlation enhances vesicle oool refilling.
Nili U le Vlt H.2" Tonnen R.2
Verhage M.and Asherv U.1.
tDep. Neurobiochemistry, Tel Aviv Universtty, Israel and:
DelJ.ofFunctional Genomics, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
During repetitive or intense stimulation, neurosecretory cells
and neurons undergo use-dependent changes in secretory
strength, which are partially mediated by activation of protein
kinase C (PKC). However, the molecular targets of PKC and
their mode of action remain elusive. In vitro studies have
demonstrated that Muncl8 can be phosphorylated by PKC in a
calcium-dependent manner and that this phosphorylation
inhibits its interaction with Syntaxin. In the present study we
investigated the effect of Muncl8 ph0sphorylation on
catecholamine secretion from chromaff'm cells by using
membrane capacitance measurements following flash
photolysis of caged calcium. In our experiments we used a
protocol consistmg of two flash stimulations given two
minutes apart. The response to the second flash stimulation
assesses the ability of the cells to refill their releasable vesicle
which are depleted following the first flash stimulation.
verexpression ofwild-type Muncl8 caused an increase in the
secretory, response to both the first and second flash
stimulations, as compared to control cells. In .co.ntrast, a
Munc18 mutant (Munc18-3A), that mimics the
non-phosphorylated form of the native protein, caused an
increase n response to the first, but not the second flash
stimulation. Preliminary results with a Munc18 mutant (Munc
18-D), that mimics a constitutively phosphorylated form of the
native protein, showed a robust increase n the response to both
the first and second flash stimulations. These results suggest
that Muncl8 enhances the secretory response to the first flash
in a phosphorylation-independent manner, and contributes to
vesicle pool refilling in aphosphorylation dependent manner.
As was shown recently, following the first flash stimulation
PKC is activated by calcium and-acts on specific targets to
enhance vesicle pool refilling. Our data suggests that munc18
is one ofthose targets.
High amplitude, visual-like activations in human visual
cortex during the complete absence ofvisual perception:
Implications for visual awareness
1, Hasson U.2, Levy I.2'3, Yeshurun H. and Malach R.
'School ofComputer Science, TelAviv University TelAviv, Tel
Aviv 61390; 2Dept. ofNeurobiology, Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot 76100; 3The Interdisciplinary Centerfor
Neural Computation, Hebrew University, Jerusalem
A fundamental question in human brain research is the nature
of the neural correlate of visual awareness. Recent studies
using single-unit recording in the alert monkey, as well as
functional MRI in human subjects suggested that neuronal
activity, in high order visual areas could be the neural correlate
of visual awareness. We have found that during complete
darkness, well known visual areas show high amplitude fMRI
activations, with strong peaks occurring at comparable
amplitudes to those found during vivid visual perception. This
finding demonstrates that strong activiW levels in high order
visual cortex are not sufficient for visual awareness. The
parameter that distinguished the activity, during darkness from
visually-driven activations was spatial de-coherence, i.e. the
breakdown of correlated activations. Thus, during darkness,
functionally distinct object areas were concurrently active, but
this activiW became rapidly and significantly de-correlated
(39% drol in correlation level, p<0.008)" during visual
stimulation. The darkness activations showed consistent
neuro-anatomical distribution which ruled out purely
hemodynamic or scanner noise sources. Control experiments
provide initial insights about the possible mechanisms
underlying the darkness activity. These experiments argue
against visual imagery orprocesses which enhance EEG alpha
band power as sources ofthe coherent darkness activity. We
conclude that spatial de-coherence of cortical activity patterns
rather than activity per-se plays a critical role in conscious
visual awareness.
Supportedby the AMNfoundation, the Academy_ ofScience
Center ofExcellencefrrApplied Geometry, andgrant 8009.
Effects of a membrane permeable metal chelator on
zinc-regula[ing protein in mice
Nitzan .B. Eleazar V.', Sekler I. Hershfinkel M. and
Silverman W.F.
Depts 1Morphology andPhysiology, Zlotowsla Centerfor
Neuroscience, Ben-Cmrion Universi ofthe Negev, Beer
Sheva 84105 Israel
Recent evidence for the involvement of zinc in the formation
of [2-amyloid plaques in the brain in Alzheimer's disease (AD)
has led to the establishment of new therapeutic strategies for
the disorder based on metal chelation. We measured the degree
of free zinc dep,letion in CD-1 mice treated with clioquinol
(CQ), an antibiotic and membrane-permeable chelator,
recently reported as a potential treatment for Alzheimer's
disease (Chemy et al., 2001). The effect of CQ was examined
using the fluorescent zinc probe, TSQ. Mice injected
intraperitoneally (i.p.) with CQ showed a dramatic reduction in
chelatable zinc in the three organs examined, brain, testis and
pancreas. In contrast, mice given CQ orally, showed no
significant difference in levels of chelatable zinc in those same
tissues. Chelation of brain Znz+
by i.p. CQ lasted less than 5
hours. Using dual-label immunofluorescence and confocal
microscopy, we next examined the effects of CQ administered
i.p. on expression of ZnT-1 and metallothionein (MT-I/II), in
olfactory bulb (OFB), hippocampus and cerebellum. In the
CNS, MT-I/II is expressed exclusively in non-neuronal cells,
in contrast to ZnT-1 (Sekler et al., J. Comp. Neurol.
447:201-209, 2002). In hippoca.rnpus CQ had no effect on
ZnT-1 and MT-I/II expression. In contrast, ZnT-1
demonstrated a significant reduction, and MT-I/II was virtually
absent in both OFB and cerebellum followingCQ treatment. In
hippocampus, zinc stores recovered rapidly from the effects of
CO, with synaptic zinc, achievingcontrol levels by 5 hrs after
administration of the chelator. However, in the cerebellum,
where chelatable zinc stores are negligible under control
conditions, chelation had a significant effect on expression of
zinc-regulating proteins. This study demonstrates that in the
mouse, CQ administered orally, does not significantly alter
levels of the|arable zinc. On the other hand, administration of
CQ via other routes may be useful in the context of
zinc-mediated cell injury.
Localization versus configuration categorization in rapid
erception
izan A., Shneor E. and Hochstein S.
Neurobiology Dept., Institute of.Life Sciences andNeural
Computation Center, Hebrew university, Jerusalem
Subjects detect rapidly an odd element which differs from its
surroundings in a single dimension, but they cannot
necessarily report its specific location. Treisman & Gelade
(1980) fotmd that only with the help of focused attention can
subjects both identify and localize an odd element. On the
other hand, Sagi & Julesz (1985) fomd that detection and
localization are two parallel fast and early processes, that do
not demand focused attention. Reverse Hierarchy Theo_ry
(RHT; Ahissar & Hochstein 1997, 2002) predicts that earl3;,
implicit processing leads to explicit detection at high cortical
levels, while later explicit processing adds details such as
precise localization, by guiding attention to appropriate low
cortical level mechanisms. We replicated the Sagi and Julesz
experiment, and tested subject localization ability. We
presented a round arrav of 36 while diagonal line elements
with 2 or 3 elements rplaced by a horizontal line and asked
subjects (n=6) to detect how many odd elements were in the
array. In another experiment, with 3 odd elements, we asked
subjects to categorize the configuration as regular or special,
i.e. an isosceles triangle. The difference between these two
triangles, as in the Sagi and Julesz experiment, was the
positon ofone triangle corner by place in the array, which is
why they called subjects' distinguishing between the two
tri.angles, a localization task. However, in a separate
experiment, the same subjects were asked to directly localize
the specific place of one odd element, which appeared in a
similar array. Our results showed good performance in the
detection and categorization tasks, but poor performance in the
direct localization task. Therefore, we reinterpret .the .Sagi.and
Julesz result and suggest that triangle categorization s a
holistic, high-level task, rather than a low-level localization
task. We conclude that detection and localization are
significantly different from each other. Detection (as
221
categorization) is an easy, early, high cortical level task, while
localization is a harder task, that takes place at low cortical
levels, where the receptive fields are small. Thus, the specific
position of an odd element can be detected only with the help
of focused attention. Our results are consistent with RHT and
the notion ofa holistic view ofthe visual scene.
Supportedbrvan Israel Science Foundation "Center of
Excellence' grant and the US-Israel Binaaonal Science
Foundation.
Bifunctional compounds eliciting both anti inflammatory
and cholinergic activity as potential drugs for CNS
disorders
Nizri E.1, Adani R), Meshulam H.,Amitai G.2, and Brenner
T.
Laboratory ofNeuroimmunoIogy, Dept. ofNeurology,
Hadassah HebrewUniversityMedical Center, Jerusalem,
Division ofMedicinal Chemistry, IIBR, Ness Ziona.
The existence of cholinergic receptors in cells of the immune
.system is well documented. Recently, it was found that the
mmune cholinergic system plays a regulatory role in
inflammatory processes. These findmgs prompted us to test the
efficacy of IBU-PO, a bifunetional compound containing both
non-steroidal anti inflammatory drug (NSAID) ibuprofen
(IBU) and a cholinesterase inhibitor Pyridostigmine Octyl
(PO) as cholinergic up-regulator (CURE). IBU-PO was
examined in experimental autoimmune enceph.alomyelitis
(EAE), an autoimmune model in mice for CNS haflammation.
IBU-PO ameliorated significantly (40-50%) the clinical score
in EAE, when given recurrently during the course of the
disease (lmg/kg, ip, during 30 days). The observed clinical
improvement was further supportedby ex vivo results: T cell
taken from the treated animals showed decreased proliferation
in response to various mitogens (e.g. PHA) and also decreased
proliferation to MOG, indicating reduced responsiveness of
MOG specific T- cells. In vitro experiments done in
human-borne ly.mphocytes were in consistence with the animal
results. In addition, IBU-PO down regulated nitric oxide (NO)
production in cultured rat brain asrtocytes. In an attempt to
determine which moiety is responsible for the observed effect,
we tested the two components IBU and PO separately. The T
cell proliferation response was partially inhibit by both IBU
and PO, but the combined effect of IBU-PO was more
enhanced. Our findings indicate that combining; the
anti-inflammatory activity_ of NSAID with chohnergic
intervention may be a novel approach for the treatment of C]qS
inflammation and demyelinatlng disorders such as Multiple
Sclerosis.
Unique prolonged brain activity to verbal stimuli with
negative subjective meaning revealed by
electrophysiological functional brain imaging
Ofek E. and Pratt H.
EvokedPotentials Laboratory, Technion Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa
Introduction: The effects of subjectively negative content of
verbal stimuli on brain actwity have not yet been
demonstrated. Verbal stimuli in general have multiple
semantic dimensions (e.g., meaning, affective valence),
complicating the study of neural correlates of semantac
content. In contrast, first names have only one major semantic
dimension (subjective valence). The s_jective meaning of a
first name is mostly acquired from familiar people n the
su.bjects' life that have this name. Specific brain activity to
subjectively emotionally loaded stimuli has already been
demonstrated. The purpose of this study was to indicate the
unique brain activity to names with a negative affective
valence names of persons who have hurt the subject in the
past. Objective: Identify whether a .unique brain activity pattern
s evoked by stimuli wth subjectively negative valence.
Methods: EEG was recorded while twelve right handed
subjects performed a task of identifying 3 emotionally neutral
names that ended in a specific consonant from a list of 25-30
names. Names were auditory presented. Following the
experiment, subjects were interviewed and the names were
rated for their valence. For each subject, the name of the
person who hurt the subject the most was chosen.
Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) were averaged separately for
each name, for each subject. The time course of brain activity
to names with subjectively negative valence compared to
neutral names was derived using the LORETA method.
Results: Enhanced activation to stimuli with subjectively
negative valence lasted from 200 msec until at least 950 msec
after stimulus onset. Activity involved mainly the left
hemisphere, and had a unique ime course, involving several
cortical areas at different time periods: Broca and Wernicke
areas, secondary auditory cortex, prefrontal cortex, posterior
cingulate gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus, postcentral gyms, and
cuneus.
222
Conclusions: Names ofpeople who have hurt the subject in the
past evoke a unique and prolonged brain response. The
response includes a specific time course of activation in
language related areas, secondary auditory areas and limbic
system. The left hemisphere dominates the response.
Neutralization of apoE4 phenotypes with apoE4 specific
antibodies
Oohir G., Smorodinski NI., Dolev I. and Michaelson DM.
Dbpt. ofneurobiochmisrty,faculoflifescmces, Tel-aviv
university, Tel Aviv
The apoE4 isoform of human apolipoprotein E is associated
with several brain pathologies, including Alzheimer's Disease
(AD), multiple sclerosis, stroke and recovery from head injury.
Animal models, in which mice transgenic to human apoE4 and
a.poE3 (which is the AD benign isofonn) were subjected to
distinct experimental paradigms, revealed that apoE4 is
associated with dominant gain of negative effects specific to
this isoform. Although several mechanisms have been
proposed for these pathological effects of apoE4, their specific
roles in mediating the effects of apoE4 in human diseases
remaines to be determined. Accordingly, a theraputic approach
directed at the neutralization of apoE4 is expectedto be
effective for patients with the apoE3/E4 genotype, which are
the vast maiority ofthe apoE4 isoform carriers.
In the pi;esent study, we prepared and characterized
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), which bind apoE4
isoform-specifically and tested their capabilities to neutralize
apoE4 related brain phenotypes, mAbs were prepared by
immunizing mice with an apoE4 specific peptide, andscreened
for their ability to interact specifically with. apo.E4 and not
oE3 in immublot, mamunoperclpltatton and
mmtmohistochmical assays. The biological effectivity ofthese
antibodies was initially assessed by measurments of their
ability to neutralize apoE4 dependent A deposition. This was
preformed by a chronic i.c.v administration of Thiorphan (an
nhibitor of the A degrading enzyme- neprilysin) which
results in enhaced brain A deposits in apoE4 transgenic mice
compared to apoE3, apoE KO and control mice. This
experiment revealed that chronic i.c.v administration of the
specific anti apoE4 mAbs neutrilized the apoE4 dependent
enhancment of A deposition. The extent to which apoE4
specific behavioural traits can also be revesed by the anti
apoE4 mAbs is currently being investigated.
Serial memory in monkeys: Is encoding of ordinal category
numerical (absolut or analog relative)?
Orlov T.,Amit DJ.', Zohary E and Hochstein S.'
Int. ofLife Sciences. Cent. forNeural Com,utation, and :Int.
ofPhysics, Hebrew Umversity, Jerusalem, Universt di
Roma La Sapienza, Rome
Monkeys use a combination of mnemonic strategies to retrieve
lists of ordered images (Orlov et al., Nature, 2000; Cerebral
Cortex, 2002). We presented them with thirty images, divided
into 10 triplets, repeatedly in fixed temporal order. On each
trial three images were shown sequentially, followed by a test
stimulus consisting of the three images and a distractor. The
monkeys touched the three images in their order of prior
presenlation. Sm'prisinglv, their dominant mnemonic strategy
was categorization of lie images according to their ordinal
position. We now ask whether this position is encoded in
absolute or relative terms9 If encodin Is a
g bso ute (numerical),
monkeys actually label images as 1st, 2nd, etc. If it is relative,
the image ordinal position can be :ategorized relatively a
initial, intermediate and last. To examine this issue we trained
two monkeys on retrieval of the item order in triplets and
quadruplets of images, and tested them on a two-set test. Each
trial of the test consisted of four images presented
simultaneously: three of them belonged to the set of triplets
and one was from the set of quadruplets (as a distractor). The
monkeys were rewarded for touching in correct order the
images from the triplet set. If encoding is absolute, they are
expected to err by touching the distractor when it belongs to
the same numerical category as the correct image (e.g.
touching a distractor from the 3rd category during the 3rd
touch).-If encoding is relative, they would confuse between
correct and distractor images if th.ey belong to the same
relative (last) category (touching &stractor from the 4th
category for the 3rd touch). Results show that monkeys mainly
err f the distractor and correct image are from the same
numerical category. We conclude that encoding of ordinal
number categories is numerical for short item lists. Supp. by
Center of Excellence grant (the Israel Science Foundation) and
grant from the National Institute for Psychobiology
Conceptual priming of ordinal number category
Orlov T., Hamush KS. Zoh-_ E. and Hochstein S.
Dept. ofNeurobiolo_gy, Lifb Sciences, andInterdisciplinary
CenterforNeural Computation, Hebrew University, Jerusalem
How do we recall the order of events or items in a sequence?
Studying serial memory in monkeys, we found that they prefer
to categorize images according to their ordinal position in a
list. rather than use item-to-item chaining. Presmnablv.
catgory assignment is based on an abstract Iabel associated
with all images of the same ordinal category (Orlov et al.,
Nature, 2000; Cerebral Cortex, 2002). We now tested the
effect of these presumed ordinal number category labels on
priming in human subjects. They were trained with 32 images,
divided into 8 quadruplets. On each trial they viewed 4
sequentially presented sample stimuli, followed by a test
stimulus, onsisting of the same images. The task was to
mouse-click the images in the order of prior presentation.
Subsequent memory tests signaled that subjects successfully
categorized images according to ordinal position. To test the
priming effect, we presented subjects with a prime image to
which they responded by reporting covirtly the image
category.. Then, (ls after prime presentation), they were.
presented with a pair oftarget images to which they reportel
whether the targets belong to the same category or different
categories. We asked whether retrieval of the prime category
influences same-different judgment? Performance in trials
when prime was of the same category as one or both of the
targets was compared with trials wth an unrelated prime.
Results indicate a significantly decreased reaction time for
related primes. This priming effect did not result from a
speed-accuracy trade-off and was not influenced by stimulus
_type (faces or objects). If covert category report was replaced
by retrieval of an irrelevant prime feature or passive viewing,
the effect disappeared. We conclude that ordinal number
categories are well represented in human cortex and lead to
conceptualpriming.
Supportedby Center ofExcellence grant (ISF) andgrantfrom
the National InstituteforPsychobiology, Israel
In,vivo occupancy offemale rat brain estrogen receptors by
17b-estradiol andtamoxifen
Pareto D., Alvarado M., Hanrahan S. and Biegon A.
Dept. 1ranging, LBNL, Berkeley CA USA
Estrogens or antiestrogens are currently used by millions of
women, but the interaction ofthese hormonal agents with brain
estrogen receptors (ER) in vivo has not been fully
characterized to date. The goal of the present study was
assess, in vivo, the extent and regional distribution of'brain ER
occupancy in rats chronically exposed to 17b-estradiol (E) or
tamoxiferi (TAM). For that purpose, female ovariectomized
Sprague-Dawley rats were implanted with subcutaneous
pellets containing either placebo (OVX), E2 or TAM for 3
weeks. ER occupancy n rossN dissected remons was
qumatified with 16a-[SF]oroetradiol ([SFIIES) and
showed both agents produced significant decreases in
radioligand binding in the brain, but the effect of E2 was
bigger and more widespread than the effect of tamoxifen.
Detailed regional distribution of the interaction was then
undertaken usin an iodinated ligand,
125 15
lb-Methoxy-16a-[ 1]iodo-estradiol ([" I]MIE2) and
quantitative autoradiography. Ez treatment resulted in
near-complete (86.6%-/ 17.5) inhibition of radioligand
accumulation throughout tile brain, while ER occupancy in the
TAM group showed a marked regional distribution such that
inhibition ranged from 40+/ 15.6% in the ventromedial
hypothalamus to 84.6+/-4.5% ii the cortical amygdala. These
results show that exposure to pharmacologically relevant levels
of tamoxifen produces a variable, region-specific pattern of
brain ER occupancy which may be influenced by the regional
proportion of ER receptor subt3qges.
Do perceptual learning effects transfer between
hemispheres and/or between tasks?
Pavlovskaya M. and Hochstein S.
Loewenslein Rehabilitation Hpital Raanana andFaculty of
Medicine, Tel Avtv University; Life Sctence Institute, Hebrew
University, Jerusalem
Differences in perceptual learning transfer max, be related to
the cerebral sites of modification due (o experience:
hard-condition tasks are seen as requiring low-level (specific)
representations while easy-condition tasks are performed using
high cortical level mechanisms alone (Ahissar & Hochstein,
Nature, 1997). We recently found that inter-hemispheric
transfer also depends on task diffictdtv. Subjects practiced a
color and orientation feature search ]ask, each s,ithin one
hemifield. Following training, we switched the sides of the
color and orientation tasks. We found nearly complete transfer
for easy conditions, and considerably less with difficult
conditions. We have discussed the "results in terms of
inter-hemispheric transfer (Pavlovskaya & Hochstein, Neural
Plasticity, 2002).
However, mt alternative interpretation e.,dsts, namely, that the
transfer is across task rather than across hemisphere. That is,
perhaps training with color pop-out transfers to orientation
search in the same hemisphere, and orientation lraining
transfers to color erformance in the other. This result would
also indicate a very high cortical level, where the same
mechanisms might be responsible for finding odd elements of
various features. We tested this alternative by teaching
orientation (or color) in one hemifield and a third task (gap
presence) in the other and then switching to a new feature for
these subjects, color (or orientation) in the fist hemifield, and
orientation (or color) in the other. In this ease, cross-hemifield
transfer would be useftd only for the second hemifieid. We
found considerable cross-task transfer (for easy conditions).
Our results support the notion that feature search with easy
conditions is performed at high cortical levels where
representation mechanisms include much of the visual field on
both sides of the vertical meridian, but also may detect odd
elements in a generalized naanner.
Supportedby Charles E. Smith Laboratoryfor Collaborative
Research in Psychobiology, Jerusalem; Israel Science
Foundation "Center ofExcellence"grant; US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation.
Learni.n2g-induced c,h3anges in motor cortex
Paz_R_. ', Boraud T)', Nathan C.1, Bergman H. and Vaadia
E.I,
1Physiology Dep. Hadassah met sch., Jerusalem, Israel; :The
Interdisciplinary center tbr neural computation, Hebrew
University. Jerusalem, Israel; Laboratoire de
Neurophysiologie, CNRS UMR 5543, Universite Vtctor
Segalen, Bordeaux, France.
Human studies show that the learning of a new sensorimotor
mapping that requires adaptation to directional errors is
spatially local. We duplicated these results in monkeys that
were required to adapt to visuomotor rotations. Specific
chances of activity were only observed in a subpopulation of
cells-in the motor cortex with directional properties
corresponding to the locally learned rotation. Changes adhered
to the dynamics of behavior during learning and persisted
between learning and relearning of the same rotation. These
fmdings suggest a neural mechanism for the confined
generalization of a newly acquired internal model and provide
electrophvsiologicnl evidence for its retention in motor cortex.
We t'uther used information theory to explore
learning-induced changes in encoding and decoding After
learning, neurons in the primary motor cortex conveyed more
information about the direction of movement and did so with
relation to their directional sensitivity. Similar to recent
findings in sensory systems, this specific improvement in
encoding was correlated with an increase in the slope of the
neurons' tuning curve. Therefore, our results suggest similar
learning mechanisms for sensor3' and motor areas and provide
evidence for a tight relationship between locality of learning
and properties of neurons. We further demonstrate that the
improved information enables a more accurate reconstruction
of movement direction from neuronal populations. This
suggests that learning induced changes can be used for better
readout of neural activity, both in the brain itself as well as by
an external observer.
Tracking-down novel mutations at the regulatory elements
of MECP2 gene employing quantitative analysis of relative
gene expressipp in patients peripheral blo.Qd: a pilqt,trial.
Petel-Galil Y." Ben Zeev B. Goldman B."', Gak E."'.
Danek Gertner Genetics lnstititute and:ChildNeurology
Dept., Sheba Medical Center; SacklerMedical School, Tel
Aviv University.
The present awareness that MECP2 provides the possibility of
molecular diagnosis of Rett syndrome and other atypical
forms, prompts the clinicians to pursue the analysis of MECP2
in an increasing number of cases. However, mutation detection
by direct sequencing of the MECP2 coding region, leaves a
substantial number of undiagnosed cases in whom the
involvement of MECP2 cannot be excluded. We considered an
alternative approach based on quantitative MECP2 expression
analysis in peripheral blood lymphoevtes, intended for
identification of novel mutations in the regulatory elements of
MECP2. In a preliminary trial we included blood samples of
normal subjects, and Ret patients with MECP2 coding and 3'
deletion mutations, and a classical patient with no mutation
findings. We also obtained samples of .ymphoblast cultures
nerated from patients with known mutations. We monitored
ECP2 expression levels using Real-Time PCR and highly
specific TaqMan probes for (1) MECP2 and (2) :-actin arid
RNaseP reference genes, in order to assess the relative
transcript quotient most consistent with the normal and
abnormal phenotypes. The MECP2/RNaseP blood ratio was
223
fomd as a potentially meaningful value that was consistent
with mutation type and Rett phenotype. The normal panel was
relatively similar according to this parameter, while both 3"
deletion and no coding mutation samples had lower
MECP2/RNaseP. In contrast, the coding mutation sample had
normal MECP2/RNaseP value. In lymphoblast cultures, all
MECP2 mutations had higher MECP2/RNaseP in compare to
the normal X expression levels. The MECP2/-actin ratio was
not found consistent in neither blood nor .ymphoblast cultures.
At present, we pursue to verify these data in a larger panel of
patients and controls, and further subject the MECP2 deficient
samples to DHPLC analysis ofthe 5" and 3"UTR fragments, in
order to. identify novel mutations associated with low MECP2
expression.
Correlation between severity ofschizophrenia and levels of
a7 acetylcholine receptor mRNA on peripheral blood
lymphocvtes
S.
Perl O.l, ;trous R.D.l' and Fuchs
ZDept. ofImmunology, The Weizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot 76100; 'Beer YaakovMental Health Center
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) and in particular the
z7 AChR have been shown to participate in pathogenesis of
schizophrenia. In a recent study we have reported that
schizophrenia patients express lower levels of a7 mRNA in
their peripheral blood lyrnphoces (PBL), than healthy
controls. The decrease in a7 mRNA levels is not a result of
medication management or nicotine consumption. This
decrease is in accordance with reports on a deficit m 7 AChR
in post mortem brains of schizophrenia patients. In the present
study we examined whether there is a correlation between the
level of a7 mRNA and severity of schizophrenia. Blood
samples were obtained from schizophreniapatients followi.ng
evaluation verified by two board certified psychiatrists 0y
means of a structured interview according to Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I, Patient Edition
guidelines. To provide another control group for analysis
among the psychiatrically ill subpopulation, blood samples
from patients diagnosed by psychiatric valuation with "severe"
personality disorder were also analyzed. Fifty patients with
schizophrenia, 15 withpersonality disorder, and 15 healthy
controls were examined. RNA was prepared from isolated
lymphocytes and a7 mRNA was determined by RT-PCR
followedbv quantification ofPCR products specifid for human
a7 AChR 6y densitometry. As previously reported, a decrease
of a7 mRNA levels on PBLs of schizophrenia patients in
comparison with controls was observed. Moreover, we found a
significant correlation between the CGI score describing the
severity of the illness given by a psychiatric evaluation, and
the level of x7 mRNA in PBL. Personality disorder patients
did not show any significant change in a7 mRNA. The
correlation demolstrated in this study between severity of
schizp,phrenia and x7 mRNA levels in PBL may contribute to
identification and evaluation of schizophrenia, and further
suggests that a7 AChR may serve as a reliable peripheral
mker for the disease
From snail to sciatic nerve: Retrograde injury signaling
from axon to soma in lesioned neuron,s
Perlson E.,Hanz,S.l, Medzihra,dsky K.,Darula S.,Munno
D.', Massarwa R., Shaked M.,Gonzalez-Dunia D., Syed
N. Burlingame A. and Fainzilber MJ
1Ddpt. ofBiological Chemistry, Wezrnann Institute, Rehovot,
Isrdtet," Dept. g)fPharmaceu#cal Chemistry, Univers#y of
CaliJbrnia, San Francisco, U.S.A.: Facultv ofMedicine,
University ofCalgary, Calgary. Alberta. (.anada; 4Dept. des
Retrovirus, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
The cell body of a lesioned neuron must receive accurate and
timely information on the site and extent of axonal damag.e, in
order to mount an appropriate response. Specific mechanisms
must therefore exist to transmit such information along the
length of the axon from the lesion site to the cell body. Three
distinct types of signals have been postulated to underlie this
process, starting with injury-induced discharge of axon
potentials, and continuing with two distinct types of
retrogradely transported macromolecular signals. The latter
include, on the one hand, an interruption of the normal supply
of retrogradely transported trophic factors from the target; and
on the other hand activated proteins emanating from the injury
site (Ambron & Walters, 1996, Molecular Neurobiology 13:
61-79).
We have used a differential proteomics approach to identify
injury-induced retrogradely transported proteins in nerves of
the mollusk Lymnaea. Products of a Lymnaea c)oskeletal
roteinp51 are highly represented in the screen, and dsRNA
nock-down of pS1 inhibits regenerative outgrowth of adult
Lymnaea neurons. Upon lesion of rat sciatic nerve, we
observed the appearance of mp51 (mammalian p51) in the
224
axoplasmic compartment, concomitantly with an increase in its
interaction with a complex containing dynein. Nerve injury
also enhanced an interaction of this protein with signaling
molecules. Finally, the regenerative outgrowth of adult DRG
neurons in culture was delayed in mp51 null mice. Thus, mp51
binding to a dynein-containg complex provides a scaffold for
retrograde trafficking ofsignaling proteins in injured nerve.
Peripheral acetylcholinesterase facilitation of
vro-inflammatorv cytokines vroduction in blood and brain
]ollak y.X, Ben-l'v[enachem O.,Ben-Hur T. Soreq H.3
and
Yirmiya R.
1Deptl ofPsychology, The Hebrew University ofJerusalem;
2Dept. ofNeurology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Hospital,
Jerusalem; 3Dept. ofBiological Chemistry, The Hebrew
University ofJerusalem, Israel
Recent findings indicate that peripheral acetylcholine (ACt)
inhibits acute inflammation, adding a rapid, localized, and
adaptive anti-inflammatory reflex to the known immune and
neuroendocrine anti- inflammatory responses. ACh released by
the efferent vagus nerve stimulates nicotinic receptors on
macrophages. This attenuates the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines(e.g, interleukin-ll (IL-113)
TNF-ct. As inhibitors and antisense suppressors of
acetylcohlinesterase (ACHE) enhance cholinergic activity, we
examined the hypothesis that these compounds would reduce
pro-inflammatory cytokines production in the blood and within
;the brain. Mice were injected intraperitoneally with endotoxin
together with tacrine, nvastigmine, neostigrnine or EN101, an
antisense oligonucleotide targeted at AChE mRNA, and IL-
and TNF-c levels measured by ELISA 2 hr later. All AChE
inhibitors attenuated IL-113 and TNFcx production in the blood,
as well as IL-113 secretion within the hippocampus.
Intriguingly, AChE inhibitors had no effect on II5-113
production within the hippocampus when injected together
with endotoxin directly ink this brain stnlcture, Furthermore
in mixed glial cultures, exposure to nicotine, muscarine, or
AChE inhibitors in combination with ACh, had no effect on
endotoxin-induced IL-113 production, suggesting that the
diminished production of brain IL-113[]under suppressed
AChE activity was due to peripheral rather than central
anti-inflammatory effects of ACh increases. Our f'mdings
suggest that circulation AChE facilitates inflammat0D'
responses in the periphery, which can indirectly promote the
production of brain cytokines under inflammatory conditions.
These findings point at circulation cholinesterases as new
therapeutic targets, the suppression of which may become
useftil for treating inflammatory-associated diseases.
Mechanisms underlying the coordination between the
dynamic dimensions ofthe plasma membrane surface area
and the cytoskeleton during neurites retraction
Prager-Khoutorsky M. and Spira M.E.
Life Sciences Institute, The Hebrew University ofJerusalem
Two main cellular systems are invoh,ed in structural
neuroplasticity: the cytoskeleton and the plasma membrane.
While the mechanisms of cytoskeleton modulation were
extensively studied the roles of membrane budgeting in
structural neuroplasticity are less understood. Nevertheless, it
is generally assumed that the changes in the membrane surface
area adjust to the dimension ofthe cytoskeleton.
Using cultured Aplysia neurons we examine here the
hypothesis that alteration in the balance between constitutive
exocytosis and endoc)osis play a leading role in neuronal
restructuring. Cultured Aplysia neurons totally retract their
main axon and neurites, by membrane internalization
following brefeldin A (10 []g/ml) application
(Prager-Khoutorsky and Spira 2000, Neuroscience Letters
supplement 55). The retraction is the outcome of excess
membrane retrieval over exocytosis and is not due to direct
effects of BFA on the cytoskeleton. Retraction proceeds by_
orderly disassembly ofthe mierotubules skeleton. Inhibition
calcium activated proteases by calpeptin (50/aM) or the
inhibition of proteasome by MG123 (101xM) or
clasto-lactacvstin-beta-lactone (101aM) inhibit the process of
axon intermilization. Imaging of the proteasome proteolytic
product accumulation and the calcium concentration revealed
that both are elevated in the axon hillock. Since the proteolytic
inhibitors do not block membrane retrieval we conclude that,
BFA-induced retraction is due to blockade of the supply.of
Golgi derived vesicles on a background of constttutwe
endocytosis ofthe plasma membrane and theadjustment ofthe
cytoskeleton dimensions to the reduced surface area. The
mechanisms linking between the plasma membrane and the
cytoskeleton are calcium-activated proteases localized at initial
segment. We conclude that alteration in membrane cycling
regulate the cytoskeletal organization and thereby may lead to
remodeling of the neuronal cytoarchitecture.
Supportedby." The lsrael Science Foundation No 556,/01
Is speech perception in noise impaired in learning disabled
teenagers?
Putter-KatzH.1'2'3 and AssarM.1'2
Dept. ofPsychology & CenterforNeural Computation,
Hebrew University, Jerusalem; Speech andHearing Center,
ShebaMedical Center, TelHashomer
Despite the general acknowledgement that noisy environment
excessively impairs language comprehension of many
individuals with learning impairments, little is "known abotit
the underlying processes. Particularly, it is not clear whether
impaired function stems from poorer speech p..erceptCon in
noise or from poorer cognitive-linguistic abilities. In the
present study we compared the thresholds of speech
dentificatitohn in temoorally modulated noise of learning
impaired 7 grade students and an age and education matched
control group. Subjects were asked to repeat one disyllabic
pseudo-wordeach time. The intensity ofthe pseudo-words
(above the fixed noise level) was adapted in a 3 down/1 up
staircase procedure, converging on 80%correct repetitions. In
addition we evaluated the reading, language aiad working
memory performance of the two groups. We found that the
learning impaired students performed worse than their peers on
the language and memory tasks. However, no difference was
observed between the groups in their thresholds for speech
identification in noise. Interestingly, in both groups, speech
identification thresholds were correlated with memory span for
infrequent words, but not with working memory scores. These
findirig.s indicate that, in contrast to common assertions, speech
percepnon of learning disabled teenagers is not more sensitive
to background noise. Their impaired performance in noisy
environments stems either from increased perceptual
sensitivity to other parameters (e.g. temporal aspects),or from
higher-level cognitive factors.
Synaptic plasticity in the service of homeostasis ofneuronal
activity in a model cal pyramidal neuron
Rabin0witch I. and Segev I.
Interdisciplinary CenterforNeural Computation andInstitute
forLife Science, Hebrew University in Jerusalem
Extensive experimental work carried out in recent years has
demonstrated that neurons employ plasticity as a means for
maintaining large time scale homeostasis of their electrical
activity. One such form of plasticity is the homeostatic scaling
of synaptic conductance, which can successfully counteract
overall elevation (or reduction) of membrane potential (e.g.
Leslie et al., 2001, J. Neurosci. 21 :RC170, 1-6).
Using a detailed compartmental model of a CA1 pyramidal
neuron, we studied such a mechanism theoretically and found
that: (i) local, synaptic-specific homeostatic scaling is capable
of equalizing the large time scale average membrane potential
throughout the enttre dendritic tree, producing a highly
non-uniform distribution of synaptic conductance, with
dramatic differences between the main apical trunk and the
side branches; (ii) a global change in the neuron's presynaptic
activation rate results in a global multiplication of synaptic
strength, in spite ofthe local scaling rule being used, consistent
with experimental results (e.g. Turrigiano et al., 1998, Nature
391, 892-896); (iii) changing the average presynaptic
activation rate forjust a small segregated subgroup ofsynapses
results in significant rescaling 0f the strength of these
synapses, provided they are clustered on side branches.
We suggest that while phenomena such as voltage fluctuations
or LTP link the neuron to the short time scale events taking
place in its environment, homeostatic plasticity couples the
neuron to substantial and persistent large time scale
environmental changes, which determine the significance of
those events to the long-lived "life ofthe neuron".
Reactive microgliosis following organophosphates-induced
brain damage: Peripheral benzodiazepine receptors as
faithful markers to memory impairment
Ra,eh L., Brandeis R., Gilat E., Rabino,dtz I., Cohen G.,
Sonego H., and Weissman B.A.
Dept. ofPharmacology, Israel Institute]br Biological
Research. Ness Ziona
Regardless of the cause of neuronal injury, reactive glial cells
always appear at and around the site of insult. These cells are
distiriguished by the exceptional abtmdance of peripheral
benzodiazepine receptors (PBRs; w3 sites), particularly as
comt)ared to surrounding neurons. Measuring the bindinu of
specl'fic ligands to PBR (e.g., 13H]PK 11195) offers a unl'que
indirect marker for reliable damage assessment in the CNS.
P.ositron emission tomography (PET) with the PBR ligand
["C]PK 11195 is used to monitor human brain
neurodegenerative processes (e.g., Alzheimer disease).
Numerous animal models demonstrated the existence of a
direct relationship between brain neuropathologies and
cognitive dysfunction. However, while attempts to relate
drug-induced neuropathologies to spatial memory impairments
in the Morris water maze yielded relatively low correlation
coefficients (r < 0.50), comparison to the respective PBR
densities produced markedly higher values (r > 0.60) in rats
intoxicated with soman, a potent organophosphate compound.
Thus, the estimation of glial proliferation associated with
neuronal damage, utilizing simple binding techniques, is
shown to be a faithful indicator for the accompanying
cognitive deficits.
Assessment ofthe functional role ofthe blind's occipital
cortex in verbal memory tasks using fMRt
Raz N., Amedi A. and Zohary E.
Hebrew Umversity, ,lerusalem, Israel 91904
We recently showed using fMRI, that the occipital cortex of
congenitally blind subjects is significantly activated during
tasks requiring retrieval of words from memory. These were
auditory verb generation (VG) and a verbal memory task,
requiring the recall of abstract words lists (VM). No such
occipital activation was found in the sighted group.
Interestingly, we found that the congenitally blind have
superior verbal memory capabilities compared to the sighted.
Thus, performance on the standardized Wechsler Memory test
(WMS4-'3ra
edition) of 9/10 blind subjects was above the
sighted population average. This raises thepossibility that the
extra activation in the occipital cortex ofthe blind during
performance of verbal-memory tas-ks, accounts for their
superior mnemonic skills. We therefore focused on the
correlation between both measures on a subject-by-su.bje.ct
basis. We utilized the fact that both verbal memory capabihties
and the degree of occipital activation during VM varied
between the blind subjects. Specifically, significant V1
activation (p<0.05 corrected) was found in 6/10 blind subjects.
Crucially, strong correlation (r=0.8 I) was observed between
the individual subjects' performance in Wechsler memo.ry test
and their V1 BOLD signal intensity during VM. Smilar
correlation (r=0.74) was found with long-term memory
performance, measured by the percent of words identified as
belonging to the original lists used during VM, months after
the scan. Using an event-related fMR/, we now test whether
the signal in the occipital cortex,of the blind is greater for
remembered than for forgotten ords, as was indicated for
.typical memory regions. Such an effect will establish the
involvement of the occipital cortex in the mnemonic
lrocessing ofverbal material in the blind.
bupportedbyIsrael Science Foundation grant #8009.
Socially restricted housing in laboratory rats increases
morphine consumption and increases aggression: Common
or separate phenomena?
Raz S., and Berger B.D.
Dept. ofPsycholog); Brain andBehaviorResearch Center,
University ofHcafa, Haifa. 3I905
We and others have reported that sociaJly restricted housing
increases aggression and interferes with the performance of a
cooperation task in male rats. One possible explanation is that
social isolation increases or exacerbates irritability or stress
both of which are also known to influence drug seeking
behavior in humans.
We report here that socially restricted housing significantly
increases the drinking ofa morphine solution (but not water) in
both male and female rats. On the other hand,
isolation-induced aggression is seen only with males. As in the
case of isolation-induced aggression, as little as 60-min. of
daily physical interaction with another rat completely abolishes
the ificrease in morphine consumption in socially restricted
animals.
Daily treatments with the SSR/ fluoxetine (5mg/kg i.p.)
reverses the increase in morphine consumption consistent with
earlier studies that fluprazine (5mg/kg i.p.) blocks the increase
in aggression following socially restricted housing. However,
whereas we have shown earlier that the beta blocke
propranolol (5mg/kg i.p.), reduces isolation-induced
aggression, we report here that propranolol does not reduce the
morphine consumption increase in animals housed in isolation.
In fact, propranolol tends to increase morphine consumption in
socially restricted animals while significantly decreasing
morphine intake in animals loused socially.
To evaluate the selectivity of these effects, we have begun to
evaluate the effects of socially restricted housing on the retake
of.o.ther substances, in cluding amphetamine, alcohol, and
rom these and other results we consider whether common or
separate mechanisms are responsible for the increase in
consumption of morphine and the increase in aggression
following socially restricted housing. We also discuss whether
an increase in irritability or stress fbllowing restricted housing
best describes the ovbrall results or whether some other
explanation(s) may be more appropriate.
225
Neurorescue properties ofthe green tea polyphenol
33-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and its potential
targets of action
Reznichenko L.,Mandel S. ,Amit T.,and Youdim MBH.
/Eve Topfand USNPF CentersforNeurodegeneranve
diseases andDept. ofPharmacology, Faculty ofMedicine,
Technion, Haifa
We have investigated the ability of EGCG to protect and
rescue rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells from apoptosis
induced by serum withdrawal and the molecular mechanisms
involved in these actions. To evaluate neuroprotection PC12
cells were deprived of serum support and immediately treated
with increasing concentrations of EGCG (0.01-1 M) for 24
and 48 h. Cell viability was significantly reduced 24 h after
serum deprivation, as determined by phase contrast
microscopy, showing retracted cell bodies and processes, or as
measuredby MTT reduction test (50% reduction vs control).
However, EGCG markedly increased cell survival by 30-60 %
over sertma free (SF) conditions. The neurorescue effect of
EGCG (0.1-10 M) was evident when given 24-72h after
serum deprivation, partially restoring cell viability to 140%
over SF values, as measured bv ELISA. Serum withdrawal
caused activation and cleavage of the apoptotic marker
caspase-3 (1.67-fold over control), while exposure to 0.1 and
lxM of EGCG for 24 h, effectively prevented its activation. We
also compared the effect of nerve growth factor (NGF), a
neurotrophic factor known to induce neurite outgrowth and
neuronal survival upon serum deprivation. Similar to EGCG,
NGF (50 ng/ml) treatment for 24 or 48 h, prevented and
rescued cell damage induced by serum withdrawal. We further
examined the levels of phosphorylated (active) and
non-phosphorylated serine/threonine protein kinase B (Akt), an
established mediator of neuronal survival and axonal
elongation. NGF, as expected caused a significant increase in
the levels of phospho-Akt in both experimental paradigms
(neuroprotection and neurorescue). Similar results were
obtained with 0.1-1tM EGCG increasing the levels of
phospho-Akt, compared to untreated control. This study shows
for the first time that EGCG displays not only neuroprotective
action, but also neurorescueproperties, involving long-term
activation of the PI3/Akt pathways, as well as inhibitaon of
apoptotic pathway.
BOLD-fMRI ofthe rat barrel field cortex in response to
multiole whisker stimulation
Rich 1. and Goelman G.
7MP/MRSlab, HBRC, Medical biophysics andnuclear
medicine dept., Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital
In the somato-sensory cortex in the rat brain, each whisker
from the snout is represented as a highly localized region in
layer 4, which are termed 'barrels'. When the neurons in the
barrel are excited by whisker mo'-ement the excitation stays
localized specifically to the area in the barrel whereas in layer
2/3 the area directly above the barrel receives the excitatory
input which can propagate laterally as has been previousl
documented from electro-phvsiological studies (1). Additional
studies have shown that there is a correlation of the neural
spike count amplitude in response to different whisking
frequencies(2).
In this study we examined the BOLD-fMRI response in the rat
barrel field cortex as a result of multiple whisker deflection.
We aim to firther explore the MRI signal in response to
whisker deflection at a variety" of frequencies in order to
compare to the results obtained from electro-physiological
experiments and to better understand the source of ihe BOLD
signal.
Methods: The rats were anaesthetized with ketamine and
secured in a homemade holder similar to a stereotaxic frame. A
surface coil of 15 nun was placed directly over the barrel field
cortex. The xhiskers were stimulated by air puffs directed at
the central whiskers at a frequency of 5 Hz. A fast imaging
protocol was used,, EPI with a TE of 17.96 msec and a spatial
,
resolution of 156 1565m.The whisker stimulation paradigm
consisted of alternatin ON and OFF periods where each
period lasted a course o!one minute.
Results: The data obtained was analyzed by using, a box-car
correlation test. Data sets showing only activation in the
superficial layers of the cortex were excltided. We obtained 4
images with activation in the contralateral barrel cortex which
was not restricted solely to layer 4, there was also a much less
significant activation in the ipsilateral barrel cortex.
Petersen CCH et a1.(2003) Neurosci 23:1298-1309; 2
Ahissar E et al. (2001) J Neurophysiol 86:354-367
226
Conformational rearrangements associated with the gating
ofthe G protein coupled potassium channel revealed
FRET microscopy
Riven I., Kalmanzon E., Segev L. and Reuveny E.
Dept. ofBiological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot 76100
G protein coupled potassium channels (GIRK/Kir3.x) are key
determinants that translate inhibitory chemical
neurotransmission into changes in cellular excitability. These
channels are activated by the binding of the GI E3 subunits ot-
G protein in concert with other intracellular components. To
understand the mechanism of channel activation by G proteins
it is necessary to define the structural rearrangements in the
channel that result from interaction with G 5 subunits. In this
study we used a combination of fluorescence spectroscopy and
through-the-objective total internal reflection microscopy to
monitor the eonformational rearrangements associated with the
activation of GIRK channels. Conformational changes were
assessed from changes in the efficiency of fluorescence
resonance enery transfer (F.RET) between CFP and YFP
attached at various positions in the cytosolic domains. We
detect activation-indticed changes in FRET consistent with a
rotation of the C-termini along the central axis of the channel.
We propose that rotation and expansion ofthe C-termini drives
the channel to operx by bending and possibly rotating the
second transmembrane segment.
Neuronal repair by disaccharides derived from chondroitin
sulfate oroteoglycan
Rolls Ax'2, Ave'dan H.z, Cahalon L.,Schori H.,Bakalash S.
2, Schwartz M.
Depts. ofNeurobiology andImmunologf The Weizmann
Institute ofScience, Rehovot
Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) inhibit central
nervous system (CNS) axonal regeneration, and their local
degradation promotes CNS recovery. We suggest that CSPGs
act as nesting molecules in CNS repair; intact CSPG
demarcates the site of injury, supports the immune reaction
mediated by T cells and promote the activation ofrnicroglia to
a neuroprotective phenotype. Upon degradation CSPG
provides disaccharides (DSs) whose function is the repair of
damaged neurons. We have shown that a CSPG-derived DS,
via activation of PKC and Pyk2 in neurons, induced neuronal
survival and neurite outgrmvth, prevented lysophospbatidic
acid-induced collapse of neurites, and protected cultured
hippocampal neurons from death. Moreover, the CSPG-DS
further supports the microglial activation to sustain its
neuroprotectve phenotype. Systemically injected
disaccharides protected neurons from degeneration in rodent
models of acute glutamate intoxication and chronic glaucoma.
CSPG-DS might provide means of circumventing common
extracellular toxin or growth inhibitory compounds,
characterizing the neurodegenerating circumstances.
Exogenous supply of CSPG-DS might be a way to promote
repair after acute CNS injuries or in chronic neurodegenerative
conditions.
Given these results, wepropose that the venom injected into
the brain affects descending tonic input to the thoracic DUM
neurons in a more subtle way then abolishing all descending
input from the brain. The decrease in actiwty of the DUM
neurons could be responsible for the decrease in the
responsiveness ofthoracic motor circuits and consequently the
expression ofspecific locornotory patterns.
Naturally occurring anti-tau antibodies in the sera of
patients affected by Alzheimer's disease and in healthy
aged subjects
Rosenmann H., Steinitz M., Meiner M., Geylis V. and
Abramskv O.
Dept. ofNeurology, Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem,
and EdperimentalPathology, The Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School., Jerusalera
Objective: To investigate whether naturally occurring anti-tau
antibodies (Abs) are present in the sera of patients affected by
Alzheimer's disease (AD), and whether the titers of these Abs
differ between AD patients and healthy subjects. The finding
may point to a role that these Abs might play in the
pathogenesis ofthe disease.
Background: A possible role of autoimmunity in the
palhogenesis of AD has lately attracted a great attention.
Immunization against beta-amyloid has been reported to
reduce amvloid burden and attenuate AD pathogenesis, but
some netroinflammatory complications were reported.
Moreover, naturally occurring anti-beta-amyloid Abs have
been detected in sera of AD patients and also in healthy adults
and aged individuals, but their role is not fully understood. As
for the second main component involved in the pathogenesis of
AD- the tau protein, it is unclear whether naturally occurring
Abs targeted against the tau protein are present in the sera of
AD patients, and whether they are revolved in disease
hOenesis.
thgd: We developed a sensitive anti-tau ELISA using the
full length recombinant human tau protein as antigen. The
assay was used to analyze the tJters otanti-tau Abs in sera of
AD patients and age matched controls.
Results: Naturally occurring Abs directed against tau were
detected in the sera of AD patients and in healthy age matched
controls. The titers of the Abs in the AD patients and in the
controls were comparable, with no significant difference.
Conclusion: In this stud), we demonstrated the presence of
autoantibodies in the sera of AD patients, and also in healthy
aged individuals, with comparable titers. A larger sample is
needed to confirm these results. We intend to compare not only
the titers but also the isotypes of anti-tau Abs in AD patients
and in healthy controls. Todav, it is unknown if these anti-tau
Abs are neuroprotecive or rattier neurotoxic, similarly to the
uncertainty wth regards to the role of anti-amyloid- beta Abs
in the patfiogenesis ofAD.
Venom reveals descending control of a modulatory system,
which regulates the expression of locomotory behaviors
Rosenberg L.A. and Libersat F.
Zlotowsld "CenterforNeuroscience andDept. ofLife Sciences,
Ben-Gurion University ofthe Negev, Beer-Sheva
In insects, locomotion is generated in the thoracic central
nervous system. The wasp Ampulex compressa injects a
neurotoxins cocktail into the brain of its prey to induce a long
lasting change in the initiation and execution of locomotory
behaviors. For instance, the thoracic escape running neuronal
circuit of a stung animal is impaired at the level of central
synapses between thoracic interneurons to motoneurons. These
central synapses are known to be modulated by bioamines. Our
hypothesis is that the iniected venom affects neurons located in
the brain, which send/]escending tonic input to bioaminergic
neurons. These in turn. control the thoracic premotor circuitry.
Octopamine is a bioaine, which is secreted by DUM (dorsal
unpaired median) neurons in the prey's thoracic portion of the
nervous system. It is known to regulate the expression of
specific motor patterns by modulating the excitability of
ecific neurons.
e pu.rpose of the present, investigation was to examine the
descen&ng control exerteo on the DUM neurons. This was
approached by recording the activity.' of DUM neurons either
alter removing the brain or after an rejection of the venom in
the brain. We show that the activity of an identified DUM
neuron from the metathoracic ganglia is altered in stung and
brainless animals. The spontaneous firing rate of this DUM
neuron in stung and brainless animals is 3 and 6 folds lower
then .control ammals, respectively.
Effects of sensory deprivation on barrel synapses in the
adult mouse
Sadaka Y.. Weinfeld E. and White E.L.
Morphology, Ben Gurion University ofthe Negev, Beer Sheva
Deprivation induced changes in the _functional organization
of the receptive fields of barrel neurons occur in animals
deprived from birth as well as in those deprived as adults. In
a previous study, trimming whiskers from birth through P60
caused decreases of 52% and 43% respectively, in the
numerical densities of symmetrical and thalamocortical
synapses in layer IV (Sadaka et al., 2003).
In this study, the effects sensory, deprivation in adults is
examined. Thalamocortical synapses were labeled by
lesion-induced degeneration in adult mice at P60 and P100
subjected to whisker deprivation from P40. After fixation,
cerebral hemispheres contralateral to the deprived side were
sectioned at 50 tm and embedded in plastic for thin
sectioning. An unbiased stereoiogical approach was applied
blindly Io systematic random samples of neuropil in barrel
hollows to estimate the numerical density of all
asymmetrical synapses, thalamocortical and symmetrical
synapses, and compared in trimmed vs. control animals.
Preliminary results ndicate no differences in the numerical
densities for any class of synapses between deprived and
control animals. Thus, the considerable plasticity of the
thalamocortical and symmetrical synapse populations
consequent to deprivation beginning at birth is not
reproduced when deprivation begins at P40. Supported by
the Israel Science Foundation grant no. 52/00 to ELW.
AD4, a novel brain target antioxidant attenuates
haloperidol-induced dyskinesia in rats
Sadan 0.1, Stroomza M. Gilgun-Sherki Y., Atlas D.
Melamed E.,and Offen D.
IDept. ofNeurology and Felsenstein Medical Research Center,
Rabin Medical Center, Sackler School ofMedJcine, TelAvJv
University, Petah Tikva; Institute ofLife Sciences, Hebrew
University, EdmondSafra Campus, Jerusalem
The acute and chronic treatment for schizophrenia and other
psychotic disorders with anti-psychotic drugs has several side
effects, tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a late onset chronic side
effect, in about 30% ofthose patients which is characterized by
abnormal movements. Oxidhtive stress and release of free
radicals molecules attaching to dopaminergic system is one of
the leading theories explaining TD's pathopysmlogT. In light
of this ass_umption, we chose to try a novel low molecular
weight thiol antioxidant (AD4) as a possible treatment for TD.
In order to examine the characteristics of TD we used the
anti-psychotic drug, haloperidol, to include experimental
model in rats. The typicaI vacuous chewing movement (VCM,)
was occurred in rats .following six weeks of chronic injection.
This purposeless mouth opening in the vertical plane is similar
to the human TD symptoms. We found that haloperidol
increased VCM level fom 16.4+/-2.4 in untreated rats to
66.5+/-7.6 (P<0.01), while co-administration of haloperidol and
AD4 decreased VCM level to 42.1+/-6.7 (P<0.05). Haloperidol
also increased the level of lipid perodation and protein
oxidation in the rat's brain, as was measured by the TBARS
and carbonyls methods, while co-administration with AD4
preserved their normal levels. In conclusion, hal0peridol
causes behavioral abnormalities similar to TD in rats
associated with oxidative stress. AD4 the brain-targeted potent
antioxidant, reduces the cellular oxidation markers and
improves the typical clinical behavior. Hence, AD4 is a
potentially new treatment for anti-psychotics- induced TD.
Expression of ShcC proteins in mouse brain: Effect of age
and LPS
Sagi O., Wolfson M. and Fraifeld V.
Dept. ofMicrobiology andImmunolog); CMRA, Ben-Gurion
University ofthe Negev, Beer-Sheva
The family of recently discovered She proteins includes ShcA,
ShcB, and ShcC. They. act as adaptors coupling activated
receptors with tyrosine kinase activity to downstream signaling
molecules, including the MAPK-associated pathway.
Expression of ShcB and ShcC appears to be limited to
neuronal tissue. Lipopolvsaccharide (LPS), a component ofthe
cell wall of gram-negdtive bacteria, is a classac trigger of
inflammatory reactions accompanied by a generation of
reactive oxygen species and activation of MAPKs. The brain is
one ofthe LPS targets mad the response to LPS is altered with
age. The present study was aimed at examining the expression
of ShcC n the mouse brain with respect to animal's age and
the effect of LPS. Male CD-1 mice aged 4 days to 12 months
old, were injected in.tra.peritoneallv with mg/kg LPS and at
different times post-njection, their brains were removed for
preparation of tissue extracts. The latter were processed
through Western blot analysis using specific anti-ShcC
antibodies. We found that (i) the basal level of ShcC in mouse
brain increased gradually during the postnatal period, reaching
the maximum at 2 months. Middle-age mice had a lower level
of ShcC compared to the young adult and young animals; (ii)
both p55 kDa and p69 kDa isof-orms of ShcC displayed similar
age-related patterns; (iii) LPS differentially dffects the
expression of ShcC isoforms, resultin m a marked
up-regulation of p69 and an insignificant effect on the level of
5p.5; (iiii) the effect of LPS on ShcC was age-related, being
mpre pronounced in the younger mice compared to the older
animals.
Supportedby a grantJhom the United States-Israel Binationat
Science Foundation (BSF), Jerusalem, Israel.
Correlation between firing rate and spontaneous synaptic
activity in SCN neurons
._Sa_a.giv N. and Yarom Y.
Dept. ofNeurobiology, L]b ,Sciences, Hebrew Universi,
derusalem
Circadian behavior in mammals is governed by the
hqgothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). GABA
(r-amino butyric acid) is an abundant neurotransmitter in the
SCN. Most SCN neurons contain GABA and show
GABAergic synajtic activity, mediated mainly b GABAa
receptors. Yet it s not clear [o wha! extent SCNnefirons form
an intrinsic GABAerg!c network. In order to unravel the
network connectivi m the circadian clock we recorded
svnaptic and firing activity of SCN neurons. Recordings were
rfiade from a 3005m hypothalamic slice containing the SCN.
Both the firing rate and the frequency of spontaneous svnaptic
currents were found to be high during the day (4.69+/-1 96 and
27.45+/-20.10 Hz, respectively). A low rate'of activity was
227
found during the night (3.27+3.10 and 17.68_+18.46 Hz for
firing rate and synaptic currents, respectively). The rate of
TTXinsensitive spontaneous synaptic currents was 2.10 Hz,
independent of the circadian time. The calculated ratio
between firing and synaptic activities was 5.8 during the
subiective day and 5.4 during subjective night. Hence we
corcluded tha't a) on average there are 5 GABAergic synapses
on each SCN neuron and b) the efficiency of the synaptic
release mechanism seems to be independent of the circadian
time. These results strongl support the hypothesis that the
SCN is composed of a net;ork ot" interconnected GABAergic
neurons.
Genomi and proteomi profiling ofthe neuroprotective
mechanisms of rasagiline in the mouse MPTP model of PD
agi Y., Mandel S. and Youdim MBH.
Eve TopfandNPFCntrs ofExcellenceforNeurodegenerative
Diseases Research, andDpt. ofPharmacology. Technion
Faculty ofMedicine, Ha!/b
Rasagiline is a monoamine oxidase (MAt) B inhibitor
antiPrkinson's disease (PD) drug. Its neuroprotective
properties has been examined in many cell culture as well as
In Vivo models,, among them the MPTP model of PD in mice
and monkeys. These studies and cDNA microarrav gene
expression "have indicated involvement of Bcl-2"fahaily
proteins and other anti apoptotic genes. In order to reveal these
mechanisms we adopted two novel methods: genomic and
proteomic profiling systems, in the mouse model of MPTP.
Both RNA, as well as protein fraction were produced from
midbrains of mice eDNA was synthesized and was hybridized
to microarrav gene chip (Clontech, CA, USA), cbntaining
2000 genesand were analyzed using a software (Atlasimage,
Clontech, USA), while protein samples were detected and
analyzed in Powerblot Proteomic array system (BD, CA, USA)
containing over 1000 mAbs. Gene analysis confirmed that
MPTP treatment involves proapoptotc mechanism and
proteomics suggested that the JNK pathway is recruited by
MPTP, in addition to Fas ligand involvement. Furthermore,
MPTP involved altered expression of n-nitric oxide synthase
(nNOS), glutamate receptor, and phosphorylated form of
Glycogen Svnthase Kinase-3b (GSK3). Proteomic analysis
confirmed r/aanv of the gene expression profile related to
MPTP neurotoicity On the contrary, rasagdine reversed the
pro apoptotic action of MPTP, rhanced anti apoptotic,
growtfi factor and in particular I3-NGF, its downstream
transcription factors: EGR1 (NGF-I A binding protein) and
EGR3 (early grovth response protein-3) gene expressions.
Rasagiline's ability to upregulate the protein levels of
pro-survival signaling of Ras, PI3K, and AKT indicates that
part ofits neuroprotective mechanism of action is mediated via
I-NGF receptor, TRK-A.
Experimentally based detailed model of synaptic
connections between layer 4 spiny neuron onto layer 2/3
pyramids in the barrel cortex 13
arid..L. Sakmann B.", and Segev I.
'InstitutefbrLib Science, Hebrew University Jerusalem:
lnterdisci tinary Cntr or Neural Com utations & :Dept of
Cell Physiology, Max-anckbsttutenorMedical Research
Heidelberg
In rodents, whisker movement is somatotopically represented
in the "barrel" cortex by electrical activity in the corresponding
cortical columns. This orderly mapping is extremely helpful
when trying to understand how sensory inforrfiation is
processed wthin and between cortical columns. The present
study is a first step in an endeavor to construct an in silico
model of the "barrel" cortex, that is tightly based on detailed
morphological and physiological information from in vivo and
in vtro studies. Tile excitatory connection between laver 4
spinv stellate cells and layer 213 pyramids was modeled'here,
based on morphology, and physiolo' of layer 2/3 neurons,
toether withthe dendritic location ad propehies of laver 4 to
la,';r 2/3 synaptic connection obtained from ih vitro
pfiir-recordings. Results from in vivo whole cell patch
recordings following whisker stimulation, both from layer 4
and layer 2/3 neurons, were used as a target for the model
performance, The compartmental models frr three layer 2/3
neurons predict ,an I, around 15KWcm and C,, around
0.9mF/cm with R 150Wcm and a peak svnaptic conductance
change, gk, that ranges between 0.15nS 1.7nS
(corresponding to 40 500 pA peak svnaptic current per
connection). An en-or that ran.ges beteen 50%-80% in
experimental estimation of go,k is expected due to imperfect
space-clamp. Next, population of 350 layer 4 neurons
converging onto a singlelayer 2/3 were activated at probability
and limes as measured experimentally following whisker
stimulation. This input gave rise to a corriposite modeled EPSP
that ranges between 10-50 mV with a significant NMDA
contribution. Suggestions for follow-up experinaents are
provided together with suggestions for the next level of
modeling.
228
Signal attenuation leads to excessive pressingin normal
humans similar to that seen in rats, and thisbehavior
correlates with the checking and doubting subscales ofthe
Obsessive Compulsive Inventory
Sch6nberg T .and Joel D.
Dept. ofPsycholog3, TelAviv University, TelAviv
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is a psychiatric
affliction with a lifetime prevalence of 1-3%. We (Joel &
Avisar 2001, Behav Brain Res 123:77-87) have recently
developed a new animal model of OCD, the signal attenuation
model. This model is based on the assumption that obsessions
and compulsions result from a failure to cease responding after
the successful completion of an action, due to a deficient
signaling that the conditions have changed following the
organism's response. In the model, excessive lever-pressing
unaccompanied by an attempt to collect a reward is induced by
attenuating a signal indicating that the lever-press response
was effective in producing food. This 'compulsive'
lever-pressing in rats has a pharmacological profile similar to
obsessions and compulsions in OCD patients, and depends on
similar neural substrates.
The present study tested whether signal attenuation induces a
simil behavioral pattern in normal human subjects. Twenty
two year social sclence B.A students underwent a computer
task, resembling a simplified version of pinball, which was
analogous to the rats" post-training signal attenuation
procedure. Twenty other subjects underwent the same task, but
without the signal attenuation stage. Subjects undergoing
signal attenuation tended to exhibit a higher proportion of
'compulsive' mouse-clicking (calculated as the number of
mouse-clicks not followed by an attempt to obtain a reward
divided by the total number of mouse-clicks) compared to
subjects that have not undergone siaal attenuation. Moreover,
'compulsive' mouse-clicking was sl.gnifieantly correlated with
the Checking and Doubting subscales of the Obsessive
Compulsive Inventory only in the signal attenuation group.
This is the first demonstration that the post-training signal
attenuation procedure can be conducted in humans. Moreover,
the present results suggest that the human analogue of
'compulsive' lever-pressing may be relevant to checking
symptoms in OCD.
Early acoustic experience is necessary for sound
localization mechanisms in mammals
Seidl A.H. and Grothe B.
Max-Planck-Institute ofNeurobioIogy, Am Klopferspitz 8a,
82152Martinsried, Germany
Interaural time differences (ITD) occurring at the two ears are
a major cue for sound localization. In mammals, ITDs are
encoded in the medial superior olive (MSO) by a complex
temporal interaction of binaural excitatory and inhibitory
inputs. Glycinergic inhibition from the medial nucleus of the
trapezoid body (MNTB) seems to be important for tuning ITD
sensitivity to the physiological relevant range of ITDs (Brand
et al., Nature 417:543, 2002). In normally developing animals
this glvcinergic input undergoes a" specific structural
refinement during the first days after hearing onset. This
refinement depends on auditory, experience and fails to
develop in animals, which are reared in omnidirectional white
noise designed to mask most spatial acoustic cues (Kapfer et
al., Nat. Neurosci 5:247, 2002).
Here we show, for the first time in mammals, that early
experience during a critical period is involved in adjustin. the
1TD-sensitivity of .sing!e neurons in the mammalian audatory
brain.stem. ITD tnm n animals at tostnatal day P15, 3 days
after hearing onset, (512) significantly differs frrm that found
in adult control animals. Animals that have been raised in an
environment ,vith omnidirectional noise from P10 to P25 fail
to develop ITD-tuning as found in adult controls. In juvenile
and noise-reared animals the ITD-tuning is not consistently
adjusted to the range of naturally occurring ITDs. Interestingly
ITD sensitivity ofjuvenile and noise-reared animals is similar
to that of MSO neurons during blockade of glycine. In adult
gerbils the same omnidirectional white noise did not alter
ITD-tuning permanently.
This study shows that experience of spatial acoustic cues is
fundamental for developing correct low frequency sound
localization capabilities. Furthermore, it seems likcly that the
structural effects of rearing animals in omnidirectional noise
are correlated with the functional differences in ITD tuning.
The development of inhibitory inputs and the resulting
maturation of sound localization mechanisms due to spatial
acoustic experience represents a mechanism of direct
adjustment of neuronal processing to behaviorally relevant
cues and offers an example of activity-driven, self-organized
synaptic plasticity of inhibitory inputs.
Epileptiform activity in the blood-brain barrier disrupted
cerebral cortex
.Seiffert E.,Dreier J.P.,,Heinemann W. and Friedman A.'
Ilnstite ofPhysiolo_gy Exp. Neurology,, Charit; Humboldt
University, Berlin, Germany; Zlotow.'lq Center of
Neuroscience. Ben Gurwn University, Beer Sheva, Israel
Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological diseases
affecting 1-2% of the population. The electrical activity
charact6rizing cortical neurons involved in epileptic activity is
well documented in different models of the disease as
paroxysmal and hypersynchronous activity of large numbers of
neurons. However, the mechanisms and sequence of events
leading to this abnormal activity are mostly unknowl Here we
report a new animal model for direct, focal disruption of the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) in the rat somatosensory cortex
using low concentrations (<5 mM) of the sodium salts
dehydrocholic acid (DHC) or 7-deoxycholic acid (DXC).
Electrophysiological recordings 4-14 days following treatment
revealed a focus of paroxysmal inter-lctal like epileptiform
activity limited to the treated region. Paroxysmal discharges
were associated with enhanced glutamatergc excitation, but
prominent inhibitory transmission was also found in the
BBB-treated region. Focal cortical superfusion with
electrolytic solutmn in serum concentrations did not cause
cortical dysfunction, whereas focal application of rat serum,
denaturated serum and an electrolytic solution containing
albumin resulted in focal paroxysmal activity, suggesting
increased oncotic pressure to be sufficient to initiate the chain
of events leading to network reorganization and ep.ileptiform
activity. While compromised BBB has been described under
numerous neurological conditions, it is the first time
experimental evidence is given for a specific brain pathology
resulting from BBB breakdown.
Transmitter release under hiah transmitter concentration
Segel L.A.2, Pamas I.rand Pamas H.
Dept. fNeurobiolog3, Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904;
:Dpt. ofComputer ience andAppliedMathematics,
Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100
50 years ago it was established that Caz+
is essential for
promoting the physiological depolarization-induced phasic
transmitter release. Astonishingly papers attemptinz to
re-confirm this role of Ca still occupy an impressive volume
of the published literature. In the last two decades, evidence
has accumulated showing that under physiological conditions
membrane potential, per se, plays a pivotal role, in addition to
Caz+, in promoting transrttd release, and the Ca-voltage
hypothesis, CVH, was suggested. The postulated controlling
role of membrane potentialhas recently been challenged by
findings suggesting that depolarization, as such, does not play"
a role in the physiological release (1). We show here that the
lack of effect of depolarization on release is a direct
consequence of the tmphvsiological experimental protocol
employed in (1). The protocol incluled long Ca'* pulses, long
depolarization and uncaging of Ca prior to depolarization.
Thus before the depolarization the transmitter concentration n
the left rises significantly due to release induced by ca
uncaging. Consequently, a fast autoinhibition process, which
differs from the slow second-messenger mediated feedback
inhibition, inhibits depolarization-induced release. This
inhibition occurs mainly during, and shortly after the (long)
depolarization pulse. Crucially, the fast autoinhibition is a
direct consequence of the molecular model that describes the
phvsiological depolarization-induced release. Accordingly, the
lack ofeffect ofdepolarization on release in the experimehts of
(I) can be fully accounted for .by the CVH. Hence, not only do
these experiments not contradict the CVH, but, rather, they
provide further support to the assertion that under
physiological conditions membrane potential, as such, plays an
essential role in promotingrelease.
Protective autoimmunity: Interferon-g activates microglia
to scavenge glutamate without evoking oxidative and
inflammatory mediators
Shaked I. Tochros D.,Gersner R.,Mordechay S. Xiao
X.. Sotertoulos P. Tolias P. Hart R.P. and chwartz M.
1Nuroboogy, Weiz;nann lns.. Rehovot. Israel: "P,rogram in
Computational Biology, Rutgers U., NewarL NJ," Centerfor
Applied Genomics. International CenterJbr Public Health,
lqewar: NJ; 4W.M. Keck Centerfor Collaborative
Neuroscience, Rutgers U. Piscataway, NJ
Glutamate at above-normal concentrations is a common pla,ver
in neuronal degeneration. The adaptive immune system, via
homing of T cells to their specific self-antigens at the site of a
central nervous system insult and their local activation there,
can help protect against glutamate toxicity. Here ve show that
activated helper T (Thl) cells increased the ability ofmicroglia
to scavenge glutamate. The Thl cytokine interferon (IFN)-7
simulated this effect, without inducingan oxidative imbalance
caused for example by expression ofthe inducible nitric oxide
svnthase (iNOS) and without activating
ihflammation-mediating enzymes such as cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2), known to impair glutamate uptake. Analysis of
TLR-4 (CD-14 toll-like receptor-4), STAT-1 (signaling
transducer and activator protein), and Ird. (inhibitor of the
transcription factor NF-B) revealed that the adaptive
immumty (activated T cells via IFN-,) activate micoglia via a
non-innate pathway, known to be induced by
lipopolysacchafide (LPS). Thus, IFN-7 acts, in a
neuron-threatening environment, to eliminate destructive
self-compounds without hazardous products of the NF-:B
pathway. Gene array analysis of IFN-/-aetivated microglia
disclosed up-regulation of gene clusters associated with
defense aga]nst oxidative stress. Our results suggest that
microglia, when activated by Thl cells, display a significantly
increased ability not only to perform their usual
immune-related functions, but also to scavenge potentially
neurotoxic glutamate without risk of redox imbalance, thus
serving as stand-by neural cells in situations of stress.
An inositol depletion mechanism for valoroate
Shaltiel G.1, Shamir A.,Shapiro J., Din'D. 2, Dalton E. 3,
Bialer M.4, Hrwood A.J.3, Belmaker RH", Greenberg M.L.
.and Agam G."
"Zlotowsta CenterforNeuroscence, Ben Gurion University of
the Negev, Beersheva, Israel; Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michiean, USA.; 3University College_ London, London
WCIE 6BT, U.; "4The Hebrew University OfJerusalem, Israel
Lithium salts (lithitma) and valproic acid (VPA) are the
FDA-approved drugs for treating the mood disorder
rnanic,depre.ive i.!lne., (bipolar disorder). The mechanism of
mood-stabilization has not been elucidated, but the role of
inositol metabolism has gained substantial support. Lithium
inhibition of inositol monophosphatase (IMPase), an enzyme
required for inositol recycling and de-novo synthesis suggested
the hypothesis that lithium depletes brain inosit0I and
attenuates phosphoinositide-signalling. Previous results
indicate that VPA also depletes inositol in yeast, Dqctyostelium
and rat neurons, but no molecular mechanism was
demonstrated. In the present study we show a 20% reduction
of inositol in mouse frontal cortex following acute VPA
administration. Assays of crude homogenate of human
prefrontal cortex indicate that inositol reduction can be
explained by a decrease in myo-inositol-l-phosphate (MIP)
synthase acidvity; 0.21 mM VPA, a therapeutically-relevan
VPA concentration reduces the activity by 50%. Among
psychotropic drugs, the effect is specific to VPA and is not
Obtained with other anticonvulsant mood stabilizers, typical
and a.typical antipsychotics, or tricyclic antidepressts.
Accordingly, only VPA upregulates expression of the 3east
1N01 gene coding for MIP-synthase. The VPA derivative
N-methyl-2,2,3,3,-tetramethyl-cyclopropane carboxamide
(M-TMCD) reduces crude human brain homogenate MIP
synthase activity and has an effect similar to VPA on rat
neurons, whereas another VPA derivative, valpromide (VPD),
poorly affects the activity and has no effect on neurons. These
results suggest that the rate-limiting step of inositol
biosynthesis, catalyzed by MIP synthase, is affected by VPA,
and demonstrate that inositol depletion is a first event common
to both lithium and VPA.
The involvement ofthe asymmetry ofthe frontal-striatal
circuitry in social cognition in patients with Parkinson's
disease and in patients with prefrontal brain damage
Shamav-Tsoorv S.G.' Aharon-Peretz J., Goldsher Y. D.
-t2 2
Tibi Y. and omerR.
Cognitive Neurology Unit, RambamMedical Center, Haifa, "
Dept. ofPsychology, University ofHaifa
The role of the right hemisphere and the prefrontal cortex in
social cognition has been well documented in the literature.
The purpose of the present study was to examine the
contribution ofthe asymmetry of the fronto-striatal circuitry to
social cognition, in vew" ofrbcent findings, suggesting that the
basal ganglia may play an important role in emotion
processing and thus contribute to social cognition.
The level of basic and complex social cognition was assessed
in patients with localized unilatelal prefrontal (N=26) and
p.osterior (N=17) cortical damage, patients with unilateral
onset of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD, N=21) and
healthy controls (N=I9). Basic aspects of social cognition
were assessed using tests of affect recognition through facial
expression and through prosody. Complex aspects of social
cognition were assessed using empathy scales and theory of
mind (TOM) tasks. Results indicated'that both PD patients
whose motor signs began on the left side of the body (right
basal ganglia dopamine deficit), and patients with right
229
prefrontal cortical damage showed impaired recognition of
emotions as compared to healthy controls. However, only
patients with prefrontal damage showed deficits in the
empathy and the TOM tasks, indicating impaired complex
sotial cognition abilities.
The results of the present study indicate an involvement of
both cortical and subcortical structures of the right hemisphere
in processing of emotional stimuli. It appears that the right
frontal-striatal circtfitry is involved m basic affecUve
processing, whereas the frontal lobes have a more integrative
role in mediating more complex processing ofaffect.
atiai cueingdoes not affect spatial summation
R.. andSagi D.
Weizmann Institute ofScience, Rehovot
Attention has been suggested to affect lateral interactions
between low-level visualdters (Freeman et aL, 2001). In light
of this result, we asked how attention would affect spatial
summation of a stimulus that is assumed to consist of
excitatory lateral interactions such as in an array of
low-contrast, co-oriented Gabor patches. In order to do so, we
compared the psychometric curves of sixteen conditions in a
spataal cueing paradigm. There were two configurations,
uniform (in which all Gabor patches had the same orientation)
and random; two array sizes- 2X2 (three locations- near
fixation, midway and far) and 5X5; and two attentional states-
cued and un-eued. The target appeared in one ofthe four visual
eld quadrants that were each marked by a white circle in the
un-cued condition. In the cued condition, the circle ofthe cued
adrant was black. There were two main outcomes: 1)
sholds in the uniform condition were lower than those in
the Random condition. This suggests a cooperative activity
between co-oriented stimuli, and strengthens the notion of
excitatory lateral interactions between low-contrast co-aligned
stimuli. In addition summation ofthe uniform stimuli followed
more closely a fourth root summation rule (sensitivity S.7 N 4)
than the random stimuli, as was shown before for contour
integration (Bonnet and Sagi, 1998). 2) Cueing did not affect
contrast detection thresholds or spatial summaUon. This result
is consistent with previous studies showing that cuing the
location of a target that is presented without masks does not
affect its contrast detection threshold (Smith, 2000; Zcngcr ct
al., 2000; Foley and Schwarz, 1998; Solomon et al., 1997).
This observation suggests a pre-attentive, parallel processing
ofthe visual field and is incompatible with uncertainty models
(Pelli, 1985). It also shows that the excitatory lateral
interactions between the spatial filters are not affected by
attention when activity is low.
Altered anticonvulsant drug sensitivity of hippocampai
neurons in chronic epilepsy
Schaub C., Remy S. and Beck H.
Dept. ofEpileptology, University ofBonn, Germany
The development of pharmacoresistance to antiepileptic drugs
in patients with epilepsy may rely on reduced drug sensitivity
of target molecules. In the case of carbamazepine (CBZ) and
phentoin (PHT) this notion is supported by a loss or
reduction of uselependent block of voltage-dependent Na
currents in hippocampal granule neurons following
epileptogenesis. We have examined whether a similar loss of
efficacy occurs also in other hippocampal cell types, namely
CA1 pyramidal neurons.
In control CA1 neurons, CBZ (1001M) and PHT (1001aM)
significantly shifted the voltage-dependence of fast
inactivation towards more hyperpolarized potentials (CBZ:
9.0+/-0.6 mV; PHT: 6.7+/-1.1 mV, p<0.05) and the activation
curve in the depolarized direction (CBZ: 2.4+/-0.5; PHT:
2.5+1.5). Both effects were unaltered in pilocarpine treated rats
(Inactivation: CBZ: 8.6+0.4mV; PHT: 10.6=t=1.2mV;
Activation: CBZ: 3.1+1.1; PHT: 3.7+/-0.7).
Next, we compared the drug effects on the biexponential time
course of fast recovery from inactivation (time constants tow
and tft). CBZ induced a profound slowing of the recover,c,
expressed mainly as a significant increase of the amplitude
proportion of the slower tme constant (Aow) and increase in
ht,: while t,to even decreased (t,: 0.97s to 0.6ls; Ato: 0.27
to 0.55, p<0.05). In piloc_arpine-treated rats, CBZ did not exert
sil,;nificantly different effects on the time constants, unlike
prior data ingranule neurons, but was less effective in altering
Aw (Aow: 0.35 to 0.56, p<0.05). PHT also induced a slowing
of the recovery in both groups, with an even larger effect on
the amplitudes and increases in both tow and tfast (Control:
lo: 0.87s to 1.15s; Alo: 0.27 to,.0.74; Piloine: o,: 0.93s
to 1.13s; Aow: 0.33 to 0.74) xith no significant differences
between the two experimental groups.
Our results point to a subregional difference in anticonvulsant
drug effects between the dentate gyrus and the CA region of
thehippocampus.
230
Scanning the voltage sensor ofKCNQ1 potassium
channels: A puzzling portrait ofchanne/gating
Schottelndreier H., Shamgar L., Peretz A. and Attali B.
Dept. ofPhysiology andPharmacology, SacklerMedical
School, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
The KCNQ potassium channels whose mutations cause
cardiovascular and neurological disorders are members of the
large superfamily of voltage-gated K channels, sharing the $4
voltage sensor sequence. Movement ofthe $4 segment induces
a conformational change that opens the channel pore. The
KCNQ1 pore-forming subunit can interact with various
auxiliary KCNE protein subunits to form K+ channels with
very different gating behaviors. As an attempt to characterize
the structural basis of the promiscuous gating of KCNQ1
channels, we performed a trptophan-scanning mutagenesis of
the KCNQ1 $4 sensor and analyzed the mutation-induced
perturbations in gati.ng free energy. Our data indicate that
specific $4 residues bias KCNQ1 channels toward either the
inactivated state, the open state or the closed state, while others
totally prevent channelclosure. The energetic impact on many
mutated residues do not accommodate with a voltage sensor
interfacing with the membrane lipids at the channel periphery.
Perturbing the gating energetics of KCNQ recapitulates many
of the promiscuous gating behaviors induced by co-assembly
with auxiliary KCNE subunits.
Hypoxia inducible factor Ict and erythropoietin receptor
upregulation in the brain of heat acclimated mice following
closed hea. iniurv: possible role in neurotrotection
Shein N.A. ,2 gholaami E.rand Horowitz M'.
Do;htS.ofPharmacolog3/ andPhysiology Hadassah Schools
armacy and Dental Medicine, the Hebrew University,
Jerusalem
Background: Long-term exposure to heat (heat acclimation,
ACC)was shown to protect against brain damage after closed
head injury (CI-II) in rats (Restor Neurol & Neurosci 6:107,
1994). Hqpoxia inducible factor (HIF1), a transcriptional
activator, s essential for the activation of various genes
including erythropoietin (Epo), .eryt.hropoietin receptor (EpoR),
some glucose transporters and glycolytlc enzymes, all of which
can potentially play a role in promoting cell survival.
Oxidative stress, occurring within minutes after CHI is a
possible HIF1 regulator. This study examined 1) whether ACC
is also neuroprotective in mice and 2) whether ACC affects
brain expression of HIFlct and subsequently EpoR levels
before, and at various times after injury Methods. Mice were
held at ambient temperature of 24C (controls) or 34C (ACC)
for 30 days (Basic Res Cardiol 98/3, 185) and then subjected
to left cerebral hemisphere CHI, by a weight drop device
(under ether anesthesia), or sham surgery. Clinical recovery
was evaluated by measuring the motor function and edema
formation (% water content) in mice 24h after CHI. Four and
24h after surgery or CHI, mice were sacrificed and their brains
removed for western blot analysis of HIFlc and EpoR.
Results: Clinical recovery was markedly greater in ACC mice
as compared to controls (p<0.05) and edema formation was
significantly smaller (p<0.05). Following sham surgerv alone,
HIFI !evels tended to be higher in ACC mice than in
controls. CHI led at 4h to an additional increase in HIFIt
levels in both groups, maintaining the difference between the
two (p<0.05). Prelimin.ary data also indicate that basal EpoR
levels in ACC mice are higher. Discussion: Our findings show
neuroprotecti-e effects of ACC in mice. The causal evidence
between better CHI recover), following ACC, upregulation of
HIF1 and in turn its target gene EpoR may suggest its
involvement in neuroprotection. It is noteworthy that Epo was
shown to be neuroprotective in this model.
Computerized geometrical methods for analysis of the
sleep
Shrniel 0.. Teicher M. and Dagan Y.
Bar Ilan Umversty, Ramat Gan
The Experiment: The research is performed with the
cooperation of the sleep lab at "SHIBA" hospital under the
supervision of ProfM. Teicher and Dr. Y. Dagan.
The lab diagnoses sleep disorders of patients by computerized
sleep rooms which allow the connection of electrodes and
sensors to the patient. Each electrode/sensor records a signal of
a specific channel during the night (i.e. EEG, EKG, Pulse,
etc...) on the same time scale, so that all channels are
synchronized. Finally, when the patient awakens, the recorded
data is analyzed.
Polysomnogram examination of this integrated data gives
much information about the sleep of the patients, such as
recognition of sleep stages, sudden arousals, breathing
difficulties and other abnormal behavior. The analvsis is
performed simply by looking at the channels and has i major
importance in the detection of sleep disorders and other
pathologies.
Background: Sleep is divided to five stages that have a
significant importance on the analysis of sleep disorders. The
EEG channel has a major rule in most of the well known sleep
analysis procedures today. Most of the sleep analysis methods
are based on the frequency of this channel, its amplitude and
known structures of it. Some of these methods are described in
the poster, as well as other methods regarding different
channels.
Goals: 1) Prediction of pre-sleeping behavior, using only
channels which can be recorded easily. 2) Prediction 6f
arousals, using channels which can also be recorded easily. 3)
Finding relationships between the GSR and other channels'.
MethodDescription: Primarilv, every channel is translated into
relevant basic components Thegn, repeating component
patterns are detected by data mining algorithms. Finally,
confrontations between the patterns are performed in order to
find statistically surprising phenomena.
In addition, confrontations between patterns and human
analysis are performed in order to find relationships between
these patterns and the known analyzed subconscious activities.
Using data-mining techniques to reveal structure of
drawingand brain activity
Shmiel T.. Drori R., Ben-Shaul Y., Teicher M. and Abeles M.
Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan
The main goal of the research was to examine relationships
between the drawing behavior and the single unit activities that
may be revealed by data-mining techniques.
While the direction of motion is traditionally considered to be
coded in the firing rates of the units, this research focuses on
finding relationships involving only synchronized spike
events from the brain activity.
Activity from motor and premotor areas of two monkeys was
recorded while the monkeys performed continuous drawing
movements in the horizontal plane. The main method of
analysis used was transforming both brain and hand activities
to some other languages, which are more concise. These
languages summarized the basic events in each activity,, and
were used later as the basis for all the revealed relationships.
After this transformation, data-mining algorithms were applied
to the translated data in order to find components repeating in
each data independently. Finally, components from the two
kinds of data were confronted (using a variety of statistical
methods), and statistically unexpected relationships were
searched.
Supported in part by ISF
The whole may be perceived faster than its parts
Shneor E. and Hochstein S.
Neurobiology Dept., Institute ofLife Sciences andNeural
Computation Center, Hebrew University, Jerusalem
Subjects detect rapidly and pre-attentively the presence of an
odd element that diffei's greatly from surrounding elements in a
single dimension, without knowing it's specific location. We
now ask what will be the speed and accuracy of detecting 2
such elements, simultaneously. Subjects viewed oa briefl
presented 8x8 array of pink "lines 6i-iented at 55 (or 60
followed by a masking stimulus after a variable
Stimulus-to-mask Onset Asynchrony. On some trials, or 2 of
the elements were replaced by a pale green line of the same
orientation, a pink line of a different orientation 35-40 (or
30), or a line with both these changes. Subjects reported the
number of odd lines (0, or 2), and their nature (orientation
and/or color difference). Surprisingly, we found that subjects
were more accurate at detecting and discriminating targets in
arrays with 2 odd elements than arrays with one. no matter the
type of the odd element\s. We clculated detectability, d'
according to Single Detection Theorv (SDT), and found that d'
for detection and identification of 2 odd elements is higher
than for element. Consequently, people don't have a 'favorite
guess' but really find detection/ identification of 2 odd
elements is better! In addition, 'e found that it was easier to
report the presence and type of two different dimensions when
they were located at different places in the array. We conclude
that detection and identification take place it high cortical
levels, perhaps at Inferior Temporal cortex, where arravs with
a pair of targets are represented as distinct unitary strfictures,
as suggested bv Reverse Hierarchy Theory (Hochstein &
Ahissar, Neuron 2002).
SEuxppOrtedby an Israel Science Foundation "Center of
cellence 'rgrant and the US-Israel Binational Science
Foundation (BSF).
Memory deficit induced by intracerebroventricular
streptozotocin in rats is associated with oxidative stress,
septohippocampal damage and impaired energy
metabolism
1,Bejar C.2, Kovalev E. ,and Weinstock M.
Research Dept., HerzogHospital', De'p o Pharmacolo,g),
Faculty ofMedicine, Hebrew University, Jerusalem
One of the earliest detectable abnormalities in Alzheimer's
disease (AD) is a decrement in cortical energy metabolism in
the cortex and hippoca.mpus. This can be in-duced in rats by
intracerebroventricular injection of streptozotocin (icv-STZ).
We have previously shown that icv-STZ causes specific
degeneration ofperiventricular myelinated structures including
the fornix, resulting in damage to the septohippo-campal
cholinergic projection and in spatial memory deficits. The
present study determined whether bilateral icv-STZ (0.5 rag) in
3-month old rats caused oxidative stress prior to myelin
damage. Oxidative-nitrative stress was detected by
immuno-histochemical staining of nitrotyrosine (NT), formed
from nitration of tyrosine by peroxynitrite, a highly reactive
derivative of NO and 02". One week after icv STZ, rats were
anesthetized and brains fixed by transcardial perfusion with
A loss of astrocytes occurred in areas
cated in the immediate perivenmcular vicinity of STZ
injection, while NT staining was seen in surviving astrocytes
in theperimeter of these areas. Double staining by rabbit
anti-NT and mouse anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein
confirmed that NT was expressed in astrocytes in these
structures as well as in astrocytes in t_he corpus callosum,
lateral septum, and fornix. Damage to myelin was observed in
the same structures 5 weeks later, suggesting that that
oxidative-nitrative stress in astrocytes induced by icv-STZ
precedes and probably contributes to myelin damage. Nitration
of tyrosine and damage to myelin also occur in the brains of
AD patients, in addition to deficits in memory and glucose
utilization. The icv injection of STZ in the rat could therefore
serve as an experimental model for the development of
antioxidant and other neuroprotective medications for the
treatment of conditions in which demyelination is involved.
Supportedby theMagnetProgram ofthe Israeli Ministry of
Trade andIndustry
Stereotypic behavior in transgenic FVB/N mice with
AChE-R over-expression: Evidence for cholinergic and
dopaminergic contributions
,Kovalev E., Cohen 0.2, Yirmiya R.3, and Soreq
H.
Research Dept. Herzog Hoslfl,ta,1, and Depts. of Biological
Chemistry, and 'Psychotogy, tebrew UniversiO, detTsalem,
Israel
Spontaneous, drug-independent stereotypic behavior (SB) has
been documented in several inherited syndromes (e.g.a.utis.m,
schizophrenia), however, the neurotransmission elremts
controlling this phenomenon areyet unknown. Here, we report
the emergence of SB by 7 10 weeks of age in TgR mice
overexpressing, under cytomegalovirus promoter regulation,
the stress-induced variant of human aeetyleholinesterase,
hAChE-R. SB included repetitive movements, increased
locomotion time, locomotor asymmetry, and reduced rearing in
open field, but with preservation of circadian motor activity
cycle. Immunohistochemical mapping revealed accumulation
ofhAChE-R in eholinoceptive regions including hypothalamic
and brainstem locomotor regions, but eholinergic and
dopaminergic neurons generally did not accumulate hAChE-R
(except for a subset of cholinergic neurons in the nucleus
basalis magnocellularis). The distributions of cholinergic and
dopaminergic neurons vere normal, with inter-hemispheric
symmetry of dopaminergie and cholinergic neurons. However,
AChE-R labeling in hippocampal CA1-3 pyramidal neurons,
was inversely associated with asymmetry and
hyperlocomotion, indicating that AChE-R accumulation in
both hippocampal and other behaviorally inhibitory limbic
brain regions moderates SB. In TgR mice, haloperidol
(dopamine antagonist) at 0.5 mg/kg reduced locomotion and
attenuated motor asymmetry in TgR mice, whereas
aaOmorphine (dopamine agonist) at 0.1 mg/kg induced
normal slow locomotion and did not affect motor
asymmetry. Also, pilocarpine, a cholinergic muscarinic
agonist, increased the accumulation of hAChE-R in
hippocampal CA1 3 neurons while reducing accumulation in
hypothalamic and brainstem locomotor regions and
suppressing locomotion. These findings implicate both
dopaminergic neurotransmission and neuronal dstribution of
AChE-R in disorders with adult onset SB, such as
schizophrenia.
231
Cognitive impairments and negative symptoms in
schizophrenia: Core dysfunctions and response to
treatment
Silver H.
Bran Behavior Laboratory, Sha 'arMenashe Mental Health
Center, Hadera, andBruce Rappaport-Faculty ofMedicine,
Technion Institute ofTechnology, Haifa
Multiple cognitive and emotional impairments are prominent
features of schizophrenia which respond poorly to treatment
and retard rehabilitation .It is a goal of schizophrenia research
to identify unifying, core mechanisms which can
parsimoniously explain such phenomenological diversity and
provide new targets for treatment. We studied relationships
between diverse neuropsychological functions and symptoms
in schizophrenia patients, aiming to identify such core deficits
and examine their response to treatment. Data will be
presented indicating that working memory (WM) dysfunction
may be a core deficit in schizophrenia such that the reduced
capacity of verbal and spatial "on-line storage" is rate limiting
in performance of other cognitive functions. WM deficits are
associated with negative symptoms suggesting use of common
circuits in the PFC. Treatment with SSRI added to
antipsychotics led to improvement in some but not all negative
symptoms. In key primary negative symptoms including
affective flattening and alogia improvement could be detected
within 2-3 weeks of treatment onset. Our findings support the
hypothesis that diverse cognitive and emotional deficits in
scfiizophrenia result from impairment in a limited number of
core dysfunctions. These may reflect a functional,
biochemically mediated, imbalance rather than static brain
.damage. and may be amenable to pharmacological
interventions.
Confocal imaging of mRNA transport, localization and
EGFP tagged protein translation in cultured Aplysia
neurons
Slonimsky G., Shapira E. and Spira M.E.
Dept. ofNeurobiology. Life Sciences Institute the Hebrew
University ofJerusalem.
Translation of proteins in "remote" neuronal compartments
appears to play important roles in housekeeping and
neuroplasticity. Presently, the transport, targeting, and control
mechanisms of mRNAs at remote sites are mostly studied in
fixed cells.
Here we examine the potential use of in vitro translated
fluorescently, labeled mRNA (fmRNA) that encodes EGFP
tagged proteins to image on line the distribution of fmRNAs
and their translational products. To that end we in vitro
synthesized fmRNA encoding EGFP actin using protocols
developed by our laboratory. The fmRNA was synthesized
using Alexa 546- dUTP's and injected to the cvtosol of
cultured Aplysia neurons. Its spatiotemporal distribfition was
imaged by confocal system. Consistent with earlier studies we
found that fmRNA encoding EGFP-Aplysia-actin is translated
in isolated axonal segment. Injection of the fmRNA into the
cell body cvtosol revealed that fmRNA translocates into the
axon formifig a gradient in which the fmRNA intensity was
greatest in the soma. In the axon the injected fmRNA appears
m granules and elongated structures. A fraction ofthe granules
are stationary while others propagated in both directions along
the axon at a rate of 0.1-0.29 m/sec. The EGFP-actin
translational product distribution accompanied the moving
front ofthe fmRNA.
Axotomy_ lead to the concentration of fmRNA in the growth
cone's (GC) center. When a GC's lamellipodium extends from
this center, typical EGFP-actin bundles are formed along the
edges of the lamellipodium. EGFP-actin assembly occurs
10-20 m away from he fmRNA localization site at the GC's
center. As microtubules invade the GC's lamellipodium, the
fmRNA translocates centripetally to concentrate n newly
formed secondary GCs. These observations were reproduced
by FISH. Interestingly, the full length form of Aplvsia -actin
mRNA and that which lacks the 3' UTR, behave siinilarly.
Supported by the BSF
Context dependant activity in primary olfactory cortex of
humans
Sobel N.
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
Attentional modulation of neural activity patterns has been
demonstrated in primary visual and audiiory cortex. Activity
throughout the olfactory system is also context dependant.
Activity in the rat olfactory bulb reflects cues that are merely
associated with odor content, and activity in rat olfacto"
cortex reflects the motivational significance of an odor. To ask
whether contextual modulation is evident, in activity patterns of
human primary olfactory cortex we used functionalmagnetic
resonance imaging to measure sniff-induced neural activity in
and out-of an olfactory context. Each trial of an event related
232
design began with an auditory primer for "task detection" or
"task inhalation". In "task detection" subjects took one sniff
and determined whether an odorant was present or not.. Odor
was present on halfof these trials. In "task inhalation" subjects
also took one sniff, but knew in advance that an odor would
never be present. Thus, the only difference between sniffs in
"task inhalation", and the no-odor sniffs of "task detection"
was that in the latter condition subjects were exploring for the
presence of odor. Real-time measurement of nasal respiration
assured sniffs were equal across conditions. Twelve subjects
were scanned at 4T (2-shot T2* sensitive EPI, TR 1000 ms,
TE 30 ms, flip angle 20,64 x 64 voxel matrix, 192 x 192
mm FOV, in-plane resolution 3.5 ram, through-plane
resolution 3.5 mm). Activity in primary olfactory cortex was
significantly higher when sniffing clean air in "task detection"
than when sniffing the same content in "task inhalation" (p <
.04). In other words, activity in human primary olfactory
cortex was strongly dependant on task context.
M-currents are reduced in CAI pyramidal neurons of
chronic enileptic rats
Sochivko_'D. Chen j.l, Becker A.,Yaari .3, and Beck H.
Depts: of ffpileptologyand :Neuropathology, Univ. ofBonn
Medica[Center, Germany; ZDeptdfPhysioTb'gy, Hebrew
Univ., lsrael
M-currents belong to the oup of voltage-dependent
potassium currents. They are cnaracterized by slow kinetics
and operate at the voltages near action potentialthreshold. Due
to these properties, M-currents contribute to the control of
neuronal excitability and firing behavior. M-currents are
supposed to be mediated by KCNQ channels family. Recently,
mutations of the genes encoding KCNQ2 and 3 channel
ubunit were shown to underlie, a form ofinherited enilepy in
human. It is known that intrinsic firing propertie of CA1
hippocampal pTamidal neurons are modifiedin the chronic
epileptic condition developing after single episode of status
epilepticus (animal model of temporal lobe epilepsy). In the
view of possible role of M currents in such chan es we
analyzed expression of M-currents in CA neurons at ierent
stages of model epileptogenesis using whole-cell patch clamp
technique in hippocampal slices. M-currents were isolated by
application of specific blocker linopirdine (10 laM). In the
early epileptic rats (7-14 days after pilocarpine-induced status
epileptlcus), the maximal density of M-currents was not
changed (1.36+/-0.14 pMpF) when compared with the control
group (1.1+/-0.06 pA/pF). In the late epileptic animals (30-100
days after status epilepticus), M-current density amounted to
0.74+/-0.12 pA/pF and was significantly reduced when
compared with control (1.53+/-0.27 pA/pF, p<0.05). This
reduction was especially prominent at physiologically
significant voltages (to 26% ofcontrol value at -43 mV). These
results suggest that switch in the firing properties of CAI
neurons from regular spiking to bursting m the chronic
epileptic conditions may be due to the d0wn-regulation of
M-currents which makes these currents a potential target of
antiepileptic drugs.
The use ofvirtual reality for integrative multi-modal
testing, and application in schizophrenia
rkmA P k A n lnh I1
So eed a dWe" s aiD.
lnterdiscplinary CenterforNeural Comtutation Hebrew
Untverstty, Jerusalem; -InstituteforPsychiatrtc Studtes,
S'ha 'atMenashe MHC, and the Rappaport Faculty of
Medicine, Technion, Haifa.
Schizophrenia is a very debilitating disease; recent insights
into the brain pathology of scfiizophrenia suggest rant
disturbances in multiple parallel processingin the brain may be
responsible for the disease. Since the problem is cross modal
and integrative, we advocate the use of Virtual Reality
Technology (VRT) for diagnosis and testing. This technology
would allow us to study brain functions in parallel, and the
integration among them. VRT will also allow us to measure
simultaneously all the interactions of the patients with the
simulated environment. To our best knowledge it is the first
Ort ofschizophrenia study using VRT.
thods: We have completed one VRT study, testing sensory
integration within working memory. Specifically, subjects
navigate in a VRT maze, passing through multiple rooms with
3 doors each. The doors are characterized by three features:
color, shape and sound. At any given moment there is a rule
controlling door opening based on a certain combination of
these features. The subject needs to learn the rule and to use it
for navigation through the maze. The rule changes over time,
without an), notification to the subject.
Results: In analyzing errors rate we measured the effect of two
factors: (i) the presence of a distractor (a feature that doesn't
affect, the door opening rule), and (ii) the complexity of the
rule (i.e., the number of features determining the rule). In the
most complex condition, when the rule was determined by 2
features and one distractor, schizophrenic patients were
adversely affected by the distractor. Surprisingly, we did not
see decreased ability among patients toadjust to rule changing,
commonly referred to as perseveration, which is a known
deficiency in schizophrenia. Overall schizophrenicpatients did
not differ from the controls on most parameters studied such as
game strategy and exploration of the environment. Patients
differed from the controls by overall slower performance and
increased errors rate.
The dependency ofthe acquisition of geometrically defined
motion elements on visual feedback and on the
implementation ofsmooth motion stratev
.osnikR.,Haupanam B.2, Kami A.1'3 a,nd'Flash T.
Weizmann Inst. ofSci., RehovotIsrael; Dept: ofNeurology,
Charit10098 ,' Berlin, German),; The Brain Behavior
Research Center, University ofHaifa, Hafa, Israel
We previouslv showed that extensive training on a sequence of
planar hand trajectories passing through several targets
resulted in the co-articulation of movement components and in
the formation of new movement elements (primitives) (Sosnik
et a12001). Reduction in movement duration was accompanied
by the gradual replacing of straight trajectories by longer
curved ones, the latter affording the maximization of
movement smoothness ("global motion planning"). The results
from transfer experiments, conducted by the end of the last
training session, have suggested that the subjects have acquired
geometrically defined movement elements, which were solely
dictated by the figural (i.e., geometrical) form of the path,
rather than by both path geometry and the temporally
dependent velocity profiles. Here we show that only 28.5% of
the participantq (two out of seven) who were trmned in the
absence of visual feedback (dark condition) co-articulated by
the end ofthe last training session compared to 75% (eight out
of twelve) who were trained on the same target configuration
in the light. Furthermore, no geometrical motion elements
were acquired while training in the dark. Surprisingly, in the
light condition, the emergence ofgeometrically defined motion
elements was temporally correlated with the implementation of
the "global motionplanning" strategy. Our results indicate that
visual feedback ofthe hand has strong effect on the capability
to implement the "global motion planning" strategy and on the
acquisition ofgeometrically defined motion elements in adults.
Supported by Dommic-Einhorn Fund
Real-time imaging of Goigi derived vesicle exocytosis
during the formation of growth cone lamellipodium after
axotomy of cultured Aplysia neurons
Spira M.E. and Malkinson G.
Life Sciences Institute, The Hebrew Universi ofJerusalem.
The transformation of a stable axonal segment into a motile
growth cone is a critical step in the regeneration of amputated
axons. Axotomy of cultured Aplysia neurons is followed by
rapid extension of a growth cones (GC) lamellipodium.
Calculations revealed that to account for this rate of growth,
80-180 vesicles/see fuse with the plasmalemma.
Here we began to explore where, when and how Golgi derived
vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane in support of the
growth process. To that end, we expressed the pH-sensitive
GFP fused to the luminal domain of VAMP
napto-pHluorin (a girl from J. E. Rothman, Memorial
oan-Kettering Cancer Center, NY) in cultured neurons.
Detection of vesicles distribution before, during and after
axotomy as well as throug.hout t.he process of GC extension
was done by confocal imaging using excitation wavelength of
488 run to image the probe during or after fusion of the labeled
vesicles, and by maging of the total population of
synapto-pHluorin labeledvesicles with excitation wavelength
of 405nm. Calcium was imaged by intracellular injection of
Fluo-4 or Rhod-2. A fraction of these indicators is taken up
by the vesicles and reveals relatively high intravesicular
calcium levels.
We found that axotomy leads to: (a) Fusion of anterogradlly
transported vesicles with thetlasma membrane at the tip ofthe
axon where the [Ca]i is elevated to > lmM. (b) After the
recovery of the [Ca ]i to control, Synapto-pHluorin labeled
vesicles accumulate at the forming GC's center. (c) These
vesicles fuse with the GC's plasma membrane in the vicinity
of the GC center. The fusion process p/',oceeds in the absence
of any detectable fluctuations m the [CaZ+]i.
In conclusion, the addition of new membrane to axotomyzed
axon is exclusively localized to the GC center. We propose
that the preferential fusion of vesicles at the GC center is
facilitatedby release of calcium from the vesicles themselves
and their local concentration.
Supportedby: The ISFand the BSF
233
TIEG2 induces apoptosis in the oligodendroglial cell
lineage Oli-neu
Spittau B., Peters B., Krieglstein K. and Wang Z.
Dept. ofNeuroanatomy, Got#ngen, Germany
Apoptosis is one of the most important incidences during the
development of neurons as well as oligodendrocyes. The
induction of ap.op,tosis is mediated by various cytokines, one of
them is the multafunctional growth factor TGF-ct.. Our previous
work has revealed that TGF-tx induced cell death is mediated
via down regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-XL and
activation of caspase 3. Here we address the question which
downstream signals regulate the transcription of TGF-t target
genes. The candidate molecule is TIEG (TGF-ct immediate
early gene), a newly defined subfamiliy of the Sp-1
transcription factors. TIEG proteins bind to the DNA with their
zinc finger motif and act as a transcriptional repressor. Over
expression of TIEGI is sufficient to induce apoptosis in many
cell types, whereas TIEG2 has been shown to inhibit cell
growth. In this study we show that the transient expression of
TIEG 2 can induce a programmed cell death in Oli-neu cells.
The detection of apoptotlc cells was accomplished using the
TUNEL assay and an apoptosis ELISA. Furthermore, we could
demonstrate that TIEG2 functions by repressing the
anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-XL, whereas Bel2 remained
unchanged. Together, our finding suggests that T1EG serves a
general role in TGF-t induced apoptosis, bridging from
TGF-x dependent signaling to the acknowledged intracellular
pathway ofapoptosis.
Biological gain control for high dynamic range
Spitzer H., Karasik Y. and Einav S.
Dept. ofBiomedical Engineering, Faculty ofEngineering,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv
The visual system has the ability to see and get detailed
information from high dynamic range scene. For example, a
person can observe a.ems in a one slgh.t while observing in a
dim room and outside through a window. A model and an
algorithm were developed forhigh dynamic range compression
that expose the details in an image, for example, as occurs
often in images where there are bright and dark areas where
these details are appeared as lost. The model succeeds in
automatically compressing the dynamic range of images to a
'human vision appearance' (as is commonly required in
cameras and displ/tys) while maintaining contrast and even
impr_oving it. The model is based on biological retinal
mechanisms of adaptation (gain control): 'local', and 'remote'.
This model can explain also the lightness constancy. These
mechanisms enable also video image applications, snce they
take into account the dynamics of human adaptation
mechanisms. The results indicate that the contribution of
adaptation mechanisms to image appearance is significant,
robust, and wasproved to fit next generation High dynamic
range cameras (CMOS based).. The algorithm Waotested on
images with standard format (2 bits) and HDR (-21bits). The
algorithm started to be applied to: real photographs, medical
images such as ultrasound images satellite images.
What are the roles of insular cortex in taste processing and
memory?
Stehb J., Desmedt A. and Dudai Y.
Dept. ofNurobiolov, The eizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot.
The insular cortex is considered to contain the primary cortical
area for taste processing. Yet numerous studies, using lesions
and pharmacological nterventions, have not yet yielded
conclusive evidence concerning the precise role of the insular
cortex in taste functions in general and in taste learning and
memory in particular. In a set of studies, we aimed to define
the role of the insular cortex in taste-guided behavior and
memory, by subjecting rats with a bilateral ibotenic acid
ablation of the insular cortex to a spectrum of behavioral
paradigms. These experiments targeted the role of the insular
cortex in taste perception, neophobia (i.e. fear of the new),
familiarity acqmsition, novelty-familiarity discrimination, and
conditioned taste aversion (CTA). In CTA, we tested distinct
memory phases, includin;_.acquisition, retention, retrieval, and
experimental extinction. We also tesied the potential roie of
cortical laterality in the aforementioned functions. Our data
suggest a role ofthe insular cortex in the CS-US association in
CTA, but not in taste perception per se. Among others, our
data suggest that animals lacking insular cortex and subjected
to CTA-training, can still remember the US exp_erienc.e
(malaise) but cannot associate it with a specific taste. Instead,
they might subsequently beware of drinking novel tastes in
general.These andother results giv.e rise to a novel anatomical
and functional model for the central taste system.
Supported by the lsrael Science bbundation.
The many functions of herpes simplex virus type 1 latency
associated gene
Steiner I., Mador N., Braun E., Haim H. and Panet A.
Laboratory ofNeurovirology Dept. ofNeurology &
Dept. ofVirology, Hadassah University Hospital
Jerusalem.
Objectives: To study the function(s) of herpes simplex virus
type (HSV-1) latericy-associated gene (LAG).
Background: The LAG is the only gene expressed during
HSV-I latent infection in human peripheral sensory ganglia. It
has been linked to viral reactivation and we have shown that it
suppresses viral replication in neuronal cells (Mador et al., J.
Virol., 1998).
Methods: In order to further facilitate the study of the LAG
function we have generated a LAG-expressing transgenic
mouse and assayed replication of a LAG-negative HSV-1
mutant in transgenic mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs).
The virus was also used to establish latent infection in
trigeminal ganglia (TG) and measure reactivation efficiency.
U,sing real-time quantitative .polyn_erase chain reaction (PCR)
as used to measure viral DNA m TG.
Results: The mutant replication was limited in transgenic
MEFs. This was not due to a toxic effect ofthe LAG upon cell.
Reactivation of the virus from TG was improved by three
different parameters: reactivation ability (100 % vs. 75%);
reactivation kinetics (maximal reactivation was achieved at
day 7th post explantation compared to day lth in controls)
and an increased titer of reactivated virus. HSV-1 genome was
identified in reactivation-negative ganglia. Using real-time
quantitative p0_lymerase chain reaction we found that latent/y
infected TG from transgenic mice did not contain increased
amounts ofHSV-1 DNA.
Conclusions: The LAG may provide several of the functions
required for HSV-1 latent nfection in peripheral sensory
ganglia: enabling the virus to enter the latent state, facilitating
reactivation and protection ofthe viral reservoir.
Bidirectional communication between rhythmogenic
networks in the neonatal rat spinal cord
Strauss I. and Lev-Tov A.
Dept. ofAnatomy & Cell Biology, The Hebrew University
Medical School, Jentsalem
The ability" of neuroactive compounds to induce coordinated
rhic-pattems in limb- and non-limb inn.eFating segn,en
of the spinal cord was examined in isolated spina cords o
neonatal rats. Addition of NMDA/5HT to the cord or selective
application of NMDA/5HT to the thoracolumbar (TL)
segments induced locomotor-like activity accompanied by
alternating left-right sacrococcygeal (SC) rhythm.The TL and
SC activities were coupled in the rostrocaudal direction.
Transecting the cord at the lumbosacral junction nearly
blocked the SC rhythm and did not interfe'e with the T'L
rhythm. Specific lesions of the vhite matter funiculi revealed
that the rostrocaudal coupling was obtained by pathways
traveling through the ventral (VF), ventrolateral (VLF), and
lateral (LF) funculi.
Bath application of the alphal-adrenoceptor agomst
methoxamine to the cord or selective application of
methoxamine to the SC segments induced a fast alternating
left-right rhythm_ in the SC and TL segments. The fast TL
rhythm appeared only in flexor dominated segments; it was
entrained by the SC rhhm, and abolished in
surgically-detached TL cords, Specific lesions of the VF,
virtually abolished the caudorostral coupling between the SC
and TL segments during the rhythm, but did not impair the SC
rhythm.
In summary, the TL and SC rhythmogenic networks can be
selectively activated by different neurochemicals; rostrocaudal
coupling between them via the VF, VLF and LF ensures a
coordinated activation of the limb, axial and tail musculature;
and caudorostral coupling via the VF allows modulation of
activity in flexor-dominated segments of the TL cord during
the methoxamine-mediated rhythm.
Putative intracellular targets of lipophilic divalent metal
ion chelators in attenuating MMP-9 activity in glial cells
Striem S. Gileadi C., Schatz G., Meirav T., Friedman J.E.,
DA_helI., Kozak A. and Haring R.
arm Ltd, Rehovot, lsrael
The Matrix Metalloproteinases (MM,Ps) are extracelhdar
calcium- and Zn-dependent proteases xhose activation results
in degr.adation of the extracellular matrix. Excessive
expression of MMPs has been implicated in many CNS
diseases involving inflammatory responses such as: Stroke,
MS, ALS, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. MMP-9
activity is determined by gene expression and pro-enzyme
activation and is modulatedby signaling pathways, e.g. MAP
234
kinases (ERK, JNK and p38), protein kinase C (PKC) and
NF-kB. We have synthesized a family of lipophilic metal
chelators, DP-b99 and DP-109 that, m the cell-membrane
milieu, preferentially bind zinc and copper compared to
calcium. In the present study we have tested the hypothesis
that lipophilic metal chelators can attenuate MMP-9 activity.
DP-109 attenuated TNFtx-induced MMP-9 release and activity_
in A-172 human glioma cells, and reduced TNFtx- and
PMA-induced MMP-9 induction in C6 rat glioma cells, with
an IC50 of 10 tM. DP-b99 (10-25 M) also reduced
TNFcx-induced MMP-9 activity. Pretreatment with 50 laM
ZnCI2 reduced the effects of DP-b99 and DP-109 on MMP-9
activity, demonstrating a zinc dependency. Activation of
MMP-9 in C6 cells by TNFt and PMA was attenuated by
PD98059 and U0126 (MEK inhibitors) and by GFI09203X
but not by SB203580 (p38 inhibitor), indicating involvement
of ERK- and PKC-medated pathways. Activation of ERK by
TNFct and PMA was attenuated by DP-109 (0.2-20tM).
Moreover, DP-109 also inhibited TNFtx-induced
phospho-c-jun activation as well as NF-:B p65 nuclear
translocation, indicating JNK and NF-:B as additional targets
for DP-109. These findings suggest that DP-b99 and DP-]09
can modify the activity/release ofMMP-9 both directly and via
affecting upstream targets. The ability ofDP-b99 and DP-109
to attenuate activation of MMP-9 indicates the usefulness of
these compounds in treatment of neurodegenerative disorders
and correlates well with the protective effect of DP-b99 in the
rat MCAO model and in human stroke, as previously reported.
Support ContributedBy: D-Pharm Lid
The effect ofDP-b99, a lipophilic divalent transition metal
chelator, on Matrix Metalloproteinases-2 and-9 activity in
a rat MCAO ischemic model
Striem S. Schatz G., Krakovsky M., Finkelstein E., Kozak A.,
Angel I. and Friedman J.E.
D-Pharm Ltd., Rehovot, Israel
The Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) are extracellular
calcium- and Zn-dependent proteases which are produced in a
latent form and require activation for catalytic activity.
Activation occurs at the cell surface and enables MMPs to
degrade components of the Extracellular Matrix (ECM) at
specific sites in the surrounding cell membrane. MMPs play
important roles in a wide range of disorders such as brain
injury and ischemia, Alzheimer's disease, inflammation and
neuroinflammation, cancer, angiogenesis and cardiovascular
diseases. MCAO/reperfusion injury is associated with
increased MMP-9 activity correlated with a reduction in the
major basal lamina constituents and brain edema. DP-b99, a
lipophilic divalent transition metal chelator reduces TNF
induced MMP-9 activity in C6 glioma and in primary glial
cells in vitro. In vivo, DP-b99 was found to reduce infarct
volume and improve neurological scores in rats following both
transient and permanent MCAO, with a therapeutic window of
at least 6 hours. In this study we tested the hypothesis that the
neuroprotective effect of DP-b99 is correlated with its effect
on MMP-9 and MMP-2 activity in a tMCAO ischemic rat
model. The neuroscore of each animal was tested and the
animals sacrificed. Blood was taken for NSE measurements
and the brains for determination of infarct size and MMP-9
and MMP-2 activity. MMP activity in the ipsi-and
contra-lateral hemispheres were comparedand correlated with
the other parameters measured. Administration of DP-b99
resulted in a decrease in the both MMP-9 and MMP-2 activity,
albeit with different dynamics. The DP-b99 reduction m
MMP-9 activity was highly correlated with reduced infarct
volume (rz 0.86) and improved neuroscore (r2
0.79) after
24 hours. MMP-2 reduction was also well correlated (r=0.79)
with the decrease in infarct volume indicating different
erns of regulation by DP-b99 for MMP-2 and MMP-9.
se data suggest that the improved outcome of MCAO rats
following DP-b99 treatment could be due, in part, to
attenuation ofthe inflammatory component ofstroke.
Support ContributedBy: D-Pharm Ltd.
Pathways for anti-nociception during barbiturate induced
general anesthesia
Sukhotinsky I., Devor M.
Insatute ofLife Sciences andCenterforResearch on Pain,
Hebrew University ofJerusalem
Microinjection of minute quantities of pentobarbital into a
restricted region of the rat brainstem, the mesopontine
tegrnental anaesthesia area (MPTA), can induce a state of
general anesthesia including atonia and failure to response to
strong noxious stimuli (Devor and Zalkind, Pain 2001). To
tmderstand the neural circuitry associated with various
elements of the anesthetic state we are investigating the
connectivi of MPTA. MPTA sends projections to, and
receives mem from, various telencephahc, diencephalic,
brainstem and spinal regions. There is a direct projection to the
.spinal cord but this end predominantly in the ventral horn, not
m dorsal horn structures normally associted with
anti-nociception. However, there is also a major descending
projection to the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM), a key
relay component of the descending brainstem system that
modulates nociception in the dorsal horn. Do MPTA neurons
with descending brainstem projections indeed terminate on
RVM cells that project to the spinal cord ? To clarify this we
performed double-labeling experiments. Bulbospinal RVM
neurons were retrogradely labeled with CBT microinjected in
the lumbar spinal cord, While the anterograde tracer BDA was
microinjected into the MPTA. At the light microscopic level
ve found numerous MPTA projections m the RVM. Labeled
axons frequently came into close apposition with retrogradely
labeled spinally projecting RVM neurons, somata and
proximal dendrites. Moreover, many of these formed single or
multiple varicosities, structures that may represent points of
nnPmaatic
contact, although electron mierosc0py is necessary to
this inference. The massive projection of MPTA
neurons onto bulbospinal RVM neurons ts a route whereby
barbiturates, and perhaps other anesthetic agents, may suppress
responsiveness to noxious stimuli during general anesthesia.
Motor control oftheoctopus' fetch movement
Sumbre G.I, Flash T.,Fiorito G.3
and Hochner B.
JDept. of_Nurobiology, Hebrew University ofJerusalem;
,Dpt. OfAppfiedMafhematics, Weizmann Institute ofScience;
Stazione gdologica di Napofi, Italy.
Previously we have shown that the octopus uses a highly
stereotypical movement to accurately bring an object to its
mouth. This fetching movement involves a dynamic
three-jointed articulated-like structure, which rotates until the
objec reaches the mouth.. Here we, report an EMG study
shoing that the part of the arm, hich is involved in the
articulated-like structure (from the base of the arm to the
location ofthe object) actively contracts or stiffens; suggesting
that the articulated part ofthe arm is actively controlled.
A positive linear correlation is revealed between the integrated
EMG level and the articulated structure length but not with
kinematic variables such as the movements' velocity or
acceleration. This suggests that stabilizing the articulated
structure against water perturbations might be the control
strategy evolved to achieve high accuracy.
Prelirmnary results show that two EMG signals; one starting
close to the distal joint and the other at the base of the ann,
propagate toward each other. Moreover, lesion experiments
demonstrate that the fetching movement involves higher brain
centers (basal lobe), suggesting involvement ofcentral control.
In addition, we observed a temporal pattern, in which the
formation of the distal joint is followed by the medial one.
This f'mdings suggest that the stimulus produced by the
grabbed object may activate, via a central command, two
waves of muscle contraction, which collide at midway,
creating the medial joint. This scheme may explain the
adjustable feature ofthe two equal-length segments articulated
structure, without requiting central representation of the arm
and definition ofthe medial joint location.
Supported by1SFandDARPA grants
Currents underlying the activity of CPG neurons B31/B32
in the buccai ganglia ofAplysia
Susswein A.J., Hurwitz I. and Koester J.
Faculty ofL_ife Sciences, Barllan University, Ramat Gan,
Israel and CenterforNeurobiology and Behavior, Columbia
University, New York, NY
The B31/1332 neurons are key elements in a central pattern
generator (CPG) in the Aplysia buccal ganglia. B31/B32
respond to excitation with a slow depolarization that, after a
delay of 1-2 seconds, triggers a plateau depolarization reaching
a value of-20 mV. The plateau is maintained for 1-2 sec. Two
electrode voltage clamping was used to characterize the
currents underlying B31/B32 activity.
Two inactivating outward currents were found. Threshold for
activating them was -40 mV. At 0 mV the currents activated
rapidly, reaching a maximum current amplitude within 10-20
msec. The currents were differentially affected by TEA and
4-AP. The 4-AP sensitive current reached 90% inactivation
---320 msec after the peak, and the TEA sensitive current
reaching 90% inactivation in-2.7 see. The rapidly-and slowly-
inactivating currents had reversal potentials of-70 mV and
55 mV, respectively. From a holding potential of-60 mV
typical resting potential for B31/B32), the amplitudes of the
rapidly- and slowly-inactivating currents at 0 mV were 200 nA
and 160 nA, respectively. These currents probably contribute
to the delay between a depolarizing stimulus and the plateau
depolarization.
A non-inactivatingoutward current was also found which was
insensitive to TEA or 4-AP. Its activation threshold was-20
mV, and its amplitude at 0 mV was 26 nA. It reversed at -35
inV. This current probably functions during the plateau
depolarization as a brake on the inward currents.
An inward current was observed during spontaneous buccal
motor programs, and in response to the cholinergic agonist
oxotremorine (Dembrow et al., 2002). Threshold foi activation
was -50 mV. The current reached peak activation in 3.5 sec,
and thereafter showed no inactivation. The reversal potential
was close to 0 mV. The data may be sufficient to account for
the intrinsic properties ofthe B31/B32 and its ability to initiate
buccal motor programs.
The influence of heat acclimation on neuromodulation of
thermor.egulation and hypohydration by angiotensin II and
nitric oxide
Schwimmer H.l, Gerstberger R.2. and Horowitz M.
The Hebrew University ofderusalem, Israel; 2Justus-Liebig
University ofGiessen, Germany
Acclimation to a new environment enhances the capacity and
responsiveness of preexisting features, beneficial to the
organism in its new environment. Coping with thermal stress
depends on body fluid compartmentalization, altering with the
course of heat acclimation. Converging input of thermal and
osmotic stimuli in the MnPO nucleus controls the body
temperature regulatory cascade. Based on the individual
involvement of central Angiotensin II (AngII) and nitric oxide
(NO) in thermoregulation and fluid balance, we aimed to
elucidate the mutual effect of AngII and neuronal nitric oxide
synthase (nNOS) in the integration of thermo- and
osmoregt.lation during the course of heat acclimation. Rats
were dwided into euhydrated or h)lohydrated (-10% body
weight.) groups of heat acclimated (34C), for 30 days
(LTHA), 2days (STHA), and non-acclimated (C).
7-Nitroindazole (Ni) nNOS blocker and AngII, separately or
combined, were centrally administered. Three experimental
paradigms were used: 1) in-vivo: measurements of
vasodilatation and evaporative cooling thresholds, and heat
endurance in conscious heat stressed (39C) rats. 2)
Expression levels of AT1 and AT2 receptors and nNOS were
measured in the hypothalamus (Western blot). 3) Real-time
PCR was used to detect transcript levels of the coding genes.
Results show a biphasie pattern of temperature thresholds for
skin vasodilatation and salivation during the acclimation
process. LTHA prolonged endurance, with a concomitant
decrease in the AT1/AT2 receptor ratio in the cell membrane,
and a drop in cytosolic AT2 receptors and nNOS levels. In
hypohydration the AT1/AT2 receptor ratio decreased in C and
LTHA. Transcription also shows a biphasic profile during the
course of acclimation. We conclude that heat acclimation
roduces a transition from AT1 to AT2 receptors, leading to a
ifferent signalingpathwav of AnglI, and changes in the
mutual effects ofNO and AhglI on thermoregulation.
Apoptotic characteristics of cell death and the
neuroprotective effect ofcarnosine-related compounds on
pheochromocytoma PC12 cells exposed to Oxygen and
Glucose Deprivation (OGD)
Tabakman R.1, Jiang H.z, Levine R.A.2, Kohen R. and
Lazarovici p.1
Dept. ofPharmacology andExterimental Therapeutws and
Dept. ofPharmacy, hool ofPharmacy.3, Hebrew University
ofJerusalem, Jerusalem 91120, lsrael; 2William T. Gossett
Neurology Laboratories, ofHenryFordHospital, Detroit, MI
48202, USA
The rat pheochromocytoma cell line PC12, which displays
phenotypic characteristics of both adrenal chromaffm cells and
sympathetic neurons is a useful system for exploring
neuroprotective agents. Using a special device and
undifferentiated PC12 cells, we established an in vitro model
for ischemia by a combination of oxygen and glucose
deprivation (1). The cell death induced in this ischemic model
was evaluated by a series of markers: lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) release, caspase 3 activation,, the presence of cvclin D1,
cytochrome C leakage from the mitochondri/l, BAX
association with the mitochondria, cleavage of poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) to an 85 kDa apoptotic
fragment, and DNA fragmentation. During the OGD insult in
the_absence of reoxygenation, strong activation of the MA)K
isoforms extracellular regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) and stress activated protein kinase
(SAPK)., also known as p-38 was measured. The detection of
optotic markers and activation of MAPKs during the
schemic insult strongly suggest that apoptosis plays an
important role in the PC12 celldeath.
Carnosine (13-alanyl-L-histidine) and carnosine-related
compounds (CRC) such as homocarnosine
(y-aminobut'l-L-histidine) are present in skeletal muscles
235
(1-20 raM) and in the central nervous system (0.7-10 mM) and
may act as neuroprotective antioxidant compounds but their
effect in PC12 ischemic model was not yet investigated.
Homocarnosine and carnosine provided a maximal
neuroprotective effect ofabout 50% measured by the release of
LDH and caspase 3 activities. Homocamosine reduced
OGD-activation of ERK and ERK 2 by 40% and 46%,
respectively, and OGD-activation ofJNK and JNK 2 by 55%
and 30%, respectively. Therefore, neuroprotection conferred
by homocarnosine on PC12 cells exposed to ischemic insult
may be explained by interference with the apoptotic process
and/or related to the differential inhibition ofMAPKs.
Tabakman R., Lazarovici P. and Kohen R. (2002)
Neuroprotective effects of carnosine and homocarnosine on
pheochromocytoma PC12 cells exposed to ischemia. J.
Neurosci. Res. 68,463-469.
Nerve Growth Factor pretreatment attenuates
Oxygen-Glucose-Deprivation induced c-Jun NH2-terminal
kinase (JNK 1) and stress-activated kinases p-38 a and
p-38 b activation and confers neuroprotection in the PC12
model
R H.z, E.3,
Tabakman
E.1, Jiang Schaefer Levine R.A. and
Lazarovici
Dept. ofPharmacology andExperimental Therapeutics,
School ofPharmacy'Faculty OfMedicine, The Hebrew
University ofderusalem, derusalem
William T. GossettNeurologyLaboratories'; HenryFord
Health System, Detroit, M148202, USA, Signal Transducton
andImmunology, QCB A Division ofBioSource
International, 3 Avenue D, Hopldnton, MA O1748, USA.
We used an Oxygen-Glucose-Deprivation (OGD) model to
investigate the neuroprotective effect of NGF.
Pheochromocytoma PC12 neuronal cultures were exposed to
OGD insult in a special device, followed by OGD-reperfusion
under regular oxygen atmospheric conditions. Neuronal cell
death induced in this model was measured by the release of
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and the activity of caspase-3
enzyme.
Pretreatment ofthe cultures with 50 ng/ml ofNGF, 18 h prior
to OGD insult, conferred 30% of neuroprotection. The
neuroprotective effect was similar to that obtained with
cAMP-inducing neuropeptide Pituitary Adenylate
Cyclase-Activating Polypeptide (PACAP); the antioxdant
4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpipefidine-l-oxyl (Tempol) and
the L-type calcium channel blocker nimodipine. However,
treatment of the cultures with NGF concomitantly with the
OGD insult, did not result in neuroprotection. These results
may suggest that the neuroprotective effect of NGF involved
protein synthesis.
Time course experiments showed marked activation of the
ERK, JNK and p-38 MAPK isoforms during the OGD phase.
Pretreatment ofthe cultures with 50 nu/ml of NGF 18 h t)rior
to OGD insult, resulted in 50% ioon of OiD-infced
activation of JNK 1, and 20% and 50% inhibition of
OGD-induced activation of p-38 (z and I], respectively. These
findings support the notion that NGF confers neuroprotection
from OGD-insult, a phenomenon related to differential
inhibition ofMAPK stress kinase isoforms.
PC12 cells exposed .to OGD offer an in vitro pharmacological
model to lnvestagate the molecular neuroprotective
mechanisms ofNGF.
M-current determines the firing pattern ofCA3 pyramidal
cells
Tamir I. and Yaari Y.
Dept. ofPhysiology, Institute ofMedical Sciences. Faculty of
Medicine, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91120
The muscarinic-sensitive K current (M-cun'.ent; It) is a
subthreshold, noninactivating, voltage-gated K* current that is
generated in CNS neurons by heteromeric assemblies of
KCNQ 2,3, and 5 gene products. It is widely accepted that
down-regulates intrinsic neuronal excitability, but its specific
function in each t)pe ofneuron is still tmknown.
We have investigated the role of lt in regulating the
excitability of CA3 pyramidal cells (PCs), using rat
hippocampal slices and standard current-clamp intracellular
recording techniques. In vivo, these neurons generate either
'simple' (i.e. single) or 'complex' (i.e. burst of) spikes,
depending on the behavioral state. In vitro, when injectedwith
brief (4 ms) depolarizing currentpulses, all PCs fired only a
single spike. Longer (180 ms) depolarizing stimuli evoked
multiple spike responses, which accommodated rapidly and
completely due to the activation of a slow
afterhyperpolarization (AHP). Intrinsic bursts, comprised of
tightly clustered spikes riding on a depolarizing envelope, were
seen in 40% ofthe PCs, but only in response to high-intensity
stimulation.
236
Exposing the slices to the selective KCNQ channel blockers
linopirdine or XE991 (10 M) markedly augmented the
number of spikes evoked by long stimuli, and increased the
propensity to burst-fire, even in response to
threshold-straddling stimuli. Additionally, these blockers
induced spontaneous, low-frequency oscillations of the resting
potential that lead to rhythmic bursting. In contrast, exposing
the slices to the KCNQchannel opener retigabine (10 M)
reduced the number ofspikes evokedat any stimulus intensity.
We conclude that la plays a decisive role in the discharge
behavior of CA3 pyramidal neurons, limiting the number of
spikes and the production of spike bursts. Given that IM is
subject to do,:n-modulation by,. many neurotransmitters, it may
be used by them to convert simple' to 'complex' spikirig in
different behavioral states.
SupportedbyBMBF, SFB 6006
Manipulating neuronal activity in culture overcomes the
death signal induced by NGF low affinity receptor pathway
Tavar S.Bogoch Y. and Linial M.
Ddpt. ofBiological Sciences, Institute ofLife sciences, The
Hebrew University, Jerusalem
Understanding thegffects of NGF activation of low affinity
NGF receptor p75 and its relationship with depolarization
is likely to shed light upon the much disputed effects of this
receptor on survival of neurons. We have hypothesized that
synoptic depolarization would modulate concomitant
neurotrophin receptor signaling, thereby integrating the
activi state of a synapse with the state of neurotrophic
signalmg available at the synapse. P19 embryonal carcinoma
cells that serve as a model for studying differentiation
processes including commitment to cell lineage, were used
following activation of neuronal differentiation. The potential
ofthese cells to mature and efficiently release neurotransmitter
(NT) was established in our lab. We discovered that several
variables, most notably, cell density and various neurotrophic
factors affects neuronal maturation, survival and the choice of
NT phenotype. P19 cells express a large quantity of p75R,
the low affinity NGF receptor, on the plasma membrane, but
not,e high affinity receptor, TrkA allowing the study of
p75 without the influence ofTrkA activation. No difference
was monitored in the expression level of TrkA when naive,
untreated cells were compared to NGF treated ones.
Immediately following their plating and adhesion, cells were
supplemented with increasing amounts of NGF (0-200 ng/ml),
as well as varying potassium levels (0-30mM) and survival
was monitored by probes indicative for membrane integrity
and membrane potential. Increasing the level of exposure to
NGF caused a switch of a survival signal to a death signal.
Furthermore, we showed that low level tonic depolarization
that mimics the physiological state of activation, reversed the
deat,h,ignal in&iced by the NGF. We suggest that P19 va its
p75 activation is a suitable system to control the delicate
balance between apoptotic deafh, early differentiation and
neuronal activity. We conclude that modulation of
neurotrophin-induced signaling via changes in synoptic
activi may be an important paradigm for the development of
novel therapeutic strategies amed at inducing, enhancing, and
accelerating neural growth and survival.
Object recognitio_n test: A tool for evaluation_of cognitive
impairment and therapeutic opportunities after traumatic
brain injury
1
Tsenter '., 13eni SM., Yatsiv I.., Biegon A. and Shohami E.
Pharmacoloev,Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel;
2physical Reff.blltaaon, Pediatric Intensive Care, Hebrew
University andHadassah, Jerusalem, lsrael," LBNL, Berkeley
CA, USA
Introduction." Co_gnitive deficits are common after brain injury.
We have shown hippocampal dysfunction in a mouse model of
closed head inj.ury (CHI). Eryghr_opoietin (EPO), a
kidney-derived cytokne with growth factor and anti-apoptotic
properties, is present in the brain and elevated after oxidative
stress (OS). We recently showed that Epo is neuroprotective
after CHI. OS is implicated in hippocampal formation of
memory, while overexpressoin of SOD1 is associated with
impairment of spatial learning and disability to express LTP,
an NMDA-dependent process. NMDA receptors are
dow.n-regulated 1-7d after CHI. This study was designed to
evaluate the effect of Epo, NMDA and SOD on c6gnitive
function of mice after CHI. Methods: Prior to CHI, and 3-14
thereafter, object recognition test was performed to evaluate
cognitive function. Mice were placed in a cage with two
identical objects and the time spent exploring each object was
recorded for 5min. Four or 24h later, one object was replaced
and exploration time was recorded. Differences between times
spent at a familiar and a new object were used to evaluate
effect of treatments on cognitive ability of CHI mice. HuEPO
(5,000 units&g/dose) was injected and 24h after CHI.
NMDA (20mg/kg) was injected 24 and 48h after CHI. The
effect of SOD Was studied in SODl-overexpressing mice.
Results and Discussion: Normal mice spent longer time
exploring a novel object. CHI mice did not differentiate
between the objects within wk after injury, but this ability
was later regained. Epo and NMDA treat6d mice displavel
significantly longer exploration time of the novel object
compared to the amiliar one (p<0.01), hence their behavioral
pattern resembled that of normal mice with intact memory.
Loss of recognition-memory was not prevented by SO]31
overexpression. We propos6 that the object recognition test
clel.y demonstrates cognitiv.e impairment after CHI, and is
senstttve to various therapeuttc strategies, acting via different
mechanisms.
A.jathy, depression and motor symptoms in Parkinson's
dtsease
Tsitrinbaum Z.', Tomer R.''and Aharon-Peretz J.
Cogniave Neurology Unit, Rambam Medical Center. HaOCa:
:Det. ofPsychology & Brain andBehavior Center, Univbrsity
ofHaifa
Although apathy is traditionally considered an aspect of
depression, it has been proposed to exist also as a separate
behavioural svndrome, most likely reflecting dopaminergic
dysfunction. Apathy without depression has been found in
12% of PD patients. However, it is not clear why some PD
patients display only apathetic symptoms whereas 3thers show
either depression alone, or both. The current study examined
the association between depression, apathy, and clinical
characteristics of PD, which are known to reflect the degree of
dopaminergic depletion, in non-demented patients with
idiopathic PD. Method_: Forty two non-dementedpatients with
idiopathic PD were recruited: Twenty three with right side
onset ofthe disease, nineteen subjects with left side of onset of
the disease. Thirty age-, sex- and education-matched healthy
volunteers served as controls. Motor symptoms of the PI
subjects were assessed using the UPDRS. All subjects
completed self-report questionnaires measuring apathy
(Apathy Evaluation Scale) and depression (Beck Depression
Inventory). _Results: PD patients vere significantly more
depressed and apathetic than the control subjects whereas they
did not differ in terms of demo_aphic features. Althougla
apa.thy and depression were sigmficantly correlated in PD
several dissociations were found, suggesting that
sphoria in PD may be associated with mesohmbocortical
dopaminer.gic depletion, whereas apath,' may be related to
both mesohmbocortical and nigrostnatal'dopaminergic deficit
in the disease.
Juvenile stress impairs adulthood avoidance learning in
rats: potential role ofGABA
Tsoory M. M. and Richter-Levin G.
Dept. ofPsychology, Faculty ofSocial Sciences, Universi of
Haifa
Epidemiological studies indicate that children exposed to early
adverse experiences are at increased risk for the development
of affective disorders, particularly depression and anxiety
disorders. Several lines ofevidence'suggest the involvement 6f
a GABA deficit in those dsorders. Furthermore,
pharmacologically increasing GABAergic neurotransmission
was found to exert antidepressant effects and to reduce
anxiety.
In order to investigate how early adverse experiences relate to
GABAergic dysfunction and impaired cognitive and emotional
abilities in adulthood, rats underwent stressful experiences on
27-29 PNDs and at 56 PNDs their exploratory behavior and
avoidance learning were assessed. At 57 PNDs limbic system
tissue was collected for WB analysis of GABA receptor
subunits.
Adult rats (56 PNDs) exposed to stress at 27-29 PNDs did not
engage in exploratory' behavior in a novel setting and e.'xhibited
poor avoidance learning compared with control. In the two
way shuttle avoidance task two typical responses were evident
among rats exposed to stress at 27-29 PNDs, about 2/3 learnt
well the escape response but not avoidance, hile the
remaining 1/3 learnt neither, thus e.'xhibiting behaviors
reminiscing ofPTSD and depressed patients respectively.
WB analysis is currently conducted in order to examine
whether these cognitive and emotional deficits are associated
with abnormal structure and function of the GABAergic
system in the limbic system.
The assessment of the "GABAergic Hypothesis" may have the
potential to contribute significantly' to "the understanding of the
neurophysiology of affective disorders and may serve to direct
thinking about potential novel courses for drug development.
Is the 'Error-Related Negativity (ERN)' specific to error
making?
Tzur G. and Berger A.
Ben Cmrion University ofthe Negev
The anterior cing.ulate cortex (AC.C) is considered to be
involved in executave control of actions, such as monitoring
conflicting response demands, detecting errors, and evaluating
the emotioinal significance of events. Electro-physiological
studies have shown about 100 ms after subjects made an error,
a focal negative wave in the electrical activity over the medial
frontal cortex. Source localization indicates the ACC as the
plausible source of this negative wave. this wave has been
attributed to the subject's awareness of making an error and is
called an Error-Related-Negativity" (ERN), since it has a
negative amplitude peak and is related to error-ranking. The
present study tests the plausibility of obtainhag a similar
negative wave when a subject just perceives an erroneous
situation. Our preliminary results support this hypothesis.
Inactivation of T-type Ca2+ channels: A mechanism
underlying short-term plasticity ofintrinsic membrane
aroperties
ldebachs M.1, Perez-Res E. and Beck H.
De t. ofEpileptolo Univergi, ofBonn, German)r,. 2Dept.
oS .r o ogy,
T-txqae Cae-
currents possesses a characteristic
.r .. donw
inactivation cun,e possesses a midpoint close to the membrane
potential of many neuronal cells, causing a steep dependence
of channel availability on membrane potential. Following
depolarizations, channel availability depends on the recovery
rate from inactivation.
We have svstematically examined the recover5, from
inactivation o" the three pore-forming Ca'-+
channel subunits
(Ca,.3.1, Ca,.3.2, Ca,3.3) underlying T-type Ca2+
channels,
expressed in HEK cells. We found that the recovery time
course following conditioning prepulses to-20 or-50 mV was
well fit by a biexponential _equation. Increasing the duration of
the condiiioning prepulse (from 0.1 to 300 s) caused a marked
slowing in recove rates in all three subunits, with
complementary, but overlapping ranges of recove rates (o:
0.18-1.57s, 2.01-7.33s, 0.18-3.80s for the three subtypes
respectively). Varying the voltage of the conditioning pulse
hadno effect on tl4e recovery rates for any subunit.
In marked contrast to continuous depolarizations, trams of
mock action potentials at increasing frequencies (1-100 Hz)
caused increasing inactivation of Ca currents, but no
concomitant slowing of recovery rates. Likewise, varying the
duration of action potential train (30 Hz, 0.1-300 seconds) did
not affect the recover, rates. Similar findings were obtained in
native thalamic relay neurons, dissociated enzymatically from
rat brain.
In summary, pronounced scaling of recovery rates is invoked
by continuous subthreshold depolarizations, but nol by series
o" action poientials This property of T-tpe Ca channel
pore-forming subunits causes them to retain a trace of
subthreshold membrane potential variations, but not action
potential firing rates, encoded via scaling ofrecovery rates.
Bias in the measurement of auditory response curves
Ulanovskv N.. Las-Ahdut L. and Nelken I.
Dept. oflhysiology and the Interdisciplinary Center.fbr
Neural Computation. Hebrew University
Several functional roles have been suggested for neuronal
adaptation, including gain control, improvement of stimulus
discriminabilitv and optimization of information transmission.
We have prcvlouslv shown that neurons inprimary auditory
cortex (A 1) respond more strongly to a soundwhen it appears
rarely in a sequence than to the same sound when common, as
a result of stimulus-specific adaptation suggesting a role for
adaptation in novelty detection. Here we propose a new role
for adaptation: cnhahccmcnt of responses to eccentric stimuli.
Adaptation can alter neuronal tuning curves, but it is
widclvassumed that adaptation-induced bias is minimizvd
when"stimuli are randomized, equi-probable and have the same
amplitude. We therefore checked the effect of adaptation on
measurement of tuning curwes. We recorded activity of
neurons in A of halothane-anesthetized cats, in response to
randomly presented tones with l0 repetitions of 20
frequcncies, covering a range of octave. We found that
adaptation was stronger for frequencies at the center of the
frequency range, than for eccentric frequencies at the edges.
This occurcd since the trials that preceded 'central' frequencies
had a smaller parametric difference from those frequecnies
(average difference of !/4 octave) then the trials that preceded
eccentric frequencies (average difference of 1/2 octave). Since
237
adaptation is stronger for similar consecutive stimuli, this
resulted in stronger adaptation to 'central' frequencies, and in
enhanced responses to eccentric stimuli. This finding has both
methodological and functional consequences.
Methodologically, measuring response curves using unbiased
stimuli (randoimzed and eqm-probable), nevertheless results in
a bias in the shape of the response curves, with selective
suppression at 'centrar stimuli. Functionally, the enhancement
of responses to eccentric stimuli may facilitate their detection,
which, as suggested by some models, may aid in frequency
discrimination.
Characterization and function ofTRKA mutations in
Israeli patients with congenital insensitivity to pain with
anhidrosis (CIPA)-pe,ripheral reuropathy,
Umansky-Safanova S.', Jiang H.,Gal,ki H2,, Blumenfeld A2,
9ddouxC.s.Axelrod F. and Lazarovici p.l
Dept ofPhbrmacology, School ofPharmac); Hebrew
Umversi_ty ofJerusalem; :Laboratory ofMoIecular
Immunology, ShebaMedical Center, Tel Hashomer,
MolecularBioloev, Hadassah UniversityHosl)itaI, Jerusalem,
Is'rael," 4William GossettNeurologyLabs, ofHenry Ford
Hospital, Detroit, M1; Human Genetics, NYUMedical Center,
New York, NE USA
Congenital Insensitivity to Pain with Anhidrosis (CIPA) is an
autosomal recessive hereditary sensory neuropathy
characterized by loss of neurons from the peripheral and
autonomic (sympathetic) nervous systems, associated with lack
of sweating (anhidrosis) and insensitivity to pain. Nerve
Growth Factor (NGF) regulates the development and survival
of nociceptive and thermoceptive sensory neurons through its
high affinity, trkA receptor. The human TRKA gene (NTRK1),
located on chromosome q21-q22 encodes the receptor
tyrosine kinase for NGF. Several lines of evidence indicate
that mutations/polymorphism in the trkAgene result in CIPA.
Most of the report.d patients reside in the Middle
East/Mediterranean region.
In the present study we characterized the trkA mutations in the
Israeli patients, in order to identify structural and physiological
impairment(s) in the trkA gene and its product, and (o correlate
it with clinical symptoms and severity. Five novel mutations
have been detected on exons 15-17, the tyrosine kinase domain
located in the carboxy terminal of the trkA receptor gene.
Among them mutations Arg761Trp is the most ,typical of
Israeli CIPA patients. Mutations related to CIPA were
performed by ste-directed mutagenesis in order to investigate
structure-fitnction relationship of trkA receptor.This trkA
receptor structure-function study is intended towards
tmderstanding the functions of the intracellular catalUtic
domain, and other domains of trkA in the etiology of CIPA,
and possibly of other neurological trkA related disorders. The
long term outcome of this study is aimed towards the
development ofgenetic approaches for CIPApatients.
Supported by a grantfrom the United States-Israel BinationaI
ScWnce Founda#on (BAT), Jerusalem, Israel.
circuits
Characterization of local brain participating in
memory consolidation of novel taste learning
Vardinon-Friedman H. and Rosenblum K.
Centerjbr Brain and Behavior, Haifa University, Haifa 30905
Long term memory is the mental faculty by which experiences
cause a persistent modification of coghition or behavior. The
experience is encoded through neuronal activity, leading to
long term changes that are mediated by protein
phosphorylation andsvnthesis.
in this research projrct we focus on the identification and
characterization of the cortical circuit employed for
consolidation of novel taste learning. Studies based on
electrophysiological, ,and lesion approaches
ave demonstrated that specific brain regions takepart in the
normal encoding of taste memories. Of these, the insular
cortex was proved to be essential for taste memory
consolidation. However, the identity of a neuronal circuit sub
serving a given taste memory consolidation is unclear.
In order to identify the taste circuit in the gustatory cortex and
to trace the chariges in it, we fluorescently ldbel specific
cellular proteins that were proved to be essential for memory
consolidation process (immediate early genes, kinase activity),
along with cytoskeletal, and synaptic markers. Imaging.of
these selected molecules, using retrospective
immunofluorescence, enables focused observation on specific
cellular populations, and yields information about neuronal
activity together with sub cellular localization, at a certain time
point.
It is important to define how the elementary bricks of cortical
microcircuits are interconnected, as fimctonal signatures of
cortical neurons are determined by their intra-aerial circuitry.
Moreover, this data is likely to be instrumental in determining
circuit-level neuronal function throughout the cortex.
238
PolyADP-ribosylation by activated ERK1/2: A ovel nuclear
mechanism apparently involved in memory formation
Visochek L.,Klein R.r, Yao Z.2, Seger R. and Cohen-Armon
M.
7-ackler School ofMedicine, Tel-Aviv University. Tel-Aviv;
:BiologicalRegulation, Weizmann Institute ofScience,
Rehovot
Our findings unveil a novel signal transduction mechanism:
Activated ERK1/2 modifies chromatin bound proteins by
polyADP-ribosylation. PolyADP-ribosvlation is a
post-translational modification of proteins atalyzed mainly by
the abundant and highly conserved nuclear protein PARP-L
This reaction is initiated by ADP-ribosylation on glutamie and
aspartic moieties and proceeds by a rapid and transient (tl/2
min) polymerization of the ADP-riboses into high polymers.
PolyADP-ribosylation of chromatin bound proteins perturbs
their binding to DNA, and thereby influences their activity and
modifies the chromatin structure. This modification affects
DNA replication, transcription and repair. PARP-1 is activated
bv its binding to free DNA-endings in nicked DNA, being o.ne
o" the known proteins expressing DNA-damage scanning
activity. However, recently we found an alternative mode of
PARP-1 activation in the absence of DNA damage: In brain
cortical neurons PARP-1 was rapidly activated downstream to
phospholipase-C activation in response to high frequency
depolarizing stimulation, or in response to stimulation by
neurotrophins or serotonin. Furthermore, here we present for
the first time evidence for an instantaneous activation of
PARP-1 by activated ERK1/2 in the cell nucleus. This process
is also active in nuclear proteins extract. The rapid
modification of chromatin bound proteins by
polyADP-ribosylation downstream to ERK-phosphorylation
cascades has a wide spectrum of implications. One of these
implications refers to the formation of long-term memory.
Cohen-A.rmon and collaborators have recently demonstrated in
the marine mollusk Aplysia the essential role of
polyADP-ribosylation in LTF, learning and long-term
memory.
Eye dominance reflected by unequal interocular stability of
eye movements during fixation.
Wagner M. and Ehrenstein W.H.
Smith Familv Lab. for Collaborative Research in
Psychobioldgv. Hebrew U. Jerusalem; The College ofJudea &
Samara, Ariel. Israel; Leibniz Research Centerfor Worldng
Environment & Human Factors, U. ofDortmund, Germany
We investigated the relation between eye dominance and
binocular eye movements during fixation under unrestrained
head posture. A fixation mark was always presented at the
center of the screen, accompanied bv t&o lines, that were
either vertical parallel (2D representation), or tilted in a
convergent or divergent way to create a pictorial depth cue
(21/2D), so that the cross appeared either in a near or far
perspective.
Eye dominance was determined by a questionnaire (Coren
1993) and a sighting task, which required binocular and
monocular alignment of a target through a hole in the middle
of a card. The eye that is co-linear with the hole and the target
is revealed as the dominant eye (card test). Eye movements
were recorded (EyeLink system).
Seven subjects were examined (two with left-eye, and one with
no dominance). The dominant eye was significantly more
accurate and stable in keeping fixation than the non-dominant.
This difference between eyes increased when the display was
changed from 2D to 21/2D representation.
Our data show that fixational eye movements actually reflect
eye dominance which determines the direction associated with
vsual straight ahead (egocentric localization), possibly to
avoid diplopia in stereo depth, but already effective with
pictorial depth cues.
Supported by the Zs'rael Science ?bundaton (ISF) Grant
#8009.
pheochromocytoma (PC-12) cells. We have demonstrated a
concentration-dependent correlation of rasagiline between
modulation of cell survival and the related gene pathways
involved in neuroprotection. PC12 cells viability was
significantly induced (30%) by rasagiline (1 and 10 mM) after
24 hr of serum deprivation, either measured by an apoptotic cell
death detection ELISA kit or by MTT reduction assay. The
involvement of Bcl-2 family members, which p.arti.cipate in the
of apoptosis, was studied using quantitative real-time
CR techmq ue. Rasagiline, dose dependently (0.1-10 mM),
significantly upregulated mitochondrial antiapoptotic Bcl-2
family genes, BcI-X and Bcl-w and downregulated proapoptotic
mRNAs of Bad and Bax at 3 and 24 hr. Western analysis of these
proteins confirmed the gene changes. Our results exhibit dose-
and time- dependent activity of rasagiline, induced
cyto-protective genes and proteir[ expression that may rescue
neurons from apoptosis mediated by the mitochondfial death
cascade and protect declining neurons in neurodegenerative
diseases.
IL-l-signaling plays an important role in the development
ofopiate tolerance
Wolf G., Yirmiya R., Bar-Hen H., Goshen I. and Shavit Y.
Dept. ofPsychology, Hebrew University, MountScopus,
derusalem
The development of tolerance is a prominent characteristic of
chronic opiates, which has immense clinical implications. In
recent years, the involvement of proinflammatory cytokines in
the development ofacute and chronic opiate tolerance has been
suggested. The cytokine intedeukin-1 (IL-1) is known to
modulate pain perception in various inflammatory conditions,
under which it primarily induces hyperalgesia. Recently, we
have demonstrated that IL-lsignal!n.g. is also involved in
determining baseline pain senstvtty, and plays an
anti-analgesic role in acute opiate analgesia. The present study
examined whether IL-1 influences the development of
morphine tolerance. Mice were injected with morphine twice a
day (10 mg/kg, sc, at 8 am and 4 pm) for five consecutive
days. Morphine analgesia was assessed using the hot-plate
latency, measured on hour following each morning injection.
Subjects were 2 strains of mice genetically impaired in IL-1
signaling (deletion of IL-1 receptor type I, or transgenic
over-expression of IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-lra)) and their
wild-type (WT) controls. Other WT mice were chronically
treated with IL-lra or placebo, using implanted micropumps,
and were also tested for tolerance development. The two
mutant strains displayed significant morphine analgesia
throughout the 5 morphine days, while their WT controls
developed morphine tolerance within a couple of days.
Similarly, mice treated chronically with IL-lra displayed
significant morphine analgesia throughout the 5 morphine
days, while placebo-treated mice developed morphine
tolerance within a couple of days. These results suggest that
IL-1 signaling plays an importaht role in the development of
morphine tolerance.
Functional role of neuronal KCNQ/M channels
Yaari Y. and Yue C.
Dept. ofPhysiology, Institute ofMedical Sciences, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Faculty ofMedicine. Jerusalem 91120
KCNQ2/3/5 channel subunits are widely .expressed in
peripheral and central neurons, where they gve rise to a
muscarinic-sensitive, subthreshold and noninactivating K
current (1). Activation of Ir may contribute to spike
frequency adaptation during sustained depolarizations, but is
considered too slow to influence the repolarization of solitary
spikes. In hippocampal pyramidal neurons, however, reducing
I with selective KCN0channel blockers markedly enhanced
the spike afterdepolarization (ADP), thereby converting
solitary spikes to high-frequency bursts of 3-7 spikes
('complex' spikes). Converselv, increasing 1 with a KCNQ
channel agonist reduced the pike ADP and induced regular
firing in bursting neurons. By effectively controlling the spike
Gene and protein expression profiles of neuroprotective ADP waveform, KCNQ channels play a critical role in
and antiapoptotic action of Rasagiline in PCI2 cell culture determining the intrinsic firing patterns, and hence, the
Weinreb O., Bar-Am O., Chillag-Talmor O., Amit T. and Youdim input-output relations ofneurons.
MBH.
Eve Topf& USNational Parkinson 's Foundation Center' of Salt appetite is not increased in swimmers
Excellencefor Neurodegenerative diseases, Rappaport Faculty of Yativ M., Stern S. and Leshem M.
Medicine, Technion, Hafa P,sychology Dept. and Brain & Behavior Center, University of
Rasagiline, a potent novel anti-Parkinsonian drug, exerts a Ha(/kt
neuroprotective activity and prevents the fall in mtochondrial Varied forms of exercise increase salt and sweet preference.
membrane potential and the opening of mitochondrial Sweet preference is related to energy replenishment. Salt
voltage-dependent anion channel in cultured neuronal cells and in preference might be due to the sympathetic arousal of exertion,
animal models of head trauma and MPTP induced neurotoxicity, but it has also been reported that it is related to the amount of
To verify whether rasagiline affects the suppression of the cell sweat loss, in turn suggesting that it is sodium loss in sweat
death process via mitochondrial signal transduction pathway, we that might cause tl-,e increased preference. As a further test of
examined in this study the mechanism underlying neuroprotection this possibility, we examined salt preference after swimming
by this drug in serum deprivation model of rat training, where exertion is similar to other forms of exercise,
but sweating is reduced. If saltpreference is indeed related to
sodium loss in sweat, we wouldexpect a minimal increase in
salt preference after swimming. Twenty youths (14.4+1.2y)
training for the Haifa Maccab swimming team participated.
Salt and sweet preference were measured before and after a 60
min training session, and level of exertion and sweat loss were
monitored. No increase in saltpreference was found in 3 tests
of salt preference, while preference for concentrated sweet
solution did increase. In comparison to other studies, sweat
loss and post-exercise salt preference were lower. These results
are a further indication that sodium loss in sweat may be the
cause of increased salt appetite after exercise, and add weight
to the proposal that salt preference in humans may be
increasedby physiological sodium need, as it is in animals.
Supportedbylsrael Science Foundation Grant 902/00-2 to
Micah Leshem
LPS-induced heat shock protein response in mouse brain
and human astrocytoma ells L.
Yavelsl V..', Wolfson M., Vais O., Sidorik and Fraifeld
1Ben-Gurion University ofthe Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel;
2Institute ofMolecular Biology, Kiev, Ukraine.
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a classic trigger of acute phase
response (APR), which manifests in a non-specific activation
of the immune system and in thermoregulatory changes. The
brain is one of the LPS targets. Heat shock protein response
(HSPR) represents another non-specific protective mechanism,
which is challenged by different and generally strong stressful
stimuli. Both ofthese responses are altered with age. Although
APR and HSPR are generally considered two independent
systems induced by stimuli of different natures and strengths,
there is evidence that they may modulate or interact with each
other. Whether or not LPS affects the level of CNS HSPs, has
hardly been addressed. The present study was undertaken to
examine this issue. Male CD-1 mice aged 2 weeks to 12
months old were injected with LPS (1 mg/kg, ip) and at
different times post-injection their brains were removed for
preparation of tissue extracts. Western blot analysis revealed
that the brain HSPs are differentially altered with age and in
response to LPS. Basal level of Hsp90 peaks at 2 months and
decreases in middle-age mice, while Hspr0 and Hsp27 appear
unaltered within the tested age range. Treatment with LPS
results in clear Hsp27 and Hsp90 up-regulation in young mice
(2 months old), without apparent changes in premature mice
and a lack of, or attenuated response in middle-age group.
Supplementation of LPS to human U251 astrocytoma cell
cultures leads to a clear increase of Hsp90, slight elevation in
Hsp27, and insignificant changes in Hsp60. Analysis ofin vivo
andin vitro kinetics points to a relatively rapid HSPR to LPS,
suggesting that an increased intensity of the bands could
mainly be attributed to post-transcriptional alterations rather
than to activation ofthe HSP gene expression.
Supported by a grantfrom the United States-Israel Binational
Science Foundation (BSF), Jerusalem. Israel.
Simulatin octopus arm movements to study motor control
Yekutieli .1, Hochner B. and Flash T.2
lNeurobiology and lnterdJsciplina CenterforNeural
Computation, Hebrew University," Computer Science and
AppliedMathematics, Weizmann InstituteofScience
Octopus arms are highly flexible, move with a wide range of
velocities, are able to grip objects and exert great force and can
delicately manipulate objects. Octopus arms belong to a group
of organs termed muscular hydrostats, which are built almost
entirely of muscles with no rigid skeletal support. The basic
biomechanical principles that govern the movements of
muscular hydrostats are relatively well understood. However,
how this hyper-redundant arm with its virtually infinite
number of-degrees of freedom is controlled, s largely
unknown.
Here we describe a dynamic model of the octopus arm that is
used to study possible control strategies of reaching
movements where a bend in the arm travels towards the tip.
The model includes both external forces (gravity, buoyancy
and water drag forces) and internal forces (muscle forces and
constant volume constraint forces). It is controlled by an
activation signal (a simplified neuronal command) that travels
along the arm.
The main findings are:
1. A simple activation wave, which moves at a constant speed,
was sufficient for the model to replicate the natural reaching
movement with similar kinematic characteristics.
2. The biomechanical mechanism that produced the reaching
movement was a stiffening wave a wave of muscle contraction
that pushes forward a bend along the arm.
3. We investigated the possibility that the control of only two
parameters mght fully specify the extension movement: the
amplitude of the activation pulse (that leads to the generation
239
of muscle force) and the activation time (the time it takes the
activation wave to travel along the arm). We showed that the
same kinematics can be achieved by applying different
activation amplitudes above some threshold. Large amplitudes
generate larger forces that increase the arms stability against
perturbations without changing the kinematic characteristics of
the movement.
Oxidative stress leads to changes in the cellular redox state
which correlates with cell death in in-vitro model of
mechanical stretch ipjury
Yeshurun-Cohen A.1'2., Kohe,n:R.2, and Shohami E.
Depts. ofPharmacologyand Pharmaceutics, Hebrew
University, School ofPharmacy, Jerusalem
Background: Astrocytes are the most abundant non-neuronal
cells in the brain. They provide a supportive environment to
the neurons by exchanging products which are essential to the
normal neuronal function and protect neurons against toxic
mediators and hostile environment. Glutathione is one of the
products which is being exchanged between astrocytes and
neurons. It is sensitive to oxidative stress and protects the brain
directly and indirectly from reactive oxygen species (ROS)
which" are massively produced in trauma, ischemia or
neurodegenerative processes. Objective: To evaluate changes
in levels of reduced (GSH) and oxidized (GSSG) glutathione
in response to stretch injury of different severities in astrocytes
and epithelial cell line, in correlation with cell death.
Methods: Primary astrocytes cultured from newborn mic and
HaCaT, transformed epithelial cell line, were grown in wells
on a flexible silastic bottom. A cell injury controller was used
to produce a rapid pressure of known amplitude and duration
leading to a stretch injury, which deforms the cells and serves
as our model system. Cells were collected hour after the
trauma, denaturated and injected into HPLC-ECD. Cell
survival was measured by MTT method. Results and
discussion: The survival of both cell types decreased with
increased degree of trauma. In parallel, a decrease in GSH as
compared with control was found in both cell tlges and
elevation in GSSG was noted in the astrocytes. Thus a total
decrease in the ratio GSH/GSSG occurred as a result of cell
injury, and the redox potential calculated by the Nernst
equation was found to be less negative in severe trauma as
compared to control. Our results indicate that mechanical
injury leads to changes in the redox state reflecting oxidative
stress, which in turn correlates with cell death. Thus, the ratio
GSH/GSSG can serve as a sensitive cellular marker for
oxidative stress after injury, and as a tool to evaluate novel
antioxidant therapies.
Tomosyn regulates the priming step in a
calcium-deaendent manner
Yizhar O.,VIatti U., Melamed R., Hagallili Y. Bruns D.,
Rettig j.z, and Asherv U.
lr 2
Dep. Neurobiocherffistry, Tel Aviv University, Physiologisches
Institut, Universit,Tt des Saarlandes, Germany.
The formation of a heterotrimeric SNARE complex is a crucial
step in the pathway leading to the fusion of
neurotransmitter-containing vesicles. The availability of
SNARE proteins to form SNARE complexes is limited by
various protein-protein interactions. One such interaction,
between Syntaxin and Munclg, prevents Svntaxin from
forming SNARE complexes, m-Tomosaa is a Irain specific,
130 kDa protein that is capable of disrupting the high-affinity
interaction of Syntaxin with Muncl 8. Tomosyn binds to
Syntaxin and forms a novel 10S complex with Syntaxin-1,
SNAP-25, and svnaptotagmin. However, the precise function
of tomosyn is not known. Using morphological, capacitance
and amperometric measurements, we investigated the effect of
tomosyn on the different kinetic components of exoc.vtosis in
adrenal chromaffin cells. Overexpression of tomosyn reduces
the release probability and causes a decrease in the number of
fusion competent vesicles. The number of docked vesicles
remains unchanged, indicating that tomosyn inhibits the
priming step. _Interestingly, during prolonged stimulation with
elevated [Ca+]i this )nhibition is partially removed.
Calcium-ramp experiments indicated that tomosyn raises the
requirement for Ca+ in exocytosis without changing the
calcium cooperativity. Overexpression of a tomosyn mutant
lackin the C-terminal Synaptobrevin-homology domain
causeo a similar reduction n secretion and shift in
calcium-dependence under steady-state conditions. However,
these changes were abolished upon elevation of [Ca2+]i. These
results suggest that tomosvn specifically inhibits the primi.ng
step and impairs partially through ts
Synaptobrevin-homology domain, the efficiency of vesicle
pool refilling in a calcium-dependent manner.
240
Involvement of Bcl-2 and Bax in neuroprotection by
lithium against MPTP neurotoxicity
Youdim MBH. and ArrafZ.
Eve Topfand USNational Parlqnson 's Foundation Centers of
ExcellenceforNeurodegenerative diseases and Depts. of
Pharmacology, Technion, Haifa
Lithium has been reported to exert neuroprotective activity in
cell several neuronal cell culture models against glutamate
toxicity. Since lithium has been shown to activate the
antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family protein we have examined its effect
on the ability of the parkinsonism neurotoxin, MPTP
(N-methyl-4-pfienyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) to deplete
striatal dopamine m mice. Mice were fed for 5 weeks with diet
containing 1.1, 2.2, 3.3, and 4.4g/kg lithium chloride (LiCI) for
4 weeks, during which serum levels oflithium were monitored.
The 3.3g/kg lithium diet gave serum level value very similar to
what is observed in lithium therapy and the 4.4g/kg'well above
this. At the end of this period the mice received 24mg/kg
MPTP i.p. once daily for three days and sacrifised 4 days later.
A direct relation was established with the increase iri serum
lithium and its ability to prevent MPTP induced depletion of
striatal dopamine (DA), DOPAC and HVA. With the highest
lithium diet there was an almost complete prevention of striatal
dopamine depletion and the reduction in tvrosine hvdroxylase
activity and protein. Lithium prevent the ihcrease in
dopamine turn over (DOPAC+HVA/DA) normally observed in
MPTP treatment. Lithium did not interfere with the
metabolism of MPTP nor its brain uptake since the level of its
monoamine oxidase (MAO) B derived metabolite, MPP+' in
striatum was almost identical in lithium and non-lithium
treated mice. Striatal Bcl-2 was significantly: decreased, while
Bax was increased in MPTP treated mice. Lithium treatment
alone not only increased striatal Bcl-2 in control mice, but also
prevented its'reduction as induced by MPTP, while pposing
effect was seen with striatal Bax. The neuroprotective action of
lithium in this model of Parkinson's disease has been
attributed to it induction ofBcl-2 and reduction of Bax.
Co-existence of multiple kinematic internal models
Zach N.', Kanarek N., Grinvald Y., Inbar D.', Milshtein T. and
Vaadia E.'
Physiology Dept., Hadassah medical school, 'ICNC centerfor
neural computation, Hebrew university, Jerusalem
Learning new sensorimotor environments results in formation
of an internal model representing the new input-output
relationships. An open question is whether there is one internal
model or more. When two different environments are learned
in succession, the acquisition and consolidation of the internal
model may be hindered, suggesting utilization of shared
resources while no interference suggests that the brain allows
co-existence of the two internal models. Co existence of
internal model was shown for kinematics vs. dynamics tasks,
but others argued that the confounding parameter is the
dependant kinematics variable.
This study examines interference and consolidation to
investigate the relationships between two kinematic tasks. We
trained subjects to learn a rotational mapping followed by
either an opposite rotation or an arbitrary association task,
where the target color determines the motor outcome. The next
day, subjects were tested for consolidation of rotational
mapping. As expected, learning of opposite rotation disrupted
consolidation. In contrast, learning arbitrary associations didnt
interfere with consolidation of the rotational mapping. This
suggests that arbitrary associations and rotational mapping
utilize different resources, i.e. internal models.
We then examined the effect of immediate successive learning
on acquisition. Learning of the rotational mapping was
facilitated when learned in succession of an opposite rotation,
suggesting that subjects generalized at the learned parameter
level -rotation and providing more evidence that these tasks
compete for same resources. Surprisingly, learning rotation
task proactively interfered with learning arbitrary associations,
suggesting that although they do not "interfere for
consolidation, they do compete in working memory.
These results provide new support for co-xistence of
kinematics-dependent internal models and raise intriguing
questions about the relation between working memory and
consolidation.
Enhanced excitability of hippocampal neurons occurs prior
to olfactory-discrimination rule learning but is not crucial
for its maintenance
Zelcer I. and Barkai E.
Dept. ofPhystology and Zlotowsla center [brneurosctence
Ben-Cmrton Untverstty, Beer-Sheva: "(enterJbr brain and
behavior, Univrtsity ofHaiJb
We have previously shown that rule learning of an.olfactory
discrimination task is accompanied bv a transient reduction ih
the post-burst after-hyperpolarizatibn (AHP) and in the
neuronal adaptation in plriform cortex pyramidal neurons. The
purpose of the present study was to examine whether such
training, is associated with modifications in intrinsic neuronal
properties of CA1 hippocampal neurons and to explore the
relations of such modifications in the inducaon and
maintenance ofenhanced learning capability.
Wter deprived rats were trnned in a 4-arm maze to
discriminate positive cues in pairs of odors for a water reward.
Using intracellular recording in brain slices, we examined the
post-burst AHP amplitude in CA1 hippocampal neurons at
different time intervals after the beginning of training. The
averaged value of AHP in neurons from naive rats did not
differ from that in neurons from pseudo trained rats, taken 2-7
day,s after the beginning of training (3.74+1.15mV, n=17 in
navies compared with 3.73+1.39mV, n=61 in pseudo trained).
Olfactory learning-induced reduction in post-burst AHP in
CA netirons from trained rats was observed as soon as 5 davs
after the rats began their training (e.g. &ring the time in whizh
they are still learning the rule) and until one day after rule
learning was achieved (2.52+0.86mV, n=13 after five training
days, 2.82_+1.20mV, n=l 7 one day after rule learning, 6 or 7
days of training for all rats in this time point). At this time
window, enhanced neuronal excitability manifested by reduced
frequency adaptation was apparent throughout the"sampled
neuronal" population. Once olfactory-dscrimination rule
learning was established, the AHP amplitude in CA neurons
resumed its control value (4.36+1.42mV, n=8), even if training
was continued with new odors and enhanced learning
capability was maintained.
We suggest that enhanced neuronal excitability, in CAI
neurons is strongly correlated with the induction of rule
learning of the o]'fctory-discrimination task. However, once
this rule is established, its maintenance is not dependent in
intrinsic modifications in these neurons.
ubMuncl3-2 acts as a priming factor for large dense-core
vesicles and is regulated by caimodulin
Zikich D.,Junge H.2, Brose N. and Ashery U.
tNeurobiochemistry. TelAviv University. lsrael,
:Max-Planck-lnsttutefor ExperimentalMedicine, Goettingen,
German),
Priming. is an essential step in the process of synaptic vesicle
maturation that strong!y influences vesicle fusion and is
mediated bv the active zone proteins Muncl3-1 and
Muncl3-2. In chromaffin cells, priming of large dense-core
vesicles occurs in a calcium dependent manner and is
facilitated by Munc13-1. Structure analyses of the rat Munc13
isoforms hive showed the existence of three Cz putative
calcium-sensor domains and a calmodulin-binding domain
(CBD). Thus, the priming activity of Muncl3 could be
regulated by calcium binding directl to the Cz domains and/or
through the interaction with calcium-calmodulin (CAM).
Therefore, our aim was to study the role of CaM binding to
Muncl3-1/2 in vesicle priming. For that purpose we used the
ubMuncl3-2, a ubiquitous splice variant of the brain
Munc13-2 isoform, and overexpressed it in adrenal chromaffin
cells usine the Semliki Forest Virus. ubMuncl3-2 caused a
substantia increase in membrane capacitance in response to
flash photolvsis of caged calcium. It enhanced significantly the
number of lrimed vesicles prior to flash as wellas faciliiated
vesicle refilling during the 5-seconds-flash stimulation. In
order to elucidate possible interaction with CaM, we mutated
the conserved tryptophan re3o, in the CBD of ubMuncl3-2
to arginine (l,lMuncl 3-2 "). Exoc,,.aotic response of
ubMunc13-2 overexpressing ceils was considerably lower
compared to wild type protein, although larger than "control
cells. This suggests that CaM-ubMunc13-2 interaction
facilitate priming but is not a crucial for Munc13-2 activity. In
low Ca ore-flash conditions, both ubMuncl3-2 "and
'ff 387R
ubMuncl3-2 showed reduced primin activity, possibly
due to the effects of additional Ca2+
"binding" site(s) ih
ubMuncl3-2. Thus, we can assume that CaM-ubMuncl3-2
interaction has a regulatory nature that facilitates ubMunc13-2
priming activity following'intracellular Ca2+
elevation.
Improving EEG inverse methods using a realistic head
model
Zilberstein A., Kicks A., Adi-Japha E. and Teicher M.
Bar-llan Umversity, Ramat Gan
Background: The EEG Inverse problem takes an important
role in cognitive neuroscience research as well as in clinical
applications (e.g. Locating epileptic activities). Several
methods have been studied in an attempt to solve this problem
(e.g. MNE, BESA, LORETA), Most of the implementations of
these methods rely on simplified head models for example:
N-layered spherical head model. Some implementations use a
realistic head model based on MRI scans, but these are used
mostly for taking into account a realistic conductivity in the
forward computations.
Objective: Improving the current EEG Inverse methods by
incorporating realistic structural head information.
241
Methods: In previous work wc solved the Inverse problem using
the approach of Genetic Algorithms. In order to test our work
and compare it to other works, we built a simple head model. In
the current work we enhanced the head model used in the
tbrward computations to include structural brain information
obtained from MRI scans. The forward computation is based on
the laws of electromagnetism and Maxwell's equations. Results:
We tested our algorithm using simulated EEG data. The dipoles
where simulated-bv averaging 20 cognitive evoked potential
trials and the simulated EFFG data was generated by using the
forward equations on a realistic head model that has h brain-like
surface structure. Current head models used by other methods
assume a homogeneous spherical head model." We tested daa
sets with 1-3 simultaneous independent dipole sources, and
results showed an improved accuracy in source localization.
Photoreception is required for the onset of the circadian
clock in the pineal gland of zebrafish embryo
Ziv L., Tovama,R. and Gothilf Y.
D--b. OfZbo/og),, Wise Faculty ofSciences, "1,/ Aviv UmversJ/y
The pinea! gland of non-mammalian vertebrates is a
photoreceptve orsan that contains an intrinsic circadian
oscillator. This is indicated bv the rhythmic and light-sensitive
production of melatonin bv "pineal lands in culture. Here, we
describe the fimctional d&relopmet of these features in the
zebrafish embryo. A functional circadian oscillator in the pineal
gland appears during the second and third day of development
as evident by a robust rhythm of serotonin-N-acetvltransferase
mRNA, characterized by liigh levels during th.e nigfit. Since this
rh,hm is driven bv an oscillator, it continues in constant
ddrkness. However, thc initiation of this rhythm depends on
light exposure during the second dav of development, at least 24
hours after fertilization. The effedt of light on the circadian
oscillator may be mediated by zebrafish PERIOD2 (zPER2). a
negative component of the mlecular oscillator. Zebrafish per2
mRNA expression in the embrvonicpineal is light-dependent
and remain undetected in embis,os that were not exposed to
liaht. Liaht reception in the 24-hour embryo may be mediated
b a nuffaber of opsin arid cr3,ptochrome photopimcnts, which
are expressed at this stage.
Anticonvuisive treatment of organophosphate induced
seizures with nasal midazolam: An electrographic,
behavioral and histological Study
Brandeis R., Kadar T., Levy A., Rabinovitz I., Cohen G., Kapon
J.,. Tamar G., Sahar R. and Gilat E.
Dept. ofPharmacology, IIBR, Ness Ziona
Centrally mediated seizures are common consequence of
exposure to organophosphates (OP). These seizures rapidly
progress to status epileptcus (SE), and contribute to profount
brain injury. To study the clinical and behavioral implications of
midazomm as an anticonvulsant, rats were implanted with
chronic ECoG electrodes. They were pre treated with
pyridostigmine and HI-6 (0.1 and 5"mg/ml) 20 rain prior to satin
exposure (1.2xLD50, 108 gg/kg). Atropine (2 m,g/kg) was
administered one-minute post exposure. Within 2-5 mm after
sarin exposure animals developed abnormal electrographic
discharges that transformed soon after to electrographic seizure
activity (EGSA). Nasal application of midazolam (1.5 mg/kg)
after,5 min was found efficient in amelioration of EGS and
convulsive behavior. Application of midazolam after 30 rain
attenuated EGSA in most cases, but was not sufficient to
mneliorate ECoG paradoxical activity and convulsive behavior.
Animals that received nasal midzolam at 5 min EGSA
exhibited a moderate decrease in weight 24 hrs posl exposure
but normal growing curves followed. Delaving the treatment to
30-min EGgA, resulted in severe loss of weight 24-hrs post
expos.ure. These animals returned to oriina! weight only a week
later. Conmve tests uthzng the iviorns Water Maze,
examining-teaming trod memory processes as -well as re,crsai
learning, demonstratcA timt nasai midazoiam, administered at 5
rain EGSA, abolished the effect of sarin intoxication on
We created an cxpefmental paradigm in w!uch monkeys could
use either or both strategies, in working memory and/or 10ng-term
memory. 30 abstract mages, divided into "10 triplets, were
prcscn(ed cyclically in fixed tcmpora order. On eah trial the
monkeys vewed three scqucntiallv presented sample stinuli.
follow6d by a test stimulus, consistfiig of the same 3 images and a
distractor mage. Their task was to touch the three images in
correct order avoiding the distractor. Macaques spontaneously
prelrred to use long-term memory lbr recalling image order. The.
dominant mnemonic routine was retrieval of ordinal number
categories. They also used working memory of samples and recall
of item-item hssociations, but onl' as additional strategies.
recruited late in training to avoid distractor images.-The
categorization phenomenon and balance between chaining and
catezorical memories were re-examined when list length was
increased to 4 items. Results indicate that monkeys..categorized
images of quadruplets according to their ordinal posmon n each
quadruplet, recalling ordinal categories for lists with 4 items as
they &d for 3 item lists. Categorization was still the dominant
in establishing image order in 4-item lists, but its
ominance was not as comple.te as in retrieval of 3-iiem lists.
Long-term memory assocmtons between individual items
contributed signific,qntlv not only to avoidance of the distractor,
but also to the retrieva[ of imag6 order in the middle part of the
list, This suggests that the impact of chaining memory on order
retrieval is greater with longer lists.
Supporwd by a Center c?/t:xce/lence grant/horn the ISFand a
grant.[?ore the NationofInstm.ttejbr Psychbology in Israel.
Quantitative Analysis ofThalamocortical Synapses in Adult
Mouse Barrels
.Lev D.L., Weinfeld E. and White E.L
Morphology, Ben GurJon University (?/the Neev, Beer ,STeva
Thalamocortical afferents were labeled bv anteroadelv
transported lysine-fixable biotinvlated dextrafi amine (BDA')
injected m. vivo into the ventroGasal thalamus. Following light
microscopic identification of labeled thalamocortical axons, serial
hin sections through the posteromedial barrel subfield were
examined with the electron microscope to assess the spatial
distribution of their synapses. Each of two reconstructed axonal
segments (78 um ani 82 um in length) madel5 sxapses, all
asvmmetrical. In aeneral, thalamocortical synapses we?e formed at
axonal varicosits orboutons: one s;enase occured at
non-varicose region of the axon, i.e., ata preterminal' axonal
segment. Axonal varicosities formed from to 3 synapses. Eighty
per cent of the thalamocortical synapses were made with spines.
the remainder with dendritic shafts, a proportion consistent with
counts obtained ti'om BDA labeled thalamocortical axons in
developing barrels (postnatal day 11), and with those observed for
degenerating thalamocorticaI afferents in the adult.
tpporledby Israel Science Foundation grant 52'00-3
A Laboratory (Rat) Model for Comparing the
Phenomenological States Induced by Psychoactive Drugs
hraga M., Hen E., Teucher D., and lgerger B.D.
Dept. ofPsychology, Brain & Behavior Research Center,
UnivedsTty ofHaij& Haijb
We present an experimental interface using a conditioned taste
aversion (CTA) paradigm where laboratory animals provide
behavioral information as to whether ofie particular drua
experience is similar or different from another drug experience.
Most psychoactive drugs induce conditioned taste aversions
(CTA) in laboratory rats when administered alter ingestion of
novel foods. However, it is not known whether these va6ous drugs
produce CTA by the stone or different internal states. We explore
this question by"capitalizing on the well-documented phenomenon
nmdfice CTA If varioudru. nrdduce CTA bv induin similar
mternai states tiaen haOtuanon to tiae stmui of one drug should
weaken the potential o! other drugs to produce CTA. On the other
hand, if drugs produce CTA by inducing different intcrnaJ states,
learning. This treatment, when given 30 min followine pre-exposure to the stimuli of one drug should not weaken the
beginning of convulsions only decreased the sarin- induce potential of other drugs to produce CTA. Different groups of
learning in.a,pairments. The con(rol group exhibited severe brain laboratory rats were injected daily for 6-days with saline, lithium,
lesions in me hipocampus, pxritbrm cortex and thalamus ,areas. or scopolamine. Immediately following 30 rain. sucrosedrinking
Nasal midazolam at 5 mn" of EGSA, bul not a! 30 rain, on the pairing day, subgroups were iniected with saline, LiC1, or
prevented the brain damage. In summary,, nasal midazolam scopolamine. Thi-ee days later, the "groups were re-tested for
treatment shortly after initiation of OP inluced seizure led to sucrose consumption. As expected, both LiC1 and scopolamine
cessation of EG'SA and prevented brain lesions mad behavioral induced CTA. Also as expectS, pre-exposure o ,iC1 or to
deficits in the rat model, scopolamine weakened the CTA produced by each of hese druas
respectivelv. However, pre-exposure to LiCI did not weaken te
Serial memory in monkeys: Changes in balance of mnemonic CTA to sc6polamine nor did pre-exposure to scopolamine weaken
strategies as a function of item list length
2.,I I,
Orlov T., Amit DJ, Yakovlev V., Zoharv E. nd Hochstein S.
the CTA to LiC1.
These findings suggest that the stimulus properties of LiC1 differ
-Int. LO'b Sciences & Cent. Neural Computahon, Int. Physics, from the stimulus properties of scopolamine, and that the CTA
HebreW, University, Jerusalem, Universit di Roma La q'apienza, induced by these agents may be mediated by different
Rome mechanism;. [n a broader view, hese and other findings suggest
We asked which nmemonic strategies chainin, item to item
g (-- that drags, may be c.la.ssified accordina to their stimulus
assocmtaons) and/or tem or&nal posmon memory are characteristics- as originally proposed Tgv Overton using a
naturally preferred for recalling ordered item lists, somewhat more cumbersome paradigm.