Emerg Infect DisEmerg Infect Dis782eidEmerging Infectious Diseases1080-60401080-6059Centers for Disease Control and PreventionPMC2627604PMC2627604.126276042627604920429210.3201/eid0302.9702041Research ArticlePolycystic kidney disease: an unrecognized emerging infectious disease?
Miller-HjelleM AHjelleJ TJonesMMayberryW RDombrink-KurtzmanM APetersonS WNowakD MDarrasF SDepartment of Biomedical and Therapeutic Sciences, University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria 61656, USA. Marcia.A.Miller@uic.eduApr-Jun199732175667113127010419972005200912052023https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is a publication of the U.S. Government. This publication is in the public domain and is therefore without copyright. All text from this work may be reprinted freely. Use of these materials should be properly cited.Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is one of the most common genetic diseases in humans. We contend that it may be an emerging infectious disease and/or microbial toxicosis in a vulnerable human subpopulation. Use of a differential activation protocol for the Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) assay showed bacterial endotoxin and fungal (1-->3)-beta-D-glucans in cyst fluids from human kidneys with PKD. Fatty acid analysis of cyst fluid confirmed the presence of 3-hydroxy fatty acids characteristic of endotoxin. Tissue and cyst fluid from three PKD patients were examined for fungal components. Serologic tests showed Fusarium, Aspergillus, and Candida antigens. IgE, but not IgG, reactive with Fusarium and Candida were also detected in cyst fluid. Fungal DNA was detected in kidney tissue and cyst fluid from these three PKD patients, but not in healthy human kidney tissue. We examine the intertwined nature of the actions of endotoxin and fungal components, sphingolipid biology in PKD, the structure of PKD gene products, infections, and integrity of gut function to establish a mechanistic hypothesis for microbial provocation of human cystic disease. Proof of this hypothesis will require identification of the microbes and microbial components involved and multifaceted studies of PKD cell biology.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY
 113
Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Synopses
Examining the hypothesis that polycystic
kidney disease (PKD) is an emerging infectious
disease and/or microbial toxicosis in a vulnerable
population of humans must begin with a review
of the conceptual tools that relate disease etio-
logy and progression to the identification of
microbes, their cellular components, and shed
toxins in affected persons (1). An emerging infec-
tious disease can be defined, in part, as an existing
disease for which microbes are newly recognized
as a causative factor and/or as a factor contri-
buting to disease progression. The microbe may
be 1) present at the site of a lesion, 2) dissemi-
nated throughout the body, or 3) localized to an
anatomic site separate from the primary lesions.
In this third case, one or more toxins released by
the microbe into distribution fluids, usually
blood, produce the pathologic effect(s); this pro-
cess resembles microbial toxicosis, where the
patient is exposed only to the toxin(s) present in
the diet, environment, and gut microflora. Dis-
tinguishing between an infectious disease and
microbial toxicosis is essential if the source of the
toxin is to be removed or reduced. Concurrent
infection and microbial toxicosis (e.g., endo-
toxicosis, mycotoxicosis) can also occur. Although
mycotoxicosis is commonly understood to refer to
the absorption of small organic fungal toxins,
such as aflatoxin, fumonisin, or trichothecene,
detection of toxin in body fluids and tissues is
often difficult. Exposure to toxin may be episodic.
For many known and newly discovered microbial
toxins, analytical methods pertinent to the levels
of toxins involved in acute and chronic disease,
especially in vulnerable subpopulations, need to
be developed and verified in human tissues and
fluid. We have taken the view that the presence of
Polycystic Kidney Disease: An Unrecognized
Emerging Infectious Disease?
Marcia A. Miller-Hjelle,* J. Thomas Hjelle,* Monica Jones,*
William R. Mayberry, Mary Ann Dombrink-Kurtzman,
Stephen W. Peterson, Deborah M. Nowak,* and Frank S. Darras*
*University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, Peoria,
Illinois, USA; East Tennessee State University, Johnson City,
Tennessee, USA; and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service, Peoria, Illinois, USA
Address for correspondence: Marcia A. Miller-Hjelle, Depart-
ment of Biomedical and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, P.O. Box 1649, Peoria, IL
61656; fax 309-671-8403; e-mail: Marcia.A.Miller@uic.edu.
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is one of the most common genetic diseases in
humans. We contend that it may be an emerging infectious disease and/or microbial
toxicosis in a vulnerable human subpopulation. Use of a differential activation protocol
for the Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) assay showed bacterial endotoxin and fungal
(13)--D-glucans in cyst fluids from human kidneys with PKD. Fatty acid analysis of
cyst fluid confirmed the presence of 3-hydroxy fatty acids characteristic of endotoxin.
Tissue and cyst fluid from three PKD patients were examined for fungal components.
Serologic tests showed Fusarium, Aspergillus, and Candida antigens. IgE, but not IgG,
reactive with Fusarium and Candida were also detected in cyst fluid. Fungal DNA was
detected in kidney tissue and cyst fluid from these three PKD patients, but not in healthy
human kidney tissue. We examine the intertwined nature of the actions of endotoxin
and fungal components, sphingolipid biology in PKD, the structure of PKD gene
products, infections, and integrity of gut function to establish a mechanistic hypothesis
for microbial provocation of human cystic disease. Proof of this hypothesis will require
identification of the microbes and microbial components involved and multifaceted
studies of PKD cell biology.
114
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997
Synopses
signature components of microbial genera/species
that produce toxins may indicate that all compo-
nents of the microbe, including its shed toxins, are
also present. As a corollary, absorption of the de-
tectable microbial components, which are often lar-
ger in molecular size than the classical mycotoxins
and endotoxins, should presume the absorption of
other components and toxins from this organism.
On its face, PKD would not appear to be an
emerging infectious disease. Classically viewed as
an inherited disease that follows Mendelian
genetics, PKD in its autosomal dominant form
affects 600,000 people in the United States at a
rate of 1 in 400-1,000 persons; the autosomal
recessive form occurs in 1 per 44,000 births. An
acquired form of PKD occurs in patients on renal
dialysis. Animal models of inherited and chemi-
cally induced PKD have been described (2-4). The
current consensus is that fundamental anomalies
in cell differentiation or maturation explain the
array of anomalies in cystic renal epithelium.
Although cysts can sometimes be detected in
utero, loss of kidney function to the point of end-
stage renal disease occurs by the sixth decade in
50% of autosomal-dominant PKD patients. Despite
substantial progress in molecular genetics studies
of PKD, the role of defective gene products in its
causation and progression to end-stage renal
disease has remained elusive (3,5,6). Indeed,
additional factors have been proposed as being
necessary for progression of PKD to end-stage
renal disease. PKD patients have higher rates of
renal and urinary tract infections and higher
rates of illness and death from infection in
general than healthy persons (7,8). Since these
infections in otherwise-healthy-persons do not lead
to PKD, PKD patients could be exhibiting
heightened vulnerability to infection and sensiti-
vity to microbial cell components and toxins. How
such sensitivity and vulnerability might occur is
unknown. The disease does not appear to involve
an immunocompromised state. Thus, alternative
possibilities need to be considered, such as
altered colonization of the uroepithelium and
altered bowel structure and colonization.
Microbes and Microbial Components
Werder et al. (9) performed perhaps the
critical experiment in establishing a pathogenic
role for microbes in PKD. Using genetically cystic
mice, they found that mice grown under germ-
free conditions survived substantially longer than
cysticlittermatesgrownunderambient conditions.
Gardner et al. (10,11) extended these observations
when they reported that rats fed a chemical
cystogenalso had lower rates of renal cystogenesis
when raised under germ-free conditions; more-
over, coadministering the ubiquitous cell wall
component of gram-negative bacteria, lipopoly-
saccharides (LPS), and the chemical cystogen
produced higher rates of cyst formation than
using cystogen alone. Thus, LPS was considered
a provocateur of the underlying genetic (or
chemically induced) susceptibility to renal cysto-
genesis. From this line of research has emerged
the possibility that LPS, either alone or in
combination with other microbial or environ-
mental factors, promote disease progression, and
removal of such provocateurs would slow the
progression of PKD to end-state renal disease.
Endotoxin is the mixture of LPS and other
bacterial cell wall proteins and constituents that
is found in bacterial infections (12). LPS is
isolated by solvent extraction of bacterial cell
walls; its chemical purity may vary across
preparations. The portion of LPS responsible for
most of its known biological activities is Lipid A;
the carbohydrate side chains also elicit responses
in humans (13). The chemical composition of LPS
depends on the genera and species of bacteria
from which it is isolated (13,14). As knowledge of
the structure and biological activities of LPS has
increased and merged with the infectious disease
vocabulary based on endotoxin, these terms are
sometimes used interchangeably. For example,
the highly purified LPS used as positive reference
material in the Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL)
assay is called Control Standard Endotoxin.
Even though interchanging the terms LPS and
endotoxin may promote appreciation of microbial
involvement in disease, we prefer the term
endotoxin in discussing disease because it re-
spects the structural and pharmacologic hetero-
geneity of LPS and mixtures of other microbial
components present in vivo.
When Miller et al. (15) measured putative
endotoxin levels by the classic LAL assay in
culture-negative urine samples of male PKD
patients with no clinically apparent infection,
80% contained detectable LAL-positive material,
while the urine samples of healthy male volun-
teers did not. In cyst fluid from PKD patients,
Gardner et al. (16) reported LAL-positive material
and cytokines typically induced by LPS. The
origins of the renal and urinary endotoxin were
not known; possible sources include the gut
115
Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Synopses
microflora, occult urogenital infections, cryptic
colonizations, and abnormal handling by the liver
of the normal daily load of absorbed endotoxin.
Enhanced exposure to endotoxin in the PKD
patient is important since endotoxin plays a
fundamental role in human health and disease.
In low doses, endotoxin enhances the immune
system, but in larger amounts it is lethal. In
combination with drugs and other substances, it
can cause tissue damage and severe disease;
examples of endotoxin synergy with other
substances resulting in disease include alcohol in
cirrhosis, aspirin in Reyes syndrome, and tricho-
thecene T-2 toxin (a mycotoxin from Fusarium) in
gastrointestinal tract damage (17). Endotoxin
can also promote the translocation of bacteria
from the gut into the blood (18). In susceptible
persons, chronic exposure to endotoxin has been
linked to rheumatoid arthritis (19); tentative
links with atherosclerosis have also been reported
(20). Although suggestive of endotoxin in PKD,
the LAL methods used above were not specific for
endotoxin, since they were susceptible to false
positive and/or negative results.
Bacterial Endotoxin in Human
PKD Renal Cysts
In this report, we describe our recent
findings concerning 1) endotoxin levels recorded
after recent improvements in LAL methods, 2)
analysis of fatty acids specific for bacterial
endotoxin, and 3) the presence of other microbial
components in human cyst fluid. The LAL assay
(Figure 1) is the classic method used to detect the
low levels of endotoxin in biologic fluids and
pharmaceuticals.
Both endotoxin (in eight of eight patients)
and (13)--D-glucans (in two of eight patients)
were detected when methods based on differential
activation of the two Limulus pathways were
applied to cyst fluids from six autosomal-domi-
nant PKD patients, one autosomal-recessive PKD
patient, and a patient with simple cysts, where
200 ml from a single simple cyst were recovered
(Table 1). None of these patients exhibited clini-
calevidenceofinfection,hadbeenonhemodialysis,
or received human immunologic products before
nephrectomy, which could have accounted for -
D-glucan reactivity (26). For six patients (four
autosomal dominant, one autosomal recessive,
and one with simple cysts), only endotoxin was
detected in cyst fluids; gel clot end points for both
the LAL and LAL+laminarin assays were equal
for each fluid tested, indicating that the -D-
glucan stimulated pathway was not activated.
When exposed to polymyxin B, LAL-positive cyst
fluids became negative. This is consistent with
the conformational changes that occur when this
antibiotic binds to Lipid A to form a stoichiometric
Endotoxin/Lipid A
(1 3)-D-Glucan
Factor G
Factor G
activated
Factor C
Factor C
activated
Factor B
Factor B
activated
Proclotting Enzyme
Activated
Clotting Enzyme
Coagulogen Protein Coagulin
+ Peptide C
Gel Clot Formation
Binding activates
Binding activates
Either Factor Bor
Factor Gcan promote
activation of Clotting Enzyme
Laminarin blocks
Glucan binding and
subsequent activation
of Factor G
Polymyxin B
binds to endotoxin
thereby preventing
its binding to Factor C
and ultimate formation
of gel clot
Spontaneous
intermolecular
noncovalent
crosslinking
Figure 1. Cascade of biochemical interactions and
reactions leading to gel clot formation in the Limulus
amebocyte lysate assay. Endotoxin binding to Factor C
via the Lipid A moiety results in its activation and in
turn the sequential activation of Factor B, which
results in the subsequent activation of the proclotting
enzyme. Binding of polymyxin B to endotoxin blocks
Limulus reactivity in those samples where endotoxin
is the initiating molecule. In contrast, (13)--D-
glucans bind to a different component, Factor G, in the
Limulus assay reagent, thereby leading to its
activation and subsequent cascade of reactions to gel
formation. The addition of laminarin, an inhibitor of
glucan binding to Factor G, to Limulus assay reagent
blocks reactivity of samples containing glucan (21).
Lipid A binds to and activates Factor C resulting
in a cascade of enzymatic reactions leading to gel clot
formation, the positive endpoint (22). Also present in
the classic LAL reagents is Factor G, which is
responsible for a side cascade (i.e., the alternative
pathway). Factor G is stimulated by (13)--D-
glucans, associated primarily with fungal cell walls
(23). Addition of laminarin, an inhibitor of glucan
binding to Factor G (24), permits a more specific
measurement of endotoxin-induced gel clot formation
and provides a means of screening for (13)--D-
glucans in biological samples, when used in a
differential activation protocol with other inhibitors
and activators. As two internal controls, polymyxin B
can block the LAL reactivity of endotoxin (25), and
known quantities of Control Standard Endotoxin can
be added to duplicate samples to detect inhibition of
the assay.
116
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997
Synopses
Table 1. Limulus assay results from human kidney cyst fluids
No. Cysts Cysts ET positive (%): Cysts -D-glucan
Donor No. Patient data Tested Endotoxin units/mla
positive (%): pg/ml
1 ADb
45 yr F 5 3 (60%): 0.48 EU/ml ndc
2 AD 52 yr F 6 4 (67%): 1.71 EU/ml nd
3 AD 48 yr M Ld
9 5 (56%): 1.45 EU/ml nd
Re
11 6 (55%): 2.27 EU/ml nd
4 AD 41 yr F 16 3 (19%): 0.88 EU/ml 3 (19%): 120 pg/ml
5 AD 37 yr M 11 2 (18%): 3.84 EU/ml 6 (55%): 106 pg/ml
6 PDf
AD 43 yr F 13 4 (31%): 0.26 EU/ml nd
7 ARg
5 wk M pool(8) 3.84 EU/ml nd
8 SCh
48 yr F 1(200ml) 3.84 EU/ml nd
a
Mean EU/ml or pg (13)--D-glucan/ml
b
Autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease (PKD)
c
Not detected
d
Left kidney
e
Right kidney
f
Peritoneal dialysis
g
Autosomal recessive PKD
h
Simple kidney cyst (not PKD)
Kidneys were from seven patients who had received or were awaiting renal allografts. Cyst fluid was obtained ex vivo
from both surface (cortex) and sub-surface (medullary) cysts by aseptic aspiration from seven excised kidneys (post-
nephrectomy) of PKD patients; simple cyst fluid was recovered by radiologically guided needle aspiration. All kidneys and cyst
fluids were collected under an approved Institutional Review Board protocol. The mean number of cysts aspirated per kidney
was 10 (range 1-21); two kidneys were obtained from one of the patients with both being used for studies. Fluid from individual
cysts in each kidney were collected separately, except for the autosomal-recessive PKD patient in whom cyst volumes were too
small (~ 0.1 ml) for individual testing. Therefore, fluid from eight cysts in close proximity were pooled. All procedures used
pyrogen-free materials in the collection, handling, and processing of kidneys and cyst fluids and preparation of commodities
and reagents for the Limulus assay. Depyrogenation was carried out at 250C for 4 hours, which eliminates both endotoxin and
(13)--D glucans (27). Cyst fluids were stored at -70C. Assessment parameters of cysts included color and size; for fluids,
color, turbidity, pH, mg protein/ml, specific gravity, and blood. A commercial dipstick was used to detect and semiquantitate
cyst fluid pH, specific gravity, and blood (Ames 10 SG Multistix, Miles, Inc., Elkhart, IN, USA). Blood sensitivity was 0.015-
0.062 mg/dL hemoglobin, equivalent to 5-20 intact red blood cells per microliter. Results were recorded as 1-4+. For specific
gravity, determinations permitted ranged from 1.000-1.030; for pH, 5.0-9.0. Protein was by the method of Lowry et al. (28).
The LAL gel clot end point assay (22) was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Charles River
ENDOSAFE, Charleston, SC). The mechanism of the LAL assay is illustrated in Figure 1. To quantify endotoxin, undiluted
samples and serial twofold dilutions through 1:64 were tested. To detect false positives due to activation of the alternate (13)-
-DG pathway, LAL assay reagent fortified with the glucan inhibitor laminarin was used (23). Laminarin was courtesy of Dr.
J. Cooper, Charles River ENDOSAFE, Charleston, SC. Laminarin had been rendered endotoxin free by treatment with 0.2 N
NaOH at 50-60C for 6 hours; treatment did not affect activity of laminarin in the LAL assay (23). The standard gel clot end
point method was used, except laminarin was added to the LAL assay reagent (23). Minimum sensitivity of both assays was
0.03-0.06 Endotoxin Units (EU)/ml (3-6 pg control standard endotoxin, CSE; 10 EU/ng of EC-5 (E.coli O133) U.S. Standard
endotoxin; for -DG, 10 pg/ml (29).
Known endotoxin-positive (tap water) and -negative (pyrogen-free water) samples were run as controls along with a CSE
curve. The endotoxin concentration was estimated by multiplying the maximum dilution producing a positive test against the
sensitivity of lysate that was verified daily. The content of -DG in cyst fluid was estimated by the difference in titers between
the endotoxin specific assay (LAL+laminarin) and the conventional LAL assay (30). Portions of all samples were additionally
spiked with 0.25 EU CSE and tested for inhibitory substances. If inhibition was observed in the LAL assays, samples were
boiled for 5 minutes, cooled to room temperature, and retested. Samples were incubated, in some cases after boiling, for 30 min
at room temperature with polymyxin B (5 mg/assay) before LAL testing. Polymyxin B inhibits the LPS-activated pathway via
Factor C by its direct binding to LPS, which yields a nonreactive complex (25). An alternative approach was to use 20% dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) to inhibit Factor C directly (23); DMSO was not used to permit detection of nonendotoxin, but LAL-reactive
materials that were not inactivated by binding to polymyxin B. However, in our system DMSO did completely block the LAL
reaction in the presence of CSE.
After centrifugation of the cyst fluid, the LAL-positive material was located only in the supernate for autosomal-
recessive- and simple cyst-derived fluids. For autosomal dominant-derived fluids, the reactive material was located in the
pellet. Thus, centrifugation of fluids to remove particulate material before the LAL assay may influence results.
LAL assay inhibition was detected in nearly two-thirds of 73 cyst fluids tested, including autosomal recessive and simple
cyst fluids. Dilution of cyst fluid through 1:16 was often required to overcome the inhibitory effect in unboiled specimens.
Boiling of entire fluids or supernates and pellets for 5 minutes eliminated LAL assay inhibition in virtually all specimens at
all dilutions. Exceptions were some undiluted and 1:2 dilutions of chocolate-colored cyst fluids, where inhibition was not
eliminated in both test and spiked specimens of autosomal dominant fluids.
117
Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Synopses
complex that is inactive in the assay (25). In
contrast, kidney tissue from one male patient
(donor 4) and one female patient (donor 5) yielded
cyst fluids that contained separately endotoxin or
-D-glucan; however, no single fluid contained
both substances (Table 1). Fluids that were LAL
positive in the presence or absence of polymyxin
B, but negative in the presence of laminarin are
consistent with the detection of -D-glucan.
Donor 6 had been on peritoneal dialysis for slightly
more than 1 year before nephrectomy. Although
cyst fluids were all initially LAL negative, when
the incubation time of the LAL assay was increased
from 1 to 2 hours, 4 of 13 cyst fluids were endotoxin
positive, albeit at much lower concentrations
than the fluids from patients not on dialysis.
None of the cyst fluids from donor 6 were positive
for -D-glucan after longer incubations. Longer
incubation times might also have produced LAL-
positive material in LAL-negative cyst fluids
from the other donors; therefore, we view the
percentage of LAL-positive cyst fluids for each
patient as a minimum value.
The concentrations of endotoxin-specific
material in autosomal dominant cyst fluids was
0.12 to 3.84 EU/ml, with substantial levels of
endotoxin (3.84 EU/ml) also found in a pool of
eight cysts from one autosomal recessive kidney
and simple cyst fluid from one donor. The mean
concentration of endotoxin across all of the auto-
somal dominant fluids tested (including those
that were LAL negative) was 0.65 EU/ml. Using
10 EU/ng as a conversion factor yields 65 pg
endotoxin/ml cyst fluid; normal plasma levels of
endotoxin are <4-5 pg/ml (31). Intravenous injec-
tion of 5 EU/kg body weight (350 EU/70 kg) can
induce shock in the average adult male (21). We
estimate that a single cystic kidney in an adult
male (3-5 kg kidney weight of which 33% is cyst
fluid) contains 648 to 1,080 EU/kidney or about
two lethal doses of endotoxin per kidney. Unex-
plained fever and flank pain in PKD patients
have been attributed to release of IL-1 from
rupture or hemorrhage of cysts (27). On the bases
of the high levels of endotoxin observed in this
study and the high sensitivity of humans to endo-
toxin, we propose that the release of endotoxin
from the cyst into the peritoneum or blood may be
an important initiator of a cascade of biologic
events after leakage or rupture of renal cysts.
For one donor (donor 3) both kidneys were
available for cyst fluid analysis (nine left and 11
right kidney cysts, respectively). When the
frequency of LAL-positive fluids (endotoxin) was
compared, no significant difference was found
(Table 1). However, a threefold difference in the
frequency of inhibitor detection was observed in
left kidney cyst fluids compared with the right
kidney (90% vs. 31%, respectively). Thus, LAL
testing of fluids for endotoxin requires vigilance
for both false negative and positive materials.
Signature Bacterial Fatty Acids
If endotoxin is present in renal cysts, fatty
acids unique to endotoxin can be used to confirm
its presence. The Lipid A region of LPS contains
on average four 3-hydroxy (3-OH) acyl groups of
various chain lengths (13,14). Acid hydrolysis of
LPS releases the 3-OH fatty acids and other fatty
acids. Diverse bacterial genera exhibit charac-
teristic ratios of fatty acids of various chain
lengths and patterns of hydroxylation; compila-
tions of such signature fatty acid profiles are
available for many genera (14). Initially, aliquots
of five cyst fluids were analyzed in a single blind
manner by gas chromatography-mass spectro-
metry as described by Mayberry and Lane (32). 3-
Hydroxy (3-OH) fatty acids of nC:12:0 and
nC:14:0 carbon length were detected but not
quantified in the three cyst fluids that were
positive in the endotoxin specific LAL assay; they
were not detected in the two cyst fluids that were
LAL negative. Thus, complete concordance of
LAL reactivity and signature fatty acid analysis
was observed. 3-OH fatty acids (C:14, C:16) were
also reported in LAL-positive cyst fluids by a
separate reference laboratory (Microbiological
Insights, Inc., Knoxville, TN). Additional chemical
analyses of cyst fluid are required before a classic
signature fatty acid profile and linkage to one or
more bacterial genera are possible. Also, we
cannot discount the possibility that 3-OH fatty
acids released during degradation of endotoxin
were incorporated into mammalian sphingolipids
that were positive in the LAL assay, thereby
accounting for both the presence of such fatty
acids and LAL reactivity in cyst fluids.
(13)-
-D-Glucans (
-DG)
In addition to endotoxin, (13)--D-glucans
were identified in cyst fluids from two patients by
differential activation of the LAL assay (Table 1).
The range of -DG reactive material in cyst
fluids was estimated at 40 to 160 pg/ml. In plas-
ma of healthy persons, levels of -DG are lower
than 6.9 pg/ml (26). -DG, a ubiquitous constituent
118
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997
Synopses
of filamentous fungal and yeast cell walls (33), is
exceeded only by endotoxin in its reactivity in the
LAL assay; glucans lacking a 13 linkage are not
LAL reactive (34), nor are mannans, dextrans,
and cellulose (24,26). Although diverse forms of
glucans are components of fungal cell walls, those
with (13)- linkages are the most potent in
causing hypersensitivity pneumonitis and other
severe pulmonary illnesses (35). Although -DGs
are indicative of fungal cell walls, their
occurrence alone does not identify the genera and
species of the fungus that produced it. To confirm
the presence of fungal components and determine
the source of -DG, serologic tests were per-
formed on three -DG positive and two -DG
negative cyst fluids from three autosomal-domi-
nant PKD patients (Table 2). Cyst fluid from donor
6 that was negative for LAL-reactive material was
also free of detectable fungal antigens and anti-
from both kidneys containing -DG-positive
material (donors 4 and 5; Table 1) were also
positive for fungal antigens. Fluid from donor 5
also exhibited fungal antibodies; fluid from donor
4 was not tested for antibodies to fungi.
Fungal serologic tests provided insights into
potential sources of -DG. Initial measurements
showed Fusarium solani antigen. These findings
suggest the antigen to be from F. solani or a
shared antigen present in other Fusarium species
(L. Kaufman, pers. comm.). IgE (but not IgG)
antibody to Fusariummoniliformewas also detected.
Aspergillus galactomannan antigen and Candida
albicans serotype A. mannan were present in
selected cyst fluids. Cross-reactivity of Fusarium
with Aspergillus and Penicillium is unlikely as 1)
the Fusarium antibody (prepared against the
mycelium) was cross-absorbed with Aspergillus,
and 2) the immunodominant group of Aspergillus
and Penicillium species, galactomannan with a
galactofuranosyl moiety (38), is absent in Fusarium
species (39). As the serologic tests for Fusarium
and Aspergillus in cyst fluids are experimental
and have not been evaluated clinically, these data
are indirect presumptive indication of the presence
of these fungal antigens. The paucity of fungal
serologic and chemical methods for detection and
identification of emerging fungal pathogens in hu-
mantissuesandbodyfluidsandfungalcomponents
in the human diet has been noted by others.
Also detected were IgE antibodies to Can-
dida. IgE antibodies to both Fusarium and
Candida in cyst fluid suggest recruitment of
immunologic defenses against fungi. The site of
production of these IgEs and route of entry into
Table 2. Serologic results of five cyst fluids from three autosomal-dominant PKD patients tested for fungal
antigens or antibodies to fungal components
Donor;Cyst No. LALa
Findings Serologic Findings
D6;1 Neg. Etb
;Neg. -DGc
Antigens not detected
D6;2 Neg. ET;Neg. -DG IgE and IgG reactive with fungi were not detected
D4;3 Neg. ET;Pos. -DG Antigens: Fusarium solani at 1:2 dilution; Aspergillus
galactomannan at >50 ng/ml
D5;4 Neg. ET;Pos. -DG Antigens: Aspergillus galactomannan at >50 ng/ml;
Candida albicans serotype A mannan at 10 ng/ml
D5;5 Neg. ET;Pos. -DG IgE reactive with Fusarium moniliforme; C. albicans
(weak positive)
a
Limulus amebocyte lysate assay
b
Endotoxin
c
-D-glucan
Fungal serology was performed on three cyst fluids from donors 4 and 5; (Table 1) with -DG positivity and two cyst fluids
from donor 6, which were negative for both endotoxin and -DG after extended incubation in the LAL assay. Fluids were tested
for antibody to Penicillium notatum (Penicillium chrysogenum) and Penicillium frequentans, Aspergillus fumigatus, Candida
albicans (yeast), and Fusarium moniliforme. The Pharmacia CAP systems RAST FEIA (IgE) and IgG FEIA were employed
(Pharmacia & Upjohn Diagnostics, Kalamazoo, MI, USA). The tests were modified by substituting cyst fluid for plasma;
interference of fluid with the test was not observed. Tests to detect fungal antigens were performed by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. To detect Fusarium sp. antigen, a modified aspergillosis microimmunodiffusion test (36)
was used with experimental rabbit anti-Fusarium solani antibody; kidney cyst fluid was substituted for plasma. A double-
antibody sandwich enzyme immunoassay was used to detect C. albicans serotype A mannan concentrations in cyst fluids;
specificity of this test in sera is reported as 100% (37). An experimental ELISA inhibition assay was used to detect Aspergillus
galactomannan (Steven Hurst, unpub. protocol) Standard serum reference curves were used for extrapolating quantities of C.
albicans mannan and Aspergillus galactomannan in cyst fluids. However, these tests were not designed for cyst fluids, but for
serum antigen detection, and must, therefore, be viewed as estimated quantities.
119
Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Synopses
the cyst are unknown; a hypersensitivity reaction
cannot be discounted. In human and experimental
PKD, the severity of cystic disease correlates
with the numbers of circulating neutrophils; neu-
trophilia is related to exposure to endotoxin and
cytokines, both of which have been reported in
cyst fluids (16). Our finding of fungal antigens
and antibodies raises the additional possibility of
leukocyte activation in PKD by -DG and mannan
released from fungi, as -DG and mannan have
been reported to stimulate cytokine production (40).
Serologic testing is frequently used to detect
fungal infection. Cyst fluids collected from PKD
patients at sequential times during progressive
stages of the disease were not feasible. Therefore,
quantitative and/or qualitative changes in anti-
gen or antibody titers could not be used to deter-
mine active fungal infections in these patients.
Although antigens of Aspergillus or Fusarium
species are generally interpreted as apparent or
covert infection, another possibility is the absorp-
tion and distribution of fungal components inde-
pendent of infection (i.e., mycotoxicosis versus
infection). While Aspergillus enters primarily by
inhalation, this route does not appear to be the
predominant source of Fusarium; fewer than 1% of
air samples contained Fusarium species (41). Fu-
monisin from Fusarium is present in grains, rice,
and corn consumed by humans (42), with regional
variations in levels and the type and processing
of dietary product. Because of their occurrence in
the food supply and their effect on experimental
animals, it has been proposed that fumonisins
may contribute to kidney disease in humans (43).
-D-Glucans and mannans are shed by fungi
during growth (26,39) and thus, like bacterial
endotoxin, can potentially be distributed through
blood and lymph. Diverticular disease and other
anomalies in the structural and functional integ-
rity of the gut may occur in up to 80% of PKD
patients (2,44). In addition to diminished barriers
to the absorption of gut-derived endotoxin, the
outpouchings (diverticula) become overgrown by
minor subpopulations of gut microflora (45),
thereby generating increased quantities of un-
usual mixtures of potentially absorbable microbial
components. Diverticular disease (44) and ac-
quired renal cystic disease (46) occur in patients on
hemo- and peritoneal dialysis. To complete the
symmetry of this line of reasoning, outpouchings
of the renal tubule in PKD are described as both
cysts and diverticula (2). Direct measurement of
intracyst pressure and elasticity of the basal
lamina have led to the rejection of the obstruction
hypothesis (i.e., a physical balloon inflation) of
cystogenesis in favor of a cell-mediated restruc-
turing of the basal lamina coupled with electro-
lyte transport into the cyst to expand intracyst
volume (47). Although diverticular disease is
thought to be a pressure-driven lesion, gut diver-
ticula in PKD and dialysis patients may also
involve a cellular lesion further promoted by
pressure. Thus, diverticula in kidney and gut are
associated with microbial components. It is not
known if the processes of renal cystogenesis,
formation of gut diverticula, and the walling off of
infecting material are all facets of the same
defense response in humans. Endotoxin in rela-
tively high concentrations was found in fluid from
a simple cystic kidney (Table 1); intestinal or
biliary obstruction and urinary tract infections
have been associated with simple kidney cysts
(2). Although endotoxin has been proposed as
being associated with "high sodium cyst fluids"
(47), we observed endotoxin in cyst fluids of low
and high sodium content (data not shown).
Relevant to our study is the report of the
capacity of -DG to prime cell systems, which
results in sensitization to bacterial endotoxin
and infection (48), an example of -DG-endotoxin
enhancement; -DG and endotoxin also demon-
strate a strong synergistic effect on macrophages
(49). In addition, there have been reports of
synergy between mycotoxin and endotoxin (50).
Detection of Fungal DNA
To identify fungal DNA as evidence of past or
current fungal infection and/or the absorption
and distribution of fungal components to kidney
cysts, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods
were used to amplify and thus detect fungal DNA
in PKD cyst fluids and kidney tissue. Six cyst
fluids from three patients and two samples of
kidney tissue from two autosomal-dominant
PKD patients were tested; all were positive for
fungal DNA. A sample of normal human kidney
was negative for fungal DNA (Figure 2 A-C).
Because culture confirmation was not achieved
from the cyst fluids, expanded studies with
species-specific probes are warranted.
Despite substantial effort, we have not been
able to culture either bacteria or fungi from PKD
cyst fluids by axenic methods, but fungi were
detected in cultured epithelial cells from PKD
kidney tissue (see below); methods appropriate to
cultureL-formsorothercell-wall-defectivemicrobes
120
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 3, No. 2, AprilJune 1997
Synopses
were not performed. Gram stains of cyst fluid
supernates and pellets did not show intact bac-
teria. Electron microscopy also did not show
intact bacteria, but occasionally, a field consis-
tent with fungal cell walls was observed (not
shown); intact fungi were not observed. Nonethe-
less, it was only from PKD kidneys where b-DG
was identified in cyst fluid that fungal organisms
were frequently isolated from PKD epithelial cell
cultures. Other human and animal cells isolated
and propagated in the laboratory by the same
reagents and work spaces were free of fungal
growth. The fungi were identified as belonging to
the genera Paecilomyces and a new species of
Penicillium (manuscript in preparation). Fungi
have been reported, albeit infrequently, as etio-
logic agents in renal infections in PKD (8). Given
all of the above, it is possible that viable fungi
were present in the PKD renal tissue, but only
Figure 2. Amplification results of normal and PKD
kidney tissue and cyst fluids with universal fungal
primers ITS 1 and NL 4. 2A: DNA from healthy human
kidney tissue diluted 1:10, 1:100 and 1:1,000 (lanes 1-
3); control fungal DNA, A. tamarii (lane 4); negative
control (lane 5); 1 kb ladder (lane 6); arrow indicates
migration front. 2B (NL 4) and 2C (ITS 1): two cyst
fluids, donor 6, negative for detectable endotoxin and
b-DG (lanes 1 and 5); two cyst fluids, donor 4, positive
for b-DG (lanes 2 and 3) and positive for Fusarium
solani antigen (lane 3); two cyst fluids, donor 5,
positive for b-DG (lanes 4 and 6); two PKD kidney
tissues, donor 5 (lane 7) and donor 4 (lane 8); negative
control (lane 9). Large arrows in 2B and 2C point to
560 bp molecular weight marker; small arrows point to
product bands.
Polymerase Chain Reaction
Specimens for PCR included 1) normal human kidney
tissue (0.46 g) from a 7-year-old girl who died of a head
injury; the kidney was not transplantable because of the
presence of a hematoma but was otherwise normal; the
section used for PCR excluded the area of hematoma. 2) 0.5 g
of cystic tissue, devoid of cyst fluid, from each of two
autosomal-dominant PKD patients (donors 4 and 5, Table 1).
3) multiple cyst fluids (0.5-1.0 ml each; donors 4, 5, and 6).
The positive control consisted of DNA extracted from A. tamarii
(NRRL 26010) plus primer. The CTAB extraction method for
fungal genomic DNA was employed. The universal
oligonucleotide primer pair ITS 1 and NL4 for fungi, as
previously described (51), was used; NL 4 is the reverse
primer. PCR master mix (37) with 1.5 mM MgCl2
and primers
in a final reaction volume of 100 ml was subjected to the
following thermal cycler parameters (Perkin Elmer Thermo
Cycler 1): 96C30 sec; 53C30 sec and 72C30 sec for 40
cycles, followed by a final 7 min extension at 72C and soak at
4C. The presence of the expected molecular weight PCR products
(600 bp) was confirmed by ethidium bromide staining after
separationona1.0%agarosegel.Theamplifiedproductswerecom-
paredvisuallyforsimilarityonthebasisofthepresenceorabsence
of bands; variations in band intensity were not considered.
A-C represent the banding patterns obtained by
agarose gel electrophoresis of healthy kidney tissue, cystic
kidney tissues, and cyst fluids following PCR amplification
with the universal fungal primer pair, ITS 1 and NL 4.
Amplified fungal products were not detected in the negative
PCR controls (2A, lane 5; 2B and C, lanes 9) or normal human
kidney tissue (2A, lanes 1-3). In marked contrast, distinct
bands of the predicted size of each fungal primer used ( ~ 600
bp; 45) were detected in all cystic kidney tissues and fluids
examined from the three patients (2B-C); minor fragments
were not detected. The migration patterns were consistent
with the positive fungal DNA control (2A, lane 4).
Although fungal DNA might have been anticipated in
tissues and fluids from PKD kidneys showing b-DG or
positive serologic findings, fungal DNA was also found in
PKD cyst fluid from donor 6 (2B and C: Lanes 1 and 5), which
lacked these components. The b-DG positive cyst fluids
tested from donors 4 and 5 are in Lanes 2 and 3 and 4 and 6,
respectively. The fluid depicted in Lane 3 also had positive
serologic results for F. solani antigen; serologic testing was
not done on the other fluids assayed by PCR. Each cyst fluid
must be considered an independent sample, requiring direct
measurement; assumption of cyst content on the basis of
other fluids within the same kidney is not valid (16). Fungal
DNA was also detected in kidney tissue from donors 4 and 5
(Figure 2B and C; Lanes 8 and 7). Differences were noted
between the two primers used; ITS 1 yielded amplified
products in all PKD samples while NL 4 amplified less well,
being more concordant with the detection of b-DG. The
amplicons are presumptive evidence of fungal DNA.
121
Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Synopses
their remnants were in the cyst fluid. Emerging
human awareness of infectious disease may well
describe our experience in this study of PKD.
Infectious Disease, Microbial Toxicosis,
and Sphingolipid Biology
Emerging knowledge of sphingolipid biology
and PKD's vulnerability to microbial toxins offer
an opportunity for a fresh look at PKD. As Spiegel
and Merrill (52) have noted, sphingolipids fall
into two broad categories, both of which are altered
in PKD (53,54). Complex sphingolipids (i.e., cera-
mide with a carbohydrate or phosphocholine head
group on carbon-1) interact with growth factor
receptors and the extracellular matrix and adja-
cent cells and act as binding sites for gram-
positive and -negative bacteria and microbial
toxins. In the second category of sphingolipids,
ceramide sphingoid bases (i.e., sphingosine, sphin-
ganine, phytosphingosine) and their 1-phosphates
modify the activity of protein kinases and phos-
phatases, ion transporters, and a growing number
of signal transduction processes. However, the
dynamicsofhumansphingolipidbiologyoccurwithin
the context of a microbe-dominated environment.
Thus, we propose a third category called
"microsphingoids," sphingolipid-like molecules of
microbial origin that mimic or antagonize the
actions or metabolism of human sphingolipids.
Examples include, but are not limited to, various
mycotoxins (42,55-57), bacterial sphingolipids
(58), and endotoxin (59,60). In this report, we
have shown the presence of endotoxin and fungal
antigens or antibodies to at least Fusarium,
Aspergillus, and Candida in human PKD tissues
and fluids; from human PKD cells in vitro we
have encountered Paecilomyces and Penicillium.
These fungi produce mycotoxins that inhibit
multiple enzymes required for sphingolipid
biosynthesis (55; Figure 3) and alter the activity
of various elements of signal transduction cas-
cades, such as protein phosphatases, calmodulin,
and GTP-binding proteins (56,61). Such myco-
toxins are also found in the human diet, which is
itself an emerging concern in food safety
(42,43,55). Rietschel et al. (13) noted the simi-
larity of LPS to glycosphingolipids. Wright and
Kolesnick (59) have reviewed the structural
similarity of the Lipid A region of bacterial LPS
with ceramide and the ability of LPS to mimic the
ceramide-induced alterations in protein kinase
and phosphatase activities. Endotoxin is also
reported to alter the structure of mammalian
sphingolipids (62) and to initiate cytokine-mediated
cascades that generate ceramide, sphingosine-1-
phosphate, and lysosphingolipids, all of which
exhibit biologic activity (13,63). Not to be ignored
are bacterial sphingolipids formed by genera such
as Bacteriodes, which represent approximately
30% of the gut microflora (58). The role of bac-
terial sphingolipids and their metabolites in
human biology and their bioavailability in
disease are poorly understood. The term "micro-
sphingoid" is intended to highlight the contri-
bution of microbes to sphingolipid biology in
human health and disease.
Could pertubations in sphingolipid biology
caused by genetic anomalies and/or "micro-
sphingoids" account for both infantile autosomal
recessive and adult onset forms of kidney cystic
disease? Hannun (64) has reviewed the role of
sphingolipids as "biostats" that regulate diverse
cellular programs executed in response to
various stimuli. Such biostatic regulation could
account for both acute and chronic changes in
cellular behavior and differentiation in the kid-
ney (65). Calvet et al. (2,66) have proposed two
models to explain the immaturity or dedif-
ferentiated state of epithelial cells found in
hereditary and acquired cystic kidneys: In infan-
tile cystic disease, the epithelial cells never reach
terminal differentiation and are trapped in an
immature state, while in adult forms of cystic
disease, toxin-induced injury to an initially
mature renal epithelium is followed by inability
of the epithelium to recover to a fully differen-
tiated state. In genetically cystic cpk/cpk mice (a
model for autosomal recessive PKD), Deshmukh
et al. (53) reported altered levels of ceramide and
complex glycosphingolipids in kidney tissue from
cystic mice, but not in their phenotypically
normal littermates. Lower levels of ceramide and
sulfatide, but higher levels of glucosyl- and lacto-
sylceramideandgangliosideGM3,weremeasured.
Our research in infantile and adult human PKD
kidney tissue and cyst fluids showed no detec-
table free sphinganine, the primary sphingoid base
formed during de novo biosynthesis of mammalian
sphingolipids (54). Thus, anomalies in sphingolipid
biology exist in cystic kidney tissue.
It is difficult to separate concepts of
sphingolipid biology from considerations of infec-
tious disease, microbial components, and "micro-
sphingoids" in PKD. Potential consequences of
alterations in glycosphingolipids on the surface
of PKD cells include enhanced microbial
122
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 3, No. 2, AprilJune 1997
Synopses
Figure 3. Sites of impact of endotoxin and mycotoxins on sphingolipid metabolism. In PKD, renal sphingolipid
formation is altered. Such compromised sphingolipid pathways would be expected to be vulnerable to these highly
potent microbial toxins, especially during chronic exposure within renal cysts.
123
Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Synopses
colonization due to the availability of complex
sphingolipids as binding sites. Binding of microbes
or their components to such sphingolipids may
even promote cystogenesis, as binding to complex
sphingolipid has been reported to cause changes
in differentiation and morphology of cells in vitro
(67). Altered biosynthesis of sphingoid bases affects
the ratios of sphinganine to sphingosine with
consequences to signal transduction (61) and
may even alter the antimicrobial environment, as
sphingoid bases are reported to have direct
antifungal and antibacterial activity (68). The
levels of sphingosine in human cyst fluid (Hjelle,
unpub.) are comparable to the levels that induce
a state of cytoresistance (cellular dedifferen-
tiation) in kidney cells in vitro (69). In addition to
products of mammalian sphingolipid metabolism,
endotoxin in relatively high amounts was found
in cyst fluids from infantile and adult forms of
PKD and in simple cysts (Table 1). Could "micro-
sphingoids" or microbial toxins injure and then
prevent repair of renal epithelial cells? Data from
diversescientificdisciplinessupportthispossibility.
LPS influences nephron formation (70) and
renal cystogenesis (11). Fumonisins are potent
nephrotoxins (43,55), alter repair mechanisms in
kidney cells in vitro (71), and induce apoptosis
(72,73). Renal cysts are occasionally reported after
chronic exposure of rodents to fumonisins (74).
Rates of programmed cell death are abnormal in
PKD kidney tissue (75,76); ceramide is a pivotal
messenger in apoptosis (64). In PKD, altered
processing and sorting of cell membrane proteins
and secretory material occurs (2-4); sphingolipids
influence processing, sorting, and movement of
membranes and ion transporters (64,65), as does
fumonisin in kidney cells in vitro (77). In PKD,
various electrolyte transport systems are altered
(2). cAMP-mediated electrolyte fluxes were pro-
posed as important in cyst formation (3).
Fumonisins are reported to activate cAMP
response elements (78). Cyst fluid contains uncha-
racterized substances that promote cystogenesis
in vitro (3). Although LPS isolated from
Escherichia coli did not induce the full array of
anticipated cystogenic responses in kidney cells
in vitro, the structure, potency, and array of
elicited biologic responses of endotoxin depend on
the genera and species of bacteria from which it
was isolated (13). Coupled with the presence of
fungal components, cyst fluid likely represents a
complex mixture of "microsphingoids" and toxins
that may change over time with dynamic
consequencestocystformation.Theheterogeneity
of cyst volume and content of growth factors and
cytokines in adult PKD has been noted (3,16).
Concepts of infection and "microsphingoids"
appear to converge with the expanding knowledge
of PKD gene products. The structures of the
PKD1 (polycystin) and PKD2 gene products
share homology with 1E subtype of voltage-
activated, calcium channels (3,6) and a sea urchin
protein likely involved in calcium fluxes during
fertilization (79). LPS alters voltage-activated,
calcium channels (80) and osmo-regulation (81)
in mammalian cells. The PKD1 gene product also
contains regions of homology with ligand and
receptor domains putatively involved in binding
to adjacent cells and extra-cellular matrix (3);
one such domain is similar to C type lectins that
can bind microbes (82). Tissues, including kidney
and gut, expressing polycystin in adult PKD, may
exhibit a relatively greater leakiness to normal
molecularandpar-ticulatetraffic,asseeninkidney
cysts (3) and susceptibility to diverticulosis (3,44).
Polycystin also shows homology with apoprotein
from low density lipoprotein. Because LPS and
sphingo-lipids bind to and are transported by
serum lipoproteins, the low-density lipoprotein
binding site in polycystin may also enable
accumulationand/ortransportof"microsphingoids."
Secondary mutations in PKD genes appear
to be required for clonal cyst formation (3,5), as is
a loss of renal tissue through dysregulation of
apoptosis (76). Alterations in the expression of
the bcl-2 gene product in mice results in poly-
cystic kidneys and dysregulation of apoptosis
(83). Although infection increases translocation
of the bcl-2 gene in human lymphoid tissue (84), it
is not known if infection in PKD patients causes
such a dysregulation of bcl-2 in kidney tissue.
Regarding infection and sphingolipids, cera-
mide is emerging as a pivotal molecule in the
immune system (63) and fumonisins are reported
to alter immune function (85). It is ironic that our
findings potentially link Fusarium to PKD, as
fumonisin is used as a molecular tool to study
sphingolipid metabolism and signal trandsduction
in PKD. Not to be overlooked are the classic
bacterial sphingomyelinases encountered during
infection and released from gut microflora (e.g.,
Staphylococcusaureus and Clostridiumperfringens)
that can stimulate ceramide formation by hydro-
lysis of sphingomyelin. Thus, the vulnerability of
PKD patients to infection may be related, in part,
to anomalies in sphingolipid biology that influence
124
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997
Synopses
1) "biostatic" mechanisms of cell regulation, 2)
the structure of the plasma membrane and the
function of PKD gene products, 3) the availability
of glycosphingolipids as binding sites for microbes
and their components, 4) the bioavailability of
microbial components present in the gut, and 5)
antimicrobial defenses in general. Such vulnera-
bility is likely influenced by repeated courses of
antimicrobial therapy that provide selection pres-
sure for colonization with a modified microflora.
The extent to which sphingolipid biology in PKD
is influenced by genetic defects rather than micro-
bial factors is yet to be defined.
Anomalies caused by the PKD gene defect(s)
alone cannot explain cystogenesis. As shown by
Werder et al. (9), raising genetically cystic mice
in a germ-free environment essentially eliminated
cystogenesis and increased survivorship to nearly
100% over that of littermates raised in ambient
environment for 18 months. Even in cyst fluid
from infantile PKD, relatively high levels of
endotoxin were found (Table 1). This suggests
that microbial toxins are available early in this
disease. Prenatal exposures to toxins and "micro-
sphingoids" are unknown. Although our finding
of fungal DNA in eight of eight samples of
autosomal-dominant PKD tissue and cyst fluids
examined suggests an intimate association of
fungal exposure to renal cysts, a contributing
multifaceted microbial toxicosis involving diet
and gut microflora cannot be excluded. By itself,
the finding of microbial components at the site of
lesion does not prove a causal role for the
microbe(s) in disease progression (1). However, a
working hypothesis can be formed on the basis of
evidence that microbes promote progression of
the primary disease and components of the
microbes act on mammalian biology to cause
effects plausibly related to the known patho-
physiology of the disease.
Although there is an established body of
knowledge that PKD is a genetic disorder, our
data indicate that bacterial endotoxin, -DG, and
likely other microbial components are available
within the kidney to provoke cystogenesis. We
have provided chemical and advanced LAL assay-
based evidence of bacterial endotoxin and -DG
in human PKD cyst fluids. From cyst fluids and
PKD kidney tissue we have provided evidence of
fungal DNA and cell components by serologic
testing and PCR with universal fungal primers.
We have integrated these findings into a working
hypothesis based on emerging knowledge of PKD
gene products, altered sphingolipid metabolism
in PKD, the effects of LPS on renal cystogenesis,
the mimicry of ceramide by LPS and the effects of
mycotoxins on mammalian sphingolipid biology
and signal transduction, the occurrence of infec-
tion in PKD, and the impact of altered gut
permeability and microbial colonization on pro-
gression of PKD. Is PKD a genetic disease
promoted by microbial influences? Tests of this
multifaceted hypothesis require awareness of a
breadth of issues drawn from numerous scientific
disciplines. Identification of the microbes and
microbial components involved will require a
concerted analysis using highly sensitive and
specific methods. As awareness of the importance
of sphingolipid biology in health and disease grows,
so will the appreciation that microbial influences
will need to be considered in pharmacologic
studies that seek to manipulate ceramide and
complex sphingolipid biochemistry in disease. The
ubiquitous and highly potent bacterial endotoxin
is again one of the usual suspects examined as
provocateur of disease; in this case, endotoxin's
modus operandi of coopting the signal trans-
duction machinery of ceramide to cause chronic
disease may ultimately be revealed.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants and gifts from
the Methodist Medical Center Foundation; the Children's
Miracle Network Telethon; and the Campus Research Board,
University of Illinois. We thank Dr. Jim Cooper for his
advice, counsel, and support during the endotoxin
experiments and preparation of the manuscript; Dr. Kerry
O'Donnell for analysis of specimens by PCR for fungal DNA;
Dr. Christine Morrison (Candida mannan), Dr. Leo
Kaufman (Fusarium antigen), and Mr. Steven Hurst
(Aspergillus galactomannan) for fungal serologic tests for
antigens; and Dr. Hun-Chi Lin for fungal serologic tests for
antibodies. We also thank Jonathan R. Lane and Robert V.
Acuff, for the use of, and advice regarding, the gas-
chromatograph-mass spectrometer.
Dr. Miller-Hjelle is professor of Microbiology and
Diplomate, American Board of Medical Microbiology.
References
1. Fredricks D, Relman D. Sequence-based identification
of microbial pathogens: a reconsideration of Koch's pos-
tulates. Clin Microbiol Rev 1996;9:18-33.
2. Martinez RR, Grantham JJ. Polycystic kidney disease:
Etiology, pathogenesis, and treatment. Dis Mon
1995;41:698-765.
125
Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Synopses
3. Grantham JJ. The etiology, pathogenesis, and treatment
of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: recent
advances. Am J Kid Dis 1996;28:788-803.
4. Carone FA, Bacallao R, Kanwar YS. The pathogenesis
of polycystic kidney disease. Histol Histophathol
1995;10:213-21.
5. Brasier JL, Henske EP. Loss of the polycystic kidney
disease (PKD1) region of chromosome 16p13 in renal
cyst cells supports a loss-of-function model for cyst
pathogenesis. J Clin Invest. In press.
6. Mochizuki T, Wu G, Hayashi T, Xenophontos SL,
Veldhuisen B, Saris JJ, et al. PKD2, a gene for poly-
cystic kidney disease that encodes an integral mem-
brane protein. Science 1996;272:1339-42.
7. Schwab S, Bander S, Saulo K. Renal infection auto-
somal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Am J Med
1987;82:714-8.
8. Sklar A, Caruana RJ, Lammers JE, Strauser GD.
Renal infection in autosomal dominant polycystic
kidney disease. Am J Kidney Dis 1987;10:81-8.
9. Werder AA, Amos A, Nielsen AH, Wolfe GH. Com-
parative effects of germfree and ambient environments
on the development of cystic kidney disease in CFWwd
mice. J Lab Clin Med 1984;103:399-407.
10. Gardner KD Jr, Evan AP, Reed WP. Accelerated renal
cyst development in deconditioned germfree rats. Kid-
ney Int 1986;29:1116-23.
11. Gardner KD Jr, Reed WP, Evan AP, Zedalis J, Hy-
larides MD, Leon AA. Endotoxin provocation of experi-
mental renal cystic disease. Kidney Int 1987;32:329-34.
12. Munford R, Hall C, Lipton J. Biologic activity,
lipoprotein-binding behavior and in vivo disposition of
extracted and native forms of Salmonella typhimurium.
Clin Invest 1982;70:877-88.
13. Rietschel ET, Kirikae T, Schade FU, Mamat U,
Schmidt G, Loppnow H, et al. Bacterial endotoxin:
molecular relationships of structure to activity and
function. FASEB J 1994;8:217-25.
14. Wilkinson SG. Gram-negative bacteria. In: Rutledge G,
Wilkinson SG, editors, Microbial Lipids, Vol. 1. New
York: Academic Press, 1988:431-57.
15. Miller MA, Prior RB, Horvath FJ, Hjelle JT. Detection
of Endotoxiuria in polycystic kidney disease patients
by the use of the Limulus Amoebocyte lysate assay. Am
J Kid Dis 1990;15:117-22.
16. Gardner KD Jr, Burnside J, Elzinga L. Cytokines in fluids
from polycystic kidneys. Kidney Int 1991;39:718-24.
17. Nolan JP. Intestinal endotoxins as mediators of
hepatic injury-an idea whose time has come again.
Hepatology 1989;10:887-91.
18. Deitch E, Berg R, Specian R. Endotoxin promotes the
translocation of bacteria from the gut. Arch Surg
1987;122:185-90.
19. Mimura Y, Yamanaka K, Kawabata R, Inoue A, Sasatomi
K, Koga H, et al. Lipopolysaccharide in rheu-matoid
arthritis. Journal of Endotoxin Research 1996;3:17.
20. Muhlestein JB, Hammond EH, Carlquist JF, Radicke
E, Thomson MJ, Karagounis LA, et al. Increased
incidence of Chlamydia species within the coronary
arteries of patients with symptomatic atherosclerotic
versus other forms of cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1996;27:1555-61.
21. Raetz CRH, Ulevitch RJ, Wright SD, Sibley CH, Ding
A, Nathan CF. Gram negative endotoxin: an extra-
ordinary lipid with profound effects on eukaryotic
signal transduction. FASEB J 1991;5:2652-60.
22. Prior RB. The Limulus amoebocyte lysate test. In:
Prior RB, editor. Clinical applications of the Limulus
amoebocyte lysate test. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press;
1990;27-36.
23. Zhang GH, Baei L, Buchardt O, Koch C. Differential
blocking of coagulation-activation pathways of Limulus
amoebocyte lysate. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:1537-41.
24. Obayashi T, Tamura H, Tanaka S, Ohki M, Takahashi
S, Kawai T. Endotoxin-inactivating activity in normal
and pathological human blood samples. Infect Immun
1986;53:294-7.
25. Morrison DC, Jacobs DM. Binding of polymyxin B to
the lipid A portion of bacterial lipopolysaccharides.
Immunochem 1979;13:813-8.
26. Miyazaki T, Hohno S, Mitsutake K, Maesaki S, Tanaka
K, Hara K. (1-3)-b-D-glucan in culture fluid of fungi
activates Factor G, a Limulus coagulation factor. J Clin
Lab Anal 1995;9:334-9.
27. Levi ME, Eshaghi N, Smith JW, Elkind C. Fever of un-
known origin following an upper gastrointestinal
series in a patient with polycystic kidney disease. S
Med J 1995;88:769-70.
28. Lowry O, Rosebrough N, Farr A, Randall R. Protein
measurement with the Folin phenol reagent. J Biol
Chem 1951; 193:265-75.
29. DouwesJ,DoekesG,MontijnR,HeedrikD,BrunekreefB.
Measurement of b (1-3)-glucan in occu-pational and home
environments with an inhibition enzyme immunoassay.
Appl Envir Microbiol 1996;62:3176-82.
30. Miyazaki T, Kohno S, Mitsutake K, Yamada H,
Yasuoka T, Malsaki S, et al. Combination of
conventional and endotoxin-specific Limulus tests for
measurement of polysaccharides in sera of rabbits with
experimental systemic Candadiasis. Tohoku J Exp
Med, 1992;168:1-9.,
31. Sturk A, VanDeventer S, Wortel C. Detection and clinical
relevance of human endotoxemia. Zeitschrift fuer
Medizinische Laboratoriums diagnostik 1990;31:147-58.
32. Mayberry WR, Lane JR. Sequential alkaline
saponification/acid hydrolysis/esterification: a one-
tube method with enhanced recovery of both
cyclopropane and hydroxylated fatty acids. J Microbiol
Methods 1993;18:21-32.
33. Yoshida M, Roth RI, Grunfeld C, Feingold KR, Levin J.
Soluble (1-3)-b-D-glucan purified from Candida
albicans: biologic effects and distribution in blood and
organs in rabbits. J Lab Clin Med 1996;128:103-14.
34. Ikemura K, Ikegama K, Shimazu T, Yoshioka T, Sugimoto
T.FalsepositiveresultsinLimulustestcausedbyLimulus
amoebocyte lysate-reactive material in immunoglobulin
products. J Clin Microbiol 1989;27:1965-8.
35. Williams D. (1-3)-b-D-Glucan. In: Rylander R, Jacobs
R, editors. Organic dusts: exposure, effects, and pre-
vention. Boca Raton (FL): Lewis Publishers, 1994;83-5.
36. Kaufman L, Reiss E. Serodiagnosis of fungal diseases.
In: Rose N, deMacario E, Fahey J, Friedman H, Penn
G, editors. Manual of clinical laboratory immunology.
Washington (DC): American Society for Microbiology,
1992:506-28.
126
Emerging Infectious Diseases Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997
Synopses
37. Innis M, Gelfand D. Optimization of PCRs. In: Innis M,
Gelfand D, Sninsky J, White T, editors. PCR protocols-
a guide to methods and applications. New York:
Academic Press 1990:3-12.
38. Latge J-P, Kobayashi H, Debeaupuis J-P, Diaquin M,
Sarfati J, Wieruszeski JM, et al. Chemical and im-
munological characterization of the extracellular
galactomannan of Aspergillus fumigatus. Infect
Immun 1994;62:5424-33.
39. Notermans S, Dufrenne J, Wijnands L, Engel H. Human
serum antibodies to extracellular polysac-charide (EPS) of
moulds. J Med Vet Mycol 1988;26:41-8.
40. Garner R, Hudson J. Intravenous injection of Candida-
derived mannan results in elevated TNFa levels in
serum. Infect Immun 1996;4561-66.
41. Roby R, Sneller M. Incidence of fungal spores at the homes
of allergic patients in an agricultural community. II.
Correlations of skin test with mold frequency. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 1979;43:286-8.
42. De Nus M, Rombouts F, Notermans S. Fusarium molds
and their mycotoxins. Journal of Food Safety
1996;16:15-58.
43. Badria FA, Li S, Shier WT. Fumonisins as potential
causes of kidney disease. Journal of Toxicology-Toxin
Reviews 1996;15:273-92.
44. Scheff R, Zuckerman G, Harter H, Delmez J, Koehler
R. Diverticular disease in individuals with chronic
renal failure due to polycystic kidney disease. Ann
Intern Med 1980;92:202-4.
45. Gans H, Matsumoto K. The escape of endotoxin from
the intestine. Surgery, Gynecology and Obstetrics
1974;139:395-402.
46. Grantham JJ. Acquired cystic kidney disease. Kidney
Int 1991;40:143-52.
47. Gardner KD Jr, Glew RH, Evan AP, McAteer JA,
Bernstein J. Why renal cysts grow. Am J Physiol
1994;266:F353-9.
48. Cook J, Dougherty W, Holt T. Enhanced sensitivity to
endotoxin induced by the R-E stimulant, glucan.
Circulatory Shock 1980;7:225-38.
49. Rylander R. Endotoxin in the environment. In: Levin J,
Alving C, Munford R, Redl H, editors. Bacterial
endotoxin: lipopolysaccharides from genes to therapy.
New York: Wiley-Liss, Inc. 1995;392:79-90.
50. Miller J. Mycotoxins. In: Rylander R, Jacobs R, editors.
Organic dusts: exposure, effects and prevention. Boca
Raton (FL): Lewis Pubishers, 1994;87-92.
51. O'Donnell K. Progress towards a phylogenetic
classificaton of Fusarium. Sydowia 1996;48:57-70.
52. Spiegel S, Merrill AH Jr. Sphingolipid metabolism and
cell growth regulation. FASEB J 1996;10:1388-97.
53. Deshmukh GD, Radin NS, Gattone V, Shayman JA.
Abnormalities of glycosphingolipid, sulfatide, and
ceramide in the polycystic (cpk/cpk) mouse. J Lipid Res
1994;35:1611-21.
54. Hjelle JT, Dombrink-Kurtzman M, Nowak DM, Miller-
Hjelle MA, Darras F, Dobbie JW. Ceramide pathways
in human polycystic kidney disease. Peritoneal
Dialysis International 1996;16:S94.
55. Riley RT, Wang E, Schroeder JJ, Smith ER, Plattner
RD, Abbas H. Evidence for disruption of sphingolipid
metabolism as a contributing factor in the toxicity and
carcinogenicity of fumonisins. Nat Toxins 1996;4:3-15.
56. Merrill AH Jr, Liotta DC, Riley RT. Fumonisins: fungal
toxins that shed light on sphingolipid function. Trends
in Cell Biology 1996;6:218-23.
57. Merrill AH Jr, Grant AM, Wang E, Bacon CW. Lipids
and lipid-like compounds of Fusarium. In: Prasad R,
Ghannoun MA, editors. Lipids of pathogenic fungi.
New York: CRC 1996;199-217.
58. Rutledge G, Wilkinson SG, editors. Microbial lipids,
Vol. 1, New York: Academic Press, 1988.
59. Wright SD, Kolesnick RN. Does endotoxin stimulate
cells by mimicking ceramide? Immunol Today
1995;16:294-302.
60. BarberSA,DetoreG,McNallyR,VogelSN.Stimulationof
theceramidepathwaypartiallymimicslipopolysaccharide-
induced responses in murine peritoneal macrophages.
Infect Immun 1996;64:3397-400.
61. Ho AK, Peng R, Ho AA, Duffield R, Dombrink-
Kurtzman MA. Interactions of fumonisins and sphing-
oid bases with GTP-binding proteins. Biochemical
Archives. In Press.
62. Portner A, Peter-Katalinic J, Brade H, Unland F,
Buntemeyer H, Muthing J. Structural characterization of
gangliosides from resting and endotoxin-stimulated
murine B lymphocytes. Biochemistry 1993;32:12685-93.
63. Ballou LR, Laulederkind SJF, Rosloniec EF, Raghow
R. Ceramide signalling and the immune response.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1996;1301:273-87.
64. Hannun Y. Functions of ceramide in coordinating cel-
lular responses to stress. Science 1996;274:1855-9.
65. Shayman JA. Sphingolipids: their role in intracellular
signaling and renal growth. J Am Soc Nephrol
1996;7:171-82.
66. Calvet JP. Injury and development in polycystic kidney
disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hyperten 1994;3:340-8.
67. Shayman JA, Radin NS. Structure and function of renal
glycosphingolipids. Am J Physiol 1991;260:F291-302.
68. Bibel DJ, Aly R, Shah S, Shinefield HR. Sphingosines:
antimicrobial barriers of the skin. Acta Derm Venereol
Suppl (Stockh) 1993;73:407-11.
69. Iwata M, Herrington J, Zager RA. Sphingosine: a
mediator of acute renal tubular injury and subsequent
cytoresistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:8970-4.
70. Woolf AS, Neuhaus TJ, Kolatsi M, Winyard PJ, Klein
NJ. Nephronformationisinhibitedbylipopolysaccaride
and by tumor necrosis factor-a. J Am Soc Nephrol
1994;5:641.
71. Counts RS, Nowak G, Wyatt RD, Schnellmann RG.
Nephrotoxicant inhibition of renal proximal tubule cell
regeneration. Am J Physiol 1995;269:F274-81.
72. Lim CW, Parker HM, Vesonder RF, Haschek WM.
Intravenous fumonisin B1
induces cell proliferation
and apoptosis in the rat. Nat Toxins 1996;4:34-41.
73. Wang W, Jones C, Ciacci-Zanella J, Holt T, Gilchrist
DG, Dickman MB. Fumonisins and Alternaria alter-
nata lycopersici toxins: sphinganine analog mycotoxins
induce apoptosis in monkey kidney cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1996;93:3461-5.
74. Gelderblom WCA, Kriek NPJ, Marasas WFO, Thiel
PG. Toxicity and carcinogenicity of the Fusarium
moniliforme metabolite, fumonisin B1
. Carcinogenesis
1991;12:1247-51.
127
Vol. 3, No. 2, April-June 1997 Emerging Infectious Diseases
Synopses
75. Woo D. Apoptosis and loss of renal tissue in polycystic
kidney disease. New Eng J Med 1995;333:18-25.
76. Winyard PJD, Nauta J, Lerienman DS, Hardman P,
Sams VR, Risdon RA, et al. Deregulation of cell
survival in cystic and dysplastic renal development.
Kidney Int 1996;49:135-46.
77. Mays RW, Siemers KA, Fritz BA, Lowe AW, van Meer
G, Nelson WJ. Hierarchy of mechanisms involved in
generating Na/K-ATPase polarity in MDCK epithelial
cells. J Cell Biol 1995;130:1105-15.
78. Huang C, Dickman M, Henderson G, Jones C. Repres-sion
ofproteinkinaseCandstimulationofcyclicAMPresponse
elements by fumonisin, a fungal encoded toxin which is a
carcinogen. Cancer Res 1995;55:1655-9.
79. Moy GW, Mendoza LM, Schulz JR, Swanson WJ, Glabe
CG, Vacquier VD. The sea urchin sperm receptor for
egg jelly is a modular protein with extensive homology
to the human polycystic kidney disease protein, PKD1.
J Cell Biol 1996;133:809-17.
80. Wilkinson MF, Earle ML, Triggle CR, Barnes S. Inter-
leukin-1b, tumor necrosis factor-a, and LPS enhance
calcium channel current in isolated vascular smooth
muscle cells of rat tail artery. FASEB J 1996;10:785-91.
81. Han J, Lee J-D, Bibbs L, Ulevitch RJ. A MAP kinase
targeted by endotoxin and hyperosmolarity in
mammalian cells. Science 1994;265:808-11.
82. Malhotra R. Collectin receptor (C1q receptor): structure
and function. Behring Inst Mitt 1993;93:254-61.
83. Veis DJ, Sorenson CM, Shutter JR, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-
2-deficient mice demonstrate fulminant lympoid apop-
tosis, polycystic kidneys, and hypopigmented hair. Cell
1993;75:229-40.
84. Reed JC. Bcl-2 and the regulation of programmed cell
death. J Cell Biol 1994;124:1-6.
85. Martinova EA, Merrill AH Jr. Fumonisin B1
alters
sphingolipid metabolism and immune function in
BALB/c mice: immunologicial responses to fumonisin
B1
. Mycopathologica 1995;130:163-70.