Dis MarkersDis. Markers2186dmDMDisease Markers0278-02401875-8630WileyPMC3850843PMC3850843.1385084338508431050508110.1155/1998/6982396982391OtherAbstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference “Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints: Advancing Clinical Research and Applications”
199876200214423064718733491219999121999070620021112201312122013Copyright © 1998 Hindawi Publishing Corporation.1998pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 Disease Markers 14 (1998) 187-334
IOS Press
0278-0240/98/$8.00 (c) 1998 - IOS Press. All rights reserved
187
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference "Biomarkers
and Surrogate Endpoints: Advancing Clinical
Research and Applications"
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
188
Foreword
Welcome to the NIH-FDA Conference, "Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints: Advancing Clinical Research and
Applications". The current era of scientific discovery, including genomics, molecular medicine, and technological
innovation, presents the research community with myriad prospective targets for developing powerful and effective
therapies for many diseases and disorders. The prospect of an abundance of new therapies, however, poses new
challenges to the scientific evaluation process that determines the efficacy and safety of these candidate therapies.
Improving the efficiency of clinical trials is a critically important public health issue that all facets of the clinical
trials enterprise must address to fully realize the potential for cures.
The challenge to conference participants is to couple the growing understanding of pathogenesis with tools from
the laboratory to develop more precise and accurate measures of disease in patients. The discovery of novel
measures of biological factors, or biomarkers, that reflect the clinical response in disease offers the potential to
streamline therapeutic development. Adaptation of these biomarkers as substitutes for clinical endpoints, or
surrogate endpoints, in clinical trials has taken on new importance in light of the opportunities now before us. We
hope this conference will chart a course of scientific discovery that unites the research community to achieve a
common goal -- enhancement of the abilities to measure disease and response to novel therapies in patients.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 189
Plenary Session 1
Historical Perspectives
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
190
Biomarkers as Surrogate Endpoints in Clinical Trials for HIV/AIDS: A Model for Other Diseases?
Donna Mildvan, M.D. and Jonathan M. Kagan, Ph.D.
Division of Infectious Diseases, Beth Israel Medical Center, and Division of AIDS, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, USA
In the earliest days of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the lack of sensitive biomarkers as near-term indicators of active
therapy necessitated large clinical trials using mortality and AIDS progression as endpoints. This changed with the
advent of molecular tools for the detection and quantitation of circulating HIV-1 RNA in all infected individuals.
HIV-1 RNA and CD4 (the end organ for HIV attack) have been shown to predict clinical outcome in untreated
patients and respond to active antiretroviral intervention. Together, these markers account for a significant
proportion of the clinical benefit mediated by effective therapy. Collectively, these findings have permitted
accelerated development and approval for HIV therapies, which have dramatically affected the epidemic in
developed nations. However, despite these successes, these markers are incomplete in that they (1) only partially
explain the clinical benefit of antiretroviral therapy; (2) have been observed to display discordant, hence
uninterpretable, responses; and (3) have not been validated for other types of interventions (e.g., immune-based
therapies). Thus, much interest has focused on the development of additional markers, although to date, few have
been identified as useful. In this respect, HIV biomarker development shares many of the same challenges
encountered in other diseases. On the basis of the HIV experience, we have proposed a paradigm for the definition
and validation of biomarkers that may pertain in other disease settings. Markers are classified hierarchically for their
value and applicability as type 0, natural history marker; type I, biological activity marker; and type II, surrogate for
clinical efficacy. This conceptual schema, along with a practical approach, will be presented to illustrate how
collaborative efforts among academia, industry, and government may facilitate the translation of basic pathogenetic
observations into biomarkers for use in prognostics, therapeutics, and individualized case management.
Key References:
Choi S, Lagakos SW, Schooley RT, Volberding PA. CD4+ lymphocytes are an incomplete surrogate marker for clinical
progression in persons with asymptomatic HIV infection taking Zidovudine. Ann Intern Med 1993;118:674-680.
Coombs RW, Welles SL, Hooper C, Reichelderfer PS, D'Aquila RT, Japour AJ, Johnson VA, Kuritzkes DR, Richman DD,
Kwok S, Todd J, Jackson JB, DeGruttola V, Crumpacker CS, Kahn J. Association of plasma human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 RNA level with risk of clinical progression in patients with advanced infection. J Infect Dis 1996;174:704-
712.
DeGruttola V, Wulfsohn M, Fischl MA, Tsiatis A. Modeling the relationship between survival and CD4+ lymphocytes in
patients with AIDS and AIDS-related complex. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1993;6:359-365.
Katzenstein DA, Hammer SM, Hughes MD, Gundacker H, Jackson JB, Fiscus S, Rasheed S, Elbeik T, Reichman R, Japour A,
Merigan TC, Hirsch MS. The relation of virologic and immunologic markers to clinical outcomes after nucleoside therapy
in HIV-infected adults with 200 to 500 CD4 cells per cubic millimeter. New Engl J Med 1996;335:1091-1098.
Mellors JW, Kingsley LA, Rinaldo CR Jr, Todd JA, Hoo BS, Kokka RP, Gupta P. Quantitation of HIV-1 RNA in plasma
predicts outcome after seroconversion. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:573-579.
Mellors JW, Rinaldo CR Jr, Gupta P, White RM, Todd JA, Kingsley LA. Prognosis in HIV-1 infection predicted by the quantity
of virus in plasma. Science 1996;272:1167-1170.
Mildvan D, Landay A, De Grutolla V, Machado SG, Kagan J. An approach to the validation of markers for use in AIDS clinical
trials. Clin Infect Dis 1997;24:764-774.
O'Brien WA, Hartigan PM, Martin D, Esinhart J, Hill A, Benoit S, Rubin M, Simberkoff MS, Hamilton JD. Changes in plasma
HIV-1 RNA and CD4+ lymphocyte counts and the risk of progression to AIDS. New Engl J Med 1996;334:426-431.
Saag, MS, Holodniy M, Kuritzkes DR, et al. HIV viral load markers in clinical practice. Nat Med 1996;2:625-629.
Stein DS, Korvick JA, Vermund SH. CD4+ lymphocyte cell enumeration for prediction of clinical course of human
immunodeficiency virus disease: a review. J Infect Dis 1992;165:352-363.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 191
Biomarkers as Surrogates in Clinical Research
Scott L. Zeger, Ph.D.
Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health, Room E3132, 615
North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205-2179, USA
The biotechnology revolution has made possible highly innovative monitoring of biological and disease processes
using biological markers or "biomarkers". The pressure to more efficiently evaluate new therapies in clinical
research motivates the use of biomarkers as substitutes or "surrogates" for more traditional clinical endpoints. This
talk will summarize a framework for evaluating biomarkers as surrogates in clinical research developed by an
National Institutes of Health working group over the past year. The distinct roles of biomarkers in early
development of new therapies and in phase III clinical trials will be detailed. The talk will then focus on the
evidence necessary to establish a biomarker as a surrogate endpoint in the evaluation of a particular therapy-disease
combination. Statistical approaches to using a surrogate endpoint in a single trial or in multiple trials will be
presented. The concepts will be illustrated with an example from a recent schizophrenia clinical trial.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
192
Plenary Session 2
The Need and Prospects for Biomarkers
in Therapeutic Development
Moderator: J. Oates, M.D., Vanderbilt University, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 193
Factors Influencing the Optimal Use of Surrogate Markers and Models
Paul Rolan, M.D.
University of Manchester, Medeval Co., Skelton House, Manchester Science Park, Manchester M15 6SH, UK
In the current development climate, there is increasing pressure to select the successful from the nonsuccessful
development candidates at the earliest possible stage and to base dose selection rationally rather than empirically.
The use of surrogates and models potentially can facilitate these decisions by demonstrating dose-concentration-
response relationships early in well-controlled experiments. However, the predictive value of data from a surrogate
or model is likely to be imperfect. Factors likely to determine the utility of such an approach include validation
aspects such as the construct, criterion, and face validity of the measurement. However, there are other less
quantitative and objective aspects that may affect surrogate or model utility in drug development. Even relatively
imperfect surrogates may need to be used in assessing drugs of high medical need, or where hard clinical endpoints
are difficult to achieve (e.g., due to the large sample size required). Another factor is the culture of the developing
organization (e.g., its attitude toward scientific and commercial risk) and whether the scientific/analytical approach
predominates over a heuristic one. One obstacle to the increasing use of surrogates and models is the basic tension
between the extent of validation of the measurement and the degree of clinical need for the intervention (i.e., the
best validated surrogates exist for a well-served therapeutic need). However, even in areas of unmet therapeutic need
where the understanding of the biology of the disease is incomplete, the maximal value of surrogates and models
will arise when there is an integrated approach to the development and use of novel techniques throughout the
preclinical and clinical development programs. This requires clinical pharmacologists to be closely involved with
the work of the preclinical scientists well before the compound is due to go into humans and the assistance of the
scientists to develop and use appropriate laboratory techniques in clinical studies. This integrated approach is not the
dominant mode in the current pharmaceutical industry, but it is likely to be the source of competitive advantage in
the future. Case examples will be presented that illustrate how decisions about the development potential of a novel
drug can be made even from data of imperfect predictive value.
Key References:
Rolan PE. The contribution of clinical pharmacology surrogates and models in drug development -- a critical appraisal. Brit J
Clin Pharmacol 1997;44:219-225.
The Importance of Markers in Drug Discovery and Development
B. Michael Silber, Ph.D.
Pharmacogenomics and Clinical Biochemical Measurements, Pfizer Inc., Eastern Point Road, Groton, CT 06340,
USA
The availability and use of validated markers of disease progression and severity as well those demonstrating
drug activity and response can be crucial during drug development for a new chemical entity (NCE). This can be
especially important when NCEs are being evaluated in patients with common, chronic, and progressive diseases
through clinical trials that can involve large numbers of patients over prolonged periods of time to detect an effect
on disease progression, severity, and outcome response. Getting an early readout on the efficacy of an NCE in
development cannot facilitate prudent use of patient and financial resources, but it can provide early feedback to
discovery to validate the importance of a new mechanism of action, especially for an unprecedented therapeutic
approach. We recently established a collaboration in the area of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in search of markers,
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
194
hoping that such markers could contribute to the design and interpretation of clinical trials as well as uncover
important new targets in AD.
The Prospective Search for Alzheimer's Disease Biomarkers
Trey Sunderland, M.D.
Geriatric Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room
3N228, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
Despite many recent advances in the understanding of the biology of Alzheimer's disease (AD), the diagnosis of
AD still depends on clinical criteria and is confirmed only by biopsy or autopsy. Although the clinical diagnosis of
an experienced clinician is accurate to a level of 80 to 85 percent, it is often delayed by the heterogeneous symptom
profile at presentation and the current lack of antemortem biologic markers of the disease process. As new and more
targeted therapies emerge for the treatment of the underlying biochemical changes associated with AD (i.e.,
accumulation of beta-amyloid peptide and hyperphosphorylated tau protein), the need for biomarkers to aid in the
diagnosis, prognosis and evaluation of treatment effectiveness has become a rate-limiting factor in the development
and advance of therapeutic studies. This talk will describe the rationale behind and progress to date in a
collaborative study developed between the National Institute of Mental Health and industry designed to use standard
and novel techniques to examine the spinal fluid of AD patients over the course of their illness compared with
controls. In addition, this study involves a longitudinal view of a special group of normal subjects at risk for
developing AD in the hope of isolating specific biomarkers that will have potential value both as diagnostic and
surrogate markers.
Use of Modern Proteomics to Discover Protein Biomarkers of Disease
Raj B. Parekh, M.A., D.Phil.
Oxford GlycoSciences, 10 The Quadrant, Abingdon Science Park, Abingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 3YS, UK
Proteins secreted by diseased cells or tissues have long been considered central to the detection, differential
diagnosis, and assessment of disease. Approaches to discovering disease-specific proteins in human blood,
cerebrospinal fluid, and so forth have to date been constrained by (1) the predominance of albumin and IgG, (2) the
lack of reproducible methods for the high-resolution separation and detection of serum proteins, and (3) the lack of
analytical methods to characterize at the molecular level trace levels of disease-specific proteins. These limitations
have largely been overcome through technological advances in modern proteomics. These advances will be
described and exemplified with reference to Alzheimer's disease.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 195
Plenary Session 3
Opportunities for Developing
Biomarkers for CNS Disorders
Moderator: L.S. Brady, Ph.D., National Institute of Mental Health, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
196
Biomarkers for the Experimental Therapeutics of Huntington's Disease and Parkinson's Disease
Ira Shoulson, M.D.
University of Rochester, Suite 212, 1351 Mount Hope Avenue, Rochester, NY 14620, USA
The degenerative disorders of the mature nervous system (Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases)
produce major disability and early death, but no therapies have minimized neuronal cell death and thereby slowed
the progression of illness. Advances in experimental therapeutics have been hampered by a lack of biological
markers that might provide useful and meaningful surrogate endpoints in therapeutic trials. Huntington's disease
(HD) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by motor and mental deterioration resulting from selective
neuronal degeneration. HD is caused by a single gene mutation (4p16.3) produced by CAG trinucleotide repeats
within its coding region. CAG repeat expansions greater than 38 represent a highly predictive trait marker for
developing clinical features of HD. The greater the CAG repeat expansions, the earlier the onset of illness and
seemingly the more rapid its progression. Experimental treatments are being examined (NS 35284) in persons who
have manifest HD in an effort to slow clinical decline. Neuroimaging techniques, including magnetic resonance
spectroscopy of brain lactate concentrations, are being evaluated as potential biomarkers to assess the impact of
putative neuroprotective therapies. Volumetric MR and dopamine receptor positron emission tomography (PET)
imaging are also being assessed as potential biomarkers of clinical onset (phenoconversion) in healthy persons at
risk for HD for use in secondary prevention studies aimed at postponing the onset of illness. Parkinson's disease
(PD) is a disorder of unknown etiology involving progressive degeneration of the dopaminergic nigrostriatal
pathway and advancing motor and mental disability. Several trials have been undertaken to examine promising
interventions aimed at slowing clinical progression, but neuroprotective effects can only be inferred without
biomarkers. Cerebrospinal fluid markers of dopamine metabolism have not proven sufficiently sensitive as indices
of disease progression. However, single photon emission computerized tomography imaging of the dopamine
transporter and fluorodopa PET imaging of dopamine synthesis are promising neuroimaging techniques to assess the
integrity of presynaptic nigrostriatal neurons and the underlying progression of PD.
Key References:
Cerebrospinal fluid homovanillic acid in the DATATOP study on Parkinson's disease. Parkinson Study Group. Arch Neurol
1995;52(3):237-245.
Jenkins BG, Koroshetz WJ, Beal MF, Rosen BR. Evidence for impairment of energy metabolism in vivo in Huntington's disease
using localized 1H NMR spectroscopy. Neurology 1993;43(12):2689-2695.
Morrish PK, Sawle GV, Brooks DJ. An [18F]dopa-PET and clinical study of the rate of progression in Parkinson's disease. Brain
1996;119(Pt 2):585-891.
Seibyl JP, Marek KL, Quinlan D, Sheff K, Zoghbi S, Zea-Ponce Y, Baldwin RM, Fussell B, Smith EO, Charney DS, et al.
Decreased single-photon emission computed tomographic [123I]beta-CIT striatal uptake correlates with symptom severity
in Parkinson's disease. Ann Neurol 1995;38(4):589-598.
Shoulson I. DATATOP: A decade of neuroprotective inquiry. Parkinson Study Group. Deprenyl and tocopheral antioxidative
therapy of Parkinsonism. Ann Neurol 1998;44(3 Suppl 1):S160-166.
Shoulson I. Experimental therapeutics of neurodegenerative disorders: Unmet needs. Science 1998;282(5391):1072-1074.
Shoulson I, Kieburtz K (1997). In PR Ber and MF Beal (eds.). Neuroprotection: Fundamental and Clinical Aspects. (pp.457-
464). New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Imaging the Addicted Brain
Nora D. Volkow, M.D.
Medical Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Building 490, 30 Bell Avenue, Upton, NY 11973, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 197
Medical physics and synthetic chemistry research made it possible to develop nuclear medicine imaging devices
such as positron emission tomography (PET) and the appropriate radiotracers required for the investigation of
biochemical, pharmacological, and physiological processes in the living human brain (Volkow et al. 1997a). Using
PET, it has been possible to investigate the molecular targets of drugs of abuse (Volkow et al. 1994; Fowler et al.
1996) and their efficacy (Volkow et al. 1997b) and pharmacokinetics in the human brain (Volkow et al. 1995). PET
has also made it possible to assess changes in the brain of drug-addicted subjects and to link them to the behaviors
that characterize drug addiction (Volkow et al. 1997c, 1993). For example, PET studies have provided evidence that
addiction is a disease not only of reward processes but also of drive circuits (Volkow et al. 1996). PET has also
provided a tool to start to study the molecular mechanisms underlying the variability between subjects in response to
drugs and their relation to vulnerability to drug addiction (Volkow et al. 1995b). These studies have provided
preliminary evidence that variability in the brain dopamine system contributes to differences in drug-liking
responses among subjects. Finally, PET has been useful in the investigation of new treatments for drug addiction
and in the evaluation of the effects of these treatments on brain function and neurochemistry.
Key References:
Fowler JS, Volkow ND, Wang G-J, Pappas N, Logan J, Mac Gregor R, Alexoff D, Shea C, Wolf AP, Warner D, Zezulkova I,
Cilento R. Neuropharmacological actions of cigarette smoke: Brain MAO B inhibition. Nature 1996;379:733-738.
Volkow ND, Ding Y-S, Fowler JS, Wang G-J. Cocaine addiction: Hypothesis derived from imaging studies with PET. J Addict
Dis 1996;15:55-71.
Volkow ND, Ding Y-S, Fowler JS, Wang G-J, Logan J, Gatley SJ, Dewey SL, Ashby C, Lieberman J, Hitzemann R, Wolf AP. Is
methylphenidate like cocaine? Studies on their pharmacokinetics and distribution in human brain. Arch Gen Psychiatry
1995a;52:456-463.
Volkow ND, Rosen B, Farde L. Imaging the living human brain: Magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission
tomography. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997a;94:2787-2788.
Volkow ND, Wang G-J, Begleiter H, Hitzemann R, Pappas N, Burr G, Piscani K, Wong C, Fowler JS, Wolf AP. Regional brain
metabolic response to lorazepam in subjects at risk for alcoholism. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1995b;19:510-516.
Volkow ND, Wang G-J, Fischman MW, Foltin RW, Fowler JS, Abumrad NN, Vitkun S, Logan J, Gatley SJ, Pappas N,
Hitzemann R, Shea K. Relationship between subjective effects of cocaine and dopamine transporter occupancy. Nature
1997b;386:827-830.
Volkow ND, Wang G-J, Fowler JS, Logan J, Gatley SJ, Hitzemann R, Chen AD, Pappas N. Decreased striatal dopaminergic
responsiveness in detoxified cocaine-dependent subjects. Nature 1997c;386:830-833.
Volkow ND, Wang G-J, Fowler JS, Logan J, Schlyer D, Hitzemann R, Lieberman J, Angrist B, Pappas N, Mac Gregor R, Burr
G, Cooper T, Wolf AP. Imaging endogenous dopamine competition with [11C]raclopride in the human brain. Synapse
1994;16:255-262.
Volkow ND, Wang G-J, Hitzemann R, Fowler JS, Wolf AP, Pappas N, Biegon A, Dewey SL. Decreased cerebral response to
inhibitory neurotransmission in alcoholics. Am J Psychiatry 1993;150:417-422.
Cognitive Biomarkers and the Treatment of Schizophrenia
Barbara A. Cornblatt, Ph.D.
Division of Righ-Risk Studies, Psychiatry Research Hillside Hospital, 75-59 263rd Street, Glen Oaks, NY 11004,
USA
Research prospectively following youngsters at genetic high risk for schizophrenia (offspring or siblings of
affected individuals) has suggested that specific cognitive abnormalities are biomarkers of illness. Cognitive
biomarkers are stable information-processing deficits that can be reliably detected in childhood or adolescence and
that indicate a biological susceptibility to future schizophrenia. Thus far, the most promising cognitive biomarkers
include impaired attention, deficits in working memory, and eye-movement abnormalities. Findings across a number
of high-risk studies have indicated that impaired attention in particular is a biomarker of schizophrenia spectrum
disorders. Since attentional deficits predate the appearance of clinical symptoms by many years, they could be
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
198
critical for establishing preillness intervention programs. In addition, two independent lines of evidence increasingly
indicate the importance of cognitive biomarkers in general to treatment across all stages of schizophrenia. First,
cognitive marker deficits appear to be independent of psychotic symptoms and to predict long-term functional
outcome more effectively than immediate treatment response. Second, treatment with standard antipsychotics has
not been found to improve cognition; although preliminary evidence suggests that atypical antipsychotics do
enhance cognitive functioning to some extent, there is no indication that the newer medications normalize or
substantially improve cognitive marker deficits. It is concluded that these findings point to the need for developing
new treatments that will specifically target cognitive abnormalities and will be used along with antipsychotic
medications. The implications of such adjunctive treatment across all phases of schizophrenia will be discussed.
Key References:
Cornblatt B, Obuchowski M, Roberts S, Pollack S, Erlenmeyer-Kimling L. Cognitive and behavioral precursors of schizophrenia.
Dev Psychopathol, in press.
Cornblatt B, Obuchowski M, Schnur D, O-Brien JD. The Hillside Study of Risk and Early Detection in Schizophrenia: An
introduction. Brit J Psychiatry 1998;172:26-32.
Cornblatt BA, Obuchowski M. Update of high risk research: 1987-1997. Int Rev Psychiatry 1997;9:437-447.
Cornblatt BA, Obuchowski M, Andreasen A, Smith C (1998). High risk research in schizophrenia: New strategies, new designs.
In: M. Lenzenweger, R. Dworkin (eds.). Origins and Development of Schizophrenia: Advances in Experimental
Psychopathology. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
Cornblatt BA, Obuchowski M, Schnur DB, O'Brien JO. Attention and clinical symptoms in schizophrenia. Psychiatr Q
1997;58(4):343-359.
McGlashan TH. Early detection and intervention in schizophrenia: Research. Schizophr Bull 1996;22:327-346.
McGlashan TH, Johannessen JO. Early detection and intervention in schizophrenia: Rationale. Schizophr Bull 1996;22:201-222.
McGorry PD, Edwards J, Mihalopoulos C, et al. EPPIC: an evolving system of early detection and optimal management.
Schizophr Bull 1996;22:305-326.
Yung AR, McGorry PD. The prodromal phase of first-episode psychosis: past and current conceptualizations. Schizophr Bull
1996;22:353-370.
Genetic and Epidemiologic Basis for Developing Biomarkers of Complex Diseases
Kathleen R. Merikangas, Ph.D.
Public Health and Psychiatry Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University, 40 Temple Street,
Suite 7B, New Haven, CT 06510, USA
Complex human disorders are characterized by high population prevalence, lack of clear Mendelian patterns of
transmission, and an imprecise distinction between disease and nondisease status. The chief impediments to
identification of biologic markers for the major psychiatric disorders and many neurologic disorders are the lack of
diagnostic validity and etiologic heterogeneity. This presentation will discuss the importance of the concepts and
methods of genetic epidemiology in refining phenotypic definitions and in identifying the etiologic role of genetic
and environmental risk factors. The necessary preconditions for identification of genetic and biologic markers will
be reviewed. Strategies for resolving impediments and public health relevance of biomarkers in terms of prevention
and treatment will be discussed.
Key References:
Khoury MJ. Genetic epidemiology and the future of disease prevention and public health. Epidemiol Rev 1997;19:175-180.
Merikangas KR, Swendsen JD. Genetic epidemiology of psychiatric disorders. Epidemiol Rev 1997;19:144-155.
Risch N, Merikangas K. The future of genetics of complex diseases. Science 1996;273:1516-1517.
Merikangas KR, Swendsen JD. Genetic epidemiology of psychiatric disorders. Epidemiol Rev, 19: 144-155, 1997.
Risch N, Merikangas K. The future of genetics of complex diseases. Science. 273: 1516-1517, 1996.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 199
Plenary Session 4
Emerging Technologies:
Insight into Novel Biomarkers
Moderator: D.J. Lipman, M.D., Director, National Center for Biotechnology Information, National
Library of Medicine, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
200
cDNA Approaches to Analysis of Human Disease
James H. Eberwine, Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, 36th Street and Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Pathophysiology associated with disease encompasses dysregulation of many aspects of normal cellular biology.
Even in the simplest of diseases, where an individual protein may bear mutations that initiate a disease process, the
coordinated dysregulation of multiple downstream genes and proteins usually results in the disease phenotype.
Methods for analysis and comparison of the expression of multiple genes and proteins from normal and diseased
tissue are required to establish the set of genes that are coordinately regulated in the disease process. An added
complication of this analysis is that often individual diseased cells are mixed in a heterogeneous population of cell
types, making it difficult to analyze the diseased cells independently of other cells. A further complication in the
analysis of human disease is the limited amount of well-characterized human tissue for molecular analysis of disease
state. To address these issues, over the past several years, methods have been developed that allow the analysis of
complex messenger riboneucleic acid (mRNA) populations from discrete amounts of tissue, down to single cells and
subregions of single cells. In addition, these methods can be applied to fixed human tissue specimens, making it
possible to analyze the mRNA complement of pathological tissue samples. This presentation will highlight the
methods utilized for analysis of complex mRNA populations using schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease as
examples. The complications associated with the development of biomarkers from such data also will be discussed.
SAGE and Expression Technologies -- Potential Biomarker Applications
Gregory J. Riggins, M.D., Ph.D.
Duke University Medical Center, Box 3156, Durham, NC 27710, USA
Recent advances in the speed at which gene expression can be measured have yielded new opportunities to
address complex biological problems. As the technology progresses, it is important to consider the advantages and
disadvantages of each approach. Many labs are attempting to obtain large-scale gene expression data. To assist in
this endeavor, the Cancer Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP) has recently created a public database, SAGEmap
(Serial Analysis of Gene Expression), which provides quantitative expression data for cancer and corresponding
normal tissue (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SAGE/). SAGE [1,2] was chosen for one of several CGAP databases because
it provides a digital and quantitative representation of the entire transcript population. These data are easily
adaptable to statistical analysis and information sharing. Currently, 820,000 transcripts have been counted from 14
cancer tissues, cell lines, or normal tissue and deposited in SAGEmap. It is important that these data be easily
accessible. SAGEmap data not only are fully downloadable but also provide useful gene-mapping and statistical
software for analysis. We anticipate that the lessons and information provided by SAGEmap will have applications
for the detection and implementation of biomarkers in cancer. In some instances, it may be advantageous to use a
SAGE approach for the detection of biomarkers. In addition, the collaborative construction of a shared expression
database may have merits in clinical research for accelerating gene expression analysis.
Key References:
Velculescu VE, Zhang L, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Serial analysis of gene expression. Science 1995;270(5235):484-487.
Zhang L, Zhou W, Velculescu VE, Kern SE, Hruban RH, Hamilton SR, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Gene expression profiles in
normal and cancer cells. Science 1997;276(5316):1268-1272.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 201
Plenary Session 5
Immune and Inflammatory Markers
Moderator: A.S. Fauci, M.D., Director, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
202
Immune Memory and Protective Immunity
Rafi Ahmed, Ph.D.
Director Emory Vaccine Center, Professor Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School
of Medicine, Rollins Research Building, Room G211, 1510 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
Acute viral infections induce long-term humoral and cellular immunity. However, the nature of T- and B-cell
memory is different. Antiviral B-cell memory is usually manifested by continuous antibody production that lasts for
many years after infection or vaccination. In contrast, the effector phase of the T cell response is short-lived (a few
weeks), and memory in the T-cell compartment results from the presence of memory T cells, which are found at
higher frequencies and can respond faster and develop into effector cells (i.e., cytotoxic T lymphocyte or cytokine
producers) more efficiently than can naive T cells. The following aspects of immunological memory will be
discussed: (1) the importance of long-lived plasma cells in maintaining humoral immunity, (2) quantitative and
qualitative (T cell receptor usage) analysis of the primary antiviral CD8 T cell response and the relationship between
the CD8 T cells responding during the primary infection to the pool of memory CD8 T cells that survive after viral
clearance, (3) functional differences between naive and memory T cells, (4) the role of major histocompatibility
complex class I molecules in the maintenance of memory CD8 T cells, and (5) protective immunity by memory
CD8 T cells.
Key References:
Ahmed R, Gray D. Immunological memory and protective immunity: understanding their relation. Science 1996;272:54-60.
Jamieson BD, Ahmed R. T cell memory: Long-term persistence of virus specific cytotoxic T cells. J Exp Med 1989;169:1993-
2005.
Jamieson BD, Somasundaram T, Ahmed R. Abrogation of tolerance to a chronic viral infection. J Immunol 1991;147:3521-
3529.
Lau LL, Jamieson BD, Somasundaram T, Ahmed R. Cytotoxic T cell memory without antigen. Nature 1994;369:648-652.
Matloubian M, Concepcion RJ, Ahmed R. CD4+ T cells are required to sustain CD8+ cytotoxic T cell responses during chronic
viral infection. J Virol 1994;68:8056-8063.
Murali-Krishna K, Altman JD, Suresh M, Sourdive D, Zajac A, Miller J, Slansky J, Ahmed R. Counting antigen specific CD8 T
cells: A re-evaluation of bystander activation during viral infection. Immunity 1998;8:177-187.
Slifka MK, Antia R, Whitmire J, Ahmed R. Humoral immunity due to long-lived plasma cells. Immunity 1998;8:363-372.
Slifka MK, Matloubian M, Ahmed R. Bone marrow is a major site of long-term antibody production after acute viral infection. J
Virol 1995;69:1895-1902.
Sourdive DJD, Murali-Krishna K, Altman JD, Zajac AJ, Whitmire J, Pannetier C, Kourilsky P, Evavold B, Sette A, Ahmed R.
Conserved TCR repertoire in primary and memory CD8 T cell responses to an acute viral infection. J Exp Med
1998;188:71-82.
Zajac AJ, Blattman JN, Murali-Krishna K, Sourdive DJD, Suresh M, Altman JD, Ahmed R. Viral Immune evasion due to
persistence of activated T-cells without effector function. J Exp Med 1998;188:2205-2213.
Seeing Is Believing: Monitoring In Vivo Gene Expression by Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Thomas J. Meade, Ph.D.
Division of Biology and Beckman Institute, California Institute of Technology, MS 139-74 1200 East California
Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) offers a noninvasive means to map brain structure and function by sampling
the amount, flow, and environment of water protons in vivo. Such an intrinsic contrast can be augmented by the use
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 203
of paramagnetic contrast agents in both clinical and experimental settings; however, these agents are little more than
anatomical reporters that can at best label individual fluid compartments or distinguish tissues that are magnetically
similar but histologically distinct. To permit a more direct imaging of the physiological state of cells or organs, we
have prepared and tested several new classes of smart MRI contrast agents that change their influence on nearby
water protons in a conditional fashion. The agents modulate fast water exchange with the paramagnetic center,
yielding distinct strong and weak relaxivity states. The modulation is triggered by two types of biological events: (1)
enzymatic processing of the complex in which a galactose is the blocking group so that regions of higher intensity in
the MR images correlate with regions expressing galactosidase, a commonly employed marker gene, and (2) binding
of the intracelluar messenger, calcium. These agents represent the first examples of direct, three-dimensional (3-D)
visualization of gene expression and intracellular second messenger concentration in the form of a 3-D MR image.
Key References:
Li WH, Fraser SE, Meade TJ. J Am Chem Soc 1999;121:1414.
Moats RE, Fraser SE, Meade TJ. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 1997;36:726.
Gene Expression in Inflammatory Disease Using Multiple DNA Array Technologies
David H. Mack, Ph.D.
Genomics Research Eos Biotechnology Inc., 225A Gateway Boulevard, San Francisco, CA 94080-7019, USA
Complex human inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), involve an immune response gone
awry. To identify molecular markers and new drug targets in this disease, we have applied two DNA array
platforms, the Affymetrix GeneChipTM and Eos oligonucleotide arrays, in a fashion where each platform
complements the other. The biology of the disease is approached by using human samples, human primary cell
culture systems that attain pathological endpoints and mimic pathological features of RA, and mouse models of the
disease. Combining these biological components and array platforms with a novel gene expression bioinformatics
system has allowed a rigorous statistical analysis of the data and direct queries of the data that are consistent with
the understanding of the disease.
Challenges in Discovery of Useful Biomarkers
Gordon Ringold, Ph.D.
Affymax Research Institute, 4001 Miranda Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
Advances in genomics and combinatorial chemistry have presented a dramatically enhanced opportunity to
identify novel therapeutic agents for the treatment of important human diseases. Ironically, the rapid identification
of new chemical entities (NCEs) that interact with a plethora of targets identified through worldwide DNA
sequencing efforts poses an ever-increasing challenge in assessing the therapeutic potential of such molecules. Our
inability to model human disease accurately in animal species and the vagaries of human pathophysiology make
rapid and cost-effective clinical investigation of NCEs practically impossible. Development of new therapeutic
agents for chronic diseases in which the pathology takes months or years to materialize present particularly
imposing challenges. Since the relevance of a particular target (e.g. an enzyme or receptor) to a given disease is
often tenuous and since multiple NCEs can be readily identified per target, pharmaceutical companies are looking
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
204
for objective measures by which to select the "most appropriate" molecule to develop. The cost to reach a critical
decision point on compound selection or progression in multicenter clinical trials often may approach hundreds of
millions of dollars. Very expensive decisions are a hallmark of the pharmaceutical industry. Unfortunately, many
such decisions are based on best-guesses drawn from preliminary and incomplete data. Indeed, in many clinical
trials, selecting the appropriate patient population, the correct dose and dosing schedule, and most importantly,
obtaining early evidence of efficacy and adverse reactions remain formidable challenges. In very few cases, well-
defined surrogate markers have allowed for development of important therapeutic entities. Reduction of blood
pressure (surrogate for stroke prevention) and reduction of serum cholesterol (surrogate for atherosclerosis and
myocardial infarction) are perhaps the two best known. Broader and more general strategies must be employed to
discover useful surrogates or biological markers that can be used to diagnose disease, monitor disease progression,
and respond to therapy. New technologies that embrace large-scale "objective" measures of physiological status,
clinical symptomatology, and medical informatics will be needed to achieve the desired goals. An imperative exists
to standardize clinical records if we are ever to extract valuable information that will lead to identification of
surrogate markers from existing and future medical databases. The fundamental advances being derived from the
"new" genetics, combinatorial chemistry, and high-throughput screening cannot be exploited without new
breakthroughs that will dramatically improve our ability to conduct efficient and thoughtful clinical trials.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 205
Definitions and Conceptual Model
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints
* Overview
* Definitions
* Conceptual Model
* Biomarkers as Surrogate Endpoints: Possible Relationships
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
206
Overview
A review of the scientific literature reveals that there are many terms and meanings used when describing the
measurement of biological parameters and their substitution for clinical endpoints in clinical trials. In an effort to
develop an effective dialogue to discuss the topics presented in the conference, a working group on definitions1
was
organized. The working group developed terminology and a conceptual model that were recommended to serve as
the convention for discussion at this conference.
Definitions
Biomarker (Biological Marker) -- A characteristic that is measured and evaluated as an indicator of normal
biologic processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacologic responses to a therapeutic intervention.
Clinical Endpoint -- A characteristic or variable that measures how a patient feels, functions or survives.
Surrogate Endpoint -- A biomarker intended to substitute for a clinical endpoint.
Global Assessment -- Evaluation of risk and benefit balance for a patient or a group of patients.
Conceptual Model
A conceptual model was developed to demonstrate the potential interactions of biomarkers and surrogate
endpoints (Figure l). Biomarkers used in evaluating a therapeutic intervention may have utility in assessing safety or
efficacy. In fact, some biomarkers may have dual functions that assess efficacy for some interventions and safety for
others. A subset, represented by the quadrant of the biomarker sphere, may achieve the status of a surrogate
endpoint in a clinical trial. Surrogate endpoint status is evaluated by considering those factors that relate to the
ability of a biomarker to accurately substitute for a clinical endpoint. The evidence supporting the linkage of a
biomarker to a clinical endpoint may be derived from epidemiologic studies, clinical trials, in vitro analyses, animal
models, and simulated biological systems. Many biomarkers have been proposed as potential surrogate endpoints,
but relatively few are likely to achieve this status because of the complexity of disease mechanisms and the limited
capability of a single biomarker to reflect the collective impact of multiple therapeutic effects on ultimate outcome.
The evaluation of the risk and benefit balance of an intervention on a biomarker employed as a surrogate endpoint
for a patient or group of patients is referred to as the "global intervention assessment". Scenarios for the
relationships of biomarkers as surrogate endpoints are shown in Figure 2.
1
Definitions Working Group: Arthur Atkinson (NIH-Clinical Center); Wayne Colburn (MDS Harris); Victor De Gruttoia
(Harvard School of Public Health); David DeMets (University of Wisconsin, Madison); Gregory Downing (Office of Science
Policy, NIH); Daniel Hoth, John Oates (Vanderbilt University); Cari Peek (Georgetown University); Robert Schooley
(University of Colorado); Bert Spilker (Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America); Janet Woodcock (Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research, FDA); Scott Zeger (Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health).
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 207
Figure
1.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
208
Figure
2.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 209
Figure
2
(continued).
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
210
Biomarkers for Chronic Lung Diseases
Objectives
* Review current status of biomarkers for three chronic lung diseases -- asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), and pulmonary fibrosis
* Address current opportunities to evaluate genetic and physiologic (e.g., biochemical, imaging, and
quality of life) biomarkers for chronic lung diseases
* Identify potential genetic markers, markers of function, markers of therapeutic benefit, and promising
new technological advances that offer improved capacity to precisely and accurately assess response
to therapies
* Determine research needs for the development, evaluation, and validation of biomarkers for these
diseases
* Identify new research questions and scientific approaches to evaluate promising biomarkers and
advance preclinical research to clinical research
* Identify potential data registries or databases for retrospective analyses or meta-analyses of potential
biomarkers, intermediate endpoints, and surrogate endpoints
Moderator: S. Buist, M.D., University of Oregon Health Sciences Center, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 211
Biomarkers of Airway Inflammation in Asthma
William W. Busse, M.D.
University of Wisconsin, USA
Asthma is characterized by airway obstruction, hyperresponsiveness, and inflammation. It is proposed that airway
inflammation contributes significantly to the intensity of airway responsiveness, the propensity for airflow
obstruction -- and possibly airway injury and remodeling and the severity of the disease. Furthermore, there is
evidence that regulation of airway inflammation by anti-inflammatory medication is the principal form of successful
long-term therapy. Based on this information, biomarkers of airway inflammation become important as indicators of
the disease process and response to therapy. A number of processes are associated with the development of airway
inflammation, including cells (e.g., mast cells, lymphocytes, and eosinophils), inflammatory proteins (e.g., cytokines
and chemokines), and mediators (e.g., histamines, leukotrienes, kinins). A number of approaches have been used to
assess the inflammatory process in the airway of asthmatic subjects. These include the use of circulating cells and
their function, airspace fluid and cells (lavage and/or sputum), and mucosal biopsies. The discussion will focus on
the use of these approaches as surrogate markers to assess a key feature of asthma -- airway inflammation.
Key References:
Fahy JV, Kim KW, Liu J, Boushey HA. Respiratory pathophysiologic responses: Prominent neutrophilic inflammation in sputum
from subjects with asthma exacerbation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1995;95:843-852.
Fahy JV, Liu J, Wong H, Boushey HA. Cellular and biochemical analysis of induced sputum from asthmatic and from healthy
subjects. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;147:1126-1131.
Gibson PG, Woolley KL, Carty K, Murree-Allen K, Saltos N. Induced sputum eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) measurement in
asthma and chronic obstructive airway disease (COAD). Clin Exp Allergy 1998;28:1081-1088.
Jarjour NN, Calhoun WJ, Schwartz LB, Busse WW. Elevated bronchoalveolar lavage fluid histamine levels in allergic asthmatics
are associated with increased airway obstruction. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;144:83-87.
Mueller R, Chanez P, Campbell AM, Bousquet J, Heusser C, Bullock GR. Different cytokine patterns in bronchial biopsies in
asthma and chronic bronchitis. Respir Med 1996;90:79-85.
Sedgwick JB, Calhoun WJ, Gleich GJ. Kita H, Abrams JS, Schwartz LB, Volovitz B, Ben-Yaakov M, Busse, WW. Immediate
and late airway response of allergic rhinitis patients to segmental antigen challenge. Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;144:1274-
1281.
Shaver JR, Zangrilli JG, Cho S-K, Cirelli RA, Pollice, M, Hastie AT, Fish JE, Peters SP. Kinetics of the development and
recovery of the lung from IgE-mediated inflammation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;155:442-448.
Smith DL, DeShazo RD. Bronchoalveolar lavage in asthma: An update and perspective. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;148:523-532.
Taylor IK, Hill AA, Hayes M, Rhodes CG, O'Shaughnessy KM, O'Connor BJ, Jones HA, Hughes JMB, Jones T, Pride NB,
Fuller RW. Imaging allergen-involved airway inflammation in atopic asthma with [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose and positron
emission tomography. Lancet 1996;347:937-940.
Biomarkers in Asthma
Francis M. Cuss, M.D.
Schering-Plough Research Institute, Kenilworth, NJ 07033-0539, USA
It is helpful to consider the disease process of asthma in the simplified form illustrated in the figure. It is believed
that there is an underlying genetic susceptibility in asthmatic subjects that in conjunction with environmental
triggers leads to an immune-mediated inflammatory response. This inflammation leads to the symptoms and signs of
asthma and, it is postulated, pathological changes in the lungs (e.g., subbasement membrane fibrosis). Over the past
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
212
10 years, it has become accepted practice to treat asthma with anti-inflammatory medication (e.g., corticosteroids)
with the hope that suppression of inflammation will not only improve the signs and symptoms of asthma but also
prevent the pathological changes. The aim of new drug discovery is to target mechanisms in the
immunoinflammatory cascade that might modify the asthmatic process. These types of programs may lead to novel
biomarkers of disease activity, which may be shown to be surrogate endpoints during clinical development.
Positional cloning in asthma and differential gene expression studies of asthmatic tissue may also provide novel
biomarkers. Finally, genotypic analysis of asthmatic patients in clinical trials may reveal biomarkers of disease
susceptibility and severity and drug response. The measures of disease response most usually utilized in clinical
trials are lung function, symptoms, and beta-agonist use. Measurement of bronchial responsiveness to various
stimuli is the commonest surrogate for bronchial inflammation as such but has several limitations. Other direct
measures of bronchial inflammation such as bronchoalveolar lavage, bronchial biopsy, and induced sputum analysis
are used in research settings. Indirect measures such as exhaled nitric oxide or hydrogen peroxide and serum and
urinary eosinophil products are currently under assessment. Recently, asthma exacerbation has been used as an
endpoint in some clinical studies and is considered by some one of the best measurements of disease activity. The
rate of asthma exacerbations may reflect the intensity of asthmatic inflammation. It has the added advantage of
being an intuitive endpoint with obvious relevance to the therapeutic situation. Unfortunately, large numbers of
patients and a prolonged observation period are needed to provide discrimination between different groups. This
may be the endpoint against which a novel biomarker should be validated as a surrogate endpoint.
Discussion Points:
1. Discovery of novel biomarkers
* Where will they come from?
* Who should be finding them?
2. Choice of endpoints to represent different features of asthma
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 213
* What do present endpoints represent in terms of disease pathogenesis and prognosis, and how does
treatment affect them?
* Which endpoint represents disease-modifying activity?
* What could be done in analyzing present clinical data or generating new data to shed light on this?
3. Validation of biomarkers against appropriate clinical endpoints
* What surrogate endpoints currently exist?
* How have they been properly assessed?
* How could they be assessed?
* What represents a valid study?
* Who should assess them?
Biomarkers for Chronic Lung Diseases
Robert P. Schleimer, Ph.D.
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine at the Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, USA
Since the past century, the primary markers of asthma have included symptoms (e.g., reversible airflow
obstruction, airways hyperreactivity, excessive mucus production) and evidence of eosinophilic inflammation (e.g.,
elevations of eosinophils or their proteins in blood, bronchoalveolar lavage or sputum). In the past decade, there has
been an exhilarating expansion in the appreciation of molecular markers of allergic airways inflammation. The
elucidation of type 1 and 2 subsets of T cells, and predominance of type 2 cells in asthma, led to the use of their
specific products (IL-4 and IL-5) as markers. More recently, numerous cell surface markers can be used to
enumerate and characterize T cells (including IL-12 receptors, IFN receptors, an IL-1 receptor family member, and
distinctive subsets of chemokine receptors). Several transcription factors have been shown to be selectively
expressed in T cell subsets (e.g., GATA-3 and others). Progress has been made in distinguishing activated (primed)
eosinophils from resting cells. In addition to traditional markers, including buoyant density, survival, and staining
with the EG2 antibody, it is becoming clear that activated eosinophils express elevated levels of CD44, CD69, and
the chemokine receptor CCR3. Indeed, the presence of a variety of eosinophil-active chemokines (e.g., eotaxin-1
and -2, RANTES, MCP-4) has been established in allergic inflammation of the airways. Among markers of
endothelial activation, VCAM-1 has emerged as a marker, active participant in the response, and potential
therapeutic target. Exciting progress is being made in the description of polymorphisms of various candidate genes
that may be causally involved and genetically associated with allergic airways disease, including polymorphisms of
the IL-4 promoter, the Fc receptor, beta adrenergic receptors, and LTC4 synthase. In the case of the chemokine
network, polymorphisms have been identified that are associated with allergic disease and are expressed at different
frequencies in individuals of African or European descent. With the sequence of the human genome imminent and
the rapid growth in the awareness of functionally relevant gene and promoter polymorphisms, integration of
available information will become more important than ever before.
Assessing Biological Response In Vivo
Stephen I. Rennard, M.D.
University of Nebraska Medical Center, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
214
A variety of methods are available for assessing biological response in vivo. These include assessment of
symptoms, measurement of pulmonary physiology, and assessment of biological materials. Symptom assessment in
lung disease is advancing rapidly with the development of validated disease- and organ-specific instruments for
assessing a variety of domains (Mahler and Jones 1997). Physiologic assessment of lung function has been an active
area of investigation for nearly five decades. Recent advances in acquisition of biological materials relevant to
chronic lung disease promises to extend these means of assessing patients with pulmonary disorders. Relevant
materials can be obtained in exhaled air, through sputum obtained either spontaneously or following induction, and
by bronchoscopy, and measures relevant to pulmonary disease can be made both in peripheral blood and in urine
specimens. A number of gases in the exhaled breath reflect biological activities relevant to lung disease including
nitric oxide (Kharitonov et al. 1994) and carbon monoxide (Horvath et al. 1998), which may reflect inflammatory
status, and pentane (Wispe et al. 1985), which may reflect oxidant activity. Exhaled air also contains a large number
of other molecules that can be collected and quantified, including hydrogen peroxide and a variety of proteins
(Schneider et al. 1993). The lower respiratory tract can also be sampled by collection of sputum. The technique of
sputum induction permits collection of samples in a reproducible fashion even from normal individuals who do not
ordinarily produce sputum (Fahy et al. 1993). Because sputum contains both biochemical and cellular elements,
sputum analyses have permitted studies of intraluminal inflammation in airways disease. Bronchoscopy is an
invasive procedure but permits sampling of the lower respiratory tract with capabilities not available through
sputum. Specifically, the cells lining the airways can be recovered either by brushing or by biopsy. This permits
both functional studies using ex vivo cultures and histologic studies using a variety of histological methods.
Biopsies can also be taken from more distal regions of the lung with the technique of transbronchial biopsy (Wang
and Mehta 1995). Finally, the technique of bronchoalveolar lavage can sample the intraluminal contents not only of
the airways but also of the alveolar spaces (Linder and Rennard 1988). Materials relevant to lung disease can also be
recovered in the peripheral blood. In this regard, measures as simple as peripheral blood leukocytes can correlate
with smoking and risk for developing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Bridges et al. 1986). Such measures,
presumably, could serve as biomarkers. Finally, the urine contains metabolic end products relevant to chronic lung
disease. In this context, both leukotriene metabolites (Drazen et al. 1992) and elastin-specific crosslinks (Stone et al.
1995) have been quantified in urine and related to disease activity. In summary, a spectrum of methods are available
for assessing biological responses in vivo in humans relevant to chronic lung disease. Their application should help
advance both understanding the natural history of chronic lung disease and evaluating therapeutic interventions.
Key References:
Bridges RB, Wyatt RJ, Rehm SR. Effects of smoking on inflammatory mediators and their relationship to pulmonary
dysfunction. Eur J Respir Dis 1986;146:S145-S152.
Drazen JM, O'Brien J, Sparrow D, Weiss ST, Martins MA, Israel E, Fanta H. Recovery of leukotriene E4 from the urine of
patients with airway obstruction. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;146:104-108.
Fahy JV, Liu J, Wong H, Boushey HA. Cellular and biochemical analysis of induced sputum from asthmatic and from healthy
subjects. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;147:1126-1131.
Horvath I, Donnelly LE, Kiss A, Paredi P, Kharitonov SA, Barnes PJ. Raised levels of exhaled carbon monoxide are associated
with an increased expression of heme oxygenase-1 in airway macrophages in asthma: A new marker of oxidative stress.
Thorax 1998;53:668 672.
Kharitonov SA, Yates D, Robbins RA, Logan -S R, Shinebourne EA, Barnes PJ. Increased nitric oxide in exhaled air of
asthmatic patients. Lancet 1994;343:133-135.
Linder J, Rennard SI. Atlas of Bronchoalveolar Lavage. Chicago: American Society of Clinical Pathology Press, 1988.
Mahler DA, Jones PW. Measurement of dyspnea and quality of life in advanced lung disease. Clin Chest Med 1997;18(3):457
469.
Schneider L, Manke HG, Schwulera U, Inacker O, Hammerle H. Detection of nonvolatile macromolecules in breath. A possible
diagnostic tool? Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;148:778-784.
Stone PJ, Gottleib DJ, O'Connor GT, Ciccolella DE, Breuer R, Bryan Rhadfi J, Shaw HA, Franzblau C, Snider GL. Elastin and
collagen degradation products in urine of smokers with and without chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1995;151:952-959.
Wang KP, Mehta AC (eds.) Flexible Bronchoscopy. Cambridge: Blackwell Science, 1995; 370 pp.
Wispe JR, Bell EF, Roberts RJ. Assessment of lipid peroxidation in newborn infants and rabbits by measurements of expired
ethane and pentane: influence of parental lipid infusion. Pediatr Res 1985;19:374 379.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 215
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, Functional Markers, Computerized Tomography, and
Quality of Life
Robert A. Wise, M.D.
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) encompasses chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Chronic
bronchitis is defined by symptoms, whereas emphysema is defined by anatomical derangement. Both disorders lead
to airflow obstruction that impairs ventilatory capacity and gas exchange. Functional measures have relied on forced
expiratory spirometry, which is a standardized and reproducible test. Exercise capacity is imperfectly correlated with
spirometric indices. Other factors that may contribute to exercise capacity and disability include efficiency of
exercise, nutritional factors, psychological factors, and the tendency to dynamically trap air. Emphysema is detected
and quantified by computerized tomography of the lung; however, methods can take into account extent, severity,
and pattern of abnormality in different ways. The correlation of morphologic emphysema to survival, functional
status, progression of disease, and response to treatment are not well developed at present. Measures of disease-
specific quality of life (QOL) have been validated for COPD, but overlap with measures of dyspnea and symptoms.
Other important impacts of COPD on quality of life such as fear of dependency, social embarrassment, and poor
sleep quality are not well represented on current QOL instruments. Many intermediate outcome measures are
available for COPD, but there are still needs for standardization and validation.
Biomarkers in Fibrogenic Lung Disease
Ronald H. Goldstein, M.D.
Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, USA
Many conditions of both known and unknown etiology may produce excess connective tissue deposition in the
lungs. These disorders are variously known as interstitial pulmonary fibrosis or fibrosing alveolitis. These processes
may develop over a course measured in days, as in the adult respiratory syndrome (ARDS), or over a course
measured in years as in pneumoconiosis or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The accumulation of collagen disrupts
function, and there is evidence that inhibition of collagen deposition attenuates the physiologic disturbance.
Fibrosing lung diseases may have serious consequences. The onset of the fibroproliferative phase of ARDS heralds
a poor outcome. Interstitial lung fibrosis has a 5-year survival of less than 50 percent. Currently, there is no effective
antifibrotic therapy in use. The ability to evaluate new therapies would be greatly enhanced by a biomarker of
disease activity. Several potential biomarkers for fibrogenic activity have been identified. The potential usefulness
for each of these markers will be discussed.
Key References:
Crouch E. Pathobiology of pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Physiol 1990;259.
Shijubo N, Imai K, Aoki S, Hirasawa M, Sugawara H, Koba H, Tsujisaki M, Sugiyama T, Hinoda Y, Yachi A, Asakawa M,
Suzuki A. Circulating intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) antigen in sera of patients with idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis. Clin Exp Immunol 1992;89:58-62.
Stone PJ, Korn JH, North H, Lally EV, Miller LC, Tucker LB, Strongwater S, Snider GL, Franzblau C. Cross-linked elastin and
collagen degradation products in the urine of patients with scleroderma. Arthritis Rheum 1995;38:517-524.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
216
Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic
Methods in Biomarker Development
and Application
Objectives
* Demonstrate how PK/PD models that incorporate biomarkers and surrogate endpoints can be used to
accelerate drug development
* Address novel PK/PD modeling approaches involving biomarkers and surrogate endpoints
* Suggest that PK/PD models can assist in evaluating the biological plausibility of biomarkers
* Provide a forum for discussion on application of PK/PD principles to biomarkers and surrogate
endpoints
Moderators: C.C. Peck, M.D., Georgetown University Medical Center, USA
S.C. Piscitelli, Pharm.D., National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 217
Accelerating Drug Development Using the U.S. FDA's "Fast Track" and "Single Clinical Trial
Effectiveness Standard" Procedures: Roles of Biomarker and Surrogate Endpoint Data that Are
Analyzed Using Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Methods
Carl C. Peck, M.D.
Center for Drug Development Science, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington DC, USA
Enactment of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA) is the most
profound regulatory development in three decades. In particular, the "fast track" provision and statutory recognition
of the single clinical trial effectiveness standard provide powerful pathways for acceleration of drug development
and regulatory approval of new drugs. The fast track provision of FDAMA legislatively confirms the Accelerated
Approval Regulation within the Food and Drug Act and provides for FDA to facilitate development and expedite
review of new drugs that address unmet medical needs. Approval of new fast track drugs may result from showing
the efficacy of using a surrogate endpoint but is subject to postapproval validation of the surrogate endpoint or
confirmation of clinical benefit. Linking (modeling) drug doses and concentrations (pharmacokinetics) with
surrogate endpoint measurements (pharmacodyamics) can be used to strengthen the evidentiary basis supporting
regulatory approval. The single clinical trial effectiveness standard described in FDAMA (and accompanying
committee reports reflecting congressional intent) provides: "The Secretary [may] determine, based on relevant
science" that substantial evidence of effectiveness may consist of "one adequate and well controlled clinical
investigation and confirmatory evidence (obtained prior to or after such investigation)," where "confirmatory
evidence" comprises "scientifically sound data from any investigation in the NDA [New Drug Application] that
provides substantiation as to the safety and effectiveness of the new drug." Furthermore, "confirmatory evidence"
may "consist of earlier clinical trials, pharmacokinetic data, or other appropriate scientific studies." Additional
regulatory guidance concerning circumstances in which a single effectiveness trial, including a pharmacokinetic,
pharmacodynamic, or clinical endpoint trial, may be sufficient for regulatory approval can be found in a recently
published FDA guidance on evidence of effectiveness (FDA Guidance for Industry 1998). Although these two
provisions of FDAMA codify regulatory practices already utilized by FDA in a limited fashion through recent
regulations or discretionary practices, their statutory status provides a powerful incentive for expanded applications.
For those instances in which pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analyses of biomarker or surrogate endpoint
data are applicable, advanced pharmacometric methods already exist (e.g., clinical pharmacology and population
pharmacokinetic techniques, modeling and simulations of clinical trials, and pharmacogenetic techniques).
Nevertheless, widespread application of these provisions will be possible only after several barriers are overcome.
These barriers include (1) broad understanding and acceptance of the sometimes complex quantitative concepts and
methods utilizing kinetic techniques, (2) limited numbers of scientists who are trained to use such methods, and (3) a
paucity of validated surrogate endpoints and routine methods for advancing biomarkers to surrogate endpoint status.
Key References:
FDA Guidance for Industry. "Providing Clinical Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drugs and Biological Products". May
1998. FDA Web page: www.fda.gov
FDA Modernization Act of 1997. FDA Web page: www.fda.gov
Modeling Hepatitis C Viral Dynamics and Interferon Treatment
Alan S. Perelson, Ph.D.
Theoretical Biology & Biophysics Group, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
218
To better understand the dynamics of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) and the antiviral effect of interferon alpha-2b
(IFN-alpha), the viral decline in 23 patients during therapy was analyzed with a mathematical model. The analysis
suggests that the major initial effect of IFN-alpha is to block the production or release of virions from infected cells
in a dose-dependent manner. The analysis also allowed the estimation of the virion clearance rate from serum and
the half-life of infected cells. Fast-infected cell death rates, deduced over the first 14 days of treatment, were
predictive of the virus being undetectable by polymerase chain reaction after 3 months of therapy.
Key References:
Neumann AU, Lam NP, Dahari H, Gretch DR, Wiley TE, Layden TJ, Perelson AS. Hepatitis C viral dynamics in vivo and the
antiviral efficacy of interferon-alpha therapy. Science 1998;282:103-107.
Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Modeling and Simulation of Docetaxel Safety Endpoints
Rene Bruno, Ph.D. and C. Veyrat-Follet, Ph.D.
Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Pharmacometry Unit, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Antony, France
Population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) was prospectively integrated into the clinical
development of docetaxel to assess the PK profile in a large population of patients and investigate systemic
exposure as a prognostic factor for clinical outcome. PK was studied at first course in 24 phase II studies of
docetaxel monotherapy in various tumor types (640 patients) using 4 randomized, sparse-sampling schedules (full-
screen approach). Three covariates were found to be important for docetaxel CL (NONMEM analysis), including
liver function: 27-percent reduction of CL in patients with concomitant elevations of transaminases (T) 1.5 x ULN
and alkaline phosphatase (AP) 2.5 x ULN. In addition, CL was an independent predictor of the odds of grade 4 and
febrile neutropenia (logistic regression). A safety analysis conducted in a larger population confirmed that these
patients had a very poor safety profile compared with others. The safety profile of other patients was similar to that
typically observed for this class of drugs. The identification of this subpopulation of patients at risk was fully
accounted for to address safety concerns raised during the review of the dossier. The impact of these findings will be
explored using the simulation of clinical trial approach.
Key References:
Bruno R, Hille D, Riva A, Vivier N, ten Bokkel Huinnink WW, van Oosterom AT, Kaye SB, Verweij J, Fossella FV, Valero V,
Rigas JR, Seidman AD, Chevalier B, Fumoleau P, Burris HA, Ravdin PM, Sheiner LB. Population
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of docetaxel in phase II studies in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:187-
196.
Bruno R, Vivier N, Vergniol JC, De Phillips SL, Montay G, Sheiner LB. A population pharmacokinetic model for docetaxel
(Taxotere): Model building and validation. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 1996;24:153-172.
Veyrat-Follet C, Bruno R, Montay G, Rhodes GR. Application of clinical trial simulation in exploring the safety profile of
docetaxel (Taxotere) in cancer patients. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1999;65:198 (abstract).
Monoamine Oxidase Type B Case Study
Jerry M. Collins, Ph.D.
Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 4 Research Court, Room 314, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 219
The pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic arena poses a series of questions about new drugs in development. These
same questions also apply to the customized management of individual patients: Does the drug work at its target?
What is dose-response at the target? What is the duration of drug action? In most cases, obtaining answers to these
questions is slow, resource intensive, and generally problematic. Biomarkers (e.g., external imaging of radiolabeled
exogenous compounds) offer an alternative approach to rapid answers. Fowler and colleagues at the Brookhaven
National Laboratory have elegantly demonstrated the use of positron emission tomography in this context. They
applied 11C-labeled deprenyl as a phenotypic probe for monoamine oxidase, type B (MAO-B). This probe is
covalently bound to the enzyme. After a tracer dose is given, the patterns of radiodistribution that are imaged
externally correspond to variations in enzymatic activity. For lazabemide, an investigational agent for inhibiting
MAO-B, the initial human studies answered all three questions by demonstrating that (1) the enzyme was inhibited
in situ, (2) there was a clear dose-response curve for inhibition, and (3) the frequency of dosing to maintain
inhibition would be either once or twice a day. This type of study is far more common in neuropharmacology than
other therapeutic areas. The development of suitable probes for use as exogenous biomarkers in other disease types
could stimulate many more relevant PK/PD studies, with consequent benefits in drug development and
individualized patient treatment.
Key References:
Fowler JS, Volkow ND, Logan J, Schyler DJ, MacGregor RR, Wang GJ, Wolf AP, Pappas N, Alexoff D, Shea C, et al.
Monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) inhibitor therapy in Parkinson's disease: The degree and reversibility of human brain
MAO B inhibition by Ro 19 6327. Neurology 1993;43:1984-1992.
Fowler JS, Volkow ND, Logan J, Wang GJ, MacGregor RR, Schyler D, Wolf AP, Pappas N, Alexoff D, Shea C, et al. Slow
recovery of human brain MAO B after L-deprenyl (Selegeline) withdrawal. Synapse 1994;18:86-93.
Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Population Model Linking Cortisol Production with
Fluticasone Concentration
Elena V. Mishina, Ph.D.
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, FDA, USA
Fluticasone propionate (FP) is a novel corticosteroid with potent anti-inflammatory activity (receptor affinity is
18 times higher than for dexamethasone) and low systemic bioavailability. It has shown a significant therapeutic
efficacy in the treatment of asthma. The main adverse effect -- suppression of adrenal function -- has been assessed
by the measurement of plasma cortisol level. For the prediction of pharmacodynamic effect based on the dose of
drug, modeling is applied. Modeling of cortisol (CT) suppression has additional complexities due to nonstationary
secretion of cortisol (circadian rhythm) and downregulation effect. Previous models describe cortisol secretion as a
cosine function or as sum of linear functions. We applied a superposition of two Bateman functions to characterize
the pulsatile circadian rhythm of cortisol in plasma. CT and FP levels were measured over 24 hours in 12 healthy
subjects after inhalation of 0.5, 1, and 2 mg of FP and placebo. NONMEM was used to model
pharmacokinesis/pharmacodynamics. PK of FP was best characterized by a two-compartment model with first-order
absorption (CL/F 158.8 L/hr, V/F 2800 L, Ka 7.1 hr-1). CT plasma levels were described by two pulsatile Bateman
functions over 24 hours. The effect of FP was modeled using the Hill equation with inhibition of cortisol secretion.
Cortisol peaks were estimated to occur in pulses at 3:30 a.m. (large sharp) and 1:30 p.m. (small shallow) with an
amplitude ratio of 7:1. The IC50 of FP was 350 pcg/mL, which is consistent with predicted values for receptor
affinity. Cortisol suppression (adverse effect) will have negligible values at the therapeutic doses (50 mg).
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
220
Panel Discussion: Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Methods in Biomarker Development and
Application
Arthur J. Atkinson, Jr., M.D.
Warren G. Magnuson Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room 1C-227, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
Statistical attempts to validate biomarkers as putative surrogate endpoints are based on an assessment of the
extent of correlation between the biomarker and clinical outcome. Whether based on results from a single study or a
meta-analysis of several studies, the fundamental approach has been to estimate the proportion of the outcome
difference that can be explained by the effect of the treatment on the biomarker. However, it is axiomatic that
correlation is no proof of causation. Thus, a number of strategies have been employed in the attempt to distinguish
between "spurious correlations" and the "true correlation" expected in a causal relationship. Of central importance
to this discussion is the use of pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) models to evaluate the biological
plausibility of a putative biomarker by formally demonstrating appropriate quantitative relationships among drug
exposure, changes in a biomarker, and clinical outcome. In its most developed form, this analysis is carried out in
the context of a disease progression model. In addition, kinetic analysis can be used in conjunction with the
development and use of biomarkers (1) as an integral part of interpreting the raw data on which a biomarker is based
(e.g. the interpretation of PET scan data) or (2) as part of investigations of pathophysiology needed to support the
biological plausibility of a biomarker.
Value of Precise, Sensitive Measurements of Clinical Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Stephen A. Williams, M.D., Ph.D.
Pfizer Inc., USA
The pressure to make rapid, correct decisions in drug development is driven by prospects of a limited payback
period, so that every development day lost, or spent futilely developing something that is later unsuccessful, is often
worth $1 million. In this environment, precise measures of pharmacokinetics and innovative clinical measurements
of pharmacodynamics are valuable contributors to the speed and quality of decisionmaking. In early development,
the information they provide is used for proof of mechanistic concept and profiling the compounds' effects. In late
development, where primary endpoints are usually relatively conventional, novel measuring tools used as secondary
endpoints can improve the ability to differentiate compounds from their competitors or can more fully characterize a
potential strength or weakness of the product. For diseases where no drugs have been registered successfully, there
may be no existing method, or the sensitivity of the method may be in question (e.g., Alzheimer's neuroprotection,
osteoarthritis joint preservation). In these circumstances, and for unprecedented mechanistic approaches, there is no
alternative but to use a novel clinical measure. However, fully "validated" measurement tools do not just appear.
Their development, evolution, and implementation is a long and complex process that requires active management
and collaboration among stakeholders from academia, industry, and regulatory authorities. Doing this more
efficiently will lead to well-informed choices for physicians, better drugs, and reduced patient suffering.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 221
Neurosciences I
Neurodegenerative and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders
Objectives
* Define biomarker, intermediate endpoint, and surrogate endpoint
* Consider how to approach identification and validation of a biomarker or set of markers for complex
diseases in which the pathophysiology is unknown (markers of disease state, progression, severity,
diagnostic and epidemiological issues)
* Evaluate how to identify and validate predictive treatment response biomarkers
* Develop an understanding of:
! the advantages and disadvantages of including biomarkers in clinical trials
! the use of biomarkers to select patient subpopulations for clinical studies and clinical trials
! statistical and modeling issues for validating biomarkers and surrogate markers for use in clinical
studies and clinical trials
Moderators: L.S. Brady, Ph.D., National Institute of Mental Health, USA
I. Shoulson, M.D., University of Rochester, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
222
Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Multiple Sclerosis Revealing In Vivo Pathology
Donald W. Paty, M.D.
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
The technique of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has provided a window on the brain for the actual pathology
of multiple sclerosis (MS) to be visualized as it evolves in the living patient. Natural history studies of the activity of
new and otherwise active lesions have shown that MRI-detected pathological activity can be seen at a rate of 5 to 10
times the rate of clinical relapses. Systematic MRI monitoring has now been used to supplement the clinical
monitoring of clinical trials (Paty and McFarland 1998; Miller et al. 1996). Beginning in the 1980s, it was clear that
MRI could define MS lesions quite precisely in both the brain and spinal cord. Diagnostically abnormal scans can be
seen in more than 90 percent of patients with clinically definite MS (CDMS). In spite of the advances related to
MRI scanning, however, the final diagnosis of MS relies on clinical findings and clinical judgment. The use of MRI
after the age of 50 is more difficult because of the nonspecificity of white-matter lesions at that age. The correlation
between clinical findings and MRI findings are statistically significant but without a high correlation coefficient.
This lack of specific correlation is probably due to the fact that most of the lesions are not located in eloquent tracts.
In addition, the major use of MRI is in diagnosis, precisely because MRI reveals many neurologically assymtomatic
lesions. Also, the analysis of data from groups of patients has shown that MRI techniques can measure the evolving
pathology over time in both an accurate and objective way. MRI findings correlate modestly with neurological
findings. The best correlations have been with neuropsychological function. When natural history studies are done
using frequent systematic MRI scans, new lesions can be seen to appear and old stable lesions enlarge. In addition,
most active lesions enhance with gadolinium. The time scale of the evolution of active lesion changes is usually
about 4 weeks waxing and 8 weeks waning. Enhancement probably occurs as the first event in active lesions and
lasts on average about 4 weeks (1 to 8 weeks). Active lesions gradually reduce in size and degree of enhancement to
then remain stable for an extended period. This period of lesion stability probably reflects the stable residual
chronically demyelinated plaque. Some chronically active plaques gradually enlarge over time. New MRI
techniques such as magnetization transfer (MT) imaging (Dousset et al. 1994) and T2 relaxation (MacKay 1994)
analysis may help identify the degree of demyelination that has occurred in these stable lesions. In addition, MR
spectroscopy (MRS) may also identify the elements of active demyelination by the detection of neutral fat as a
degradation product of myelin. The final irreversible damage in the MS lesion is axonal loss (Trapp et al. 1998).
Axonal integrity can be measured by MRS techniques such as the height of the N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) peak
(Arnold et al. 1992). These new combinations of MRI investigative techniques are exciting for understanding the
evolution of MS pathology. A practical application of MRI monitoring in MS has been the adjudication of clinical
trials (Paty and Li 1993). Acute phase monitoring can be done by identifying active (new, enlarging, or enhancing)
lesions. One can then compare a placebo group with treated groups in a way similar to measuring the number of
clinical relapses in both placebo and treated groups. Repeated pretreatment scans prior to baseline can also give a
reasonable idea of the untreated MRI activity rates. Baseline activity also seems to predict on-study activity. Chronic
phase monitoring is done by measuring the total extent of the MRI detected MS pathological involvement in the
brain. This measurement of the MRI burden of disease (BOD) or lesion load can be considered the MRI equivalent
of the chronic neurological impairment measures such as the EDSS. Over the past 10 years, several studies have
shown that MRI activity and quantitative measures have predictable changes over time and are sensitive to treatment
effects. Four clinical trials with interferon beta show both a clinical effect on relapses or disability and an MRI effect
on both activity measures and chronic impairment measures (IFNB Multiple Sclerosis Study Group 1995; Jacobs et
al. 1996; PRISMS Study Group 1998; European Study Group 1998). In the future, the application MR techniques to
clinical trials will be enhanced by more specific measures of pathology such as MT, T2 relaxation analysis, and
MRS. It is the understanding of evolving pathology in vivo that is the most exciting aspect for MR in the future.
Key References:
Arnold DL, Matthews PM, Francis GS, Antel J. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging for metabolic characterization
of demyelinating plaques. Neurol 1992;31(3):235-241.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 223
Dousset V, Brochet B, Gaillou A, Mieze S, Lafont P, Caille JM. Longitudinal magnetization transfer study of MS lesions. 10th
Congress of the European Committee for Treatment and Research in Multiple Sclerosis. 1994;49.
European Study Group on Interferon alpha-1b in Secondary Progressive MS. Placebo-controlled multicentre randomised trial of
interferon beta-1b in treatment of secondary progressive multiple sclerosis. Lancet 1998;352:1491-1497.
IFNB Multiple Sclerosis Study Group and the University of British Columbia MS/MRI Analysis Group: Interferon beta-1b in the
treatment of multiple sclerosis: Final outcome of the randomized controlled trial. Neurol 1995;45:1277-1285.
Jacobs LD, Cookfair DL, Rudick RA, Herndon RM, Richert JR, Salazar AM, Fischer JS, Goodkin DE, Granger CV, Simon JH,
Alam JJ, Bartoszak DM, Bourdette DN, Braiman J, Brownscheidle CM, Coats ME, Cohan SL, Dougherty DS, Kinkel RP,
Mass MK, Munschauer FE 3rd, Priore RL, Pullicino PM, Scherokman BJ, Whitham RH, et al. Intramuscular interferon
beta-1a for disease progression in relapsing multiple sclerosis. The Multiple Sclerosis Collaborative Research Group. Ann
Neurol 1996;39:285-294.
MacKay A, Whittall K, Adler J, Li D, Paty D, Graeb D. In vivo visualization of myelin water in brain by magnetic resonance.
Magn Reson Med 1994;31:673-677.
Miller DH, Albert PS, Barkhof F, Francis G, Frank JA, Hodgkinson S, Lublin FD, Paty DW, Reingold SC, Simon J. Guidelines
for the use of magnetic resonance techniques in monitoring the treatment of multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1996;39:6-16.
Paty DW, Ebers GC. Contemporary Neurology Series: Vol. 50, Multiple Sclerosis. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis, 1997;ch.9.
Paty DW, Li DKB, UBC MS/MRI Study Group, and the IFNB Multiple Sclerosis Study Group. Interferon beta-1b is effective in
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. II. MRI analysis results of a multicenter randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Neurol 1993;43:662-667.
Paty DW, McFarland H. MR Techniques to monitor the long term evolution of MS pathology and to monitor definitive clinical
trials. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, in press.
PRISMS (Prevention of Relapses and Disability by Interferon beta-1a Subcutaneously in Multiple Sclerosis) Study Group.
Randomised double-blind placebo-controlled study of interferon beta-1a in relapsing/remitting multiple sclerosis. Lancet
1998;352:1498-1504.
Trapp B, Peterson J, Ransohoff RM, Rudick R, Mork S, Lars B. Axonal transection in the lesions of multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 1998;338:278-85.
Novel Brain Imaging Techniques and Drug Development in Schizophrenia
Marc Laruelle, M.D.
Columbia University, USA
Abnormalities of dopamine function in schizophrenia are suggested by the common antidopaminergic properties
of antipsychotic medications. However, direct evidence of a hyperdopaminergic state in schizophrenia has been
difficult to demonstrate given the difficulty of measuring dopamine transmission in the living human brain. Such
evidence has recently emerged from new brain imaging techniques. Three studies reported an increase in dopamine
transmission following acute amphetamine challenge in patients with schizophrenia compared with matched healthy
controls (Laruelle et al. 1996; Breier et al. 1997; Abi-Dargham et al. 1998), thus demonstrating a dysregulation of
dopamine in schizophrenia. The dysregulation of dopamine function revealed by the amphetamine challenge is
present at onset of illness and in patients never previously exposed to neuroleptic medications. However, this
dysregulation was observed in patients experiencing an episode of illness exacerbation but not in patients studied
during a remission phase. This finding has important consequences for the development of new treatment strategies
for both the exacerbation and remission phases of schizophrenia. To study modulation of this abnormal response by
drugs such as 5HT2A antagonists or metabotropic receptor agonists might be useful as proof of concept in drug
development. In addition, the recent availability of high-resolution positron emission tomography cameras might
document the possible mesolimbic selectivity of these alterations, providing further guidance to drug development.
Key References:
Abi-Dargham A, Gil R, Krystal J, Baldwin RM, Seibyl JP, Bowers M, van Dyck CH, Charney DS, Innis RB, Laruelle M.
Increased striatal dopamine transmission in schizophrenia: Confirmation in a second cohort. Am J Psychiatry
1998;155:761-767.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
224
Breier A, Su TP, Saunders R, Carson RE, Kolachana BS, de Bartolomeis A, Weinberger DR, Weisenfeld N, Malhotra AK,
Eckelman WC, Pickar D. Schizophrenia is associated with elevated amphetamine-induced synaptic dopamine
concentrations: Evidence from a novel positron emission tomography method. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:2569-
2574.
Laruelle M, Abi-Dargham A, van Dyck CH, Gil R, D'Souza CD, Erdos J, McCance E, Rosenblatt W, Fingado C, Zoghbi SS,
Baldwin RM, Seibyl JP, Krystal JH, Charney DS, Innis RB. Single photon emission computerized tomography imaging of
amphetamine-induced dopamine release in drug-free schizophrenic subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:9235-
9240.
Brain Stages of Alzheimer's Disease as Determined by In Vivo Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Mony de Leon, Ed.D., A. Convit, M. Bobinski, S. DeSanti
1
Neuroimaging Laboratory, New York University School of Medicine, NY NY, USA
2
Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg NY, USA
3
Institute for Basic Research, Staten Island NY, USA
We present the first evidence that structural in vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain over the
course of Alzheimer's disease (AD) supports a neuropathology/neuroanatomy staging model of sequential and
progressive regional involvement of the entorhinal cortex (EC), hippocampus, and neocortex (Braak et al. 1993;
Gomez-Isla et al. 1996; West et al. 1994; Bobinski et al. 1995). Currently, only reductions in the size of the
hippocampus are sufficiently characterized in vivo to be considered as an early (preclinical) diagnostic marker for
AD. Hippocampal atrophy is nearly always found in patients with AD, and it is relatively uncommon in normal
elderly persons (de Leon et al. 1997). Hippocampal atrophy is associated with memory deficits in normal subjects
(Golomb et al. 1994); in preclinical AD, it is anatomically specific (Convit et al. 1997) and predicts future AD (de
Leon et al. 1989, 1993). AD is marked by both hippocampal and neocortical atrophy (Convit et al. 1997). Recent
MRI data show that EC surface area measurements were superior to hippocampal volume in classifying very mild
AD patients and controls (Bobinski et al. 1999). In a 3-year longitudinal study of normal elderly persons, the
baseline EC uniquely predicted hippocampal volume reductions and was superior to hippocampal volume in
predicting memory decline. In summary, MRI data support a model where the EC is the first brain region affected in
the course of AD. Subsequent hippocampus atrophy is associated with significant memory impairments and predicts
future neocortical atrophy and dementia.
Key References:
Bobinski M, de Leon MJ, Convit A, De Santi S, Wegiel J, Tarshish CY, Saint-Louis LA, Wisniewski HH. MRI of entorhinal
cortex in mild Alzheimer's disease. Lancet 1999;353:38-40.
Bobinski M, Wegiel J, Wisniewski HM, Tarnawski M, Reisberg B, Mlodzik B, de Leon MJ, Miller DC. Atrophy of hippocampal
formation subdivisions correlates with stage and duration of Alzheimer's disease. Dementia 1995;6:205-210.
Braak H, Braak E, Bohl J. Staging of Alzheimer-related cortical destruction. Euro Neurol 1993;33:403-408.
Convit A, de Leon MJ, Tarshish C, De Santi S, Tsui W, Rusinek H, George AE. Specific hippocampal volume reductions in
individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Aging 1997;18:131-138.
de Leon MJ, George AE, Golomb J, Tarshish C, Convit A, Kluger A, De Santi S, McRae T, Ferris SH, Reisberg B, Ince C,
Rusinek H, Bobinski M, Quinn B, Miller DC, Wisniewski HM. Frequency of hippocampus atrophy in normal elderly and
Alzheimer's disease patients. Neurobiol Aging 1997;18:1-11.
de Leon MJ, George AE, Stylopoulos LA, Smith G, Miller DC. Early marker for Alzheimer's disease: The atrophic
hippocampus. Lancet 1989;2:672-673.
de Leon MJ, Golomb J, George AE, Convit A, Tarshish CY, McRae T, De Santi S, Smith G, Ferris SH, Noz M, Rusinek H. The
radiologic prediction of Alzheimer's disease: The atrophic hippocampal formation. Am J Neuroradiol 1993;14:897-906.
Golomb J, Kluger A, de Leon MJ, Ferris SH, Convit A, Mittelman MS, Cohen J, Rusinek H, De Santi S, George A. Hippocampal
formation size in normal human aging: A correlate of delayed secondary memory performance. Learn Mem 1994;1:45-54.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 225
Gomez-Isla T, Price JL, McKeel DW Jr., Morris JC, Growdon JH, Hyman BT. Profound loss of layer II entorhinal cortex
neurons occurs in very mild Alzheimer's disease. J Neurosci 1996;16:4491-4500.
West MJ, Coleman PD, Flood DG, Troncoso JC. Differences in the pattern of hippocampal neuronal loss in normal ageing and
Alzheimer's disease. Lancet 1994;344:769-772.
Biomarkers for Cerebrovascular Diseases
Justin A. Zivin, M.D., Ph.D.
University of California, San Diego, USA
The only proven acute stroke treatments act by improving blood flow to the ischemic brain region. Numerous
neuroprotective drugs are effective in animal models but have failed in clinical trials. Many of these failures are
because preclinical investigations optimize the conditions for treatment and often differ substantially from feasible
patient studies. Identification of critical treatment variables is essential, and the available clinical rating scales are
rather inefficient. Specifically, we would like to identify surrogate endpoints that can be used in phase II trials to
facilitate protocol designs for phase III studies. An important advantage of stroke investigations is that the cause of
the disorder is simply a mechanical disruption of blood supply. Therefore, it is possible to model the problem quite
well in animals. At present, no single abnormality has been identified that is responsible for irreversible ischemic
nervous system damage. Further understanding of the pathophysiology of ischemic injury is needed to develop valid
biomarkers. Until then, clinical investigation will depend on empiric methods. For this purpose, imaging methods
may provide usable surrogate endpoints for identifying salvageable tissue, but no such methods have yet been
proven useful.
Key References:
Choi DW. Ischemia-induced neuronal apoptosis. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1996;6(5):667-672.
Fisher M. Characterizing the target of acute stroke therapy. Stroke 1997;28:866-872.
Ginsberg MD. The validity of rodent brain-ischemia models is self-evident. Arch Neurol 1996;53:1065-1067.
Powers WJ, Zivin J. Magnetic resonance imaging in acute stroke: Not ready for prime time. Neurology 1998;50:842-843.
Zivin JA, Choi D. Stroke therapy. Sci Am 1991;265:56-63.
Zivin JA, Grotta JC. Animal stroke models: They are relevant to human disease. Stroke 1990;21:981-983.
Cognitive Markers of Alzheimer's Disease and Schizophrenia
Richard C. Mohs, Ph.D.
Mount Sinai School of Medicine/Bronx VA Medical Center, USA
Cognitive impairment is a defining feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Proposed treatments for AD must be
shown to improve cognitive function in a way that is clinically meaningful. Nearly all current clinical trials of
proposed treatments for AD use two outcome measures, a performance-based assessment of cognitive function and a
clinician's global evaluation of the patient's clinical condition. The most widely used cognitive assessment is the
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS). Data supporting the usefulness of the ADAS as a surrogate marker
include studies of its reliability, coverage of cognitive domains recognized as clinically important in AD,
correlations with functional impairment, and the scale's ability to measure longitudinal cognitive decline. Cognitive
impairment is also present in many patients with schizophrenia. Recent data indicate that cognitive impairment,
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
226
more that the severity of psychosis, is the major determinant of poor functional outcome in schizophrenic patients.
Recent clinical trials in schizophrenia include assessments of cognition along with measures of the severity of
positive and negative symptoms. Data necessary for the selection and interpretation of cognitive test results in
schizophrenia clinical trials are lacking or incomplete. Data suggest that a variety of cognitive functions, particularly
attention and verbal memory, are impaired in schizophrenic patients, that impairment may precede the onset of
psychosis, that impairment is not closely related to the severity of psychosis, and that cognitive impairments
gradually worsen throughout a patient's life.
Key References:
Davidson M, Harvey PD, Welsh KA, Powchik P, Putnam KM, Mohs RC. Cognitive functioning in late-life schizophrenia: A
comparison of elderly schizophrenic patients and patients with Alzheimer's disease. Am J Psychiatry 1996;153:1274-1279.
Harvey PD, Howanitz E, Parrella M, White L, Davidson M, Mohs RC, Hoblyn J, Davis KL. Symptoms, cognitive functioning,
and adaptive skills in geriatric patients with lifelong schizophrenia: A comparison across treatment sites. Am J Psychiatry,
1998;155:1080-1086.
Marin DB, Green CR, Schmeidler J, Harvey PD, Lawlor BA, Ryan T, Aryan M, Davis KL, Mohs RC. Noncognitive disturbances
in Alzheimer's disease: Frequency, longitudinal course and relationship to cognitive symptoms. J Am Geriatr Soc
1997;45:1331-1338.
Mohs RC. Assessing cognitive function in schizophrenics and patients with Alzheimer's disease. Schizophrenia Res
1995;17:115-121.
Mohs RC. Neuropsychological assessment of patients with Alzheimer's disease. In: Psychopharmacology: The Fourth
Generation of Progress. Bloom FE, Kupfer DJ (eds.) New York: Raven: 1995;1377-1388.
Rogers SL, Doody RS, Mohs RC, Friedhoff LT, Donepezil Study Group. Donepezil improves cognition and global function in
Alzheimer's disease: A 15-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:1021-1031.
Biochemical and Neuroendocrine Markers in Psychiatric Disorders
Stanley J. Watson, Jr., Ph.D., M.D.
Mental Health Research Institute, University of Michigan, USA
Biological markers for complex cognitive and affective behavioral states are difficult to envision. There are
relatively few biological indices of the subtleties of brain function. Among the most actively studied are those found
with sleep electroencephalograph, neuroendocrine, behavior, and genetics (neuroimaging is being presented
separately). Each of these four areas has produced some information useful for tracking patient status, response or
response potential, yet none is very powerful. Each brings novel data to the question -- sleep patterns, genetics of
drug metabolism, basal and stress responses via responses to social stressors. It is likely that integration of these
several markers will provide the best index of treatment response.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 227
Cardiovascular I
Acute Ischemic Coronary Syndromes
Background
The pathology of acute ischemia is typically related to plaque instability, thrombus formation, and
coronary flow obstruction resulting in myocardial damage. The intervention is targeted to restore patency,
whether through use of thrombolytic agents or direct revascularization. The relevant biomarker would be
related to a patency and/or perfusion assessment. Patency can be assessed directly by angiography or
indirectly by perfusion techniques.
Moderators: V. Dzau, M.D., Brigham and Women's Hospital, USA
J. Hochman, M.D., Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
228
Echocardiography in Acute Coronary Syndromes
Pamela S. Douglas, M.D.
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, USA
Cardiac echocardiography is an important part of the management of acute coronary syndromes, and much
research has gone into identifying prognostic features. Echocardiography is therefore a useful tool in risk
stratification, with high-quality research indicating excess mortality in patients with lower global left ventricular
function (ejection fraction), more extensive regional abnormalities, moderate or severe mitral valve regurgitation
and acute left ventricular dilation, and longer term remodeling. Unfortunately, such studies have wide confidence
intervals; few analyses have been done to determine the predictive power of these variables for cardiac events or
death; and no studies have yet demonstrated causal relationships between echocardiographic findings and
subsequent events. A promising echocardiographic tool, myocardial perfusion assessment by the use of intravenous
microbubble injection, is currently in development. Only one multicenter assessment of test performance has been
reported, indicating poor sensitivity for segmental perfusion defects (compared with single photon emission
computerized tomography sestamibi), with reasonable specificity. This technique is not yet sufficiently refined to
replace angiography in determining coronary patency.
Key References:
DeMaria AN, Cotter B, Ohmori K. Myocardial contrast echocardiography: Too much, too soon? (editorial) J Am Coll Cardiol
1998;32(5):1270-1271.
Lehmann KG, Francis CK, Dodge HT. Mitral regurgitation in early myocardial infarction. Incidence, clinical detection, and
prognostic implications. TIMI Study Group. Ann Intern Med 1992;117(1):10-17.
Marwick TH, Brunken R, Meland N, Brochet E, Baer FM, Binder T, Flachskampf F, Kamp O, Nienaber C, Nihoyannopoulos P,
Pierard L, Vanoverschelde JL, van der Wouw P, Lindvall K. Accuracy and feasibility of contrast echocardiography for
detection of perfusion defects in routine practice: Comparison with wall motion and technetium-99m sestamibi single-
photon emission computed tomography. The Nycomed NC100100 Investigators. J Am Coll Cardiol 1998;32(5):1260-
1269.
Popovic AD, Neskovic AN, Marinkovic J, Thomas JD. Acute and long-term effects of thrombolysis after anterior wall acute
myocardial infarction with serial assessment of infarct expansion and late ventricular remodeling. Am J Cardiol
1996;77(7):446-450.
St. John Sutton M, Pfeffer MA, Plappert T, Rouleau JL, Moye LA, Dagenais GR, Lamas GA, Klein M, Sussex B, Goldman S, et
al. Quantitative two-dimensional echocardiographic measurements are major predictors of adverse cardiovascular events
after acute myocardial infarction. The protective effects of captopril. Circulation 1994;89(1):68-75.
Volpi A, De Vita C, Franzosi MG, Geraci E, Maggioni AP, Mauri F, Negri E, Santoro E, Tavazzi L, Tognoni G. Determinants of
6-month mortality in survivors of myocardial infarction after thrombolysis. Results of the GISSI-2 data base. The Ad hoc
Working Group of the Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza nell'Infarto Miocardico (GISSI)-2 Data Base.
Circulation 1993;88(2):416-429.
Cardiovascular II: Stable Coronary Syndromes
Gerald M. Pohost, M.D.
University of Alabama, School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA
There are a multitude of biomarkers useful for detection of stable cardiovascular diseases, including ultrasound
methods, x-ray approaches, radionuclide methods, and magnetic resonance (MR) strategies. The usefulness of these
methods for two of the most common cardiological problems, ischemic heart disease and valvular heart disease, is
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 229
described below. In ischemic heart disease, certain biomarkers are useful for detection and for prognostication.
Ultrasonic methods used clinically can be divided into transthoracic and transesophageal approaches.
Ultrasonography is the most widely used of the imaging biomarkers and it is used to evaluate morphologic
alterations that occur as a consequence of myocardial damage such as left ventricular aneurysm, ventricular septal
defect, and so forth. Ultrasonography is also used to assess left ventricular function both at rest and during infusion
of a myocardial stimulant such as dobutamine. Ventricular function at rest correlates well with prognosis, while
function under the influence can evaluate viability of poorly contractile segments of heart muscle. X-ray methods
have largely revolved around the use of electron beam-computed tomography. The level of calcium in the coronaries
is thought to be a means of screening for important coronary artery disease (CAD). It is also possible to assess the
patency of coronary artery bypass grafts. Radionuclide methods are useful for detecting the extent of CAD using
myocardial perfusion imaging with thallium-201 of a technetium-based tracer. Radionuclides provide the optimal
approach for detecting and prognosticating in CAD. Finally, MR methods include imaging to assess morphology,
evaluate ventricular function, assess myocardial perfusion, and determine the patency of arterial vasculature and
ultimately the composition of arterial plaque. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic methods are being applied
in a research mode to assess viability and other metabolic characteristics of myocardium. Finally, these techniques,
by monitoring changes in ventricular function and metabolism, should provide insight into the optimal timing for
valve repair or replacement so that myocardial function would be preserved in the postoperative state. Imaging
approaches provide a means to comprehensively detect and prognosticate in cardiovascular disease states by
providing a number of biomarkers for myocardial function, perfusion, morphology, arterial patency, arterial wall
composition, and myocardial metabolism.
Key References:
Pohost GM, O'Rourke RA (eds.). Principles and Practice of Cardiovascular Imaging (1991). Little Brown and Company: Boston.
Skorton DJ, Schelbert HR, Wolf GL, Brundage BH (eds.) Marcus Cardiac Imaging (1996). WB Saunders Company:
Philadelphia.
Electron Beam-Computed Tomography
Nathaniel Reichek, M.D.
Allegheny General Hospital, MCP/Hahnemann School of Medicine, USA
Electron beam-computed tomography (EBCT) is a highly effective method for detection of calcific coronary
atherosclerosis. Thus, the EBCT calcium score is a very useful marker of the extent of coronary atherosclerosis,
particularly for studies of clinical epidemiology. Stratification of a population by calcium score correlates well
overall with likelihood of coronary stenoses and prevalence of coronary events. In populations with chest pain, those
with normal EBCT calcium scores have a much lower likelihood of coronary stenoses than those with high calcium
scores. Effective treatment of hyperlipidemia can be associated with a reduction in calcium score. However, the
calcium score also has many important limitations that limit use as a biomarker for coronary atherosclerosis at the
present time. The variability of calcium score on repeat EBCT is excessively high. Age-dependent increases in score
complicate interpretation. The method may not identify patients with early disease and potentially hazardous
vulnerable plaques. A high calcium score is sensitive but nonspecific as a marker for coronary stenoses. Although
scores may change with lipid-lowering treatment or increase over time as part of the natural history of coronary
atherosclerosis, there is no evidence that such changes correlate with changes in the actual extent of atherosclerosis
or risk of clinical events.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
230
Key References:
Baumgart D, Schmermund A, Goerge G, Haude M, GeJ, Adamzik M, Sehnert C, Altmaier K, Groenmeyer D, Seibel R, Erbel R.
Comparison of electron beam computed tomography with intracoronary ultrasound and coronary angiography for detection
of coronary atherosclerosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;30:57-64.
Budoff MJ, Georgiou D, Brody A, Agatston AS, Kennedy J, Wolfkiel C, Stanford W, Shields P, Lewis RJ, Janowitz WR, Rich S,
Brundage BH. Ultrafast computed tomography as a diagnostic modality in the detection of coronary artery disease: A
multicenter study. Circulation 1996;93:898-904.
Callister TQ, Cooil B, Raya SP, Lippolis NJ, Russo DJ, Raggi P. Coronary artery disease: Improved reproducibility of calcium
scoring with an electron-beam CT volumetric method. Radiology 1998;208:807-814.
Callister TQ, Raggi P, Cooil B, Lippolis NJ, Russo DJ. Effect of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors on coronary artery disease as
assessed by electron-beam computed tomography. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1972-1978.
Detrano R, Hsiai T, Wang S, Puentes G, Fallavollita J, Shields P, Stanford W, Wolfkiel C, Georgiu D, Budoff M, Reed J.
Prognostic value of coronary calcification and angiographic stenoses in patients undergoing coronary angiography. J Am
Coll Cardiol 1996;27:285-290.
Devries S, Wolfkiel C, Fusman B, Bakdash H, Ahmed A, Levy P, Chomka E, Kondos G, Zajac E, Rich S. Influence of age and
gender on the presence of coronary calcium detected by ultrafast computed tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol 1995;25:76-82.
Rumberger JA, Behrenbeck T, Breen JF, Sheedy PF. Coronary calcification by electron beam computed tomography and
obstructive coronary artery disease: A model for costs and effectiveness of diagnosis as compared with conventional
cardiac testing methods. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999;33:453-462.
Wexler L, Brundage B, crouse J, Detrano R, Fuster V, Maddahi J, Rumberger J, Stanford W, White R,Taubert K. Coronary
artery calcification: Pathophysiology, epidemiology, imaging methods and clinical implications. A statement for health
professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation 1996;94:1175-1192.
Acute Ischemic Coronary Syndromes: Electrocardiogram
Bernard R. Chaitman, M.D. and Allan S. Jaffe, M.D.
St. Louis University School of Medicine, State University of New York (SUNY), USA
In clinical trials, sample size can be reduced by identifying high-risk patient subsets at entry. The magnitude of
risk can be related to clinical characteristics and the extent of electrocardiographic (ECG) abnormalities. Novel lead
configurations, more frequent ECG acquisition, and use of selected coding criteria have the potential to further
enhance identification. Definitions of Q or non-Q wave myocardial infarction vary considerably in trials of acute
coronary syndrome (ACS). Cardiac serum markers (i.e., serial CK-MB and cardiac troponins) identify the presence
of myocyte injury. Appropriate cutpoints for the definition of myocardial infarction have become problematic of late
with the advent of more sensitive markers, especially in patients with heart failure and hypertension and those after
interventional and cardiac surgical procedures. Sampling frequency, the type of assay used, missing samples, and
determination of myocardial infarction represent challenges to clinical trial design. Estimates of myocardial
infarction size have been considered as a surrogate endpoint for mortality, enhancing the specificity of this
composite endpoint, but have become more problematic in the area of recanalization. Myocardial infarction
definitions in clinical trials of ACS will undoubtedly represent tradeoffs between sensitivity versus specificity.
Standardized definitions should be used for reporting purposes and comparability among studies.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 231
Transplantation I
Physiologic, Histologic, and
Pharmacologic Markers
of Graft Function
Background
Graft survival for all solid organ transplantation procedures is restricted by acute and chronic rejections.
The solution to this problem is induction of a state of donor-specific tolerance in the patient so rejections
will not occur. Current methods of diagnosing allograft dysfunction are inadequate in that significant
organ damage occurs prior to the establishment of a clinical diagnosis. Clinical tolerance remains an
elusive goal despite success in animal models. One of the main hurdles in developing tolerance strategies
is the lack of a clinical biomarker or a "tolerance assay". The development of assays or novel
technologies that will enable detection of allograft dysfunction/rejection, monitor responses to therapy,
and predict long-term outcomes is vital for the success of transplantation clinical trials.
Objectives
* Assess graft dysfunction for renal, hepatic, and cardiac allografts by histological criteria and identify
newer methods to quantitatively assess the degree of dysfunction
* Define physiological and pharmacological criteria for graft dysfunction and validate the techniques
* Identify areas in need of further diagnostic tool refinement
Moderators: A. Tejani, M.D., New York Medical College, USA
J. Neylan, M.D., Emory University Hospital, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
232
Physiologic, Histologic, and Pharmacologic Markers of Graft Function
M. Roy First, M.D.
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, USA
Kidney transplantation outcomes have improved progressively over the past three decades. However, despite a
large body of literature produced during this period, few reports indicate agreement on the clinical presentation of
acute rejection, the treatment of acute rejection, the response of acute rejection to therapy, and the correlations
between the pathologic findings and the clinical presentation and response to treatment. In the precyclosporine era, a
number of clinical parameters associated with a diagnosis of acute rejection were described. However, after the
introduction of cyclosporine, these became less obvious in the patient experiencing an acute rejection episode.
Measurement of serum creatinine has been the most significant biochemical marker of acute rejection, but
considerable tissue damage may occur prior to the serum creatinine becoming elevated. A search for a more reliable
biochemical marker of graft dysfunction remains elusive, and histologic assessment of the allograft has therefore
become the gold standard for the diagnosis of acute rejection. The Banff classification of acute rejection grades the
process according to histologic severity. A strong correlation has been shown between the histologic severity and
clinical and biochemical parameters and provides a reliable means for stratifying patient risk of treatment success or
failure. By using the pathologic findings in conjunction with other markers of acute rejection, the clinician should be
able to make the decision on treatment so as to offer the patient the maximum benefit of judicious antirejection
therapy, while avoiding unnecessary overimmunosuppression in the absence of data supporting the benefit of such
therapy to an individual patient.
Key References:
Al-Awwa IA, Hariharan S, First MR. Importance of allograft biopsy in renal transplant recipients: Correlation between clinical
and histologic diagnosis. Am J Kidney Dis 1998;31(suppl 1):S15-S18.
Gaber LW, Moore LW, Gaber AO, First MR, Guttmann RD, Pouletty P, Schroeder TJ, Soulillou JP. Utility of standardized
histological classification in the management of acute rejection. 1995 Efficacy Endpoints Conference. Transplantation
1998;64:376-380.
Guttmann RD, Soulillou JP. Definitions of acute rejection and controlled clinical trials in the medical literature. Am J Kidney Dis
1998;31(suppl 1):S3-S6.
Guttman RD, Soulillou JP, Moore LW, First MR, Gaber AO, Pouletty P, Schroeder TJ. Proposed consensus for definitions and
endpoints for clinical trials of acute kidney transplant rejection. Am J Kidney Dis 1998;31(suppl 1):S40-S46.
Solez K, Axelsen RA, Benediktsson H, Burdick JF, Cohen AH, Colvin RB, Croker BP, Droz D, Dunnill MS, Halloran PF, et al.
International standardization of criteria for the histologic diagnosis of renal allograft rejection: The Banff working
classification of kidney transplant pathology. Kidney Int 1993;44:411-422.
Use of Surrogate Endpoints in Cardiac Transplantation Abstract
Leslie W. Miller, M.D.
University of Minnesota, USA
Acute cellular rejection and chronic allograft rejection (allograft coronary disease) are the two primary endpoints
in most trials in heart transplantation. Unlike renal transplantation, there this no biochemical marker to suggest or
define rejection, and therefore, endomyocardial biopsy has remained the gold standard for diagnosis of rejection in
heart transplantation for the past 25 years. However, there is limited evidence to suggest that the incidence,
frequency, severity, or time to rejection have a good correlation with graft function, survival, or development of
chronic rejection. Perhaps the most definitive study regarding the correlation between acute and chronic rejection
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 233
was with the use of intravascular ultrasound to measure direct intimal thickening within the allograft vessel as the
marker of chronic rejection. Only the average biopsy score in the first 3 months posttransplant had any correlation
with development of intimal thickening using the current grading system to define acute cellular rejection. Function
of the graft (ejection fraction) can be readily measured, but patients who demonstrate evidence of severe graft
dysfunction or hemodynamic compromise have a 40 to 50 percent mortality at 1 year. Therefore, all heart transplant
recipients are biopsied on a predetermined protocol basis in hopes of detecting rejection before graft dysfunction
develops. Data from protocol kidney biopsies, which were not driven by change in function, have confirmed a
significant "trafficking" of lymphocytes and inflammatory cells that when left untreated often resolve entirely and
were never associated with the change in function. These data suggest that many of the biopsies interpreted as
showing histologic rejection in heart transplantation may represent a potentially innocent immunological response.
This phenomenon is one of the main reasons for the lack of correlation of acute rejection with chronic rejection and
the problem with the use of biopsy-proven rejection as a primary endpoint in heart transplant trials. A number of
noninvasive or surrogate markers have been examined in heart transplantation, including (1) echocardiography to
define alterations in dystocic compliance that may precede overt systolic dysfunction; (2) measurement of voltage
from endocardial electrodes; and (3) markers of immune activation, including originally simple T-cell subsets, but
more recently both surface and soluble interleukin-2 receptor. Other approaches have included examination of
proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor and IL-6, as well as adhesion molecules ICAM and
VCAM. The most important advance in use of biologic markers as endpoints for defining chronic allograft rejection
in heart transplant recipients is the use of intervascular ultrasound. This new technology allows direct examination
and measurement of the amount of intimal thickening within the allograft vessels. This safe and highly reproducible
technology has now become the most definitive surrogate for chronic rejection in any vascularized allograft. The
major deficiency in the field of transplantation is the lack of a bioassay of the level of immunosuppression. One
recent approach is the use of a cell line expressing donor antigens to which a mixed lymphocyte culture can be
performed at any time following transplantation to assess the degree of donor specific alloreactivity. This test not
only provides a relative quantitation of low, medium, or high reactivity but also can be used as a target for
increasing or decreasing immunosuppression.
Key References:
Addonizio L. Detection of cardiac allograft rejection using radionuclide techniques. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1990;33(2):73-83.
Carlos T, Gordon D, Fishbein D, Himes V, Coday A, Ross R, Allen M. Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 is induced on
endothelium during acute rejection in human cardiac allografts. J Heart Lung Transplant 1992;11:1103-1109.
Costanzo-Nordin MR. Cardiac allograft vasculopathy: Relationship with acute cellular rejection and histocompatibility. J Heart
Lung Transplant 1992;11(suppl):S90-103.
Griffiths G, Namikawa R, Mueller C, Liu C, Young J, Billingham M, Weissman I. Granzyme A and perforin as markers for
rejection in cardiac transplantation. Eur J Immunol 1992;21:687-692.
Hauptman P, Nakagawa T, Tanaka H, Libby P. Acute rejection: Culprit or coincidence in the pathogenesis of cardiac graft
vascular disease? J Heart Lung Transplant 1995;14:S173-S180.
Hosenpud J. Noninvasive diagnosis of cardiac allograft rejection: Another of many searches for the grail. Circulation
1992;85(1):368-371.
Kobashigawa J, Miller L, Yeung A, Hauptman P, Ventura H, Wilensky R, Valantine H, Wiedermann J, and the Sandoz/CVIS
Investigators. Does acute rejection correlate with the development of transplant coronary artery disease? A multicenter
study using intravascular ultrasound. J Heart Lung Transplant 1995;14:S221-226.
Schuetz A, Fritsch S, Kemkes B, Kugler C, Angermann C, Spes C, Anthuber M, Weiler A, Wenke K, Gokel J. Antimyosin
monoclonal antibodies for early detection of cardiac allograft rejection. J Heart Transplant 1990;9:654-661.
Valantine H, Fowler M, Hunt S, Naasz C, Hatle L, Billingham M, Stinson E, Popp R. Changes in Doppler echocardiographic
indexes of left ventricular function as potential markers of acute cardiac rejection. Circulation 1987;76(suppl V):V-86.
Warnecke H, Schuler S, Goetze H, Matheis G, Suthoff U, Muller J, Tietze U, Hetzer R. Noninvasive monitoring of cardiac
allograft rejection by intramyocardial electrogram recordings. Circulation 1986;74(suppl III):III-72.
Young J, Windsor N, Smart F, Kleiman N, Weilbaecher D, Noon G, Nelson D, Lawrence E. Inability of isolated soluble
interleukin-2 receptor levels to predict biopsy rejection scores after heart transplantation. Transplantation 1991;51(3):636-
641.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
234
Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Surrogates in Transplantation
Barry D. Kahan, Ph.D., M.D.
The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Division of Immunology and Organ Transplantation, USA
The advent of a variety of novel immunosuppressive agents has led to a need to understand their
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics when either used alone or in drug combinations. Initial data that the
pharmacokinetic behavior of an immunosuppressive drug is important to predict outcome were first obtained with
cyclosporine (CsA) (Kahan et al. 1982, 1983, 1984). Almost 20 years of investigation have shown that concentration
rather than dose determines outcome: A low drug exposure represents a risk factor for acute rejection episodes
(Lindholm and Kahan 1993) and a variable exposure, a risk factor for chronic rejection (Kahan et al. 1996). Parallel
considerations may be important for the dosing of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and possibly sirolimus
(Napoli and Kahan 1996). Pharmacodynamic assays to quantitate drug effects on transplant recipient lymphoid cells
have been limited due to the rapid reversibility of the effects, general insensitivity of the assays, and the difficulty to
assay cells ex vivo without altering their pathophysiologic state. The largest effort has been reported with CsA
estimating IL-2 m-RNA content by Southern blots with specific probes (Yoshimura et al. 1987), measuring cytokine
production by patient lymphocytes (Yoshimura and Kahan 1985), and most recently by in vitro calcineurin assays
(Batiuk et al. 1995). Using the median effect equation to obtain a rigorous model of drug action, one can evaluate
the immunosuppressive as well as toxic interactions between two agents as more than additive (synergistic),
additive, or less than additive (antagonistic) (Kahan 1985). Due to the possibility of interactions of CsA and
sirolimus at the tissue level -- namely, pharmacokinetic interactions at cytochrome P450 3A4 (Stepkowski et al.
1996) or pharmacodynamic interactions at the level of low-density lipoprotein generation and metabolism -- we
have recently developed new mathematical models that describe combined pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
effects.
Key References:
Batiuk TD, Pazderka F, Enns J, Decastro L, Halloran PF. Cyclosporine inhibition of calcineurin activity in human leukocytes in
vivo is rapidly reversible. J Clin Invest 1995;96:1254-1260.
Kahan BD. Immunologic monitoring: Utility and limitations. Transplant Proc 1985;17:1537-1545.
Kahan BD, Ried M, Newburger J. Pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine in human renal transplantation. Transplant Proc
1983;15:446-453.
Kahan BD, Van Buren CT, Lin SN, Ono Y, Agostino G, LeGrue SJ, Boileau M, Payne WD, Kerman RH.
Immunopharmacological monitoring of cyclosporin A-treated recipients of cadaveric kidney allografts. Transplantation
1982;34:36-45.
Kahan BD, Welsh M, Schoenberg L, Rutzky L, Katz SM, Urbauer DL, Van Buren CT. Variable oral absorption of cyclosporine:
A biopharmaceutical risk factor for chronic renal allograft rejection. Transplantation 1996;62:599-606.
Kahan BD, Wideman CA, Ried M, Gibbons S, Jarowenko MV, Flechner SM, Van Buren CT. The value of serial serum trough
cyclosporine levels in human renal transplantation. Transplant Proc 1984;16:1195-1199.
Lindholm A, Kahan BD. Influence of cyclosporine pharmacokinetic parameters, trough concentrations and AUC monitoring on
outcome after kidney transplantation. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1993;54:205-218.
Napoli KL, Kahan BD. Routine clinical monitoring of sirolimus (rapamycin) whole-blood concentrations by HPLC with
ultraviolet detection. Clin Chem 1996;42:1943-1948.
Stepkowski SM, Napoli KL, Wang ME, Qu X, Chou TC, Kahan BD. Effects of the pharmacokinetic interaction between orally
administered sirolimus and cyclosporine on the synergistic prolongation of heart allograft survival in rats. Transplantation
1996;62:986-994.
Yoshimura N, Kahan BD. Pharmacodynamic assessment of in vivo cyclosporine effect on interleukin-2 production by
lymphocytes of kidney transplant recipients. Transplantation 1985;40:661-666.
Yoshimura N, Oka T, Clark SC, Kahan BD. The inhibition of IL-2 gene expression at the level of messenger RNA by in vivo
cyclosporine treatment in kidney transplant recipients. Transplant Proc 1987;19:3510-3512.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 235
Optimal Pharmacological Monitoring of Antirejection Drugs
Giuseppe Remuzzi, M.D.
Department of Immunology and Clinic of Organ Transplantation, Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo - Mario Negri
Institute for Pharmacological Research, Bergamo, Italy
Pharmacological monitoring is a key step in the management of transplant recipients to allow adequate
immunosuppression to avoid graft rejection and minimize drug toxicity. Therapeutic monitoring of trough blood
cyclosporine (CsA) concentration has been widely adopted to adjust CsA dose in individual subjects. However,
trough-level monitoring is not of universal help. More informative than trough CsA concentration is the area under
the concentration-time curve (AUC), which is calculated from the individual complete pharmacokinetic profile.
However, this approach is quite expensive and time consuming and increases discomfort for the patients, making it
seldom feasible in routine outpatient clinic monitoring. Thus, abbreviated CsA AUC profiles have been proposed.
Recent data show the possibility of accurately estimating the CsA AUC using only three very early blood samples
after Neoral dosing. Attempts to define abbreviated kinetic profiles in AUC monitoring has also been extended to
the more recent immunosuppressants that are now entering routine clinical application. This is the case of
tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, as well as sirolimus, for which a limited sampling strategy represents an
efficient approach to assess total exposure to drugs. Although the proposed strategies are good predictors, they are
difficult to apply to day-by-day drug monitoring in clinical practice since in all cases the last time-point of blood
sampling is far from drug dosing (6, 9, or even 12 hours), making the procedure cumbersome for outpatients and
taxing for the transplant centers in terms of staff effort. Evaluating drug exposure is the conventional way to optimal
pharmacological monitoring of transplant patients but does not reveal more on the level of immunosuppression
achieved by a given antirejection drug. Thus, efforts should focus on setting up simple, accurate, and precise
methods for monitoring the level of T-lymphocyte inhibition in these circumstances.
Key References:
Amante AJ, Kahan BD. Abbreviated area-under-the-curve strategy for monitoring cyclosporine microemulsion therapy in
immediate posttransplant period. Clin Chem 1996;42:1294.
Batiuk TD, Yatscoff RW, Halloran PF. What is the dose-response curve for the effects of cyclosporine on calcineurin and
cytokine induction in vivo? Transpl Proc 1994;26:2835.
Fruman D, Klee C, Bierer B. Calcineurin phosphatase in T lymphocytes is inhibited by FK506 and cyclosporine A. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:3686.
Gaspari F, Perico N, Signorini O, Caruso R, Remuzzi G. Abbreviated kinetic profiles in area-under-the-curve monitoring of
cyclosporine therapy. Kidney Int 1998;54:2146.
Kaplan B, Meier-Kriesche H-U, Napoli K, Kahan BD. A limited sampling strategy for estimating sirolimus area-under-the-
concentration curve. Clin Chem 1997;43:539.
Keown P, Landsberg D, Halloran P, Shoker A, Rush D, Jeffery J, et al. A randomized, prospective multicenter,
pharmacoepidemiologic study of cyclosporine microemulsion in stable renal graft recipients. Report of the Canadian
Neoral Transplantation Study Group. Transplantation 1996;62:1744.
Ku Y-M, Min DJ. An abbreviated area-under-the-curve monitoring for tacrolimus in patients with liver transplants. Ther Drug
Monit 1998;20:219.
Lindholm AS, Kahan BD. Influence of cyclosporine pharmacokinetics, trough concentration, and AUC monitoring on outcome
after kidney transplantation. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1993;54:205.
Perico N, Remuzzi G. Prevention of transplant rejection. Current treatment guidelines and future developments. Drugs
1997;54:533.
Schutz E, Armstrong WW, Shipkova M, Weber L, Niedmann PD, Lammersdorf T, et al. Limited sampling strategy for the
determination of mycophenolic acid area under the curve in pediatric kidney recipients. Transpl Proc 1998;30:1182.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
236
Prediction of Long-Term Renal Allograft Outcome Using Image Analysis of Sirius Red Staining in
Protocol Biopsies
Paul C. Grimm, M.D.
Department of Pediatrics, University of California at San Diego, USA
The 6-month Banff Chronic Score (BCS) is a predictor of the 24-month serum creatinine in renal transplant
patients. As components of the Banff Chronic Score are subject to sample error, computerized image analysis of
interstitial fibrosis may allow more precise quantitation. The objective of this study was to assess whether
quantitation of interstitial fibrosis by image analysis could predict long-term graft outcome. We studied 6-month
protocol allograft biopsies from 51 patients with at least 3 years of followup. 1/serum creatinine graphs were used to
estimate the time to graft failure (TTGF) by extrapolating to a creatinine level of 5 mg/dL. A blinded observer
analyzed biopsy fibrosis by using the mean particle size of Sirius Red-stained tubulointerstitial collagen using image
analysis with watershed segmentation. The BCS was used as a comparison. The total BCS of the 6-month biopsy
was correlated with TTGF (p = 0.0011, r = 0.44, r2 = 0.181). The mean particle size of interstitial Sirius Red
staining was also correlated with TTGF (p = 0.0001, r = 0.516, r2 = 0.266). This study of computerized image
analysis indicates a superior correlation of Sirius Red analysis with TTGF than the BCS. Further development is
necessary to determine whether this will be useful in predicting allograft outcome.
Key References:
Nickerson P, Jeffery J, Gough J, McKenna R, Grimm PC, Cheang M, Rush D. Identification of clinical and istopathological risk
factors for diminished renal function 2 years post-transplant. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:482-487.
Rush D, Nickerson P, Gough J, McKenna R, Grimm PC, Cheang M, Trpkov K, Solez K, Jeffery J. Beneficial effects of treatment
of early subclinical rejection: A randomized study. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;11: 2129-2134.
Rush D, Nickerson P, Jeffery J, McKenna R, Grimm P, Gough J. Protocol biopsies in renal transplantation: Research tool or
clinically useful? Current Opin Nephrol and Hypertens 1998;7:691-694.
Immune Parameters Correlating Hyporesponsiveness
Ronald H. Kerman, Ph.D.
University of Texas Medical School, Houston, USA
Long-term renal allograft survival is due to the efficacy of immunosuppressants or to an immunoregulatory
recipient (recip) hyporesponsiveness. In vitro immunologic evaluation parameters were used to identify
immunologically low-risk allograft recips with improved long-term graft survival. Recips whose pretransplant (Tx)
sera had little IgG anti-HLA class I antibody (< 10 percent PRA, ELISA-developed) experienced a 35 percent versus
a 70 percent rejection frequency (p < 0.01) and an 85 percent versus 74 percent 1-year graft survival (p < 0.01) when
compared with recips with reactive anti-HLA sera (PRA 10 percent). The pre-Tx PRA sera < 10 percent delineated
an unsensitized, weak immune responder. The recip-donor mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) also served as an in
vitro correlate, reflecting recip antidonor hyporesponsiveness or hyperresponsiveness. Hypo-MLR recips
experienced only 27 percent versus 54 percent rejection episodes (p < 0.05) and had a 92 percent versus 79 percent
1-year graft survival (p < 0.01) compared with hyper-MLR recips (SI 10). There was significant correlation between
recips with a pre-Tx PRA sera < 10 percent, and a post-Tx hypo-MLR: 89 percent (46/52) of post-Tx hypo-MLR
versus 19 percent (12/63) of hyper-MLR responders displayed pre-Tx PRA sera < 10 percent (p < 0.001). These
data suggest that unsensitized recips (PRA < 10 percent) may develop an immunoregulated status resulting in donor
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 237
hyporesponsiveness and improved graft survivals and may be candidates for tapering and/or withdrawing
immunosuppressants.
Key References:
Kerman RH, Katz SM, Schoenberg L, Baraket O, Van Buren CT, Kahan BD. Ten-year follow-up of mixed lymphocyte reaction-
hyporesponsive living related cyclosporine montherapy-treated renal allograft recipients. Transplant Proc 1997;29:198-
199.
Kerman RH, Susskind B, Buelow R, Regan J, Pauletty P, Williams J, Gerolami K, Kerman DH, Katz SM, Van Buren CT, Kahan
BD. Correlation of WLISA-detected IgG and IgA anti-HLA antibodies in pretransplant sera with renal allograft rejection.
Transplantation 1996; 62:201-205.
Kerman RH, Susskind B, Katz SM, Van Buren CT, Kahan BD. Postrenal transplant MLR hypo-responders have fewer rejections
and better graft survival than MLR hyper-responders. Transplant Proc 1997;29:1410-1411.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
238
Cancer Prevention
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints
in Clinical Trials
Objectives
* Examine the advantages and disadvantages of using biomarkers as surrogate endpoints in cancer
prevention trials
* Discuss decision criteria for biomarkers to be considered in clinical trials
* Consider current options substituting for clinical endpoints in chemoprevention strategies
* Address statistical considerations for the validation of biomarkers as surrogate endpoints
! What role does preclinical validation play in establishing surrogate status?
! What approaches should be considered in the evaluation of multiple surrogate endpoints?
! What strategies can be used to interpret and analyze "macroscale" biomarker data obtained from
high-throughput technologies (e.g., gene expression patterns)?
! How can statistical modeling incorporating epidemiologic data (including biomarkers) be used in
the design of large, randomized clinical trials?
* Identify research needs for high-throughput, sensitive assay systems for biomarkers
! What can be done to foster technology development?
! What resources (e.g., animal models, tissue specimens, sera, genetic and protein data) are needed
to ensure the accuracy and precision of novel biomarker assays?
Moderators: E.R. Greenberg, M.D., Dartmouth Medical School, USA
W.K. Hong, M.D., University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 239
Predictive Markers of Cancer in Smokers
Margaret R. Spitz, M.D.
University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, USA
Risk biomarkers used in the design of chemoprevention trials, and especially in the identification of high-risk
cohorts, can affect study size and duration as well as stratification and analytic considerations. Their value is further
enhanced if they are also predictive of response to the intervention. These biomarkers should be of a high sensitivity
and specificity; the biomarker assay should be standardized, validated, relatively easy to measure, and should
require noninvasive techniques. Since only a fraction of smokers will develop neoplastic lesions, markers of genetic
susceptiblity to tobacco carcinogenesis would in theory help identify highest risk smokers for enrollment in
chemoprevention trials. A number of low penetrance/high frequency genes are likely to be relevant in the etiology of
tobacco-related cancers. For example, the dose of tobacco carcinogens to which aerodigestive tract tissue is exposed
is modulated by genetic polymorphisms in the cytochrome P450 multigene family of enzymes. These enzymes are
involved in phase I oxidative processes that may create intermediates more reactive than the parent compounds. The
derivative compounds may covalently bind to DNA and form carcinogen-macromolecular adducts. Phase II
metabolic processes generally inactivate these genotoxic compounds through conjugation that promotes cellular
excretion. Cancer risk is thus defined by the balance between metabolic activation and detoxification of tobacco
carcinogen compounds, as well as by the efficiency of DNA repair. Several phenotypic assays are predictive of risk.
These include the host cell reactivation assay that measures DNA repair capability and the mutagen sensitivity assay
in which the frequency of in vitro bleomycin- or benzo[a]pyrene-induced breaks in cultured peripheral lymphocytes
is quantified as a measure of sensitivity. These assays are not optimal since they require viable lymphocytes and are
labor intensive. Nevertheless, our data show that they are predictive of risk and might also be useful to predict
patients at higher risk of developing recurrence and/or second primaries. Emphasis should now be placed on
studying phenotype/genotype correlations and on comparing markers in surrogate tissue (peripheral lymphocytes)
with molecular and cellular changes in the target (lung) tissue. In the near future, microarray technology will enable
large-scale, low-cost genotyping with the use of automated workstations for extracting DNA and performing DNA
amplification, hybridization, and detection. As many as 100 genes at a time can be analyzed for this allele signature
analysis. The initial chip being developed will include putative genes for tobacco-induced cancer susceptibility as
well as nicotine addiction. The legal and ethical implications of this emerging technology are immense.
Retinoic Acid Receptor Beta as an Intermediate Biomarker in Retinoid Chemoprevention Trials
Reuben Lotan, Ph.D.; Xiao-Chun Xu, M.D., Ph.D.; and Waun K. Hong, M.D.
The University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA
Cancer chemoprevention is the intervention in the multistep process of carcinogenesis by chemical agents (Hong
et al. 1995; Hong and Sporn 1997; Lotan 1996). Prevention trials that rely on cancer development as an endpoint are
prolonged and require large populations. Therefore, biomarkers are needed to serve as intermediate endpoints (Hong
et al. 1995; Hong and Sporn 1997). We investigated the expression of nuclear retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and
retinoid x receptors (RXRs) (alpha, beta, and gamma) in surgical specimens collected from normal, premalignant,
and malignant head and neck and lung tissues during retinoid chemoprevention trials (Hong et al. 1995; Lotan 1996,
1997) using a nonradioactive in situ hybridization technique (Xu et al. 1994; Xu and Lotan 1998). The level of
RARbeta messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) was suppressed in 50 to 65 percent of oral premalignant lesions and
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (Xu et al. 1994; Lotan et al. 1995). Treatment of leukoplakia patients with
13-cis-retinoic acid caused an increase in RARbeta expression, which was associated with clinical response (Lotan
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
240
et al. 1995). Similar results were obtained recently with specimens from normal and malignant lung biopsies (Xu et
al. 1997). Thus, RARbeta can serve as an intermediate biomarker because its level decreases during the carcinogenic
process, it is upregulated by the chemopreventive agent (retinoid), and this upregulation is associated with clinical
response. Several ongoing trials will assess in a prospective manner the potential of employing RARbeta as an
intermediate biomarker for chemoprevention trials.
Key References:
Hong WK, Lippman SM, Hittelman WN, Lotan R. Retinoid chemoprevention of aerodigestive cancer: Basic to clinic. Clin
Cancer Res 1995;1:677-686.
Hong WK, Sporn MB. Recent advances in chemoprevention of cancer. Science 1997;278:1073-1077.
Lotan, R. Retinoids in cancer chemoprevention. FASEB J 1996;10:1031-1039.
Lotan, R. Retinoids and chemoprevention of aerodigestive tract cancer. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1997;16:349-356.
Lotan R, Xu X-C, Lippman SM, Ro JY, Lee JS, Lee JJ, Hong WK. Suppression of retinoic acid receptor beta in oral
premalignant lesions and its upregulation by isotretinoin. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1405-1410.
Xu X, Lotan R (1998). Non-isotopic in situ hybridization for detection of nuclear retinoid receptor transcripts in tissue sections.
In: Methods in Molecular Biology: Retinoids. Redfern C (ed.) Totowa NJ: Humana Press 1998;89:233-246.
Xu X, Sozzi G, Lee JS, Lee JJ, Pastorino U, Pilotti S, Kurie JM, Hong WK, Lotan R. Selective suppression of nuclear retinoic
acid receptor beta in non-small cell lung cancer in vivo: Implications for lung cancer development. J Natl Cancer Inst
1997;89:624-629.
Xu, X-C, Clifford JL, Hong WK, Lotan R. Detection of nuclear retinoic acid receptor mRNAs in histological tissue sections
using non-radioactive in situ hybridization histochemistry. Diagn Mol Pathol 1994;3:122-131.
Xu X-C, Ro JY, Lee JS, Shin DM, Hong WK, Lotan R. Differential expression of nuclear retinoic acid receptors in normal,
premalignant, and malignant head and neck tissues. Cancer Res 1994;54:3580-3587.
Theoretical and Practical Considerations in the Use of Surrogate Endpoints in Cancer Prevention
Research
Arthur Schatzkin, M.D., Dr.P.H.
National Cancer Institute, USA
Because cancer occurs relatively infrequently, prevention trials with cancer endpoints tend to be large, long, and
costly. Studies with surrogate cancer endpoints may be smaller, shorter, and cheaper. The key question though, is
whether studies with surrogate endpoints give us the right answers about cancer. Using colorectal cancer as an
illustration, I will discuss two potential surrogate endpoints: epithelial cell hyperproliferation and adenoma
formation. Studies with colorectal mucosal proliferation as an endpoint have been influential (e.g., the calcium
chemoprevention story). Although hyperproliferation has been postulated as a relatively early event in
carcinogenesis, whether it is a necessary step on the pathway to cancer is uncertain. Alternative pathways to cancer
that bypass (and possibly offset) hyperproliferation are plausible, which casts doubt on using hyperproliferation as a
surrogate endpoint. The most definitive way to address this uncertainty is to integrate proliferation markers in
prevention trials with cancer endpoints, the very studies we were trying to avoid. Less persuasive evidence can be
gleaned from observational cohort studies of proliferation versus cancer. Furthermore, even if we establish that
hyperproliferation is a good surrogate endpoint in a prevention trial with treatment A (a chemopreventive agent or
dietary modulation), there is no guarantee that this marker is a valid surrogate for treatment B. Similar problems are
likely to attend the use of other potential molecular and cellular surrogates. In contrast, adenomatous polyp
recurrence in the large bowel is widely regarded as a strong surrogate endpoint for intervention studies. Adenoma
formation, a relatively late event in carcinogenesis, appears to be a necessary step in the development of most
colorectal cancers (the adenoma-carcinoma sequence). Even for adenomas, however, inferences to cancer may be
problematic: (1) A small proportion of cancers may arise from areas of flat dysplasia not readily observable through
the colonoscope; (2) preventive interventions may differentially affect the pathways to bad (progressing to cancer)
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 241
and innocent (not progressing) adenomas, complicating the interpretation of polyp trials; and (3) because recurrent
adenomas tend to be small, if an intervention operates primarily in the transition from small to large adenoma, or
large adenoma to cancer, then this effect will be largely missed in polyp trials. Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia type
3 (CIN3) may be one of the strongest surrogates for cancer, but this state of severe dysplasia/carcinoma in situ is
obviously very close to being invasive cervical cancer. The analogous state for large bowel might be the so-called
advanced adenoma (more than 1 cm in size, villous elements, or high-grade dysplasia). An adenoma recurrence trial
with large or advanced adenomas as endpoints, however, would have to be substantially larger and more expensive
than the current generation of polyp trials. For surrogate endpoints in cancer prevention research, study cost and
inferential certainty may well be directly related.
Key References:
Alberts DS, Einspahr J, Ritenbaugh C, Aickin M. Rees-McGee S, Atwood J, Emerson S, Mason-Liddil N, Bettinger L, Patel J,
Bellapravalu S, Ramanujam PS, Phelps, J, Clark L. The effect of wheat bran fiber and calcium supplementation on rectal
mucosal proliferation rates in patients with resected adenomatous colorectal polyps. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1997;6:161-169.
Fleming TR, DeMets DL. Surrogate endpoints in clinical trials: Are we being misled? Ann Intern Med 1996;125:605-613.
Freedman LS, Schatzkin A, Schiffman MH. Statistical validation of intermediate markers of precancer for use as endpoints in
chemoprevention trials. J Cell Biochem 1992;16G:27-32.
McShane LM, Schatzkin A, Wargovich MJ, Woods C, Purewal M, Freedman LS, Corle D, Burt RW, Mateski DJ, Lawson M,
Lanza E, Kulldorff M, O'Brien B, Lake W, Moler J. An evaluation of rectal mucosal proliferation measure variability
sources in the Polyp Prevention Trial: Can we detect informative differences among individuals' proliferation measures
amid the noise? Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:605-612.
Prentice RL. Surrogate endpoints in clinical trials: Definition and operational criteria. Stat Med 1989;8(4):431-440.
Schatzkin A, Freedman LS, Dawsey SM, Lanza E. Interpreting precursor studies: What polyp trials tell us about large bowel
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:1053-1057.
Schatzkin A, Freedman LS, Dorgan J, McShane L, Schiffman M, Dawsey S. Surrogate endpoints in cancer research: A critique.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996;5:947-953.
Schatzkin A, Freedman LS, Schiffman MH, Dawsey SM. The validation of intermediate endpoints in cancer research. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1990;82:1746-1752.
Schiffman MH. New epidemiology of human papillomavirus infection and cervical neoplasia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;87:1345-
1347.
Evaluating Chemoprevention Strategies: Multiplicity Issues
Susan S. Ellenberg, Ph.D.
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, USA
A variety of measurements and outcomes have been proposed as possibly predictive of the development of
cancer. The approaches to assessing the predictive value of such variables are complex and increase in complexity
when considering multiple variables simultaneously. Nevertheless, it may be the case that combinations of
biomarkers or early clinical events (e.g., precancerous changes) will prove to be better predictors of disease than any
single variable. Statistical methods for evaluating interventions based on multiple outcomes have been developed;
their potential application to the setting of cancer prevention studies will be considered.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
242
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints in Breast Cancer Prevention Studies
Barbara S. Hulka, M.D., M.P.H.
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
Cancer prevention studies evaluate the effectiveness of interventions to reduce cancer risk in population
subgroups using the model of randomized, double-blind clinical trials. Biomarkers are used to enrich the study
population with individuals at high risk of breast cancer (i.e., susceptibility markers), measure compliance with the
intervention, and serve as surrogate endpoints. A study population at high risk of disease serves both to increase the
potential for benefits to study participants and to reduce sample size requirements by increasing the frequency of
outcome events. The selection of population groups with germline alterations in major genes such as the breast
cancer gene BRCA1 and 2, or common polymorphisms in specific P450 genes may be suitable for targeting specific
interventions. Biomarkers of compliance are specific to the intervention. Most critical to trial design is the need for
surrogate endpoints that may be identified well in advance of the occurrence of disease. To be useful, these
measurable biological events must occur with greater frequency than clinically detectable breast cancer, occur at an
earlier point in disease pathogenesis, and be strong predictors of invasive cancer occurrence. Breast parenchymal
patterns, depicted on mammograms as variations in radiographic density, illustrate a potential surrogate endpoint. A
high percentage relative to a low percentage of density in the breast confers at least a fourfold increased risk of
breast cancer. Thus, the correlates of breast density, including hormone replacement therapy, require further
evaluation and will be discussed.
Key References:
Boyd NF, Lockwood G, Byng J, Tritchler D, Yaffe M. Mammographic densities and breast cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiology,
Biomarkers Prevention 1998;7:1133-1144.
Clonal Genetic Alterations as Cancer Biomarkers
David Sidransky, M.D.
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Otolaryngology -- Head & Neck Surgery, Baltimore, Maryland
21205-2196, USA
Clonality is a fundamental characteristic of human cancer. One transformed cell gives rise to daughter cells that
all exhibit the same genetic change that initially provided a growth advantage to the parent cell (Nowell 1976). The
faithful transmission of these and other genetic changes in subsequent daughter cells has been well documented in
vitro and in vivo (Sidransky et al. 1992). Correlation of these clonal genetic changes with histopathologic
progression has led to the development of molecular progression models (Fearon et al. 1990). Thus, genetic markers
able to detect the clonal outgrowth of neoplastic cells may be useful in the detection of primary cancers. We have
demonstrated that point mutations in critical oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes can be used in polymerase chain
reaction detection of rare neoplastic cells in bodily fluid. We have identified ras gene mutations in the stool of
patients with colorectal cancer, p53 mutations in the urine of patients with bladder cancer, and both ras and p53
mutations in the sputum of patients with lung cancer (Sidransky 1997). Although widespread microsatellite
instability is rare, we found that markers composed of larger repeat sizes (trinucleotides and tetranucleotides) were
more likely to display instability in many tumor types (Mao et al. 1994). We have identified more than 90 percent of
bladder cancers at initial presentation and followup with a panel of 20 carefully selected markers (Mao et al. 1996;
Steiner et al. 1997). Furthermore, we have identified a clonal population of cells several months before cystoscopic
detection in at least two patients. Patients without evidence of recurrence (NED) have reverted to normal by
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 243
molecular analysis. Epigenetic promoter methylation can inactivate tumor suppressor genes and serves as a marker
of clonal expansion. Using a panel of differentially methylated genes, including p16, we have shown that 50 percent
of lung cancer patients display a methylated DNA pattern in sputum and serum (Ahrendt et al. 1999; Esteller et al.
1999). Novel automated approaches will allow rapid assessment of these tests in prospective trials and rapid
integration into the clinical setting. Identification of clonal DNA alterations in clinical samples continues to evolve
as a promising method of cancer detection (Ju et al. 1996).
Key References:
Ahrendt SA, Chow Xu L, Yang SC, Eisenberger CF, Esteller M, Herman JG, Wu L, Decker PA, Jen J, Sidransky D. Molecular
detection of tumor cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with early stage lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst, in
press.
Esteller M, Sanchez-Cespedes M, Rosell R, Sidransky D, Baylin SB, Herman JG. Detection of aberrant promoter
hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes in serum DNA from non-smallcell lung cancer patients. Cancer Res 1999
Jan1;59:67-70.
Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759-767.
Ju J, Glazer AN, Mathies RA. Energy transfer primers: A new fluorescene labeling paradigm from DNA sequencing and
analysis. Nat Med 1996;2:246-249.
Mao L, Lee DJ, Tockman MS, Erozan YS, Askin F, Sidransky D. Microsatellite alterations as clonal markers in the detection of
human cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:9871-9875.
Mao L, Schoenberg MP, Scicchitano M, Erozan YS, Merlo A, Schwab D, Sidransky D. Molecular detection of primary bladder
cancer by microsatellite analysis. Science 1996;271:659-662.
Nowell PC. The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science 1976;94:23-28.
Sidransky D, Mikkelsan T, Cavenee W, Vogelstein B. Clonal expansion of p53 mutant cells leads to histologic progression in
astrocytoma. Nature 1992;335:841-42.
Sidransky D. Nucleic acid-based methods for detection of cancer. Science 1997;278:1054-1058.
Steiner G, Schoenberg MP, Linn JF, Mao L, Sidransky D. Detection of bladder cancer recurrence by microsatellite analysis of
urine. Nat Med 1997;3(6):621-624.
Genetics of Preneoplasia and Lung Cancer Development
Adi F. Gazdar, M.D.
Hamon Cancer Center, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA
Three important concepts are important in understanding the pathogenesis of lung cancer: (1) Lung cancer is
preceded by multiple preneoplastic changes that take many years to evolve into invasive cancer; (2) multiple
molecular changes involving recessive and dominant oncogenes are present in lung cancers; and (3) these changes
commence early in the pathogenesis. These concepts can be explained by the field cancerization theory that states
that much of the upper aerodigestive tract has been damaged by exposure to carcinogens present in tobacco smoke.
The major findings are as follows:
1. Preneoplastic bronchial lesions can be recognized by fluorescent bronchoscopy.
2. Women smokers are at greater risk for developing lung cancer, but they have fewer bronchial preneoplastic
lesions than male smokers.
3. Molecular changes are present in the majority of smokers, and they commence early during lung cancer
pathogenesis, even in histologically normal epithelium.
4. Similar changes are present in the bronchial epithelium of smokers with lung cancer.
5. Patients with small-cell lung cancer have more extensive bronchial epithelial changes than other lung cancer
patients.
6. Numerous small clonal patches, most consisting of only a few hundred cells, are present in the epithelium of
lung cancer patients.
7. Preneoplastic lesions and molecular changes persist for many years after smoking cessation.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
244
8. Molecular changes do not appear randomly but follow a set pattern. The patterns of changes in preneoplasia
may predict for those at increased risk of cancer development.
9. We are currently investigating whether the pathological lesions and molecular changes are reversible after
chemopreventive therapy.
Key References:
Ahrendt SA, Chow JT, Xu L-H, Yang SC, Eisenberger CF, Esteller M, Herman JG, Wu L, Decker PA, Jen J, Sidransky D.
Molecular detection of tumor cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with early-stage lung cancer. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1999;91:332-339.
Belinsky SA, Nikula KJ, Palmisano WA, Michels R, Saccomanno G, Gabrielson E, Baylin SB, Herman JG. Aberrant
methylation of p16(INK4a) is an early event in lung cancer and a potential biomarker for early diagnosis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci 1998;95:11891-11896.
Esteller M, Sanchez-Cespedes M, Rosell R, Sidransky D, Baylin SB, Herman JG. Detection of aberrant promoter
hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes in serum DNA from non-small cell lung cancer patients. Cancer Res
1999;59:67-70.
Gazdar AF, Minna JD. Molecular detection of early lung cancer [editorial; comment]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:299-301.
Lam S, Kennedy T, Unger M, Miller YE, Gelmont D, Rusch V, Gipe B, Howard D, LeRiche JC, Coldman A, Gazdar AF.
Localization of bronchial intraepithelial neoplastic lesions by fluorescence bronchoscopy. Chest 1998;113:696-702.
Maitra A, Wistuba II, Virmani AK, Sakaguchi M, Park I, Stucky A, Ro JY, Broxson A, Yu R, Morice RC, Kemp BL, Khuri FR,
Walsh GL, Hittelman WN. Enrichment of epithelial cells for molecular studies. Nat Med, in press.
Mao L, Lee JS, Kurie JM, Fan YH, Lippman SM, Lee JJ, Hong WK. Clonal genetic alterations in the lungs of current and former
smokers [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:857-862.
Wistuba II, Behrens C, Milchgrub S, Bryant D, Hung J, Minna JD, Gazdar AF. Sequential molecular abnormalities are involved
in the multistage development of squamous cell lung carcinoma. Oncogene 1999;18:643-650.
Wistuba II, Behrens C, Virmani AK, Milchgrub S, Syed S, Lam S, et al. Allelic losses at chromosome 8p21-23 are early and
frequent events in the pathogenesis of lung cancer. Cancer Res, in press.
Wistuba II, Lam S, Behrens C, Virmani AK, Fong KM, LeRiche J, Samet JM, Srivastava S, Minna JD, Gazdar AF. Molecular
damage in the bronchial epithelium of current and former smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1366-1372.
Issues and Challenges in the Application of Biomarkers in Cancer Detection and Prevention
Sudhir Srivastava, Ph.D., M.P.H. and Barnett S. Kramer, M.D., M.P.H.
National Cancer Institute, USA
New technologies coming from the field of molecular and cellular biology are now able to identify genetic as
well as antigenic changes during the early stages of the malignant process. Some of these changes show promise as
biomarkers for preneoplastic development or for early malignant transformation. However, it is essential to fully
understand the molecular pathogenesis of cancer (i.e., the natural history of tumor progression at the molecular
level) that would lead to development of accurate molecular determinants or biomarkers. However, these biomarkers
must be validated for their sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value in defined clinical settings to fully
evaluate their performance characteristics. In addition, for these biomarkers to be effective in earlier cancer
detection, they need to be validated in asymptomatic populations using carefully designed epidemiologic studies
with consideration of interindividual and intraindividual variability, cost-effectiveness, and ethical issues. Authors
will discuss an array of issues and challenges that need to be addressed prior to the application of biomarkers in
earlier cancer detection and prevention trials.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 245
Biomarkers of Joint Destruction
and Repair
Objectives
* Identify new and promising biomarkers for diseases characterized by progressive joint destruction
* Define the knowledge gaps and research opportunities to advance the understanding and use of
biomarkers as surrogate endpoints in clinical trials for diseases characterized by progressive joint
destruction
Moderators: K.D. Brandt, M.D., Indiana University School of Medicine, USA
Introductory Remarks: S. Serrate-Sztein, M.D., National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and
Skin Diseases, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
246
Imaging Markers of Joint Destruction and Repair
Charles G. Peterfy1
, M.D., Ph.D. and Harry K. Genant2
, M.D.
1
Synarc, Inc., USA
2
University of California San Francisco, USA
The past two decades have seen remarkable advances in medical imaging. The development of magnetic
resonance imaging, in particular, has brought unprecedented power to the study of joint disease and its causes and
has offered a unique opportunity to explore arthritis in ways not imaginable in the past. This discussion will review
the different roles that medical imaging can play in clinical trials and outline the deliverables that imaging markers
must strive to meet to be useful in these roles. It also will review the most promising imaging markers available
today for evaluating arthritic changes in bone, articular cartilage, and other joint structures and point to areas where
further progress can be anticipated.
Key References:
Altman RD, Hochberg M, Murphy WAJ, Wolfe F, Lequesne M. Atlas of individual radiographic features in osteoarthritis.
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 1996;3(suppl. A):3-70.
Bashir A, Gray ML, Burstein D. Gd-DTPA as a measure of cartilage degradation. Magn Reson Med 1996;36:665-673.
Buckland-Wright JC, Macfarlane DG, Lynch JA, Jasani MK, Bradshaw CR. Joint space width measures cartilage thickness in
osteoarthritis of the knee: High resolution plain film and double contrast macroradiographic investigation. Ann Rheum Dis
1995;54:263-268.
Disler DG, McCauley TR, Kelman CG, Fuchs MD, Ratner LM, Wirth CR, Hospodar PP. Fat-suppressed three-dimensional
spoiled gradient-echo MR imaging of hyaline cartilage defects in the knee: Comparison with standard MR imaging and
arthroscopy. Am J Rheumatol 1996;167:127-132.
Peterfy C. Imaging techniques. In: Rheumatology 2d ed. Klippel J, Dieppe P (eds.) Philadelphia: Mosby 1997;1:14.1-14.18.
Peterfy C. Magnetic resonance imaging. Osteoarthritis. In: Brandt K, Doherty M, Lohmander L (eds.) New York: Oxford
University Press 1998;473-494.
Peterfy CG, Majumdar S, Lang P, van Dijke CF, Sack K, Genant H. MR imaging of the arthritic knee: Improved discrimination
of cartilage, synovium and effusion with pulsed saturation transfer and fat-suppressed T1-weighted sequences. Radiology
1994;191:413-419.
Recht MP, Pirraino DW, Paletta GA, Schils JP, Belhobek GH. Accuracy of fat-suppressed three-dimensional spoiled gradient-
echo FLASH MR imaging in the detection of patellofemoral articular cartilage abnormalities. Radiology 1996;198:209-
212.
Imaging of Ankylosing Spondylitis
Robert D. Boutin, M.D.
University of California, San Diego and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Diego, USA
Radiological evaluation of arthropathies is classically based on analysis of two fundamental findings: the
distribution and morphology of osteoarticular abnormalities. Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) primarily targets synovial
and cartilaginous joints, as well as sites of tendinous and ligamentous attachment to bone. Radiographic
abnormalities in patients with AS predominate in the sacroiliac joints and spine, following in descending order of
frequency by the hips, glenohumeral joints, knees, hands, wrists, and feet. In the past, scientific investigations
commonly evaluated the efficacy of imaging in providing an accurate diagnosis of early AS. Although the early and
accurate diagnosis of AS is still a primary goal of imaging, other concerns and questions are voiced with increasing
frequency. For example, given the substantial constraints imposed by managed care, how should imaging be utilized
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 247
to provide a cost-effective impact on patient care and outcome? Specifically, what is the optimal imaging algorithm
for the assessment of patients? Other questions focus on more academic (and corporate) concerns: What is the most
sensitive and specific means for detecting response to a new therapy? Although conventional radiography continues
to be the principal method of radiologic assessment, other imaging methods (e.g., magnetic resonance imaging) are
expected to be used in the future with increasing frequency to detect pathologic changes involving joints, bones, and
entheses.
Imaging Technology for Osteoarthritis
Mark E. Brezinski, M.D., Ph.D.
Harvard Medical School, USA
A variety of modalities have now shown feasibility for modifying the progression of articular cartilage damage in
osteoarthritis. This has resulted in a need for better methods to image early changes in cartilage and monitor the
progression of these changes. The advantages and limitations of traditional imaging methods, such as radiography,
low-frequency ultrasound, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and arthroscopy, for assessing
articular cartilage, will be examined. In addition, newer technologies, such as optical coherence tomography (OCT),
will be discussed. OCT is a new method of high-resolution imaging that allows distances to be measured on a
micron scale. OCT can be envisioned as analogous to ultrasound, measuring the intensity of backreflected infrared
light rather than sound. All technologies will be discussed with respect to their ability to identify fine changes in the
cartilage necessary for monitoring therapeutic modalities.
Cytokine Expression in Arthritis
Gary S. Firestein, M.D.
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, USA
Cytokines play a key role in the perpetuation of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Careful studies of the cytokine profile
in RA have demonstrated an abundance of macrophage and fibroblasts such as IL-1, TNF-alpha, and IL-6.
Furthermore, production of proinflammatory mediators, including prostaglandins and metalloproteinases, is
regulated in rheumatoid synovium by these cytokines. In an effort to understand the mechanism of action of
antirheumatic drugs, surrogate markers for clinical trials have been evaluated. Although peripheral blood and
synovial effusions are more accessible and a few studies have demonstrated clinical correlations with cytokines or
soluble cytokine receptors, they are probably less useful than direct examination of synovial tissue. Serial synovial
biopsies to evaluate surrogate markers was first used to examine the effect of steroids and methotrexate on
metalloproteinase gene expression. Subsequent studies have demonstrated that blind percutaneous biopsies are
essentially equivalent to arthroscopic samples and can be used to evaluate the expression of cytokines. For instance,
methotrexate and anti-TNF-alpha therapy significantly decrease synovial expression of cytokines as determined by
immunohistochemistry. This method for assessing cytokine expression is reproducible and has been carefully
validated. Attempts to quantify cytokine mRNA in synovial tissue using nested reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction are also promising, although no studies to date have directly compared mRNA and protein analyses.
Additional studies are required to develop clear criteria for determining the most appropriate techniques for assaying
cytokines as well as the best cytokine surrogate markers.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
248
Key References:
Dolhain RJ, Tak PP, Dijkmans BA, De Kuiper P, Breedveld FC, Miltenburg AM. Methotrexate reduces inflammatory cell
numbers, expression of monokines and of adhesion molecules in synovial tissue of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Br J
Rheumatol 1998;37:502-508.
Firestein, GS, Paine M, Boyle DL. Mechanisms of methotrexate action in rheumatoid arthritis: Selective decrease in synovial
collagenase gene expression. Arthritis Rheum 1994;37:193-200.
Firestein, GS, Paine M, Littman BH. Gene expression (collagenase, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase, complement, and HLA-
DR) in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis synovium: Quantitative analysis and effect of intra-articular corticosteroids.
Arthritis Rheum 1991;34:1094-1105.
Kirkham BW, Navarro FJ, Corkill MM, Panayi GS. In vivo analysis of disease modifying drug therapy activity in rheumatoid
arthritis by sequential immunohistological analysis of synovial membrane interleukin 1 beta. J Rheumatol 1994;21:1615-
1619.
Kotake S, Schumacher HR Jr, Yarboro CH, Arayssi TK, Pando JA, Kanik KS, Gourley MF, Klippel JH, Wilder RL. In vivo gene
expression of type 1 and type 2 cytokines in synovial tissues from patients in early stages of rheumatoid, reactive, and
undifferentiated arthritis. Proc Assoc Am Physicians 1997;109:286-301.
Tak PP, Taylor PC, Breedveld FC, Smeets TJ, Daha MR, Kluin PM, Meinders AE, Maini RN. Decrease in cellularity and
expression of adhesion molecules by anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha monoclonal antibody treatment in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1996;39:1077-1081.
Youssef PP, Kraan M, Breedveld F, Bresnihan B, Cassidy N, Cunnane G, Emery P, Fitzgerald O, Kane D, Lindblad S, Reece R,
Veale D, Tak PP Quantitative microscopic analysis of inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis synovial membrane samples
selected at arthroscopy compared with samples obtained blindly by needle biopsy. Arthritis Rheum 1998;41:663-669.
Genetic and Major Histocompatibility Complex Markers of Disease Severity in Rheumatoid
Arthritis
Cornelia M. Weyand, M.D.
Mayo Clinic, USA
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease that often leads to disability and crippling. It is now
recognized that RA is a multigene disorder with several genetic risk factors contributing to pathogenesis. We have
proposed that multiple subtypes of RA exist and that different phenotypes of RA correspond to the inheritance of
different arrays of disease risk genes. This concept has been supported by a detailed analysis of the distribution of
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DRB1 polymorphisms in patient cohorts, indicating that the clinical heterogeneity
in course and outcome correlates with HLA-DRB1 allelic polymorphisms. A set of HLA-DRB1 alleles has been
recognized as disease associated, but different alleles are enriched in distinct subtypes of RA. Rheumatoid factor-
positive destructive disease is preferentially associated with the HLA-DRB1*0401 allele, whereas HLA-
DRB1*0404 and B1*0101 predispose to milder and seronegative disease. Inheritance of two copies of RA-
associated alleles carries a high risk for extra-articular spreading of RA. Homozygosity for HLA-DRB1*0401 has
been reported in patients with the most serious complication of RA, rheumatoid vasculitis. In addition to HLA-
encoded polymorphisms, abnormalities in the generation and function of CD4 T cells can be useful in dissecting
patient subsets with different variants of RA. In patients with extra-articular RA, unusual CD4+ lymphocytes
emerge that are characterized by a deficiency for the CD28 molecule. CD4+CD28- T cells have a tendency to form
large clonal populations, produce high amounts of interferon-gamma, and exhibit autoreactivity. Accumulation of
these CD4 T cells in a subset of RA patients likely reflects a fundamental abnormality in T cell homeostasis.
Appreciation of the heterogeneity of the synovial component of RA has come from studies describing at least three
different patterns of lymphoid organization and tissue cytokine production in the synovium of RA patients. Genetic
elements determining disease expression in the inflammatory lesions await identification, but candidate genes
include cytokine genes and tissue injury response genes. The ultimate goal of these studies is to dissect the
phenotypic and genotypic heterogeneity of RA and to correlate combinations of disease-risk genes with clinical
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 249
variants of the disease. The recognition of clinical subcategories will be required to optimize pathogenic studies and
also provide important tools in the diagnostic and therapeutic management of patients with the RA syndrome.
Key References:
Klimiuk P, Goronzy JJ, Bjornsson J, Beckenbaugh RD, Weyand CM. Tissue cytokine patterns distinguish variants of rheumatoid
synovitis. Am J Pathol 1997;151:1311-1319.
Schmidt D, Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM. CD4+ CD7- CD28- T cells are expanded in rheumatoid arthritis and are characterized by
autoreactivity. J Clin Invest 1996;97:2027-2037.
Wagner UG, Koetz K, Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ. Perturbation of the T cell repertoire in rheumatoid arthritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1998;95:14447-14452.
Walser-Kuntz DR, Weyand CM, Weaver AJ, O'Fallon WM, Goronzy JJ. Mechanisms underlying the formation of the T cell
receptor repertoire in rheumatoid arthritis. Immunity 1995;2:597-605.
Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ. The molecular basis of rheumatoid arthritis. J Mol Med 1997;75:772-785.
Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ. Pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Med Clin North Amer 1997;81:29-55.
Weyand CM, Hicok KC, Conn DL, Goronzy JJ. The influence of HLA-DRB1 genes on disease severity in rheumatoid arthritis.
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:801-806.
Weyand CM, Klimiuk PA, Goronzy JJ. Heterogeneity of rheumatoid arthritis: From phenotypes to genotypes. Springer Semin
Immunopathol 1998;20:5-22.
Weyand CM, McCarthy TG, Goronzy JJ. Correlation between disease phenotype and genetic heterogeneity in rheumatoid
arthritis. J Clin Invest 1995;95:2120-2126.
Weyand CM, Schmidt D, Wagner U, Goronzy JJ. The influence of sex on the phenotype of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum
1998;41:817-822.
Serum Markers of Joint Metabolism
Eugene J.-M.A. Thonar, Ph.D.
Rush Medical College at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
Fragments produced when molecules are degraded in joints eventually reach the blood circulation where they can
be measured by sensitive immunoassays. The levels of these molecular markers provide critical information
concerning the state of health of joint tissues, especially articular cartilage. Measurements of the markers in joint
disease have already proved useful to monitor changes in the metabolism of joint tissues following joint injury and
to identify individuals most likely to exhibit rapid joint destruction. They also can be used to monitor disease
progression and to identify drugs capable of inhibiting deleterious processes or promoting repair in articular
cartilage.
Molecular Markers in Osteoarthritis
Stefan L. Lohmander, M.D., Ph.D.
Department of Orthopedics, Lund University, 22185 Lund, Sweden
The identification of individuals at risk for disease progression, the monitoring of outcomes in clinical trials, and
the treatment of osteoarthritis (OA) present a challenge. The lack of readily usable methods hinders progress in the
treatment of joint diseases. Interventions developed in this area concentrate on agents that inhibit proteolytic
degradation of the cartilage matrix. Considerable literature exists on molecular markers in human arthritis and OA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
250
(Lohmander et al. 1995, 1998), supporting a relationship between marker concentrations in joint fluid, serum or
urine, and cartilage turnover. This provides face validity for these markers to monitor dynamic changes in the target
tissue. Other aspects of validity for the use of markers are less well supported, but new data suggest that markers
will be useful in future trials. Increased serum concentrations of hyaluronan, C-reactive protein, and cartilage
oligomeric matrix protein predict future OA progression (Mansson et al. 1995; Sharif et al. 1995a, 1995b; Spector et
al. 1997), which can be used to select high-risk individuals in early trials. Data on within- and between-patient
variability for molecular markers in joint fluid and serum and urine are available for stable OA cohorts (Lohmander
et al. 1998) and suggest that (1) variability differs between markers in the same compartment, (2) variability is lower
within than between patients, and (3) markers are responsive to change. Some 30 patients per treatment arm would
be needed to show a change of 0.5 standard deviation with 80-percent power (Lohmander et al. 1998). The final
answer on the utility of these surrogate measures must await the availability of an agent that changes OA disease
progression.
Key References:
Lohmander LS, Dahlberg L, Eyre D, Lark M, Thonar EMJ-A, Ryd L. Longitudinal and cross-sectional variability in markers of
joint metabolism in patients with knee pain and articular cartilage abnormalities. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 1998;6:351-361.
Lohmander LS, Felson DT. Defining and validating the clinical role of molecular markers in osteoarthritis. In: Osteoarthritis.
Brandt KD, Doherty M, Lohmander LS (eds.) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998;519-530.
Lohmander LS, Saxne T, Heinegard D, editors. Molecular markers of joint and skeletal diseases. Acta Orthop Scand 1995;66
(suppl):1-212.
Mansson B, Carey D, Alini M, Ionescu M, Rosenberg LC, Poole AR, Heinegard D, Saxne T. Cartilage and bone metabolism in
rheumatoid arthritis. Differences between rapid and slow progression of disease identified by serum markers of cartilage
metabolism. J Clin Invest 1995;95:1071-1077.
Sharif M, George E, Shepstone L, Knudson W, Thonar EJ, Cushnaghan J, Dieppe P. Serum hyaluronic acid level as a predictor
of disease progression in osteoarthritis of the knee. Arthritis Rheum 1995a;38:760-767.
Sharif M, Saxne T, Shepstone L, Kirwan JR, Elson CJ, Heinegard D, Dieppe PA. Relationship between serum cartilage
oligomeric matrix protein levels and disease progression in osteoarthritis of the knee joint. Br J Rheumatol 1995b;34:306-
310.
Spector TD, Hart DJ, Nandra D, Doyle DV, Mackillop N, Gallimore JR, Pepys MB. Low-level increases in serum C-reactive
protein are present in early osteoarthritis of the knee and predict progressive disease. Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:723-727.
Collagen Type II Cross-Linked Telopeptides: A Promising Marker of Cartilage Degradation in
Arthritis
David Eyre, Ph.D.
Burgess Professor of Orthopedic Research, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
A specific cartilage degradation marker has potential value in chondro-protective drug development and clinical
management of arthritis patients. There is a need for minimally invasive biochemical assays that can assess the rate
of cartilage degradation in patients with degenerative joint diseases. The collagen framework of cartilage turns over
extremely slowly in the normal adult, and its gross degradation in articular cartilage is believed to be a critical,
irreversible event in osteoarthritis. A degradation assay for cartilage collagen is particularly desirable. We describe
an advance in developing an immunoassay designed to measure pyridinoline cross-linked telopeptides from type II
collagen in human urine, serum, and synovial fluid.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 251
Synovial Fluid Markers of Osteoarthritis
Kenneth D. Brandt, M.D.
Professor of Medicine and Head, Rheumatology Division; Director Multipurpose Arthritis and Musculoskeletal
Diseases Center, Indiana University Medical Center, USA
Development of potential disease-modifying osteoarthritis (OA) drugs has prompted efforts to develop outcome
measures of OA progression in humans. Although interest exists in various imaging procedures and arthroscopy,
these techniques have not been validated or been proved suitable for use in clinical trials. Interest has grown,
therefore, in biochemical/immunochemical tests for monitoring OA progression. Given the problems that exist in
relating the serum concentration of a cartilage-derived molecule to events in an index joint, it has been suggested
that synovial fluid (SF) measurements may be more useful as markers of disease activity or severity in OA.
However, unless factors that affect the kinetics of removal from the joint are taken into account, the SF
concentration of these molecules cannot be a valid quantitative indicator of changes in articular cartilage
metabolism. Although synovitis increases clearance of proteins from the joint space, we found that even after
adjustment for the increased clearance rate in the OA knee, the synovial fluid concentration of sulfated
glycosaminoglycans (most of which are derived from the cartilage) did not correlate with the severity of concurrent
or subsequent cartilage damage. This emphasizes that the SF concentration of a cartilage-derived marker is related
not only to its clearance but also to other, more proximal variables, such as its rate of degradation, matrix
permeability, and the rate of synthetic activity by chondrocytes in the OA cartilage.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
252
Severe Infections and Septic Shock
Objectives
* Review state of current biomarkers and surrogate endpoints in sepsis clinical research
! What is the experience to date in clinical trials with specific biomarkers and secondary endpoints?
! What is the association of biomarkers and surrogate endpoints with mortality or organ failure?
! How do physiologic endpoints (e.g., reversal of shock, development of organ failure) interact
with biomarkers and mortality?
! Have these physiologic endpoints been affected by the experimental therapies?
* Discuss role of biomarkers and surrogate endpoints in enhancing development of trials of novel
therapies for septic shock and review their role in preclinical and clinical studies in measuring
therapeutic and adverse effects of agents
! Can substitution of biomarkers for clinical endpoints be used to evaluate the safety and efficacy
of a novel therapy?
! What is necessary to validate biomarkers in preclinical and clinical studies?
! Can information be obtained from existing databases of completed trials to validate biomarkers?
! Will trial design be improved with novel endpoints?
! Can biomarkers be applied as a surrogate endpoints in Phase III trials of therapies for sepsis?
* Discuss how novel technologies may contribute to the development of biomarkers and facilitate the
identification of target populations
! What strategies are necessary to incorporate novel technologies (e.g., functional and structural
imaging, patterns of gene expression via CDNA microarray technology, gene polymorphisms,
cell signaling markers, circulating biomarkers, functional assays such as proinflammatory activity
of body fluids, banked tissues from clinical trials) in the development of novel biomarkers?
! How should the new technologies be validated in preclinical and clinical applications?
! What resources are available to fund biomarker research, including new technology application,
development of tissue and blood banks from clinical trials, and consortium development?
Moderators: T.R. Martin, M.D., University of Washington and Seattle Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
USA
A.F. Suffredini, M.D., National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 253
Overview of Biomarkers and Secondary Endpoints in Sepsis
Anthony F. Suffredini, M.D.
Critical Care Medicine Department, Clinical Center National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
Major breakthroughs for the treatment of sepsis remain elusive. More than 10,000 patients (21 studies) have been
enrolled in trials of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents in septic shock, and no agent has altered outcomes. When
the treatment effects from these trials are pooled, a small (3 percent) beneficial effect, equal to a 7-percent reduction
in mortality, is found (Natanson et al. 1998). These data suggest that mediator-specific anti-inflammatory therapies
as currently applied (e.g., patient selection, dose, duration of therapy) have at most only small beneficial effects.
Power analysis suggests that demonstrating these modest effects would require large trials (more than 5,000
patients). To date, however, clinical parameters (e.g., severity of illness scores) or biologic markers (e.g., blood
cytokine and endotoxin levels or cell antigen expression) have not proven useful for selecting patients for these
inflammation-modifying therapies (Reinhart et al. 1996; Abraham et al. 1998). Although biomarkers in some
diseases correlate with pathogenesis and outcome (e.g., CD4 cell counts in HIV infection), syndromes such as sepsis
are more difficult to characterize because the clinical importance of biomarkers may depend on their context (e.g.,
tumor neurosis factor [TNF] has beneficial and harmful effects) and the net effects of other signaling molecules
(Brandtzaeg et al. 1996). Identifying new host or microbial-derived biomarkers, refining the use of existing markers,
and developing models that reflect the complex nature of these interactions will be important in future clinical trial
development.
Key References:
Abraham E, Anzueto A, Gutierrez G, Tessler S, San Pedro G, Wunderink R, Dal Nogare A, Nasraway S, Berman S, Cooney R,
Levy H, Baughman R, Rumbak M, Light RB, Poole L, Allred R, Constant J, Pennington J, Porter S. Double-blind
randomised controlled trial of monoclonal antibody to human tumor necrosis factor in treatment of septic shock.
NORASEPT II Study Group. Lancet 1998;351:929-933.
Brandtzaeg P, Osnes L, Ovstebo R, Joo GB, Westvik AB, Kierulf P. Net inflammatory capacity of human septic shock plasma
evaluated by a monocyte-based target cell assay: Identification of interleukin-10 as a major functional deactivator of human
monocytes. J Exp Med 1996;184:51-60.
Natanson C, Esposito CJ, Banks SM. The sirens' songs of confirmatory sepsis trials: Selection bias and sampling error
[editorial]. Crit Care Med 1998;26:1927-1931.
Reinhart K, Wiegand-Lohnert C, Grimminger F, Kaul M, Withington S, Treacher D, Eckart J, Willattts S, Bouza C, Krausch D,
Stockenhuber F, Eiselstein J, Daum L, Kempeni J. Assessment of the safety and efficacy of the monoclonal anti-tumor
necrosis factor antibody-fragment, MAK 195F, in patients with sepsis and septic shock: A multicenter, randomized,
placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study. Crit Care Med 1996;24:733-742.
IL-6 and Tumor Necrosis Factor Levels as Markers of Response in Sepsis Trials
Edward Abraham, M.D.
Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, USA
Although elevated circulating IL-6 levels have been shown to correlate with poor outcome in septic patients, it
has been more difficult to show any relation between IL-6 and response to therapy. The INTERSEPT and
NORASEPT II trials examined the utility of a murine antitumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) alpha monoclonal
antibody in patients with septic shock. In neither study was any predictive value associated with IL-6 levels and
response to anti-TNF therapy. Similarly, a p55 TNF receptor fusion protein was studied in two clinical trials of
patients with severe sepsis with or without hypotension. Although there was a significant relationship in both studies
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
254
between IL-6 levels and outcome, there was no predictive value apparent for response to anti-TNF therapy and IL-6
levels. In contrast, a small study using Fab fragments of a murine monoclonal antibody showed a linear relationship
between dose of this anti-TNF therapy and improved survival, but only in patients with IL-6 levels greater than
1,000 pg/mL. Such results were unable to be confirmed in a larger European study. However, a large North
American study of more than 2,000 patients aimed at further examining the relationship between IL-6 levels and
outcome to this anti-TNF therapy was recently completed, and results should be available shortly. Circulating levels
of TNF are present in only a minority of patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. However, in the NORASEPT II
trial, those patients with detectable plasma TNF alpha levels seemed to have better response to the anti-TNF
antibody than patients without such elevations in circulating TNF.
Key References:
Abraham E, Marshall JC. Sepsis and mediator-directed therapy: Rethinking the target population. Mol Med Today 1999;5:56-58.
Tracey KJ, Abraham E. From mouse to man: Or what have we learned about cytokine-based anti-inflammatory therapies. Shock
1999;11:224-225.
Cytokine Balance in Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome: Implications for Detecting Acute Lung
Injury
Thomas R. Martin, M.D.
University of Washington School of Medicine, USA
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is characterized by an intense inflammatory response in the lungs
that begins before ARDS is clinically evident. Markers of inflammation in blood and lungs were among the first
measurements made to predict the onset and outcome of ARDS. Despite initial studies in small samples, single
cytokine markers in blood and lung fluids are not consistently predictive. The biological activity of individual
cytokines is determined by the balance between cytokines and their naturally occurring inhibitors and by other
factors, such as binding to tissue matrix. In the Seattle ARDS Specialized Center of Research program, we have
prospectively studied 25 patients at risk for ARDS and 45 with established ARDS, using serial bronchoalveolar
lavage. Proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines are detectable in the lungs of patients at risk, increase at the
onset of ARDS, and decline with time. For tumor necrosis factor alpha, IL-1alpha, and IL-6, the molar
concentrations of naturally occurring inhibitors (sTNFRI and II, IL-1RA, sIL-6R and others) exceed those of the
ligands at all times by tenfold or more. High concentrations of anti-IL-8 IgG and alpha-2-macroglobulin, which
binds IL-8, also are present. The only cytokine that increases with time in ARDS is migration inhibitory factor, a
naturally occurring antagonist of the inhibitory effects of cortisol on macrophage cytokine production. Neither the
cytokines nor their inhibitors were strong predictors of outcome. Thus, cytokine balance complicates the use of
single cytokine measurements as predictors of ARDS. Markers of the effects of inflammation on the structural
components of the alveolar wall may prove to be more useful in predicting the onset or outcome of ARDS.
Key References:
Donnelly SC, Strieter RM, Kunkel S, Walz A, Robertson CR, Carter DC, Grant IS, Pollock AJ, Haslett C. Interleukin-8 and
development of adult respiratory distress syndrome in at-risk groups. Lancet 1993;341:643-647.
Goodman RB, Strieter RM, Steinberg KP, Milberg JA, Martin DP, Maunder RJ, Kunkel SL, Walz A, Hudson LD, Martin TR.
Inflammatory cytokines in patients with persistence of the acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1996;154:602-611.
Martin TR. Cytokines and the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS): A question of balance. Nat Med 1997;3:272-273.
Miller EJ, Nagao S, Griffith D, Maunder RJ, Martin TR, Wiener-Kronish JP, Matthay MA, Sticherling M, Chrostophers E,
Cohen AB. Elevated levels of NAP-1/interleukin-8 are present in the airspaces of patients with the adult respiratory distress
syndrome and are associated with increased mortality. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;146:427-432.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 255
Pittet JF, Mackersie R, Martin TR, Matthay MA. Biological markers of acute lung injury: Prognostic and pathogenetic
significance. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;155:1187-1205.
Suter PM, Suter S, Girardin E, Roux-Lombard P, Grau GE, Dayer JM. High bronchoalveolar levels of tumor necrosis factor and
its inhibitors, interleukin-1, interferon, and elastase, in patients with adult respiratory distress syndrome after trauma, shock,
or sepsis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;145:1016-1022.
Nonmortal Clinical Endpoints for Trials in Critically Ill Patients
Gordon R. Bernard, M.D.
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, USA
The cause of death in most intensive care unit (ICU) patients is multiple organ dysfunction or failure (MOD).
Life support is increasingly effective (at least in the short term). Well-established methods exist for outcome
prediction (e.g., APACHE, SAPS, MPM), but there are no well-established methods for systematically quantifying
morbidity (or severity of illness). We hypothesized that standardized assessment of organ dysfunction can be used as
a tool to measure important clinical morbidity in clinical trials and clinical practice. Methods included development
of standard definitions through a series of consensus conferences (Antioxidants in ARDS Study Group, Chicago,
July 1993; Acute Lung Injury Specialized Center of Research Coordination Group, Bethesda, September 1993;
Sepsis Round Table Group, Brussels, March 1994). The selection criteria for MOD assessment variables were that
they be (1) simply and easily measured, (2) useful in heterogeneous groups of patients, (3) reflective of specific
organ function, (4) unaffected by therapeutic interventions that may appear to but do not restore organ function, (5)
a continuous variable, (6) abnormal in only one direction, and (7) correlative with increasing mortality. Results will
be presented at the conference. MOD assessment is simple and easy to apply and describes ICU morbidity in a
clinically meaningful manner and when combined with OFF (organ failure-free) day analysis, avoids the
confounding effect of high mortality rates. Such a measure would be a useful standard measure of outcome in
clinical trials in critically ill subjects. It is likely to be a more sensitive and specific outcome variable than mortality
in clinical trials in the critically ill.
Key References:
Arons M, Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, et al. Developing an improved lung injury score. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1997;155(4):A584.
Arons M, Wheeler AP, Hudson LD, Carroll FE, Morris PM, Summer W, Schein R, Swindell B, Steinberg K, Wright P,
Fulkerson W, Bernard GR. Chest x-rays, gas exchange measurements and the lung parenchymal injury score in patients
with sepsis induced lung injury. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;153(4):A123.
Bernard GR, Artigas A, Brigham KL, Carlet J, Falke K, Hudson L, Lamy M, LeGall JR, Morris A, Spragg R, Consensus
Committee. Report of the American-European Consensus Conference on Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Part I):
Definitions, mechanisms, relevant outcomes, and clinical trial coordination. Simultaneous publication in J Crit Care
1994;9(1):72-81; Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994;149:818-824; Intensive Care Med 1994;20:225-232.
Bernard GR, Doig G, Hudson LD, Lemeshow S, Marshall JC, Russell J, Sibbald W, Sprung CL, Vincent JL, Wheeler AP.
Quantification of organ failure for clinical trials and clinical practice. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;151(4):A323.
Hebert PC, Russell JA, Drummond AJ, Singer J, Bernard GR. A simple multiple system organ failure scoring system predicts
mortality of patients who have sepsis syndrome. Chest 1993;104:230-235.
Marshall JC, Cook DJ, Christou NV, Bernard GR, Sprung CL, Sibbald WJ. The multiple organ dysfunction (MOD) score: A
reliable descriptor of a complex clinical outcome. Crit Care Med 1995;23(10):1638-1652.
Singer J, Russell J, Drummond A, Fulkerson W, Hudson L, Schein R, Steinberg K, Summer W, Wheeler A, Wright P, Bernard
GR. Multiple organ dysfunction evaluation system (MODES) as an outcome of human sepsis syndrome: correlation with
mortality. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;153(4):A833.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
256
Prospects for Functional Immune Assessment in Severe Infections and Septic Shock
Stephen F. Lowry, M.D.
University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, New
Jersey, USA
Critical care risk evaluation systems that utilize demographic and biochemical parameters have been proposed as
a means to direct some therapeutic decisions or to evaluate responses to therapy. The refinement of additional
disease or condition-specific biomarkers to enhance therapeutic decisions has great appeal but lacks prospective
investigation. In theory, such a biomarker should be definitively altered by the prevailing clinical condition and
responsive to intervention. Such markers should also be attainable in real time, be cost effective, and exhibit a high
degree of sensitivity and specificity with respect to clinical outcome (surrogate endpoint). The function of solid
organs is currently assessed by biochemical or clinical parameters that do not provide insight into the competence of
the innate and acquired immune systems. Toward this end, recent efforts to quantify soluble inflammatory mediators
or their respective soluble or cell-associated receptors suggest that such an approach is clinically feasible and
potentially useful as a surrogate endpoint of disease severity in critically ill patients. It remains to be established that
such markers are responsive to novel therapies. Results of these studies and the prospects for development of
biomarkers of immune function will be discussed.
Key References:
Calvano SE, Coyle SM, Barbosa KS, Barie PS, Lowry SF. Multivariate analysis of nine disease-associated variables for outcome
prediction in patients with sepsis. Arch Surg 1998;133:1347-1350.
Hubl W, Wolfbauer G, Streicher J, Andert S, Stanek G, Fitzal S, Bayer PM. Differential expression of tumor necrosis factor
receptor subtypes on leukocytes in systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Crit Care Med 1999;27:319-324.
Validating Biomarkers and Ascertaining their Relationship to Clinical Endpoints
Polly E. Parsons, M.D.
Denver Health Medical Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, USA
Patients with sepsis are not a homogeneous population (Parsons and Moss 1996; Abraham et al., in press). They
frequently have preexisting/comorbid conditions, including alcohol abuse and diabetes, that contribute to outcome
and influence biomarker measurements. In 351 patients at risk for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), we
found that the incidence of ARDS was 43 percent in those with a history of alcohol abuse compared with 22 percent
for those who were not alcoholic (Moss et al. 1996). The effect was most pronounced in the cohort of septic patients
(n=109) in which the incidence of ARDS was 52 percent in the alcoholics compared with 20 percent. In 113 patients
with septic shock, we found that the incidence of ARDS was 25 percent for those with diabetes (n = 32) compared
with 47 percent for those without (Moss et al. 1997). Alcohol abuse and diabetes also affect the measurements of
biomarkers. ICAM-1 levels are decreased in the circulation of septic patients with a history of alcohol abuse
compared with septic patients without alcohol abuse (Moss et al. 1998), and patients at risk for and with diabetes
have increased levels of ICAM-1 in their circulation (Lampeter et al. 1992; Roep et al. 1994). Numerous other
preexisting/comorbid conditions, including renal failure, liver disease, age, gender, and drug abuse -- which could
also influence clinical outcomes and biomarker measurements -- remain to be investigated.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 257
Key References:
Abraham E, Dinarello CA, Matthay MA, Vincent JL, Cohen J, Opal SM, Glauser M, Parsons PE, Fisher CJ, Repine JE.
Consensus conference definitions for sepsis, septic shock, acute lung injury, and ARDS -Time for a re-evaluation. Crit Care
Med, in press.
Lampeter ER, Kishimoto TK, Mainolfi EA, Rothlein R, Bertrams J, Kolb H, Martin S. Elevated levels of circulating adhesion
molecules in IDDM patients and subjects at risk of IDDM. Diabetes 1992;41:1668-1671.
Moss M, Bucher B, Moore FA, Moore EE, Parsons PE. Predicting the development of the Adult Respiratory Distress Syndrome:
The role of chronic alcohol abuse. JAMA 1996;275:50-54.
Moss M, Duhon G, Brown LAS, Guidot G. Chronic alcohol abuse is associated with reduced soluble ICAM-1 levels in patients
at risk for the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:A682.
Moss M, Steinberg K, Guidot D, Duhon G, Treece P, Wolken R, Hudson L, Parsons PE. Diabetic patients with septic shock have
a decreased incidence of the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;155:A503.
Parsons PE, Moss M. Early detection and markers of sepsis. Clin Chest Med 1996;17:199-212.
Roep B, Hedenthal E, De Vries R, Kolb H, Martin S. Soluble forms of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 in insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus. Lancet 1994;343:1590-1593.
Severity of Infectious Challenge Alters the Effects of Anti-Inflammatory Agents in Sepsis
Peter Q. Eichacker, M.D.
Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, USA
Although anti-inflammatory agents were shown to markedly improve survival in published animal models of
sepsis, these agents have had at best only small beneficial effects in clinical sepsis trials. These differing results
suggest that factors encountered in clinical trials were not controlled for in preclinical studies. One such factor may
be the severity of infectious challenge. Humans were studied in sepsis trials with mortality rates of 30 to 50 percent,
whereas published preclinical trials were performed in animal models with 70 to 90 percent mortality rates. We
therefore investigated the relationship between control mortality and the effects of anti-inflammatory agents on
survival in animal studies of sepsis we performed as well as in published animal and human trials. Both in our own
animal studies as well as those in the literature, there was a significant association between control mortality and the
effects of anti-inflammatory agents on survival. Agents were most beneficial at high mortality rates. As mortality
rates decreased, agents became less effective or even harmful. The small beneficial effects of anti-inflammatory
agents in clinical trials, where control mortality was not high, were consistent with findings in animal studies. Thus,
severity of infectious challenge may be an important factor altering the effects of anti-inflammatory agents in sepsis.
Anti-inflammatory agents may be most beneficial in septic patients with a high likelihood of dying. However, these
agents may have little effect or be harmful in septic patients with less severe infections associated with a low
mortality rate. These findings suggest that effective use of anti-inflammatory agents in sepsis may not be possible
unless reliable markers differentiating the severity of infection in patients can be identified.
cDNA Microarray Applications in Critical Care Medicine
Robert L. Danner, M.D.
Critical Care Medicine Department, Warren G. Magnuson Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
258
cDNA microarray technology promises to become a pivotal tool in understanding the functional genomics of
complex diseases (Heller et al.1997). Critically ill or injured patients frequently die of incompletely understood
conditions such as septic shock, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and ultimately multiple organ dysfunction
syndrome. Activation of host inflammatory pathways causes tissue injury and thereby acts as a major pathogenic
mechanism in these syndromes. At a basic level, the clinical and biological manifestations of host responses are
determined by quantitative and qualitative changes in gene expression. Therefore, organ injury syndromes might be
defined by their associated patterns of altered gene expression. From paired samples of cells or tissues, cDNA
microarrays can quantitate relative changes in mRNA levels for thousands of genes simultaneously (Chen et al.
1998). Furthermore, cDNA microarrays can be used to detect genetic polymorphisms that affect outcome and to
identify new gene targets for drug development (Ramsay 1998). Because cDNA microarrays generate huge data sets
even from relatively simple experiments, difficulties with validating and conceptually handling this quantity of
information need to be resolved. Clustering data from genes with shared characteristics, developing software to aid
in the interpretation of results, and rapidly making results widely available (Iyer et al. 1999) are some potential
approaches to these problems. Serial samples from patients, human or rodent models, and cultured cells could be
used to create a public-domain, functional genomics database relevant to investigating septic shock and multiple
organ failure.
Key References:
Chen JJ, Wu R, Yang PC, Huang JY, Sher YP, Han MH, Kao WC, Lee PJ, Chiu TF, Chang F, Chu YW, Wu CW, Peck K.
Profiling expression patterns and isolating differentially expressed genes by cDNA microarray system with colorimetry
detection. Genomics 1998;91:313-324.
Heller RA, Schena M, Chai A, Shalon D, Bedilion T, Gilmore J, Woolley DE, Davis RW. Discovery and analysis of
inflammatory disease-related genes using cDNA microarrays. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1997;94:2150-2155.
Iyer VR, Eisen MB, Ross DT, Schuler G, Moore T, Lee JCF, Trent JM, Staudt LM, Hudson J Jr, Boguski MS, Lashkari D,
Shalon D, Botstein D, Brown PO. The transcriptional program in the response on human fibroblasts to serum. Science
1999;283:83-87.
Ramsay G. DNA chips: State of the art (Review). Nature Biotech 1998;16:40-44.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints for Anti-inflammatory Therapies for Sepsis
Jay P. Siegel
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, FDA, USA
Mortality, the endpoint of primary clinical interest in sepsis,occurs in about 30% of patients in most trials, usually
within a few days to a few weeks. Thus, frequency and rapidity of the endpoint do not give rise to need for a
surrogate. However, drug development in this area has been extremely difficult, in part because of the broad
diversity of the target population. Sepsis patients differ with regard to many parameters which might influence
response to therapy including site of infection, type of infection, underlying disease, metabolic state, presence of
shock and organ failure. Identifying the optimal target population, dose, regimen, and concomitant therapies could
be greatly facilitated by identification of a marker that effectively predict effects on mortality and or other important
clinical outcomes. However, given the diversity of pathophysiological processes present during sepsis, one must be
cautious about assuming that an agent with a favorable effect on one will not have an unfavorable effect on others.
FDA-coordinated efforts currently underway to analyze sepsis trials to date and to identify useful markers will be
described briefly.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 259
Neurosciences III
Biomarkers for Pain Assessment
Objectives
Modification of the function, chemistry, and structure of neurons is a major determinant of inflammatory
and neuropathic pain. The challenge is to:
* Identify which signals initiate plasticity and develop markers for these
* Characterize the cellular, molecular, and physiological markers that may be involved in pain
responses
* Discover the participation of novel genes in plasticity that are relevant to pain mechanisms
* Use imaging techniques to identify pain-activated areas in humans that may provide opportunities to
follow effectiveness of new therapeutic approaches
* Utilize this information to improve the diagnosis and initiate novel treatment strategies for pain
Moderators: G. Fischbach, M.D., National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, USA
H. Slavkin, D.D.S., Director, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, USA
C. Kitt, Ph.D., National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
260
Imaging Pain: Promise for Diagnosis
M. Catherine Bushnell, Ph.D.
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Pain is a subjective experience that results from injury to cutaneous, musculoskeletal, visceral, or nervous tissue.
Since structural and functional alternations in pain transmission and pain modulation pathways in the central
nervous system can emerge from injuries that are not easily recognized or that appear to be minor, identifying the
neural basis of altered pain perception is often elusive. Human functional brain imaging is an emerging technique
that, with caution, may provide insights into the diagnosis and treatment of pain conditions. Functional magnetic
resonance imaging and high-resolution positron emission tomography have been used to image neural activity
related to peripheral and central neuropathic pain conditions. For example, some neuropathic pain states produce
reduced thalamic activity, whereas allodynia in central nervous system pain patients leads to activation of pain-
related cortical areas such as the anterior cingulate cortex. Functional brain imaging has begun to be used to
compare neural activation patterns related to cutaneous, musculoskeletal, visceral, and neuropathic pain, but data are
not yet available to predict the source of pain based on such activation patterns. Competitive radioligand binding
studies using opiate agonists such as diprenorphin have identified possible forebrain sites of pain-related opiate
actions. Similar radioligand binding studies may prove useful in screening novel analgesic medications. At the
present time, functional brain imaging alone cannot be used to diagnose pain conditions or to determine the
effectiveness of analgesic treatments. However, with appropriately designed experiments and cautious
interpretation, this method may provide important insights into the neural substrate of different pain conditions and
may be useful in evaluating new analgesic treatments.
Key References:
Coghill RC, Talbot JD, Evans AC, Meyer E, Gjedde A, Bushnell MC, Duncan GH. Distributed processing of pain and vibration
by the human brain. J Neurosci 1994;14:4095-4108.
Hsieh JC, Belfrage M, Stone-Elander S, Hansson P, Ingvar M. Central representation of chronic ongoing neuropathic pain
studied by positron emission tomography. Pain 1995;63:225-236.
Iadarola MJ, Max MB, Berman KF, Byas-Smith MG, Coghill RC, Gracely RH, Bennett GJ. Unilateral decrease in thalamic
activity observed with positron emission tomography in patients with chronic neuropathic pain. Pain 1995;63:55-64.
Jones AKP, Qi LY, Fujirawa T, Luthra SK, Ashburner J, Bloomfield P, Cunningham VJ, Itoh M, Fukuda H, Jones T. In vivo
distribution of opioid receptors in man in relation to the cortical projections of the medial and lateral pain systems
measured with positron emission tomography. Neurosci Lett 1991;126:25-28.
Svensson P, Minoshima S, Beydoun A, Morrow TJ, Casey KL. Cerebral processing of acute skin and muscle pain in humans. J
Neurophysiol 1997;78:450-460.
Imaging Modalities and Pharmacologic Markers for Analgesia
James C. Eisenach, M.D.
Wake Forest University School of Medicine, USA
Other than reversal of opiate analgesia with naloxone and imaging of regional brain glucose metabolism or blood
flow before and after opiates, there has been little investigation into imaging and markers of analgesia or analgesic
mechanisms. Development of high-resolution positron emission tomography (PET) scanners and synthesis of highly
selective ligands should allow examination of pharmacologic mechanisms of analgesia and sites of action in
humans. For example, we have recently demonstrated spinal cholinergic activation by PET in response to opiate
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 261
administration, a marker for one site of opiate analgesic activity. In the future, activity at known sites of action could
predict analgesic activity in certain pain syndromes and help guide drug development.
Key References:
Adler LJ, Gyulai FE, Diehl DJ, Mintun MA, Winter PM, Firestone LL. Regional brain activity changes associated with fentanyl
analgesia elucidated by positron emission tomography. Anesth Analg 1997;84(1):120-126.
Iadarola MJ, Berman KF, Zeffiro TA, Byas-Smith MG, Gracely RH, Max MB, Bennett GJ. Neural activation during acute
capsaicin-evoked pain and allodynia assessed with PET. Brain 1998;121(5):931-947.
Mach RH, Voytko ML, Ehrenkaufer RLE, Nader MA, Tobin JR, Efange SMN, Parsons SM, Gage HD, Smith CR, Morton TE.
Imaging of cholinergic terminals using the radiotracer [18F](+)-4-fluorobenzyltrozamicol: In vitro binding studies and
positron emission tomography studies in nonhuman primates. Synapse 1997;25:368-380.
Behavioral Markers of Pain
Francis J. Keefe, Ph.D.
Health Psychology Program, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701, USA
Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience that is typically assessed through self-report measures
such as numeric or adjective rating scales. Although pain is a personal experience, it does have behavioral
correlates. People who have pain may talk about their pain, reduce their activity level, take medication, or exhibit
pain-related body postures or facial expressions. Over the past decade, there has been a growing recognition that an
assessment of such pain-related behaviors may provide a useful supplement to the more typical self-report measures
of pain. The purpose of this presentation is to provide an overview of recent research on the behavioral assessment
of pain. The presentation is divided into three parts. In the first part, the clinical and theoretical rationale for the
measurement of pain behavior is discussed. The second part describes and evaluates behavioral observation
protocols that are increasingly being used to assess pain behavior. These protocols feature the use of trained
observers who systematically observe and code nonverbal pain behaviors that occur in standardized situations or the
natural environment. The reliability and validity of behavioral observation protocols have been supported by
numerous studies carried out in patients suffering from arthritis pain, back pain, and cancer pain. The third part of
this presentation focuses on important future directions for pain behavior assessment. Innovative approaches will be
highlighted, including the use of electronic event monitoring to assess pain medication intake and hand-held
electronic diaries to record day-to-day variations in pain behavior. Taken together, findings from recent studies
suggest that behavioral methods can play an important role in the assessment of pain. These methods provide a
useful adjunct to self-reports of pain and yield information that can be quite helpful in understanding and treating
pain.
Clinical Trial Design Issues for Evaluation of Pain Biomarkers
Christine N. Sang, M.D., M.P.H.
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Neuropathic pain is made up of heterogeneous mechanisms. Such heterogeneous mechanisms are usually
clinically assessed only on the basis of subjective measures of overall pain intensity and unpleasantness. The use of
surrogate markers to distinguish between pain mechanisms may facilitate the conduct of clinical trials and the
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
262
development of new treatment strategies. Study groups or subgroups that address pain mechanisms may be
distinguished ad hoc by using surrogate endpoints, and surrogate endpoints may be used to evaluate patients'
responses to treatment. However, the validity of such endpoints, the clear relationship between the surrogate
endpoint and the true endpoint, is critical to the validity of the data from clinical trials that use these markers. We
will discuss the validation of pain biomarkers using clinical trials to evaluate both the marker itself and the true
endpoint, using intensity and spread of allodynia as a specific example.
Key References:
Eisenach JC, Hood DD, Curry R, Tong C. Alfentanil, but not amitriptyline, reduces pain, hyperalgesia, and allodynia from
intradermal injection of capsaicin in humans. Anesthesiology 1997;86(6):1279-1287.
Liu M, Max MB, Parada S, Rowan JS, Bennett GJ. The sympathetic nervous system contributes to capsaicin-evoked mechanical
allodynia but not pinprick hyperalgesia in humans. J Neurosci 1996;16(22):7331-7335.
Max MB, Byas-Smith MG, Gracely RH, Bennett GJ. Intravenous infusion of the NMDA antagonist, ketamine, in chronic
posttraumatic pain with allodynia: A double-blind comparison to alfentanil and placebo. Clin Neuropharmacol
1995;18(4):360-368.
Park KM, Max MB, Robinovitz E, Gracely RH, Bennett GJ. Effects of intravenous ketamine, alfentanil, or placebo on pain,
pinprick hyperalgesia, and allodynia produced by intradermal capsaicin in human subjects. Pain 1995;63(2):163-172.
Rowbotham MC, Fields HL. The relationship of pain, allodynia and thermal sensation in post-herpetic neuralgia. Brain
1996;119(Pt 2):347-354.
Sang CN, Hostetter MP, Gracely RH, Chappell AS, Schoepp DD, Lee G, Whitcup S, Caruso R, Max MB. AMPA/kainate
antagonist LY293558 reduces capsaicin-evoked hyperalgesia but not pain in normal skin in humans. Anesthesiology
1998;89(5):1060-1067.
Segerdahl M, Ekblom A, Sjolund KF, Belfrage M, Forsberg C, Sollevi A. Systemic adenosine attenuates touch evoked allodynia
induced by mustard oil in humans. Neuroreport 1995;6(5):753-756.
Whitehead WE, Palsson OS. Is rectal pain sensitivity a biological marker for irritable bowel syndrome: Psychological influences
on pain perception. Gastroenterology 1998;115(5):1263-1271.
Biomarkers for Inflammatory Pain
Jon D. Levine, M.D., Ph.D.
University of California at San Francisco, USA
There have been many developments in the understanding of pain on the molecular and cellular levels. With
these developments have come specific markers of the presence of mechanisms highly specific to pain. These
objective markers provide the possibility for unique therapies as well as detection of disruption of what might be
presumed to be necessary mechanisms for the experience of pain. However, our understanding of pain is far
removed from placing it in the objective realm, and the traditional subjective assessments of which the visual analog
scale is the gold standard will undoubtedly continue to be in the forefront in clinical pain research. Nevertheless, the
existence of markers such as the tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium channel, vanilloid receptor, and specific second
messenger isoforms provide an opportunity to explore further the objectification of pain transmission and present
significant potential for pharmacological targeting and as pain transmission markers.
Neuropathology of Pain
Robert R. Myers, Ph.D.
San Diego VA Healthcare Center and the University of California, San Diego, Departments of Anesthesiology and
Pathology (Neuropathology), 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0629, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 263
Recent neuropathology research has identified mechanistic links between nerve injury and pain that have been
useful in understanding neural biomarkers of pain. There are several clinical studies of historical importance that
have sought to link the form of neuropathy with pain conditions, but structure-function relationships have been too
general to provide much prognostic significance. This is due in part to the retrospective protocols of the studies,
which have compared sural nerve biopsies with descriptions of clinical complaints. More recent prospective studies
demonstrate a strong relationship between injury of small sensory nerve fibers and spontaneous neuropathic pain
(Griffin et al.). The strongest correlation in spontaneous neuropathic pain in feet was not with changes in the
morphology of sural nerve biopsies, although small fiber loss was evident in many cases, but with small fiber loss in
distal biopsies of epidermal tissue of the feet. These studies reinforce the thought that sensory fiber loss is a common
feature of neuropathies with spontaneous neuropathic pain, and that the small sensory fiber loss is greatest distally.
Laboratory work has demonstrated quite convincingly that the neuropathies with rapid axonal degeneration are the
most painful, and that the cytokine-driven process of Wallerian degeneration is the link that unites painful
neuropathies of different causes (Myers et al. 1993, 1999). Although predominantly demyelinating neuropathies can
be painful, many of these also involve axonal injury, and it is this component of the neuropathy that best relates to
pain. We believe that the direct effect of tumor necrosis factor alpha, upregulated in response to endoneurial release
of nociceptive neuropeptides and Schwann cell activation, is the key factor that links nerve injury, pain, and
sensitization of the afferent sensory pathway. Thus, markers for cytokine upregulation and axonal degeneration
could provide important diagnostic, prognostic, and treatment endpoint measures without the need for a more
invasive nerve biopsy. In this regard, the recent work of Helena Brisby in Gothenburg, Sweden, is important (Brisby
et al., in press). She has shown that human patients with acute, painful disk herniation in the lumbar spine have
significant increases in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) neurofilaments from injured nerve root axons and increased S-100
protein in CSF, presumably as a consequence of Schwann cell injury during Wallerian degeneration. It is proposed
that continued research to identify molecular markers of axonal injury shed into the blood or CSF will be
instrumental in designing a relatively noninvasive biomarker for pain.
Key References:
Brisby H, Olmarker K, Rosengren L, Cederlund C-G, Rydevik B. Markers of nerve tissue injury in the cerebrospinal fluid in
patients with lumbar disc herniation and sciatica. Spine, in press.
Griffin JW, Herrman D, Scott L, Cornblath DR, Hauer P, McArthur JC. Fiber loss in painful neuropathies. J Periph Nervous Sys,
in press.
Myers RR, Wagner R, Sorkin LS. Hyperalgesia actions of cytokines on the peripheral nervous system. In: Cytokines and Pain:
Progress in Inflammation Research. Watkins L (ed). Basel: Birkhauser Verlag 1999;133-158.
Myers RR, Yamamoto T, Yaksh TL, Powell HC. The role of focal nerve ischemia and Wallerian degeneration in peripheral nerve
injury producing hyperesthesia. Anesthesiology 1993;78:308-316.
A Rat Model of Painful Peripheral Neuropathy as a Biomarker for the Clinical Efficacy of New
Analgesics
Gary J. Bennett, Ph.D.
MCP Hahnemann University, USA
Damage to peripheral somatosensory nerves by disease or trauma sometimes results in a chronic syndrome of
abnormal pain sensation. Examples of such painful peripheral neuropathies include diabetic neuropathy,
posttherapeutic neuralgia, causalgia, and the toxic neuropathy caused by chemotherapy. These abnormal pain
conditions respond poorly or not at all to standard nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and opiate analgesics.
Testing new analgesics in these patients is a difficult and expensive undertaking, and testing in normal animals
seems pointless because neuropathic pain has no obvious counterpart in normal physiology. Recently developed rat
models of painful peripheral neuropathies can serve as biomarkers of clinical conditions, which has led to a rapid
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
264
increase in research for new drug therapies. Several models are available, but only two have been used extensively
in pharmacological research. The chronic constriction injury (CCI) model of Bennett and Xie (1988) is produced by
tying loosely constrictive ligatures around the rat's sciatic nerve at midthigh level. The ligatures evoke intraneural
edema, the swelling is opposed by the ligatures, and the nerve self-strangulates. The spinal nerve transection (SNT)
model developed by Kim and Chung (1992) involves tight ligation (and hence transection) of the L5 and L6 spinal
nerves close to their respective ganglia. Both models produce signs of abnormal pain that resemble those found in
patients -- heat-hyperalgesia, mechanohyperalgesia, mechanoallodynia, and cold-allodynia -- plus signs of
spontaneous pain. The animal models have been accurate in predicting clinical efficacy. Drugs with efficacy in the
rats have efficacy in human patients and vice versa. Moreover, drugs that are weakly effective in rats (e.g.,
carbamazepine and nonspecific Ca2+ channel blockers) are also weakly effective in patients, and drugs that do not
work in rats (e.g., benzodiazepines) are also clinically ineffective. Research with these biomarkers has already led to
the discovery of at least three entirely new classes of drugs that have clinical efficacy: N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor blockers, N-type calcium channel blockers, and gabapentin-like drugs. These drugs have little or no effect
on normal acute pain sensation; thus, they would have been impossible to discover using the animal models
traditionally used to discover new analgesics.
Key References:
Bennett GJ, Xie Y-K. A peripheral mononeuropathy in rat that produces disorders of pain sensation like those seen in man. Pain
1988;33(1):87-107.
Kim SH, Chung JM. An experimental model for peripheral neuropathy produced by segmental spinal nerve ligation in the rat.
Pain 1992;50(3):355-363.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 265
Biomarkers of Toxicity and Surrogate
Endpoints for Safety
Objectives
* Review the current status of toxicology biomarkers in drug development and clinical safety
assessments
! Do we need more information on biomarkers, and are we using our current information wisely?
* Demonstrate that biomarkers can serve as early predictors of insidious adverse effects related to
chronic drug exposures
! What is needed to establish the utility of a biomarker as an indicator of clinically significant
toxicology?
* Discuss the development of genetically modified rodent models as better predictors of drug effects in
humans
! Can or should transgenic humanized models be developed in other species besides the mouse?
* Discuss the clinical application of pharmacogenetics to predict and prevent adverse drug effects
! Do the benefits outweigh the costs/risks associated with clinical pharmacogenetic profiling?
* Identify technological approaches that will provide opportunities for developing more and better
toxicology biomarkers
! What are the roles of industry, academia, and the government in the development of toxicology
biomarkers?
! What are the current barriers to the development of toxicology biomarkers?
Moderators: F. Sistare, Ph.D., Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, USA
J.D. Morrow, M.D., Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
266
The Status of Toxicity Biomarkers and Safety Evaluation Approaches
James T. MacGregor, Ph.D.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, USA
Safety evaluation has traditionally relied on the measurement of clinical chemistry and hematology parameters
that serve as biomarkers of cellular integrity (e.g., serum transaminases) and homeostasis of the organism (e.g.,
blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes) or as indicator cell populations (e.g., white blood cell, host-defense cell
counts). Recently, advances in biological understanding have created the opportunity for new surrogate markers of
toxicity, including (1) inducible damage-specific responses; (2) transgenic animals with humanized characteristics,
accelerated tumor development, and other favorable traits; (3) in vitro human cell models that retain in vivo
characteristics; (4) chemokine and/or cytokine signals as surrogates for tissue damage; (5) more specific and
sensitive molecular markers of organ damage; and (6) the opportunity to use hybridization array, proteomic, and
imaging technologies to improve conventional biomarker assays. These new technologies can be expected to
improve the clinical and nonclinical interface and improve the approaches to both nonclinical and clinical safety
studies.
Key References:
MacGregor JT. Transgenic animal models for mutagenesis studies: Role in mutagenesis research and regulatory testing. Environ
Mol Mutagen 1998;38:106-109.
MacGregor JT, Farr S, Tucker JD, Heddle JA, Tice RR, Turteltaub KW. New molecular endpoints and methods for routine
toxicity testing. Fund Appl Toxicol 1995;26:156-173.
MacGregor JT, Tucker JD, Eastmond DA, Wyrobek AJ. Integration of cytogenetic assays with toxicology studies. Environ Mol
Mutagen 1995;25:328-337.
Cardiac Troponin T as a Biomarker for Monitoring Chronic Doxorubicin Cardiomyopathy
Eugene H. Herman, Ph.D.1
; Jun Zhang, M.D.1
; Steven Lipshultz, M.D.2
; Nader Rifai, Ph.D.3
; Kazuyo Takeda,
M.D.4
; Zu-Xi Yu, M.D.4
; Douglas P. Chadwick, B.S. 1
; and Victor Ferrans, M.D., Ph.D.4
1
Food and Drug Administration, Laurel, Maryland, USA
2
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA
3
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
4
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
The present study sought to determine whether cardiac troponin T (cTnT), a cardiac protein used to diagnose
ischemic myocardial injury, also may be useful in detecting doxorubicin (DXR) cardiotoxicity. Spontaneously
hypertensive rats (SHRs) were given 1 mg/kg DXR weekly. Myocardial tissues and serum samples were collected
and analyzed after 2,4,6,8,10, or 12 weeks of treatment. DXR lesion scores were assessed semiquantitatively by
light microscopy, and serum levels of cTnT were quantified by an ELISA method (Enzyum). Increases of cTnT
(0.03-0.05 ng/mL) in serum and lesion scores of 1 or 1.5 were noted in 1/5 and 2/5 SHRs given 2 or 4 mg/kg DXR,
respectively. All SHRs given 6 mg/kg or more DXR had elevations of cTnT in serum and myocardial lesions. The
average cTnT concentrations and the average lesion scores increased with the cumulative DXR dose (0.13 versus
0.40 ng/ml and 1.4 versus 3.0) in SHRs given 6 and 12 mg/kg DXR, respectively. It is concluded that cTnT is
released from DXR-damaged myocytes, and measurements of serum levels of this protein can provide a sensitive
means for assessing the early and continuing cardiotoxic effects of DXR.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 267
Key References:
Herman E, Lipshultz S, Rifai N, et al. Use of cardiac troponin T levels as an indicator of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity.
Cancer Res 1998;58:195-197.
Lipshultz SE, Rifai N, Sallan SE, Lipsitz SR, Dalton V, Sacks DB, Ottlinger ME. Predictive value of serum cardiac troponin T
(cTnT) in pediatric patients at risk for myocardial injury. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;96:2641-2648.
Preclinical Toxicology Model: Comparing Different Human Variant Alleles in a Mouse Model
Daniel W. Nebert, M.D.; Michael J. Carvan III, Ph.D.; Gary W. Stuart, Ph.D.; and Tim Dalton, Ph.D.
Center for Environmental Genetics (CEG) and Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati
Medical Center, P.O. Box 670056, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0056, USA
Department of Life Sciences, Indiana State University, Terre Haute, IN 47809, USA
Striking interindividual differences in environmental toxicity and cancer susceptibility among human populations
often reflect polymorphisms in drug-metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) and receptors that control DME levels.
Compared with interspecies (human-mouse) differences of twofold to perhaps twentyfold, human interindividual
variability in DME activities or DME receptor affinity has often been shown to vary fourfold to more than 10,000-
fold. How can these different human alleles be studied most effectively and efficiently in an experimental animal
model? Transgenic knock-in technology can be used to insert unique human alleles in place of the orthologous
mouse genes. The knock-in of each gene is a separate targeting event, however, requiring (1) construction of the
targeting vector and transfection into embryonic stem cells, (2) generation of a targeted mouse, and (3) backcross
breeding of the knock-in mouse (at least six times) to produce a suitable genetically homogeneous (99 percent)
background (for decreasing interindividual variability). These experiments require years to complete -- making this
very powerful technology inefficient for routine applications. If, on the other hand, the initial knock-in targeting
vector includes sequences that would allow the knocked-in gene to be exchanged (possibly, even repeatedly) for yet
another new allele, then testing a battery of human polymorphic alleles in transgenic mice could be accomplished in
several months instead of several years. This gene swapping can be done by zygotic injection of the human allele
cassette into the fertilized ovum of the parental knock-in mouse strain or by cloning mice from fibroblasts
containing the nucleus wherein each human allele has already been swapped. In mouse cells, we have succeeded in
gene swapping by exchanging one gene (including its regulatory regions) flanked by heterotypic lox sites with a
second gene (including its regulatory regions) flanked by heterotypic lox sites. This research is supported in part by
National Institutes of Health grants R01 ES07058, R01 ES08147, R01 AG09235, R01 ES06321, and P30 ES06096.
Pharmacogenetics as Applied to Human Drug Safety Testing
Richard M. Weinshilboum, M.D.
Mayo Medical School/Mayo Clinic/Mayo Foundation, USA
A large number of functionally significant, common, genetic polymorphisms for enzymes that participate in drug
and xenobiotic biotransformation have been described over the past three decades. We now appreciate that genetic
polymorphisms for both phase I and phase II drug- and xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes can be important factors
for variation in toxicity after exposure to these agents. Prototypic examples of genetically polymorphic drug-
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
268
metabolizing enzymes will be described in the context of the rapid advances that are occurring in human genomics
as well as molecular pharmacology and toxicology.
The Role of Mass Spectrometry in the Development of Biomarkers
Ian A. Blair, Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania, USA
The quantitation and identification of DNA adducts in biological samples as molecular dosimeters of both
exogenous and endogenous carcinogens require sophisticated analytical methodology because adducts are normally
present in such low concentrations. Mass spectrometric techniques have high sensitivity and are highly specific
because only ions derived from the analyte of interest are monitored. The development of liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry methodology based on the use of atmospheric pressure ionization-based
techniques of electrospray ionization, ionspray, and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization has had a profound
effect on our ability to identify analytes of interest when only trace amounts of material are available. These
techniques are extremely robust and are amenable to the quantitation of DNA adducts in biological samples. High
sensitivity can be attained by the use of selected reaction monitoring of a specific product ion after collision-induced
dissociation has been performed on the protonated molecular ion derived from the analyte of interest. The ability to
use this methodology as a dosimeter for environmental chemicals was exemplified in recent studies we have
conducted on butadiene exposure. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry, in combination with stable isotope
methodology, provided a robust, sensitive, and accurate means to quantify the butadiene derived N7-guanine
adducts. Using this methodology, it was possible to demonstrate the presence of two diastereomeric forms of
trihydroxybutylguanine in liver DNA and to assess the excretion of these DNA adducts in the urine. Studies on
endogenous carcinogens have relied more heavily on the use of gas chromatography/electron capture negative ion
chemical ionization mass spectrometry because of the high sensitivity of this technique. However, liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry has been very useful for identifying novel targets for molecular dosimeters.
Using this methodology, we have recently identified a new reactive electrophilic aldehyde from the breakdown of
lipid peroxides that form covalent adducts with DNA bases. The characterization of these DNA adducts has
provided two novel biomarkers that can be employed to assess exposure to oxidative stress. This research is
supported by National Institutes of Health grant CA63878.
Key References:
Chaudhary AK, Nokubo M, Marnett LJ, Blair IA. Analysis of the malondialdehyde-2'- deoxyguanosine adduct in rat liver DNA
by gas chromatography/electron capture negative chemical ionization mass spectrometry. Biol Mass Spectrom
1994;23:457-464.
Chaudhary AK, Nokubo M, Oglesby TD, Marnett LJ, Blair IA. Characterization of endogenous DNA adducts by liquid
chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry. J Mass Spectrom 1995;30:1157-1166.
Chaudhary AK, Nokubo M, Reddy GR, Yeola SN, Morrow J, Blair IA, Marnett LJ. Detection of endogenous malondialdehyde-
deoxyguanosine adducts in human liver. Science 1994;265:1580-1582.
Chaudhary AK, Reddy GR, Blair IA, Marnett LJ. Characterization of an N6-oxopropenyl-2'-deoxyadenosine adduct in
malondialdehyde-modified DNA using liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry.
Carcinogenesis 1996;17:1167-1170.
Kambouris SJ, Chaudhary AK, Blair IA. Liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectroscopy (LC/ESI
MS/MS) analysis of 1,2-epoxybutene adducts of purine deoxynucleosides. Toxicology 1996;113:331-335.
McCoull KD, Rindgen D, Blair IA, Penning TM. Synthesis and characterization of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ortho-
quinone depurinating N7-guanine adducts. Chem Res Toxicol 1999;In press.
Muller M, Belas FJ, Blair IA, Guengerich FP. Analysis of 1,N2-ethenoguanine and 5,6,7,9-tetrahydro-7-hydroxy-9-
oxoimidazo[1,2-a]purine in DNA treated with 2-chlorooxirane by high performance liquid chromotography/electrospray
mass spectrometry and comparison of amounts to other DNA adducts. Chem Res Toxicol 1997;10:242-247.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 269
Oe T, Kambouris SJ, Walker VE, Meng Q, Recio L, Wherli S, Chaudhary AK, Blair IA. Persistence of N7-(1,2:3,4-
trihydroxy)guanine adducts in the livers of mice and rats exposed to 1,3-butadiene. Chem Res Toxicol 1999;12:247-257.
Rouzer CA, Chaudhary AK, Nokubo M, Ferguson DM, Reddy GR, Blair IA, Marnett LJ. Analysis of the malondialdehyde-2'-
deoxyguanosine adduct pyrimidopurinone in human leukocyte DNA by gas chromatography/electron capture/negative
chemical ionization/mass spectrometry. Chem Res Toxicol 1997;10:181-188.
Toxicogenomics in Safety Assessment
Ronald D. Tyler, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Director International Strategic Toxicological Sciences, Medicines Safety Evaluation, Glaxo Wellcome Research
and Development, Ware, England, UK
Most toxicities that are not lethal within minutes are likely to have some impact on gene expression, be a result of
gene expression, or both. Some of the gene expression changes (GECs) that occur as toxicity develops are expected
to be unique to the mechanism of toxicity (e.g., free radical production, inhibition of cellular respiration). Some
GECs are expected to be unique to the type of toxicity (e.g., apoptosis, nongenotoxic carcinogenicity) but common
among mechanisms that cause the same type of toxicity. Other GECs are expected to be adaptive in response to
changes in such things as blood pressure, nutrition, and so forth. Determination of GECs that reliably indicate the
above would allow development of gene expression-based biomarkers of toxicity. The most valuable GECs will
probably be critical core genes that have been conserved during evolution. These GECs will be shared among
species, greatly improving interspecies comparisons and extrapolations. If gene expression analysis in discovery and
toxicology studies identify GECs indicative of toxicity and in vitro studies with human and animal cell lines
establish that the human gene homologs behave as the animal genes do, GECs can be used as biomarkers of toxicity
in clinical trials and patients. These biomarkers will be especially valuable when they occur in easily assessable
tissues (e.g., lymphocytes) and for early detection of chronic toxicity. Although functional or morphologic evidence
of chronic toxicities may take weeks to years to develop, characteristic GECs likely occur in hours or days.
Identification of these GECs would enable early detection of the chronic toxicity, markedly shortening necessary
animal studies and protecting clinical trial subjects and patients. To fully harvest the benefit of gene expression
analysis, reliable broad gene coverage technologies, computer systems capable of manipulating large data sets, and
scientists that understand pathophysiology at the molecular and transcriptional level are necessary. Development of
these technologies, systems, and scientists should be a major focus of future resource commitment.
Gene Expression Analysis for Toxicology: Moving Beyond Phenomenology
Spencer B. Farr, Ph.D.
Phase-1 Molecular Toxicology, Sante Fe, New Mexico, USA
The science of toxicology is changing radically. There are two fundamental forces compelling this change: (1)
high-throughput chemical library synthesis and screening and (2) the human genome project and attendant
technology for rapid polymorphism and expression analysis. Toxicologists are faced with the challenge of
developing high-throughput toxicity screens to keep pace with the increased number of "hits" derived from
upstream screening activities. In addition, toxicologists will need to better understand the interaction between a
potential drug and the individual genetic makeup of the patient exposed to that compound. To make meaningful
progress in either area, toxicologists will have to effectively assimilate and wisely use an avalanche of information.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
270
Without appropriate bioinformatics developed specifically for these challenges, the effort will be stunted. The
purpose of this presentation is to present an overview of the interplay among screening, molecular toxicologic
analysis, and associated informatics.
Additional Thoughts on Toxicity Biomarkers: The Isoprostanes, Indices of Oxidative Stress In Vivo
Jason D. Morrow, M.D.
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, USA
Over the past decade, the role that oxidant stress plays in human pathophysiology has received considerable
attention. A number of biomarkers have been developed to measure oxidative injury although most have serious
shortcomings when applied to the assessment of oxidant stress in vivo. We have previously described a series of
prostaglandin F2-like compounds, termed F2-isoprostanes (F2-IsoPs), produced independently of the
cyclooxygenase enzyme by the free-radical-catalyzed peroxidation of arachidonic acid in vivo in humans. A large
body of evidence suggests that quantification of these compounds is an accurate index of lipid peroxidation in vitro
and in vivo. F2-IsoPs can be quantified by mass spectrometry or immunologically. A particular interest of mine is
the role of oxidative injury in atherosclerosis and neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. We have
found that risk factors for atherosclerosis are associated with markedly increased circulating levels of F2-IsoPs and
that antioxidants such as vitamin E, which decrease the incidence of atherosclerosis, suppress plasma F2-IsoP levels.
Furthermore, F2-IsoPs are selectively increased in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with Alzheimer's disease, and
levels correlate with disease severity. Therefore, these studies suggest that quantification of F2-IsoPs may provide a
useful biomarker of oxidant stress in humans.
Key References:
Montine TJ, Morrow JD. Increased CSF F2-isoprostane levels in probable Alzheimer's disease. Neurology 1999;52:562-565.
Morrow JD, et al. The isoprostanes-unique bioactive markers of lipid peroxidation. Prog Lipid Res 1997;36:1-21.
Roberts LJ, Morrow JD. Isoprostanes as markers of lipid peroxidation in atherosclerosis. In: Molecular and Cellular Basis of
Inflammation. Serhan CN (ed.) Totowa NJ: Humana Press, 1998;141-163.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 271
Osteoporosis Biomarkers and
Surrogate Endpoints
Objectives
* Assess the current status of biomarkers as surrogate endpoints in clinical trials of osteoporosis
interventions
* Address future needs and opportunities in the assessment of bone structure and function using
imaging technologies
* Translate advances in the understanding of osteoporosis pathogenesis into improved clinical
measures to assess change in bone mineralization status
* Consider current measures of bone absorption and reabsorption as biomarkers and surrogate
endpoints in osteoporosis clinical trials
* Develop strategies to stimulate research on biomarkers and their use as surrogate endpoints in clinical
trials for osteoporosis interventions
Moderators: S.R. Cummings, M.D., University of California, San Francisco, USA
S. Sherman, Ph.D., National Institute on Aging, USA
J. McGowan, M.D., National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases,
USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
272
Surrogate Endpoints for Treatment-Induced Change in Risk of Osteoporotic Fractures:
Introduction
Steven R. Cummings, M.D.
University of California, San Francisco Coordinating Center, USA
Bone mass, measured in a number of ways, is strongly associated with the risk of fracture. In addition,
biochemical markers of bone resorption and formation can be measured in urine or serum. Single measurements of
these markers are related to the subsequent risk of fracture. To be useful surrogates for the effect of treatment on the
risk of fracture, changes in these markers during treatment should predict changes in the risk of fractures. This
session will review the evidence that changes in these markers predict changes in risk of fracture. In addition, we
will review how well two common outcomes, changes in vertebral dimensions on x-ray and changes in stature
during treatment, predict change in risk of nonspinal fractures and morbidity. The goals of the session are to review
the state of the art in biomarkers and surrogate endpoints for change in fracture risk and identify key questions that
still need to be addressed.
Osteoporosis: Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints
Samarendra N. Dutta, M.D., Ph.D.
Division of Metabolism and Endocrine Drug Products, Food and Drug Administration (Retired), USA
Biochemical markers of bone turnover reflect bone remodeling at the skeletal level and provide information about
bone formation (by the osteoblast) and resorption (by the osteoclast). Important formation markers include serum
bone alkaline phosphatase (BAP) and serum osteocalcin or bone-gla-protein (OC). Specific markers of bone
resorption include urinary pyridinoline crosslinks (Pyr), urinary deoxypyridinoline crosslinks (dPyr), and their
amino- and carboxy-terminal telopeptides NTx and CTx. Serum formation markers are secreted by the osteoblast
and are subject to less biologic variation. Diurnal variation of serum BAP is also less evident. Urine assays of
resorption markers usually show high biologic variability, and their clinical usefulness is also limited due to diurnal
variation. Potential uses of these markers are to (1) predict bone loss at menopause to identify "fast" versus "slow"
bone losers, (2) monitor response to antiresorptive therapy in postmenopausal osteoporosis, (3) estimate fracture
risk, (4) predict changes in bone mineral density to antiresorptive therapy, and (5) monitor compliance with
treatment. However, biochemical markers provide little or no help in the diagnosis of osteoporosis. Significant
changes in biochemical markers are generally observed within 3 to 6 months of treatment with antiresorptive drugs
in postmenopausal osteoporosis. In response to treatment, changes in formation markers lag behind changes in
resorption markers. Conflicting data in the literature preclude the use of these markers as surrogate of any efficacy
endpoints in clinical practice. The clinical utility of these markers other than in postmenopausal osteoporosis has not
been clearly demonstrated. Future long-term longitudinal studies with measurements of specific markers of bone
formation and resorption will lead to a better understanding of their clinical usefulness.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 273
Is Change in Bone Mineral Density an Adequate Surrogate for Assessing the Effect of
Antiresorptive Medications on Fracture Risk?
Dennis M. Black, Ph.D., Jim Pearson and Steven R. Cummings, M.D.
University of California, San Francisco, USA
Bone mineral density (BMD) has been shown to be a strong predictor of future fracture risk, and it has been
thought that antiresorptive drugs that reduce fracture risk do so by improving bone mineral density. In fact, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration and other regulatory agencies base their approval of some medications solely on
showing effectiveness for BMD. If the pathway of action of a drug in reducing risk is solely through its effect on
BMD, then a drug's effect on BMD should accurately predict its effect on fracture risk. To test this hypothesis, we
compared the BMD effects to vertebral fracture effects from a large number of recent clinical trials of osteoporosis
medications. To compile a comprehensive list of trials, we performed MEDLINE searches of the published
literature, examined abstracts from major meetings over the past 2 years, and queried experts in the field. We
included all trials of antiresorptive medications that were large enough to have at least five fractures per treatment.
A total of 11 trials of 6 medications, which randomized a total of about 19,000 women, were included. We
correlated the active/placebo BMD difference to the log of the relative risk for the observed fracture effect and
performed a weighted linear regression analysis. There were two major findings from this analysis. First, we found
that, in general, the studies that showed the largest BMD effects tended to show the largest fracture reductions.
However, despite the large number of studies, the correlation was only moderate and was only marginally
statistically significant (p = .09). Second, we found that the changes in BMD were too small to account for the large
decreases in fracture risk found in these trials. This suggests that factors other than BMD must account for at least
some of the action of these drugs. To confirm these results, we performed an analysis using the method of Freedman
and colleagues to estimate the proportion of the fracture effect that could be explained by the change in BMD in a
large trial of alendronate. The results showed that change in BMD could explain only 15 to 17 percent of the effect
of alendronate. We conclude that BMD only is not an adequate surrogate for assessing the potential effects of a drug
on fracture risk. Since no other surrogates are presently available, trials with fracture endpoints are necessary to
ascertain how effective a drug will be in reducing fracture risk.
Key References:
Black DM, Cummings SR, Karpf DB, Cauley JA, Thompson DE, Nevitt MC, Bauer DC, Genant HK, Haskell WL, Marcus R,
Ott SM, Torner JC, Quandt SA, Reiss TF, Ensrud KE. Randomised trial of effect of alendronate on risk of fracture in
women with existing vertebral fractures. Lancet 1996;348:1535-1541.
Cummings SR, Black DM, Thompson DE. Effect of alendronate on risk of fracture in women with low bone density but without
vertebral fractures: Results of the Fracture Intervention Trial. JAMA 1998;280(24):2077-2082.
Ensrud K, Black D, Recker R, et al. "The Effect of 2 and 3 Years of Raloxifene on Vertebral and Non-Vertebral Fractures in
Postmenopausal Women with Osteoporosis." Paper presented at the ASBMR meeting, San Francisco, CA, 1998.
Genant HK, Chesnut III CH, Eisman JA. "Chronic Intermittent Cyclical Administration of Tiludronate in Postmenopausal
Osteoporosis: Report of Two Multicenter Studies in 2,316 Patients." Paper presented at the ASBMR meeting, San
Francisco, CA, 1998.
Silverman S, Chesnut C, Andriano K, et al. "Salmon Calcitonin Nasal Spray (NS-CT) Reduces Risk of Vertebral Fracture(s)
(VF) in Established Osteoporosis and Has Continuous Efficacy With Prolonged Treatment: Accrued 5-Year Worldwide
Data of the PROOF Study." Paper presented at the ASBMR meeting, San Francisco, CA, 1998.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
274
Quantitative Ultrasound as a Surrogate Endpoint for Fracture Risk in Osteoporosis Studies
Mary L. Bouxsein, Ph.D.
Orthopedic Biomechanics Laboratory, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA
Osteoporosis is an enormous and growing public health concern. In the United States alone, it is estimated that 25
million postmenopausal women are at risk for fracture due to low bone mass. Despite the increased awareness of
osteoporosis and expansion in clinical bone densitometry, only a minority of these individuals at risk are diagnosed,
because traditional bone densitometry scans are not yet available to all patients who might benefit from knowledge
of their skeletal status. Thus, it is clear that there is a growing need for bone densitometry techniques that can
increase access to bone density testing. Quantitative ultrasound (QUS) has recently been introduced and shows
promise as a tool for widespread screening and evaluation of skeletal status as it is quick, easy to use, portable, and
free from ionizing radiation and requires a relatively low capital investment. Moreover, due to the nature of the
interaction between ultrasound and bone, QUS may reflect skeletal properties that are distinct from bone mineral
density. Devices currently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration include those designed to assess
bone at the heel and tibia. Prospective studies indicate that heel QUS is a strong predictor of hip fracture risk, with
risk ratios (RR = 2.0) similar to those obtained from femoral BMD. However, there are few data available to
evaluate whether QUS can be used to monitor therapeutic response and thus whether changes in QUS are predictive
of changes in fracture risk. Randomized clinical trials incorporating QUS, BMD, and fracture as outcome measures
are required to fully evaluate the potential clinical utility of QUS.
Assessment of Trabecular Bone Using Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Role in the Study of
Osteoporosis
Sharmila Majumdar, Ph.D.
University of California, San Francisco, USA
Currently bone mineral density (BMD) testing is the most common clinical diagnostic for assessing skeletal
status and fracture risk; however, there is strong evidence that trabecular bone structure may be of importance in
osteoporosis (Kleerekoper et al. 1985; Parfitt 1982, 1987; Hodgskinson and Currey 1990), and considerable effort is
being expended in developing techniques to assess trabecular bone microarchitecture noninvasively. In addition,
bone macroarchitecture and changes in trabecular bone microarchitecture may play a role in and affect the
biomechanical competence of trabecular bone. The heterogeneity in the microarchitecture of trabecular bone is
primarily governed by physiological function and mechanical loading on the skeleton. This results in trabecular
bone microarchitecture being dependent on the anatomic site, as well as having a directional anisotropy of the
mechanical properties and architecture (Zhu et al. 1994; Ciarelli et al. 1991; Martens et al. 1983; Schoenfeld et al.
1974; Goldstein 1987). Traditionally, trabecular structure has been assessed using a two-dimensional analysis of
histomorphometry sections obtained from iliac crest biopsies. However, the anisotropy of trabecular orientation and
connectivity of trabecular bone, which is a three-dimensional (3-D) quantity, is likely to play an important role in
determining bone strength. With recent hardware and software advances, magnetic resonance (MR) images with
spatial resolutions of 80 to 200 m and slice thicknesses of 300 to 700 m, which resolve the trabecular structure,
have been obtained both in vitro and in vivo. In conjunction with 3-D image processing and an understanding of the
mechanisms of image formation, these high-resolution images may be used to quantify trabecular bone architecture.
In addition to obtaining standard stereological measures such as trabecular bone volume, mean trabecular width,
mean trabecular spacing, mean intercept length as a function of angle, parameters such as 3-D connectivity as
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 275
measured by the Euler number, fabric tensor in three dimensions, and texture-related parameters such as fractal
dimension may be derived from such images. In vitro, quantitative measures of trabecular architecture derived from
such images have been compared with those obtained from higher resolution 18 m images and with those with
biomechanical properties. In vivo, high-resolution MR techniques combined with standard techniques of stereology
and texture analysis have been used to determine the relationship between trabecular bone structure parameters, age,
and measures of BMD and osteoporotic status. Furthermore, these structure measures may be combined with density
measures to assess the added role of trabecular microarchitecture, as well as combined with finite element modeling
to predict mechanical properties of bone. The issues associated with longitudinal assessment of trabecular bone
structure in vivo are complex and will be discussed. Recent results emphasize the need for studies to establish the
role of bone structure in understanding the pathophysiology of osteoporosis, and the mechanism of therapeutic
action clearly warrants further investigation. However, with the recent advances in technology and research, the
potential of combining MR imaging with 3-D image analysis provides a potentially unparalleled tool for this
purpose.
Key References:
Ciarelli MJ, Goldstein SA, Kuhn JL, Cody DD, Brown MB. Evaluation of orthogonal mechanical properties and density of
human trabecular bone from the major metaphyseal regions with materials testing and computed tomography. J Orthop Res
1991;9:674-682.
Goldstein SA. The mechanical properties of trabecular bone: Dependence on anatomic location and function. J Biomechanics
1987;20:1055-1061.
Hodgskinson R, Currey J. The effect of variation in structure on the Young's modulus of cancellous bone: A comparison of
human and non-human material. Proc Inst Mech Engrs 1990;204:115-121.
Kleerekoper M, Villanueva AR, Stanciu J, Rao DS, Parfitt AM. The role of three-dimensional trabecular microstructure in the
pathogenesis of vertebral compression fractures. Calcif Tissue Int 1985;37:594-597.
Martens M, Van Audekercke R, Delport P, De Meester P, Mulier JC. The mechanical characteristics of cancellous bone at the
upper femoral region. J Biomechanics 1983;16:971-983.
Parfitt AM. The contribution of bone histology to understanding pathogenesis and improving the management of osteoporosis.
Clin Ivest Med 1982;5:163-167.
Parfitt AM. Trabecular bone architecture in the pathogenesis and prevention of fracture. Am J Med 1987;82(suppl 1B):68-72.
Schoenfeld CM, Lautenschlager EP, Meyer PR Jr. Mechanical properties of human cancellous bone in the femoral head. Med
Biol Eng 1974;12:313-317.
Zhu M, Keller TS, Moelianto E, Spengler DM. Multiplanar variations in the structural characteristics of cancellous bone. Bone
1994;15:251-259.
Radiographically Detected Vertebral Deformities and Loss of Stature as Surrogate Endpoints in
Osteoporosis
Michael C. Nevitt, Ph.D.
University of California, San Francisco, USA
The primary objective of osteoporosis treatment and prevention is to reduce the risk of clinical fractures and their
associated morbidity, including pain, limitation of activity, and disability. Although hip fractures cause the greatest
morbidity, a wide variety of other fractures are common in elderly persons and also result in substantial morbidity.
Radiographically detected vertebral deformities are the most common fracture in elderly patients, a hallmark of
osteoporosis, and the primary fracture endpoint in most clinical trials of osteoporosis treatments. However, a large
proportion of these radiographically detected deformities are asymptomatic; an even larger proportion escape
clinical detection, and their clinical and functional impact remains uncertain. We will examine evidence for the
validity of radiographically detected vertebral deformities as surrogate endpoints for clinical fractures and the
morbidity caused by osteoporosis. What is the morbidity associated with vertebral deformities? What is the
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
276
relationship between deformities and clinical spine fractures and between deformities and other clinical fractures?
How well do the treatment effects observed for vertebral deformities agree with the effects of the same treatment on
clinical spine fractures and on other clinical fractures? Do we see effects of treatment on morbidity related to spine
fractures? Does a reduction in deformities or spine fractures explain the effect observed on morbidity? Similarly, we
will examine the validity of loss of stature as a valid surrogate endpoint for radiographically detected vertebral
deformities or spine fractures.
Biological Markers of Bone Turnover: Clinical Value of Biochemical Markers
Richard Eastell, M.D.
University of Sheffield, UK
Bone turnover markers could have clinical utility in setting treatment for osteoporosis if they predicted response
to treatment or allowed monitoring of response. So far, these markers have been evaluated against another surrogate
marker, bone mineral density in clinical trials. They need to be evaluated against the probability of sustaining a
fracture. The markers could be used to evaluate efficacy of treatment and to enhance compliance. We need to know
the relationship of response to variability to characterize an individual's response. We need to know whether
excessive dosage is harmful such that titration of treatment to response is a valid exercise. We need to know whether
compliance is enhanced by treatment monitoring. We need to conduct studies that monitor bone turnover after
cessation of therapy to understand how long treatment effects persist. Finally, we could use markers to evaluate
anabolic treatments for osteoporosis, not just to identify such compounds in the short term, but also to devise the
optimal dosing regime.
Key References:
Blumsohn A, Hannon RA, Eastell R. Biochemical assessment of skeletal activity. Phys Med Rehab Clin North America
1995;6:483-505.
Eastell R. Treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 1998;338:11;736-746.
Garnero P, Shih WJ, Gineyts E, Kalpf D, Delmas PD. Comparison of new biochemical markers of bone turnover in late
postmenopausal osteoporotic women in response to alendronate treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;79:1693-1700.
Riggs BL, Melton LJ 3rd, O'Fallon WM. Drug therapy for vertebral fractures in osteoporosis: Evidence that decreases in bone
turnover and increases in bone mass both determine antifracture efficacy. Bone 1996;18:197S-201S.
Biological Markers of Bone Turnover: Current Status as Surrogate Endpoints in Clinical Trials
David B. Karpf, M.D.
Director of Clinical Research, Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Disease, Roche Pharmaceuticals, Clinical
Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, USA
In the setting of clinical trials, biochemical markers of bone turnover should be considered validated surrogate
efficacy parameters for compounds where the primary mechanism of action is antiresorptive (or where at least a
significant proportion of the antifracture efficacy is presumed to be mediated by this mechanism). Substantial
evidence supports a key role of enhanced bone turnover in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis and osteoporotic
fractures:
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 277
* Estrogen deficiency is associated with an increased rate of bone turnover, whether measured
histomorphometrically or by use of biochemical markers (Eriksen et al. 1990; Eastell et al. 1988; Riis 1996;
Garnero et al. 1994; Riis et al. 1996). With any imbalance between resorption depth and wall thickness, any
increase in activation frequency will be associated with an increased rate of decline in bone mass. In addition,
estrogen deficiency is associated with an increase in the degree of negative bone balance at each BMU, which,
together with the increased activation frequency, further exacerbates the rate of decline in bone mass.
* Increased bone turnover is predicted to decrease bone strength (and increase fracture risk) independently of its
effect to decrease bone mass (e.g., via an increased number of resorption spaces, decreased ability of
trabeculae to withstand buckling loads due to the presence of resorption lacunae, and decreased trabecular
connectivity due to increased perforation) (Einhorn 1992; Parfitt et al. 1983; Riggs et al. 1996).
This biomechanical theory has been supported by several prospective studies in which patients in the highest
quartile for bone turnover demonstrated a significantly increased relative risk for either hip or vertebral fractures.
The predictive value of increased bone turnover was as predictive of fracture risk as decreased bone mineral density
(BMD) and was independent of BMD; hence, the risk of high turnover was additive to that imposed by low bone
mass (Garnero et al. 1995; Ross et al. 1997). Data from prospective fracture trials have shown that the fracture
efficacy demonstrated is substantially greater than that predicted by the increased BMD alone (Cummings et al.
1996). Both the magnitude and the time course of the fracture efficacy observed are inconsistent with the entire
effect being mediated only or substantially by increased BMD and support the concept that the efficacy derives
primarily from the substantial and rapid decrease in bone turnover (Black et al. 1996). For antiresorptive agents,
there appears to be a relationship between the magnitude of the turnover suppression and the magnitude of the
fracture efficacy. Thus, in the clinical trial setting, markers of bone turnover constitute validated surrogates for the
clinical endpoint of fractures. Recommendations for future study/analysis include quantification of the relationship
between bone turnover decrease and reduction in fracture risk, as well as studies to evaluate the validity of turnover
markers as efficacy surrogates for anabolic agents.
Key References:
Black DM, Cummings SR, Karpf DB, Cauley, JA, Thompson DE, Nevitt MC, Bauer DC, Genant HK, Haskell WL, Marcus R,
Ott SM, Torner JC, Quandt SA, Reiss TF, Ensrud KE. Randomised trial of effect of alendronate on risk of fracture in
women with existing vertebral fractures. Fracture Intervention Trial Research Group. Lancet 1996;348:1535-1541.
Eastell R, Delmas PD, Hodgson SF, Eriksen, EF, Mann KG, Riggs BL.. Bone formation rate in older normal women: Concurrent
assessment with bone histomorphometry, calcium kinetics, and biochemical markers. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1988;67:741-748.
Einhorn TA. Bone strength: The bottom line. Calcif Tissue Int 1992;51:333-339.
Eriksen EF, Hodgson SF, Eastell R, Cedel SL, O'Fallon WM, Riggs BL. Cancellous bone remodeling in type I (postmenopausal)
osteoporosis: Quantitative assessment of rates of formation, resorption, and bone loss at tissue and cellular levels. J Bone
Mineral Res 1990;5:311-319.
Garnero P, Shih WJ, Gineyts E, Karpf, DB, Delmas PD. Comparison of new biochemical markers of bone turnover in late
postmenopausal osteoporotic women in response to alendronate treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;79:1693-1700.
Parfitt AM, Mathews CH, Villaneuva AR, Kleerekoper M, Frame B, Rao DS. Relationships between surface, volume, and
thickness of iliac trabecular bone in aging and in osteoporosis. Implications for the microanatomic and cellular mechanisms
of bone loss. J Clin Invest 1983;72:1396-1409.
Riggs BL, Melton LJ III, O'Fallon WM. Drug therapy for vertebral fractures in osteoporosis: Evidence that decreases in bone
turnover and increases in bone mass both determine antifracture efficacy. Bone 1996;18:197S-201S.
Riis BJ. The role of bone turnover in the pathophysiology of osteoporosis. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1996;103:9-15.
Riis BJ, Hansen MA, Jensen AM, Overgaard K, Christiansen C. Low bone mass and fast rate of bone loss at menopause: Equal
risk factors for future fracture: A 15-year follow-up study. Bone 1996;19:9-12.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
278
Biomarkers in Cancer Therapeutics
Objectives
* Assess the use of imaging modalities as correlates to physiologic markers
* Evaluate various approaches used to identify cellular markers of disease state, progression of disease,
and therapeutic competence (efficacy)
* Determine research needs for the advancement of marker identification useful in the identification of
early cancer detection and cancer therapeutic drug targets
* Identify other technological approaches that will provide opportunities for developing more and
better biomarkers to measure therapeutic efficacy
* Examine the roles of industry, academia, and government in the development of toxicity biomarkers
* Determine the current barriers impeding the development of biomarkers for cancer therapeutics
Moderators: A.F. LoBuglio, M.D., University of Alabama, Birmingham, USA
J.M. Pluda, M.D., National Cancer Institute, USA
S.P. Ivy, M.D., National Cancer Institute, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 279
Biomarker Analysis in Human Carcinomas Subsequent to Epidermal Growth Factor-Receptor
Blockade Therapy Alone and in Combination with Cytotoxic Agents
C.J. Bruns, M.D.; P. Perrotte, M.D.; T. Matsumoto, M.D., Ph.D.; C.P.N. Dinney, M.D.; and Robert Radinsky, Ph.D.
Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, USA
The molecular mechanisms specific regulate the metastasis of tumor cells to specific organs are diverse and both
tumor and organ specific. Data will be presented that demonstrate that the organ microenvironment can influence
the pattern of gene expression and the biologic phenotype of metastatic tumor cells, including regulation of cellular
survival, angiogenesis, and growth at the organ-specific metastatic site. Insight into the molecular mechanisms
regulating this process as well as a better understanding of the interaction between the metastatic cell and the organ-
specific microenvironment provides a foundation for the design of new therapeutic approaches. The purpose of this
study was to determine whether epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) signaling regulates, in part, human
bladder and pancreatric carcinoma cell proliferation, invasion, or angiogenesis. EGF-R overexpression correlates
with bladder (TCC) and pancreatic carcinoma (PC) progression. We evaluated whether EGF-R blockade by use of
(1) dominant negative mutant EGF-Rs, (2) EGF-R-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors, or (3) neutralizing anti-EGF-R
antisera (C225) has therapeutic benefits against high-grade TCC and PC growing orthopically in nude mice. In vitro
treatment of each cell type with EGF-R blockade therapies resulted in inhibition of EGF-R-specific phosphorylation
as measured by Western blotting and maximal 50 percent cytostasis. A decrease was observed in expression of the
angiogenic factors vascular endothelial growth factor, IL-8, and bFGF and the matrix metalloproteinase 9 protease
by the treated cells at both mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner (p < 0.005). In contrast, cell cycle-
related proteins such as p16, p21, and CDK2 were not downregulated, although the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27 was elevated after treatment. Systemic therapy of established TCC and PC tumors with EGF-R
blockade therapies alone or in combination with Taxol or gencitabine, respectively, resulted in growth inhibition,
tumor regression, and abrogation of metastasis (p < 0.0005). Therapy conferred a significant survival advantage to
the treated mice (p = 0.0001). The expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen, Rb, MMP9, VEGF, IL-8, and
bFGF (protein and mRNA) levels was significantly reduced in treated versus control tumors (p = 0.001), whereas
p27 levels were induced to high levels. The inhibition of the angiogenic peptides resulted in the subsequent
involution of the tumor neovascularization as determined by microvessel density (p < 0.005), contributing in part to
an increased tumor cell apoptotic index. These experiments indicate that therapeutic strategies targeting EGF-R
signaling have a significant antitumor effect, mediated in part by the inhibition of cellular proliferation, invasion,
and angiogenesis that leads to apoptosis and tumor regression. Ongoing studies are analyzing the identical
biomarkers in patient specimens subsequent to treatment with EGF-R blockade therapies in combination with
cytotoxic drugs. Collectively, these data support the hypothesis that the microenvironment of different organs can
influence the biological behavior of tumor cells during the metastatic process and provide a therapeutic basis for
interfering with metastasis by downregulation of receptor number or function.
Biochemical Endpoints in Mechanism-Based Clinical Cancer Trials
James K.V. Willson, M.D.
Case Western Reserve University and University Hospitals of Cleveland, USA
Our group has conducted a series of mechanism-based phase I clinical cancer trials in which one endpoint of the
trial was the modulation of a molecular target. A procedure for sequential computerized tomography-guided
biopsies of solid tumors was developed to investigate the modulation of a biochemical target in tumor tissues. In one
phase I trial, we used this approach to determine the dose and schedule of a novel modulator of DNA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
280
alkyltransferase activity in tumor tissues. In this trial, 28 patients completed sequential tumor biopsies which proved
informative for biochemical studies of alkyltransferase. The drug level required to deplete the enzyme in the tumors
was tenfold higher than the drug area under the curve required to deplete alkyltransferase activity in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells. This experience demonstrates the feasibility of using molecular endpoints in the
development of cancer therapeutics. This experience also demonstrates the limitation of studying a surrogate tissue
and the importance of investigating biochemical endpoints in the relevant target tissue.
Key References:
Spiro TP, Willson JKV, Haaga J, Hoppel CL, Liu L, Majka S, Gerson SL. O6-benzylguanine DNA alkyltransferase directed
DNA repair. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1996;15:178(A366).
Willson JKV, Haaga JR, Trey JE, Stellato TA, Gordon NH, Gerson SL. Modulation of O6alkylguanine alkyltransferase directed
DNA repair in metastatic colon cancers. J Clin Oncol 1995;13:2301-2308.
Practical Issues in Current Drug Development: The Gross Philadelphia Chromosome as a Chronic
Myelogenous Leukemia Surrogate Endpoint; Progression-Free Survival as an Endpoint for
Tumoristatic Therapies
Robert J. Spiegel, M.D.
Schering-Plough Research Institute, USA
The question to be addressed is, Are there now instances where outcomes short of survival should be accepted as
appropriate surrogates for new therapies in the treatment of cancer? In particular, Does the new genetic
understanding of the basis of certain malignant transformations allow demonstrations of effect on tumor genetics to
serve as adequate surrogates of new therapeutic's efficacy? In chronic myelogenous leukemia, the gross
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph1) aberration has been recognized for decades as a pathognemonic marker of this
disease. With the introduction of interferon and bone marrow transplantation, for the first time some patients were
demonstrated to lose detectable Ph1 following treatment. A number of studies have now confirmed that those
patients who lose Ph1 can expect durable long-term responses. The question arises, Can the demonstration of loss of
Ph1 and normalization of hematologic values for some X period of time be considered a suitable surrogate of
treatment efficacy and preclude the necessity of following cohorts of hundreds of patients over 3 to 5 years to
demonstrate survival benefit? This model raises interesting questions for other therapies in the future, which may be
able to eliminate specific genetic defects that are easily tracked. A larger and related question involves the recent
introduction into the clinic of new therapies that are expected to produce tumoristatic rather than tumoricidal effects.
Some current approaches to gene therapy such as replacement of tumor suppressor genes (p53) or reversal of
oncogenic gene stimuli (farnesyl protein transferase inhibitors in RAS-positive tumors) may produce successful
control of tumor growth but without bystander effect and without dramatic conventional tumor responses. These
approaches to cancer therapy may well produce control of existent tumor but not elimination. Demonstration of
clinical benefit in these circumstances may take hundreds of patients followed for many years, and this produces
serious challenges to the normal development process where early readout is necessary to optimize drug
formulations or determine a positive decision to invest further resources. A discussion of specific therapeutic
approaches and specific disease settings will be made.
Key References:
Anon. Interferon alfa-2a as compared with conventional chemotherapy for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia. The Italian
Cooperative Study Group on Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. N Engl J Med 1994;114:820-825.
Guilhot F, Chastang C, Michallet M, Guerci A, Harousseau JL, Maloisel F, Bouabdallah R, Guyotat D, Cheron N, Nicolini F,
Abgrall JF, Tanzer J. Interferon alpha-2b combined with cytarabine versus interferon alone in chronic myelogenous
leukemia. French Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Study Groups. N Engl J Med 1997;337:223-229.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 281
Kantarjian HM, Smith TL, O'Brien S, Beran M, Pierce S, Talpaz M. Prolonged survival in chronic myelogenous leukemia after
cytogenetic response to interferon-alpha therapy. The Leukemia Service. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:254-261.
Ohnishi K, Ohno R, Tomonaga M, Kamada N, Onozawa K, Kuramoto A, Dohy H, Mizoguchi H, Miyawaki S, Tsubaki K, et al.
A randomized trial comparing interferon-alpha with busulfan for newly diagnosed chronic myelogenous leukemia in
chronic phase. Blood 1995;86:906-916.
Talpaz M, Kantarjian H, Kurzrock R, Trujillo JM, Gutterman JU. Interferon-alpha produces sustained cytogenetic responses in
chronic myelogenous leukemia. Philadelphia chromosome-positive patients. Ann Intern Med 1991;114:532-538.
HER2 Testing: Use of a Biomarker to Select Therapy
Susan D. Hellmann, M.D., M.P.H.
Genentech, Inc., USA
The use of biomarkers to select therapy has been a frequent topic for theoretical discussion. Herceptin, a recently
approved humanized monoclonal antibody, is the first drug whose use is specifically based on the presence of a
biomarker, the HER2/neu oncogene. The challenges associated with the practical implications of using a biomarker
to select therapy will be discussed.
Biomarkers and Angiogenesis -- A Tabula Rasa
Thomas Boehm, Ph.D.
Children's Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
The field of angiogenesis research and particularly the application of the antiangiogenesis concept as a potential
way to treat cancer were pioneered by Judah Folkman during the past 30 years. During the past 5 years, several
potent or less potent molecules have been found to be capable of controlling certain aspects of angiogenesis and
thereby of blocking tumor growth. Nevertheless, only a handful publications can be found on biomarker and
angiogenesis. In addition, these publications describe molecules secreted from tumor cells to stimulate endothelial
cells (bFGF and VEGF). In other words, these proteins are not real markers for angiogenesis but for the presence of
tumor cells. It is now generally accepted that tumor cells need to establish an adequate capillary network to expand.
This means that endothelial cells will undergo phenotypical changes, because they have to migrate, proliferate,
degrade, and remodel the matrix to accomplish the task of forming a functional unit supplying the tumor cells with
oxygen and nutrients. If these phenotypical changes can be measured and quantified, we could detect cancer earlier
or follow antiangiogenic therapy. Before this can be accomplished, these endothelial cell-specific molecules lost or
overexpressed during tumor growth must be identified. A possible approach to isolate real endothelial cell marker
will be presented.
Key References:
Dirix LY, Vermeulen PB, Pawinski A, Prove A, Benoy I, De Pooter C, Martin M, Van Oosterom AT. Elevated levels of the
angiogenic cytokines basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in sera of patients. Br J Cancer
1997;76(2):238-243.
Jinno K, Tanimizu M, Hyodo I, Nishikawa Y, Hosokawa Y, Doi T, Endo H, Yamashita T, Okada Y. Circulating vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a possible tumor marker for metastasis in human hepatocellular carcinoma. J
Gastroenterol 1998;33(3):376-382.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
282
Kumar H, Heer K, Lee PW, Duthie GS, MacDonald AW, Greenman J, Kerin MJ, Monson JR. Preoperative serum vascular
endothelial growth factor can predict stage in colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4(5):1279-1285.
Landriscina M, Cassano A, Ratto C, Longo R, Ippoliti M, Palazzotti B, Crucitti F, Barone C. Quantitative analysis of basic
fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in human colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 1998;78(6):765-
770.
Moses MA, Wiederschain D, Loughlin KR, Zurakowski D, Lamb CC, Freeman MR. Increased incidence of matrix
metalloproteinases in urine of cancer patients. Cancer Res 1998;58(7):1395-1399.
Nguyen M, Watanabe H, Budson AE, Richie JP, Hayes DF, Folkman J. Elevated levels of an angiogenic peptide, basic fibroblast
growth factor, in the urine of patients with a wide spectrum of cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86(5):356-361.
Prognostic Markers
Donald Berry, Ph.D.
Professor Institute of Statistics & Decision Sciences, Duke University, 223 Old Chemistry Building, Main Campus,
Box 90251, Durham, NC 27708-0251, USA
Prognostic markers are of little clinical interest unless they have therapeutic implications. Despite some attitudes
to the contrary, it may not be appropriate to use the most intensive and most toxic therapies with patients having the
poorest prognosis. But assessing interactions between therapy and biomarkers is difficult and requires very large
numbers of patients. Such assessment is made even more difficult because the typical experiment involves assessing
numerous markers. A result is that the false-positive rate increases, giving rise to biomarkers that are flashes in the
pan. These and related problems in the case of HER-2/neu and p53 and their possible interaction with doxorubicin in
node-positive breast cancer will be discussed as well as the general notion of using surrogate markers in clinical
research from the Bayesian perspective.
Radiolabeled Probes as a Tool for the Assessment of Receptor Expression or Vascularity
Albert F. LoBuglio, M.D.
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Comprehensive Cancer Center, USA
A recent phase I clinical trial utilizing a humanized anti-Vitronectin receptor provided an opportunity for our
group to initiate attempts at measuring antibody binding or blockade of this angiogenesis-dependent endothelial cell
receptor. We proposed that it may bind available Vitronectin receptors and that administration of radiolabeled tracer
doses might be used to image tumor vascular bed and when administered postinfusion of a therapeutic dose, might
demonstrate blockade of the receptor. This initial attempt was only partially successful and suggested that the
antibody's binding affinity was too low, and particularly, its "off-rate" was too rapid. Evidence for this hypothesis
was then presented by Viti and colleagues who showed that single-chain antibodies directed to an alternative
intravascular target were only able to image the tumor vascular bed if their off-rate was very slow. Such high-
affinity and low off-rate versions of the anti-Vitronectin receptor antibody have been described. The generalization
of this concept (i.e., use of a probe carrying an isotope or other imaging agent as a means of delineating the tumor
vascular bed) might well be applicable to magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography scanning
as a means of estimating "volume" or "extent" of vascular bed per volume of tumor.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 283
Key References:
Brooks PC, Clark RA, Cheresh DA. Requirement of vascular integrin alpha v beta 3 for angiogenesis. Science
1994;264(5158):569-571.
Viti F, Tarli L, Giovannoni L, Zardi L, Neri D. Increased binding affinity and valence of recombinant antibody fragments lead to
improved targeting of tumoral angiogenesis. Cancer Res 1999;59(2):347-352.
Assessing the Effects of Antiangiogenic Therapy on Tumor Vasculature and Metabolism Using
Functional Imaging
Steven K. Libutti, M.D.
Surgery Branch National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room 2B17, 9000 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
As new anticancer agents are developed that target the tumor neovasculature, novel approaches to measuring
responses are needed. Functional imaging has been suggested as a means of detecting changes in tumor blood flow
and metabolism. Several challenges confront the development of these new technolgies. We must identify
noninvasive methods to quantify changes in tumor vasculature, and we must validate these methods as a means of
quantifying the effects of antivascular agents. We must also be able to control for variability of repeated measures.
Finally, we must be able to coregister images with traditional scans to follow the responses of particular lesions over
time. We have identified several advanced imaging modalities that we believe have the potential to address these
challenges: positron emission tomography (PET) utilizing radiolabeled glucose (18
FDG), radiolabeled carbon
monoxide (11
CO), radiolabled water (H2O15
), and dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). PET-FDG relies on
the fact that malignant lesions have elevated glycolysis, and therefore there is increased uptake of [18
-F]
fluorodeoxyglucose. Conversion of 18
FDG to 18
FDG-6-phosphate occurs, which traps the radioisotope in neoplastic
tissues. Our hypothesis is that changes in tumor vascularity in response to agents may alter glucose metabolism and
therefore change the amount of uptake of 18
FDG. PET-CO is designed to assist in the quantification of tumor blood
volume. 11
CO is administered by inhalation, binds tightly to red blood cells, and has a short half-life (20 minutes).
Red blood cell volume can be quantified as can changes in blood volume over time. PET- H2O allows for the
measurement of tumor blood flow. H2O15
is delivered intravenously and is rapidly cleared (half-life < 5 minutes).
Short scanning times can be used, and flow in tumor vessels can be standardized to major vessels and to arterial
blood samples. The technique has been validated in myocardial and cerebral blood flow studies. Dynamic MRI
relies on the rapid (more than 1 minute) administration of a gadolinium-based contrast agent. Ultrafast analysis of
signal intensity and patterns of contrast uptake within tumors can correlate with microvessel density.
Pharmacokinetic modeling of gadolinium clearance -- as well as measurements such as the rate of enhancement,
time to peak enhancement, clearance rate, and area under the curve -- can be performed. Recent advances in MRI
utilizing gradient-recalled echo and inhaled carbogen may enhance these measurements. Our current clinical trial is
designed to evaluate these various imaging modalities in patients currently being treated with antiangiogenic agents
(anti-VEGF, thalidomide, isolated hepatic perfusion). Pretreatment imaging with CT, PET, and dynamic MRI is
followed by interval imaging while on therapy. Correlation with tumor biopsy is performed when available.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
284
Transplantation II
Immune Markers of Graft Dysfunction
Background
Graft survival for all solid organ transplantation procedures is restricted by acute and chronic rejections.
The solution to this problem is induction of a state of donor-specific tolerance in the patient so rejections
will not occur. Current methods of diagnosing allograft dysfunction are inadequate in that significant
organ damage occurs prior to the establishment of a clinical diagnosis. Clinical tolerance remains an
elusive goal despite success in animal models. One of the main hurdles in developing tolerance strategies
is the lack of a clinical biomarker or a "tolerance assay". The development of assays or novel
technologies that will enable detection of allograft dysfunction/rejection, monitor responses to therapy,
and predict long-term outcomes is vital for the success of transplantation clinical trials.
Objectives
* Address the validation of histological evidence of graft dysfunction by immunological methods
* Develop noninvasive techniques that use peripheral blood and urine to establish biomarkers that may
be used as surrogate endpoints in transplantation clinical trials
* Evaluate newer methods of functional prediction by genomic DNA typing
Moderators: M. Suthanthirian, M.D., New York Hospital, Cornell Medical Center, USA
M.H. Sayegh, M.D., Brigham and Women's hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 285
Intragraft Cytokine and Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Gene Expression
Margaret J. Dallman, D.Phil.
Imperial College of Science Technology and Medicine, USA
Cytokines play a central role in directing both the magnitude and type of immune response generated to organ
transplants. Since they are normally expressed at low or undetectable levels but rapidly upregulated at the onset of
an immune response, they should provide early predictors of graft dysfunction and in theory provide information
about the mechanism of immune attack. Difficulties have been encountered in (1) finding sensitive and easily
performed methods of cytokine detection, (2) retrieving material from the transplant on a frequent basis for analysis,
and (3) defining patterns of cytokine expression that are unique to rejection. Genes associated with cytotoxic T
lymphocyte function may aid in differentiating rejection from other immunological conditions.
Key References:
Dallman MJ. Cytokines and transplantation: Th1/Th2 regulation of the immune response to solid organ transplants in the adult.
Curr Opin Immunol 1995;7:632-638.
McLean AG, Hughes D, Welsh KI, Gray DW, Roake J, Fuggle SV, Morris PJ, Dallman MJ. Patterns of graft infiltration and
cytokkine gene expression during the first 10 days of kidney transplantation. Transplantation 1997;63:374-380.
Piccotti JR, Chan SY, VanBuskirk AM, Eichwald EJ, Bishop DK. Are Th2 helper T lymphocytes beneficial, deleterious, or
irrelevant in promoting allograft survival? Transplantation 1997;63:619-624.
Strom TB, Roy-Chaudhury P, Manfro R, Zheng XX, Nickerson PW, Wood K, Bushell A. The Th1/Th2 paradigm and the
allograft response. Curr Opin Immunol 1996;8:688-693.
Cytotoxic Lymphocyte Gene Expression Events and Allograft Rejection
Terry Strom, M.D.
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center/Harvard Medical School, USA
Gene expression for granzyme B, perforin, and fas L are strongly linked to acute renal allograft rejection. These
events can be detected in allograft biopsies, peripheral blood cells, or urinary leukocytes. Expression of IL-15 and
IL-10 are also closely linked to clinical or subclinical rejection. We believe that a refined molecularly defined
diagnostic strategy is ready for clinical deployment and may prevent fixed tissue injury and resultant chronic
rejection.
Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Gene Expression in Urinary Cells During Acute Rejection
Manikkam Suthanthirian, M.D.
Cornell University Medical College, USA
Acute rejection remains an important clinical challenge, and accurate diagnosis is contingent on the invasive
procedure of renal allograft biopsy. Core needle biopsies, while providing invaluable information, carry with them
the risk of significant hematuria, arteriovenous fistulas, or graft loss. Successful development of a noninvasive
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
286
surrogate for allograft biopsies, therefore, has the significant potential for improving transplant patient management.
We have initiated studies investigating the correlation between histologic diagnosis of acute rejection and urinary
cell cytotoxic attack molecule mRNA steady-state levels. RT-quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to
quantify mRNA encoding perforin or granzyme B in urinary cells. Renal allograft biopsies were classified on the
basis of Banff criteria, and the mRNA steady-state levels were correlated with the histologic diagnosis. Our data
suggest that the level of perforin transcripts or that of granzyme B transcripts in urinary cells is significantly higher
during histologically validated acute rejection compared with no rejection.
Key References:
Suthanthirian M. Molecular analyses of human renal allografts: Differential intragraft gene expression during rejection. Kidney
Int 1997;51(Suppl 58):S15-S21.
Cytokine Gene Polymorphisms
Ian V. Hutchinson, Ph.D.
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
The production of cytokines is under genetic control. Alleles of the cytokine genes encode high or low
production, and because these segregate independently, each one is a mosaic of higher or lower responses. In the
context of transplantation, the cytokine genes we have studied are those for the inflammatory cytokines tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and the anti-inflammatory/
immunoregulatory cytokines interleukin-10 (IL-10) and transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta 1). TGF-beta
1 also has potent fibrogenic activities. We have used simple polymerase chain reaction-based methods to genotype
kidney, heart, lung, and liver transplant recipients for these cytokines. Acute cellular rejection is strongly associated
with high-producer TNF-alpha genotype in heart and kidney recipients, whereas IL-10 and IFN-gamma play
modulating roles. Chronic rejection (including declining graft function, transplant vasculopathy, graft loss, and
patient death) is strongly associated with high-producer TGF-beta 1 genotype. These results imply that TNF-alpha
and TGF-beta 1 are pivotal cytokines in the acute and chronic transplant rejection.
Key References:
Awad MR, El-Gamel A, Simm E, Hasleton PS, Yonan N, Deiraniya AK, Sinnott PJ, Hutchinson IV. Genotypic variation in the
transforming growth factor-beta 1 gene: Association with TGF-beta 1 production, fibrotic lung disease and graft fibrosis
after lung transplantation. Transplantation 1998;67:1014-1020.
Awad M, Pravica V, Perrey C, Sinnott PJ, Hutchinson IV. CA repeat allele polymorphism in the first intron of the human
interferon-gamma gene is associated with lung allograft fibrosis. Human Immunology, in press.
Crawley E, Kay R, Sillibourne J, Patel P, Hutcinson IV, Woo P. Polymorphic haplotypes of the IL-10 5' flanking region
determine variable IL-10 transcription and are associated with particular phenotypes of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Arthritis Rheum, in press.
Hutchinson IV, Pravica V, Sinnott PJ. Genetic regulation of cytokine synthesis: Consequences for acute and chronic transplant
rejection. Graft 1998;1:186-192.
Hutchinson IV, Turner DM, Sankaran D, Awad M, Pravica V, Sinnott PJ. Cytokine genotypes in allograft rejection: Guidelines
for immunosuppression. Transpl Proc 1998;30:3991-3992.
Perrey C, Pravica V, Sinnott PJ, Hutchinson IV. Genotyping for polymorphisms in interferon-gamma, interleukin-10,
transforming growth factor-beta 1 and tumour necrosis factor-alpha genes: A technical report. Transpl Immunol
1998;6:193-197.
Pravica V, Asderakis A, Perrey C, Hajeer A, Sinnott PJ, Hutchinson IV. In vitro production of IFN-gamma correlates with CA
repeat polymorphism in the human IFN-gamma gene. Eur J Immunogen, in press.
Sankaran D, Ashraf S, Asderakis A, Roberts ISD, Short CD, Dyer PA, Sinnott PJ, Hutchinson IV. Tumour necrosis factor-alpha
and interleukin-10 gene polymorphisms predict acute renal allograft rejection. Kidney Int, in press.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 287
Turner DM, Grant SCD, Yonan N, Sheldon S, Dyer PA, Sinnott PJ, Hutchinson IV. Cytokine gene polymorphism and heart
transplant rejection. Transplantation 1997;64:776-779.
Turner DM, Williams DM, Sankaran D, Lazarus M, Sinnott PJ, Hutchinson IV. An investigation of polymorphism in the
Interleukin-10 gene promoter. Eur J Immunogen 1997;24:1-8.
Indirect Allorecognition: A Predictor of Chronic Allograft Dysfunction?
Mohamed H. Sayegh, M.D.
Research Director, Laboratory of Immunogenetics and Transplantation, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA
CD4+ T cell recognition of alloantigen is the key initial event that leads to graft rejection. There are two
nonmutually exclusive pathways of allorecognition. In the direct allorecognition pathway, T cells recognize intact
donor major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on donor antigen-presenting cells. In the indirect
pathway, T cells recognize processed donor alloantigen presented as allopeptides by recipient antigen-presenting
cells. There is increasing evidence to suggest that both pathways play important roles in the rejection process but
that indirect allorecognition may be the dominant role in chronic rejection. Indeed, T cells from patients with
chronic graft dysfunction exhibit specific alloreactivity to donor MHC peptides with epitope spreading. The utility
of these assays as a biomarker of allograft dysfunction will be discussed.
Immune Parameters Correlating With Long-Term Graft Outcome
Nancy L. Reinsmoen, Ph.D.
Professor Pathology, Director of Clinical Transplantation Immunology Lab, Box 3712, Duke University Medical
Center, Department of Pathology, Durham, NC 27710, USA
Our long-term goal is to identify immune parameters that predict graft outcome and use these parameters to
identify recipients who are candidates for individualization of immunosuppression. We have used the immune
parameters of donor antigen-specific hyporeactivity, peripheral blood allogeneic microchimerism, donor antigen-
specific anti-HLA antibodies, and cytokine gene polymorphism to test solid organ recipients transplanted at two
centers. We have found that hyporeactivity of the donor antigen-specific response at 1 year posttransplant, as
determined by a decreased donor antigen-specific proliferative response, is predictive of a chronic rejection-free
state in kidney, heart, and lung recipients (predictive value = 96 percent for kidney, 100 percent for lung, and 91
percent for heart recipients). Furthermore, kidney recipients who have experienced an acute rejection episode and
remain responsive to donor antigen are at high risk for developing chronic rejection versus those who develop
hyporeactivity (odds ratio = 3.61, p = 0.0042). The presence of high levels of peripheral blood allogeneic
microchimerism (1:10,000) in lung recipients is also associated with a chronic rejection-free state (BOS grade
< 1)(p = 0.029 at 18 months posttransplant). Recently, we have identified kidney recipients who, at the time of
transplantation, had donor class II-directed antibodies detectable only by ELISA or flow cytometry techniques but
not by cytotoxicity, and were at high risk for acute and chronic rejection. Of seven such kidney recipients, all had
one or more acute rejection episodes, and three have developed biopsy-proven chronic rejection. We have also
investigated whether cytokine (TNF- , TGF- and IL-10) genotype polymorphisms associated with high and low
cytokine production contribute a greater propensity for acute or chronic rejection. In heart recipients (n = 28), four
allelic patterns were found only in seven recipients with coronary artery disease (CAD); four other patterns were
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
288
found only in eight recipients without CAD; and three other unique patterns were found in four recipients with and
nine recipients without CAD (p < 0.001). We are currently genotyping lung and kidney recipients. Thus, the use of
multiple parameters to assess a recipient's immune profile may more accurately predict graft outcome, thus
permitting individualization and optimization of immunosuppression.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 289
Immune Correlates of Protection
and Recovery: Hepatitis C Virus
Objectives
* Identify current biomarkers used in the evaluation of therapeutics and preventive interventions for
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections
* Explore immune response parameters in the control and cure of HCV infections
* Determine areas of need, opportunity, and viable approaches to developing clinical assessment tools
to evaluate HCV therapies
* Identify applicable tools, technologies, and strategies to evaluate response to HCV treatments
Moderators: D. Mildvan, M.D., Beth Israel Medical Center, USA
I.N. Crispe, Ph.D., Yale University, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
290
What Do We Need To Know About HCV Infection?
I. Nicholas Crispe, M.B.B.S., Ph.D.
Yale University Medical School, USA
The selection of appropriate biomarkers to monitor hepatitis C virus (HCV) progression and determine the
effectiveness of therapy is hampered by the limited understanding of the pathophysiology of the infection. It would
be useful to identify candidate biomarkers that could be used both in studies of the disease's natural history and in
monitoring experimental therapy. Such biomarkers would enable the clinical research community to evaluate the
following: How much viral RNA and virus-encoded protein are present in body fluids and in the liver? How many
hepatocytes are infected with HCV? In which other cells and tissues is HCV present? How many activated T cells
are present in the blood, and how many of these are specific for HCV antigens? How many lymphocytes are present
in the liver, what is their subset distribution, what is their level of activation, and how many are tolerized or
apoptotic? How many of these lymphocytes are HCV-specific? How many hepatocytes are damaged, and how much
of this damage is due to virus infection versus the host immune response? How much damage affects noninfected
hepatocytes? What effector arms of the immune system are active in HCV-infected liver? It would clearly be
desirable to move beyond techniques based on reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting,
and T cell subset analysis of the peripheral blood, and beyond H and E histology of liver biopsy material, and deploy
a wider range of biomarkers in investigational settings. We look forward to a wide-ranging discussion of the
options.
Overview of the Hepatitis C Virus: Natural History and Current Therapeutic Regimens
Karen L. Lindsay, M.D.
University of Southern California, USA
Acute infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is associated with a high frequency of chronic infection, the
potential for development of chronic liver disease which may result in liver failure (requiring liver transplantation or
resulting in death), and hepatocellular carcinoma. Extrahepatic disorders, such as mixed cryoglobulinemia and renal
disease, also occur. The natural history of HCV has been studied in two populations -- individuals identified or
retrospectively studied during the acute phase of the infection and individuals identified during the chronic phase of
the infection. Studies on the natural history of acute HCV infection indicate that more than 80 percent of cases
develop chronic infections. The estimated incidence of acute infection in the United States has, however, markedly
diminished since the late 1980s. The relatively low incidence of new infections as well as other factors have made
prospective studies of the immunologic response to acute infection and treatment of acute HCV very difficult. Once
chronic infection occurs, progression of the liver disease follows a variable course over time.
Retrospective/prospective followup studies of cohorts who acquired HCV infection in the 1970s have shown that
liver-related mortality is slightly increased in the first 22 years of infection, but the percentage of individuals with
significant hepatic fibrosis is low. Modeled analyses of the progression of hepatic fibrosis based on serial liver
biopsies have demonstrated that male sex, age 40 or older at infection, and a history of heavy alcohol consumption
are associated with an increased risk of fibrosis. In patients with clinically compensated cirrhosis, the estimated 10-
year survival is at least 80 percent, but once clinical decompensation occurs, survival decreases to less than 40
percent. In patients coinfected with HIV, the course of the chronic liver disease is accelerated. Based on the results
of a large recent study, the estimated prevalence of hepatitis C in the United States is 1.8 percent, corresponding to
an estimated 3.9 million Americans who have been infected with HCV, most of whom have chronic infections.
Currently, the primary endpoint of treatment for chronic HCV is nondetectability of HCV RNA by reverse
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 291
transcription-polymerase chain reaction at the end of treatment and for at least 6 months after treatment is
discontinued (sustained virological response [SVR]). In adult patients with elevated serum alanine aminotransferase
and clinically compensated chronic liver disease, unselected patients treated with standard doses of interferon alpha-
2b monotherapy for 48 weeks demonstrated a virological response rate of 24 percent at the end of treatment, and
SVR is achievable in approximately 13 percent of patients. Treatment with interferon alpha-2b combined with
ribavirin is associated with SVR rates of 28 percent in patients infected with genotype 1 HCV who were treated for
48 weeks and 69 percent in patients infected with other genotypes of HCV and treated for 24 weeks. Long-term
followup of patients with SVR has demonstrated clinical benefit, and data from several Japanese studies have raised
the possibility that treatment with interferon alpha, even in the absence of SVR, is associated with a decrease in the
risk of progressive liver disease or development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Identification of immunological
markers associated with recovery from acute infection, slow progression of liver injury, virological response during
therapy, and particularly those which are associated with and could predict a sustained virological response off
treatment are potentially of great benefit.
Intrahepatic Immune Responses Against Hepatitis C Virus
Margaret J. Koziel, M.D.
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
The hepatitis C virus (HCV) is notable for the high rate of chronic infection that occurs in nearly all individuals
who become infected. Liver biopsies from individuals with chronic HCV infection are notable for the presence of
numerous mononuclear cells, at least some of which are CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes. The immune response to
HCV is polyclonal and multispecific, both in terms of antibody and cellular immune responses. Individuals who
recover from acute HCV infection appear to have quantitatively more vigorous CD4+ cell proliferative responses
against one or more HCV proteins compared with those individuals who develop chronic disease. However, there is
compartmentalization of a unique set of CD4+ cell responses in the liver during chronic infection. CD8+ cell
responses are less well characterized, in part because of the technical difficulties involved in isolating and
characterizing these cells. HCV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes can be readily isolated from the liver of
chronically infected persons and recognize multiple epitopes within the HCV polyprotein. Even individuals with the
same human leukocyte antigen type do not consistently recognize the same epitope. Thus, there does not appear to
be an immunodominant response on the CD8+ cell level in this infection. CD8+ cells do appear to play some role in
limiting viral replication, although they likely cause tissue damage once chronic infection is established. These
responses are insufficient to eradicate the virus completely, however, and may cause liver injury once chronic
infection is established. The kinetics of the CD8+ cell response in the liver is poorly understood in human studies.
Cytokines produced by both CD4+ and CD8+ cells may play an important role in both inhibiting viral replication
and causing liver injury. Intrahepatic CD4+ and CD8+ T cells produce type 1 cytokines such as interferon gamma
although this appears insufficient to control viral replication. A better understanding of the role of cellular immunity
in the pathogenesis of HCV infection may aid in the development of vaccines and immunotherapeutic intervention
strategies.
Key References:
Abrignani S. Antigen-independent activation of resting T-cells in the liver of patients with chronic hepatitis. Dev Biol Stand
1998;92:191-194.
Ballardini G, Groff P, Pontisso P, Giostra F, Francesconi R, Lenzi M, Zauli D, Alberti A, Bianchi FB. Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
genotype, tissue HCV antigens, hepatocellular expression of HLA-A,B,C, and intercellular adhesion-1 molecules. Clues to
pathogenesis of hepatocellular damage and response to interferon treatment in patients with chronic hepatitis C. J Clin
Invest 1995;95:2067-2075.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
292
Bertoletti A, D'Elios MM, Boni C, De Carli M, Zignego AL, Durazzo M, Missale G, Penna A, Fiaccadori F, Del Prete G, Ferrari
C. Different cytokine profiles of intrahepatic T cells in chronic hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus infections.
Gastroenterology 1997;112:193-199.
Botarelli P, Brunetto MR, Minutello MA, Calvo P, Unutmaz D, Weiner AJ, Choo QL, Shuster JR, Kuo G, Bonino F, et al. T-
lymphocyte response to hepatitis C virus in different clinical courses of infection. Gastroenterology 1993;104:580-587.
Crispe IN, Mehal WZ. Strange brew: T cells in the liver. Immunol Today 1996;17:522-525.
Huang L, Soldevila G, Leeker M, Flavell R, Crispe IN. The liver eliminates T cells undergoing antigen-triggered apoptosis in
vivo. Immunity 1994;1:741-749.
Koziel M, Walker B. Characteristics of the intrahepatic cytotoxic T lymphocyte response in chronic hepatitis C virus infection.
Springer Semin Immunopathol 1997;19:69-84.
Koziel MJ. The role of immune responses in the pathogenesis of hepatitis C virus infection. J Viral Hepat 1997;4(Suppl)2:31-41.
Koziel MJ, Dudley D, Afdhal N, Grakoui A, Rice CM, Choo QL, Houghton M, Walker BD. HLA class I-restricted cytotoxic T
lymphocytes specific for hepatitis C virus. Identification of multiple epitopes and characterization of patterns of cytokine
release. J Clin Invest 1995;96:2311-2321.
Nuti S, Rosa D, Valiante NM, Saletti G, Caratozzolo M, Dellabona P, Barnaba V, Abrignani S. Dynamics of intra-hepatic
lymphocytes in chronic hepatitis C: Enrichment for Valpha24+ T cells and rapid elimination of effector cells by apoptosis.
Eur J Immunol 1998;28(11):3448-3455.
Wong DK, Dudley DD, Afdhal NH, Dienstag J, Rice CM, Wang L,Houghton M, Walker BD, Koziel MJ. Liver-derived CTL in
hepatitis C virus infection: Breadth and specificity of responses in a cohort of persons with chronic infection. J Immunol
1998;160:1479-1488.
Role of the Cellular Immune Response During Recovery From Hepatitis C Virus Infection
Barbara Rehermann, M.D.
Liver Diseases Section, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
The hepatitis C virus (HCV) has a remarkable ability to establish clinically inapparent, persistent infections in
individuals who are otherwise immunocompetent. Both the immunologic and virologic correlates that determine
resolution versus chronic evolution of acute HCV infection are still unknown. The reasons are that patient cohorts
and HCV strains are generally heterogeneous and neither duration nor route of infection are known. Out of
necessity, therefore, most human studies have concentrated on patients with chronic HCV infection. To date, these
reports suggest that once chronic infection is established, the HCV-specific immune response exerts some control
over viral load but is unable to terminate persistent infection or resolve chronic hepatitis in most cases. Nevertheless,
HCV-specific T cells are considered key players in the defense against HCV infection because of their ability to
recognize viral antigens in and to eliminate virus from HCV-infected cells. A strong T helper 1 cell-dominated T-
helper response targeted against immunodominant epitopes in the nonstructural proteins of the virus has been
demonstrated in the few patients with known, acute, self-limited hepatitis C. Lack of such a T cell response in the
early phase of infection is associated with chronic evolution of disease. HCV-specific helper and cytotoxic T cells
have been demonstrated in the peripheral blood for up to two decades after biochemical and virologic recovery from
disease. In contrast, circulating HCV-specific antibodies may not be maintained for such a long time and were
completely lost in 46 percent of patients studied between 10 and 20 years after recovery from a single-source
outbreak of hepatitis C. Therefore, cellular rather than humoral immune responses persist for decades after recovery
from hepatitis C. These findings imply that the percentage of cases with acute self-limited HCV infection and
complete recovery may be underestimated in the general population since these recovered patients do not display
HCV antibodies as markers of prior HCV infection.
Key References:
Diepolder HM, Gerlach J-T, Zachoval R, Hoffmann RM, Jung MC, Wirrenga EA, Scholz S, Santantonio T, Houghton M,
Southwood S, Sette A, Pape GR. Immunodominant CD4+ T-cell epitope within nonstructural protein 3 in acute hepatitis C
virus infection. J Virol 1997;71:6011-6019.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 293
Diepolder HM, Zachoval R, Hoffmann RM, Wierenga A, Santantonio T, Jung M-C, Eichenlaub D, Pape GR. Possible
mechanism involving T lymphocyte response to non-structural protein 3 in viral clearance in acute hepatitis C virus
infection. Lancet 1995:346:1006-1007.
Rehermann B, Chang KM, McHutchison J, Houghton M, Rice C, Chisari FV. Differential cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responsiveness to the hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses in chronically infected patients. J Virol 1996;70:7092-7102.
Takaki A, Wiese M, Maertens G, Depla E, Liebetrau A, Manns M, Rehermann B. A strong cellular, not humoral immune
response distinguishes recovered from chronic patients 18 years after a single source outbreak of hepatitis C. Hepatology
1998;28:4(Suppl.):320A.
Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine Design and Biomarkers of Protective Immunity
Christopher M. Walker, Ph.D.
The Ohio State University, USA
Vaccines that protect from hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection are at the earliest stages of development. Progress
has been slow, in part because biomarkers of protective immunity against this virus have not yet been identified.
Anti-HCV antibodies may be an important component of immunity, and preliminary data suggest that immunization
with recombinant E2 glycoprotein protects chimpanzees from infection with low doses of a genetically matched
virus (Choo et al. 1994). It is unlikely that antienvelope antibody titers alone will be a useful marker for vaccine
evaluation, because sterilizing immunity (i.e., complete neutralization of infectivity) will probably not be achieved
against a virus as variable as HCV. A more realistic goal for HCV vaccines may be termination of viremia during
the acute phase of infection. Resolution is observed in a minority of individuals in the first few weeks after
infection, but mechanisms of protective immunity remain to be elucidated. Virus-specific T lymphocytes belonging
to the helper (CD4) and cytotoxic (CD8) subsets probably contribute to control of ongoing virus replication. Indeed,
the observed correlation between virus-specific CD4+ T helper cell activity and resolution of acute HCV infection
(Diepolder et al. 1995; Missale et al. 1996) might have implications for vaccine design and marker development.
Studies correlating acute phase immune responses with outcome of infection are incomplete, however. Further
investigation of this issue using human subjects is important but also complicated by several factors, including
difficulty in identifying individuals with acute infection, limited access to liver tissue, and uncertainty about virus
genetic variability and its impact on detection of HCV-specific T lymphocyte responses. Nonhuman primate models
may be crucial for defining and stimulating immune responses that protect from chronic hepatitis C. Chimpanzees
are the only species other than humans reproducibly infected by HCV. Although rare and endangered, they may be
of great value in defining acute-phase immune responses that determine infection outcome. Preliminary data suggest
that a CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte response directed against multiple viral proteins is temporally associated with
termination of virus replication in two animals. Strikingly, these animals failed to make antibodies against viral
structural proteins. Eliciting strong cytotoxic cell responses by immunization has been the holy grail of HIV vaccine
research, and several strategies for delivery of antigens into the class I major histocompatibility complex processing
pathway have emerged. Many of these approaches, including nucleic acid vaccines, are now being applied to HCV.
Comparing multiple vaccine options in chimpanzees is neither practical nor feasible. Methods for monitoring the
breadth, frequency, and duration of vaccine-induced T cell responses in a small nonhuman primate model such as
the rhesus macaque are needed to facilitate studies of HCV vaccine immunogenicity.
Key References:
Choo QL, Kuo G, Ralston R, Weiner A, Chien D, Van Nest G, Han J, Berger K, Thudium K, Kuo C, et al. Vaccination of
chimpanzees against infection by the hepatitis C virus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:1294-1298.
Diepolder HM, Zachoval R, Hoffmann RM, Wierenga EA, Santantonio T, Jung MC, Eichenlaub D, Pape GR. Possible
mechanism involving T-lymphocyte response to nonstructural protein 3 in viral clearance in acute hepatitis C virus
infection. Lancet 1995;346:1006-1007.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
294
Missale G, Bertoni R, Lamonaca V, Valli A, Massari M, Mori C, Rumi MG, Houghton M, Fiaccadori F, Ferrari C. Different
clinical behaviors of acute hepatitis C virus infection are associated with different vigor of the anti-viral cell-mediated
immune response. J Clin Invest 1996;98:706-714.
Immune-Based Strategies and Therapeutic Vaccines
Gregory R. Reyes, M.D., Ph.D.
Schering-Plough Research Institute, USA
Approximately 10 years have passed since the principal agent responsible for parenteral (blood-borne)
transmission of infectious non-A, non-B hepatitis was cloned. The molecular characterization of the hepatitis C
virus (HCV) has provided critical insight into small molecule intervention strategies targeting the viral-encoded
genes required for viral replication (e.g., nonstructural protease, helicase, polymerase). HCV infection becomes
chronic in the majority of exposed individuals with a significant fraction developing serious life-threatening
sequelae such as cirrhosis, liver failure, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Therapy with interferon alpha, alone or in
combination with ribavirin, achieves an antiviral effect through a direct inhibition of viral replication as well as
through immunomodulation. Differences in sustained response are seen between type 1 and non-1 genotypes;
however, the biological basis for these observations has not yet been determined. The mechanism(s) for virus
persistence is (are) largely unknown but probably include the generation of viral quasispecies and the evasion of
antibody neutralization through immunoselection and hypervariability in the viral envelope. The complex interplay
between host and virus can exist for decades with host immunity largely ineffective at eliminating the virus and
virus-infected cells. Adjunctive immunotherapeutic approaches to address this immune-tolerant (compromised?)
state may be useful in an effort to improve the sustained response rate. Activation of the cellular immune response
may assist in the control and elimination of virus and virus-infected cells and perhaps improve efficacy in a
genotype-independent manner. The interplay and role of the various components of the cellular immune response to
viral infection have been broadly defined (Ag presenting cells, T helper 1 cells, and cytotoxic T lymphocytes). In
particular, therapeutic advantage may be taken of cooperative cellular interactions to process and present viral
antigen and in the process activate the immune system. The elicitation of an effective CTL response to virus-
infected cells and the in vivo measures of that response may require the application of metrics other than the
accepted biomarker of circulating HCV viral load. In the course of any future immunotherapeutic clinical trial, it
may be necessary to identify other surrogate measures of safety and efficacy. The timely development of DNA
therapeutic vaccines and cytokine adjuvants and other approaches to immunomodulation will require an
understanding of the relative contributions of antigens, modes of presentation, and their activity in eliciting immune
recognition, recruitment, and activation.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 295
Biomarkers in the Spectrum of
Autoimmune Disease
Objectives
* Review current state of biomarkers for autoimmune diseases, including type 1 diabetes, multiple
sclerosis, scleroderma, and systemic lupus erythematosis
* Determine criteria for identification, development, and validation of biomarkers for disease risk,
diagnosis, disease activity or stage, immune activity, and response to therapy
! What are our gold standards?
! What are the criteria and approaches for defining and validating a biomarker?
* Discuss advantages and disadvantages of genetic, immunologic, inflammation, quality-of-life, and
end-organ specific biomarkers for diagnosis, staging, and evaluation of therapy of autoimmune
diseases in general and of specific diseases
* Identify opportunities for potential new biomarkers for autoimmune diseases, research approaches to
develop these, and pathways for transition of new biomarkers from basic research to clinical research
to clinical practice
* Evaluate the possibility for clinical trials for new agents for prevention and treatment of autoimmune
disease to be done in a timely, cost-effective, and definitive manner with available biomarkers
* Identify the roles of government, industry, academia, clinicians, and health care payers in the
development and validation of new biomarkers
Moderator: D.S. Pisetsky, M.D., Ph.D., Duke University, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
296
Biomarkers in Lung Disease in Scleroderma
Barbara White, M.D.
University of Maryland Research Service, VA Maryland Health Care System, USA
Interstitial lung disease is the leading cause of death in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc). We have used
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) to study immune abnormalities in the lungs of SSc patients. All patients were seen at
the Johns Hopkins and University of Maryland Scleroderma Center and had pulmonary function tests (PFTs),
including measurement of forced vital capacity (FVC) and single-breath diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide
(DLco). In a series of 89 patients, we found that the presence of alveolitis, defined by an abnormal BAL cell
differential with equal to or greater than 3 percent neutrophils or equal to or greater than 2.2 percent eosinophils or
defined by interstitial inflammation on lung biopsy, was associated with greater subsequent decline in FVC and
DLco compared with patients who did not have alveolitis. The presence of alveolitis was also associated with worse
survival. Treatment of alveolitis with cyclophosphamide was associated with normalization of BAL cell differentials
and an improved outcome in FVC, DLco, and survival compared with untreated patients with alveolitis. In a similar
study of 61 SSc patients, the presence of high levels of CD8+ T cells, especially activated CD8+ T cells, was
associated with lower initial and followup FVC and DLco values. These CD8+ T cells were found to make a type 2
pattern of cytokine mRNAs. Production of type 2 cytokine mRNAs was associated with a greater decline in FVC
and DLco over time. In contrast, activation of cytolytic pathways of CD8+ T cells, as measured by soluble Fas
ligand, granzyme A, and granzyme B levels, was not associated with a worse pulmonary outcome. These data
suggest that activated CD8+ T cells may contribute to pulmonary fibrosis in SSc, especially through the production
of type 2 cytokines. Consideration could be given to using BAL cell differential, numbers and percents of activated
CD8 T cells, and production of type 2 cytokine mRNAs by CD8+ T cells as surrogate endpoints in SSc lung disease.
Key References:
Atamas SP, Yurovsky VY, Wise R, Wigley FM, Goter Robinson CJ, Henry P, Alms WJ, White B. Type 2 cytokines made by
CD8+ lung cells predict decline in pulmonary function in patients with systemic sclerosis. Arthritis Rheum, in press.
White B, Moore WC, Wigley FM, Xiao HQ, Wise RA. Stabilization or improvement of pulmonary function in systemic sclerosis
patients with alveolitis treated with cyclophosphamide, compared to untreated patients, submitted.
Antigen-Specific Proliferation and Cytokine Expression as Surrogate Endpoints for Highly Specific
and Global Immunotherapies of Autoimmune Diseases
Roland Martin, M.D.; Bibiana Bielekova, M.D.; Klaus-Peter Wandinger, M.D.; Henry F. McFarland, M.D.
Neuroimmunology Branch, NINDS, NIH Building 10, Room 5B-16 10 Center DR MSC 1400, Bethesda, MD 20892-
1400, USA
Similar to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis (MS) is considered a T
cell-mediated autoimmune disease in which T-helper-1 (Th1) lymphocytes (i.e., T cells that secrete interferon
gamma [IFNg] and tumor necrosis factors-a/b [TNF-a/b]), contribute to organ damage. During recent years, a
number of candidate autoantigens have been identified in MS, among them myelin basic protein (MBP). Based on
this knowledge, a number of novel immunotherapies have been developed. These try to interfere specifically with T
cell recognition of an autoantigenic peptide or to inhibit more globally the release of pathogenic mediators such as
the Th1 cytokines. We have explored immunological measures that allow us to monitor the fluctuation of antigen-
specific T lymphocytes during the natural course of MS or under a specific treatment, but we have also begun to
develop markers that may be useful to assess the immunological disease state (with respect to Th1 responsiveness)
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 297
and response to cytokine-directed immunotherapies. These readouts include antigen-specific proliferative assays and
the use of quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect the expression of Th1-associated cytokines and
Th1-associated receptors. Applications of both techniques will be presented.
Key References:
Hohlfeld R. Biotechnological agents of the immunotherapy of multiple sclerosis. Principles, problems and perspectives. Brain
1997;120: 865.
Martin R, McFarland H. Experimental immunotherapies for multiple sclerosis. Springer Semin Immunopathol 1996;18:1.
Sallusto, F, Lenig D, Mackay CR, Lanzavecchia A. Flexible programs of chemokine receptor expression on human polarized T
helper 1 and 2 lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1998;187:875.
Zipp F, Weller M, Calabresi PA, Frank JA, Bash CN, Dichgans J, McFarland HF, Martin R. Increased serum levels of soluble
CD95 (Apo-1/Fas) in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1998;43:116.
Immunologic Staging of Multiple Sclerosis
Howard L. Weiner, M.D.
Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system postulated to be a cell-
mediated autoimmune disease against myelin antigens. Lymphocytes of MS patients have increased interferon
gamma secretion, and administration of interferon gamma induces exacerbations of the disease. We found that the
raised interferon gamma secretion in MS was mediated by increased IL-12 production, which was more common in
progressive than in relapsing-remitting patients. The increased IL-12 production was mediated by CD40-CD40
ligand interactions. We also found that increased IL-12 production correlated with disease activity, and treatment of
MS patients with pulse cyclophosphamide normalized the elevated IL-12 levels. In addition, changes in serum levels
of soluble intercellular adhesion molecules and soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor correlate with disease activity.
Furthermore, changes in activated lymphocyte populations in the peripheral blood (cells expressing the IL-2
receptor CD25, class II major histocompatibility complex, or the dipeptidylpeptidase IV/CD26) also correlate with
disease activity. These studies suggest that different immune markers may be used to follow the patients and assess
their response to therapy.
Key References:
Balashov KE, Olek MJ, Khoury SJ, Weiner HL. Seasonal variation of IFN-g production in progressive multiple sclerosis. Ann
Neurol 1998;44:824-828.
Balashov KE, Smith DR, Khoury SJ, Hafler DA, Weiner HL. Increased IL-12 production in progressive multiple sclerosis:
Induction by activated CD4+ T-cells via CD40 ligand. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:599-603.
Comabella M, Balashov K, Issazadeh S, Smith D, Weiner HL, Khoury SJ. Elevated IL-12 in progressive multiple scleriosis
correlates with disease activity and is normalized by pulse cyclophosphamide therapy. J Clin Invest 1998;102:671-678.
Hafler DA, Weiner HL. Immunologic mechanisms and therapy in multiple sclerosis. Immunol Rev 1995;144:75-107.
Khoury SJ, Weiner HL, Hafler DA. Immunological mechanisms in multiple sclerosis. In Handbook of Multiple Sclerosis. Cook
SD (ed.) New York: Marcell Dekker, 1996;145-155.
Smith DR, Balashov KE, Hafler DA, Khoury SJ, Weiner HL. Immune deviation following pulse cyclophosphamide treatment of
multiple sclerosis: increased IL-4 production and associated eosinophilia. Ann Neurol 1997;42:313-318.
Takashima H, Smith DR, Fukara H, Khoury SJ, Hafler DA, Weiner HL. Pulse cyclophosphamide plus methylprednisolone
induces myelin-antigen-specific IL-4 secreting T-cells in multiple sclerosis patients. Clin Immunol Immunopathol
1998;88:28-34.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
298
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus, Addison's Disease, and Celiac Disease
George S. Eisenbarth, M.D., Ph.D.
Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, USA
A combination of genetic analysis, autoantibody determination, and physiologic testing allows the identification
of individuals at high risk for a series of autoimmune disorders and more precise diagnosis of specific disorders. In
particular, for type 1A diabetes mellitus, Addison's disease, and celiac disease specific class II, human leucocyte
antigen alleles are associated with a high risk of disease. The highest risk genotype for type 1 diabetes is DQ8/DQ2
(risk approximately 6 percent in the United States), DQ8/DQ2 with DRB1*0404 for Addison's disease (risk
approximately 1/200), and DQ2/DQ2 (risk approximately 1/20 in U.S. infants). The autoimmunity of type 1 diabetes
and celiac disease often begins early in life (prior to 9 months in many DQ8/DQ2 infants with expression of GAD,
ICA512, or insulin autoantibodies) and prior to age 3 years for celiac disease (transglutaminase autoantibodies). As
autoantibody assays are improved and cutoffs are set at or above the 99th percentile of normal populations, the
autoantibodies are remarkably stable prior to the development of overt disease. This stability also allows the
definition of response to therapy. For celiac disease transglutaminase autoantibodies, a gluten-free diet is associated
within months with a marked decrease in autoantibodies as well as resolution of intestinal pathology. It should be
similarly possible to design trials for the prevention of the appearance of anti-islet autoantibodies and to evaluate
therapies to suppress such antibodies. Approximately one-third of DQ8/DQ2 first-degree relatives of patients with
type 1 diabetes develop anti-islet autoantibodies prior to age 2. At present, autoantibodies provide the only specific
and sensitive immunologic marker for type 1 diabetes. Current T cell assays in workshop evaluation were not able to
distinguish patients with diabetes from controls, and reported assays of serum IL-4 have lacked specificity
(interference from heterophile antibodies). It is likely that T cell assays will be improved, in particular with the
introduction of tetramers to quantitate specific T cells. In the nonobese diabetic mouse model of type 1 diabetes, we
believe insulin is the primary autoantigen, and a dominant insulin peptide (B:9-23) has been identified. The T cell
clones recognizing this peptide evidence restricted Valpha chain utilization. The development of both specific T cell
and antibody assays coupled with determination of metabolic function and cytokine production by specific cells will
hopefully provide additional surrogate markers.
A Correlate Does Not a Surrogate Make: Autoantibodies and Beta-Cell Function in Prevention of
Type 1 Diabetes
Carla J. Greenbaum, M.D.
University of Washington, Department of Veterans Affairs, Puget Sound Health Care System, USA
The ideal surrogate endpoint must have a strong biological rationale, the marker must predict disease, and
treatment effects must be the same on the marker as on the disease. For the prevention of type 1 diabetes, markers
include autoantibodies and beta-cell function. Autoantibodies are useful in prediction of disease; however, not all
antibody-positive subjects progress to disease. In addition, clinical trial data indicate that change in autoantibodies is
not associated with clinical outcome. For beta-cell function, there is a strong biological rationale. First-phase insulin
release (FPIR) is useful in predicting disease; however, not all subjects with low FPIR progress to diabetes.
Moreover, glucose homeostasis is a result of both insulin secretion and insulin action. Interpretation of insulin
secretion measurements during intervention trials may be complicated by the adaptation of the beta-cell to changes
in insulin sensitivity. Also, interventions may effect insulin secretion by mechanisms unrelated to the autoimmune
process. These caveats notwithstanding, beta-cell function is currently the best surrogate endpoint for trials aimed at
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 299
the prevention of type 1 diabetes. In addition, since the preservation of beta-cell function may have clinical benefits
of its own, it is reasonable for this to be used as a surrogate endpoint in phase I and II trials.
Key References:
Bougneres PF, Carel JC, Castano L, Boitard C, Gardin JP, Landais P, Hors J, Mihatseh MJ, Paillard M, Chaussain JL, et al.
Factors associated with early remission of type I diabetes in children treated with cyclosporine. N Engl J Med
1988;318:663-670.
Bougneres PF, Landais P, Boisson C, Carel JC, Frament N, Boitard C, Chaussain JL, Bach JF. Limited duration of remission of
insulin dependency in children with recent overt type 1 diabetes treated with low-dose cyclosporin. Diabetes
1990;39:1264-1272.
Castano L, Boitard C, Bougneres PF. Cyclosporin A suppresses insulin autoantibodies and heterologous insulin antibodies in
type I diabetic children. Diabetes 1988;37:1049-1052.
D'Alessio DA, Kahn SE, Leusner CR, Ensinck JW. Glucagon-like peptide 1 enhances glucose tolerance both by stimulation of
insulin release and by increasing insulin-independent glucose disposal. J Clin Invest 1994;93:2263-2266.
Fleming TR, DeMets DL. Surrogate end points in clinical trials: Are we being misled? Ann Intern Med 1996;125:605-613.
Greenbaum CJ, Kahn SE, Palmer JP. Nicotinamide's effects on glucose metabolism in subjects at risk for IDDM. Diabetes
1996;45:1631-1634.
Greenbaum CJ, Sears KL, Kahn SE, Palmer JP. Relationship of beta-cell function and autoantibodies to progression and
nonprogression of subclinical type 1 diabetes: Follow-up of the Seattle Family Study. Diabetes 1999;48:170-175.
Kahn SE, Prigeon RL, McCulloch DK, et al. Quantification of the relationship between insulin sensitivity and beta-cell function
in human subjects. Evidence for a hyperbolic function. Diabetes 1993;42:1663-1672.
Mandrup-Poulsen T, Molvig J, Andersen HU, Helqvist S, Spinas GA, Munck M. Lack of predictive value of islet cell antibodies,
insulin antibodies, and HLA-DR phenotype for remission in cyclosporin-treated IDDM patients. The Canadian-European
Randomized Control Trial Group. Diabetes 1990;39:204-210.
Prentice RL. Surrogate endpoints in clinical trials: Definition and operational criteria. Stat Med 1989;8:431-440.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Arthur Kavanaugh, M.D.
The University of Texas, Southwestern Medical School, USA
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is often considered the prototypical systemic autoimmune disorder. A
variety of genetic, psychosocial, endocrinologic, environmental, and immunological host variables appear to
modulate the initiation and progression of SLE. Various patient characteristics, as well as measures of disease
activity and organ involvement, have been suggested to correlate with disease outcome in patients with SLE.
Because it is an autoimmune disease, a great deal of work has focused on the analysis of various immunologic
biomarkers as indicators of disease activity or outcome. Much of this work has focused on a number of
autoantibodies. Recently, an evidence-based analysis of autoantibodies and their use in SLE has been undertaken.
This analysis has revealed the potential utility of such markers as well as the important issues that remain to be
resolved in the future definition of other biomarkers for SLE.
Outcome Measures in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Clinical Trials
Michelle Petri, M.D., M.P.H.
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
300
Clinical trials in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) need to capture three domains as outcome measures:
disease activity, damage, and health status. Currently, instruments are available to measure damage (SLICC/ACR
Damage Index) and health status (SF-36), but there is still disagreement on the best instrument to measure disease
activity. Longitudinal observational studies have shown that SLE is actually characterized by three patterns of
disease activity: (1) relapsing remitting, (2) chronic active, or (3) long quiescence. Only the chronic active pattern
lends itself to clinical trial assessment. Demographic variables predict the relapsing remitting pattern. Serologic
variables -- including C3, C4, anti-DNA -- do not predict the relapsing remitting pattern. Thus, there is currently
no accepted biomarker for SLE clinical trials.
Biomarkers in Rheumatoid Arthritis
David S. Pisetsky, M.D., Ph.D.
Duke University Medical Center, USA
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease in which synovial inflammation and proliferation
lead to tissue destruction. Although immune activation is key to the pathogenesis of RA, the relative roles of B and
T cells, macrophages, and synovial fibroblasts in disease are unclear. A variety of biomarkers have been studied
with the goals of elucidating pathogenesis as well as identifying measures useful for drug development. These
markers have utilized serum, synovial fluid, and synovium and have been tested in cross-sectional as well as
longitudinal studies involving antirheumatic agents. Among biomarkers found in serum, cytokines (e.g., IL-6),
cytokine receptors (e.g., TNF-R, IL-2R) as well as shed cell-surface molecules (e.g., CD4 and CD8) have all shown
utility in assessing disease activity, although traditional measures such as C-reactive protein also provide useful
information. The development of biomarkers has been limited by possible disease heterogeneity, difficulty in
defining disease activity, and uncertainty in the mode of action of drugs. Progress in this field will likely come from
clinical trials in which biomarkers are tested in patients treated with agents with well-defined actions.
Key References:
Barrera P, Boerbooms AMT, Janssen EM, Sauerwein RW, Gallati H, Mulder J, de Boo T, Demacker PNM, van de Putte LBA,
van der Meer JWM. Circulating soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors, interleukin-2 receptors, tumor necrosis factor
alpha, and interleukin-6 levels in rheumatoid arthritis. Longitudinal evaluation during methotrexate and azathioprine
therapy. Arthritis Rheum 1993;36:1070-1079.
Beckham JC, Caldwell DS, Peterson BL, Pippen AMM, Currie MS, Keefe FJ, Weinberg JB. Disease severity in rheumatoid
arthritis: Relationships of plasma tumor necrosis factor-alpha, soluble interleukin 2-receptor, soluble CD4/CD8 ratio,
neopterin, and fibrin d-dimer to traditional severity and functional measures. J Clin Immunol 1992;12:353-361.
Cope AP, Aderka D, Doherty M, Engelmann H, Gibbons D, Jones AC, Brennan FM, Maini RN, Wallach D, Feldmann M.
Increased levels of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors in the sera and synovial fluid of patients with rheumatic
diseases. Arthritis Rheum 1992;35:1160-1169.
Houssiau FA, Devogelaer JP, Damme JV, Nagant de Deuxchaisnes C, Snick JV. Interleukin-6 in synovial fluid and serum of
patients with rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory arthritides. Arthritis Rheum 1988;31:784-788.
Okamoto H, Yamamura M, Morita Y, Harada S, Makino H, Ota Z. The synovial expression and serum levels of interleukin-6,
interleukin-11, leukemia inhibitory factor, and oncostatin M in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:1096-1105.
Perkins DJ, St. Clair EW, Misukonis MA, Weinberg JB. Reduction of NOS2 overexpression in rheumatoid arthritis patients
treated with anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha monoclonal antibody (cA2). Arthritis Rheum 1998;41:2205-2210.
van Leeuwen MA, Westra J, Limburg PC, van Riel PLCM, van Rijswijk MH. Interleukin-6 in relation to other proinflammatory
cytokines, chemotactic activity and neutrophil activation in rheumatoid synovial fluid. Ann Rheum Dis 1995;54:33-38.
Walters MT, Stevenson FK, Goswami R, Smith JL, Cawley MID. Comparison of serum and synovial fluid concentrations of
beta2-microglobulin and C reactive protein in relation to clinical disease activity and synovial inflammation in rheumatoid
arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 1989;48:905-911.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 301
Efficient Development of New Therapeutics Will Require Validated Markers of Disease Activity
Michael B. Stewart, M.D.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Princeton, NJ 08543-4000, USA
Substantial unmet medical needs persist in autoimmune diseases for both new diagnostic and therapeutic
modalities. Particularly needed are agents that will allow the subclinical and clinical course to be altered rather than
simply treating the symptoms of established diseases. Scientific knowledge about the basic mechanisms of immune
regulation and inflammatory response, as well as the genomics of diseases mediated by these mechanisms, is
growing rapidly. There is great opportunity for meaningful advances if clinical and basic research resources can be
aligned. Escalating costs for clinical trials and the protracted timelines and large numbers of patients that are
required for currently used composite clinical endpoints and indices mandate becoming more efficient in
determining how well new agents can address unmet medical needs. That efficiency is most likely to be achieved by
validating correlations between specific biological mechanisms of disease and clinical outcomes. The benefits will
include faster evaluation of new therapeutic agents or diagnostic methods in early clinical studies, as well as fewer
patients and shorter timelines in confirmatory trials. Types of markers to be considered may include molecules in
systemic circulation, cells and cellular responses, and tissue-localized markers assessed biochemically or by imaging
techniques.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
302
Neurosciences II
Biomarkers for Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Objectives
* Evaluate the use of imaging technologies for the assessment of receptor changes in the CNS and the
evaluation of subjects in clinical trials based on receptor responses
* Gain an appreciation of the state of the art in using brain imaging techniques as biomarkers of
addiction
* Understand the advantages of computerized cognitive testing in clinical trials
* Achieve an appreciation of antecedent markers of vulnerability to alcohol use and markers of current
use
* Consider the application of statistical modeling issues involved in integration of multiple domains
into an index biomarker
Moderators: E.D. London, Ph.D., National Institute on Drug Abuse, USA
F. Vocci, Ph.D., National Institute on Drug Abuse, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 303
Opioid Biomarkers as Predictors of Naltrexone Treatment Response
Mary E. McCaul, Ph.D.; Gary S. Wand, M.D.; and J. James Frost, M.D., Ph.D.
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA
Alcoholism has multiple biological and environmental determinants; alcohol-dependent persons demonstrate
considerable individual differences in the biological underpinnings of the disorder and in treatment response. Recent
research has suggested that the endogenous opioid system plays a central role in alcohol reinforcement and
dependence. Recent clinical trials of naltrexone treatment for alcoholism have demonstrated efficacy, and findings
also have shown variable responsiveness to opioid antagonist therapy. Several opioid-related variables, including
baseline alcohol craving, high levels of baseline somatic distress, and family history of alcoholism, appear to
modulate naltrexone treatment effectiveness. Our research is examining individual differences among alcohol-
dependent subjects in three direct measures of the opioid system and the effectiveness of these measures in
predicting naltrexone treatment outcomes. First, we employ positron emission tomography imaging for
measurement of mu- and delta-opioid receptor binding throughout key central nervous system regions. We will
assess individual differences in receptor blockade at baseline and after induction on naltrexone therapy. Second,
characterization of hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis stimulation (i.e., adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol
release) following opioid receptor blockade by naloxone provides a functional assessment of opioid activity. In
preliminary data, we have observed a reciprocal relationship between endogenous opioid activity and opioid
receptor binding, such that low opioid activity is associated with a compensatory upregulation of opioid receptors.
Third, naltrexone is rapidly converted to its major active metabolite 6-beta-naltrexol, which provides a stable marker
for naltrexone bioavailability. Research has demonstrated individual variability in naltrexone metabolism, with
fourfold differences across subjects in peak 6-beta-naltrexol levels. Our data suggest that differing individual
biotransformation rates and associated differences in 6-beta-naltrexol levels influence naltrexone effects on alcohol
reinforcement and consumption. This research initiative will provide important information on the mechanism of
action of naltrexone pharmacotherapy for alcoholism and, in the future, may allow us to individualize naltrexone
pharmacotherapy based on patients' endogenous opioid system characteristics.
Key References:
Bencherif B, Gorelick D, Nelson R, Stauffer R, Ravert HT, Mathews WB, Musachio JL, Dannals RF, Frost JJ. Measurement of
brain mu opioid receptor binding by PET in chronic cocaine users during early and prolonged monitored abstinence. J Nucl
Med 1997;38:35.
Frost JJ, Douglass KH, Mayberg HS, Dannals RF, Links JM, Wilson AA, Ravert HT, Crozier WC, Wagner HJ.
Multicompartmental analysis of [11C]-carfentanil binding to opiate receptors in humans measured by positron emission
tomography. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1989;9:398-409.
Gianoulakis C, Krishnan B, Thavundayil J. Enhanced sensitivity of pituitary beta-endorphin to ethanol in subjects at high risk of
alcoholism. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1996;53(3):250-257.
Jaffe AJ, Rounsaville B, Chang G, Schottenfeld RS, Meyer RE, O'Malley SS. Naltrexone, relapse prevention, and supportive
therapy with alcoholics: An analysis of patient treatment matching. J Consul Clin Psychol 1996;64(5):1044-1053.
O'Malley SS, Jaffe AJ, Chang G, Schottenfeld RS, Meyer RE, Rounsaville B. Naltrexone and coping skills therapy for alcohol
dependence. A controlled study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1992;49:881-887.
Verebey K, Volavka J, Mule SJ, Resnick RB. Naltrexone: Disposition, metabolism, and effects after acute and chronic dosing.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 1976;20:315-328.
Volpicelli JR, Alterman AI, Hayashida M, O'Brien CP. Naltrexone in the treatment of alcohol dependence. Arch Gen Psychiatry
1992;49:876-880.
Volpicelli JR, Clay KL, Watson NT, O'Brien CP. Naltrexone in the treatment of alcoholism: predicting response to naltrexone. J
Clin Psychiatry 1995;7(39):39-44.
Wand GS, Mangold D, El Diery S, McCaul ME, Hoover D. Offspring from families with a high density of alcohol dependent
individuals have altered endogenous brain opioidergic activity. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1998;55:1114-1119.
Zubieta JK, Gorelick DA, Ravert HT, Dannals RF, Frost JJ. Increased mu opioid receptors binding detected by PET in cocaine
dependent men is associated with cocaine craving. Nat Med 1996;2(11):1225-1229.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
304
Neuroimaging of Cue-Induced Craving States
Anna Rose Childress, Ph.D.; William McElgin, B.S.; P. David Mozley, M.D.; and Charles P. O'Brien, M.D., Ph.D.
Penn/VA Addiction Treatment Research Center, 3900 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6178, USA
Powerful drug incentive (craving) states are cardinal features of addictive disorders and can fuel the relapse
tendency that characterizes addiction. These craving states can be triggered by cues signaling the drug, and this fact
has enabled their study under controlled laboratory conditions. Our early research found that video cues for cocaine
could reliably elicit profound craving and arousal in users of the drug. The craving state was often likened by
cocaine users to strong sexual desire and was sometimes accompanied by cocaine-like symptoms (e.g., ear-ringing,
head-buzzing, taste of cocaine in back of the throat, even mild euphoria). Understanding the substrates of this
particular biomarker may help explain the differential vulnerability to addiction: Many individuals are exposed to
highly rewarding drugs, yet only a relatively small subset develop the compulsive craving/drug use characteristic of
addiction. We recently studied the brain substrates of cocaine craving (Childress et al. 1999) by monitoring brain
activity (indexed by regional cerebral blood flow, with 0-15 position emission tomography) during video cues that
reliably induce the state. Based on preclinical data showing limbic activation both to cocaine and to cocaine cues
and on the salient emotional and motivational properties of cocaine craving, we hypothesized and subsequently
confirmed increases in limbic activity (amygdala, anterior cingulate, and temporal pole) during cue-induced cocaine
craving. Comparison regions (cerebellum, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, basal ganglia, occipital cortices, and
thalamus) did not show differential activation. Cocaine-naive controls neither craved nor showed differential limbic
activation during the cocaine videos. Results suggest limbic activation characterizes appetitive drug craving.
Ongoing work with induced craving for natural rewards (e.g., sexual activity) will help determine whether the brain
activation during pathognomonic cocaine craving differs, either quantitatively or qualitatively, from normal desire.
Key References:
Childress AR, McElgin W, Mozley PD, Fitzgerald J, Reivich M, O'Brien CP. Limbic activation during cue-induced cocaine
craving. Am J Psychiatry 1999;156(1):11-18.
Biomarkers of Addiction Revealed Through Brain Imaging: State of the Art
Edythe D. London, Ph.D.
National Institute on Drug Abuse, USA
Brain imaging has been applied to studies of cerebral abnormalities in substance abusers even during abstinence.
Some convergent data implicate the same brain regions in the genesis of some addiction-related behavioral states.
For example, position emission tomography (PET) studies of cerebral glucose metabolism demonstrated correlation
between cue-elicited craving and activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and cerebellum. To
some extent, these findings have been replicated in other studies, including assessments of cerebral blood flow using
PET and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Nonetheless, discrepancies exist and may reflect variations
in the experimental paradigms or the analytical methods used. One major consideration is the fact that brain activity
reflects the complexity of simultaneous thoughts and feeling states. Determination of the extent to which a change in
a particular brain region is a function of that feeling state or of another process (e.g., remembering taking cocaine)
even if significantly correlated with the state of craving requires careful study design. Spatial and temporal
resolutions have been greatly improved through brain imaging techniques. Future studies will benefit from pairing
these refined methods with paradigms that isolate specific behavioral states or probe the function of particular brain
regions as markers for vulnerability to addiction or for drug-induced damage.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 305
Key References:
Breiter HC, Gollub RL, Weisskoff RM, Kennedy DN, Makris N, Berke JD, Goodman JM, Kantor HL, Gastfriend DR, Riorden
JP, Mathew RT, Rosen BR, Hyman SE. Acute effects of cocaine on human brain activity and emotion. Neuron
1997;19:591-611.
Grant S, London ED, Newlin DB, Villemagne VL, Liu X, Contoreggi C, Phillips RL, Kimes AS, Margolin A. Activation of
memory circuits during cue-elicited cocaine craving. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:12040-12045.
The Role of Cognitive Function Assessment in Clinical Research
Keith Wesnes, Ph.D.
Cognitive Drug Research Ltd., Reading RG30 1EA, University of Northumbria, Newcastle-on-Tyne, UK
Cognitive function is crucial for the execution of the activities of daily living. Aspects of cognitive function such
as attention, short-term memory, long-term memory, reasoning, planning, and so on are all vital processes that
underlie our ability to conduct various everyday tasks. While we all accept that complex tasks require a high level of
involvement of various elements of cognitive function, it is becoming acknowledged that even the simplest everyday
tasks depend on adequate cognitive functioning. Unfortunately, many professionals mistakenly believe that
behavioral observation, electroencephalography, positron emission tomography scanning, and so forth can directly
measure cognitive function. However, these are indirect measures, and their roles as surrogate endpoints for changes
in human cognitive function is thus seriously flawed. The only direct assessment of cognitive function is the
measurement of the capability of an individual to perform a cognitive task. Cognitive tasks are therefore the only
valid surrogates for changes in cognitive function in clinical research. Cognitive tasks designed by psychologists are
used in clinical research for two major reasons: (1) to identify the current status of functioning of various aspects of
mental ability and (2) to measure change in cognitive function. A wide range of procedures are available for
assessing the current status of functioning, and if time is not an issue, a typical comprehensive neuropsychological
workout can be conducted in about 2 hours. The requirements for assessing change make the number of available
procedures dramatically smaller. We need parallel forms to minimize training effects. Furthermore, ideally,
pretraining on tests enables change over time to reflect a change in the cognitive status of the individual as opposed
to simply representing an experience-based difference in the ability to do the task. Because the greatest requirement
in clinical research is to assess change in individuals as result of the experimental treatments and manipulations, this
will be the principal focus of this presentation. Traditional pencil-and-paper measures such as the digit symbol
substitution test will be reviewed and their limitations highlighted. The advantages of automated procedures will be
highlighted, and examples of their application to clinical research will be assessed. An important area of clinical
research is the development of novel medicines and therapies. Patients have the right to know whether medicines
will alter their ability to conduct the tasks of daily living. Cognitive function assessment can provide this
information at any time during the clinical research program, enabling decisions to be made about the relative utility
of novel medicines. Many medicines (but not those for treating central nervous system disorders) can affect
cognitive function, and any medicine can potentially interact with alcohol and other compounds. Improvements in
cognitive function can also be identified, resulting either directly from the compound or by the successful treatment
of a medical or psychiatric condition known to impair cognitive function (e.g., diabetes, depression). The stages of
validation of computerized cognitive tests will be discussed, with examples from the automated system used most
widely in clinical research, plus examples of the reliability and sensitivity of the system in current clinical use.
Finally, the future developments of cognitive testing for clinical research will be outlined.
Key References:
Ebert U, Oertel R, Wesnes K, Kirch W. Effects of physostigmine on scopolamine-induced changes in quantitative
electroencephalogram and cognitive performance. Hum Psychopharmacol 1998;13:199-210.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
306
van Harten J, Stevens L, Raghoebar M, Holland R, Wesnes K, Cournot A. Fluvoxamine does not interact with alcohol or
potentiate alcohol-related impairment of cognitive function. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1992;52:427-435.
Walker LG, Wesnes KA, Heys SD, Walker MB, Lolley J, Eremin O. The cognitive effects of recombinant Interleukin-2 (rIL-2)
therapy: A controlled clinical trial using computerized assessments. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:2275-2283.
Wesnes K and Revell A. The separate and combined effects of scopolamine and nicotine on human information processing.
Psychopharmacology 1984;84:5-11.
Wesnes K, Simmons D, Rook M, Simpson PM. A double blind placebo controlled trial of Tanakan in the treatment of idiopathic
cognitive impairment in the elderly. Hum Psychopharmacol 1987;2:159-171.
Wesnes K, Simpson PM, Jansson B, Grahnen A, Weimann H-J, Kuppers H. Moxonidine and cognitive function: Interactions
with moclobemide and lorazepam. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1997;52:351-358.
Wesnes K, Simpson PM, White L, Pinker S, Jertz G, Murphy M, Siegfried K. Cholinesterase inhibition in the scopolamine model
of dementia. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1991;640:268-271.
Wesnes K and Warburton DM. A comparison of flurazepam and temazepam in terms of sleep quality and residual effects on
performance. Neuropsychobiology 1984;11:255-259.
Wesnes KA, Walker MB, Walker LG, Heys SD, White L, Warren R, Eremin O. Cognitive performance and mood after a
weekend on call in a surgical unit. Br J Surg 1997;84(4):493-495.
Biomarkers of Heavy Alcohol Consumption
Raymond F. Anton, M.D.
Medical University of South Carolina Alcohol Research Center, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
USA
Biomarkers of heavy alcohol use are used both to identify potential alcohol abusers in clinical and nonclinical
settings and to monitor alcoholics during treatment. Older markers were limited to the measurement of alcohol itself
in various bodily fluids or to nonspecific markers of tissue damage such as hepatically produced gamma-glutamyl
transferrase (GGT). Recently, the newer more specific liver-secreted protein, serum carbohydrate deficient
transferrin (CDT), has been widely evaluated. In addition, other markers have been reported, such as blood
hemoglobin acetaldehyde adducts and urinary 5-hydroxy tryptophol, that are promising. This presentation, while
mentioning all of the above, will focus primarily on CDT, since it is used extensively in Europe and is close to
commercialization in the United States. The utility of CDT as a marker to identify heavy alcohol consumers and to
monitor abstinence and relapse drinking in clinical populations (based on a recently completed U.S. multisite study)
will be highlighted. Its comparison to, and combined use with, GGT will be addressed. Assay differences and
commonalties will be considered. Appropriate issues to consider in evaluating markers for the detection of heavy
alcohol use will be emphasized throughout the presentation.
Key References:
Allen JP, Litten RZ, Anton RF, Cross GM. Carbohydrate deficient transferrin as a measure of immoderate drinking: Remaining
issues. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1994;18:799-812.
Anton RF, Moak DH, Latham P. Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin as an indicator of drinking status during a treatment outcome
study. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1996;20:841-846.
Gronbaek M, Henriksen JH, Becker U. Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin a valid marker of alcoholism in population studies?
Results from the Copenhagen City Heart Study. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1995;19:457-461.
Helander A, Carlsson AV, Borg S. Longitudinal comparison of carbohydrate-deficient transferrin and gamma-glutamyl
transferase: Complementary markers of excessive alcohol consumption. Alcohol Alcohol 1996;31:101-107.
Litten RZ, Allen JP, Fertig JB. G-glutamyltranspeptidase and carbohydrate deficient transferrin: Alternative measures of
excessive alcohol consumption. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1995;19:1541-1546.
Meerkerk G-J, Njoo KH, Bongers IMB, Trienekens P, van Oers JAM. The specificity of the CDT assay in general practice: The
influence of common chronic diseases and medication on the serum CDT concentration. Alcohol Clin Exp Res
1998;22:908-913.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 307
Musshoff F, Daldrup TH. Determination of biological markers for alcohol abuse. J Chromatogr Biomed Sci Appl 1998;713:245-
264.
Sillanaukee P. Laboratory markers of alcohol abuse. Alcohol Alcohol 1996;31:613-616.
Sillanaukee P, Aalto M, Seppa K. Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin and conventional alcohol markers as indicators for brief
intervention among heavy drinkers in primary health care. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1998;22:892-896.
Sillanaukee P, Seppa K, Koivula T. Effect of acetaldehyde on hemoglobin: HbA1ach as a potential marker of heavy drinking.
Alcohol 1991;8:377-381.
Genetic Markers of Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse
Henri Beglieter, Ph.D.
Department of Psychiatry, State University of New York Health Science Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA
A complex illness such as alcoholism does not have a pattern of inheritance that results from a single genetic
abnormality. The psychiatric diagnosis of alcoholism does not inform us about its possible biological underpinnings.
For the past two decades, we have pursued the possible brain anomalies that may be present in alcoholics and their
relatives and also present in young unaffected offspring. In the early 1980s, we identified an abnormal event-related
brain potential response manifested as a low p3 voltage. This low p3 response is prevalent in young sons and
daughters of alcoholic families. More recently, we have demonstrated that this neuroelectric anomaly is also present
in young adult offspring from high-density families. In addition, we have found that this electroencephalographic
feature is highly heritable. In a nationwide study on the collaboration on the genetics of alcoholism, we have
conducted linkage analysis of a large number of pedigrees and have found some quantitative trait loci that relate to
both qualitative traits (diagnosis) and quantitative traits (neurophysiology). We have postulated that these
neuroelectric features index an imbalance in the central nervous system (CNS) excitatory/inhibitory homeostasis.
This is manifested by CNS disinhibition and hyperexcitability. A number of neurobiological systems are
hypothesized.
Themes in the Development of Addiction-Related Biomarkers
Robert L. Stout, Ph.D.
Center for Alcohol and Addiction Studies, Brown University, USA
The presenters in this session on behavioral and biochemical markers cover an especially diverse set of markers.
The issue of markers in the sense of early indications of future status has received little direct attention in substance
abuse research. It is not always easy to assess current substance use, so looking at markers may in some ways seem
premature. Nonetheless, it is important for us to enrich our armamentarium of alternative outcome measures or
indicators to give students of alcohol problems maximum flexibility in conducting studies and by using multiple
fallible indicators, maximum confidence in the results of our studies. There have been many applications of
computerized adaptive testing in the assessment of individual differences, but the use of adaptive techniques in
outcome evaluation is novel. Because of concerns about subject burden and cost of assessment, this technology will
undoubtedly receive further research scrutiny. Biochemical markers of consumption have a firmly established role
in outcome assessment. Because all existing markers have important weaknesses, however, their promise can only
be realized through further development of the technology. Vulnerability measures as described by Dr. Begleiter
could potentially be used in outcome assessment by enabling us to target the highest-risk subjects for the most
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
308
intensive scrutiny or surveillance, which would be an application of the kind of adaptive techniques described in the
first paper at a higher level of assessment.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 309
Cardiovascular II
Stable Cardiovascular Disease
Background
In patients with stable coronary artery disease (CAD), the atherosclerotic process can induce a host of
coronary functional and anatomic abnormalities that eventually affect myocardial performance. A number
of factors likely contribute to this process, including procoagulant tendencies, inflammation, metabolic
abnormalities, coronary microcalcification, oxygen radicals, and oxidized lipids. The treatment is usually
multitargeted, frequently focused on clinical presentation of ischemia. The relevant biomarker might
target coronary flow limitations and/or abnormalities, expression of ischemia, such as perfusion,
myocardial metabolism or left ventricular function, or factors involved in CAD. Ischemia can be assessed
directly by myocardial metabolic assessment (31
P or other techniques), indirectly by perfusion techniques,
such as nuclear imaging or MRI, or by ECG changes (ambulatory ECG).
Moderators: R. Califf, M.D., Duke University, USA
R.S. Balaban, M.D., National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
310
Calcium as a Biomarker for Atherosclerosis Progression and Regression in Coronary Artery
Disease
Douglas P. Boyd, Ph.D.
Imatron Inc., USA
Atherosclerosis is a silent disease that develops slowly over decades of life until it manifests itself in clinical
coronary artery disease with symptoms including angina, heart attack, heart failure, and sudden death. The treatment
of atherosclerosis involves lifestyle modifications and medical treatment of lipid disorders. Histologic studies have
shown that approximately 20 percent of the volume of plaque in coronary atherosclerosis is marked by detectable
levels of calcium (Rumberger et al. 1995). Although soft plaques with no detectable calcium exist, large studies
have shown that 96 percent of asymptomatic patients with clinical coronary disease as demonstrated by angiography
have detectable coronary calcium (Laudon et al. 1999). Other studies have shown that the prevalence of calcium
correlates with increased risk of future coronary events, and the greater the amount of calcium, the higher the risk
(Arad et al. 1996). The risk, sometimes expressed as an "odds ratio," can be 20:1 or higher and is independent of the
presence or absence or symptoms of cardiac disease. In the past, coronary artery calcification (CAC) could be
detected by fluoroscopy. However, the results were variable due to the relative insensitivity of the fluoroscopic
technique and the requirement of a skilled operator. Today the "gold-standard" for the detection and quantification
of CAC is electron beam CT (EBCT) scanning using a 100 millisecond scan speed. Recent research has focused on
the reproducibility of CAC scores and the ability of such quantitation to track the progression and regression of
atherosclerotic disease. Callister and colleagues (1998) demonstrated in a retrospective study of 149 patients the
ability to track disease progression after 12 to 15 months of treatment with a statin drug. Untreated patients
advanced in plaque volume by 52 percent. Those treated who achieved a final low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol level of less than 120 mg per deciliter had a net regression of about 7 percent. Regression analysis
showed an association with the degree of regression and the final LDL level achieved. These kinds of drug studies
depend on the accuracy of CAC scoring. With higher accuracy, the longitudinal interval could be shortened and
fewer patients would need to be logged into a blind study. Currently, CAC is scored using an Agatston score
(Agatston et al. 1990), which approximates the mass of calcium present, and a volume score, which estimates a
plaque volume. The major sources of error include motion artifact, electrocardiograph triggering errors, resolution
blurring, and variability in background subtraction as determined by a threshold. All of these issues can be
addressed by technical improvements, many of which are under way. Some of the improvements will be made in the
EBT scanner itself (reduce scan speed to the 35-50 msec range, introduce multiple slices, increase resolution by
doubling detector pitch), and others require improvements in the CAC scoring workstation algorithms (interpolation
scoring, linearization, and normalyzation of background using self-calibration). These techniques and others will
advance the accuracy of CAC in future years, thus providing an increasingly precise biomarker for early detection,
monitoring of treatment, and for interventional research studies in coronary artery disease.
Key References:
Agatston AS, Janowitz WR, Hildner FJ, Zusmer NR, Viamonte M Jr, Detrano R. Quantification of coronary artery calcium using
ultrafast computed tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol 1990;15:827-832.
Arad Y, Spadaro LA, Goodman K, Lledo-Perez A, Sherman S, Lerner G, Guerci AD. Predictive value of electron beam
computed tomography of the coronary arteries, 19-month follow-up of 1173 asymptomatic subjects. Circulation
1996;93:1951-1953.
Callister, TQ, Raggi, P, Cooil, B, Lippolis, NJ, and Russo, DJ. Effect of HMG-CoA Reductase inhibitors on coronary artery
disease as assessed by electron-beam computed tomography, N Engl J Med 1998;339:1972-1978.
Laudon DA, Yukov LF, Breen JF, Rumberger JA, Wollan PC, Sheedy PF. Use of electron-beam computed tomoraphy in the
evaluation of chest pain patients in the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med 1999;33:15-21.
Rumberger JA, Simons DB, Fitzpatrick LA, Sheedy PF, Schwart RS. Coronary artery calcium area by electron beam computed
tomography and coronary atherosclerotic plaque area: A histopathologic correlative study. Circulation 1995;15:2157-2162.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 311
Electron Beam-Computed Tomography
Nathaniel Reichek, M.D.
Allegheny General Hospital, MCP/Hahnemann School of Medicine, USA
Electron beam-computed tomography (EBCT) is a highly effective method for detection of calcific coronary
atherosclerosis. Thus, the EBCT calcium score is a very useful marker of the extent of coronary atherosclerosis,
particularly for studies of clinical epidemiology. Stratification of a population by calcium score correlates well
overall with likelihood of coronary stenoses and prevalence of coronary events. In populations with chest pain, those
with normal EBCT calcium scores have a much lower likelihood of coronary stenoses than those with high calcium
scores. Effective treatment of hyperlipidemia can be associated with a reduction in calcium score. However, the
calcium score also has many important limitations that limit use as a biomarker for coronary atherosclerosis at the
present time. The variability of calcium score on repeat EBCT is excessively high. Age-dependent increases in score
complicate interpretation. The method may not identify patients with early disease and potentially hazardous
vulnerable plaques. A high calcium score is sensitive but nonspecific as a marker for coronary stenoses. Although
scores may change with lipid-lowering treatment or increase over time as part of the natural history of coronary
atherosclerosis, there is no evidence that such changes correlate with changes in the actual extent of atherosclerosis
or risk of clinical events.
Key References:
Baumgart D, Schmermund A, Goerge G, Haude M, GeJ, Adamzik M, Sehnert C, Altmaier K, Groenmeyer D, Seibel R, Erbel R.
Comparison of electron beam computed tomography with intracoronary ultrasound and coronary angiography for detection
of coronary atherosclerosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;30:57-64.
Budoff MJ, Georgiou D, Brody A, Agatston AS, Kennedy J, Wolfkiel C, Stanford W, Shields P, Lewis RJ, Janowitz WR, Rich S,
Brundage BH. Ultrafast computed tomography as a diagnostic modality in the detection of coronary artery disease: A
multicenter study. Circulation 1996;93:898-904.
Callister TQ, Cooil B, Raya SP, Lippolis NJ, Russo DJ, Raggi P. Coronary artery disease: improved reproducibility of calcium
scoring with an electron-beam CT volumetric method. Radiology 1998;208:807-814.
Callister TQ, Raggi P, Cooil B, Lippolis NJ, Russo DJ. Effect of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors on coronary artery disease as
assessed by electron-beam computed tomography. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1972-1978.
Detrano R, Hsiai T, Wang S, Puentes G, Fallavollita J, Shields P, Stanford W, Wolfkiel C, Georgiu D, Budoff M, Reed J.
Prognostic value of coronary calcification and angiographic stenoses in patients undergoing coronary angiography. J Am
Coll Cardiol 1996;27:285-290.
Devries S, Wolfkiel C, Fusman B, Bakdash H, Ahmed A, Levy P, Chomka E, Kondos G, Zajac E, Rich S. Influence of age and
gender on the presence of coronary calcium detected by ultrafast computed tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol 1995;25:76-82.
Rumberger JA, Behrenbeck T, Breen JF, Sheedy PF. Coronary calcification by electron beam computed tomography and
obstructive coronary artery disease: A model for costs and effectiveness of diagnosis as compared with conventional
cardiac testing methods. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999;33:453-462.
Wexler L, Brundage B, crouse J, Detrano R, Fuster V, Maddahi J, Rumberger J, Stanford W, White R,Taubert K. Coronary
artery calcification: Pathophysiology, epidemiology, imaging methods and clinical implications. A statement for health
professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation 1996;94:1175-1192.
The Electrocardiogram as a Surrogate Marker for Clinical Research in Stable Coronary Disease
Peter H. Stone, M.D. and Bernard Chaitman, M.D.
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, St. Louis University, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
312
The presence of myocardial ischemia, as evidenced by the electrocardiogram (ECG), is an independent,
noninvasive predictor of adverse clinical outcomes in patients with stable coronary disease (CAD). The presence of
ST-segment depression on the resting ECG predicts increased morbidity and mortality. The development of
exercise-induced ST-segment depression is the standard noninvasive marker of poor prognosis and serves as the
fundamental clinical guide to identify the need for coronary angiography and revascularization for millions of
patients with CAD. Episodes of ST-segment depression during routine daily activities, identified by ambulatory
ECG (Holter) monitoring, provides incremental prognostic information. Treatment of ischemic jeopardy with
revascularization or pharmacologic strategies improves both prognosis and the ECG markers of ischemia. It remains
unknown, however, whether the improved prognosis is due to the improvement in ischemia, as indicated by the
ECG marker, or to an improvement in the fundamental coronary anatomy that is responsible for the adverse cardiac
events (i.e., presence of a vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque). The improvement in prognosis may be due only to the
improved coronary anatomy and not to the improvement in ischemia per se (or the ECG marker of ischemia).
Treatments may improve coronary anatomy, with a subsequent improvement in prognosis, even with the persistence
of ECG markers of ischemia. The Asymptomatic Cardiac Ischemia Pilot (ACIP) Study was designed to determine
whether there was an incremental prognostic benefit from aggressively reducing ECG markers of ischemia in
addition to simply controlling anginal symptoms. Patients were randomized to one of three strategies: (1)
medications to alleviate angina only, (2) medications to alleviate angina and abolish as much ECG marker of
ischemia as possible, and (3) revascularization. Although only a pilot study, there was the suggestion that
progressive reduction in the ECG markers of ischemia was associated with a progressive improvement in prognosis.
Large-scale trials are being planned to explore these associations. If such research indicates that improved ECG
markers are strongly correlated with improved prognosis, then ECG markers may be sufficient both to guide clinical
care decisions and to develop and approve new treatment strategies.
Key References:
Chaitman BR, Stone PH, Knatterud GL, Forman SA, Sopko G, Bourassa MG, Pratt C, Rogers WJ, Pepine CJ, Conti CR.
Asymptomatic Cardiac Ischemia Pilot (ACIP) Study: Impact of anti-ischemia therapy on 12-week rest ECG an exercise test
outcomes. The ACIP Investigators. J Am Coll Cardiol 1995;26:585-593.
Knatterud GL, Bourassa MG, Pepine CJ, Geller NL, Sopko G, Chaitman BR, Pratt C, Stone PH, Davies RF, Rogers WJ, et al.
Effects of treatment strategies to suppress ischemia in patients with coronary artery disease: 12-week results of the ACIP
study. J Am Coll Cardiol 1994;24:11-20.
Moss AJ, Goldstein RE, Hall WJ, Bigger JT Jr, Fleiss JL, Greenberg H, Bodenheimer M, Krone RJ, Marcus FI, Wackers FJ, et
al. Detection and significance of myocardial ischemia in stable patients after recovery from an acute coronary event. JAMA
1993;269:2379-2385.
Rogers WJ, Bourassa MG, Anderws TC, Bertolet BD, Blumenthal RS, Chaitman BR, Forman SA, Geller NL, Goldberg AD,
Habib GB, et al. Asymptomatic Cardiac Ischemia Pilot (ACIP) Study: Outcome at 1 year for patients with asymptomatic
cardiac ischemia randomized to medical therapy or revascularization. The ACIP Investigators. J Am Coll Cardiol
1995;26:594-605.
Stone PH, Chaitman BR, Forman S, Andrews TC, Bittner V, Bourassa MG, Davies RF, Deanfield JE, Frishman W, Goldberg
AD, MacCallum G, Ouyang P, Pepine CJ, Pratt CM, Sharaf B, Steingart R, Knatterud GL, Sopko G, Conti CR. Prognostic
significance of myocardial ischemia detected by ambulatory ECG, exercise treadmill testing, and ECG at rest to predict
cardiac events by one year (the ACIP Study). Am J Cardiol 1997;80:1395-1401.
Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor Type 1 (PAI-1) and Vasculopathy
Burton E. Sobel, M.D.
Fletcher Ellen Health Care, Fletcher 311, University of Vermont MCHV Campus, 111 Colchester Avenue,
Burlington, VT 05401, USA
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 313
Insulin-resistant states, including type 2 diabetes mellitus, are associated with increased concentrations of
plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) in blood and in extracted coronary atheroma as well as with an
increased incidence of acute coronary syndromes, known to be precipitated by rupture of vulnerable atherosclerotic
plaques. However, plaque rupture is potentiated by proteolysis. Accordingly, the parallel relationship between
augmentation of concentrations of an inhibitor of proteolysis and plaque vulnerability appears to be paradoxical. The
following resolution is proposed. Reduced cellularity of plaques may result when high concentrations of PAI-1 in
early atheroma inhibit migration of vascular smooth muscle cells into the neointima. Such migrating cells
subsequently proliferate. If their total number is reduced, the composition of plaques may be altered throughout
development with reduction of vascular smooth muscle cell content and consequent additional changes. In
aggregate, such changes may render mature, complex plaques vulnerable to rupture mediated by proteolysis
responsible for degradation of thin fibrous caps on relatively acellular, lipid-laden plaques. Accordingly, high PAI-1
in blood may be a marker of plaque vulnerability.
Key References:
Ehrmann DA, Schneider DJ, Sobel BE, Cavaghan MK, Imperial J, Rosenfield RL, Polonsky KS. Troglitazone improves defects
in insulin action, insulin secretion, ovarian steroidogenesis, and fibrinolysis in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997;82:2108-2126.
Fattal PG, Schneider DJ, Sobel BE, Billadello JJ. Post-transcriptional regulation of expression of plasminogen activator inhibitor
type 1 mRNA by insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1. J Biol Chem 1992;267:12412-12415.
Haffner SM. The insulin resistance syndrome revisited. Diabetes Care 1996;19:275-277.
Juhan-Vague I, Vague P, Alessi MC, Badier C, Valadier J, Aillaud MF, Atlan C. Relationships between plasma insulin,
triglyceride, body mass index, and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1. Diabete Metab 1987;13:331-336.
Loskutoff DJ, van Aken BE, Seiffert D. Abnormalities in the fibrinolytic system of the vascular wall associated with
atherosclerosis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1995;748:177-183.
McGill JB, Schneider DJ, Arfken CL, Lucore CL, Sobel BE. Factors responsible for impaired fibrinolysis in obese subjects and
NIDDM patients. Diabetes 1994;43:104-109.
Schneider DJ, Ricci MA, Taatjes DJ, Baumann PQ, Reese JC, Leavitt BJ, Absher M, Sobel BE. Changes in arterial expression of
fibrinolytic system proteins in atherogenesis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 1997;17:3294-3301.
Sobel BE. The potential influence of insulin and plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 on acceleration of macrovascular disease
in type 2 diabetes. Proceedings of the Association of American Physicians, submitted.
Sobel BE, Woodcock-Mitchell J, Schneider DJ, Holt RE, Marutsuka K, Gold H. Increased plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1
in coronary artery atherectomy specimens from type 2 diabetic compared with nondiabetic patients: A potential factor
predisposing to thrombosis and its persistence. Circulation 1998;97:2213-2221.
Uusitupa MI, Niskanen LK, Siitonen O, Voutilainen E, Pyorala K. 5-Year incidence of atherosclerotic vascular disease in
relation to general risk factors, insulin level, and abnormalities in lipoprotein composition in non-insulin-dependent diabetic
and nondiabetic subjects. Circulation 1990;82: 27-36.
Inflammatory Biomarkers in the Prediction of Future Coronary Events Among Apparently
Healthy Men and Women
Paul M. Ridker, M.D., M.P.H.
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA
Myocardial infarction and stroke commonly occur among individuals without hyperlipidemia. In an attempt to
better predict future coronary events, epidemiologic studies have explored a series of novel risk factors including
biomarkers of inflammatory function. Specifically, recent large-scale prospective studies indicate that nonspecific
inflammatory markers, such as C-reactive protein and serum amyloid A, as well as direct markers of cellular
adhesion (soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1) and cytokine activation interleukin-6 are all elevated many
years in advance among those at high risk for future events. This has been shown for women as well as men and is
present in subgroups of patients traditionally considered low risk. Further, the predictive value of inflammatory
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
314
markers appears to be additive to that of total and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Because these inflammatory
changes are present many years in advance and likely reflect the presence of unstable lesions, the use of
inflammatory markers in the clinical setting may provide a mechanism for early detection and intervention for those
at high risk for future coronary disease.
Key References:
Ridker PM. Fibrinolytic and inflammatory markers for arterial occlusion: the evolving epidemiology of thrombosis and
hemostasis. Thromb Haemost 1997;78:53-59.
Ridker PM, Cushman M, Stampfer MJ, Tracy RP, Hennekens CH. Plasma concentration of C-reactive protein and risk of
developing peripheral vascular disease. Circulation 1998;97:425-428.
Ridker PM, Glynn RJ, Hennekens CH. C-reactive protein adds to the predictive value of total and HDL cholesterol in
determining risk of first myocardial infarction. Circulation 1998;97:2007-2011.
Ridker PM, Haughie P. Prospective studies of C-reactive protein as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. J Invest Med
1998;46:391-395.
Ridker PM, Hennekens CH, Roitman-Johnson B, Stampfer MJ, Allen J. Plasma concentration of soluble intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 and risks of future myocardial infarction in apparently healthy men. Lancet 1998;351:88-92.
Ridker PM, Hennekens CH, Roitman-Johnson B, Stampfer MJ, Allen J. Ridker PM, Cushman M, Stampfer MJ, Tracey RP,
Hennekens CH. Inflammation, aspirin, and the risk of cardiovascular disease in apparently healthy men. N Engl J Med
1997;336:973-979.
Ridker PM, Rifai N, Pfeffer MA, Sacks FM, Moye LA, Goldman S, Flaker GC, Braunwald E for the Cholesterol and Recurrent
Events (CARE) Investigators. Inflammation, pravastatin, and the risk of coronary events after myocardial infarction in
patients with average cholesterol levels. Circulation 1998;98:839-844.
Coronary Angiographic Imaging as a Surrogate Measurement of Atherosclerosis and Treatment
Interventions
Edwin L. Alderman, M.D.
Stanford University Medical Center, USA
Coronary angiography has the advantages of direct lumen quantitation, correlation with current clinical status,
and demonstrated strengths in multiple randomized studies of risk factor interventions (e.g., exercise, hypolipidemic
drugs, etc.). Computer-assisted quantitation has been successfully used to detect atherosclerosis regression or
progression. Its applicability in clinical trials is limited by necessity for invasive procedures, technical constraints on
image resolution (epicardial vessels only), and indirect relationship of a lumen measurement with intramural disease
and with occurrence of clinical events. Intramural disease is better evaluated using intracoronary ultrasound, which
can visualize plaque volume and composition. However, serial image quality is dependent on attention to the details
of the imaging protocol, retention of image resolution from acquisition to core lab analysis (transfer media) and the
criteria used to select lesions and segments for quantitation. Statistical decisions arise regarding selection of
individual diameter measurements (e.g., minimum, mean, etc.), whether visually diseased or nondiseased segments
are included, and manner of integration of lesion or segment quantitation data into a patient-by-patient analysis.
Key References:
Haskell WL, Alderman EL, Fair JM, Maron DJ, Mackey SF, Superko HR, Williams PT, Johnstone IM, Champagne MA, Krauss
RM, Farquhar JW. Effects of intensive multiple risk factor reduction on coronary atherosclerosis and clinical cardiac events
in men and women with coronary atherosclerosis: The Stanford Coronary Risk Intervention Project (SCRIP). Circulation
1994;89:975-990.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 315
Establishing the Research Infrastructure
to Develop and Classify Clinical
Biomarkers
Objectives
* Explore the development of a conceptual model that describes the future for biomarker development
and their application as surrogate endpoints
* Establish an action plan throughout the clinical trials enterprise to apply this model
* Evaluate classification systems for surrogate endpoints
* Consider broad infrastructure needs in basic and clinical research areas to apply fundamental biology
and technological advances to foster development of novel clinical measuring tools
* Characterize the need to organize scientific disciplines that will utilize biomarkers in evaluation of
therapeutic safety and efficacy
Moderators: B. Spilker, Ph.D., M.D., (PhRMA) Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America,
USA
S.L. Zeger, Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health, USA
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
316
Establishing the Research Infrastructure to Develop and Classify Clinical Biomarkers
Bert Spilker, Ph.D., M.D.; Scott L. Zeger, Ph.D.; John Oates, M.D.; and Adam Cohen, M.D., Ph.D.
PhRMA (Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America), USA
Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, USA
Vanderbilt University, USA
Center for Human Drug Research, University of Leiden, The Netherlands
The purpose of the session will be to propose an agenda for advancing the scientific approaches by which clinical
biomarkers will be discovered, evaluated, and in appropriate instances, developed as effective surrogate endpoints.
This session will be organized as a free-flowing discussion designed to address several topics. The first is the
research infrastructure in support of developing clinical biomarkers, to include (1) Centers of Excellence that
provide an environment in which fundamental scientific inquiry is integrated with clinical investigation in the
process of translational research; (2) technological resources (e.g., chip technology, mass spectrometry, proteomics,
magnetic resonance imaging); (3) training and the training environment; (4) requests for proposals that encourage
development of biomarkers in designated areas; and (5) other infrastructure support. The second topic, research
infrastructure in support of classifying clinical biomarkers, will include (1) What evidence is necessary to establish
the utility of a surrogate endpoint for a particular treatment and disease? (2) What new methodologies will enhance
our ability to generate the evidence necessary to establish the utility of a surrogate endpoint? (3) Who should be
systematically evaluating surrogate endpoints? How can such research be stimulated and disseminated for maximal
benefit? Should there be a repository of such information on surrogate endpoints? If so, where should it be located,
and who should manage it? and (4) What will research on biomarkers and surrogate endpoints look like over the
next 5 to 10 years? Participants in this session will include bench scientists, clinical investigators, and statisticians
with both scientific and regulatory perspectives. Session participants will draft a tentative agenda and action plan for
research and activities needed in the future.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 317
Poster Abstracts
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
318
The Importance of Specimen Banks for the Determination of Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints
Issue: Evaluation of Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints
Harry B. Burke, M.D., Ph.D. and Donald E. Henson, M.D.
New York Medical College, USA, Phone: (914) 594-4920, Fax: (914) 594-4923, E-Mail: harry_burke@nymc.edu
As types of prognostic factors, biomarkers and surrogate endpoints are important for assessing the natural history
of disease, selecting the optimal therapy, and evaluating the effectiveness of treatment. Two issues are central to the
initial evaluation of biomarkers and surrogate endpoints. The first is the time from diagnosis to the analysis of
outcomes (e.g., mortality). The longer this interval, the longer the prediction time interval can be. To provide, for
example, 10-year survival predictions, a patient population must be followed for 10 years. The 10-year information
is used to assess predictive accuracy and to provide 10-year outcome predictions for future patients. Once the
relationship between the surrogate outcome and the true outcome is known, the factor can be used as a surrogate
endpoint. The second issue is the accrual of a sufficient number of outcomes so that the assessment of the factor is
statistically reliable. A human specimen bank that contains abnormal and normal tissue, white cells, serum, and
plasma facilitates the determination of biomarkers and surrogate endpoints because, if the tissue was collected long
ago and the patients followed through time, it eliminates the initial waiting time and accrual problems inherent in
both biomarkers and surrogate endpoints.
Potential Utility of Biological Markers of Bone Turnover in Clinical Testing of Nutritional Products
Mona Schiess Calvo, Ph.D.
Expert Regulatory Review Scientist, Clinical Research and Review Staff, Office of Special Nutritionals, Center for
Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, MS HFS-452, 200 C Street, SW
Washington, DC 20204, USA, Phone: (202) 205-5199, Fax: (202) 205-3126, E-Mail: mcalvo@bangate.fda.gov
Recently, we have witnessed an explosive growth in the use of biological markers of bone turnover as clinical
endpoints in evaluating the safety and efficacy of therapies other than antiresorptive drugs. These markers have been
applied as assessment tools in nutritional therapy involving conventional foods, dietary supplements, functional
foods, food fortificants, infant formulas, and medical foods. In safety and efficacy testing of nutritional products, the
ideal biological marker should reflect a change in physiological status such as toxicity, nutritional deficiency or
sufficiency, as well as health benefits. The following discussion focuses on safety testing and present evidence
supporting the utility of the biological markers of bone turnover in clinical testing of nutritional products. Both
resorptive and formative markers used as an index of bone turnover show variable and often weak response to
nutritional therapy when compared with the classic endpoints used in drug trials, bone mineral density (BMD), and
fracture rate. This was observed in a 3-year calcium and vitamin D supplementation trial in elderly men and women
where significant increases in BMD were observed at several sites, which was consistent with a reduction in fracture
rate in the supplemented group. Serum osteocalcin showed a small but significant reduction with supplementation
compared with the placebo group; the resorptive marker, urinary N-telopeptide of type 1 collagen of bone (NTx),
did not change. The absence of an increase in either bone marker relative to the placebo group is an important
indicator of nutritional adequacy. Usefulness of these biomarkers in this capacity is evident in a 2-year study
comparing supplementation with milk to calcium carbonate or placebo. Significant increases in serum osteocalcin
and urinary NTx occurred in women with the lowest calcium intake, demonstrating nutritional inadequacy in the
placebo group and suggesting poor compliance in the milk group. A recent study demonstrated significant increases
in type I C-terminal procollagen peptide (PICP), osteocalcin, and urinary deoxypyridinoline (DPY) in response to
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 319
acute dietary calcium depletion. This study further supports the potential usefulness and sensitivity of these markers
to indicate conditions of nutrient insufficiency. There is also growing evidence that this technology has application
in improving nutritional intervention practices. An unexpected suppressive effect of magnesium supplements on
serum-intact parathyroid hormone levels and bone turnover rate was demonstrated using serum biochemical markers
of bone formation (osteocalcin and PICP) and resorption (type I collagen telopeptide, ICTP). Biomarkers may
therefore prove useful in designing and testing functional foods or dietary supplements for specific interventions
such as optimizing peak bone mass in young adults. Ricci and colleagues used the urinary pyridinium cross-links
and osteocalcin to monitor bone loss during weight reduction intervention in postmenopausal women. They
demonstrated that calcium supplementation was effective in reducing bone loss that occurs during energy restriction.
The markers have also been used effectively to demonstrate lack of benefit of calcium supplementation during states
of increased physiological need such as lactation. Calcium supplementation did not affect the levels of bone
turnover markers (osteocalcin, bone alkaline phosphatase [bAlkP], and urinary DPY) in Gambian women
consuming a calcium supplement compared with those consuming a placebo for 52 weeks. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) is also aware of the use of these markers in nutrient fortification trials in developing
countries, notably in situations where the fortificant may interfere with calcium or bone metabolism. Osteocalcin is
unique among the bone markers in that it has utility as both a marker of bone formation and turnover and a sensitive
indicator of vitamin K nutritional status. Functional indication of vitamin K status is measured by the degree of
undercarboxylation of the glutamic acid residues in this bone protein. Measurement of undercarboxylated
osteocalcin has demonstrated that the current recommended daily allowance for vitamin K is insufficient to meet the
needs of nonheptic tissue. Collaborators from FDA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Yale Medical
School are using sera from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) to determine
the utility of measuring undercarboxylated osteocalcin to estimate vitamin K status in the U.S. population.
Biological markers of bone turnover may also prove useful in demonstrating in large cross-sectional surveys the age
at which skeletal maturity occurs. Urinary NTx and bAlkP measures were included in the 1999 survey (NHANES
IV), with the objective that these markers would facilitate the determination of when skeletal maturity occurs in the
various racial/ethnic and gender groups. This information has direct bearing on the most appropriate ages to initiate
dietary interventions. We have measured osteocalcin and bALK P in samples from the previous NHANES survey
for this same purpose. These few examples will hopefully help broaden scientific awareness to the potential utility
of the bone markers in clinical testing of nutritional products and in establishing nutritional status of vitamin K.
High-Throughput Analysis of Oxidizability of Low-Density Lipoprotein Suitable for Use in Clinical
Trials
Issue: Oxidizability of Lipoproteins as a Promoter of Atherosclerosis and Lack of Large-Scale Clinical Trials
Thomas G. Cole, Ph.D. and Nilima Parikh, B.Sc.
Director Core Lab for Clinical Studies, Washington University, Box 8046, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA, Phone: (314) 362-3516, Fax: (314) 362-4782, E-Mail: thom@imgate.wustl.edu
Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL) has been suggested as a causative factor in atherosclerosis. The
measurement of the oxidizability of LDL in clinical studies has been hampered by tedious methodology and a lack
of instrumentation that allows analysis of large numbers of specimens. We developed a method to measure the
kinetics of the Cu++
-induced production of conjugated dienes (CD) in LDL simultaneously in 96 specimens. LDL
was isolated from ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) plasma by sequential ultracentrifugation at 1.063 and
1.019 g/mL KBr in 10 M EDTA. KBr was removed by rapid gel filtration, and LDL apo B was measured by
nephelometry. LDL (50 g/mL apo B) in 10 M EDTA/phosphate-buffered saline was incubated with Cu++
(25 M)
at 37o
C in a Bio-TekTM
PowerWave 200 plate reader using a disposable microtiter plate with UV-transparent bottom
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
320
(CostarTM
). The rate of oxidation (CD production) was monitored at 234 nm with readings every 3 minutes for 3
hours. Lag time (LT), maximum velocity (Max V), and total CD production were calculated.
Precision Within Run (n = 19) Between Run (n = 19)
Mean % CV Mean % CV
LT (min) 69.7 2.3 77.8 6.1
Max V (muol/min.g) 11.7 5.9 11.9 3.9
CD (muol/g) 454.0 4.8 485.0 3.9
Pretreatment of plasma with vitamin E lengthened LT, and preoxidation of LDL with Cu++
reduced LT. In a
typical run, 46 specimens and 2 quality control specimens were analyzed in duplicate, allowing the analysis of the
large number of specimens often encountered in clinical studies.
Nuclear Imaging in Drug Development
Issue: Emerging Technologies in Drug Development
Richard A. Frank, M.D., Ph.D.
Senior Director, Sanofi Research, 9 Great Valley Parkway, Malvern, PA 19355, USA, Phone: (610) 889-8724, Fax:
(610) 889-6227, E-Mail: frankra@fast.net
The need for relevant, validated biomarkers (Colburn 1997; Rolan 1997) to confirm drug mechanisms of action in
nonclinical and clinical studies highlights a key distinction between classical imaging and positron emission
tomography, single photon emission computerized tomography, or functional magnetic resonance imaging. In
contradistinction to computerized tomography, these emerging technologies quantify molecular biomarkers or
mechanistic intermediates. These snapshots of toxicological, cognitive, physiological, pharmacokinetic, and
biochemical processes (Gibson et al. 1993; Langstrom et al. 1993) might be called bioimages, or pharmacoimages,
for their utility in drug development (Frank, submitted). These rapid, noninvasive measurements can be made
repeatedly at the site of action in small numbers of unanesthetized humans with minimal perturbation of the system
studied. The quantitative results can be expressed in familiar units of measure. Thus, all the criteria are satisfied for
a clinical pharmacology tool as well as two criteria for approval of an New Drug Application based on a single
phase III trial--multiple endpoints involving different events and persuasive data showing the related pharmacologic
effect (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 1998). During phase I or IIa clinicals, the value added makes these
technologies attractive for portfolio management, venture capital milestones, and out-licensing strategies. The
pharmaceutical industry can be a valuable source of potential tracers if proprietary issues are acknowledged. For
such clinical investigations as longitudinal course of disease, multisite validation, or drug dependence and
recidivism, broad societal benefit begs public-private partnerships.
References
Colburn WA. Selecting and validating biologic markers for drug development. J Clin Pharmacol 1997;37:355-362.
Frank RA. Nuclear bioimaging in drug development and regulatory review. J Clin Pharmacol (suppl), submitted.
Gibson RE, Burns HD, Eckelman WC. The potential uses of radiopharmaceuticals in the pharmaceutical industry. In: Nuclear
Imaging in Drug Discovery, Development, and Approval. HD Burns, R Gibson, R Dannals, P Siegl, eds. Birkhauser,
Boston. 1993;321-331.
Langstrom B, Bergstrom M, Hartvig P, Valind S, Watanabe Y. Is PET a tool for drug evaluation? In: PET for Drug Development
and Evaluation. D Comar, ed. Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands. 1995;37-50.
Rolan P. The contribution of clinical pharmacology surrogates and models to drug development - a critical appraisal. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 1997;44:219-225.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 321
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Providing Clinical Evidence of Effectiveness for Human Drugs and
Biological Products. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration. May 1998 Clinical 6
(http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm).
Forced Oscillatory Impedance Provides Sensitive Biomarkers for Chronic Lung Disease
Issue: Biomarkers in Chronic Lung Disease
Michael David Goldman, M.D., Sc.D.
Professor of Medicine, Veterans Administration West Los Angeles Medical Center, Building 304, Room E3-112,
11301 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90073, USA, Phone: (310) 268-4593, Fax: (310) 268-4910, E-Mail:
mdg@ucla.edu
Forced oscillation has been superimposed on natural breathing for more than 40 years as an index of respiratory
airflow resistance. We used a new method of nonsinusoidal forcing (impulse, IOS) to measure a newly defined
index of low-frequency reactance (LFRX)as a biomarker for small (peripheral) airway obstruction. We used
plethysmographic airway resistance as a "gold standard" and showed in 43 patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and in 32 asthmatic patients that LFRX was 20 percent more sensitive and more specific than
conventional spirometry (FEV1) in detecting repsonse to inhaled bronchodilator. In 29 patients with a history of
asthma, LFRX showed changes of greater than 50 percent and greater than 2 standard deviation in 13 patients
classified conventionally (by FEV1) as nonresponders. We conclude that LFRX is a substantially more sensitive
biomarker of changes in small airway disease in patients with chronic lung disease. Twenty percent more patients
are classified correctly using this biomarker with bronchodilator challenge, whereas 144 percent more patients are
correctly classified in response to bronchoconstriction challenge.
Quantitative Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Clinical Drug Trials of Joint Diseases: Virtual
Biopsy of Articular Cartilage
Issue: Imaging Technology in Development of Biomarkers
Laurie Hall, Ph.D.; Paul Watson; Ashwini Kshirsagar; and Jenny Tyler
Professor Herchel Smith Laboratory, University of Cambridge, University Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge
CB2 2PZ, UK, Phone: 44-0-122333-6805, Fax: 44-0-122333-6748, E-Mail: tac12@hslmc.cam.ac.uk
It is already well known that radiological magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can visualize injury of human
articular joints. The hypothesis is that new MRI protocols will enable accurate measurement of osteoarthritis and
rheumatoid arthritis. This presentation will demonstrate, for the first time, fully automated MRI procedures for
quantitating both the amount and composition of human articular cartilage in the hand and knee, specifically,
measurement of thickness, total volume, and selected volumes of cartilage via three-dimensional (3-D) MRI and
measurement of the MRI parameters of water in finger and knee cartilage, including Mo, T1, T2, MTR, Msat/Mo,
and D. Important features especially relevant to clinical drug trials include quantitative 3-D assessment of each joint
as an intact organ, including all soft tissue, bone, musculature, and vasculature; fully automated measurement of
images from MRI-scanners worldwide; use of image coregistration for automated, repeat-measurements of diseased
tissues; and measurement of animal models for osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis using human MRI protocols.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
322
Surrogate Anatomic and Functional Sites for Risk Assessment in Cancer Prevention
Issue: Expanding the Concept of Surrogate Endpoints To Include Accessible Anatomic and Functional Field
Effects to Assess Risk for Cancer in the Nonaccessible Organ Sites (e.g., Prostate) for Chemoprevention
Donald E. Henson, M.D.
Medical Officer, Program Director, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Executive Plaza North,
Room 330, MSC 7346 6130 Executive Boulevard, Bethesda, MD 20892-7346, USA, Phone: (301) 496-9424, Fax:
(301) 402-0816, E-Mail: deh@helix.nih.gov
Surrogate endpoints are needed for evaluating therapy. However, the concept of surrogate can be extended to
anatomic sites to include risk assessment for cancer chemoprevention. For accessible sites, such as the uterine
cervix, analsysis of risk usually depends on cytology. For sites that are not accessible, such as lung, it is more
difficult to evaluate risk of cancer, since a biopsy or other diagnostic test cannot be justified unless there is evidence
of disease (e.g., an elevated prostatic surface antigen for a prostate biopsy). Therefore, to assess risk in
nonaccessible sites, physicians might be able to take advantage of the anatomical or functional field effects in
cancer. Patients with lung cancer often develop additional cancers of the upper aerodigestive tract (UADT) because
of a field effect. Thus, the risk for lung cancer might be assessed by evaluating biomarkers for cancer in the
oropharynx (surrogate for lung), since all UADT epithelium, including lung, is exposed to cigarette smoke.
Theoretically, the risk for breast cancer can be tested by evaluating biomarkers (functional field effect) along the
mammary line, which might serve as a surrogate for breast tissue. Potential examples of functional and anatomical
surrogate sites will be presented for cancers of the lung, prostate, breast, esophagus, and ovary.
A New and Rapid Protein-Profiling Method for Cancer Biomarker Discovery Using Surface-
Enhanced Laser Desorption /Ionization (SELDI) ProteinChip TM
Technology From Laser Capture
Microdissection-Procured Cells and Seminal Plasma of Prostate Cancer Patients
Issue: A Novel ProteinChipTM
Technology for Biomarker Discovery for Disease State and Cancer Prevention
Sau-Mei Leung, Ph.D.; Lisa Cazares, B.Sc.; and George L. Wright, Jr., Ph.D.
Field Research Scientist, Ciphergen Biosystems, Inc., 2817 New Providence Court, Falls Church, VA 22042, USA,
Phone: (703) 645-8739, Fax: (703) 645-8756, E-Mail: mei@ciphergen.com
Protein profiling has become increasingly important for indicating global changes between normal and disease
states and searching for disease biomarkers. Surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (SELDI) ProteinChipTM
technology was used to generate and analyze protein profiles for cancer biomarker discovery. Laser capture
microdissection (LCM)-procured normal and prostate cancer (PCA) cells were added onto the ProteinChipTM
array.
After binding and washing, the mass for the bound proteins was determined by SELDI mass reader. Comparison
maps showing the changes in the protein profiles between the normal and PCA samples were generated by SELDI
software. Using 1,000 to 2,000 LCM-procured cells, prostatic acid phosphate and prostate-specific antigen were
found in both normal prostate and PCA, and prostate-specific membrane antigen was found in two out of three
matched tissue samples based on their molecular weights. We also found two unique proteins in PCA cells below 1
kDa and at least three unique proteins under 1 kDa using one uL of seminal plasma. The ProteinChipTM
technology
provides a rapid, sensitive protein analysis in complex biological samples. Besides, it is readily adaptable to a
clinical assay format. Further studies will be required to determine whether the unique proteins identified in this
preliminary study will be found to be novel biomarkers for diagnosis or prognosis of PCA.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 323
Use of Antigen-Specific Cytokine-Producing Cells as Markers of Immune Function
Issue: Biomarkers of Immune Status
Holden T. Maecker, Ph.D.; Maria A. Suni, B.S.; and Vernon C. Maino, Ph.D.
Use of sensitive reagents for detection of intracellular cytokines has allowed the development of assays that
measure T cell responses to specific antigens after very short in vitro restimulation. This saves time over assays that
require long-term stimulation, such as cytotoxic T lymphocyte, proliferation, and traditional cytokine ELISA assays.
It also has the potential to be more physiologically relevant, since sufficient time for amplification or apoptosis of
responding populations is not allowed. Similar in concept to the ELISPOT technique, the measurement of antigen-
specific responses by flow cytometry is distinguished by its ability to do multiparameter assessments on individual
cells (e.g., simultaneous phenotyping of cell surface markers, activation antigens, and other cytokines). We have
used these types of analyses to detect host responses to infectious agents, including CMV, HIV, mumps, HCV,
measles, VZV, and HSV, in whole blood. A correlation between vaccination and development of CD4+ responses
by this assay was seen in an HIV vaccine trial. Correlations of CD4+ responses with disease progression and
treatment history were also seen in HIV-positive individuals. Responses to a neoantigen, KLH, were seen in another
study after multiple vaccinations. In all cases analyzed, the CD4+ responses were restricted to the memory
compartment (CD62Llow, CD44hi, CD45RO+). Stimulation with soluble protein usually does not lead to reliable
detection of CD8+ responses; however, use of an human leukocyte antigen-matched peptide from CMV allows
detection of CD8+, CMV-specific responses. These responses include most, but not all, cells staining with an MHC
tetramer presenting the same peptide. Thus, although staining with MHC tetramers allows rapid identification of
antigen-specific CD8+ cells, a single-cell immune function assay can distinguish the subpopulation of these cells
that are functional in terms of cytokine secretion.
Glucose Metabolic Response to a Drug: A Biomarker for the Development of Drugs Affecting the
Central Nervous System
Issue: Imaging in the Development of Biomarkers
Malcolm Cooper, M.D. and John Metz, Ph.D.
University of Chicago and MIICRO, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA, Phone: (312) 455-0934, Fax: (312) 455-0964, E-Mail:
john@yoda.bsd.uchicago.edu
Cerebral metabolism of glucose is a physiologically robust indicator of neuronal functioning. As assessed with
PET and FDG under controlled conditions in human subjects, this measurement can demonstrate that a drug affects
the central nervous system (CNS) and where it affects the CNS. At early stages in drug development, this
information can be predictive of a drug's therapeutic value and its likely behavioral consequences. The method can
also be used to distinguish differences in doses of effective drugs and, therefore, could be used to reduce the range
of doses and the frequency of dosing that would need to be examined in clinical trials. The method can be applied in
patient or healthy normal populations, after either acute or chronic drug administrations. It can also be used to
qualitatively compare different drugs and to examine the interactions of drugs. In addition, we hypothesize that
systematically applied clinical trials will reveal that the method provides a surrogate marker for drug efficacy. Thus,
when used at various stages in drug development, this approach can provide quantitative indicators that can
accelerate the development process, significantly limit risk, and suggest the likelihood of a compound's success in
clinical trials and in the market.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
324
Urine Magnetic Resonance Spectra Can Accurately Distinguish Normal Allografts from those with
Biopsy-Proven Rejection
Issue: Noninvasive Diagnosis of Renal Transplant Rejection
Peter Nickerson, M.D.; Ray Somorjai, Ph.D.; Roxanne Deslauriers, Ph.D.; Tony Shaw, Ph.D.; John Jeffery, M.D.;
and David Rush, M.D.
Director Transplant Immunology Lab, Departments of Internal Medicine and Immunology, Health Sciences Centre,
University of Manitoba, Room GG549, 820 Sherbrook Street, Winnipeg, MB R3A 1R9, Canada, Phone: (204) 787-
7251, Fax: (204) 787-3326, E-Mail: pnickerson@exchange.hsc.mb.ca
A noninvasive test of renal allograft pathology would safely predict rejection and its resolution following
treatment. Magnetic resonance (MR) spectral analysis of urine, combined with a reliable classification strategy,
provides such a test. Our strategy to generate disease classifiers (i.e., validated on several biofluids and tissues,
including novel spectral preprocessing, bootstrap-based cross-validation, simple and robust linear discriminant
analysis) was applied to urine MR spectra (ppm range 0.0 to 9.0, 4,096 points/spectra) using transplant protocol
biopsy pathology (Banff scored) as a reference "gold standard." MR spectra from 22 patients (normal histology) and
22 normal controls constituted the "normal" group, and those of 34 patients with biopsy-proven acute rejection
(n = 15), chronic rejection (n = 9), or acute/chronic rejection (n = 10) made up the "rejection" group. The optimized
classifier correctly allocated both the normals (3 misclassifications; sensitivity = 91 percent, specificity = 95 percent,
positive predictive value = 95 percent) and the rejections (1 misclassification; sensitivity = 95 percent,
specificity = 91 percent, positive predictive value = 92 percent). These results suggest that urine MR spectra can
distinguish between normal histology and acute and/or chronic allograft inflammation. Ongoing studies are
developing classifiers for specific graft pathology. Urine MR spectral analysis, with appropriate classifier strategy
and algorithms, provides a rapid noninvasive test of graft pathology that allows repetitive sampling of the graft.
Urine Infrared Spectra Can Accurately Distinguish Normal Allografts from those with Biopsy-
Proven Rejection
Issue: Noninvasive Diagnosis of Renal Transplant Rejection
David N. Rush, M.D.; Ray Somorjai, Ph.D.; Roxanne Deslauriers, Ph.D.; Tony Shaw, Ph.D.; John Jeffery, M.D.;
and Peter Nickerson, M.D.
Head Section of Nephrology, University of Manitoba, Room GE 421-A, 820 Sherbrook Street, Winnipeg, MB R3A
1R9, Canada, Phone: (204) 787-7807, Fax: (204) 787-3326, E-Mail: drush@exchange.hsc.mb.ca
A noninvasive test of renal allograft pathology would safely predict rejection and its resolution following
treatment. Infrared (IR) spectral analysis of urine, combined with a reliable classification strategy, provides such a
test. Our strategy to generate disease classifiers (i.e., validated on several biofluids and tissues, including novel
spectral preprocessing, bootstrap-based cross-validation, simple and robust linear discriminant analysis) was applied
to urine IR spectra (800 to 5,000 cm-1
range, 2,163 points/spectra) using transplant protocol biopsy pathology (Banff
scored) as a reference "gold standard." IR spectra from 22 patients (normal histology) and 22 normal controls
constituted the "normal" group, and those of 34 patients with biopsy-proven acute rejection (n = 15), chronic
rejection (n = 9), or acute/chronic rejection (n = 10) constituted the "rejection" group. The optimized classifier
correctly allocated both the normals (only 3 misclassifications; sensitivity = 88 percent, specificity = 89 percent,
positive predictive value [PPV] = 88 percent) and the rejections (3 misclassifications; sensitivity = 89 percent,
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 325
specificity = 88 percent, PPV = 88 percent). These results suggest that urine IR spectra can distinguish between
normal histology and acute and/or chronic allograft inflammation. Ongoing studies are developing classifiers for
specific graft pathology. Urine IR spectral analysis, with the appropriate classifier strategy and algorithms, provides
a rapid noninvasive test of graft pathology that allows repetitive sampling of the graft.
Mass Spectrometry: An Invaluable Tool for the Identification of Disease
Issue: Technologies for Identification of Proteins as Biomarkers
Yingming Zhao, Ph.D. and Brian T. Chait
Assistant Professor Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA,
Phone: (212) 659-6759, Fax: (212) 824-2508, E-Mail: zhao@vaxa.crc.mssm.edu
Biological machines control many critical cellular processes such as DNA replication, gene expression, and
protein sorting. Identification of the protein components of such machines is often the first step in gaining a detailed
understanding of the operation of such machines. In this presentation, we report our utilization of capillary LC-ion
trap mass spectrometry and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-tandem ion trap mass spectrometry (MALDI-
TIMS) in combination with a protein sequence database search using the software tool PepFrag for the identification
of gel-separated proteins from various preparations of biological complexes. Using this approach, we were able to
identify a protein at a level greater than 0.2 pmol loaded on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel, which is at
least 50 times more sensitive than the more conventional Edman peptide sequencing method. This approach was
used for the analysis of 450 protein bands from two preparations of enriched yeast nuclear pore complex. The
analysis yielded 430 positive protein identifications, which resulted in the identification of 220 different proteins. In
addition to the yeast nuclear pore complex, we also applied the methods for the identification of protein components
of other biological machines (e.g., RNA polymerase II holoenzyme, SWI/SNF complex, Stat1a TAD-associated
proteins). These studies demonstrated that mass spectrometry-based protein identification and sequencing methods
provide an extremely powerful tool for the dissection of a complicated biological system.
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
326
Trainee Travel Award Abstracts
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 327
Can Periodicity of Breathing during Sleep Mark Individuals at Risk for Hypoxic Brain Injury?
Issue: Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration
Barbara Waag Carlson R.N., Ph.D.; Virginia J. Neelon, R.N., Ph.D.; and John R. Carlson, M.S.
Postdoctoral Fellow Biobehavioral Lab, University of North Carolina School of Nursing, CB 7460, Carrington
Hall, Room 6, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA, Phone: (919) 966-9416, Fax: (919) 966-7298, E-Mail:
bcarlson@email.unc.edu
This study represents the first step in testing the hypothesis that breathing patterns during sleep can serve as a
marker of cognitive decline in older adults. Studies suggest that the periodicity of breathing correlates with arousals
during sleep, and breathing patterns characterized by recurrent apneas and low periodicity may mark individuals
who are at risk for hypoxia during sleep. This study evaluates the sensitivity of four variables, measured
noninvasively, for characterizing the periodicity of breathing during sleep. Five older adults (four females, ages 65
to 79) were monitored using an abdominal inductance band (respiratory movement), the NIRMS (body movements),
and standard sleep laboratory measures. We used four derived variables to classify each 5-minute segment: (1) the
standard deviation (SD) of interbreath intervals (SDIBI: range = 0-5s), (2) the SD of interbreath frequencies
(SDIBF: range = 0-11cps), (3) the SD of cycle amplitude (sdAMP: range = .01-.2v), and (4) a frequency index
(FI=SDIBF-SDIBI, range = 0-11 units). Two variables divided segments into four mutually exclusive breathing
patterns and distinguished subjects with low and high periodicity: TYPE-1 had very low periodicity (FI < 1units,
SDAMP < .1v); TYPE-2 had high-frequency periodicity (FI1units, SDAMP < .1v); TYPE-3 had low-frequency
periodicity (FI < 1units, SDAMP > .1v); and TYPE-4 had very high periodicity (FI1units, SDAMP.1v). Type 1 and
3 patterns had more apneic events (SDIBI > 1.75s) than Type 2 and 4 patterns. Type 3 and 4 patterns had more
arousals. We concluded that low periodicity may mark individuals who have impaired arousal to hypoxic events
during sleep. This research was supported by NRO6821-01, P30 NRO3962, R00046, 1S1MH53651, and T32
NRO7091.
Circulating Plasma Leptin Concentrations on Predicting Four-Year Body Weight Changes among
U.S. Men
Issue: Elevated Plasma Leptin as Markers of Leptin Resistance and Weight Gain
Nain-Feng Chu, M.D.; Donna Spigleman, Sc.D.; and Gokhan Hota, M.D., Ph.D.
Doctoral Student Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Kresge Building, Room 911, 677
Huntington Avenue, Boston MA 02115, USA, Phone: (617) 432-4569, Fax: (617) 566-7805, E-Mail:
nfchu@hsph.harvard.edu
Leptin, an adipose tissue-derived protein product of the obesity gene, is an important regulator of energy
metabolism. Null mutations in the genes that code for leptin or its receptor result in obesity in animals. Although
similar mutations have also been reported in obese humans, their frequency is extremely rare. In contrast, body fat
mass is strongly associated with elevated circulating leptin levels in humans, which suggests that leptin resistance,
rather than leptin production, may contribute to the development of obesity. A sample of 468 men from the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study were selected to study biological markers of alcohol consumption. From this group,
247 men ages 47 to 64 years in 1994 and free of cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and malignant
neoplasmas had completed anthropometric, diet, and lifestyle questionnaires in 1994 and 1998 and had provided a
venous blood sample in 1994. At baseline, compared with men in the lowest quintile of leptin (mean = 2.7 ng/mL),
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
328
men in the highest quintile (mean = 12.2 ng/mL) weighed more, were physically less active, and had higher
circulating insulin levels. The correlation between plasma leptin levels and body weight in 1994 and 1998 was 0.51.
From a multivariate linear model overall, there was a 3.6-pound (95-percent CI, 0.2-6.9 pound) increase in weight
over 4 years, associated with 10 ng/mL increase in plasma leptin levels after adjusting for baseline age, body weight,
height, smoking status, alcohol intake, and physical activity. The observed association between leptin and weight
gain was limited to men with a baseline body mass index equal to or greater than 25, where a 5.4-pound (95 percent
CI 1.6-9.2 pound), 4-year weight gain was found for every 10 ng/mL increase in plasma leptin levels. Further
control for total energy intake, plasma insulin, and soluble tumor necrosis factor-receptor 1 (sTNF-R1) and sTNF-
R2 levels did not appreciably alter these results, and plasma insulin level was not independently associated with
weight gain among these subjects during 4-year followup. These data suggest that elevated plasma leptin
concentrations among overweight men may be a marker of leptin resistance and subsequent weight gain.
Erythrocyte Low Potassium Content: A Proposed Genetic Marker for Essential Hypertension
Issue: Markers for Hypertension
Maria Carolina Delgado, M.D. and Antonio Delgado-Almeida, M.D.
Research Fellow Division of Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Health
System, 3918 Taubman Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA, Phone: (734) 936-4795, Fax: (734) 936-8898, E-Mail:
delgadoc@umich.edu
Levels of erythrocyte potassium (RBCKi) were measured in 4 groups: (1) 100 adults (50 hypertensives and 50
normotensive controls, (2) 100 adolescents, (3) 13 hypertensive families (14 hypertensive and 12 normotensive
parents and 37 offspring), and (4) 4 families (4 hypertensive parents and 20 offspring) that were reexamined 3 to 5
years later. The results of the RBCKi analysis were as follows: Group 1 hypertensives had RBCKi levels lower than
normotensives (81.3 4 versus 92.9 6 mmol/L cell, p < . 0001). The RBCKi correlated with systolic blood
pressure (SBP) (r = .65, p = .001) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) (r = .70, p = .001). Group 2 adolescents with
hypertensive parents had RBCKi levels lower than those with normotensive parents (90.2 5 versus 93.4 6
mmol/L cell, p = .005). RBCKi correlated with SBP (r = .22, p = .027), and the odds-ratio of having low levels of
RBCKi was 3.5 times greater in adolescents with hypertensive parents than those with normotensive parents (chi-
square = 7.6054, p < .01). In group 3, RBCKi was lower in hypertensive parents (81.7 3.5 mmol/L cell) than in
their offspring (86.4 6 mmol/L cell). RBCKi correlated with DBP (r = .48, p = .009) and SBP (r = .38, p = .001).
In group 4 initially, offspring were 31.5 11 years old, with blood pressure 124.4 4/72.6 6 mmHg and RBCKi
85.9 5 mmol/L cell. After 4 1 year, 55 percent of the offspring became hypertensives with low RBCKi levels
(149.5 13/90.2 2 mmHg, 81.8 5 mmol/L cell) versus 45 percent who became normotensive and had higher
levels of RBCKi (121.2 7/66.4 5 mmHg, 90.2 2 mmol/L cell). These observations demonstrate the associated
inheritability of RBCKi and essential hypertension and its potential as a genetic marker.
Color M-Mode Echocardiography for the Clinical Assessment of Left Ventricular Filling
Characteristics
Issue: Noninvasive Evaluation of Myocardial Function
Michael S. Firstenberg, M.D.; Mario J. Garcia, M.D.; Neil L. Greenberg, M.D.; Nicholas Smedira, M.D.; Michael
Main, M.D.; Sudhir Wahi, M.D.; David L. Prior, M.D.; and James D. Thomas, M.D.
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 329
The Cardiovascular Imaging Center, Department of Cardiology, Desk F-15, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA, Phone: (216) 445-6313, Fax: (216) 445-7306, E-Mail:
firstem@ccf.org
Doppler echocardiography is a useful tool to assess left ventricular (LV) dysfunction, a common clinical problem.
Color M-mode echocardiography (CMM) provides blood propagation velocities. We correlated CMM
characteristics with early diastolic transmitral pressure gradients (PMV), LV isovolumic relaxation time constant (),
and left atrial (LA) pressures -- all valuable indices of LV function. Twelve patients undergoing cardiac surgery
had, during baseline, norepinephrine infusions and partial-bypass conditions transesophageal CMM performed.
Simultaneous high-fidelity LA and LV pressures were also obtained. LV end-diastolic (EDV) and end-systolic
volumes (ESV) were measured from transesophageal echo. PMV, and LAP were correlated with CMM-derived
propagation (VP), pressure gradients, calculated using the simplified Euler equation, which relates pressure gradients
to spatial and temporal velocity changes (PEuler), and early diastolic peak filling velocities (E). Vp was strongly
correlated with (58 16 msec, r = -0.78, p < 0.001, Figure 1) but changed little with preload (baseline: 37 12
cm/sec versus partial bypass: 34 16 cm/sec, p = 0.3). E also correlated with LAP (r = 0.68) as did PEuler with PMV
(y = 0.79x + 0.48, r = 0.91, Figure 2). VP is a preload independent index of LV relaxation. CMM-derived pressure
gradients may be useful for the clinical assessment of LV filling and function.
Figure 1: Relationship between Tau (T) and Color M-mode propagation (Vp)
Figure 2: Relationship between actual transmitral pressure gradient and the predicted gradient using the simplified
Euler equation
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
330
Noninvasive, Echocardiographic-Derived, Myocardial Systolic Strain Assessment of Left
Ventricular Contractility
Issue: Noninvasive Evaluation of Myocardial Function
Michael S. Firstenberg, M.D.; Mario J. Garcia, M.D.; Neil L. Greenberg, Ph.D.; Michael Main, M.D.; Peter Castro,
B.S.; Agnes Travaglini, M.S.; Leonardo Rodriguez, M.D.; and James D. Thomas, M.D.
The Cardiovascular Imaging Center, Department of Cardiology, Desk F-15, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA, Phone: (216) 445-6313, Fax: (216) 445-7306, E-Mail:
firstem@ccf.org
Quantitative assessment of left ventricular (LV) contractility is a challenging task and common clinical problem.
Color tissue Doppler echocardiography (CTDE), a novel technique, allows noninvasive measurement of myocardial
contraction velocities. Myocardial strain represents the spatial derivative of these velocities (dv/ds). CTDE images
of the interventricular septum were recorded from the apical four-chamber view in seven closed-chest, anesthetized
dogs during four to five different inotropic stages. Simultaneous, LV volumes and pressures were obtained with a
combined-conductance, high-fidelity pressure catheter. Peak elastance (Emax), the slope of end-systolic pressure-
volume relationships during caval occlusion, was used as the "gold standard" of LV contractility. Peak systolic
CTDE basal-septal velocities (Sm), peak (peak), and mean (mean) strain were compared against Emax by linear
regression analysis. Emax and CTDE systolic indices increased during stimulation with dobutamine and decreased
with esmolol infusion. A stronger relationship was found between Emax and peak (r = 0.94, p < 0.01, y = 0.27x + 0.56,
Figure 1) and mean (r = 0.85, p < 0.01, y = 0.18x + 0.39, Figure 2) than for Sm (r = 0.75, p < 0.01). CTDE-derived peak
and mean are strong noninvasive indices of LV contractility and can be used in the acute and serial clinical assessment
of patients with LV dysfunction.
Figure 1: Relationship between peak elastance (Emax) and peak strain (peak)
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 331
Figure 2: Relationship between peak elastance (Emax) and mean strain (mean)
Endothelium Response Markers Facilitate Liver Disease Prognosis
Issue: Biomarkers for Endothelial Responses
Magdalene M. George, Ph.D.; David Van Thiel, M.D.; Debra Hoppensteadt, Ph.D.; Qing Ma, M.S.; Jean Amiral,
Ph.D.; Rosenne Gusein, R.N.; and Jawed Fareed, Ph.D.
Research Associate Department of Pathology, Loyola University Medical Center, Room 2646, 2160 South First
Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153, USA, Phone: (708) 216-3262, Fax: (708) 216-6660, E-Mail: qmal@luc.edu
Acute endothelium injury is often caused by oxidative stress induced by an inflammatory reaction associated wiht
the production of oxygen-derived free radicals. Such occurs in the liver in response to any array of disease processes
that include viral infection, alcohol abuse, cirrhosis due to any cause, chemotherapy or other drug-induced injury,
and allograft rejection. This leads to neutrophylic activation and adherence and an accelerated endothelial
inflammatory reaction associated with uninhibited widespread vascular injury. The latter circumstance characterizes
the sequence of events associated with end-stage liver diease that characteristically terminates a multisystem organ
failure. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay systems (ELISA) and colorimetric immunoassays for inducible nitric
oxide system (iNOS), human soluble L-selectin (hs-L-Sel), antiannexin V (anti-Anx V), human soluble
thrombomodulin (hs-TM), free and total tissue factor pathway inhibitor (F-TFPI and T-TFPI), and human soluble
interferon-gamma (IFN) were used to measure these releasable endothelium response biomarkers in plasma.
Individual patient groups (4 to 6) with various liver and renal autoimmune diseases such as acute liver failure
(ALF), acute renal failure (ARF), hepatitis C and autoimmune hepatitis (HCV auto), hepatocellular carcinoma,
hepatitis C (HCC, HCV), hepatitis C cirrhosis (HCV cirrh), hepatocellular carcinoma cirrhosis (HCC cirrh), and
hepatitis C cryoimmunoglobulimia (HCV cryo) were included. The seven response markers may provide a disease-
specific profile for each disorder, as shown in the table below. Although antiannexin V was elevated in groups 1 and
2; L-selectin in groups 1, 2, 5, and 6; and hs-TM in groups 1, 2, 3, the constant elevation of iNOS was found in all
groups. The results suggest that measurement of these endothelial response markers may help in the categorization
of patients in various risk groups. Furthermore, these markers may be helpful in the assessment of therapy directed
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
332
at modulating oxidative stress and limiting vascular injury, which appear to both initiate and perpetuate organ injury
leading to multiorgan failure.
iNOS hs-L-Sel anti-Anx V hs-TM F-TFPI T-TFPI IFN-g
No Groups M/mL/min ng/mL ng/mL ng/mL ng/mL ng/mL pg/mL
Control 54-67 560-690 0-2.2 3-5 6-8 60-90 587-790
1 ALF,ARF 1,790 202 1,750 425 519.2 29 31 1.92 325 29 751 64 1,800 157
2 HCV auto 744 57 1,550 154 23 10 28 3 45 5 93 11 800 135
3 HCC,HCV 442 184 836 89 9.25 0.4 22 6.6 94 12 236 46 830 51
4 HCV cirrh 435 80 717 75 ND 10.8 1.8 16.9 4 68 12 2,635 200
5 HCC cirrh 345 41 1,588 55 ND 8 1.5 31.5 6 108 10 800 70
6 HCV cryo 945 66 1,560 252 ND 7 1.95 14.2 3.6 31 11 750 51
Longitudinal Stability of Cerebrospinal Fluid Tau Levels in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease
Issue: Biomarkers for Neurodegenerative Disorders
Robert Levin, M.D.; Trey Sunderland, M.D.; Benjamin Wolozin, M.D., Ph.D.; Douglas Galasko, M.D.; James Levy;
Ruth Dukoff, M.D.; Marcel Bahro, M.D.; Robert Lasser, M.D.; Ruth Motter, M.P.H.; Terho Hetimaki, M.D., Ph.D.;
and Peter Seubert, Ph.D.
Senior Staff Fellow Geriatric Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health,
Building 10, Room 3N228, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA, Phone: (301) 435-6052, Fax: (301)
480-2847, E-Mail: rlevin@condon.nih.gov
Antemortem elevation of tau protein in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients has
been a consistent finding. Although abnormally high levels of CSF tau protein can be detected even in mild AD, it
has not been known how tau levels might vary over the course of the illness. We followed 29 mild-moderately
affected AD subjects over 2 years with repeated CSF examination and found no significant overall change in CSF
tau levels (548 355 versus 557 275 pg/mL, NS). During the same period, clinical measures of demential severity
(Clinical Dementia Rating Scale, Global Deterioration Scale, and Mini-Mental State Examination) all revealed
evidence of progression of the disease. None of these variables was significantly correlated with either baseline
levels of CSF tau or delta CSF tau (endpoint minus baseline). Similarly, baseline CSF tau and changes over time
were not signfiicantly related to apolipoprotein E (Apo E) phenotype. These data suggest that CSF tau levels are
stable over extended periods of time and that tau levels do not predict either the severity of disease or the rate of
progression of AD.
Surrogate Variables in Randomized Clinical Trials: Where to From Here?
Issue: The Role of Surrogate Endpoints in Clinical Trials and Statistical Methods
N.D.C. Lewis, B.A.(Hons)
Research Student, University of Cambridge MKB Parmar, D.Phil.-Head of Cancer Division Medical Research
Council Clinical Trials Unit, Cambridge, UK, Phone: 44-0-1223-311-110, x219, Fax: 44-0-1223-311-844, E-Mail:
nl@mrc-cto.cam.ac.uk
Biomarkers and Surrogate Endpoints 333
Over the past decade, there has been an accelerating interest in the replacement of final endpoints with surrogate
endpoints in randomized clinical trials. Unfortunately, the treatment of surrogate variables for cancer clinical trials
in the medical and statistical literature has often been heuristic and ad hoc in character. Nevertheless, there are
underlying issues present in much of the more recent research, an understanding of which will enable us to highlight
the inherent methodological limitations of techniques for assessing the validity of surrogate endpoints. We begin by
outlining the common approaches to surrogate variables adopted in the literature. A detailed discussion of the
methodological strengths and weakness of each approach and the resulting impact on reliability and quality are
underpinned by a discussion of empirical examples. Pointers to improved methodology are discussed. Although the
practical constraints of randomized clinical trials often encourage the use of surrogate variables, the choice of a
particular method for use in a trial remains ad hoc. However, this choice can have a substantial impact on the quality
and reliability of findings. We outline some factors that need to be taken into consideration and outline a
methodological framework for the development of more robust methods.
Quantification of Intestinal Fatty Acid Binding Protein (IFABP): Evaluation in Critically Ill
Patients of an Immunologically Distinct Cytoplasmic Protein That Is Site-Specific for the Mature
Small Intestinal Epithelium
Issue: Biomarkers in Critical Illness
Joshua M. Lieberman, M.D.; Christine Marks, B.A.; James Sacchettini, Ph.D.; and William H. Marks, M.D., Ph.D.
Research Fellow Laboratory for Transplantation Biology, Department of Organ Transplantation, Swedish Medical
Center, Suite 400, 1120 Cherry Street, Seattle, WA 98104, USA, Phone: (206) 386-3660, Fax: (206) 386-3644, E-
Mail: jlieberman@compuserve.com
Intestinal mucosal injury occurs in necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), and intestinal mucosal compromise has been
related to the development of complications (e.g., multiple organ dysfunction and systemic inflammatory response
syndrome [SIRS]) in critically ill patients. Intestinal fatty acid binding protein (IFABP) is a 15kD cytoplasmic
protein unique to the mature small intestinal enterocyte. In animal models of acute intestinal mucosal injury, IFABP
in measurable concentrations was found in serum and was then excreted in the urine. We hypothesized a similar
occurrence in humans with clinical diseases involving acute mucosal compromise. A radioimmunoassay for IFABP
was developed in our laboratory. Healthy staff volunteered random serum, plasma, and urine specimens. Preliminary
blinded, prospective studies were performed in two groups: Group 1 comprised 21 consecutive patients admitted to
a neonatal intensive care unit for NEC, and Group 2 comprised 100 consecutive patients admitted to a surgical
intensive care unit. In controls, all IFABP levels were less than 1.87 ng/mL. In NEC, plasma IFABP was directly
related to disease severity (Table 1). For adults admitted to the SICU, urine IFABP correlated with the development
of SIRS and peaked an average 1.4 days before SIRS was diagnosed. These preliminary studies support the
hypothesis that IFABP concentrations correlate with the severity and development of disease in NEC and SIRS.
Development of this marker may aid the clinician/scientist in predicting, monitoring the course of disease, and in
assessing the effects of interventions.
Table 1: Group 1 patients admitted to a neonatal intensive care unit for necrotizing enterocolitis
Number of Patients Average Admission Plasma IFABP Concentration (ng/mL)
7 1 (mild) 1.87
9 2 (moderate) 0.96 1.93
5 3 (severe) 20.80 18.90
Abstracts of the NIH-FDA Conference
334
Table 2: Group 2 patients admitted to a surgical intensive care unit and followed prospectively for development of systemic
inflammatory response syndrome
No. of Patients Complications During First 7 Days of Admission Peak Urine IFABP Concentration (ng/mL)
60 No Complications 7.0 14.0
35 Complications but no SIRS 8.3 12.2
5 SIRS 30.4 23.4