J Korean Med Sci658jkmsJournal of Korean Medical Science1011-89341598-6357Korean Academy of Medical SciencesPMC3057602PMC3057602.1305760230576021164152410.3346/jkms.2001.16.5.5672001105671Research ArticleEnhanced expressions and histological characteristics of intravenously administered plasmid DNA in rat lung.
RhaS. J.drrha@cmc.cuk.ac.krWangY. P.Department of Thoracic & Cardiovascular Surgery, College of Medicine, Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.102001165195103567572011020013103201101032016Cationic liposome-mediated gene transfection is a promising method for gene therapy. In this study, the transfection efficiency and histological patterns were evaluated in rat lung after intravenous administration via femoral vein of naked plasmid DNA, naked plasmid DNA with pretreatment of DOTAP, and DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex. Plasmid DNA encoding bacterial LacZ gene was used. For quantification of LacZ gene expression, beta-galactosidase assay was performed. For histologic examination, X-gal staining and immunohistochemical staining for transfected gene products were performed. Pretreatment of DOTAP prior to the infusion of naked plasmid DNA increased transfection efficiency up to a level comparable to DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex injection. Transfected genes were mainly expressed in type II pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages in all animals. We conclude that the high transfection efficiency is achievable by intravenous administration of naked plasmid DNA with pretreatment of DOTAP, to a level comparable to DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex. In this regard, naked plasmid DNA administration with pretreatment of DOTAP could be a more feasible option for intravenous gene transfer than DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex, in that the former is technically easier and more cost-effective than the latter with a comparable efficacy, in terms of intravenous gene delivery to the lung.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 INTRODUTION
Intravenous delivery of therapeutic genes for gene therapy
has an advantage for lung tumor that is deeply located in the
thorax. But there are few successful methods for intravenous
delivery of genes into the lung. Several methods using viral
(1, 2) and liposomal (3-7) vectors are now studied intensive-
ly for intravenous delivery of genes into the lung. Templeton
et al. (6) demonstrated that DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid
DNA complex showed high affinity in mouse lung after
intravenous infusion. DOTAP is a well-known cationic lipid
for making lipid-DNA complex and is used in many gene
transfection researches. Recently, the ability for intravenously
administered naked plasmid DNA to be expressed at sub-
stantial levels in mammalian organs was demonstrated (8-
10). Also several supportive methods for enhancement of
intravenously administered naked plasmid DNA transfection
were introduced. Song et al. (9) demonstrated that intra-
venously pretreated DOTAP, which formed transient micro-
embolism on pulmonary capillary beds, prolonged the reten-
tion time of naked plasmid DNA and produced more trans-
fection efficiency of plasmid DNA. Liu et al. (10) demon-
strated that rapid intravenous injection of a large volume of
naked plasmid DNA solution produced efficient gene trans-
fection. In this study, we have compared the transfection effi-
ciencies and histological characteristics after intravenous
administration 1) of naked plasmid DNA alone, 2) naked
plasmid DNA after DOTAP pretreatment, and 3) DOTAP-
cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal
Male Fischer 344 rats of approximately 250 g (Charles
River Breeding Corp., Wilmington, MA, U.S.A.) were used
in all experiments. Experimental groups were 1) phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) treated (NOR, n=7), 2) naked plasmid
DNA-treated (NAK, n=7), 3) naked plasmid DNA-treated
after DOTAP pretreatment (PRE, n=7), and 4) DOTAP-
cholesterol-plasmid DNA-treated (COM, n=7). Femoral
vein was used as a route for infusion of plasmid DNA, lipo-
some and liposome-DNA complex in all groups. Animal
care was conducted in accordance with the
"Principles of
Laboratory Animal Care"formulated by National Society
Suk-Joo Rha, Young-Pil Wang
Department of Thoracic & Cardiovascular Surgery,
College of Medicine, Catholic University of Korea,
Seoul, Korea
Received : 20 March 2001
Accepted : 18 June 2001
Address for correspondence
Suk-Joo Rha, M.D.
Department of Thoracic & Cardiovascular Surgery,
Catholic University of Korea Uijongbu St. Mary'
s
Hospital, 65-1 Kumoh-dong, Uijongbu 480-131,
Korea
Tel : +82.31-820-3071, Fax : +82.31-847-8077
E-mail: drrha@cmc.cuk.ac.kr
567
J Korean Med Sci 2001; 16: 567-72
ISSN 1011-8934
Copyright The Korean Academy
of Medical Sciences
Enhanced Expressions and Histological Characteristics of Intravenously
Administered Plasmid DNA in Rat Lung
Cationic liposome-mediated gene transfection is a promising method for gene
therapy. In this study, the transfection efficiency and histological patterns were
evaluated in rat lung after intravenous administration via femoral vein of naked
plasmid DNA, naked plasmid DNA with pretreatment of DOTAP, and DOTAP-
cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex. Plasmid DNA encoding bacterial LacZ gene
was used. For quantification of LacZ gene expression, -galactosidase assay
was performed. For histologic examination, X-gal staining and immunohisto-
chemical staining for transfected gene products were performed. Pretreatment of
DOTAP prior to the infusion of naked plasmid DNA increased transfection effi-
ciency up to a level comparable to DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex
injection. Transfected genes were mainly expressed in type II pneumocytes and
alveolar macrophages in all animals. We conclude that the high transfection effi-
ciency is achievable by intravenous administration of naked plasmid DNA with
pretreatment of DOTAP, to a level comparable to DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid
DNA complex. In this regard, naked plasmid DNA administration with pretreat-
ment of DOTAP could be a more feasible option for intravenous gene transfer
than DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex, in that the former is technically
easier and more cost-effective than the latter with a comparable efficacy, in terms
of intravenous gene delivery to the lung.
Key Words : Gene Transfer Techniques; Plasmid DNA; Lung; Transfection
568 S.-J. Rha, Y.-P. Wang
of Medical Research and the
"Guide or the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals"
prepared by National Institute of
Health.
Plasmid DNA
We used pCMV-LacZ plasmid, containing bacterial -
galactosidase cDNA, which is driven by CMV promoter.
The plasmid was obtained, amplified, and verified using
standard methods.
Liposome preparation
Cationic liposomes composed of DOTAP and DOTAP
cholesterol (1:1 weight ratio) were prepared by the method
of Templeton et al. (6). Briefly, the powdered DOTAP and
cholesterol (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL, U.S.A.)
were dissolved in high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) grade chloroform (Mallinckrodt, Chesterfield, MO,
U.S.A.) in a 1-L round-bottomed flask. After chloroform was
evaporated for making a thin lipid film on a Buchi rotary
evaporator at 30 for 30 min, the film was dried under
vacuum for 15 min. Finally, the film was hydrated with 5%
dextrose in water (5% DW) to give a final concentration of
20 mM DOTAP and DOTAP-cholesterol liposomes. The
hydrated lipid was rotated in water bath at 50 for 45 min,
at 35 for 10 min. and allowed to stand at room tempera-
ture overnight, after which the mixture was sonicated at low-
frequency for 5 min at 50. The liposome was sequential-
ly extruded through Whatman Anotop filters (Whatman,
Kent, U.K) of decreasing pore size of 1.0, 0.45, 0.2, and 0.1
m using syringes. The liposomes were stored under N2 gas
at 4.
DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex
Liposome-DNA complex was made for COM group (6).
Briefly, plasmid DNA and liposome (20 mM) were diluted
in 5% dextrose in water (DW). Equal volumes of both DNA
solution and liposome solution were mixed. 225 L of 20 mM
DOTAP-cholesterol (4,500 nmol) and 500 g of plasmid
DNA were mixed separately with 5% DW to make 500 L
of solution.
In vivo gene delivery
The rats were anesthetised by intraperitoneal injection of
pentobarbital 50 mg/kg (Abbott Laboratories, North Chica-
go, IL, U.S.A.). In each experiment, femoral vein was used
for intravenous administration. In NOR group, 1 mL of PBS
was administered. In NAK group, 1 mL of naked plasmid
DNA was injected. In PRE group, 1 mL of DOTAP was in-
jected first through the femoral vein and after 5 min, PBS
diluted 1 mL of 500 g of naked plasmid DNA was inject-
ed. In COM group, 1 mL of DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid
DNA complex containing 500 g of plasmid DNA was in-
jected via femoral vein. After 48 hr, rats were sacrificed and
their lungs were harvested for further investigation. There
was no liposome or plasmid DNA-related death.
Detection of transfected gene by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)
After 48 hr of treatment, total DNA was extracted from
lung tissue of each group, using DNAeasy kit (Qiagen, Valen-
cia, CA, U.S.A.). Oligonucleotide primers were synthesized
to E coli LacZ (sense 5
-GCC GAC CGC ACG CCG CAT
CCA GC- 3
; antisense 5
- CGC CGC GCC ACT GGT GTG
GGC C- 3
) (11). The primer gave rise to a 1,036 bp pro-
duct. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed
for 30 cycles (denaturing, 95 for 1 min; annealing, 55
for 1 min; and extension, 72 for 2 min) using Taq poly-
merase in 50 L containing 20 mmol/L Tris pH 8.4, 50
mmol/L KCl, 1.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 100 ng genomic DNA,
and 10 mmol of each primer.
Quantification of gene transfection
To quantify the amount of transfected plasmid DNA, -
galactosidase reporter gene assay was performed using Galac-
to-Star kit (Tropix, Bedford, MA, U.S.A.). Briefly, 1 g of
lung tissue was homogenized for 20 sec with 1 mL lysis
buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Boehringer
Mannheim, Germany) and centrifuged at 12,500xg for 10
min at 4. The supernatant fluid was heated at 48 for
60 min to inactivate endogenous -galactosidase activity
(12). The sample was centrifuged again at 12,500xg for 5
min and total protein concentration of each sample was deter-
mined with Bradford assay. 200 g of protein from each
sample was mixed with 70 L reaction buffer in Monolight
luminometer cuvettes (Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.)
and incubated at room temperature for 60 min and placed in
luminometer (Analytical Luminescence Laboratory, Mono-
light 2010C, Ann Arbor, MI, U.S.A.). Light emission accel-
erator was added and after 2-sec delay following injection,
the value was counted for 5 sec.
Histological analysis
Forty-eight hours after the treatment, animals were sacri-
ficed and the lungs were harvested and processed for X-gal
staining. Lung tissues of two rats from each group were used
for whole lung tissue X-gal staining. Briefly, harvested heart
and lung en bloc tissues were washed completely using 100
mM tris buffer, pH 8.5 through pulmonary artery to remove
the remaining blood and infuse fixative (0.5% glutaralde-
hyde in 100 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.5) through trachea for 1
hr. The tissue was washed again with same buffer through
Intravenously Administered Plasmid DNA in Rat Lung 569
both the pulmonary artery and trachea and X-gal staining
was performed with X-gal staining solution for overnight at
37. To evaluate histological pattern of gene expression, X-
gal staining of frozen lung section was done. The harvested
left lung was inflated with Tissue-Tek O.C.T. compound
(Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA, U.S.A.) through trachea and
immediately dipped into liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissue was
cut in 5 m thickness, fixed with 0.5% glutaraldehyde for
20 min, and stained with X-gal staining solution for 18 hr.
Finally, the slides were counterstained with nuclear fast red.
Right lung was formalin-fixed and processed for hematoxylin-
eosin staining or immunohistochemical staining. After de-
paraffinization and rehydration process, the sections of 5 m
thickness were blocked with a 3% H2O2 in methanol and
washed in PBS buffer at pH 7.4. After preincubation with
blocking serum (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA,
U.S.A.), sections were incubated with monoclonal anti- -
galactosidase antibody (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.) at a
1:200 dilution in a blocking serum and monoclonal anti-
human p53 protein antibody, which was used for avoiding
unexpected cross-reactivity with rat endogenous p53 pro-
tein, (Bp53-12, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA,
U.S.A.) at a 1:200 dilution in a blocking serum for 30 min.
The secondary antibody, rabbit anti-mouse (Vector Labora-
tories, Burlingame, CA, U.S.A.), was used as conjugate with
biotin in a 1:600 dilution for 30 min. Antibody binding
was visualized with a streptavidin-peroxidase complex fol-
lowed by addition of 3,3
-diaminobenzidine (DAB) peroxi-
dase substrate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.) for 5 min.
RESULTS
Detection of delivered plasmid DNA into the rat lung
The delivery of plasmid DNA, containing LacZ gene, into
the lung was confirmed by PCR of total DNA from lung
tissue using primers that contain specific sequences for the
LacZ gene. A specific 1036 bp band was detected in NAK,
PRE, and COM, but not in NOR. Although PCR is not a
quantitative analysis, the relative amount of delivered DNA
appears to be highest in COM, followed by PRE and NAK
as seen in Fig. 1.
Expression of delivered DNA by -galactosidase assay
For quantification of the functional expression of the deliv-
ered LacZ gene, chemiluminescent -galactosidase assay was
performed. As shown in Fig. 2, NAK group showed increased
-galactosidase activity. COM group showed an almost two-
fold higher expression as compared with NAK group. Inter-
estingly, PRE group also exhibited high -galactosidase activ-
ity, which was comparable to COM group.
X-gal staining and Immunohistochemical staining
For morphological assessment of gene expression, we per-
formed X-gal staining of whole lung tissue and frozen section
of the lung. As shown in Fig. 3, NAK, PRE, and COM
groups showed blue staining throughout the lungs. The
lungs from PRE and COM group showed relatively strong
expressions, but the pattern of expression in PRE group,
which showed many focal areas of strong expression, was
different from that in COM group. To investigate the micro-
scopic pattern of gene expression, X-gal staining of frozen
lung sections was also performed. As shown in Fig. 4, the
same X-gal staining patterns were observed in NAK, PRE,
and COM groups. -galactosidase was expressed in a scat-
tered pattern. Most of them had round nuclei and cytoplasm,
which are characteristic features of alveolar macrophage and
type II pneumocyte. Relatively few cells had the character-
istics of type I pneumocyte. Because X-gal staining itself
has potential false positivity, we further confirmed the same
B C D E F G
A
Fig. 1. Detection of pCMV-LacZ plasmid DNA by PCR in lung
tissue 48 hr after intravenous administration of plasmid DNA. A
specific band of 1036 bp was detected in NAK (E), PRE (F), COM
(G), but not in NOR (D). (A, negative control; B, pCMV-Luc plas-
mid; C, positive control).
-galactosidase
Activity
(Relative
Light
Unit/mg)
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
NOR NAK COM PRE
Fig. 2. -galactosidase activity of lung tissue 48 hr after intra-
venous administration of plasmid DNA. NOR, PBS administration;
NAK, naked pCMV-LacZ plasmid administration; PRE, naked
pCMV-LacZ plasmid administration with intravenous DOTAP
pretreatment; COM, DOTAP-cholesterol-pCMV-LacZ plasmid
complex administration. Error bars represent SD from five rats.
570 S.-J. Rha, Y.-P. Wang
LacZ gene expression as X-gal staining by immunohisto-
chemical staining of bacterial -galactosidase.
DISCUSSION
Although many efforts to synthesize new cationic lipids
led to the development of more efficient lipids, systemic
gene delivery using liposomal-DNA complex has not been
effective and also it is difficult to obtain good quality of the
complex. Also the mechanisms by which cationic liposomes
deliver DNA into cells are not well understood. Presumably,
cationic liposomes bind to DNA via ionic interaction, whereas
liposomes facilitate the delivery of DNA by fusion with
plasma membrane or cognate receptors in microvasculature
(13, 14). Despite the unclear mechanism of liposomal gene
delivery, several liposomal formuli have contributed to the
efficient gene transfection into the lung. Templeton et al. (6)
demonstrated DOTAP-cholesterol-DNA complex, which
was injected via tail vein, showed a high level of expression
of transfected gene in mouse lung. They implied that sever-
al factors including liposome-DNA complex particle size and
DNA: liposome ratio were crucial for improving systemic
delivery of liposomal-DNA complex. But the production of
adequate quality of liposomal-DNA complex is technically
delicate, costlier and liposomal-DNA complex is not stable
for long time preservation (15). Without a specific mecha-
nism for naked DNA molecules to enter a cell, transfection
of genes into host cell was considered impossible. But it was
shown that an injection of a large amount of naked DNA
into the liver led to a detectable expression of recombinant
genes (16), suggesting that the absence of measurable gene
expression after interstitial injection of DNA into most tis-
sues might reflect quantitative differences in the efficacy of
gene uptake and expression rather than a qualitative absence
of pathway for transfection events. Recently, several efforts
using naked plasmid DNA for systemic gene delivery with-
out any vehicles have been tried and demonstrated a possi-
bility of naked gene transfection. The first important result
Fig. 3. X-gal staining of whole lung tissue. (A) (NOR; PBS admin-
istration) dose not show any blue stained area. (B) (NAK; naked
pCMV-LacZ plasmid administration), (C) (PRE; naked pCMV-
LacZ plasmid administration with intravenous DOTAP pretreat-
ment), and (D) (COM; DOTAP-cholesterol-pCMV-LacZ plasmid
complex administration, arrows indicate focal strong expression
areas) show blue stained area through the entire lungs. Small
blue areas of both upper lobes in NOR are influenced by the
endogenous galactosidase activity of the thymus.
A
C
B
D
Fig. 4. Histological characteristics of transfected gene expres-
sion. Frozen lung sections from pCMV-LacZ gene-transfected
lung were reacted with X-gal and counterstained with nuclear
fast red (A, B, and C). Immunohistochemical staining for bacte-
rial -galactosidase of frozen sections from pCMV-LacZ gene-
transfected lung (D, E, and F). B (arrow: type II pneumocyte,
arrow head: macrophage) and C (arrow: type I pneumocyte)
show blue stained X-gal (+) cells. E (arrow: type II pneumocyte)
and F (arrow: type I pneumocyte) show brown stained -galac-
tosidase (+) cells. (A and D, NOR; B, C, E, and F, PRE).
C
E
D
A B
F
Intravenously Administered Plasmid DNA in Rat Lung 571
was an observation that injection of purified naked DNA into
skeletal muscle led to uptake and expression of the injected
gene in mice (17). Recently, it was shown that intravenous
administration of naked plasmid DNA produced certain
amount of gene expression in the liver (8) and the lung (9),
although efficiency of this process is relatively low. Song et al.
(9) reported that pretreatment of cationic liposomes (DOTAP)
enhanced transfection efficiency of systemically injected naked
plasmid DNA (50 g/20 g of a mouse) into mouse lung.
They proposed that pretreated cationic liposome play a role
in formation of transient microembolization in pulmonary
capillary beds and prolong retention time of naked plasmid
DNA that may enhance gene transfer efficiency due to pro-
viding longer time to plasmid DNA to contact with host
cells. Liu et al. (10) also demonstrated that the rapid injection
of naked plasmid DNA in a large volume of DNA solution
(25 g/20 g of a mouse) without any liposome pretreat-
ment produced efficient gene transfer in mouse liver. Song'
s
and Liu'
s data suggest that a special structure of DNA-lipo-
some complexes might not be required in gene transfection
of the lung, as suggested by some other previous studies
(18, 19). According to Lechardeur et al. (20), even when plas-
mid DNA was successfully delivered into cells, metabolic
instability of naked plasmid DNA in cytosol would be a
potential barrier to gene expression. The inhibition of
cytosolic nuclease is a possible target to enhance the effi-
ciency of gene expression using naked plasmid DNA. These
data are promising in that the naked DNA could be used for
gene therapy for lung disease with ease and cost-effective-
ness.
In our experiment, we demonstrated the different effi-
ciencies in gene transfection among naked DNA, DOTAP-
cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex, and naked plasmid DNA
with pretreatment of DOTAP. While a systemic injection
of naked DNA produced certain amount of gene expression,
when pretreated with DOTAP, naked plasmid DNA showed
a more efficient transfection, which was comparable to
DOTAP-cholesterol-plasmid DNA complex. Interestingly,
our data showed that the majority of transfected cells in all
plasmid DNA-treated groups were type II pneumocytes
and alveolar macrophages and only a small number of trans-
fected cells were type I pneumocytes. These data suggest
that intravenously introduced naked plasmid DNA and
liposome-plasmid DNA complex may have a tropism to
specific lung cell type. Griesenbach et al. reported a similar
observation that intravenous injection of liposome-DNA
complex was mainly deposited in type II pneumocytes (21).
It should be tested in future experiment how alveolar epithe-
lial cell and alveolar macrophage react to intravenously inject-
ed liposome and naked plasmid DNA.
In conclusion, we demonstrated intravenous administra-
tion of naked plasmid DNA can be transfected and expressed
successfully in rat lung and DOTAP pretreatment enhanced
naked plasmid DNA transfection at a level comparable to
DOTAP-cholesterol-DNA complex. The majority of trans-
fected cells were type II pneumocytes and alveolar macro-
phages. These results show systemic administration of naked
plasmid DNA with DOTAP pre-treatment in to the lung
can replace complicated liposome-plasmid DNA complex
and reduce the cost of the gene therapy of lung disease. Also
further efforts are needed to develop new strategies to improve
efficacy of transfection of naked DNA to the lung, such as
isolated pulmonary arterial perfusion to increase the local
concentration of plasmid DNA, and to reveal cell-specific
tropism of intravenously-infused of plasmid DNA.
REFEENCES
1. Huard J, Lochmuller H, Acsadi G, Jani A, Massie B, Karpati G. The
route of administration is a major determinant of the transduction
efficiency of rat tissues by adenoviral recombinants. Gene Ther 1995;
2: 107-15
2. Nielsen LL, Gurnani M, Syed J, Dell J, Hartman B, Cartwright M,
Johnson RC. Recombinant E1-deleted adenovirus-mediated gene
therapy for cancer; efficacy studies with p53 tumor suppressor gene
and liver histology in tumor xenograft models. Human Gene Ther
1998; 9: 681-94.
3.Zhu N, Liggitt D, Liu Y, Debs R. Systemic gene expression after intra-
venous DNA delivery into adult mice. Science 1993; 261: 209-11.
4. Felgner PL, Tsai YJ, Sukhu L, Wheeler CJ, Manthorpe M, Marshall
J, Cheng SH. Improved cationic lipid formulations for in vivo gene
therapy. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1995; 27: 126-39.
5. Liu F, Qi H, Huang L, Liu D. Factors controlling the efficiency of
cationic lipid-mediated transfection in vivo via intravenous admin-
istration. Gene Ther 1997; 4: 517-23.
6. Templeton NS, Lasic DD, Frederik PM, Strey HH, Roberts DD,
Pavlakis GN. Improved DNA; liposome complexes for increased
systemic delivery and gene expression Nat Biotechnol 1997; 15:
647-52.
7.Li S, Rizzo MA, Bhattacharya S, Huang L.Characterization of cation-
ic lipid-protamin-DNA (LPD) complexes for intravenouse gene deliv-
ery. Gene Ther 1998; 5: 930-7.
8. Budker V, Zhang G, Knechtle S, Wolff JA. Naked DNA delivered
intraportally expresses efficiently in hepatocytes. Gene Ther 1996;
3: 593-8.
9. Song YK, Liu F, Liu D. Enhanced gene expression in mouse lung
by prolonging the retention time of intravenously injected plasmid
DNA. Gene Ther 1998; 5: 1531-7.
10. Liu F, Song Y, Liu D. Hydrodynamics-based transfection in ani-
mals by systemic administration of plasmid DNA. Gene Ther 1999;
6: 1258-66.
11. Wang YN, Luk JM, Chung S, Fan ST. In situ gene transfer into rat
auxiliary liver transplant. Transplantation 1997; 64: 1537-41.
12. Young DC, Kingsley SD, Ryan KA, Dutko FJ. Selective inactiva-
tion of eukaryotic -galactosidase in assays for inhibitors of HIV-1
TAT using bacterial -galactosidase as a reporter enzyme. Anal
572 S.-J. Rha, Y.-P. Wang
Biochem 1993; 215: 24-30.
13. Felgner PL, Gadek, TR, Holm M, Roman R, Chan HW, Wenz M,
Northrop JP, Ringold GM, Danielsen M. Lipofection: a highly effi-
cient lipid-mediated DNA transfection procedure. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1987; 84: 7413-7.
14. Zhou X, Huang L. DNA transfection mediated by cationic liposomes
containing lipopolylysine; characterization and mechanism of action.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1994; 1189: 195-203.
15. Moelling K. Naked DNA-the poor man'
s gene therapy? Gene Ther
1998; 5: 573-4.
16. Hickman MA, Malone RW, Lehmann-Bruinsma K, Sih TR, Knoell
D, Szoka FC, Walzem R, Carlson DM, Powell JS. Gene expression
following direct injection of DNA into liver. Human Gene Ther 1994;
5: 1477-83.
17. Wolff JA, Malone RW, Williams P, Chong W, Acsadi G, Jani A,
Felgner PL. Direct gene transfer into mouse muscle in vivo. Science
1990; 247: 1465-8.
18. Sternberg B, Sorgi FL, Huang L. New structures in complex forma-
tion between DNA and cationic liposomes visualized by freeze-frac-
ture electron microscopy. FEBS Lett 1994; 356: 361-6.
19. Radler JO, Koltover I, Salditt T, Safinya CR. Structure of DNA-
cationic liposome complexes; DNA intercalation in multilamellar
membranes in distinct interhelical packing regimes. Science 1997;
275: 810-4.
20.Lechardeur D, Sohn KJ, Haardt M, Joshi PB, Monck M, Graham RW,
Beatty B, Squire J, O'
Brodovich H, Lukacs GL. Metabolic instabili-
ty of plasmid DNA in the cytosol; a potential barrier to gene trans-
fer. Gene Ther 1999; 6: 482-97.
21. Griesenbach U, Chonn A, Cassady R, Hannam V, Ackerley C, Post
M, Tanswell AK, Olek K, O'
Brodovich H, Tsui LC. Comparison
between intratracheal and intravenous administration of liposome-
DNA complexes for cystic fibrosis lung gene therapy. Gene Ther