Braz J Med Biol ResBraz. J. Med. Biol. Res1733bjmbrBrazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research0100-879X1414-431XAssociação Brasileira de Divulgação CientíficaPMC3854440PMC3854440.1385444038544402380223410.1590/1414-431X201326431ReviewsDevelopments in the use of nanocapsules in
oncology
YurgelV. ). Drug-loaded nanoparticles
provide a promising solution by selectively targeting tumor cells, thereby
preventing damage to healthy cells ( ).
Nanoparticles can be engineered to incorporate a wide variety of chemotherapeutic or
diagnostic agents, creating a flexibility in their design that is not possible with
other types of drug delivery systems ( ).
Active therapeutic molecules are often degraded or opsonized and removed from the
bloodstream by macrophages. Therefore, in order to increase blood circulation time
and to enhance the probability of the molecule to extravasate in the tumor, a
promising alternative is to protect the active molecule inside nanoparticles ( ). Colloidal drug carriers can also be rapidly
cleared from the systemic circulation due to their recognition as foreign bodies by
Kupffer cells in the liver and macrophages in the spleen. Clearance is enhanced by
opsonization and activation of the complement system by plasma proteins ( ). The elimination and subsequent loss of
effectiveness of colloidal systems is strongly influenced by their size, nature,
surface charge, and hydrophilicity. Modifications of the carrier surface have been
used to minimize opsonization and clearance by macrophages ( ).
The longevity of circulating drug carriers improves drug delivery to their targets,
particularly solid tumors ( ). This approach
makes use of the anatomical and functional differences between normal and tumor
vasculature, with angiogenic blood vessels in tumor tissues containing gaps between
adjacent endothelial cells. This characteristic coupled with poor lymphatic drainage
characterizes the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect. The EPR effect
arises from the fact that nanoparticles can easily extravasate through the defective
vasculature system in tumors and subsequently accumulate in the tumor
microenvironment in the presence of ineffective lymphatic clearance, allowing
passive targeting to the tumor region ( ).
While passive targeting takes advantage of physicochemical and physiological
factors, active targeting depends on the attachment of a homing moiety, such as a
monoclonal antibody or a ligand, for drug delivery to pathological sites or to cross
biological barriers based on molecular recognition processes ( ). Active targeting should be based on specific cell surface
receptors that are overexpressed on cancerous cells, thereby distinguishing the
malignant cell from other organ cells.
The success of current cancer therapeutic strategies, such as surgery, radiation
therapy and chemotherapy is variable ( ). The
effectiveness of chemotherapy is limited by poor uptake into cancer cells, enhanced
detoxification and efficient elimination of the drugs. Moreover, severe side effects
in patients can lead to a reduction of the drug dose or even termination of the
therapy. In the absence of new drugs, anticancer therapy can be improved by the
targeted delivery of conventional chemotherapeutics. These agents usually have
limited solubility, poor distribution among cells, and the inability to cross
cellular barriers, thereby limiting their clinical use ( ). One of the most relevant processes involved in
chemoresistance is the overexpression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). P-gp can transport
lipophilic and cationic substrates, and prevent the accumulation of anticancer drugs
in cells by pumping out drug molecules from the cytosol. The uptake of drug-loaded
nanocarriers by cancer cells has the potential to overcome these chemoresistant
processes ( ).
Nanoparticle-based therapy offers important advantages over the traditional
approaches, allowing targeted delivery of high payloads of multiple drugs,
controlled drug release, and bypassing multidrug-resistance mechanisms ( ). Nanocapsules (NC) are potential
nanocarriers for several strategies in oncology. An NC is a vesicular system that
exhibits a typical core-shell structure in which active molecules are confined to a
reservoir or cavity that is surrounded by a polymer membrane or coating. The cavity
can contain an active substance in liquid or solid form, or as a molecular
dispersion. NC zeta-potential (ZP) is an important index for the stability of a
nanoparticle suspension, representing the electric potential at the NC shear plane,
that depends on the chemical nature of the polymer and stabilizing agent, and the
medium pH ( ). A high absolute value of ZP
indicates a high surface electrical charge, which can cause strong repellent forces
among the particles and prevent aggregation in solution. It is also important in
determining the in vivo interaction of the NC with the cell
membrane, which is usually negatively charged ( ). Some of the current strategies employing NC for cancer treatment
research are summarized in .

 

NCs can be produced by two approaches: self-assembly and template-based. In
self-assembly, lipid molecules or amphiphilic block copolymers can aggregate in
aqueous solution into vesicular structures and the hollow sphere morphology of these
aggregates makes them suitable precursors for the preparation of stable NC
formulations by using different reactions. In the template approach, a polymer shell
is formed around a template particle that can subsequently be removed, leaving an
empty polymeric shell ( ). Alternatively,
core particles can be synthesized by conventional emulsion polymerization, followed
by the addition of a different monomer that results in the formation of a
cross-linked shell around a core particle, followed by the removal of the core
particles ( ). Illustrations of nanocapsular
structures are presented in .
 In the process of the polyelectrolyte (PE) self-assembly on charged surfaces, hollow
capsules are prepared via the layer-by-layer (LbL) technique, typically formed by
the consecutive deposition of complementary/interacting polymers onto colloidal
particles, followed by removal of the sacrificial template ( ). However, to avoid PE-induced particle flocculation it is
necessary to use low particle concentrations and unadsorbed PE has to be carefully
removed after each step ( ).
The principle of LbL coating is to sequentially expose the substrate to be coated to
solutions containing either negatively or positively charged PEs. Adsorption of the
PEs is based on electrostatic interactions originating from the charged nature of
the substrate and the PEs. Thickness and properties of the coating film can be
controlled by the number and composition of the layers and the process conditions.
After each coating layer, removal of excess PE can be achieved by different methods.
Tangential flow filtration has been proposed for the intermediate purification of
the NC dispersion during the LbL process and is a convenient method that retains NC
integrity throughout successive purification steps, and does not involve the use of
toxic solvents or harsh conditions ( ). In
addition, a versatile technique for drug encapsulation involves the adsorption of
the drug within a porous particle that can subsequently be LbL-coated, and the
template (e.g., silica) can be removed, resulting in the formation of NCs with high
loading capacities ( ).
In many cancer treatments, particularly for brain tumors, it is difficult to deliver
the therapeutic agents to the tumor site and to the infiltrating tumor cells.
Therefore, new devices are being developed to facilitate intratumoral distribution,
to protect the active agent from premature degradation and to allow its sustained
and controlled release. In the following sections, recent studies on the use of NCs
in cancer are presented according to their particular NC formulations. However, this
division is somewhat arbitrary since the NCs can be assigned to more than one
section.

## Lipid nanocapsules
Lipid nanocapsules (LNCs) are nanovectors with biomimetic properties that are
produced through a phase inversion temperature process following the formation of an
oil/water microemulsion. The process relies on at least three main components: an
oily phase, an aqueous phase and a nonionic surfactant. LNC structure consists of an
oily liquid triglyceride core surrounded by a tensioactive cohesive interface ( ). Changes in the proportions of
triglycerides, lecithin, salt-water, and polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydroxystearate
lead to different sized formulations of LNCs, ranging from 20 to 100'nm, depending
on the quantity of excipients, with a narrow distribution ( ). No organic solvent is used during the formulation and all
the excipients are FDA approved.
LNCs are characterized as a hybrid structure between polymer NCs and liposomes, with
the advantages of greater stability and a solvent-free manufacturing process
compared to liposomes. Moreover, the temperature cycling process crossing the phase
inversion zone plays a relatively important role in LNC formulation. Reducing the
amount of surfactant increases the number of temperature cycles required to
stabilize dispersion ( ). In general, LNCs
have a negative surface charge due to the phospholipid molecules ( ) and the presence of PEG dipoles in their
shell, which are able to reduce the surface charge in proportion to their
concentration ( ). The efficient
encapsulation of drugs in the oily core of LNCs can be denoted by no significant
modification of the average particle size and ZP.
In addition to their efficient drug-loading capacity, LNCs show adjuvant effects,
such as P-gp inhibition properties, which can favor higher anticancer drug
concentrations inside cancer cells ( ). The
in vitro gastrointestinal stability of LNCs was studied to
evaluate the applicability of oral administration of anticancer drugs. The LNCs were
stable in simulated gastric medium and fasted state intestinal medium ( ).
LNCs appear to satisfy the properties required for weak complement activation and low
macrophage uptake, resulting in an increased bloodstream circulation time due to
their nanoscale size range and their high-density PEG surfactant shell ( ). Introducing surfactants in the
post-insertion process alters the surface properties of the nanoparticles. Grafting
longer PEG chains, such as PEG 1500 instead of PEG 660, prolonged their circulation
time ( ). Although the long-circulating
properties of LNCs coated with DSPE-mPEG2000
(1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-ethanolamine-N-[methoxy-(polyethyleneglycol)-2000])
have been demonstrated ( ), the abundant
presence of PEG, especially with long chains on the nanoparticulate surface, can
inhibit the internalization of drug-loaded NCs, possibly by preventing interactions
between the NCs and the tumor cell surface ( ).
Experimental results obtained by Perrier et al. ( ) indicate that DSPE-PEGs are efficiently transferred from micelles to
LNCs during the process by a temperature-dependent molecular transfer. The
hydrodynamic diameter (HD) increased from 55 to 70'nm at 5% DSPE-PEG2000-OCH3.
Concentrations greater than 5% had no effect on increasing the HD and an upper limit
of 70'nm was observed. In addition, the ZP decreased with the amount of
DSPE-PEG2000-OCH3, suggesting that additional DSPE-PEG molecules were still
interacting with the LNC. The HD increased with the length of the PEG chain,
although less than predicted by an assumption of linear conformation, indicating
that the PEG chains interact strongly in a compact conformation. The variation of
PEG chain length and subsequent purification by dialysis determined the limits for
post-insertion in terms of the nature of transferred amphiphiles. In the case of
highly hydrophilic molecules, post-insertion can be reversible and incomplete ( ).
In the gene delivery field, the most commonly used polynucleotide lipid-based
carriers are lipid-DNA complexes, called lipoplexes. These are obtained by mixing
cationic liposomes with DNA. However, an excess of cationic lipids can lead to high
cytotoxicity ( ). Viral vectors are still
used for gene expression, despite having several drawbacks. Therefore, LNCs are good
candidates for an efficient DNA delivery system, as NCs are an alternative for the
maintenance of nucleic acid integrity required for efficient gene delivery in cancer
therapy. LNCs provide protection by entrapping plasmid DNA molecules via lipoplexes
in their lipid core, and DNA-coated LNCs have been shown to be stable. DNA molecules
can be encapsulated and protected against degradation, as demonstrated by Morille et
al. ( ). Analysis by agarose gel
electrophoresis showed that there was no DNA migration after NC formulation followed
by a post-insertion process, whereas when incubated with a detergent (Triton), DNA
molecules were released, migrating unaltered into the gel.
To increase the stability for efficient in vivo DNA transfection,
the surface of the LNCs was modified by inserting longer PEG chains onto the surface
of DNA-LNCs by post-insertion of two kinds of amphiphilic and flexible polymers. The
first was F108, a block copolymer, and the second was the lipid PEG derivative
DSPE-mPEG2000. Measurements of the ZP found that DNA-LNCs were able to partially
mask the positive charge due to the presence of the lipoplexes ( ). The two polymers DSPE-PEG2000-gal and
F108-gal were obtained by chemical and enzymatic galactosylation, respectively. The
DNA-LNCs were tested for in vitro transfection efficiency on
primary hepatocytes. This study confirmed that galactose moieties were accessible on
the surface of galactosylated DNA-LNCs coated with F108, and this effect was less
pronounced in galactosylated DNA-LNCs coated with DSPE-PEG2000. The F108-gal coating
improved gene delivery compared to F108 without galactose. The addition of galactose
to DSPE-PEG2000 did not improve transfection efficiency, probably due to the
insufficient accessibility of galactose when attached to this polymer. Therefore,
DNA-LNCs coated with F108-gal can be used for targeted-gene expression based on a
cell-specific, receptor-mediated, endocytosis process.
The in vivo tumoral transfection potential of amphiphilic
DSPE-mPEG2000- and poloxamer F108-coated NCs was tested in a mouse tumor model,
demonstrating that DNA-LNCs can be efficient in transfecting tumor tissues
in vivo if coated with DSPE-mPEG2000 in association with a
special PEG chain conformation ( ). Coating
with F108 or DSPE-mPEG2000 increased the HD, evidence of an association between the
DNA-LNCs and the post-inserted polymers. The size increase, when adding
DSPE-mPEG2000 at any concentration to the DNA-LNC surface, ranged from 11 to 20'nm,
indicating a probable extended chain conformation. By contrast, the size increase
due to F108 post-insertion was smaller (about 15'nm), even though the F108
polyethylene oxide chains are 3 times longer than those of the DSPE-mPEG2000. These
results suggest a probable coiled configuration of the F108 chains that allowed some
accessibility of hydrophobic moieties on the DNA-LNC surface. The decreased
surface-charge density was observed for both polymers, but was more marked for the
DSPE-mPEG2000 coating, with a charge decrease from positive to negative values. Two
surface layer parameter measurements (spatial charge density and softness) indicated
that the DSPE-mPEG2000 coating was organized in a brush conformation, while F108 had
adopted a super-coiled conformation ( ).
F108-coated NCs had a dramatically increased transfection rate in
vitro ( ); however, the F108
coating did not expose any transfection in tumor tissues in vivo
( ). This can be linked to its
interaction with other organs before acceding to the tumor site. As attested by
Morille et al. ( ), F108 has a shorter
half-life in blood than DSPE-mPEG2000-coated DNA-LNCs. A major difference between
gene expression in tumor tissue and in other organs was observed for DNA-LNCs coated
with DSPE-mPEG2000, with only minor transfection observed in other organs (including
elimination organs). The in vivo chain conformation of
DSPE-mPEG2000 probably allowed sufficient accumulation via the EPR effect. At the
tumor site, in vivo gene expression was possible despite the low
transfection levels observed in vitro ( ).
LNCs are suitable for local treatment, including direct intracranial drug delivery,
thereby eliminating the need for a chemotherapeutic agent to bypass the blood-brain
barrier (BBB). The convection-enhanced delivery (CED) technique, using an external
positive pressure gradient injecting therapeutic fluid in the brain, allows a
greater volume distribution to be achieved in comparison to diffusion alone ( ). Therefore, LNCs with drug-loaded core
delivered by the CED technique appear to be a promising approach for the treatment
of brain tumors ( ). Overcoming problems
related to short drug tissue retention times or heterogeneous distribution,
nanoencapsulation may offer advantages such as protection of the active species,
reduced brain toxicity, a better drug distribution, and a longer half-life.
Alternatively, the route of administration by intracarotid injection may also
represent a promising path for drug delivery to brain tumors by giving the
nanoparticles a greater chance to cross the BBB ( ).
Ferrocifen-type molecules, obtained by attaching a ferrocenyl unit onto a tamoxifen
skeleton in order to enhance its cytotoxicity, are anticancer drug candidates ( ), although they suffer from poor
bioavailability due to their highly hydrophobic phenol groups. These hydrophobic
bioorganometallic molecules, which contain at least one carbon directly bound to a
metal or metalloid, can be active in glioblastoma multiform therapy, but their water
insolubility can impede their potential biological activity. Allard et al. ( ) have shown that it is possible to formulate
these molecules in LNCs. LNCs loaded with the ferrocenyl diphenol compound called
“ferrociphenol” (Fc-diOH), one of the most active molecules in this new class of
organometallic drugs, proved to be effective against 9L glioma cells and in a 9L
animal model and exhibited advantages over swollen micelles, which are smaller sized
particles produced by a similar process with the same excipients ( ).
LNCs were rapidly taken up by 9L cells, while micelles were taken up at much lower
levels. Although smaller than the LNCs, the presence of a high-density PEG coating
likely decreased the interaction of the swollen micelles with cells, resulting in
low internalization. This suggested that the LNCs improved the intracellular
bioavailability of the Fc-diOH, which had a much higher cytotoxic activity than
empty LNCs, and also demonstrated a higher cytotoxic effect in glioma cells than in
astrocytes. In the in vivo glioma model, Fc-diOH-loaded LNCs
significantly inhibited tumor growth and this was not observed in rats treated with
Fc-diOH-loaded micelles ( ).
The activity of the Fc-diOH-LNCs was evaluated in 9L cells in association with
radiotherapy (RT) and a combined treatment using the CED of Fc-diOH-LNCs with
external beam RT was evaluated in 9L glioma-bearing rats ( ). For the combined RT, sucrose was dissolved in the aqueous
phase of the LNC suspension after formulation, to enhance the viscosity of the
infusion, and its presence did not affect the LNC size and had no toxic effect on
cells in vitro. The treatment was more efficient when cells were
first treated with Fc-diOH followed by RT, improving survival time compared to all
other treatments and the control groups. The treatment combination in such order
showed synergy and not only an additive effect, and the radiosensitizing effect of
Fc-diOH may explain this enhanced efficacy. The synergy between the organometallic
compounds and RT indicated a potential therapeutic application for this class of
molecules, which often suffer from bioavailability problems. In the intracranial
in vivo model, the Fc-diOH-loaded LNCs with the highest dose
entrapped were administered to 9L glioma-bearing rats by the CED, followed by
external RT. This resulted in a significant increase in median survival time
compared to the chemotherapy group, to the group treated with empty LNCs followed by
the same irradiation protocol, and to the group treated only with RT ( ).
The identification of a subpopulation of human mesenchymal stromal cells, called
“marrow-isolated adult multilineage inducible” (MIAMI) cells that could be used as
delivery vehicles, was used to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of MIAMI cells
carrying Fc-diOH-LNCs ( ). Internalization
of the drug-loaded LNCs did not affect MIAMI cell viability, and MIAMI cells loaded
with Fc-diOH-LNCs were cytotoxic to glioma cells. The Fc-diOH-LNC-loaded MIAMI cells
induced a significant, dose-dependent, inhibition of U87MG cell proliferation, which
suggested that the MIAMI cells were able to deliver the Fc-diOH or Fc-diOH-LNCs.
Furthermore, this cytotoxic effect was confirmed in vivo in a
heterotopic U87MG glioma model. Although the authors successfully demonstrated that
the MIAMI cells were able to efficiently internalize the drug-loaded LNCs while
remaining viable, and deliver the drug-loaded LNCs into tumors, the effects of
Fc-diOH-LNC-loaded MIAMI cells and those of Fc-diOH-LNCs alone were not compared
( ).
Tumor-targeting nanoscale vectors able to deliver radionuclides have been recently
developed. The LNCs permit the encapsulation of a lipophilic complex of Rhenium-188
(188Re), and Vanpouille-Box et al. ( ) reported the LNC188Re-SSS as a radiopharmaceutical
carrier for internal RT in rats with hepatocellular carcinoma. No intolerance
following LNC188Re-SSS intra-arterial injection was observed, and
therapeutic efficiency was evidenced by a reduction in tumor progression. This could
be combined with an altered angiogenesis process as indicated by lower vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels. In addition, an increase in the median
survival and preservation of healthy liver tissue compared to control groups was
observed.
Novel LNC formulations towards the development of new mitochondria-targeted medicines
have been proposed to improve the administration and biological activity of an
analogue of the pro-apoptotic molecule HA14-1 ( ). HA14-1 was designed to inhibit Bcl-2/Bax interactions and thus
stimulate apoptosis ( ). Subsequently, due
to the instability of the molecule, a more stable analogue of HA14-1, called SV30,
was prepared ( ) and evaluated against
glioma cells ( ). SV30 was incorporated into
LNCs at a high encapsulation rate, and its stability was maintained during the
formulation process. Of note, unlike the other studies mentioned in this section,
LNC size was affected by the loading of the lipophilic drug, resulting in a 20%
increase compared to unloaded LNCs. Thus, LNC size and, more discretely, ZP
modifications post-encapsulation combined with the relatively fast release of SV30
suggested that the drug might also be present on the external shell of the LNCs
( ). Empty LNCs had no effect on glioma
cells, while the SV30-LNCs triggered a 2-fold increase in cancer cell death compared
to free SV30. In addition, the nanoformulation was stable for at least 1 month at
4°C. The potential of LNCs to carry two different molecules was exploited to load a
fluorescent probe, but could also have been used to load another synergistic drug.
The labeled LNCs were used to confirm the ability of the SV30-LNCs to reach the
mitochondria, which represent a major intracellular target for cell death induction
and Bcl-2-related inhibition. The LNCs were able to accumulate next to the
mitochondria, and the SV30-LNCs were more potent than empty-LNCs to do so. Thus,
interactions of Bcl-2 (or a Bcl-2 family member) with SV30 and SV30-LNCs may have
triggered specific modifications of subcellular trafficking pathways resulting in
LNC redistribution within cells ( ).
Paclitaxel (PTX) is a major antineoplastic agent with widespread antitumor activity,
but presents administration issues. Lacoeuille et al. ( ) demonstrated the increased circulating properties of LNC
and the therapeutic efficiency of PTX-LNC compared to controls in a hepatocellular
carcinoma model. The PTX-LNCs had the advantage of avoiding the conventional use of
Cremophor EL for the solubilization and formulation of PTX, which is associated with
severe side effects. Therefore, PTX-LNC has been proposed as a new drug delivery
system for PTX ( ). The LNCs were evaluated
as new pulmonary delivery strategies, and the incorporation of the drug into
breathable droplets for pulmonary delivery by nebulization is a potential
therapeutic strategy with reduced systemic side effects. In this context, Hureaux et
al. ( ) demonstrated that PTX-LNCs could be
delivered by nebulization and the physical and chemical parameters were optimized
for aerosol delivery and storage.
The formulations were nonpyrogenic and remained sterile for up to 4 months, showing
that PTX-LNC dispersions exhibited the principal parameters required for aerosol
delivery in humans. Osmolarity and pH can be a problem for bronchial and alveolar
cells; therefore, following LNC fabrication, the pH was increased to reach tissue pH
by the addition of sodium hydroxide and the osmolarity was also increased to
near-human iso-osmolarity by adding sodium chloride. Ultimately, only one mesh
nebulizer was able to produce aerosols of the PTX-LNC dispersions without damaging
the LNCs and sustaining good characteristics for human use. Stability during storage
is important in order to allow preclinical and clinical studies to take place. The
freeze-storage protocol developed did not alter or damage the PTX-LNCs. The
cytotoxic effect of the stored PTX-LNCs was identical to that of the fresh PTX-LNCs,
and the chemical parameters were not modified. As the PTX-LNCs are sustained-release
drug nanocarriers that can be nebulized, the traditional limitations for the blood
infusion of PTX, such as a low concentration in the lungs, insufficient drug
delivery to tumor cells, resistance, and nonspecific distribution associated with
systemic toxicity could be overcome with aerosols of PTX–LNCs in lung cancer
patients ( ).
More recently, Basile et al. ( ) evaluated
the protective effect of a new series of amphiphilic PEG derivatives obtained by
conjugating either carboxy- or amine-PEG to lipoamino acid residues (LAA) on
PTX-LNCs. Coated NCs were prepared by post-insertion. The behavior of the PEG-LAA
conjugate was also compared to commercial DSPE-mPEG used to produce sterically
stabilized vesicles. They investigated the ability of the novel amphiphilic PEG
conjugate to stabilize colloidal drug carriers with respect to their permanence in
the bloodstream, and found that it was possible to prepare sterically stable
nanocarriers, although future studies will be needed to assess the potentiality of
these nanocarriers.

## Layer-by-layer nanocapsules
One of the goals of an LbL process is to improve the stability of the core particles
( ) or the controlled release of an
encapsulated substance ( ). Typically, LbL
particles are formed by consecutive deposition of interacting polymers onto particle
templates, resulting in the formation of thin, multilayered polymer coatings on
particles of different size, shape, composition, thickness, permeability, and
function ( ). Several templates can be used
to deposit multiple layers, which are subsequently removed by chemical or thermal
means to yield the polymer capsules. The nonporous templates include: inorganic
molecular precursors that have been used to prepare inorganic capsules, liquid
droplets, and gas bubbles. The porous templates include mesoporous silica (MS) and
calcium carbonate particles, both of which can be decomposed under adequate
conditions ( ). Nonporous colloidal
particles ( ) are convenient templates for
capsules with nanometer-thick walls, while with porous particle templates ( ) polymer chains can infiltrate the core and,
upon core dissolution, give rise to nanoporous polymer particles. Such nanoporous
polymer particles can be used as high-load carriers of a desired molecule.
Since this method allows broad control of capsule properties through the choice of
the sacrificial colloids and the film components, significant advances in the
development of LbL particles have enabled efficient cargo encapsulation, triggered
release, and antibody-mediated targeting ( ). The feasibility of the LbL method improves the production of
functionalized nanoparticles using polymers with free reactive groups for the outer
layer. The sonication-assisted LbL nanoassembly technique can be used for the
nanoencapsulation of poorly soluble anticancer drugs, and was exploited by Vergara
et al. ( ) to efficiently produce PTX-NCs.
It was also used in the nanoformulation of two drugs in one NC, locating PTX in the
core and lapatinib on the shell surface. Encapsulation increased the in
vitro antitumor efficacy of PTX, which, in combination with lapatinib,
significantly overcame multidrug resistance in ovarian cancer cell lines ( ).
Son et al. ( ) developed a new type of hollow
NC for use in combining photodynamic therapy (PDT) with chemotherapy. PDT uses a
combination of light and dyes or photosensitizers to induce damage in cancer cells
and tissue ( ). To produce the
photosensitizer, a negatively charged dendritic porphyrin (DP) was synthesized and
combined as a bilayer component with poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) to
fabricate hollow NCs. While most NCs used in drug delivery system (DDS) are prepared
from linear polyelectrolytes whose only function is as a drug container, this system
employed DP not only as a polyelectrolyte component in the LbL assembly for the
formation of NCs, but also as a photosensitizing agent for PDT. The amount of DP was
controlled by changing the number of deposited layers. The (PAH/DP)n multilayer NCs
were filled with the anticancer drug doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX), producing NCs
with both PDT and chemotherapeutic actions. DOX could diffuse easily through the
multilayer shells to fill the hollow NCs, and the release profile resembled the
loading profile. To control the release rate, the shells were cross-linked between
PAH and DP, and sustained release could be achieved by controlling the degree of
cross-linking. Cell viability studies showed that the combined treatment resulted in
higher toxicity than either chemotherapy or PDT alone ( ).

## Core-shell nanocapsules
Since tumor growth depends on the oxygen and nutrients supplied by tumor blood
vessels, neovasculature in the tumor microenvironment is necessary for tumor
pathogenesis ( ). Therefore, targeting drugs
directly to the tumor vasculature can provide an alternative therapy approach.
However, there is evidence that tumor angiogenesis results from multiple associated
and compensatory mechanisms, which could limit the therapeutic effects of a single
antiangiogenesis therapy. Therefore, the therapeutic combination of a cytotoxic
agent and an antiangiogenetic drug would probably enhance treatment ( ). Moreover, a DDS that allows the sequential
release of the antiangiogenic agent from the same carrier, followed by the cytotoxic
drug, could lead to a more effective cancer treatment.
Wang and Ho ( ) designed a tumor vasculature-
targeted, combinatorial, double self-assembled core-shell NC, with the aim to
sequentially disrupt tumor vasculatures with combretastatin A4 (CA4), followed by
induction of tumor cell apoptosis with PTX. The sequential drug release was
accomplished by loading CA4 onto the lipid layer shell and PTX into the polymeric
core. In addition, the arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD peptide) was used as a
vascular-targeting ligand, since the proliferating vascular endothelial cells of the
tumor overexpress integrin receptors, αVβ3 and
αVβ5, on the cell membrane. Thus, NCs could deliver drugs
in a sustained and temporal manner to disrupt tumor vasculature and ablate tumor
cells with the assistance of the RGD-targeting ligand ( ).
The lipid-assisted nanoprecipitation method used in this study consisted of a
one-step self-assembly process, where fewer chemicals and steps are involved, which
makes the NC preparation simple and robust for large-scale production. The
self-assembled PTX-loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) core
surrounded by a hydrophilic PEG surface was coated with a lipid layer as a shell,
and CA4 was loaded onto this lipid layer by hydrophobic interactions. The lipid
shell served as a depot for CA4, as well as a molecular fence to control the release
of PTX from the polymeric core, inducing cell death in a sequential manner ( ).
An alternative design for an NC for the sequential delivery of CA4 and PTX employed
the nanoprecipitation method using methoxyl PEG-poly(lactic acid) (mPEG-PLA) as the
building-up matrix. PTX was conjugated to PLA, and CA4 was encapsulated in the core
when the mPEG-PLA self-assembled in an aqueous environment. This resulted in the
production of uniform and stable nanoparticles exhibiting effective drug loading and
sequential release of drugs. The in vitro evaluation of drug
release showed a distinctive profile for PTX and CA4, with an initial fast release
of CA4 followed by a sustained release. PTX was released in a sustained pattern with
a slight peak on the first day of incubation, and longer incubation times
accelerated the release of PTX from the NC, which was controlled by the slow
hydrolysis of the ester bond between PTX and PLA ( ).
Both in vitro and in vivo experiments have
demonstrated significant therapeutic effects of dual-drug-loaded sequential-delivery
NCs. The NCs accumulated in the tumor mass over time and no abnormalities were
detected in the liver, kidney or heart of treated mice, and there were no apparent
side effects. Cancer cell proliferation was reduced in the drug treatment group and
there was no significant tumor cell metastasis, compared to the control groups (PBS
and empty NCs). Although the exact therapeutic mechanism of these NCs is not clear,
the induction of cellular apoptosis and antiangiogenesis activity was improved
compared to single agent-loaded NCs. In addition, expression of VEGF, a major
pro-angiogenesis factor in the tumor microenvironment, was inhibited ( ).
The combination of physical imaging for cancer diagnosis and anticancer drug delivery
into one system is of great interest. Multifunctional core/shell structured hollow
MS NCs with ellipsoidal morphology for both MRI and drug delivery have been
evaluated ( ). Monodispersed ellipsoidal
Fe2O3 nanocrystals were chosen as a template to obtain
magnetic mesoporous NCs, which were fabricated by hydrothermal synthesis using iron
perchlorate as the Fe precursor. A thick layer of dense silica was deposited onto
the surface of Fe2O3 to form
Fe2O3@SiO2 core/shell nanostructures. A thin
layer of MS shell was deposited onto the surface of the
Fe2O3@SiO2 to form a trilayered composite
nanostructure (Fe2O3@SiO2@mSiO2). The
middle silica layer, with a lower degree of condensation, was etched away under
alkaline conditions to form large cavities between the shell and core
(Fe2O3@mSiO2). The outer MS shell (higher
condensation degree) was maintained. Finally, the Fe2O3 core
of the NCs was reduced in a gas mixture of H2 and N2 to
produce hollow Fe3O4@mSiO2 core/shell NCs with
well-defined mesopores in the silica shell and controllable cavity sizes in the NCs
( ). The
Fe3O4@mSiO2 nanocapsules demonstrated excellent
blood compatibility and no significant coagulation effect was observed, ensuring
biosafety for intravenous administration. There was no apparent in
vitro cytotoxicity of the empty NCs even at high concentrations, and
DOX could be loaded into the NCs with high efficiency, maintaining the
pharmaceutical activities of the loaded DOX and enhancing its cytotoxicity against
cancer cells ( ).

## Polymeric and shell cross-linked nanocapsules
To improve the conventional LbL technique for the preparation of NCs, Wang and Caruso
( ) used a solid silica core and MS
shell (SC/MS) template to prepare thick-walled, single-component polymer NCs. The
process involved the infiltration of polyelectrolyte or polymer-drug conjugates into
the mesoporous shells of the SC/MS particles, followed by cross-linking of the
infiltrated polymer chains and subsequent removal of the SC/MS silica template,
producing polyelectrolyte or drug-conjugated polymer NCs. PAH was employed as the
polyelectrolyte, glutaraldehyde was used as the cross-linking agent, and the SC/MS
template was removed via treatment with hydrofluoric acid to obtain PAH NCs. For
drug delivery applications, the preparation with polymers poly(L-amino acids), which
are structurally related to natural proteins and considered to be biocompatible and
biodegradable, was evaluated. Amine-functionalized positively charged SC/MS
particles were used to adsorb poly(L-glutamic acid) (PGA) conjugated with DOX. The
polymer-drug conjugate, PGA-DOX, was loaded into the mesoporous shells and
cross-linked using 2,2"-diaminodiethyl disulfide dihydrochloride (cystamine) in the
presence of 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride. After
removal of the SC/MS template, PGA-DOX NCs were obtained, and induced a significant
decrease in the number of viable tumor cells in vitro, achieving
>85% cell death ( ).
Polymeric NCs can be designed to encapsulate proteins that are protected against
proteolysis and denaturation, and have increased efficiency in transport across the
cell membrane. One strategy consisted of the development of protease-modulated
reversible NCs, in which monomers and cross-linkers were deposited onto the protein
surface via physical adsorption. Free-radical polymerization was performed
in situ to form the protective shell. Upon proteolytic cleavage
of the cross-linker, the polymeric shell disintegrated and the protein was released
in functional form ( ). This has proven to
be effective by successful delivery of caspase-3 (CP-3), a peptidase in the
apoptotic signaling pathway, through degradation of the cross-linked polymeric shell
from within, promoting inhibition of proliferation and extensive apoptotic DNA
fragmentation in cancer cell lines. Cancer cells treated with native CP-3 or NCs
synthesized under identical conditions but with a nondegradable cross-linker did not
show such characteristics ( ).
For PDT, an increased photosensitizer affinity for tumor cells in order to reduce
side effects on normal cells, as well as protection from thermal and
photodegradation of the photosensitizer, are desired ( ). Pietkiewicz et al. ( ) reported polymeric oil-cored poly(n-butyl cyanoacrylate) (PBCA) NCs
fabricated by means of o/w microemulsion templates formed by polyoxyethyleneted
nonionics as promising nanocarriers for the delivery of hydrophobic cyanine-type
photosensitizers. There was a discrepancy in size between the much bigger NCs and
the corresponding microemulsion droplets, which probably resulted from the dynamic
character of the microemulsion systems, assuming that the polymerization process did
not involve a single droplet but several droplets at the same time. The preparation
of NCs from the o/w microemulsion templates improved the encapsulation efficiency of
cyanine IR-768, which was associated with the core rather than adsorbed on the
surface, as shown by the sustained diameter and ZP, circumventing the undesirable
characteristics of free cyanine.
Although PBCA NCs demonstrated low or moderate levels of hemolytic activity on human
erythrocytes, it was concluded that intravenous injection of the NCs would result in
lower serum concentrations compared to the in vitro experiments.
Therefore, the NCs appeared to be relatively safe carriers of cyanine IR-768 in the
circulation. The NCs were able to deliver cyanine IR-768 to cancer cell lines, and
there was an initial burst release followed by a slow and sustained phase. The
in vitro IR-768 leakage was dependent on the monomer
concentration and not on the type of microemulsion. The dye did not aggregate inside
the cells and could therefore act as an effective photosensitizer. Noteworthy,
free-cyanine uptake caused significant changes in cell morphology while cells
treated with IR-768-loaded NCs maintained a regular shape ( ).
Shell cross-linked NCs were found to be efficient delivery vehicles for
water-insoluble anti-cancer drugs such as PTX, and achieved effective cancer therapy
by reducing the nonspecific side effects on normal tissue ( ). The conventional PTX formulation induces acute side
effects that are associated with the oil-based vehicle ( ). PTX shows high affinity for, and strong binding to human
serum albumin (HSA), and Lee et al. ( )
employed HSA and amine-reactive multi-arm PEG to fabricate shell cross-linked NCs
that incorporated PTX. Oil was not used and PTX was efficiently encapsulated into
the hydrophobic interior by HSA-PTX interactions that were stabilized by a
cross-linked shell layer consisting of PEG and HSA. As HSA is a negatively charged
protein at neutral pH, it is necessary to overcome the strong electrostatic
repulsion hindering entry into cells through the negatively charged cell membrane.
This was achieved by conjugation, using a flexible PEG linker, of the drug-loaded
NCs with the cell-penetrating peptide Hph1. Such modification enhanced the
therapeutic performance of the loaded PTX against several cancer cell lines, and
this could be induced by the Hph1-facilitated translocation of the NCs into the
cells.
The biocompatible HSA/PEG PTX-NCs were structurally stable and the cytotoxic effect
was attributed to PTX-induced apoptosis. In a mouse tumor model, clearance of the
HSA/PEG NCs by the macrophages in the liver was minimal, suggesting that the NCs
were targeted to and stayed in the tumor tissue for an extended period of time, with
no severe nonspecific uptake by normal tissues. Tumor growth was significantly
suppressed in mice that received a single iv dose of the NCs
compared to untreated control mice ( ).
Small interfering RNA (siRNA), a short double-stranded RNA less than 30 nucleotides
in length, has received significant attention in biomedical research owing to its
therapeutic potential. siRNAs function as effective mediators of
post-transcriptional specific gene silencing via a mechanism called RNA interference
( ). However, there are challenges in
the application of siRNAs for anti-cancer therapy ( ), as they exhibit poor in vivo stability by
enzymatic degradation in the bloodstream. Lee et al. ( developed pluronic/polyethylenimine (PEI) shell cross-linked
NCs with embedded magnetite nanocrystals (PPMCs) for magnetically triggered
intracellular delivery of siRNA. Pluronic is a biocompatible amphiphilic tri-block
copolymer, and PEI is a cationic polymer used in non-viral gene delivery systems
both in vitro and in vivo ( ). However, its use to transfect tumors after systemic
injection still represents an issue ( ).
The formulation was produced by a modified emulsification/solvent evaporation
procedure based on cross-linking at emulsion interfaces resulting in the formation
of a pluronic/PEI composite shell layer encapsulating iron oxide nanocrystals in
their hollow interior space. Since these NCs had a highly cationic shell layer they
could be used as delivery vehicles for anionic therapeutic agents such as siRNA. The
PPMCs were expected to interact electrostatically with the negatively charged
siRNA-PEG conjugates to form nanosized polyelectrolyte complexes favorable for cell
internalization. The application of an external magnetic field could direct the
PPMC/siRNA-s-s-PEG polyelectrolyte complexes into target cells. This enhances their
uptake via endocytosis plus magnetically enforced cellular transport processes. The
PPMCs suppressed gene expression in cancer cells, suggesting that they could be used
as powerful nontoxic delivery vehicles for various nucleic acid-based therapeutic
agents. In addition, the magnetic targeting of PPMCs greatly enhanced the efficiency
of intracellular delivery and the gene silencing effect of the encapsulated siRNA
( ).
The direct protein delivery to the cytosol in order to restore functions of interest
is an interesting approach, but this has been hampered by some of the inherent
characteristics of proteins. Therefore, vehicles for suitable protein delivery must
meet certain criteria: they should protect the protein cargo from denaturation and
proteolysis, shield the negatively charged protein, release the protein cargo in
native forms when the desired destination is reached, not require covalent
modification that can disturb protein folding and impair biological activity, and
not exhibit low delivery efficiency or encounter difficulties due to colloidal
instability ( - ). Zhao et al. ( )
reported a method to encapsulate single protein molecules in a polymeric NC using a
redox-responsible, disulfide-containing cross linker.
NCs interconnected by the cross-linker through interfacial polymerization should
maintain the integrity of the thin polymer shell under the oxidative conditions
outside the cell, but must be able to undergo rapid degradation and protein cargo
release under the reducing conditions encountered upon entry into the cytosol. The
formulation was internalized by the cells and a significant portion of the
internalized NCs and the cargo escaped from the endosomal compartment and reached
the desired destination. A human cancer cell line treated with CP-3 encapsulated in
the NCs underwent extensive apoptotic DNA fragmentation, while apoptosis was not
observed in cells treated with the negative control. This demonstrated that CP-3-NCs
could be internalized by cancer cells, and that functional CP-3 was released into
the cytosol where it induced apoptosis. The redox-responsive encapsulation strategy
was a simple yet effective method of intracellular protein delivery ( ).

## Liposome-like nanocapsules
The concept of directly using drug molecules as components of NCs was demonstrated
using the hydrophobic drug Camptothecin (CPT) ( ). CPT was used to replace the fatty acid(s) in phospholipids, in a
formulation that contained a short nonionic ethylene glycol chain as the water
soluble part and a β-thioester bond as the linker. The formed liposome-like NCs
acted as nanocarriers that released the CPT inside cells due to the presence of
estearase. In addition, these liposome-like NCs could be efficiently loaded with DOX
for combination therapy and showed high in vitro and in
vivo antitumor activity.
The frequently used platinum-based drug cisplatin has problems related to cumulative
toxicity. Liposomal formulations of cisplatin reduced toxicity but exhibited
relatively low concentrations of platinum in tumor tissue ( ). An alternative method using cisplatin NCs was evaluated
against a panel of human ovarian carcinoma cell lines. The cisplatin NCs consisted
of nanoprecipitates of cisplatin encapsulated in a phospholipid bilayer. The
increased cytotoxicity caused by the cisplatin NCs was observed to be cell
line-dependent ( ). The in
vitro cytotoxicity resulted from the uptake of the NCs by
caveolae-mediated endocytosis. This led to increased intracellular accumulation of
cisplatin and increased levels of platinum-DNA-adducts. In the absence of
caveolin-1, the cisplatin NCs were taken up via clathrin-mediated endocytosis and
became trapped in an endocytic compartment, resulting in a modest increase in
platinum-DNA-adduct formation and toxicity of the encapsulated versus the free drug.
The observation that cytotoxicity depended on the route of cellular entry may have
identified a new strategy for predicting the efficacy of nanoparticulate anticancer
DDS against different types of tumors. The cisplatin NCs may be able to circumvent
the blocking mechanisms used by platinum-resistant cells and destroy them ( ).

## Protein nanocapsules
Phosphorylation by protein kinases plays an important role in cell growth and
functions through the activation of the target proteins via signal transduction
pathways. Abnormal activation of certain protein kinases has been associated with
many diseases ( ). Casein kinase 2 (CK2) is
a highly conserved and ubiquitous protein serine/threonine kinase with an important
role in cancer. Besides being implicated in cell proliferation and differentiation,
CK2 can also be a potent suppressor of apoptosis ( ). Therefore, downregulation of CK2 is a potential cancer therapy
strategy if it can be targeted to cancer cells. The inhibition of CK2 using NCs
could enhance the tissue-specific targeting and therapeutic efficacy of this
approach ( ).
Protein kinase CK2 may interact with both NF-κB and TP53 pathways and thereby promote
a malignant phenotype and its progression. NCs containing tenfibgen (the fibrinogen
binding domain of tenascin) have been shown to enhance the intracellular delivery to
tumor cells of the siRNA anti-CK2α/α" oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) that acts against
both of the CK2α and CK2α" subunits ( ). The
anti-CK2α/α" ODN was encapsulated in sub-50-nm tenfibgen NCs and targeted CK2α/α" in
a head and neck squamous cell carcinoma xenograft model ( ). Tumor growth was significantly suppressed and the
expression of multiple proteins involved in NF-κB, TP53, and apoptotic pathways was
altered. An additional therapeutic approach was developed to target protein kinase C
isozyme (PKCα) that is overexpressed or hyperactivated in cancer cells ( ). This regulation system was provided by a
PKCα-specific substrate peptide that could distinguish between normal and tumor
cells but was not tissue-specific.
BNCs are hollow nanoparticles that can be produced efficiently in recombinant yeast
cells. They consist of hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface antigen molecules and a lipid
bilayer. Intravenous injection of BNCs has allowed the efficient delivery of
incorporated payloads to human hepatocytes by using the HBV infection machinery
( ). The pre-S1 peptide displayed on the
BNCs specifically recognizes human hepatocytes, and therefore provided, in
combination with the tumor cell specific gene regulation, the desired selectivity
for hepatoma cells.
Two conjugates were designed using N-methacryloyl-PEG (NPEG), the positive polymer
NPEG(S) containing serine at the phosphorylation site of the peptide [peptide(S)],
and the negative polymer NPEG(A) containing alanine [peptide(A)] that blocked
phosphorylation by PKCα. The NPEG(S) polymer was phosphorylated by PKCα after being
incorporated into the polymer backbone and combined with DNA. The NPEG(S)-DNA
complex was broken up by phosphorylation of the peptide and resulted in the release
of the DNA from the complex. The delivery of the NPEG-DNA into cells was promoted by
the BNCs. After transfection of the NPEG(S)-DNA-BNC complex, phosphorylation by PKCα
induced gene expression. This complex increased transfection efficiency and resulted
in cell-specific gene expression in hepatoma cells and tissues. No gene expression
was observed in normal human hepatocytes or human epidermoid tumor cells,
demonstrating that the system had hepatoma-specific gene expression both in
vitro and in vivo ( ).
A novel concept of immune-based therapy for lung cancer involved a vault NC for the
delivery of immune potentiating cytokines. Vault NCs are naturally occurring
ubiquitous cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein particles, which may serve as a flexible
therapeutic delivery vehicle. The effect of the vault NC delivery of CCL21, a
lymphoid chemokine, on the growth of Lewis Lung (3LL) tumors in
vivo was evaluated ( ). The aim
was to promote the recruitment of T lymphocytes and dendritic cells into the tumor
microenvironment in order to stimulate a robust antitumor activity response. A
single dose of the CCL21-vault NCs induced potent antitumor activity and inhibited
tumor growth. Neutralizing antibodies to CCL21 inhibited the chemotactic activity of
the NCs, demonstrating that the antitumor activity was CCL21-dependent ( ).

## Final remarks
In the development of more effective and less harmful anticancer therapeutic agents,
improved carrier systems are urgently needed. Carriers should be biocompatible, with
the lowest possible cytotoxicity, and should not influence the therapeutic effect of
the loaded bioactive substances. NCs, nanovesicular systems that can act as carriers
of therapeutic molecules, have shown great potential in cancer research. They can
enhance drug accumulation at a specific tumor site, thereby reducing the side
effects associated with most chemotherapeutic drugs, and they can deliver DNA and
siRNA. Most anticancer drugs have poor water solubility, rapid blood clearance, low
tumor selectivity, and severe side effects for healthy tissues. Nanoencapsulated
systems offer the appropriate physicochemical characteristics and modify the
biodistribution of the encapsulated therapeutic agents. NCs can deliver higher
payloads, shield the active molecules from degradation, prolong drug circulation
time and delay their release. In addition, they can facilitate cellular uptake,
improve drug targeting and solubility, and provide controlled release.
A further advantage is that more than one drug can be carried by the same
nanoparticulate DDS, and they can be released in a sequential manner ( ). Thus, the activity of a number of
anticancer hydrophobic compounds can be improved ( ). In addition, cellular uptake of the NCs by the endocytosis
mechanism can be achieved ( ). The
self-degrading NC approach ( ) may be useful
in protein drugs or vaccines, and may be extended to applications in which external
proteases trigger the disassembly of the NCs. Encapsulated radioactive components
can allow imaging of the distribution of the targeted NCs for diagnostic and
therapeutic uses ( ). Antibodies can be
attached to the NC surface, and antibody functionalized NCs can bind specifically to
cancer cells expressing the complementary antigen ( ).
LNCs can be coated by a post-insertion technique to improve their circulation times
in order to give them the adequate features for in vivo injection
and accumulation in tumors ( ).
Nevertheless, accessibility to ions decreases with PEG length, and since the
conformation of PEG tends to be globular, the length of PEG should be adapted for
each application ( ). For a delivery vehicle
to be effective, it is desirable that it should not allow degradation of its content
in the blood stream; however, it should easily release its cargo after reaching its
destination within tumor cells ( ). The size
of nanodevices is also an important feature: if they are too large they will be
removed from the bloodstream by the macrophages in the liver and spleen, whereas if
they are too small they will be filtered by the kidneys. The ideal diameter of
nanoparticles should be less than 200'nm for their efficient capture by the tumor
vasculature ( ), and NCs will be able to
reach the targeted site through gaps in the endothelium ( ).
LNC formulations are prepared using FDA-approved constituents in a solvent-free and
low-energy process ( ). Other formulation
approaches also use biocompatible and biodegradable materials, with minimal, if any,
cytotoxic effects, to construct a self-assembled core-shell NC ( ). Besides, inorganic NCs can provide
excellent cell uptake and high delivery efficiency of encapsulated drugs. Functional
inorganic nanocrystals in the core of the NCs could allow simultaneous imaging and
drug delivery functionalities ( ). LbL
assembly has proven to be advantageous ( ),
but alternatives have been proposed without multiple polymers and/or multiple
polymer adsorption steps, such as template synthesis ( ), providing NCs with thick shells. The nanoprecipitation
technique can be used to encapsulate hydrophobic drugs into an amphiphilic
copolymer, which can be self-assembled into a micellar structure in an aqueous
environment ( ). Another alternative is the
use of natural functional macromolecular assemblies and structures that can be
manipulated for nanobiotechnology applications. Protein engineering coupled with
synthetic chemical strategies can be used to redesign structure and function,
yielding biodegradable particles with very narrow size distributions and
multifunctional control afforded by recombinant synthesis strategies ( ).
In conclusion, the capability to generate a wide range of materials with tunable
properties that can interact in a unique fashion with biological systems is
providing exciting new opportunities for designing advanced NCs for use in a range
of therapeutic and diagnostic applications. While several challenges remain to be
addressed, undoubtedly NCs represent an interesting alternative for the development
of new tools that can inhibit the growth of cancer cells.

First published online May 28, 2013.