J Neuroimmune Pharmacol365springeropenJournal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology1557-18901557-1904pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleSpringerPMC3153655PMC3153655.1315365531536552019578010.1007/s11481-010-9196-991961Brief Report16th Annual Society on NeuroImmune Pharmacology Conference
CabralGuy A+1-804-8282306+1-804-8288220gacabral@hsc.vcu.eduSchool of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA USA 232010320105Suppl 11992093592109201126062024© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesissue-copyright-statement© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010 
16th SNIP Conference, April 13–17, 2010
SNIP Administrative Meetings
Tuesday, April 13, 2010
1:00  PM Opening of Conference Office
3:00–4:00  PM SNIP Executive Committee Meeting (President’s Suite)
4:00–6:30  PM SNIP Meetings Committee
7:30  PM SNIP Council Dinner
Conference Scientific Program
Wednesday, April 14, 2010
8:30–9:00  AM Awards Committee
9:00–10:00  AM Finance Committee
10:00–11:00  AM Communications Committee
11:00  AM–Noon Membership Committee
Noon–1:15  PM Lunch
1:15–3:00  PM Council Meeting and Committee Reports
2:00  PM Conference Office opens
3:00–6:00  PM Registration Opens—Put up Posters for Session1
5:00–7:00  PMOpening Reception
5:00–7:00  PM POSTER SESSION I—Young Investigators Session
Please have ALL posters mounted on the poster boards BEFORE 5:00 PM.
Odd numbered posters are to be presented from 5–6 PM
Even numbered posters are to be presented from 6–7 
 PM
Please remove posters at end of this session.
7:15–9:15  PM Meet the Mentors Dinner: Hosted by Gayle Baldwin, Ph.D. (David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA) and the Young Investigator Travel Award Committee
Restricted to Young Investigators Who are Presenting Their Work at the Conference and Who Have a Confirmed Reservation
Thursday, April 15, 2010
7:30–8:30  AM Continental Breakfast for Conference Registrants
Put up Posters for Poster Session II
8:30–8:40  AM INTRODUCTION TO THE MEETING
Welcome from the Society on NeuroImmune Pharmacology
Yuri Persidsky, M.D., Ph.D.—SNIP President (Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA)
–Acknowledgement of NIH Staff and Officials
–Acknowledgement of Key Sponsors, Committees and Chairs
Guy A. Cabral, Ph.D., Chairman, SNIP Meetings Committee (Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA)
–Conference Overview & Business
8:45–9:25  AM PLENARY LECTURE I: Stuart Lipton, M.D., Ph.D.—Scientific Director, Burnham Center for Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Research
8:45–8:50 Introduction by Yuri Persidsky, M.D., Ph.D.—SNIP President (Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA)
8:50–9:25 Lecture:“Molecular Mechanism of Decreased Adult Neurogenesis in the HIV-Infected Brain”
9:30  AM–12:00 SYMPOSIUM #1: Effects of HIV-1 in Promoting Alcohol Addiction and Mechanisms of Associated Neurodegeneration
Session Co-Chairs:Yuri Persidsky, M.D., Ph.D.—Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
He Li, Ph.D.—Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, People’s Republic of China
9:30–10:00 Symposium Lecture: Fulton T. Crews, Ph.D.—Director: Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, Pharmacology and Psychiatry, University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill
“Synergistic Effects of Alcohol and TLR Agonists in Neuroinflammation and Neurodegeneration”
10:00–10:25 Lecture 1: Kathleen A. Grant, Ph.D.—Senior Scientist, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Portland, OR
“Longitudinal Analysis of Circulating Cytokines in a Monkey Model of Alcohol Self-Administration”
10:25–10:45 Coffee Break
10:45–11:10 Lecture 2: Consuelo Guerri, Ph.D.—Department of Cell Pathology, Centro de Investigacion Principe Felipe, Valencia, Spain
“Critical Role of TLR4 Response in Ethanol-induced Microglia Activation and Neuroinflammation”
11:10–11:35 Lecture 3: Yuri Blednov, M.D., Ph.D.—Research Scientist, University of Texas in Austin
“Excessive Alcohol Consumption: An Inflammatory Disease? Lessons Learned from Mouse Models”
11:35–12:00 Lecture 4: Yuri Persidsky, M.D., Ph.D.—Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
“How HIV-1 CNS Infection Can Promote Alcohol Addiction”
12:00–1:00  PM Lunch on your own
1:00–2:00 PM SNIP Annual Business Meeting
All Society Members Welcome
2:00–4:00  PM POSTER SESSION II (Video Conference Room)
GENERAL POSTER SESSION
PROGRAM NOTE: Presenting authors for “odd-numbered” posters (T-1, T-3, T-5, etc.) should be at their posters from 2:00–3:00 p.m. to present their work and presenting authors for “even-numbered” posters (T-2, T-4, T-6, etc.) should be at their posters from 3:00–4:00 p.m. to present their work.
Please have ALL posters mounted on the poster boards BEFORE 2:00 PM.
Coffee Break at 3:30  PM During Poster Session
Remove all posters at the end of the session.
4:00–6:00  PM SYMPOSIUM #2: Opiates, Other Drugs of Abuse and Co-Infections
Session Co-Chairs:Ing-Kang Ho, Ph.D.—National Health Research Institutes, Taiwan, R. O. C.
Kurt Hauser, Ph.D.—Virginia Commonwealth University, School of Medicine, Richmond, VA
Symposium Talks:
4:00–4:25 Lecture 1: Kurt Hauser, Ph.D.—Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA
“Coordinated Astroglial and Microglial Actions Mediate the Synergistic Inflammatory and Neurodegenerative Effects of Opioids in HIV-1 Encephalitis”
4:25–4:50 Lecture 2: Joan Berman, Ph.D.—Departments of Pathology and of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
“Dopamine Exacerbates CNS Inflammation and HIV Infection”
4:50–5:15 Lecture 3: Jian-Guo Wu, Ph.D.—Director, State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan People’s Republic of China
“Inputs on Co-Infection of HIV and HCV”
5:15–5:40 Lecture 4: Zhengrong Wang, M.D.—Sichuan University, West China Medical College, Sichuan Center for Disease Control, People’s Republic of China.
“HIV Infection and Drug Abuse in the Yi Ethnic Chinese of Sichuan”
6:00–7:00  PMTacos and Beer—Sponsored by the UCLA Center for AIDS Research and UCLA AIDS Institute
7:00–9:05  PM UCLA CENTER FOR AIDS RESEARCH AND UCLA AIDS INSTITUTE SYMPOSIUM: HIV and Host Immunity in the Design of Novel Therapeutic Approaches
Session Co–Chairs: Gayle Baldwin, Ph.D.—David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA
Michael Roth, M.D.—David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA
7:00–7:25 PM Lecture 1:Otto Yang, M.D., Ph.D.—“Obstacles to an HIV Vaccine”
7:25–7:50 PM Lecture 2:Christel H. Uittenbogaart, M.D.—“Impact of the Innate Immune Response on HIV Infection
7:50–8:15 PM Lecture 3:Dung Sung An, M.D., Ph.D.—“Gene Therapy: A Potential Approach to Eradicate HIV–1 Infection”
8:15–8:40 PM Lecture 4:Scott Kitchen, Ph.D.—“Engineering HIV-specific T Cell Immunity”
8:40–9:05 PM Lecture 5:Raphael J. Landovitz, M.D.—“A Combined Biobehavioral Intervention for HIV Prevention in Methamphetamine-using Men who have Sex with Men”
Friday, April 16, 2010
7:30–9:00  AM Continental Breakfast for Conference Registrants
9:00–11:30  AM SYMPOSIUM #3:Nanomedicine and Drug Delivery
Session Co-Chairs:Howard E. Gendelman, M.D.—Chair, Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
Philip S. Low, Ph.D.—Ralph C. Corley Distinguished Professor–Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
9:00–9:45 Symposium Lecture: Andre Nel, Ph.D.—Chief, Division of Nanomedicine, UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
“An Overview of Nanomedicine”
9:45–10:05 Lecture 1: Alexander V. Kabanov, Ph.D., Dr. Sc.—Director, Center for Drug Discovery and Nanomedicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
“Nanomedicines for Polypeptide Delivery to the CNS”
10:05–10:25 Lecture 2: Philip S. Low, Ph.D.—Ralph C. Corley Distinguished Professor–Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
“Use of Targeting Ligands to Deliver Therapeutic Agents to Pathologic Cells”
10:25–10:45 Coffee Break
10:45–11:05 Lecture 3: Madhavan Nair, Ph.D.—Director, Center for Neuroimmune Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, FL
“Multifunctional Magnetic Nanocarrier for Drug Targeting of Brain”
11:05–11:25 Lecture 4: Howard E. Gendelman, M.D.—Chair, Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
“NanoArt”
11:30–Noon PICK UP LUNCHES
12:00–1:00  PM TECHNICAL WORKSHOP:New NIH Initiatives, Grant Writing & Review Process
Session Co-Chairs:David Shurtleff, Ph.D. (NIDA/NIH)/Abraham Bautista, Ph.D. (NIAAA/NIH)
David Shurtleff, Ph.D.—Division of Basic Neuroscience and Behavioral Research/(NIDA/NIH)
Abraham Bautista, Ph.D.—Director, Office of Extramural Activities/ (NIAAA/NIH)
Srinivas Ranga, Ph.D.—Extramural Project Review Br./(NIAAA/NIH)
1:00–2:05  PM YOUNG INVESTIGATOR’S SYMPOSIUM
Session Co-Chairs:
Gayle Baldwin, Ph.D.—David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA
Albert Avila, Ph.D.—Division of Basic Neuroscience and Behavioral Research/NIDA
1:00–1:05 Introduction to the YITA Symposium
Pre–Doctoral Presentations:
1:05–1:20 Xiuyan Huang—Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
“Functional Proteomic Analyses of CD4+T Lymphocyte Surveillance of the HIV-1 Infected Macrophage”
1:20–1:35 Sody Mweetwa Munsaka—Neuroscience and MR Research Program, University of Hawaii, John A. Burns School of Medicine, Honolulu, HI
“Marijuana Use Worsens Cognitive Function but Does Not Change CSF Immune Markers in Subjects without HIV Associated Neurocognitive Disorder (HAND)”
Post-Doctoral Presentations:
1:35–1:50 Ming Zhang, M.D., Ph.D.—Department of Physiology, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
“A Cannabinoid CB2Agonist Attenuated Leukocyte-Brain Endothelial Interaction and Blood–Brain Barrier Dysfunction Under Inflammatory Conditions”
1:50–2:05 P. J. Gaskill, Ph.D.—Departments of Pathology and of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
“Mechanisms of Dopamine-Mediated Increase in HIV Infection of Human Macrophages”
2:15–7:00  PM Free Time or Trip to Getty Museum
7:00–9:30  PM Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology Editorial Board Meeting
Saturday, April 17, 2010
7:30–9:00  AM Continental Breakfast for Conference registrants
9:00–9:55  AM PLENARY LECTURE II: Vincenzo Di Marzo, Ph.D.—Istituto di Chimica Biomolecolare, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Pozzuoli, Italy
9:05–9:10 Introduction by Guy Cabral
9:10–9:50 “Endocannabinoids and Related Lipid Mediators: A General Introduction and Emerging Role in Neuroinflammatory Disorders”
10:00–12:00  AM SYMPOSIUM #4:Neuroimmunopharmacology and the Cannabinoid System
Session Co-Chairs:Martin Adler, Ph.D.—Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
Guy A. Cabral, Ph.D.—Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University, School of Medicine, Richmond, VA
10:00–10:20 Lecture 1: R. Bryan Rock, M.D.—Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN
“Protective Role of Synthetic Cannabinoids in gp120-induced Neurotoxicity”
10:20–10:40 Coffee Break
10:40–11:00 Lecture 2: Aron Lichtman, Ph.D.—Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA
“Targeting Endocannabinoid Catabolic Enzymes to Treat Inflammatory Pain”
11:00–11:20 Lecture 3: Norbert Kaminski, Ph.D.—Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
“Enhanced Anti-influenza Immune Responses Are Associated with Targeted Deletion of both Cannabinoid Receptors, CB1and CB2”
11:20–11:40 Lecture 4: Ronald Tuma, Ph.D.—Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
“SR141716A, Unexpected Actions”
11:45–12:45  AM Pick-up box lunches
12:45–2:30  PM SYMPOSIUM #5:Recent Advances in the Activities of Tobacco Smoke
Session Co-Chairs:Thomas Rogers, Ph.D.—Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
Mohan Sopori, Ph.D.—Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM
Symposium Talks:
12:45–1:05 PM Lecture 1: Thomas Rogers, Ph.D.—Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
“The Immunopathology Associated with Cigarette Smoking: It May Be Worse than you Think”
1:05–1:55 Lecture 2: Nancy Kerkvliet, Ph.D.—Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon
“Immunoregulation by the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AHR)”
1:55–2:15 Lecture 3: Imad Damaj, Ph.D.—Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
“Differential Contribution of Neuronal Nicotinic Acetycholine Receptors to Nicotine Dependence: Recent Progress and Emerging Opportunities”
2:15–2:35 Lecture 4: Mohan Sopori, Ph.D.—Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM
“Role of GABA Receptors in Cigarette Smoke/Nicotine-induced Chronic Bronchitis”
2:35–3:00 Coffee/Tea Break
3:00–4:40  PM SYMPOSIUM #6:Epigenomic Regulation in Neuroscience and HIV Infection
Session Co-Chairs:Diane Lawrence, Ph.D.—National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health
Howard Fox, Ph.D., M.D.—University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
Symposium Talks:
3:00–3:20 Lecture 1: Yi Sun, Ph.D.—Associate Academic Director, Broad Center for Stem Cell Research, Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, UCLA
“DNA Methylation and Neuronal Differentiation”
3:20–3:40 Lecture 2: Lisa Monteggia, Ph.D.—Department of Psychiatry, UT Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas
“Role of Histone Deacetylases (HDACS) in Regulating Synapse Function“
3:40–4:00 Lecture 3: Melanie Ott, M.D., Ph.D.—Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco
“Regulation of HIV Transcription by Tat Methylation”
4:00–4:20 Lecture 4: Sowmya V. Yelamanchili, Ph.D.—University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
“Dysregulation of Neuronal MicroRNA Expression in SIV/HIV Associated Neurological Disease”
4:20–4:40 Lecture 5: Kenneth Witwer—Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
“IFNβ-modulating MicroRNAs in Lentivirus-associated CNS Disease”
7:00–10:00 PM EVENING BANQUET AND AWARDS CEREMONY
Hosted by Toby Eisenstein, Ph.D.—incoming SNIP President
Special Dinner Presentation: Patricia Molina, M.D., Ph.D.—Louisiana State University Health Science Center, New Orleans, LA
“Alcohol, Drugs of Abuse, and HIV: Beyond Risk Factors”
Meeting Adjourned!
Sunday, April 18, 2010—Departure Day
INVITED SPEAKER ABSTRACTS
Gene Therapy: A Potential Approach to Eradicate HIV Infection. D An1, S Shimizu1, P Hong1, B Arumugam1, L Pokomo1, J Boyer1, N Koizumi1, K Kittipongdaja1, A Chen1, G Bristol1, Z Galic1, J Zack1, O Yang1, I Chen1, B Lee1; 1UCLA AIDS Institute, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095
Stable inhibition of the HIV-1 co-receptor CCR5 expression holds great promise for controlling and potentially eradicating HIV-1 infection in patients. We succeeded in stably knocking down human CCR5 cell surface expression by a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) in a human bone marrow/liver/thymus (BLT) transplanted mouse model. We delivered a potent shRNA against CCR5 into human CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor/stem cells (HPSCs) by lentiviral vector transduction. We transplanted vector-transduced human HPSCs solidified with matrigel and a thymus segment under the mouse kidney capsule. Vector-transduced autologous CD34+ cells were subsequently injected in the irradiated mouse intended to create systemic reconstitution. CCR5 expression was down-regulated in human T cells and monocytes/macrophages in systemic lymphoid tissues, including gut associated lymphoid tissue, the major site of HIV-1 replication. The shRNA-mediated CCR5 knockdown had no apparent adverse effects on T cell development as assessed by polyclonal T cell receptor V? family development and naïve/memory T cell differentiation. CCR5 knockdown in the secondary transplanted mice suggested the potential of long-term hematopoietic reconstitution by the shRNA-transduced HSPCs. CCR5 tropic HIV-1 infection was effectively inhibited in mouse-derived human splenocytes ex vivo. These results demonstrate that lentiviral vector delivery of shRNA into human HPSCs could stably down-regulate CCR5 in systemic lymphoid organs in vivo. Supported by NHLBI 1R01HL086409, NCI CA086306, UCLA CFAR NIAID AI028697
Dopamine Exacerbates CNS Inflammation and HIV Infection. JW Berman1; 1Departments of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461
Many HIV-infected substance abusers have exacerbated and accelerated CNS disease and subsequent dysfunction. Drugs of abuse, including cocaine and methamphetamine, cause increased levels of extracellular dopamine. Thus, we examined dopamine-mediated alterations in CNS functions that could contribute to the neuropathology characteristic of HIV-infected drug abusers. We demonstrate that dopamine significantly increases chemokine-mediated T cell transmigration across our tissue culture model of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and that dopamine alters BBB tight junction proteins that could result in increased CNS inflammation. Several other genes whose products participate in barrier function and inflammation were altered by dopamine, as demonstrated by gene arrays. Additionally, we show that dopamine increases HIV infection of human macrophages, the major cell target of HIV in the brain, through activation, in part, of the D2 receptor This results in an increased number of HIV-infected cells. Preliminary data indicate that one of the mechanisms by which dopamine increases infection is by increased viral entry. Dopamine alters several signaling molecules in macrophages, including MAP kinase pathways, which also may mediate macrophage dysfunction in the HIV-infected brain. Thus, we demonstrate several mechanisms by which elevated levels of extracellular dopamine in the CNS in the context of HIV infection contribute to the exacerbated neuropathogenesis and subsequent cognitive impairment in the drug-abusing, HIV-infected population. Supported by NIDA
Excessive Alcohol Consumption: An Inflammatory Disease?YA Blednov1, RA Harris1; 1Waggoner Center for Alcohol and Addiction Research, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712
Genes classified as “immune/stress response” form one of the most prominent functional groups with differential expression in frontal cortex of alcoholics in comparison to non-alcoholics (Liu et al. 2006). In addition, our ongoing analysis of brain gene expression in mice that are genetically predisposed to high alcohol consumption indicates an important role for pro-inflammatory mediators in regulating alcohol intake (Mulligan et al. 2006). We hypothesized that the normal functioning of the immune system maintains drinking at “social” levels, whereas activation of the immune system promotes excessive alcohol consumption. This is based on our new findings that null mutant mice with impaired immunity drink less alcohol (Blednov et al., RSA poster 2009). Our initial studies with C57Bl/6 inbred mice have shown that injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 1 mg/kg, i.p.) promotes alcohol consumption. Such effect on alcohol consumption was long-lasting and was observed at least 3 month after LPS treatment. This increase of alcohol intake could not be explained by changes in taste (sweet or bitter) perception or olfactory recognition of ethanol. However, the lack of CD14, a key component of the TLR4 signaling pathway (CD14 knockout mice), completely prevented the increase of alcohol intake after treatment with LPS. Our results show that activation of an immune response, via TLR4, produces a long-lasting increase in voluntary alcohol intake even in a strain of mice with genetically elevated alcohol intake. Supported by NIAAA/AA U01 13520-INIA Project; AA06399
Ethanol-TLR Synergistic Induction of Innate Immune Responses Leads to Persistent Brain Neuroinflammatory Gene Induction, Oxidative Stress, and Neurodegeneration. FT Crews1; 1Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7178
Alcoholic pathology includes liver disease, neurodegeneration, and dysfunctional cytokine cascades. Ethanol (5 g/kg, i.g., daily for 10 days) pretreatment followed by LPS, a TLR4 agonist, increases liver, serum, and brain levels of TNF-alpha, MCP-1, IL-6, as well as other protease and oxidase innate immune genes and microglial markers. Similarly, ethanol pretreatment preceding poly I:C, TLR3 viral mimetic, increases TNF-alpha (345%), IL-1-beta (331%), IL-6 (167%), and MCP-1(190%) compared with poly I:C alone treatment. Brain innate immune gene induction persists long after systemic levels decline. A component of the brain innate immune response involves NOX, an enzyme that produces reactive oxygen species (ROS). Ethanol-LPS or poly I:C increases NOX, production of ROS, microglial activation, and neurodegeneration as shown by caspase-3 activation and Fluoro-Jade B staining. ROS in neurons showing neurotoxicity are blocked by diphenyleneiodonium, a non-specific NOX inhibitor. Dopamine neurons are followed over long periods. Persistent brain ROS following transient systemic insults show no marked change until at 7 months, a 23% decrease progresses to 47% by 10 months. Motor deficits at 10 months are reversed by l-DOPA. NOX-deficient (NOX−/−) mice do not show TH neuron loss. Markers of neuroinflammation are broadly reduced, including Iba1-activated microglial morphology, levels of TNF-alpha, and other pro-inflammatory genes. Together, these results suggest that ethanol induction of innate immune genes, particularly NOX, leads to ROS and neurotoxicity. Supported by NIAAA
Differential Contribution of Neuronal Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors to Nicotine Dependence: Recent Progress and Emerging Opportunities. MI Damaj1; 1Pharmacology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298
Nicotine dependence (ND), a major public health challenge, is a complex and multifactorial behavior. Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) can regulate the activity of many neurotransmitter pathways throughout the central nervous system and are considered to the primary site of action in the brain for nicotine, the major addictive component of tobacco smoke. nAChRs consist of five membrane-spanning subunits (alpha and beta isoforms) that can associate in various combinations to form functional nAChR ion channels. Until recently, most research on the role of nAChRs in ND has focused on alpha4 beta2*, and not much attention has been paid to the possible contribution of the other brain nAChR subunits. This situation has changed dramatically in the last several years during which intensive research using the genetically modified mice and human genetics analysis have addressed the issue. In this presentation, we highlight recent findings regarding the contribution of non-alpha4/beta2-subunit containing nAChRs to ND based on several lines of evidence: (1) human genetics studies, (2) differential pharmacological and biochemical properties of receptors containing these subunits, and (3) evidence from genetically manipulated mice. Combining neurobiological genetic and behavioral perspectives, we suggest that ND is not linked to one or two specific nAChR subtypes but to several. In particular, the alpha3, alpha5-6, and beta3-4 nAChR subunits may play a much more pivotal role in the neurobiology of ND than was appreciated earlier. Supported by NIH
Endocannabinoids and Related Lipid Mediators: A General Introduction and Emerging Role in Neuroinflammatory Disorders. V Di Marzo1; 1Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Pozzuoli, 80078
The identification of the psychoactive constituent of Cannabis, delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, led to the cloning of the G-protein-coupled cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors for this compound and to the isolation and characterization of their endogenous agonists, the endocannabinoids (eCBs), of which anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) are the two most studied representatives. CB receptors, eCBs, and enzymes controlling eCB levels constitute the eCB system (eCBS). CB1 receptors are very abundant in neurons, whereas CB2 receptors are mostly found in immune cells and become over-expressed in the brain during neuroinflammatory disorders. The eCBs, and 2-AG in particular, act via CB1 as local neuromodulators and participate in the retrograde control of synaptic activity. On the other hand, CB2 receptors modulate microglia and astrocyte migration and the release of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. The eCBS plays a major and possibly dual role in neuroinflammatory disorders. They first become activated following excitotoxicity and neuronal damage in an attempt to exert a pro-homeostatic, neuroprotective function and possibly regulate microglial and astrocyte activity in a site- and time-specific manner. However, during neurodegenerative disorders with self-feeding inflammatory responses, as in the late phases of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, the eCBS becomes dysregulated and start contributing to the symptoms. These observations might open the way to the therapeutic use of both “enhancers” and “curbers” of eCB levels and action in these disorders.
NanoART Manufacture, Delivery, and Pharmacokinetics for Optimizing Drug Adherence. HE Gendelman1, AV Kabanov2, HS Fox1, C Fletcher2, Y Alnouti1, S Swindells1, RL Mosley1, G Kanmogne1, L Poluektova1, M Boska1, A Anderson1, A Nowacek1, J McMillan1; 1Colleges of Medicine and 2Pharmacy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5880
While antiretroviral therapy (ART) leads to improved morbidity and reduced mortality for HIV-1-infected people, a major limitation rests in the need for lifelong daily regimens. Suboptimal adherence causes increased risk of treatment failure. Drug abuse disorders correlate with such sporadic adherences commonly resulting in accelerated HIV disease progression. Providers are often reluctant to prescribe ART to patients who abuse or are addicted to drugs because of concerns about the promotion of virologic resistance. These risk factors often result in poor treatment outcomes. The advent of slow-release ART (ritonavir, indinavir, efavirenz, atazanovir, and efavirenz) will positively impact these concerns. Thus, our laboratories are developing antiretroviral nanoparticles (nanoART) that are carried within circulating immunocytes and delivered to virus target tissues. Cell-based nanoART can travel to sites of inflammation and release drug slowly with limited tissue toxicities. We posit that such a drug delivery system, if realized, can revolutionize ART treatment outcomes particularly those within the nervous system. This lecture describes works conducted in our laboratories demonstrating “proof of concept” in that a single nanoART dose can elicit high-sustained tissue and plasma drug levels in the reticuloenthelial system and brain. NanoART can be taken up within minutes by circulating monocytes and released in tissues for more than 2 weeks. This process is monitored by cell biologic, pharmacologic, virologic, and molecular testing and shows potential for human use. Supported by NINDS, NIDA, and NIMH
Longitudinal Analysis of Circulating Cytokines in a Monkey Model of Chronic Alcohol Self-Administration. KA Grant1, WM Freeman2, KE Vrana2; 1Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health & Sciences University, Portland, OR 97006, 2Department of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033
Alcohol abuse and alcoholism is the third major cause of preventable death in the USA. Heavy alcohol consumption alters immune system function, but a complete characterization of these changes is not yet known. Studies with human subjects are limited due to an unknown pre-alcohol state and quantifying total alcohol consumption. Animal models help bridge this gap. Here, we report on ten adult male cynomolgus monkeys that were induced to drink ethanol with a standard procedure and given over 12 months of daily sessions with the choice of drinking ethanol (4%, w/v, in water) or water for 22 h/day. Daily mean intakes were 2.8 g/kg (about 12 drinks/day), and mean blood ethanol levels 7 h after the onset of the session was 102 mg/dl. In a directed proteomic screening approach, Luminex technology was used to query 90 different protein and peptides, including cytokines (Rules Based Medicine, Austin TX). Sixty of the 90 proteins were detected using the human assay. Of these, 15 cytokines changed significantly over the course of drinking, measured at baseline, post-induction, 6 months, and 12 months of 22 h/day access to ethanol. Some, such as IL-7 and IL-13, were increased, whereas most were decreased. Furthermore, cytokines had different “threshold doses” for change, with some altered during the low doses consumed during induction and others requiring 12 months of heavy drinking to be significantly changed. Overall, the data suggest a complex effect of chronic alcohol drinking on circulating cytokines, most likely involving pathological changes in liver, heart, bone, and brain. Supported by National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism AA 13510, 13641, 16613
Critical Role of TLR4 Response in Ethanol-Induced Microglia Activation and Neuroinflammation. C Guerri1, S Fernandez-Lizarbe1, S Alfonso-Loeches1, M Pascual1, M Pascual-Mora1; 1Cell Pathology/ Principe Felipe Research Center, Principe Felipe Research Center, Valencia, Spain 46012
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in the innate immune response. Activation of TLRs triggers the stimulation of glia, production of inflammatory mediators, neuroinflammatory damage, and neurodegeneration. Alcohol abuse induces brain damage and can sometimes lead to neurodegeneration. We recently found that ethanol induces microglia activation and phagocytosis to trigger the production of inflammatory mediators which cause neuronal death. We showed that TLR4 is critical for ethanol-induced inflammatory signaling in microglial cells since knockdown of TLR4 by either using siRNA or by using cells from TLR4-deficient mice abolished the activation of MAPKs and NFkappaB pathways and the production of inflammatory mediators by microglia. Our recent results in mice show that chronic ethanol intake by wild-type mice up-regulates CD11b (microglial marker) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (astrocyte marker) and increases caspase-3 activity, iNOS, COX-2, and several cytokines in cerebral cortex. The deficiency of TLR4 (TLR4−/− mice) protects against ethanol-induced glial activation, hampering the induction of inflammatory mediators and of apoptosis. These findings not only provide the first evidence for the critical role of the TLR4 response in ethanol-induced neuroinflammation but also new insight into the mechanisms participating in ethanol-induced brain injury and possible neurodegeneration. Supported by MCI, SAF 2006-02178 and SAF 2009-07503
Coordinated Astroglial and Microglial Actions Mediate the Synergistic Inflammatory and Neurodegenerative Effects of Opioids in HIV-1 Encephalitis. KF Hauser1, S Zou2, ML Block2, AJ Bruce-Keller3, PE Knapp2; 1Dept. Pharmacology & Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298-0613, 2Dept. Anatomy & Neurobiology, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298-0613, 3Pennington Biomedical Research Center, LSU, Baton Rouge, LA 70808
Opioids reportedly exacerbate HIV encephalitis (HIVE). We find that morphine enhances the neurotoxicity of Tat and gp120 in vitro and observe that this relates to the presence of glia. Opioids can exacerbate viral protein-induced cytokine and/or oxyradical production uniquely in glia (astroglia and microglia). To assess the role of glia in mediating the interactive neurotoxicity, neurons were cultured alone or with glia enriched in astrocytes from wild-type or mu opioid receptor (MOPr) null mice. Cell culture paradigms included (1) transwell cultures with glia physically separated from neurons; (2) neurons and glia physically separated by specific distances; and (3) co-cultures with neurons and glia in contact. Results showed that (1) HIV Tat or gp120 were intrinsically neurotoxic irrespective of glial proximity, while (2) morphine-enhanced Tat/gp120 neurotoxicity was entirely dependent on proximity to glia, and (3) the synergistic neurotoxicity was abolished when neurons were cultured with MOPr null glia. Thus, morphine’s ability to potentiate Tat or gp120-induced neurotoxicity seems completely dependent upon the presence of MOPr+ glia. We propose that opioids and HIV-1 Tat/gp120 act synergistically to directly destabilize glial function and that aberrant glia-neuron signaling causes neuron injury and dysfunction. Our results provide insight into the cellular basis by which opioids exacerbate HIVE. MOPr-expressing glia, and not neurons, may be the most logical targets for therapeutic intervention for HIV–opioid abuse comorbidity. Supported by NIH NIDA DA19398, DA18633
Functional Proteomic Analyses of Cd4+T Lymphocyte Surveillance of the HIV-1 Infected Macrophage. XY Huang1, YY Zeng2, HE Gendelman1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5800, 2Institute for Tissue Transplantation & Immunology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, P.R. China 510632
Macrophages orchestrate immune responses that include microbial clearance, presentation of antigens, and secretion of bioactive molecules. Paradoxically, they also act as reservoirs and vehicles for microbial pathogen dissemination including HIV. Moreover, macrophages, as biological response modifiers, influence disease progression. We demonstrated that both effector T cells (Teff) and regulatory T cells (Treg) affect neuroAIDS. Treg inhibits macrophage activation, enhances apoptosis, and reduces viral production. Teff showed contrary effects except for killing infected macrophage. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms for these effects, we used iTRAQ to study quantitative changes in the proteome of virus-infected macrophages during cell–cell interactions with Teff or Treg. In these studies, HIV-1/VSV pseudotypes were used to infect murine bone marrow macrophages. Expectedly, both Teff and Treg modulated virus-infected macrophage proteins associated with cell structure, metabolism, and redox biology. Surprisingly, they enhanced virus-specific immune response by upregulation of interferon-inducible proteins (GBP2, STAT1, and ISG15). HIV-1 infection triggered caspase-1 activation. This response was enhanced by Teff and attenuated by Treg, resulting in pyroptosis and apoptosis, respectively. Taken together, we posit that Treg possess regulatory and effector functions for virus-infected macrophages. Our results challenge the dogma that Treg functions exclusively as suppressor and provide undisclosed mechanisms of adaptive immune surveillance during HIV-1 infection.
Nanomedicines for Polypeptide Delivery to CNS. AV Kabanov1, WA Banks2, EV Batrakova1, MC Zimmerman1, IH Zucker1; 1Center for Drug Delivery and Nanomedicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5830, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63106
Polypeptides can positively affect outcomes of central nervous system (CNS)-related diseases, but their entry into the brain is commonly restricted. One example is leptin, a candidate for treatment of epidemic obesity that has failed. A major cause of its failure is unfavorable pharmacokinetics and peripheral resistance—loss of leptin ability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and so reach its receptors in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus. We produced a conjugate of leptin with Pluronic P85 (P85-LepA) that has a long half-life, is enzymatically resistant in blood and brain, and retains biological activity. The P85-LepA crosses the BBB by a mechanism independent of the leptin transporter and was shown to be effective in the ob/ob mouse and mice with diet-induced obesity. Therefore, P85-LepA may be effective when normal transport of leptin across BBB is impaired. Another example is RedOx enzymes, such as Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1), which have potential to mitigate oxidative stress in CNS. We incorporated SOD1 into polyion complexes with cationic block copolymers. Such complexes (nanozymes) were shown to increase stability, circulation half-life, and brain delivery of active SOD1 after peripheral administration. The intracarotid injection of SOD1 nanozyme greatly attenuates AngII pressor response in conscious rabbits after chronic heart failure. Therefore, SOD1 nanozymes have potential for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases associated with the dysregulation of brain angiotensinergic signaling, particularly hypertension and chronic heart failure. Supported by National Institutes of Heath (RO1 NS051335, 1P20RR021937)
Enhanced Anti-influenza Immune Responses are Associated with Targeted Deletion of Both Cannabinoid Receptors, CB1 and CB2. N Kaminski1, P Karmaus1, W Chen1, R Crawford1, B Kaplan1; 1Pharmacology & Toxicology, Integrative Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824
The focus of these studies was to ascertain the role of cannabinoid receptors (CB) in the antiviral immune response to a single non-lethal challenge with A/PR8/34, an H1N1 strain of influenza, by comparing mice null for both CB1 and CB2 (KO) to wild-type (WT) C57Bl/6. KO mice infected with PR8 exhibited markedly less viral H1 mRNA in lungs compared to WT, suggesting more rapid clearance of virus in KO mice. Flow cytometric analysis of BALF on day 7 also showed significantly greater numbers of CD8+ T cells in PR8-infected KO versus WT mice. Based on these observations, times earlier than 7 days post-infection were investigated. Consistent with preliminary observations, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) contained a greater immune cell infiltrate in KO mice compared to WT, with the highest magnitude at day 3 post-challenge. Differential staining of BALF showed an increase in both macrophages and neutrophils, with the latter being statistically significant in KO compared to WT. In lung tissue, CD69 surface expression and IFN-gamma intracellular staining was increased in CD4+ T cells from KO as compared to WT on day 3. In addition, the CD8+ T cell response was more rapid as determined by the presence of CD8+ IFN-gamma+ as early as day 3 in KO versus day 7 in WT post-influenza challenge. In conclusion, the magnitude of CD4+ T cell and inflammatory responses was greater and CD8+ T cell response was accelerated in KO compared to WT mice. Supported by NIH DA07908 and NIH DA12740
Immunoregulation by the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AHR). NI Kerkvliet1; 1Environmental & Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331
AhR is a cytoplasmic ligand-binding protein that partners with nuclear ARNT (Hif1b) to function as a transcription factor regulating gene expression. Activation of the AhR by its most potent ligand, TCDD, results in severe immune suppression in mice that has recently been associated with the induction of regulatory T cells (Treg). AHR-induced Tregs appear to underlie the potent suppression of the graft vs. host (GVH) response in TCDD-treated mice as well as suppression of autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes in NOD mice and EAE. Current studies are focused on identifying the genes that are regulated by AhR activation in CD4+ T cells treated with TCDD that drive the Treg pathway. A genetic fingerprint of this pathway will provide mechanistic insight into the signaling pathways that underlie the potent immunosuppressive activity of TCDD and related chemicals of concern due to environmental exposure. This fingerprint will also be useful for identifying alternative AHR ligands that might find clinical application in the treatment of immune-mediated diseases. Supported by NIH/NIEHS
Engineering HIV-Specific T Cell Immunity. SG Kitchen1, Z Galic1, A Lieberman1, A Young1, J Kim1, M Bennett1, OO Yang1, JA Zack1; 1UCLA AIDS Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has a profound effect on lymphoid cells in an infected individual. A therapeutic strategy that contributes to the antiviral immune response and allows protection and reconstitution of these cells could have important implications in the treatment and clinical prognosis of an infected individual. We seek to genetically manipulate human hematopoietic stem cells to target HIV-infected cells following their differentiation into mature CTL. To perform this, we have examined the ability of human stem cells to generate mature CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) that express an anti-HIV T cell receptor (TCR). We have utilized a TCR specific for the SL9 peptide, a conserved region in the HIV gag protein sequence. To demonstrate that a “transgenic” TCR can function in the context of human cells, CD34+ human hematopoietic progenitor cells were genetically modified and allowed to develop in humanized mice. We determined that the expression of the anti-HIV TCR allows gag-specific tetramer binding and induces preferential lineage commitment towards CD8+ mature thymocytes. In addition, we demonstrate that these cells can functionally respond to SL9 peptide stimulation. This system has demonstrated that a human transgenic TCR can undergo T lineage development and produce an antigen-specific, functional CTL. These results have strong implications in the use of this technology to engineer the human immune response to combat viral infections and suggest that genetic engineering via stem cells may allow tailoring of the immune response. Supported by CIRM, NIH
A Combined Biobehavioral Intervention for HIV Prevention in Methamphetamine-Using Men Who Have Sex with Men. RJ Landovitz1, G Inzhakova2, S Shoptaw1, CJ Reback2; 1Center for Clinical AIDS Research & Education, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90049, 2Friends Community Center, Friends Research Institute, Los Angeles, CA 90028
Background: In Los Angeles, methamphetamine (MA)-using men who have sex with men (MSM) are 2.4 times more likely to acquire HIV infection (8%) than non-using MSM (3%). Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) after sexual exposure to HIV has not been studied among MA-using MSM due to historically poor medical adherence. This study provided a drug reduction intervention for MA-using MSM at high risk for HIV infection to facilitate adherence to PEP following exposure to HIV. A prospective single-arm, open-label, pilot safety and feasibility study using contingency management (CM, voucher-based incentives to support MA abstinence) with PEP to prevent seroconversion among MA-using MSM. Between March 2009 and January 2010, 32 participants enrolled. Mean age was 35 (SD 7.7), race/ethnicity was mostly Caucasian/White (60%), or Latino (30%), the majority identified as gay (87%), most had a high school diploma or bachelor’s degree (90%), and most earned less than $15,000 per year (57%). Participants reported elevated historical rates of chlamydia (33%), gonorrhea (40%), and syphilis (20%). At baseline, participants had high rates of chronic hepatitis B (7%), syphilis (7%), gonorrhea (7% pharyngeal; 3% rectal), and chlamydia (7% rectal; 3% urethral). Twenty-one of the 32 participants (66%) initiated PEP. Median time from high-risk exposure to PEP initiation was 37 h (range, 14–68). Among evaluable participants (n = 19), mean medication adherence was 75% (SD 37.7). Although a small sample size, no incidence seroconversions were observed. Supported by Los Angeles County Office of AIDS Programs and Policy/NIDA K23DA026308
Targeting Endocannabinoid Catabolic Enzymes to Treat Inflammatory Pain. AH Lichtman1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0613
The endocannabinoid system consists of the naturally occurring ligands anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG), enzymes regulating endocannabinoid biosynthesis and catabolism, and CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors. Inhibition of fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) or monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) leads to increased levels of AEA and 2-AG, respectively, and concomitant reductions of nociception in a variety of pain models (e.g., neuropathic and visceral). Here, I will present new research testing the hypothesis that FAAH and MAGL can also be targeted to reduce nociceptive responses in an inflammatory pain model in which LPS is administered into the mouse hind paw. Genetic or pharmacological blockade of FAAH dampened nociception to thermal or mechanical stimulation of the inflamed paw. These anti-hyperalgesic actions required the activation of cannabinoid receptors, strongly suggesting an important role of AEA in reducing inflammatory nociception. Surprisingly, inhibition of MAGL failed to reduce LPS-induced nociceptive behavior despite the fact that 2-AG brain levels were elevated approximately tenfold. These results contrast with previous research implicating the involvement of both endogenous cannabinoids in dampening nociceptive responses in other pain assays. Accordingly, this is the first evidence suggesting that anandamide and 2-AG play distinct roles in reducing inflammatory pain. More generally, these findings suggest that FAAH represents a more viable target than MAGL for developing endocannabinoid-based medications to treat inflammatory pain. Supported by NIDA P01DA009789, P01DA017259, P50DA005274, R01DA015197, and T32DA007027
Molecular Mechanism of Decreased Adult Neurogenesis in the HIV-Infected Brain. SA Lipton1, YJ Kang1, CW Brechtel4, E Siviglia1, R Russo1, A Clemente1, A Harrop1, S Mckercher1, M Kaul1, Z Huang1, SI Okamoto1; 1Center for Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Res., Burnham Inst. for Medical Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, 2Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 3Molecular and Integrative Neurosciences Department, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 4Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093
HIV-1 or gp120 can activate microglia/macrophages in the brain. These monocytoid cells then release molecules that contribute to neuronal apoptosis via an NMDA receptor-mediated pathway. Additionally, we recently found that gp120 can impair neuronal stem/progenitor cells in the brain. Impaired neurogenesis has been observed in the adult human brain in several neurodegenerative diseases, including HIV-associated dementia (HAD). Similarly, we found decreased proliferation of adult neural progenitor cells (aNPCs) in the hippocampus of gp120-transgenic mice, thus inhibiting generation of new neurons. We demonstrated that gp120 arrests cell cycle progression of aNPCs at the G1 phase via a molecular cascade mediated by a cell cycle checkpoint kinase. Prior work had shown that checkpoint kinases were involved in the DNA damage response; in a completely unexpected manner, we found that checkpoint kinases can also inhibit stem cell proliferation, importantly, in the absence of overt DNA damage. The detailed signaling pathway consists of: gp120/CXCR4 receptor interaction; p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK); MAPK-activated protein kinase 2 (a cell cycle checkpoint kinase); and Cdc25B/C. Our findings define a molecular mechanism that compromises adult neurogenesis in neurodegenerative disorders. Additionally, this pathway may provide drug targets to treat neurodegenerative diseases, including HAD. Recently, we developed novel agents, termed synthetically and modularly modified (SMM)-chemokine analogs. SMM-chemokines can abrogate the gp120-induced proliferation deficit of aNPCs. Supported by NIH R01 EY09024
Use of Targeting Ligands to Deliver Therapeutic Agents to Pathologic Cells. PS Low1; 1Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907
We have developed methods to target drugs specifically to pathologic cells, thereby avoiding collateral toxicity to healthy cells. To achieve this specificity, we have searched for ligands that bind selectively to diseased cells and have linked these ligands to therapeutic agents to promote their selective uptake by the pathologic cells. In the case of cancer, we have exploited up-regulation of the folate receptor on many malignant cells to target the following pharmaceuticals to cancer tissue: (1) protein toxins, (2) chemotherapeutic agents, (3) gene therapy vectors, (4) siRNAs, (5) radioimaging agents, (6) MRI contrast agents, (7) liposomes with entrapped drugs, (8) radiotherapeutic agents, (9) immunotherapeutic agents, and (9) enzyme constructs for prodrug therapy. Current clinical trials of four of our folate-linked drugs demonstrate that the folate receptor targeting strategy holds great promise for increasing drug potency while reducing drug toxicity. We have also developed imaging and therapeutic agents that target prostate-specific membrane antigen in prostate cancer. A brief summary of laboratory, preclinical, and clinical results with these targeted agents will be presented. In other areas of medicine, we have developed drug targeting strategies for the imaging and therapy of rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, atherosclerosis, diabetes and ischemia reperfusion injury, etc. Finally, we are beginning to explore uses of similar ligand targeting methods to deliver drugs selectively into pathogenic microbes. Several examples of these will be discussed. Supported by DOD, Endocyte Inc.
Role of HDACs in Regulating Synapse Function. LM Monteggia1; 1Department of Psychiatry, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9070
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are nuclear enzymes that trigger long-term changes in gene expression by removing acetyl groups from key histone residues, thus promoting an inactive chromatin state. HDACs also regulate several developmental processes as well as plasticities in mature tissue and are widely expressed in the brain, although the role of individual HDACs in the CNS is largely unknown. In the last decade, several studies have shown that the structural assembly of synapses can be accomplished in a rapid time frame. Nevertheless, there is also ample evidence that most nascent synapses formed during early development are not fully functional and respond poorly to presynaptic action potentials. In this presentation, we will discuss our recent findings that the activity of HDACs underlies this commonly observed delay in functional maturation of excitatory synapses during development. Our results show that pharmacological inhibition of HDACs, as well as genetic knockdown of HDACs1&2, during early synaptic development results in a robust facilitation of excitatory synapse maturation and a modest increase in synapse numbers. Furthermore, these findings pinpoint class I HDACs (HDACs1&2) as the primary players in this suppression of synaptic function. In contrast, we also found that this inhibitory role of HDACs in synapse regulation was restricted to early development as in mature neurons, a specific decrease in HDAC2 levels alone attenuated basal excitatory neurotransmission without a significant change in the numbers of detectable nerve terminals. Supported by NIMH
Marijuana Use Worsens Cognitive Function But Does Not Change CSF Immune Markers in Patients Without HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorder (HAND). SM Munsaka1, U Feger1, T Ernst1, V Nerurkar2, EM Volper2, H Nakama2, L Chang1; 1Neuroscience and MR Research Program, University of Hawaii, John A Burns School of Medicine, Honolulu, HI 96813, 2Department of Tropical Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813
Marijuana is the leading drug abused by HIV-infected individuals and is often prescribed to them for medical reasons. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the major psychoactive ingredient in marijuana, may lead to cognitive deficits and may shift the balance of cytokine or chemokine expression from TH1 to TH2. We studied 20 HIV subjects with normal cognition and had current (within last 6 months) or without current (last use >1 year) daily marijuana use. Each was administered a battery of neuropsychological tests that had been used in numerous HIV studies, localized brain proton MR spectroscopy in four brain regions, and had lumbar punctures to collect cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for measurements of a set of cytokines using Luminex. No significant group difference was observed between HIV current and non-current marijuana smokers in the 11 measurable cytokines and chemokines (IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, FLT-3L, IP-10, MCP-1, MDC, PDGF-AA, TGF-alpha) in their CSF. Yet, current HIV+ marijuana users had significantly lower z-scores in cognitive domains for learning (p = 0.040), memory (p = 0.050), and motor function (p = 0.023), as well as lower glutamate in the basal ganglia (p = 0.05) and higher glutamate+glutamine in frontal white matter (p = 0.03). These findings suggest that poorer cognitive functions in the HIV+ marijuana users is not related to the THC-mediated alteration of expression of these cytokines and chemokines, but may be due to other mechanisms such as oxidative stress or changes in neurotransmitter function. Supported by NIMH (R01 MH61427); NIDA (K24-DA16170); NINDS and NIDA (U54NS56883)
Multifunctional Magnetic Nanocarrier for Drug Targeting to Brain. MN Nair1; 1Immunology / INIP / College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199
Opiates act synergistically with HIV-1 proteins to potentiate the HIV-related neurotoxicity that leads to the development of NeuroAIDS. Currently, no effective treatment exists for NeuroAIDS, which is mainly attributed to the impenetrability of therapeutic molecules across the blood–brain barrier (BBB). We herein report the development of a magnetic nanocarrier of AZT 5′-triphosphate (active form of AZT) and CTOP (a potent mu-opioid receptor antagonist) to deliver drugs across the BBB under the influence of an external magnetic field. The proposed nanocarrier is anticipated to simultaneously reduce NeuroAIDS and opiate addiction in HIV-1 infected subjects who are opiate users. Supported by NIDA
The Promise, Prospects, and Impact of Nanomedicine. A Nel1; 1Department of Medicine, Division of NanoMedicine, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095
NanoMedicine is the science and technology of diagnosing, treating, alleviating, and preventing disease and traumatic injury through the use of nanoscale operations in the human body. Operations at the nanoscale (one billionth of a meter) are incredibly powerful because all the interactive components and energy are concentrated on the surface of the material and therefore strengthen its interactivity. If an engineered nanomaterial is placed in juxtaposition with a biological component (which often assumes nanoscale dimensions, e.g., proteins and cellular organelles), new interactions are created wherein the inorganic nanomaterial can communicate with the biological substrate to influence the function of the protein or the cellular organelle. For instance, the engineered material could interrogate the biological substrate to find out if it is damaged and then relay that information to a remote sensor via an optical or magnetic signal on the nanomaterial surface. This could allow the physician to diagnose a disease while it is still at the molecular level and to send a nanomaterial delivery device back into the body to fix the damage or to deliver a drug that can assist in healing. Thus, the foundations of NanoMedicine include the use of nanomaterials and nanodevices to perform nano-imaging, early disease diagnosis, and delivery of therapeutic agents. I will illustrate this aspect by describing some of the research in the UCLA Nanomachine Center where we are developing nanovalve-controlled mesoporous silica nanoparticles for cancer drug delivery. Supported by NCI, NIEHS
Regulation of HIV Transcription by Tat Methylation. M Ott1, S Pagans1, S Kauder1, S Schroder1, K Kaehlcke1, W Dormeyer2, R Trievel3, E Verdin1, M Schnolzer3; 1University of California, San Francisco, Gladstone Institute for Virology and Immunolog, San Francisco, CA 94158, 2German Cancer Research Center, Functional Proteome Analysis, Heidelberg, D-69120 , 3University of Michigan, Department of Biological Chemistry, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Posttranslational modifications of the HIV-1 Tat protein have emerged as critical regulatory mechanisms that fine-tune interactions of the viral transactivator with TAR RNA and cellular cofactors. We recently identified the lysine methyltransferase Set7/9 (recently renamed KMT7) as a novel co-activator of HIV transcription. Set7/9-KMT7 associates with the HIV promoter in vivo and monomethylates lysine 51, a highly conserved residue located in the RNA-binding domain of Tat. Knockdown of Set7/9-KMT7 suppresses Tat transactivation of the HIV promoter, but does not affect the transcriptional activity of methylation-deficient Tat (K51A). Set7/9-KMT7 itself binds TAR RNA and forms a complex with Tat and the positive transcription elongation factor P-TEFb. Our findings uncover novel RNA-binding properties of Set7/9-KMT7 and demonstrate a positive role of Tat methylation in the early steps of the Tat transactivation cycle.
How HIV-1 CNS Infection Can Promote Alcohol Addiction. Y Persidsky1; 1Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple Univ School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140
Our previous works demonstrated molecular mechanisms of blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption by alcohol in pathophysiologically relevant concentrations. Such mechanisms included alcohol metabolism in BMVEC causing oxidative stress, Ca2+ release, activation of myosin light chain kinase, and phosphorylation of tight junction proteins, activation of phospholipase A2 (PLA2) and cyclooxygenase (COX-2), and secretion of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). These changes increased BBB permeability in vitro and in vivo and enhanced monocyte migration across BBB, events enhancing neurotoxicity associated with HIV-1 CNS infection. Ethanol metabolism in human astrocytes enhanced generation of reactive oxygen species land secretion of prostaglandin PGE2 due to the induction of PLA2 and COX-2. Alcohol metabolism in human neurons resulted in oxidative stress and activation of NADPH/xanthine oxidase, leading to neuronal injury. Overall, alcohol promoted pro-inflammatory phenotype in different types of CNS cells. Using small animal model for HIV-1 encephalitis, we found that alcohol exposure caused significant increase in neuroinflammation and decreased antiviral responses, leading to increased viral load in the brain. Recent findings in humans and animal models suggest that alcohol induces inflammatory processes in the brain, leading to neurodegeneration. Neuroinflammation appears to promote alcohol addiction, making this finding very relevant for HIV-1 brain infection associated with chronic inflammation. Therefore, HIV-1 infection increasing neuroinflammatory responses could promote excessive drinking. Supported by NIAAA/ AA017398, AA015913
Protective Role of Synthetic Cannabinoids in Gp120-Induced Neurotoxicity. RB Rock1, S Hu1, WS Sheng1, PK Peterson1; 1Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455
Despite the therapeutic impact of anti-retroviral therapy (ART), HIV-1-associated dementia (HAD) remains a serious threat to AIDS patients, and there currently remains no specific therapy for the neurological manifestations of HIV-1. Based upon recent work that the nigrostriatal dopaminergic area is a critical brain region for the neuronal dysfunction and death seen in HAD, that synthetic cannabinoids inhibit HIV-1 expression in human microglia and suppress production of inflammatory mediators in human astrocytes, as well as a substantial literature demonstrating neuroprotective properties of cannabinoids in other systems, we tested the hypothesis that synthetic cannabinoids will protect dopaminergic neurons against the toxic effects of the HIV-1 protein gp120. Using a human midbrain cell culture model, we were able to identify the relative sensitivity of dopaminergic neurons to gp120-induced damage, evaluate the extent of neuronal damage, demonstrate the role of gp120-induced oxidative damage in this process, and also show that CB1/CB2 agonist WIN55,212-2 blunts the gp120-induced neuronal damage. Pretreatment with WIN55,212-2 also inhibited the migration of human microglial cells toward CCL2. Furthermore, in the presence of glutamate, gp120 pretreatment potentiated neurotoxicity of human cortical neuronal cultures and pretreatment with WIN55,212-2 down-regulated gp120-induced glutamate receptor activity. These results support the concept that synthetic cannabinoids are potential neuroprotective agents that may prove useful for the treatment of HIV-1-related brain disease. Supported by NIH/NIDA DA025525
The Immunopathology Associated with Cigarette Smoking: It May Be Worse Than You Think. T Rogers1, 1Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140
Long-term inhalation of tobacco smoke can result in the development of a number of disease states, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This disease is characterized by remodeling and destruction of lung tissue and a significant reduction of lung function. Some of these patients experience periods of acute exacerbation in which lung function is further reduced and hospitalization may be required. I will present results which show that exacerbation in these patients is accompanied by a substantial alteration in systemic immune competence. Results from our studies suggest that the exacerbation process is associated with immune processes which may promote a profibrotic inflammatory response. These studies support the notion that the development of acute exacerbation of COPD involves a significant change in the composition of the circulating immune system, and this may contribute to the ongoing immunopathology in the lung.
Role of GABAA Receptors in Cigarette Smoke/Nicotine-Induced Chronic Bronchitis. M Sopori1, S Gundavarapu1, JA Wilder1, HC Mishra1, J Rir-sim-ah1, S Buch2, SP Singh1, R Jaramillo1, KS Harrod1, Y Tesfaigzi1; 1Immunology Division , Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute , Albuquerque, NM 87108, 2Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198
Mucous overproduction is associated with chronic airway inflammatory diseases such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and cystic fibrosis. Moreover, HIV-positive smokers have a much higher incidence and early onset of COPD than HIV-negative smokers. We have shown that nicotine inhibits allergen-induced Th2 inflammation in the lung; surprisingly, however, nicotine upregulated mucous cell metaplasia. Recent reports suggest that GABAA receptors (GABAAR) regulate mucous production by airway epithelial cells. In the CNS, nicotine is GABAergic, and to explain the paradox of increased mucus formation under low Th2 response, we hypothesized that nicotine promoted mucus formation through upregulated expression of GABAAR, and the expression is further increased by HIV infection. To test this hypothesis, we examined the expression of GABAAR and mucus formation in normal human bronchial epithelium (NHBE) cells grown at the air–liquid interphase and exposed to nicotine and/or gp120/tat. Expression of GABAAR and mucous formation was also determined in Balb/c mice exposed to secondhand smoke (SS). Results suggest that: (a) while control mice had very low or undetectable expression of GABAAR in lung, lungs from animals exposed to secondhand cigarette smoke exhibited significantly higher expression of GABAAR and mucous formation that was further increased after allergic sensitization. (b) NHBE cells express alpha-7-, alpha-9-, and alpha-10-nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, and nicotine treatment increased GABAAR-alpha2 expression in these cells. The expression of GABAAR-alpha2 was casually related to elevated mucous cell metaplasia after IL-13 or LPS treatment and blocked by nicotinic receptor or GABAAR antagonists. (c) gp120 and tat induced GABAAR-alpha2 receptor expressions and IL-13/LPS-stimulated mucous formation in NHBEC; this response was increased further in the presence of nicotine. Thus, nicotine in cigarette smoke and HIV proteins may affect mucus formation through the upregulation of GABAARα2 receptors on the epithelial cells. Dysregulated expression of GABAAR-alpha2 receptors may influence the development of mucus-related diseases in smokers. Supported by NIDA, DOD, and Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute
SR141716A, Unexpected Actions. RF Tuma1, M Zhang1, MW Adler,1; 1Center for Substance Abuse Research, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140.
The CB1 receptor antagonist SR141716A is perhaps the most commonly used antagonist for the CB1 receptor. SR141716A has very high affinity for the CB1 receptor and very low affinity for the CB2 receptor. Therefore, because of the differences in affinity between these two well-characterized receptors, alterations in outcome following administration of SR141716A have often been interpreted as evidence of the contributions of the CB1 receptor to neuroprotective effects. However, SR141716A may modulate other receptors within the brain. Therefore, the assumption that changes seen following administrations of SR141716A are just the result of alterations in the activity of the CB1 receptor may lead to serious misinterpretations of the actions of the CB1 receptors and be the cause of numerous conflicting reports concerning the activity of this receptor. This conclusion is supported by recent studies in our laboratory indicating that SR141716A may act upon receptors other than CB1 and CB2 within the central nervous system. Results from our laboratory also provide evidence that the combined administration of SR141716A with a selective CB2 agonist may result in unique changes in vascular function following ischemia. Supported by Crain H. Neilsen Foundation #82412, NIH 1 RO1 A1084065-01A209, DA P30 13429
Impact of the Innate Immune Response on HIV-1 Infection. CH Uittenbogaart1; 1Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095
Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) is a cytokine known for its antiviral effects and has been shown to decrease HIV viral replication in vitro. Based on its antiviral effects, it has been used for the treatment of HIV infection alone or in combination with antiretroviral drugs, with mixed results. Nonetheless, a wave of IFN-alpha observed in acute infection may initially suppress viral replication, yet persistent high levels may cause pathogenesis. In addition to antiviral effects, IFN-alpha which is mainly produced by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) links the innate and adaptive immunity and is known to have immunoregulatory activities. Our hypothesis is that IFN-alpha may be important for normal functioning of the adaptive and innate immune system at low, physiologic concentrations, while it is immunosuppressive at high concentrations. Indeed, we discovered that IFN-alpha is expressed in normal thymus tissue where T cell development takes place, but that high concentrations of IFN-alpha, comparable with plasma levels in HIV-infected individuals, are indeed immunosuppressive for T cells and inhibit early steps of T cell development in the human thymus. HIV infection impairs thymic output of naïve T cells and depletes developing T cells in the thymus. A potential unifying hypothesis is that HIV-1 induces high and persistent levels of IFN-alpha which impair human T cell development and consequently peripheral T cell reconstitution. Thus, elevated levels of IFN-alpha are not correlated with control of HIV-1 infection but are likely a sign of immune activation that contributes to HIV pathogenesis. Supported by NIH/NIAID R01 AI080564
HIV Infection and Drug Abuse in the YI Ethnic Chinese of Sichuan.Z Wang1, 1Sichuan University, West China Medical College, Sichuan Center for Disease Control, People’s Republic of China. [Abstract not available at time of publication]
IFN-Beta-modulating micro-RNA in Lentivirus-Associated CNS Disease. KW Witwer1, JM Sisk1, J Liu1, L Gama1, JE Clements1; 1Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205
Interferon beta (IFN-beta) production is an early innate immune response to lentiviral infection of the CNS. In our rapid and consistent SIV/macaque model of HIV encephalitis, SIV enters the CNS within 4 days of infection, accompanied by a marked IFN-beta response. IFN-beta levels then decline when SIV enters its latent phase. The critical role of IFN-beta in the CNS antiviral response, combined with the potential for inflammatory damage associated with long-term activation, suggests that IFN-beta is subject to multiple levels of regulation. Adding to known regulatory mechanisms, we present evidence that IFN-beta expression may be tuned posttranscriptionally by microRNAs (miRNAs). We identified miRNAs with potential recognition elements in the 3′ UTR of the IFN-beta transcript using target recognition algorithms. Three macrophage-expressed miRNAs, -26a,-34a, and let-7b, appear to exert direct effects on the IFN-beta 3′ UTR in reporter assays and to modulate the levels of IFN-beta protein in primary macrophages, while miR-145 may have indirect effects. In vivo relevance is supported by differential expression of these miRNAs during the course of SIV infection and by IFN-beta-mediated upregulation of several IFN-beta-targeting miRNAs. We further describe the localization of miRNAs and IFN-beta mRNA in macrophages/microglia, astrocytes, and neurons during SIV infection, discussing the implications of these expression patterns for miRNA-mediated control of IFN-beta. Our results suggest the regulation of IFN-beta by miRNAs and show that miRNAs may influence HIV-associated CNS disease progression. Supported by NIH/NS055648
Inputs on Co-infection of HIV and HCV. JG Wu1, L Kang1, XS Xia2; 1State Key Laboratory of Virology and College of Li, Wuhan University, Wuhan, P.R. China 430072, 2College of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, P.R. China 650093
Both human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) are deadly pathogens to human health. Due to shared routes of transmission, co-infection is common that is unfortunately a scenario because of high risk factors of the viruses. Here, we studied the molecular mechanism involved in HIV-1/HCV co-infection with emphasis on the effect of HCV on HIV-1 replication. To gain a clinical implication for HIV-1/HCV co-infection, we analyzed 149 blood specimens derived from co-infected intravenous drug users which revealed that there was a correlation between HCV and HIV-1 viral loads (spearman’s ρ = 0.200, p < 0.05). Such correlation was confirmed by infecting pNL4-3-transfected Huh7 cells with HCV1b (R = 0.978, p < 0.05), which showed that HCV significantly enhanced HIV-1 replication in vitro. We further demonstrated that HCV NS3/4A complex stimulated HIV-1 replication through NF-KB pathway. In addition, we showed that HIV-1 Vpu protein was required for the NS3/4A-mediated activation of NF-KB. In conclusion, we demonstrated that HCV stimulates HIV-1 replication through the interaction between HCV NS3/4A complex and HIV-1 Vpu protein. Our results provided new insight in understanding the molecular mechanism of HIV-1/HCV co-infection.
Obstacles to an HIV Vaccine. OO Yang1; 1Division of Infectious Diseases, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095
More than 25 years after HIV was isolated as the causative agent of AIDS, a vaccine remains elusive. Despite increasing knowledge about the immunopathogenesis of HIV infection and multiple vaccine trials in humans, the field has been fraught with disappointment. This presentation will review the principles of immunity and likely reasons for failure of vaccine attempts and review recent vaccine trial results. Supported by NIH AI043203 and AI051970
Dysregulation of Neuronal Micro-RNA Expression in SIV/HIV-Associated Neurological Disease. SV Yelamanchili1, C Li-na1, H Xiong1, HS Fox1; 1Dept of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University Of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198
Many facets of transcriptional and translation regulation contribute to the proper functioning of the nervous system. miRNAs are small RNA molecules that serve as checkpoints in transcription and translation processes. However, the molecular basis for neuronal dysfunction found in the HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND) and its associated neuropathology, HIV encephalitis (HIVE), remains unknown. This study focused on identifying the regulation of miRNAs in the brains of monkeys and humans with SIVE/HIVE. Strikingly, a number of miRNAs were significantly increased in the infected brains and, when assessed by in situ hybridization, were abnormally expressed in neurons. Given the ability of miRNAs to modulate cellular mRNAs and proteins and thus cellular physiology, we identified for the first time that a critical neuronal transcription factor is a target of one of these miRNAs, miR-21. Functionally, miR-21 expression in neurons prolongs the opening of voltage-gated K+ channels. These findings further underscore the regulatory loop in which miRNAs function and highlight their importance in neurodegenerative research. Supported by NIH grants P30 MH062261 and R01 MH073490 in addition to Nebraska Tobacco Settlement Biomedical Research
A Cannabinoid CB2 Agonist Attenuated Leukocyte–Brain Endothelial Interaction and Blood–Brain Barrier Dysfunction Under Inflammatory Conditions. M Zhang1, S Ramirez2, Y Persidsky2, RF Tuma1; 1Department of Physiology, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, 2Deparment of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), released from Gram-negative bacteria, induces an inflammation-mediated endothelial and vascular dysfunction in various organs. Our previous studies indicated that selective CB2 receptor activation was neuroprotective through its anti-inflammatory properties. In this study, the role of a selective CB2 receptor agonist (O-1966) in LPS-induced cerebral microvascular inflammation and blood–brain barrier (BBB) function was investigated. Cranial window and intravital microscopy were used to directly observe leukocyte/endothelial interactions in mouse brain after LPS (6 mg/kg) injection. O-1966 (5 mg/kg) was given at the same time as LPS. BBB function was tested by Evans blue extravasations in vivo. Transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) was used to test the effects of O-1966 on compromised barrier integrity of human brain endothelial cells (BMVEC) after LPS stimulation in vitro. The results showed that LPS induced a dramatic increase in leukocyte rolling and adhesion (p < 0.05) on brain microvascular endothelial cells after LPS inoculation, which were significantly reduced by O-1966 (p < 0.05). Permeability of BBB (measured by Evans blue extravasations) was increased at 24 h after LPS injection (p < 0.05), and these changes were prevented by treatment with O-1966. Our preliminary data also indicate that O-1966 enhances and protects barrier function when the TEER is monitored on BMVEC. Our studies demonstrated that selective CB2 activation diminished leukocyte engagement by brain endothelium under inflammatory conditions and protected BBB.
YOUNG INVESTIGATOR TRAVEL AWARD APPLICANTS
Poster Session I
Morphine Induces Tubular Cell Autophagy Through Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Generation. S Arora1, D Salhan2, P Tandon2, PC Singhal2; 1Division of Internal Medicine, Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY 11237-0000, 2Immunology, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY 11030
Background: Morphine is a known immune modulator and has been reported to stimulate the generation of ROS in a variety of cells. ROS-induced oxidative stress leads to the accumulation of damaged organelles and proteins that, if not degraded, may injure the cell and may activate cell death pathway. We asked whether morphine promotes oxidative stress in tubular cells and, if so, whether it is associated with enhanced autophagic process. The effect of morphine on the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by cultured mouse proximal tubular cell (MRPTECs) was determined by the trafficking of redox sensor CC-1 and Mitotracker green. The kinetics of ROS metabolism was determined by measuring the intensity of the fluorescent signal from the redox-sensitive fluoroprobe (DCFDA) at multiple time points. Control and morphine-treated cells in the presence or absence of antioxidants (DPI and N-acetyl cysteine) were evaluated for the development of autophagy by staining with Monodansylcadaverine and electron microscopic studies. Cells treated under the same conditions were also evaluated for the expression of genes (beclin-1, LC3-2) associated with the induction of autophagy. Morphine stimulated tubular cell ROS generation in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Morphine not only promoted tubular cell accumulation of autophagic vacuoles but also enhanced the expression of beclin-1 and LC-3-2. Antioxidants such as DPI and N-acetyl cysteine inhibited morphine-induced tubular cell autophagy as well as the expression of the genes associated with the induction of autophagy.
HIV-1 Tat and Cocaine Cooperatively Disrupt the Neurovascular Unit: Role of PDGF/PDGF-SS Receptor Axis. C Bethel-Brown1, H Yao1, SJ Buch1; 1Department of Pharmacology & Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68137
Cocaine, abused by HIV+ patients, worsens HIV-associated neurological disease (HAND) that is accompanied by astrogliosis, BBB disruption, and neuronal degeneration. Among the various cytokines implicated in HAND, the role of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) remains elusive. This factor is critical in various pathological syndromes. We have demonstrated upregulation of PDGF in perivascular macrophages in the brains of SIV-infected macaques. Since these cells enter the brain via disrupted BBB, we hypothesized that PDGF/PDGF-beta-R may play a role in HIV-1- and cocaine-mediated compromise of the neurovascular unit of the BBB. Astrocyte foot processes in close proximity of the endothelial cells are critical in maintaining the integrity of the barrier. To explore the role of PDGF/PDGF-beta-R axis in astroglial–endothelial interaction, astrocytes were treated with HIV-1 Tat. Exposure with Tat induced the expression of PDGF RNA and protein. Reciprocally, exposure of brain endothelial cells to cocaine resulted in sigma receptor-mediated phosphorylation of PDGF-beta-R. Engagement of PDGF-beta-R, in turn, resulted in the disruption of tight junction proteins of the barrier. Signaling pathways involved in PDGF-beta-R phosphorylation include MAPK and FAK/Rho/PKC kinases. In conclusion, HIV-1 Tat and cocaine complementarily disrupt the neurovascular unit leading to enhanced transmigration of monocytes into the CNS. Supported by grants RO1 DA020392, RO1 DA027729 & Nebraska Tobacco Settlement Biomedical Research
CXCR4/DOR Interactions in the Brain of MOR-Deficient Mice.S Burbassi1, O Meucci1; 1Department of Pharmacology & Physiology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102-0000, 2Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102
Growing evidence suggests a reciprocal cross talk between chemokine and opioid receptors. Our previous data show that in vitro or in vivo treatments with mu-opioid receptor (MOR) agonists increase intracellular levels of ferritin heavy chain in neurons, which inhibits CXCR4 function. To further characterize the interaction between opioid receptors and CXCR4 in brain cells, we investigated the effect of CXCL12 in tissue/cells from MOR-deficient (MOR−/−) mice. Surprisingly, our data show a significant reduction in CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling in MOR−/− mice despite apparent increase in CXCR4 mRNA and total protein in the MOR−/− and similar surface expression of CXCR4 in WT and MOR−/− animals. As expected, very low levels of FHC were observed in MOR−/−. Interestingly, co-immunoprecipitation studies show increased association of CXCR4 with delta opioid receptors (DOR) in MOR−/−-derived brain tissue (and cultured cells), suggesting that the two receptors may form heterodimers. In line with this hypothesis, co-treatment of WT neuronal cultures or brain homogenates with CXCL12 and the DOR selective agonist SNC80 prevents CXCR4 activation by CXCL12. Moreover, pretreatment with Naltrindole (a DOR antagonist) before addition of CXCL12 restores CXCL12-induced stimulation in brain homogenates from MOR−/− animals. We conclude that in the absence of MOR, CXCR4 may form silent dimers with DOR. Overall, these findings indicate that opioid receptors play an important role in the regulation of CXCR4 via multiple mechanisms converging on inhibition of CXCR4 signaling. Supported by NIH DA15014, DA19808
Increased Brain Levels of Amyloid Beta Enhance HIV Tat Protein-Induced Blood–Brain Barrier Disruption and Transcapillary Migration of Leukocytes. L Chen1, YJ Choi1, M Toborek1; 1University of Kentucky, Neurosurgery, Lexington, KY 40536
The widespread use of anti-retroviral therapy in Western countries transformed HIV infection into a chronic disease. Because HIV-infected patients live longer, an emerging development is an increase in the older population infected with HIV. HIV-infected brains are characterized by elevated depositions of amyloid beta (A-beta); however, the interactions between A-beta and viral factors are poorly understood. The present study is based on a model of HIV protein Tat injections into double transgenic mice that express a chimeric mouse/human amyloid precursor protein (Mo/HuAPP695swe) and a mutant human presenilin 1 (PS1-dE9) and are characterized by increased A-beta deposition in the brain. Tat was administered via a vessel microport directed into the internal carotid artery. Twenty-four hours after Tat treatment, we evaluated vascular permeability, tight junction protein expression, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) activity. In addition, we monitored endothelial attachment of leukocytes through a cranial window in live animals. Tat injections resulted in increased permeability across cerebral capillaries, elevated MMP-9 activity, and enhanced disruption of tight junctions in transgenic mice as compared to littermate controls. These changes were associated with increased leukocyte attachment and their transcapillary migration, the effects that were attenuated by a specific Rho inhibitor hydroxyfasudil. These results indicate that increased brain levels of A-beta can enhance vascular toxicity and pro-inflammatory responses induced by Tat. Supported by MH63022, MH072567, NS39254
Suppressive Effect of Nicotine on the Toll-Like Receptor Signaling Pathway in Macrophages. W Cui1, SL Chang2, M Li1; 1Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22911-0000, 2Department of Biological Sciences, Seton Hall University , South Orange, NJ 07097
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are key immune receptors that mediate inflammation. Although nicotine dampens TLR signaling and exerts anti-inflammatory effects in macrophages, the underlying molecular mechanism is not fully understood. We investigated gene expression patterns in RAW264.7 macrophages treated with 5 μM nicotine and stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or poly(I:C) using a custom-designed pathway-focused RT-PCR array containing 50 genes in the TLR signaling pathway. Nicotine significantly suppressed expression of various key adaptors of two signaling pathways downstream of the TLR: the myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88)-dependent pathway and the TIR domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon-gamma (TRIF)-dependent pathway. Because more genes in the TLR3 than the TLR4 pathway were changed by nicotine, we hypothesized that the TRIF-dependent TLR3 pathway is more sensitive to nicotine than is TLR4, which triggers both TRIF-and MyD88-dependent pathways. To test this hypothesis, we examined nicotine’s effects on LPS-induced phosphorylation of P38, the early phase of which is controlled by the MyD88 pathway whereas the late phase is controlled by the TRIF pathway. We found that nicotine suppressed the late but not the early phase of P38 activation. This indicates that the suppressive effect of nicotine on TLR signaling is more dependent on the TRIF than the MyD88 pathway. Supported by NIH grant DA DA-013783 to MDL and DA-026356 to SCL and MDL
Valproic acid (VPA) as a Potential Adjunct Therapy for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-Associated Neurocognitive Disorders (HAND). DC Davidson1, S Spinelli2, A Casey3, J Bernard3, G Schifitto4, RP Phipps1, SB Maggirwar1; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642-0000, 2Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester , NY 14642, 3Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester , NY 14642, 4Department of Neurology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642
HIV-1 enters the CNS in the early stages of infection and can lead to the development of neurocognitive impairments, referred to as HAND. Infiltration of the CNS by activated macrophage is believed to be one of the largest contributing factors in the pathogenesis of HAND due to the induction of an excessive inflammatory state that leads to neuronal death. In this context, we have previously shown that levels of the inflammatory mediator soluble CD40L (sCD40L) are elevated in the plasma and CSF of HIV-1-infected, cognitively impaired individuals. Here, we demonstrate that the mood-stabilizing drug VPA reduces sCD40L levels in both plasma samples of HIV-1-infected individuals and cultured human platelets, which are the main source of circulating sCD40L. Additionally, previous reports indicate that VPA acts as an inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3b), a kinase known to be activated by the HIV-1 neurotoxin platelet-activating factor (PAF). We hypothesize that GSK3b may play a role in the release of sCD40L from platelets, a mechanism that may be blocked with VPA treatment. Consistent with this notion, here, we show that treatment of human platelets with VPA is able to reverse PAF-induced GSK3b activation. Furthermore, over-expression experiments using GSK3b mutants in human megakaryocytes suggest that GSK3b is involved in CD40L surface expression, which occurs prior to its release, in platelets. These findings offer insight into the possible mechanism of VPA in the context of neuroprotection and emphasize the potential of VPA as an adjunct therapy for HAND.
Greater CNS Penetration of Antiretroviral Medications May Contribute to Neurotoxicity in HIV Patients. FF Duennebier1, U Feger1, H Ernst1, S Nakama1, L Chang1; 1Neurscience and MR Research Program, University of HI John A. Burns School of Medicine, Honolulu, HI 96813
HIV-associated neurological disorder (HAND) remains a significant burden for HIV-infected individuals even in the era of readily available antiretroviral therapy (ART). We evaluated whether the central nervous system-penetrating effectiveness (CPE) of ART may affect brain metabolites [using localized in vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS)] and cognitive function (with a battery of neuropsychological tests) in 46 HIV+ individuals known to be stable on antiretroviral therapy for at least 6 months. We categorized HIV groups into those taking ARVs with lower (CPE < 1.5, n = 19) and higher (CPE ≥ 1.5, n = 27) CPEs. The two groups were matched by age, education, CD4 count, viral load, and Karnofsky scores. HIV subjects taking higher CPE ARVs showed trends for lower brain myoinositol in all four brain regions than those taking lower CPE ARVs (p = 0.11), with a significantly lower level in the parietal gray matter (p = 0.03). The parietal glutamate was also lower in those taking the higher CPE ARVs than those taking lower CPE ARVs (p = 0.05). Furthermore, those taking high CPE were slower on the Grooved Pegboard task (non-dominant: p = 0.04) and tended to score lower on HIV dementia scales (p = 0.12). These findings suggest that HIV patients taking high CPE ARVs have less glial activation or neuroinflammation throughout the brain. However, the lower parietal glutamate and slower fine motor function in those taking high CPE ARVs suggest that higher concentrations of ARVs in the brain may contribute to greater neurotoxicity through other mechanisms. Supported by NIMH (R01 MH61427); NIDA (K24-DA16170); NINDS & NIDA (U54NS56883)
Morphine Modulates Differential Leukocyte Trafficking in Tat-Transgenic Mice. R Dutta1, R Charboneau1, RA Barke2, S Roy1; 1Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 2Department of Surgery, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN 55417
Streptococcus pneumonia infection is common in immune-compromised human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients and also in opiate drug users. The cellular mechanisms involved in the acceleration of this co-infection among morphine drug abusers are largely undefined. In the present study, we explore the extent and kinetics of specific myeloid subsets that proliferate in the peripheral blood and their trafficking into the spleen of Streptococcus pneumoniae (serotype 3)-infected wild-type (WT) and Tat-transgenic mice following chronic morphine exposure. Flow cytometry analysis revealed a significant increase in myeloid subpopulation of CD45+CD11b+Ly6CintLy6G+ (granulocytes) and CD45+CD11b+Ly6G-Ly6Chigh (inflammatory monocytes) in the blood of Tat-transgenic mice when compared to the WT mice. Morphine (25 mg) treatment decreased the polymorphonuclear granulocytes and inflammatory monocytes in the blood of both WT and Tat-transgenic mice. However, when leukocyte trafficking into the spleen was investigated in the presence of morphine, a significant increase in T lymphocytes (CD45+CD11b−CD3+) and inflammatory monocytes we observed in both WT and Tat-transgenic mice. Interestingly, the trafficking of inflammatory monocytes in the morphine-treated Tat-transgenic mice was tenfold higher than WT mice. Results implicate that the morphine exposure following infection increases the migration property of the monocytes at the early stage of infection. Studies are in progress in identifying the mechanism underlying the differential migration pattern of leukocyte. Supported by RO1 DA12104, RO1 DA022935, KO2 DA015349, P50 DA11806 (to S.R.) and T32 DA07097
Association of Pro-inflammatory Cytokines in CSF with MRS Glial Markers Differs with HIV Status and Cognitive Function. U Feger1, T Ernst1, V Nerurkar2, EM Volper2, H Nakama1, S Buchthal1, L Chang2; 1MR Research Program, Department of Medicine, JABSOM, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813, 2Asia-Pacific Institute of Tropical Medicine, JABSOM, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813
HIV-1 brain infection can lead to the development of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). To elucidate the role of an ongoing immune response in the brain and onset and progression of cognitive impairment, we conducted localized in vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) in four brain regions, and measurements of a set of cytokines in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), in HIV-subjects with HAND (HIV-HAND) and without HAND (HIV-NC) and in seronegative controls (SN). The pro-inflammatory markers IP-10, IL-8, and IL-1 alpha were all elevated in the CSF of HIV subjects with HAND when compared to controls (<0.00001 to p = 0.01) or to HIV-NC (p = 0.003 to n.s.). In addition, elevated MRS myoinositol (mI), a surrogate marker for glial activation, was seen in the frontal white (fwM) and grey (fgM) matter in HIV-HAND subjects when compared to SN (p = 0.03 to n.s) and to HIV-NC (p = 0.07 to n.s). Furthermore, SN controls showed a positive correlation for all three CSF cytokines with mI in the fgM and fwM (p = 0.008 to n.s). In contrast, HIV-NC subjects showed an inverse relationships between mI in the fgM and fwM and these CSF cytokines (p = 0.02 to n.s). No clear trend was seen for the HIV-HAND group. Consequently, several interactions were found for the three groups’ CSF cytokines levels in relation to brain mI. These findings suggest altered mechanism of immune regulation in the brains of HIV patients and a potential influence of immune status on cognitive function. Supported by NIMH (R01 MH61427); NIDA (K24-DA16170); NINDS and NIDA (U54NS56883)
Cannabinoids Inhibit the Migration of Microglial-Like Cells in Response to the HIV-Tat Protein Through the CB2Cannabinoid Receptor. Fraga D1, ES Raborn1, GA Cabral1; 1Virginia Commonwealth University, School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298-0678
The HIV-transcriptional trans-activator protein (Tat) has been implicated as playing a major role in HIV encephalitis since it elicits chemokines and cytokines from microglia as well as a chemotactic response. Since cannabinoids can be anti-inflammatory, the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of exogenous and endogenous cannabinoids on the migration of microglia in response to Tat using an immortalized mouse BV-2 microglial-like cell model. The exogenous cannabinoid partial agonist Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC; 10−6–10−9 M) exerted a concentration-related reduction in the migration of BV-2 cells induced by Tat (50 nM). A similar inhibitory response was obtained using the endogenous cannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG; 10−5–10−7 M). The monoacyl glycerol lipase inhibitor (URB602, 10−6 M) also reduced the migration of BV-2 cells induced by Tat (50 nM). The CB2 receptor antagonist SR144528 (10−6 M), but not the CB1 receptor antagonist SR141716A (10−6 M), blocked the reduction of migration produced by THC (10−6 M), 2-AG (10−5 M), and URB602 (10−6 M), consistent with a functional linkage of cannabinoid-mediated inhibition to the CB2 cannabinoid receptor. Collectively, the results suggest that the CB2 receptor has potential to serve as a molecular target for the therapeutic manipulation of untoward CNS inflammatory effects elicited by the HIV protein Tat. Supported by NIDA/NIH 005832
Mechanisms of Dopamine-Mediated Increase in HIV Infection of Human Macrophages. PJ Gaskill1, J Cano2, EA Eugenin1, GV Kalpana2, JW Berman1; 1Department of Pathology, Einstein, Bronx, NY 10461, 2Department of Genetics, Einstein, Bronx, NY 10461
As HIV-infected individuals live longer with the success of combinatorial antiretroviral therapy, neurological complications are emerging as a major health issue, especially among HIV-infected drug abusers. HIV-positive individuals who abuse drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamine show significant increases in the incidence and severity of neuropathology and in the development of HIV-associated neurological disorders (HAND). The mechanism(s) by which drug abuse accelerates the development of neurological disease remains unclear, but cocaine, methamphetamine, and other drugs of abuse mediate their effects by increasing extracellular dopamine in the CNS. We hypothesize that dopamine alters HIV infection in macrophages through dopamine receptors, resulting in the exacerbation of HIV-induced neuropathology in HIV-infected drug abusers. Our findings demonstrate that dopamine increases HIV replication in primary human macrophages by increasing the number of macrophages infected with HIV, at least in part, through the activation of D2-like dopamine receptors. Preliminary data indicate that increased infection is due to enhanced HIV entry into macrophages in the presence of dopamine. Our data also demonstrate that dopamine activates macrophage dopamine receptors and alters cytokine production. These data indicate a significant role for dopamine in the response of the CNS to HIV infection and suggest that drug-induced increases in dopamine may be a common mechanism by which drugs of abuse exacerbate the development of HAND in HIV-infected drug-abusing individuals. Supported by NIDA
The Gap Junction Proteins Connexin43 and 36 are Dysregulated in HIV Infection of Macrophages: Potential Role in HIV Neuropathogenesis. JE Gibson1, R Gamms1, EA Eugenin1, JW Berman1; 1Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461
HIV infection of the CNS occurs early in the disease, and despite successful therapy, significant inflammation and neurocognitive dysfunction persists. Cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage are key mediators of HIV-associated neuropathogenesis. Connexin43 (Cx43) is a primary component of gap junctions in the CNS, facilitating rapid communication between cells that regulates CNS homeostasis. A role for Cx43 in the immune system has also been described. Cx43 is expressed in a variety of immune cells including macrophages. Connexin hemichannels facilitate inflammation as well as phagocytosis, although their function is not completely characterized. Our previous data indicate that gap junctions mediate transfer of an apoptotic signal from HIV-infected astrocytes to neighboring cells. In the current study, we demonstrate that Cx43 is expressed in primary human macrophages at low levels. HIV infection of macrophages enhances hyperphosphorylation of Cx43, which correlates with a decrease in the surface expression of Cx43. Other groups showed that HIV-infected macrophages have impaired phagocytosis. We propose that this effect may be mediated by down-regulation of Cx43 on the surface of infected cells. Cx36, primarily found in neurons, has not been demonstrated in macrophages. We find high levels of Cx36 expression in primary human macrophages. Expression of both Cx43 and Cx36 is enhanced in CD68+ cells in HIV encephalitic tissue. Our findings suggest a novel mechanism of communication in macrophages that may contribute to the pathogenesis of HIV CNS disease.
HIV-1 Tat Protein and Morphine Alter Proliferation and Motility in Neuronal/Glial Progenitors and Attract Microglia by Secreting Chemokines.Y Hahn1, S Fitting2, P Vo1, KF Hauser2, PE Knapp1; 1Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0000, 2Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298
Myelin pallor is commonly detected by MRI in opiate-abusing HIV patients even in those treated with HAART. These neurological disturbances are known to be especially aggressive in pediatric patients. Myelin pallor had been thought to result from edema due to alterations in the blood–brain barrier, but our previous work suggests that oligodendroglia may be directly affected by the HIV-1 Tat protein. We have hypothesized that neuronal/glial progenitors (NPC/GPCs), and especially those that form oligodendrocytes, may be targets of HIV proteins ± opioid drugs of abuse. Based on our hypothesis, we examined the survival, proliferation, and other cell functions in NPC/GPCs. We also examined whether the effects of HIV proteins on progenitors might be exacerbated by opioid drugs of abuse, as we have observed in mature glia. Our results showed that NPC/GPCs are direct targets of HIV viral proteins ± morphine. Although cell death does not appear to be increased, NPC/GPCs exhibit reduced motility, migration rate, and proliferation. We are presently confirming these results on NPC/GPCs in vivo using transgenic mice exposed to Tat from uterus to early postnatal stages. Bioplex analysis also showed that Tat exposure significantly enhanced the secretion of specific chemokines (RANTES and MIP-1a/b) from NPC/GPCs. We demonstrated that these chemokines could attract microglia using mAb neutralization of CCR5/CXCR4 (2D7/12G5) and the specific inhibitors Anibamine/Maraviroc. In summary, these data support our hypothesis that both HIV protein and opioids can affect the function of NPC/GPCs. Supported by NIDA: R01 DA024461 & P01 DA19398
The Cannabinoids JWH-015 and O-1966 Inhibit the Mixed Lymphocyte Reaction Via the Cannabinoid Receptor 2 (CB2). RR Hartzell1, JJ Meissler1, MW Adler1, TK Eisenstein1; 1Center for Substance Abuse Research, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140
There is a robust literature showing that cannabinoids modulate immune responses. Our laboratory has previously shown that delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and anandamide, added in vitro, suppress antibody responses by mouse spleen cells in the primary and secondary plaque-forming cell assays via CB2. The present study tested the possibility that CB2 agonists, through their immunosuppressive capacity, might lessen graft rejection in transplant patients. The mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) is considered to be an in vitro correlate of transplant rejection. In this assay, spleen cells from two mouse strains are incubated together and T cells of one strain respond to the foreign cells by proliferating. The capacity of CB2 selective cannabinoids to suppress proliferation in the MLR was tested. Two CB2 selective cannabinoids, JWH-015 and O-1966, were added to MLR cultures. Both inhibited the MLR in a dose-dependent fashion. To verify that these effects were through the CB2 receptor, splenocytes were incubated with either CB1 or CB2 selective antagonists prior to the addition of the agonists. The CB1 selective antagonist had no effect on the suppression induced by JWH-015 or O-1966, while the CB2 selective antagonist blocked the suppressive capacity of both compounds. Furthermore, treatment of splenocytes from CB2 receptor-deficient mice with JWH-015 showed no suppression of the MLR. These results support the hypothesis that cannabinoids, acting through the CB2 receptor, can inhibit the MLR and suggest that CB2 agonists may be useful adjunct therapies to block graft rejection. Supported by NIH Training grant 2T32A1007101-30 and NIH grants DA13429 and DA06650
Functional Proteomic Analyses of Cd4+T Lymphocyte Surveillance of the HIV-1 Infected Macrophage. XY Huang1, YY Zeng2, HE Gendelman1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5800, 2Institute for Tissue Transplantation & Immunology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, P.R. China 510632
Macrophages orchestrate immune responses that include microbial clearance, presentation of antigens, and secretion of bioactive molecules. Paradoxically, they also act as reservoirs and vehicles for microbial pathogen dissemination including HIV. Moreover, macrophages, as biological response modifiers, as such influence disease progression. We demonstrated that both effector T cells (Teff) and regulatory T cells (Treg) affect neuroAIDS. Treg inhibits macrophage activation, enhances apoptosis, and reduces viral production. Teff showed contrary effects except for killing infected macrophages. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms for these effects, we used iTRAQ to study the quantitative changes in the proteome of virus-infected macrophages during cell–cell interactions with Teff or Treg. In these studies, HIV-1/VSV pseudotypes were used to infect murine bone marrow macrophages. Expectedly, both Teff and Treg modulated virus-infected macrophage proteins associated with cell structure, metabolism, and redox biology. Surprisingly, they enhanced virus-specific immune response by upregulation of interferon-inducible proteins (GBP2, STAT1, and ISG15). HIV-1 infection triggered caspase-1 activation. This response was enhanced by Teff and attenuated by Treg, resulting in pyroptosis and apoptosis, respectively. Taken together, we posit that Treg possesses regulatory and effector functions for virus-infected macrophages. Our results challenge the dogma that Treg functions exclusively as suppressor and provides undisclosed mechanisms of adaptive immune surveillance during HIV-1 infection.
Role of Alcohol on the Expression of Cytochrome P450: Implication in Anti-retroviral Therapy and Oxidative Stress. M Jin1, P Silverstein1, A Kumar1, K Patel1, S Kumar1; 1Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Univ. of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108
Alcohol consumption is highly prevalent in HIV patients, which leads to a decrease in the response to anti-retroviral therapy (ART) and an increase in oxidative stress (OS)-mediated toxicity. Therefore, we studied the effect of alcohol on the genetic and functional expressions of cytochrome P450 (CYP) that are known to metabolize ART drugs (such as 2B6, 2D6, and 3A4) and OS (such as 2A6, 2E1, and 3A4) in the liver. This study was performed in U937, a human leukemic monocyte lymphoma cell line that differentiates into macrophages and is an in vitro model for HIV-related research. Compared with housekeeping gene GAPDH, the mRNA expression of CYP2A6 (1%), CYP2E1 and CYP3A4 (0.1%), and CYP2B6 (∼0.01%) was measurable in both U937 monocytes and macrophages. Alcohol showed up-regulation of CYP2A6 (3-fold), CYP2B6 (2.5-fold), CYP2E1 (5-fold), and CYP3A4 (2.4-fold) compared with the control in the early time points (6 and 12 h). Thus, the results suggest that alcohol could lead to a decrease in response to ART drugs as a result of their increased metabolism by CYP2B6 and CYP3A4. Similarly, alcohol could lead to an increase in OS by increasing the expression of CYP2A6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4. Synergistic effect of alcohol and ART drugs on the expression of CYP in U937 and primary cells is underway. Supported by start-up funds KBE78
HIV-1 Hijacks the Endocytic Trafficking Networks for Direct Intercellular Dissemination Through Tunneling Nanotubes in Human Macrophages. I Kadiu1, H Gendelman1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5800
Tunneling nanotubes (TNT) are bridging conduits that support intercellular exchanges of receptors, lysosomes, and mitochondria. HIV-1 transmission by intercellular connections is 1,000 times more efficient than the cell-free dissemination. Therefore, mechanisms of TNT-mediated HIV-1 escape from humoral immunity have generated intense interest following failure of vaccine strategies. To determine the mechanisms underlying intra- and intercellular viral trafficking, still and live confocal imaging, transmission, and scanning electron microscopy were utilized. HIV-1 enhances the frequency of TNT in infected macrophages, and these structures were observed to extend over 600 μm. These support seamless intercellular bidirectional flow of endocytic vesicles at an average velocity of 1.5 μm/s propelled primarily by myosin II. Confocal imaging and proteomic analysis of TNT showed that viral constituents (proteins and RNA) are transferred to the uninfected target cells by early (Rab5/EEA1), recycling endosomes (Rab11a), multivesicular bodies (ESCRT III), and lysosomes. Inhibition of myosins by blebbistatin and butandiene monoxime and disruption of actin filaments and microtubules by cytochalasin D and nocodasole perturbed trafficking of HIV-1 constituents through the TNT. These data provide new evidence that HIV-1 can escape immune surveillance by inducing TNT formation and increased vesicle sorting in human macrophages and uses such processes for direct transport from infected to the uninfected target cells. Supported by P01 NS43985
Pharmacologic Inhibitor of Phosphodiesterase Prevents Tat-Mediated Activation of Microglial Cells. MM Kiebala1, D Seth1, G Schifitto2, SB Maggirwar1; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, 2Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642
HIV-1-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) occur, in part, due to the inflammatory response to viral proteins, such as Tat, in the central nervous system (CNS). Ibudilast (AV411) is a non-selective cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase inhibitor that is currently used to treat neuropathic pain. It has previously been shown that phosphodiesterase inhibition decreases TNF-alpha synthesis via modulation of NF-KB signaling and that AV411 can specifically inhibit LPS-induced TNF-alpha production by murine microglial cells. Based on this information, we hypothesized that AV411 would inhibit Tat-induced TNF-alpha release from microglial cells. Here, we demonstrate that TNF-alpha production in Tat-exposed microglial cells is dose-dependently inhibited by AV411 pretreatment and that this inhibition is dependent on protein phosphatase activity as it was reversed by okadaic acid. Also, it appears that AV411 does not affect Tat-induced NF-KB activation in microglial cells, as shown by IKB-alpha immunoblot and RelA nuclear localization. Our data suggest that AV411 inhibits Tat-induced cytokine synthesis in a manner that does not modulate activation of NF-KB and that this inhibition is reversed by okadaic acid, which is an inhibitor of serine/threonine protein phosphatase. Our findings shed light on the mechanism of AV411 inhibition of Tat-induced TNF-alpha production and may have important therapeutic implications for the management of HAND. Supported by National Institutes of Health
HIV-1 Deactivates Oxidative Stress-Induced Antioxidant Production in T Cells. D Kumar1, KK Madugula1, PC Singhal1; 1Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North Shore-LIJ Health System, New Hyde Park, NY 11367
Background: T cell depletion below a threshold often leads to recurrent infection in patients with HIV-1 infection. Recently, pivotal roles of p66ShcA proteins have been identified in the generation of oxidative stress and induction of T cell apoptosis. HIV-1 activates p66ShCA pathway leading to the deactivation of Foxo3A-dependent stress response program, resulting into the accumulation of ROS and thus promoting T cell apoptosis. We evaluated the effect of HIV-1 on T cell expression of phospho-p66ShcA, phospho-Akt, phospho-FoxO3a, MnSOD, and catalase (by Western blotting) as well as T cell ROS generation (T cells probed with DCFDA). Moreover, we studied the relationship of HIV-1-induced ROS generation and induction of T cell apoptosis. HIV-1 promoted ROS generation in a time- and dose-dependent manner. HIV-1 also enhanced phspho-p66ShcA expression by T cells; interestingly, T cells lacking p66ShcA showed not only attenuated generation of ROS but also reduced occurrence of apoptosis in response to HIV-1. Moreover, HIV-1-treated T cells showed increased phosphorylation of FoxO3A as well as diminished production of superoxide (SOD) and catalase. HIV-1 stimulates p66ShCA pathway which induces deactivation of Foxo3A-dependent stress response program, resulting into the accumulation of ROS and entry into apoptotic phenotype.
Methamphetamine Alteration of Mu-Opioid Receptor Expression Via a Reactive Oxygen Species Mechanism. EL Langsdorf1, SL Chang1; 1Institute of NeuroImmune Pharmacology, Seton Hall University, South Orange, NJ 07079
Methamphetamine (METH) has been shown to induce oxidative stress in SH-SY5Y, a neuroblastic, dopaminergic cell line model. In neuronal cells, oxidation of dopamine by auto-oxidative or enzymatic events leads to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Neuronal cells treated with METH accumulate dopamine which can ultimately lead to increased levels of ROS. ROS has been shown to mediate expression of mu-opioid receptor (MOR). The goal of this in vitro study using SH-SY5Y cells was to examine how treatment with METH affects the accumulation of intracellular ROS, which may in turn modulate MOR expression. Laser scanning confocal microscopy indicated that METH-induced intracellular accumulation of ROS, detected as the increased fluorescence of dihydrorhodamine 123, occurred in a dose- and time-dependent manner. In addition, accumulation of ROS preceded METH-induced expression on MOR. METH-induced MOR expression was attenuated with the free radical chelator, vitamin E. Additional evidence supporting a role for ROS in METH modulation of MOR expression includes an observed increase in MOR expression following hydrogen peroxide treatment. Our data show that the effect of METH on MOR expression appears to be dependent upon the intracellular accumulation of ROS. This study suggests a possible coupling of METH- and opiate-mediated intracellular signaling. Supported by NIH/NIDA K02 (DA016149) to SLC
Rescue of Impaired Hippocampal Neurogenesis in HIV-GP120 Transgenic Mice with Paroxetine. MH Lee1, JP Steiner1, A Venkatesan1, A Nath1; 1Johns Hopkins, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21087
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in the CNS causes neurocognitive disorders. Impairment of adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus contributes to cognitive dysfunction. The effects of paroxetine on the proliferation and generation of neurons in the hippocampus in HIV-gp120 transgenic mouse model were determined. Paroxetine was administered by subcutaneous osmotic mini-pump in adult mice at a dose of 10 mg kg−1 day−1 for 4 weeks. To assess neural progenitor cell (NPC) proliferation, a single dose of 200 mg/kg of BrdU was given and euthanized 2 h later. For the study of maturation of NPCs, after 2 weeks of paroxetine infusion, 50 mg/kg BrdU was injected once daily for 7 days and all mice were euthanized 3 weeks after the first BrdU injection. There was a 37% reduction in the number of newborn cells labeled with BrdU+ in the dentate gyrus of the gp120 transgenic mice as compared to wt mice, suggesting a defect of NPC proliferation. Subcutaneous administration of paroxetine led to a 21% increase in NPC proliferation in gp120 transgenic mice, thereby resulting in a partial rescue of NPC proliferation. Double-label immunohistochemistry analysis showed a 47% reduction in the number of newly generated neurons, which are labeled as BrdU+NeuN+ cells in the dentate gyrus of gp120 transgenic mice as compared to littermate wt mice. Paroxetine administration led to a significant increase in BrdU+NeuN+ cells in the dentate gyrus. Thus, the paroxetine rescues both NPC proliferation and generation of new neurons in gp120 transgenic mice. Supported by NINDS, NIMH
Bowman–Birk Inhibitor Inhibits Neurotoxicity of LPS-Activated Macrophages. JL Li1, L Ye1, X Wang1, DL Kolson2, WZ Ho1; 1Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, 2Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104
Bowman–Birk inhibitor (BBI) is a soybean-derived serine protease inhibitor which has been shown to exert potent anti-inflammatory effects. We thus investigated the effect of BBI as a neuroprotective agent against neurocytotoxicity of LPS-activated macrophages. Although LPS, when directly added to the rat cortical neuron culture, had little cytotoxicity effect, supernatant from LPS-stimulated macrophage culture induced neurotoxicity as evidenced by the loss of cortical neurons. In contrast, supernatant from BBI-treated and LPS-activated macrophage culture resulted in a significant reduction of neurocytotoxicity. In addition, BBI-treated neuronal cells became less susceptible to toxicity of LPS-activated macrophages. This BBI-mediated neuroprotection was independent to NMDA receptor as BBI treatment could not protect rat cortical neuron from NMDA-mediated cytotoxicity. Investigation of the mechanism responsible for the BBI action revealed that BBI treatment of macrophages inhibited LPS-induced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, TNF-alpha and IL-6, two known neurotoxins. BBI treatment also induced the expression of IL-10, a known anti-inflammatory cytokine in macrophages. These findings provided scientific evidence to support the use of BBI as a supplementary treatment for microglia/macrophage-mediated neuronal injury. Supported by NIH Grants DA12815 and DA22177 (to WZH)
Methamphetamine Inhibits Toll-Like Receptor 9-Mediated Anti-HIV Activity in Macrophages. JP Liu2, P Ceng3, L Ye1, X Wang1, JL Li1, H Liang3, WZ Ho1; 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, 2Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, P.R. China 430022, 3Public Health Center, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, P.R. China 530021
Very little is known about the impact of methamphetamine (METH), a highly abused psychostimulant, on host cell innate immunity. This study examined whether METH has the ability to impair toll-like receptor-9 (TLR-9)-mediated anti-HIV immunity in macrophages. TLR-9 activation by CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG ODN) induced the expression of endogenous IFN-alpha and inhibited HIV-1 replication in macrophages. However, METH treatment of macrophages compromised the anti-HIV ability of TLR-9 activation. Dopamine D1 receptor antagonist (SCH23390) could block the METH action. Investigation of the mechanisms revealed that METH selectively inhibited endogenous TLR-9 expression as well as ODN-induced TLR-9/IFN-alpha expression in macrophages, leading to the downregulation of multiple key elements (MyD88, IRF-7, MxA, and ISG56) in TLR-9/IFN-alpha signaling pathway. These findings provide an additional novel mechanism for METH-mediated enhancement of HIV replication in macrophages. Supported by National Institutes of Health Grant DA25477
Methamphetamine Induces Autophagy in Human Endothelial Cells. J Ma1, J Wan1, JH Wang1, S Ramakrishnan1, R Charboneau2, R Barke2, S Roy1; 1Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 2Department of Surgery, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN 55417
Methamphetamine (METH), a potent stimulant with strong euphoric properties, has been shown to alter the permeability of the blood–brain barrier (BBB). However, the mechanisms by which METH directly affects endothelial cells and causes endothelial injury, leading to BBB dysfunction, are not completely understood. In some cellular settings, autophagy can serve as a cell survival pathway, suppressing apoptosis, and in others, it can lead to death itself, either in collaboration with apoptosis or as a backup mechanism when the former is defective. In this study, we found that METH treatment evoked an autophagic response in primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Endothelial cells exposed to 10 µm METH did not reduce cell viability, however up-regulated the autophagy-related gene Beclin 1 expression in a time-dependent manner with a concurrent inhibition of the antiapoptotic gene Bcl-2 expression. Confocal microscopy revealed an up-regulation in the vesicular localization of LC-3-GFP, and Western blot analysis shows an increased LC-3II. Studies are in progress to determine if inhibition of autophagy by siRNA-mediated silencing of Beclin 1 can prevent METH-induced apoptosis, demonstrating an important role of autophagy in METH-induced cell death. The role of sigma-1 and dopamine D1/D2 receptors will also be investigated as potential mechanisms underlying METH-induced autophagy using receptor-specific antagonists. Our studies suggest that METH induces autophagy in endothelial cells as an initial survival response, but chronic exposure may lead to apoptotic events. Supported by RO1 DA12104, RO1 DA 022935, KO2 DA015349, P50 DA11806 (to S.R.)
Marijuana Use Worsens Cognitive Function But Does Not Change CSF Immune Markers in Patients Without HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorder (HAND). SM Munsaka1, U Feger1, T Ernst1, V Nerurkar2, EM Volper2, H Nakama2, L Chang1; 1Neuroscience and MR Research Program, University of Hawaii, John A Burns Sch of Medicine, Honolulu, HI 96813, 2Department of Tropical Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813
Marijuana is the leading drug abused by HIV-infected individuals and is often prescribed to them for medical reasons. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the major psychoactive ingredient in marijuana, may lead to cognitive deficits and may shift the balance of cytokine or chemokine expression from TH1 to TH2. We studied 20 HIV subjects with normal cognition and had current (within last 6 months) or without current (last use >1 year) daily marijuana use. Each was administered a battery of neuropsychological tests that had been used in numerous HIV studies, localized brain proton MR spectroscopy in four brain regions, and had lumbar punctures to collect cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for measurements of a set of cytokines using Luminex. No significant group difference was observed between HIV current and non-current marijuana smokers in the 11 measurable cytokines and chemokines (IL-1-beta, IL-6, IL-8, FLT-3L, IP-10, MCP-1, MDC, PDGF-AA, and TGF-beta) in their CSF. Yet, current HIV+ marijuana users had significantly lower z-scores in cognitive domains for learning (p = 0.040), memory (p = 0.050), and motor function (p = 0.023), as well as lower glutamate in the basal ganglia (p = 0.05) and higher glutamate+glutamine in frontal white matter (p = 0.03). These findings suggest that poorer cognitive functions in the HIV+ marijuana users is not related to the THC-mediated alteration of expression of these cytokines and chemokines, but may be due to other mechanisms such as oxidative stress or changes in neurotransmitter function. Supported by NIMH (R01 MH61427); NIDA (K24-DA16170); NINDS and NIDA (U54NS56883)
Morphine Modulation of Neutrophil Chemotaxis and Function. T Muppavarapu1, R Charboneau1, RA Barke2, S Roy1; 1Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 2Department of Surgery, Veterans affairs medical center, Minneapolis, MN 55455
Patients prescribed morphine for the management of chronic pain often present complications like increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections and inadequate healing of wounds. Neutrophils are important cells of the innate immune system and are among the first responders that are recruited to the site of infection or inflammation. Neutrophil chemotaxis occurs by the binding of the chemokine (MIP2) to a chemokine receptor (CXCR2). A delay in neutrophil chemotaxis and function would result in impaired clearance of infection or improper wound healing. However, effects of morphine on neutrophil chemotaxis, function, and the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon have not yet been characterized. Our lab has standardized a modified model for chemotaxis—under agar migration assay—to observe the effects of morphine on neutrophil chemotaxis. Our findings show a marked decrease in chemotaxis towards MIP2 when neutrophils were treated with morphine. Furthermore, morphine treatment significantly altered neutrophil function as observed by an in vitro phagocytosis assay. To delineate the mechanism, we show that chronic morphine treatment increases intracellular cAMP which concurrently activates PKA. PKA has been shown to modulate downstream effectors of the Rho family GTPases Rac/cdc42, leading to actin polymerization. Actin polymerization is important for neutrophil chemotaxis and function. Taken together, these results establish the detrimental effects of morphine on neutrophils. The mechanisms underlying this phenomenon will be identified using specific antagonists. Supported by RO1 DA12104, RO1 DA022935, KO2 DA015349, P50 DA11806 (to S.R.)
Cytomegalovirus Preferentially Infects Neuronal Precursors in the Developing Brain. MB Mutnal1, MC Cheeran1, S Hu1, M Little1, JR Lokensgard1; 1CIDMTR, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most frequent infectious cause of developmental disorders of the central nervous system (CNS) in humans. It has been shown that neural stem cells are specifically targeted by this virus, which appears to be responsible for the generation of brain abnormalities. In this study, we hypothesized that CMV preferentially infects neuronal precursors in the developing brain and alters subsequent neurogenesis. In our first set of experiments, we evaluated which specific cell types supported viral infection. One-day-old neonatal mice were infected with a recombinant virus that expresses green fluorescent protein (GFP). At 7 days p.i., CMV-infected brains were dissociated and incubated with antibodies identifying distinct CNS precursor subtypes, including CD133, CD24, CD44, A2B5, and nestin. Previous studies have shown that CD133 (Prominin-1)-expressing cells have the highest frequency of initiating clones, as measured by neurosphere formation. CD24 expression has been used to identify transit-amplifying cells as well-differentiated neurons, and expression of this marker has been found to be required for terminal differentiation of neuronal progenitors. At 7 days p.i., we found that the majority of CD24-positive cells were infected, while only a small proportion of glial precursor cells were found to be infected. We also observed that Prominin-1-positive cells were found to be less numerous in infected brains when compared to sham controls. These findings suggest that neuronal precursor cells are at the highest risk of viral infection and damage. Experiments are currently supported by R01 NS-038836 from NINDS.
The Chemokine CXCL12 Regulates Expression of the NMDA Receptors NR2B Subunit through a Histone Deacetylase-Dependent Pathway Contributing to Neuronal Survival.J Nicolai1, S Burbassi1, J Rubin2, O Meucci1; 1Pharmacology and Physiology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102, 2Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MS 63110
Constitutive expression of the chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor CXCR4 on neuronal and glial cells suggests a homeostatic role of this chemokine/receptor pair in the CNS. Our previous studies show CXCL12 protects cortical neurons from excitotoxicity by promoting the function of the gene repressor protein Rb, which is involved in the recruitment of chromatin modifiers (e.g., histone deacetylases) to gene promoters. In neurons, Rb controls activity-dependent genes essential to neuronal plasticity and survival, such as the NMDA receptors subunit NR2B. NMDA receptor kinetics is determined by the combination of regulatory subunits, and receptor subtype/localization may contribute differently to survival. Some data suggest that synaptically located NR2A-containing receptors facilitate neuronal survival, while NR2B-containing receptors are involved in neurotoxicity. We report that CXCL12 differentially modulates intracellular responses following stimulation of synaptic and extrasynaptic NMDA receptors via a regulation of the NR2B gene that involves histone deacetylases. Our results show that CXCL12 selectively inhibits NR2B expression in vitro and in vivo, altering NMDA-induced calcium responses associated with neuronal death while promoting pro-survival pathways associated with synaptic receptor activation. Along with previous studies, these findings underline the role of CXCL12/CXCR4 in the regulation of crucial components of glutamatergic transmission. These novel effects of CXCL12 may be involved in the physiological function of the chemokine in both the developing and mature brain. Supported by DA15014, DA19808, CA118389
Morphine Modulation of Mechanisms Involved in Macrophage Bactericidal Activity. J. Ninkovic1, S. Roy2; 1Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 2Department of Surgery, Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
Morphine-induced immune suppression has been well explored in scientific literature as well as anecdotally. Clinically, opioid users and abusers show a greater susceptibility to opportunistic bacterial infections. It has been shown by our group and others that morphine leads to increased bacterial dissemination and bacterial loads. The increased susceptibility to infection and higher bacterial loads are detrimental for the host’s survival. An important component of bacterial clearance is bacterial killing. Following phagocytosis, bacterial pathogens are cleared by a series of mechanisms. The focus of this research is to determine mechanisms by which morphine inhibits bacterial killing in macrophages. Our data show that morphine inhibits bacterial killing by primary peritoneal macrophages and macrophage cell line. We examine the effects of morphine on macrophage bactericidal ability by measuring bacterial loads of GFP-tagged Escherichia coli via fluorometry and by culturing cell homogenates following macrophage phagocytosis of bacteria. Our data show that morphine inhibits activation of Rac-GTPase, which is essential in function and recruitment of the NADPH complex, a key mechanisms for bacterial killing. In order to identify other mechanisms involved in morphine-induced inhibition of bactericidal functions, our studies focus on how morphine modulates release of reactive oxygen intermediates such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as well as release of nitric oxide (NO) and iNOS expression. Supported by RO1DA12104, RO1 DA022935, KO2 DA015349, P50DA11806 (to S.R.) and T32 DA07097, F31DA026264-01A1 (to J.N.)
Laboratory Macrophage Screening Assays Predict Pharmacokinetics of Controlled Release of Nanoformulated Antiretroviral Drugs In Vivo. A Nowacek1, Z Ma1, J Mcmillan1, J Huang1, R Sai praneeth1, R Bathena1, C Fletcher1, U Roy1, Y Alnouti1, A Anderson1, H Dou1, H Gendelman1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198
Backgruond: Factors that limit the efficacy of conventional antiretroviral therapy (ART) for HIV-1 infection include pharmacokinetics (PK) and penetration into viral sanctuaries. These affect rates of viral mutation and drug resistance. In attempts to bypass these limitations, nanoparticles containing ritonavir (RTV), indinavir (IDV), and efavirenz (EFV; described collectively as nanoART) were screened in human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) for measures of drug uptake, release, and cytotoxicity. NanoART were manufactured by wet-milling of crystalline drug with various surfactant coatings. Size, charge, and shape of the nanoparticles were assessed. MDM nanoART uptake and drug release, cell migration, and cytotoxicity were determined. NanoART that performed best and worst in vitro were then tested in mice for in vivo PK and biodistribution following a single intravenous dose. Drug levels in serum, liver, and spleen were determined by LC-MS/MS and RP-HPLC. Parallels between in vitro drug uptake and in vivo PK were assessed. Efficient MDM uptake was seen in <30 min based on size, charge, and coating. Antiretroviral drugs were released over 14 days and showed dose-dependent reduction in virion production. Cytotoxicities resulting from nanoART carriage were limited. Sustained IDV and RTV levels in serum (2–10 ng/ml) were present >7 days without toxicity. These results demonstrate that MDM nanoART drug screening in vitro can predict in vivo PK. The data support the establishment of cell depots of nanoART for long-term drug release. Supported by NIH Grant: 34-5160-2028-012
Transcriptional Regulation of the HIV-1 Chemokine Co-receptor CCR5 by the CAMP/PKA/CREB Pathway in Bone Marrow Progenitor Cells. N Parikh1, A Banerjee1, V Pirrone1, B Wigdahl1, MR Nonnemacher1; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102
The cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent signaling pathway directs the expression of several genes. The primary effectors of this pathway are members of the cAMP response element binding (CREB) family of transcription factors, in particular CREB-1 and cAMP response element modulator (CREM). Although the beta-chemokine receptor CCR5 has been identified on progenitor cells in the bone marrow, the regulatory mechanisms orchestrating its expression are not fully understood. Previous reports have identified putative cAMP response elements in the CCR5 promoter and have described a suppressive role for cAMP in CCR5 expression. In this study, the CD34+CD4+CCR5+ human bone marrow progenitor cell line TF-1 was used to investigate the detailed kinetics of CCR5 transcription in response to the elevation of intracellular cAMP levels and the underlying molecular events. We demonstrate that CCR5 transcription follows an asymmetrical sinusoidal pattern in TF-1 cells that parallels a protein kinase A-dependent alternating change in the ratio of activator pCREB-1-alpha,delta to repressor pCREM-alpha,beta isoforms. However, elevated CCR5 mRNA levels do not correlate with enhancement in infectivity with respect to the R5 human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) strain, although there is an increase in X4-utilizing virus. These results lend critical insight into the precise mechanism governing the cAMP-CCR5 axis in progenitor cells and pose interesting questions regarding its functional role in HIV-1 infection. Supported by NIDA
Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 NEF and Methamphetamine Increase the Expression of Interleukin-6 in Astrocytes: Implication in HIV-Associated Dementia.K Patel1, A Kumar1; 1Division of Pharmacology, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64112
Methamphetamine use has been shown to be associated with increased HIV-1 infection and also known to be associated with increased neurological abnormalities in HIV-infected individuals. Patients with AIDS dementia complex have been reported to show a detectable concentration of IL-6 when compared with patients with neurological diseases. HIV-1 gp120 and Tat have been widely implicated in HIV-associated neurological abnormalities, but very little is known about HIV-1 nef, its effect on astrocytes, and how it works in conjunction with methamphetamine. In this study, we asked whether methamphetamine and HIV-1 nef individually affect IL-6 expression in human astrocytes and whether there will be synergy between HIV-1 nef and methamphetamine. Our study shows that methamphetamine and HIV-1 nef increased the IL-6 expression in SVGA astrocytes by 5.3 ± 0.2- and 11.7 ± 1.9-fold, respectively. We also observed synergy between these two, and IL-6 expression was found to be elevated by 28.8 ± 7.2-fold. We also observed that the NF-kB pathway was involved in Nef-mediated IL-6 over-expression as NF-kB-specific siRNA inhibited IL-6 production. Moreover, Nef-specific siRNA inhibited the IL-6 induction too. These results indicate that HIV+ individuals and methamphetamine users are at a higher risk of neurological abnormalities compared to those who are infected with HIV but do not use methamphetamine.
Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3-Beta in the Basolateral Amygdala Mediates the Reconsolidation of Drug-Related Memory. WU Ping1; 1National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China 100191
Exposure to drug-associated conditioned stimuli elicits craving and increases the probability of drug relapse in cocaine users even after extended periods of abstinence, while drug seeking can be inhibited by disrupting the reconsolidation of drug-related memory. Previous studies have demonstrated a role for glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK-3-beta) in the synaptic plasticity underlying dopamine-associated behaviors and diseases, as well as the reconsolidation of fear memory. In the present study, we examined the role of GSK-3-beta in the basolateral amygdala (BLA) in reconsolidation of drug-related memory using an animal model of cocaine-conditioned place preference (CPP). We found that: (1) GSK-3-beta activity in the BLA, but not central amygdala (CeA) of rats that acquired cocaine CPP, increased after re-exposure to a previously cocaine-paired chamber (a retrieval procedure). (2) Lithium chloride, a non-selective inhibitor of GSK-3-beta, systemically administered after retrieval inhibited reconsolidation of the drug-related memory. (3) Microinjection of SB216763, a selective inhibitor of GSK-3-beta, into the BLA, but not into the CeA, immediately after re-exposure to the previously cocaine-paired chamber inhibited reconsolidation of the drug-related memory. The disruption of the memory lasted at least 1 week and did not reinstate following a cocaine priming injection. These results suggest that the activity of GSK-3-beta in the BLA mediates the reconsolidation of drug-related memory.
Comorbid Effect of HIV-1 GP120 and Methamphetamine on Synaptic Transmission and Plasticity in Rat Hippocampal Slices. BC Reiner1, H Xiong1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198
Methamphetamine (Meth) abuse and human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) infection are major public health issues today, and infection of HIV-1 is often associated with Meth use. While many investigations have focused on the individual effects of Meth and HIV-1 in the brain, far less has been done on their intersecting influences. We hypothesize that Meth and HIV-1gp120 might have synergistic detrimental effects in the brain. To test this hypothesis, we studied the effects of HIV-1gp120 (200 pM) and Meth (100 μM) on synaptic transmission and plasticity in rat hippocampal slices using an electrophysiological approach. Electrical-evoked field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) were recorded in the CA1 region of untreated (control) slices and slices treated with HIV-1gp120 or Meth alone or in combination. Our results showed that incubation (1 h) of brain slices with HIV-1gp120 or Meth alone impaired input–output responses and long-term potentiation (LTP) induced by high-frequency stimulation of Schaffer collateral fibers, and these impairments were significantly strengthened when brain slices were incubated with both HIV-1gp120 and Meth. Our data demonstrated that HIV-1gp120 and Meth exert a comorbid effect on synaptic transmission and plasticity in the brain. Supported by NIH grant R01 NS063878
Synaptic Protein Degradation Plays Critical Roles in Reconsolidation of Cocaine-Rewarding Memory. ZY Ren1, MM Liu1, L Lu1; 1National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, Beijing , P.R. China 100191
The process of drug addiction shares striking commonalities in neural plasticity associated with natural reward learning and memory. A fundamental mechanism for learning and memory is the remodeling of synapses, arising by the degradation of proteins or by the incorporation of new proteins. Drug memories are dynamic in nature. The reactivation of a drug memory through re-exposure to drug-related cues results in its destabilization, necessitating a restabilization process known as reconsolidation, a disruption of which leads to amnesia. Memory reconsolidation consists of two phases, a reactivation-dependent destabilization process followed by the protein synthesis-dependent restabilization phase. Although it has been shown that protein synthesis inhibition can disrupt the morphine-conditioned place preference (CPP) memory, it still remains unknown what is the role of synaptic protein degradation in drug-rewarding memory. Using cocaine CPP model, we demonstrated that synaptic protein degradation was increased by memory reactivation in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) core, a critical region in mediating drug-seeking behavior. Synaptic protein degradation is critical in reconsolidation and extinction, but not consolidation of cocaine-rewarding memory. Infusion of lactacystin into the NAc core rescued anisomycin-induced reconsolidation impairment and blocked memory extinction. This suggests that protein degradation is as crucial as protein synthesis in the updating process of cocaine-rewarding memory, which provides a novel strategy for drug addiction treatment. Supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program, 2006AA02Z4D1)
Cystatin B Associates with Proteins Related to HIV Replication. L Rivera Rivera1, J Pérez laspiur1, M Plaud Valentín1, L Meléndez1; 1Department of Microbiology and NeuroAIDS Program, University of Puerto Rico, School of Medicine, San Juan, PR 00936-5067
HIV persistence in monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) has been associated with cystatin B, a cysteine protease inhibitor. High levels of cystatin B in MDM are associated with HIV replication, whereas low levels in placental macrophages (PM) and microglia are associated with HIV restriction. Furthermore, studies with MDM demonstrate that levels of cystatin B correlate with lower level of tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT-1 (STAT-1PY). We used a proteomics approach consisting of immunoprecipitation followed by LC-MS/MS to identify the proteins interacting with cystatin B in order to elucidate the relationship between cystatin B, STAT-1 phosphorylation, and HIV persistence in MDM. We hypothesize that cystatin B may interact with proteins that regulate the phosphorylation of STAT-1 and contribute to additional functions besides being an active cysteine protease inhibitor. We found that cystatin B associates with two distinct regulatory proteins, one of these associated with the STAT-JAK signaling pathway. Six enzymes were associated with the glycolytic pathway, including pyruvate kinase M2 isoform, previously associated with HIV replication. These results demonstrate that cystatin B interacts with proteins related to the regulation of STAT-1 phosphorylation and HIV replication. The elucidation of how cystatin B regulates STAT-1 phosphorylation and HIV infection can prove important for the development of inhibitory factors against macrophage reservoirs. Supported by RO1 MH08316-01, NINDS 1 U54NS430, RCMI-G12RR03051
Effect of Buprenorphine and Methadone on Human Cd4+T Lymphocytes and Glial Cells. M Rodriguez1, M Rodriguez1, C Lopez-Cepero1, NM Boukli1, MP Nair2, A Nath3, E Rios-Oliveras1, JW Rodriguez1; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Universidad Central del Caribe School of Medicine, Bayamon, PR 00960, 2Department of Immunology, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33155, 3Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287
Background: Buprenorphine (BUP) and methadone (MTD) are mu-opioid receptor agonists widely used for detoxification and short- and long-term maintenance treatment of opiate addiction. Since the emerging and frequent use of these drugs in the HIV-1 population, it is significant to appreciate how these drugs impact the HIV-1 replication at the cellular and molecular level. Previous studies indicated that MTD enhances HIV-1 replication and suppresses cellular function, raising a major concern that MTD and perhaps BUP could play a role in the pathogenesis of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). In this study, we investigated whether MTD or BUP potentiates HIV-1 replication in human CD4+ T lymphocytes and glial cells using quantitative RT-PCR. In addition, we also measured the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines using cytometric bead array (CBA). We have shown that both MTD and BUP enhanced HIV-1 replication in both CD4+ T cells and microglial cells. This enhancement effect was associated with alterations in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in CD4+ T lymphocytes and the expression of HIV-1 co-receptor CCR5 on microglial cells. Following pre-exposure with mu-opioid receptor antagonists such as nalthrexone (NALT) and naloxone (NALX), HIV-1 replication was not affected, suggesting that MTD and BUP may be eliciting their cellular and molecular mechanisms through the mu-opioid receptor. These findings provide a cellular mechanism that supports the notion that both MTD and BUP may have a co-factor role in the development of HAND. Supported by NIH-RCMI grant #2G12RR03035
Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 GP120 Increases the Expression of Interleukin-6 in Astrocytes: Implication in HIV-Associated NeuroAIDS.A Shah1, A Kumar1; 1Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64112
HIV-1 protein gp120 is a surface glycoprotein which enables viral attachment/entry to the host cells. Among various complications associated with HIV-1, the mechanism of HIV-associated dementia (HAD) remains underdeveloped. HIV-1 Tat and gp120 have been largely implicated in neuroinflammation in HIV-infected individuals. However, it is not known with certainty whether gp120 causes IL-6 over-expression in the central nervous system. It has also been reported that HIV-infected patients with neuroinflammation show elevated levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6). In our study, we sought to address whether gp120 is involved in IL-6 over-expression in astrocytes. Our study shows that HIV-1 gp120 increases the IL-6 expression at both mRNA and protein levels by 51.3 ± 2.1- and 17.9 ± 3.7-fold, respectively, which could be abrogated by the use of gp120-specific siRNA. We have also confirmed that the NFkB pathway is involved in gp120-mediated IL-6 over-expression as IKK-2 and IKKb inhibitors inhibited the gp120-mediated IL-6 expression by 55% and 65%, respectively. These results were also confirmed with the use of NFkB-specific siRNA. The results indicate that HIV-1 gp120-mediated over-expression of IL-6 in astrocytes may be at least one mechanism responsible for neuroinflammation in HIV-infected individuals and that this over-expression was mediated by the NF-kB pathway.
Vaccine Strategy for Parkinson’s Disease Protects Against TH17 Cell-Mediated Nigrostriatal Neurodegeneration in MPTP Mouse Model. DK Stone1, AR Reynolds1, JA Hutter1, RL Mosley1, HE Gendelman1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5880
Nitration (N) and aggregation of alpha-synuclein (a-syn) are associated with a broad range of immune and neural activities in Parkinson’s disease (PD). N-a-syn drains to cervical lymph nodes and induces a robust antigen-specific T cell effector (Teff) response that exacerbates microglial neurotoxic responses and consequent nigrostriatal neurodegeneration in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-intoxicated mice. We show that such neuroimmune degenerative activities, in significant measure, are Th17 cell-mediated. Indeed, adoptive transfer of CD4+ T cells polarized to Th1 and Th17 N-4Ysyn (nitrated C-terminus of a-syn) Teff exacerbates MPTP-induced nigrostriatal degeneration, whereas Th2 Teff did not, and, importantly, CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells (Treg) were protective. Tregs from N-4Ysyn-immunized mice showed diminished antiproliferative responses and, as such, contribute to Teff-associated neurodegeneration. In contrast, natural and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-induced Treg reversed N-4Ysyn T cell nigrostriatal degeneration. Combinations of adoptively transferred N-4Ysyn and VIP immunocytes attenuated MPTP-induced microglial inflammation and led to robust protection of the nigrostriatum. Taken together, these results demonstrate the ability to utilize immunopharmacologic means to reverse the pathobiology of in vitro and in vivo PD models. This work is transformative as it provides a distinct direction in neuroimmune pharmacology to slow the progression of nigrostriatal degeneration reflective of PD. Supported by Frances and Louie Blumkin Foundation and the Community Neuroscience Pride of Nebraska Research Initiative
Alterations in the Expression of the HIV-1 Coreceptor CXCR4 in Response to the Mu-Opioid Agonist DAMGO Decreases HIV-1 Replication in TF-1 Human Bone Marrow Progenitor Cells. M Strazza1, A Banerjee1, S Passic1, O Meucci2, B Wigdahl1, MR Nonnemacher1; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102, 2Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102.
About one third of the cases of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in the USA have been attributed to the use of injected drugs, frequently involving abuse of opioids. Previous in vitro and in vivo studies addressing the role of mu-opioid agonists in altering levels of co-receptor CXCR4 and consequent HIV-1 replication have yielded contrasting results. The bone marrow (BM) is believed to be a potential anatomical sanctuary for HIV-1. In this study, the CD34+CD38+ human BM progenitor cell line TF-1 was used as a model to investigate the effects of the mu-opioid receptor-specific peptide DAMGO on CXCR4 expression as well as infection of undifferentiated hematopoietic progenitor cells. The results revealed the presence of the mu-opioid receptor-1 isoform (MOR-1) in TF-1 cells. Immunofluorescence microscopic analyses demonstrated a bipolar co-localization pattern for MOR-1 and CXCR4 in a subpopulation of cells positive for both receptors. TF-1 cells were subdivided into two subpopulations comprising low and high surface CXCR4 expressors. Flow cytometry experiments indicated that treatment with DAMGO resulted in a shift in the relative proportion of CXCR4+ cells to the low-expressing phenotype. This result is correlated with a >3-fold reduction in replication of X4 HIV-1 strain IIIB, indicating a potential role for the CXCR4 high expressors in sustaining infection within these cells. These experiments provide insight into the role of MOR-1-mediated signaling with respect to inhibition of viral replication in BM progenitor cells. Supported by NIDA
Effects of Acute Tyrosine, Tryptophan, and Phenylalanine Depletion Treatment on Cue-Induced Alcohol Urging in Patients with Alcohol Dependence in China.HQ Sun1, Y Liu1, YP Bao1, XL Di2, FD Yang2, L Lu1; 1National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China 100191, 2Department of Alcohol Dependence, Beijing Hui-Long-Guan Hospital, Beijing, P.R. China 100096
The capacity of alcohol cues to precipitate the desire to drink may be an important determinant of relapse to alcohol use in recovering alcohol-dependent patients. The serotonin and/or dopamine may play a role in the craving induced by alcohol cues. Tryptophan (Trp) and phenylalanine/tyrosine (Phe/Tyr), precursors of serotonin and dopamine synthesis, acute depletion can make the attenuation of serotonin and dopamine synthesis in the human brain. Some studies showed that there were no significant changes in the magnitude of cue-induced craving with active tryptophan depletion compared with placebo in abstinent alcoholic patients. However, compared to the balance mixture, Phe/Tyr-free, but not Trp-free, significantly decreased the ingestion of alcohol in healthy women. Up to date, the effect of acute tyrosine, tryptophan, and phenylalanine depletion on the cue-induced alcohol craving in patients with alcohol dependence is not entirely clear. This study evaluated whether attenuation of serotonin and dopamine synthesis via depletion of their precursors tryptophan, tyrosine, and phenylalanine can change the magnitude of cue-induced alcohol urging for alcohol in recently abstinent alcoholic male individuals in China. This is a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover design. Twelve male patients with alcohol dependence in China who met the criteria of DSM-IV completed the experiment under two acute treatment conditions. Supported by The National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, 2007CB512302)
Functional Disconnection of the Ventral Tegmental Area–Basolateral Amygdala–Nucleus Accumbens Circuit Disrupts Heroin-Induced Conditioned Immunomodulation. JL Szczytkowski1, DT Lysle1; 1Psychology Department, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27703
Heroin-induced suppression of pro-inflammatory mediators such as inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), TNF-alpha, and IL-1 beta can be conditioned to environmental stimuli associated with drug administration. Recently, our laboratory has shown that both the basolateral amygdala (BLA) and the nucleus accumbens (NAC) independently play critical roles in the expression of these conditioned effects. The present investigations sought to determine whether a circuit exists between the ventral tegmental area (VTA), the BLA, and the NAC which mediates the expression of heroin-induced conditioned immunomodulation by utilizing the functional disconnection procedure. Rats were given five conditioning trials in which they received an injection of heroin immediately upon placement into a conditioning chamber. Rats were then re-exposed to the conditioning chamber 6 days later without further drug administration. Prior to re-exposure, rats received unilateral intra-BLA microinfusions of the dopamine D1 antagonist, SCH23390, to block the dopaminergic input from the VTA to the BLA. Concomitantly, the glutamate antagonist, AP-5, was infused into the contralateral NAC shell to disrupt the glutamatergic input to the NAC from the BLA. Analyses using real-time RT-PCR indicate that disconnection of this circuit attenuates the suppressive effects of heroin-associated environmental stimuli on pro-inflammatory mediators. This study is important because it is the first to define a specific circuit involved in neural immune interactions. Supported by NIDA
Opiates Modulate T Cell Stress Response Program. D Torri1, D Saran1, D Kumar1, PC Singhal1; 1Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North Shore-LIJ Health System, New Hyde Park, NY 11040
Oxidative stress has been demonstrated to be an important mediator of cell death in a variety of cells including T cells. Recently, pivotal roles of p66ShcA proteins have been identified in the generation of oxidative stress and induction of T cell apoptosis. We hypothesize that opiates stimulate the p66ShCA pathway which induces deactivation of Foxo3A-dependent stress response program, resulting into the accumulation of ROS and entry into apoptotic phenotype. We studied the effect of morphine on T cell oxidative stress, associated downstream signaling, and the outcome. Morphine promoted ROS generation which was associated with T cell apoptosis. These effects of morphine were inhibited both by opiate receptor antagonists as well as by antioxidants. Interestingly, morphine enhanced T cell phspho-p66ShcA and phospho-Foxo3A expression which led to the diminished production of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase. Similarly, mice receiving morphine not only showed enhanced splenic tissue ROS generation, apoptosis, and expression of p66ShcA, and Foxo3A but also displayed diminished production of SOD and catalase; however, these effects of morphine were attenuated by naloxone. These findings indicate that opiates stimulate the p66ShCA pathway which induces deactivation of Foxo3A-dependent stress response program, resulting into the accumulation of ROS (by attenuating antioxidant generation) and entry into apoptotic phenotype.
Heroin-Induced Suppression of Sickness Behavior and Pro-inflammatory Mediators in Associated Brain Regions. AF Wagner1, LJ Jannach1, RL Bigler1, DT Lysle1; 1Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3270
Central pro-inflammatory mediators are essential for inducing sickness behaviors that improve infection outcome. Opiates are known to be peripherally immunosuppressive; however, little is known regarding the immune effects of opiates within the brain and subsequent consequences on these adaptive sickness behaviors. In the present experiments, the effects of heroin on pro-inflammatory mediators in the brain and sickness behaviors (behavioral depression and fever) were evaluated. Biotelemetry devices conveying activity levels and body temperature were surgically implanted in Lewis rats. Groups consisted of saline/saline, heroin (1 mg/kg, s.c.)/saline, saline/LPS (1 mg/kg, s.c.), or heroin/LPS treatments. Brains were removed 8 h post-treatment, and the hippocampus and the hypothalamus, which are associated with behavioral depression and fever, respectively, were processed for mRNA analysis via RT-PCR. In the saline/LPS-treated group, TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, iNOS, MCP-1, and IL-6 mRNA levels were significantly increased in the hippocampus and hypothalamus, and behavioral depression and fever were exhibited. However, in the heroin/LPS-treated group, mRNA levels of TNF-alpha and IL-6 in the hippocampus and in TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, and iNOS in the hypothalamus were significantly suppressed compared to the saline/LPS-treated group. The heroin/LPS group also displayed inhibited behavioral depression and fever production. These results indicate that heroin has immunosuppressive effects in the brain and on sickness behaviors, which may be detrimental to infection outcome. Supported by NIDA
Pro-inflammatory Mediators Increased Selectively in the Hippocampus of HIV-1 Transgenic Rats. AF Wagner1, LJ Jannach1, RL Bigler1, DT Lysle1; 1Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27514
Neurological complications in HIV-1 infection are associated with increased levels of pro-inflammatory mediators, including interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in the central nervous system. These pro-inflammatory mediators are believed to be produced in response to the presence of HIV proteins and contribute to neurological symptoms by creating a chronic inflammatory state in the central nervous system. The present study examined pro-inflammatory mediator mRNA present in specific brain regions in the HIV-1 transgenic rat which expresses HIV proteins. Brains from HIV-1 transgenic rats were dissected and processed for real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. Results indicated that the HIV-1 transgenic rats expressed increased levels IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and iNOS mRNA in the hippocampus compared to wild-type controls; in the cortex, striatum, and hypothalamus, there were no differences in mRNA between the two groups. However, control experiments utilizing lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment as a general immune stimulus in non-HIV-1 transgenic rats induced elevations in IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and iNOS mRNA in all regions examined. The specificity of pro-inflammatory responses to the hippocampus of HIV-1 transgenic rats versus the general pro-inflammatory response produced by LPS suggests a particular susceptibility of the hippocampus to HIV protein-induced alterations. Supported by National Institute on Drug Abuse
Chronic Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol Treatment Lowers Markers of Inflammation and Oxidative Stress in Lymph Nodes of Rhesus Macaques Infected with Simian Immunodeficiency Virus. EM Walker1, A Amedee2, L Birke3, N Lacour2, C Vande stouwe1, P Winsauer4, P Molina1; 1Department of Physiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, 2Dept of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Louisiana State Univeristy Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, 3Division of Animal Care, Louisiana State Univeristy Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, 4Department of Pharmacology, Louisiana State Univeristy Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112
Ongoing studies indicate that chronic Delta9-THC (THC)-treated, simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-infected rhesus macaques have increased survival and tend to have lower plasma viral loads during infection. Cannabinoids have been reported to exert anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative effects; both mechanisms could impact on viral replication particularly at lymphoid sites. Lymph nodes serve as a viral reservoir, contributing to plasma viral load throughout infection, and could be a site of cannabinoid immunomodulation. We examined the effects of chronic THC (0.32 mg/kg; twice daily, i.m.) administration on viral load, cytokine expression, and oxidative stress in plasma and lymph nodes of SIV-infected rhesus macaques collected at necropsy. Animals were necropsied at various time points post-infection. Chronic THC-treated animals had lower plasma viral load (5.28 vs. 6.11 log copies of gagRNA/ml), lymph node proviral DNA (1.57 vs. 1.99 log copies/10,000 cells), and viral gagRNA (1.14 vs. 2.08 log copies/total RNA) as compared to vehicle-treated animals, yet failed to reach statistical significance. Survival time post-infection showed a negative correlation with levels of IFNgamma in lymph nodes (r = −0.853, p = 0.007). Levels of IFNgamma and protein carbonylation, a marker of oxidative stress, were lower in THC-treated compared to vehicle-treated animals, but these values failed to reach statistical significance. These data suggest that small changes in inflammatory or oxidative states in lymphoid tissues may contribute to the THC treatment effects on survival and viral load. Supported by NIDA-020419-011
Morphine Differentially Modulates TLR-4-Induced Autophagy and Phagolysomal Maturation in Macrophages. J Wan1, HD Yu1, S Ramakrishnan1, R Charboneau1, S Roy1; 1Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
Autophagy is an important player in many critical biological processes and involves the sequestration of regions of the cytosol within double-membrane-bound compartments and delivery of the contents to the lysosomes for degradation. Activation of TLR-4 by LPS leads to the redistribution of LC3 from diffuse to punctate staining, typical of autophagosomes. As maturation proceeds, autophagosomes fuse with endosomal vesicles and acquire lysosome-associated membrane proteins (LAMP1 and LAMP2), thus becoming late autophagosomes that subsequently fuse with lysosomes. Phagolysosomal fusion then facilitates killing of ingested pathogens. We investigated the effect of morphine on TLR-4-induced autophagy and phagolysosomal fusion in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM). Our results show that morphine treatment resulted in a significant increase in LPS-induced vesicular translocation of LC3-1-GFP with a concurrent increase in the lipidated form of LC3-II (Western blot). In addition, morphine treatment of BMDM resulted in the up regulation of LPS-induced Beclin 1 and down-regulation of Bcl-2. In contrast, morphine inhibited LPS-induced phagosome maturation and phagolysosomal fusion, as indicated by the failure to recruit the late phagosomal marker LAMP-1 into phagosomes. These observations imply that although morphine treatment facilitates LPS-induced autophagy leading to increased survival of infected macrophages, it inhibits phagosome maturation and phagolysosomal fusion which is essential for the efficient removal of internalized pathogens, thereby potentiating bacterial survival. Supported by RO1 DA12104, RO1 DA022935, KO2 DA015349, P50 DA11806 (to S.R.) and T32 DA07097
Dysregulation of Neuronal Micro-RNA Expression in SIV/HIV-Associated Neurological Disease. SV Yelamanchili1, C Li-na1, H Xiong1, HS Fox1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University Of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5800
Many facets of transcriptional and translation regulation contribute to the proper functioning of the nervous system. miRNAs are small RNA molecules that serve as checkpoints in transcription and translation processes. However, the molecular basis for neuronal dysfunction found in the HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND) and its associated neuropathology, HIV encephalitis (HIVE), remains unknown. This study focused on identifying the regulation of miRNAs in the brains of monkeys and humans with SIVE/HIVE. Strikingly, a number of miRNAs were significantly increased in the infected brains and, when assessed by in situ hybridization, were abnormally expressed in neurons. Given the ability of miRNAs to modulate cellular mRNAs and proteins and thus cellular physiology, we identified for the first time that a critical neuronal transcription factor is a target of one of these miRNAs, miR-21. Functionally, miR-21 expression in neurons prolongs the opening of voltage-gated K+ channels. These findings further underscore the regulatory loop in which miRNAs function and highlights their importance in neurodegenerative research. Supported by NIH grants P30 MH062261 and R01 MH073490 in addition to Nebraska Tobacco Settlement Biomedical Research
A Cannabinoid CB2 Agonist Attenuates Leukocyte–Brain Endothelial Interactions and Blood–Brain Barrier Dysfunction Under Inflammatory Conditions. M Zhang1, S Ramirez2, Y Persidsky2, RF Tuma1; 1Department of Physiology, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, 2Deparment of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), released from Gram-negative bacteria, induces an inflammation-mediated endothelial and vascular dysfunction in various organs. Our previous studies indicated that selective CB2 receptor activation was neuroprotective through its anti-inflammatory properties. In this study, the role of a selective CB2 receptor agonist (O-1966) in LPS-induced cerebral microvascular inflammation and blood–brain barrier (BBB) function was investigated. Cranial window and intravital microscopy were used to directly observe leukocyte/endothelial interactions in mouse brain after LPS (6 mg/kg) injection. O-1966 (5 mg/kg) was given at the same time as LPS. BBB function was tested by Evans blue extravasations in vivo. Transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) was used to test the effects of O-1966 on compromised barrier integrity of human brain endothelial cells (BMVEC) after LPS stimulation in vitro. The results showed that LPS induced a dramatic increase in leukocyte rolling and adhesion (p < 0.05) on brain microvascular endothelial cells after LPS inoculation, which were significantly reduced by O-1966 (p < 0.05). Permeability of BBB (measured by Evans blue extravasations) was increased at 24 h after LPS injection (p < 0.05), and these changes were prevented by treatment with O-1966. Our preliminary data also indicate that O-1966 enhances and protects barrier function when the TEER is monitored on BMVEC. Our studies demonstrated that selective CB2 activation diminished leukocyte engagement by brain endothelium under inflammatory conditions and protected the BBB.
Depressive-Like Behaviors are Associated with Increased Membrane Fraction of P35 Level in the Hippocampal Dentate Gyrus After Chronic Mild Stress in Rats. WL Zhu1, L Lu1; 1National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China 100191
Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) has been implicated in learning and synaptic plasticity. Previous evidence suggests that neuronal plasticity and neurotrophins are involved in depression and bipolar disorder. Here, we explored if Cdk5 participates in the depressive-like behaviors in chronic mild stress (CMS)-treated rats. We found here that CMS caused a significant increase of Cdk5 activity and an upregulation of membrane fraction of p35 protein as well as a reduction of cytosolic p35, a Cdk5 activator, in the dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus. Conversely, microinjection of a Cdk5 inhibitor, butyrolactone (Buty), in DG subregion, but not in CA1 or CA3 hippocampal subfields, reversed these depressive-like symptoms without affecting the symptoms of control rats. Furthermore, treatment with Buty in DG, but not in CA1 or CA3 of the hippocampus, increased the cytosolic p35 level as well as decreased the membrane p35 level in CMS-administrated rats. The current results proposed that the development of depressive-like behaviors were regulated by increased Cdk5 activity through the p35 translocation from the cytosol to the membrane in the DG subregion of the hippocampus. These findings indicated that the depressive-like behaviors induced by chronic mild stress were mediated by the activation of Cdk5 in DG and that the Cdk5/p35 complex could provide a potential target for development as a novel therapeutic for the treatment of depressive disorders. Supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, 2007CB512302) and National Natural Science Foundation (no. 30800362)
POSTER SESSION II
High HIV DNA in Brain CD14+/16+Cells in Necropsy Cases Diagnosed with Neurocognitive Disorders. MA Agsalda1, D Troelstrup1, B Shiramizu1; 1Hawaii Center for AIDS, University of Hawaii, JABSOM, Honolulu, HI 96816-0000
In HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND), activated monocytes (CD14+/16+) are hypothesized to traffic HIV into the CNS and initiate inflammation. We hypothesize that HIV encephalitis (HIVE) brains will have higher HIV DNA copies in CD14+/16+, which could be targeted by polyamine analogs in new therapeutic strategies. Matched cryostat sections from the basal ganglia (BG) and the frontal cortex (FC) from HIVE and HIV-infected cases with normal cognition (NC) were obtained from the UCSF ACSR. Dual-labeled regions (CD14+/16+) were extracted by laser-capture microdissection. CD14 regions were extracted separately. Quantitative multiplex PCR determined HIV DNA copies/cell. HIVE individuals (n = 4) contained higher CD14+/16+ HIV DNA levels (0.9 HIV DNA copies/cell ± 0.9; 0.7 copies/cell ± 0.5) compared to CD14-cells (0.3 copies/cell ± 0.1; 0.09 copies/cell ± 0.09) in the BG and FC, respectively. In contrast, individuals with NC (n = 3) had higher HIV DNA levels in CD14 cells (2 copies/cell ± 3; 0.8 copies/cell ± 0.5) compared to CD14+/16+ cells (1.3 copies/cell ± 0.5; 0.02 copies/cell ± 0.04) in the BG and FC, respectively. Higher HIV DNA copies are found in CNS targeted regions in CD14+/16+ cells from HIVE cases, suggesting that these cells traffic and target the basal ganglia and frontal cortex, possibly establishing an inflammatory environment. This further suggests that specific polyamine analogs that target CD14+/16+ cells peripherally, such as MGBG, could potentially be used to prevent CNS inflammation. Supported by AI081450; NS053345
Effects of Alcohol on Cannabinoid (CB2) and Serotonin (5-HT3) Receptors in the Human Neuroblastoma Cell Line, SK-N-MC, and the Role of Histone Deacetylase 2 (HDAC2). M Agudelo1, Z Saiyed1, N Gandhi1, T Samikkannu1, P Khatavkar1, M Nair1; 1Institute of NeuroImmune Pharmacology, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199-0000
Alcohol dependence (AD) is a complex addiction regulated by multiple mechanisms including the serotonin and cannabinoid systems. The serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT) and cannabinoid receptor (CBR) genes are known to be involved in AD, and 5-HT3 and CB1 antagonists have been shown to reduce alcohol self-administration. However, most studies were done in animals, and the expression and alcohol-mediated mechanism of 5-HT3 and CB2 in human neuronal cells is not clear. CB2 is known as the peripheral receptor, and its expression in brain cells is controversial. Recent reports have implicated histone deacetylases (HDACs) in drug abuse through their ability to regulate gene expression, and HDAC inhibitors modulate genes involved in drug addiction such as the µ-opioid receptor gene. Therefore, we hypothesize that HDACs play a role in AD via modulation of CB2 and 5-HT3 receptors. The levels of CB2, 5-HT3, and HDAC 2 mRNA were measured in the human neuroblastoma cell line, SK-N-MC, by qRT-PCR. The effects of acute EtOH treatment on gene and protein expression were assessed at different time points. The HDAC effect was studied using an HDAC inhibitor, Trichostatin A (TSA). Results show that SK-N-MC expresses CB2 and 5-HT3 receptors and EtOH increases CB2, 5-HT3, and HDAC2 mRNA in a dose-dependent manner. Inhibition of HDAC with TSA shows modulation of ethanol effects on CB2 and 5-HT3 mRNA. These results suggest that HDAC2 is involved in the alcohol-mediated effects on CB2 and 5-HT3 receptors and the use of HDAC inhibitors may be of therapeutic significance for the treatment of AD. Supported by National Institute on Drug Abuse grants R37DA025576, R01DA01DA2366, and R01DA021537
HIV-1-Induced Amyloid Beta Accumulation in Brain Endothelial Cells is Attenuated by Simvastatin. IE Andras1, SY Eum1, W Huang1, Y Zhong1, B Hennig2, M Toborek1; 1Molecular Neuroscience and Vascular Biology Lab, University of Kentucky, Neurosurgery, Lexington, KY 40536-0000, 2College of Agriculture, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0000
HIV-1-infected brains are characterized by increased amyloid deposition. To study the influence of HIV-1 on amyloid beta (Abeta) homeostasis at the blood–brain barrier (BBB) level, we employed a model of brain microvascular endothelial cells exposed to HIV-1 in the presence or absence of Abeta. HIV-1 markedly increased endogenous Abeta levels and elevated accumulation of exogenous Abeta. Simvastatin, the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, blocked these effects. We next evaluated the effects of HIV-1 and/or simvastatin on the expression of the receptor for lipoprotein-related protein (LRP1) and the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) known to regulate Abeta transport across the BBB. LRP1 expression was not affected by HIV-1; however, it was increased by simvastatin. Importantly, simvastatin attenuated HIV-1-induced RAGE expression. These results suggest that HIV-1 may directly contribute to Abeta accumulation at the BBB level. In addition, statins may protect against increased Abeta levels associated with HIV-1 infection in the brain.
Lower CSF ApoE in HIV-infected Individuals Without ApoE4 Allele. M Andres1, U Feger2, H Nakama3, S Munsaka2, L Chang2; 1Pacific Biosciences Research Center, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822-0000, 2Dept of Medicine, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96813-0000, 3Dept of Psychiatry, John A. Burns School of Med, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96813-0000
ApoE gene polymorphism is implicated to play a significant role in the progression of the HIV disease. Of the three possible ApoE alleles (E2, E3, and E4) in humans, E4 renders HIV-infected individuals more susceptible to neurological impairments and to dysregulated lipid, sterol, and sphingolipid metabolism, increasing susceptibility to oxidative stress. Since ApoEprotein transports cholesterol to growing and regenerating neurons in the CNS, adequate delivery of lipids and cholesterol by ApoEprotein may be a critical factor in repair processes in the brain. This study evaluated possible interactions between HIV infection and ApoE4 status on CSF ApoEprotein levels and cognitive function. We genotyped 32 HIV-infected subjects and 29 age- and education-matched seronegative controls and measured their CSF [ApoEprotein]. HIV-infected subjects have significantly lower levels of CSF ApoEprotein than the healthy controls (−20%, p = 0.048). Although no differences in CSF [ApoEprotein] were observed between E4+ and E4− seronegative controls (p = 0.20), E4-HIV subjects had even lower CSF [ApoEprotein] compared to E4+ carriers with HIV (−33%, p = 0.026). Those with lower CSF [ApoEprotein] actually performed better on the HIV dementia scale. These findings suggest that the metabolism of ApoEprotein in the CNS is affected by HIV infection, but the alteration may not be due to the E4 allele. Ongoing analyses will further correlate these findings with detailed cognitive assessments. Supported by NIH (2R01MH61427, 5R25MH080661 2K24DA016170 and 1U54-NS056883)
Morphine Induces the Release of CCL5 from Astrocytes: Potential Neuroprotective Mechanism Against the HIV Protein GP120. V Avdoshina1, F Biggio1, G Palchik1, L Campbell1, I Mocchetti1; 1Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057-0000
A number of HIV-positive subjects are also opiate abusers. These individuals are at high risk to develop neurological complications from HIV infection. However, little is still known about the molecular mechanism(s) linking opiates and HIV neurotoxicity. To learn more, we exposed rat mixed neuronal/glial cultures from the cerebellum to opiate agonists and the HIV envelope glycoprotein gp120, which has been shown to cause neuronal loss. Gp120IIIB and gp120BaL, which bind to CXCR4 and CCR5 chemokine receptors, respectively, promoted cell death. Morphine did not change the toxic effect of gp120IIIB but inhibited the cytotoxic property of gp120BaL. This effect was blocked by naloxone and reproduced by the μ-opioid receptor agonist DAMGO. To examine the potential mechanism(s) of neuroprotection, we determined the effect of morphine on the release of chemokines CCL5 and CXCL12. CCL5 has been shown to prevent gp120BaL neurotoxicity, while CXCL12 decreases neuronal survival. Morphine failed to affect the release of CXCL12. However, morphine elicited a time-dependent release of CCL5, which was seen only in primary cultures of astrocytes. To examine the role of endogenous CCL5 in the neuroprotective activity of morphine, mixed cerebellar neurons/glial cells were immunoneutralized against CCL5 prior to morphine and gp120s. In these cells, the neuroprotective effect of opiate agonists was blocked. Our data suggest that morphine may exhibit a neuroprotective activity against M-tropic gp120 through the release of CCL5 from astrocytes. Supported by NIDA
Unfolded Protein Response in Human Monocyte-Derived Dendritic Cells Exposed to Alcohol Revealed by Proteomics. NM Boukli2, Z Saiyed2, M Ricaurte2, JW Rodriguez2, E Rios olivares2, L Cubano2, M Nair2; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Universidad Central del Caribe School of Medicine, Bayamon, PR 00960-0000, 2Institute of NeuroImmune Pharmacology, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33155-0000
Dendritic cells (DC) are responsible for the activation of T and B cells. There is accumulating evidence showing that alcohol can significantly affect various immune responses. We hypothesize that this occurs by modulating changes in specific key proteins triggering a process known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). This process typically protects cells from the toxic effects of accumulated misfolded proteins causing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Although much is known about ER stress, much less is understood about the consequences of the disruption of these interactions due to alcohol treatment. In the present study, we investigated alterations in DCs proteins treated with 0.1% of alcohol by 2D gel electrophoresis, protein identification using mass spectrometry, and confirmation at the gene expression level by qRT-PCR. DCs proteome induced with alcohol demonstrated 32 differentially expressed proteins. Alcohol significantly changed the expression of the key components of the UPR-ER stress-induced pathway that include chaperones, ER stress antioxidant enzymes, protein degradation proteins, and enzymes related to alcohol metabolism. qRT-PCR analyses highlighted enhanced expression of important UPR and antioxidant genes that increased rapidly with alcohol treatment. Results of these analyses provide insights into alcohol mechanisms of regulating DC and suggest that alcohol induced a UPR transcriptional program in DC. We speculate that activation of a UPR by alcohol may protect the DC from oxidant injury that may lead to the development of alcohol-related diseases.
Psychostimulants and the Female Genital Mucosa: Norepinephrine (NE) Delays Epithelial Wound Healing.DR Brown1, L Vulchanova1, SM O'grady2; 1Dept. of Veterinary & Biomedical Sciences, Univ. of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108-6010, 2Depts. of Animal Science-Physiology, Univ. of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108-0000
Abuse of sympathomimetic psychostimulants like cocaine, which increase synaptic NE concentrations, is associated with increased susceptibility to HIV infection. The epithelia of the vagina and cervix are the first sites exposed to HIV and are damaged during coitus. Immunohistochemistry revealed that nerve fibers immunoreactive for NE synthetic enzymes terminate under the human cervical epithelium. We hypothesized that NE alters wound repair in cervical and vaginal epithelial cells. Wound repair was measured using continuous impedance sensing combined with phase contrast imaging to characterize the time course for wound closure. Circular wounds (250-μm diameter) were produced by electroporation of confluent vaginal (hVE) and cervical (hCE) cell monolayers. Complete restitution occurred at 4 h for control hVE cells and at 5.5 h for hCE cells. NE (10 μM) significantly slowed the initial rate of wound closure by 3.5-fold in hVE and hCE cells, and complete restitution was delayed by 4–6 h after wounding. The inhibitory effect of NE on wound healing appears to be mediated by alpha2-adrenergic receptors in hVE cells. These results suggest that NE disrupts intrinsic barrier function and repair processes in vaginal and cervical epithelial cells. Cocaine and other abused sympathomimetic drugs could enhance pathogen penetration in the female genital mucosa. Supported by NIH DA-10200
Reversal of gp120 Inhibition of the Antinociception Induced by the Cannabinoid Agonist WIN55,212-2 with a CXCR4 Antagonist. X Chen1, EB Geller1, J Palma1, TK Eisenstein1, MW Adler1; 1Center for Substance Abuse Research, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000
In a previous study, both the chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1alpha and the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 coat protein, glycoprotein 120 (gp120), were reported to reduce the antinociception induced by subcutaneous (s.c.) injection of the cannabinoid agonist WIN55,212-2 in the cold water tail-flick test (CWT). Because gp120 binds to the same receptor, CXCR4, as CXCL12/SDF-1alpha, the present experiments were designed to use the CXCR4-selective antagonist, AMD3100, to investigate the receptor involvement in the effect of gp120 on the cannabinoid-induced antinociception. Adult male Sprague–Dawley rats (200–250 g, Ace Animals, Inc.) were housed individually after surgical implantation of cannulae into the periaqueductal grey (PAG). Experiments began 1 week postoperatively. The CWT was used as an antinociceptive index. A cutoff time was set at 60 s. The percent of maximum possible antinociception (%MPA) for each animal at each time was calculated using the following formula: %MPA = [(test latency − baseline latency)/(60 − baseline latency)] × 100. The results showed that (1) AMD 3100 (100 pg, 10 ng, 100 ng, and 500 ng, PAG) itself had no effect in this range; (2) gp120 (100 ng, PAG, t = −30) can reduce the antinociception induced by WIN55,212-2 (1 mg/kg, s.c., t = 0); and (3) AMD3100 (100 ng, PAG, t = −45) can reverse the gp120 (100 ng, PAG, t = −30) antagonism of this antinociception. These results suggest that CXCR4, expressed in the brain of rats, is involved in the gp120 antagonism of antinociception induced by cannabinoids. Supported by NIDA Grants DA 06650 and DA13429
Altered Gene Expression in Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMC) During Acute Exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (AECOPD). WD Cornwell1, CL Grabianowski1, L Chensny2, JP Gaughan1, FC Sciurba2, N Kaminski2, TJ Richards2, TJ Rogers1, GJ Criner1; 1Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000, 2Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261-0000
Long-term inhalation of tobacco smoke can result in the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) which is characterized by remodeling and destruction of the lung tissue and a significant reduction of lung function. These patients can also experience periods of acute exacerbation in which lung function is further reduced and hospitalization may be required. In an effort to understand the immune system status of these patients, we examined the gene expression profile of PBMCs of patients during AECOPD. Twenty-two patients hospitalized for AECOPD were enrolled. Blood samples were collected during hospitalization and 11 ± 8 weeks following resolution of AECOPD. PBMCs were isolated and microarray analysis performed. Data were analyzed using Scoregene, Genomica, and Ingenuity. Of probes, 4.8% and 3.4% detected significant gene expression changes >40% up or down, respectively. Several genes with higher expression, including fibronectin, scavenger receptors, arginase1, IL1R type II, IL13Ra1, IGF1, C5aR1, MMPs, and TLR6, suggest an elevation of circulating alternatively activated macrophages. In contrast, there were T cell-specific genes reduced, including CD3, CD8, LFA1, IL2Rg, and TCR Vb alleles, but not CD4. Interestingly, the expression of these genes is not normally regulated in mature cells, which suggest that there is a significant reduction in circulating CD8 cells during AECOPD. These results suggest that the development of AECOPD involves a change in the composition of the circulating immune system which may contribute to the ongoing immunopathology in the lung. Supported by NIH-NIDA P30DA-13429; DA25532; DA14230
LPS-Induced miR-155 Upregulation Modulates MOR Expression by Inhibiting PU.1. S Das1, S Roy2; 1Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000, 2Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000
Mammalian microRNAs (miRNAs) have recently emerged as potent regulators of gene expression in activated acquired and innate immune responses including development, differentiation, and homeostasis. In addition, mechanistic studies have suggested that these processes are crucially dependent upon the interaction between miRNAs and transcription factors. The current study was aimed at investigating the role of miR155 in modulating LPS-induced mu opioid receptor (MOR) expression. Our preliminary miRNA array data suggested miRNA-155 as one of the miRNAs being upregulated when stimulated with LPS. Our findings suggested that LPS upregulated miR-155 expression in murine J774 cells. Morphine alone did not have any effect, while morphine in combination with LPS decreased LPS-induced miR-155 overexpression. We also tested the target genes for miR-155. The two major target genes we found were PU.1 and C/EBPb. In our studies, both transcription factors were negatively regulated by miR155, confirming them as its target. Since PU.1 has also been shown to interact with MOR gene in sequence-specific manner, thereby negatively regulating MOR gene expression, we tested the same in our model. LPS stimulation also increased MOR gene expression. Therefore, in our model, LPS by inducing miR-155 negatively regulates PU.1, thereby upregulating MOR gene expression. We are further investigating the roles of other transcription factors like NFkB and how they regulate LPS-mediated miR155 upregulation and MOR gene expression. Supported by RO1 DA12104, RO1 DA022935, KO2 DA015349, P50 DA11806 (to S.R.)
Progressive Neurodegeneration in HIV-1 Infected CD34 Cord Blood Cell Reconstituted Immunodeficient Mice. PK Dash1, S Gorantla1, M Mellon1, E Mcintyre1, HA Gelbard2, HE Gendelman1, MD Boska1, LY Poluektova1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-0000, 2Dept. of Neurology, Pediatrics and Microbiology, University of Rochester Medical Center, New York, NY 14642-0000
The objective of this study was to determine the time-dependent functional central nervous system (CNS) alterations following HIV-1 infection in humanized mice. NOD/SCID-IL-2R g−/− mice were reconstituted with human cord blood CD34+ cells. Mice were infected with the laboratory-adapted HIV-1ADA strain and CNS deficits assessed during progressive viral infection using quantitative 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) acquired at 4 and 8 weeks after viral infection. Mice were bled once every 2 weeks and the sera analyzed for HIV-1 viral RNA by the COBAS AMPLICOR test. Blood cells were stained for human CD45, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, and CD14 and analyzed by flow cytometry. Viral load in peripheral blood increased from 2 to 8 weeks after virus exposure. Flow cytometric analyses clearly demonstrated reductions in CD4+ T cells by 8 weeks after HIV infection. Immunohistochemical analysis of infected brains demonstrated human cell infiltration into the CNS with activation of microglia and astrocytes. While 1H MRS showed no significant alterations in the hippocampus or the brainstem/pons regions, diminished N-acetyl aspartate levels at 8 weeks were seen in the cerebellum and the cerebral cortex, demonstrating early neurodegeneration. This multiplex study of HIV-1-infected of humanized mice provides a model system to assess in vivo functional changes in the brain following progressive viral infection. Future studies will determine the time course of neurodegeneration and the effectiveness of therapeutic interventions for CNS disease following HIV-1 infection.
Role of NFkB in IL-1beta-Mediated C3 Gene Regulation. PK Datta1, J Rappaport1, DW Kim2; 1Neuroscience, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000, 2Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Changwon National University, Changwon , Korea
Uncontrolled complement component C3 synthesis as a result of excessive IL-1beta synthesis as observed in patients with acute (stroke, trauma) and chronic (HIV dementia, Alzheimer’s disease) neurodegenerative diseases can be injurious to host tissue. Our previous studies have demonstrated that IL-1beta induces C3 expression in a CAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-dependent manner. In this study, we investigated the role of NFkB in IL-1beta-mediated regulation of C3 expression in astrocytic cells. Our results demonstrate that overexpression of NFkB subunits p65, p50, and c-rel induces C3 promoter activity. Furthermore, pre-incubation of astrocytic cells with SC-514, an inhibitor of NFkB signaling, or overexpression of a dominant negative mutant of IkBalpha inhibits IL-1beta-mediated C3 expression. Our studies also demonstrate that overexpression of NIK activated C3 expression, and this expression was inhibited by co-transfection of a wild-type IKK-gamma expression plasmid. Our results suggest that overexpression of IKK-gamma inhibits activation of NFKB by NIK by competing with NIK for interaction with IKK-gamma. Supported by NIDA
Anti-inflammatory Actions of the Opioid Receptor Antagonist, β-Funaltrexamine: Implications in Neuroinflammation.RL Davis1, DJ Buck1, S Aravind1, N Saffarian1, CW Stevens1; 1Department of Pharmacology/Physiology, Oklahoma State University Ctr for Health Sciences, Tulsa, OK 74107-0000
Increasing evidence suggests that astroglial-mediated inflammation is instrumental in the neuronal damage observed in neuroinflammatory pathologies. For instance, astrocyte-derived chemokines, such as CCL2 and CXCL10, seem to contribute to the pathology of neuroAIDS. We have modeled an integral component of neuroinflammation associated with HIV-1 infection by exposing human astroglial cells to tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α, HIV-1 Tat1-72, and bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). These pro-inflammatory mediators induce NF-κB activation and subsequent CCL2 and CXCL10 induction. We have discovered that the opioid receptor antagonist, β-funaltrexamine (β-FNA) inhibits pro-inflammatory-induced astroglial chemokine expression. Furthermore, we have utilized HEK-293 reporter cells (HEK-Blue4) to assess signaling through the toll-like receptor (TLR)4-NF-κB pathway. Initial findings demonstrate that TLR4 signaling is also inhibited by β-FNA. To date, our data suggest that modulation of NF-κB activation may be involved in the anti-inflammatory actions of β-FNA. Studies are ongoing to further elucidate the mechanism by which β-FNA inhibits inflammatory signaling, particularly in human astroglia. Insights gained are expected to be instrumental in the development of therapeutic strategies to prevent and/or treat neuroinflammation. Supported by NIH/NINDS R15 NS 062664
Cannabinoid Modulation of Matrix Metalloproteinase Induced by the HIV-1 Protein Tat. G de Almeida Ferreira1, ES Raborn1, AD Lafrenaye2, GA Cabral1; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0678, 2Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0709
The dysregulation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is thought to play an important role in the dissemination of HIV-1 and associated neuropathies. Secreted MMPs cleave components of the extracellular matrix, facilitating the migration of cells through the blood–brain barrier into the central nervous system (CNS) and altering trafficking of chronically activated immune cells. Macrophages and microglia are important targets of HIV-1 which, upon infection, release a plethora of factors including the viral regulatory protein Tat. In response to Tat, activated cells secrete inflammatory mediators and proteases such as MMPs. In the present study, human monocytic U937 cells and primary neonatal rat microglia were employed using an in vitro invasion model to assess the effects of the cannabinoid partial agonist delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) on MMP activity and cell migration in response to Tat. Using gel zymography and Western immunoblotting to MMP-2 and MMP-9, it was demonstrated that Tat-induced increase in the production of MMPs by these cells was inhibited by THC. In addition, it was shown that Tat-induced increase in cell migration was inhibited by the metalloproteinase inhibitor 1,10-phenantroline and by THC. These results suggest that select cannabinoids have the potential to alter migration of cells through extracellular matrices in response to the HIV protein Tat by inhibiting the expression of MMPs. Supported by NIH/NIDA DA005832
Evidence of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension in the HIV Transgenic Rat Model.NK Dhillon1, F Li1, S Buch2, A Ladner3; 1Dept of Physiology, University of Kansas Meical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160-0000, 2Dept of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-0000, 3Dept of Pulmonary/Critical Care Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160-0000
Rationale: The clinical syndrome of HIV-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension (HIV-PAH) is a serious complication of HIV infection. While the prevalence of clinical HIV-PAH is 0.5%, recent reports shed some insight into subclinical arteriopathic phenomena through their report of elevated pulmonary arterial systolic pressures in 35% of asymptomatic individuals with known HIV infection. The possible identification of early changes within the pulmonary vascular bed may offer preemptive therapeutic opportunities and deserves attention. In this study, we have used HIV-transgenic (Tg) rat model as a biological tool to explore the association of pulmonary arteriopathy and HIV-1.The lungs from 4- to 5-month-old HIV-Tg rat and wild-type controls were assessed for pulmonary arteriopathy, right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH), and for the expression of mediators associated with PAH. HIV-Tg rats demonstrated significant medial hypertrophy of pulmonary vessels and increased right ventricular hypertrophy. The real-time RT-PCR analysis suggested an increase in the expression of HIF-1 alpha, IL-18, and PDGF-B mRNA in lung extracts from HIV-TG rat compared with wild-type controls. The increase in the expression of these mediators was linearly correlated with the increase in RVH as measured by RV/LV+septum ratio. Our report of pulmonary arteriopathy with right heart hypertrophy in a HIV-Tg rat model may warrant an increased focus on the screening and monitoring of HIV-infected patients for HIV-PAH and offer therapeutic targets. Supported by Parker B. Francis Fellowship (ND), NIH-AI080280-01(ND), Joseph A.Cates Foundation (AOL)
Role of Gap Junction and Maxi Channels in Astrocytes During the Pathogenesis of NeuroAIDS.EA Eugenin1; 1Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461-0000
HIV entry into the central nervous system (CNS) is an early event after infection, resulting in neurological dysfunction in a significant number of individuals. As people with AIDS live longer, the prevalence of cognitive impairment is increasing despite antiretroviral therapy. The mechanisms that mediate CNS dysfunction are still not well understood and include inflammation, viral presence, and/or replication. Our laboratory demonstrated that gap junction, electrical synapses, and maxi channels, hemichannels of connexin and pannexin-1, as well as ATP receptors in astrocytes play a key role in the amplification of inflammation and toxicity within the CNS, BBB integrity, and neuronal function. Our findings describe a novel mechanism of toxicity within the brain triggered by low numbers of HIV-infected astrocytes and amplified by gap junction and maxi channels, contributing to the pathogenesis of NeuroAIDS. Supported by NIH MH076679
A Dual Role for Cannabinoid Receptor 2 (CB2) Agonists in Protecting the Blood–Brain Barrier Against Inflammatory Insult. S Fan1, SH Ramirez1, N Reichenbach1, R Potula1, H Dykstra1, Y Persidsky1; 1Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000
The cerebral vascular endothelium provides the protective blood–brain barrier (BBB) interface. By restricting the entry of blood components, including immune cells, the BBB regulates the delicate milieu optimal for neuronal communication. Inflammatory responses diminish BBB integrity, leading to neuronal dysfunction. Therefore, pharmacological strategies that feature anti-inflammatory and barrier-enhancing properties may prevent BBB breakdown under inflammatory conditions. To this end, we sought to evaluate whether CB2 stimulation (1) down-regulate pro-inflammatory genes in TNFa stimulated primary human microvascular endothelial cells (BMVEC) and (2) enhance barrier function. Using the Taqman Gene Signature Array for human immune responses, the expression of 92 pro-inflammatory genes was evaluated in BMVEC exposed to CB2 agonist alone (O-1966 or JWH-133), TNFa, or TNFa with CB2 agonist. Analysis of fold regulation revealed that the following genes were markedly inhibited by either of the CB2 agonists: CCL2, CSF1, IP10, CXCL11, ICAM-1, and NOS2A. In addition, agonist O-1966 attenuated the expression of many genes that were not decreased by JWH-133 (such as CCL5 and CCL19), suggesting a differential potency of the CB2 agonist. Evaluation of barrier function showed that CB2 agonists increased transendothelial electrical resistance and up-regulated membranous expression of tight junction proteins, occludin and claudin-5. These results indicate that CB2 agonist may benefit the BBB by dampening inflammatory response and strengthening barrier function. Supported by NIDA and NIAAA
C/EBPbeta Regulates Astrocyte TIMP-1 During Neuroinflammation. JA Fields1, K Borgmann1, A Ghorpade1; 1Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107-0000
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated neurocognitive disorders comprise several complications of which HIV-associated dementia (HAD) is the most devastating. The disease is characterized by an accumulation of infected macrophages/microglia in the central nervous system (CNS) which causes neuroinflammation. Astrocytes are the most numerous cell type of the CNS and are essential to maintaining homeostasis and proper neural function. Neuroinflammation activates astrocytes, causing astrogliosis and affecting their gene expression. One important multifunctional molecule expressed predominantly by astrocytes is tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease-1 (TIMP), the inducible form of a family of four TIMPs that are the natural antagonists of matrix metalloproteases (MMP). An altered MMP/TIMP ratio is believed to contribute to several diseases of the CNS including HAD. TIMP-1 levels are decreased in HAD patients. In vitro, immune-stimulated astrocytes initially increase TIMP-1 expression, but over time, levels decrease. The mechanism for this switch is unknown. We identified a novel CAAT site at -310 of the promoter that when deleted increases promoter activity. Treating astrocytes with HAD-relevant stimuli robustly increases C/EBPbeta expression, and the transcription factor is localized to the nucleus. Knockdown of C/EBPbeta increases TIMP-1 mRNA levels after 3 days of stimulation. Overexpressing C/EBPbeta in astrocytes decreases TIMP-1 promoter activity. This work begins to unravel the mechanism causing the decrease in astrocyte TIMP-1 in neuroinflammation. Supported by NIH-Neurobiology of Aging
Molecular Basis for Kappa-Opioid Regulation of Chemokine Receptor Expression. MJ Finley1, TJ Rogers1; 1Fels Institute for Cancer Research & Molecular Bio, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000
We report here that activation of the kappa opioid receptor (KOR) down-regulates transcription of the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4. Transcription factor array analysis revealed a possible involvement of the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) and interferon regulatory factor (IRF) pathways in this process. STAT activation following KOR stimulation by the KOR-specific agonist, U50,488H, resulted in Janus kinase (JAK)-dependent phosphorylation of STAT3. Increased mRNA and protein production of interferon regulatory factors (IRF) 1 and 2 have been detected by real-time PCR. Using a bioinformatic approach to search for potential transcription elements, IRF elements have been identified in both the CCR5 and CXCR4 promoters. In addition, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays have demonstrated binding of IRFs within the promoter region of CXCR4. This suggests a direct mechanism of IRF suppression of CXCR4 transcription. Characterization of this novel pathway linking opioid and interferon signaling pathways will have several benefits, including the potential use of KOR agonists as therapeutic tools for the treatment of HIV-1 infection or certain inflammatory diseases. Supported by NIH grants: DA14230, DA16544, and P30 DA13429
Sublethal Changes of Synaptic Organization and Function in Hippocampal CA1 Neurons Accompany Spatial Learning Deficits in HIV-1 Transgenic Mice. S Fitting1, PE Knapp2, AE Medina2, W Guido2, KF Hauser1; 1Virginia Commonwealth Univ., Dept. Pharmacol. Toxicol., Richmond, VA 23298-0000, 2Virginia Commonwealth Univ., Dept. Anat. Neurobiol., Richmond, VA 23298-0000
HIV-associated cognitive impairment, including memory dysfunction, continues to be a major clinical manifestation of advanced HIV infection. To assess whether HIV Tat is responsible for disrupting neuronal plasticity and cognitive impairment, we used a GFAP-driven, doxycycline (DOX)-inducible Tat transgenic mouse model and examined structure–activity relationships in hippocampal pyramidal CA1 neurons using morphologic (Golgi impregnations) and electrophysiological approaches. First, we examined the effects of Tat induction on structural changes by assessing the number of dendritic spines and neuronal TUNEL reactivity in CA1 neurons. Second, we examined the effects of Tat induction on synaptic function by assessing long-term potentiation (LTP) of field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) at Schaffer collateral/commissural fiber-CA1 synapses. Third, we examined the effects of Tat induction on spatial learning in the Morris water maze. Data showed a Tat-induced disruption of spatial learning as well as a suppression of LTP in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. Additionally, the loss of function coincided with increased dendritic pathology with significantly reduced numbers of spines but without overt neuronal death. Collectively, our data indicate that non-lethal pathologic structural and functional changes in dendrites and synapses caused by Tat were sufficient to disrupt spatial memory. Based on the present findings, we speculate that Tat-induced structural and functional deficits in neurons underlie the cognitive dysfunction seen in patients infected with HIV-1. Supported by NIDA DA19398 and DA27374
HIV-1 Tat and Opioid Interactive Comorbidity: Morphine Exacerbates Inflammation and Accelerates Neuronal Injury in the Striatum. S Fitting1, C Bull2, SK Buch3, R Xu2, N El-hage1, A Nath4, PE Knapp2, KF Hauser1; 1Virginia Commonwealth Univ., Dept. Pharmacol. Toxicol., Richmond, VA 23298-0000, 2Virginia Commonwealth Univ., Dept. Anat. Neurobiol., Richmond, VA 23298-0000, 3Univ. Kentucky, Dept. Anat., Lexington, KY 40536-0000, 4John Hopkins Univ., Dept. Neurol., Baltimore, MD 21287-0000
HIV-1-infected individuals who abuse opiates show an increased risk of CNS complications compared to either affliction alone. To assess whether morphine interacts with HIV Tat to increase CNS inflammation and disrupt neuronal synaptic organization, a GFAP-driven, doxycycline (DOX)-inducible Tat transgenic mice model was used to explore alterations in Golgi-impregnated striatal spiny neurons. Tat induction caused detectable Tat expression throughout the brain as assessed by immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry. Morphine exposure caused synergistic increases in Tat-induced MCP-1/CCL2 production, astrogliosis, and microgliosis at 2 or 7 days. Sustained Tat induction with morphine co-exposure significantly reduced spine density while causing synergistic dendritic pathology, including the formation of bead-like varicosities and/or fragmentation. Morphine effects were typically antagonized by naltrexone. Collectively, Tat induction caused increased cytokine production (RANTES/CCL5, IL-6), dendritic pathology, and spine losses, while morphine co-exposure potentiated MCP-1/CCL2 production and dendritic pathology. Because similar types of degenerative changes in dendrites can be reversible in other systems, we speculate that the neurocognitive defects accompanying chronic HIV-opioid abuse comorbidity may involve reversible alterations in neuronal organization. Supported by NIDA DA19398 and DA27374
Histone Deacetylase Activity in Development of HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorder. N Gandhi1, M Agudelo1, Z Saiyed1, T Samikkannu1, J Napuri1, P Khatavkar1, M Nair1; 1Immunology/INIP/College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199-0000
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a pivotal role in epigenetic regulation of transcription and homeostasis of protein acetylation in histones and other proteins involved in chromatin remodeling. Previous studies report histone hypoacetylation and transcriptional dysfunction in a variety of neurodegenerative disorders. More recently, neuron-specific overexpression of HDAC2 has been shown to modulate synaptic plasticity and learning behavior in mice. However, the role of HDAC2 in the development of HIV-1-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) is not reported. We hypothesize that HIV-1 tat protein may upregulate HDAC2 leading to transcriptional repression of neuroprotective genes in neuronal cells, thereby contributing to the progression of HAND. We evaluated the effect of HIV-1 Tat protein on HDAC2 gene expression by qRT-PCR and protein expression by flow cytometry in neuroblastoma cells, SKNMC, and primary neuronal cultures. Results indicate upregulation of HDAC2 by Tat treatment in a dose- and time-dependant manner. Furthermore, HDAC2 overexpression was associated with concomitant downregulation in Camk2a, BDNF, and CREB gene expression which are known to regulate neuronal functions. The observed effects were specifically reversed by treatment with HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A. Thus, our results for the first time indicate the possible role of HDAC2 in the development of HAND. Therefore, the use of HDAC2-specific inhibitor in combination with HAART may be of therapeutic value in the treatment of neurocognitive disorders observed in HIV-1-infected individuals. Supported by NIDA
Cerebellum Astrocytes: Defender of the Brain Cells in Alcohol Abuse.J Haorah1, TJ Rump1, A Lamb1, C Haorei1, Y Persidsky2; 1Dept. of Pharmacology and Exp. Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-0000, 22Dept. of Pathology and Lab Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000
Immediate sign of alcohol abuse include impaired coordination of movement, balance, vision, and cognitive function, indicating cerebellum as a key target. Clinical symptoms and pathology of Wernickes encephalopathy support the evidence that cerebellum is a target organ of chronic alcohol abuse. We identify the putative underlying molecular, biochemical, and cellular mechanisms of how the cerebellum possibly regulates the CNS response to alcohol intoxication and the aftermath neurological effects. Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDH2, ALDH1A1) mostly localized in cerebellar astrocytes control the mechanism. ALDHs protein reduction in mice cerebellum from chronic alcohol or thiamine deficiency diets correlated with increased gliosis and neuronal loss, whereas co-administration of acetyl-l-carnitine (ALC) with alcohol diet stabilized the cerebellar astrocytic ALDHs, reduced the sign of astroglial activation, and neuronal loss. ALC significantly delayed the onset of muscle atrophy and prolonged the life span of mice in thiamine-deficient diets. Co-culture of primary human neurons with astrocytes, endothelial cells, or microglia with/without ALC confirmed the neuroprotective effects of astrocytes from ethanol toxicity by stabilizing ALDHs protein. These findings suggest that inherent cerebellum ALDHs activity controls the underlying switch mechanism of beneficial or deleterious effects of alcohol in the brain. Furthermore, stabilization of ALDHs protein and preventive effects on thiamine deficiency warrant dietary supplementation of ALC for chronic alcohol abusers. Supported by NIH/NIAAA grants AA017398-01, AA016403-01A2
A Reagent Toolkit for Analyzing CB2 Receptor Expression and Function in Human Cells. A Harui1, SM Kiertscher1, C Remillard1, AJ Karon1, P Gangalum1, MD Roth1; 1Division of Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1690
Delta-9-THC (THC) has immunoregulatory effects on human immune cells. While it has been hypothesized that the CB2 receptor mediates these effects, immune cells also express mRNA for CB1 and could be susceptible to receptor-independent effects. We are therefore developing an expanded toolkit of reagents for analyzing CB2 receptor expression and function in human cells. Adenoviral and lentiviral vectors capable of expressing full-length human CB2 in a transient or stable fashion, respectively, were constructed. CB2 expression by cell lines and primary human cells can be manipulated with these reagents. Corresponding shRNA sequences are being screened to produce knockdown vectors capable of down-regulating CB2 expression. In a test cell line, biologic responses to THC correlated with CB2 receptor modulation. The final toolkit reagents are for characterizing CB2 expression. A monoclonal anti-CB2 receptor antibody was optimized for detecting CB2 receptor on the surface of human cells by FACS analysis. Using this reagent, fresh human peripheral blood B cells and monocytes from normal donors were found to express cell surface CB2. In contrast, CB2 expression by CD8 cells was found to be low and variable, while CD4 cells were not stained. Modulation of CB2 receptor protein on immune cells by different activation and differentiation signals is under study and will be correlated to mRNA expression by real-time RT-PCR. This toolkit should allow the immunobiology of human CB2 receptor to be studied in greater detail. Supported by NIDA/NIH R21-DA021813 and R01-DA03018
A Genomic Analysis Designed to Correlate Virologic Biomarkers with Neurocognitive Impairment in Aging HIV Seropositives. J Hogan1, D Anisman-posner1, N Boukli3, K Goodkin2, G Baldwin1; 1Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-0000, 2Psychology and Biobehavioral Science, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048-0000, 3Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Universidad Central del Caribe School of Medicine , Bayamon, 00960
There is consensus that older age is associated with an increased likelihood of HIV-associated dementia; however, studies correlating age with mild neurocognitive disorder and asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment in HIV-seropositive individuals are less compelling. We have undertaken a longitudinal study to determine the extent to which aging affects the progression of HIV-1 infection in terms of neuropsychological test performance and impairment, HIV-1-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND), functional status in activities of daily living, immunologic measures, and virologic measures. In terms of virologic biomarkers of disease, we have developed a standardized microchip assay to measure HIV gene expression in PBMCs derived from our study cohort, which includes older and younger HIV-seropositive individuals at varying stages of neurocognitive impairment and disorder. The first-generation custom gene array includes structural and regulatory HIV genes as well as inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and chemokine receptor genes. The samples remain blinded as to age and neurocognitive status; however, HIV-1 serostatus is known. In the HIV-1-seropositive subjects, preliminary results indicate up-regulation of IL-5 and CCR5 (5-fold) and down-regulation of CCL2 (4-fold), relative to samples from HIV-1-seronegative subjects. Although our results are preliminary, we have established an experimental framework that will allow us to determine if virologic biomarkers of HIV disease correlate with an age-associated decline in neurocognitive function. Supported by NIH/NIMH R01 MH058532
Natural Killer T Cells Inhibit HIV Infection of Macrophages. W Hou1, X Wang2, L Ye2, L Zhou1, L Song2, WZ Ho2; 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000, 2Institute of Medical Virology, Wuhan University School of Basic Medical Science, Wuhan, 430071
Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a crucial component of the host innate immune system and play an important role in defense against viral infections. However, the role of NKT cells in the control of HIV infection remains to be determined. We investigated the non-cytolytic anti-HIV-1 activity of primary NKT cells in human macrophages. Supernatants (SN) collected from NKT cell cultures inhibited HIV infection and replication. This NKT SN-mediated anti-HIV-1 activity is broad as NKT SN could inhibit infection by both laboratory-adapted and clinical strains of HIV. The antibody to interferon (IFN)-γ could block NKT SN-mediated anti-HIV effect. Investigation of mechanism(s) responsible for the NKT action showed that NKT SN upregulated the expression of signal transducer and activator of transcription-1 (STAT-1) and STAT-2 and enhanced the expression of IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) 1, 7, and 9, resulting in the induction of endogenous IFN-γ/γ expression in macrophages. Moreover, NKT SN induced the expression of CC-chemokines, the ligands for CCR5. The antibodies to CC-chemokines (MIP-1α, MIP-1β, and RANTES) significantly blocked NKT SN-mediated anti-HIV activity. These findings indicate that NKT cells have a critical role in innate immune cell-mediated defense against HIV-1 infection. Supported by DA 12815, DA 25477 and DA 22177 (to WZ Ho); China National Natural Science Foundation grants 30972754 (to W Hou)
Cannabinoids Inhibit HIV-1 gp120-Induced Glutamate Receptor Activity in Human Cortical Neurons: Implication of Attenuating Glutamate-Triggered Neurotoxicity. S Hu1, WS Sheng1, PK Peterson1, RB Rock1; 1CIDMTR, University of Minnesota Medical school, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 gp120 has been implicated in HIV neuropathogenesis. Reports have shown that gp120 is neurotoxic and the toxicity is partially mediated by enhanced glutamate release and activation of glutamate receptors. Using high-affinity radiolabeled 3H-glutamate receptor binding assay, we found in this study that treatment of highly enriched human cortical neuronal cultures with gp120 for 3 days increased glutamate receptor activity. Furthermore, in the presence of glutamate, gp120 pretreatment potentiated neurotoxicity of human cortical neuronal cultures. Cannabinoids have been shown to have anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective properties. Therefore, we sought to investigate the effects of cannabinoid agonists on the gp120-treated human cortical neuronal cultures. Our preliminary results showed that pretreatment with synthetic cannabinoid agonist WIN55,212-2 (300 nM) downregulated gp120-induced glutamate receptor activity, suggesting a possible neuroprotective mechanism. We will continue to study the effects of cannabinoids on gp120 and glutamate-treated neuronal cultures to delineate their mechanisms involved in the neuroprotection. Supported by NIH/DA025525
Methamphetamine Alters Fundamental Relationships Between Immune, Viral, and Blood–Brain Barrier Measures in Simian Immunodeficiency Virus-Infected Rhesus Macaques (Macaca mulatta). J Jiang1, S Sankaran2, S Dandekar2, J Capitanio1; 1California National Primate Research Center, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616-0000, 2Dept. of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616-0000
Methamphetamine (METH) has been associated with alterations in cognition and blood–brain barrier function in HIV infection, but the extent of METHs influence is unclear. We tested the hypothesis that METH exerts its effects by altering the relationships between blood–brain barrier (BBB), immune, and viral measures. Adult male rhesus monkeys were randomly assigned to groups, received twice daily i.m. injections of either METH (0.75 mg/kg, n = 11) or saline (n = 10), and were inoculated with SIVmac251. Among saline-treated animals, we found expected relationships among variables that were strong and significant: a stronger SIV-specific IgG response at week 8 post-inoculation (p.i.) was associated with fewer activated monocytes (CD14+CD16+; r = −0.89) at week 8 p.i., lower viral set point at week 10 p.i. (r = −0.603), and a lower ratio of CSF/serum albumin (r = −0.81), a measure of BBB integrity. Similarly, the number of activated monocytes was positively correlated with viral load (r = 0.71) and albumin ratio (r = 0.78). There were no significant differences between METH and saline animals for any measures (all p > 0.16), but the correlation coefficients among the four measures for the METH animals were all non-significant. Moreover, four of the five correlation coefficients for saline animals were significantly (or nearly significant) different from the corresponding coefficients for the METH animals. These results indicate that METH leads to major disruptions in immune control of the virus and suggest examination of lymphoid tissue to understand the mechanisms of this alteration. Supported by NIDA/DA024441
Mechanisms by Which Cannabidiol Enhances T Cell Function. B Kaplan1, L Topper1, N Lichorobiec1, N Kaminski1; 1Center for Integrative Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-0000
While cannabinoid compounds have been historically characterized as immunosuppressive, there are conditions under which cannabinoids enhance immune function. For instance, the non-psychoactive cannabinoid, cannabidiol (CBD), differentially modulates IL-2 and IFN-γ production depending on the magnitude to which T cells are activated. Using phorbol ester plus calcium ionophore (P/I) to stimulate cytokine production, CBD suppressed or enhanced cytokine production in response to optimal P/I (40 nM/0.5 µM) or suboptimal P/I (4 nM/0.05 µM), respectively. Thus, the objectives of these studies were to characterize the mechanisms by which CBD enhances immune function in primary murine T cells. CBD increases intracellular calcium in resting lymphocytes, which is exacerbated by P/I regardless of the concentration of P/I used, suggesting that the differential regulation of cytokine production might be mediated by the concentration of intracellular calcium. Moreover, the trend of cytokine production was similar to that of nuclear protein expression of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), a calcium-dependent transcription factor important for IL-2 and IFN-γ production. Finally, using FACS analysis, CBD induced IL-2 from CD4+ T cells, whereas CBD induced IFN-γ from CD8+ T cells. Overall, these results demonstrate that cannabinoids enhance cytokine production in response to suboptimal T cell activation and suggest that cannabinoids should be classified as immunomodulatory. Supported by NIDA DA007908
Behavioral and Physiological Evaluation of the Biological Determinants of Methamphetamine-Induced Behavior in HIV-1 Transgenic Rats During Development. MD Kass1, M Vigorito1, X Liu1, L Chang2, SL Chang1; 1Institute of NeuroImmune Pharmacology, Seton Hall University, South Orange, NJ 07079-0000, 2Dept of Medicine, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813-0000
We have recently shown (1) that methamphetamine (METH) induced greater behavioral sensitization (BS) in adult HIV-1 transgenic (HIV-1 Tg) rats than in adult Fischer 344/NHsd (F344) strain background control animals, (2) that the HIV-1 Tg rat has metabolic abnormalities, and (3) that environmental modulation of METH-induced behavior can be differentiated from HIV-associated biological determinants of behavior. Thus, we hypothesized that METH-induced disturbances in brain metabolism and behavior would be affected by both the persistent presence of viral proteins and developmental factors. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of METH on the brains of adolescent versus adult HIV-1 Tg rats using both behavioral (METH-induced stereotypic head movement) and physiological (rectal body temperature) parameters. We found that both the acute and BS effects of METH were greater in HIV-1 Tg rats compared to controls and also in adolescent rats compared to adult animals regardless of HIV-1 status. We determined that acute hyperthermic effects of METH as well as tolerance to METH-induced hyperthermia were greater in HIV-1 Tg rats than in controls. Taken together, these results suggest that both the neuroadaptations seen in HIV infection and the immaturity of the adolescent brain are associated with increased sensitivity to the psychoactive and BS properties of METH. Thus, HIV-infected individuals and adolescents may be more vulnerable to the development of METH abuse and dependence than non-infected individuals and adults. Supported by National Institute on Drug Abuse/DA016149 to SLC
Activation of CB2 Cannabinoid Receptors Inhibits gp120-Induced Synapse Loss. HJ Kim1, SA Thayer1; 1Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection of the CNS is associated with dendritic and synaptic damage. Synapse loss correlates better with cognitive decline than cell loss in patients with HIV-1 associated dementia (HAD). HAD is due in part to the release of viral proteins from infected cells. Because cannabinoids modulate neurotoxic and inflammatory processes, we investigated their effects on changes in synaptic connections induced by the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein gp120. Morphology and synapses between cultured hippocampal neurons were visualized by confocal imaging of neurons expressing DsRed2 and postsynaptic density protein 95 fused to GFP (PSD95-GFP). Twenty-four-hour treatment with gp120 IIIB decreased the number of PSD95-GFP puncta by 37 ± 4%. The decrease was time- and concentration-dependent (EC50 = 195 ± 79 pM). Synapse loss preceded cell death. Pretreatment with AMD3100, IL-1 ra, or MK801 significantly reduced gp120-induced synapse loss, indicating that sequential activation of the CXCR4 receptor, the IL-1 receptor, and the NMDA receptor was required. Expression of ARF, which inhibits the ubiquitin ligase MDM2, protected synapses, implicating the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The cannabinoid receptor full agonist WIN55,212-2 inhibited gp120-induced PSD loss in a manner reversed by the CB2 receptor antagonist AM630. These results indicate that cannabinoids prevent the impairment of network function produced by gp120 and thus might have therapeutic potential in HAD. Supported by Grants DA07304 and DA024428 from NIDA.
Effect of Alcohol on Cytochrome P450 in Monocytes/Macrophages: Implications in Anti-retroviral Therapy and Oxidative Stress. S. Kumar1, M. Jin1, P. Silverstein1, A. Kumar1; 1Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108-0000
Cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage are not only known to function as an important HIV-1 reservoir but have also been demonstrated to require higher concentrations of antiretroviral therapeutic drugs (ART) for effective inhibition of viral replication. Alcohol abuse is known to reduce the therapeutic efficacy of ART that are metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) system. In addition, CYP enzymes play an important role in oxidative stress, which is an important mediator of HIV pathogenesis. The present study is designed to assess the effect of alcohol on the CYP enzymes involved in ART metabolism (CYP2B6, CYP2D6), oxidative stress (CYP2A6, CYP2E1), and both (CYP3A4). The CYP expressions in U937 monocytes/macrophages were determined by mRNA quantification and protein analysis. The mRNA levels relative to GAPDH (housekeeping gene) were CYP2A6 (1%), CYP2E1 and CYP3A4 (0.1%), and CYP2B6 and CYP2D6 (∼0.001%). The protein levels of these CYP were consistent with their respective mRNA levels. Alcohol caused upregulation of the mRNA levels of CYP2A6 (3-fold), CYP2B6 (2.5-fold), CYP2E1 (5-fold), and CYP3A4 (2.4-fold) compared with the control. The upregulation of these CYP was also confirmed by protein analysis. Furthermore, the activity of oxidative stress marker enzymes showed a significant increase in activity in alcohol-treated samples. Thus, the results suggest that alcohol leads to: (1) a decrease in response to ART as a result of their increased metabolism by CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 and (2) an increase in oxidative stress by enhanced expression of CYP2A6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4. Supported by Start-up funds KBE78
Genome-Wide Association Study of HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorders: Preliminary Report. AJ Levine1, S Service2, N Freimer3, EJ Singer1; 1National Neurological AIDS Bank, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90025-0000, 2Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Behavior, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90024-0000, 3Southern California Genotyping Consortium, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90024-0000
Improved healthcare access and pharmaceutical therapies have prolonged the lives of HIV+ individuals. However, this has resulted in an increasing prevalence of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). Factors affecting risk for HAND include older age, substance use, and the presence of certain comorbid medical conditions. In addition, candidate gene studies have identified a handful of genes believed to have a role in the neuropathogenesis of HAND. Unfortunately, the results of such candidate gene studies have been difficult to replicate. More recently, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have become the method of choice for identifying genetic factors associated with disease. For example, a recent GWA identified novel genes associated with disease progression in HIV/AIDS. The success of this method in identifying genetic markers associated with HIV disease progression suggests that it will help clarify the neuropathogenesis of HAND. Towards this goal, we describe here the preliminary results of a GWA study of HAND. Over 350,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in a well-characterized sample of 1,230 HIV+ individuals from the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study. We examined two phenotypes: (1) progression of neurocognitive deficits and (2) time to dementia using Cox proportional hazards model. This preliminary report will evolve into a much larger study involving over 4,000 HIV+ individuals. Ultimately, this investigation may lead to the identification of pharmaceutical targets for those with or at risk for HAND. Supported by UCLA-AIDS Institute and the UCLA Center for AIDS Research-AI28697 and National Institute of Drug Abuse-1R03DA026099-01
Involvement of KV1.3 Channel in Microglia-Induced Neurotoxicity. J Liu1, C Xu1, L Chen1, B Katafoasz1, H Xiong1; 1Dept. Pharmacol. & Exp. Neurosci., University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5880
Inflammatory responses mediated by activated microglia play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of HIV-1-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). As such, studies on the identification of specific targets to control microglia activation and resultant neurotoxic activity are imperative. Increasing evidence indicates that voltage-gated K+ (Kv) channels are involved in the regulation of microglia functionality. In this study, we investigated role of Kv1.3 channels in gp120-induced neurotoxic activity in primary rat microglia cultures. Our results showed that incubation of microglia with gp120 increased the expression levels of Kv1.3 mRNA and protein, which were significantly blocked by Kv channel blockers 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) and tetraethylammonium (TEA). In parallel, whole cell patch-clamp studies revealed that gp120 enhanced Kv1.3 currents in microglia. The association of gp120-induced enhancement of Kv1.3 current with microglia neurotoxic activity was demonstrated by experimental results that blockade of microglia Kv channels markedly inhibited microglia-induced neuronal injury, cytokine secretion, and NO production. TUNEL assay revealed that 4-AP and TEA reduced the numbers of apoptotic neurons induced by gp120-activated microglia from 33.8 ± 2.3% to 11.9 ± 4.5%, and 12.5 ± 5.0%, respectively. In addition, knockdown of Kv1.3 gene by transfection of Kv1.3-siRNA abrogated neurotoxicity mediated by gp120-activated microglia. Our data indicate that Kv1.3 channels regulate microglial neurotoxic activity and may function as the potential targets for the development of therapeutic strategies. Supported by NIH R01 NS041862
HIV-1 Pr55gag/env Virus-Like Particles (HIV VLPS) Induce Robust Pro-inflammatory Responses by Human Microglia. A Nettles1, S Hu1, W Sheng1, R Rock1, J Lokensgard1; 1CIDMTR Dept. of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000
Virus-like particles (VLPs) have been shown to be potent inducers of both innate and adaptive immune responses and have been widely used in vaccine studies. However, they may also be used to induce neuroinflammatory responses, including production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this study, we produced HIV-1 VLPs expressing surface gp120 using co-transfection of Pr55 gag-yellow fluorescent protein (YFP), Tat, and env plasmids: p3NL4-3env and p3NL(AD8)env. These HIV VLPs were quantified by p24 Ag ELISA as well as by their intrinsic Gag-YFP expression. HIV VLPs were also characterized for their gp120 expression using ELISA. Results obtained from this study demonstrated that CCR5- and CXCR4-utilizing HIV VLPs induced strong pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine responses from primary human microglial cells. Currently, we are investigating the interaction of HIV VLP surface gp120 with the CXCR4, CCR5, and CD4 receptors. In addition, we are examining the mechanisms of stimulation by blocking this interaction with antibodies and dissociating HIV VLPs with detergent or sonication. We are also currently assessing the induction of ROS and determining the extent of oxidative damage in murine brains after the administration of HIV VLPs. Supported by NIH/NIDA 5T32DA007097-27
Use of Drugs of Abuse Results in Altered Patterns of HIV-1 LTR Transcription Factor Binding Site Conservation During HIV Disease. M. Nonnemacher1, V Pirrone1, B Aiamkitsumrit1, N Parikh1, A Wojno1, B Blakey1, D Downie2, S Lewis2, J Jacobson2, B Wigdahl1; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102-0000, 2Division of Infectious Disease and HIV Medicine, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102-0000
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR) serves a number of critical functions in viral replication, one of which involves regulating the transcriptional activity of the integrated provirus. We have previously demonstrated that sequence variation at HIV-1 LTR C/EBP site I and Sp site III revealed sequence configurations that were found to increase in prevalence with disease severity and correlate with HIV-associated dementia (HAD). In contrast, LTR NF-κB sites I and II were highly conserved regardless of disease severity. Previous studies have demonstrated that substances of abuse modify HIV disease by altering the activation state of infected cells, resulting in a compromise of the immune system, thereby affecting viral replication. This in turn impacts the selection of viral quasispecies within a given patient. In conjunction with our ongoing analysis of the HIV-1 LTR transcription factor binding sites for specific genotypic variants that correlate with disease progression in the DREXELMED HIV-1 cohort, we have also characterized these sequence variations to determine if the use of drugs of abuse (specifically cocaine and cannabinoids) impacts the genotypic variants observed within these sites in LTRs isolated from patients in late stages of disease. To date, results have shown that the use of either substance results in an overall decreased binding site conservation; however, each binding site revealed a unique pattern of conservation relevant to the subtype B consensus sequence. Supported by NIDA R01 DA19807
Methamphetamine Alters Tight Junction Integrity Via NADPH Oxidase-Induced Oxidative Stress in Human Cerebral Endothelial Cells. M Park1, B Hennig2, M Toborek1; 1Department of Neurosurgery , University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington, KY 40536-0000, 2College of Agriculture, University of Kentucky , Lexington, KY 40536-0000
The blood–brain barrier (BBB) is formed by specialized brain endothelial cells interconnected by tight junctions (TJ) whose main function is to maintain the homeostasis of the CNS. Methamphetamine (METH) is an abused drug whose neurotoxic effects may be mediated in part by reactive oxygen species (ROS). Because generation of ROS may induce BBB dysfunction and neuroinflammatory responses in the brain, the present study focused on the role of NAD(P)H oxidase (NOX) as a possible source of METH-induced ROS generation in brain endothelial cells. NOX activity was markedly activated by a 30-min exposure to 10 μM METH in the human cerebral microvascular endothelial cell line (hCMEC/D3). These effects were associated with an increase in phosphorylation of p47 and bindings between p47 and gp91 or p22 NOX subunits. Importantly, treatment of hCMEC/D3 with METH resulted in a significant increase in ROS levels that was significantly attenuated by the NOX-specific inhibitor NSC 23766. Inhibition of NOX also protected against METH-induced alteration of expression of tight junction proteins, occludin and ZO-1, and transendothelial migration of monocytes. The present findings indicate the importance of NOX as a source of ROS generation in METH-mediated dysfunction of brain endothelial cells. In addition, they suggest that NOX may be a promising target in therapeutic strategies to protect against METH-induced disruption of the BBB and the development of neuroinflammation. Supported by DA027569, MH63022, MH072567, and NS39254
Quantitative Proteomic Profiling of the Caudate Nucleus During Chronic SIV/METH and SIV/Morphine-Associated CNS Dysfunction. G Pendyala1, JL Buescher1, HE Gendelman1, P Ciborowski1, SJ Buch1, HS Fox1; 1Department of Pharmacology & Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-0000
Despite substantive research efforts, the mechanisms underlying cognitive impairment resulting from HIV infection and drugs of abuse (DOA) are far from understood. While profiling of biofluids such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma have been useful to a certain extent, the real clues that can divulge CNS changes are by analyzing the brain itself. Our working hypothesis is that in the presence of a DOA, the harmful effects of SIV on the CNS are increased, thus leading to alterations in the synaptic proteome. Using isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomics approach, we analyzed the caudate, a target of both SIV/HIV and drugs of abuse such as methamphetamine (METH) and morphine for differential protein expression. Employing classical biochemical fractionation, we isolated purified synaptosomes that are subcellular structures containing the pre- and postsynaptic components and identified several membrane proteins including transporters, ion channels, and receptors to be differentially regulated. Amongst these, we found Na+/K+ ATPase alpha 3 (ATP1A3), a member of the Na+/K+ family of ATPases, to be upregulated in SIV-infected monkeys that were treated with METH or morphine. Given its role in establishing and maintaining the electrochemical gradients of Na+ and K+ ions across the plasma membrane and also for electrical excitability, we are currently performing validation studies. Future studies focus on using in vitro approaches to elucidate associated mechanistic clues during SIV/HIV and drugs of abuse comorbidity. Supported by NIH grants MH073490, MH062261 and DA026146
Mechanism of BBB Disruption by Methamphetamine. Y Persidsky1, SH Ramirez1, R Potula1, S Fan1, T Eidem2, H Reichenbach1, H Dykstra1; 1Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple Univ School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000, 2Pharmacology, UNMC, Omaha, NE 68198-0000
Methamphetamine (METH), a potent stimulant with strong euphoric properties, has a high abuse liability and long-lasting neurotoxic effects. Recent studies in animal models have indicated that METH can induce impairment of the blood–brain barrier (BBB), thus suggesting that some of the neurotoxic effects resulting from METH abuse could be the outcome of barrier disruption. Here, we provide evidence that METH alters BBB function via direct effects on endothelial cells and explore possible underlying mechanisms leading to endothelial injury. We report that METH increases BBB permeability in vivo, and exposure of primary human microvascular endothelial cells (BMVEC) to METH diminishes tightness of BMVEC monolayers in a dose- and time-dependent manner by decreasing expression of cell membrane-associated tight junction (TJ) proteins. These changes were accompanied by enhanced production of reactive oxygen species, increased monocyte adhesion to and migration across METH-treated endothelial monolayers, and activation of myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) in BMVEC. Antioxidant treatment attenuated or completely reversed all tested aspects of METH-induced BBB dysfunction in vitro and in vivo. Our data suggest that BBB injury is caused by METH-mediated oxidative stress, which activates MLCK and negatively affects the TJ complex. These observations provide a basis for antioxidant protection against brain endothelial injury caused by METH exposure. Supported by NIDA.
Meth-Induced Cytosolic Calcium Enhances the Generation of Mitochondrial ROS in T Cells: Role in Immune Dysfunction. R Potula1, J Cenna1, JM Malette1, B Hawkins1, S Fan1, SH Ramirez1, Y Persidsky1; 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000
Methamphetamine (METH) abuse is known to be associated with an inordinate rate of infections. However, little is known about the effects of METH on T cells and how it may lead to compromises in the regulation of immune homeostasis. Here, in our present study, we show that METH exposure resulted in mitochondrial oxidative damage and caused dysfunction of primary human T cells. METH treatment of T cells led to a rise in intracellular Ca2+ levels that enhanced the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Exposure to METH induced mitochondrial dysfunction in the form of marked decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm), increased mitochondrial mass, enhanced protein nitrosylation, and diminished protein levels of complexes I, III, and IV of the electron transport chain. These changes paralleled reduced IL-2 secretion and T cell proliferative responses following TCR-CD28 stimulation, indicating impaired T cell function. Furthermore, antioxidants attenuated METH-induced mitochondrial damage by preserving the protein levels of mitochondrial complexes I, III, and IV. Altogether, our data suggest that METH-induced cytosolic calcium enhances the generation of mitochondrial ROS. In this context, the mitochondrial impairment (decrease membrane potential and increased mitochondrial mass) and T cell dysfunction ensuing the METH-induced generation of ROS represents a redox-dependent pathway mediating their effects. Supported by NIDA/R21 DA0249791
Cannabinoids Inhibit Macrophage Migration to the Tat Protein of HIV-1: Linkage to the CB2 Cannabinoid Receptor. ES Raborn1, GA Cabral1; 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0678
Macrophages are important targets of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) infection at peripheral sites and in the CNS. Infected cells secrete a multitude of toxic factors, including the viral regulatory protein Tat. This protein is highly immunogenic and also serves as a potent chemoattractant for monocytes. We demonstrated that the exogenous cannabinoids delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and CP55940 significantly inhibited migration of human U937 macrophage-like cells to the Tat protein in a concentration-related manner. The CB1 receptor selective agonist ACEA had no effect on Tat-mediated migration, whereas the CB2 receptor-selective agonist O-2137 exerted a concentration-related inhibition of U937 cell migration in response to Tat. Pharmacological blockage of CB1 receptor signaling using the antagonist SR141716A had no effect on CP55940-mediated inhibition of macrophage migration to Tat, while treatment with the CB2 receptor antagonist SR1444528 reversed the CP55940-mediated inhibition of migration. THC had no inhibitory effect on migration to Tat following siRNA knockdown of the CB2 receptor. Collectively, the pharmacological and biochemical knockdown data indicate that cannabinoids signal through the CB2 cannabinoid receptor to modulate macrophage migration to the HIV-1 Tat protein. These results suggest that the CB2 receptor has potential to serve as a therapeutic target for ablating detrimental inflammatory responses associated with HIV-1 infection. Supported by NIDA/NIH DA005832
Targeted Delivery of Magnetic Nanoparticle-Bound Azidothymidine 5′-Triphosphate Across the Blood–Brain Barrier. ZM Saiyed1, NH Gandhi1, MN Nair1; 1Immunology / INIP / College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199-0000
In the post-HAART era, neuroAIDS remains a great challenge due to the poor penetrability of antiretroviral (ARV) drugs across the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Recently, the advent of nanotechnology-based drug targeting strategies has shown tremendous potential for the delivery of ARVs to the brain. Previous studies have reported that such nano-sized formulations can directly transverse the BBB and also be taken up by circulating mononuclear phagocytes, thereby piggybacking across the BBB via cell-based carrier system. We report herein the development of magnetic AZTTP liposomal nanoformulation and its ability to transmigrate across an in vitro BBB model by the application of an external magnetic field. The results show that magnetic AZTTP liposomes were successfully formulated and were able to transverse across an in vitro BBB model using direct transport by the application of an external magnetic field. The apparent permeability of magnetic AZTTP liposomes was significantly higher than free AZTTP. The magnetic AZTTP liposomes were also efficiently taken up by monocytes, and these magnetic monocytes showed enhanced transendothelial migration compared to non-magnetic monocytes in the presence of an external magnetic field. Furthermore, we found that magnetic AZTTP liposome effectively inhibited HIV-1 replication in an in vitro HIV-1 infection model system. Thus, we anticipate that the developed magnetic nanoformulation can be used for targeting active NRTIs to the brain and thereby eliminate the brain HIV reservoir and help treat neuroAIDS. Supported by NIDA
Neuropathogenic Mechanisms of HIV-1 Clade B and C: Role of Methamphetamine (METH). T Samikkannu1, M Agudelo1, N Gandhi1, MP Nair1; 1Institute of NeuroImmune Pharmacology, Florida International Univ, Miami, FL 33199-0000
Methamphetamine (METH) enhances the HIV viral replication and disease progression. Previous studies have demonstrated that infections with HIV-1 clades differentially contribute to the neuropathogenesis of HIV infection. The dopamine receptor-2 (DRD-2) and tyrosine hydoxylase (TH) downregulate Ca2+/CaM-dependent protein kinases (CaMKs) and are known to play a significant role in neuropathogenesis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). We hypothesize that clade B and C gp120 proteins exert differential effects on DRD-2 and TH and METH exacerbates these effects, and the mechanisms may be mediated by dysregulation of CaMKinases (CaMK II and IV) gene and protein expression. Astrocytes were treated with gp120 form HIV-1 clade B- and C-proteins alone or in combination with METH. RNA was extracted, reverse-transcribed, and analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR to determine DRD-2, TH, and CaMK II and CaMK IV gene expression. Cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot for protein expression. Our results indicate that HIV-1 clade B gp120 protein significantly downregulated DRD-2, TH, CaMK II, and CaMK IV genes and their protein expression compared to gp120 from HIV-1 clade C, and METH exacerbates these effects. Our studies for the first time demonstrate that HIV-1 clades B and C differentially modulate DRD-2, TH, CaMK II, and CaMK IV genes and their protein expression, and METH exacerbates neuropathogenesis of HIV infection. The present study was supported by grants from National Institute of Health (NIH); DA012366, DA 021537, DA 025576
Herpes Simplex Virus Infection of Microglia Triggers Oxidative Stress Responses and Damage Via Toll-Like Receptor 2. SJ Schachtele1, S Hu1, MR Little1, JR Lokensgard1; 1Center for Infectious Disease, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000
Using a murine model of herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 encephalitis, our laboratory has determined that the induction of pro-inflammatory mediators in response to viral brain infection is largely mediated through a Toll-like receptor-2 (TLR2)-dependent mechanism. Published studies have shown that like other inflammatory mediators, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species are generated during viral brain infection. In the present study, oxidation of 2,7-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA) was used to measure intracellular ROS production in microglia isolated from murine brain tissue and in cultured murine microglia. Intracranial injection of HSV into C57B/6 mice increased microglial cell-produced ROS at 4 days post-infection (p.i). Similarly, levels of intracellular ROS were highly elevated by 48 h p.i. in HSV-stimulated microglia cultures. Comparison of virus-induced ROS production in microglia from wild-type and TLR2−/− mice indicated that in vivo and in vitro ROS production was largely mediated through TLR2. It is increasingly clear that reactive oxygen species are responsible for facilitating secondary tissue damage, such as lipid peroxidation, during and subsequent to herpes encephalitis. Using 8-isoprostane as a marker for lipid peroxidation, we found that HSV-infected microglia from TLR2−/− mice produce less neuronal oxidative damage when added to mixed brain cell cultures. These effects are associated with insufficient activation of p38 and p42/44 MAPK and aberrant production of oxidative stress enzymes (Gpx1, HO-1) in TLR2−/− mice.
Regulation of Cannabinoid Receptor Expression in Human Microglial Cells. WS Sheng1, S Hu1, PK Peterson1, RB Rock1; 1CIDMTR, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000
Cannabinoid receptors (CBs) in the CNS play an important role in modulating brain development and inflammatory responses. Expression of CB1 is well documented in the CNS and CB2 in the immune system. We and others have found that CB2 is also expressed in microglial cells. While psychoactive effects resulting from CB1 activation are undesirable, activation of CB2 has been reported to regulate many physiological functions, and CB2 is considered a therapeutic target. CB expression levels could be modulated by various stimuli depending on the cell activation state. In this study, we sought to investigate the effects of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), HIV proteins gp120 and Tat, cytokines, and CB agonists WIN55,212-2 and JWH015 on CB expression in human microglial cells. Using real-time PCR, we found that CB1 mRNA expression was relatively unaffected by these treatments (<2-fold change in 24 h). However, treatment with LPS and Tat markedly down-regulated CB2 mRNA expression. Treatment with the cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, and IL-10 also modestly inhibited CB2 mRNA expression. In a binding study using 3H-CP55,940, we found that specific binding was approximately 75% and mostly through CB2 when CB-specific antagonists SR141716A (CB1) and SR144528 (CB2) were used for competitive binding. Similarly, treatment with LPS and Tat for 72 h markedly inhibited 3H-CP55,940 binding mainly through CB2. These findings suggest an interaction between CB2 and microglial activation and that CB2 expression can be regulated for potential therapeutic benefit. Supported by NIH/DA025525
Lipopolysaccharide Increases the Expression of Multidrug. PS Silverstein1, KL Audus2, N Qureshi3, A Kumar1; 1Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108-0000, 2Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-0000, 3Basic Medical Sciences-School of Medicine, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108-0000
Multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP-1) is a ubiquitously expressed member of the ATP-binding cassette transporter family. MRP-1 is one of the primary transporters of glutathione and glutathione conjugates. This protein also transports antiretroviral therapeutics such as HIV-1 protease inhibitors (PI). We hypothesized that inflammatory mediators that activate macrophages would modify the expression and activity of MRP-1 in macrophages. Real-time PCR assays, Western blots, and calcein efflux assays were used to show that exposure of macrophage cell line RAW 264.7 to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) increased the expression of MRP-1 at the levels of mRNA, protein, and functional activity. Treatment of macrophages with LPS resulted in 2-fold increases of MRP-1 expression or functional activity. LPS-mediated increases in calcein efflux were repressed by the MRP-specific inhibitor MK-571. These results suggest that the effectiveness of HIV-1 PI therapy may be compromised by the presence of opportunistic infections. Supported by NIH
Voluntary Exercise Protects Against Methamphetamine-Induced Oxidative Stress in Brain Microvasculature and Disruption of the Blood–Brain Barrier. M Toborek1, MJ Seelbach1, C Rashid1, L Chen1, IE András1, YJ Choi1, B Hennig1, KA Esser1; 1Department of Neurosurgery, University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington, KY 40536-0000
Moderate to vigorous exercise is a powerful means to influence health status and lower the risk of the development of chronic diseases. We hypothesize that increased antioxidant potential by endurance exercise plays a critical role in the protection against the development of cerebral toxicity associated with drug abuse. To address this hypothesis, mice were subjected to voluntary wheel running for 5 weeks. The control mice did not have access to running wheels. At the end of exercise training, mice were injected with methamphetamine (Meth, 10 mg/kg) for 24 h. Exercise markedly changed Meth-induced alterations of cerebral blood flow and protected against Meth-induced disruption of the blood–brain barrier as assessed by in situ brain perfusion. Consistent with these results, exercise protected against Meth-mediated disruption and localizations of tight junction protein expression (ZO-1, occludin, and claudin-5). Importantly, exercise markedly attenuated Meth-induced oxidative stress in brain microvessels. It appears that protection against upregulation of NADPH oxidase may be responsible, at least in part, for these protective effects. The obtained results indicate that exercise is an important modifiable behavioral factor that can protect against Meth-induced CNS toxicity. Supported by DA027569, MH63022, MH072567, NS39254, and from the University of Kentucky Center for Muscle Biology
Quiescent CD4+T Cells Exhibit Low Levels of HIV Infection: Impact on Viral Latency and Persistence. DN Vatakis1, S Kim1, G Bristol1, G Baldwin1, SA Chow2, JA Zack1; 1Department of Medicine, Division of Hem/Onc, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-0000, 2Department of Molecular Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-0000
Quiescent CD4+ T cells have shown resistance to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Interestingly, our recent studies of HIV infection kinetics in quiescent CD4+ T cells found that viral integration occurred in these cells at essentially the same efficiency as in activated T cells once reverse transcription was completed. Yet, subsequent stimulation of quiescent cells failed to result in robust viral protein expression. Recently published work by our group demonstrated that the integration sites in quiescent CD4+ T cells showed similar patterns to that of stimulated cells. Furthermore, proviral 3 LTR ends at the virus–host junctions, and 2-LTR circles showed increased levels of abnormal LTR junctions in quiescent CD4+ T cells. Treatment of quiescent CD4 T cells with nucleosides resulted in improved HIV infection kinetics and an increase of the fraction of normal LTR ends to the levels seen in stimulated cells (not treated with nucleosides). This may be due to improved stability of the viral cDNA or the presence of increased raw materials needed to successfully complete reverse transcription. Furthermore, we were able to activate the quiescent cell reservoir in vitro and establish a spreading infection when co-culturing with uninfected T cells. Based on the studies above, quiescent CD4+ T cells can constitute a stable and inducible HIV reservoir, a reservoir that may provide new insights on HIV latency and reactivation in AIDS, especially in the context of other disease co-factors such as drugs of abuse. Supported by NIH grants AI36059, AI03059, and AI070010 and UCLA CFAR (AI28697)
Effects of Nicotine on the Water Maze Performance of HIV-1 Transgenic and F344 Control Rats. M Vigorito1, J Cao3, M Kass2, D Kroner1, MD Li3, SL Chang2; 1Department of Psychology, Seton Hall University, South Orange, NJ 07079-0000, 2Institute of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, Seton Hall University, South Orange, NJ 07079-0000, 3Dept. of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0000
Previous studies have demonstrated that HIV-1 transgenic (HIV-1 Tg) rats show a deficit in learning to locate a submerged platform in a multiple-trial water maze task compared to control rats (Vigorito et al. 2008; Lashomb et al. 2009). The purpose of this study was to determine if the learning deficit in HIV-1 Tg rats is also observed in a single-trial-per-day procedure and to investigate the effects of nicotine on maze performance. We found that the learning deficit in HIV-1 Tg rats is also observed in a single-trial-per-day procedure and that daily nicotine (1.0 mg/kg) treatment disrupted performance of both HIV-1 Tg and F344 control rats. In addition, we found that nicotine reduced the memory for the location of the platform in both groups as determined by a probe test trial at the end of 14 days of training. Additional tests with the F344 control animals showed that 7 days of pretreatment with nicotine eliminates the disruptive effects of nicotine during training. Moreover, the lowest of four tested nicotine doses (0.125, 0.25. 0.5, and 1.0 mg/kg) improved performance in F344 rats, although this effect was not observed consistently. Nicotine treatment is known to have neuroprotective effects and has been observed to improve performance in a variety of learning tasks. The effects of nicotine in a HIV-1 Tg rat model will be instructive in elucidating the learning deficits resulting from the presence of HIV-1 viral proteins and in defining the genes and biological pathways associated with those effects. Supported by NIH DA-026356
Morphine Modulates Dendritic Cell Interleukin 23 Production Through TLR2 and NOD-2 Synergistic Signaling. J Wang1, J Ma1, J Wan1, S Roy1; 1Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000
IL-23, produced by dendritic cells and macrophages, plays a critical role in innate immunity against bacterial infection. To determine the mechanism by which morphine modulates IL-23 production, bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) and macrophages (BMDMs) were treated with morphine and infected with Streptococcus pneumoniae or stimulated with toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands (pneumolysin, LTA, CpG) and Nod2 ligand (MDP). We found that an increase in IL-23 protein production was observed in S. pneumoniae-, LTA-, and PLY-stimulated BMDCs and BMDMs. However, when compared with BMDMs, BMDCs secreted approximately 5-fold more IL-23. Morphine treatment significantly inhibited the IL-23 promoter activity, mRNA expression, and protein production in S. pneumoniae-infected DCs. Interestingly, LTA in synergy with MDP induced the same level of IL-23 production as S. pneumoniae infection, suggesting that IL-23 production in DCs is through the activation of TLR2 and Nod-2 synergistic signaling. Pretreatment of DCs with MyD88 and IL-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK) 1/4 inhibitors or TLR-2 antibody diminished the S. pneumoniae-induced IL-23 and abolished morphine inhibitory effects, indicating that the IL-23 production induced by S. pneumoniae infection is a downstream event that depends on the activations of TLR2-MyD88-IRAK1/4 signaling pathway. Moreover, morphine decreased S. pneumoniae-induced phosphorylation of IRF3 and ATF2 in DCs. Our study shows that morphine impairs S. pneumoniae-induced IL-23 production through MyD88-IRAK1/4-dependent TLR2 and Nod-2 synergistic signaling in DCs. Supported by R03 DA023353 (J. Wang) and R01 DA12104 and K02 DA015349, P50 DA11806 (S. Roy)
Heroin Inhibits Anti-HIV miRNAs and Enhances HIV Infection of Macrophages. X Wang1, Y Zhou3, DJ Zhou3, EB Geller2, MW Adler2, WZ Ho1; 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000, 2Center for Substance Abuse Research, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000, 3Division of Virology, Wuhan Center for Disease Prevention &Control, Wuhan, 430015
Opioids have a cofactor role in the immunopathogenesis of HIV disease. However, the mechanism(s) of their actions remains to be determined. We thus investigated whether heroin, one of the most widely abused drugs, inhibits intracellular innate immunity in human blood monocyte-derived macrophages and facilitates HIV infection/replication. Heroin treatment was found to suppress the expression of endogenous IFN-alpha and IFN-beta in macrophages. In addition, heroin treatment of macrophages impairs the expression of anti-HIV miRNAs and APOBEC3G, the newly identified intracellular restriction factors of HIV replication. The in vitro impact of heroin on the miRNA expression was supported by the in vivo observation that the heroin-dependant subjects had significantly lower levels of anti-HIV miRNAs in macrophages than the normal subjects. These findings were in parallel with the observation that heroin treatment enhanced HIV infection of macrophages. These in vitro and in vivo data indicate that heroin use impairs intracellular innate anti-HIV mechanisms in macrophages, promoting HIV infection and replication. Supported by NIH DA12815, DA22177to Dr. Wenzhe Ho; P30DA13429 to Dr. Martin W. Adler
NMR Metabolic Changes of Human Microglial Cells Exposed to Lipopolysaccharide or Morphine. GL Wilcox1, I El ghazi1, W Sheng1, S Hu1, B Reilly1, JR Lokensgard1, B Rock1, PK Peterson1, IM Armitage1; 1Dept of Neuroscience, Univ of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0000
Microglial cells play a major role in host defense of the central nervous system. Once activated, several functional properties are up-regulated, including migration, phagocytosis, and secretion of inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and chemokines. Little, if anything, is known about the metabolic changes that occur during the activation process. High-resolution 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra obtained from perchloric acid (PCA) extracts of human microglial cell cultures exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or morphine were used to both identify and quantify the metabolites. We found that human microglia exposed to LPS had increased concentrations of glutamate and lactate, whereas the cells exposed to morphine had decreased concentrations in creatinine, taurine, and thymine. Glutamate and creatinine were the key metabolites differentiating between the two stimuli. Interestingly, in light of recent data indicating activation of rodent microglia in situ by morphine, neither the classic indicators of microglial activation, cytokines, and chemokines nor glutamate, which may be a novel indicator, was increased by ex vivo treatment of human microglia with morphine. These results add a new dimension to the detection of activation in the inflammatory response of human microglial cells to LPS and morphine. Supported by Minnesota Medical Foundation, NIH R01 DA 04381 and Minnesota Supercomputer Institute
IFNβ-Modulating miRNAs in Lentivirus-Associated CNS Disease. KW Witwer1, JM Sisk1, J Liu1, L Gama1, JE Clements1; 1Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205-0000
Interferon beta (IFNβ) production is an early innate immune response to lentiviral infection of the CNS. In our rapid and consistent SIV/macaque model of HIV encephalitis, SIV enters the CNS within 4 days of infection, accompanied by a marked IFNβ response. IFNβ levels then decline when SIV enters its latent phase. The critical role of IFNβ in the CNS antiviral response, combined with the potential for inflammatory damage associated with long-term activation, suggests that IFNβ is subject to multiple levels of regulation. Adding to known regulatory mechanisms, we present evidence that IFNβ expression may be tuned posttranscriptionally by microRNAs (miRNAs). We identified miRNAs with potential recognition elements in the 3 UTR of the IFNβ transcript using target recognition algorithms. Three macrophage-expressed miRNAs,-26a,-34a, and let-7b appear to exert direct effects on the IFNβ 3 UTR in reporter assays and to modulate the levels of IFNβ protein in primary macrophages, while miR-145 may have indirect effects. In vivo relevance is supported by differential expression of these miRNAs during the course of SIV infection and by IFNβ-mediated upregulation of several IFNβ-targeting miRNAs. We further describe the localization of miRNAs and IFNβ mRNA in macrophages/microglia, astrocytes, and neurons during SIV infection, discussing the implications of these expression patterns for miRNA-mediated control of IFNβ. Our results suggest the regulation of IFNβ by miRNAs and show that miRNAs may influence HIV-associated CNS disease progression. Supported by NIH/NS055648
Increased Internalization of HIV-1 into Morphine- and Cocaine-Stimulated Human Podocytes Via Up-regulation of DC-Sign Expression. A Yadav1, J Mikulak2, S Arora3, PC Singhal2; 1Nephrology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029-0000, 2Immunology, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, NY 11030-0000, 3Internal Medicine, Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York, NY 11237-0000
Occurrence of collapsing variant of glomerulosclerosis both in HIV-1 transgenic mice and in HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) patients highlighted the role of podocytes in the development of HIVAN. In vitro studies showed that conditionally immortalized human podocytes (CIHPs) internalized the primary R5 and X4 HIV-1 strains (JASN, 09). We have shown that DC-specific ICAM-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC SIGN) receptor is expressed in CIHPs and mediates the binding and the entry of HIV-1. The immunochemical studies in human renal tissue showed the podocyte expression of DC-SIGN receptors. Drug abuse being an important risk factor in the development of HIVAN, we asked whether use of cocaine (Coc) or morphine (Mor) contributes to the entry of HIV-1 into podocytes. CIHPs were treated in the presence or absence of morphine or cocaine for variable time periods followed by mRNA isolation and proteins for probing for DC-SIGN. Viral assay by RT-PCR was done on Mor- and Coc-pretreated CIHPs incubated with HIV-1 for variable time periods. Drug-stimulated CIHPs showed enhanced DC-SIGN gene as well as protein expression when compared to control cells. Since drug-stimulated CIHPs showed increased levels of HIV-1-specific strong-stop DNA levels, it appears that drug-mediated up-regulation of DC-SIGN resulted in the increased internalization of R5 and X4 HIV-1 strains. These findings suggest that Mor and Coc may act as cofactors in HIVAN by increasing DC-SIGN expression on human podocytes. A better understanding of the role of DC-SIGN will help design novel therapeutic strategies to combat HIVAN.
Cocaine Abuse and HIV-1 Infection: Role of PDGF/PDGF Receptor Axis in Disruption of Blood–Brain Barrier. HH Yao1, KJ Kim2, JQ Wang3, SJ Buch1; 1Department of Pharmacology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-0000, 2Department of Microbiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160-0000, 3Department of Basic Medical Science, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108-0000
Cocaine, often abused by HIV-infected patients, has been suggested to worsen HIV-associated neurological disorders (HAND) via unknown mechanisms. Blood–brain barrier (BBB) is critical for the maintenance of CNS homeostasis and for the regulation of the neural microenvironment. In HIV disease, however, disruption of this barrier is what leads to the entry of HIV-infected monocytes into the CNS. In this study, we demonstrated up-regulation of PDGF-β in monocytes infected with HIV or exposed to cocaine. Reciprocally, we also found that exposure of human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMEC) to cocaine resulted in the phosphorylation of the PDGF-β receptor. Furthermore, PDGF-βR activation was associated with increased endothelial permeability. Additionally, we have also shown that both exogenous PDGF as well as cocaine can disrupt the integrity of the BBB in a tissue culture model, with alterations in expression of tight junction and adhesion proteins. Dissection of signaling pathways in PDGF and in cocaine-mediated activation of PDGF-βR in HBMECs has implicated the roles of MAPK and FAK/Rho/PKC kinases. Exposure of mice to either of these agents resulted in increased BBB permeability and transmigration, as evidenced by Evans blue extravasation and monocyte migration assays, respectively. Furthermore, PDGF-βR inhibitor, iminitab was able to abrogate cocaine/PDGF-mediated enhancement of BBB permeability and transmigration in vivo. Taken together these findings underpin the role of PDGF-βR as a potential target in the therapeutical intervention of HAND. Supported by RO1 DA020392, RO1 DA027729
No Effect of Tetherin on Hepatitis C Virus Replication/Release in Human Hepatocytes. L Ye1, X Wang1, JL Li1, JP Liu1, WZ Ho1; 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140-0000
Transmembrane protein tetherin (BST-2, CD317) was recently discovered as a novel component of the innate defense against enveloped viruses. Tetherin is an unusually structured protein that restricts the release of progeny virions from infected cells. This study investigated whether tetherin has the ability to inhibit hepatitis C virus (HCV) release from infected human hepatocytes, impairing HCV infection. Tetherin was found in very low abundance in primary human hepatocytes and hepatocyte cell line (Huh 7). Expression of exogenous tetherin in human hepatocytes, however, did not inhibit HCV release as it did not affect the levels of intracellular or extracellular HCV RNA as well as the production of infectious HCV. Although the exogenous interferon-alpha treatment could greatly increase tetherin expression by human hepatocytes, the induced endogenous tetherin had no role in the anti-HCV activity of interferon-alpha. These findings do not support the presence of an association between tetherin and HCV replication/release in/from human hepatocytes. Supported by National Institutes of Health grant DA22177
Intraventral Tegmental Recombinant Tat Attenuates Nicotine-Mediated Locomotor Sensitization. J Zhu1, CF Mactutus2, R Booze2; 1South Carolina College of Pharmacy, Univ. of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208-0000, 2Department of Psychology, Univ. of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208-0000
Tobacco smoking prevalence in the HIV-positive population is profoundly higher than that in the non-HIV population. The current study explored potential neurobehavioral mechanisms through which HIV-positive individuals show increased vulnerability to nicotine dependence. Rats received bilateral microinjections of Tat1-86 (50 μg/side) or vehicle directed at ventral tegmental area (VTA). Subsequently, 24 h after Tat injection, rats were injected intravenously with nicotine (0.05 mg/kg) or saline once daily for a total of 14 days. Locomotor activity was measured every other day in automated chambers for 60 min following nicotine or saline injections. In saline group, intra-VTA Tat diminished locomotor activity across treatment days compared to the vehicle injection. Repeated nicotine administration produced behavioral sensitization with ∼3-fold higher levels of total activity. Tat attenuated the locomotor sensitization observed with nicotine administration alone. Since the transcription factor cyclic AMP-response element binding protein (CREB) plays a critical role in rewarding properties of nicotine, we also investigated whether the phosphorylated form of the CREB (pCREB) in mesocorticolimbic areas of these rats was changed after the last nicotine or saline injection. In vehicle group, pCREB was reduced in prefrontal cortex (PFC) but increased in nucleus accumbens (Nac) and VTA following repeated nicotine administration. In contrast, intra-VTA Tat enhanced the basal levels of pCREB and blocked the effects of nicotine on CREB phosphorylation in these brain regions. Supported by NIH/NIDA DA026721
Evidence for HIV-1 Tat1-86 Allosteric Modulation of Dopamine Transporter Function. J Zhu1, S Ananthan2, CF Mactutus3, RM Booze3; 1South Carolina College of Pharmacy, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208-0000, 2Department of Organic Chemistry, Southern Research Institute, Birmingham, AL 35255-0000, 3Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208-0000
Dopamine (DA) transporter (DAT) function is strikingly altered in patients with HIV-1-associated neurocognitive disorders and a history of chronic drug abuse. The current study investigated the mechanisms underlying the inhibitory effects of the HIV-1 protein Tat on DAT function. Kinetic analysis of [3H]DA uptake and [3H]WIN35,428 binding in HEK293 cells expressing human DAT revealed that Tat decreased Vmax and increased the apparent Km in a concentration-dependent manner. The potency of Tat for inhibiting [3H]DA uptake (IC50 = 3.2 µM) was 4-fold less than that for inhibiting [3H]WIN 35,428 binding. In addition, indatraline and cocaine, two competitive inhibitors at DAT, and SoRI-20041, a novel allosteric modulator of the DAT, were examined. Cocaine-induced inhibition of [3H]DA uptake was determined in the presence and absence of Tat or these drugs. Indatraline (10 nM) decreased specific [3H]DA uptake by 33% of the control and increased the IC50 value of cocaine from 0.52 to 2.0 µM. SoRI-20041(12.8 µM) reduced specific [3H]DA uptake to 30% of control and changed the IC50 value of cocaine to 0.71 µM. Tat protein (5 µM) reduced specific [3H]DA uptake to 45% of the control and produced a smaller increase in the IC50 value of cocaine (from 0.52 to 0.95 µM) than did indatraline. Taken together, these results indicate that the Tat protein may act as an allosteric modulator of DAT. Such allosterism could represent a novel therapeutic potential and underlie a neurobiological mechanism of dysfunction of DAT reported in patients with HIV infection. Supported by DA026721, HD043680 and DA013137
Cocaine Modulation of Human Dendritic Cell Differentiation and T Cell Activation Enhances HIV Replication In Vitro. J Zhuo1, S Kiertscher1, K Whittaker1, M Roth1, G Baldwin1; 1Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-0000
Dendritic cells (DC) are an important reservoir for HIV and play an essential role in HIV infection of activated T cells. T cell activation also promotes important changes in proliferation and cytokine/chemokine production, which also may enhance HIV infection. Many of these events are modulated by cocaine, suggesting a variety of potential mechanisms by which cocaine could synergize with the process of DC Ag presentation to enhance HIV infection. Using in vitro adenoviral and MLR antigen presentation assays, we determined that both control and cocaine-exposed DC induced HIV infection in responding T cells. The frequency and magnitude of HIV infection was, however, enhanced following exposure of T cells to cocaine-treated DC. In order to determine the mechanisms underlying these effects, we used receptor antagonists and/or blocking antibodies to relevant co-stimulatory molecules. We found that blocking the HIV entry pathway with the HIV co-receptor (CXCR4) antagonist or interfering with DC:T cell interactions (using neutralizing antibodies to CD86/β2M) significantly decreased HIV infection in DC:T cell co-cultures (±cocaine). Additionally, co-administration of dopamine or sigma-1 receptor antagonists diminished cocaine-mediated effects on HIV replication, suggesting that the effects of cocaine are mediated in part by both dopamine and sigma-1 receptors. Our studies suggest that cocaine influences the immune response to HIV by impacting the phenotype and function of human DC, the characteristics of DC-activated T cells, and their subsequent susceptibility to HIV infection. Supported by NIH/NIDA R01DA023386