Pharmacol TherPharmacol. Ther.319nihpaPharmacology & therapeutics0163-72581879-016Xpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC4380664PMC4380664.143806644380664NIHMS6705092555023110.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.12.004NIHMS670509NIHPA6705091ArticlePharmacology of cognitive enhancers for exposure-based therapy of fear, anxiety and trauma-related disorders
SingewaldN. SchmuckermairC. WhittleN. HolmesA. ResslerK.J. aDepartment of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Pharmacy and CMBI, Leopold-Franzens University of Innsbruck, Innrain 80-82, A-6020 Innsbruck, AustriabLaboratory of Behavioral and Genomic Neuroscience, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USAcDepartment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA*Corresponding author at: Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Center for Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck (CMBI), University of Innsbruck Innrain 80-82, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. Fax: +43 512 507 58889. nicolas.singewald@uibk.ac.at (N. Singewald)1These authors contributed equally
27122014520151492511881501901103201501052015010520150104201504042025© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.2014https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Pathological fear and anxiety are highly debilitating and, despite considerable advances in psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy they remain insufficiently treated in many patients with PTSD, phobias, panic and other anxiety disorders. Increasing preclinical and clinical evidence indicates that pharmacological treatments including cognitive enhancers, when given as adjuncts to psychotherapeutic approaches [cognitive behavioral therapy including extinction-based exposure therapy] enhance treatment efficacy, while using anxiolytics such as benzodiazepines as adjuncts can undermine long-term treatment success. The purpose of this review is to outline the literature showing how pharmacological interventions targeting neurotransmitter systems including serotonin, dopamine, noradrenaline, histamine, glutamate, GABA, cannabinoids, neuropeptides (oxytocin, neuropeptides Y and S, opioids) and other targets (neurotrophins BDNF and FGF2, glucocorticoids, L-type-calcium channels, epigenetic modifications) as well as their downstream signaling pathways, can augment fear extinction and strengthen extinction memory persistently in preclinical models. Particularly promising approaches are discussed in regard to their effects on specific aspects of fear extinction namely, acquisition, consolidation and retrieval, including long-term protection from return of fear (relapse) phenomena like spontaneous recovery, reinstatement and renewal of fear. We also highlight the promising translational value of the preclinial research and the clinical potential of targeting certain neurochemical systems with, for example d-cycloserine, yohimbine, cortisol, and L-DOPA. The current body of research reveals important new insights into the neurobiology and neurochemistry of fear extinction and holds significant promise for pharmacologically-augmented psychotherapy as an improved approach to treat trauma and anxiety-related disorders in a more efficient and persistent way promoting enhanced symptom remission and recovery.

Fear extinctionExposure therapyAugmented relearningReconsolidationDrug developmentCognitive enhancerpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## 1. Introduction
Fear, anxiety and trauma-related disorders are associated with excessive fear reactions triggered by specific objects, situations or internal and external cues in the absence of any actual danger, and often include an inability to extinguish learned fear and to show adequate safety learning [( ; ; ; ; ) reviewed in ( ) and ( )]. Pathological fear and anxiety occur in a range of psychiatric conditions, including various types of phobia (e.g. social phobia, agoraphobia or specific phobia), panic disorder with/without agoraphobia, obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), generalized anxiety (GAD) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) ( ; ). These disorders comprise the most common mental disorders and are estimated to have a life-time prevalence of up to 28% among western populations ( ; ; ). In addition to the personal suffering of patients, the economic burden caused by anxiety disorders is heavy ( ).
Available pharmacological and psychotherapeutic treatments ( ) which aim to reduce fear and anxiety are associated with decreased symptom severity, but up to 40% of anxiety patients show only partial long-term benefit, and a majority of them fail to achieve complete remission ( ; ; ) clearly underlining the need for further improvement. Current pharmacological approaches either induce rapid anxiolytic effects (e.g. benzodiazepines, some antipsychotics) or require prolonged, chronic treatment (e.g. antidepressants) to attenuate symptoms of pathological fear and anxiety. Commonly employed psychotherapeutic interventions apply cognitive behavioral strategies and exposure techniques to help patients overcome the maladaptive beliefs and avoidance behaviors that reinforce the pathology related to fear-eliciting cues. Meta-analyses show that cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) does have efficacy for several anxiety disorders, including PTSD, but patients have difficulty bearing the demanding and exhausting process of therapy and many who do manage to cope with it respond only partially and often relapse with time ( ).
One strategy to improve CBT is to augment psychotherapy with ad-junctive pharmacological treatments. Early attempts at combining ‘CBT’ with anxiolytic medications [e.g. benzodiazepines (BZD)] showed that the combination was no more effective [in some instances even counterproductive ( ; )] than psycho- or pharmacotherapy alone [for details see ( ; ; , ; )]. However, at least in some cases, this failure may have reflected idiosyncratic effects of the drugs tested (especially BZDs) rather than utility of the strategy itself, and there has been an intense search to identify agents that serve as more effective adjuncts to CBT. The preclinical assay most frequently used in this search is fear extinction – the focus of this current review. Extinction of fear following Pavlovian fear learning ( ) in animals is procedurally similar to exposure-based CBT ( ). We will briefly outline different aspects of Pavlovian fear learning [ (which is thought to be involved in the etiology and maintenance of anxiety disorders, e.g. ( )] and extinction highlighting the key processes that could be targeted to augment fear extinction (see for an overview).

## 1.1. Fear and fear extinction
Experimentally, fear conditioning occurs when a previously neutral stimulus [conditioned stimulus (CS) – such as a tone or light] is paired with an aversive, unconditioned stimulus (US – e.g. electric shock to the forearm in humans, mild foot shock in rodents), resulting in a CS-US association whereby the CS alone elicits a conditioned fear response (e.g. freezing in rodents or increased skin conductance in humans). Following a successful CS–US association, fear memories require consolidation, a process involving a cascade of molecular and cellular events that alter synaptic efficacy, as well as a prolonged systems level interaction between brain regions, to stabilize the memory ( ). Once consolidated, fear memories, reactivated by presenting the CS, are destabilized to render the original fear memory liable to pharmacological/ behavioral interference (see overview in ) and this is then followed by a second phase of molecular and cellular events to re-stabilize (re-consolidate) the (adapted) memory ( ).
Fear memories can be attenuated by various processes and interventions (including pharmacological and psychological approaches), some producing temporary blunting of fear behaviors and others causing more long-lasting relief. Interfering with the re-consolidation by inhibiting molecular and cellular events supporting fear memory re-stabilization [ , ( ; )], for example with β-adrenoceptor blockers ( ; ), has been proposed as a clinical approach to alleviating fear memories. For discussion on this and other means of reducing fear (e.g. via US habituation) we refer the reader to some excellent prior reviews ( ; ). Other potential ways to relieve fear include safety learning ( ; ) and erasure-like mechanisms such as destruction of erasure-preventing perineuronal nets ( ).
Alternatively, fear memories can also be extinguished. Fear extinction, a process originally described by Pavlov ( ), entails repeated exposure to anxiety-provoking cues to establish a new memory that counters the original fear memory. The process is highly relevant to fear, anxiety and trauma-related disorders which are associated with negative emotional reactions triggered by specific objects, situations or internal and external cues that are excessive to the actual danger posed. Moreover, extinction in animals is procedurally similar to forms of CBT that rely on exposure to anxiety-provoking cues (see ) ( ), and anxiety disorders are associated with an inability to extinguish learned fear and to respond adequately to safety signals ( ; ; ; ; ) [reviewed in ( )]. Thus, fear extinction has considerable translational utility. The key processes that can be targeted to pharmacologically augment fear extinction are summarized in .
Extinction is a learning process driven by violation of the original CS=US contingency (termed ‘prediction error’ for review see ( ; ) ], but it also contains other elements including habituation and desensitization some also say era-sure/destabilization ( ). Some authors therefore favor the term ‘relearning’ over extinction [for discussion see ( )]. As with fear learning, extinction occurs in two phases: extinction acquisition and extinction consolidation. The decrement in the fear response during’extinction training’ is also termed ‘within-session extinction’. Similar to fear memory, stabilization of the extinction memory requires both a cascade of overlapping, but dissociable, molecular and cellular events [for review see ( ; ) ] that alter synaptic efficacy and brain systems-level interactions ( ). The strength of extinction memory can be assessed at some interval (usually >1 day) after extinction training in “extinction retrieval” sessions (also termed ‘extinction retention’ or ‘extinction expression’, but note that we use the term “extinction retrieval” throughout this review).
That extinction memories are prone to re-emergence (due to insufficient ‘longterm extinction’) indicates that the original fear memory is still in place and the extinction memory is weaker/more labile than the fear memory. This may be particularly true of older (‘remote’) fear memories ( ). The re-emergence of extinguished fear occurs under multiple circumstances: (i) renewal, when the CS is presented in a different context to that in which extinction training occurred; (ii) reinstatement, when the original US or another stress-or is given unexpectedly; and (iii) spontaneous recovery, when a significant period of time has elapsed following successful extinction training ( ; ). The likelihood of fear re-emergence is dependent on the strength of the extinction memory which is also determined by the type of extinction protocol used see e.g. ( ; ). Spontaneous recovery ( , ; ), reinstatement ( ) and renewal ( ) are all observable in clinical settings, and can be readily exploited in the laboratory to identify drugs and other interventions that can prevent fear re-emergence in animals and relapse in humans ( ).
Our goal in the current review is to offer a comprehensive overview of preclinical work on the possible pharmacological approaches (see for an overview) to augment fear extinction and protect against the re-emergence of fear, and to discuss the potential translational value of these candidates as adjuncts to exposure-based CBT in anxiety patients.

## 2. Neuronal substrates of fear extinction
Using a number of complementary techniques (including electro-physiology, immediate-early gene mapping, tracing studies, lesioning/ inactivation approaches and optogenetics) research is revealing the complex and interconnected brain circuitry mediating fear extinction. Several key brain areas including the amygdala (AMY), hippocampus (HPC), medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), periaqueductal gray (PAG), bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and others have been implicated in extinction [for recent detailed reviews see ( ; ; ; ; ; ; )]. Of these, we focus on the AMY, HPC and mPFC as major, well-defined components of the fear circuitry (see ).
While the AMY and the mPFC are crucial for the formation and maintenance of fear extinction memories, the HPC, linked with the mPFC and the AMY ( ), processes contextual information linked with extinction ( ). Altering these hippocampal contributions to extinction memory or mimicking the hippocampal response within the extinction context (see below) may be mechanisms that render extinction context-independent. The AMY is a core hub in fear extinction processing. Data in rodents and humans suggest sustained AMY activity in extinction-impaired individuals, possibly resulting from a failure to engage pro-extinction circuits in cortical areas and subregions of the AMY [reviewed in ( )]. Different AMY subregions and neuronal populations have differential contributions to extinction. The centromedial AMY (CeM) is the major output station of the AMY that drives fear via its connections to the hypothalamus and brainstem regions ( ; ; ), and its responding is modulated following extinction via intra-amygdala and remote inputs. Extinction training has been shown to cause a rapid reduction of CS-evoked responses of lateral AMY (LA) neurons possibly via depotentiation of thalamic inputs ( ). The basal AMY (BA) contains extinction-encoding neurons which drive GABAergic cells in the medial intercalated cell masses (ITC) and neurons in the centrolateral AMY (CeL) to inhibit the CeM and the expression of fear ( ; ). Following from these initial findings, additional studies involving optogenetic approaches, have shown that a subpopulation of the BA pyramidal neurons which express the Thy1 gene may mark the extinction neuron subpopulation ( ).
It is also becoming apparent that different ITCs are part of a GABAergic feed-forward relay station interconnecting AMY nuclei with distinct networks within the ITCs that are engaged in particular fear stages exerting different influences on extinction ( ; ; ). Separate neuronal populations in the CeL have been found to have contrasting roles in fear and fear extinction. CeL-OFF neurons (PKCδ+ phenotype) inhibit fear-promoting CeM neurons, while CeL-ON (PKCδ- phenotype) cells stimulate fear-promoting CeM neurons ( ; ). Additionally, a very recent finding suggests that a subpopulation of neurons within the CeM – that of the Tac2 peptide-expressing cells – is critically involved in fear learning and fear expression ( ).
Another important node within the extinction circuitry is the mPFC, which shares strong interconnections with the HPC and the AMY. Fear extinction recruits the ventral segment of the mPFC, the infralimbic (IL) subdivision [the rodent correlate of the human ventromedial PFC (vmPFC)] which projects to BA extinction and ITC neurons and can thereby inhibit the activity of CeM fear output neurons [reviewed in ( ; )]. When a conditioned cue following extinction is presented in the extinction (therapy) context, the HPC activates the IL (an activation which is absent or less in a novel context), supporting subsequent CeM inhibition ( ). The IL subdivision is involved in the consolidation of extinction memory and synaptic plasticity in this region is crucial for successful extinction retrieval ( ). Impaired extinction has been associated with relatively low activity in IL neurons, and successful extinction with relatively high IL neuronal activity [reviewed in ( )]. The region of the mPFC neighboring the IL [the prelimbic cortex (PL) in rodents and the dorsal anterior cingulate in humans] plays an opposite role to the IL in regulating fear and extinction [reviewed in ( )]. The PL interacts with BA fear neurons, augmenting output of the basolateral amygdaloid complex (BLA) and hence CeM activity ( ).
There is now strong evidence from both animal and human studies that these various components of the neural circuit underlying extinction are functionally disturbed in individuals with impaired extinction (reviewed in ( ) and importantly that successful extinction in animals ( ) and exposure therapy in humans ( ) can correct these abnormalities by triggering a lasting reorganization of this network.

## 3. Neurochemical and molecular substrates of fear extinction
Research is revealing that the activity of a number of specific intra-cellular signaling cascades [reviewed in ( )] carrying biological information from the cell surface to the nucleus, is the key to successful extinction by modulating gene transcription and ultimately promoting synaptic plasticity in extinction-relevant brain regions. The consolidation of extinction memories requires new protein synthesis initiated by molecular signaling cascades within the AMY, HPC and mPFC. The extinction-related molecular signaling and gene expression modulation can differ considerably in these brain areas ( ). Key molecules in the amygdala include calcium (Ca2+) influx via NMDA-receptors [in an interaction with α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors] and VGCCs-mediated activation of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and kinases such as Ca2+ /phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (PKC), and cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA). Once activated, these kinases merge into a common mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway initiating cAMP response element binding (CREB) phosphorylation and transcription of plasticity proteins [reviewed in ( , see for overview]. Aspects of this intracellular signaling seem to be disrupted in deficient extinction, as exemplified by the correlation of impaired extinction with reduced ERK activity in extinction-relevant brain areas ( ; ; ). Similarly, aberrant expression of memory-related genes in these areas is correlated with impaired extinction ( ).
To enable selective therapeutic targeting, an important aim in the extinction field is to identify neural mechanisms and intracellular pathways in fear extinction that are different from those involved in fear memory formation. Many of the intracellular mechanisms are similar, however there are also a number of distinct processes and features in fear vs fear extinction learning, including differences in protein synthesis dependence, in brain area- and neuronal population-specific localization and recruitment of signaling pathways, in time course of recruitment, in distinct involvement of certain isoforms of key signaling components (e.g. ERK1 vs ERK2) and resulting gene expression ( ; ; ; ). While there are examples of the direct targeting of pharmacologically important components of the aforementioned intracellular signaling, e.g. the MAPK/ERK pathway ( ; ; ) to modulate fear extinction, they were mainly targeted indirectly via membrane receptors e.g. ( ; ) or ion channels ( ; ). These findings have stimulated the hypothesis that boosting specific synaptic plasticity mechanisms by pharmacological means may constitute novel drug targets to promote fear extinction. Indeed, as outlined below, systemic and brain region specific drug studies have identified a number of promising compounds which augment the behavioral and neurobiological effects of fear extinction. The results of these studies are building a framework upon which novel therapeutic interventions to facilitate the efficacy of CBT may be rationally developed and which may ultimately help to enhance symptom remission and recovery.

## 4. Pharmacologically enhancing extinction

## 4.1. Serotonergic system
The serotonin (5-HT) system is positioned to modulate the extinction circuitry via ascending 5-HT projections arising from midbrain raphe nuclei that innervate certain brain structures including the AMY (BLA > LA ≫ CeA), the HPC, the mPFC and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis [reviewed in ( )]. The acquisition and expression of conditioned fear increases 5-HT release in the BLA, mPFC and dPAG ( ; ; ) though possible changes in 5-HT release during acquisition and consolidation of fear extinction have not been reported to the best of our knowledge.
There are 16 5-HT receptor subtypes classified into 7 receptor families (5-HT1–7) ( ). All 5-HT receptors, excluding the 5-HT3 family – a member of a superfamily of ligand-gated ion channels, are metabotropic, coupled to Gs (5-HT6 and 5-HT7), Gi/0 (5-HT1, 5-HT4 and 5-HT5) or Gq (5-HT2) proteins.
To date, research has largely focused on the role of 3 of the 5-HT receptors in fear extinction; namely 5 HT1A, 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 ( , ). Selective activation of 5-HT1A ( ; ) or 5-HT2A receptors ( ; ) enhances extinction. This might occur via 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors expressed in the mPFC and the LA ( ; ; ). Both of these receptors regulate mPFC and LA excitability via direct activation of pyramidal cells and/or GABAergic interneurons ( ; ; ). 5HT2A agonists increase presynaptic glutamate release ( ) and increase NMDA receptor sensitivity ( ) and these are mechanisms well characterized as being important in extinction (see Section 4.4 Glutamatergic system).
The roles in extinction of other 5-HT receptors or other components of the 5-HT system, such as melatonin (( ) have not been extensively explored. For example, recent work indicating that the 5-HT7 receptor regulates emotional memories ( ), has not been followed up with studies on extinction. However, 5-HT3 receptors have been also associated with fear extinction mechanisms ( ). While 5-HT3 antagonists have been found to improve extinction ( ), constitutive deletion of 5-HT3 receptors has the opposite effect, possibly due to developmental changes in the 5-HT system ( ).
Despite the limited knowledge that we have so far regarding specific 5-HT receptor contributions to extinction, chronic treatment with SSRIs to enhance 5-HT availability is the first-line therapy for many anxiety disorders. Acute SSRI treatment induces anxiogenic effects, which can be prevented with 5-HT2C antagonists in rodents and mimicked by 5-HT2C agonists administered systemically ( ; ) or locally into the BLA ( ). Chronic treatment with some SSRIs (e.g., fluoxetine) but not all (e.g., citalopram) enhances extinction in rodents ( ) [for a recent review see ( )], including models of impaired extinction [( ; ) see ]. Venlafaxine – a combined 5-HT and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor with weaker affinity to the noradrenaline transporter ( ) – also improves extinction retrieval and protects against fear reinstatement in rodents ( ). Chronic fluoxetine treatment does not strengthen fear conditioning or fear expression ( ) suggesting relative selectivity for extinction. Another clinically relevant attribute of chronic fluoxetine treatment is the protection it provides against the return of fear, as assayed by spontaneous recovery or fear renewal ( ; ; ). Furthermore, an important molecular mechanism through which fluoxetine produces extinction-associated reductions in fear may be the transformation of adult plasticity mechanisms to a juvenile state ( ).
These encouraging preclinical discoveries will hopefully stimulate comprehensive clinical assessment of the efficacy of SSRIs in augmenting CBT in anxiety patients ( ). There have been small-scale clinical trials showing, for example, that paroxetine augments fear reductions (assessed using CAPS scores) and is associated with higher remission rates when combined with CBT in PTSD patients as compared with a placebo/CBT group. An optional treatment maintenance for an additional 12 weeks revealed that symptomatic improvements were long-lasting and consistent although no further improvements could be detected. However, this may have been due to enhanced drop-out of patients who had remitted in earlier phases of the study ( ). More evidence is available in panic disorder ( ). There is evidence that chronic SSRI treatment (fluvoxamine, paroxetine) increases CBT-induced fear reductions in panic disorder patients ( ; ). However results concerning the extinction-augmenting ability of SSRIs are not consistent as SSRIs, including fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, sertraline and paroxetine, have failed to demonstrate efficacy in primary outcomes [clinical global impression; ( ; ; ; ; ). Despite their common effect of serotonin transporter inhibition, SSRIs are known to differ with regard to their pharmacological properties. Along these lines, some SSRIs (e.g. paroxetine) show additional noradrenaline transporter-inhibiting properties via their metabolites ( ), while others (e.g. citalopram) show continued selectivity for the serotonergic system ( ). In this respect, differential effect sizes of SSRIs are to be expected.
Nevertheless, a number of outstanding questions remain, including that concerning the specificity of SSRIs in augmenting fear extinction as opposed to fear learning (as observed with fluoxetine in preclinical models; see above). In this respect, the finding that prior fear conditioning administration of escitalopram augments extinction learning in healthy volunteers without influencing fear acquisition ( ) may hint at a potential selectivity of SSRIs to preferentially engage extinction mechanisms. However, this remains to be tested.
In summary, the clinical studies performed so far have demonstrated that SSRI augmented psychotherapy holds some benefits for panic disorder patients and possibly for PTSD and SAD patients. However, further studies of different SSRIs in larger patient cohorts will be needed, as well as adequate follow-up time to reveal long-term effects, before more definite conclusions can be drawn. Until such studies, as well as studies investigating receptor selective approaches are available, it seems rational to recommend combined treatment involving exposure-based psychotherapy together with antidepressants including SSRIs such as fluoxetine, as there is more evidence supporting than disproving such a strategy at the moment.

## 4.2. Dopaminergic system
An increasing amount of evidence suggests that dopamine (DA) signaling has an important role in extinction mechanisms ( ) [for a recent detailed review, see ( )]. The DAergic system innervates forebrain extinction circuits through ascending mesocortical/limbic DAergic projections from the ventral tegmental area targeting certain brain regions including the mPFC, HPC and AMY ( ; ; ). There is increased dopamine release in the mPFC during and following extinction training ( ) and boosting DAergic signaling with DA precursors or DA-releasing drugs facilitates extinction consolidation ( ; ) and can rescue impaired fear extinction in female rats ( ). Conversely, reducing DAergic transmission by lesioning mesocortical DAergic projection neurons (with 6-OH-DOPA) impairs extinction memory formation ( ; ) (see summary in ). More recently, there have been further insights into the mechanisms of how and where DAergic signaling can influence fear extinction have been made. These studies (see and below) have revealed a complex two-pronged feature of DAergic signaling that can (i) gate the expression of fear, and (ii) influence fear extinction consolidation mechanisms.
Dopamine receptors are metabotropic and in the classical view, coupled to either Gs (increased cAMP, D1-like) or Gi/0 (decreased cAMP, D2-like) proteins. However, DAergic signals can also be transduced via Phospholipase C (PLC) activation (enhanced DAG, IP3) mediated by D1-like Gα proteins, by D2-like Gβγ subunits or by receptors forming D1/D2 heteromers ( ; ) [for review see ( )]. The D1-class receptor signaling modulates the excitability of BLA parvalbumin-positive interneurons ( ; ; ) and ITCs ( ). In concert with D2-like receptors in the CeL/CeC ( ), DAergic signaling exerts tight control over CeM-mediated expression of fear. To date, however, pharmacological manipulation of DAergic signaling in the AMY has produced conflicting results with regard to extinction ( ; ) (see ).
Preclinical work has aimed to clarify the role of DA receptor activity in extinction. However, research has been largely complicated by the lack of receptor subtype-selective compounds, leaving many investigations reliant on drugs acting on D1-like (D1, D5) and D2-like (D2, D3, D4) receptor subfamilies. One reliable finding, however, is that DA antagonism (see ) specifically in the mPFC impairs the retrieval of extinction memories ( ; ; ). In this case, DAergic effects on glutamatergic NMDA receptor signaling may be involved. As discussed below (Section 4.4 Glutamatergic system), NMDA receptor-mediated burst activity of mPFC neurons is associated with stabilization of extinction memories ( ) and D1-like receptor agonists facilitate NMDA receptor currents via Gs mediated increases in adenylate cyclase (AC) activity ( ). There is also the possibility that D2 receptor mechanisms in the PFC support extinction, as ( ) showed that a pre-extinction IL injection of the D2 antagonist raclopride impaired the consolidation of extinction memory. However, following systemic administration of the (less selective) D2 receptor antagonist sulpiride, accelerated extinction was found ( ).
In summary, the results of preclinical studies do not yet fully clarify the specific DA receptor or receptor class mediating the extinction augmenting effect of enhanced dopaminergic signaling. Work still needs to be done on the use of receptor-selective agonists and antagonists, as well as biased ligands (showing functional selectivity for either AC or PLC signal transduction pathways) to reveal receptor-specific functions and their modulation of downstream signaling cascades in extinction. Pharmacologically increasing the DA tone promotes extinction. L-DOPA administration following extinction training enhances fear extinction in mice and healthy humans, rendering extinction resistant to fear renewal, reinstatement and spontaneous recovery ( ). L-DOPA is a precursor for all catecholamines, but preferentially enhances dopaminergic turnover in the frontal cortex ( ), eliciting D1- and D2-like receptor responses ( ). Indeed, L-DOPA augments extinction-related neural activity in the mPFC (IL) of mice and increases mPFC functional coupling in humans ( ). These findings have immediate translational potential because L-DOPA is a US Food and Drug Administration-approved compound used in the treatment of Parkinson's disease, typically in combination with carbidopa (a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor) to maximize central availability and minimize peripheral side effects. While there are abuse related issues with any DA enhancer, this could be mitigated by supervised, acute treatment during CBT. Encouragingly, a small-scale clinical trial found improved efficacy of psychotherapy in treatment-resilient PTSD patients by administration of another DA-enhancing drug, MDMA ( ) and a follow-up indicated robust fear reductions for up to 74 months [( ), see ]. A caveat here is that it is unclear whether these effects of MDMA are solely attributable to its effects on DA, and not also to its effect on other targets of MDMA, notably 5-HT. Nonetheless, boosting DA transmission in conjunction with CBT could have significant potential translational value.

## 4.3. Noradrenergic system
The noradrenergic system is crucial for both the formation and the maintenance of fear memories, as well as for extinction memories (reviewed in ( ; )). Noradrenaline can enhance neuronal excitability in extinction-relevant brain regions such as the IL ( ) and successful fear extinction is associated with enhanced extracellular levels of nor-adrenaline in the mPFC ( ). Boosting noradrenaline levels, via administration of either noradrenaline itself ( ) or of compounds such as yohimbine (see below) or methylphenidate ( ) enhances fear extinction ( ). There is evidence from preclinical studies that activating β-adrenoceptors, one target receptor of noradrenaline, can also facilitate fear extinction ( ) [for recent review, see ( )]. Conversely, depleting central noradrenaline or lesioning ascending noradrenaline projections from the locus coeruleus, impairs extinction, as does systemic alpha1 or β adrenoceptor blockade ( ) [reviewed in ( )].
There has been interest in the clinical utility of targeting noradrenergic mechanisms to augment extinction. Here, we focus on α2-adrenoceptors given the recent clinical findings supporting the utility of α2-adrenoceptor antagonists in improving extinction. Based on results of rodent studies ( ), two small clinical studies ( ; ) have shown that combining yohimbine with CBT can reduce anxiety in patients with social anxiety disorder and claustrophobic fear ( ). A third study found no CBT-augmenting benefit of yohimbine in patients with fear of flying; however, CBT may have exerted a ‘ceiling effect’ that occluded the drug's effect ( ).
In rodents, blocking α2-adrenoceptors (e.g., with yohimbine) that function as autoreceptors on locus coeruleus neurons increases locus coeruleus activity and noradrenaline release in terminal regions ( ). Yohimbine is anxiogenic and increases neuronal activity in widespread brain areas, including extinction-relevant areas such as the amygdala, mPFC and HPC ( ). Downstream targets of yohimbine-induced noradrenaline release include β1-adrenoceptors, and increasing activity at these receptors in locus coeruleus terminal regions (mPFC) enhances extinction ( ), possibly via facilitating extinction-relevant long-term potentiation ( ) in a BDNF-dependent manner ( ). Yohimbine facilitates extinction in rodents, including extinction-impaired subjects ( , ), though a more selective α2-adrenoceptor, atipamezole, does not ( ) [for further discussion, see ( )]. Yohimbine also protects against spontaneous fear recovery, in a manner similar to the effect of a noradrenaline uptake inhibitor, atomoxetine ( ). However, yohimbine reduces fear only in the extinction context in which the drug was administered ( ), which would be a limitation of the clinical goal of achieving context-independent reductions in fear. Thus, other strategies may be needed, including combination strategies where drugs which do produce context-independent extinction, for example targeting HDACs (see Section 4.10 Epigenetics), are combined with yohimbine.

## 4.4. Glutamatergic system
Glutamatergic signaling plays a crucial role in synaptic plasticity and many forms of learning and memory, including fear extinction (see for an overview). Fast excitatory glutamatergic signaling is mediated by ionotropic receptors (NMDA and AMPA), and slower signaling by metabotropic (mGluR1–8) receptors. Group I (mGluR1 and mGluR5) receptors are mainly expressed postsynaptically and coupled to Gq proteins enhancing phospholipase C (PLC) activity. Group II (mGluR2, mGluR3) and Group III (mGluR4, mGluR6–mGluR8) are both coupled to Gi proteins inhibiting adenylate cyclase (AC) activity and expressed on pre- as well as postsynaptic sites ( ).
Pharmacological potentiation of AMPA receptor activation (by PEPA) facilitates extinction learning and retrieval ( , ; ), although it is ineffective in severely extinction-impaired subjects ( ). Studies using localized infusion of AMPA potentiators ( ) and blockers ( ; ; ) coupled with electrophysiological recordings suggest that AMPA-mediated effects on extinction are localized to the mPFC [( ) see , for recent detailed reviews ( ; )].
The part played in extinction by the metabotropic glutamate receptors mGluR1, mGluR5 and mGluR7 has also been evaluated. Antagonizing mGluR1 (which is expressed on ITC innervating neurons ( ) with CPCCOEt ( ) and antagonizing mGluR5 receptors in the IL ( ) have been shown to impair extinction. Furthermore, gene mutations resulting in deficits in mGluR5 ( ) or mGluR7 ( ; ; ) impair extinction learning, while selective activation ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ) improves extinction [see for summary and ( ; ) for more details].
The most extensively studied glutamate receptor in relation to fear extinction is the NMDA receptor (NMDAR). As shown in , systemic or local administration of NMDAR antagonists into the BLA or mPFC produces extinction deficits [reviewed in ( )]. Due to the potential for major side-effects (e.g. excitotoxicity) a general enhancement of NMDAR transmission is clinically undesirable and more subtle modulation of NMDAR signaling is required. NMDARs are specialized voltage-dependent, ligand-gated ion channels that are expressed as heterotetramers formed by GluN1 in combination with GluN2 or GluN3 subunits. To date, eight different splice variants of the GluN1 subunit, four distinctive GluN2 (GluN2A–D) subunits and two GluN3 (GluN3A–B) subunits have been identified [for review see ( )]. Activation of NMDARs requires L-glutamate binding to GluNR2 subunits, L-glycine or D-serine binding to GluNR1 subunits and membrane depolarization relocating the channel pore-blocking Mg2+ and Zn2+ ions.
The repertoire of NMDAR subunits permits the assembly of a range of NMDARs with varying dissociable signaling properties. Systemic ( ; ; ; ) or localized BLA ( ; ; ) or mPFC ( ; ) inhibition of GluN2B-containing NMDARs (via ifenprodil or Ro25–6981) disrupts extinction. Conversely, GluN2B overexpression enhances extinction ( ). Recently, facilitated signaling of GluN2C/D-containing NMDARs in the BLA (via CIQ infusion) was also demonstrated to enhance extinction ( ). The contribution of other subunits, such as GluN2A, remains to be determined.
The organization of NMDARs provides additional druggable pharmacological targets. GluN1 and GluN2 subunits are endowed with binding sites for positive and negative allosteric regulations that enable fine-tuning of NMDAR activity. The GluN1 subunit contains an inhibitory H+ binding site rendering GluN2B/D-containing NMDARs in particular sensitive to local pH changes, as well as to endogenous molecules with redox potential ( ). The GluNR2 subunit is responsive to allosteric modification of NMDAR signaling by polyamines such as spermidine. Spermidine-induced activation of GluN2B signaling facilitates the consolidation of extinction ( ; ), while arcaine, an antagonistic polyamine, disrupts extinction ( ). A GluN2 allosteric binding site – still uninvestigated in the field of fear extinction – enables modulation of NMDAR signaling by neurosteroids (i.a. allopregnanolone) ( ).
Nuanced pharmacological modulation of NMDARs can also be achieved by targeting the Zn2+ binding domain found on GluN2 subunits. Zn2+-binding to this modulatory site mainly inhibits GluN2A–containing NMDARs, by reducing NMDAR channel open probability ( ). Brain Zn2+ signaling which, in addition to the NMDAR binding site, acts via other sites including the GPR39 Zn-sensing receptor ( ), has been shown to exert both enhancing and attenuating effects on learning and memory via complex interactions with neurotransmitters and synaptic plasticity mechanisms (reviewed in ). Dietary Zn2+ supplementation impairs extinction ( ), while dietary-induced reduction of brain Zn2+ levels rescues deficient extinction ( ). Although these effects may be mediated by Zn2+ modulation of NMDAR signaling, other actions cannot be excluded (e.g., see discussion on HDAC inhibition in Section 4.10: Epigenetics). The same is true for another NMDAR-modulating ion, Mg2+, which has also been shown to facilitate extinction when globally enhanced in the brain ( ; ).
The most extensively investigated allosteric modulation of NMDARs is mediated via the L-glycine binding site on the GluN1 subunit. As shown in , systemic administration of ligands on this binding site, D-serine or D-cycloserine (DCS), augments extinction consolidation [see ( ; ) for recent detailed reviews]. There is evidence (although not consistent) that DCS may promote generalization of the extinction effect ( ; ) that is, to other cues (e.g. odors, sounds, visual stimuli) that acquired fear during a more complex conditioning situation. Generalized extinction could be of potential clinical benefit, provided that cues that trigger adaptive reactions are not affected. However, DCS administration outside the consolidation window can limit the drug's effectiveness. When extinction or exposure sessions are too short or yield insufficient fear inhibition, DCS can strengthen (re-)consolidation of the original fear memory. Along these lines, the extinction augmenting effects of DCS require the subject to show at least some ability to extinguish ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Finally, chronic DCS treatment leads to loss of effects on extinction, possibly via NMDAR desensitization ( ; ). It is of note, that chronic treatment with antidepressants also disrupts the facilitating effects of DCS on extinction, possibly by interfering with NMDAR function ( ).
Notwithstanding these caveats, DCS represents one of the best examples of translational research paving the way for novel anxiety treatments. DCS augmentation of CBT has been clinically studied in various anxiety disorders ( ) including among pediatric patients [see ( ) for a recent review]. To summarize the current clinical data, DCS-augmented CBT shows advantages in PTSD ( ; ; ), specific phobia ( ; ; ), SAD ( ; ; ; ) and OCD [( ; ; ; ; ) but see ( )]. Panic disorder patients ( ; ) also show faster symptom alleviation after DCS-augmented CBT. Reflecting the preclinical findings, negative outcomes were associated with short CBT sessions ( ), insufficient within-session fear inhibition ( ; ), chronic DCS treatment ( ), DCS administration outside the therapeutic temporal window ( ) and subclinical levels of fear [( ; ) but see ( )].
If these factors are properly attended to [see above, reviewed in ( )], the evidence supports the adjunctive treatment of CBT with DCS for a range of anxiety disorders.

## 4.5. γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA)
GABA is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the adult mammalian brain. Because extinction largely reflects the promotion of active inhibitory processes, it is not surprising that GABA serves as an important source of such inhibition. GABA signaling occurs largely via binding to ionotropic GABAA and metabotropic GABAB receptors (former GABAC receptors have been reclassified and are now termed GABAA rho-subclass receptors). GABAA receptors are pentameric, ligand-gated Cl− channels which, upon activation induce hyperpolarization of cells and hence reduce neuronal excitability. Seven classes of GABAA subunits (α1–6, β1–3, γ1–3, ρ1–3, δ, ε, ) have been identified so far, permitting the assembly of highly variable GABAA receptors with distinct functions and signaling properties. Furthermore, several allosteric binding sites, in addition to the GABA binding pocket located at the α/β-subunit interface, allow nuanced modifications of GABAA receptor signaling. The allosteric benzodiazepine (BZD) binding site is localized at the interface of α-and -γ-subunits and when activated, facilitates GABAergic transmission by promoting GABA binding to the receptor and increasing the opening probability of the Cl− channel. The binding sites of other allosteric modulators of GABAA signaling including barbiturates and neurosteroids among others are not yet fully characterized [see and ( ; )].
In preclinical studies, the robust inhibitory effect of full GABAA receptor agonists at the GABA binding site (α/β-subunit interface) (e.g. muscimol), is often used to inactivate a brain region to clarify its participation in certain functions including extinction. Muscimol-injections into the BLA ( ; ; ), mPFC/IL ( , ; ) and HPC [( ; ), see for a summary] disrupt extinction learning and memory, supporting the crucial involvement of these areas. However, muscimol infusion into the BLA and IL facilitates extinction in some studies ( ).
There is solid evidence that fear extinction learning is associated with upregulation of GABAergic markers in the AMY, underscoring the importance of a certain level of GABAergic signaling in this brain area for the successful formation of extinction memories. For example, levels of gephyrin, a clustering protein facilitating postsynaptic scaffolding of GABAA receptors, were enhanced 2 h following extinction training along with enhanced surface expression of GABAA receptors in the BLA ( ). Extinction learning also increases GABAA receptor α2- and β2 subunit mRNA and levels of the GABA-synthesizing enzyme glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) and the GABA transporter GAT1 ( ). Further demonstrating the importance of GABAergic signaling to extinction, fear extinction learning is disrupted by mutation-induced deficits in the activity-dependent GAD isoform GAD65 ( ), and by viral knock-down of the constitutive GAD isoform GAD67 ( ). While these findings suggest that upregulation of GABAergic signaling supports extinction, GABAA receptor antagonists such as picrotoxin or bicuculline can enhance extinction memories when administered systemically ( ), or when infused into the BLA ( ) or specific (fear promoting) areas (PL)of the mPFC ( ; ). The reason for these apparent contradictions is not yet clear.
Preliminary findings from studies using genetically modified mice suggest that the development of subunit-selective GABAA receptor drugs could be a promising way to more distinctly utilize GABAergic mechanisms facilitating extinction. For example, there is reduced mRNA expression of α5 and γ1 subunits in the AMY of a mouse model of enhanced anxiety ( ) displaying impaired extinction ( ). In addition, deletion of α5-containing GABAA receptors in the HPC is sufficient to impair fear extinction recall ( ) while global deletion of the GABAAα3 subunit produces modest improvements in extinction learning ( ).
An additional possible explanation for some paradoxical findings concerning GABA regulation and AMY function in extinction is the fact that most of the prior studies have performed pharmacological or genetic manipulations that affect either the entire brain, just the AMY, or even only AMY subregions. Despite this, we now know that GABA receptors are found on most of the neuronal cell types and thus even a subregion-specific manipulation is likely to affect many different cell populations which may have opposing functional effects. One recent attempt to address this complexity involved the use of an inducible GABAa1 knockout strategy limited only to the corticotropin-releasing-hormone containing neuronal population ( )), which revealed relatively specific effects, including enhanced anxiety and extinction deficits. It is likely that future studies aimed at cell-type specific manipulations will help address the vast complexity of the many different cell types combined with the large number of different GABA receptor populations.
As mentioned above, the multiple different binding sites found with-in GABAA receptors can be used to elicit a more nuanced modulation of GABAA receptor activity. Positive allosteric modulation of GABAA receptor activity via BZD, represents the most widely described drug-based strategy for acute treatment of anxiety states ( ). The prevalence of BZD use among patients suffering from mental disorders is high, and is estimated to range between 40 and 70% of these patients ( ) However anxiolytic treatment with BZDs is recommended only for short periods of time, due to several disadvantages including its sedative effects, the development of dependence and difficulties with discontinuing chronic treatment ( ). The sedating and calming effects of BZDs might in fact interfere with extinction possibly via reduced arousal and decreased release of neurochemicals (e.g. noradrenaline) and stress hormones (e.g. glucocorticoids) that support extinction [( ), see Section 4.8 Glucocorticoids) for details]. BZDs may also render extinction memories dependent on the drug-induced internal anxiolytic-state (state dependent learning), which upon BZD discontinuation may no longer be accessible. These concerns are borne out by preclinical data showing that systemic ( ; ; ; , , ; ) or intra-BLA ( , ) BZD administration impairs extinction ( ), presumably also through state-dependent mechanisms. Systemic treatment with a BZD inverse agonist ( ; , ) has similar effects (see for a summary]. Hence, combining BZD with CBT needs careful consideration. As well as further development of BZDs targeting specific subunits of the GABAA receptor [reviewed in ( )], which provides some hope, there is preliminary evidence that putative novel anxiolytics that do not impair extinction learning [e.g. neuropeptide S; ( ) see Section 4.7 Neuropeptides] can be developed to help reduce patients' aversion to the unpleasant and demanding procedure of recalling details of their traumatic memories, thus increasing their willingness to interact with the psychotherapist.
In contrast to the relatively large number of studies of the GABAA receptor, only a few studies have investigated the role of GABAB receptors. Functional GABAB receptors are heterodimers containing a GABAB1 and a GABAB2 subunit; the GABAB1 subunit has two isoforms – GABAB1a and GABAB1b ( ). While functional deletion of GABAB receptors (GABAB1a/b knock-out) impairs extinction learning ( ), pharmacological GABAB receptor antagonism does not ( ; ). Systemic administration of (non-selective) agonists or positive allosteric modulators of GABAB signaling also has inconsistent effects (impairing or negative) on extinction [( ; ) see ]. A final answer to this question regarding the role of GABAB receptors may have to await the availability of GABAB1a-and GABAB1b-selective compounds
Taken together, the available evidence indicates that GABA signaling has a major, but spatially and temporally restricted role in the formation of fear extinction memories. While GABA that is engaged during extinction is likely to support synaptic plasticity, increasing GABAergic tone globally seems to limit the efficacy of extinction-based therapies by mechanisms outlined above. Therefore, it is unlikely that drugs broadly targeting the GABA system will be useful in this respect. Pharmacological adjuncts to exposure therapy targeting the GABA system would rather need to strike a balance between driving and maintaining relevant GABA activity without over-activating the system. The evidence so far suggests that subunit-selective or allosteric (distinct from BZD) modulation of GABAA receptor signaling may hold promise in this regard.

## 4.6. Cannabinoids
A growing body of literature demonstrates that the endogenous cannabinoid (eCB) system modulates neuronal excitability in stressful and fearful situations ( ; ). eCB signaling has been implicated in emotional and cognitive processing of threatening stimuli, for instance during the consolidation of fear and fear extinction memories (for more detailed recent reviews see ( ; ). Upon neuronal activation, an eCB (anandamide) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol ( ) are rapidly synthesized in the postsynaptic neuron (within minutes) and released into the synaptic cleft to modulate presynaptic signaling by the activation of Gi/0-coupled CB-1 receptors (CB-2 receptors are mainly expressed on immune cells, osteoblasts, osteoclasts and hematopoietic cells but also on neuroglia).
Supporting a role of eCB signaling in the extinction of aversive memories (see for overview), there are increased eCB levels in the mouse BLA following extinction training ( ). Conversely, PTSD patients show low brain anandamide levels ( ). In rodents, facilitation of eCB signaling by CB-1 receptor agonists or exogenous cannabinoids [cannabidiol, ( )], reuptake inhibitors [AM404, ( ; ; )] or anandamide degradation blockers [AM3506, URB 597, ( )] enhances the formation or consolidation of extinction memories. Blockade or knock-out of CB1-receptors ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ) impairs extinction and blocks the pro-extinction effects of drugs that facilitate eCB transmission ( ; ; ) (see ). Collectively, these observations point to CB-1 receptor mediated eCB signaling as a powerful modulator of extinction.
Following up on these studies, intra-cerebral infusions of CB1-receptor agonists and antagonists have revealed a potential role of mPFC-BLA eCB signaling in extinction [see , ( ; ; )]. CB1-receptor activation inhibits both presynaptic glutamate and GABA release. The release of anandamide and concomitant CB1-receptor activation induce long-term depression of inhibitory transmission (LTDi) in the BLA ( ; ). In addition, a recent study demonstrated that enhanced inhibitory input via activation of CB1 receptor expressing cholecystokinin (CCK) positive interneurons selectively reduces firing of BLA fear neurons and promotes extinction ( ). Of note is the fact that it has also been shown that one potential mechanism for the CB1 effect on extinction within the AMY is via blockade of CCK release, as an intra-AMY CCK antagonist reversed the extinction blockade of systemic CB1 antagonists, and CCK agonists block extinction ( ).
In summary, current preclinical data suggest that eCB signaling gates BLA function through plastic changes, including a long-lasting depression of inhibition, to modulate extinction-related AMY activity. Initial results from clinical studies in healthy volunteers suggest that exogenous cannabinoid administration strengthens extinction and protects against reinstatement [see , ( ; )]. Future clinical trials in extinction-impaired PTSD patients will be needed to show whether cannabinoids (or substances which increase endogenous eCB signaling, such as FAAH inhibitors) might prove useful as adjuncts to CBT-based therapy.

## 4.7. Neuropeptides (oxytocin, neuropeptide Y, neuropeptide S, opioids)
Various neuropeptides and their corresponding receptors are localized in brain regions mediating emotional behavior and stress response and have been considered as potential anxiolytic drug targets ( ; ; ). While other neuroptides such as hypocretin/Orexin ( ) may also be involved in fear extinction, we will here address the role of oxytocin, neuropeptide Y, neuropeptide S and opioids in extinction.

## 4.7.1. Oxytocin
The oxytocin (OXT) system, strongly implicated in social cognition and behavior, is posited to play a role in anxiety disorders with impaired social functioning ( ; ). OXT is synthesized in the paraventricular (PVN) and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus and processed along the axonal projections to the posterior pituitary gland. Upon neuronal activation OXT is released from secretory vesicles into the peripheral circulation as neurohypophyseal hormone. The central nervous system (CNS) component of OXT is derived from dendritic release of the same cell population ( ), as well as from the OXT-synthesizing parvocellular PVN cells sending projections throughout the brain [reviewed in ( )]. OXT receptors are typically Gq-protein coupled and have potential allosteric binding sites for Mg2+ and steroids like cholesterol. The distribution of OXT receptors has not been fully delineated, but OXT fibers and neurosecretory nerve endings have been described in, among other regions, the AMY [especially CeL ( ; )], the dorsal and ventral HPC and the main monoamine nuclei – substantia nigra (dopamine), raphe nuclei (serotonin) and the locus coeruleus (noradrenaline) [see ( ) for review).
Regulatory effects of OXT on stress-induced activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, as well as direct OXT effects on the brain and specific parts of the extinction circuitry, can affect fear extinction in various ways. Intracerebroventricular (icv) infusion of OXT prior to fear conditioning does not affect fear learning but facilitates later extinction acquisition and retrieval ( ). Conversely, OXT receptor antagonists impair extinction learning and retrieval when administered icv prior to fear acquisition ( ). More localized OXY infusions into the central CeA reduce fear expression by inhibiting CeM excitatory output to fear-eliciting brainstem structures ( ) ( ), suggesting one possible mechanism for the effects of icv OXY on extinction.
Another potential mechanism might be OXT-induced dampening of stress-induced activation of the HPA axis ( ; ; ; ). As explained in more detail in Section 4.8 Glucocorticoids, glucocorticoid release during an actual learning process facilitates cognitive processing [reviewed in ( )], hence the release of endogenous OXT during traumatic experiences ( ) may interfere with the consolidation of fear memories. Along these lines, OXT-mediated reduction of HPA axis activity and subsequent lower glucocorticoid levels could interfere with fear acquisition, resulting in a weaker fear memory that is more susceptible to extinction training. In this context, OXT administration either icv or intra BLA prior to extinction training disrupts extinction learning [( ) ( ) see for summary]. OXT infusions into the dorsolateral septum prior to extinction training have the opposite effect and facilitate extinction learning and retrieval in a social fear conditioning paradigm that may recruit a somewhat different neural circuitry than non-social forms of fear ( ).
Considering that systemically applied neuropeptides do not cross the blood–brain-barrier, clinical use of neuropeptides would require a direct pathway to the human brain. In the case of OXT, this may be feasible via intranasal administration ( ). Intranasal OXT administration has been demonstrated to reduce stress-induced cortisol release in humans ( ; ; ), and to attenuate AMY hyperactivity as well as AMY-hindbrain coupling in anxiety patients [( ; )]. In a recent study investigating the effects of intranasal OXT treatment on fear extinction in healthy volunteers, OXT increased initial fear expression during extinction training, but this effect was gone by the end of training and there was a lower level of fear in the OXT treated group in extinction retrieval ( ). These data raise the prospect of OXT-augmented CBT effectiveness.

## 4.7.2. Neuropeptide Y
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) contains 36 amino acids and is the most widely expressed neuropeptide in the mammalian brain. There are particularly high concentrations of NPY in the limbic system, including in the AMY, the HPC and the periaqueductal gray. Six G-protein coupled NPY receptors (Y1–6) have been identified, among which Y1, Y2, Y4, and Y5 mediate central effects. Y1 mRNA is present at a high level in brain areas involved in memory processing, namely the AMY, HPC, thalamus, hypothalamus, and the cerebral cortex. The AMY, HPC, and hypothalamus are also rich in Y2 receptors, while Y5 receptors can be detected in HPC, cingulate cortex and thalamic and hypothalamic nuclei ( ) [reviewed in ( )].
Icv administration of NPY facilitates extinction learning ( ), while genetic deletion of NPY disrupts extinction acquisition and subsequent retrieval ( ). Extinction deficits caused by NPY knock-out are rescued by AAV-mediated NPY re-expression in the BLA ( ), where NPY co-localizes with GABAergic neurons modifying inhibitory control of BLA projection neurons ( ). To elucidate which NPY receptors mediate the BLA-associated effects on extinction, the consequences of gene deletion via either deletion of Y1 or Y2 receptors or double Y1/Y2 deletion have been examined. Deletion of Y1 receptors impaired extinction learning, while Y2 receptor deletion had no effect ( ). Underscoring the importance to extinction of Y1 receptors in the BLA, local infusion of the Y1 agonist Leu31Pro34-NPY prior to extinction training led to stronger extinction retrieval ( ; ). Further studies are required to further delineate the underlying mechanisms of Y1-mediated facilitation of extinction, and to investigate the potential clinical use of NPY and Y1 receptor agonism as adjunctive therapy to CBT.

## 4.7.3. Neuropeptide S
Neuropeptide S (NPS) is synthesized in neurons located adjacent to the locus coeruleus ( ) and binds to G-protein coupled NPS receptors expressed in the BLA among other areas. Intra-BLA infusion of exogenous NPS accelerates extinction learning, while BLA NPS receptor antagonism (via SHA68) impairs extinction learning and retrieval and increases fear renewal ( ; ) ( ). NPS treatment also rescues deficient extinction learning in hyperanxious rats ( ), exhibiting aberrant cortico-AMY activation ( ). The activation of NPS receptors in the BLA increases excitatory input to GABAergic ITCs, thus increasing feed-forward inhibition to CeM neurons and reducing fear expression ( ; ; ). Exogenous NPS administration is also associated with enhanced DA release in the mPFC ( ), suggesting another mechanism for strengthening extinction (see Section 4.2 Dopaminergic system).
Underscoring the translational relevance of NPS, healthy human volunteers carrying the NPS receptor polymorphism rs324981, which potentiates NPS efficacy at the receptor, show enhanced extinction in a virtual reality fear potentiated startle paradigm ( ). Additional studies are required to assess whether increasing NPS signaling improves extinction in anxiety patients. This would be aided by the development of small molecule NPS receptor agonists.

## 4.7.4. Opioids
The opioid peptide family comprises different members including endorphins, enkephalins, dynorphins and hemorphins. The 3 classical opioid receptors [µ (MOR), κ (KOR) and δ (DOR)] show heterogeneous expression throughout the brain and are located in extinction-relevant brain areas including the AMY, mPFC and HPC. Typically, MOR, KOR and DORs are coupled to Gi-proteins, reducing (in most cases) net neuronal excitability and reducing neurotransmitter release upon activation [reviewed in ( )].
There is evidence that morphine application (intended for pain management) following an acute trauma attenuates the incidence of PTSD at later timepoints ( ; ; ; ). Aside from this potential PTSD preventing property of opioids, several studies have tried to determine the importance of opioids in extinction.
Systemic administration of the opioid receptor antagonist naloxone (which has highest affinity to MOR, but also inhibits KOR and DOR) impairs extinction when given prior to extinction training ( ; ) but not when applied after extinction training or prior to retrieval, see ). Subsequent investigations have demonstrated that extinction-impairing effects are mediated by MORs in the PAG [as shown with the selective MOR antagonist CTAP in the PAG ( ; )].
The AMY ITCs express high levels of MOR ( ), and lesioning of MOR-expressing neurons in the ITCs following extinction training impairs extinction retrieval ( ), indicating that MOR signaling in the ITCs contributes to extinction consolidates. Probably due to the high addiction potential of MOR agonists, no clinical studies have investigated their potential in CBT. However, treatment with the opioid receptor antagonist naloxone prior to exposure therapy is associated with reduced treatment success ( ; ), which is in accordance with preclinical results ( ).
Another opioid receptor gaining attention in the field of fear extinction is the KOR, activated by endogenous dynorphins (reviewed in ). Human volunteers with single nucleotide polymorphisms in the prodynorphin gene showed increased skin conductance (a physiological measure of fear) during fear extinction training and blunted functional connectivity between AMY and mPFC ( ). Along these lines, genetic deletion of dynorphin or systemic antagonism of KORs in rodents impairs extinction learning and reduces neuronal activity in the BLA and mPFC ( ). In contrast to these extinction-impairing effects, systemic administration of KOR antagonists protects against fear renewal ( ) – an effect mimicked by local infusions into the ventral HPC ( ). Additional studies will help clarify these effects and their possible relevance to clinical use of opioidergic drugs in conjunction with exposure-based therapies.

## 4.8. Glucocorticoids
Emotionally arousing experiences activate the HPA axis and the release of glucocorticoids (GCs) into the bloodstream. GCs which include cortisol in humans, and corticosterone in rodents are lipophilic and readily cross the blood–brain-barrier to interact with glucocorticoid (GR) and mineralocorticoid receptors (MR) in the brain. GRs are widely expressed throughout the brain including the AMY, HPC and PFC ( ). Early pioneering studies reported that extinction-memory formation is disrupted by adrenalectomy ( ), as well as, more recently, by compounds that antagonize GRs, such as mifepristone ( ), or that inhibit corticosterone synthesis [metapyrone, ( ; ; ; , )] (see ). Conversely, systemic administration of corticosterone ( ) or the GR agonists dexamethasone or RU28362 ( ; , ) facilitate the consolidation of aversive and appetitive extinction memories (see ).
How can stress hormones promote the formation of extinction memories? Cytosolic GRs induce genomic responses by binding to glucocorticoid responsive elements within promoter regions of GC-responsive genes, and act as transcription factors inducing the expression of learning-related genes. In addition, membrane-bound GRs can induce non-genomic actions of relevance to extinction, including the synthesis of eCBs (see Section 4.6 Cannabinoids) from membrane phospholipids ( ; , ). Further supporting a link between GRs and eCBs, and possibly of importance in GC-augmented extinction consolidation, adrenalectomy leads to reduced CB-1 receptor expression ( ) and GC-mediated memory consolidation is prevented by CB-1 receptor antagonists ( ).
GRs can also induce indirect learning-relevant genomic actions via activation of intracellular signaling cascades such as the ERK/MAPK pathway (reviewed in ) in cooperation with other neuro-transmitter systems or ion channels including β-adrenoceptors ( ), and L-type calcium channels ( ). These interrelated effects are functionally relevant, given that the infusion of β-adrenoceptor antagonists into the BLA blocks the memory-facilitating effects of systemically administered glucocorticoids ( ; ).
Another important functional interaction occurs between GCs and the glutamate system. GCs potentiate glutamatergic signaling via genomic and non-genomic mechanisms, by (i) increasing the readily releasable pool of presynaptic glutamate vesicles, and (ii) enhancing NMDA and AMPA receptor surface expression through increased receptor trafficking (reviewed in ). The concomitant activation of GC and NMDA receptors, which can occur during emotionally arousing experiences, induces downstream nuclear mechanisms that result in histone modifications (reviewed in ), an epigenetic mechanism implicated in extinction (see Section 4.10: Epigenetics for details). Underscoring the potential importance of emotional arousal and thus of GC release in this process, pretreatment with the anxiolytic BZD lorazepam (resulting in reduced arousal in response to the stressor) blocked epigenetic modifications on Histone H3, while application of the anxiogenic BZD inverse agonist FG7142 ( ) induced transcription facilitating acetylation and phosphorylation on histone tails ( ). These epigenetic effects could contribute to the aforementioned extinction impairing effects of BZDs (see Section 4.5: γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) and ).
In contrast to the effects of acute GC elevations, chronic high levels of corticosterone reduce cell-surface NMDA and AMPA receptor expression ( ). This loss of critical plasticity mechanisms might be one explanation as to why anxiety patients with a history of repeated traumatic events, such as combat veterans, show greater resistance to treatment. However, a considerable proportion of PTSD patients have reduced cortisol levels ( ) and small case studies suggest that there are beneficial effects of CBT and adjunctive cortisol administration in PTSD patients ( ). A number of larger studies are under way to extend this work (NCT01108146, NCT00751855, NCT01525680). In addition, it has been found that cortisol-augmented CBT has efficacy in acrophobia ( ), arachnophobia ( , ) and social phobia [( ) see for a summary]. Whether cortisol augmented CBT for non-phobic anxiety disorders, including also GAD, facilitates fear inhibition is currently being investigated in ongoing clinical studies (see ). Furthermore, future studies may implement more selective GC agonists than cortisol (which is also acting on MRs) to avoid nonspecific side effects.

## 4.9. Neurotrophins and miscellaneous targets

## 4.9.1. Fibroblast growth factor-2
Fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2) is a multi-functional growth factor involved in brain development and learning-related molecular signaling cascades (reviewed in ). FGF2 signaling is associated with glutamate-mediated synaptic plasticity ( ), L-type voltage gated calcium channel expression and activation ( ) and phosphorylation of both MAPK ( ) and CREB ( ). FGF2 also promotes LTP in the HPC ( ). Hence, FGF2 interacts with the molecular tools required for the formation and consolidation of extinction memories. FGF receptors are tyrosine kinase receptors expressed widely throughout the brain, including in areas within the extinction circuitry such as the HPC and the CeA, and FGF2 expression in the HPC and the mPFC is induced under stress ( ), thus suggesting that emotionally arousing situations requiring new learning generate increased FGF2 signaling which supports the formation of emotional memories.
FGF2 has been shown to cross the blood–brain barrier ( ) and pioneering work demonstrates that systemic administration of FGF2 prior to or following extinction training facilitates the consolidation of extinction memories ( , ). Local infusion into the BLA replicates the extinction-facilitating effects of systemic FGF2 ( ), demonstrating at least one key site of this neurotrophin's action ( ). Of significant importance, is the fact that FGF2-augmented extinction has been associated with enhanced protection against return of fear phenomena including renewal and reinstatement [( , , ), see for details] making it an interesting candidate for future clinical applications. Clinical studies investigating the potential of FGF2 in CBT could be implemented in the near future as human trials investigating FGF2 for angiogenesis have already shown some drugs to be safe ( ).

## 4.9.2. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is the most abundant neurotrophin in the CNS and a key player in synaptic plasticity (reviewed in ). BDNF binds with high affinity to the tropomyosin-related kinase B (TrkB) receptor and with low affinity to the p75NTR, a receptor for multiple neurotrophins ( ). BDNF and TrkB are present in the HPC, AMY, PFC and the hypo-thalamus, and are integral components of fear extinction mechanisms as blunted activity of BDNF-TrkB signaling is associated with deficient extinction retrieval in rats ( ). Conversely, increased levels of BDNF mRNA are observed in the BLA ( ), mPFC ( ) following successful fear extinction. The potential utility of BDNF-TrkB signaling as cognitive enhancing target is underscored by the findings that stimulating TrkB signaling by administering the TrkB agonist 7,8-dihydroxyflavone (DHF) facilitates LTP induction in the AMY ( ) and can augment fear extinction ( ; ).
Haploinsufficiency of BDNF leads to deficits in extinction learning and retrieval ( ), while inhibition of the BDNF-evoked signaling cascade via transfection of a dominant negative form of the TrkB receptor specifically disrupts extinction consolidation in a fear potentiated startle paradigm ( ). Conversely, systemic injection of the TrkB agonist DHF promoted extinction in a stress model of impaired fear extinction and protected against the reinstatement of fear ( ) (for an overview, see ). In mice and humans, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the BDNF gene (Val66Met), causing inefficient BDNF trafficking and reduced activity-dependent BDNF secretion, is associated with poor extinction ( ) and abnormal fronto-AMY activity ( ). Moreover, human carriers of the BDNF Val66Met SNP show reduced responsivity to exposure-based therapies [reviewed in ( )], underscoring the potential role of BDNF in deficient fear extinction.
Studies aimed at identifying the site of BDNF-induced effects on extinction showed that deletion of BDNF in the HPC, but not in the PL( ), impairs fear extinction learning ( ). In addition, injection of BDNF antibodies (anti-BDNF) in the IL prior to extinction training disrupts acquisition and retrieval of extinction memories while anti-BDNF infusions in the PL cortex do not affect extinction ( ) ( ). These findings indicate that BDNF signaling in the HPC and the IL support the formation and maintenance of fear extinction memories. In fact, local BDNF injections in the IL produced fear inhibition for recent as well as remote fear memories even in the absence of extinction training ( ; ). Given the possibility that BDNF infusions into the IL could reinstate fear by using the aforementioned extinction-independent paradigm ( ), BDNF seems to induce signaling cascades crucial for the formation of extinction memories rather than decreasing the stability of the original fear memory. Overall these effects are consistent with a model in which the effects of BDNF are brain-region dependent, and BDNF appears to enhance synaptic plasticity of the most robust form of learning occurring in a time- and region-dependent manner.
Various targets described in this review may mediate their effects on extinction via interactions with BDNF. For example, chronic treatment with the SSRI fluoxetine (Section 4.1: Serotonergic system) facilitates extinction and enhances BDNF levels in the AMY and the HPC ( ). Valproate, an extinction-promoting inhibitor of histone deacetylation (see Section 4.10: Epigenetics), increases BDNF mRNA in the mPFC ( ). Furthermore, TrkB activation triggers the release of eCBs ( ) and increases the expression of CB1 receptors ( ), hence potentially contributing to extinction memory formation (see Section 4.6: Cannabinoids). Finally, BDNF Met66 knock-in mice exhibit dysfunctional NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic plasticity in addition to reduced extinction acquisition ( ) that is rescued by systemic administration of D-cycloserine ( ), underscoring an additional strong interaction between BDNF and the glutamatergic system [see ( ) for more details].
These findings suggest that BDNF signaling may be an important common signaling pathway for various systems involved in extinction. Although poor blood–brain-barrier permeability ( ) limits the therapeutic potential of BDNF itself, TrkB receptor agonists such as DHF (see above) or LM22A-4 ( ) may hold promise for CBT-adjunctive therapy in anxiety.

## 4.9.3. Nitric oxide and methylene blue
Nitric oxide (NO) signaling has received considerable attention in terms of its effect on fear learning and has been shown, for example, to be implicated in the formation of LTP at thalamic input synapses in the LA ( ). One recent study did demonstrate that reducing NO signaling via inhibition of nitric oxide synthase (e.g. via L-NAME) impairs extinction learning and retrieval ( ), indicating that NO signaling may also be involved in the formation and maintenance of fear extinction memories.
More work has been done on the brain penetrant methylene blue, which is an inhibitor of NO synthase, as well as a central monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor and a cerebral metabolic enhancer (reviewed in ). A contribution of nitric oxide to the behavioral effects of this and related compounds was suggested in relation to their observed antidepressant-like activity ( ).
In rodents, subchronic administration of methylene blue facilitates extinction retrieval ( ) ( ) and increases metabolic activity in the IL subdivision of the mPFC. Methylene blue administration also rendered extinction memories resistant to fear renewal when administered following extinction training in a learned helplessness model exhibiting impaired extinction ( ).). Because methylene blue is used to treat metemoglobinemia and has a well-described safety profile ( ), these preclinical data could be quickly moved forward to clinical investigations. Indeed, the first clinical study has recently reported that methylene blue treatment during CBT led to greater fear inhibition that was persistent for at least one month [( ) see A for details]. However, similar to the profile of DCS discussed earlier, only those patients capable of showing some extinction benefited from the methylene blue treatment. A clinical trial investigating the potential of methylene blue in PTSD (NCT01188694) is now under way.

## 4.9.4. Histamine
The tuberomammillary nucleus is the main source of histamine in the brain. Histaminergic projections innervate main monoaminergic nuclei, such as raphe nuclei and locus coeruleus ( ), as well as extinction relevant brain areas, including the AMY, mPFC and hippocampus ( ). To date, 4 histamine receptor subtypes (H1–4) have been identified – H1–3 are expressed in the CNS, while H4 is involved in chemotactic processes of the immune system. Local histamine infusions into the CA1 region of the HPC have been associated with improved extinction consolidation ( ). This effect is H2 receptor mediated, since the H2 agonist dimaprit facilitates extinction consolidation while the histamine H2 antagonist ranitidine impairs it, when injected into the CA1, BLA or IL following extinction training ( ; ). Furthermore, both histamine and the H2 agonist dimaprit facilitate extinction-induced phosphorylation of Erk1, suggesting a possible molecular pathway mediating the augmenting effects of H2 receptor agonism on extinction consolidation ( ). However, although the H1 antagonist hydroxyzine has been used in some anxiety therapies ( ), the potential clinical use of histaminergic drugs in particular targeting the H2 receptor for CBT augmentation has not been investigated.

## 4.9.5. Voltage gated calcium channels
Voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) are classified into L-, P/Q-, R-, N- and T-type VGCCs (for a review see ). A rise in intracellular calcium via NMDA receptor or VGCC activation initiates various second messenger signaling cascades that play a role in LTP formation. Due to their neuronal expression as well as their association with gene transcription the L-type calcium channels (LTCCs) Cav1.2 and Cav1.3 ( , ) have attracted most attention in the fear conditioning field.
Early studies have shown that systemic injections of LTCC blockers, e.g. nifedipine (that inhibits Cav1.2 and Cav1.3 channels), impair fear extinction acquisition ( ). However, whole-brain gene knockout of Cav1.3 channels ( ; ) as well as conditional knockout of Cav1.2 on CaMKII-expressing principal neurons ( ) failed to replicate deleterious effects of LTCC blockers on extinction training. Pre-training icv infusion of nifedipine has revealed no effect on extinction learning ( ), suggesting that the extinction-impairing effects of systemic nifedipine may be due to peripheral actions ( ).
However, pre-training intra-BLA or intra-HPC infusion of nifedipine, or of another LTCC blocker, verapamil, impairs extinction retrieval 24h later ( ; ), indicating a role for LTCCs within these regions in the consolidation of extinction. This effect could be related to Cav1.3 mediation of synaptic plasticity and neuronal excitability in the AMY ( ) or to altered neuronal firing in the CA1 region of the HPC ( ). However, the effect on extinction consolidation of selective Cav1.3 activation has not been assessed so far.
While activation of Cav1.2 channels produces severe neurological effects and germline gain of Cav1.3 function is deleterious ( ), selective Cav1.3 activation in adulthood has been shown to be tolerated at least in mice ( ; ). Hence, short term use of such compounds, as would typically be required in combination with exposure therapy, should be possible. Taken together, these preclinical findings raise the prospect of targeting LTCCs, and Cav1.3 in particular, for the treatment of anxiety.

## 4.10. Epigenetics
The formation of extinction memories requires an intricate regulatory network of signal transduction, gene transcription and translation. A key step in this process involves the coordinated transcription of specific genes coding for learning-associated transcription factors, synaptic plasticity factors, neurotransmitter receptors, cytoskeletal proteins and other cellular substrates [reviewed in ( ; )]. Gene transcription is in turn tightly controlled by epigenetic mechanisms ( ). Epigenetic mechanisms regulate the accessibility of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) to transcription-initiating machinery via certain molecular events including histone tail post-translational modifications and DNA methylation. In this section we will focus on histone acetylation and DNA methylation, with emphasis on their dynamic interactions within the chromatin environment that orchestrate the regulation of genes at the molecular level, and review accumulating evidence that modulation of extinction-relevant receptors at the synapse can initiate epigenetic programs within the nucleus and modulate extinction in a persistent and context-independent manner. We will also review data showing that drugs targeting epigenetic mechanisms may serve to strengthen extinction.

## 4.10.1. Histone modifications
To date, a main focus of research is on understanding the interaction between histone modifications and the strengthening of fear extinction memories. In eukaryotic cells, DNA is organized in a highly conserved structural polymer, termed chromatin. The basic building block of chromatin is the nucleosome, which consists of 146 base pairs (bp) of DNA wrapped around an octamer consisting of (dimers of) core histone proteins (H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) held together by a H1 linker protein ( ). Histones contain a globular domain with a covalently modifiable N-terminal tail consisting of lysine and/or arginine residues. Histone modifications constitute a signal that is read alone or, in combination with other modifications and interactions with neighboring histones – a ‘histone code’ ( ). At least 9 different posttranslational modifications, including acetylation, phosphorylation, methylation, biotinylation, SUMOylation, ADP ribosylation, and ubiquitination, influence chromatin condensation, resulting in gene transcription by coordinating protein and enzyme complex accessibility to DNA ( ). Here, we focus primarily on the most well-studied histone modification in extinction – acetylation of histone proteins.
Histone acetylation on lysine (K) residues leads to transcriptional activation by neutralizing the positive charge of the K ε-amino group of histone tails, which in-turn relaxes chromatin by reducing the electrostatic bonding of histone with negatively charged DNA ( ). The enzymes involved in regulating this process are 1) histone acetyltransferases (HATs), also known as lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) ( ) or ‘writers’ ( ) and 2) histone deacetylases (HDACs), also known as lysine deacetylases (KDACs) ( ) or ‘erasers’ ( ). HATs acetylate K residues to promote gene transcription, whereas HDACs, which are present in co-repressor complexes, remove K residues to impair gene transcription (see .) [for greater detail, see ( )].
There is some evidence that extinction is associated with alterations in HAT activity and that drugs increasing HAT activity could constitute a novel approach to augmenting extinction ( .). Following extinction, there is increased expression of the HAT p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) in the rodent IL, and intra-IL infusion of the PCAF activator, SPV106, facilitates extinction and protects against fear renewal ( ). However, inhibiting, rather than activating, the activity of another HAT, p300, in the IL also strengthens extinction ( ). One possible explanation of this finding is that rather than strengthening extinction, p300 may bolster fear memory reconsolidation via transcription of genes including nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) ( ; ) and yin-yang 1 (YY1) ( ), known to be involved in reconsolidation ( ; ). These two studies that demonstrate how targeting HATs affects fear in different ways indicate the need for additional work to determine the optimal approach to facilitate extinction with HAT modulators.
There is an increasing amount of evidence to suggest that histone acetylation is an important mechanism promoting successful fear extinction (reviewed in ( )] ( .). An important early study found that histone extinction is associated with increased acetylation of histone H4 in the promoter region of bdnf exon IV ( ). Subsequent work showed that administration of various HDAC inhibitors including TSA (trichostatin A), sodium butyrate, entinostat (MS-275), vorinostat (SAHA, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid), VPA (valproic acid) and Cl-944 can augment fear extinction ( ). The potential clinical utility of using HDAC inhibitors has been further strengthened by showing that Cl-944, MS-275 and SAHA rescue extinction deficits in various rodent models ( ; ; ; ) (see ).
An additional attribute of HDAC inhibitors is their ability to extinguish remote (aged) fear memories that are normally resistant to extinction. Extinction of recent fear memories (1 day after conditioning), using a memory update-consolidation paradigm, increases HDAC2 nitrosylation ( ), which facilitates the dissociation of HDAC2 from chromatin ( ), leading to histone hyper-acetylation and HPC expression of extinction-relevant genes including c-Fos. By contrast, nitrosylation of HDAC2 and c-Fos expression do not increase after extinction training of remote (1 month post conditioning) fear memories ( ) ( .). Systemic administration of the HDAC inhibitor Cl-994 was able to rescue remote extinction and the associated gene expression deficits. Rescue of impaired remote extinction has been observed with dietary zinc restriction, which inhibits HDAC in addition to affecting other systems ( ; ). Collectively, these two studies support the potential clinical utility of HDAC inhibitors as adjuncts to CBT treatment of fearful memories that started long after the exposure to trauma.
Further supporting a role of HDAC activity in the modulation of fear extinction mechanisms is the observation that reduced HDAC activity is associated with improvements in fear extinction ( ). At present 18 different mammalian HDAC isoforms have been identified, and they are divided into four classes (Classes I–IV). Targeting individual HDAC isoforms is an important aim of drug development ( ). The majority of currently available HDAC inhibitors target multiple isoforms of the HDAC family (e.g. classes I, II, and IV), while some of the HDAC inhibitors that have proved to be successful in augmenting fear extinction ( ) exhibit preferential selectivity towards class-I HDACs (encompassing HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC8) ( ).
Studies using gene knockdown or over-expression suggest that targeting specific HDAC isoforms could indeed be a promising approach to modulating extinction [reviewed in ( )]. This is exemplified by the recent finding that gene silencing of HDAC2, but not HDAC1, in forebrain neurons promotes extinction ( ). However, the effect of specifically inhibiting other HDAC isoforms, including HDAC3 [recently shown to facilitate the extinction of drug-seeking memories ( )], remains to be tested.
It is likely that the extinction-facilitating effects of HDAC inhibitors are due to activation of extinction-related gene transcription programs. The HDAC inhibitors SAHA and VPA increase, respectively histone acetylation in the promoter region of grin2b (NMDA receptor subunit 2B) ( ), and histone H4 acetylation in promoter IV of bdnf, leading to increased BDNF exon IV mRNA expression ( ). In addition, the HDAC inhibitor Cl-994 increases histone H3 acetylation in the promoter region of plasticity associated genes including igf2, adcy6, c-Fos, npas4, and arc ( ). Indeed, a range of neurotransmitter/neuromodulator systems that are known to mediate extinction, induce transcription of relevant genes via enhancement of histone acetylation, including histone H3 acetylation in the promoter region of bdnf, camk2a, creb and the NMDA receptor subunit genes grin2a and grin2b ( ; , ; ). Concerning a possible convergent downstream mechanism for these effects, serotonin via activation of PKA signaling pathways ( ), L-type calcium channel activation ( ) and BDNF/TrkB activation ( ) all activate the MAPK/ERK signaling pathway, which is crucial for fear extinction ( ) (see also ). MAPK/ERK signaling to the nucleus could increase histone acetylation by enhancing activity of the HAT CREB-binding protein (CBP) ( ).

## 4.10.2. DNA methylation
DNA methylation is a crucial mechanism for controlling chromatin remodeling in the adult mammalian nervous system ( ; ) and can occur at multiple sites within a gene. DNA methylation is a direct chemical modification of a cytosine side-chain that adds a methyl (–CH3) group through a covalent bond, catalyzed by a class of enzymes known as DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs)( ). The DNMTs transfer methyl groups to cytosine residues within a continuous stretch of DNA, specifically at the 5′-position of the pyrimidine ring (5-methylcytosine) ( ). Not all cytosines can be methylated; typically, cytosines are followed by a guanine in order to be methylated ( ) ( .). However, given the recent finding that methylation can occur outside CpG islands and in CpH (where H = adenine/cytosine/thymine) islands and that these CpH islands can repress ( ) substantially expands and adds further complexity to how methylation can regulate gene transcription in the central nervous system. Furthermore, this finding raises the open question of whether CpH methylation is a molecular mechanism regulating fear extinction.
In a pioneering study, linking DNA methylation and extinction, extinction-resistant female mice were found to exhibit increased DNA methylation of Bdnf exon IV and a concomitant decrease in BDNF mRNA expression in the PFC ( ). The fact that DNA methylation is reversible suggests that enhancement of gene transcription by DNA demethylation could represent a novel mechanism for strengthening extinction that has the potential to be pharmaceutically exploited. Along these lines, the ten-eleven translocation (Tet) family of methylcytosine dioxygenases, which includes Tet1, Tet2, and Tet3 enzymes, catalyze oxidation of 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and thereby promotes DNA demethylation ( ; ).
Two recent studies demonstrate the importance of these Tet enzymes in extinction. Extinction leads to a genome-wide redistribution of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and Tet3 occupancy to extinction-relevant genes including the GABAA clustering protein, gephyrin (see Section 4.5: γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)), and to enhanced gephyrin mRNA expression in the IL ( ). Furthermore, gene knockdown of Tet1 impairs extinction ( ). While agents targeting Tet enzymes are not currently available, these emerging pre-clinical findings may provide the impetus to develop such compounds.

## 4.10.3. Non-coding RNA
In addition to histone modifications and DNA methylation, gene expression is also regulated by non-coding RNAs including micro-RNAs (miRNAs) ( ). miRNAs represent classes of non-coding RNAs that mediate post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, including genes associated with synaptic plasticity, learning and memory ( ). Although miRNAs are usually associated with preventing mRNA translation and thereby with suppressing new protein synthesis, a specific miRNA was recently shown to augment fear extinction. Fear extinction enhanced the expression of miR-128b in the IL associated with down-regulation of plasticity-related genes including creb1 and sp1 in tandem with inhibition of the original fear memory ( ). Clearly, further clarification of the role of non-coding RNAs during fear extinction is warranted, including through the development of tools by which specific non-coding RNAs can be modulated.

## 5. Discussion and final conclusions
In this review we aimed to summarize (druggable) systems involved in fear extinction and how pharmacological compounds have been utilized to augment fear extinction in preclinical and small-scale clinical studies. It is anticipated that these findings are paving the way for clinical use of such approaches given that extinction training is procedurally similar to exposure-based psychotherapy and the underlying fear/extinction circuitries and molecular mechanisms are well conserved across species ( ). As mentioned in the introduction, the main problems with current exposure-based CBT treatment of fear, anxiety and trauma-related disorders are that a significant proportion of patients either: 1) have difficulties bearing the demanding and exhausting process of this therapy, 2) do not, or not sufficiently, respond to the therapy – failing to substantially reduce their fear response, or 3) responds initially, but suffer from return of fear phenomena hampering remission and full recovery. In this review we summarize the pharmacological approaches that have been investigated and utilized to improve these shortcomings. Initial attempts to combine exposure-based CBT with pharmacotherapy included benzodiazepines that dampened anxiety but also reduced the learning effects of this procedure hence provoking return of fear symptoms upon discontinuation ( ; , ). A complicating issue is the observation that the interoceptive state induced by such anxiolytics can form part of a “context”, and consequently may promote fear in subsequent testing in an “off drug state”, leading to state-dependent learning due to a change in interoceptive context ( ). However, there is evidence that targeting novel anxiolytic systems such as the NPS system or fibroblast growth factor-2 may elicit acute anxiolytic effects without producing sedation, state-dependency and/or interference with the formation of extinction memories. These findings are particularly exciting as they are beginning to address one of the important problems associated with CBT (i.e. intolerability to CBT exposure). However, more research is necessary to prove the utility of such approaches. As well as improving tolerability to exposure, improvements concerning onset, magnitude and duration of the therapeutic effect of exposure-based CBT are also in the main focus of drug development in this field. As outlined in this review, the augmentation of fear extinction/exposure therapy with a range of different drugs acting as cognitive enhancers to strengthen extinction memories represents an important approach to enhancing therapy efficacy. This has been made possible by revealing the neurochemical/neurobiological responses within the neural circuitry whose activity is required for fear extinction and, by extension, to rescue fear extinction deficits.
Considerable progress has been made in defining the neural basis of fear extinction and fear extinction deficits (for recent reviews see ( ; ; ). The steadily growing knowledge concerning where and how fear extinction is processed and how it can be pharmacologically augmented is an essential platform from which to identify promising candidates for extinction-promoting therapeutics. Indeed, by successfully translating findings from animal models, progress has been made in enhancing the outcomes of exposure-based CBT using compounds such as DCS, yohimbine and glucocorticoids as cognitive enhancers in the treatment of patients with anxiety disorders, PTSD and OCD ( ; ; ).
As outlined in this review, an impressive number of additional extinction augmenting drugs, acting on a wide variety of pharmacological targets, have indeed been identified. Data arising from the use of animal models displaying deficient fear extinction, reflecting patients resistant to exposure therapy, indicate that different neurotransmitter/neurobiological signaling pathways are involved in different temporal phases of extinction. Hence, it is likely that different pharmacological approaches will be required to either induce fear reductions during extinction training or rescue/boost the consolidation of fear extinction (reviewed in ( ). The important finding that within-session fear reduction/habituation favors drug-augmented extinction rather than facilitating reconsolidation of existing fear memories ( ; ) has also been demonstrated in clinical trials using DCS (( ) and yohimbine ( ). Moreover, multi-target approaches that simultaneously modulate the activity of diverse neurotransmitter/neurobiological systems seem to be an important option to pursue, in particular for individuals with severe extinction deficit/resistance to exposure therapy. Interestingly, in the much more well established medical fields of infectious disease, hypertension, oncology, and similar areas, targeting multiple different mechanisms of action is also the norm, not the exception and it is also considered promising in other fields of psychiatry ( ).
One of the most important aspects of extinction-promoting drugs is their ability to bolster extinction by enhancing memory consolidation. It is likely that this extinction enhancement occurs via the enhancement of cortico-AMY synaptic plasticity through multiple mechanisms (reviewed in ( ; ; ; ), ultimately providing lasting effects and better protection from return of fear phenomena. If translated into clinical use, these effects would support sustained symptom remission and recovery. Some of the drug targets outlined in this review [e.g. epigenetic targets including histone modification, BDNF and facilitated dopaminergic and fibroblast-growth-factor-2 signaling) and also cholinergic targets – see ( )] seem to be promising in this respect, as they promote long-term and context-independent fear inhibition when combined with fear extinction. Context-independent extinction learning (extinction generalization) offering enhanced protection against fear return phenomena such as renewal, may be supported not only by targeting specific pharmacological mechanisms, but also by behavioral approaches (see below). Fortunately, some of the promising substances in that respect are approved for human use (e.g. Valproate, L-DOPA, FGF2) and thus, their extinction-augmenting capacity could be immediately examined in anxiety and trauma-focused clinical trials. Although some of the discussed agents may share important common downstream signaling pathways, it seems clear that there are a number of different pharmacological pathways to access the circuits that underlie fear extinction learning and memory (see ), which will enable even more specific targeting of the essential extinction-promoting mechanisms in the future.
Despite this clear progress there remain major challenges for the development of medications to improve the effectiveness of exposure-based therapies, including challenges related to the design of safe, brain-penetrant molecules with limited adverse side-effects. Individual differences in treatment tolerability and efficacy, caused by genetic variation, and prior medication history are further complicating concerns. For example, the careful dissection of the brain regions mediating fear extinction including the AMY, PFC, HPC and other regions has also shown that some systems can promote both extinction-facilitating and extinction-impairing effects depending on the brain area/cellular substrate they are acting on. An example is the β-adrenoceptor, blockade of which interferes with extinction when restricted to the IL, but promotes extinction when the BLA is targeted – hence it is difficult to predict the net effect of medicating a patient with a β-adrenoceptor blocker or agonist during exposure therapy. The targeting of specific intracellular signaling cascades might be a solution for future, more selective approaches in this direction. Research in the last few years has revealed that the specific ligands can bias the signal output of G-protein coupled receptors by stabilizing the receptor structure in a distinct way to the natural ligand. By providing a means to produce functional selectivity, biased agonists and antagonists may be utilized to activate preferential, even unnatural, signaling cascades mediating the therapeutically favored downstream biological consequences [for a recent review see ( )].
Another important aspect for future clinical implementation of drug-induced facilitation of exposure therapy outcome concerns the time course of drug administration. While current drug treatment for anxiety and trauma-related disorders involves mainly chronic treatment (e.g. with SSRIs, SNRIs, TCA, MAOI) the compounds discussed in this review are (with the exception of antidepressants) recommended to be applied acutely in combination with psychotherapeutic interventions for a limited number of exposure trials. This strategy includes several advantages: First, chronic application of drugs can induce very different biological effects from those observed with acute administration. It is extremely challenging to predict how and at which stage (recall of fear memory, learning, reconsolidation, consolidation, retrieval of extinction memory) chronically applied drugs will enhance/interfere with fear extinction. For example, it is likely that facilitation of extinction and disruption of fear reconsolidation, both leading to fear reduction, depend on opposing molecular processes, such that chronic administration of the same drug may lead to very different therapeutic outcomes depending on which process (i.e. extinction or reconsolidation) it enhances ( ). Second, acute administration implies a reduced side effect potential. One example is the addiction potential of some of the compounds currently examined for extinction augmentation (e.g. MDMA). Indeed, first clinical trials reported that none of the involved patients developed a substance abuse problem when MDMA was administered acutely to assist psychotherapy ( ).
In addition to pharmacological parameters, the efficacy and duration of exposure therapy in humans may also depend (as shown in animal studies) on manipulation of specific behavioral extinction training parameters [see also e.g. ( ; )] such as providing sufficient extinction training, enhancing the number of contexts for such training, trial spacing, and other approaches (reviewed in ; ). It will be an important future line of research to test the optimal combinations between such behavioral interventions and the outlined pharmacological approaches in order to maximize treatment outcome. It is also important to note that thought needs to be given to a variety of factors concerning how to optimally utilize adjunctive and novel treatments. Such factors include consideration of monotherapy vs. add-on adjunctive treatment; use of medications in drug naïve vs. already medicated subjects; combined use of medication explicitly with exposure/extinction psychotherapy vs. medication taken without explicit psychotherapy; timing of medication – e.g. at night to aid memory consolidation during sleep vs. immediately before or after exposure; and use of medications in countries with well-developed vs. poorly developed health systems. As the field of psychopharmacotherapy matures beyond the models that it has followed for decades, all of these considerations are important for new drug development. For example some medications may not be as efficacious in subjects with a history of antidepressant use, as has been suggested for D-cycloserine ( ). Furthermore, as sleep is increasingly thought to be associated with extinction learning, targeting medication to enhance the memory consolidation process during sleep may be important ( ). Finally, medications which are available readily in generic form and that do not require specialized adjunctive psychotherapy may be more readily disseminated to locations with less well-developed mental health care systems than those that are novel, or more expensive, or that may require specialized combined therapy. Taken together, these considerations remind us that identifying molecular mechanisms and novel drug approaches to fear regulation is only part of the challenge, and that the context of the dissemination of such new therapeutics is also of critical concern.
In summary, based on the evidence outlined in this review, the next few years promise to produce several novel clinical approaches to treating trauma- and anxiety-related disorders in a more efficient and persistent way that will most likely lead to enhanced symptom remission. Progress will depend on translational research approaches and a close interaction between preclinical and clinical researchers. outlines how the different levels of understanding, from genetics to epigenetics to neural circuits, can inform each other as well as how they can be informed across species due to the high level of convergence of shared fear-related processing across mammals. This research and the considerable number of compounds to choose from in the growing pharmacological tool box in this field, many of which display minimal side effects, may enable psychiatrists/psychologists to individualize drug treatment according to specific symptoms of anxiety disorders, PTSD and OCD. Such options are expected to further improve treatment outcome and to reduce the amount of psychotherapy sessions needed, or the duration or intensity that is required for long-lasting treatment success. As outlined above, evidence is beginning to shape the hypothesis that specific classes of compounds and cognitive enhancers may be superior to others in their ability to support long-term fear-inhibiting effects. There is evidence that the efficacy of different classes of drugs may be distinctly influenced by a number of factors including age, gender and other examples of individual differences. Hence, future research is warranted in order to investigate whether specific drugs used as cognitive enhancers in this field are more or less appropriate for specific individuals, conditions and treatment durations. In conclusion, cognitive enhancers present a promising option to safely augment extinction-based anxiety- and trauma therapy and to reduce treatment duration, thereby facilitating treatment coherence and outcomes.

Conflict of interest statement
Drs. Singewald, Schmuckermair, Whittle and Holmes declare no conflict of interest. Dr. Ressler is a founding member of Extinction Pharmaceuticals/Therapade Technologies. He has received no equity or income from this relationship within the last 5 years. The terms of these arrangements have been reviewed and approved by Emory University in accordance with its conflict of interest policies.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the Austrian Science Fund [FWF grant numbers SFB F4410 and P25375-B24] for funding our research related to this review (NS).

## Abbreviations
5-HT5-hydroxytryptamine = serotonin
ACadenylate cyclase
AMPAα-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid
AMYamygdala
BAbasal amygdala
BDNFbrain-derived neurotrophic factor
BLAbasolateral amygdaloid complex
BZDbenzodiazepine
CaMKIICa2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II
cAMP3′-5′-cyclicadenosine monophosphate
Cav 1.2L-type calcium channel alpha 1C isoform
Cav 1.3L-type calcium channel alpha 1D isoform
CBTcognitive behavioral therapy
CCKcholecystokinin
CeAcentral amygdala
CeMcentromedial amygdala
CeLcentrolateral amygdala
CNScentral nervous system
CREBcAMP response element binding
CSconditioned stimulus
DAdopamine
DCSd-cycloserine
DNAdeoxyribonucleic acid
eCBendogenous cannabinoiod
ERKextracellular regulated kinase
ERPexposure and prevention CBT
FGF2fibroblast growth factor-2
GABAγ-aminobutyric acid
GABAAGABAA receptor
GADgeneralized anxiety disorder
GAD (65/67)glutamate decarboxylase 65/67
GluNNMDA receptor subtype
GRglucocorticoid receptor
H3histone H3 protein
H4histone H4 protein
HAThistone acetyltransferase
HDAChistone deacetylase
HDAC2histone deacetylase 2
HPAhypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
HPChippocampus
icvintracerebroventricular
ILinfralimbic cortex
ITCintercalated cell masses
Klysine
KORkappa opioid receptor
LAlateral amygdala
L-DOPAlevodopa
MAPKmitogen-activated protein kinase
MDMA3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine
Mg2+magnesium ion
mGluRmetabotropic glutamate receptor
miRNAmicro-RNA
mPFCmedial prefrontal cortex
mRNAmessenger ribonucleic acid
MS-275entinostat (Pyridin-3-ylmethyl N-[[4-[(2-aminophenyl)carbamoyl] phenyl]methyl]carbamate)
NMDAN-methyl-d-aspartate
NMDARNMDA receptor
nsnot studied
NOnitric oxide
NPSneuropeptide S
NPYneuropeptide Y
OCDobsessive-compulsive disorder
OXToxytocin
PAGperiaqueductal gray
PEPA4-[2-(Phenylsulphonylamino)ethylthio]-2,6-difluorophenoxyacetamide
PKCas Ca2+ /phospholipid-dependent protein kinase C
PTSDpost-traumatic stress disorder
PLprelimbic cortex
SADsocial anxiety disorder
SAHAvorinostat(N-hydroxy-N’-phenyl-octanediamide)
SNPsingle nucleotide polymorphism
SNRIselective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor
SSRIselective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
TrkBtropomyosin-related kinase B
USunconditioned stimulus
VGCCvoltage-gated calcium channel
VRETvirtual reality exposure
Zn2+zinc ion
 

## Box 1 Why pharmacological augmentation of extinction?
A limitation of extinction-based exposure therapy is that patients can often relapse with the passage of time, with changes in context (out of the therapy context), or under conditions of stress or other provocations, such as experiencing trauma reminders. In the parlance of learning theory, extinction memories are labile and fragile. A key goal for pharmacotherapy, therefore, is to identify compounds that overcome this fragility, by bolstering the formation, persistence and possibly context independence of extinction memories. One approach to achieving this goal is to use drugs as adjuncts to exposure therapy (cognitive enhancers) as a way to augment the extinction learning process. In this review, we discuss the various neurochemical and molecular signaling pathways that have been targeted to this end. On the one hand, there remain significant challenges to overcome, including the selective targeting of extinction-related processes without concurrent effects on original fear memories. On the other hand, there are clearly a plethora of potentially promising avenues to pursue, and we are optimistic that real advances can be made in treating trauma-related disorders.