ACS Biomater Sci EngACS Biomater Sci Eng822acssdabACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering2373-9878pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC4710891PMC4710891.1471089147108912680743810.1021/acsbiomaterials.5b003121ArticleTrehalose-Based Block Copolycations Promote Polyplex
Stabilization for Lyophilization and in Vivo pDNA Delivery
TolstykaZachary
P. PhillipsHaley CortezMallory WuYaoying IngleNilesh BellJason B. HackettPerry B. ReinekeTheresa M. †Department
of Chemistry and Center for Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota, 207 Pleasant Street SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States⊥Department
of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, and Center for Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States*E-mail: treineke@umn.edu.22122015110120162126332243552207201520112015130120162101201616022026Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society2015American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.Correction to Trehalose-Based Block Copolycations
Promote Polyplex Stabilization for Lyophilization and in Vivo pDNA
Delivery
331022017495495ACS Biomaterials Science & EngineeringPMC815339633465944 
The
development and thorough characterization of nonviral delivery
agents for nucleic acid and genome editing therapies are of high interest
to the field of nanomedicine. Indeed, this vehicle class offers the
ability to tune chemical architecture/biological activity and readily
package nucleic acids of various sizes and morphologies for a variety
of applications. Herein, we present the synthesis and characterization
of a class of trehalose-based block copolycations designed to stabilize
polyplex formulations for lyophilization and in vivo administration.
A 6-methacrylamido-6-deoxy trehalose (MAT) monomer was synthesized
from trehalose and polymerized via reversible addition–fragmentation
chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization to yield pMAT43. The
pMAT43 macro-chain transfer agent was then chain-extended
with aminoethylmethacrylamide (AEMA) to yield three different pMAT-b-AEMA cationic-block copolymers, pMAT-b-AEMA-1 (21 AEMA repeats), -2 (44 AEMA repeats), and -3 (57 AEMA
repeats). These polymers along with a series of controls were used
to form polyplexes with plasmids encoding firefly luciferase behind
a strong ubiquitous promoter. The trehalose-coated polyplexes were
characterized in detail and found to be resistant to colloidal aggregation
in culture media containing salt and serum. The trehalose-polyplexes
also retained colloidal stability and promoted high gene expression
following lyophilization and reconstitution. Cytotoxicity, cellular
uptake, and transfection ability were assessed in vitro using both
human glioblastoma (U87) and human liver carcinoma (HepG2) cell lines
wherein pMAT-b-AEMA-2 was found to have the optimal
combination of high gene expression and low toxicity. pMAT-b-AEMA-2 polyplexes were evaluated in mice via slow tail
vein infusion. The vehicle displayed minimal toxicity and discouraged
nonspecific internalization in the liver, kidney, spleen, and lungs
as determined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and
fluorescence imaging experiments. Hydrodynamic infusion of the polyplexes,
however, led to very specific localization of the polyplexes to the
mouse liver and promoted excellent gene expression in vivo.

glycopolymernanoparticlenanomedicinenonviral gene deliverystealth polymertransfectionRAFT polymerizationhydrodynamic injectioncryo-stabilizationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9ab5b00312document-id-new-14ab-2015-003129ccc-price

## Introduction
Gene therapy offers
new avenues for the treatment of genetic diseases
characterized by deficiency of a protein that can be treated by the
delivery of DNA encoding the required polypeptide. − Viral vectors are often used for DNA delivery; − however, the
most commonly used viruses have limited DNA cargo capacity and many elicit
strong immunological responses. In contrast, nonviral vectors can
package any length of nucleic acid; however, delivery of nonviral
vectors into cells is generally very difficult to achieve at levels
that have therapeutic efficacy. 
Cationic polymers that form an interpolyelectrolyte complex with
the negatively charged phosphodiester backbone of DNA or RNA, termed polyplexes, are an attractive choice
for nonviral gene delivery agents as their chemical structure, functionality,
and molecular weight can be tailored in a controlled fashion. Typically,
polyplexes contain an excess of polymer, which yields a complex that
has a net positive charge. However, when such polyplexes are introduced
into the bloodstream they aggregate with various negatively charged
proteins, which hinders their ability to penetrate the plasma membranes
of cells in tissues. Therefore, noncharged
“stealth” coatings such as polyethylene glycol (PEG)
have been used to help shield these particles from aggregation. PEGylated complexes generally have decreased
immunogenicity and increased lifetimes in the blood when compared
with their unmodified counterparts. , However, PEG
is nonbiodegradable and has been implicated in antibody formation, hypersensitivity reactions , and accelerated blood clearance upon repeated dosage. − Accordingly, we have focused on building novel carbohydrate-based
polymers to create a hydrophilic polyplex shell as an alternative
to PEG. This study presents the first systematic investigation of
these glycopolymers in vivo.
Previously, we polymerized the
glucose-based monomer, 2-deoxy-2-methacrylamido
glucopyranose (MAG), to form a block copolymer with N-(2-aminoethyl) methacrylamide (AEMA). Tests in vitro suggest that the cationic glycopolymers have superior
solution stability and lower cell toxicity in cell culture compared
to polyethylenimine (PEI) complexes. The use of trehalose has also recently been explored
as a PEG alternative. Trehalose is an
α–α-linked dimer of glucose that is synthesized
by bacteria, fungi, plants, and invertebrate animals , and used by living systems to survive in extreme conditions. , Trehalose has long been used as a stabilizing agent in drug formulations
such as Herceptin and Lucentis. Step-growth
polymers have been synthesized using a modified trehalose as one of
the monomers. Polyplexes formed with these polymers have been found
to display lower toxicity, high cellular uptake, and similar gene
expression when compared to the commercially available gene delivery
polymer jetPEI. − Polytrehalose has been shown to impart thermal stability
to proteins: lysozyme enzymatic activity was retained upon extreme
heating and cooling when polytrehalose was covalently attached. Our lab has reported polyplexes formulated with
short interfering RNA (siRNA) and a trehalose block copolycation 6-methacrylamido-6-deoxy
trehalose-co-N-(2-aminoethyl) methacrylamide
(pMAT-b-AEMA). Polyplexes
formulated with pMAT-b-AEMA polymers displayed high
uptake efficiency and powerful gene knockdown in U87 cells. 
Herein, we investigate the use of pMAT-b-AEMA
block copolymers in the formulation of polyplexes containing pT2/CaL
plasmid DNA (pDNA) for gene delivery in vitro and in vivo ( ). These plasmids
contain a Sleeping Beauty transposon carrying the
firefly luciferase reporter gene under the regulation of a strong
synthetic promoter (CAGGS) that is highly active in vertebrate cells. Delivery experiments were first performed in
cultured glioblastoma (U87) and human liver carcinoma (HepG2) cell
lines and found to be highly efficacious. The trehalose polymers were
then examined for the ability to stabilize polyplex formulations through
lyophilization and reconstitution. We reveal that these trehalose-coated
polyplexes retain pDNA delivery and gene expression activity after
lyophilization and reconstitution, an important metric to improve
the consistency of gene delivery and increase shelf life of nanomedicines.
We also reveal the first examination of these trehalose block copolycations
for in vivo pDNA administration. Polyplex formulations were administered
to mice using two different injection techniques to observe toxicity,
biodistribution, and efficacy of gene delivery in vivo. We reveal
that these trehalose-coated polyplexes shield the formulations from
nonspecific tissue internalization under slow tail vein infusion,
yet also retain stability in vivo following rapid hydrodynamic injection,
resulting in the promotion of highly specific and excellent gene expression
in the mouse liver (compared to JetPEI and pDNA only controls). Indeed,
this study demonstrates that trehalose-coated nanomedicines offer a
new stealth design motif that could provide an alternative to PEGylation
for stabilizing formulations for in vivo administration.
 

## Materials and Methods
A brief version of the material and methods used is provided here.
More detailed methods are included in the Supporting Information.

## Materials
All reagents were obtained
at the highest
available purity from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc. (Pittsburgh,
PA) or Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC. (St. Louis, MO) and used as received
unless noted otherwise. JetPEI was obtained from Polyplus-transfection
SA (Illkirch, France). Glycofect was obtained from Techulon, Inc.
via donation. 6-Methacrylamido-6-deoxy trehalose (MAT) was synthesized
as described previously. Propidium iodide,
UltraPure Agarose-1000, trypsin, (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl
tetrazolium bromide (MTT), phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), Minimum
Essential Medium with reduced serum (Opti-MEM) and Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) were purchased from Life Technologies
– Thermo Fisher Scientific (Carlsbad, CA). The pT2/CaL plasmid
was prepared as described previously. The Luciferase Assay Kit and cell lysis buffer were obtained from
Promega Corporation (Madison, WI). Bio-Rad DC Protein Assay Reagent
A, Reagent B and Reagent S were obtained from Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Inc. (Hercules, CA). HepG2 and U87 cells were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC) (Manassas, VA). The cells were grown
in complete DMEM [supplemented with 10% (v:v) fetal bovine serum and
1% antibiotic-antimycotic solution (containing penicillin, streptomycin,
and amphotericin B)] at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in a humidified
incubator.
Wild-type (WT) C57BL/6J 6wk-old mice were purchased
from Jackson Laboratories (Sacramento, CA). All mice were maintained
under AAALAC-accredited (Association for Assessment and Accreditation
of Laboratory Animal Care) specific pathogen-free conditions.

## Instrumentation
NMR spectra were recorded using a Bruker
Avance III HD 500 MHz spectrometer in D2O purchased from
Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc. (Andover, MA). NMR data was analyzed
using Bruker Top Spin version 3.1. UV–vis data was collected
with an Ocean Optics Inc. CUV 1 cm cuvette holder powered by a Mikropack
DH-2000 Deuterium/Halogen open-close TTC lamp, and data was analyzed
by Ocean Optics Inc. Basic Acquisition Software.
Size exclusion
chromatography (SEC) was conducted using an Agilent 1260 High Performance
Liquid Chromatograph running 1.0 wt % acetic acid/0.1 M Na2SO4 as the eluent at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min on size
exclusion chromatography columns [CATSEC1000 (7 μ, 50 ×
4.6), CATSEC100 (5 μ, 250 × 4.6), CATSEC300 (5 μ,
250 × 4.6), and CATSEC1000 (7 μ, 250 × 4.6)] obtained
from Eprogen Inc. (Downers Grove, IL). Signals were acquired using
Wyatt HELEOS II light scattering detector (λ = 662 nm), and
an Optilab rEX refractometer (λ = 658 nm). SEC trace analysis
was performed using Astra VI software (version 5.3.4.18), Wyatt Technologies
(Santa Barbara, CA). The hydrodynamic diameters of the polyplexes
were recorded via dynamic light scattering measurements (DLS) with
a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZA. MTT, protein, and luciferase assay plates
were analyzed using a Biotek Synergy H1 plate reader (BioTek Instruments,
Inc., Winooski, VT). Cy5-uptake was measured on a FACSVerse (Becton
Dickinson Biosciences, San Jose, CA) flow cytometer. TEM images were
obtained with a FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN (FEI, Hillsboro, OR)
transmission electron microscope, operated at 120 kV.
Live animal
and animal tissue imaging were performed on an IVIS
Spectrum In Vivo Imaging system and data was analyzed with the Living
Image software (PerkinElmer Inc., Waltham, MA). RT-qPCR was performed
using an Eppendorf Mastercycler (software version 2.2; Eppendorf).

## Polymer Synthesis and Polyplex Characterization

## Synthesis
of Poly(methacrylamidotrehalose) (pMAT43)
PMAT43 was synthesized as previously described. Briefly, MAT monomer was polymerized via RAFT
in acetate buffer. 4-cyano-4-(propylthiocarbonothioylthio)-pentanoic
acid was dissolved in 645 μL of MeODH and added to the MAT solution,
followed by 4,4′-azobis(4-cyanovaleric acid) (V-501). Finally,
861 μL of MeOD was added and oxygen was removed by bubbling
nitrogen through the system for 45 min. The flask was heated to 70
°C for 6 h and the reaction was stopped by removing the septum
and cooling the reaction mixture on ice. The polymer solution was
dialyzed against ultrapure water (3500 Da MWCO) and acidified to pH 4–5
with HCl. After 3 d of dialysis, the polymer solution was freeze-dried
on a VirTis benchtopK lyophilizer at 62 mT with the condenser at −57.4
°C to yield 454 mg of white solid. Method details and characterization
results can be found in Figure S1.

## Synthesis
of Cationic Diblock Copolymers pMAT-b-AEMA-1, -2,
and -3
Cationic diblock copolymers were synthesized
as previously reported. Briefly, pMAT43 and V-501 were dissolved in 1.0 M acetate buffer (pH 5.5)
and added to a Schlenk tube containing aminoethylmethacrylamide hydrochloride
(AEMA). Deoxygenation was achieved via bubbling nitrogen gas for 45
min. The tube was heated to 70 °C. Aliquots (1.25 mL) were removed
via syringe at 30 min (pMAT-b-AEMA-1) and 60 min (pMAT-b-AEMA-2). Each
aliquot was exposed to air and cooled in liquid nitrogen to stop polymerization.
After 90 min (pMAT-b-AEMA-3), the reaction
was halted by septum removal and submerging the Schlenk tube in liquid
nitrogen. All three copolymers were dialyzed (3500 Da MWCO) against
0.5 M NaCl solution, followed by 0.1 M NaCl and finally ultrapure
water. All dialysis media were acidified with HCl to pH 4–5.
Polymer solutions were lyophilized as described above to yield white,
flocculent powders. All experiments were completed using polymers
pMAT-b-AEMA-1, -2, and -3. Polymer characterization
details can be found in Figures S2–S5.

## Synthesis of Cy7-pMAT-b-AEMA-2
PMAT-b-AEMA-2 was labeled using an NHS-Cy7 fluorophore by dissolving
it in H2O. Cy7 functionalized with N-hydroxysuccinamide
(NHS-Cy7) in DMF was added followed by DMF to target 1 fluorophore/50
amine residues. The mixture was vortexed for 30 s and allowed to proceed
at room temperature for 4 h in the dark. The labeled polymer was purified
via dialysis (3500 MWCO) against H2O (acidified to pH ∼5.5
with HCl) for 2 days and lyophilized using the same conditions listed
before to yield a blue flocculent solid.
Extent of labeling
was quantified by measuring the absorbance of a 0.2 mg/mL solution of labeled polymer in H2O at 750 nm via UV–vis (ε = 199000
at 750 nm, Abs = 0.16), giving approximately 1 Cy7 fluorophore/10
polymer chains (Figure S6).

## Polyplex
Formation for Gel Electrophoresis and Tissue Culture
(In Vitro) Experiments
Polymer solution at an appropriate
concentration in water was added to a 400 μM solution of pDNA
in DNase/RNase-free distilled water in an equal volume to yield polyplexes
of (nitrogen to phosphate ratios) N/P = 7, 14, and 21 at a final concentration
of 200 μM pDNA. The nitrogen ratios were calculated based on
the concentrations of amines (either pendant from AEMA blocks or within
the backbone of jetPEI or Glycofect). The solutions were incubated
at 23 °C for 1 h before further use.

## Gel Electrophoresis
A gel electrophoresis mobility
shift assay was run to determine the minimal amount of polymer needed
to achieve complete binding of the pDNA. Ten μL of each polyplex
solution formulated at various N/P ratios were diluted with 10 μL
of water to achieve a concentration of 100 μM and were incubated
at 25 °C for 1 h to allow polymer-pDNA binding. The polyplex
suspensions were run on agarose gels (0.6%) containing 6 μg
ethidium bromide at 60 V for 80 min. Images were obtained using 312
nm UV light (Figure S7).

## Dynamic Light
Scattering (DLS)
To measure polyplex
size in a protein environment over time, we ran DLS experiments in
DMEM containing 10% FBS. Polyplexes were formulated at N/P = 7, 14, and 21 in H2O and incubated for 1 h at a concentration
of 200 μM pDNA (to allow complexation) before being diluted
with DMEM containing 10% FBS by volume. For DLS studies prior to lyophilization,
the polyplexes were diluted to a final concentration of 100 μM
(T = 0 h). For the postlyophilization DLS, polyplexes
were prepared and lyophilized as previously described, reconstituted
with water for 1 h, then diluted with DMEM with 10% FBS to 133 μM.
Size measurements were taken at 25 °C using a 173° detection
angle at times of 0, 1, 2, and 4 h (Figure S8).

## Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) Imaging
Three
μL of polyplex solution (formulated with pDNA and polymers pMAT-b-AEMA-1, -2, or -3) prepared at N/P = 10 were applied to
a 300-mesh carbon coated copper grid (Ted Pella, Inc., Redding, CA)
and negatively stained with uranyl acetate. Images were saved as TIFF
files and polyplexes sized (excluding polyplexes on image edges) by
counting pixels using Microsoft Paint, and the sizes are plotted in Figure S9.

## Examination of Polyplex
Function In Vitro

## MTT Assay
MTT (3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,
5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) was used to estimate the cytotoxicity of the polyplexes.
HepG2 or U87 cells were seeded at 50 000 cells/well in 24-well
plates 24 h prior to transfection. Polyplexes were formulated as described
previously, then mixed with transfection media (200 μL of either
OptiMEM (Figure S10) or DMEM containing
10% FBS). The mixture was added to each well. The transfection was
ended 4 h later by diluting polyplexes with 1 mL of complete DMEM
containing 10% FBS. 48 h after polyplexes were added to the cells,
0.5 mg/mL of MTT was added to each well and incubated for 1 h. Cells
were lysed using DMSO and 200 μL aliquots were transferred to
a 96-well plate for analysis using the plate reader (absorbance was
measured at 570 nm). Nontransfected cells were used for normalizing
the data.

## Cellular Uptake Assay
Flow cytometry
experiments were
performed to examine the cellular uptake of Cy5-labeled pDNA 4 h post-transfection.
HepG2 or U87 cells were seeded at 300 000 cells/well in 6-well
plates 24 h prior to transfection. Polyplexes were prepared as described
in the MTT assay protocol, except that the formulation was scaled
up from 50 000 cells to 300 000 cells. After 4h, the
polyplex media was removed and cells were detached from the plate
surface using trypsin, centrifuged to remove polyplexes and trypsin,
and then washed twice with PBS. Finally, 1 mL of PBS was added and
the cellular suspensions were kept on ice. Propidium iodide (1.0 mg/mL,
2.5 μL) was added prior to analysis. Each experiment was performed
in triplicate, and OptiMEM results are plotted in Figure S11.

## Luciferase Gene Expression
Cells
(HepG2 and U-87) were
seeded at 50 000 cells/well in 24-well plates 24 h prior to
transfection. Polyplexes were prepared, diluted, and applied to the
cells as described in the cytotoxicity section above. After 48 h,
the cells were washed with PBS and treated with cell lysis buffer.
Aliquots (5 μL) of cell lysate combined with 100 μL luciferase
substrate were examined in 96-well plates using a luminometer to determine
relative light units (RLUs). Data were measured in triplicate and
normalized for the amount of protein in each sample. Sample averages
were plotted with error bars representing standard deviations (OptiMEM
results in Figure S12).

## Mouse Studies

## Tail
Vein Injections
Appropriate amounts of polyplexes
(10 μg or 25 μg of pDNA/dose at desired N/P of polymer)
were prepared in a 5% by weight aqueous dextrose solution (D5W, Hospira, Inc.), and a 200 μL dose of polyplexes was injected
through the tail vein of experimental animals. After injection, animals
were returned to their colony and imaged after 24 and 48 h. Mice injected with Cy7-labeled polymer were imaged immediately (data not shown), euthanized, and then their organs were imaged ex vivo.

## Hydrodynamic Injections
Appropriate amounts of polyplexes
(10 μg or 25 μg of pDNA/dose at desired N/P of polymer)
were prepared in D5W solution and injected through the
tail vein of experimental animals using a hydrodynamics-based procedure
as previously described. Briefly, animals
to be injected were weighed. A polyplex solution with a volume equivalent
to 10% of the weight of the mouse was injected in 3 to 4 s. After
injection, animals were placed on a heating pad to recover, then returned
to their colony. Mice were either imaged for luciferase transgene
expression about 24 and 48 h after transfection or imaged immediately
after injection for Cy7 polymer fluorescence. After fluorescence imaging,
mice were euthanized and their organs were imaged ex vivo.

## Bioluminescence
Imaging In Vivo
One hundred microliters
of luciferin substrate solution (28.5 mg/mL) was injected intraperitoneally
to each mouse. Three to five minutes later, mice were imaged for 1
min using a Xenogen Spectrum CCD camera system (Xenogen, Alameda,
CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each experiment
was performed in triplicate.

## Euthanizing and Tissue
Collection/Processing
Mice were
euthanized by carbon dioxide (CO2) inhalation, perfused
with saline, and selected organs were resected and preserved for analyses.
Plasma and tissues were stored at −80 °C. Frozen tissues
were homogenized by mortar and pestle, and ∼100 mg of each
tissue sample was removed for DNA processing. DNA was pulled from
the organs using a phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation.
DNA purity and concentration were determined by using a NanoDrop instrument (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE).

## qPCR
DNA samples were normalized to 100 ng/μL. Five hundred nanograms of DNA was used with TaqMan Gene Expression
Master Mix (Life Technologies – Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad,
CA). TaqMan primers were designed and manufactured by Life Technologies
– Thermo Fisher Scientific (Carlsbad, CA), Custom Plus TaqMan
Assay, Assay ID – AJ6RNJ4. A standard curve was prepared by
serially diluting pT2/CaL plasmid into WT C57BL/6 DNA. Samples were
run using the impulse setting. The following conditions were used
for the qPCR experiments: 95 °C for 10 min and 40 cycles of 90
°C for 15 s then 60 °C for 1 min.

## Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed
using JMP Pro Software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) through the University
of Minnesota Supercomputing Institute.

## Results and Discussion

## Polymer
Synthesis and Polyplex Characterization
Trehalose
is a carbohydrate with unique cryo- and lyo-protectant properties,
which have prompted the use of this carbohydrate in materials synthesis
to both retain and enhance these protective abilities. − , Previously, we have shown that
trehalose-containing block copolymers are effective in the formulation
of polyplexes and efficient delivery of siRNA. Herein, we sought to examine these trehalose-based polycations
for delivery of plasmids to cells in culture and in organs of living
animals. Trehalose-based polymers were synthesized via reversible-addition–fragmentation
chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization with a 65:1 monomer: chain-transfer
agent (CTA) ratio of 6-methacrylamido-6-deoxy methacrylamido trehalose
(MAT) and 4-cyano-4-(propylthiocarbonothioylthio)-pentanoic acid (CPP)
with 4,4′-azobis(4-cyanovaleric acid) (V-501) as the initiator
to yield pMAT with 43 repeats. This 43-repeat unit pMAT was used as
a macro CTA and chain-extended via RAFT polymerization with 125 equiv
of N-(2-aminoethyl) methacrylamide (AEMA) and V-501
as the initiator to yield three cationic block copolymers ( ), pMAT-b-AEMA-1 (21 repeats), -2 (44 repeats),
and -3 (57 repeats), with each having the same length of MAT block
but increasing lengths of the AEMA block.
 These polymers were combined with
pDNA encoding for the luciferase
reporter gene to form polyplexes. The amount of polymer needed to
fully bind the pDNA was first determined via gel electrophoresis.
Polymers and pDNA were mixed at nitrogen-to-phosphate (N/P) ratios
of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 10, mixed with 1 μL of running buffer
and electrophoresed through a 0.6% w/w agarose gel containing ethidium
bromide in TAE buffer. The gel was imaged under UV light to confirm
binding (Figure S7). Anionic plasmid that
remains uncomplexed by the cationic polymer migrates through the gel
toward the positively charged anode whereas fully complexed DNA does
not. All three polymers fully bound the DNA at N/P = 3. For further
studies, each polymer was combined with DNA at three different N/P
ratios: 7, 14, and 21, yielding nine polyplex formulations. Polyplex
size and stability from aggregation in biological media containing
serum (10% by volume fetal bovine serum, FBS) were examined via dynamic
light scattering (DLS). We have previously shown that polyplexes formed
from this polymer and siRNA have a positive ζ-potential in H2O. Polyplexes were formulated at 200 μM pDNA and allowed
to complex for 1 h at 23 °C in water. The polyplexes were then
diluted with Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing
10% by volume fetal bovine serum (FBS) solution to a final concentration
of 100 μM in pDNA, and the polyplex size was monitored over
4 h ( ). ζ-potential
of these polyplexes was not collected as the presence of FBS disrupts
the measurement.
Trehalose polyplex size (∼50–100
nm in diameter)
remained consistent over the course of this experiment relative to
the control polyplexes, jetPEI (N/P = 5) and Glycofect (N/P = 20),
which increased in diameter with time. It is proposed that the jetPEI
and Glycofect polyplexes aggregate with amino acids, buffer salts,
and FBS proteins found in DMEM, which neutralizes their surface charge
and causes aggregation. The trehalose polyplexes neither aggregate
nor swell compared to the control complexes. This result mirrors what
has been observed previously with carbohydrate-based block-co-polycations: poly 2-deoxy-2-methacrylamido glucopyranose-b-N-(2-aminoethyl) methacrylamide (pMAG-b-AEMA) polyplexes formulated with pDNA and pMAT-b-AEMA polyplexes formulated
with siRNA. Polyplexes formed with cationic
polymers containing a carbohydrate block are protected from aggregation.
The pendant trehalose units of the MAT portion of the block copolymer
likely form a shell around the outside of the polymer-pDNA polyplex,
providing a highly hydrophilic layer and facilitating steric stabilization
of the polyplexes in biological media.
 To examine further the polyplex
formulations, we used transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) to image the formulations before and after
lyophilization. Each of the polymers (pMAT-b-AEMA-1,
-2, or -3) were mixed and allowed to complex with pDNA at N/P = 10
in water for 1 h at 23 °C, then the sample was divided into two
portions. The first portion was imaged by TEM immediately ( a–c), whereas
the second was lyophilized and resuspended before imaging ( d–f).
 No significant size or shape differences
were observed between
the fresh polyplexes and those reconstituted following lyophilization.
We have recently reported that polyplexes formed with pMAT-b-AEMA and siRNA maintained size and biological activity
following lyophilization and resuspension. The particles appear slightly
smaller in the TEM images than via DLS, likely due to a combination
of dehydration of the particles during TEM sample preparation and the preference of the negative stain for
the highly charged core of the particle. 

## Examination of Polyplex Function In Vitro
Examination
of the polyplex function was performed on two human cell lines with
differing physiological function to assess the general biologic activity
of the polyplex formulations. Cell culture studies of polyplex internalization
and luciferase gene expression were performed in both HepG2 liver
carcinoma and U87 glioblastoma human cell lines. We chose to examine
two cell lines as we have found polyplex behavior to vary substantially
in different cell lines. This behavior is difficult to predict and
must be determined experimentally. These assays were run in Opti-MEM
(Figures S10, S11, S13) and repeated with
DMEM containing 10% FBS to understand the role of serum in the transfection
conditions ( – ). First, a colorimetric live–dead
cell study was performed to assess the cytotoxicity of polyplexes
formed from the pMAT-b-AEMA and control polymers
with pDNA. The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide MTT assay is a commonly used viability assay that measures
mitochondrial activity. Cells were exposed
to polyplexes in DMEM containing 10% FBS for 4 h then incubated for
48 h prior to running an MTT toxicity assay. Survival of each sample
was normalized to a negative control of cells that were exposed to
neither pDNA nor polymer ( ).
 With HepG2 cells, most samples did not differ in
value from the
negative control of naïve cells. Only the pAEMA and pMAT-b-AEMA-3 polyplexes formulated at an N/P = 7 showed cell
survival rates of less than 100%. In the U87 cell line, jetPEI as
well as pMAT-b-AEMA-3 polyplexes formulated at N/Ps
of 14 and 21 showed some toxicity. The pMAT-b-AEMA-2
and -3 cell survival values decreased as N/P increased, which matched
trends found in previous work with glycopolymer polyplexes. However,
none of the pMAT-b-AEMA-2 formulations were found
to cause a significant decrease in cell survival when compared to
naïve cells grown without polyplexes present via the Student’s t test (p < 0.05). , , On average, polyplexes formulated with jetPEI
at N/P = 5 were between 3 and 48% more toxic to the U87 cells than
other polymers tested at higher N/P ratios but were not toxic to HepG2
cells. In both cells lines, the pMAT-b-AEMA with
shorter AEMA block lengths had equal or higher levels of cell survivability
than any of the controls, which also reflects previous work showing
the biocompatibility of trehalose polymers. , , 
To quantify the amount of plasmid
cargo taken up by cells, we fluorescently
labeled pDNA with cyanine 5 (Cy 5) prior to transfection. Polyplexes
were formulated and exposed to the cells as previously described for
the MTT assay. After transfection, cells were washed, collected, and
centrifuged to concentrate the cells in solution and analyzed via
flow cytometry. After the first run, 2.5 μL of propidium iodide
(PI) was added to the remaining samples in each tube and left to sit
for 30 min at room temperature prior to reanalysis. Cells positive
for PI were assumed to be dead or dying and were removed from gating.
Data were plotted as a percentage of live cells positive for Cy5 ( ).
 For the cellular internalization results, all samples were
statistically
compared to the negative control cells exposed to noncomplexed pDNA.
In the HepG2 cells, all but one polyplex formulation had higher Cy5
percentages than DNA alone, with pAEMA having the highest uptake,
followed by pMAT-b-AEMA-2, PEG-b-AEMA, and jetPEI. pMAT-b-AEMA-2 at all three N/P ratios tested had
the highest level of polyplex uptake when compared to the other trehalose
block-co-polycation formulations (and were statistically
superior to the positive control jetPEI in HepG2 cells), which correlates
with the high gene expression seen in (vide infra). pMAT-b-AEMA-1
polyplexes in both cell lines have lower uptake compared with either
pMAT-b-AEMA-2 or -3 with some formulations barely
exceeding background levels.
In the U87 cell line, pMAT-b-AEMA-2 polyplexes
again had higher cell uptake compared to all other trehalose-containing
polymer formulations except for pMAT-b-AEMA-3 at
N/P = 7. The N/P = 14 and 21 formulations of pMAT-b-AEMA-2 and N/P = 7 formulation of pMAT-b-AEMA-3
were found to be statistically similar to the positive control jetPEI.
While none of the pMAT-b-AEMA-2 formulations nor
any of the positive controls differed statistically from each other
when compared to the cells-only control, an interesting trend appeared
in the other samples: both the shortest and longest MAT polymers showed
decreased uptake values with an increase in N/P ratio with U87 cells.
This trend suggests that more positive charge promotes uptake to a
point, then begins to limit uptake. While it was expected that pAEMA
polyplexes would have very high uptake due to its high amount of positive
charge, it was also predicted to be the most toxic. Surprisingly,
we did not observe any effects of cell death with pAEMA polyplexes
(at N/P = 7) and thus, this did not impact uptake values. Also, it
should be noted that both pMAT-b-AEMA-2 and- 3 polyplex
formulations at N/P = 7 had cell uptake comparable to that of PEG-b-AEMA. , 
Efficiencies of polyplex
transfection and uptake of the plasmid
cargo were assessed by measuring expression of a luciferase reporter
gene. Polyplexes were formed and incubated with cells for 4 h in DMEM
containing 10% FBS, followed by an additional incubation period of
48 h to allow for protein expression. Cells were washed, lysed, and
the lysate analyzed for luminescence intensity after treatment with
luciferin. In , luminescence was plotted as relative light units (RLUs) per protein
(mg) in each sample to normalize for the number of cells in each well,
thus negating differences in expression due to cell death. In both
cell lines, jetPEI polyplexes yielded the highest levels of luciferase
expression and were statistically higher than the other formulations.
Therefore, as shown in , we chose to statistically compare the pMAT-b-AEMA polyplex formulations to the protein expression yielded by
the pAEMA-homopolymer control. In previous work, we have found that
polyplexes formed with glucose-containing pMAG-b-AEMA exhibited higher transfection efficiency with a shorter length
of AEMA when made with siRNA and a longer AEMA block when formulated
with plasmid DNA (pDNA). Polyplexes formulated
with trehalose-block copolycations, pMAT-b-AEMA,
and siRNA also displayed better transfection with a shorter AEMA block
than with longer blocks. Among the trehalose
polyplex formulations studied herein from N/P = 7 to N/P = 21, luciferase
expression increased 8 fold in HepG2 cells and 13-fold in U87 cells
for pMAT-b-AEMA-1 and decreased with N/P with pMAT-b-AEMA-3. For pMAT-b-AEMA-2 polyplexes,
luciferase expression was statistically equivalent from N/P = 7–21
to expression values from pAEMA polyplexes in HepG2 cells. Similarly,
gene expression with pMAT-b-AEMA-2 polyplexes were
also statistically equivalent to that yielded by pAEMA with U87 cells
at N/P = 7; however, a decrease in expression was noted with increasing
pMAT-b-AEMA-2 N/P ratio with this cell type. The
pMAT-b-AEMA-2 formulations were the only pMAT-b-AEMA-based polyplexes to exhibit luciferase expression
at the same level as any of the control polymers. This trend was similar
to the cellular uptake data, again supporting the hypothesis that
AEMA (and therefore positive charge) aids cellular internalization
and expression to a point. However, with a further increase in the
N/P ratio, expression values start to decrease. The decrease could
be due to two factors: (i) prevention of the release and transcription
of DNA cargo or (ii) by increasing cell
membrane permeability to the point of toxicity. , Because luminescence RLUs are normalized to the amount of cell protein
in each sample, cytotoxicity is not enough to account for low expression
in either cell line. It is more likely that polyplexes with large
AEMA blocks and high ratios of polymer-to-plasmid have higher charge
densities that prevent cargo release and transcription, , whereas complexes with too little AEMA or too small an N/P ratio
could prematurely release DNA prior to nuclear entry. We were not as concerned with this latter issue because
of the stability of the polyplexes that was observed in the DLS data.
It should be noted that differences between some samples are not statistically
significant, but the general trend that appears in the uptake assays
as well as gene expression studies for both cells lines correlates
with previous work in the field. , , , 
 The pMAT-b-AEMA polymers were
next tested for
their ability to act as a lyoprotectant when complexed with pDNA.
pMAT-b-AEMA-2, jetPEI, Glycofect, and PEG-b-AEMA were used to formulate polyplexes in H2O and allowed to incubate for 1 h at room temperature. They were
immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized to dryness.
The resulting powder was then reconstituted with water, allowed to
incubate for another hour, and either administered to cells in DMEM
+ 10% FBS or resubjected to the same lyophilization procedure. Luciferase
expression assays were completed as previously described. The expression
for each lyophilized polyplex sample was normalized to samples made
with the same polymer that had not been lyophilized. shows these data as a percentage of gene expression retained for
each round of lyophilization.
 Following a single round
of lyophilization and reconstitution,
only the two polymers containing a sugar moiety, pMAT-b-AEMA-2 and Glycofect, retained any ability to transfect U87 cells.
pMAT-b-AEMA-2 exhibited expression equal to 69% of
its initial level while Glycofect was reduced to 4%. It is hypothesized
that the pMAT-b-AEMA polyplexes form a core–shell
structure with the trehalose-containing block coating the external
surface of the polyplex, aiding polyplex stability during the lyophilization
process. Neither Glycofect nor jetPEI polyplexes contain stabilization
layers, leaving these formulations susceptible to aggregation via the
lyophilization procedure. Interestingly, the PEG-b-AEMA was expected to have a similar polyplex structure (containing
a hydrophilic PEG shell coating) to the pMAT-b-AEMA-2;
however, it did not retain transfection capability following lyophilization.
The trehalose blocks appear to impart a unique protective property
to polyplexes for potential lyophilization and storage.

## Mouse Studies
Polyplexes formed from pMAT-b-AEMA-2 and pDNA
had the highest level of gene expression in cultured
cells in vitro and low toxicity at the three tested N/P ratios; these
promising properties led to the selection and examination of this
formulation in vivo. Murine studies with pMAT-b-AEMA-2
were explored for delivering luciferase-encoding pDNA with C57 black
6 (C57BL/6) mice. Tail vein injection was used to probe for biodistribution,
toxicity, and transfection of the polyplexes in a living organism.
Mice treated via standard tail vein injections were administered
with one of four polyplex formulations in 5% dextrose (D5W, Table S1) and a fifth control sample
of D5W only. Importantly, with all formulations, all mice
survived to the 48 h end point of the study with no noticeable health
deterioration. All mice were active and showed no signs of lethargy
nor ill health effects after being dosed with up to 490 μg of
polymer per mouse (the equivalent of 19.6 mg/kg of polymer/mouse).
Following tail vein injection, the mice were then injected peritoneally
with luciferin at 24 and 48 h after polyplex injection and imaged
using a bioluminescence Xenogen Spectrum CCD camera system. Luciferase
gene expression could not be detected either 24 or 48 h after the
infusion of polymers. Following the 48 h imaging, all mice were euthanized
and the heart, liver, lung, spleen, kidneys, and brain were harvested
for analysis by qPCR to determine biodistribution of the pDNA cargo
(Table S1). QPCR analysis revealed a nearly uniform distribution of genetic
material throughout the tissues. On a per-cell basis, pDNA was found
at a range of 1.1–10 plasmid copies per cell in each organ
(values less than or equal to 1.0 copies/cell cannot be resolved from
the background). Hydrodynamic injection of 25 μg of pDNA, discussed
in further detail below, typically achieves delivery of ∼100
plasmids per cell in the liver, leading to significant gene expression. , The lower level of genetic material delivered to each of these organs
following tail vein injection was insufficient to achieve observable
gene expression.
Multiple cyanine fluorophores, including Cy7,
have been used successfully
to tag DNA cargos for in vivo imaging. − Using cyanine-3 labeled
siRNA, Davis and co-workers have shown that tail vein-injected polyplexes
begin urinary clearance within 6 min. Here, to determine if the polymer and pDNA reached the tissues with
similar distributions (indicative of intact polyplexes), we fluorescently
labeled pMAT-b-AEMA-2 with Cy7 via amine-NHS coupling
chemistry. Polyplexes were then formulated with Cy7-pMAT-b-AEMA-2 polymer and 25 μg of pDNA at an N/P = 7 and administered
to mice via tail vein injections. Animals were imaged 15 min postinjection,
euthanized, and the organs were harvested and imaged ( ).
 Fluorescence was observed in the
liver, spleen, kidneys, and lungs
of the mice injected with the Cy7-labeled pMAT-b-AEMA-2
( ). Fluorescence
was not observed in the blood, indicating that the polymers/polyplexes
had fully cleared the bloodstream (at the detectable level). As expected,
the organs from the naïve mouse also did not show fluorescence,
indicating that the fluorescence visualized in the experimental mice
arose from the Cy7-labeled polymer and not from background fluorescence
from the tissues.
Collectively, these data show that the concentration
of plasmid
delivered to each organ was insufficient to observe significant gene
expression in the mice when delivered through a standard tail vein
injection. Thus, a hydrodynamic injection technique was then examined
to promote plasmid delivery specifically to the liver, wherein a large
volume of DNA solution, typically 2 mL in a 20g mouse, is infused
in 4–8 s. More than 99% of the
gene can be localized to the liver as
the high pressure appears to expand the liver endothelium promoting
liver cell internalization and gene expression. − Typically,
naked plasmid DNA is used with this injection technique and results
in high signals of gene expression, ∼1 × 1010 to 1 × 1011 RLUs, in the liver when the firefly
luciferase gene is placed behind a strong promoter such as the hybrid
b-actin/cytomegalovirus (CAGGS) synthetic promoter ( ). The large volume injected, combined with the high pressure, has been found to strain the mouse,
especially the cardiac system , and the liver; it takes
24 to 48 h for the liver to recover from the injection. , , However, while direct scale up
of systemic hydrodynamic injection to larger mammals resulting in
sustained transgene expression has yet to be achieved, it may be potentially translatable if the high
pressure injection is isolated only to the organ of interest and formulation
of DNA into polyplexes could improve delivery and gene expression.
For example, Itaka and co-workers were able to perform a hydrodynamic
injection directed to skeletal muscle by injecting into a limb isolated
with a tourniquet. DNA delivered as a
polyplex formulated from a PEG-poly-l-lysine cationic block
copolymer showed increased expression and DNA lifetime in the tissue
when compared to similar injections performed with naked pDNA. Nakamura and co-workers performed hydrodynamic
injection followed by a luciferase assay on excised liver tissue and
found that polyplexes formed with jetPEI yielded higher luminescence
than naked pDNA. 
Herein, Glycofect,
jetPEI, and pMAT-b-AEMA-2 were
used to deliver 10 μg of pDNA via hydrodynamic injection and
compared to naked pDNA as a control ( ). All mice survived the high-pressure injections.
To analyze gene expression, the mice were injected peritoneally with
luciferin at 24 and 48 h and imaged with a Xenogen system ( ). Interestingly,
jetPEI, despite being the most effective delivery vehicle in tissue
culture, showed the lowest level of luciferase expression in the liver
of all tested formulations via live-animal imaging. The luminescence
level was found to be 2–3 orders of magnitude below that of
the naked pDNA. Even when the amount of DNA was more than doubled
to 25 μg, the luminescence level was still 1 to 2 orders of
magnitude below that of the control. Glycofect was the more effective
of the commercially available transfection agents but still performed
an order of magnitude below the control. Polyplexes formed with pMAT-b-AEMA-2 transfected at a higher level than either of the
commercially available polymers and maintained the same level of gene
expression as the naked pDNA control. Taken together, these results
show that pMAT-b-AEMA-2 polyplexes are capable of
delivering DNA that can subsequently be expressed in vivo with minor
toxicity.
 It appears that the majority of the pDNA was delivered
to the liver
because of the high levels of gene expression observed. Polyplexes
were again formed using the Cy7-labeled pMAT-b-AEMA-2
and injected hydrodynamically to verify delivery of intact polyplexes to the liver and understand polymer distribution with this high pressure delivery technique. Animals were injected, imaged 15
min postinjection, euthanized, and the organs were harvested and imaged
( ). The liver
was the only organ to show significant fluorescence, indicating that
the polyplexes stay intact during the hydrodynamic experiment as polymer
and pDNA are localized to the liver and are responsible for yielding
high levels of gene expression.
 

## Conclusion
Trehalose-containing cationic block copolymers
were synthesized
and their colloidal stabilization and gene delivery properties were
examined in detail in vitro and in vivo. The pMAT-b-AEMA polymers bound pDNA and remained stable over time even in the
presence of serum. Studies in tissue-cultured cells, however, indicated
that both the pAEMA block length and polymer–pDNA ratio are
important factors in determining toxicity, cellular uptake, and gene
expression.
Overall, the pMAT-b-AEMA polymers
demonstrated
low toxicity, high levels of luciferase expression, and were also
able to harness the unique property of trehalose as a lyoprotectant
upon freeze-drying and resuspension, prompting in vivo studies of
these formulations. To test the
biodistribution and toxicity of these trehalose-stabilized
polyplexes in vivo, we selected pMAT-b-AEMA-2 for
murine studies.
The mice appeared to suffer no ill health effects
after being dosed with up to 490 μg of polymer per mouse (the
equivalent of 19.6 mg/kg of polymer/mouse). Quantitative PCR studies
were conducted to measure the plasmid amount in six major organs.
The amount of plasmid present was very low, expecially when compared
to plasmid levels in the liver following hydrodynamic infusion. , The low level of polyplex uptake by all tissues was insufficient
to achieve detectable levels of luciferase gene expression. The widespread
and roughly equal distribution of the polyplexed plasmid suggested
that the trehalose polyplexes were colloidally stable during circulation
and offer an excellent design motif for further in vivo delivery experiments.
To determine the in vivo stability of the polyplexes (whether the
polymer retained its cargo upon delivery), we fluorescently tagged
the polymer and imaged the mice and their organs. After 15 min of
polyplex circulation, we detected fluorescence in the organs where
pDNA was found but not in the blood, which was consistent with results
that injected polyplexes are cleared into the urine within 6 min. 
A second injection method was then used
to bypass extended circulation
in the blood as a physical means to target polyplex delivery to a
specific tissue. Accordingly, we performed a hydrodynamic infusion
to force the majority of polyplexes to the liver, − which resulted
in significant luciferase expression. Indeed, gene expression was
comparable to that seen in previous work with diseased mouse models, suggesting that genes coding for therapeutic
proteins would also be expressed at high levels when complexed with
pMAT-b-AEMA-2. Because of the large volumes required
to perform hydrodynamic injection, it is difficult to expand the use
of this delivery technique into higher mammal models. − Catheters are being explored to localize the high pressure
to targeted tissues of interest, yet it is still difficult to achieve
sufficient pressure levels needed to promote successful naked plasmid
delivery and gene expression in vivo. Polyplexing plasmids could offer
a method to reduce the injection volume and pressure needed to maintain
significant gene expression. To this end, we show that polyplexing
pDNA does not appear to prohibit its delivery/expression through in
vivo hydrodynamic delivery methods (in fact, higher gene expression
was observed) and shows promise to offer a way to formulate plasmids
for direct catheter-based tissue administration. Overall, this work
demonstrates the unique properties of trehalose for stabilizing polyplex
formulations for lyophilization and delivery in vivo, important metrics
for advancing new vehicles for clinical gene therapy applications.
Future work is aimed at introducing these polyplex formulations with
therapeutic genes by isolating hydrodynamic infusions to the liver
of animal models.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.5b00312.Detailed experimental procedures,
chemical characterization,
additional in vitro characterization, and PCR analysis of plasmid
delivery to major organs (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
ab5b00312_si_001.pdf

## Author Present Address
‡ M.C.
is currently Department of Physical Sciences, Nicholls State
University, Thibodaux, LA, 70310.

## Author Present Address
§ Y.W.
is currently at University of Chicago, Department of Surgery,
5812 S. Ellis Ave., Chicago, IL, 60637.
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge
funding of this project by the NIH Director’s
New Innovator Program (DP2OD006669) and the Camille and Henry Dreyfus
Foundation to TMR. We acknowledge the use of UMN Bruker NMR spectrometers
through the following statement: Research reported in this publication
was supported by the Office of the Director, National Institutes of
Health of the National Institutes of Health under Award S10OD011952.
We acknowledge the financial support of NIH grants 1R01DK082516 and
P01HD32652 to PH. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institutes of Health. All animal studies were performed under
the IACUC Protocol #1202A09921 (PI: Hackett).