2749ebiomEBioMedicineeBioMedicineElsevierPMC4909382490938249093822732245710.1016/j.ebiom.2016.03.048Prolactin protects retinal pigment epithelium by inhibiting sirtuin 2-dependent cell death
Meléndez GarcíaRodrigo Arredondo ZamarripaDavid ArnoldEdith Ruiz-HerreraXarubet Noguez ImmRamsés Baeza CruzGerman AdánNorma BinartNadine Riesgo-EscovarJuan GoffinVincent OrdazBenito Peña-OrtegaFernando Martínez-TorresAtaúlfo ClappCarmen ThebaultStéphanie aInstituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Campus UNAM-Juriquilla, 76230 Querétaro, MexicobInstitut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1185, Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de Médecine Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre 94270, FrancecInstitut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1151, Institut Necker Enfants Malades, Université Paris-Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75014, France⁎Corresponding author at: Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Campus UNAM-Juriquilla, 76230 Querétaro, Qro., Mexico.Instituto de NeurobiologíaUniversidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM)Campus UNAM-JuriquillaQuerétaroQro.76230Mexico stephaniethebault@gmail.com
1RMG, DAZ, and EA contributed equally to this work.
204201673535–492162016© 2016 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
The identification of pathways necessary for retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) function is fundamental to uncover therapies for blindness. Prolactin (PRL) receptors are expressed in the retina, but nothing is known about the role of PRL in RPE. Using the adult RPE 19 (ARPE-19) human cell line and mouse RPE, we identified the presence of PRL receptors and demonstrated that PRL is necessary for RPE cell survival via anti-apoptotic and antioxidant actions. PRL promotes the antioxidant capacity of ARPE-19 cells by reducing glutathione. It also blocks the hydrogen peroxide-induced increase in deacetylase sirtuin 2 (SIRT2) expression, which inhibits the TRPM2-mediated intracellular Ca2+ rise associated with reduced survival under oxidant conditions. RPE from PRL receptor-null (prlr−/−) mice showed increased levels of oxidative stress, Sirt2 expression and apoptosis, effects that were exacerbated in animals with advancing age. These observations identify PRL as a regulator of RPE homeostasis.
Keywords: Age-related retinal degeneration, Prolactin, Antioxidant, SIRT2, TRPM2 channels, Retinal pigment epithelium

## Highlights
•Endogenous prolactin is necessary for the viability of retinal pigment epithelium.
•Exogenous prolactin protects retinal pigment epithelium from death upon oxidant insult and advancing age.
•Prolactin exerts its protective actions by inhibiting the oxidant-induced sirtuin 2-dependent activation of TRPM2 channels.
As we age, vision declines. This process can be fastened in certain diseases of the retina. The retina is composed of ten layers, among which, one named the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is known to become dysfunctional. In particular, RPE cells can die. Here, we demonstrated that the hormone of lactation, prolactin, helps the RPE to survive under conditions that are threatening for the eye and happen during natural aging.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2016 Jan 27; Revised 2016 Mar 23; Accepted 2016 Mar 31; Collection date 2016 May.

1.

## Introduction
As aging populations grow, sight loss is becoming a major world health concern. Eye conditions related to aging share some common pathological characteristics, including the degeneration of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) ( ) and secondary photoreceptor cell damage ( ). Several lines of evidence have determined oxidative stress in the RPE to be a major pathogenic element in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) ( ) and diabetic retinopathy ( ). Oxidative stress refers to elevated intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) ( ), which are produced by damaged mitochondria and which inevitably impair cellular function ( ). Recently, oxidative stress was shown to induce an age-dependent increase in ROS levels and cell death in human RPE ( ). However, the molecular mechanisms making aging RPE vulnerable to high levels of ROS and subsequent activation of cell death are largely unknown.
We have recently identified the neuroprotective role of prolactin (PRL) in rat retinas ( ). PRL is a critical link between the neuroendocrine and immune systems. Notably, deep sequencing experiments showed that increased vulnerability to AMD is due to initially high levels of inflammatory factors and low levels of homeostatic neuroprotective factors, such as the suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) 1 ( , ). PRL signaling is down-regulated when SOCS-1 is lost ( ). Together, these findings indicate that PRL signaling may play a critical role in the age-related degeneration of the retina.
PRL and its receptor are expressed in the retina ( ). Retinas from PRL receptor knockout (prlr−/−) mice exhibit photoresponsive dysfunction that correlates with reduced rhodopsin levels ( ). Given that the RPE normally supplies photopigments to rods ( ), a lack of PRL signaling may alter its function. A previous study demonstrated that most retinal cells are positive for the PRL receptor ( ), but whether this receptor is present in the RPE remains to be determined.
In addition, there is abundant evidence of altered Ca2+ dynamics in cells with increased age ( ) and oxidative stress ( ), which are partially mediated by transient receptor potential (TRP) channel dysfunction ( ). Notably, TRP melastatin 2 (TRPM2) is a unique Ca2+-permeable, nonselective cation channel that is responsive to ROS ( ) and that has been implicated in cell death in response to oxidative stress ( ). Emerging evidence supports the idea that glutathione (GSH) depletion, which occurs during aging ( ), associates with altered intracellular Ca2+ dynamics that may develop in neurons as a result of increased TRPM2-mediated Ca2+ influx ( ). Reinforcing the possibility that TRPM2 may contribute to neurological diseases associated with aging and oxidative stress is the fact that this channel is gated by the sirtuin metabolite 2′O-acetyl-ADP-ribose ( , ). Sirtuins are a conserved family of protein/histone deacetylases, of which the founding member Silencing Information Regulator 2 (SIRT2) has been suggested to be neuroprotective when inhibited ( ). Indeed, reduced sirt2 expression associates with increased photoreceptor survival in flies ( ), although it is not yet clear whether SIRT2 activation has negative effects in aging retinas.
Here we demonstrate that PRL is necessary for the survival of RPE under normal and advancing age conditions. We further identified SIRT2 and TRPM2 as molecular targets for the antioxidant and anti-apoptotic actions of PRL in the RPE.

2.

## Materials and Methods
2.1.

## Reagents
Human recombinant PRL ( ) generated in Escherichia coli was provided by Michael E. Hodson (Yale University, New Haven, CT). The PRL receptor antagonist Del1-9-G129R-hPRL was produced in Escherichia coli and purified as described ( ). Anti-human PRL rabbit polyclonal antibody IC5 and anti-TRPM2 (#ACC-043) were kind gifts from the National Hormone and Pituitary Program (UCLA Medical School, Torrance, CA) and Alomone Labs, respectively. Normal rabbit serum was collected from control (non-immunized) rabbit whole blood. N-acetyl cysteine (Cat. number A7250) ( ), AGK2 (Cat. number A8231) ( ), and piceatannol (Cat. Number P0453) ( ) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Anti-PRL receptor (U5, Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO), Alexa-488 goat anti-mouse IgG (ab150117, Abcam, Carlsbad, CA), anti-RPE65 (MAB5528, Chemicon International, Temecula, CA) and anti-β-tubulin (ZYMED from Life Technologies; #22833) antibodies were purchased as specified.

2.2.

## Ethics Statement
All experiments were approved by the Bioethics Committee of the Institute of Neurobiology from the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM, clave NOM-062-ZOO-1999) in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Society for Neuroscience: Policies on the Use of Animals and Humans in Neuroscience Research. All efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used and their suffering.

2.3.

## Animal Care and Retinal Tissue
Male albino rats (Wistar, 275 ± 25 g, 7–9 weeks) and 30 male and 30 female albino mice (129Sv, 33 ± 2 g, 3 month old) were fed ad libitum and reared in normal cyclic light conditions (12 h light: 12 h dark) with an ambient light level of approximately 400 lx. Animals were sacrificed by CO2 inhalation and decapitation. Eyes were enucleated and processed for in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry.

2.4.

## Mice
Mice heterozygous for PRL receptor (( ); 129Sv background) were crossbred, and PRL receptor-null (prlr−/−) mice were selected as previously described ( ). Wild-type (16 males and 13 females) and prlr−/− (14 males and 17 females) mice were subjected to normal cyclic light until they reach 5 or 14 months of age. After a 24-h dark adaptation period, mice were killed by CO2 inhalation and decapitation. Eyes were enucleated, and flat mounts of RPE were obtained ( ) and processed for histology, apoptosis, and immunostaining, or retinas were obtained for RNA extraction.

2.5.

## In Situ Hybridization
Sense and antisense PRL receptor RNA probes labeled with digoxygenin were synthesized from a linearized plasmid containing the rat PRL receptor cDNA. Isolated retinas were fixed for 24 h in 4% formaldehyde, incubated for 24 h in RNase-free 10% sucrose-phosphate buffered saline (PBS), then for 3 days in 30% sucrose-PBS. Retinas were embedded in Tissue-Freezing Medium (Leica Instruments, Neussloch, Germany), sectioned (12 μm), and mounted on slides (Superfrost/Plus; A. Daigger & Co., Vernon Hills, IL). Sections were dried for 15 min at 60 °C, fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 10 to 15 min in PBS, and washed in PBT (PBS + 0.1% Tween 20). Sections were incubated in a 1:1 mixture of PBT and hybridization solution (5 × sodium chloride and sodium citrate solution), 0.1% Tween 20, 50% deionized formamide, 100 μg/ml sonicated salmon sperm DNA) and prehybridized in hybridization solution for 1 h at 55 °C. Probes were denatured in hybridization solution and allowed to hybridize to tissue sections overnight at 55 °C. Slides were washed at 60 °C with hybridization solution and then with PBT. They were incubated for 2 h with an anti-digoxygenin antibody coupled to alkaline phosphatase (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), then washed in PBT. Signal was detected using tetrazolium blue and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate as substrates in alkaline buffer (Roche).

2.6.

## Immunohistochemistry
Eyes were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. Then, they were either washed overnight in 0.1 M PBS, immersed in 15% sucrose at room temperature, oriented and frozen in Tissue-Tek (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA), and sectioned (12 μm thick) along the sagittal axis of the eye or dissected for a whole mount of the RPE as described ( ). Retina cryosections and RPE flat mounts were incubated in PBS with 1% SDS for 5 min, rinsed three times with PBS for 5 min, blocked in PBS containing 10% normal goat serum and 0.1% Triton X-100 for 1 h, and then incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-PRL receptor monoclonal antibody (U5) at 20 μg/ml. The primary antibody reaction was detected using the avidin-biotin complex-detection kit (Vectastain, ABC kit; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) or labeled with Alexa-488 goat anti-mouse IgG used at 1:200 dilution. RPE flat mounts were then incubated with a 1:1000 dilution of rhodamine phalloidin (R415, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for 1 h. Double labeling was performed with both anti-PRL and anti-RPE cell specific antibodies [anti-PRL polyclonal antibody IC5, dilution 1:500; anti-RPE65, at 0.08 μg/ml]. After incubation with the primary antibodies, samples were rinsed 3 times in PBS and labeled for 2 h with Alexa-594-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG, or Alexa-488-goat anti-rabbit IgG obtained from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR) and used at dilutions of 1:500 (anti-mouse) or 1:1000 (anti-rabbit), respectively. Control for the U5 anti-PRL receptor antibody was carried out using prlr−/− mice ( b), and secondary antibody control for the IC5 anti-PRL antibody was carried out omitting the primary antibody (data not shown). Labeled samples were examined with a laser scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200 LSM 510 Meta, Carl Zeiss International, Oberkochen, Germany). Images were prepared using the Zeiss LSM Image Examiner.
 
2.7.

## In Situ Apoptosis
RPE flat mounts were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and 0.1% sodium citrate for 7 min followed by incubation in sodium citrate buffer (10 mM sodium citrate, 0.5% Tween 20, pH 6.0) for 1 min at 86 °C. Apoptosis was detected by the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) method using the In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche Diagnostics). DNA was stained with DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole ( ), 1 μg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich). Apoptotic signals were visualized under fluorescence microscopy (Microscope BX60F5, Olympus Optical Co. LTD) and quantified by the image analysis system software Pro-Plus (Media Cybernetics Inc.).

2.8.

## Detection of Intracellular ROS
The in situ production of ROS in the RPE was assessed using dihydroethidium (DHE, structure is provided in Supplemental Fig. 1a) staining. RPE flat mounts were fixed in 4% PFA and mounted on gelatin-coated slides. In a dark chamber, RPE was loaded with 5 μM DHE for 30 min at room temperature and then washed thrice in PBS. RPE was mounted on glass slides with VECTASHIELD® mounting medium with DAPI, and the slides were analyzed without delay using a LSM 510 confocal laser-scanning microscope. Images were obtained using an Apo-406 objective. The same acquisition settings were used for all experiments to allow direct comparison of RPE flat mounts. Digital images were processed using free ImageJ software (V.1.36, National Institutes of Health). Only cropping of images was performed; there was no adjustment of brightness. The mean fluorescence intensity ratio in RPE was determined in 6 different regions of interest (same size), distributed equally over the full layer, from three flat mounts per condition. The ratio between DHE (numerator) and DAPI was calculated to determine superoxide anion production in the three experimental groups.

2.9.

## Cell Culture
The ARPE-19 human cell line was purchased from ATCC (Number: CRL-2302) ( ) and was grown in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium nutrient mixture F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cultures were seeded at an initial density of 106 cells and maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Because serum contains variable mixtures of factors that might modulate the effects of PRL, we preincubated the cultures in serum-reduced (1%) medium for 12 h prior treatments.

2.10.

## RNA Isolation and cDNA Synthesis
Retinas were dissected for mRNA analysis. Total RNA from retinas and ARPE-19 cells was isolated using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA). Total RNA was quantified. For retina RNA, contaminating genomic DNA was removed using 1 ml of RNase-free DNase I (BoehringerMannheim)/10 mg of RNA at 37 °C for 30 min. A 1-mg sample (retinas) and a 2-μg sample (ARPE-19 cells) were reverse-transcribed using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA).

2.11.

## Conventional PCR
For the PCR reaction, specific sense and antisense primers were selected (Table 1), based on GenBank TRP sequences, using GeneJockey II (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK). Each sample was amplified using Maxima SYBR Green/ROX qPCR Master Mix (Thermo Scientific, Auburn, AL) in an automated thermal cycler (Bio-Rad CFX96 Real-Time System; Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). DNA amplification conditions included an initial 7-min denaturation step at 95 °C (which also activated the AmpliTaq Gold) and 40 cycles of 30 s at 95 °C; 30 s at 57 °C for the PRL receptor, 60 °C for TRPM2, and 57 °C for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH); 40 s at 72 °C, and a final elongation of 7 min at 72 °C. The RT-PCR samples were electrophoresed on a 1.5% agarose gel and stained with ethidium bromide (0.5 μg/ml), then photographed under UV light.

2.12.

## Quantitative PCR
PCR products were detected and quantified with Maxima SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (Thermo Scientific) in a 10-μl final reaction volume containing template and 0.5 μM of each of the primer pairs (Table 2). Amplification performed in the CFX96 real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) included a denaturation step of 10 min at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of amplification (10 s at 95 °C, 30 s at the primer pair–specific annealing temperature, and 30 s at 72 °C). The PCR data were analyzed by the 2–ΔΔCT method, and cycle thresholds normalized to the housekeeping gene TBP were used to calculate the mRNA levels of interest.

2.13.

## Transient Transfection
ARPE-19 cells were transfected with 50 nM siRNA against human TRPM2 (SMARTpool: SiGENOME TRPM2 siRNA, NCBI substance Id 152147430, GE Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Control experiments were performed by transfecting the SiGENOME non-targeting control siRNAs, Cat# D-001210-01-05, GE Dharmacon) or by exposing cells to Lipofectamine 2000 without siRNA. Analysis of protein content, Ca2+ imaging and survival assays were performed 24 h after transfection.

2.14.

## Immunocytochemistry
ARPE-19 cell cultures were fixed in 4% PFA for 1 h, incubated in PBS with 1% SDS for 5 min, rinsed three times with PBS for 5 min, blocked in PBS containing 10% normal goat serum and 0.1% Triton X-100 for 1 h, and then labeled overnight at 4 °C with anti-PRL receptor monoclonal antibody (U5) at 20 μg/ml. The primary antibody was detected with Alexa-488 goat anti-mouse IgG (ab150117) used at 1:200 dilution. F-actin was stained with a 1:1000 dilution of rhodamine-phalloidin (R415, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, structure is provided in Supplemental Fig. 1b) for 1 h. Samples were then mounted on glass slides with VECTASHIELD® mounting medium with DAPI. Labeled samples were examined with a laser scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200 LSM 510 Meta). Images were prepared using the Zeiss LSM Image Examiner.

2.15.

## Immunoblotting
Conditioned media from 3-day confluent ARPE-19 cell cultures were collected and concentrated 30-fold using Amicon® Ultra centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). In another group of experiments, ARPE-19 cells were transfected with siRNA against human TRPM2 or control siRNA for 48 h. Protein samples were resuspended in lysis buffer (0.5% Igepal, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1 μg/ml aprotinin, and 100 μg/ml PMSF, pH 7.0), and subjected to SDS/PAGE; total protein (40 μg) was blotted and probed overnight with a 1:500 dilution of anti-PRL IC5 antibody, a 1:200 dilution of anti-TRPM2 or a 1:1000 dilution of anti-β-tubulin antibodies. Primary antibody detection was performed using an alkaline phosphatase-coupled secondary antibody and a colorimetric detection kit (Bio-Rad).

2.16.

## Viability Assay
The reduction of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) was used as an index of RPE cell survival. Cells were seeded in 96-well collagen-coated flat bottom microculture plates (Corning) at an initial density of 2500 cells/well and treated for 48 h with 1% FBS culture medium supplemented or not (control) with 100 pM PRL, anti-human PRL antibody (dilution 1:500; defined in pilot experiments), normal serum control, Del1-9-G129R-hPRL (0.1 and 1 μM; defined in pilot experiments), or increasing doses of H2O2, as indicated. In another group of experiments, ARPE-19 cells were incubated with 100 μM H2O2 in the presence or absence of 100 pM PRL, 10 μM antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine, 10 μM SIRT2 inhibitor AGK2 or siRNA against TRPM2, as indicated. Piceatannol (10 μM) was also tested. The dose of hPRL (100 pM) that maximally promoted ARPE-19 cell survival was determined by performing a dose-response assay (not shown). Based on PRL levels detected in 10% FBS medium ( e), we calculated that 1% FBS medium contains a few pg/ml of PRL, which may be considered negligible compared to the concentrations present in the conditioned medium of ARPE-19 cells (1.7 ± 2.1 ng/ml, e) and the 100 pM (i.e. 2.3 ng/ml) exogenously administered PRL. Next, cells were incubated with MTT (500 mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 °C for 3 h, and the formazan precipitate was solubilized with 0.4 N HCl containing 10% SDS for 30 min at room temperature and quantified by measuring absorbance at 570 nm.
 
2.17.

## Cell Proliferation Assay
Cell proliferation was assessed by [3H]thymidine incorporation (Amersham International plc, Cardiff, UK). The [3H]thymidine incorporation assay consisted in seeding cells in 48-well collagen-coated flat-bottom microculture plates (Corning) at an initial density of 5000 cells/well and subjecting them to a series of treatments (all in 200 μl of culture medium containing 1% FBS) that included a 24-h incubation with recombinant human PRL (100 pM) combined or not with Del1-9-G129R-hPRL (1 μM), or with H2O2 (100 μM). Twenty-four hours before ending the treatment, 1 μL of [3H]-thymidine per well was added. After the 48-h treatment, wells were washed thrice in 5% trichloroacetic acid, with the last wash for 20 min at 4 °C. Next, 250 μL boiling 0.25 N NaOH was added, and samples were transferred to scintillation vials for quantification.

2.18.

## Apoptosis Detection
ARPE-19 cells were assayed for apoptosis by measuring fragmented nucleosomal DNA using the Cell Death Detection ELISA Kit (Roche).

2.19.

## Measurement of Total ROS and Antioxidant Capacity Using the Victor3 V Microplate Reader
Total ROS levels (The Enzo Life Sciences' Total ROS/Superoxide detection kit; ENZ-51010) and antioxidant capacity (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI; 709001) were assessed according to the Manufacturer's instructions.

2.20.

## Quantification of GSH Levels
GSH levels in lysates from ARPE-19 cells were measured with the GSH-glo-glutathione-assay (Promega) according to the Manufacturer's instructions. GSH concentrations were determined by interpolation from a GSH standard curve generated using the bioluminescent system.

2.21.

## Ca2+ Imaging
For Ca2+ imaging studies, ARPE-19 cells at confluence were plated onto round coverslips covered with poly-l-lysine (10 μg/ml, Sigma Chemical) and incubated in the dark with 10 μM fluo 8-AM (Invitrogen) dissolved in the extracellular buffer containing: 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 0.1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin, 1.0 mM EGTA, adjusted to pH 7.4 with NaOH. Loaded cells were transferred into a perfusion chamber located on a microscope adapted to an epifluorescence system (Eclipse E600FN; Nikon Melville, NY). Cells were constantly perfused with oxygenated extracellular buffer at a rate of 15–17 ml/min and at 29–30 °C. Excitation of the fluorophore (at 488 nm) was performed with a light source controlled by a Lambda LS illuminator (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA). Images were acquired with a cooled digital camera (Cool-SNAP-ES, Roper Scientific, Tucson, AZ) using the RS image software (Photometrics; Roper Scientific). The image field was 800 × 600 μm in size ( ). Short movies (180 s total time, at 40 ms exposure at 4 Hz) were taken in control conditions and during the wash-in of the pharmacological treatments. To normalize the change in fluorescence of the treated cultures, their Δ fluorescence was corrected by subtracting that of one of the untreated conditions.

2.22.

## Image Analysis
Images were analyzed using Image J (V.1.36, National Institutes of Health). The cells in a field were semiautomatically identified, and their mean fluorescence was measured as a function of time. Single-pixel noise was removed using a 5-pixel ratio mean filter. Ca2+-dependent changes in fluorescence (Δ fluorescence) were computed as (Fi − Fo) / Fo where Fi is fluorescence intensity at any given frame, and Fo is the resting fluorescence.

2.23.

## Statistical Analysis
In general, all results were replicated in three or more independent experiments. The number of replicates (n) in each experiment and how often it was independently repeated (N) is indicated in each figure legend. Serum PRL levels are reported as mean ± S.D. and all others as mean ± S.E.M.; all data showed normal distribution or equal variance according to D'Agostino-Pearson omnibus and Levene's tests, respectively. Statistical differences between two groups were determined by a two-tailed Student's t-test, among three groups with one variable by one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni's post-hoc comparison test, and among four groups with two variables by two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni's post-hoc comparison test (Sigma Stat 7.0, Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA). Differences in means with P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

2.24.

## Gender Analysis
Mice of both genders (ratio almost 1:1 for wild-type: 16 males and 13 females, and prlr−/− mice: 14 males and 17 females) were used. We did not assess the stage of estrous. Independent analysis for either sex did not show any significant difference in the PRL receptor distribution or in the assays presented in (data not shown).
 

3.

## Results
3.1.

## PRL and PRL Receptor are Present in Rodent RPE
PRL receptor mRNA was found in the RPE layer from rat retinal cross sections by in situ hybridization ( a). Immunohistochemistry using the U5 anti-PRL receptor antibody labels the PRL receptor in whole mounts of mouse RPE, whereas no specific signal appeared in prlr−/− RPE ( b).
PRL signaling is triggered by PRL binding to preformed PRL receptor homodimers ( ). Immunohistochemistry was performed on retina sections using RPE-65 isomerase as an RPE marker ( ). We observed immunopositive staining for PRL in RPE-65-expressing cells ( d). PRL colocalized with RPE-65 within the cytoplasm of RPE cells.
All together, these data suggest that the RPE is a target for autocrine/paracrine actions of PRL.

3.2.

## Endogenous PRL is a Trophic Factor for Human RPE cells
To explore the direct effects of the PRL signaling pathway on the RPE, we first used a human RPE cell line, ARPE-19 ( ), in which we found both PRL receptor mRNA ( a) and protein ( b). We also observed that PRL was present in the conditioned medium of ARPE-19 cell cultures ( c). We assessed levels of bioactive PRL using the Nb2-cell bioassay and found a PRL concentration of 1.7 ± 2.1 ng/ml in the conditioned medium of ARPE-19 cell cultures ( d). Of note, 10% FBS medium contained 0.031 ± 0.18 ng/mL ( d). Previous studies demonstrated that PRL regulates cell survival, proliferation, and apoptosis in a variety of cell types ( , , ). To assess the direct involvement of endogenous PRL in RPE cell survival, ARPE-19 viability was tested in the presence of anti-PRL polyclonal antibody ( ), normal rabbit serum or the competitive PRL receptor antagonist Del1-9-G129R-hPRL ( ) for 48 h. Both anti-PRL antibody and the highest dose of Del1-9-G129R-hPRL decreased ARPE-19 cell survival by 20–30% relative to the control, while pre-immune serum did not ( e). Using 3[H] incorporation, we showed that Del1-9-G129R-hPRL diminished ARPE-19 cell proliferation by 13 ± 3% and also prevented the proliferative effect of recombinant human PRL (hPRL, f).

3.3.

## PRL Protects and Rescues Human RPE Cells From Hydrogen Peroxide (H2O2)-induced Damage
The RPE is in a location in the retina where it is in constant contact with ROS. H2O2 has been used as a direct oxidant to initiate and study cellular oxidative stress, because it is generated by the RPE during phagocytosis of the photoreceptor outer segments ( ). Dose-response experiments showed that H2O2 markedly inhibited ARPE-19 cell survival with an IC50 of 57 μM after a 24-h treatment ( a). Using 100 μM H2O2, we showed that this effect involved both a drastic reduction of cell proliferation (82 ± 6%; b) and a marked increase in apoptosis (51 ± 12%; c), as determined by internucleosomal DNA fragmentation measured by ELISA. We next evaluated whether PRL protected against the effect of a 24-h exposure to 100 μM H2O2 ( d). H2O2 reduced RPE cell survival ( e) and induced apoptosis ( f), and these effects were prevented by PRL. Alone, PRL promoted the survival of ARPE-19 cells, but it did not modify their levels of apoptosis. We then investigated restorative properties of PRL by administering PRL 18 h after H2O2 treatment ( g), i.e., when oxidative damage is evident ( h, i). PRL reversed the reduction in cell survival ( h) and the increase in apoptosis ( i) induced by H2O2. Alone, PRL did not modify ARPE-19 cell survival or apoptosis.
 
3.4.

## PRL Reduces Intracellular Levels of ROS in Human RPE Cells, Thus Decreasing the Cytotoxic Effect of SIRT2
Serum levels of PRL were previously shown to positively correlate with superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity in mammary tissues ( ), but whether PRL directly favors an antioxidant environment remains elusive. The antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine ( ) prevented the reduction in ARPE-19 cell survival induced by H2O2 ( a), thereby mimicking PRL actions. Further, PRL reduced the increase in total ROS levels associated with H2O2 exposure to control levels ( b). Alone, PRL decreased the total levels of ROS. We showed that ARPE-19 cells increased their antioxidant capacity by 1.8-fold in response to H2O2, and by 3.6-fold in the presence of PRL and H2O2 ( c), but PRL alone did not modify the antioxidant capacity. The mRNA levels of endogenous antioxidant enzymes such as catalase, SOD, and glutathione peroxidase were assessed by quantitative PCR. d shows that exposure to H2O2 increased the levels of Mn2+-SOD, Cu2+-SOD, and glutathione peroxidase mRNA by 45 ± 1.0%, 30 ± 0.5%, and 36 ± 0.5% of controls, respectively, but did not alter catalase levels. PRL did not modify the H2O2-mediated increase in Mn2+-SOD, Cu2+/Zn2+-SOD, and glutathione peroxidase levels, nor did PRL change catalase mRNA levels. PRL by itself did not modify the mRNA levels of any of these enzymes. Additionally, we quantified reduced GSH levels since N-acetyl cysteine, which mimics PRL actions, is a precursor of glutathione. Exposure to H2O2 almost totally eliminated GSH, an effect that was not only prevented but also reversed by PRL ( e). Alone, PRL did not modify GSH levels. These results indicate that PRL limits the impact of oxidative stress in human RPE.
 H2O2 has been found to induce expression of the deacetylase SIRT2 in prostate epithelial cells ( ), and PRL receptor dimerization and subsequent signaling are inhibited by SIRT2-mediated deacetylation ( ). SIRT2 is expressed in the retina ( ), and SIRT2 inhibitors, including AGK2, can decrease cell death in various models of neurodegeneration ( ). qPCR analysis of the SIRT2 gene showed that PRL prevented the 2.4-fold increase in SIRT2 mRNA levels induced by H2O2 compared with levels in untreated conditions ( f). Alone, PRL did not modify the ARPE-19 cell content of SIRT2 transcript. We also found that treatment with AGK2 opposed the reduction in ARPE-19 cell survival induced by H2O2 ( g), as did PRL. Alone, AGK2 did not modify ARPE-19 cell survival. To test the possibility that PRL preserves the integrity of human RPE by inhibiting SIRT2, we used piceatannol, an analog of resveratrol ( ) known to stimulate SIRT2 ( ). Like H2O2, piceatannol (10 μM, ( )) diminished ARPE-19 cell survival, an effect that was blocked by PRL ( h).

3.5.

## PRL Maintains Human RPE Cell Survival by Inhibiting the Oxidant-induced SIRT2-dependent Increase in Intracellular Ca2 + That is Mediated by TRPM2 Channels
Previous studies demonstrated that SIRT2 activity produces 2′O-acetyl-ADP-ribose ( ), a metabolite that binds the cytosolic, C-terminus of TRPM2 channels, leading to an increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels that correlates with cell death ( ). While TRPM2 mRNA has been reported in the retina ( ), the presence of these channels in RPE is unknown. We found that ARPE-19 cells expressed TRPM2 mRNA ( a) and protein ( b). siRNA against TRPM2 decreased protein levels of the channel in ARPE-19 cells ( b). Using the Ca2+ indicator fluo-8, we observed that exposure to H2O2 elicited a sustained increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels that was prevented by siRNA against TRPM2 or by a 15-min pretreatment with PRL ( c). Scrambled siRNA or PRL alone did not modify intracellular Ca2+ levels. We observed that SIRT2 activation by piceatannol caused an increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels that had similar amplitude and kinetics to the one evoked by H2O2, and that was inhibited by siRNA against TRPM2 or PRL ( d). We also found that the H2O2-mediated increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels was prevented by a 15-min pretreatment with AGK2 ( e). We then evaluated whether the inhibition of TRPM2 channels preserved human RPE survival under oxidant conditions. We found that siRNA against TRPM2 minimized the reduction in ARPE-19 cell survival induced by H2O2 ( f). Scrambled siRNA did not modify the levels of ARPE-19 survival in the presence of H2O2.
 
3.6.

## RPE Degeneration is Enhanced During Advancing Age and in Mice Lacking PRL Receptor
In order to examine the in vivo relevance of our findings, whole mounts of RPE from 5- and 14-month-old prlr−/− mice were evaluated by the TUNEL assay. In young mice, there was positive TUNEL signal in the RPE ( a), indicating that PRL is required for the survival of RPE under normal conditions. Apparent morphological alterations including an increased number of cells that have more than two nuclei were also detected in the 5-month-old prlr−/− mice. Consistent with RPE degeneration being a feature of age-related retinal degeneration ( ), 14-month-old prlr+/+ mice showed more TUNEL signal in RPE, compared to that in 5-month-old prlr+/+ mice ( a). Positive TUNEL signal was also present in the RPE from prlr−/− mice with advancing age ( a). The higher levels of apoptosis in 5- and 14-month-old prlr−/− RPE were statistically significant after quantifying the TUNEL signal ( b). Also, the number of RPE cells decreased in 5-month-old prlr−/− mice compared with age-matched wild-type counterparts, and they had more nuclei ( b). Evaluation of the surface and perimeter of individual RPE cells showed hypertrophy of RPE cells from prlr−/− mice compared with those from wild-type counterparts: RPE cell surface and perimeter were higher in 5- and 14-month-old prlr−/− mice compared with age-matched wild-type mice, respectively ( c). However, the surface and perimeter of RPE cells from 5-month-old wild-type and prlr−/− mice were similar to those of 14-month-old wild-type and prlr−/− mice, respectively ( c). These data suggest that PRL helps to maintain the morphology of RPE, and that this effect was independent of age. We then analyzed the production of superoxide anion in whole mounts of RPE. d shows representative images of whole mounts of RPE stained with the oxidative fluorescent dye dihydroethidium (DHE), and quantification using the mean pixel fluorescence intensity ratio of DHE/DAPI is provided in e. The RPE from young prlr−/− mice produced more superoxide anion than RPE from age-matched wild-type counterparts. While superoxide anion levels were higher in the RPE from 14-month old prlr+/+ mice than those of young mice, they were similar in the RPE of 14-month old prlr+/+ and prlr−/− mice. We then explored whether reduced overall synthesis of antioxidant enzymes correlates with increased oxidative stress in prlr−/− retinas. Catalase mRNA levels were reduced in young prlr−/− retinas by 55 ± 3% compared with values from age-matched prlr+/+ retinas ( f). Consistent with oxidative stress being a hallmark of aging retina ( ), catalase expression was reduced equally in retinas of prlr+/+ and prlr−/− mice with advancing age. Lack of PRL receptor or advancing age per se was accompanied by a 2.4- or 3.5-fold increased synthesis of SIRT2 in the retina, respectively, compared to young wild-type retinas ( f). The SIRT2 mRNA levels were comparable in the retinas of 14-month old prlr+/+ and prlr−/− mice. Further, we measured negligible levels of PRL receptor and PRL mRNA in the retina of 14-month old mice ( g), supporting the notion that under the oxidative conditions accompanying aging, increased levels of SIRT2 are associated with reduced PRL signaling and RPE cell death.

4.

## Discussion
The multigenic and complex etiology of age-related retinal diseases in humans is responsible for the relative paucity of effective compounds for their early prevention and treatment. Given that the relationship between the RPE and photoreceptors is crucial to sight ( ), identifying pathways necessary for RPE function is essential to uncover therapies for blindness. The present study identifies the PRL signaling pathway in the adult RPE and demonstrates that it is necessary for RPE survival. PRL receptor antagonism or deficiency increases RPE apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo and conversely, PRL receptor stimulation promotes the resistance of RPE cells to oxidative stress. One of the mechanisms by which PRL signaling mediates its protective effects in the RPE is through antioxidant actions that lead to decreased SIRT2 expression and TRPM2 inhibition. This study strengthens the significance of the PRL pathway beyond its classical roles in lactation since no sex-based difference in PRL-mediated RPE effects were observed in our experimental conditions. Nevertheless, it is possible that sex-based differences do occur under physiological conditions such as pregnancy and lactation given that the amplitude of the ERG B-wave is higher in pregnant women ( ).
Although the role of PRL in NO signaling has been widely studied ( ), the direct action of PRL on ROS has not been shown previously. In response to oxidative stress, we found that PRL reduced the levels of ROS and promoted the antioxidant capacity of ARPE-19 cells by increasing GSH levels in the RPE. More importantly, prlr−/− RPE exhibited increased staining for the superoxide indicator DHE, and mRNA levels of catalase were reduced in prlr−/− retinas originating from young or aging mice. These data are consistent with the observations that reduced levels of circulating PRL associate with increased plasma oxidant status in rats ( ). However, blockage of PRL secretion was also reported to associate with enhanced antioxidant defense ( ) and more particularly, with increased activity of antioxidant enzymes like catalase ( ). The reasons for this inconsistency are unknown but may relate to the finely tuned balance between ROS levels and antioxidant defenses. It is clear that if ROS levels are high enough to overwhelm the antioxidant defenses or if the antioxidant protective mechanisms are compromised, then the resulting oxidative stress may lead to aberrant cell signaling through oxidative modification of redox-sensitive signaling proteins ( ). Whether PRL or its receptor are susceptible to oxidative modifications remains to be investigated. The present study also shows that advancing age associates with decreased expression of PRL and PRL receptor in the retina. Whether the down-regulation of PRL and its receptor occurs specifically in the RPE was not determined. Nonetheless, increased oxidative stress and phenotypic changes in the RPE have been reported ( ). Along this line, the best-validated therapies remain oral antioxidant supplements based on those investigated in the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) and the recently completed AREDS 2 ( , ). Here, we show that N-acetyl cysteine which, like PRL, allows more GSH to be produced, preserves the integrity of ARPE-19 cells under oxidative stress. Moreover, we found that PRL per se reduced intracellular levels of ROS without modifying the antioxidant capacity of ARPE-19 cells. The mechanism underlying this effect has not been explored, but the expression of PRL receptors positively correlates with mRNA abundance for uncoupling proteins UCP1 ( ) and UCP2 ( ), which are mitochondrial anion carrier proteins that are involved in minimizing ROS emission from the electron transport chain ( ).
Consistent with previous studies (see review ( )), here we show that H2O2 attenuated ARPE-19 cell survival by inhibiting their proliferation and stimulating their apoptosis, as evaluated by reduced 3[H] incorporation and increased DNA fragmentation, respectively. Administering PRL before or after injury opposed the H2O2 cytotoxic and proapoptotic effect on ARPE-19 cells. The molecular mechanisms underlying this effect were not analyzed, but PRL is a well-known anti-apoptotic factor. It activates STAT3 ( ), which signals to inhibit apoptosis by inducing Bcl-2 ( ) and decreasing p53 ( ) transcription. Reduced Bcl-2 contributes to RPE death by apoptosis, while pharmacologic treatments to block p53 expression can protect RPE cells from apoptosis ( ).
The fact that PRL counteracts the proapoptotic effect of H2O2 argues in favor of its pro-survival effect on RPE under oxidative stress. Conversely, lack of PRL signaling should result in RPE apoptosis under pro-oxidant conditions. To investigate this concept, we studied the RPE in situ and chose advancing age as a model of RPE degeneration. Apoptosis occurred, but we did not observe any significant hypertrophy of RPE cells as others did in human tissue ( ). Notably, we showed that the levels of apoptosis were greater in the RPE of prlr−/− mice with advancing age than in the RPE of aged-matched wild-type mice or young prlr−/− mice. These data demonstrate the trophic effect of PRL on RPE in vivo. The antiapoptotic effect of PRL under challenging conditions was clearly established earlier ( ). In particular, PRL protects beta cells in vitro from H2O2 ( ) and limits photoreceptor apoptosis in a phototoxicity model of retinal degeneration ( ).
PRL is essential for adult RPE survival. Targeted disruption of the PRL receptor gene causes apoptosis and reduces the number of RPE cells in this tissue, indicative of a defect in RPE survival, and also hypertrophy, which is known to lead to gradual atrophy ( ). Further supporting this notion is the fact that increased apoptosis and hypertrophy are observed in prlr−/− RPE independently of advancing age. Also, we show that immunoneutralization of PRL as well as a pure PRL receptor antagonist ( ) reduce ARPE-19 cell survival and proliferation, indicating that endogenous PRL is a major mitogenic factor for these cells.
A key issue is whether RPE is responding to local or circulating PRL, or both. Radioactive PRL injected intracardially is incorporated into ocular tissues (ciliary body, choroid, and retina) ( ). The ciliary body is responsible for the active transport of plasma proteins to intraocular fluids ( ), and we demonstrated that the PRL receptor is localized in this structure ( ). To examine if the PRL receptor in the ciliary body could mediate uptake of circulating PRL, we analyzed retinal PRL in prlr−/− mice, which are known to be hyperprolactinemic ( ). The mice displayed 700-fold higher levels of circulating PRL ( ), but the levels of retinal PRL were similar to those of their wild-type littermates (Supplemental Fig. 5). A similar mechanism can also take place directly in the outer component of the blood-retina barrier, although this alternative warrants further investigation. If the exact contribution of local versus circulating PRL at RPE site needs further investigation, it is worth mentioning that both the estimated concentration of PRL in the conditioned media of ARPE-19 cultures and the dose of exogenously administered PRL are in the physiological range. PRL was previously shown to be necessary for cell survival in the absence of a challenging context in adult mice ( ). Here, we demonstrate that a hormone is necessary for adult RPE survival. Such a conclusion had been reached previously only for antioxidant enzymes ( ) or transcription factors ( ).
A number of studies have demonstrated that oxidative injury in RPE cultures can be mitigated by compounds that exhibit antioxidant properties, including resveratrol ( ). In contrast, we observed that piceatannol, a naturally occurring hydroxylated analog of resveratrol, promotes a sustained increase of intracellular Ca2+ that can cause apoptosis ( ) and reduces the survival of ARPE-19 cells. These data are consistent with a study showing that resveratrol and some of its analogs exert cytotoxic effects on normal nontransformed cells ( ). Additionally, piceatannol has been previously associated with opposite effects on cell growth depending on its concentration, i.e., low doses (nM range) induce cell growth whereas high doses (μM range) attenuate cell growth ( ).
Resveratrol and its analogs are substrate-specific activators of yeast and human sirtuins ( ). Among the seven members of the mammalian sirtuin family, SIRT2 has been detected in adult retina ( ), and disruption of its signaling has been proposed as an endogenous therapeutic target to preserve the integrity of aging cells against exogenous stressors such as ROS ( ). SIRT2 inhibition by AGK2 results in decreased ROS levels ( ), which coincides with PRL decreasing intracellular levels of ROS in ARPE-19 cells. Consistent with studies showing that oxidative stress up-regulates SIRT2 ( ), we found that both H2O2 exposure and advancing age cause the elevation of SIRT2 mRNA levels in ARPE-19 cells and mouse retinas, respectively. The fact that AGK2 decreases H2O2-induced apoptosis in ARPE-19 cells indicates that in these cells, SIRT2 mediates oxidative stress-induced apoptosis, as previously reported ( ). Also, we show that PRL prevents the induction of SIRT2 expression under pro-oxidant conditions in ARPE-19 cells and that SIRT2 expression tends to be elevated in retinas from prlr−/− mice with advancing age compared to age-matched wild-type animals. Most conspicuously, SIRT2 expression was elevated in prlr−/− retinas from young mice. Considering that SIRT2 inactivates the PRL receptor through its deacetylation ( ), our data suggest that a negative feed-back loop between SIRT2 and PRL signaling may exist. Together with the fact that PRL prevents the reduction in ARPE-19 cell survival induced by piceatannol, these data lead us to propose that PRL, by reducing ROS levels, maintains SIRT2 at levels that contribute to RPE survival. Conversely, under oxidizing conditions, increased levels of SIRT2 blunt PRL signaling, leading to RPE cell death. The possibility that PRL may directly regulate SIRT2 needs further studies.
Although PRL signaling, SIRT2, and TRPM2 channels are currently viewed as being independent, we suggest that these pathways are more intricately connected than previously appreciated. We report here that TRPM2 is expressed in ARPE-19 cells. This result complements a previous study showing that all TRP channel genes are expressed in the retina ( ). We also show that H2O2 activates TRPM2 leading to Ca2+ influx in a SIRT2-dependent manner since AGK2 blocks the H2O2-induced Ca2+ increase in ARPE-19 cells. In parallel, silencing TRPM2 inhibited the piceatannol-induced increase in intracellular Ca2+, suggesting that SIRT2 increases intracellular Ca2+ by activating TRPM2. Thus, we assume that TRPM2 channels are activated by H2O2 in a SIRT2-dependent manner in ARPE-19 cells. Undoubtedly, the TRPM2-mediated Ca2+ rise is a dominant source of the Ca2+ required to reduce ARPE-19 cell viability under pro-oxidant conditions ( f). Our observations are consistent with previous studies demonstrating that the TRPM2 Ca2+ current links oxidative stress-induced SIRT2 activation to oxidative stress-induced cell death ( ).
The novelty here consists in demonstrating that PRL inhibits the oxidant-induced SIRT2-dependent activation of TRPM2 channels. PRL alone does not modify Ca2+ levels, and there is no evidence that PRL activates TRPM2. Instead, PRL seems to block TRPM2 once this latter is activated. We emphasize that this effect cannot be attributed to the ability of PRL to reduce SIRT2 transcription, because the time course of the two events is different (seconds/minutes versus 24 h). Reduced levels of intracellular ROS may explain the short-term effect of PRL on TRPM2 as well as the restorative effect of PRL at 6 h, though further studies using different techniques and dyes are required to address this issue. Interestingly, TRPM2 current density was shown to increase in cultured pyramidal neurons over time in vitro. This increase in current density was prevented by treatment with N-acetyl cysteine and conversely, depletion of GSH augmented TRPM2 currents ( ).
Importantly, PRL is proteolytically cleaved in the retina to yield vasoinhibins ( ), a family of peptides that act on both endothelial and RPE cells to prevent the hypervasopermeability associated with diabetes ( ). Vasoinhibins exert actions through a mechanism independent of the PRL receptor ( ). The existence of such mechanisms therefore makes the prlr−/− mouse a complex model since exaggerated signaling through non-PRL receptor pathways may be expected. However, we previously demonstrated that in spite of being hyperprolactinemic, prlr−/− mice do not show increased levels of vasoinhibins in their retinas ( ).
Our general view is that antiapoptotic mechanisms including the PRL signaling pathway degrade with advancing age so that RPE cells become vulnerable to normal proapoptotic stressors such as ROS, SIRT2, and elevated intracellular Ca2+ levels, creating a tipping point beyond which retinal homeostasis is lost ( ), leading to visual dysfunction as we previously reported ( ). Concomitantly with RPE damage, rhodopsin mRNA levels and cone and rod photoreception are compromised in the prlr−/− mice ( ). A similar degree of alterations in electroretinogram parameters was previously shown to associate with reduced visual acuity in various animal models ( , , , ).
 Most studies devoted to detecting changes in plasma levels of PRL during aging in humans have been carried out in males, usually with age-range subject selection, which results in considerable variability and conflicting results. In most studies, healthy aging subjects showed no change in circulating levels of pituitary PRL ( , , ), while some showed a decrease ( , ). From a clinical point of view, one may consider the option of increasing levels of systemic PRL during advancing age in order to protect the RPE. However, the potential undesirable effects of induced hyperprolactinemia prompt us to propose instead that targeting SIRT2 or TRPM2 channels with inhibitors may improve RPE function in conditions that induce oxidative stress in the RPE. Therapeutic interventions may also benefit from identifying the signal transduction pathways that link PRL receptor stimulation to antioxidant actions. STAT3 appears to be a main candidate since signaling through the PRL receptor canonically involves JAK2/STAT3 activation ( ), and neuronal oxidative stress associates with reduced JAK2/STAT signaling ( , ), an effect that can be counteracted by anti-oxidant molecules including GSH and NAC ( ). In particular, knockdown of STAT3 has been recently shown to abolish the protective effects of innate immune system activation in the retina during oxidative stress ( ), and PRL is a well-known modulator of this system ( ).

## Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: ST, EA, and CC. Performed the experiments: RMG, DAZ, EA, XRH, RNI, JRE, GBC, NA, BO, and ST. Analyzed the data: RMG, DAZ, BO, and ST. Interpreted the data: FPO, ATM, CC, and ST. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: FPO, NB, VG, ATM, CC, and ST. Wrote the paper: ST.

## Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

## Acknowledgements
We would like to thank M. Diaz Muñoz and M. Flourakis for insights. R. Meléndez García, D. Arredondo Zamarripa, E. Arnold, X. Ruiz-Herrera, G. Baeza Cruz, and N. Adán are Master's and Doctoral students from Programa de Posgrado en Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM) and received fellowships from CONACYT. We thank F. López-Barrera, G. Nava, D. Mondragón, A. Prado, M. García, and E. N. Hernández Ríos for their technical assistance, and D. D. Pless for critically editing the manuscript. This study was supported by the UNAM grant IN201814 (ST), the National Council of Science and Technology of Mexico (CONACYT) grant 176393 (ST), and the Shedid grant (ATM). The role of the three funders strictly consisted in providing funds to purchase all materials necessary in this study.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.03.048.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
Table 1: Primer pairs used for conventional PCR. h, human; s, sense; as, antisense. GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.
Table 2: Primer pairs used for quantitative PCR. h, human; m, mouse; s, sense; as, antisense. TBP; TATA box binding protein.
Image 1Supplemental Fig. 1: (a) DHE structure. (b) Rhodamine-phalloidin structure. (c) 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide. (d) Glutathione.
Supplemental Fig. 2: Separate confocal images of RPE whole mounts from wild-type (prlr+/+, a) and PRL receptor-null (prlr−/−, b) mice showing PRL receptor (green) and F-actin (stained by phalloidin, red) immunofluorescence in the x-y plane.
Supplemental Fig. 3: Separate confocal images of ARPE-19 cells showing nucleus (blue) and PRL receptor (green) immunofluorescence in x-y axis (a) and z-axis projection (b). The step size was 0.36 μm.
Supplemental Fig. 4: Separate confocal images of RPE whole mounts from 5-month old wild-type (prlr+/+, a), 5-month old PRL receptor-null (prlr−/−, b), 14-month old prlr+/+ mice (c), and 14-month old prlr−/− mice (d) showing TUNEL (green), F-actin (stained by phalloidin, red), and DAPI (blue) immunofluorescence, in the x-y plane and z-axis projection. The step size was 0.5 μm (a) and 1.4 μm (b, c, and d).
Supplemental Fig. 5: (a) Western blot analysis of retinal anti-mouse PRL immunoreactive bands in prlr+/+ and prlr−/− mice. MWM, molecular weight markers. cPRL, cleaved PRL standard that corresponds the residual C-terminal fragment of PRL (7 kDa). (b) Corresponding evaluation of retinal PRL by densitometry normalized to beta-tubulin (n = 3, each a pool of six retinas). The polyclonal anti-mouse PRL antibody we used was a generous gift from Talamantes F. Of note, ~ 16 kDa bands correspond to N-terminal fragments of PRL known as vasoinhibins ( ).
Image 2

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Table 1: Primer pairs used for conventional PCR. h, human; s, sense; as, antisense. GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.
Table 2: Primer pairs used for quantitative PCR. h, human; m, mouse; s, sense; as, antisense. TBP; TATA box binding protein.
Image 1Supplemental Fig. 1: (a) DHE structure. (b) Rhodamine-phalloidin structure. (c) 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide. (d) Glutathione.
Supplemental Fig. 2: Separate confocal images of RPE whole mounts from wild-type (prlr+/+, a) and PRL receptor-null (prlr−/−, b) mice showing PRL receptor (green) and F-actin (stained by phalloidin, red) immunofluorescence in the x-y plane.
Supplemental Fig. 3: Separate confocal images of ARPE-19 cells showing nucleus (blue) and PRL receptor (green) immunofluorescence in x-y axis (a) and z-axis projection (b). The step size was 0.36 μm.
Supplemental Fig. 4: Separate confocal images of RPE whole mounts from 5-month old wild-type (prlr+/+, a), 5-month old PRL receptor-null (prlr−/−, b), 14-month old prlr+/+ mice (c), and 14-month old prlr−/− mice (d) showing TUNEL (green), F-actin (stained by phalloidin, red), and DAPI (blue) immunofluorescence, in the x-y plane and z-axis projection. The step size was 0.5 μm (a) and 1.4 μm (b, c, and d).
Supplemental Fig. 5: (a) Western blot analysis of retinal anti-mouse PRL immunoreactive bands in prlr+/+ and prlr−/− mice. MWM, molecular weight markers. cPRL, cleaved PRL standard that corresponds the residual C-terminal fragment of PRL (7 kDa). (b) Corresponding evaluation of retinal PRL by densitometry normalized to beta-tubulin (n = 3, each a pool of six retinas). The polyclonal anti-mouse PRL antibody we used was a generous gift from Talamantes F. Of note, ~ 16 kDa bands correspond to N-terminal fragments of PRL known as vasoinhibins ( ).
Image 2