Nat CommunNat Commun319nihpaNature communications2041-1723pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC4333735PMC4333735.143337354333735NIHMS6540732569250910.1038/ncomms7224NIHMS654073NIHPA6540731ArticleDendritic cells induce Th2-mediated airway inflammatory responses to house
dust mite via DNA-dependent protein kinase
MishraAmarjit BrownAlexandra L. YaoXianglan YangShutong ParkSung-Jun LiuChengyu DagurPradeep K. McCoyJ. Philip KeeranKaren J. NugentGayle Z. JeffriesKenneth R. QuXuan YuZu-Xi LevineStewart J. ChungJay H. 1Laboratory of Asthma and Lung Inflammation, Division of
Intramural Research, NHLBI, NIH.2Laboratory of Obesity and Aging Research, Division of Intramural
Research, NHLBI, NIH.3Transgenic Core Facility, Division of Intramural Research, NHLBI,
NIH.4Flow Cytometry Core Facility, Division of Intramural Research,
NHLBI, NIH.5Animal Surgery and Resources Core Facility, Division of
Intramural Research, NHLBI, NIH.6Pathology Core Facility, Division of Intramural Research, NHLBI,
NIH.Correspondence should be addressed to S.J.L.
(levines@nhlbi.nih.gov) or J.H.C.
(chungj@nhlbi.nih.gov)7These authors contributed equally to this work.
8These authors jointly supervised this work.
1822015201562495556224622410012015180820151808201511042026Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsDNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) mediates double stranded DNA break repair,
V(D)J recombination, and immunoglobulin class switch recombination, as well as innate
immune and pro-inflammatory responses. However, there is limited information regarding the
role of DNA-PK in adaptive immunity mediated by dendritic cells (DCs), which are the
primary antigen-presenting cells in allergic asthma. Here we show that house dust mite
induces DNA-PK phosphorylation, which is a marker of DNA-PK activation, in DCs via the
generation of intracellular reactive oxygen species. We also demonstrate that
pharmacological inhibition of DNA-PK, as well as the specific deletion of DNA-PK in DCs,
attenuates the induction of allergic sensitization and Th2 immunity via a mechanism that
involves the impaired presentation of mite antigens. Furthermore, pharmacological
inhibition of DNA-PK following antigen priming similarly reduces the manifestations of
mite-induced airway disease. Collectively, these findings suggest that DNA-PK may be a
potential target for treatment of allergic asthma.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## Introduction
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is a key enzyme involved in the recognition
and repair of double stranded DNA breaks (DSB) by a process termed nonhomologous end-joining
(NHEJ) whereby DNA ends are directly ligated ,
 , , . This represents an important mechanism of
cellular repair in response to DSB induced by ionizing radiation, as well as reactive oxygen
species, that prevents chromosomal translocations and genetic instability that can lead to
carcinogenesis or cellular death , . DNA-PK is comprised of a regulatory heterodimer
of Ku proteins (Ku70 and Ku80) and a 465 kDa catalytic subunit, DNA-PKcs, which is a member
of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinase (PIKK) family and functions as a
serine/threonine kinase.
DNA-PK also participates in additional processes that involve DSB repair, such as
V(D)J recombination and class switch recombination , . Mice with the
scid mutation affecting the Prkdc gene that encodes
DNA-PKcs are unable to generate functional immunoglobulin and T cell receptors and are
deficient in mature B and T lymphocytes , , , . The scid missense mutation
results in a premature stop codon that leads to diminished expression of the DNA-PKcs
protein and specifically impairs the differentiation of stem cells into mature lymphocytes,
whereas myeloid differentiation is not affected ,
 , . Similarly, mice with a targeted disruption of the Prkdc
gene, which encodes DNA-PKcs, have a phenotype of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)
and radiosensitivity .
Although its canonical function is to mediate DSB repair by NHEJ, DNA-PK has also
been shown to regulate innate immune responses and pro-inflammatory signaling
pathways , . For example, DNA-PK modulates host defense against viral infection by
acting as a pattern recognition receptor that binds cytoplasmic DNA . This activates an innate immune response
mediated by type I interferons via a pathway involving IRF-3 (interferon regulatory factor
3), TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase 1) and STING (stimulator of interferon genes). Interestingly,
vaccinia virus (VACV) has evolved a strategy to evade this mechanism . The VACV C16 protein directly binds the Ku
heterodimer, thereby blocking DNA-PK binding to DNA, which inhibits DNA sensing and innate
immunity to DNA viruses. The mechanism of killing of CD4+ T cells during human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infection has also recently been shown to involve DNA-PK
activation . Integration of the HIV-1
genome into the host chromosome induces a double stranded DNA damage response that activates
DNA-PK and phosphorylates p53 and histone H2AX, with resultant death of CD4+
cells. Interestingly, HIV-1-mediated CD4+ cell death could be inhibited by
pharmacological inhibitors of DNA-PK. Infection with Listeria monocytogenes
also causes DNA strand breaks that induce the phosphorylation and activation of DNA-PK, H2AX
and CDC25A. This activates a DNA damage/replication checkpoint that delays cell cycle
progression and thereby facilitates propagation of this intracellular pathogen . DNA-PK also participates in an endosomal
signaling pathway that induces a pro-inflammatory response in natural killer cells by
phosphorylating Akt on Ser473
 . The DNA-PK-mediated phosphorylation of
p50 NF-κB is similarly required for tumor necrosis factor-induced VCAM-1
expression . Lastly, DNA-PK mediates
free fatty acid-induced lipid accumulation in hepatocytes, which may contribute to the
pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis .
Since DNA-PK can regulate innate immunity and pro-inflammatory signaling pathways,
we hypothesized that it might also modulate adaptive Th2-mediated immune responses to house
dust mite (HDM) antigen. We also hypothesized that if DNA-PK were involved in the
pathogenesis of HDM-induced asthma, then pharmacological inhibitors of DNA-PK kinase
activity might be utilized as a novel treatment approach. We focused on HDM because it is a
clinically important aeroallergen that is a potent inducer of Th2-mediated immune responses
and a common cause of allergic asthma worldwide. To investigate the role of DNA-PK in
HDM-induced asthma, here we utilize genetic and pharmacological models, including the
development of a CD11c-specific DNA-PKcs knockout mouse. We show that HDM activates DNA-PK
in dendritic cells (DCs) via a ROS-dependent pathway. Furthermore, we show that DNA-PK is
required for both effective antigen presentation by DCs, as well as the induction of
HDM-induced Th2-mediated airway inflammation. This demonstrates a previously unidentified
link between the role of DNA-PK in DCs and the induction of allergic sensitization and Th2
immunity in HDM-induced asthma. Furthermore, it identifies DNA-PK as a novel therapeutic
target for the development of new treatments for asthmatic patients.

## Results

## House Dust Mite induces DNA-PK Phosphorylation in Dendritic Cells
First, we considered whether HDM could induce the generation of intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS) by human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs) as a
mechanism by which DNA-PK phosphorylation and activation are initiated. Stimulation of
human moDCs with HDM induced the production of intracellular ROS, which could be inhibited
by the anti-oxidant, NAC (N-acetylcysteine), the NADPH
oxidase/flavoprotein inhibitor, DPI (diphenyleneiodonium chloride), and the DNA-PK
inhibitor, NU7441 ( ) . We then assessed whether human moDCs
express DNA-PK and whether DNA-PK can be activated in response to HDM stimulation. Western
blots of human moDC proteins demonstrated that DNA-PKcs is expressed under basal
conditions and is activated in response to HDM stimulation, as evidenced by
auto-phosphorylation on Ser2056, which is a marker of DNA-PK activity ( ) . DNA-PK activity peaks at 3 and 6 hours and markedly diminishes by 24
hours. HDM-induced DNA-PK phosphorylation at Ser2056 at 6 hours was inhibited
by treatment with NU7441, as well as NAC and DPI . HDM stimulation also induced Akt phosphorylation on
Ser473 and Thr308 that was maximal at 6 and 24 hours. Levels of
p-Akt (Ser473) and p-Akt (Thr308) were similarly reduced by NU7441,
NAC and DPI. Collectively, these results demonstrate that HDM stimulates intracellular ROS
generation by human moDCs and that ROS are required for the HDM-induced phosphorylation of
DNA-PK, as well as Akt, which is downstream of DNA-PK signaling and has been reported to
be a regulator of DC function .
Experiments were next performed with bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs)
from Prkdcscid mice that have a spontaneous mutation in the
Prkdc gene. HDM-challenged BMDCs from wild type (WT), but not
Prkdcscid mice, had increases in intracellular ROS
generation ( ). Thus, in addition to being
activated by ROS, DNA-PK is required for HDM-induced ROS production by BMDCs. Next, BMDCs
from Prkdcscid mice were used to investigate the role of
DNA-PK in antigen-specific T cell proliferation and Th2 cytokine production. Co-culture
experiments of splenic CD4+ T cells from mice expressing the MHCII-restricted
DO11.10 T-cell receptor that recognizes the OVA 323–339 peptide showed that BMDCs
from Prkdcscid mice have a reduced ability to induce both T
cell proliferation and Th2 cytokine production as compared to BMDCs from WT mice following
ex vivo stimulation with the OVA 323–339 peptide ( ) . Similarly, BMDCs from Prkdcscid mice had
an impaired ability to induce Th2 cytokine production following ex vivo
stimulation with full-length ovalbumin when co-cultured with splenic T cells from
OVA-sensitized mice. Collectively, this shows that DNA-PK-deficient dendritic cells have a
primary defect in antigen presentation to T cells and are unable to mediate the
antigen-specific production of Th2 effector cytokines. Lastly, we show that both murine
BMDCs and human moDCs express the co-stimulatory molecules, CD40, CD80 and CD86 ( ). Furthermore, HDM stimulation increased
expression of CD86 by murine BMDCs and CD40 by human moDCs.

## Dendritic Cells from Prkdcscid mice Mediate Reduced Th2
Inflammation
Adoptive transfer experiments using HDM-pulsed CD11c+ BMDCs from WT
and Prkdcscid mice were next utilized to define the role of
dendritic cell DNA-PK in inducing Th2-mediated airway inflammatory responses to HDM ( ). Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from
HDM-challenged WT mice that had received the adoptive transfer of HDM-pulsed BMDCs from WT
mice (WT BMDCs) had significant increases in inflammatory cells as compared to
HDM-challenged WT mice that had received the adoptive transfer of HDM-pulsed BMDCs from
Prkdcscid mice (scid BMDCs) ( ). Similarly, HDM-challenged recipients of
adoptively transferred WT BMDCs that had been pulsed with HDM had an increase in
peri-bronchial inflammatory cell infiltrates on lung histology as compared to recipients
of HDM-pulsed scid BMDCs ( ). HDM re-stimulation of cultures of mediastinal lymph node (MLN) cells from
HDM-challenged mice showed a significant reduction in the production of the Th2 effector
cytokines, IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13, in recipients of scid BMDCs as compared
to WT BMDCs ( ). BALF levels of C-C
chemokines that recruit eosinophils and T cells to the lung, were also significantly
reduced in recipients of scid BMDCs as compared to WT BMDCs ( ). These include CCL24 (eotaxin-2),
which interacts with CCR3 to recruit eosinophils, CCL17 (TARC) and CCL22 (MDC), which
interacts with CCR4 on Th2 cells, and CCL5 (RANTES), which interacts with CCR5 that is
highly expressed on T cells in the lung ,
 . Lastly, serum levels of HDM-specific
IgE were significantly reduced in recipients of scid BMDCs as compared to
WT BMDCs, thereby demonstrating the reduced ability of scid BMDCs to
induce allergic sensitization ( ).
Collectively, these results demonstrate that DNA-PK-deficient dendritic cells are
defective in the initiation of HDM-mediated allergic sensitization and Th2-mediated airway
inflammatory responses.

## DNA-PK Inhibition Attenuates Dendritic Cell-mediated Th2 Inflammation
Experiments were next conducted to assess whether CD11c+ BMDCs that
had been treated ex vivo with the DNA-PK inhibitor, NU7441, have a
reduced ability to induce Th2-mediated allergic airway inflammation in response to HDM
( ). Recipients of adoptively transferred
HDM-pulsed WT DCs that had been treated with NU7441 had significant reductions in the
number of BALF inflammatory cells as compared to recipients of HDM-pulsed WT DCs that had
been treated with medium alone ( ).
Consistent with this, lung histology showed a reduction in peri-bronchial inflammatory
cell infiltrates in recipients of HDM-pulsed WT DCs that had been treated with NU7441,
which was associated with a reduction in mucous cell metaplasia ( ). HDM re-stimulation of ex vivo
cultures of MLN cells from recipients of NU7441-treated HDM-pulsed BMDCs had a reduced
ability to produce the Th2 cytokines, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 as compared to recipients of
HDM-pulsed WT DCs treated with medium alone ( ). BALF levels of the anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10, were significantly
higher in recipients of NU7441-treated HDM-pulsed WT DCs ( ), whereas BALF levels of chemokines (CCL5, CCL17, CCL22 and CCL24)
were significantly reduced ( ). Lastly, serum
levels of HDM-specific IgE were significantly reduced in recipients of NU7441-treated
HDM-pulsed WT DCs, indicating impaired allergic sensitization ( ). These results demonstrate that NU7441-mediated
pharmacological inhibition of DNA-PK in BMDCs impairs their ability to initiate
HDM-mediated allergic sensitization and Th2-mediated airway inflammatory responses.
If Akt is downstream of DNA-PK signaling in DCs, then treatment of adoptively
transferred DCs with GDC0068, a pharmacological inhibitor of Akt kinase activity, would be
predicted to have the same effect as treatment of BMDCs with NU7441 prior to adoptive
transfer. Consistent with this concept, WT recipient mice that received the adoptive
transfer of HDM-pulsed CD11c+ BMDCs that had been treated ex
vivo with GDC0068 demonstrated significant reductions in the BALF inflammatory
cells ( ) and mucous cell metaplasia ( ). In addition, recipients of GDC0068-treated
HDM-pulsed WT DCs had reductions in Th2 cytokine production by MLN cells that had been
re-stimulated ex vivo with HDM ( ), as well as an increase in BALF IL-10 levels, as compared to recipients of
HDM-pulsed WT DCs that had not been treated with GDC0068 ( ). Collectively, these results are consistent with the conclusion that
Akt is downstream of DNA-PK signaling in DCs.

## CD11c-specific DNA-PKcs Knockout Mice Have Impaired Th2
Inflammation
Next, we considered whether the specific deletion of DNA-PKcs in
CD11c+ dendritic cells would similarly impair the induction of allergic
sensitization and Th2 immune response to HDM. DNA-PKcsfl/fl
mice were created with loxP sites flanking exons 82 and 83 of the Prkdc
gene ( ). Exons 82 and 83, along with exon
81, comprise the kinase catalytic domain of DNA-PKcs and human cells with deletions of
these exons have both undetectable kinase activity and DNA-PKcs protein
expression . The insertion of the
LoxP sites in the floxed allele of the Prkdc gene was confirmed by
Southern blotting of genomic DNA from DNA-PKcsfl/+ mice ( ). DNA-PKcsfl/fl
mice were bred with CD11c-Cre mice to generate homozygous
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice in which DNA-PKcs expression
is specifically deleted in CD11c+ DCs, but not in other cells, such as airway
epithelial cells ( ). As shown in , DNA-PKcs mRNA levels were
15.5 fold higher in splenic DCs isolated from DNA-PKcsfl/fl as
compared to those from DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice. The
deletion of exons 82 and 83 of the Prkdc gene was further confirmed by
sequencing of genomic DNA from CD11c+ splenic DCs isolated from DNA-PKcs
fl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice ( ).
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice then received multiple
intranasal HDM challenges to assess the effect of the CD11c-specific deletion of DNA-PKcs
on HDM-induced airway inflammation and Th2 responses ( ). As shown in , the number of
BALF inflammatory cells recovered from HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice were significantly reduced as compared to those from
HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice. Similarly, lung
histopathology showed a reduction in the extent of peri-bronchial inflammatory cell
infiltrates in HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice as
compared to HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice ( ). Mucous cell metaplasia was also significantly
reduced in HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice as
compared to HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice ( ). HDM re-stimulation of MLNs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice showed significant
reductions in the Th2 cytokines, IL-5 and IL-13, whereas the reduction in IL-4 production
was not statistically significant ( ). There
was also no change in IFN-γ production by MLN cells following HDM re-stimulation.
BALF levels of C-C chemokines, CCL17, CCL22, and CCL24, were also significantly reduced in
HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice as compared to
HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice, whereas there was no
difference in levels of CCL5 ( ). Lastly,
there was a significant reduction in serum levels of HDM-specific IgE in HDM-challenged
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice ( ). Collectively, these results demonstrate that
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice have an impaired ability to
induce both allergic sensitization to HDM and Th2-mediated airway inflammatory
responses.
Experiments were next conducted to assess the mechanisms by which
DNA-PK-deficient CD11c+ DCs have a reduced capability to induce allergic
sensitization and Th2 immunity to HDM. First, we assessed whether the percentage of T and
B cells in naïve DNA-PKcsfl/fl and
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice were reduced as compared to
the wild type (WT) parental strain of C57BL/6 mice, which could be indicative of a defect
in V(D)J recombination with resultant altered lymphocyte development. As shown in , the percentage of CD3+ T
cells and CD19+ B cells were not significantly different in the lungs and
spleens of naïve WT, DNA-PKcsfl/fl, and
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice, except for an increase in
the percentage of splenic CD19+ B cells in DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice as compared to WT mice. This finding suggests that lymphocyte
development was not significantly impaired in DNA-PKcsfl/fl
and DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice. Second, we found that cell
surface expression of the co-stimulatory molecule, CD80, was significantly reduced on
CD11c+ DCs in the lungs ( ) and
MLNs ( ) of HDM-challenged
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice as compared to
HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice. Although there were
statistically significant differences in the expression of OX-40L, CD40 and CD86 by
CD11c+ DCs in the lung and MLNs, these differences appeared modest as
compared to the reduction in cell surface expression of CD80. In addition, as compared to
the murine BMDCs and human moDCs that were utilized for the experiments in , CD11c+ DCs from the lungs and MLNs
of DNA-PKcsfl/fl and DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice had a different pattern of expression of CD40, CD80 and CD86, as
well as lower cell surface levels of these co-stimulatory molecules.
Next, we focused on CD11b+ DCs, as these have been shown to be the
primary DC subset that mediates antigen presentation and Th2 immunity , , . We show that the percentage of
CD11c+ DCs that express CD11b were modestly reduced in the lungs ( ), but not the MLNs ( ) of DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice
as compared to DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice. Next, to assess the
functional significance of the reduction in numbers of CD11b+ DCs,
AF647-labeled HDM was administered to the lungs of DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre and DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice. As shown in , there was no difference in either
uptake of HDM antigen in the lung or subsequent migration to MLNs by
CD11c+/MHCII+/CD11b+ DCs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice as compared to
DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice. Lastly, since DNA-PK has been reported
to modulate the expression of toll-like receptors (TLR) in RAW264.7 macrophages by
interacting with the autoimmune regulator, Aire, we assessed whether TLR expression by
lung CD11b+ DCs was modified in DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice as a possible mechanism by which T cell priming might be
impaired . As shown in , there was no difference in the
percentage of lung CD11b+ DCs that expressed TLR4 or TLR5, or the mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI) of TLR4 and TLR5 expression by lung CD11b+ DCs, in
DNA-PKcsfl/fl as compared to
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice. Thus, modified expression
of TLR4 or TLR5 by lung CD11b+ DCs does not appear to mediate impaired T cell
priming to HDM in DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice. This is
consistent with prior reports which found that expression of TLR4 by structural cells,
such as airway epithelial cells, but not hematopoietic cells, such as DCs, mediates
priming of Th2 cells to HDM through the airway, whereas both hematopoietic and structural
cells are required for maximal TLR5-mediated allergic sensitization , .
We then assessed whether production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10 was
modified in DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice as a mechanism by
which HDM-associated inflammatory responses are decreased. As shown in , IL-10 was higher in BALF from HDM-challenged
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice as compared to
HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice. Furthermore, BMDCs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice secreted larger amounts of
IL-10 in response to HDM stimulation as compared to those from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice ( ). Lastly, IL-10 secretion by HDM-stimulated BMDCs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice was increased in response to GDC0068
and MK2206, pharmacological inhibitors of Akt, which is downstream of DNA-PK signaling
( ). Collectively, these results suggest
that HDM-induced IL-10 production by DCs is suppressed via a DNA-PKcs/Akt pathway. We also
assessed whether the number of
CD3+/CD4+/CD25+/Foxp3+ regulatory T cells
(Tregs) was modified in DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice. However, we found that
there was no difference in the percentage of Tregs in MLNs of HDM-challenged
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice as compared to
DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice ( ).

## DNA-PK-deficient CD11b+ DCs have Impaired Antigen Presentation
Since uptake of HDM antigen in the lung and trafficking to MLNs by
CD11b+ DCs from DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice
were not reduced, we next assessed whether CD11b+ DCs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre mice have an impairment in
antigen presentation that limits their ability to induce allergic sensitization and
Th2-mediated airway inflammation. CD11b+ DCs were isolated from MLNs of
DNA-PKcsfl/fl and DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice that had been challenged with HDM or saline and adoptively
transferred to WT mice that subsequently received intranasal HDM challenges to induce
airway inflammation ( ). As shown in , the number alveolar macrophages, eosinophils,
neutrophils and lymphocytes were significantly reduced in BALF from recipients of
CD11b+ DCs from DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre donor
mice as compared to DNA-PKcsfl/fl donor mice. Similarly, lung
histology showed a reduction in peri-bronchial inflammatory cell infiltrates and mucous
cell metaplasia in recipients of CD11b+ DCs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; Cd11c-Cre donor mice as compared to
DNA-PKcsfl/fl donor mice ( ). Serum levels of HDM-specific IgE were significantly reduced
in recipients of CD11b+ DCs from DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre donor mice, while ex vivo cultures of MLNs that had
been re-stimulated with HDM showed an impaired ability to produce IL-5 and IL-13 ( ). Collectively, these experiments
demonstrate that CD11b+ DCs from DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice have an impairment in antigen presentation and the subsequent
induction of allergic sensitization and Th2 immunity to HDM.

## Pharmacological Inhibition of DNA-PK Suppresses HDM-induced Airway Disease
Lastly, we assessed whether pharmacologic inhibition of DNA-PK by consumption of
chow containing NU7441 could attenuate HDM-induced airway disease in WT mice, which could
provide evidence to support the concept of utilizing DNA-PK inhibitors for the treatment
of asthmatic patients ( ). As shown in , mice that consumed chow containing
0.6% or 0.9% NU7441 had similar significant decreases in the number of
BALF inflammatory cells. Lung histopathology similarly revealed that mice fed NU7441 had
reductions in peri-bronchial inflammatory cell infiltrates ( ). In addition to the reductions in airway inflammation, NU7441 also
attenuated HDM-mediated increases in mucous cell metaplasia ( ) and airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) ( ). The reductions in airway inflammation and AHR were similar in mice
that received chow containing either 0.6% or 0.9% NU7441.
Additional experiments were performed to characterize further the effects of
NU7441 on indices of airway inflammation. As shown in , HDM re-stimulation of ex vivo MLN cultures from mice that
had been fed chow containing NU7441 showed significant reductions in the production of the
Th2 cytokines, IL-5 and IL-13, with or without ex vivo treatment with
NU7441. Similarly, the number of BALF CD4+ T cells were reduced in
HDM-challenged mice that were fed chow containing NU7441, as were the number of
IL-5+ CD4+ T cells, whereas the number of IL-13+
CD4+ T cells appeared to be decreased, but did not reach statistical
significance ( ). The number of
IL-17+ CD4+ T cells, however, was not reduced ( ). Mice that received NU7441 also had an
increase in BALF IL-10 levels ( ) and a
reduction in BALF CCL24 ( ). NU7441 also
attenuated allergic sensitization as indicated by reduced plasma levels of HDM-specific
IgE ( ). Collectively, these findings
demonstrate that oral administration of a pharmacological DNA-PK inhibitor can attenuate
allergen sensitization and Th2-mediated airway inflammation, as well as other cardinal
manifestations of experimental HDM-induced asthma, including mucous cell metaplasia and
AHR.
Lastly, experiments were performed to assess the effect of treatment with NU7441
after T cell priming had already occurred. As shown in , HDM-sensitized WT mice that consumed chow containing 0.9%
NU7441 concurrent with intranasal HDM challenges, but after allergic sensitization had
already occurred, demonstrated a significant reduction in the number of BALF inflammatory
cells ( ), as well as in the extent
of peri-bronchial inflammation on lung histology ( ). NU7441 (0.9%) treatment was also associated with reductions in
serum levels of HDM-specific IgE ( ),
mucous cell metaplasia ( ) and AHR
( ), whereas BALF IL-10 levels were
significantly increased ( ). This
demonstrates that oral administration of a pharmacological DNA-PK inhibitor only during
the challenge phase can similarly attenuate the manifestations of HDM-induced asthma.

## Discussion
DCs are the primary antigen presenting cells in the lung that induce allergic
sensitization and Th2 adaptive immune responses to inhaled allergens, such as HDM, which is
a common aeroallergen that causes asthma ,
 . DCs that reside in the airway take up
antigens for processing in the context of MHCII, followed by migration to MLNs where they
facilitate Th2 cell differentiation and production of key effector cytokines, such as IL-5
and IL-13. Consistent with this, transgenic mice that have been depleted of
CD11c+ DCs are not capable of mounting Th2 responses to HDM or HDM-induced
pulmonary eosinophilia and lymphocytosis, whereas the adoptive transfer of
CD11c+/MHCII+ cells is sufficient to induce Th2 immunity and
pulmonary eosinophilia and lymphocytosis . Limited and conflicting data, however, exists regarding the role of DNA-PK
in DC function , , . Prior studies
using splenic CD11c+ DCs and bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) from
DNA-PKcs−/− mice have found that DNA-PK was
not required for production of IFN-α and IL-12 in response to oligodeoxynucleotides
that contained unmethylated CpG motifs (CpG-ODN), which instead signaled via TLR9 and
MyD88 , . A recent publication, however, has shown that BMDCs from
DNA-PKcs−/− mice had reduced CpG-ODN-mediated
production of IL-6 and IL-12 .
Furthermore, CpG-ODN was shown to bind DNA-PKcs and induce its association with TRAF6.
Here, we investigated whether DNA-PK participates in DC-mediated induction of
allergic sensitization to HDM and Th2-mediated airway inflammation. First, we show that
DNA-PK is phosphorylated and activated in DCs in response to HDM stimulation by a mechanism
that is dependent upon the generation of intracellular ROS. This is consistent with prior
reports demonstrating that factors which activate DNA-PK are not restricted to DSB, but also
include ROS and hypoxia , , . We also show that
the DNA-PK inhibitor, NU7441, as well as ROS inhibitors, NAC and DPI, attenuate HDM-mediated
phosphorylation of Akt on Ser473 and Thr308. This is consistent with
the ability of DNA-PK to function as an upstream kinase that associates with and
phosphorylates Akt on Ser473, especially in the setting of DSB , .
This is also highly relevant to the induction of HDM-mediated allergic immune responses, as
Akt signaling has been reported to regulate the activation and antigen presenting capability
of DCs .
We also showed that HDM-stimulated BMDCs from
Prkdcscid mice were defective in ROS generation. DCs
endogenously generate ROS during antigen presentation and ROS functions as a second
messenger for MHCII-restricted antigen presentation with resultant activation of
CD4+ Th2 cells to produce effector cytokines , , , , . Therefore, we hypothesized that in the absence of DNA-PK, DCs
might have an impaired ability to induce Th2-mediated adaptive immune responses to HDM.
Here, we utilized several experimental models to demonstrate a key role for DNA-PK in the
induction of allergic sensitization and Th2 effector cytokine production by dendritic cells
in response to HDM. First, we showed that the adoptive transfer of HDM-pulsed
CD11c+ BMDCs from Prkdcscid mice or wild type
CD11c+ BMDCs that had been treated with the DNA-PK inhibitor, NU7441, had an
impaired ability to induce allergic sensitization, as indicated by a decrease in serum
levels of HDM-specific IgE, as well as a reduction in production of Th2 effector cytokines,
C-C chemokines and HDM-mediated airway inflammation. Next, a CD11c-conditional
DNA-PKcs-deficient mouse was created to characterize further the role of DNA-PK expression
by DCs in allergic sensitization. Similar to the adoptive transfer experiments,
HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice displayed a
phenotype of impaired allergic sensitization and attenuated induction of Th2 immune
responses to HDM that were associated with reductions in C-C chemokine production, airway
inflammation and mucous cell metaplasia. Furthermore, CD11c+ DCs in the lungs and
MLNs from HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice had
reduced cell surface expression of the co-stimulatory molecule, CD80, which mediates signal
2 signaling via binding CD28 on T cells .
CD11b+ DCs have been shown to be specialized for antigen presentation
in the context of MHCII and induce Th2 responses via the expression of IRF4 (interferon
regulatory factor-4) target genes, whereas CD11b− DCs, whose main
function is to mediate MHCI-restricted cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses via the expression
of IRF8 (IFN regulatory factor-8) and BATF3 (basic leucine zipper transcription factor,
ATF-like 3), can prime MHCII-restricted T cell responses only at high doses of
antigen . Consistent with this,
CD11b+ DCs play an important role in mediating Th2 effector responses to
HDM , . CD11b+ conventional DCs (cDCs) have been identified as the
key DC subset that mediates the presentation of HDM antigens and the induction of
Th2-mediated eosinophilic airway inflammation, whereas the primary role of CD11b+
monocyte-derived DCs is to generate pro-inflammatory cytokines, although they can also
induce Th2-mediated immunity to HDM .
Here, we show that CD11b+ DCs that had been isolated from the MLNs of
HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11cCre mice displayed
impaired antigen presentation upon adoptive transfer to wild type mice that was associated
with attenuated airway inflammation. This also demonstrates that the antigen presentation
defect was not a consequence of deletion of DNA-PKcs in other CD11c+ cells in the
lung, such as alveolar macrophages. Furthermore, we found that neither uptake of HDM antigen
nor subsequent migration to MLNs were impaired in CD11b+ DCs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice. Collectively, these results
demonstrate that DNA-PK-deficient CD11b+ DCs have a defect in antigen
presentation that results in attenuated allergic sensitization and Th2 immune responses to
HDM.
IL-10 is an important anti-inflammatory cytokine that attenuates the functions of
a variety of cell types that are relevant to the pathogenesis of asthma, including
DCs , . In particular, IL-10 suppresses several key DC functions, including
antigen presentation, cellular maturation, expression of MHCII and co-stimulatory molecules,
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and activation of Akt and NF-κB signaling
pathways , , . Furthermore, mature
pulmonary DCs can produce IL-10 in response to OVA challenge and thereby mediate
antigen-specific T cell unresponsiveness indicative of immunologic tolerance, while IL-10
gene delivery to the lung suppresses Th2 inflammation, as well as antigen presentation and
migration to MLNs by CD11c+ DCs ,
 . Myeloid DCs have also been shown to
produce IL-10 via TLR-dependent and TLR-independent pathways , , . Here we show that in addition to defective antigen
presentation by CD11b+ DCs, HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
CD11c-Cre mice had an increase in BALF levels of IL-10 and BMDCs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice secreted increased amounts of
IL-10 in response to HDM. IL-10 production by BDMCs from wild type mice was increased
following Akt inhibition, which is consistent with a ROS-activated pathway in HDM-stimulated
DCs that signals via DNA-PK and Akt to attenuate IL-10 production. Thus, increases in IL-10
production may also contribute to the reduced allergic sensitization and Th2-type
inflammation in HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
CD11cCre mice.
We also assessed whether pharmacological inhibition of DNA-PK might represent an
effective therapeutic approach to attenuate the manifestations of HDM-mediated allergic
asthma. NU7441 (8-diebenzothiopen-4-yl-2-morpholin-4-yl-chromen-4-one) is a highly potent
and selective, ATP-competitive inhibitor of DNA-PK (IC50 = 0.014 uM) that was
initially identified by screening of a chromenone library . NU7441 was developed as an anti-cancer agent based upon its
ability to potentiate cell death mediated by chemotherapy- and radiation therapy-induced
DSBs . Here, we show that
pharmacological inhibition of DNA-PK with NU7441 attenuated the induction of HDM-induced
allergic sensitization, as well as Th2 effector cytokine production, airway inflammation,
mucous cell metaplasia and AHR. Additionally, initiation of NU7441 treatment after T cell
priming had already occurred similarly reduced HDM-induced airway inflammation, mucous cell
metaplasia and AHR. Thus, we propose the concept of targeting DNA-PK with small molecule
pharmacological inhibitors might be developed as a novel treatment approach for patients
with allergic asthma. To avoid systemic effects, site-directed delivery of a DNA-PK
inhibitor directly to the lungs via inhalation would likely represent the preferred method
of administration.
To the best of our knowledge, our report is the first to describe a role for
DNA-PK in modulating dendritic cell function in the pathogenesis of Th2 immune responses to
HDM in experimental allergen-induced asthma. We propose that this is a novel and unexpected
function for DNA-PK in DCs, as the adoptive transfer of CD4+ T cells into
Prkdcscid mice has induced or enhanced disease in
experimental murine models of colitis, skin allograft rejection and
Pneumocystis pneumonia, which suggests that DC function in these settings
is sufficient to mediate disease , , .
Additional studies will therefore be required to elucidate the dichotomy in DC function
between experimental allergic asthma and other CD4+ T cell-mediated
disorders.
In summary, we have identified a novel function for DNA-PK in DCs where it is
required for effective antigen presentation and the subsequent induction of allergic
sensitization and Th2 immunity to HDM in the airway. We show that HDM induces
phosphorylation and activation of DNA-PK via a ROS-dependent pathway and that ROS production
by DCs is DNA-PK-dependent. Furthermore, we demonstrate that pharmacological inhibition of
DNA-PK with NU7441 attenuates the cardinal manifestations of experimental HDM-induced
asthma, including allergic sensitization, Th2-mediated airway inflammation, mucous cell
metaplasia and AHR. This identifies DNA-PK as a potential therapeutic target in asthma and
can serve as the basis for the future development of DNA-PK inhibitors as a new treatment
approach for patients with asthma.

## Methods

## Reagents
NU7441 was from Tocris Bioscience (Bristol, United Kingdom). DPI
(diphenyleneiodonium chloride) and NAC (N-acetylcysteine) were from
Calbiochem (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). House dust mite (Dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus) extract was purchased from Greer Laboratories, Lenoir, NC as a
freeze-dried preparation (Item #B82). The Akt inhibitors GDC0068 and MK2206 were
from Cellagen Technology (San Jose, CA) and Selleckchem (Houston, TX), respectively.
Quantikine ELISA kits for measurement of cytokines and chemokines were from R&D
Systems (Minneapolis, MN).

## Mice
BALB/c, C57BL/6, Prkdcscid
(CBySmn.CB17-Prkdcscid), DO11.10 TCR
(C.Cg-Tg(DO11.10)10Dlo), which express a transgenic MHC-II-restricted TCR that binds the
ovalbumin (OVA) peptide antigen, OVA 323–339 , and Cd11c-Cre (B6.Cg-Tg(Itgax-cre)1-1Reiz/J) mice
were purchased from The Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, Maine). 6 to 8 week old female
mice were utilized for experiments. Murine experimental protocols were approved by the
Animal Care and Use Committee of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda,
MD.
To generate the DNA-PKcsfl/fl mouse, a LoxP site was
inserted between exons 81 and 82 of a 3.6 kb Hind III - SacI fragment of the mouse
Prkdc gene in pBluescript II SK to give p1227 by using a Quikchange kit
from Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA) and oligo PKKpnLoxP2 (5′-
CCTCCCAAGTGCTGGGATTAGGTACCATAACTTCGTATAATGTATGCTATACGAAGTTATAAGGCGTGCACTACCACTGC-3′).
The insert resulting from the SacI digestion of p1227 was transferred into a SacI-digested
plasmid pBSK-H3 that contained a 7.5 kb HindIII fragment of mouse Prkdc
in pBluescript II SK, to generate plasmid p1228. A SalI - NotI fragment encoding
FRT-Neo-FRT-Loxp from plasmid pL451 (http://ncifrederick.cancer.gov/research/brb/productDataSheets/recombineering/plasmid.aspx#PL451)
was cloned between Prkdc exons 83 and 84 by PacI digestion of plasmid
p1228 . The final construct was
linearized by digestion with NotI for electroporation into the v6.5 mouse ES cell line (a
129 and C57BL/6J F1 hybrid ES cell line) . Electroporated ES cells were grown in culture media containing both
G418, for positive selection, and ganciclovir for negative selection. ES cell clones
resistant to G418 and ganciclovir were screened for targeted insertion by southern
blotting. ES cell clones with correct homologous recombination were injected into
blastocyst-stage embryos, which were then transferred to the uteri of surrogate mothers.
F0 generation mice born from the injected embryos are chimeras composed of genetic
contributions from both the modified ES cells and the recipient embryos. To obtain mouse
lines that carry the gene-targeted mutation, we bred the chimeras to transmit the ES cell
genetic component through the germ line. Once germ line transmission was established, mice
were back-crossed to C57BL/6J mice for at least 10 generations.
DNA-PKcsfl/fl mice were then bred with
CD11c-Cre mice to generate DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
CD11c-Cre mice that were homozygous at each allele. Both male and female
DNA-PKcsfl/fl and DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
CD11c-Cre mice that were 6 to 8 weeks old were utilized for experiments.

## Southern blotting
An exon 79 probe labeled with 32P by nick translation was used for
Southern blotting to identify a 10 kb band for the modified Prkdc allele
when genomic DNA was digested with EcoRI, while an exon 86 probe identified an 8.4 kb band
when genomic DNA was digested with BamHI.

## Genotyping and genomic sequencing
The following oligonucleotides, which flank the 5’ LoxP of the targeting
construct, were used as primers for PCR genotyping reactions; PKEx81f
(5′-CTGGAGCCTATGTGCTAATGTACAG-3′) and PKEx82r
(5′-CTGTTTCTGTACGGTTAGCTCGGCTG-3′). Genomic DNA was isolated from flow
sorted cells using a DNAeasy kit (Qiagen) and PCR was performed using HotStar Taq
(Qiagen). Amplification products were separated on 2% agarose gels that were
stained with ethidium bromide to visualize a 646 bp band.
Genomic DNA from flow sorted cells was amplified by PCR using the following
primers: NotpKEX81f (5′-GGGCGGCCGCCTGGAGCCTATGTGCTAATGTACAG-3′) and
NotminusLoxPr (5′- GGGCGGCCGCGTGTCAGGTTTCATAACAATGCC-3′). Overlapping DNA
sequences were obtained by PCR using the following primer pairs: PKseq30f (5′-
GTTCTCTTGAGAGCTCTGGTCCG-3′) and PK Ex84seqr (5′-
GGCATCAACTCAGGGACTGGAAG-3′), as well as NotpKEX81f and pKseq30r (5′-
CGGACCAGAGCTCTCAAGAGAAC-3′). The amplified DNA was cloned and sequenced.

## qRT-PCR
RNA was isolated from the same flow sorted cells using trizol reagent (Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and cDNA was generated using a High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA
kit (Applied Biosystems). The cDNA was pre-amplified by PCR using oligos PKEx81f and
PKEx83r (5′-CTGAGTAGCTGATCCAAACGC-3′) and HotStar Taq. qRT-PCR was
performed in triplicate for each sample using a Taqman gene expression assay
(Mm01342966_g1, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) that spans the junction between exons
82 and 83 of mouse DNA-PKcs and was normalized to 18S RNA. The assay was
repeated three times.

## Derivation of Dendritic cells from Monocytes and Bone Marrow Cells
Elutriated human monocytes, which had been obtained from normal volunteers who
had provided informed consent to participate in an institutional review board-approved
protocol (01-CC-0168), were provided by the Department of Transfusion Medicine, NIH
Clinical Center. Monocytes were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS,
L-glutamine (2 mM), penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 µg/ml)
(Gibco®/Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY), human recombinant GM-CSF (150 ng/ml)
and IL-4 (25 ng/ml) (BioLegend, San Diego, CA) in 10 cm petri dishes (BD Biosciences, San
Jose, CA) for 7 days prior to experimentation to induce the differentiation of
monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs) . CD11c+/HLA-DR+/CD14− human
moDCs were analyzed by flow cytometry using the following antibodies, CD11c-APC,
HLA-DR-PerCP/Cy5.5, CD14-Alexa Fluor® 488, CD40- Alexa Fluor® 647,
CD80-Brilliant Violet 605™, and CD86-PE, all from Biolegend (San Diego, CA). Cell
viability was assessed using Fixable Viability Dye eFluor® 450 (eBioscience, San
Diego, CA).
Bone marrow cells were isolated from the leg bones of euthanized wild type and
Prkdcscid mice and cultured at a density of 2 ×
106 cells/ml in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% heat-inactivated FCS,
penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 µg/ml), L-glutamine (2 mM),
2-mercaptoethanol (50 µM), and recombinant mouse GM-CSF (20 ng/ml). Cultures were
supplemented with an equal volume of medium on day 3 and 50% of the medium was
replaced on day 6. Non-adherent cells were collected on day 8 and viable CD11c+
bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) were sorted by flow cytometry using a
CD11c-APC-Cy7 antibody from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA). BMDCs were analyzed by flow
cytometry using the following antibodies, CD11c-APC-eFluor 780, MHCII-PE-Cy7, CD40-APC,
CD80-Cy5, CD86-eFluor 605 NC and Fixable Viability Dye eFluor® 450, all from
eBioscience.

## Western Blot Analysis
Human moDCs were lysed in RIPA buffer and 100 µg of protein that had
been separated by SDS-PAGE using 4 – 20% Tris-Glycine gels (Lonza,
Walkersville, MD) was transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare Life
Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA). Membranes were reacted with antibodies (1:1000 dilution)
directed against phospho-DNA-PKcs (Ser2056) (Abcam, Cambridge, MA); DNA-PKcs (Thermo
Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA); phospho-Akt (Ser473), phospho-Akt (Thr308), Akt (Cell
Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA); and β-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA). Blots were stripped using Restore Western Blot Stripping Buffer (Thermo
Scientific).

## Measurement of Intracellular Reactive Oxygen Species by Flow Cytometry
Cultures of human moDCs and BMDCs from WT C57BL6 and
PrkdcSCID mice were incubated with 2 µM of the
redox-sensitive probe, CM-H2DCFDA,
(5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate, acetyl
ester) (Molecular Probes, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) for 30 min at 37°C.
Oxidation of the CM-H2DCFDA probe by reactive oxygen species (ROS) produces a
stable fluorescent adduct that was detected by an increase of fluorescence in the
fluorescein (FITC) channel. Levels of intracellular ROS generated in response to treatment
with HDM (100 µg/ml) for 1 h were quantified by subtracting the background mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI) of the non-fluorescent sample (negative control) from the
measured MFI values of fluorescent samples in flow cytometry analysis.

## OVA-induced T Cell Proliferation and Th2 Cytokine Production
BMDCs from WT BALB/c and Prkdcscid mice were pulsed
overnight with 1 µg/ml of OVA 323–339 peptide (AnaSpec, Fremont, CA) or
PBS as a control and viable CD11c+ cells were isolated by flow sorting using an
anti-mouse CD11c-APC-Cy7 antibody (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Naïve
CD4+ T cells were purified from the spleens of DO11.10 TCR mice by flow
sorting using an anti-mouse CD4-eFluor® 650NC antibody (eBioscience, San Diego,
CA) and labeled with 5 µM CFSE-SE (carboxyfluoroscein diacetate, succinimidyl
ester) (Cayman Chemical, MI) for 30 mins. 1 × 105 OVA peptide-specific
CD4+ T cells were co-cultured with 2 × 104
CD11c+ BMDCs in 96-well plates for 4 days and T cell proliferation was
quantified by flow cytometry using the CSFE dye dilution method. The
“Proliferation Ratio” is the MFI of CSFE-SE from OVA 323–339
peptide-pulsed CD11c+ BMDCs divided by the MFI of CSFE-SE from PBS-pulsed
CD11c+ BMDCs. The quantity of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 released into the culture
medium after 4 days was measured by ELISA.
For experiments assessing priming with full-length OVA, female BALB/c mice (6
– 8 weeks old) received intraperitoneal injections of ovalbumin (OVA; Sigma
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) emulsified in 0.2 ml of sterile PBS containing 2 mg of aluminum
hydroxide (Sigma Aldrich) on days 0 and 7. 105 splenic CD4+ T cells
were purified by flow sorting on day 10, co-cultured with BMDCs from WT and
Prkdcscid mice at a 5:1 ratio in medium containing
full-length OVA (1 µg/ml) for 4 days in 96-well plates and the quantity of
cytokines released into the culture medium was measured by ELISA.

## House Dust Mite Sensitization and Challenge Models
(1) Adoptive Transfer of CD11c+ Bone Marrow-derived Dendritic
Cells from Prkdcscid mice.CD11c+ bone
marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) that had been isolated from wild type and
Prkdcscid mice by flow cytometry were pulsed with HDM (100
µg/ml) or PBS for 16 h. 5 × 104 viable CD11c+ BMDCs
were adoptively transferred in 20 ul of PBS via intranasal administration on day 0 to
recipient WT C57BL/6 mice. Recipient mice received daily intranasal HDM challenges (25
µg) on days 11 through 13 and endpoints were analyzed on day 15. The HDM extracts
contained between 29.1 and 50 endotoxin units/mg of HDM protein, which resulted in 73 to
125 pg of LPS being administered with each 25 µg dose of HDM. (2) Adoptive
Transfer of CD11c+ Bone Marrow-derived Dendritic Cells Treated with NU7441 or
GDC0068. CD11c+ bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) that had been isolated
from wild type BALB/c mice by flow cytometry were pulsed with HDM (100 µg/ml) in
the presence or absence of NU7441 (0.5 µM), GDC0068 (1 µM) or PBS for 16
h. 5 × 104 viable CD11c+ BMDCs were adoptively transferred
in 20 ul of PBS via intranasal administration on day 0 to recipient WT BALB/c mice.
Recipient mice received daily intranasal HDM challenges (25 µg) on days 11 through
13 and endpoints were analyzed on day 15. (3) Intranasal Sensitization and Challenge
of
DNA-PKcsfl/fl
and
DNA-PKcsfl/flCD11cCre
mice. DNA-PKcsfl/fl and
DNA-PKcsfl/flCD11cCre mice were sensitized and
challenged via daily intranasal administration of 25 µg of HDM or PBS, both in a
volume of 10 µl, five days a week, for 6 weeks. (4) Adoptive Transfer of
CD11b+ Dendritic Cells Isolated from Mediastinal Lymph Nodes of HDM-pulsed
DNA-PKcsfl/fl
and DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice. DCs from
DNA-PKcsfl/fl and
DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice were loaded in vivo with HDM
allergen by intranasal instillation of HDM extract (100 µg), or saline as a
control, using a modification of a previously described protocol . After 4 days, mice were sacrificed, mediastinal lymph nodes
were removed and
CD11c+/CD11b+/SiglecF−/MHCII+ DCs
were isolated from by flow cytometry using a FACS-ARIA II flow sorter (BD Biosciences, San
Jose, CA) and the following antibodies, CD11c-APC-Cy7 and Siglec-F Alexa Fluor 647, both
from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA), CD11b–PerCP-Cy5.5 (eBioscience, San Diego, CA)
and MHCII-PE-Cy7 from Biolegend (San Diego, CA). 2.5 × 104
CD11c+/CD11b+/SiglecF−/MHCII+ DCs
were adoptively transferred to wild type C57BL/6 recipient mice by intranasal
administration in a volume of 20 ul. All recipient mice received daily intranasal HDM
challenges (25 µg) on days 9 through 14 and endpoints were analyzed on day 15.
(5) Oral Administration of NU7441. Wild type BALB/c were sensitized and
challenged by daily intranasal administration of HDM (25 ug) or PBS, both in a volume of
10 µl, five days a week for four weeks. Mice were fed chow that contained
0%, 0.6% or 0.9% NU7441 (TestDiet, St. Louis, MO) throughout the
four week study period. For experiments assessing the effect of NU7441 administration only
during the HDM challenge phase, WT BALB/c mice were sensitized by intraperitoneal
injection of HDM (100 µg) emulsified in 200 µl of PBS containing 3 mg of
aluminum hydroxide (Sigma-Aldrich) on days 0 and 4. Mice were challenged by intranasal
administration of HDM (100 µg) in a volume of 40 µl on days 8, 10 and 12
and end-points were analyzed on day 14. Mice were fed chow that contained 0.9%
NU7441 starting day 8, coincident with the start of the challenge phase of the protocol.
Control mice were both sensitized and challenged with saline and were fed regular
chow.

## Analysis of Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid (BALF) and Lung Histopathology
Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed three times with 0.5 ml of PBS. Red blood
cells were lysed with ACK buffer for 2 min at 4° C and cells were re-suspended in
RPMI-1640 medium with 10% FBS. BALF cell counts were performed using a
hemocytometer and differential cell counts were performed on Diff-Quik-stained cytospin
slides (Siemens, Deerfield, Illinois). For histological analysis, lungs were inflated with
10% formalin to a pressure of 25 cm H20, fixed in 10% formalin
for 24 h, dehydrated through gradient ethanol, embedded in paraffin, sagittal sections cut
to a thickness of 5 µm and stained with hematoxylin and eosin or periodic acid
Schiff (PAS). Quantification of mucous cell metaplasia was performed by analyzing all the
airways present (large (conducting), medium (central), and small (distal)) within each
representative lung section. The number of airways that contained PAS-positive cells was
counted and mucous cell metaplasia is presented as the percentage of airways with
PAS-positive cells.

## HDM-specific IgE
Plates were coated overnight with 0.01% HDM in PBS and blocked with
1% BSA in PBS prior to addition of serum samples that had been diluted 1:10 in
blocking buffer and standards for 1h. Plates were washed 6x with PBS containing
0.05% Tween-20 prior to incubation with biotinylated anti-mouse IgE (Pharmingen,
San Jose, CA) at a concentration of 2 µg/ml for 1 hr. Plates were washed an
additional six times, streptavidin-HRP (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) was added
for 30 min and the amount of bound HDM-specific antibody was determined using TMB
substrate.

## Analysis of Cytokine Production by ex vivo Cultures of Mediastinal
Lymph Node Cells Following ex vivo Re-stimulation with HDM
Single cell suspensions from mediastinal lymph nodes were cultured at a density
0.2 × 106 cells/ml in round-bottom 96-well plates and pulsed with HDM
(100 µg/ml) for 72 hours at 37°C in RPMI medium containing 10 %
FBS. In selected experiments, cells were also treated with NU7441 (0.5 µM).

## Flow Cytometry
For genotyping of DNA-PKcsfl/fl and
DNA-PKcsfl/fl; CD11c-Cre mice,
CD11c+/MHCII+/SiglecF− DCs were isolated from
spleens by flow sorting using a FACS-ARIA II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA)
and the following antibodies, CD11c-APC-Cy7, MHCII-PE-Cy7 and SiglecF-AF647, all from BD
Biosciences (San Jose, CA). Lung cells were isolated by enzymatic digestion using liberase
(Roche, Indianapolis, IN), 100 µg/ml, and DNase I (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO),
0.2 mg/ml, in a volume of 1 to 2 ml per lung at 37 °C for 25 mins with agitation.
Cells from digested lungs were incubated with anti-CD16/CD32 antibodies (clone 2.4G2)
(Pharmingen/BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) to block Fcγ III/II receptors before
surface staining. Lung alveolar type II epithelial cells were isolated as
CD45−/CD11c−/EpCAM+ cells using the
following antibodies, CD11c-APC-Cy7 and EpCAM-PE from BD Biosciences and CD45R-650NC, from
eBioscience . CD3+ T
cells and CD19+ B cells present in the lungs and spleens of WT C57BL/6,
DNA-PKcsfl/fl and
DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice, were analyzed using CD3-APC and CD19-APC-Cy7, both from
Biolegend, while the Fixable Viability Dye eFluor® 450 was from eBioscience.
CD11c+/MHChi/SSClo DCs present in lungs and mediastinal
lymph nodes of HDM-challenged DNA-PKcsfl/fl and
DNA-PKcsfl/fl;
Cd11c-Cre mice were analyzed using the following anti-mouse antibodies,
CD252 (OX40L)-PE, CD40-APC, CD80-PE-Cy5 and CD86 eFluor® 605NC, all from
eBioscience (San Diego, CA). CD11b+ DCs were identified using a
CD11b–PerCPCy5.5 antibody (eBioscience), while TLR4 and TLR5 expression on
CD11c+/MHCIIhi/SSClo/CD11b+ DCs were
analyzed using TLR4-APC from Biolegend and TLR5-PE antibodies from Novus Biologics
(Littleton, CO). Tregs were analyzed using CD3-APC, CD4-eFluor® 650NC, and
CD25-PE-Cy7, all from eBiosciences. For quantification of intracellular Foxp3, cells were
fixed and permeabilized with Foxp3 staining buffer and reacted with a Foxp3-PE antibody,
both from eBioscience. All antibodies were utilized at a concentration of 0.5 – 1
µg/ml. Data were acquired on a LSRII (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) equipped with
407, 488, 532, and 633 LASER lines using DIVA 6.1.2 software and analyzed with the Flow Jo
software version 9.6.1 (Treestar, San Carlos, CA). Cellular debris was excluded using a
forward light scatter/side scatter plot.
For analysis of intracellular cytokines, 1 × 106 BAL cells/ml
were suspended in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS, L-glutamine (2 mM),
penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 µg/ml), cultured in 24-well
flat-bottom plates and stimulated with PMA (50 ng/ml), ionomycin (500 ng/ml) and brefeldin
A (3 µg/ml) (eBiosciences) for 4 h at 37°C. Cells were washed with PBS,
re-suspended in Flow Cytometry Staining Buffer (eBiosciences) containing 10% mouse
serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch, Inc., West Grove, PA) and reacted with 5 µg/ml of
rat anti-mouse CD3-APC-Cy7 and CD4-eFluor® 650NC for 30 mins, followed by two
additional washes. Cells were treated with DNase I (60 µg/ml) for 15 mins at
37°C, washed and re-suspended in 300 µl of permeabilization buffer
containing 1% anti-mouse CD16/CD32 for 20 mins. Cells were then reacted with rat
anti-mouse IL-5-PE, IL-13-APC, and IL-17-PE-Cy7 (eBiosciences) for 45 min at 4° C.
Cells were washed twice with permeabilization buffer, re-suspended in PBS containing
1% paraformaldehyde and viable CD3+/CD4+ T cells that
expressed IL-5, IL-13 or IL-17 were quantified using the LSR-II using FMO as controls by
Flowjo analysis software.

## Analysis of Dendritic Cell Migration to Mediastinal Lymph Nodes
50 µg of HDM that had been labeled with the Alexa Fluor® 647
(AF647) Protein Labeling Kit (Molecular Probes, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) was
administered in 80 ul of PBS by i.t. instillation to
DNA-PKcsfl/fl and
DNA-PKcsfl/flCD11cCre mice . Lungs and mediastinal lymph nodes were
harvested after 72 hours and the number of
CD11c+/MHCIIhi/SSClo/CD11b+/HDM+
DCs were quantified by flow cytometry.

## Airway Hyperresponsiveness
Following cannulation of the trachea with a 19-gauge beveled metal catheter,
airway resistance to increasing concentrations of methacholine (0 – 10 mg/ml) was
directly measured in mechanically ventilated mice using an Elan RC Fine Pointe system
(Buxco, Wilmington, NC) and average values are presented as cm H2O/ml/s.

## Statistics
Data were analyzed using Graph Pad Prism version 5.0a and are presented as mean
± SEM. A one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s or Sidak’s multiple
comparison test, a Mann Whitney test or an unpaired t test were used for
the analyses. A P value < 0.05 was considered significant.

## Supplementary Material
1

## Acknowledgements
Funding: Division of Intramural Research, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute.
We thank Dalton Saunders for his assistance with mouse management. The authors
also thank Dr. Martha Vaughan and Dr. Joel Moss for their helpful discussions.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author Contributions
AM and ALB together with XY, SY, SJP, PKD, KJK, GZN, KRJ and XQ performed the
experiments; ALB, SY, CL and JHC generated the DNA-PKcsfl/fl
mice; AM, ALB, PKD, JPM, ZXY, SJL and JHC analyzed the data; AM, ALB, PKD, JPM, SJL and
JHC wrote the manuscript.