102genoresGenome ResearchGenome ResCold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressPMC4448682444868244486822588332210.1101/gr.184390.114Antagonistic regulation of mRNA expression and splicing by CELF and MBNL proteins
WangEric T WardAmanda J CheroneJennifer M GiudiceJimena WangThomas T TreacyDaniel J LambertNicole J FreesePeter SaxenaTanvi CooperThomas A BurgeChristopher B 1Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA;2Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA;3Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA;4Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA;5Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USAPresent address: 6Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
✉Corresponding authors: et_wang@mit.edu, cburge@mit.edu
62015256858858–871862015© 2015 Wang et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressThis article, published in Genome Research, is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution 4.0 International), as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

## Abstract
RNA binding proteins of the conserved CUGBP1, Elav-like factor (CELF) family contribute to heart and skeletal muscle development and are implicated in myotonic dystrophy (DM). To understand their genome-wide functions, we analyzed the transcriptome dynamics following induction of CELF1 or CELF2 in adult mouse heart and of CELF1 in muscle by RNA-seq, complemented by crosslinking/immunoprecipitation-sequencing (CLIP-seq) analysis of mouse cells and tissues to distinguish direct from indirect regulatory targets. We identified hundreds of mRNAs bound in their 3′ UTRs by both CELF1 and the developmentally induced MBNL1 protein, a threefold greater overlap in target messages than expected, including messages involved in development and cell differentiation. The extent of 3′ UTR binding by CELF1 and MBNL1 predicted the degree of mRNA repression or stabilization, respectively, following CELF1 induction. However, CELF1's RNA binding specificity in vitro was not detectably altered by coincubation with recombinant MBNL1. These findings support a model in which CELF and MBNL proteins bind independently to mRNAs but functionally compete to specify down-regulation or localization/stabilization, respectively, of hundreds of mRNA targets. Expression of many alternative 3′ UTR isoforms was altered following CELF1 induction, with 3′ UTR binding associated with down-regulation of isoforms and genes. The splicing of hundreds of alternative exons was oppositely regulated by these proteins, confirming an additional layer of regulatory antagonism previously observed in a handful of cases. The regulatory relationships between CELFs and MBNLs in control of both mRNA abundance and splicing appear to have evolved to enhance developmental transitions in major classes of heart and muscle genes.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2014 Sep 14; Accepted 2015 Apr 2.

CELF RNA binding proteins (RBPs) play roles in early embryonic development, heart, and skeletal muscle functions. They are also thought to contribute to DM pathogenesis ( ) and have been suggested to contribute to other diseases ( ). The six family members present in mammals can be divided into two subfamilies: CELF1-2, which are expressed most highly in heart, skeletal muscle, and brain, and CELF3-6, which exhibit more restricted expression ( ). The CELF proteins contain two N-terminal RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) and one C-terminal RRM, with which they bind GU-rich RNAs, and a linker region termed the “divergent domain” that separates RRM2 and RRM3 and is involved in the regulation of alternative pre-mRNA splicing and mRNA decay ( ; ).
During normal development, CELF1 and CELF2 proteins are highly expressed in early embryonic stages and are then down-regulated more than 10-fold in skeletal muscle ( ) and the heart ( ) during post-natal development, remaining at low levels in adult tissues. This developmental down-regulation occurs through multiple mechanisms, including repression by microRNAs (miRNAs) and reductions in protein phosphorylation, which destabilizes the protein ( , ). However, in DM type 1 (DM1), CELF1 protein levels increase in skeletal muscle and heart ( ) as the protein is stabilized by PKC-mediated phosphorylation ( ).
The combination of increased CELF levels and MBNL sequestration by CUG repeat RNA is thought to be responsible for much of DM pathology by reversing the developmental changes in both proteins toward embryonic levels, shifting splicing of regulatory targets toward fetal isoforms ( ; ; ; ). Expression of CELF1 in adult mice recapitulates a subset of the misregulated splicing events observed in DM1 skeletal muscle and heart ( , ; ). Of 44 developmentally regulated alternative splicing events in heart development that were investigated, 24 were found to revert toward embryonic splicing levels in response to inducible expression of CELF1 in the adult heart or in mice lacking Mbnl1 ( ). A long-standing question has been whether CELF and MBNL splicing factors share regulatory targets and whether they synergize or antagonize. The half-dozen events known to be regulated by both CELF and MBNL proteins, including H2afy exon 6 and Mbnl2 exon 8, are regulated antagonistically ( ; ; ). However, in a study analyzing CELF motifs present near Mbnl-responsive alternative exons, evidence for widespread antagonistic regulation was not observed ( ).
CELF proteins are present in both cytoplasm and nucleus and play roles in deadenylation, RNA stability, and translation, as well as splicing ( ; ; ). Tethering CELF1 to an mRNA is sufficient for destabilization of the mRNA ( ), and addition of GU-rich sequences to an RNA confers destabilization following CELF1 overexpression ( ). Human CELF1 is 88% identical to the Xenopus homolog embryo deadenylation element binding protein (EDEN-BP) and can functionally replace it, binding to the EDEN element to control poly(A) tail length and aiding in rapid deadenylation of maternal mRNAs after fertilization ( ). CELF1 interacts with poly(A)-specific ribonuclease (PARN) in HeLa cell extracts to promote deadenylation of FOS and TNF transcripts ( ). Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of CELF1 in HeLa cells and myoblasts led to the stabilization of a set of normally rapidly degraded transcripts bound by CELF at GU-rich elements (GREs) and GU-repeats ( ; ; ; ). It is possible that abnormal up-regulation of CELF proteins in adult tissues in DM1 could impact the stability of many transcripts and contribute to DM pathology.
To investigate the functional significance of the post-natal down-regulation of CELF in heart and skeletal muscle tissues, we inducibly expressed CELF1 in adult mouse heart or muscle or CELF2 in adult heart and performed a time-series RNA-seq analysis following induction, complemented by high-throughput biochemical assays and comparisons to available data for MBNL1. Our observations lead to a model in which CELF and MBNL proteins compete to specify different mRNA fates so as to change the expression and localization of hundreds of mRNAs during development.

## Results

## Identification of hundreds of CELF-responsive exons
We performed strand-specific paired-end RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of poly(A)+ RNA from skeletal muscle or heart of mice in which CELF1 was induced, or heart of mice in which CELF2 was induced at several time points post-induction, and from control mice, in biological triplicate. The CELF1 mice have been described previously ( ; ). The CELF2 mouse model was newly developed here and is described in Methods. All mice used are summarized in Supplemental Table S1. Human CELF1 or CELF2 transgenes were induced in mice by administration of doxycycline, in separate mouse lines for each tissue/protein pair, and reached levels between five- and 10-fold above endogenous levels (Supplemental Fig. S1A,B). The level of CELF1 mRNA increased strongly before declining at the end of the time course, likely as a secondary effect of heart pathology on the Myh1 promoter that drives rtTA ( ). However, CELF1 protein levels consistently increased in these mice at least eightfold in skeletal muscle ( ) and approximately fourfold in heart and remained high through at least day 7 ( ). Heart pathology was not observed in the CELF2 mouse, and mRNA and protein levels increased throughout the time course (Supplemental Fig. S1C,F). RNA was isolated from three Tet-inducible mice each at 12, 24, and 72 h and 7 d following induction and from three control mice lacking Tet-inducible CELF1 or CELF2 transgenes, treated with doxycycline for 72 h. The MISO software for statistical inference of splicing changes using RNA-seq data ( ) was used to estimate a percentage spliced in (PSI, or Ψ) value for each cassette (skipped) exon, which estimates the fraction of a gene's messages that include the exon. We also calculated Ψ values for alternative 5′ and 3′ splice sites and retained introns. For each comparison of Ψ between samples, we calculated a Bayes factor (BF) representing the ratio of the likelihood of the hypothesis that Ψ values differ from the null hypothesis of no change in Ψ, and we used BFs to identify differentially regulated exons.
We identified thousands of exons whose Ψ values changed between time points at a BF cutoff of five, a value supported by previous studies of RBPs ( ). For example, exon 3 in Tmed2 had a Ψ of 79% in the control heart but decreased to 13% after CELF1 induction for 7 d ( A). To identify splicing events that change monotonically over time, we developed a permutation-based method that could be applied to time course data. We ordered samples chronologically, and for each event compared all pairs of samples from different time points, tallying the number of comparisons representing a significant increase or significant decrease in Ψ (at BF > 5). We calculated a quantity called δ, the number of significant positive ΔΨ values (increases over time) minus the number of significant negative ΔΨ values (Supplemental Fig. S2A). To assess statistical significance, we recalculated δ after randomly permuting the sample labels. Repeating this process 100 times, we generated a null distribution and derived a “monotonicity Z-score” (MZ) defined as MZ = (δ − μ)/σ, where μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the null distribution of δ values, respectively. Large positive or negative MZ values indicate consistent increase or decrease, respectively, in the inclusion of an alternative exon over the time course. (MZ scores and Ψ values of alternative exons for all experiments are listed in Supplemental Table S2.) We observed 627 and 825 exons responsive to CELF1 induction at a MZ score of 1.8 in heart and skeletal muscle, respectively.
 

## About 30% of splicing changes in heart development respond to CELF1 induction
We next sought to understand the functions of CELF proteins in different tissues and developmental stages. By comparing ΔΨ values of monotonically changing (high MZ) skipped exons between CELF1-induced heart and CELF1-induced skeletal muscle, we observed a high correlation (RSpearman = 0.64), suggesting that the functions and regulatory targets of CELF1 in these tissues are quite similar ( B). To ask about functions of different CELF family members, we compared splicing changes in the heart following induction of CELF1 or CELF2. This comparison yielded a moderate positive correlation (RSp = 0.47), suggesting similar but not necessarily identical splicing functions ( C).
To explore connections to the developmental roles of CELF proteins, we compared splicing in the CELF1 heart to changes that occur during normal heart development. Developmental changes were analyzed by use of an RNA-seq time series ( ), including embryonic day 17 (E17), post-natal (PN) day 1, PN 10, PN 28, and adult, during which CELF1 protein levels fall by more than 10-fold ( ). In all, 234 alternatively skipped exons changed monotonically in heart development and/or following CELF1 induction. Splicing of 198 (85%) of these exons changed in the opposite direction following CELF1 induction from that during heart development, with a fairly strong negative correlation (RSp = −0.59, D). Thus, CELF1 induction triggers widespread reversal of heart developmental splicing and suggests that normal reductions in CELF activity during heart development may contribute to a substantial portion—perhaps 30% (Supplemental Fig. S2B)—of the splicing changes that occur during normal heart development ( ; ).

## More than 200 exons are regulated antagonistically by CELF and MBNL proteins
Six mouse exons ( ) and at least one human exon ( ) are known to be regulated antagonistically by CELF1 and MBNL1. Confirming and extending this trend, we identified dozens of additional exons regulated by both factors. Mbnl1 depletion ( ) mimicked a reversal of many splicing changes that occur during heart development (RSp = −0.47) ( E). In skeletal muscle, we detected 120 exons whose splicing was responsive to both proteins, of which 78 (65%) were regulated in an antagonistic fashion ( F; for exons responsive to both factors, see Supplemental Table S3). Extending this analysis to additional tissues and cell lines and comparing to heart development, we found that exons responsive to induction of CELF1 or CELF2 showed a strong and quite general tendency to also respond to Mbnl1 depletion and to be developmentally regulated ( G). Furthermore, the direction of splicing regulation tended to oppose normal developmental transitions, with both Mbnl1 depletion and CELF1 induction often reversing developmental changes ( H; Supplemental Table S3).
The observed splicing antagonism might result from direct effects of CELF1 on splicing or potentially from indirect effects on MBNL expression by CELF proteins. We found that CELF1 induction in heart and muscle yielded only modest changes in the mRNA levels of Mbnl1 (up 15% in heart, down 10% in muscle) and Mbnl2 (up 9% in heart, down 12% in muscle) by RNA-seq RPKM and did not change inclusion of Mbnl1 exon 5, which can regulate nuclear-cytoplasmic distribution of MBNL1 (Supplemental Fig. S1D,E; ). Furthermore, CELF1 overexpression in C2C12 mouse myoblasts did not detectably alter MBNL1 protein levels (Supplemental Fig. S1G) or change the localization of MBNL1 by Western blot (data not shown). Finally, inclusion levels of exons bound and regulated by MBNL1, but not bound by CELF1, showed no tendency to change in a direction consistent with an overall decrease in MBNL1 activity (data not shown). These observations indicate that antagonistic regulation of many MBNL-dependent splicing events by CELF proteins results predominantly from direct effects on splicing rather than indirectly through regulation of MBNL activity.
In total, 206 alternative exons were responsive to both Mbnl1 depletion and CELF1 induction in muscle and/or heart. These exons were enriched for several Gene Ontology (GO) categories, including “cell differentiation,” “multicellular organismal development,” “microtubule cytoskeleton,” and “cell junction,” suggesting roles in developmental remodeling of the heart (Supplemental Table S4). Furthermore, 124 of these exons (60%) preserved the translational reading frame (compared to a background of 44% of alternative exons, P < 0.001, binomial test), suggesting that the splicing activities of CELF and MBNL proteins are predominantly involved in shaping the spectrum of protein isoforms expressed in the heart. These observations provide genome-wide evidence for the principle that CELF and MBNL proteins exert opposing effects on the splicing of a large cohort of exons. They also expand the number of developmentally regulated CELF-/MBNL-responsive exons several-fold.

## Transcriptome-wide binding locations of CELF1 in heart, muscle, and myoblasts
To identify transcript sites bound by CELF1, we performed CLIP-seq analysis using the 3B1 mouse monoclonal antibody against the endogenous CELF1 protein, yielding 1.6 million, 1.0 million, and 1.6 million reads uniquely mapping to the genome and splice junctions in 16-wk-old C57BL/6 heart, 16-wk-old C57BL/6 muscle, and C2C12 myoblast samples, respectively, after collapsing identical reads. Mapping occurred predominantly to transcribed regions, with enrichment for introns and/or 3′ UTRs (Supplemental Fig. S3A), consistent with previous studies ( ).
CELF1 binding locations were consistently observed across different tissues, for example, in the 3′ UTR of the myeloid-associated differentiation marker gene, Myadm ( A). CELF1 binding density along mRNAs, assessed in 5-nucleotide (nt) windows, was highly correlated across tissues and cell lines and was distinct from that observed for MBNL1 ( B). Controlling for pre-mRNA length and gene expression, CELF1 CLIP clusters were enriched for UGU-containing pentanucleotides (5mers) in the heart and other tissues ( C; Supplemental Fig. S3B). Introns flanking alternative exons with CLIP clusters within 1 kb from either splice site were more highly conserved across species, in particular in the downstream intron, supporting their in vivo function ( D).
 To more precisely map sites of CELF1 binding, we measured the frequency of “crosslink-induced substitutions” (CISs)—positions where CLIP-seq reads differ from the genome ( ; )—at each position within CLIP clusters. We noted that guanines with a high CIS showed biases in flanking bases, with the −1 base preceding the substituted guanine increasingly biased toward uracil as CIS frequency increased (reaching ∼61% in heart); the base at the +1 position was also biased toward uracil ( E; Supplemental Fig. S3C). The implied CIS-enriched motif UGU resembles the motifs observed in C and in previous studies of CELF1 binding affinity ( ; ), suggesting that frequently substituted guanines are highly enriched for sites of direct crosslinking to CELF1 protein.

## Context-dependent regulation of splicing by CELF1
Exons whose splicing changed after CELF1 induction were enriched for CELF1 CLIP clusters (Supplemental Fig. S4). To determine an RNA map describing the splicing regulatory activity of CELF1, we analyzed the location of CELF1 clusters relative to exons responsive to CELF1 overexpression in heart and/or muscle. We found that cassette alternative exons bound by CELF1 were more likely to be repressed following CELF1 induction in heart and muscle ( F), with 80%–85% of exons with MZ score >1.5 being repressed versus 15%–20% being activated. Though we had reasonable statistical power, we did not observe a consistent trend toward repression or activation of exons bound by CELF1 in the upstream or downstream introns. These observations suggest that exonic binding by CELF family members may directly repress splicing, while the direction of splicing regulation resulting from intronic binding may depend on other variables such as RNA structure or cooperation or antagonism with other RBPs ( ; ).
To directly test whether CELF1 could repress splicing when bound to a cassette exon, we fused the C-terminal “divergent domain” of CELF1 (omitting the RRMs) to two different Pumilio (Puf) domains, each recognizing a distinct eight-base Puf motif, as in ). We expressed these constructs in HeLa cells, along with a splicing reporter ( ) containing either cognate or noncognate Puf motifs within the cassette exon, and used quantitative RT-PCR to assess splicing changes ( G). We found that expression of CELF1-Puf fusion decreased Ψ from ∼25% to ∼12% when paired with the cognate Puf motif but had a negligible effect when paired with the noncognate motif. Thus, recruitment of a single CELF1 protein molecule to an exon appears sufficient to reduce splicing by double-digit percentage values in this system. Natural regulatory targets often have multiple CELF1 binding sites; recruitment of multiple CELF1 proteins is likely to magnify the impact on splicing in the mode of other splicing regulatory factors ( ). Control RS domain-Puf fusions activated splicing, as expected ( H; ). These observations indicate that tethering the CELF1 divergent domain to an exon is sufficient to repress its splicing.

## Dose-dependent down-regulation of expression associated with CELF1 binding to 3′ UTRs
We observed extensive CELF1 binding to 3′ UTRs, with increased density upstream of the cleavage and polyadenylation site (PAS) ( A). Consistent with the established activity of CELF1 in binding mRNAs and recruiting cytoplasmic deadenylases ( ), binding density increased close to the PAS on the upstream side and fell to background levels just downstream from the PAS site in heart, muscle, and myoblast. Increased phylogenetic conservation was observed for 3′ UTRs containing CELF1 CLIP clusters, relative to 3′ UTRs with a similar length and expression level, suggesting that these mRNAs are enriched for conserved functional motifs or structures ( B). GO analysis of 3′ UTR binding targets of CELF1 revealed enrichment of proteins related to muscle structures, such as M band and I band, and factors involved in vesicle and protein transport in both heart and muscle (Supplemental Table S5).
 Analyzing gene expression globally, we observed that mean expression of CELF1-bound mRNAs decreased substantially at 7 d after CELF1 induction relative to genes not bound by CELF1 (Supplemental Table S6). For example, the Clcn1 mRNA, which had prominent CELF1 binding clusters in its 3′ UTR, decreased in expression 50%–70% from its initial level 7 d after CELF1 induction, in both muscle ( C) and heart (Supplemental Table S6). Furthermore, the average magnitude of target down-regulation increased monotonically with the density of CLIP clusters in the 3′ UTR, reaching 1.4-fold and twofold in heart and muscle, respectively, for messages with four or more CLIP clusters per kb of 3′ UTR ( D). The consistent association between binding and down-regulation and the “dose-response” effect observed in D both support a direct role for CELF1 in target mRNA repression.
We expected similar levels of CELF1-mediated target repression to occur in heart and muscle, given that the level of CELF1 induction was similar in both tissues (Supplemental Fig. S1; ; ). However, the magnitude of target down-regulation in the heart was consistently only about half of that observed in muscle for messages with similar CLIP density. This difference might be related to a pattern we observed in which targets of miRNAs were derepressed in the heart following CELF1 induction (Supplemental Fig. S5).

## CELF1 binding to alternative 3′ UTRs is associated with isoform-specific repression
Many mammalian genes end with more than one PAS, yielding “tandem UTR” isoforms, differing in the length of their 3′ UTRs. We observed many instances of altered 3′ UTR isoform abundance following CELF1 induction in the heart and muscle. For example, the Cnih4 gene, a member of the cornichon family AMPA receptor auxiliary proteins involved in the selective transport and maturation of TGF-alpha family proteins, contains multiple tandem alternative PASs that are used in these tissues. CELF1 CLIP clusters are located in the extension region of the Cnih4 3′ UTR between the two PASs ( A). The relative abundance of the longer isoform relative to total Cnih4 mRNAs was ∼85% in adult heart and ∼75% in muscle but decreased monotonically in both tissues following CELF1 induction to ∼30% and 40%, respectively ( A), consistent with CELF1-mediated down-regulation of the longer isoform. Our genome-wide analysis revealed that 57 tandem UTR events contained at least three CELF1 clusters in the extension region and zero clusters within the core (shared) region; of these, ∼75% followed the pattern of Cnih4, exhibiting decreased abundance of the longer isoform relative to the shorter isoform following CELF1 induction. Across other combinations of binding sites, a consistent trend was observed with higher relative abundance of CELF1 clusters in extension versus core regions associated with greater relative decline in distal isoform expression ( B).
 Changes in tandem UTR expression associated with CELF1 binding could, in principle, result from regulation of cleavage and polyadenylation to produce less of the distal PAS isoform or by differential regulation of the stabilities of the isoforms. If regulation occurs by the latter mechanism, overall gene expression should decrease following CELF1 induction in proportion to the extent of binding in the core and extension regions, with binding in the core exerting a stronger effect, since the core region is shared by both isoforms. Our analysis of expression changes of tandem UTR genes revealed exactly this: Following induction, gene expression decreased with the number of CELF1 CLIP clusters in either region ( C). By using a linear model, we compared the magnitude of down-regulation associated with extension and core sites and found that sites in the core were associated with down-regulation of mRNA expression by 6.9 ± 2.7% (95% CI) per site, and sites in the extension were associated with 2.7 ± 2.5% down-regulation. Because of their presence in both long and short isoforms, core sites are expected to exert stronger effects on overall gene expression than are sites in the extension, as observed. Therefore, the effects of CELF1 on tandem UTR isoform expression can be explained based on the factor's known ability to destabilize mRNAs via recruitment of deadenylases without needing to invoke a potential activity in regulating cleavage and polyadenylation.
In thousands of other mammalian genes, a combination of alternative splicing and alternative PAS usage gives rise to alternative last exons (ALEs) ( D). The distinct 3′ UTRs of ALEs provide natural reporters of 3′ UTR functions, since they generally have little or no effect on the ORF. For more than 1000 genes, we observed a monotonic change in the relative expression of ALE isoforms following CELF1 induction in muscle. The ALE isoform exhibiting greater CELF1 binding tended to be down-regulated, and the magnitude of this bias increased as the difference in the number of sites increased ( D). A similar bias was observed in ALE pairs lacking CELF1 binding within 500 nt of each alternative splice site (Supplemental Fig. S6), suggesting that changes in ALE abundance do not commonly result from regulation of splicing by CELF1. Furthermore, as was observed for tandem UTRs, increased CELF1 binding was associated with increased mRNA down-regulation ( E), with an average magnitude of 5.9 ± 1% (95% CI) per CLIP cluster, consistent with mRNA destabilizing activity. Together, the consistent pattern of down-regulation of mRNAs ( D) and of specific mRNA isoforms ( B–E) associated with CELF1 binding to 3′ UTRs provides evidence of widespread direct effects of binding on mRNA expression and identifies numerous instances of gene- and isoform-specific regulation.

## Evidence for CELF1-mediated regulation of alternative 3′ UTR isoforms in development
The dramatic changes in CELF1 levels that occur during heart development led us to ask whether these 3′ UTR isoforms are often developmentally regulated. By comparing changes in 3′ UTR isoform abundance during heart development to changes following CELF1 induction in heart, we observed a strong negative correlation (RSp = −0.52) ( F). Therefore, as observed at the level of splicing, CELF1 induction tends to reverse isoform changes that occur during normal heart development. This negative correlation held whether analyzing CELF1 induction in heart or skeletal muscle and whether analyzing tandem UTRs or ALEs ( G). The hundreds of 3′ UTR isoforms involved in these patterns suggest that developmental reductions in CELF1 activity underlie a substantial fraction of 3′ UTR isoform changes that occur during heart development.

## Antagonistic regulation of mRNA expression by CELF and MBNL proteins
In addition to their nuclear functions in RNA splicing, MBNL proteins also exert cytoplasmic functions, targeting 3′ UTR-bound mRNAs for localization to membrane destinations and promoting translation of targeted messages ( ; ). To ask whether this function might be related to mRNA repression by CELF proteins, we compared CELF1 and MBNL1 3′ UTR binding targets. We observed more than 1000 3′ UTRs bound by both CELF1 and MBNL1 (with at least two CLIP clusters for each factor), three times as many as expected by chance (P < 1 × 10−48, Fisher's exact test) ( A; for CLIP clusters, see Supplemental Table S7). Given that gene expression level impacts the statistical power to detect CLIP binding, we assessed the fold enrichment of cobinding relative to independence in sets of genes binned by expression level, and observed as well as expected numbers of shared targets are shown in A. These genes were enriched for a number of GO categories, including categories related to cytoskeleton, such as “actin cytoskeleton organization,” and to development, such as “mesoderm formation,” “patterning of blood vessels,” “ventricular septum development,” and other categories (Supplemental Table S8), suggesting important developmental functions. These observations led us to explore whether CELF and MBNL might exert antagonistic, or synergistic, effects on mRNA levels.
 To assess possible functional relationships between the effects of CELF and MBNL proteins on expression, we assessed gene expression changes for sets of genes grouped by extent of CELF1 and MBNL1 binding. Expression changes following CELF1 induction exhibited a strong dependence on the ratio of CELF1 to MBNL1 binding sites: Greater CELF1 binding was associated with strong (up to approximately twofold) average down-regulation, messages with similar numbers of CELF1 and MBNL1 clusters exhibited little change, and those with greater MBNL1 binding showed increased expression ( B). These data suggest that MBNL binding can protect a message from CELF-mediated repression. The highly consistent pattern in which each additional CELF binding site conferred reduced expression, while each additional MBNL binding site conferred increased expression, suggests that MBNL1 and CELF1 compete for cobound mRNAs to target them for different fates. The set of mRNAs that (1) were down-regulated upon CELF1 induction; (2) are bound by both CELF1 and MBNL1; and (3) changed their localization upon Mbnl depletion in the expected direction (away from membrane and toward the insoluble compartment, based on our previous study) ( ) included Cpe, Igfbp5, Kcnj2, and Sobp (see Discussion).
Within the set of mRNAs not detectably bound by CELF1, the up-regulation of mRNAs bound more strongly by MBNL1 relative to less-bound messages was unexpected. One possible explanation is that this signal derives from CELF1 CLIP false negatives, i.e., messages that are bound by CELF1 but that failed to crosslink efficiently (or failed to be recovered in our CLIP-seq data for other technical reasons). Another possibility is that CELF proteins may exert a general nonspecific or low-specificity, mRNA decay-promoting activity at high levels and that MBNL binding protects against this effect as well as the effects of specific CELF1 binding.
To further explore the relationship between CELF1 and MBNL1 proteins, we analyzed the relative locations of CELF1 and MBNL1 binding sites in 3′ UTRs. We found that sites bound by CELF1 and MBNL1 tended to cluster together more than expected, relative to randomly placed clusters (P < 1.8 × 10−55 by Kolmogorov-Smirnov [KS] test) ( C). This proximity effect remained highly significant when performing additional analyses that preserved the locations of CELF1 and MBNL1 binding sites but permuted protein identity, a treatment that controls for variations in local base composition and accessibility along mRNAs (Supplemental Fig. S7A).
To ask whether functional antagonism between MBNL1 and CELF1 might depend on binding site proximity, we examined the effects of CELF1 induction on messages with proximal (≤50 nt) or distal (>50 nt) pairs of CELF1 and MBNL1 binding sites. The presence of a distal MBNL1 site was sufficient to abrogate the repression normally associated with presence of a CELF1 site, but presence of a proximal MBNL1 site lacked such a protective effect ( D). These trends extended to messages containing multiple CELF1 sites. Comparing sets of mRNAs with the same distributions of CELF1 site counts and with exactly one MBNL1 site, those with a greater number of proximal CELF1/MBNL1 pairs were more strongly down-regulated following CELF1 induction (Supplemental Fig. S5B). This phenomenon of “local inhibition” of MBNL1's activity by CELF1 suggests that CELF1 can bind to messages when MBNL1 is bound nearby, and is readily explicable by either of two models: (1) “local inhibition of binding,” in which inhibition results simply from CELF1 inhibiting nearby binding of MBNL1, either directly through steric hindrance or indirectly via effects on local RNA structure; or (2) “local inhibition of function,” in which occupancy of CELF1 binding sites proximal to bound MBNL1 antagonizes the localization/stabilization function conferred by MBNL1 without affecting MBNL1's binding.
Under either model, mRNAs containing a proximal pair of MBNL and CELF sites are expected to be more responsive to developmental changes in CELF and MBNL levels than messages containing distal pairs of sites. To explore this idea, we assessed developmental changes in expression of mRNAs grouped by binding site count and presence of proximal or distal CELF/MBNL site pairs ( E). Overall, we observed moderate derepression in proportion to the number of CELF sites present and observed repression when MBNL sites exceeded CELF sites. This pattern reverses the pattern observed in B, as expected given the down-regulation of CELF1 during heart development. Moreover, messages containing proximal CELF/MBNL pairs were derepressed more strongly than those containing exclusively distal pairs, consistent with the local inhibition phenomenon observed in D. Together, these data indicate that the regulatory rules that govern CELF1 function in heart development are similar to those observed in the transgenic mouse model.

## No evidence for direct antagonism of binding for CELF and MBNL proteins
To help distinguish between the “local inhibition of binding” and “local inhibition of function” models introduced above, we performed a variant of our RNA Bind-n-Seq (RBNS) assay ( ), in which recombinant, tagged CELF1 protein was incubated with a pool of random RNA oligonucleotides (of length 40 nt), in the absence of MBNL1 or in the presence of varying concentrations of recombinant MBNL1 protein. This experiment can be thought of as mimicking the effects of developmental induction of MBNL1 on CELF1's interaction with RNA. Following pulldown of CELF1 using the affinity tag, bound RNA was eluted and used to prepare libraries for high-throughput sequencing (Methods). The calculation of motif enrichment (called RBNS R-values) in the CELF1 pulldown libraries relative to a control library prepared from input RNA enables assessment of sequence-specific RNA affinity.
By analyzing all RNA 6mers, we observed a strong preference for GU- and UGU-containing motifs such as UGUUGU in all pulldown libraries, consistent with previous studies ( ; ; ). By comparing data obtained with relatively high MBNL1 concentration (e.g., 250 nM, a concentration at which MBNL1 exhibits strong sequence-specific binding in this assay) to 0 MBNL concentration, we observed no effect of the presence of MBNL1 protein on the absolute or relative affinity of CELF1 for different RNA motifs ( F), nor any effect of the presence of MBNL1 motifs in the oligonucleotide. These observations were consistent across a range of additional MBNL1 concentrations, from 64 nM to 1 μM (Supplemental Fig. S8). This result was not entirely unexpected, as CELFs and MBNLs have distinct sequence specificities, with CELF1 favoring GU- and UGU-containing motifs ( ; ; ), and MBNL1 favoring motifs containing UGC and/or GCU ( ; ). These data suggest that binding of these two proteins to RNA exhibits neither synergism nor antagonism, instead occurring independently. Of course, the usual caveats regarding the experimental setup and presence of an affinity tag on CELF1 apply, and the in vivo situation might be different. This conclusion provides no support for local inhibition of binding but is consistent with the local inhibition of function model.

## Discussion
The relationship between CELF and MBNL proteins is important both in the development and context of neuromuscular disease, particularly DM. Throughout mouse heart development, CELF protein levels decrease and MBNL levels increase ( ); in DM, MBNL proteins are sequestered by expanded CUG or CCUG repeats, and CELF proteins are stabilized via hyperphosphorylation by PKC and derepressed as a result of reduced miRNA expression ( ; ; ). The nature of the relationship between these RBPs in normal physiology and development has been a long-standing question in the field.
It has recently been established that many genes shift toward greater expression of longer 3′ UTR isoforms during differentiation of muscle cells and likely other cell types ( ). We observed a strong pattern of antagonistic regulation of mRNA levels by CELF and MBNLs associated with binding to 3′ UTR regions. It is known that CELF1 can recruit deadenylases to 3′ UTRs and destabilize mRNAs ( ), and recently we uncovered a global role for MBNLs in localizing mRNAs to membrane destinations for localized translation ( ). These observations suggest a model in which MBNL and CELF proteins specify different cellular outcomes for mRNAs and compete with one another to determine the localization/stabilization or destabilization of specific mRNAs that contain binding motifs for both factors ( A). Changes in localization often impact mRNA stability ( ). Our data, e.g., the pattern shown in B, can be most simply explained if messages tend to have a basal decay rate in the cytoplasm, which is generally accelerated by CELF1 induction and specifically enhanced by direct CELF1 binding, but have a lower decay rate when localized to the membrane compartment. Under this model, the localizations and half-lives of more than 1000 messages bound by both factors are determined by the outcome of a competition between the activities of MBNL and CELF proteins.
 Down-regulation of the CLCN1 gene, which encodes the major voltage-gated chloride channel that controls the membrane excitability of skeletal muscle, causes the myotonia that is characteristic of DM ( ; ). This down-regulation is thought to result primarily from aberrant inclusion of exon 7a, due to loss of MBNL1 activity, which produces a nonfunctional CLCN1 mRNA ( ). Here, we showed that Clcn1 mRNA levels decreased monotonically following CELF1 induction in both muscle and heart and that CELF1 binds to the Clcn1 3′ UTR ( C). These observations suggest that CELF1 may down-regulate the stability of Clcn1 mRNA, independently of splicing regulation. Therefore, the up-regulation of CELF activity that often accompanies MBNL sequestration in DM skeletal muscle may destabilize the CLCN1 mRNA and exacerbate myotonia symptoms.
Other messages bound by both factors whose expression responded to CELF1 induction and whose localization changed in response to Mbnl1 depletion (Results) included Kcnj2, a cardiac inward rectifier potassium channel whose mutation is associated with a syndrome that involves cardiac arrhythmia ( ), and the sine oculis binding protein homolog Sobp, mutations of which have been linked to intellectual disability ( ). Other messages with this pattern of binding and localization included Cpe, which is involved in insulin processing, and Igfbp5, which regulates insulin-responsive growth factor. Thus, genes that encode competing mRNA targets of CELFs and MBNLs may contribute to symptoms such as cardiac arrhythmia, mental retardation, and insulin resistance, which are observed in DM.
The distance between CELF and MBNL sites on a message appears to play an important role in the outcome of competition between these factors: Close spacing of CELF1 sites near MBNL sites (less than ∼50 nt apart) appears to override the protective effect normally conferred by MBNL1 binding ( D, B), either by inhibition of binding or of activity. Our in vitro binding data ( F) did not detect evidence of a cooperative or antagonistic relationship between binding of CELF1 and MBNL1, suggesting that antagonism occurs at the functional level. For example, CELF binding may inhibit the recruitment or activity of MBNL-dependent complexes involved in mRNA localization or stabilization. Functional antagonism between RBPs that bind to the same mRNAs is well known; e.g., PTB can repress U1 snRNP's ability to promote spliceosome formation without inhibiting its binding to the 5′ splice site ( ; ), and SRRM4 (also known as NSR100) can overcome the repressive effects of PTBP1 without generally interfering with its binding ( ). The functional antagonism between MBNL and CELF proteins uncovered here is likely to contribute to the robustness of developmental changes in mRNA stability and localization, particularly for mRNAs bound by both factors ( E). These mRNAs may be particularly susceptible to misregulation in DM, perhaps contributing to pathogenesis.
We identified several dozen exons exhibiting antagonistic splicing regulation, many of which are developmentally regulated. These exons tend to preserve the reading frame and to reside in genes affecting functions involved in development and cell differentiation (see Results). Human homologs of this set of antagonistically regulated exons may be misregulated in DM to a particularly strong extent, as increased levels of CELF proteins would exacerbate splicing changes that result from MBNL sequestration. The hypothesis that CELF binding to exons tends to repress splicing, suggested by genome-wide analyses, was confirmed in a splicing reporter system, establishing a rule to predict CELF-dependent splicing regulation.
CELF1 function intersects with RNA processing in a different way in its impact on the stability of alternative mRNA isoforms that differ in their 3′ UTRs. We observed a large set of genes with developmentally regulated ALEs and tandem UTR isoforms that differentially respond to CELF induction ( ). Regulation of some of these isoforms by CELF1 may impact encoded protein functions by changing the abundance of protein isoforms differing in their C termini, while regulation of others may alter mRNA localization or translation or other UTR-dependent properties during development and other physiological situations in which CELF activity changes.

## Methods

## Heart inducible CELF2 mouse
N-terminal FLAG-tagged human CELF2 was expressed from the transgene previously used for CELF1 ( ). TRECUGBP2 transgenic mice were generated by standard techniques and maintained on an FVB background. All reported TRECUGBP2/MHCrtTA bitransgenic mice were the F1 progeny from TRECUGBP2 × MHCrtTA (FVB/N-Tg(Myh6-rtTA)1Jam) matings. TRECUGBP2/MHCrtTA bitransgenic mice induced using doxycycline did not show evidence of ECG, echocardiography abnormalities, or abnormal heart size or morphology after 8 wk of induced expression of CELF2.

## RNA-seq library preparation and sequencing
CELF1 and CELF2 were induced in the heart and muscle by feeding mice 2 g/kg doxycycline for 12, 24, 72 h, or 7 d in the relevant transgenic animal. For CELF1 induction in the heart, mice with myosin heavy chain, promoter-driven, reverse tetracycline transactivator (rtTA) and Tet-inducible, N-terminal FLAG-tagged human CELF1 LYLQ isoform were used (data are provided under GEO accession GSE56185) ( ). For CELF2 induction in the heart, mice with the myosin heavy chain promoter-driven rtTA and Tet-inducible human CELF2 were used. Hearts were harvested, atria removed, and ventricles frozen in liquid nitrogen. For CELF1 induction in muscle, mice with the rat myosin light chain 1/3 promoter/enhancer driving rtTA and Tet-inducible, N-terminal FLAG-tagged human CELF1 LYLQ isoform were used. The left and right gastrocnemius were isolated and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Control experiments for all time courses used mice with rtTA cassettes but lacking the Tet-inducible CELF cassettes; control mice were fed 2 g/kg doxycycline for 72 h before tissue harvest. Total RNA was isolated in all cases using TRIzol (Invitrogen), followed by RNeasy column with DNase treatment (Qiagen). Poly(A)+ RNA was prepared using Oligo dT dynabeads (Invitrogen) and prepared for paired-end RNA-seq (36–40 nt on Illumina GAII).

## CLIP-seq library preparation and sequencing
CLIP was performed using 254-nm UV irradiation as previously described ( ), using heart tissue or muscle tissue of 16-wk-old mice or cultured C2C12 mouse myoblasts. Tissue was ground to a powder using a liquid nitrogen–cooled mortar and pestle prior to UV irradiation. The dry powder was placed into a 10-cm2 tissue culture dish, sitting on ice, and crosslinked 3 × 400 mJ/cm2. In between each round of cross-linking, the dish was shaken from side to side to redistribute the tissue powder and provide maximum opportunity for all tissue particles to be cross-linked. The tissue was then lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40, 0.5% SDS). The lysate was treated with DNase and RNase If (NEB) for 10 min at 37° C, with dilutions of 1:10,000 and 1:50,000 providing optimal RNA fragment lengths for downstream purification. Immunoprecipitation was performed using the 3B1 antibody clone against CELF1 (Millipore) and protein A beads (Invitrogen). The beads were washed twice with RIPA and twice with RIPA containing 1 M NaCl. The 3′ adapter was preadenylated with ImpA ( ) and ligated while the RNA–protein complexes were on beads using T4 RNA ligase (Rnl2 truncation) in the absence of ATP (NEB). The complexes were run on SDS-PAGE gel, transferred to nitrocellulose, and isolated from membrane as previously described ( ). Further details are provided in the Supplemental Material.

## RNA-seq and CLIP-seq read mapping, gene expression estimation
All read mapping was performed using Bowtie/TopHat ( ; ), mapping to mm9. Only uniquely mapping reads were used. CLIP reads were collapsed to remove identical sequences; adapter sequences were removed; and processed reads were then mapped separately for each CLIP read length. To estimate gene expression levels, the number of reads mapping to each kilobase of constitutive coding sequence of RefSeq/Locuslink genes was counted and divided by the number of reads (in millions) mapping uniquely to nonribosomal and nonmitochondrial sequence to obtain RPKM values. For purposes of the analyses performed in E, gene expression values in the heart development time course were normalized as previously described ( ), using parameters M = 0.3 and A = 0.2.

## Estimation of isoform frequencies, calculation of MZ score
MISO (version 0.4.8) ( ) was used to estimate isoform frequencies for splicing events and alternative 3′ UTR events, using a minimum of 20 reads per event and the parameters of burn_in=500, lag=10, num_iters=5000, and num_chains=6. To identify splicing events that change monotonically over time, we ordered samples chronologically, and for each event compared all pairs of samples from different time points, tallying the number of comparisons representing significant increase or significant decrease in Ψ (at BF > 5). We calculated a quantity called δ, the number of significant positive ΔΨ values (increases over time) minus the number of significant negative ΔΨ values. To assess statistical significance, we recalculated δ after randomly permuting the sample labels. Repeating this process 100 times, we generated a null distribution and derived the “monotonicity Z-score” (MZ = (δ − μ)/σ), where μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the null distribution, respectively.

## Analysis of antagonistically regulated splicing events
Splicing events regulated in response to each perturbation (CELF overexpression, Mbnl1 KO, or heart development) were enumerated, and the number of events regulated among each pair of perturbations was counted (this was the “observed” overlap) ( G,H). To compute the “expected” overlap, we assumed independence; e.g., the fraction of events regulated in both perturbations equals the fraction of events regulated in the first perturbation multiplied by the fraction of events regulated in the second perturbation. Significance of the bias in direction of regulation ( H) was assessed by binomial test, assuming a null hypothesis frequency of 0.5.

## Analysis of CLIP clusters and correlation across the transcriptome
Analysis of CLIP data was performed as described in the Supplemental Material ( B,C,E; Supplemental Fig. S3B,C).

## Conservation analysis for cassette exons and 3′ UTRs
Conservation (30-way phastCons, UCSC Genome Browser) of cassette exons with CLIP clusters within 1 kb of each splice site or within the exon itself was compared to a control set of cassette exons found in similarly expressed genes ( D, B). Conservation (30-way phastCons) of 3′ UTRs with CLIP clusters <1 kb upstream of and <500 bases downstream from the constitutive transcript ends was assessed and compared to a control set of 3′ UTRs with similar length, in similarly expressed genes. For these analyses, CLIP clusters and gene expression values from heart were used.

## Analysis of gene expression changes as a function of CELF CLIP clusters and/or miRNA seed matches
Genes were grouped by the number of CELF CLIP clusters found in 3′ UTRs ( D) or miRNA seed matches (Supplemental Fig. S5A), and the mean log2(fold-change) in expression level in each group was computed, relative to genes with no CLIP clusters or miRNA seeds, respectively ( D; Supplemental Fig. S5A). Significance was assessed by rank-sum test. The abundance of miRNAs in heart (Supplemental Fig. S5B) was derived from .

## Analysis of binding targets shared by CELF1 and MBNL1
Genes were binned by expression level in mouse myoblast ( ), and within each bin, the number of genes with 3′ UTRs containing CELF1 CLIP clusters only, MBNL1 CLIP clusters only, or clusters for both proteins was counted (“observed” number). The “expected” number was computed by assuming independence. The approximately threefold observed/expected value was obtained by taking the mean observed/expected value across all gene expression bins. In A, CLIP data for CELF1 were derived from muscle; data for MBNL1 were derived from myoblasts.

## Analysis of CELF1 and MBNL1 binding locations within 3′ UTRs
To precisely assess the distance between CELF1 and MBNL1 binding locations within 3′ UTRs, we searched for known CELF1 and MBNL1 binding motifs within each CLIP cluster for each protein ( C–E; Supplemental Fig. S7A,B). The motifs were derived from Bind-n-Seq data ( ). For MBNL1, the motifs were GCTT, CGCT, TGCT, GCGC, CCGC, CTGC, GCTA, ACGC, CGCA, AGCT, TTGC, and CAGC. For CELF1, the motifs were TGTT, ATGT, TTGT, TGTC, GTGT, TGTA, GTTT, TGTG, GTCT, and TTTT. If none of these motifs was found within the cluster, the binding location was estimated to be the center of the CLIP cluster. The closest distance between each CELF1 and MBNL1 motif derived from its respective cluster was recorded and compared with randomly assigned clusters ( C) or clusters whose identity was shuffled (Supplemental Fig. S7A). Tests for significant differences in C and Supplemental Figure S7A were performed by modified KS test, where cumulative distributions were visually inspected to confirm a true shift in median values.

## Analysis of alternative 3′ UTR isoforms
The abundance of alternative 3′ UTR isoforms by MISO was performed in “multi-isoform” mode ( B–E; Supplemental Fig. S6). However, analysis was restricted to those events with exactly two isoforms whose regulation is significant and monotonic (BF > 5, MZ > 1.6 for tandem UTRs, MZ > 1.5 for ALEs). To assess changes in gene expression, genes were binned by the number of CELF1 CLIP clusters in the “core” or “extension” regions ( B) or in both ALEs ( E), and the mean expression change following CELF1 induction in each bin was compared to the mean expression change in the bin with zero CELF1 CLIP clusters. Significance was assessed by rank-sum test. To estimate the “potency” of each CLIP cluster, we used a linear model; for tandem UTRs, we considered a linear model in which log(expression change) is proportional to the number of core sites × potency of core site + number of extension sites × potency of extension × Ψextension. For ALEs, we considered a model in which log(expression change) is proportional to the number of sites in ALE1 × potency × ΨALE1 + number of sites in ALE2 × potency × ΨALE2. In both cases, coefficients were estimated by least squares regression.

## Data access
The RNA-seq, CLIP-Seq, and RBNS sequencing data from this study have been submitted to the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under superseries accession number GSE61893.

## Supplementary Material

## Supplemental Material

## Acknowledgments
We thank M. Swanson and members of the Burge laboratory for helpful comments. This work was supported by a grant from the Myotonic Dystrophy Foundation and National Institutes of Health grant OD017865-02 (E.T.W.); National Institutes of Health grants R01HL045565, R01AR060733, and R01AR045653 (T.A.C.); American Heart Association grant 14POST20270001 (J.G.); Pew Charitable Trusts 2933 (J.G.); National Science Foundation award 0821391 (A. Keating and C.B.B.); and National Institutes of Health grants R01GM085319 and RC2HG005624 (C.B.B.).

## Footnotes
[Supplemental material is available for this article.]
Article published online before print. Article, supplemental material, and publication date are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.184390.114.
Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplemental Material