Mol PharmMol. Pharm822acssdmpMolecular Pharmaceutics1543-83841543-8392pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC4051247PMC4051247.1405124740512472481124310.1021/mp40063581ArticlePoly(amidoamine) Dendrimer Nanocarriers and Their
Aerosol Formulations for siRNA Delivery to the Lung Epithelium
ContiDenise S. BrewerDanielGrashikJordanAvasaralaSumantda RochaSandro R. P. Department of Chemical Engineering
and Materials Science, College of Engineering, Wayne State University, 5050 Anthony Wayne Drive, Detroit, Michigan 48202, United
States*Tel.: + 1 313 577 4669. Fax: + 1 313 578 5820. E-mail: sdr@eng.wayne.edu.28042014020620141162388321808182227102013280420142103201428042015280420152002201503072024Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical Society 
Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-based
therapies have great promise
in the treatment of a number of prevalent pulmonary disorders including
lung cancer, asthma and cystic fibrosis. However, progress in this
area has been hindered due to the lack of carriers that can efficiently
deliver siRNA to lung epithelial cells, and also due to challenges
in developing oral inhalation (OI) formulations for the regional administration
of siRNA and their carriers to the lungs. In this work we report the
ability of generation four, amine-terminated poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM)
dendrimer (G4NH2)–siRNA complexes (dendriplexes) to silence
the enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) gene on A549 lung alveolar
epithelial cells stably expressing eGFP. We also report the formulation
of the dendriplexes and their aerosol characteristics in propellant-based
portable OI devices. The size and gene silencing ability of the dendriplexes
was seen not to be a strong function of the N/P ratio. Silencing efficiencies
of up to 40% are reported. Stable dispersions of the dendriplexes
encapsulated in mannitol and also in a biodegradable and water-soluble
co-oligomer were prepared in hydrofluoroalkane (HFA)-based pressurized
metered-dose inhalers (pMDIs). Their aerosol characteristics were
very favorable, and conducive to deep lung deposition, with respirable
fractions of up to 77%. Importantly, siRNA formulated as dendriplexes
in pMDIs was shown to keep its integrity after the particle preparation
processes, and also after long-term exposures to HFA. The relevance
of this study stems from the fact that this is the first work to report
the formulation of inhalable siRNA with aerosol properties suitable
to deep lung deposition using pMDIs devices that are the least expensive
and most widely used portable inhalers. This study is relevant because,
also for the first time, it shows that siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes
can efficiently target lung alveolar epithelial A549 cells and silence
genes even after siRNA has been exposed to the propellant environment.

pulmonary siRNA deliveryPAMAM dendrimerssiRNA dendriplexespressurized-metered
dose inhalers (pMDIs)gene silencingalveolar
epitheliumNational Institutes of Health, United Statespmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9mp4006358document-id-new-14mp-2013-006358ccc-price

## Introduction
RNA interference (RNAi)
promotes silencing of gene expression in
a post-transcriptional manner. , The delivery of exogenous
double-stranded small interfering RNA (ds-siRNA, typically consisting
of 20–27 base pairs), which targets
the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) located in the cell cytoplasm,
is considered a very promising therapeutic approach in the treatment
of a broad range of diseases. , RNAi-based therapies
have also shown great potential in the treatment of pulmonary disorders
including lung cancer, cystic fibrosis, asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV), and severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) viral infection. However, further progress on siRNA-based technologies that target
lung ailments has been hindered by the lack of adequate carriers capable
of overcoming the extra and intracellular barriers present in the
lung tissue, and challenges in formulating siRNA and their carriers
in portable oral inhalation (OI) devices for the local delivery of
siRNA to the lungs. , , 
Poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers are highly monodispersed,
hyperbranched
polymers that contain easily functionalizable surface groups, and
thus represent promising structures for the construction of effective
drug carriers and gene transfer vehicles. , Amine-terminated PAMAM dendrimers have their surface groups (primary
amines) protonated at physiological conditions. They can thus efficiently bind to nucleic acids, forming
nanoscale complexes termed dendriplexes that may offer opportunities to improve targeting of siRNA to the
cell cytosol. Even though many publications have addressed the transfection
of cells using dendrimer–DNA complexes, few reports have discussed the gene silencing (with siRNA , or antisense oligonucleotide ) with
PAMAM dendrimers in cells that are models of the lung alveolar epithelium.
Once a suitable carrier for the delivery of siRNA to the cytosol
of lung cells is found, another important consideration is the ability
to target the siRNA–carrier complex to the lungs. OI is a very
promising route of administration for siRNA to the pulmonary epithelium
since it provides a direct and noninvasive means of targeting the
lungs. Pressurized metered-dose inhalers
(pMDIs) are important devices within the context of siRNA delivery
to the lungs as they are the least expensive and most widely used
OI devices. pMDIs are portable, have long shelf life, are reliable,
and can be used even in patients with compromised lung function as
they are propellant based. However, due
to formulations challenges, there has been no report in the literature
to date of siRNA or siRNA–carrier systems formulated in pMDIs.
On the basis of the challenges and opportunities discussed above,
we propose in this work the development of propellant-based OI formulations
of siRNA–dendrimer complexes for the efficient silencing of
genes of the lung epithelium. We report the preparation and characterization
of siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes, and evaluate the in vitro gene knockdown efficiency in a model lung alveolar epithelial cell
line. We propose different formulation strategies for the dendriplexes,
and study their aerosol performance. The relevance of this study stems
from the fact that this is the first work to report the formulation
of inhalable siRNA with aerosol properties suitable to deep lung deposition
in pMDIs, which are the least expensive and most widely used portable
inhalers available in the market. This study is relevant because,
also for the first time, it shows that siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes
can efficiently target lung alveolar epithelial cells A549, and silence
genes even after siRNA has been exposed to the propellant environment.

## Experimental
Section

## Materials
Generation-four, amine-terminated poly(amidoamine)
dendrimer (PAMAM G4NH2, 14,215 g × mol–1, 64
NH2 surface groups) was purchased from Dendritech Inc. (Midland, MI,
U.S.A.) and provided in methanol (15.35 w/w). Methanol was removed
with the help of a rotary evaporator (Buchi R-200). Double-stranded
siRNA (sense: 5′-AAC UUC AGG GUC AGC UUG C dTdT-3′; antisense: 5′-GCA AGC UGA CCC UGA AGU U
dTdT-3′) was purchased from Bioneer Inc. (Alameda, CA, U.S.A.).
Double-stranded Dicer substrate siRNA (Ds-siRNA) targeting eGFP (sense:
5′-p ACC CUG AAG UUC AUC UGC ACC AC cg-3′; antisense:
5′-p CGG UGG UGC AGA UGA ACU UCA GGG UCA-3′) and a respective mismatch
(both from Integrated DNA Technologies, IDT, Leuven, Belgium) were
used for all gene knockdown experiments. Capital letters represent
ribonucleotides, underlined bases depict 2′-O-methylribonucleotides, lower case letters represent 2′-deoxyribonucleotides,
p and dTdT depict an additional phosphate at the 5′-end, and
thymine overhangs, respectively. Deionized water (DI-water, resistivity
of 18.2 MΩ × cm) was obtained from NANOpure DIamond UV
ultrapure water system (Barnstead International, Dubuque, IA, U.S.A.)
and treated with 0.1% v/v diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC) overnight, following
autoclaving. DEPC (high purity) and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA, 0.5 M sterile solution, pH 8, DEPC treated) were purchased
from Amresco (Solon, OH, U.S.A.). A549 cells (CCL-185, passage 82)—human
lung adenocarcinoma cell line, an in vitro model
of Type II alveolar epithelium —were
sourced from ATCC (Manassas, VA, U.S.A.). Gibco Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, high glucose, GlutaMAX, pyruvate), Gibco
Penicillin-Streptomycin Liquid (AB), Quant-iT PicoGreen, and Lipofectamine
2000 Transfection Reagent were purchased from Invitrogen Life Technologies
(Grand Island, NY, U.S.A.). Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, Advantage, nonheat
inactivated, S11050) was purchased from Atlanta Biologicals Inc. (Norcross,
GA, U.S.A.). Trypsin EDTA 1X Corning Cellgro (0.25% trypsin, 2.21
mM EDTA in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution, HBSS) was purchased
from Mediatech Inc. (Manassas, VA, U.S.A.). CellTiter 96 AQueous Non-Radioactive
Cell Proliferation Assay (MTS reagent powder) and TransFast Transfection
Reagent were purchased from Promega Corporation (Madison, WI, U.S.A.).
Phenazine methosulfate (PMS, 95%) was purchased from MP Biomedicals
(Santa Ana, CA, U.S.A.). eGFP lentiviral particles (LVP-340, 1 ×
107 IFU × mL–1, a puromycin gene
under Rsv promoter allows the selection of transduced fluorescent
positive cells) were purchased from GenTarget Inc. (San Diego, CA,
U.S.A.). Puromycin dihydrochloride (10 mg × mL–1) was purchased from Toku-E (Bellingham, WA, U.S.A.). Cell culture
flasks Cellstar (75 cm2), 24- and 96-well Costar cell culture
microplates (flat bottom, tissue culture treated, polystyrene, sterile)
were purchased from Corning Inc. Life Sciences (Tewksbury, MA, U.S.A.).
Ninety-six-well microplate (black, flat bottom shape, polypropylene)
was purchased from Greiner Bio One (Monroe, NC, U.S.A.). Ribonuclease
A (RNase A, R5503, 43 U × mg–1 solid) from
bovine pancreas, heparin sodium salt (H4784, 194 U × mg–1) from porcine intestinal mucosa, d-mannitol (minimum 98%),
chitosan (CS, 100–300 kDa, 80% degree of deacetylation), 3,6-dimethyl-1,4-dioxane-2,5-dione
(lactide, LA), tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate (stannous octoate, SnOct2, 95%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.).
RiboLock RNase Inhibitor (RI, EO0381, 40 U × μL–1) was purchased from Thermo Scientific (part of Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). SeaKem LE Agarose was purchased from Lonza (Rockland,
ME, U.S.A.). Ethidium bromide (98%, 10 mg × mL–1) was purchased from IBI Scientific (Peosta, IA, U.S.A.). Tris Base
Ultrapure BioReagent (99.5%) was purchased from J. T. Baker (Avantor
Performance Materials, Center Valley, PA, U.S.A.). Glacial acetic
acid (100%), citric acid anhydrous (100%), phosphate buffered saline
(PBS 10× solution), and microscope cover glasses (22 mm ×
22 mm) were purchased from Fisher Scientific (part of Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). Tris-HCl 1 M pH 8, and Tris-EDTA
(TE) 20× pH 7.4 buffers were purchased from Boston BioProducts
(Ashland, MA, U.S.A.). Dibasic sodium phosphate anhydrous (99%) was
purchased from EMD Millipore (Billerica, MA, U.S.A.). Ethyl acetate
(99.5%) was purchased from Mallinckrodt Chemicals (present Macron
Chemicals, Avantor Performance Materials, Center Valley, PA, U.S.A.).
Propellant HFA-277 (Dymel 227 ea/P) was a gift from DuPont (Wilmington,
DE, U.S.A.). 2H,3H-perfluoropentane
(HPFP, DuPont Vertrel XF) was purchased from TMC Industries Inc. (Waconia,
MN, U.S.A.). Deuterated dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO-d6, 99.9%) was purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories
Inc. (Tewksbury, MA, U.S.A.). Multi-75 silicon Atomic Force Microscopy
(AFM) probes for force modulation and light tapping (75 kHz, 3 N ×
m–1) were purchased from Budget Sensors (distributed
by NanoAndMore USA, Lady’s Island, SC, U.S.A.). Mica sheet
was purchased from Ted Pella Inc. (Redding, CA, U.S.A.).

## Preparation
and Characterization of siRNA–G4NH2 Dendriplexes
Dendriplexes
were formed by combining equal volumes (10–100
μL) of negatively charged siRNA (50–150 μg ×
mL–1, RNase free DI-water) and positively charged
PAMAM G4NH2 (150–3000 μg × mL–1, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 buffer RNase free). , siRNA solution was added dropwise into the G4NH2 solution under
vortex at 3000 rpm (VWR Digital Vortex Mixer) for 1 min. The siRNA–G4NH2
dispersions were kept at room temperature for at least 30 min before
any experiments, in order to ensure complete formation of the dendriplexes. The G4NH2 concentration was varied in order
to prepare dendriplexes at different N/P ratios—the molar ratio
between the primary amine groups (N) from G4NH2 and phosphate groups
(P) from siRNA. 
siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplex dispersions (minimum of five independent batches, n = 5) were quantitatively analyzed using PicoGreen assay in a Synergy 2 Microplate Reader (BioTek, VT)
for the uncomplexed siRNA content, which was calculated using a linear
calibration curve (siRNA concentration vs fluorescent units). PicoGreen
is an ultrasensitive fluorescent nucleic acid stain used to quantify
double-stranded DNA (ds-DNA) and ds-siRNA
in solution. The siRNA complexation efficiency
(CE) was calculated on the basis of the difference between the initial
amount of siRNA added during the formation of the dendriplexes and
the non-entrapped free siRNA remaining in the dendriplex dispersion,
i.e., an indirect measurement of the siRNA content complexed with
PAMAM G4NH2 within dendriplexes.
Light Scattering (LS, Malvern
ZetaSizer Nano ZS) was used to evaluate
the hydrodynamic size (diameter) and zeta potential (ζ) of the
siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes. Samples were diluted to 80 nM siRNA,
and measurements were performed at 25 °C using refractive index,
viscosity, and dielectric constant of the buffer (for size) or DI-water
(for ζ). Dendriplexes were formed in RNase free DI-water for
ζ, which was calculated using the Smoluchowski Model. A minimum of three independent batches (n = 3) were used to calculated an average size and ζ.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Jeol/EO JSM-6510LV-LGS, 25 kV)
and AFM (Pico SPM LE Molecular Imaging) were used to investigate the
geometric size and morphology of the dendriplexes, which were formed
in RNase-free DI-water. For SEM imaging, several drops of the siRNA–G4NH2
dispersion were deposited on a microscope cover glass, dried overnight,
and sputter-coated with gold (Ernest Fullan) under vacuum for 40 s.
The sizes of the dendriplexes were estimated from the SEM images using
ImageJ 1.42q to confirm the size range
determined by LS. The histogram of the measured diameters (>400
particles)
was fit to a Gaussian distribution, from which average and standard
deviation were calculated. For AFM imaging, 20 μL of siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplex dispersion was deposited on a freshly cleaved mica sheet
and incubated at room temperature for 5 min to allow the binding of the dendriplexes onto the substrate. The
substrate was then washed with few drops of DI-water, and dried with
gentle air flow. AFM images were obtained using a Multi-75 silicon
AFM probe in AC tapping mode. 

## Gel Retardation
Assay
The capacity of G4NH2 to form
complexes with siRNA was also examined by gel electrophoresis. A known
volume of the dendriplex dispersion (equivalent to 300 ng siRNA) was
loaded in the slots of casted nondenaturing agarose gel (1.5% w/v
in tris base, acetic acid, and EDTA (TAE) 1X pH 8.2 buffer) stained
with ethidium bromide (0.5 μg × mL–1).
The electrophoresis was performed at 60 V (E0160-VWR Mini Gel Electrophoresis)
for 40 min, and the siRNA–dye migration was visualized under
UV irradiation (FOTO/Analyst Investigator/Eclipse with UV Transilluminator
Fotodyne Inc.). The images were recorded using the FOTO/Analyst PC
Image software (v.5).

## RNase Protection Assay
Three RNase
protection assays
were performed. (i) the determination of the minimal RNase A concentration
needed to completely degrade free siRNA is described in the (SI). (ii) The effect
of the N/P ratio on the protection efficiency against RNase A degradation
was also evaluated. Briefly, siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at different
N/P ratios were formed in buffer as described earlier, and 6 μL
dendriplex dispersions (equivalent to 250 ng siRNA) were incubated
with 8 μL RNase A in TE 1X pH 8 buffer (0.162 μg RNase
A per 1 μg siRNA) for 6 h at 37 °C; following the addition
of RiboLock RNase inhibitor (RI, 1 μL = 40
U) and incubation for 30 min at 37 °C to stop degradation reaction. Dendriplexes were dissociated by adding 8 μL
heparin (455 U per 1 μg siRNA) in TE 1X pH 8 buffer following
incubation for 30 min at 37 °C. Samples were frozen at −20
°C overnight, and the integrity of siRNA was determined by gel
electrophoresis at the same conditions as those applied for gel retardation
assay. (iii) The third set of experiments consisted in determining
the effect of RNase concentration on the siRNA integrity at a fixed
N/P ratio. Briefly, siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P 5 were
incubated with increased concentrations of RNase (0.35, 0.7, 1.0,
1.5, and 3.5 μg RNase A per 1 μg siRNA) for 6 h at 37
°C, following the treatments with RI and heparin, as described
earlier. Appropriate controls (free siRNA and dendriplexes ±
RNase A, and ± heparin treatments) were included in these experiments.
Heparin decomplexation assay is described in .

## In Vitro Release
siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes at different N/P ratios were formed in buffer as described
earlier. A known volume of 0.1 M citrate/phosphate buffer (pH 5 or
7.4, to mimic intracellular endosomes/lysosomes and cytosol, respectively) was added to the dendriplexes
dispersion (2.2 μg siRNA) to make 2 mL, and samples were incubated
in a water bath at 37 °C. Aliquots of 50 μL were taken
out at each time point, placed in a black 96-well microplate, and
frozen at −20 °C. The collected samples were quantitatively
analyzed using PicoGreen assay in Synergy
2 Microplate Reader (BioTek, VT) for the amount of siRNA released
with time, which was calculated using a linear calibration curve (siRNA
concentration vs fluorescent units) and taking into account the amount
of free and complexed siRNA removed from the sample in each aliquot
of 50 μL. Experiments were performed in triplicates (n = 3).

## In Vitro Cytotoxicity
A549 cells (passages
5–8 from the original passage provided by ATCC) were seeded
in 96-well microplate (5 × 103 cells per well) and
cultured in 200 μL DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% AB
(v/v) for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2 (Thermo Scientific
Incubator, NAPCO 8000WJ). For the cytotoxicity of free PAMAM G4NH2,
cells were rinsed with PBS 1X buffer, the medium was replaced by 200
μL of regular culture medium containing increased concentrations
of G4NH2 dendrimer (0–500 μM), and the cells were kept
in the incubator for 48 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. For
the cytotoxicity of dendriplexes, cells were rinsed with PBS 1X buffer,
and the medium was replaced by 100 μL DMEM containing increasing
concentrations of siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P 30 (0–25
μM G4NH2, and 0–1.25 μM siRNA) formed in buffer
as described earlier. Cells were kept in the incubator for 6 h at
37 °C and 5% CO2. They were then overlaid with 100
μL of regular culture medium (the dendriplexes were kept in
contact with the cells) and incubated for 72 h at 37 °C and 5%
CO2. The protocol for the in vitro cytotoxicity
of dendriplexes was designed according to the in vitro gene knockdown experimental conditions, and therefore, slightly
different from the protocol for dendrimer alone. The concentration
ranges of G4NH2 and siRNA used in the cytotoxicity experiments reported
here were designed in such way that the concentrations of G4NH2 and
siRNA applied in all gene knockdown and aerosol characterization fall
within that. Equally important, the incubation time in the cytotoxicity
experiments falls within the usual time times (24–96 h) applied
in gene knockdown experiments. The cell
viability was assessed by MTS cell proliferation assay. Briefly, cells were rinsed with PBS 1X buffer,
and 100 μL DMEM was added to the cells, followed by 20 μL
MTS/PMS solution. Cells were incubated in this DMEM/MTS/PMS mixture
for 4 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. MTS is bioreduced into
formazan (which is soluble in the culture medium) by dehydrogenase
enzymes found in metabolically active cells. Absorbance of formazan at 490 nm was measured directly from the
96-well microplate (Molecular Devices, Spectra Max 250), and it is
proportional to the number of living cells. Thus, cell viability (%)
was calculated as the ratio between the absorbance of treated (incubated
with free G4NH2 or dendriplexes) and untreated (G4NH2 and dendriplexes
free) cells. Experiments were performed applying seven independent
wells per each condition (n = 7).

## In
Vitro Gene Knockdown
In order to
evaluate the knockdown efficiency achieved by siRNA-based dendriplexes,
A549 cells stably expressing eGFP were developed as detailed in . After successfully establishing the eGFP
A549 cell line, eGFP knockdown experiments were performed. We tested
both a ds-siRNA targeting eGFP—the positive sequence, called
siRNA(+), and an eGFP-mismatch ds-siRNA, the scramble or negative
sequence called siRNA(−). Dendriplexes at different N/P ratios
were formed between PAMAM G4NH2 and siRNA(+) and siRNA(−) as
described earlier. Commercial transfection reagents (Lipofectamine
2000 and TransFast) , were used as positive controls,
and free siRNA (+ and −) was used as a negative control. All
eGFP knockdown experiments were performed according to Lipofectamine
2000 protocol. First, eGFP stable A549
cells were seeded in a 75 cm2 cell culture flask and subcultured
until approximately 90% confluence. The cell culture medium (DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS and 2.5 μg × mL–1 puromycin selective antibiotic) was changed every 2 days. Then,
eGFP stable A549 cells (passages 10–20 from the original passage
provided by ATCC) were seeded in a 24-well microplate (50,000 cells
per well) and cultured in 500 μL DMEM supplemented with 10%
FBS (v/v, no antibiotics) for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2 (Thermo Scientific Incubator, NAPCO 8000WJ). Cells were rinsed with
PBS 1X buffer, and 250 μL transfection medium (DMEM containing
80 nM of siRNA (+ or −) equivalent to 20 pmol per well) was
added, and the transfection proceeded for 6 h at 37 °C and 5%
CO2. The transfection medium was then replaced with 500
μL culture medium (DMEM + 10% FBS, no antibiotics), and the
cells were returned to the incubator for 72 h at 37 °C and 5%
CO2. Cells were resuspended in 1 mL PBS 1X buffer, and
the median fluorescent intensity (MFI) was measured by flow cytometry
(FACS, HWCRC 615 - BD LSR II Analyzer in Microscopy) with data from
10,000 to 20,000 cells. Untreated non-eGFP and eGFP stable A549 cells
(no siRNA or dendriplexes) were used as further controls. The MFI
level of eGFP expression in untreated eGFP stable A549 cells was taken
as 100%. The % eGFP knockdown efficiency was calculated by correlating
the eGFP expression of untreated stable eGFP A549 cells with that
from transfected cells.
The effect of the propellant HFA-227
on the biological activity of the anti-eGFP ds-siRNA was also investigated.
Briefly, a known amount of siRNA(+) dissolved in RNase free DI-water
was placed in a pressure proof glass vial, frozen at −20 °C
overnight, and lyophilized (Labconco Freeze Zone 1) at −47
°C and 0.055 mbar for 48 h. The vial was closed with a pressure
valve (HiP, 15-11AF1) and propellant HFA-227 was filled into the vial
with the help of a manual syringe pump (HiP, 50-6-15) and a home-built
high-pressure filler. The siRNA(+) was stored in HFA-227 at 25 °C
and saturation pressure of the propellant, simulating a pMDI formulation
of free siRNA(+). After two months, the propellant HFA-227 was released
by depressurization, and the siRNA(+) was allowed to dry at room temperature,
following its dissolution in a known volume of RNase A free DI-water,
making a siRNA(+) concentration of 10 nmol per 1 mL. As control, an
aliquot of the lyophilized siRNA(+) was kept in the freezer at −20
°C instead of being stored in pressurized, liquid HFA. Gene knockdown
experiments (as described earlier) were performed with the siRNA(+)
to evaluate the effect of storage under a compressed HFA environment.
All transfection experiments (siRNA as received, stored in HFA and
freezer) were performed, at minimum, in triplicates (n = 3).

## Preparation of Chitosan-g-Lactic Acid (CSLA) Microparticles Loaded with Dendriplexes
First, the biodegradable, water-soluble, and HFA-philic CSLA co-oligomer
was synthesized according to our previous work. CSLA was composed by short segments of lactide [oligo(LA)]
grafted onto low-Mw CS via ring-opening
polymerization. Details about the synthesis
and characterization can be found in . Emulsification diffusion was employed
to prepare core–shell microparticles of CSLA loaded with siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes. Briefly, 15 mg CSLA was dissolved in 800 μL RNase
free DI-water, and combined with 200 μL dispersion of siRNA–G4NH2
at N/P 10. The mixture (equivalent to 5–10 μg siRNA)
was emulsified in 19 mL ethyl acetate using a sonication bath (VWR,
P250D, set to 180 W) for 5 min at 15–20 °C making a water-in-oil
(W/O) emulsion, which was quickly transferred to 180 mL ethyl acetate.
Core–shell microparticles (CSLA as shell) loaded with siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes within their core were thus formed, collected via centrifugation
(5000 rpm for 20 min), and dried in air-flow at room temperature.

## Preparation of Mannitol Microparticles Loaded with Dendriplexes
siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P 10 were formed in buffer
as described earlier, and 200 μL of a dendriplex dispersion
(equivalent to 10 μg siRNA) was combined with 30 mg mannitol
previously dissolved in 800 μL RNase free DI-water. The mixture
was spray-dried (BUCHI Mini Spray Dryer B-290) using the following
parameters: atomizing air flow = 473 L·h–1,
aspiration = 70%, pump ratio = 5%, nozzle cleaner = 0, inlet temperature
= 45 °C, outlet temperature = 30–33 °C. Nitrogen
was the atomizing gas, and dry mannitol microparticles loaded with
dendriplexes (white powder) were accumulated in the collection vessel
at the end of the glass cyclone, from where they were collected to
be used in further experiments.

## Characterization of CSLA
and Mannitol Microparticles Loaded
with Dendriplexes
siRNA loading efficiency into microparticles
was assessed by densitometry. Briefly,
a known amount of particles was dissolved in 200 μL TE 1X pH
8 buffer and incubated at room temperature overnight, so that the
water-soluble mannitol or CSLA shell could be broken down. Next, a
known mass of heparin (equivalent to 455 U per 1 μg siRNA, based
on the estimation that all siRNA was loaded into microparticles) was
added to the mixture, which was vortexed until heparin dissolution.
The system was incubated for 30 min at 37 °C, so that siRNA complexed
with the G4NH2 could be released (see heparin decomplexation assay
in ). Samples were frozen at −20
°C overnight, and gel electrophoresis was performed at conditions
applied for the gel retardation assay. The siRNA content encapsulated
into the microparticles was quantified by densitometry using ImageJ
1.42q based on the electrophoresis images.
Appropriate controls were employed—free siRNA mixed with heparin
(positive control), and CSLA (or mannitol) mixed with heparin (no
siRNA, negative control). Four independent batches (n = 4) of dendriplexes loaded into microparticles were used to calculate
an average and standard deviation of the loading. In addition, the
integrity of the siRNA after dendriplexes formation followed by encapsulation
into CSLA or mannitol microparticles was also determined.
The
size (diameter) of the microparticles was assessed by LS. Briefly,
particles loaded with siRNA–G4NH2 at N/P 10 were dispersed
in HPFP (2 mg per 1 mL) using a sonication bath, and measurements
were performed at 25 °C using refractive index, viscosity, and
dielectric constant of the HPFP, which is a model of propellant HFA
that is liquid at ambient conditions. Next, HPFP was evaporated, and 1 mL RNase free DI-water was added
to the microparticles to break down the CSLA shell (or mannitol) and
release the siRNA from the dendriplexes. LS measurements were performed
at 25 °C using refractive index, viscosity, and dielectric constant
of the water, and thus, the hydrodynamic diameter of the dendriplexes
was recorded, but at this time, in the presence of the CSLA (or mannitol)
dissolved in the aqueous medium. SEM was used to investigate the geometrical
size and morphology of the microparticles, which were dispersed in
HPFP using a sonication bath. Several drops of the dispersion were
deposited on a microscope cover glass, the HPFP was quickly evaporated
by air flow, and the glass was sputter-coated with gold (Ernest Fullan)
under vacuum for 40 s, following the SEM images.

## Preparation
of the pMDI Formulations and Evaluation of Their
Physical Stability
A known mass of microparticles (CSLA or
mannitol) encapsulating siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes (at N/P 10)
was weighed into pressure proof glass vials (8412-B, West Pharmaceutical
Services) and crimp-sealed (CroPharm, Inc.) with a 63 μL metering
valves (EPDM, 3 M Drug Delivery Systems). A known volume of propellant
HFA-227 was added with the help of a manual syringe pump (HiP, 50-6-15)
and a home-built high pressure filler in order to make a 2 mg ×
mL–1 concentration. The particles were dispersed in the propellant using a sonication
bath (VWR, P250D, set to 180 W, 15–20 °C). The physical stability was investigated via
a sedimentation rate experiment, that is, by visually monitoring the
quality of the dispersions as a function of time after stopping the
mechanical energy from the sonication–digital images were taken
according to the time. pMDI formulations
of free siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P 10 were attempted,
as described in . However, the free dendriplexes
were found not to disperse in the propellant to any degree.

## Aerosol
Characterization of the pMDI Formulations
An
eight-stage Andersen Cascade Impactor (ACI, Copley Scientific), fitted
with a USP induction port and operated with a flow rate of 28.3 L
× min–1 at 25 °C and 75% relative humidity, was used to evaluate the aerosol properties
of the pMDI formulations, which were prepared as described earlier.
Prior to each ACI test, the formulation was dispersed in the propellant
with the help of a sonication bath for 10–15 min at 15–20
°C. After five actuations were fired to waste, the next 50–65
actuations (depending on the siRNA concentration in the formulation)
were fired into the ACI, with an interval of 10 s between each actuation. After each test, the ACI was disassembled and
had the actuator (AC), induction port (IP), and all stages rinsed
with and kept in 20 mL RNase free DI-water for 6 h in order to break
down the water-soluble CSLA shell (or mannitol) from the microparticles
containing siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes. Samples were frozen at
−20 °C overnight and lyophilized (Labconco Freeze Zone
1) at −47 °C and 0.055 mbar for 48 h. The collected powder
was dissolved in 100 μL TE 1X buffer pH 8 and incubated with
a known mass of heparin (equivalent to 455 U per 1 μg siRNA,
as described in ) for 30 min at 37 °C,
in order to dissociate the siRNA from the PAMAM G4NH2. Samples were
frozen (−20 °C) overnight, loaded into the slots of nondenaturing
agarose gel following electrophoresis at conditions applied for gel
retardation assay. The siRNA content in each ACI stage was quantified
by densitometry using ImageJ 1.42q based
on the electrophoresis images and appropriate controls (presence or
absence of siRNA, as described earlier). The aerosol characteristics
were thus calculated: (i) fine particle fraction [FPF: the siRNA content
on the respirable stages of the ACI (from stage 3 to filter) over
the total siRNA content released into the impactor (from IP to filter)
excluding the siRNA remaining in the actuator]; (ii) respirable fraction (RF: the siRNA content collected
from stage 0 to filter over the total siRNA released into the impactor); (iii) % siRNA recovered, and siRNA content in
a single puff dose; (iv) mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD);
and (v) geometric standard deviation (GSD). MMAD and GSD were calculated
as described in the literature. ACI experiments
were performed in duplicates (n = 2).

## Statistical
Analysis
OriginPro 8 SR0 v8.0724 (B724)
was used to perform statistical analysis. Data were compared using
One-Way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s posthoc
test. Means were considered statistically significant different with
a p value <0.05.

## Results and Discussion

## Preparation
and Characterization of siRNA–G4NH2 Dendriplexes
siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes at different N/P ratios were prepared
and characterized with respect to their morphology, size and surface
charge according to AFM, SEM and LS. The results are summarized in
Table . Details of the characterization for
one N/P ratio (N/P = 20), including AFM and SEM micrographs, are shown
in Figure .
 It was observed that the hydrodynamic diameter of the dendriplexes
did not vary substantially with the N/P ratio. As measured by LS,
the size average of all N/P ratios combined was 257 nm. This value
was confirmed by SEM (size average of 258 nm), and since these techniques
provide a good representation of the sizes of dendriplexes in solution,
they were preferred to the sizes estimated from AFM images (∼100
nm). Discrepancies between the sizes of dendriplexes obtained from
LS and AFM images have already been reported, and are likely due to sample preparation. As seen in the literature, , , the size of dendriplexes usually
displays significant heterogeneities, as is the case for polyplexes
prepared with other cationic polymers. This heterogeneity has been
attributed to the electrostatic and entropic nature of the complexation
process. 
The overall surface charge
of the siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes
were fairly similar, and did not show any specific trend as a function
N/P either, with an average value of ∼34 mV, also in agreement
with previous studies of dendriplexes with PAMAM dendrimers. 

## Gel Retardation Assay
The ability
of G4NH2 to form
complexes with siRNA as a function of the N/P ratio was investigated
by gel electrophoresis combined with PicoGreen assay. The results
are summarized in Table and Figure .
 The complexation efficiency (CE)
of G4NH2 to siRNA is seen to be
low (<80%) at N/P < 1. However, almost all siRNA was complexed
with the PAMAM G4NH2 dendrimer at N/P ratios >2 (siRNA CE >
95%).
These quantitative results assessed by PicoGreen assay—measuring
the uncomplexed siRNA remaining in solution after dendriplex formation,
i.e., an indirect method of quantifying the siRNA CE—were confirmed
by gel electrophoresis (inset in Figure ). The siRNA band is seen to disappear in the gel
as the N/P ratio increases, indicating that the siRNA was largely
complexed with the PAMAM G4NH2 dendrimer and, thus, was unable to
flow through the pores of the gel (compare lanes 2–11: siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes formed at N/P 0.2–30, with lane 1: untreated siRNA control). Therefore, these results
reinforce the observation that highly positively charged PAMAM G4NH2
is able to condense siRNA into NPs very efficiently, since very little
uncomplexed siRNA was found to be free in the supernatant after the
complexation process (N/P > 2).

## Protection
of siRNA by PAMAM G4NH2 against RNase Degradation
siRNA is
vulnerable to degradation by RNases, and
one of the important potential advantages in using
nanocarriers in siRNA therapeutic technologies is the ability to protect
this frail cargo. Thus, in order to evaluate the ability of PAMAM
G4NH2 to protect siRNA from RNase degradation, siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes were formed at several N/P ratios and incubated with
the RNase A (the lowest concentration found to digest free siRNA completely
−0.162 μg RNase A per 1 μg siRNA – as seen
in the ) for 6 h at 37 °C, following
RNase inhibitor and heparin treatments, and gel electrophoresis so
as to release and quantify the nondegraded siRNA. The results are
presented in Figure . PAMAM G4NH2 is seen
to efficiently protect siRNA from RNase A degradation upon complexation.
As seen in Figure , for all tested N/P ratios,
the siRNA released from the dendriplexes after being kept in contact
with RNase A (lanes 3, 7, 11, and 15) was comparable to the siRNA
extracted from the dendriplexes which were not exposed to RNase A
(lanes 5, 9, 13, and 17 - positive controls, respectively).
 Next, siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes formed at
N/P 5 were incubated
with increasing concentrations of RNase A (0.35, 0.7, 1.0, 1.5, and
3.5 μg per 1 μg siRNA) for 6 h at 37 °C, following
RNase inhibitor and heparin treatments, and gel electrophoresis, in
order to probe the protection efficiency provided by the dendrimers
at increasing RNase A concentrations. The results are shown in Figure and again indicate that the siRNA was sufficiently
protected from RNase degradation upon complexation with PAMAM G4NH2.
Even at this relatively low N/P ratio (N/P of 5), the siRNA was well
protected when kept in contact with very high concentrations of RNase
A (3.5 μg per 1 μg siRNA); in Figure , compare the siRNA from dendriplexes incubated in presence
(lane 20) and absence (lane 22)
of RNase A.
 

## In Vitro Release of siRNA from PAMAM G4NH2
The siRNA release from the dendriplexes was evaluated in
vitro at 37 °C, in citrate/phosphate buffer at pHs 7.4
and 5, in order to mimic cytosol and endosomes/lysosomes, respectively. The results are shown in Figure , and indicate that the siRNA in vitro release
profile from dendriplexes (N/P 10, 20, and 30) is highly dependent
upon the pH. The release is much slower at acidic medium than at physiological
pH. At low pHs (<5) all primary and tertiary amines from PAMAM
G4NH2 are protonated, and consequently
the electrostatic interactions between the positively charged dendrimer
and negatively charged siRNA increase, which results in stronger binding
and lower siRNA released at low pH. At physiological pH 7.4 the tertiary
amines are deprotonated, and only the primary amines are protonated, which decreases the electrostatic interactions
between siRNA and G4NH2, and as a result, the release of the siRNA
increases at higher pH.
 This degree of compactness observed at lower pHs
is also manifested
by the fact that no burst release is observed at pH 5.0. On the other
hand, at physiological pH, a burst release was observed after 1–2
days, and it was ∼3.5% or 5.5 pmol—based on the initial
loading of siRNA into dendriplexes. After 3–5 days, it was
observed that 8–10% siRNA was released from the dendriplexes,
which corresponds to 13–16 pmol. The results in Figure show that 48, 24, and 34% of the total siRNA complexed
with G4NH2 is released from the dendriplexes at N/P 10, 20, and 30,
respectively, after 20 days in citrate/phosphate buffer pH 7.4 at
37 °C. While no literature results are available for the in vitro release of siRNA from PAMAM dendriplexes, we can
contrast the results obtained here with the release of oligonucleotide
(ON) from PEI polyplexes. At N/P 15 and
40 in PBS pH 7.4 and 37 °C, 55% ON was released from PEI after
20 days (i.e., ON was released faster from PEI at N/P 40 than N/P
15), a result somehow similar to that observed here–siRNA released
slightly faster from G4NH2 at N/P 30 than N/P 20 in buffer pH 7.4.
This is likely due to hydrophilization operated by G4NH2, i.e., dendriplexes formed at higher N/P have
increased G4NH2 content, which can contribute for more rapid entry
of water molecules into the dendriplexes. Water molecules can penetrate
throughout the G4NH2 interior, cause the dendrimer structure to swell
(due to the favorable interaction of water molecules with the primary
and tertiary amines), , and thus release the siRNA. However,
the amount of siRNA released from dendriplexes at N/P 30 was statistically
significant different from that at N/P 20 at 12 h and day 2 only.
Since the in vitro release was conducted with 24
time points, we demonstrate that, in 92% of all time points, the siRNA
released from dendriplexes at N/P 20 and 30 was not statistically
significantly different (n = 3 for each time point,
One-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s posthoc test, p value <0.05).

## In Vitro Cytotoxicity of
PAMAM G4NH2 and siRNA−G4NH2
Dendriplexes
Cationic dendritic polymers, such as polypropyleneimine
(PPI), poly-l-lysine (PLL), and PAMAM, may induce significant in vitro cytotoxicity due to the high density of cationic
groups on their surface. There are many
reports discussing the concentration- and generation-dependent toxicity
of dendrimers, , , − which is a critical factor to be considered when
evaluating the potential of dendrimers as nanocarriers for siRNA delivery.
Here, in vitro cytotoxicity studies were performed
with A549 cells by incubating them with free PAMAM G4NH2, and siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes at N/P 30, according to the MTS cell proliferation assay. The cell viability results are shown in Figure .
 The results presented in Figure a
indicate
that the viability of A549 was >85% when the cells were in contact
with PAMAM G4NH2 for 48 h at concentrations up to 5 μM. This
result is in agreement with previous literature reporting that the
viability of A549 cells was >80% for G4NH2 at low concentrations
of
0.7 and 7 μM, as evaluated by MTT cell proliferation assay after
72 h of incubation. Several other works
report different cytotoxicity results for PAMAM G4NH2, , , and thus, the cytotoxicity of
G4NH2 is dependent upon concentration, cell type, and incubation time. PAMAM dendrimers are known to be cytotoxic by
causing membrane rupture, substantially related to the formation of
cavities in the cellular membrane. Toxicity
and other dendritic properties (interactions, mechanisms of cellular
uptake, and intracellular fate) are most likely governed by the surface
groups. 
The toxic effects of siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes at N/P 30
(the highest N/P ratio applied in the gene knockdown experiments discussed
next) to A549 were also investigated via MTS assay after 72 h of contact
of dendriplexes with the cells. The results in Figure b indicate that the cytotoxicity of the dendriplexes at N/P
30 was low, even at the highest concentration studied–viability
of A549 cells was ∼80% at 25 and 1.25 μM of G4NH2 and
siRNA, respectively. In addition, the in vitro viability
of A549 cells incubated with siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P
30 (72 h) is comparable to that with G4NH2 alone (48 h) at the same
G4NH2 concentration, e.g., cell viability of ∼90% (Figure a and b) at 0.25 μM G4NH2; and ∼75%
and 80% (Figures a and b, respectively) at
25 μM G4NH2. Moreover, the in vitro viability
of A549 cells after incubation with 5 and 50 μM G4NH2 alone
(48 h) was found not statistically significantly different from that
with 25/1.25 μM G4NH2–siRNA at N/P 30 (72 h) (n = 7, One-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s posthoc
test, p value <0.05). These results suggest that
siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes did not become more toxic than G4NH2
alone.
It has been reported in literature that J-774 cells (macrophage-like
cell line) showed 90–95% viability after 24 h incubation with
siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P 10 (0.05 μM siRNA) as
measured by MTT assay. Here, at the same
0.05 μM siRNA concentration, A549 cells showed ∼85% viability.
This result is interesting since the time of incubation and N/P ratio
were both 3-fold higher than that reported in literature. Other work showed that the viability of A549
was reduced to 45% when the cells were incubated with G5NH2/ON (20
mer and 0.16 μM) dendriplexes at N/P 15 for 4 h, following measure
by CellTiter-Blue. Here, at similar 0.125
μM RNA concentration, the viability of A549 cells was ∼80%.
Thus, it can be seen that the in vitro cell viability
resulting from the delivery of siRNA using PAMAM dendrimers is variable
at some extent and depends on several factors—e.g., dendrimer
surface groups and generation, physicochemical properties of the siRNA–dendrimer
dendriplexes, assay, experimental conditions, cell type and passage,
and certainly, some interlab variability can be observed as well.
The in vitro cytotoxicity results are necessary
for the gene knockdown studies. When working in concentration regions
of no toxicity, gene knockdown is not confounded with nonspecific
toxicity. At the harshest conditions of the in vitro cytotoxicity studies, the cell viability of A549 was still ∼80%
after 72 h of incubation with siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P
30 containing 25 and 1.25 μM G4NH2 and siRNA, respectively.
In contrast, at the harshest condition of the in vitro gene knockdown experiments (discussed next), the A549 cells were
incubated for 6 h only, with dendriplexes at N/P 30 containing 1.95
μM and 80 nM G4NH2 and siRNA, respectively. At these G4NH2 and
siRNA concentrations, the viability of A549 cells was at least ∼90%
(Figure b), and expected to be higher at smaller
N/P ratios. It is worthwhile to mention that cellular debris (due
to dead or damaged dying cells) was gated out during the FACS analyses
to prevent any toxic effects of the G4NH2 alone and/or siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes to mask the true gene knockdown.

## In Vitro Gene Knockdown of siRNA–G4NH2
Dendriplexes
FACS of A549 cells stably expressing eGFP was
used to investigate the gene silencing efficiency of siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes. Lipofectamine 2000 (LF) and TransFast (TF) were the
commercial transfection reagents selected as positive controls. TF
is originally designed as a transfection reagent for DNA, but it has shown gene suppression of ∼60–90%
when used to deliver siRNA in vitro. Free siRNA was used as the negative control. A549 cells
that were not transduced (no eGFP) were used as reference. Cellular
debris was gated out during FACS to prevent the small toxicity of
the nanocarriers to mask true gene knockdown. Transfection of eGFP
stable A549 cells was performed with ds-siRNA targeting eGFP, the
positive sequence siRNA(+), and an eGFP-mismatch ds-siRNA, the nonrelevant
negative sequence siRNA(−). The results are shown in Figure , and indicate that the gene knockdown efficiency
of siRNA(+)–G4NH2 dendriplexes varied from 22 to 37%, and was
intermediate between the positive controls (LF at 72% and TF at 70%),
and free siRNA(+) (2.8%). The gene silencing efficiency of the eGFP
cells treated with the commercial reagents and dendriplexes at N/P
5, 10, 20 and 30, was found to be statistically significantly different
from that of eGFP cells treated with free siRNA(+) only. Additionally,
no statistically significant difference was found when comparing the
eGFP knockdown efficiency as a function of the N/P ratio (minimum n = 3, One-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s posthoc
test, p value <0.05).
 Few reports in literature have
investigated the in vitro knockdown efficiency by
siRNA or antisense oligonucleotide (AON)
delivered via dendriplexes to A549 lung alveolar epithelial cells.
Dendrosomes (dendriplexes formed between G5NH2 and AON incorporated
into liposomes) have shown suppression of the PKC-α gene expression
between ca. 27–74% at messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels,
respectively. Dendriplexes formed between
folate–PEG appended to cyclodextrin–G3NH2 conjugates
and siRNA have provided luciferase knockdown ranging from ∼15–50%, and up to 80% with siRNA–G7NH2 dendriplexes. Such variability in the in vitro gene silencing efficiency is expected due to the differences in
the target gene, assay to assess the knockdown, experimental conditions
during transfection (e.g., N/P ratio, treatment times, siRNA and AON
concentrations), generation of the PAMAM dendrimer, and presence of
other molecules/structures in the carrier.
While no gene knockdown
result has been reported for siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes on A549 cells, we contrast our results with the literature
for other cell types. siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P 10 caused
12.5 and 22% inhibition of eGFP expression in J-774 (macrophage-like)
and T98G (human glioblastoma) cell lines, respectively, and 10% eGFP knockdown in C-166 (mouse yolk
sac embryo) cells. Thus, the eGFP silencing
efficiency (∼22–37%) obtained with siRNA–G4NH2
dendriplexes on the A549 alveolar epithelial cells is comparable to
other cell types and falls within the range reported for other PAMAM-based
dendriplexes (with and without the help of other molecules/structures).
Despite this low-to-moderate gene silencing in vitro, the proposed siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes have the potential
to demonstrate gene silencing in vivo (following
optimization, but such is not the focus of this work), since PAMAM-based
nanocarreirs have shown promising results in the delivering siRNA in vivo, even if the gene silencing efficiency in
vivo is lower compared to that observed in vitro. , , This is due to the
siRNA potency, i.e., very small amounts of siRNA (once properly delivered
to the target site) are shown sufficient for effective in
vivo gene silencing. − 
It is worth noticing a
reduction in eGFP expression in A549 cells
is also observed when the scramble siRNA(−) was delivered using
LF (34%), TF (19.5%), and G4NH2 (6–15%): Figure . It has been shown that LF/siRNA(−) complexes cause
measurable and undesirable gene silencing ∼25–50% in
different cell types. , This unwanted eGFP suppression
is most likely due to off-target effects, which can be due to toxicity of nanocarrier, and also due to the similarity between the nucleotide sequence
from the siRNA(−) and short motifs in mRNA and other unrelated
genes not targeted during the transfection. , Alterations in gene expression in vitro and in vivo have been also reported for several types of nanocarriers,
including linear and branched PEI, PEG–PEI, polypropylenimine (PPI), diaminobutane (DAB). Off-target
effects in RNAi are quite common and an issue of consideration when
developing RNAi technologies, but may
be hard to avoid, and are still not well
understood. 

## In Vitro Gene Knockdown of siRNA–G4NH2
Dendriplexes Exposed to Propellant HFA
In order to test whether
the biological activity of the siRNA was preserved after the formulation
in the pMDI (under HFA atmosphere), the gene knockdown activity of
dendriplexes formed with siRNA(+) that was lyophilized and stored
under HFA-227 at 25 °C and saturation pressure of the propellant
for two months, was compared to a control (lyophilized but stored
at −20 °C). Gene knockdown experiments were performed
on eGFP A549 cells as discussed above, with dendriplexes having an
N/P ratio of 20, and the results are shown in Figure . Even after storage conditions in propellant HFA, it can
be observed that the siRNA(+) was still biologically active to silence
the eGFP expression in A549 cells: ∼69% and 22% eGFP knockdown
for TF and dendriplexes at N/P 20, respectively. Similar values were
obtained with the control siRNA(+) that was not stored under HFA-227,
but at −20 °C in freezer (FRE)—67% and 22% for
TF and N/P 20, respectively. The gene silencing efficiency was found
to be statistically significant between the eGFP cells treated with
TF/siRNA(+) and dendriplexes at N/P 20–for both storages in
HFA and FRE, when compared to cells treated with free siRNA(+) as
received. Most importantly, the gene knockdown efficiency provided
by dendriplexes at N/P 20 (and TF) prepared with siRNA(+) as received,
stored in HFA and FRE, was found not to be statistically significantly
different (minimum n = 3, One-Way ANOVA followed
by Tukey’s posthoc test, p value <0.05).
Collectively, these results indicate that the biological activity
of the siRNA is kept after long-term exposure in propellant HFA.

## Preparation and Characterization of Microparticles Loaded with
Dendriplexes
There are major obstacles in the regional delivery
of the dendriplexes to the lungs when using OI devices. While the
dendriplexes are in the order of nanometers in size, the optimum aerosol
size for deep lung deposition is in the micrometer range (0.5–5
μm). Particles with an aerodynamic
diameter <0.5 μm may be exhaled, while those >5 μm
tend to be deposited in the mouth and throat, ending up in the digestive
tract. Moreover, alveolar macrophages are most selective to particles
of 1–3 μm, and less efficient toward larger (≳6
μm) and smaller (≲260 nm) particles. In the case of pMDIs, another hurdle that needs to be overcome
is the physical stabilization of the microparticle dispersions (suspension)
in the low dielectric propellant HFA. , 
It is
necessary, therefore, to develop particle engineering strategies capable
of forming stable suspension of the dendriplexes in the form of microparticles
suitable for deep lung deposition and able to minimize the uptake
by alveolar macrophages. We demonstrate in this work two such strategies.
One consists in encapsulating the dendriplexes within mannitol microparticles,
via spray drying; the other consists in using a CSLA co-oligomer shell
that is formed during emulsification diffusion. Mannitol was chosen
as it has high aqueous solubility, it is a generally recognized as
a safe (GRAS) excipient widely used as bulking agent and nonactive
carrier in dry powder inhalers. Mannitol
particles alone also have shown to have less adhesion/cohesion in
propellant HFA, slower sedimentation rates, and superior aerosol performance
than other sugars, such as lactose. The
CSLA co-oligomer was chosen because it is water-soluble and interfacially
active at the W/O interface of the emulsion droplets (it migrates/resides
at the interface formed between the small water droplets into the
large ethyl acetate organic phase). During
the emulsification diffusion, the dendriplexes are kept within the
water emulsion droplets, and then encapsulated by the CSLA co-oligomer
residing at the W/O interface of the emulsion droplets. Thus, the
organic phase is not expected to be in contact with the siRNA of the
dendriplexes and/or affect somehow the dendriplex aggregates within
the CSLA microparticles. In addition, the CSLA co-oligomer is degradable
and non-HFA soluble–i.e., the shell will not disintegrate in
HFA but will break down when in contact with the fluid lining the
lungs. The ester groups from the LA are
HFA-philic, , and microparticles formed with
CSLA shell have shown enhanced physical stability in propellant HFAs. , , An important detail is that the
nonactive ingredients used to form these microparticles (mannitol
and CSLA) can readily dissolve in aqueous media , as the fluid lining the lungs, thus releasing the nanosized dendriplexes,
and consequently minimizing the alveolar macrophage uptake. In addition,
it is also worthwhile to point out that we have previously shown that
CSLA does not impact the gene transfer potential of CSLA-based microparticles
as carriers for CS-pDNA complexes. 
The size and morphology of the CSLA and mannitol microparticles
containing siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P 10 were evaluated
by LS and SEM. The results are shown in Figure . Microparticles were loaded with dendriplexes at N/P 10 instead
of N/P 5 and 20 (even though dendriplexes at N/P 5, 10, and 20 resulted
in similar in vitro gene knockdown efficiency, as
shown in Figure ) because N/P 10 produced
slightly smaller and more stable dendriplexes in solution (please
refer to Table ) than did N/P 5 and 20.
 The hydrodynamic diameter of CSLA and mannitol microparticles
measured
by LS was found to be 2.0 ± 0.8 μm and 4.6 ± 0.9 μm,
respectively, as shown in Figure ; average
and standard deviation were calculated based on eight (n = 8) independent batches. These results suggest that the spherical
dendriplexes carrying microparticles are in the desired size range
for appropriate deep lung deposition. 
It is worthwhile to mention that the size of the dendriplexes
at
N/P 10 was measured by LS after contacting the microparticles with
aqueous solution, and it was found to be 236 ± 75 nm and 192
± 38 nm for CSLA and mannitol, respectively. Size distribution
by LS is shown as inset in Figure ; average and standard deviation calculated based on five
(n = 5) independent experiments. Thus, the hydrodynamic
diameter of the dendriplexes at N/P 10 released from the shell are
readily comparable to those (Table ) before
loading into CSLA or mannitol microparticles and are nonstatistically
significantly different (n = 5, One-Way ANOVA followed
by Tukey’s posthoc test, p value <0.05).
This demonstrates that the process of forming the microparticles does
not seem to induce any undesirable irreversible aggregation of the
dendriplexes.
The siRNA loading efficiency (% siRNA encapsulated
into microparticles
from the initial content complexed with dendrimers) into CSLA and
mannitol microparticles was measured via densitometry using ImageJ, based on the images obtained from gel electrophoresis
(insets in Figure ) using
the protocol discussed in . The siRNA loading efficiency within the microparticles of 49.0
± 8.4% was found for CSLA (230 ± 20 ng siRNA per 1 mg CSLA
particles), and 25.4 ± 4.0% (229 ± 47 ng siRNA per 1 mg
mannitol particles) for mannitol. The final siRNA yield was 65% and
50% (w/w) after emulsification diffusion and spray drying, considering
the initial content of CSLA and mannitol, respectively.
The
integrity of the siRNA after particle preparation was also
observed using the same gel images (inset in Figure ). The siRNA bands after particle preparation was
found to be very similar (position in the gel) to the untreated siRNA
control (compare lanes 1 and 3).
The intensity of the band in lane 3, which corresponds
to the siRNA released from microparticles, is weaker due to the fact
that less siRNA is added to the gel (see loading efficiency above).
Collectively, these results demonstrate the feasibility of encapsulating
siRNA-based dendriplexes into CSLA and mannitol microparticles via
emulsification diffusion and spray drying processes, respectively.
The siRNA was successfully loaded into such microparticles (which
showed appropriate size for formulation in pMDIs), it conserved its
integrity, and the hydrodynamic diameter of the dendriplexes was kept
after particle processing and shell dissolution.

## Physical Stability
of Microparticles Loaded with Dendriplexes
in Propellant HFA
Sedimentation rate experiments of the microparticles
containing dendriplexes at 25 °C and saturation pressure of the
propellant were performed in order to evaluate their physical stability
in HFA. Microparticles were weighed into pressure proof glass vials,
crimp sealed with 63 μL metering valves, and a known volume
of propellant HFA-227 was added to make 2 mg × mL–1. The particles were dispersed with the aid of a sonication bath
for 30 min at 15–20 °C. Stability of the formulations
was determined visually via sedimentation rate/flocculation as a function
of the time after stopping the mechanical energy input from the sonication
bath. Digital images were taken, and the results are presented as insets in Figure .
 Dispersions of both CSLA and mannitol microparticles containing
siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes at N/P 10 in propellant HFA-227 showed
good physical stability. While some aggregation could be observed
on the walls of the canister and in the bulk propellant, no strong
flocculation/irreversible aggregation was observed (insets in Figure ). Aggregates formed due to sedimentation
could be easily redispersed by simple manual agitation. In the case
of CSLA, the improved physical stability compared to dendriplexes
alone, which are not dispersible in propellant HFA (see ) arises due to the enhanced solvation of the
ester groups from (LA chains) of CSLA by the propellant HFA. , In the case of the mannitol, the reasons for the enhanced stability
are less clear, but we expect to have an improved density matching
to that of HFA-227 since spherical spray-dried mannitol microparticles
produce densities ∼1.47–1.51 g × cm–3 (depending on the spray-drying conditions) and the density of HFA-227 is 1.39 at 25 °C. Moreover, the fact that the cohesive force for mannitol
in HFA is relatively lower compared to other those of other sugars,
such as lactose, indicates an enhanced
solvation of that surface in the propellant, but this is a relative
observation, and no quantitative comparison with the cohesive interaction
between CSLA particles and those with mannitol is available.

## Aerosol
Performance of the pMDI Formulations with the Engineered
Microparticles
An eight-stage ACI was used to quantify the
aerosol properties of the HFA-based formulations containing the mannitol
and CSLA engineered microparticles, with siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes
(N/P 10) loaded within their core. As described earlier, free dendriplexes
(negative control, with no mannitol or CSLA shell) did not disperse
at all in propellant HFA-227 (the dendriplexes remained stuck onto
the walls of the canister, and thus ACI tests could not even be performed).
The siRNA content for the microparticle formulations was quantified
by incubation of each ACI stage with RNase free DI-water (which broke
down the mannitol or CSLA shell, thus releasing the dendriplexes to
the aqueous solution) followed by freezing, lyophilization, heparin
decomplexation assay (which dissociates the siRNA from the G4NH2),
gel electrophoresis, and densitometry using the gel images, as described
earlier. A summary of the results is shown in Table , and plotted as % in Figure .
 The FPF, an important aerosol characteristic
that serves as a measure
of the therapeutically beneficial portion of the inhaled mass of siRNA
which would reach the lower respiratory tract, was determined from the ACI results. The FPF for mannitol
and CSLA microparticles was determined to be 49% and 46%, respectively,
which is excellent, falling within those of commercial HFA-based pMDIs
for small-molecule therapeutics (30–55% on average) , even though no optimization was attempted in our case. It is worth
noticing that FPFs for both formulations were not significantly different
(n = 2, One-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s
posthoc test, p value <0.05). The respirable fraction
(RF) (siRNA content collected from stage 0 to filter over the total
siRNA released into the impactor ) was
found to be slightly higher for pMDIs formulated with mannitol microparticles
(77%) than those with CSLA (64%), but these results were not statistically
significantly different from each other (n = 2, One-Way
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s posthoc test, p value
<0.05).
The MMAD and GSD are properties that characterize
the particles
in the aerosol spray. MMAD represents the aerodynamic diameter (AD)
on a mass basis, and GSD is a measure of the spread of particle size
around this median. As seen in Table , the MMAD and GSD of the CSLA and mannitol microparticles
loaded with siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes were not statistically
significantly different from each other: MMAD of 1.9 and 2.6 μm,
and GDS of 3.7 and 3.8 on average, respectively (n = 2, One-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s posthoc test, p value <0.05). These results indicate that microparticles
from both strategies, mannitol and CSLA, would be able to deliver
siRNA to the deep lungs.
The MMAD (by ACI) and hydrodynamic
diameter (by LS) of CSLA microparticles
were similar to each other (1.9 and 2.0 μm on average, respectively),
but different for mannitol microparticles (2.6 and 4.6 μm on
average, respectively). Differences between aerodynamic and hydrodynamic
diameters of particles are somehow expected because the aerodynamic
diameter is a property that depends on shape, density, and size (geometric
diameter) of the particles. , For spherical particles
with density of 1, the geometric and aerodynamic diameters should
be the same, provided that there is no aggregation. Hydrodynamic diameter is expected to be slightly larger
than geometric diameter due to the presence
of a solvation layer around the particle.
The most significant
difference in both strategies came in the
form of the total siRNA recovered and the siRNA content in a single
puff dose (n = 2, One-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s
posthoc test, p value <0.05). While the fraction
recovered in the mannitol formulation was only 28%, 85% was recovered
in the CSLA formulation. The single puff dose in the mannitol formulation
was only 9.5 ng, while that for CSLA engineered microparticles was
26 ng. These results indicate that the strategy of encapsulating siRNA–G4NH2
into CSLA microparticles using the emulsification diffusion technique
seems to have greater efficiency for delivering siRNA to the lungs.
Collectively, the results shown here indicate that pMDI formulations
from both microparticle engineering strategies proposed produce aerosols
conducive to deep deposition of siRNA to the lungs. However, in terms
of total siRNA recovered and the amount of siRNA actuated from the
pMDI, the CSLA strategy displayed a much greater efficiency.

## Conclusions
In this work we demonstrate, for the first time, the ability to
formulate siRNA in pMDIs. This carries great weight as pMDIs are the
least expensive and most widely used portable oral inhalation devices
available in the market today and also because of the tremendous promise
of therapeutic siRNA in treating lung diseases, as indicated by the
many ongoing clinical trials where the lungs are the target tissue. , We show that complexes between siRNA and positively charged PAMAM
dendrimers (G4NH2) can successfully silence the production of genes
in a model alveolar epithelial cell (A549), and aerosols of pMDIs
formulated with those nanosized complexes encapsulated either in a
GRAS component (mannitol) or a biodegradable co-oligomer (CSLA) have
high respirable fractions (up to 77%), and fine particle fractions
(∼50%), which are comparable to those of highly optimized commercial
pMDIs for small-molecule therapeutics. We also show that, even after
exposure to the propellant HFA used in pMDIs, the biological activity
of the siRNA (gene silencing) is still maintained. Moreover, the dendriplexes
are shown to preserve their characteristics after particle engineering,
a necessary feature to reproduce its gene silencing ability after
delivery to deep lungs. This work is highly complementary to other
studies that have demonstrated the possibility of delivering siRNA
to the lungs using dry powder inhalers , and nebulizers, which are other important tools available to
the clinicians to target medically important lung disorders along
with pMDIs.

## Supporting Information Available
siRNA degradation
by RNase
A, heparin decomplexation assay, development of eGFP stable A549 cell
line, characterization of CSLA co-oligomer, and pMDI formulation of
free siRNA–G4NH2 dendriplexes. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

## Supplementary Material
mp4006358_si_001.pdf

## Author Present Address
† Science
Group, Office of Generic Drugs (OGD), Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research (CDER), US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 10903
New Hampshire Avenue, WO75, Room 1711B, Silver Spring, MD 20993, United
States.
The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NSF
(CBET Grant # 0933144),
and by Nano@WSU (seed support). Denise S. Conti was partially supported
through a scholarship from the Graduate School at Wayne State University
(WSU). The authors thank DuPont for the propellant HFA-227, 3M Drug
Delivery Systems for the metering valves, and West Pharmaceutical
Services for the canisters. At WSU, we would like to thank Dr. Oupicky
(for the access to the Synergy 2 Microplate Reader) and Dr. Merkel
(for kindly providing the anti-eGFP and mismatch Ds-siRNA) at College
of Pharmacy & Health Sciences; Dr. Chow (Chemistry), Dr. Mao and
Dr. Matthew (Chemical Engineering and Materials Science) for access
to LS and Spectra Max 250 UV plate reader; Dr. Pile (Biological Sciences)
for access to the FOTO/Analyst Investigator/Eclipse with UV Transilluminator
Fotodyne; Dr. Jessica Back and Mr. Eric Van Buren (Microscopy, Imaging
and Cytometry Resources Core) for help with the flow cytometry analysis.
The MICR Core is supported, in part, by NIH CenterGrant P30CA022453
to The Karmanos Cancer Institute, and the Perinatology Research Branch
of the National Institutes of Child Health and Development, both at
WSU.