483jexpmedThe Journal of Experimental MedicineJ Exp MedThe Rockefeller University PressPMC5584128558412855841282881132410.1084/jem.20170910The transcriptional program, functional heterogeneity, and clinical targeting of mast cells
CildirGökhan PantHarshita LopezAngel F TergaonkarVinay 1Centre for Cancer Biology, University of South
Australia and SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia2School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia3Laboratory of NF-κB Signalling, Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), Singapore,
Singapore4Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore,
Singapore✉Correspondence to Vinay Tergaonkar:
vinayt@imcb.a-star.edu.sg
1582017214924912491–2506432018© 2017 Cildir et al.This article is distributed under the terms of an
Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites
license for the first six months after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms/). After six months it is
available under a Creative Commons License
(Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 International
license, as described at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).Cildir et al. discuss the recent findings in transcriptional regulation of mast
cell development and activation and provide insights into the plasticity and
clinical targeting of mast cell functions.

## Abstract
Mast cells are unique tissue-resident immune cells that express an array of
receptors that can be activated by several extracellular cues, including
antigen–immunoglobulin E (IgE) complexes, bacteria, viruses, cytokines,
hormones, peptides, and drugs. Mast cells constitute a small population in
tissues, but their extraordinary ability to respond rapidly by releasing
granule-stored and newly made mediators underpins their importance in health and
disease. In this review, we document the biology of mast cells and introduce new
concepts and opinions regarding their role in human diseases beyond IgE-mediated
allergic responses and antiparasitic functions. We bring to light recent
discoveries and developments in mast cell research, including regulation of mast
cell functions, differentiation, survival, and novel mouse models. Finally, we
highlight the current and future opportunities for therapeutic intervention of
mast cell functions in inflammatory diseases.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2017 May 19; Revised 2017 Jun 28; Accepted 2017 Jul 26; Issue date 2017 Sep 4.

## Introduction
Mast cells reside in tissues as terminally differentiated cells with a capacity
to proliferate and migrate upon specific external signals. Hematopoietic stem
cell (HSC)–derived mast cell progenitors circulate in blood and populate
all vascularized tissues, especially at sites exposed to the external
environment, including skin, conjunctiva, upper airways, lungs, and intestines
( ). Mast cell
differentiation, phenotype, function, and survival in these tissues are largely
determined by their microenvironment, activating factors, and cytokine milieu
( ).
A characteristic feature of mast cells is the presence of granules in their
cytoplasm that contain a variety of biologically active molecules, including
proteases (e.g., tryptase, chymase); lysosomal enzymes (e.g., cathepsins);
bioactive amines (e.g., histamine, serotonin); select cytokines (e.g., TNF,
IL-15); and enzymes, including granzyme B, β-hexosaminidase, and
β-glucuronidase ( ). Furthermore, heparin, a proteoglycan, is a vital component of
mast cell granules that is essential for the packaging of histamine and mast
cell proteases ( ).
Notably, several cell-surface receptors are involved in mast cell activation,
including high-affinity IgE receptor FcεR1 and specific G
protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) such as endothelin receptor type A
(ETA), complement component 5a receptor (C5AR), adenosine A3
receptor (ADORA3), and MAS-related GPR family member X2 (MRGPRX2). Mast cells
also generate cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and lipid mediators of
inflammation (e.g., prostaglandins and leukotrienes; ). Therefore, equipped with a
great capacity to respond to a variety of signals, mast cells have a unique and
versatile role in the immune system.
Mast cells are implicated not only in allergic diseases such as asthma, hay
fever, and atopic dermatitis but also in nonallergic conditions including but
not limited to stroke, myocardial infarction, and cystitis. Importantly,
therapeutic interventions to modulate mast cell functions can occur at several
levels by blocking the action of released mediators or by preventing the
transcription or release of mediators. Other targets include modulating mast
cell migration, differentiation, survival, and intercellular interactions.
Hence, a thorough understanding of mast cell biology and heterogeneity along
with their role in human health and disease is paramount.
This review will primarily focus on the molecular mechanisms of mast cell
development, activation, and functional diversity. In particular, we will
highlight the recent findings in regard to the transcriptional program and
signal transduction mechanisms that underlie the heterogeneity of mast cell
functions. Furthermore, we will introduce the available mouse models, exploring
their inherent advantages and disadvantages in investigating the biological
questions in mast cell research. Finally, we will discuss the common human
diseases in which mast cells are implicated and highlight new therapeutic
approaches currently envisaged to target mast cell functions in the clinical
setting.

## Heterogeneity and evolutionary adaptations of mast cells
In humans, mast cell subtypes are defined according to whether they are positive
for chymase and tryptase (MCTC) or tryptase alone (MCT).
MCTC cells are comparable with mouse connective tissue mast
cells, and MCT cells are comparable with mouse mucosal mast cells.
The MCTC subtype is predominantly found in skin, the gastrointestinal
tract, and conjunctiva, whereas the MCT subtype is the predominant
mast cell type in the lungs, nose, and sinuses. However, this traditional
classification is simplistic, and mast cells show significant plasticity ( ). The microenvironment
plays decisive roles in shaping mast cell development, phenotype, and function
( ). Under basal
conditions, even within the same tissue, mast cell populations are
phenotypically different and form further specific subpopulations. In human
lungs, for example, connective tissue mast cells in bronchi express higher
levels of FcεR1 than alveolar and small-airway mast cells, suggesting
location- and possibly function-dependent phenotypic alterations ( ). This
location-dependent phenotypic diversity has important implications in clinical
manifestations of allergic diseases. For instance, the MRGPRX2 receptor is
expressed at high levels in MCTC cells in the skin but not in
MCT cells in the lungs ( ). Therefore, activation of MRGPRX2 with
diverse ligands, such as neuropeptide substance P, is associated with
skin-specific effects such as itchiness.
Importantly, tissue-specific foreign microorganisms also contribute to the
development and activation of mast cells, adding another layer of complexity to
mast cell diversity. In mouse skin, for instance, skin microbiome can regulate
the development of mast cells by inducing keratinocyte-derived stem cell factor
(SCF) production, an essential growth factor for mast cell development ( ). Also, in mouse skin,
Staphylococcus aureus–derived δ toxin can
induce mast cell activation and cause allergic skin disease ( ), suggesting the
considerable impact of the microbiome on mast cell functions.
Adipose tissue is another location where mast cells reside in the body. It is
well known that mast cell progenitors are released from the bone marrow and
contribute to peripheral mast cell populations. However, it is now evident that
adipose tissue is also a rich source of several hematopoietic cell types,
including mast cells and mast cell progenitors ( ). Notably, the numbers of adipose
tissue mast cells increase upon high-fat diet (HFD)–induced obesity in
mice ( ). Although
mast cells were recently found to be dispensable in regulating metabolic
parameters such as fat mass and insulin sensitivity in mice ( ; ), the precise
functions of adipose tissue–resident mast cells have not yet been
determined.
Mast cells perform diverse functions in health and disease. Their role in
mounting an effective antiparasitic defense is well established ( ; ). For instance, in a
recent study, intestinal mast cells in mice were shown to be crucial for the
expulsion of intestinal helminth Heligmosomoides polygyrus
( ). In
response to the invasion by helminth larvae, ATP is released from apoptotic
intestinal epithelial cells. This activates mast cells to produce IL-33, which
is important for the activation and IL-13 production of type 2 innate lymphoid
cells (ILC2s), a process critical for the expulsion of helminths ( ). Furthermore,
mast cells enhance innate and adaptive host resistance to the toxicity and
mortality induced by arthropod and reptile venoms ( ). In particular, mast
cell–derived carboxypeptidase A3 (CPA3) and mast cell protease 4 (MCPT4)
were found to inactivate toxins Sarafotoxin 6B and Helodermin, respectively
( ). Recently, mast cells were
also shown to be beneficial for preserving cardiac function after myocardial
infarction in mice ( ). In response to a myocardial infarction, mast cell progenitors from
white adipose tissue were recruited to the heart and differentiated into mature
mast cells. Mast cell–derived tryptase mediated muscle contractility and
preserved heart function after myocardial infarction. In line with this, mast
cell depletion was associated with decreased cardiac function after myocardial
infarction ( ).
Another beneficial role of mast cells has been identified in cystitis, where
mouse mast cells help to eradicate uropathogenic Escherichia
coli (UPEC)–infected bladder epithelial cells (BECs). After
infection, BECs release IL-1β and recruit mast cells, and in turn mast
cell–derived chymase is endocytosed by BECs, which induce their cytolytic
death ( ). It is also
well known that mast cells are integral to the pathophysiology of anaphylaxis.
For example, mucosal mast cells in mouse intestine contribute to food-induced
intestinal anaphylaxis by being a major source of IL-9 ( ). Accordingly, mice ablated for
IL-9–producing mucosal mast cells had decreased food allergies.
Similarly, mouse meningeal mast cells can worsen stroke pathology by releasing
IL-6 and chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 7 (CCL7) and promoting the infiltration of
granulocytes, brain swelling, and infarct size ( ).
 Although there are many examples of the heterogeneity of mast cells, in many
cases the mechanistic details of this diversity remain underexamined. To gain a
better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of mast cell heterogeneity and
functional plasticity, it is essential to uncover the transcriptional program
for mast cell development and activation.

## Mast cell transcriptional program
To understand the transcriptional heterogeneity of tissue-resident mast cells,
basal transcriptomes of mouse mast cells from different tissues (peritoneum,
skin, esophagus, trachea, and tongue) were analyzed as part of the Immunological
Genome Project (ImmGen; ). These results indicated that mast cells are very distantly
related to the other hematopoietic cell types ( ). Interestingly, basophils, which are widely
considered to have similar functions to mast cells, exhibit a vastly different
transcriptome. ImmGen results also pointed out important and surprising
transcriptional differences among different tissue-resident mast cells. Notably,
peritoneal and skin mast cells have the greatest transcriptional diversity. For
example, the cell-surface glycoprotein CD34, an adhesion molecule previously
considered to be a mast cell marker, was expressed in all mast cell types except
skin mast cells. However, CD59a, a complement system regulator, had the highest
expression in skin mast cells but had no expression in peritoneal mast cells in
mice.
In primary human mast cells, however, transcriptomic data are more limited. As
part of the Functional Annotation of the Mammalian Genome (FANTOM) project, the
transcriptomes of human skin–derived mast cells have been analyzed using
cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE) sequencing ( ). Similar to mouse mast cells, human
skin–derived mast cells were also found to be distantly related to other
immune cell types in humans. FANTOM analysis also discovered novel regulators of
human mast cell functions, including bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 1A
(BMPR1A). Importantly, stimulation of human mast cells with bone morphogenetic
protein receptor (BMPR) ligand BMP4 prolonged mast cell survival and increased
the histamine release upon FcεR1 cross-linking ( ), suggesting a cross talk between
BMPRs and FcεR1 signaling in the human skin microenvironment. Overall,
these results in mouse and human mast cells strongly reinforce the well-known
concept of heterogeneity of mast cells in different tissues and species.
The core elements of the transcriptional program essential for mast cell
development and maintenance in tissues encompass several transcription factors
(TFs). These include microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF), GATA
binding protein 2 (GATA-2), and STAT-5, which are essential for orchestrating
mast cell responses at steady state ( ; ).
Several effector mast cell proteases and cell-surface receptors responsible for
mast cell activation are transcribed by the coordinated actions of these TFs
( ).
MITF is a well-known TF in the melanocytic lineage ( ), but it is also recognized as a key TF
for mast cell development ( ). MITF controls the expression of a diverse set of genes,
including Mcpt4 and SCF receptor (Kit), which
are important for mast cell functions ( ). Mast cells and basophils show various
phenotypic similarities despite their different anatomical locations; basophils
are found in circulating blood, whereas mast cells are tissue resident. Using
pre-basophil and mast cell progenitors (preBMPs), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
α (C/EBPα) has been found to be critical for basophil fate
specification, whereas MITF is crucial for mast cell specification in mice
( ). Notably, MITF
and C/EBPα have been shown to antagonize each other’s
transcriptional programs, and the expression of both C/EBPα and MITF is
STAT-5 dependent ( ).
STAT-5 was previously shown to be important for mast cell survival in mice
( ). In
addition, STAT-5 in mast cells is required for skin inflammation, and mast
cell–specific deletion of STAT-5 ameliorated atopic dermatitis in mice
( ). GATA-2 is
another critical factor for mast cell identity and function. GATA-2 was found to
be vital for differentiation of preBMPs into basophils and mast cells in mice
( ). Notably, a large
number of genes important for mast cell functions, including
Fcer1a, Kit, and histidine decarboxylase
(Hdc) are dysregulated in the absence of GATA-2. Similar to
MITF, GATA-2 levels were also proposed to be regulated by STAT-5 in mast cells
( ), and forced
expression of GATA-2 was sufficient to drive basophil and mast cell
differentiation in mice. In another study in which the GATA-2 DNA-binding domain
(GATA2ΔCF) was deleted in mice, BM-derived mast cell (BMMC) numbers were
greatly reduced ( ),
confirming the important role of GATA-2 DNA binding and trans-activation for
mast cell identity. Recently, using single-cell transcriptomic analysis of
pre-granulocyte–macrophage progenitors (preGMs), GATA-1, another member
of the GATA family of TFs, was also shown to be critical for marking progenitor
cells generating mast cells, eosinophils, megakaryocytes, and erythroids in mice
( ). However,
using tamoxifen-inducible Gata1 knockout mice
(Gata1−/y), another
study proposed that GATA-1, unlike GATA-2, is not essential for mast cell
development in mice ( ). Using novel mast cell–specific genetic strategies might
allow us to understand the precise contribution of GATA-1 to mast cell
homeostasis in future studies. Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF-3) is
another TF that has been shown to influence mast cell development in mice ( ).
ATF-3–deficient mast cells have significant developmental defects in
mouse peritoneum and skin. Also, BMMCs from ATF-3–deficient mice have
impaired degranulation but elevated IL-4 and IL-6 levels upon activation.
However, the precise role of ATF3 in mast cell survival is not clear.
In addition to transcriptional activators, transcriptional repressors may also
play an important role in mast cells. For example, hairy and enhancer of split 1
(HES1) is a repressive TF highly expressed in mast cells. HES1 is a
Notch-responsive factor, and HES1 overexpression in mast cell precursors results
in down-regulation of C/EBPα, a process important for mouse mast cell
lineage commitment ( ). However, the precise repressive function of HES1 in mast cells
is unclear and requires further investigation. In macrophages, HES1 has been
described as a negative regulator of inflammation by limiting the levels of
chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (CXCL1; ), and it remains to be determined whether such
regulatory mechanisms also exist in mast cells. Finally, for cell type
specification, differential DNA-binding sites of TFs are crucial to drive the
cell type–specific transcriptional program. It has been reported that the
same TFs with similar abundance show differential binding patterns in mouse
BMMCs and hematopoietic precursor cells ( ). There is also cooperativity among the
TFs to drive an efficient gene expression program. The Mcpt4
locus, for example, is bound by many TFs such as GATA-2, MITF, and c-FOS
cooperatively mediating its transcription ( ). Therefore, TF cooperativity seems to be
a critical factor for lineage commitment and basal expression of key genes in
mast cells.
Although transcriptional analysis of mast cell development and activation is
emerging, the epigenetic regulation of these processes is not well understood.
In particular, how mast cell chromatin regulates mast cell functions is unclear.
Recently, to address some of these questions, the functions of certain chromatin
regulatory enzymes have been studied in mast cells ( ). For instance, tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 2
(TET2) is a methyl cytosine dioxygenase enzyme that converts 5-methylcytosine
(5-mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) and thereby mediates demethylation of
DNA ( ).
Recently, TET2 was shown to be important for mediating mouse mast cell
proliferation and in vitro differentiation ( ). Interestingly, both enzymatic
activity–dependent and independent functions of TET2 have been uncovered
in mast cells. Although BMMCs from TET2-deficient mice have differential 5-hmC
and transcriptional profiles depending on their deoxygenase activity, increased
proliferation observed in TET2-deficient mast cells was independent of its
enzymatic activity, suggesting other as-yet-unknown functions of TET2 in mast
cells. Another epigenetic regulator, DNA methyltransferase 3a (DNMT3a), has also
been suggested to control mast cell functions ( ). As opposed to TET2, DNMT3a is a DNA
methyltransferase adding methyl groups to CpG elements in DNA ( ). Notably, BMMCs from
DNMT3a-deficient mice are hyperresponsive to FcεR1 cross-linking, with
increased degranulation and cytokine production ( ). Similarly, when reconstituted in
mast cell–deficient mouse models, DNMT3a-deficient mast cells showed
significantly elevated passive cutaneous anaphylaxis (PCA) responses. It is
proposed that these effects, at least in part, might be due to a decrease in the
levels of IQ motif-containing GTPase-activating protein 2 (IQGAP2), which
regulates cytoskeleton dynamics in mast cells ( ). Another interesting epigenetic mechanism
operating in mast cells is mediated by mast cell protease tryptase. Although
mast cell proteases are primarily located to cytoplasmic granules, tryptase is
also observed in the nucleus ( ). Importantly, tryptase has been shown to catalyze the clipping
of histone H2 and H3 in chromatin. In line with this, BMMCs from
tryptase-deficient mice accumulate lysine 5–acetylated H2B (H2BK5ac),
which also leads to induction of non–mast cell lineage genes ( ). Further studies
seeking to define the key mechanisms in the mast cell transcriptional program
will open up opportunities in an area of potentially highly specific and
effective therapeutic interventions.
 

## Transcriptional regulation in activated mast cells
Several TFs are known to orchestrate the transcriptional response in activated
mast cells for de novo synthesis of cytokines and chemokines. Similar to their
roles in other cell types, NFAT, activator protein 1 (AP-1), and NF-κB
have well-studied roles in driving transcription of inflammatory genes in
activated mast cells ( ; ;
 ). In addition,
NF-κB signaling components have been implicated in mast cell
degranulation. As an indispensable part of the NF-κB signaling pathway,
IκB kinase 2 (IKK2) is an upstream kinase phosphorylating IκBα
and priming its degradation to activate NF-κB subunits for DNA binding and
trans-activation ( ;
 ; ). Importantly, IKK1
and IKK2 also have other cellular substrates independent of their roles in
NF-κB signaling ( ). In the context of mast cell functions, it has been suggested
that IKK2 is critical for phosphorylation of synaptosomal-associated protein 23
(SNAP23), an important regulator of mast cell degranulation ( ). Because IKK2
deficiency results in embryonic lethality in mice, IKK2-deficient mouse fetal
liver–derived mast cells have been generated and shown to have impaired
degranulation upon FcεR1 cross-linking ( ). However, in a subsequent study, connective
tissue mast cell–specific deletion of IKK2 (Mcpt5-Cre,
IKK2F/F mice) resulted in normal
degranulation but impaired cytokine production from peritoneal-derived mast
cells ( ). In the
same study, Mcpt5-Cre–mediated deletion of NF-κB
essential modulator (NEMO; another essential subunit of the IKK complex
mediating NF-κB activation) also resulted in impaired cytokine production
from activated mouse peritoneal mast cells. Finally, using BMS-345541, a
pharmacological inhibitor of IKK2 kinase activity, a recent study proposed that
IKK2 is important for SNAP23 and syntaxin-4 (STX4) complex formation and
cytokine production upon FcεR1 cross-linking ( ). Overall, it is possible that the
role of IKK2 in mast cell degranulation is context dependent, but IKK2 is
undeniably essential for the synthesis of a subset of cytokines in activated
mast cells by controlling NF-κB activation.
Early growth response 1 (EGR1) and EGR2 are early-response TFs that are members
of the zinc finger TF family and are induced by a diverse array of extracellular
stimuli in different cell types ( ). In mouse BMMCs, de novo synthesized EGR1 has been shown
to regulate TNF and IL-13 production upon FcεR1 cross-linking ( , ). A similar TF, EGR2, however, has been shown to
regulate chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 1 (CCL1) production in mouse fetal
liver–derived mast cells, which is important for the recruitment of T
cells into inflamed tissues ( ). Although the binding of EGR1 and EGR2 has been suggested to
occur in the promoter regions of certain proinflammatory genes, it is, however,
important to identify the genome-wide binding patterns of EGR1 and EGR2 to
obtain a complete picture of their effect on activated mast cells. Zinc finger
E-box–binding homeobox 2 (ZEB2) is another zinc finger TF that is
implicated in the activation of BMMCs based on siRNA-mediated knockdown
experiments. Although it has been shown that ZEB2 is highly expressed in mast
cells and knocking down ZEB2 levels caused impaired activation of mast cells
upon FcεR1 cross-linking ( ), its genome-wide DNA-binding pattern in mast cells and genetic
deficiency in mice require further investigation.
In conclusion, our understanding of the transcriptional dynamics of mast cell
development and activation is limited, and most studies are still based on mouse
mast cells. Because TFs are critical for the expression of cell-surface
receptors and extracellular mediators involved in mast cell activation,
strategies specifically targeting mast cell TFs could be developed and tested in
future clinical studies.

## Modes of mast cell activation
Although it is well known that mast cells can be activated by different
ligand–receptor complexes, it has only recently become evident that there
are notable differences between different modes of mast cell activation. The
recent identification of the MRGPRX2 receptor and its mouse orthologue Mrgprb2,
which are activated by several ligands such as neuropeptide substance P, and
several pseudoallergic drugs has opened up a new research avenue and introduced
a new therapeutic target for the control of pseudoallergic reactions ( ). It has been shown
that Mrgprb2 is specifically expressed on connective tissue mast cells but not
on mucosal mast cells in mice, and the activation of Mrgprb2 and MRGPRX2 by
diverse ligands leads to mast cell degranulation ( ).
A disease relevance for MRGPRX2 has also started to emerge; the levels of MRGPRX2
expression on skin mast cells have been observed to be higher in chronic
urticaria patients compared with healthy individuals ( ), suggesting dynamic regulation of
its surface expression on mast cells. Recently, an elegant study using large
chemical libraries and structural modeling discovered novel agonists of MRGPRX2
( ). These
agonists include many opioid compounds and peptides such as (–) and (+)
morphine; hydrocodone; sinomenine; dynorphin A; dynorphin B; and a synthetic
compound, ZINC-3573, which has very high specificity toward MRGPRX2 but not to
other GPCRs. Importantly, these compounds caused mast cell degranulation in
human mast cells in an MRGPRX2-dependent manner ( ). Overall, these findings have
important implications for humans; morphine and similar analgesics are known to
induce histamine release and itching in humans ( ). However, whether the effects of opioid
ligands on mast cells are also physiologically relevant should be tested in vivo
using nonhuman primate models. MRGPRX2 and its mouse orthologue Mrgprb2 have
only a 52% sequence homology, and MRGPRX2 is conserved only in primates. In line
with this, opioid compounds did not show a significant effect on the Mrgprb2
receptor ( ).
It has now become evident that there are important differences between MRGPRX2-
and FcεR1-mediated mast cell activation and degranulation ( ). Classically, IgE-dependent mast
cell activation occurs via FcεR1 comprising four polypeptide chains: an
α, a β, and two γ ( ). The β and γ chains have an immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) that is essential for signal transduction
mediated by Lck/Yes novel tyrosine kinase (Lyn) and spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk)
phosphorylations, whereas the extracellular domains of the α subunit bind
to IgE ( ).
Immediately after antigen- and IgE-induced cross-linking of cell-surface
FcεR1, activation of the kinases Lyn and Syk leads to the rapid
phosphorylation of FcεR1 ITAMs and the subsequent activation of multiple
downstream events, including increased cytosolic calcium levels and cytoskeleton
rearrangements such as microtubule polymerization and actin depolymerization
( ; ). Importantly, FcεR1-mediated
mast cell activation involves a robust inflammatory response with newly made
cytokines and chemokines, mediated by several TFs such as NFAT, AP-1,
NF-κB, EGR1, and EGR2, and this response has been shown to be limited in
MRGPRX2-mediated activation ( ). Although FcεR1 cross-linking results in
granule–granule fusions in cytoplasm before granule release, MRGPRX2
activation results in more uniform and rapid release of individual granules
( ).
Furthermore, FcεR1-mediated granule release is known to be orchestrated by
several soluble N-ethylmaleimide–sensitive factor-activating protein
receptor (SNARE) complexes and adaptor proteins, including but not limited to
SNAP23, STX4, vesicle-associated membrane protein 8 (VAMP8), protein Unc-13
homologue D (MUNC 13-4), and Ras-related protein Rab-27B (RAB27B; ; ), but the identity of these
complexes is less well known in MRGPRX2-mediated degranulation. Finally,
depending on the affinity of the antigen to IgE, FcεR1 cross-linking
causes differential cellular and physiological effects in mast cells.
Importantly, the strength of, and qualitative changes in, the molecular signals
downstream of FcεR1 can be discriminated by high-affinity or low-affinity
antigen stimulus despite equivalent FcεR1 phosphorylation ( ). In particular,
low-affinity antigens activate feline Gardner–Rasheed sarcoma viral
oncogene homologue (Fgr) kinase and shift the balance from linker for activation
of T cells (LAT1) adaptor molecules toward LAT2 adaptor molecules, which then
initiates a more chemokine-based inflammatory response compared with the
high-affinity antigens ( ; ). Consistent with
the higher intracellular calcium increase after FcεR1 cross-linking,
high-affinity antigen binding also results in higher degranulation ( ).
 IgE binding to the FcεR1 complex is a major mechanism for activation of
mast cells. However, it is uncertain how tissue-resident mast cells acquire IgE
molecules from the bloodstream. By studying reporter IgE molecules, it has been
demonstrated that tissue-resident perivascular mast cells acquire IgE by
extending their protrusions across the blood vessel walls ( ). This indicates that IgE uptake is a
dynamic process and that perivascular positioning of mast cells is important to
sample IgE molecules in blood ( ).
It is important to note that coactivation of various cell-surface receptors can
enhance or diminish FcεR1 signaling in mast cells. For example, T cell
immunoglobulin and mucin-domain containing-3 (TIM3) is a cell-surface immune
checkpoint regulator that is also expressed on mast cells ( ). Importantly, cross-linking of the
TIM3 receptor with specific antibodies simultaneously with FcεR1
cross-linking resulted in increased mast cell degranulation and cytokine
secretion ( ).
Similarly, BMMCs from TIM3-deficient mice have been reported to have reduced
activation-induced cytokine levels, suggesting positive regulatory functions of
TIM3 in FcεR1 signaling ( ). Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 2 (S1PR2) has also been
proposed to regulate FcεR1 signaling, and S1PR2 antagonists significantly
reduce mast cell degranulation and cytokine secretion upon FcεR1
cross-linking ( ). In addition, TNF receptor superfamily member 14 (TNFRSF14)
activation by its ligand cytokine TNFSF14 (LIGHT) has been reported to enhance
FcεR1 signaling and result in enhanced degranulation in both human mast
cells and mouse BMMCs ( ). By binding to IL-6R, IL-6 increases the reactivity of human
mast cells to FcεR1 cross-linking by regulating the levels of STAT-3 and
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3; ). Similarly, by binding to IL33R/ST2, IL-33
pretreatment increases the IgE-mediated degranulation and cytokine secretion in
human mast cells ( ).
In contrast, co-ligation of the allergy-inhibitory receptor (Allergin-1), an
Ig-like receptor, and FcεR1 impairs degranulation in mouse BMMCs ( ). A novel mechanism
of inhibition of mast cell responses was recently proposed. Referred to as
trans-inhibition, it is mediated by phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate
5-phosphatase 1 (SHIP1; ). It was previously known that inhibitory receptor FcγRIIB
blocks mast cell activation when it is co-engaged with FcεR1
(cis-inhibition). However, in trans-inhibition, it is proposed that receptors
recruiting sufficient amounts of SHIP1 phosphatase, including but not limited to
FcγRIIB, can inhibit FcεR1-mediated mast cell activation and
Kit-dependent mast cell proliferation ( ). Overall, it is conceivable that in future studies
other receptors that regulate FcεR1- and MRGPRX2-dependent mast cell
activation could be identified and targeted to alleviate allergic
inflammation.

## New mouse models of mast cells
In vivo animal models have greatly enhanced our understanding of mast cell
functions. Many novel mouse models with different genetic strategies have
recently been developed and used to test the previously proposed functions of
mast cells and gain novel mechanistic insights. The functions of mast cells and
mast cell–derived mediators have historically been analyzed using mouse
models in which cell surface receptor KIT has been disrupted. Initially, these
included mouse models WBB6F1-KitW/W-v and
C57BL/6-KitW-sh/W-sh. These models use
either point mutations, causing the Kit protein to be unable to be expressed on
the cell surface (Kitw) and limiting its kinase
activity (KitW-v), or an inversion mutation
(KitW-sh) in upstream regulatory regions of
the Kit locus in mice ( ). Notably, both of these KIT-dependent mouse models use
adoptive transfer of BMMCs into tissues, and there are concerns as to how
closely adoptively transferred mast cells resemble native populations in
tissues. Moreover, the route of BMMC injection, the number of injected cells,
and the analysis time after the injection could also contribute to the
variations in mast cell responses in these models. In addition, it is now
evident that these models affect non–mast cell populations as well,
thereby introducing inherent confounding variables in mast cell research. For
example, WBB6F1-KitW/W-v mice are anemic and
sterile. They also have several abnormalities reported in other cell types,
including decreased numbers of basophils and neutrophils, defects in
interstitial cells of Cajal, melanocytes, and γδ T cells in the gut
( ). However,
whereas C57BL/6-KitW-sh/W-sh mice are fertile and
not anemic, they show defects in melanocytes, reduced levels of IgE, and
elevated numbers of neutrophils and basophils ( ).
To circumvent some of the aforementioned problems in
WBB6F1-KitW/W-v and
C57BL/6-KitW-sh/W-sh mouse models, new
KIT-independent mouse models have been generated to study mast cell functions.
These new mouse models could lead to constitutive or inducible mast cell
deficiency or allow mast cell–specific inactivation of genes of interest.
Importantly, some findings on the roles of mast cells using KIT-dependent mouse
models have been refuted using KIT-independent mouse models ( ; ).
KIT-independent mouse models with constitutive mast cell deficiency include
Mcpt5-Cre; R-DTA mice (in which the
diphtheria toxin [DT] α chain is expressed in
Mcpt5-expressing mast cells),
Cpa3Cre/+ mice (also known as
“Cre-Master,” heterozygous mice in which Cre is
expressed under the Cpa3 promoter), and
Cpa3-Cre; Mcl-1F/F mice (also
known as “Hello Kitty” mice in which the antiapoptotic gene
Mcl-1 is deleted in Cpa3-expressing mast
cells). Furthermore, mouse models with inducible depletion of mast cells include
Mcpt5-Cre; iDTR mice (in which
Mcpt5-Cre mice crossed with
iDTRF/F mice, thereby allowing
Cre-dependent expression of DTR in
Mcpt5-expressing mast cells and depletion of these cells
upon DT injection), Mas-TRECK mice (in which human DTR is
expressed under the control of IL-4 intronic enhancer elements), and RMB mice
(in which DTR and bright red td-Tomato [tdT] fluorescent proteins are expressed
in 3′ UTR of the membrane spanning 4-domains A2 [MS4A2]
gene encoding for the FcεR β chain; ; ). In addition, mast cell–specific gene
deletion has been achieved with Mcpt5-Cre,
Cpa3-Cre, and FcεR1β-Cre mouse
models ( ; ; ). However, some of these new mouse
models also have specific disadvantages or undesired Cre activities in other
cell populations. For instance, Mcpt5-Cre mice enable gene
inactivation only in connective tissue mast cells but not in mucosal mast cells,
and Cre activity in this model has also been reported in a small fraction of NK
cells in blood ( ).
Similarly, although the Cpa3-Cre model enables gene
inactivation in both mucosal mast cells and connective tissue mast cells,
Cpa3 is also expressed by basophils, some populations of T
cell progenitors, thymic T cells, and hematopoietic progenitor cells. In line
with this, “Hello Kitty” mice also have defects in non–mast
cell populations and show macrocytic anemia ( ). Apart from these models, it has been shown that
genetic deficiency of several genes could also result in impaired mast cell
development in mice ( ).
 Finally, although mouse models have greatly contributed to our understanding of
mouse mast cells, the contribution of human mast cells to in vivo responses has
been difficult to analyze. Therefore, a humanized mouse model (NSG-SGM3 BLT
mice) has recently been developed ( ). This model provides a rich source of human mast cells
that could be activated by chimeric IgE molecules and could be used to develop
in vivo disease models in which therapeutics may be tested.

## Mast cell–mediated human diseases
The involvement of mast cells in the progression of many human diseases is
becoming increasingly clear, and many therapeutics are being developed to
control abnormal mast cell activation and proliferation in several inflammatory
diseases, including allergic asthma, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, dermatitis, food
allergies, chronic rhinosinusitis, nasal polyps, aspirin-exacerbated respiratory
disease (AERD), and chronic urticaria ( ). In these conditions, mast cells, together with other
immune cells such as eosinophils, macrophages, and T cells, are involved in
disease progression. These diseases affect both adults and children, and the
prevalence of allergic diseases is estimated to be 19.6% of the population. In
2007, the financial cost of allergies was estimated to be $6 billion USD ( ).
Primary mast cell dysfunction results in mastocytosis and mast cell activation
disorders (MCADs; ).
Whereas mastocytosis involves the aberrant accumulation of mast cells in many
tissues and organs, MCADs involve the chronic, uncontrolled activation of mast
cells. Importantly, several causative mutations have been identified in
mastocytosis patients, KIT D816V being the most common. KIT D816V mutation leads
to autoactivation of KIT receptor tyrosine kinase, which then constitutively
drives mast cell proliferation ( ). Additional KIT mutations (such as KIT D419H and M541L)
and mutations in other genes (such as c-CBL, TET2, SRSF2, ASXL1, and RUNX1) have
also recently been identified in mastocytosis patients ( ; ). Although it is unknown if these mutations are
drivers or passengers, their coexistence with common KIT mutations may lead to
increased proliferation or hyperactivation of mast cells and is a marker for
poor prognosis in mastocytosis patients ( ). Therefore, it is important to determine which
specific non-KIT mutations also predispose individuals to mastocytosis. Given
the facts that epigenetic regulators DNMT3a and TET2 have been shown to modulate
mast cell proliferation in mice ( ; ) and that DNMT3a and TET2 mutations are also frequent in human
mastocytosis patients ( ), it is also imperative to determine whether these mutations
affect the expression or catalytic functions of TET2 and DNMT3a.
Apart from mast cell clonal diseases and activation disorders, some patients show
abnormal levels of mast cell–derived mediators in basal conditions.
Because mast cell proteases are secreted upon mast cell activation, their
abnormal levels in blood serum is also a significant risk factor for developing
inflammatory disorders. It has been shown that basal serum levels of tryptase
are higher in some individuals without showing signs of mastocytosis ( ). Using genome
sequencing to account for the genetic cause of elevated basal tryptase levels in
a cohort of patients, germline duplications and triplications in
TPSAB1 gene coding for α-tryptase protein have
recently been identified ( ). These patients with higher basal tryptase levels show various
clinical features, including joint hypermobility, skeletal abnormalities, body
pain, and headaches. Importantly, peripheral blood–derived mast cells
generated from these patients exhibit more spontaneous tryptase secretion ( ).

## Novel approaches in clinical targeting of mast cell functions
The actions of mast cell–derived mediators contribute to the
pathophysiology of common allergic disorders. In clinical settings, various
strategies targeting intracellular or extracellular mast cell mediators have
traditionally been tested in allergic patients, and some of them are in common
clinical use ( ). However, some of
these treatments are only partially effective, have sedative side effects, are
not tolerated by all patients, or are considered safe to use long term in
children. For instance, corticosteroids (e.g., oral prednisolone, topical
budesonide and fluticasone) suppress some of the IgE-mediated activities and
provide partial to complete short-term symptom control. However, some patients
are resistant to the effect of corticosteroids, whereas others develop
corticosteroid resistance over the course of their disease (often those with
severe asthma or nasal polyps; ; ).
Furthermore, oral corticosteroids are not safe for all patients, especially
those with peptic ulcer disease or a history of shingles, and their long-term
use has numerous well-known side effects ( ). Antihistamines also have variable efficacy and
sedative side effects. Some newer therapies have been recently designed to
improve the efficacy profile in patients ( ). For example, Omalizumab is a humanized monoclonal
antibody that binds to free IgE in circulation, acting as a competitive
inhibitor for binding to FcεR1 ( ). It is an FDA-approved drug currently in
use to treat severe asthma and chronic idiopathic urticaria. Furthermore,
anti–IL-5 monoclonal antibody (e.g., Mepolizumab) has also shown
promising results in patients with severe asthma ( ). Similarly, newer biologics such as
anti–IL-4/anti–IL-13 monoclonal antibody (Dupilumab) are showing
better efficacy profiles compared with corticosteroid alone in atopic
dermatitis, chronic rhinosinusitis, and nasal polyps ( ; ). This highlights the notion that
multiple therapeutic targets are required to control chronic inflammation.
 Targeting upstream molecules controlling the activation of numerous
proinflammatory downstream mediators is an attractive therapeutic approach. For
example, GATA-3 is a critical TF controlling the expression of Th2
genes, which is a common signature in asthma. Traditionally, TFs were considered
to be difficult to target in vivo, but deoxyribozyme (DNAzyme)
technology has promise in this field of therapeutics. Notably, an inhaled
GATA-3–specific DNAzyme, SB010, has been shown to be effective in
cleaving and inactivating GATA-3 mRNAs, in turn reducing mRNA and protein levels
of GATA-3. More importantly, SB010 has demonstrated considerable efficacy in
clinical trials with allergic asthma patients ( ). Similar approaches might also be beneficial to
target upstream regulators of mast cell functions in other mast
cell–related diseases, including mastocytosis and MCADs.
Use of antisense oligonucleotides is another promising approach for therapeutic
targeting of mast cell functions. For example, MS4A2 loci
coding for the β chain of FcεR1 (FcεR1β) is associated
with allergies in humans ( ) and, in a recent study, a truncated variant of
FcεR1β (t-FcεR1β) was also identified in human mast
cells ( ).
T-FcεR1β lacks exon 3 of MS4A2, coding for the
first two transmembrane domains of FcεR1β; therefore,
t-FcεR1β does not traffic to the plasma membrane ( ). Antisense
oligonucleotide–mediated exon skipping has been successfully applied to
specifically manipulate MS4A2 splicing, target
FcεR1β, and down-regulate the expression and activation of
FcεR1 ( ).
Notably, local applications of antisense oligonucleotides have the potential to
control mast cell responses in allergic disorders. Another promising therapeutic
target for allergic diseases is the MRGPRX2 receptor. Because of its specific
expression pattern on connective tissue mast cells (apart from some neurons),
targeting MRGPRX2 receptor activation with small-molecule inhibitors or
monoclonal antibodies might alleviate common pseudoallergic reactions.
Inhibitory receptors such as sialic acid binding Ig-like lectin (Siglec)
receptors represent further novel therapeutic targets in mast cells. Although
there are many Siglec receptors with different expression patterns in immune
cells, Siglec 8 is specifically expressed in human mast cells and eosinophils,
and pretreatment of human mast cells generated from CD34+ precursors
with an antibody activating Siglec 8 has been shown to inhibit mast cell
degranulation ( ).
Importantly, clinical trials with antibodies activating Siglec 8 (AK001 and
AK002) are ongoing in nasal polyposis and systemic mastocytosis patients.
Similarly, Siglec 7 has also been shown to dampen FcεR1-dependent mast
cell activation ( ),
and antibodies activating Siglec 7 could also be a viable therapeutic option in
the future.

## Concluding remarks and future directions
Mast cells play an increasingly recognized role in health and disease. Recent
developments in mast cell research have reinforced the understanding that mast
cells have unique immune functions, a deeper understanding of which will have a
great impact on human health. As new genomic tools and mouse models become more
available, our understanding of mast cell functions and plasticity will continue
to increase. However, there are still several challenges to be addressed for
better control of mast cell activation and proliferation in disease
settings.
First of all, mouse and human mast cells may have functional differences, and
findings on mouse mast cells should be supported by studies on human mast cells
wherever possible. In particular, we believe that humanized mouse models will be
a valuable tool to investigate the functions of human mast cells in vivo.
Second, with the recent advances in cutting-edge techniques such as CRISPR,
single-cell sequencing, and CyTOF, it is now feasible to identify novel
molecular targets and delineate previously unknown genetic and epigenetic
mechanisms in human mast cells. For instance, single-cell sequencing shows great
promise in uncovering subpopulations of various tissue-resident cells, and it
could be applied to delineate specific subpopulations of mast cells in different
human tissues in steady state as well as in acute and chronic inflammatory
settings. Furthermore, we still have a very limited understanding of the roles
of noncoding RNAs in mast cell development or activation. Many studies have
shown that noncoding RNAs play an important role in controlling inflammatory
responses, and it is conceivable that long noncoding RNAs might also play a
previously unknown role in mast cell development or activation. Loss-of-function
studies using CRISPR in human mast cells will help determine the unknown roles
of RNAs in mast cell biology.
Because mast cells generate many different cytokines, chemokines, and other
soluble mediators, targeting an upstream regulator rather than a single mediator
will undoubtedly be a more viable approach in controlling allergic diseases. In
this regard, further research on the MRGPRX2 receptor will provide important
clues to control pseudoallergic reactions commonly seen in the population.
Finally, it is now widely accepted that the microbiome has immense effects on
human physiology and that many diseases have connections with tissue-specific
microbiomes. Because mast cells also reside in the skin and intestines, the
effects of the skin and gut microbiome on mast cell functions should be further
investigated.

## Outstanding questions

## What are the specific extracellular cues and intracellular
transcription factors regulating MRGPRX2
transcription in mast cells, and how does MRGPRX2 structurally
recognize diverse ligands?
MRGPRX2 is expressed on connective tissue mast cells but not on
mucosal mast cells, suggesting that specific extracellular signals
and associated transcription factors might be involved in inducing
the transcription of MRGPRX2. MRGPRX2 could be activated by numerous
ligands, including pseudoallergic drugs, neuropeptides, and opioid
compounds. Detailed analysis of MRGPRX2–ligand interactions
responsible for mast cell activation must be performed for
therapeutic purposes.

## Are there any polymorphisms in coding regions or cis-regulatory
domains of the human MRGPRX2 locus?
MRGPRX2 variants might predispose individuals to hyperactivation by
changing the structure of MRGPRX2. Similarly, single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in cis-regulatory domains of the
MRGPRX2 locus might regulate the expression of
the receptor on cells.

## Which common non-KIT mutations are drivers of
mastocytosis?
Although several common mutations have been observed in mastocytosis
patients, it is unknown if they are driver or passenger mutations.
CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing will allow testing of the
involvement of these mutations in mast cell proliferation.

## Could DNAzyme technology be applied to intracellular mast cell
targets?
Given the fact that the GATA-3–specific DNAzyme has shown
efficacy in asthma patients, it is also worth testing specific
DNAzymes for intracellular targets in mast cells.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Stephen J. Galli, Stephanie A. Conos, and Simon Conn
for their comments on the manuscript.
The authors also gratefully acknowledge funding provided by the Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A*STAR) of Singapore; the National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC) of Australia; and the Premier’s Research and
Industry Fund grant provided by the South Australian Government Department of State
Development.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

## Footnotes

## Abbreviations used:
BMMCBM-derived mast cell
DTdiphtheria toxin
GPCRG protein–coupled receptor
MCADmast cell activation disorder
MITFmicrophthalmia-associated transcription factor
SCFstem cell factor
TFtranscription factor

## References