1821mtnaMolecular Therapy. Nucleic AcidsMol Ther Nucleic AcidsAmerican Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC5423349542334954233492862421110.1016/j.omtn.2017.04.006Translation of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 upon Liver- and Lung-Targeted Delivery of Optimized Chemically Modified mRNA
SchromEva HuberMaja AnejaManish DohmenChristian EmrichDaniela GeigerJohannes HasenpuschGünther Herrmann-JansonAnnika KretzschmannVerena MykhailykOlga PasewaldTamara OakPrajakta HilgendorffAnne WohlleberDirk HoymannHeinz-Gerd SchaudienDirk PlankChristian RudolphCarsten Kubisch-DohmenRebekka 1Department of Pediatrics, LMU Munich, 80802 Munich, Germany2Ethris GmbH, 82152 Planegg, Germany3Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany4Institute of Molecular Immunology and Experimental Oncology, TU Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany5Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, 30625 Hannover, Germany∗Corresponding author: Rebekka Kubisch-Dohmen, Ethris GmbH, Semmelweisstr. 3, 82152 Planegg, Germany. kubisch@ethris.com
∗∗Corresponding author: Carsten Rudolph, Ethris GmbH, Semmelweisstr. 3, 82152 Planegg, Germany. rudolph@ethris.com
13420177350350–3651152017© 2017 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Changes in lifestyle and environmental conditions give rise to an increasing prevalence of liver and lung fibrosis, and both have a poor prognosis. Promising results have been reported for recombinant angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) protein administration in experimental liver and lung fibrosis. However, the full potential of ACE2 may be achieved by localized translation of a membrane-anchored form. For this purpose, we advanced the latest RNA technology for liver- and lung-targeted ACE2 translation. We demonstrated in vitro that transfection with ACE2 chemically modified messenger RNA (cmRNA) leads to robust translation of fully matured, membrane-anchored ACE2 protein. In a second step, we designed eight modified ACE2 cmRNA sequences and identified a lead sequence for in vivo application. Finally, formulation of this ACE2 cmRNA in tailor-made lipidoid nanoparticles and in lipid nanoparticles led to liver- and lung-targeted translation of significant amounts of ACE2 protein, respectively. In summary, we provide evidence that RNA transcript therapy (RTT) is a promising approach for ACE2-based treatment of liver and lung fibrosis to be tested in fibrotic disease models.
Keywords: ACE2, RNA therapy, cmRNA, modified mRNA, mRNA delivery

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2017 Jan 3; Accepted 2017 Apr 7; Collection date 2017 Jun 16.

## Introduction
Fibrotic diseases are major causes of mortality and morbidity worldwide, leading to a serious economic burden and challenges for health services. , Fibrosis is caused by repetitive noxious stimuli leading to cell stress, injury, and apoptosis, causing organ dysfunction and ultimately organ failure. , Fibrosis can affect nearly every organ, with liver and lung fibrosis showing a rising prevalence due to lifestyle changes or unfavorable environmental conditions. , , Currently, there are several treatment options under evaluation for liver and lung fibrosis; however, these have had limited therapeutic success, raising the need for new therapeutic approaches. , , Investigations of the underlying mechanisms of fibrotic diseases showed that dysregulation of the organ-specific renin-angiotensin system (RAS) plays a critical role in disease onset by triggering excessive pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic signaling. 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a family member of the RAS and acts as a metallo-carboxypeptidase cleaving angiotensin II (AngII) to Ang-(1-7). AngII acts on the AngII type I receptor (AT1R), leading to pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic signaling, while Ang-(1-7) acts on the Mas oncogenic receptor (Mas receptor), leading to anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic signaling. Thus, ACE2 can shift the RAS balance by reducing the amount of AngII and at the same time increasing the amount of Ang-(1-7) molecules. Therefore, ACE2 not only re-establishes the physiologic balance of the RAS, but it also clearly shifts it toward resolution of inflammation and fibrosis. , , 
ACE2 levels are markedly increased in patients with liver fibrosis as well as in experimental models, which may be due to a counter-regulatory response to RAS upregulation. 
ACE2 knockout studies revealed that the loss of ACE2 leads to exacerbation of liver injury, which can be attenuated by administration of recombinant ACE2 or by adeno-associated ACE2 gene therapy. Similar therapeutic effects were shown by administration of Ang-(1-7) and as a side-effect of AngII receptor blocker (ARB) therapy. , Interestingly, unlike observations in liver fibrosis, ACE2 levels are markedly decreased in lung tissue from patients suffering from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). In murine models, two studies showed that intraperitoneal injection of exogenous ACE2 protein in bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis led to re-establishment of local ACE2 levels and reduced levels of lung injury. , The same protective effect of ACE2 could be shown in a bleomycin-induced mouse model by intratracheal administration of lentiviral packaged Ang-(1–7) fusion gene or ACE2 cDNA. 
RNA transcript therapy (RTT) has gained substantial attention as a newly evolving therapeutic approach. mRNA exerts its function in the cytoplasm, leading to high and reliable transfection efficiency in proliferating as well as quiescent cells without the risk of insertional mutagenesis faced by viral vectors or plasmid DNA (pDNA). In comparison to recombinant protein therapy, RTT is not limited to secreted proteins, making it an interesting alternative for translation of intracellular or membrane-bound protein. Due to enzymatic mRNA degradation mechanisms in the cytoplasm, protein translation is controllable, as it is naturally self-limited. , , Many of the initial obstacles of mRNA therapy, such as RNA instability and immunogenicity, have been solved, offering today a repertoire of techniques for designing chemically modified mRNA (cmRNA) with tailor-made pharmacodynamic properties. , , , , However, clinical application of RTT is still at a pre-clinical stage, owing to challenges such as cell- or organ-specific delivery or the complexity of mRNA pharmacology. 
As previously stated, promising results of ACE2 therapy in experimental liver and lung fibrosis have been reported. , , , , , , In human clinical trials, the safety and tolerability of systemically applied recombinant ACE2 was shown. , However, localized translation of membrane-anchored ACE2 may be even more favorable. This may be achieved with recent advances in cmRNA technology. , , Therefore, the objective of this study was to establish robust ACE2 translation from cmRNA in the liver or lung, respectively. First, we performed an in vitro validation of ACE2 cmRNA translation, protein activity, and integrity. In a second step, we designed eight different cmRNA sequences and screened them in cell culture to identify the optimal cmRNA composition for sustained protein translation and activity in liver and lung cells. Finally, this lead candidate was formulated for liver- or lung-specific delivery, which led to increased translation of ACE2 protein selectively in these organs.

## Results

## ACE2 cmRNA Is Successfully Transfected and Translated In Vitro
In our first set of experiments, we investigated RNA delivery of in vitro-transcribed chemically modified ACE2 RNA and its successful translation into ACE2 protein. As a generic test system, we chose HEK293 human embryonic kidney cells, which are frequently used for transient transfection experiments. With the aim of liver- and lung-targeted protein translation in subsequent in vivo studies, we selected A549 alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) and HepG2 hepatoma cells as representative human cell lines and hepatocytes and lung fibroblasts as representative primary murine cells.
First, all cells were screened for their endogenous levels of ACE2 mRNA ( ). Endogenous levels in pulmonary cells were either not detectable (as in the case of lung fibroblasts) or were at detection limit (in the case of A549 cells). All other cells showed moderate levels of ACE2 mRNA relative to three reference genes. Cellular uptake of cmRNA after transfection was analyzed by real-time PCR ( A). cmRNA uptake was quantified against a set of reference genes (which were not affected by the experimental conditions; data not shown). 24 hr after transfection, ACE2 cmRNA was successfully taken up in all ACE2 cmRNA-treated samples, while no ACE2 cmRNA could be detected in control cmRNA or untransfected samples. In a next step, we aimed at verifying whether ACE2 cmRNA is successfully translated into ACE2 protein. First, ACE2 protein abundance after transfection was analyzed by western blot. For this purpose, A549, HepG2, and HEK293 cells were transfected with two doses of ACE2 cmRNA, respectively. All three cell lines showed clear dose-dependent expression levels for ACE2 protein ( B). Likewise, transfection of primary liver and lung cells with ACE2 cmRNA also led to clearly detectable ACE2 protein levels. Second, enzymatic activity of ACE2 protein was analyzed by an ACE2 activity assay ( C). All ACE2 cmRNA-transfected samples showed a significant induction in ACE2 activity relative to untransfected samples. These findings demonstrate that ACE2 cmRNA transfection leads to translation of an enzymatically active protein in liver and lung cells.
 

## During Post-translational Modification, ACE2 Is Glycosylated and Integrated into the Plasma Membrane
ACE2 is a typical type I integral membrane protein with the core domain located at the extracellular surface. The extracellular domain is flanked by a signal peptide followed by the catalytic domain, which has several glycosylation sites. It was crucial for our in vivo studies to guarantee a locally expressed membrane-bound version of ACE2 protein; therefore, we specifically investigated post-translational modifications (e.g., glycosylation and intramolecular disulfide bonds) with regard to these biological properties. N-linked glycosylation is pivotal for proper folding, assembly, and trafficking of membrane proteins. Therefore, we investigated whether cmRNA-derived ACE2 protein is glycosylated and correctly integrated into the plasma membrane. Cells transfected with ACE2 cmRNA produced an ACE2 protein with a size of 120 kDa, corresponding to the mature, fully glycosylated form of the protein. The glycosylation process was successfully inhibited by treating cells with tunicamycin, an inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation. Retrospective deglycosylation of mature ACE2 protein by enzymatic deglycosylation resulted in the same protein size as inhibition of glycosylation, confirming full protein glycosylation ( A). Additionally, the formation of disulfide bonds is shown in . To verify correct protein integration and expression on the cell surface, ACE2 cmRNA-transfected cells were stained with anti-ACE2 antibody recognizing the ACE2 core domain located on the cell surface. Cells were then analyzed by flow cytometry ( B and 2C). In all three cell lines, ACE2 cmRNA-transfected samples showed a clear increase in ACE2 translation relative to untransfected samples. To localize cmRNA-derived protein, A549 and HepG2 cells were transfected with ACE2 cmRNA and ACE2 protein was visualized by fluorescence staining (HepG2 and A549 cells in D and , respectively). In both cell lines, samples transfected with ACE2 cmRNA stained positive for ACE2 protein, while transfection with control cmRNA showed only a weak background signal in HepG2 cells. In light of potential future therapeutic applications for lung and liver fibrosis, endogenous levels of ACE2 protein are not sufficient to prevent disease onset and progress; hence, strong ACE2 translation is pivotal. The immunocytochemical images revealed ACE2 protein localization throughout the cytoplasm and on the plasma membrane. The accumulations found throughout the cytoplasm showed a dotted pattern, indicating protein enrichment in vesicular structures probably involved in protein maturation or trafficking to the plasma membrane. The presence of ACE2 protein at the plasma membrane was indicated by co-localization of ACE2 with wheat germ agglutinin, a plasma membrane marker (white staining patterns in overlay images). Taken together, we could prove that ACE2 cmRNA-derived protein undergoes biological post-translational modifications leading to correct integration into the plasma membrane.
 

## Codon-Optimized ACE2 cmRNA with Human α-Globin 5′ UTR Leads to Enhanced cmRNA Stability and ACE2 Protein Translation
After having successfully verified that the sequence of ACE2 cmRNA leads to the translation of an active membrane-bound form of ACE2 protein, we wanted to further optimize the sequence for strong protein translation. Therefore, we designed eight different ACE2 cmRNA sequences, sharing the same open reading frame (ORF) encoding ACE2, a C1-m7G cap, and a poly(A) tail of ∼120 nucleotides, which was found to be the optimal length. In addition to the natural ACE2 mRNA sequence, we introduced three different modifications of the UTRs known for a high level of protein translation , , : namely, a minimal 5′ UTR, a human alpha globin (hαG) 5′ UTR, and a cytochrome b-245 alpha poly-peptide (CYBA) 5′ with 3′ UTR. For all four sequences, we designed one natural version and one codon-optimized version of the ORF.
First, we were interested in the effect of the cmRNA modifications on intracellular ACE2 cmRNA stability. Overall, cmRNA followed a degradation pattern of an exponential one-phase decay ( ). The RNA of all sequences was detectable 72 hr after transfection. Overall, codon optimization slowed the rate of cmRNA degradation, leading to higher levels of cmRNA at later time points. The only exception was the codon-optimized natural ACE2 sequence, which had the highest number of non-codon-optimized nucleotides in its sequence due to the long natural 5′ and 3′ UTR regions. Based on these data, the half-life for each sequence was calculated for the decay phase ( ). In A549 cells, all codon-optimized sequences showed an extended half-life compared to native sequences. In HepG2 cells, codon optimization led to a prolonged half-life for hαG and minimal cmRNA sequences. Looking at ACE2 translation efficiency, codon optimization led to stronger protein translation in both cell lines for up to 144 hr (A549 and HepG2 cells in A, left and right panels, respectively). The strongest protein translation was observed for codon-optimized hαG cmRNA, followed by codon-optimized minimal cmRNA. Despite the extended half-life of codon-optimized CYBA cmRNA, ACE2 protein abundance could not reach the levels of codon-optimized minimal and hαG cmRNA. Data obtained by western blot were confirmed by an ACE2 activity assay (A549 and HepG2 cells in B, left and right panels, respectively). In both cell lines, ACE2 enzymatic activity was significantly increased for samples transfected with codon-optimized hαG cmRNA and codon-optimized minimal cmRNA relative to untransfected samples. Based on these results, codon-optimized minimal and codon-optimized hαG cmRNA were identified as the best performing sequences with regard to cmRNA stability, protein translation, and kinetics. As the codon-optimized hαG cmRNA sequence showed a slightly longer half-life than the minimal sequence, it was used in all subsequent in vivo studies.
 

## ACE2 cmRNA Can Be Selectively Targeted to the Liver and Lung and Shows Strong ACE2 Protein Translation
Dysregulation of the local RAS contributes significantly to inflammation and fibrosis, , a process that can best be counterbalanced by specific ACE2 translation in the affected organs. For the purpose of liver-targeted cmRNA delivery, we chose lipoplexes (referred to as the liver lipidoid formulation [LLF] in the following) as described by Jarzębińska et al. The liver specificity of LLF was first confirmed in a formulation with firefly luciferase cmRNA. A 1 mg/kg dose of this formulation was administered intravenously to mice and luciferase protein activity was measured 6 hr after administration. All animals showed strong and selective cmRNA uptake in the liver, without signals in other organs ( A and 4B). Luciferase protein expression in the liver clearly mirrored the blood flow through the organ, thereby reflecting lipoplex distribution after intravenous injection ( C and ). Strong protein enrichment was observed close to the portal region, where afferent vessels enter the liver, with a gradual decrease toward the efferent central vein. After we successfully verified targeted and selective enrichment of LLF-complexed cmRNA and protein translation in the liver, we formulated two doses of ACE2 cmRNA (4 and 2 mg/kg) and a single dose (2 mg/kg) of control cmRNA in LLF for intravenous injection in mice. 6 hr after treatment, in situ hybridization of livers from ACE2 cmRNA-treated animals showed cmRNA uptake by hepatocytes and detection of cmRNA in liver sinusoids throughout the liver sample in a more or less homogeneous pattern ( D and ). These results were confirmed by real-time PCR, showing significant ACE2 cmRNA in liver homogenates of these animals ( E). Quantification of deposited ACE2 cmRNA showed a clear dose-dependent uptake of 0.032 ± 0.007 ng ACE2 cmRNA/μg total RNA for a 4-mg/kg dose and 0.016 ± 0.002 ACE2 cmRNA/μg total RNA for a 2-mg/kg dose. There was no ACE2 cmRNA detected in the control group. ACE2 cmRNA was successfully translated, as shown in western blot analysis ( F) by a clear increase in ACE2 protein abundance in the ACE2 treatment groups. Glycosylation was shown by enzymatic deglycosylation of liver homogenates, inducing a shift in protein size indicative for the active glycosylation process in vivo. In the ACE2 activity assay ( G), significantly higher protein activity was detected in ACE2-transfected liver samples than in the control group showing endogenous ACE2 baseline activity.
 For the purpose of pulmonary cmRNA delivery, we developed a novel proprietary lipid formulation especially designed for lung-targeted cmRNA delivery by intravenous injection (referred to as the pulmonary lipid formulation [PLF] in the following). First, the lung targeting of the formulation was evaluated by intravenous application of luciferase cmRNA in PLF in mice at a dose of 1 mg/kg. 6 hr after injection, a strong luciferase signal was detected selectively in the lungs, whereas other organs did not show any signal ( A). After we identified PLF as a selective delivery agent for lung application, we formulated a mixture of 90% ACE2 cmRNA or 90% control cmRNA and 10% luciferase cmRNA in PLF. A 1-mg/kg dose of this formulation was administered intravenously to mice, while sham-treated animals received a single injection of PBS. After 6 hr, lung-specific delivery was confirmed by luciferase activity, which showed high levels in the lungs compared to other organs for all animals that received PLF formulations ( B). In situ hybridization of ACE2 cmRNA-treated animals showed a homogeneous distribution of positive-stained cells in the alveolar walls, which were interpreted to be type II and type I AECs ( C, left panel). Furthermore, single macrophages with cmRNA were found. Immunohistochemical stainings for ACE2 protein in ACE2-treated animals revealed multifocal membranous positive staining of cells located predominantly in the alveolar angles, most likely type II AECs or macrophages ( C, middle panel). In addition, ACE2 cmRNA-treated animals showed positive cells in the alveolar walls with strong membrane and moderate cytoplasmic staining. The morphology of these cells is indicative of type I AECs. ACE2 protein abundance was increased in the ACE2 cmRNA-treated group, while control cmRNA and sham samples showed only endogenous ACE2 protein levels detected by western blot ( D). Overall, the application of cmRNA resulted in mild to moderate focally disseminated free alveolar erythrocytes ( C, right panel). Taken together, we have shown that intravenous administration of lipoplexes of a codon-optimized hαG ACE2 cmRNA in lipidoid nanoparticles (LLF) or PLF is able to strongly induce ACE2 protein translation selectively in the liver or lung.
 

## Discussion
Re-establishment of a well-balanced RAS is repeatedly shown to have promising therapeutic effects in the treatment of liver and lung fibrosis. , , , , , , , , These effects may be further enhanced by local translation of ACE2 in affected organs, which is feasible with the latest cmRNA technology. In this study, we designed an optimized sequence of chemically modified ACE2 mRNA that leads to prominent ACE2 protein translation and activity in vitro and in vivo. Tailor-made lipidoid-based formulations of this optimized ACE2 cmRNA sequence led to ACE2 protein translation directly and selectively in the liver, while the lipid-based formulation for pulmonary delivery resulted in selective ACE2 translation in the lung using the same ACE2 cmRNA.
The RAS is a signaling cascade producing multiple biological active intermediates. Initially, drug development was mainly focused on ACE inhibitors in the context of blood pressure regulation. However, with increasing knowledge about the physiologic and pathologic properties of the biological intermediates further down the proteolytic cascade, AT1 receptor blockers, AT2 receptor agonists, recombinant ACE2 or ACE2 activators, and Ang-(1-7) analogs gained momentum. , With the exception of ACE2, the therapeutic purpose of all of these drugs was to either reduce pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic signaling through the AT1 receptor or to counterbalance AT1 receptor signaling by increased Mas receptor signaling. The effect of ACE2 regulators, however, is unique in the RAS, as they can achieve both. By cleaving AngII to Ang-(1-7), ACE2 reduces stimulation of AT1 receptor signaling and at the same time increases anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic signaling through the Mas receptor. The therapeutic effects of modulating the RAS by increased ACE2 signaling as just described were repeatedly shown for both liver and lung fibrosis. However, previous studies struggled with hurdles such as organ-specific delivery, controllable protein expression, and immunogenicity, among others. Post-translational modifications such as glycosylation are indispensable for full functionality of proteins subjected to such modifications, especially for ACE2 (a membrane-integrated protein), which cannot be guaranteed by recombinant protein therapy. These obstacles and requirements could potentially be solved by RTT; hence, we aimed at investigating the potential of ACE2 RTT. Thus, we designed an in vitro-transcribed chemically modified ACE2 mRNA sequence. This sequence was successfully tested in vitro for cellular cmRNA uptake and translation into enzymatically active protein in a generic test system (HEK293 cells), as well as in human and murine pulmonary and hepatocellular cells ( ).
Administration of recombinant human ACE2 in experimental liver and lung fibrosis showed the first promising results. However, long-term effects on collagen deposition in the lung were considered questionable and increased the need for local ACE2 delivery with greater efficacy, two requirements that are feasible with the latest advances in RTT. In addition, limited understanding of the physiological relevance of soluble ACE2 and a limited terminal half-life of 10 hr for recombinant ACE2 protein in humans urged us to verify that cmRNA-derived ACE2 protein is processed to a stably expressed transmembrane protein. After we verified full protein glycosylation in vitro and in vivo ( A and F), a crucial step for protein trafficking and integration into the plasma membrane, we confirmed correct protein integration into the plasma membrane ( B–2D). In fluorescence stainings of ACE2 cmRNA-transfected cells, we could further observe ACE2 enrichment in vesicular structures, which may be part of the post-translational maturation machinery ( A, 2B, ). However, a detailed analysis of all post-translational modifications relevant for ACE2 would be required for a complete assessment of the consensus between endogenous and ACE2 cmRNA-derived protein processing.
With potential future applications of ACE2 RTT in humans, careful consideration of the biochemical properties relating to its biological implications for pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics is required. Therefore, we optimized the ACE2 cmRNA sequence with regard to cmRNA stability, protein abundance, enzymatic activity, and translation kinetics. Based on our and other groups’ work, we decided on a set of modifications that we considered most promising for our purpose. Cell type and cell state have a strong impact on how the cell reacts to variations in artificially introduced mRNA sequences. , , , The biological implications of these modifications need to be carefully evaluated. UTRs are key elements in the mRNA sequence for translation initiation, elongation, and termination as well as intracellular localization and mRNA stability, , all of which have a significant impact on final protein expression kinetics. Therefore, we designed sequences with three UTR modifications and a minimal 5′ UTR known for a high level of protein translation over an extended time period. , , Codon optimization is another technique that is frequently used for strong protein translation. In this technique, translation rates are markedly increased by replacing rare codons with abundant codons without modifying the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein. , In addition, codon optimization reduces secondary structures of cmRNA, which may otherwise induce cellular immune reactions. Therefore, for all four sequences, we designed one natural version and one codon-optimized version of the ORF. In our screen with A549 and HepG2 cells ( ), we observed that codon optimization also led to an increased half-life for all cmRNA sequences in A549 cells, but not in HepG2 cells. Protein translation, however, was markedly increased from 6 to 144 hr in both cell lines for codon-optimized sequences. We could further increase ACE2 protein translation and enzymatic activity by also replacing natural ACE2 UTRs with UTRs of strongly translated proteins. As the different UTRs did not affect the physical half-life of cmRNA ( ), we conclude that replacing UTRs did primarily increase translational efficiency, which is in line with previous findings. For the purpose of liver- and lung-targeted application of ACE2 cmRNA, we could identify codon-optimized hαG ACE2 cmRNA as the best performing sequence. Furthermore, we observed that codon optimization of the hαG ACE2 cmRNA sequence led to reduced immunogenicity ( ), probably leading to a prolonged half-life and strong protein translation for up to 6 days in both cell lines.
Cell- and tissue-specific delivery of cmRNA is currently considered a major obstacle to overcome for RTT. We could show that intravenous delivery of reporter cmRNA in LLF as described by Jarzębińska et al. led to strong and liver-specific protein translation ( A and 4B). Immunohistochemical stainings indicate that intravenous application is a potent delivery mechanism for reaching a high number of hepatocytes, which was previously shown for delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA) as well as mRNA. , , , , The current understanding of the underlying mechanism is that lipoplexes enter the liver lobuli via fenestrated capillaries, which lack a diaphragm (unlike other types of capillaries). This makes them highly permeable for small molecules, and lipoplexes are easily taken up into the interstitium, where they are transported by ligand-based targeting or diffusion from the afferent to the efferent vessels. , , This is visible in the histochemical stainings for luciferase protein showing a gradual decrease in protein abundance from the afferent to the efferent vessels ( C). This effect is observable throughout the whole organ, confirming the advantage of RTT over recombinant protein therapy and pDNA delivery—namely, to reach a large pool of cells even beyond physical barriers such as endothelium in both mitotic and non-mitotic cells, which was postulated previously by Matsui et al. With the aim of shifting the local balance of the RAS toward resolution of fibrosis, we consider reaching hepatocytes, the most abundant cell type in the liver, a major achievement for strong translation of our target protein. In a second step, we applied the same delivery method to ACE2 cmRNA and saw markedly increased ACE2 protein translation and activity 6 hr after treatment ( F and 4G). Our in vitro findings ( ) showed that ACE2 protein is detectable up to 5 days. If this expression pattern can be established in future in vivo models by RTT, ACE2 expression lies above levels reached by recombinant ACE2 therapy in humans and below levels reached by adeno-associated viral ACE2 therapy in experimental models. This emphasizes once more the advantages of RTT for a flexible dosing regimen for potential future clinical application.
Choosing the optimal administration route for lung-targeted cmRNA delivery requires careful consideration of the pathologic characteristics of the targeted disease. IPF is characterized by AEC apoptosis in response to repetitive microinjuries, and this effect is particularly evident adjacent to fibroblast foci. Previous in vitro studies have shown that AECs produce more AngII in response to injury, while ACE2 mRNA is reduced at the same time. This makes AECs even more prone to injury and AngII-induced apoptosis. , , , We therefore consider delivering ACE2 cmRNA especially to these areas of epithelial cell death essential for therapeutic success. Due to scarring of the lung parenchyma, these areas are poorly ventilated, hindering the uptake of drugs via the airways. Looking at the vascularization of fibrotic lungs, it was shown that fibroblast foci themselves are poorly vascularized, while the adjacent non-fibrotic areas, where AEC apoptosis takes place, are highly vascularized. , Therefore, we hypothesized that it may be more effective to reach these areas via the pulmonary vasculature than via the airways. Thus, we used a lipid-based cmRNA formulation (PLF) optimized for pulmonary delivery for intravenous application in mice. This formulation showed strong and selective protein translation in the lung ( A and 5B). Administration of PLF containing ACE2 cmRNA led to equally strong ACE2 protein translation in the lung ( C). Immunostainings showed that sham-treated animals expressed ACE2 in type II AECs as already observed by Wiener et al., while ACE2 cmRNA-treated lungs presumably also express ACE2 in type I AECs. These findings are especially valuable for therapeutic application in IPF; unlike rodent lungs, human lungs also express ACE2 in type I AECs, , rendering them an enormous pool for locally active ACE2 protein to break the vicious circle of AngII-stimulated ACE2 downregulation and apoptosis. Establishing ACE2 translation in type I AECs could not be achieved by recombinant protein therapy or lentiviral-mediated ACE2 overexpression. 
In summary, we advanced the latest RNA technology for sustained local ACE2 translation in the liver or lung. These achievements highlight the strengths of RTT over recombinant protein therapy, where protein half-life, immunogenicity, and organ- or cell-targeted delivery are still challenging. Compared to non-viral gene transfer by pDNA, RTT shows strong translation efficiency without the risk of insertional mutagenesis, a problem also found with retroviral, lentiviral, and adeno-associated gene transfer. In addition, the time frame of viral-mediated gene expression is difficult to control, lasting up to years in the case of adeno-associated viruses. Furthermore, in contrast to gene therapy, cell division is not needed for successful protein expression in RTT. In this study, we designed an ACE2 cmRNA sequence, leading to strong and stable ACE2 protein translation in vitro and in vivo. In combination with selected lipidoid and lipid nanoparticles serving as carrier systems, we were able to translate ACE2 protein selectively in the liver and lung, which may allow re-establishment of local RAS balance. Due to its self-limited translation without the risk of genomic integration, ACE2 protein translation can be fine-tuned to each patient’s needs with a controllable treatment duration until the halt or resolution of fibrosis. Therefore, we consider ACE2-based RTT a promising approach for the treatment of liver and lung fibrosis to be tested in fibrotic disease models.

## Materials and Methods

## cmRNA Preparation
Chemically modified mRNA was synthesized as previously described. In brief, the respective pDNA templates were subjected to in vitro transcription using T7 RNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a predefined mix of natural and chemically modified ribonucleotides. To enhance RNA stability, a C1-m7G cap structure was enzymatically added at the 5′ end of the transcript, while the 3′ end was subjected to polyadenylation of ∼ 200 nucleotides. The cmRNA product was purified by ammonium-acetate precipitation and was re-suspended in water at the desired concentration. Purity and quality were checked on a NanoDrop2000C spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and with the Standard Sensitivity RNA Analysis Kit on a Fragment Analyzer (Advanced Analytical Technologies). The following cmRNA sequences were designed: human ACE2 5′ and 3′ UTRs (natural), GGGAGAC(Nat)GCCACCATG____TGA(Nat)-poly(A); minimal 5′ UTR (minimal), GGGAGACGCCACCATG____TGA-poly(A); human alpha globin 5′ UTR (hαG), GGGAGAC(hαG)GCCACCATG____TGA-poly(A); and human CYBA 5′ and 3′ UTR (CYBA), GGGAGAC(CYBA)GCCACCATG____TGA(CYBA)-poly(A). The structure of the natural human ACE2 UTRs (Nat) was retrieved from NCBI GenBank (GenBank: NM_021804.2). The hαG 5′ UTR (hαG) was designed with omission of the first 30 nucleotides of the hαG reference sequence (GenBank: NM_000517.4) and introduction of an additional “G” to give a full Kozak element upstream of ATG. CYBA UTRs (CYBA) were designed as previously described. 

## cmRNA Lipoplex Formation and Transfection
For in vitro experiments, lipoplexes were formed using an in-house transfection reagent, Lipofectamine 2000, or Lipofectamine MessengerMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) depending on the experimental aim and cell type. For the initial proof of concept, an in-house transfection reagent comprising preassembled C12-(2-3-2)/DPPC/cholesterol/DMG-PEG2k lipoplexes in aqueous solution was used at an N/P ratio (molar ratio of amino groups of lipid to phosphate groups of cmRNA) of 8. In brief, cmRNA in aqueous solution was rapidly injected into the appropriate amount of in-house transfection reagent, followed by 5-min incubation at room temperature (RT) for self-assembly of cmRNA and lipoplexes. Screening of the eight cmRNA sequences was performed using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as the transfection reagent, while primary cells were transfected with Lipofectamine MessengerMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Transfection was carried out according to the manufacturer’s protocol with a cmRNA-to-transfection reagent ratio of 1:2 for Lipofectamine 2000 and 1:1.5 for Lipofectamine MessengerMAX. In general, 2 μg cmRNA per well was used for experiments performed in six-well plates, 250 ng and 25 ng cmRNA per well for 24-well plates, and 16 ng cmRNA per well for 96-well plates. For all experiments, cells were seeded in a number to reach 70% confluence within 24 hr. After 24 hr, the medium was renewed and lipoplexes were added dropwise with or without 0.005 mg/mL tunicamycin (Sigma-Aldrich). The medium was replaced 4 hr after transfection for cells transfected with Lipofectamine MessengerMAX or after 24 hr if cells were kept in culture for more than 24 hr.
For liver-targeted in vivo experiments, cmRNA was formulated in LLF as previously described. Lung-targeted lipoplexes (PLF) were prepared by mixing cmRNA with in-house polyethylene glycol (PEG) co-polymer in aqueous solution and applying it to a mix of preassembled lipid micelles. After incubation for 15 min at RT for self-assembly of cmRNA in this PLF, the mix was transferred into Dulbecco’s PBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 2% sucrose. Lipoplexes were applied in a final volume of 150 μL per animal with a cmRNA dose of 1 mg/kg.

## Isolation and Cell Culture of Murine Liver and Lung Cells
Liver cells were isolated from 8-week-old male C57BL/6J mice. For hepatocyte isolation, animals were euthanized and the liver was perfused via the portal vein with EGTA buffer, which contained 25 mM HEPES (Gibco/Life Technologies), pH 8.5, 5.7 g/L glucose (Applichem), 103 mM NaCl, 2.4 mM KCl, 1.23 mM KH2PO4, 0.480 mM l-glutamine (Biochrome), 15% (v/v) amino acids (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.5 mM EGTA. In the next step, hepatocytes were extracted by digestion of liver tissue with a collagenase solution, which contained 25 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 5.7 g/L glucose, 103 mM NaCl, 2.4 mM KCl, 1.23 mM KH2PO4, 0.480 mM l-glutamine, 12% (v/v) amino acids, 2 mM CaCl2, and 3.5 mM MgCl2 supplemented with 0.12 U/mL type NB 4G collagenase (Serva), and they were subjected to a Percoll gradient (GE Healthcare). Cells were then seeded on Collagene R (Serva)-coated six-well plates in William’s E medium (PAN-Biotech) supplemented with 0.22 mM l-glutamine, 0.02 M HEPES, pH 7.4, 0.5% penicillin/streptomycin (Biochrome), 100 mg/L gentamycin (Sigma-Aldrich), 110 nM hydrocortisone (RotexMedica), insulin (Novo Nordisk), 1.6% DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich), and 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) (PAN-Biotech). After cell attachment, the medium was changed to culture medium supplemented with 1% FCS.
Fibroblast extraction was performed by excising lungs of 16-week-old C57BL/6J wild-type mice after an intraperitoneal overdose of ketamine/xylazine and cervical dislocation. Under sterile conditions, the lungs were flushed with PBS after cannulation of the right ventricle. The flushed lungs were then excised, diced into 2- to 3-mm pieces, and digested in media with collagenase solution, which contained DMEM/F-12, l-glutamine, and 15 mM HEPES (Gibco/Life Technologies) supplemented with 26.5 U/mL collagenase type I (Biochrome). The digested tissue was filtered, washed with PBS, and seeded in culture medium, which contained DMEM/F-12, l-glutamine, 15 mM HEPES, and 10% heat-inactivated FCS (Gibco/Life Technologies), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco/Life Technologies). Experiments were performed between passages 4 and 6.
All cells were cultured in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C with an exchange of culture medium every 2–3 days.

## Cell Culture of Human Cell Lines
A549 (ACC-107) and HEK293 (ACC-305) cells were purchased from DSMZ and cultured in minimum essential media (MEM) with GlutaMAX (Gibco/Life Technologies). HepG2 cells were purchased from DSMZ (ACC-180) and cultured in RPMI 1640 plus GlutaMAX (Gibco/Life Technologies). Within the 2 years of in vitro experiments, cross-contamination was checked by short tandem-repeat profiling. The medium for all three cell lines was supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FCS (Gibco/Life Technologies) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco/Life Technologies). Cells were cultured in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C. The cell culture medium for A549, HepG2, and HEK293 cells was renewed twice a week and cells were passaged at 80% confluence.

## cmRNA Quantification and Relative Gene Expression Analysis
Total RNA was isolated from cell culture or tissue samples using the Nucleospin RNA Plus Kit (Machery-Nagel) and total RNA was transcribed into cDNA using the Transcriptor First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche Diagnostics). Real-time qPCR was performed with SsoAdvanced Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) on a Roche Light Cycler 96 (Roche Diagnostics). The following primers were used: ACE2 cmRNA in vitro experiments (5′-ggccaatcactacgaggact-3′ and 5′-tccactccgttcacctcata-3′); native ACE2 cmRNA construct screen (5′-aaaaatgagatggcaagagca-3′ and 5′-gccatctaccccatttacttca-3′); codon-optimized ACE2 cmRNA construct screen (5′- aatacgtggtgctgaagaacg-3′ and 5′-agtcgccgtagtcctcgtag-3′); human ACE2 (5′-ccagtggatgaaaaagtggtg-3′ and 5′-gtttcatcatggggcacag-3′); human β-actin (PrimePCR SYBR Green Assay; Bio-Rad); human TATA-binding protein (PrimePCR SYBR Green Assay); human β-2-microglobulin (5′-ttctggcctggaggctatc-3′ and 5′-tcaggaaatttgactttccattc-3′); human mitochondrial ribosomal protein L19 (MRPL19) (5′-ggaatgttatcgaaggacaagg-3′ and 5′-caggaagggcatctcgtaag-3′); human succinate dehydrogenase, subunit A (SDHA) (5′-tccactacatgacggagcag-3′ and 5′-ccatcttcagttctgctaaacg-3′); mouse ACE2 (5′-tgtagaacgtaccttcgcagag-3′ and 5′-gtaggaagggtaggtatccatcaa-3′); mouse hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (Hprt) (5′-ggagcggtagcacctcct-3′ and 5′-aacctggttcatcatcgctaa-3′); mouse MRPL19 (5′-cgagtacagcacctttgacg-3′ and 5′-ggcttcattttaactttcagcttg-3′); mouse SDHA (5′-ttgagatccgtgaaggaagag-3′ and 5′-tagacgtgtggccagttgc-3′; and mouse glucuronidase beta (Gusb) (PrimePCR SYBR Green Assay).
Reference genes used in A were β-actin and TATA-box binding protein for human samples; MRPL19, Gusb, and SDHA for hepatocytes; and MRPL19 and HPRT for lung fibroblasts. Absolute cmRNA values were calculated by interpolation using GraphPad Prism software. Half-lives and 95% confidence intervals were calculated applying a one-phase exponential decay function with automatic outlier elimination in GraphPad Prism software.

## Western Blot Analysis
For in vitro experiments, cells were lysed with 0.5% Triton X-100 in ACE2 lysis buffer (1 M NaCl, 0.5 mM ZnCl2 and 75 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5), while ex vivo samples were lysed with RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate). Total protein content was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay, following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). If applicable, parts of the lysates were used for deglycosylation with NEB Protein Deglycosylation Mix II following the manufacturer’s instructions for denaturing conditions (New England Biolabs). Cell lysates were separated on 8% or 4%–12% polyacrylamide gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Bio-Rad). Membranes were blocked in gelatin buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Triton X-100, 5 mM EDTA, and 0.25% gelatin) and probed with antibodies against ACE2 (0.1 μg/mL, AF933; R&D Systems/Bio-Techne) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (1:10,000, 5174; Cell Signaling Technology/New England Biolabs). For protein detection, horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-goat (1:10,000, sc2020) and anti-rabbit (1:10,000, sc2004; both from Santa Cruz Biotechnology) antibodies were added. For signal detection, Luminata Western HRP substrate was applied according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Merck Chemicals).

## ACE2 Activity Assay
To quantify ACE2 activity, cell culture samples were lysed as for western blotting. The ACE2 activity assay was adapted from Pedersen et al. 30 μg total protein extract was incubated with or without DX600 (Bachem) for 20 min at RT in ACE2 reaction buffer. 10 μM synthetic substrate Mca-Y-V-A-D-A-P-K(Dnp)-OH (R&D Systems) was added to a total volume of 100 μL and incubated for at least 60 min at 37°C.
Ex vivo samples were prepared as described by Joyner et al. In brief, frozen liver and lung samples were homogenized in ACE2 reaction buffer (Complete; Roche Diagnostics), which contained 25 nM HEPES buffer, 125 nM NaCl, and 10 μM ZnCl2, pH 7.4, followed by a centrifugation at 2,500 × g for 5 min. The supernatant was collected and spun for 10 min at 28,000 × g. The resulting pellet was re-suspended in reaction buffer before overnight incubation with 0.5% Triton X-100 at 4°C and gentle shaking. Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 28,000 × g, the supernatant was collected, and the total protein content was measured by the BCA assay. For the assay, 20 μg protein was incubated for 20 min at RT in ACE2 reaction buffer containing 10 μM Captopril (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), an ACE inhibitor. 1 mM MLN4760 (Exclusive Chemistry), another ACE2 inhibitor, was added, followed by another incubation for 20 min at RT. Finally, 1 mM substrate Mca-A-P-K(DnP) (Caslo) was added and samples were incubated for 1 hr at 37°C.
Fluorescence of all samples was measured on a Tecan Infinite 200 PRO plate reader with excitation at 320 nm and emission at 405 nm.

## Flow Cytometry Analysis
Correct protein integration into the plasma membrane was assessed by flow cytometry. Cells were washed with PBS, detached with TrypLE (Gibco/Life Technologies), and re-suspended in flow cytometry buffer (PBS supplemented with 10% FCS). Cells were incubated with primary antibody against ACE2 (5 μg/mL, AF933; R&D Systems) in flow cytometry buffer for 1 hr at 4°C. After washing with flow cytometry buffer, anti-goat AF488 antibody (1:400, A11087; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added for 1 hr at 4°C. Cells were washed again in flow cytometry buffer and stained with propidium iodide for discrimination between live and dead cells (1 µg/mL Sigma-Aldrich). Analysis was performed on an Attune Acoustic Focusing Cytometer (Life Technologies) with Attune Cytometric Software (version 2.1; Life Technologies) and FlowJo (version 10).

## Firefly Luciferase Assay
For detection of firefly luciferase activity, 60–90 mg frozen lung tissue was lysed in luciferase lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 1% Triton X-100, and Complete). 100 μL luciferin substrate (0.47 mM d-luciferin, 0.27 mM coenzyme A, 33.3 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol, 0.53 mM ATP, 1.1 mM MgCO3, 2.7 mM magnesium sulfate heptahydrate, 20 mM Tricine, and 0.1 mM EDTA disodium salt dihydrate) was added to the tissue homogenate and photon emission was measured for 1 s on a Lumat LB 9507 (Berthold Technologies).

## In Vivo Bioluminescence Imaging
Mice were anesthetized, followed by a 3 mg intraperitoneal and 1.5 mg intra-nasal application of d-luciferin substrate (Synchem) dissolved in PBS at 30 mg/mL, pH 7.0. Bioluminescence was measured 10 min later using an IVIS Lumina XR Imaging System (Caliper Life Sciences) with an exposure time of 1 min. Organs were excised and placed on a Petri dish and reimaged on the IVIS system.

## Animal Studies
Animal studies were performed in BALB/c or C57BL/6J mice. Animals were purchased from Charles River Laboratories, and they were 9–11 weeks of age and weighed ∼20 g at the start of the experiment. All studies were approved by the Government of Upper Bavaria or by the Norddeutsches Landesamt für Verbraucherschutz und Lebensmittelsicherheit (LAVES) in Germany, and all animal experiments were carried out according to the guidelines of the German law of protection of animal life and reviewed by the local ethics committee.

## Immunofluorescence Staining
Cells were cultured on coverslips in six-well plates. After washing with PBS, 20 μg/mL tetramethylrhodamine-conjugated wheat germ agglutinin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in Hank’s balanced salt solution (Gibco/Life Technologies) was added to the samples and incubated for 10 min in the incubator. Samples were washed with PBS and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at RT. Cells were washed again and incubated for 10 min with 0.2% Triton X-100 at RT. After another washing step, cells were blocked in PBS supplemented with 10% FCS and 0.05% Triton X-100 for 30 min at RT. Slides were then incubated for 1 hr with primary antibody against ACE2 (5 μg/mL, AF933; R&D Systems) at RT, followed by another washing step. Secondary anti-goat AF488 antibody (1:400, A11087; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and DAPI (1 μg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich) were added and incubated for 1 hr at RT. After a final wash, slides were mounted in FluorSave (Merck Chemicals) and viewed under a Leica DMi8 microscope (Leica Microsystems).

## Immunohistochemistry
Liver and lung tissues were excised, fixed for 24 hr in 4% buffered formaldehyde solution, and embedded in paraffin for histological examination. Tissues were then sectioned into 3- to 4-μm slices, deparaffinized, and rehydrated in a graded ethanol series. For antigen retrieval, tissue sections were incubated in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH 6.0, for 30 min using a waterbath at 96°C, washed in PBS, and quenched for 5 min in 3% H2O2. After another washing step, sections for luciferase were blocked for 1 hr at RT in 2.5% horse serum in PBS (Vector Laboratories). The sections were then incubated with primary anti-luciferase antibody (1:300, G7451; Promega) in PBS supplemented with 0.3% Triton X-100 at 4°C overnight. Tissue sections were washed in PBS and incubated with ImmPRESS reagent (Vector Laboratories) for 30 min at RT. After washing again with PBS, 3,3′-diaminobenzidine substrate at 0.5 mg/mL in PBS was added for 1–8 min at RT. For ACE2 staining, the tissue sections were additionally subjected to an avidin/biotin block (Vector Laboratories) for 15 min at RT, followed by a brief wash. Then tissues were blocked in Vectastain serum-blocking reagent D (Vector Laboratories) for 30 min at RT, followed by an overnight incubation at 4°C with primary anti-ACE2 antibody (10 μg/mL, AF933; R&D Systems) in 10% normal goat serum (Life Technologies) in PBS supplemented with 0.2% Triton X-100. After washing with PBS, the sections were incubated with Vectastain biotinylated anti-goat immunoglobulin G (IgG) (diluted according to the manufacturer’s protocol; Vector Laboratories), washed again, and incubated with Vectastain ABC reagent (Vector Laboratories), each for 30 min at RT. 3,3′-diaminobenzidine substrate was added at 0.5 mg/mL in PBS for 1 min at RT and the reaction was stopped by washing tissue sections in distilled water. After a counterstaining with hematoxylin (Roth), sections were evaluated under a Leica DM2000 LED microscope (Leica Microsystems).

## In Situ Hybridization
In situ hybridization of liver tissues was performed by Advanced Cell Diagnostics (ACD), while lung tissues were analyzed by ITEM using a brown RNAscope 2.5 HD Reagent Kit (catalog no. 322300; ACD) following the manufacturer’s instructions. For detection of ACE2 cmRNA, a targeted probe was designed by ACD based on the cmRNA sequence provided, while a probe detecting murine ACE2 was derived from GenBank (Genbank: NM_027286.4) RNAscope dapB (bacterial dapB; ACD) was used as a negative control, and RNAscope PPIB (cyclophilin B; ACD) as a positive control. Samples were counterstained with hematoxylin and viewed under a bright-field microscope.

## Statistical Analysis
Each experiment was performed with at least three technical replicates per sample. In addition, quantitative analysis of fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) samples and screening for the best performing cmRNA construct was performed with a minimum of three biological replicates. Results are shown as means ± SD unless otherwise stated. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software (version 6). Pairwise comparison of in vitro experiments was conducted by the two-tailed Student’s t test and group comparisons of in vivo experiments were done by one-way ANOVA, followed by the Dunnett multiple-comparisons test. A p value ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Author Contributions
E.S. performed proof-of-concept in vitro studies and M.H. executed the screen of ACE2 cmRNA sequences. D.W. provided primary murine hepatocytes, while A.H. and P.O. provided primary murine lung fibroblasts. J.G. and M.A. designed and produced cmRNA. C.D. and O.M. provided lipoplex formation for the in vivo experiments. G.H., T.P., and A.H.-J. conducted the animal experiments, while E.S. performed the ex vivo assays; V.K. coordinated the histological analysis and D.E. performed the pathologic evaluation of tissues. H.-G.H. and D.S. performed in situ hybridization of lung tissues. R.K.-D., C.P., and C.R. supervised the project and refined the manuscript; E.S. performed the data analysis and wrote the manuscript.

## Conflicts of Interest
M.H., M.A., C.D., D.E., J.G., G.H., A.H.-J., V.K., R.K.-D., O.M., and T.P. are employees of Ethris GmbH, and C.R. and C.P. hold equity in Ethris GmbH.

## Acknowledgments
The laboratory work was done at Ethris GmbH, the Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (Helmholtz Zentrum Munich), and the Institute of Molecular Immunology and Experimental Oncology. This study was supported by the Biochance project (031A526) funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via the Nanosystems Initiative Munich (NIM) Excellence Cluster. We thank all members of Ethris GmbH for technical support and discussions. We acknowledge Jana Lambrecht for contributions with regard to PKR activation, Katrin Lindner for support in histological processing of in vivo samples, and Philipp Beck for help with the setup of the ACE2 activity assay.

## Footnotes
Supplemental Information includes eight figures and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2017.04.006.

## Contributor Information
Carsten Rudolph, Email: rudolph@ethris.com.
Rebekka Kubisch-Dohmen, Email: kubisch@ethris.com.

## Supplemental Information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S8

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S8

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information