Chem Res ToxicolChem. Res. Toxicol822acssdtxChemical Research in Toxicology0893-228X1520-5010pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC5569670PMC5569670.1556967055696702875016610.1021/acs.chemrestox.7b001281PerspectiveRepair-Resistant
DNA Lesions
GeacintovNicholas E. BroydeSuseChemistry and Biology Departments, New York University, New York, New York 10003-5180, United States*E-mail: ng1@nyu.edu. Phone: (212) 998-8407.27072017210820173082974391517154812052017240820172708201722072024Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes. 
The eukaryotic global genomic nucleotide
excision repair (GG-NER)
pathway is the major mechanism that removes most bulky and some nonbulky
lesions from cellular DNA. There is growing evidence that certain
DNA lesions are repaired slowly or are entirely resistant to repair
in cells, tissues, and in cell extract model assay systems. It is
well established that the eukaryotic DNA lesion-sensing proteins do
not detect the damaged nucleotide, but recognize the distortions/destabilizations
in the native DNA structure caused by the damaged nucleotides. In
this article, the nature of the structural features of certain bulky
DNA lesions that render them resistant to NER, or cause them to be
repaired slowly, is compared to that of those that are good-to-excellent
NER substrates. Understanding the structural features that distinguish
NER-resistant DNA lesions from good NER substrates may be useful for
interpreting the biological significance of biomarkers of exposure
of human populations to genotoxic environmental chemicals. NER-resistant
lesions can survive to replication and cause mutations that can initiate
cancer and other diseases. Furthermore, NER diminishes the efficacy
of certain chemotherapeutic drugs, and the design of more potent pharmaceuticals
that resist repair can be advanced through a better understanding
of the structural properties of DNA lesions that engender repair-resistance.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9tx7b00128document-id-new-14tx-2017-00128yccc-price1

## Introduction
The
genome is continuously exposed to exogenous and endogenous
genotoxic agents that generate different forms of DNA damage including
DNA strand breaks, chemically modified nucleobases, and intrastrand
and interstrand DNA cross-links that are collectively referred to
as DNA lesions. Mammalian cells have developed repair pathways that
remove the DNA damage and regenerate the intact DNA sequence. Among
the major repair pathways are base excision repair (BER), global genomic nucleotide excision repair , (GG-NER), and transcription coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC
NER). , − The BER system removes
specific and ubiquitous nonbulky DNA lesions such as 8-oxo-2′-deoxyguanosine
(8-oxoG) and restores the original DNA by a series of exquisitely
orchestrated steps that include the recognition of the damaged bases,
their removal, and reinsertion of the correct nucleotides using the
undamaged bases in the complementary strand as templates. By contrast,
the nucleotide excision repair system can repair a large variety of
different forms of DNA damage because it recognizes the local DNA
distortions/destabilizations caused by the DNA lesion rather than
the chemically modified base itself. , The NER process
involves ∼30 different proteins and a series of coordinated
steps that excise a 24–32 nucleotide sequence that contains
the damaged nucleotide, followed by the DNA polymerase-catalyzed resynthesis
of the missing sequence using the unmodified complementary strand
as the template. , 
The two subpathways of NER,
GG-NER and TC-NER, differ from one
another in the sensing and recognition of the DNA lesions. In the
case of mammalian GG-NER, the DNA distortions and thermodynamic destabilization
caused by the damaged nucleotide(s) are sensed by the heterodimeric
XPC-RAD23B protein (abbreviated as XPC below) that binds noncovalently
to the damaged site , and then recruits the subsequent
NER factors that lead to the characteristic ladder of excised oligonucleotide
sequences. , In the case of TC-NER, the DNA
damage in the transcribed strand is recognized by the stalling of
the RNA polymerase RNAP II, an event that leads to the subsequent
recruitment of the same NER factors as in the GG-NER XPC pathway. , Thus, the same ladders of dual incision and excision fragments are
observable after successful GG- and TC-NER that are the hallmarks
of NER activity. The TC-NER mechanism occurs only on the transcribed
strand of an active gene and thus affects
only a small fraction of DNA lesions, while most of the lesions in
genomic DNA are repaired by the GG-NER mechanism.
While it has
been known for a long time that chemically and structurally
different forms of nucleobase damage are repaired by the NER system
with variable efficiencies, some nonbulky
DNA lesions and certain bulky DNA lesions (traditionally called “DNA
adducts”) are entirely resistant to NER. Interest in these
phenomena has been growing because repair-resistant forms of DNA damage
persist in human tissues, with detrimental consequences for the cells.
Indeed, cellular DNA adduct levels have been correlated with levels
of mutations in mammalian cells. , The repair-resistant
DNA lesions can result in error-prone translesion synthesis, genomic
instability, and the initiation of cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.
These processes may depend on base sequence context and the reactivity
patterns of DNA adduct formation. Thus, human exposure to chemical
carcinogens can give rise to characteristic signatures of mutations
that can provide information about the nature of the carcinogen that
caused the cancer. − 
Understanding the structural features of repair-resistant
DNA lesions
can provide novel insights into the molecular basis of their recognition
by damage-sensing proteins in a sea of normal, unmodified DNA bases.
In this perspective, we focus on the eukaryotic NER pathway, while
damage recognition in prokaryotes has been reviewed by Kisker et al. A resemblance in the relative efficiencies of
dual incisions elicited by the same sets of DNA lesions by prokaryotic
and eukaryotic NER systems in vitro has been noted
and attributed to common, apparently conserved molecular mechanisms
of recognition of DNA damage. Here we
review our current knowledge of GG-NER-resistant bulky DNA lesions
and the structural characteristics that render them poor substrates
of NER, in contrast to those that are good-to-excellent human NER
substrates. Interstrand cross-linked DNA lesions also pose challenges
to cellular repair mechanisms but are not considered here since this
topic has been reviewed elsewhere. 

2

## Recognition of DNA Damage and Initiation of
GG-NER
Exposure of human skin to UV irradiation generates
the well-known
cyclobutane thymine dimers (T^T CPDs) and the pyrimidine (6–4)
pyrimidone photoproducts ( A and B, respectively). If not repaired, these DNA
lesions cause mutations and skin cancers. While the (6–4) photoproduct is readily repaired via the
human NER pathway, the CPD thymine dimer and other bipyrimidine CPDs
are repaired much more slowly than the (6–4) lesions in human
skin, in cell extracts, , and in cells. These premutagenic lesions,
if not repaired by NER mechanisms, are the primary causes of skin
disorders and melanomas. While XPC recognizes
and binds strongly to the (6–4) photoproduct, its binding affinity
to CPD lesions is very weak, at best. Incubation of the (6–4) photoproduct in cell-free extracts
yields the characteristic NER dual incision products, while CPD is
resistant to NER under the same conditions. , These latter observations are consistent with the XPC binding results.
However, in intact cells, the binding of XPC to the CPD lesion is
primarily mediated by the DNA damage binding protein DDB2 that is
part of the UV-DDB1/2 complex, − although the repair of CPD in
intact cells is still significantly slower than the removal of the
6–4 lesions that are directly recognized by XPC. , , While the thymine dimer T^T CPD
opposite its canonical adenine (AA) bases in the complementary strand
is NER-resistant, it becomes an excellent substrate of NER when these
AA bases are replaced by “mismatched” GG. The development of genome-wide methods of analysis
of the formation and repair of these UV photolesions in human fibroblasts, human lymphocytes, and yeast genomes has provided novel
insights into the base sequence dependence of mutational processes
at the single nucleotide level of resolution.
 2.1

## Recognition of DNA Lesions by NER Damage-Sensing
Proteins
Valuable insights
into the mechanisms of recognition
of chemically damaged DNA by the eukaryotic NER system have been obtained
from the X-ray crystallographic structure of a truncated form of Rad4-Rad23
(abbreviated as Rad4), the S. cerevisiae homologue
of the XPC-RAD23B heterodimer. The Rad4
dimer was complexed with an oligonucleotide containing a T^T CPD lesion
opposite two mismatched thymine bases in the complementary strand
( C). One of
the three β-hairpin domains, BHD2 (orange in C), contacts the minor groove
side without penetrating the DNA. A second hairpin, BHD3 (shown in
green in C),
is inserted into the DNA helix from the major groove, thus separating
the damaged and the complementary strands at the site of the lesion.
The CPD lesion is positioned in a disordered region of the crystal
and its coordinates could not be established, and no contacts were
evident between CPD and the protein. However, the two mismatched thymines
opposite the CPD in the complementary strand are flipped out of the
duplex and interact with Rad4 amino acid residues in specific binding
pockets. This structure represents the productive open complex that
can stimulate the subsequent NER steps, and it reveals that the BHD3
β-hairpin insertion and the concomitant interaction with the
protein of the two flipped-out thymine bases in the complementary
strand ( C)
are most likely important elements of lesion recognition in eukaryotic
NER. The mechanistic aspects of the recognition
of DNA lesions by Rad4 are of great current interest and are being
investigated by temperature-jump perturbation spectroscopy (T-Jump)
techniques in combination with fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) methods. , In these studies, a two stage
binding mechanism for Rad4 was observed, a first fast step (∼100–500
μs) followed by a slow second step (5–10 ms). A “twist-open”
mechanism was proposed to account for the binding of Rad4 to its DNA
substrates. The first, rapid step involves
DNA untwisting, while the slower, second step involves a local separation
of the two strands in the DNA duplex and the full flipping of two
nucleotides out of the duplex. It was proposed that the rates of these
two steps depend on the DNA lesion, and the distortion and local destabilization
caused by the lesion.
On the basis of the results of T-jump
experiments, it was also suggested that lesion recognition is under
kinetic control via a “kinetic gating” mechanism that
would allow efficient recognition of DNA-destabilizing lesions. Single molecule fluorescence microscopy studies have provided further insights into the “kinetic
gate” and “twist-open” lesion recognition steps. The molecular details
and associated energetics and pathway of Rad4 binding to the CPD lesion
have been investigated by molecular dynamics simulation methods, which
provided atomic level views of the “twist-open” mechanism
and the free energy profile along the binding path. While XPC is a much larger protein than Rad4, the homologies
in the DNA binding domains suggest that the human protein adopts similar
key elements of recognition of DNA damage as Rad4. , 
Once the XPC-RAD23B–damaged DNA complex is formed,
the ten-protein
complex TFIIH and other NER factors , , , are assembled at the site of the DNA lesion in a sequential manner. , , The assembly of the TFIIH complex
leads to a subsequent, second level of DNA lesion recognition called
the verification step. The TFIIH complex contains the helicases XPB
and XPD that lead to an ATPase-driven enlargement of the six-base
single stranded region, initially caused by XPC, to a 24–32
nucleotide single-stranded region. The
detailed mechanisms of this verification step are not yet completely
understood, but it is widely assumed that the presence of a true DNA
lesion is signaled by the stalling of XPD at the site of the lesion. , The recruitment of the endonucleases XPF and XPG to the double-single
strand junctions leads to the excision of the 24–32-mer damaged
oligonucleotides and the subsequent DNA synthesis step that regenerates
the intact DNA sequence. Like other forms
of DNA damage, DNA lesions, such as those derived from intrastrand
cross-linked cisPt , , and bulky benzo[a]pyrene-derived adducts, cause the partial opening and strand separation
of a six base-pair sequence containing the lesion site. The local
weakening of the DNA duplex facilitates the extrusion of the nucleobases
opposite the lesion in the complementary strand and favors the insertion
of the BHD3 β-hairpin between the two strands from the major
groove side of the DNA.

2.2

## Nucleotide Excision versus
BER Pathways and
Resistance to NER
The general paradigm in the field of DNA
repair is that small nonbulky DNA lesions derived from the oxidation
of nucleobases in DNA are substrates of BER mechanisms, but not of
NER. Well known BER substrates include 8-oxoG that is excised by the
BER protein hOGG1 in humans. A very weak NER activity in human cell-free
cell extracts associated with hOGG1 has been reported. Many other nonbulky DNA lesions are substrates
of BER pathways but are resistant to NER. On the other hand, the CPD
and the 6–4 UV photoproducts, as
well as the intranucleotide, cross-linked and oxidatively generated
8,5′-cyclopurine adenine and guanine lesions, are substrates
of NER only, , but not of BER. , Interestingly, the oxidatively generated spiroiminodihydantoin and
guanidinohydantoin lesions, and the intrastrand
cross-linked G[C8–N3]T lesions, are substrates of both BER and NER in human cell-free extracts.
These results indicate that the susceptibility or resistance to NER
of nonbulky DNA lesions is dependent on their unique structural features
and the kind of distortions to the local B-DNA structure they engender.
The GG-NER mechanism is the most universal and versatile DNA repair
mechanism because it recognizes the distortions/destabilizations caused
by DNA damage rather than the lesion itself. Some DNA lesions like
the CPD UV photoproduct, as well as bulky DNA adducts, are slowly
repaired by NER, while some others are completely resistant to NER.
Before discussing NER resistance, we discuss the physical characteristics
and structural features of bulky forms of DNA damage that affect their
response, including resistance, to the human NER apparatus. We first
compare the characteristics of site-specifically modified DNA lesions
in double-stranded DNA with their excision by the human NER system
in human cell extracts. These in vitro systems are
suitable for comparing the intrinsic NER efficiencies of different
structurally defined bulky and nonbulky forms of DNA damage in defined
base sequence contexts. In chromatin, remodeling of the latter is
necessary before NER can occur. We conclude
with a survey of known examples of NER-resistant DNA lesions in mammalian
cellular environments.

3

## Structural Features of Bulky
PAH–DNA
Adducts
3.1

## Stereoselective Covalent DNA Adduct Formation
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) are products of fossil fuel
combustion and are therefore ubiquitous, genotoxic contaminants in
the environment. Two classes of PAH have been distinguished, the bay
region PAH that includes the most extensively studied representative,
benzo[a]pyrene, and
the fjord PAH that includes the most tumorigenic compound known to
date (dibenzo[a,l]pyrene) − ( A).
 In human cells, the PAH
are metabolically activated by Cytochrome
P450 (CYP) enzymes to epoxides that are converted by epoxide hydrolases
(EH) to PAH dihydrodiol intermediates ( B). A second round of epoxidation by CYP
leads to stereochemically distinct and tumorigenic PAH diol epoxides ( ) , that can react chemically with
the exocyclic amino groups of guanine − or adenine − in DNA to form
stable, stereoisomeric covalent DNA adducts ( ).
 The most genotoxic metabolite
of B[a]P is the
(+)-7R,8S-dihydrodiol,9S,10R-epoxy-benzo[a]pyrene enantiomer
((+)-7R,8S,9S,10R-anti-B[a]PDE) that is
generated with a ∼6-fold greater yield in rat liver microsomes than its (−)-7S,8R,9R,10S mirror image
enantiomer (−)-anti-B[a]PDE
( B). The (+)
and (−) signs denote the signs of the optical rotatory dispersion
signals beyond the UV absorption bands of these compounds, while the anti designation indicates that the 7-OH group and the 9,10-epoxy
group are on opposite sides of the planar polycyclic aromatic ring
system; since this is the only form of diol epoxides discussed in
this article, the prefix “anti” is
omitted throughout. These B[a]PDE enantiomers exhibit
different mutagenic and tumorigenic properties. 
The stereochemical properties of (+)-
and (−)-B[a]PDE and their adducts are summarized
in . The (+)-B[a]PDE and other PAH diol epoxides can react with the exocyclic
amino
groups of guanine by trans- or cis-addition mechanisms, as illustrated in A and B. Similar reaction patterns are observed
when the same B[a]PDE enantiomers react and bind
with the exocyclic amino group of adenine, but only the major trans-N6–dA products
will be discussed here ( C). The cis-N2-guanine adduct is formed when the exocyclic N2-amino group of dG approaches the C10 carbon atom from the
same side as the epoxide group, while in the case of trans addition, the N2–dG and the epoxide
groups are on opposite sides. The absolute R and S configurations of the N2–dG
adducts at the C10 carbon atom are also indicated in and . In mammalian cells, the dominant benzo[a]pyrene-derived
DNA product is the (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct. , , The reactions of racemic (±)-B[a]PDE with DNA in vitro in aqueous solutions
yield predominantly N2–dG adducts
with lesser amounts of N6–dA adducts,
and some dC adducts as well. , The (+)-7R,8S,9S,10R B[a]P diol epoxide forms the major proportion of guanine adducts
in cellular DNA, , while smaller proportions of
DNA adducts derived from the (−)-SRRS-enantiomer
are also observed. Direct reactions of (±)-B[a]PDE and other PAH diol epoxides with 2′-deoxyribooligonucleoides
in aqueous solution , produce cis-
and trans-N2–dG
and N6–dA adducts in yields sufficient
for structural and biochemical studies
using site-specifically modified DNA templates. − 
 The structural features of a variety of stereochemically
and structurally
distinct PAH diol epoxide-derived DNA adducts have been reviewed. Additional results have been published since
then. − Other significant contributions to our understanding of the structures
of PAH-derived DNA adducts include those from the Stone laboratory − as well as by Jerina and collaborators. − Other types of bulky DNA adducts that have been structurally
characterized include those derived from 2-aminofluorenes (AF) and N-acetylaminofluorene (AAF), − 2-aminopyrene, fluorene-labeled AF
and AAF, − heterocyclic aromatic amines, − and other bulky and nonbulky
DNA lesions described below. , Collectively, these
publications represent a rich source of information on the conformational
features of structurally diverse forms of bulky DNA adducts for studying
the relationships between their properties and their impact on biological
phenomena. 

3.2

## Conformational
Motifs of Bulky DNA Adducts
The conformational and stereochemical
features of polycyclic aromatic
diol epoxide-derived DNA adducts can exert a significant impact on
their excision by the human NER system. Therefore, the structural features of these forms of DNA damage
and their relationships to DNA repair are of considerable interest.
Examples of such structural studies are summarized in this section.
The effects of stereochemistry on the conformations of B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts (G*)
have been most extensively studied in the 11-mer duplex 5′-d(CCATCG*CTACC)·d(GGTAGCGATGG)
(duplex I) by NMR methods. The different conformational themes can be divided into several
broad classes.
3.2.1

## Minor Groove Conformations
with Minimal
Perturbations of Base Pairing
The reactions of (+)- and (−)-B[a]PDE by trans-addition to the exocyclic
amino group of guanine give rise to stereoisomeric 10S (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG and 10R (−)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts, respectively, in oligonucleotide duplexes I. These 10R and 10S stereoisomeric
adducts are characterized by opposite absolute configurations at the N2–dG linkage sites. The planar aromatic
ring systems reside in the minor groove of these duplexes pointing
either toward the 5′-(10S adduct) or the 3′-end
(10R adduct) of the modified strands , as shown in A. These solution NMR structures illustrate the important principle
that enantiomeric pairs of PAH diol epoxides form trans (or cis) adducts with purines in DNA that adopt
opposite orientations relative to the modified bases. The conformations
of these bulky adducts in the crowded DNA environment are governed
by the absolute configurations of the hydroxyl groups , and by the relative orientations of the planar bulky B[a]PDE aromatic residue relative to the guanine ring system. This orientation
is characterized by the torsion angle β′ shown in . A survey of sterically allowed values of β′
and the sets of torsion angles χ and α′ (the glycosidic
and the C2-N2 torsion angles, respectively)
revealed four low potential energy domains, each with a limited range
of allowed β′ values. , The experimentally
observed β′ values of the (+)-trans-
and the (−)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts , are found within the lowest potential energy domains identified
by Xie et al. The preferred domains
are the least crowded for each stereoisomeric adduct and explain the
opposite orientation phenomenon ( ), which has proved to be a principle that
is generally followed based on many examples. 

3.2.2

## Base-Displaced Intercalation
Examples
are the guanine adducts derived from the reactions of (+)- and (−)-B[a]PDE to the exocyclic amino groups of guanine by cis-addition ( B). , The planar aromatic ring systems
of the (+)- and (−)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts are inserted
between neighboring base pairs (intercalation) and displace both the
modified and partner bases out of the double helix.

3.2.3

## Intercalation of N2–dG Adducts
from Minor Groove without Base Displacement
The diol epoxide
(−)-11R,12S,13S,14R DB[a,l]PDE derived from the
metabolic activation of DB[a,l]P) has the same absolute
configurations as the (+)-7R,8S,9S,10R-B[a]PDE enantiomer.
The reaction of this (−)-11R,12S,13S,14R DB[a,l]PDE enantiomer with N2–dG yields
the 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG adduct
(dG*) that is positioned in the minor groove
pointing toward the 5′-direction of the modified strand ( ). This minor groove conformation is related to the one characterizing
the stereochemically analogous 10S (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
adduct ( A);
however, it causes a much greater distortion of the minor groove and
a rupture of the modified dG*:dC base pair because of the greater
bulk of the aromatic DB[a,l]PDE residue.
 The (+)-11S,12R,13R,14S DB[a,l]PDE
enantiomer generates the 14R (+)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG adduct that has the same absolute configuration
as the 10R (−)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct. While
the latter assumes a minor groove conformation in double-stranded
DNA, the 14R (+)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG
adduct is intercalated from the minor groove between two adjacent
base pairs ( ); furthermore, the larger size and additional ring in the fjord
region of the covalently attached DB[a,l]PDE residue, as well as its intercalation from the narrow minor
groove, cause the disruption of the modified dG*–dC base pair;
by contrast, in the less bulky minor groove 10R B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct, the
analogous base pair remains intact and the B[a]P
ring system is positioned in the minor groove ( B). These examples illustrate how the size
and shape of the polycyclic aromatic ring system can give rise to
different conformations of DNA adducts and hence the degree of distortion/destabilization
of the DNA duplexes. However, in all cases, regardless of conformation,
the N2–dG adducts with S absolute configuration at the linkage sites are oriented
on the 5′-side of the modified guanine dG*, while adducts with R-stereochemistry are oriented on the 3′-side of
dG* ( ).

3.2.4

## Intercalation from Major Groove without
Base Displacement
The exocyclic amino group of adenine (N6) is positioned on the major groove side of
B DNA. All PAH diol epoxides that have been studied up until now bind
covalently to N6–dA via the intercalative
insertion of their aromatic ring systems between adjacent base pairs
without base displacement. The 10S (+)- and 10R (−)-B[a]PDE-N6–dA adducts (A*) , , − , − are examples of this intercalation motif
( C). However,
the (+)-10S A* adduct is conformationally more flexible
than the (−)-10R A* adduct, and the A–T
Watson–Crick base pair at the lesion site is destabilized.
Other examples of intercalation without base displacement include
the fjord B[c]PhDE-N6–dA, , B[g]CDE-N6–dA, and
DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts in double-stranded DNA. Our molecular dynamics
simulation studies suggest that the
bulky aromatic residues of the 14R and 14S DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts are intercalated on the 5′-
and 3′-sides of dA*, respectively, without disrupting adjacent
base pairs and with significant, stabilizing π–π
base stacking interactions ( ).

3.2.5

## Thermodynamic Destabilization
of Modified
DNA Duplexes
As discussed in , the recognition of DNA lesions by XPC
most likely involves the insertion of a β-hairpin into the duplex
at the site of the lesion and the flipping out of two bases on the
complementary, unmodified strand ( ). These phenomena
are facilitated when DNA damage destabilizes the duplex, and it is
therefore of interest to examine the impact of different DNA lesions
on the stabilities of the modified DNA duplexes. The destabilizing
effects of DNA lesions are easily determined by measuring the thermal
dissociation temperatures of relatively short duplexes, typically
11-mer duplexes under standard solution conditions. However, longer, 43-mer duplexes can also be employed. The experimentally measured duplex melting
points, Tm, are defined as the temperatures
at which 50% of the DNA strands are in the double-stranded form. The
degree of destabilization caused by the DNA lesions is characterized
by the difference in duplex melting points, ΔTm = Tm(modified duplex) – Tm(unmodified duplex).

4

## Excision of Different Forms of DNA Damage by
Human NER System Is Highly Variable
The relationships between
the structural features of chemically
modified nucleobases and their removal by the NER apparatus are best
explored using structurally well-defined DNA modifications and a reliable
and reproducible assay of NER activities. Analyses of structural features
of many modified nucleobases by solution NMR methods , , , , , , − have yielded a wealth of information on their conformations and
the distortions of the local DNA structure that they cause.
There is a significant body of evidence that different forms of
DNA damage are removed from mammalian cells and tissues with variable
efficiencies. The critical recognition
and dual incision steps can be determined by monitoring the relative
yields of dual incision products. The subsequent steps of repair are
the resynthesis of the missing nucleotides in the gap, which is no
longer dependent on the nature of the lesion. Therefore, the relative
NER efficiencies can be measured in cell extracts by determining the
yields of dual incision products as a function of time.
4.1

## Nucleotide Excision Repair Assays
The response of different
DNA lesions to the human NER apparatus
in vitro is assessed by incubating site-specifically modified and
internally 32P-labeled oligo-2′-deoxyribonucleotide
duplexes (typically 135–147 base pairs in length) that harbor
a single chemically defined base in cell-free extracts from human
cells. Such cell-free extracts are known
to contain the complement of active NER proteins that can excise the
24–32-mer oligonucleotide sequences that contain the lesions.
The yields of NER dual 24–32-mer incision products are evaluated
by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and densitometric analysis of
the gel autoradiographs. However, extracts from human cells prepared
from different batches of cells at different times exhibit variable
NER activities. To enhance reproducibility, we utilize the NER response
of one particular adduct, normally the (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct that
is 32P-labeled at the same time as the DNA adduct sample
being studied, as a standard against which the relative yields of
other NER substrates are measured in one and the same cell extract.
This (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct exhibits approximately the same NER
response as the 6–4-thymine dimer UV photoproduct, and the
dG–C8-AAF adduct derived from the binding of N-acetylaminofluorene
(AAF) to the C8-position of guanine. , In this manner,
good reproducibility is obtained that allows for comparisons of relative
NER responses measured at different times and in different cell-free
extracts.

4.2

## NER Efficiencies Depend on Structural Features
of DNA Lesions
A long-recognized example of the variability
of NER efficiencies of DNA lesions is the difference in excision activities
of the UV light-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) that
are very poor substrates of NER in cells, in cell extracts, and in human skin, while the (6−4) pyrimidine–pyrimidone
photoproducts are efficiently excised under identical conditions.
The effects of PAH diol epoxide–DNA adduct stereochemistry
on NER dual incision efficiencies are striking manifestations of structure–function
relationships. In this section, the structural features of bulky DNA
adducts that favor efficient NER or that characterize NER-resistant
adducts are described.
4.2.1

## B[a]PDE-N2–dG Adducts in Sequence Context of Duplex I
The base-displaced intercalated (+)-cis- and (−)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts are among the most efficiently
incised in human cell extracts (assigned NER efficiency of 100%) ( ), while the relative
efficiencies of excision of the minor groove (+)-trans- and (−)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts are ∼5-times lower , in the same sequence context ( ); however, sequence context has a strong impact on
relative efficiencies of excision in the case of the (+)-trans adduct, as detailed in .
 The base-displaced
intercalative (+) and (−) cis-adducts are
considered to be excellent NER substrates that are repaired
with the same efficiencies as the (6–4) UV photoproducts (as mentioned above), and the N-acetylaminofluorene-derived dG-C8-AAF adduct. These cis-adducts manifest full disruption
of one Watson–Crick base pair, the extrusion of the modified
base and its partner base out of the helix and, therefore, a loss
of base–base stacking interactions. The π–π
stacking interactions between the polycyclic aromatic ring system
and the adjacent base pairs partly compensate for these distortions, as revealed by the overall modest impact of
this lesion on the thermal melting of the modified DNA (see below).
However, the key conformational property of this lesion appears to
be the extruded partner cytosine base. It is likely that the initial conformational capture of this preflipped,
extruded partner base C by the XPC NER recognition protein ultimately fosters its productive binding to
the site of the lesion that can further stimulate the recruitment
of the subsequent NER factors. Therefore, the strong NER response
of the (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct is most probably due to its ability
to efficiently capture the XPC protein. 
In the case of the stereoisomeric (+)- and (−)-trans-adducts that are positioned in the minor groove ( A), all base pairs
remain intact,
and there are no extruded bases. These minor groove conformations
display slow repair in the same sequence context in which the cis adducts embedded in duplex I are efficiently
repaired. The trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts that obstruct the minor
groove may hinder the productive interaction of the BHD2 β-hairpin
of XPC with the damaged DNA site. , , Furthermore, the minor structural distortions in
base pairing caused by these trans-adducts may not
be sufficient to elicit the same high NER response as in the case
of the stereoisomeric cis-adducts. 
The 11-mer duplexes I with single (+)-
and (−)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts are thermodynamically less
destabilized (ΔTm = Tm (modified)
– Tm (unmodified) = −4 to
−5 °C, respectively) than the (+)- and (−)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts (ΔTm = −8
to −10 °C). Although the
two cis-duplexes are structurally more distorted
than the two trans-duplexes, the destabilization
due to distortion in the cis cases is counterbalanced
in part by stabilizing stacking interactions between the polycyclic
aromatic ring systems and adjacent bases. Since the relative NER efficiencies are ∼5-times lower in
the case of the trans than the cis-adducts, there is no correlation between the global destabilization
of DNA duplexes and NER efficiencies in this case. However, in the
case of other classes of DNA adducts, such qualitative correlations
are indeed observable ( ). A partial explanation of these observations is that
the DNA lesions induce a local distortion/destabilization that is
recognized by XPC, while the Tm experiments
are performed with oligonucleotide duplexes of different lengths that
contain the same lesions. The melting points reflect not only the
local destabilization, but also the cooperative melting of the full
duplexes that depends on the base sequence context and the lengths
of the duplexes. The extent of local destabilization can be more accurately
assessed by temperature-dependent NMR experiments, as was shown by
Rodriquez et al. 
Furthermore, the
binding of XPC may also depend on the structural
features of the bulky DNA adducts. For example, as discussed above
for the case of the cis adduct, partner base extrusion
may foster initial conformational capture and efficient binding. In other cases, a specific structural feature
might hinder productive binding of XPC to intercalated bulky lesions
and impede the separation of the two DNA strands because of strong
π–π base stacking interactions between the intercalated
polycyclic aromatic residues and adjacent base pairs. Consequently,
the insertion of the BHD3 hairpin between the two DNA strands would
be hindered; this would prevent the proper alignment of the protein
at the site of the lesion, thus leading to nonproductive binding complexes
that are unable to stimulate the following NER steps. However, once the BHD3 hairpin is properly
inserted, the XPC-damaged DNA complex would be stabilized and stimulate
the subsequent NER steps. Hilton et al. studied the dynamics of XPC-Rad23B
binding to AAF-modified DNA sequences by surface plasmon resonance
methods and proposed that longer protein dissociation constants are
correlated with enhanced NER efficiencies. 
In summary, it is well established that XPC binds to unmodified
double-stranded DNA more weakly than to known DNA lesions. , , , , − Although the binding of XPC is essential for recruiting subsequent
repair factors that lead to successful NER, it has been shown that
XPC has high affinities for some DNA lesions that are nonetheless
resistant to NER in cell-free extract experiments. 

4.2.2

## NER Response of (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
(G*) Adducts in Other Sequence Contexts
The 11-mer sequences
shown in were
embedded in otherwise fully identical 135-mer duplexes that were used
as substrates in the usual NER assays in vitro. The
CG*C–I sequence containing single (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
adducts (G*) in the duplex I sequence context has a relative
NER efficiency of ∼20% relative to the stereoisomeric (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct. Replacing the two
cytosines flanking G* by thymines (TG*T sequence) enhances the efficiency
by a factor of about two, which has been explained on the basis of
the weaker hydrogen bonding and consequent greater dynamics when the
base pairs adjacent to the G* are thymines instead of cytosines. , Replacing two base pairs distant from G* (...ATCC on the 3′-side
in CG*C–I by···ATAT in CG*C–II) diminishes
the NER efficiency by a factor of ∼2 ( ); these two different sequence contexts
impose differences in duplex bending and flexibility that correlate
with the differences in NER efficiencies observed. 
 Remarkably, different sequence
effects have been observed with
the (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG (G*) adduct positioned in the identical sequence
5′-d(......CATGCG1G2CCTAC···)
but with the modified guanine adduct positioned either on the 5′-guanine
G1, or the 3′-guanine G2 in this same
sequence context (labeled CG*G and GG*C in ). In the case of the adduct positioned on
the 3′-side guanine in the GG*C sequence context, the NER efficiency
is ∼35%. However, with the adduct positioned on the 5′-side
guanine in the CG*G context, the NER efficiency is ∼80% ( ). This strikingly
enhanced efficiency has been attributed to steric crowding between
the puckered, OH-containing aliphatic ring of the (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
adduct and the minor groove positioned exocyclic amino group of the
G flanking the G* on its 3′-side. As a result, the aromatic ring system is partially displaced within
the minor groove and disrupts the Watson–Crick base pairing
on its 5′-side, as demonstrated by NMR methods. The substantial differences in NER dual incision
efficiencies associated with the same DNA adduct in special sequence
contexts like CG*G/GG*C, indicates that the sequence context can play
a very significant role in determining NER efficiencies. , These few examples point to the importance of base sequence context
effects on NER efficiencies assessed in human cell-free extracts using
a limited set of site-specifically modified B[a]PDE-guanine
adducts.
Recently, Li et al. developed a novel translesion excision
repair-sequencing
method (tXR-seq) to study genome-wide nucleotide excision repair maps
of B[a]PDE–dG (G*) adducts derived from human
lymphocyte cells treated with racemic (±)-B[a]PDE. This approach is based on the
detection of DNA adducts that are substrates of NER in cellular environments.
A sequencing library for tXR-seq analysis was generated by the immunoprecipitation
of the intermediate NER dual excision products complexed with TFIIH,
followed by the construction of a suitable library for next generation
sequencing. The frequencies of nearest neighbor X and Y in the XG*Y
sequence context (X,Y = A, C, or T) found in the NER dual excision
products were analyzed. An enrichment by a factor of ∼2 of
5′-....CG*...over TG* and AG* sequences was found, and a somewhat
greater preference for CG*C and CG*T sequences relative to other trinucleotide
sequences was also documented. The groundbreaking
results of Li et al. demonstrated the feasibility of the tXR-seq approach
for studying genome-wide repair maps.
These (±)-B[a]PDE-derived adduct maps are
probably not significantly affected by the diversity of stereoisomeric
DNA adducts formed because a single adduct is dominant (see below).
In general, however, DNA adduct heterogeneity and differences in susceptibilities
to GG-NER, especially differences in repair resistance, will need
to be considered. The treatment of cells and tissues with reactive
mutagens generally yields a spectrum of structurally different DNA
lesions, including some that are good substrates of NER, some that
are slowly repaired, and some that are resistant to GG-NER. In the
case of native DNA treated with racemic diol epoxide (±)-B[a]PDE, Cheng et al. have shown that the dominant adducts
formed are the trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG (∼79% trans- and 11% cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG, and 10% trans-B[a]PDE-N6–dA adducts). It is therefore not surprising that the disappearance of DNA lesions
in cellular environments associated with GG-NER as a function of time,
may exhibit more than one kinetic decay phase (examples are cited
in , below).
In human A549 lung epithelial carcinoma cells treated with (+)-B[a]PDE cells, the disappearance of the covalent B[a]PDE–DNA adducts formed was indeed biphasic, with
about ∼40% of the adducts removed within ∼1 h (the stereochemistry
of the adducts was not specified), while the remainder disappeared
more slowly. Other workers showed that
the treatment of mouse skin with benzo[a]pyrene gave
rise to (+)-cis- and (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts that
decayed at similar rates over a period of ∼100 h after the
administration of B[a]P. In mammalian cells, the different DNA adducts formed by mutagens
other than (±)-B[a]PDE are repaired at different
rates, as suggested by the experimentally observed biphasic decays
of DNA adducts (see , below). Therefore, in general, differences in rates of repair
of the different DNA adducts formed by a given mutagen need to be
considered when interpreting the results of genome-wide sequencing
experiments.

4.2.3

## Intercalated B[a]PDE-N6–dA Adducts:
NER Efficiencies and Thermodynamic
Destabilization
The reaction of the (+)-7R,8S,9S,10R-B[a]P diol epoxide with the exocyclic amino group of adenine
yields the 10S B[a]PDE-N6–dA adduct that is intercalated on the 3′-side
of dA*, , without any base displacement out of the
double helical DNA. The (−)-7S,8R,9R,10S-B[a]PDE
enantiomer yields the stereoisomeric 10R B[a]PDE-N6–dA adduct that
is intercalated on the 5′-side of dA*in double-stranded DNA
without base displacement. , These B[a]PDE-N6–dA adducts are characterized
by NER efficiencies in the range of ∼5–30% (relative
to the 10R (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct), depending
on the sequence context and adduct stereochemistry ( ). The 10S adducts are better NER substrates than the stereoisomeric 10R adducts in several different sequence contexts. This pair
of stereochemically related DNA lesions represent an excellent opportunity
for correlating differences in their conformational features with
their NER responses.
 The NMR solution structures of
these diastereomeric B[a]PDE-N6-adenine adducts (dA*) in double-stranded
oligonucleotides have been evaluated in the CA*C , , , and CAA* , , , , sequence contexts and are very
different from those of the N2-guanine
adducts. In the case of the 10R (−)-trans-B[a]PDE-N6–dA adduct, all Watson–Crick base pairs, including
the modified dA*:dT base pair, are intact. , The dA* residue is predominantly (95%) in the anti glycosidic bond conformation that is in equilibrium with a minor syn conformation. The NMR structure of the stereoisomeric
10S (+)-trans adduct in the same
sequence context could not be resolved because of structural disorder
at the binding site and the local destabilization
of the duplex. However, its conformation
was inferred from NMR studies of duplexes with a mismatched dA*:dG
base pair, and a stereochemically related syn-B[a]PDE-N6–dA* adduct paired with dT in the complementary strand. Together
with these experimental findings, molecular modeling and dynamic simulation
studies , indicate that the polycyclic aromatic ring
system of the 10S B[a]PDE-N6–dA adduct is intercalated from the
major groove on the 3′-side of the dA*:dT base pair. The 10S adduct is conformationally more heterogeneous and more
disordered than the 10R adduct. In both cases, the
duplex is stretched and partially unwound to accommodate the bulky
intercalated aromatic ring system of the trans-B[a]PDE-N6–dA adducts.
The bulky aliphatic ring of the 10S (+)-trans adduct is situated on the 5′-side of the modified
base and, because of the right-handed helical twist, there is steric
crowding with the 5′-base adjacent to dA*. To partially relieve
this crowding and to maintain stacking interactions between the aromatic
ring system and neighboring base pairs, the glycosidic bond in the
10S (+)-trans-modified–dA*
residue adopts a syn orientation for the major conformer
that is in equilibrium with a minor anti orientation,
thus disrupting the dA*:dT Watson–Crick hydrogen bonding. , 
Because the aliphatic ring of the 10R adduct
is
positioned on the 3′-side of the modified base, the adjacent
base pair is rotated away from this aliphatic residue because of the
helical twist, thus avoiding the steric crowding that occurs in the
10S (+)-trans-adduct. Therefore,
the normal anti glycosydic bond conformation and
dA*:dT Watson–Crick hydrogen bonding remain essentially intact
in the intercalated 10R (−)-trans-adduct.
Consistent with the greater structural disorder, the
thermal melting
points of the 10S adducts are significantly and consistently
lower than the Tm values of the 10R B[a][P-N6–dA adduct in 9–11-mer duplexes. Buterin et al. investigated
the NER efficiencies of the 10R (−)-trans- and the 10S (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N6–dA
adducts embedded in different sequence contexts in 135-mer duplexes
and incubated in human cell extracts. The results of these NER assays
are compared to the ΔTm values of
shorter oligonucleotides (9–11 base pairs long) containing
the same DNA adducts positioned in the same sequence contexts. The
NER efficiency of the 10S adduct was ∼2–3-times
greater than that of the stereoisomeric 10R adduct
in ···CA*CG··· (ΔTm (10R) = −13
°C and ΔTm (10S) = −28 °C) and in the ···ACA*AG···
sequence contexts (ΔTm (10R) = −10 °C and ΔTm (10S) = −18 °C),
and ∼10-times greater in the ···TCA*CT···
sequence contexts (ΔTm= −10 °C (10R) and −17 °C
(10S)). − The ΔTm values are negative in all three sequence contexts, and the B[a]PDE-N6–dA adducts with S adduct stereochemistry are consistently more destabilized
than the stereoisomeric 10R adducts ( ). Therefore, the differences
in the magnitudes of the negative ΔTm values qualitatively parallel the higher NER efficiencies in the
case of all three pairs of B[a]PDE-N6–dA adducts. These differences are consistent
with the greater structural distortions of the duplexes caused by
the 10S than the 10R B[a]PDE-N6–dA adducts that were observed
by NMR methods ( ) and suggested by molecular dynamics simulations. , 
This positive correlation is in sharp contrast to the results
obtained
with the conformationally distinct pairs of cis-
and trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts ( ). These observations may be related
to the similarities of the conformational intercalation motifs adopted
by the 10S and 10R B[a]PDE-N6–dA adducts, whereas the
conformations of the cis- and trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
adducts are dramatically different from one another (base displaced
intercalation and minor groove, respectively). We infer that thermodynamic
destabilization is one, but not necessarily the only, factor that
plays a role in the recognition steps of DNA lesions. Other factors
including the structural properties and conformational features of
specific bulky DNA adducts can also play an important role, as exemplified
by the set of stereoisomeric B[a]PDE-N2–dG and – N6–dA adducts discussed in this section.

4.3

## Unusual NER Resistance of Duplexes with Deleted
or Noncanonical Bases Opposite B[a]PDE-N2–dG Adducts
If DNA replication occurs
before the DNA lesions or adducts are removed by DNA repair mechanisms,
translesion synthesis (TLS) catalyzed by various polymerases can be
error-prone and thus induce mutations during the next round of replication. The TLS past B[a]PDE-N2–dG (G*) adducts in vitro( , ) and in cellular environments , have been documented. The insertion of nucleotides opposite G* other
than dCTP gives rise to point mutations, while slipped frameshift
intermediates can stimulate the bypass of G* without the insertion
of any nucleotide, which can yield DNA duplexes with single nucleotide
deletions.
Following DNA replication past a guanine adduct G*,
the resulting duplexes may also contain mismatched partner bases designated
as G*:A, G*:G, or G*:T duplexes, or G*:Del duplexes without a nucleotide
opposite G*. Therefore, the repair of such mismatched and deletion
duplexes is of significant interest.
4.3.1

## G:Del*
and G*:AB Duplexes Are NER-Resistant
A remarkable observation
is that the absence of the single nucleotide
dC opposite the trans- or cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct (G*:Del
duplex) completely abrogates NER activity ( A). Removing just the cytosine, but leaving
the phosphodiester backbone and attached deoxyribose residue intact,
creates an abasic site opposite the trans- or cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct (G*:AB duplex), which also abolishes the NER activity
that is normally observed in the full duplex. To gain mechanistic insights into the NER resistance exhibited by
the G*:Del and G*:AB duplexes, the structural features of these duplexes
were compared to those of the full 11-mer G*:C duplexes I with all complementary nucleotides intact that are good to-excellent
NER substrates ( ).
 As discussed in , the (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct in
G*:C full
duplexes assumes a base displaced intercalative conformation and is
fully NER-active. The G*:Del and G*:AB 11-mer duplexes also assume
intercalative conformations , , but are NER-inactive and differ from the full duplexes because there
are no preflipped cytosines as in the full G*:C duplexes with (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts. The (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct in G*:C full
duplexes assumes a minor groove conformation ( A), but like the stereosiomeric (+)-cis-adduct, it is also intercalated in the G*:Del and G*:AB
duplexes , and is NER-resistant. , , This kind of NER resistance
of Del duplexes does not seem to be limited to B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts since a similar resistance to NER was also
observed in the case of the dG–C8-N-acetylaminofluorene adduct,
G*(AAF):Del duplexes. 

4.3.2

## Molecular Basis of NER Resistance in Deletion
and Abasic Duplexes
The first insights into the origins of
the NER resistance of G*:Del duplexes were obtained from experimental
measurements of the thermal stabilities of deletion duplexes with
a (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct (G*:Del) and the unmodified (G:Del)
duplex. The difference in Tm values between
the G*:Del and the G:Del 11-mer duplexes, ΔTm = Tm (G*:Del) – Tm (G:Del) = +19 °C ( B). This bulky adduct strongly stabilizes
the deletion duplex by an astonishing 19 degrees. By contrast, the
same lesion strongly destabilizes the full duplex with the canonical
C opposite G* since ΔTm = Tm (G*:C) – Tm (G:C) = −12 degrees. This remarkable stabilization of G*:Del
duplexes is attributed to the intercalation of the bulky polycyclic
aromatic ring system between adjacent base pairs that maximizes the
hydrophobic effect and the π–π base stacking interactions
with the polycyclic aromatic ring system. On the other hand, the presence of the extruded cytosine residue
in the base-displaced intercalated full G*:C duplex ( B) results in an overall modest
thermal destabilization. These observations have led to the conclusion
that the presence of a bulky DNA adduct produces a change in the local
stability of the DNA adduct, which depends on the balance between
stabilizing and destabilizing effects of the lesion that are modulated
by sequence effects, lesion topology, and bulky adduct stereochemistry. 
These conclusions are supported by solution
NMR structural studies: the (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct adopts a base-displaced
intercalated conformation with a complete rupturing of the Watson–Crick
G*:C base pair ( B). Further molecular modeling and dynamics simulation studies show
that steric crowding due to some of the hydroxyl groups in the bulky
benzylic ring also cause episodic propeller twisting and buckling
of the two adjacent base pairs. This local destabilization and the
displaced C partner base of G* should facilitate the insertion of
the XPC BHD3 β-hairpin and the interaction of the flipped cytosine
base with XPC, leading to a productive XPC protein–DNA complex
that can successfully recruit the other NER factors that lead to the
dual incisions. However, the absence of the partner nucleotide dC
in the deletion duplexes causes a compression of the duplex on the
complementary strand side (a wedge shape), which pushes the benzylic
ring of the B[a]PDE residue into the minor groove,
relieving some of the steric crowding and stabilizing the flanking
base pairs. , Notably, the compression or
wedge shape causes a significant enhancement of the B[a]P aromatic ring-base stacking interactions that stabilize the site
of the adduct; this would hinder insertion of the XPC BHD3 β-hairpin
into the damaged DNA site and prevent formation of the strand-separated
state that represents the productive open complex. Furthermore, the
absence of the dC nucleotide in the dG*:Del duplexes corresponds to
the loss of one of the flippable nucleobases that interact with amino acid pockets in the XPC protein. These considerations are consistent with the
observed NER-resistance of the G*:Del duplexes. − Similar explanations may also apply to the dG*:AB duplexes that
are also NER resistant. However, loss
of one partner base may still permit modest repair when an adduct
is itself particularly destabilizing, as observed for the food mutagen-derived
C8–dG-PHIP adduct that is base displaced-intercalated but possesses
a disruptive mobile phenyl ring. 

4.3.3

## dG*:dX Duplexes with Mismatched Partner
Bases dX = dA or dG Are Also NER-Resistant
Experimentally,
in the case of the dG*:dC duplex with a canonical dC nucleotide opposite
the modified guanine (+)- trans- or (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
adduct, NER activity is observed. In the case of the cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
adduct opposite dC in duplex I, the NER activity has
an arbitrary value of 100% ( ), and the duplex is moderately destabilized
(ΔTm = −4
°C). When dC is replaced by dT, the NER activity is reduced by
a factor of ∼3, while in the case of duplexes with dG*:dA and dG*:dG, the NER activity is completely
abolished. The values of ΔTm in the case of dG*:dX* mismatches
(ΔTm = −3
°C for X = A, or +2 °C for X = T) are similar to those observed
in the case of the normal G*:C duplex I sequence (ΔTm = −4 °C).
Such
base sequence context effects on NER activity involving different
bases opposite DNA lesions are not limited to bulky PAH-derived DNA
adducts. Similar phenomena have been reported in the case of some
of the 8,5′-cyclopurine-2′-deoxyguanosine (cdG) and–deoxyadenosine
(cdA) lesions by Pande et al. The 5′S cdA stereoisomers with a dC opposite the lesion (cdA:C)
are excellent NER substrates, but the NER activities of cdA:dT or
cdA:dA were 6–10-times smaller. However, entirely different
results were observed in the case of dG*(AAF):dX) mismatched duplexes
with dX = dT, dA, dG since the NER efficiencies were similar to those
in the case of dG*:dC full duplexes with dG* = dG-C8-AAF. Such duplexes are strongly destabilized by
the bulky AAF residue with ΔTm = −18 °C in the CG*C sequence context of
the NarI 12-mer mutation hotspot sequence. 

4.3.4

## Molecular Basis of NER
Resistance of dG*:dX
Mismatch Duplexes with dX = dA, dG, dT
The (+)-cis-B[a]PDE dG*:dT duplex is a weaker NER substrate
than the (+)-cis-B[a]PDE–dG*:dC
duplex by a factor of ∼3. On the basis of NMR studies of the
conformation of the dG*:dC duplex with dG* = (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG,
it is known that this bulky aromatic B[a]PDE-derived
adduct assumes a base-displaced intercalative conformation with the
nonaromatic benzylic ring and guanine residue of dG* positioned in
the minor groove, and the “orphaned” dC residue displaced
into the major groove. However, the
exact position of the external dC residue could not be ascertained
by NMR. Molecular modeling and molecular dynamics simulations of this
structure suggests that a stabilizing dynamic hydrogen bond can form
between the cytosine amino group and a pendant phosphate oxygen on
the 5′-side of dC, which helps
to maintain the dC residue in the extruded position that is preflipped
to interact with the XPC.
Recent studies of the Rad4–DNA
binding mechanisms have revealed that the yeast ortholog of human
XPC does initially capture the extruded partner C base. In the case of the dT duplex, the NER efficiency
is reduced by a factor of ∼3 relative to the dG*:dC duplex.
The molecular dynamics simulations show that the hydrophobic methyl
group of thymine interacts with DNA residues in the major groove via
van der Waals interactions and is thus more rarely fully extruded
to a flipped out external position than the dC residue. The (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG:dA and dG*:dG duplexes are fully resistant to NER. The
larger purines, in contrast to the smaller pyrimidines, manifest strong
van der Waals interactions with the DNA major groove where they are
anchored or occasionally even intercalated into the duplex. Consequently,
neither the dA nor the dG moieties are found in a flipped out conformation. 
Overall, these results suggest that the
dG*:dG/dA purine mismatched
duplexes might prevent the insertion of the XPC BHD3 β-hairpin
between the two DNA strands from the major groove and that these purines
do not readily assume a flipped out external conformation, thus accounting
for the NER resistance of the dG*:dG/dA duplexes. By contrast, in
normal dG*:dC duplexes with base-displaced conformations, the dC partner
base is preflipped and can interact with XPC. In the case of the pyrimidine
mismatched dG*:dT duplexes, molecular dynamics simulation studies
indicate that the ensemble contains a small population of extruded
dT in equilibrium with dT that interacts with the major groove, which
could account for the ∼30% NER efficiency ( ). Relative to the dG*:dG/dA
mismatch duplex, the van der Waals interactions between the thymine
methyl group and the DNA residues are much weaker. Therefore, some
extrusion of the dT mismatch and β-hairpin insertion could occur
that allows for productive XPC binding that, in turn, stimulates the
subsequent NER steps.

4.4

## NER-Resistance of Fjord
PAH Diol Epoxide-N6-Adenine, but Not N2-Guanine Adducts in Full DNA Duplexes
4.4.1

## Fjord and Bay Region PAH Diol Epoxide-DNA
Adducts
The key structural feature that distinguishes fjord
from bay region PAH compounds is the steric crowding in the fjord
regions of the B[c]Ph, B[g]C, and
DB[a,l]P molecules that results
from the proximities of the pairs of hydrogen atoms at C1 and C12
(B[c]Ph), and C14 and C1 in B[g]C
and DB[a,l]P ( ). As a consequence, the 9,10,11,12 aromatic
ring of B[c]Ph and the 1,2,3,4-aromatic rings of B[g]C and DB[a,l]P in the fjord region adopt nonplanar
conformations. The out-of-plane twist
is flexible and adopts a conformation that optimizes the stacking
interactions between the fjord PAH and adjacent base pairs at the
DNA intercalation sites. Furthermore,
the more compact arrangement of aromatic rings in the fjord PAH compounds
due to the closer proximity of the 1,2,3,4 aromatic ring to the sites
of covalent attachment of purines in double-stranded DNA, also facilitates
optimal stacking with adjacent base pairs in intercalative conformations.
By contrast, all aromatic rings are rigid and coplanar in the sterically
uncrowded bay region PAH aromatic compounds, , the elongated bay region pyrenyl ring system cannot accommodate
itself as well into the sterically crowded interior of the DNA duplex
and thus tends to destabilize double-stranded DNA.

4.4.2

## Fjord PAH Diol Epoxide–DNA Adducts
Are Highly Genotoxic
The fjord PAH, especially dibenzo[a,l]pyrene, have attracted significant
attention from the chemical carcinogenesis community , , , because they are by far the most tumorigenic PAH ever tested. It has been estimated that the fjord PAH are
up to ∼100-fold more tumorigenic than the bay region PAH benzo[a]pyrene. Both types of PAH
are metabolically activated to reactive diol epoxide intermediates
that react predominantly with guanine or adenine in cellular DNA to
form premutagenic covalent adducts in mammalian cells and tissues. , , , , , − While the bay region B[a]PDE adducts react predominantly
with N2–dG in DNA with only minor
quantities of N6–dA adducts formed, the fjord PAH diol epoxides react with both N2–dG and N6–dA resulting in a greater proportion of adenine adducts in
DNA in vitro. , Consistent with this
DNA adduct distribution, Yoon et al. found that treatment of BigBlue mouse cells with different stereoisomeric DB[a,l]PDE diol epoxides produced predominantly
A to T transversions. Higher proportions
of DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts were found in human MCF-7 cells and in rodent tissues. , The genotoxic activities of fjord PAH diol epoxides are well correlated
with DNA adduct levels in V79 and other
cells. , Correlations between DNA adduct levels and
tumorigenicity have also been reported in various mammalian systems. , , , Since the stereochemical features are similar in the bay and fjord
PAH diol epoxide-derived DNA adducts, the differences in their biological
impact are related to the chemical reactivities of the respective
diol epoxides with DNA and the biological response to the genotoxic
DNA adducts formed.

4.4.3

## NER and Other Characteristics
of Fjord PAH-N6-Adenine and N2-Guanine Adducts
The NER efficiencies of the
fjord DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG
and DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts are compared in A and B. The NER experiments
were conducted with the G* = 14R (+)-trans- and 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG
adducts (labeled G*-14R and G*-14S, respectively) embedded in the [5′-d(CCATCG*CTACC)]·[5′-d(GGTAGCGATGG)]
11-mer duplex (I-G*) sequence context that was also used to study
the NER efficiencies of the stereoisomeric B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts ( ). The A*
= 14R (+)-trans- and 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts (labeled
A*-14R and A*-14S, respectively)
were embedded in the similar [5′-d(CCATCA*CTACC)]·[5′-d(GGTAGTGATGG)]
11-mer duplex (I-A*) sequence context, which allows for a direct comparison
of the NER responses of the DB[a,l]PDE-derived adenine and guanine adducts in double-stranded DNA.
The 11-mer duplexes I-G* and I-A* were used in the NMR structural
studies , and in the determinations of duplex thermal
melting points. The NER studies were performed with the same I-G*
or I-A* sequences embedded in fully complementary 135-mer duplexes.
 
4.4.4

## The 14R (+)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE–N2-Guanine Adduct
This adduct manifests a smaller
NER response (∼65%) in HeLa cell-free extracts (G*-14R in A,B) than the standard base-displaced intercalated 10R (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct (G*-10R). The strong
NER response of this 14R (+)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE–dG adduct ( A,B) is in sharp
contrast to the NER response of the minor groove 10R (−)-trans-B[a]PDE–dG
adduct that is about three-times smaller
and that has the identical absolute configurations of substituents
of the nonaromatic ring as the intercalated G*-14R adduct (we recall that the + and–signs denote the optical
rotatory dispersions of the PAH diol epoxides and not the absolute
configurations). These differences are attributed to the structural
features of the G*-14R DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG adducts that
were elucidated by NMR methods. The bulky
aromatic ring system of the G*-14R adduct is intercalated
from the minor groove and the G*:C Watson–Crick base pairing
is ruptured although the bases remain partly stacked with the aromatic
ring system of the DB[a,l]PDE residue.
The bulky aliphatic ring in the crowded minor groove further destabilizes
the duplex. These destabilizing structural properties are reflected
in the rather large negative ΔTm = −10 °C value ( C).
The stereochemically identical minor groove
10R (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG and the intercalated
14R (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG
adduct differ from one another by the single additional 1,2,3,4-aromatic
ring in the latter. However, because of this additional aromatic ring,
the DB[a,l]PDE-derived DNA adduct
adopts an intercalative conformation that favors hydrophobic interactions
that are further enhanced by the compact fjord topology that positions
the 1,2,3,4-aromatic ring close to the N2–dG binding site. However, this intercalative motif is accompanied
by the unfavorable rupturing of the base pair and steric crowding
associated with intercalation from the minor groove that destabilize
this G*-14R adduct and thus favors efficient NER.

4.4.5

## The 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE–N2-Guanine Adduct
The relative NER efficiency
of the minor groove 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG adduct is ∼20% ( B), which is similar to the NER efficiencies
of the minor groove 10S trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct ( B). Like the stereochemically
identical 10S (+)-trans-B[a]PDE adduct, the 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-derived
guanine adduct is also positioned in the minor groove and is oriented
on the 5′-side of the modified guanine residue. However, because of the larger size of the
aromatic ring system, the minor groove is much more structurally distorted
in the G*-14S case, and the distortions of the double
helix extend to the two adjacent base pairs flanking the adduct G*
on its 5′-side. The Watson–Crick base pairing is ruptured
at the G*-C base pair and also at the adjacent 5′-base pair.
By contrast, in the case of the stereochemically analogous B[a]PDE-derived 10S (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
adduct, all base pairs are intact, including the G*-C base pair. Surprisingly,
the smaller-size of the 10S (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG
adduct is more destabilizing (ΔTm = −10 °C), while ΔTm is only −2 °C in the case of the more bulky fjord 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG
adduct. We proposed that the greater stability of this G*-14S adduct is due to enhanced van der Waals interactions of
the more bulky aromatic ring system of the 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG residue with the DNA residues in
the minor groove; the latter is greatly widened and opened to accommodate
these interactions. Intercalation of this bulky 14S stereoisomeric adduct from the minor groove is disfavored, although
this intercalated conformation is observed in the case of the stereochemically
identical N2–dG adduct derived
from the smaller fjord region PAH fjord benzo[c]phenanthrene
diol epoxide. 
Although the modified
duplexes are destabilized to different extents, the differences in
the overall NER efficiencies of the two trans-14S DB[a,l]PDE- and 10S B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts are not well correlated with their impact on the
absolute ΔTm values. A perhaps dominant
and common feature of the bay region B[a]PDE- and
fjord region DB[a,l]PDE-derived
guanine adducts is the similar alignment of the bulky polycyclic aromatic
ring systems in the minor grooves of the DNA duplexes. The presence
of the bulky aromatic ring systems in the minor groove may interfere
with the proper alignment of XPC protein, which may be the key factor
that determines the relatively weak NER response of N2–dG adducts that occupy the minor groove. This
notion is consistent with the NER resistance of DNA adducts derived
from the binding of aromatic amines to the exocyclic amino groups
of guanines in DNA described in that are also NER-resistant. Indeed, the
BHD2 β-hairpin binds to the minor groove of the damaged DNA
in the productive binding complex and
a lesion in the minor groove would impede this binding.

4.4.6

## The A*-14S (−)-
and 14R (+)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE–N6-Adenine
Adducts
The NER efficiencies of these two trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts are ≤ 2% relative to the NER efficiency
of the 10R (+)-cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct standard ( B) and are considered
to be NER-resistant. The ΔTm value
for the A*-14R adduct is +11 °C indicating that
the 14R (+)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA
adduct stabilizes double-stranded DNA ( C), in contrast to the stereochemically
identical 10R (−)-trans-B[a]PDE-N6–dA adduct (ΔTm = −12 °C, ). On the other hand,
the thermal melting of the stereoisomeric A*-14S adduct
is very modestly destabilized (ΔTm = −3 °C) in the full duplex ( C). It is therefore of interest to examine
the structural features of the stereoisomeric A*-14R and A*-14S adducts in DNA duplex I-A*.
The
structures of the 14R (+)-trans-
and 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA
(A*-14R and A*-14S adducts, respectively,
in ) in sequence
I-A* were investigated by molecular modeling and molecular dynamics
simulations that were based on solution NMR studies of stereochemically
and structurally related adducts derived from the reactions of the
smaller fjord region trans-B[c]PhDE
PAH diol epoxides ( ) with N6-adenine in DNA duplexes. , , Like the analogous B[c]PhDE- and B[g]CDE-N6–dA adducts (55), the 14R (+)-trans-and 14S (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts are intercalated from the major groove
side on the 5′- and 3′-sides of the modified adenine
residues, respectively ( ). Molecular dynamics simulations indicate that all hydrogen
bonds remain intact in both the 14R and 14S adducts, but the Propeller Twist and Buckle are perturbed
at the 3′-flanking dC:dG base pair adjacent to the 14S dA*:dT base pair. In addition,
the aromatic DB[a,l]PDE residue-base
stacking interactions are weaker in the case of the 14S adduct, and its hydrophobic aromatic ring system is more exposed
to the aqueous solvent environment than the aromatic ring system of
the stereoisomeric 14R adduct.
These structural
differences between the A*-14S and A*-14R adducts can account for the slightly
negative ΔTm value of the A*-14S adduct, while the A*-14R adduct is significantly
more stable as indicated by its large and positive ΔTm value ( C). Yet, both of these adducts are similarly
resistant to NER with observed NER efficiencies close to the background
levels of ∼2%. Our hypothesis is based on the Rad4-DNA structure
( ) showing
that the recognition of DNA lesions and adducts is a highly localized
phenomenon that involves the interaction of the BHD2 hairpin with
the minor groove and the insertion of the BHD3 β-hairpin between
the two DNA strands at the site of the lesion from the major groove
side. Since this intrusion of the BHD3 hairpin occurs from the major
groove, the interaction of these bulky, major groove intercalated
adenine adducts likely obstructs the hairpin insertion, which is also
resisted by the stacking interactions of the DB[a,l]P aromatic ring system with adjacent base pairs. Together, these phenomena could be sufficient
to inhibit productive binding by XPC. The overall binding affinities
of the DNA lesion-sensing XPC-RAD23B factor to the 14R and 14S trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA are experimentally
indistinguishable. As discussed elsewhere, productive and unproductive modes of binding
may coexist, as shown for example by Sugusawa, who found that there are two modes of XPC binding and only
one of these can lead to the subsequent steps that permit successful
NER. This is an area of research that is in need of further development
to reach a better understanding of the basic phenomena underlying
the mechanisms of efficient NER, as well as resistance of DNA lesions
to NER.

4.5

## B[c]Ph
and B[g]C Diol Epoxide Derived DNA Adducts
Other fjord PAH diol
epoxide–DNA adducts depicted in are also resistant to repair. The 1S (−)-trans- and 1R (+)-trans-B[c]PhDE-N6–dA adducts are intercalated without base displacement
on the 3′- and 5′-sides, respectively, of the dA*–dT
base pairs , and are fully NER-resistant
in standard HeLa cell extracts. Both
duplexes are characterized by ΔTm ≈ 0, which is not destabilizing. The
lower van der Waals interactions between the 1R B[c]PhDE-N6–dA aromatic
ring system with neighboring base pairs are, however, insufficient
to stabilize the duplexes as observed in the case of the larger DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA
adducts ( C). However, with one additional aromatic ring relative to the analogous
B[c]Ph diol epoxide-derived adenine adduct, the 14R (+)-trans-B[g]CDE-N6–dA adduct in the same duplex is also
intercalated on the 5′-side of the dA*–dT base pair,
but the adduct stabilizes the duplex with ΔTm = +9 °C, and is NER-resistant
in human cells. In all cases, the adenine
adducts are intercalated from the more spacious major groove with
little destabilization that is further favored by the compact topology
of the fjord region PAH adducts that places aromatic rings close to
their site of attachment. Taken together, these factors enhance stacking
interactions with adjacent base pairs at DNA intercalation sites,
and this conclusion applies to all of the intercalated (without base-displacement)
fjord PAHDE-N6–dA adducts studied
up until now.
 
4.6

## Implications for Molecular Basis of NER Resistance
The extensive series of structural studies and NER efficiencies
observed under standardized and reproducible conditions in human cell-free
extracts in vitro, have provided insights into relationships
between the properties of a variety of stereisomeric polycyclic aromatic
diol epoxide-derived DNA adducts and their susceptibilities to NER.
Several themes have emerged that can explain the high susceptibility
of some substrates to NER as well as resistance to NER. A number of
different DNA lesions such as the 6–4 UV photoproduct, other
nonbulky DNA lesions that include spiroiminodihydantoins (Sp) and
guanidinohydantoin, base-displaced intercalated cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG, and N-acetyaminofluorene-derived C8–dG adducts manifest approximately equivalent susceptibilities
to NER with relative efficiencies designated by us as ∼100%.
The relative NER efficiencies of other DNA lesions and adducts are
compared to this standardized value. In our experience, only cisplatin
intrastrand G*TG*cross-linked DNA adducts are better NER substrates
than the bulky PAH-diol epoxide–DNA adducts we have studied
(∼160% on this scale ). Although
Sp is a nonbulky lesion, its relative NER efficiency is ∼100%
on this same scale. The propeller-like
structure strongly destabilizes the duplexes (as shown by calorimetric
methods) because of weakened interactions between Sp and flanking
base pairs as shown by NMR methods. The
NER efficiencies of benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide-derived
intercalated N6–dA adducts, as
well as the minor groove-positioned B[a]PDE-N2–dG adducts, are in the range of ∼10–30% , , and are dependent on sequence
contexts ( and ).
Some of the stereoisomeric
fjord PAH diol epoxide N6–dA adducts
are resistant to NER (efficiencies ≤2%) and result from intercalative
insertions from the major groove of the compact fjord aromatic ring
systems ( C)
that maximize π–π base stacking interactions with
neighboring base pairs. The stacking interactions stabilize the DNA
duplexes by hindering the separation of the two DNA strands at or
near the sites of the intercalated adducts, thus impeding the intrusion
of the XPC BHD3 hairpin, which is also sterically obstructed by the
intercalation from the major groove; these features are believed to
inhibit lesion recognition by XPC and the subsequent NER steps. , On the other hand, intercalation by the benzo[a]pyrene-derived dA adducts is much more distorting and destabilizing
due to the extended, planar, and rigid nature of the bay region adduct,
which prevents more optimal intercalation as in the more compact and
twisted fjord adducts. Detailed analysis
of these interactions by molecular modeling and molecular dynamic
simulations indicates that the overall stability of different covalent
fjord and bay region PAH diol epoxide DNA adducts depends on the size
and shape of the intercalated fjord PAH aromatic ring systems and
on the balance between stabilizing and destabilizing PAH residue–DNA
interactions. Contact between XPC and
the DNA damaging moiety itself is not essential for XPC binding, but
bulky DNA adducts could play an indirect role by hindering the proper
alignment of the XPC proteins at the perturbed DNA binding site, thus
resulting in the formation of unproductive XPC–DNA adduct complexes
that are not efficiently processed by subsequent NER factors. Such effects may, in part, account for the
lower NER efficiencies of DNA adducts that occupy the minor groove
of DNA and that may sterically hinder the interaction of hairpin BHD2
with the damaged DNA duplexes on the minor groove side.
In summary,
the combination of steric effects and strong stacking
and other van der Waals interactions associated with large PAH ring
systems, as well as obstruction of the appropriate alignment of the
XPC-RAD23B damage-sensing NER factor at the site of DNA lesions, could
explain the observed NER resistance observed in human cell extracts.
We now consider the available evidence that NER-resistant forms of
DNA damage also exist in cellular and mammalian tissues.

5

## Repair-Resistance of DNA Adducts in Cellular
Environments
5.1

## Fjord PAH–DNA Adducts
An early
report of the persistence of DNA adducts derived from the reactions
of fjord PAH benzo[g]chrysene diol epoxide with DNA
in human fibroblasts in culture was presented by Lloyd and Hanawalt
in 2002. The levels of (+) and (−)-B[g]CDE–dG and–dA adducts were determined by
the sensitive 32P-postlabeling method and were found to
persist at least until 3 days after treatment with 10 nM concentrations
of B[g]CDE. Dreij et al. incubated A549 human epithelial lung carcinoma cells with the bay
region (+)-B[a]PDE or the highly reactive fjord region
(−)-DB[a,l]PDE diol epoxide stereoisomer and measured the persistence of the
covalent DNA adducts formed. They found that the overall rate of removal
of adducts derived from (−)-DB[a,l]PDE was slower relative to those derived from (+)-B[a]PDE. The dA/dG adduct ratios increased from 2.9 after a 20 min incubation
time with (−)-anti-DB[a,l]DE to 4.0 after 6 h, which suggested that the adenine
adducts were repaired more slowly than the guanine adducts. However,
the ratio of dA/dG adducts remained constant during the same time
interval upon incubation with the stereochemically identical (+)-anti-B[a]PDE. The slower repair of the
DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts is consistent with the higher fraction
of mutations at A:T than G:C sites in the Hprt gene
in Chinese hamster V79 cells treated with (−)-DB[a,l]PDE. It was shown by Jankowiak et al., that the exposure of mouse skin leads to a 2:1 ratio of covalent
deoxyadenosine to deoxyguanosine adducts. By using a DNA adduct conformation-sensitive
fluorescence method, it was also found that DNA-adducts that adopt
intercalative conformations are more resistant to repair than adducts
that adopt external conformations; these conclusions are consistent
with the resistance of the intercalated fjord DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA
adducts to NER in cell extracts ( ). Lagerqvist et al. reported that DNA adducts in DNA repair-proficient Chinese
Hamster Ovary cell lines treated with racemic (±)-DB[a,l]PDE generated adducts that were repaired
∼5-times more slowly than those produced by (+)-B[a]PDE; however, adenine adducts were not distinguished from guanine
adducts in this study. A 32P-postlabeling method for monitoring
DNA adduct levels in NER-deficient and NER-proficient SV40-transformed
human skin fibroblasts and MCF7 cells with racemic (±)-DB[a,l]PDE was employed by Spencer et al.; the major DNA reaction products detected were
guanine adducts that exhibited biphasic repair kinetics and the DNA
adducts persisted for at least 34 h after treatment.
More recently,
the effects of the bay region B[a]PDE-N6–dA and the fjord B[c]PhDE-N6–dA adducts on transcription and transcription-coupled
repair (TCR) were assessed based on a pCI-neo-G-less-T7 plasmid that
incorporated either of these adducts downstream from a CMV immediate-early
promoter/enhancer element. These plasmids were transfected into primary
human fibroblasts of different genetic backgrounds. Both adducts were found to be substrates of TCR; the B[a]PDE-N6–dA adduct was
also repaired by the GG-NER pathway, while the fjord B[c]PhDE-N6–dA adduct was resistant
to GG-NER. Previous NER assays conducted in cell-free extracts are thus consistent with these findings in
intact human cells. While more studies using these cellular assays are needed, these preliminary results suggest
that the cell-free extract NER assays may be relevant to understanding
NER in cellular environments.
Zhang and El-Bayoumy , developed an oral
cancer model based on the treatment of the oral cavities of mice with
DB[a,l]P and DB[a,l]PDE. The genotoxic impact of DB[a,l]P on oral tissues is predominantly due to its
metabolic activation to the (−)-anti-DB[a,l]PDE enantiomer. The levels of (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts were greater by a factor
of 2 than the levels of the stereoisomeric (−)-cis-, (+)-trans-, and the (+)-cis-DB[a,l]PDE-N2–dG
adducts. However, all adducts persisted in the oral tissues of mice
for at least 28 days after the last dose of DB[a,l]P administration. While the development of mutations and
tumorigenesis was attributed to both DB[a,l]PDE-adenine and -guanine adducts, it was concluded that
the levels and persistence of the (−)-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adducts in oral tissue may play a significant role
in accounting for the carcinogenic activity of DB[a,l]P in the oral tissues of mice.

5.2

## Aflatoxin B1–Derived Guanine Adducts
The major
DNA adduct derived from Aflatoxin B1 in human cells stems
from its metabolic activation to AFB1-exo-8,9-epoxide , and its reaction with N7-guanine in DNA to yield the cationic adduct trans-8,9-dihydro-8-(N7-guanyl)-9-hydroxyaflatoxin B1 adduct
(AFB1-N7–dG). The subsequent
base-catalyzed hydrolysis cleaves the imidazole ring of guanine to
yield the AFB1 FAPY adduct trans-8,9-dihydro-8-(2,6-diamino-4-oxo-3,4-dihydropyrimid-5-yl-formamido)-9-hydroxy
aflatoxin B1 ( ). The AFB1-N7–dG adduct is
rapidly repaired, while the AFB1 FAPY adduct is long-lived in the
livers of rats treated with AFB1. Analogous
results were obtained in human fibroblasts treated with rat liver
microsome-activated AFB1. Insights into
the molecular basis of the repair-resistance of the AFB1 FAPY adduct
were obtained from studies of their conformations in double-stranded
DNA. , The solution NMR structures showed that
in a 10-mer duplex, the cationic AFB1 N7–dG and the FAPY adducts
assume intercalated conformations on the 5′-side of the modified
G*:C base pair; all Watson–Crick base pairs were normal except
at the G*:C and 5′-flanking base pair (G:C). None of these
two AFB1 adducts destabilized the 10-mer 2′-deoxyoligonucleotide
duplexes in which it was embedded. Instead, the cationic duplex was
moderately stabilizing with ΔTm =
+2–3 °C, while the AFB1 FAPY adduct yielded a remarkably
large increase in the thermal stability of the duplex with ΔTm = +15 °C. These phenomena were attributed
to the intercalation of AFB1 between adjacent base pairs and significant
residue–base stacking interactions that have been correlated
with the repair-resistance of these adducts. 
 
5.3

## DNA Adducts Derived from
Nitroaromatic Compounds
and Aromatic Amines
The genotoxic properties of nitroaromatic
compounds and aromatic amines have been studied extensively. , The metabolic activation of these compounds generates electrophilic
intermediates that react predominantly with purines in DNA to yield
adducts that can, if not repaired by cellular defense systems, lead
to mutations, genomic instability, and cancers. A number of these DNA adducts have been identified that
are resistant to repair or are slowly repaired by the NER mechanism
as described below.
5.3.1

## 2-Nitrofluorene-Derived
2-Aminofluorene
and 2-Acetylaminofluorene-Guanine Adducts
2-Nitrofluorene
is an environmental pollutant that is metabolically activated in mammalian
cells to the widely studied mutagenic and carcinogenic aromatic amines
2-aminofluorene (AF) and 2-acetylaminofluorene (AAF). These electrophilic derivatives react with
guanine in DNA to form predominantly dG-C8-AF and dG-C8-AAF (N-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-2-AF and -AAF, respectively) and,
to a lesser extent, the dG-N2-AAF (3-(deoxyguanosin-N2-yl)-2-AAF) DNA adducts ( ). Treatment of primary cultures of rat hepatocytes with N-hydroxy-AAF generates three adducts that are removed with a half-life
of ∼10 h (dG-C8-AAF), or more slowly in a biphasic manner (dG-C8-AF
and dG-N2-AAF); the dG-N2-AAF adduct was found to be particularly persistent. Similar results were reported in animal experiments
based on the dietary administration of AAF to rats and the subsequent
analysis of the DNA in the liver; the dG-C8-AAF adduct was present
in ∼10-times higher amounts than the dG-C8-AF and dG-N2-AAF adducts, and the latter were the most
persistent adducts in these tissues. Cui et al. examined the formation
and persistence of four DNA adducts formed in different tissues of
rats after long-term dietary administration of AF. Two of these adducts
were not identified but were found to be persistent in liver tissues.
Two other DNA adducts found in the liver were identified as dG-C8-AF
and dG-N2-AAF. The latter adduct persisted
for at least 10 months in the livers of these rodents after the cessation
of feeding 2-nitrofluorene to these animals. By contrast, the levels
of dG-C8-AF adducts decreased by a factor of more than ∼100
during the same period of time. 
 The structural features
of the dG-N2-AAF adduct were investigated
by Zaliznyak et al. by NMR spectroscopy
and restrained molecular dynamics. The
AAF residue was positioned in the minor groove pointing to the 5′-end
of the modified strand, and all Watson–Crick base pairs remained
intact; a minor groove position for this adduct was previously predicted
by Grad et al. This structure is reminiscent
of the (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct positioned in the minor groove
with the bulky aromatic residue pointing toward the 5′-direction
of the modified strand. The latter PAH
diol epoxide adduct destabilizes double-stranded DNA, and its NER efficiency varies from weak to strong, depending
on the sequence context. , , However, the dG-N2-AAF adduct stabilizes
double-stranded DNA and is repair-resistant in rodent tissues. The
difference between these two N2–dG
adducts stems from the planarity and curved topology of the fluorenyl
ring system in the dG-N2–AAF adduct,
which fits tightly into the B-DNA minor groove. On the other hand,
the (+)-trans-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct is larger, more extended, and has a
nonplanar benzylic ring; it therefore significantly widens the minor
groove that tends to destabilize the duplex and can account for its
moderate NER activity. 

5.3.2

## 3-Nitrobenzanthrone
DNA adducts
derived from the metabolic activation of the nitroaromatic compound
3-nitrobenzanthrone (3NBA) are known to be mutagenic. Like other nitro-PAH derivatives, 3NBA undergoes
nitroreduction to 3-aminobenzanthrone (ABA) that is subsequently metabolically
activated to the electrophilic arylnitrenium ion. This intermediate
reacts with purine bases to yield the three DNA adducts N-(deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone (C8–dG-ABA), 2-(deoxyguanosin-N2-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone
(N2–dG-ABA), and 2-(deoxyadenosin-N6-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone
(N6–dA-ABA) ( ). After treatment of rats
by intratracheal instillation of 3NBA, persistent DNA adducts were
found in various organs but were not identified. Treatment of human hepatoma HepG2 cells with 3NBA gives
rise to two major adducts, C8–dG-ABA and N6–dA-ABA, while the N2–dG-ABA was found to be a minor adduct. The C8- dG-ABA and N6–dA-ABA adducts were rapidly repaired,
but the N2–dG-ABA adduct was significantly
more persistent. Interestingly, the N2–dG-ABA adduct assumes a minor groove
conformation pointing toward the 5′-end of the modified strand
and its thermodynamic stability is characterized by a positive ΔTm value (+7.5 °C), while the C8–dG adduct assumes a base-displaced
intercalative conformation and strongly destabilizes the DNA duplex
(ΔTm= −11 °C). These features
of the ABA adducts are similar to those of the dG-C8-AAF and dG-N2-AAF adducts ( ).
 
5.3.3

## 6-Aminochrysene
Reduction Products of 6-Nitrochrysene
It has been shown that
6-nitrochrysene (6NC) is metabolically activated
in rodents and in vitro systems by the nitroreduction
of 6NC to N-hydroxy-6-aminochrysene that yields three
major adducts that include N-(dG-8-yl)-6AC (N-(deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-6-aminochrysene), 5-(dG-N2-yl)-6AC (5-(deoxyguanosin-N2-yl)-6-aminochrysene), and N-(dA-8-yl)-6AC (N-(deoxyadenosine-8-yl)-6-aminochrysene)
( ). This pattern of adduct formation is analogous
to the pattern of purine adduct formation associated with 2-nitrofluorene
and 3-aminobenzanthrone-derived DNA adducts. The relative NER efficiencies
of these adducts in Hela cell extracts , showed that
the 5-(dG-8-yl)-6AC and the N-(dA-8-yl)-6AC adducts were repaired
with similar efficiencies, while the 5-(dG-N2-yl)-6AC adduct was almost one order of magnitude less well
incised in human cell extracts than the dG-C8–6AC adducts.
However, the conformations of these 6-aminochrysene-derived guanine
and adenine adducts have not been investigated. It has been hypothesized
that the slow repair of the various lesions derived from 6NC/6AC and
their potential persistence in mammalian tissue could in part account
for the powerful carcinogenicity of 6NC. 
 
5.3.4

## Aristolochic
Acid-Derived Adenine Adduct,
ALII–dA
The nephrotoxin aristolochic acids AAI (8-methoxy-6-nitrophenanthro[3,4-d][1,3]dioxole-5-carboxylic acid) and AAII (same as
AAI except that the 8-methoxy group is replaced by a hydrogen atom)
is present in plants of the Aristolochiaceae family
and was first linked to Balkan endemic nephropathy, a disease that
was concentrated among communities living along the Danube river in
the Balkans and adjacent East European countries. It was eventually
discovered that chronic exposure to aristolochic acids in the human
diet leads not only to terminal kidney failure, but also to transitional
cell carcinoma of the urinary tract. , Aristolochic
acid is a complex derivative of the PAH phenanthrene that has a carboxylic
acid and a nearby nitro group that play key roles in its metabolic
activation to aristolactam derivatives (ALI and ALII). , Both ALI and ALII react with the exocyclic amino groups of guanine
and adenine in cellular DNA to form
genotoxic and persistent DNA adducts ( ) in human kidney tissues of cancer patients
that had been exposed to AA. 
 Most of the somatic mutations found in human urethelial carcinomas
attributed to AA have a distinct preponderance of A:T → T:A
transversions. This unusual mutational signature was discovered by
genome-wide sequencing of DNA extracted from tumor tissues of upper
urothelial cell carcinoma patients. These results clearly established
a link between exposure to an environmental carcinogen and the etiology
of these urothelial cancers. , 
Sidorenko et
al. showed that ALII–dG adducts are repaired
by NER mechanisms while ALII-N6–dA
adducts are resistant to NER in human fibroblasts exposed to AA. The
ALII adducts site-specifically incorporated into plasmids were also
NER-resistant in human cell extracts. Therefore, there has been considerable interest in elucidating the
conformational and biological properties of the DNA adducts formed
by the reactions of these aristolactams with DNA.
The structural
features of ALII–dA (A*) lesions have been
investigated by Lukin et al. With the
normal partner base dT in the complementary strand, this aristolactam
AL–DNA adduct adopts a novel intercalative conformation with
the aromatic ring system of the adduct, including the modified adenine,
intercalated between adjacent base pairs. The Watson–Crick
hydrogen bonding with the dT base is fully disrupted and the T is
displaced into the major groove. The
11-mer duplexes containing this adduct are moderately destabilized
as is evident from the relatively small lowering of the Tm of these duplexes relative to the unmodified controls
in different sequence contexts (ΔTm = −3.0, −3.6, and −6.4 °C in duplexes
with ..CA*G.., TA*G.., and ..CA*C.. sequence contexts, respectively).
It was proposed that the loss of one Watson–Crick base pair
is compensated by stabilizing π–π stacking interactions
between the aromatic ring system of the ALII residue and the flanking
guanine residues in the CA*C sequence context. This effect is reminiscent of the weak destabilizing effects
of the NER-resistant 14S DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA adduct ( C). The ALII–dA lesion is resistant to GG-NER
in human fibroblasts treated with aristolochic acid, which is accounted
for by a lack of specific binding of XPC-RAD23B to this DNA adduct;
however, when the ALII–dA adduct is mismatched with CCC, XPC-RAD23B
binding is observed. These latter observations
with mismatches are analogous to similar effects observed with the
cross-linked T^T CPD lesion (see ). The resistance of the ALII–dA lesions
to NER is also paralleled by the bulky DB[a,l]PDE-N6–dA and B[c]PhDE-N6–dA lesions
in cell-free extracts, , although XPC-RAD23B
binds robustly to these fjord adducts, in contrast to the ALII–dA adducts. The ALII–dA adducts persist in rat genomic DNA and are repaired
only by TC-NER in human fibroblasts, while the ALII–dG adducts
are substrates of both TC-NER and GG-NER. 
The structural and dynamic characteristics of these two adducts
were analyzed by molecular dynamics simulations. The basic difference suggested by the simulations is in
the preferred relative orientations of the planar bases and the planar
aromatic ALII ring systems. In the case of the ALII–dA adducts,
these moieties are approximately coplanar, while in the case of the
ALII–dG adducts, they are not. This leads to a greater structural
distortion at the lesion site, enhanced dynamics in the case of the
guanine adduct, and thus diminished carcinogen-base stacking interactions.
Similar differences in local structural distortions in the case of
fjord PAH-N2–dG and N6–dA adducts were associated with the NER resistance
of the adenine, but not guanine adducts. 

5.3.5

## Heterocyclic Aromatic Amines
Heterocyclic
aromatic amines (HAA) are present in cooked meats and fish and are
metabolized by CYP P450 1A2 to N-hydroxylamines that
are highly mutagenic and carcinogenic. The N-hydroxylamines are acetylated by the N-acetyl
transferases NAT2. The resulting highly reactive nitrenium ions are
generated by solvolysis and react mostly with C8–dG, and to
a minor extent with N2–dG in DNA
to form stable adducts.
The reactions of the HAA 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline (IQ) with DNA lead to the formation of the major
guanine adduct C8-[(3-methyl-3H-imidazo[4,5-f]quinolin-2-yl)amino]–dG
(dG-C8-IQ) and, to a lesser extent, to the N2-(2-amino-3-methyl-3H-imidazo[4,5-f]quinol-5yl)–dG
(dG-N2-IQ) adduct ( ). The formation
and rates of removal of these DNA adducts were investigated in rats
after administration of an oral dose of IQ; after cessation of treatment,
the dG-C8-IQ adduct was cleared from the liver and kidney more quickly
than the dG-N2-IQ adduct, which persisted
for at least 4 weeks after treatment. It is therefore interesting to compare the physical and structural
difference between the dG-C8-IQ and the dG-N2-IQ adducts.
 Stone and co-workers demonstrated that the dG-C8-IQ adduct
adopts
a base-displaced intercalative conformation when positioned at G3,
and minor groove conformations when positioned at G1 and
G2 in the 12-mer NarI sequence context 5′-d(CTCG1G2CG3CCATC) in a duplex hybridized
with its fully complementary 12-mer strand. , All three 12-mer duplexes are destabilized by these adducts with
ΔTm in the range of −4 to
−7 °C. 
The dG-N2-IQ adducts positioned at
G1 and G3 also adopt base-displaced conformations, , but the thermal destabilization is negligible. In the case of all
three duplexes with the adducts at G1, G2, or
G3, the ΔTm is within
the −1 to +1 range, close to the experimental error of these
measurements. Thus, the duplex melting points Tm of the dG-N2-IQ duplexes are
practically the same as the Tm of the
unmodified 12-mer duplex, while the dG-C8-IQ duplexes are destabilized.
In this case, the differences in reported NER repair resistance of
these adducts appear to be better correlated with the thermal destabilization
of these DNA adducts than their conformations
in double-stranded DNA. However, the relative NER efficiencies in
standardized NER assays using the six site-specifically modified dG-C8-IQ/dG–N2–dG would need to be established to
determine the impact of the adduct conformations on NER in this set
of related DNA adducts. Nevertheless, the dG-N2-IQ involves the linkage of a bulky adduct to the exocyclic
amino group of guanine which protrudes into the minor groove. Therefore,
this is yet another example of an N2–dG
DNA adduct that is partially or fully resistant to NER.
The
heterocyclic aromatic amine DNA adduct dG-C8-PhIP, a guanine
adduct derived from 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine, has been found in prostate tumors. The relative dual incision efficiency of site-specifically
modified oligonucleotide duplexes with dG-C8-PhIP adducts, is about
90% of the cis-B[a]PDE-N2–dG adduct value. This adduct adopts a base-displaced intercalated conformation with
its adducted G and partner C both extruded into the major groove, and the heterocyclic aromatic ring system that
is intercalated has a characteristic destabilizing mobile phenyl ring. Thermal melting data revealed a destabilization
of −10.6 °C of PhiP-modified relative to unmodified 11-mer
duplexes. The dG-C8-PhIP adduct thus fits the pattern established
by other base-displaced intercalated bulky C8–dG adducts that
are thermally destabilized, and are very good NER substrates.

6

## Summary and Conclusions
In this perspective,
some of the known classes of bulky NER-resistant
DNA lesions have been discussed ( ). There is little doubt that other GG-NER-resistant
DNA lesions remain to be discovered, or have already been documented
but not characterized structurally. An example of the latter are the
DNA adducts derived from the alkylating agent acylfulvene and their natural product precursor and antitumor
agent illudine S. An important motivation
for understanding the molecular and structural origins of repair-resistance
of DNA lesions is the potential for designing improved drugs for chemotherapeutic
applications. In this respect, the interstrand cross-linked lesions
are particularly important, and include
the well-known cisplatin intrastrand cross-linked DNA lesions, and
other forms of DNA damaging agents. Among
the best NER substrates besides the cisplatin intrastrand cross-linked
DNA lesions are the 6–4 UV photoproducts and other forms of
DNA damage reviewed by Gillet and Schärer, certain oxidatively generated DNA lesions, , and base-displaced intercalated bulky DNA adducts ( ).
 What are the features of DNA lesions that are associated
with good
substrates of GG-NER and of NER resistant lesions? Some typical examples
of strong and weak NER substrates and NER-resistant DNA lesions, including
their structural characteristics and impact on the thermodynamic properties
of the modified DNA duplexes, are compared in . Our overall conclusion is that the NER
response in standardized human cell-free extracts depends on (1) the
bulk and the specific chemical structure of the individual lesion,
(2) the modified nucleotide and the site of attachment of the lesion
to this nucleotide, (3) the sequence context that the lesion is embedded
in, (4) the DNA conformation adopted by the lesion which depends on
factors 1–3, and (5) the impact of the lesions on the local
thermodynamic stability of double-stranded DNA.
 The effect of DNA sequence context can be particularly
dominant
as shown by the examples in . A DNA lesion can be an excellent substrate in the
normal full duplex but becomes NER-resistant when the partner base
in the complementary strand is absent (the Del duplexes).
The
impact of the lesions on the overall thermodynamic characteristics
of DNA duplexes, as measured by thermal melting experiments, can be
stabilizing or destabilizing, depending on the lesion. The concept
has emerged that bulky adducts, because of their enhanced potential
for stabilizing van der Waals interactions with DNA residues, can
locally stabilize DNA duplexes especially via intercalation and thus
impart NER resistance to the DNA adducts. , 
While accurate a priori predictions of the
effects
of DNA lesion structure on susceptibilities to GG-NER are difficult
if not impossible, certain trends have nevertheless been identified.
DNA repair resistance is most clearly associated with DNA adducts
that are intercalated between adjacent base pairs without expulsion
of either the modified or partner base ( ). All of the identified NER-resistant bulky
lesions either thermodynamically stabilize the local DNA sites (presumable
by van der Waals adduct-base stacking interactions) or have little
or no negative impact. Weaker NER substrates can be thermodynamically
destabilizing but are characterized by conformations that do not strongly
affect the stacking of base pairs within the duplex. Thus, minor groove
DNA adducts involving covalent linkages with the exocyclic N2-amino groups of guanine that thermally destabilize
DNA tend to be among the weaker substrates of NER.
Specific
examples of the known NER-resistant DNA substrates can
be categorized according to the following three groups:(I)Certain bulky polycyclic
aromatic
diol epoxide-N6-adenine ( , ) and aristolochic acid-derived ( ) N6-adenine adducts. The former are
intercalated between adjacent base pairs without base displacement
and all Watson–Crick pairs are intact, while the aristolochic
acid-derived adduct has a partner T base that is displaced into the
major groove; both manifest strong π–π stacking
interactions between the aromatic ring system and adjacent bases.
(II)Bulky polycyclic aromatic N2-guanine adducts that are excellent substrates
of NER in full double-stranded DNA, but are fully resistant when the
canonical cytosine nucleotides are deleted, or replaced by noncanonical
purine nucleotides ( ). Such duplexes with “deletion” or mismatches
are biologically significant because they can arise during DNA replication
due to error-prone bypass of lesions by replicative or by translesion
DNA polymerases.
(III)DNA lesions that do not greatly
distort the structure of DNA include, for example, most of the nonbulky
DNA lesions that are substrates of BER, and the UV-induced CPD thymine
dimers that are GG-NER-resistant in cell-free extracts. However, the
CPD lesions are repaired by NER in vivo with the
assistance of the proteins DDB1 in the DDB1/2 complex. , 
(IV)Adducts that are
bound to DNA via
the exocyclic amino groups of guanine are often repaired slowly by
NER mechanisms in human cell extracts. Such adducts are also known
to persist in cells and tissues for significant periods of time. Since
the amino group of guanine protrudes into the minor groove, such bulky
PAH N2–dG adducts are often positioned
in the minor groove of DNA. It is interesting to note that some DNA
repair-resistant heterocyclic aromatic amine-N2–dG adducts have indeed been found in cells and tissues
of animals exposed to various heterocyclic aromatic amines ( ). Some bulky minor
groove adducts are readily recognized by the damage-sensing NER factor
XPC-RAD23B ( and ), but
they may interfere with the proper NER-productive alignment of XPC,
thus limiting the efficiency of NER.

7

## Perspectives
In this article, we have implicitly assumed
that the appearance
of the characteristic 24–32 nucleotide-long NER dual incision
products reflect the early stages of the complex NER multiple step
mechanism, which involves the recognition and excision of the 24–32
nucleotide-long oligonucleotides that contains the damaged base. The
subsequent gap-filling steps are no longer dependent on the nature
of the excised lesion, and it is therefore assumed that the relative
NER efficiencies in human cell-free extracts are critical to understanding
these early recognition and excision steps that must occur for the
successful completion of all of the other subsequent NER steps. The
successful GG-NER mechanisms involve the recognition and the binding
of XPC-RAD23B to the site of the damage that is followed by a verification
mechanism that involves TFIIH. The initial binding of XPC-RAD23B may
be either productive or unproductive and thus not necessarily lead
to the dual incisions. The subsequent
recruitment of TFIIH to the XPC-RAD23B-damaged DNA complex leads to
the verification step that involves the local unwinding of the DNA
duplex on both sides of the lesion and the verification of the presence
of a genuine DNA lesion. The details of the verification mechanism
are still not well understood. Since XPC-RAD23B binds well to at least
some DNA lesions that are nevertheless resistant to NER, it remains to be determined whether and how
the verification mechanism plays a role in the DNA lesion recognition
phenomenon in NER and somehow fails to recognize such DNA lesions.
DNA lesions that are resistant to excision by the NER mechanism
can still be recognized and removed by TC–NER, thus ensuring
the accurate transcription of the genome in spite of the presence
of NER-resistant DNA lesions. However, error-prone bypass of these
lesions by DNA polymerases adds to the mutagenic burden of the cells
and ultimately to transcription errors, and it is therefore important
to distinguish the forms of DNA damage that are resistant to DNA repair
by GG-NER mechanisms.
In chromatin in intact cells and tissues,
the access of repair
proteins to DNA lesions is strongly hindered. , Therefore, NER activity is significantly slower in chromatinized
DNA than in cell extracts. In principle, it may be more difficult
to distinguish NER-resistant from good NER substrates in cellular
and tissue environments. On the other hand, there are several examples
that show that the same genotoxic substances can give rise to different
adducts, some persistent and others repaired more rapidly ( ). In such cases,
differences in DNA lesion-specific repair capacities are discernible
even at the cellular level.
An important general question remains
whether the hierarchies of
GG-NER efficiencies observed in cell-free extracts in vitro, especially NER resistance, are relevant to cellular DNA repair
capacities, that is, the removal of similar forms of DNA damage in
cellular environments and tissues. These questions should be addressed
using the same well-defined site-specifically positioned DNA lesions
in cell-free extracts and in intact cells. At this time, there are
only two explicit comparisons of this type summarized in , both involving adenine
adducts: (1) a site-specific fjord B[c]Ph-N6–dA adduct is NER resistant in cell
extracts as well as in intact fibroblasts, , and (2) the aristolochic acid derived ALII–dA adduct is repair
resistant in fibroblasts and in Hela cell-free extracts. The NER efficiencies of the other bulky DNA
lesions listed in that have been found to be DNA repair-resistant in mammalian cellular
environments have not yet been studied in mammalian cell extracts
(e.g., the dG-N2-AAF aromatic amines).
The in vitro cell extract experiments are more convenient
than cell- or tissue-based methods for establishing GG-NER resistance.
The potential biological impact of previously uncharacterized forms
of DNA damage that are discoverable by mass spectrometric adductomics
methods could be assessed by cell-free
NER experiments to distinguish NER-resistant from easily repaired
DNA adducts. Such GG-NER-resistant DNA adducts may turn out to be
particularly relevant and useful as biomarkers of exposure of human
populations to toxic environmental chemicals and the prevention of
human diseases that they engender.

The support
of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS)
Grant No. ES024050 (N.E.G.) and National Cancer Institute (NCI) Grant
No. CA168469 (N.E.G.), and NIEHS Grant No. ES025987 (S.B.), NCI Grant
Nos. CA75449 (S.B.), and CA 28038 (S.B.), are gratefully acknowledged.
This work used the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment
(XSEDE), which is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Grant No. MCB060037 (S.B.), and the high performance computing resources
of New York University (NYU-ITS).
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
Nicholas E. Geacintov is Professor
of Chemistry at
New York University in New York and the Vice Dean of Science at NYU
Shanghai. He served as the Chair of the NYU Department of Chemistry
(2000–2009) and is currently the Chair of the ACS Division
of Chemical Toxicology (2017–2018). He was trained as a polymer
physical chemist and received his PhD from the Environmental Sciences
and Forestry College at Syracuse University. He gradually switched
fields to areas at the interface of chemistry and biology and is currently
interested in unraveling the mechanisms of repair of DNA lesions formed
by reactions of endogenous and environmental genotoxic chemicals with
DNA.
Suse Broyde is Professor
of Biology and Affiliate
Professor of Chemistry at New York University. She received her PhD
in Physical Chemistry from the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn,
now NYU Tandon School of Engineering. Her research has focused for
many years on molecular modeling of DNA damaged by environmental and
endogenous mutagens and carcinogens, in settings that include DNA
and RNA polymerases, DNA repair proteins, and with the DNA packaged
in nucleosomes. The goal is to gain understanding on a molecular level
of the mutagenic properties of the damaged DNA and its susceptibility
to nucleotide excision repair using state-of-the-art computational
chemistry approaches.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Dr.
Yuqin Cai for outstanding help with the figures
and manuscript preparation.

## Abbreviations
NERnucleotide excision repair
BERbase excision repair
GG-NERglobal genomic
nucleotide excision repair
TC-NERtranscription coupled nucleotide excision repair
hRNAPIIhuman RNA polymerase
II
8-oxoG8-oxo-2′-deoxyguanosine
T^T CPDcyclobutane
pyrimidine dimer
6–4 photoproductpyrimidine–pyrimidone photoproduct
PAHpolycylic aromatic hydrocarbons
Deldeletion duplex
TLStranslesion synthesis
CYPcytochrome P450
EHepoxide hydrolase
G*, A*guanine or adenine
adduct
THFtetrahydrofuran
XPCXPC-RAD23B