Mucosal ImmunolMucosal Immunol319nihpaMucosal immunology1933-02191935-3456pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC5638669PMC5638669.156386695638669NIHMS8467152840193310.1038/mi.2017.12NIHMS846715NIHPA8467151ArticleBcl-xL mediates RIPK3-dependent necrosis in M.
tuberculosis-infected macrophages
ZhaoXiaomin KhanNargis GanHuixian TzelepisFanny NishimuraTomoyasu ParkSeung-Yeol DivangahiMaziar RemoldHeinz G. 
1Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA
2Health Center, Keio University. 35 Shinamo machi; Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan
3Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology & Immunology,
McGill International TB Centre, McGill University Health Centre, Meakins-Christie
Laboratories, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1, Canada*Corresponding authors: Heinz Remold, MD, PhD, Department
of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Smith Research Building, 1
Jimmy Fund Wayt, Boston, MA 02115, hremold@partners.org. Maziar
Divangahi, Ph.D. Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, McGill International TB Centre, RI-MUHC, Centre for Translational
Biology, Meakins-Christie Laboratories, 1001 Decarie Blvd, Block E (EM3.2248),
Montreal, Quebec H4A 3J1, maziar.divangahi@mcgill.ca‡These authors equally contributed to this study.
12420171120171062997161553156809022017181020171810201717062024Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsVirulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) triggers
necrosis in host Mφ, which is essential for successful pathogenesis.
Here we demonstrate that necrosis of Mtb-infected Mφ is
dependent on the action of the cytosolic kinase Receptor Interacting Protein 3
(RIPK3) and the mitochondrial Bcl-2 family member protein B-cell lymphoma -
extra large (Bcl-xL). RIPK3-deficient Mφ are able to better
control bacterial growth in vitro and in vivo.
Cytosolic RIPK3 translocates to the mitochondria where it promotes necrosis and
blocks caspase 8-activation and apoptosis via Bcl-xL. Furthermore,
necrosis is associated with stabilization of hexokinase II on the mitochondria
as well as cyclophilin D-dependent mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT).
These events up-regulate the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) to induce
necrosis. Thus, in Mtb-infected Mφ mitochondria are an
essential platform for induction of necrosis by activating RIPK3 function and
preventing caspase 8 - activation.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## INTRODUCTION
Cell death is triggered by regulated and highly specific intracellular and
extracellular signals. Apoptosis and necrosis are two major forms of cell death that
play a critical role in immunity to infection by Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (Mtb) ( ). These distinct cell death modalities of macrophages (Mφ)
directly affect control of Mtb growth and dissemination ( – ) as well as antigen specific T cell mediated immunity via
cross-presentation ( – ). Thus it is not surprising that virulent strains of
Mtb have developed mechanisms that allow evasion of Mφ
apoptosis by inducing necrosis ( ).
Furthermore, we and others have demonstrated that during infection with
Mtb, mitochondrial function is critical in determining the cell
death modality ( , – ).
Infection of human Mφ with the attenuated Mtb H37Ra
predominantly induces apoptosis ( , , ),
which is dependent on mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) and
release of mitochondrial cytochrome c into the cytosol ( ). In contrast, infection of Mφ with the
virulent Mtb strain H37Rv induces necrosis ( , ) associated
with irreversible permeabilization of the mitochondrial inner membrane (MIMP)
leading to mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) and loss of mitochondrial
integrity as well as function ( ). The MPT
is regulated by calcium and occurs after opening of a functional pore believed to
include the adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT), and a voltage-dependent anion
channel (VDAC), whose functions are regulated by cyclophilin D (CypD) ( , ).
CypD, the only component of the MIMP, that is indispensable for induction of
necrosis ( ), is a member of the cyclophilin
family of peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases and has been implicated in
MPT-dependent necrotic (but not apoptotic) cell death ( , ). We have
previously shown that CypD is involved in induction of
Mtb-dependent Mφ necrosis, which allows bacterial growth in
virulent Mtb-infected cells ( ). These studies collectively indicate that programmed necrosis is
essential for evasion of immunity by Mtb and is regulated at the
level of mitochondria but the molecular mechanisms involved in the necrotic pathway
remain elusive.
It has recently been shown that inhibitors of apoptosis (e.g. IAP) trigger
formation of a complex including RIPK3 and RIPK1, which induces a type of necrosis
referred to as necroptosis ( ). RIPK3 -
dependent necrosis seems to be tightly regulated by caspase 8 ( ) as it was shown that caspase 8 inactivates RIPK3
( ). Interestingly, an elegant study in
a murine tumor model recently has demonstrated that RIPK3-mediated necroptosis is
more efficient in cross-priming CD8+ T cells than apoptosis and within those
dying cells RIPK1 signaling is required for initiating T cell mediated immunity
( ). Death associated molecular patterns
(DAMPs) released from necroptotic cells also provoke a strong inflammatory response
( ). Cumulatively, little is known about
the role of cell death-inducing mechanisms during host interaction with a living
pathogen that initiates multiple complex signaling pathways.
NAD(P)H oxidases (NOX), electron-transporting membrane enzymes including
NOX2, a phagocyte oxidase, and mitochondrial respiration are the major sources of
cellular ROS ( ). ROS is produced in the
mitochondria predominantly by the complexes I to III of the electron transport chain
and by mitochondrial dehydrogenases including glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and
α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, a Krebs cycle enzyme ( ), which produces NADH and generates ROS if the
NADH/NAD+ ratio is high ( ). Processing of glucose is initiated by enzymes of the hexokinase
(HK) family, which has four isoforms (HK-I to HK-IV). HK-II is critical for
mitochondrial energy production since its presence on the outer mitochondrial
membrane couples glycolysis with oxidative phosphorylation ( ). Augmented levels of HK-II increase ROS accumulation
if the normal function of the mitochondrial electron chain is compromised.
Interestingly, increased mitochondrial ROS production has been associated with
RIPK3-dependent necrosis ( ).
The mitochondrial Bcl-2 family protein B-cell lymphoma-extra large
(Bcl-xL) on the mitochondria is known to block apoptosis by
inhibiting the function of Bcl-2 homologous antagonist/killer (BAK) ( ) via blocking Bcl-2–associated X protein (BAX)
recruitment to the mitochondria ( , ). Here we report that in Mφ infected
with virulent Mtb, RIPK3 translocates to mitochondria as evidenced
by its presence in mitochondria along with Bcl-xL and pro-caspase 8.
Mitochondrial pro-caspase 8 in the presence of RIPK3 and Bcl-xL remains
in its inactive zymogen form, suggesting that Bcl-xL is critical for
preventing caspase 8 mediated apoptosis and that the presence of active RIPK3 on the
mitochondria is required for induction of necrosis. Furthermore, we identify RIPK3
as an important kinase that is involved in the induction of necrosis impairing host
Mφ immunity both in vitro and in vivo.
Interestingly, the enhanced protection of RIPK3 deficient mice was independent of T
cell mediated immunity to pulmonary Mtb infection.
Similar to our findings in human Mφ infected with virulent
Mtb, Roca and Ramakrishnan have reported a comparable role of
RIPK3 in a zebra fish model of infection with Mycobacterium marinum
( ), which underscores the evolutionary
conservation of the RIPK3-dependent necrosis pathway in Mtb
pathogenesis. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that following
Mtb infection RIPK3 is involved in the activation of several
independent mechanisms that ultimately converge at the inhibition of apoptosis and
promotion of necrosis in Mφ, which enhances the susceptibility of the host
to infection.

## RESULTS

## RIPK3 is required for induction of necrosis in Mφ infected with
virulent Mtb
A hallmark of infection of Mφ with virulent H37Rv is necrosis,
which allows the bacteria to evade host defense mechanisms ( ). RIPK3 is required for the induction of necrosis
in a variety of cell models ( ). To test
whether a RIPK3-dependent pathway is directly involved in necrosis and innate
control of virulent H37Rv infection, we silenced the RIPK3 gene in human
Mφ using two different RIPK3 siRNAs ( and ). In the absence of RIPK3, necrosis was
remarkably reduced in Mtb infected Mφ ( and ). This
reduction of necrotic cell death also correlated with decreased bacterial growth
in RIPK3 deficient Mφ ( ).
Because of potential off-target effects of siRNA, we performed similar
experiments using RIPK3 deficient mice. Similar to human Mφ,
Mtb infected RIPK3-deficient murine Mφ revealed
decreased necrosis ( ), which led
to significant reduction of bacterial growth in vitro ( ). Decreased necrosis in
RIPK3−/− Mφ was also associated with
significant reduction of extracellular bacteria compared to
Mtb-infected wild-type (WT) Mφ ( ). To determine whether reduced necrosis also
occurs in the lungs of RIPK3−/− mice following
Mtb infection, we infected
RIPK3−/− and WT mice via the
intratracheal route with H37Rv and collected bronchoalveolar lavage 2 days after
infection. The levels of dead cells were significantly lower in the lungs of
infected RIPK3−/− mice than WT mice ( ). We next investigated the involvement of
the mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL), which is a functional RIPK3
substrate that binds to RIPK3 through its kinase-like domain but lacks kinase
activity of its own in RIPK3 mediating necrosis. Interestingly, the levels of
MLKL were increased in human Mφ infected with H37Rv ( ) and silencing of MLKL significantly
decreased necrosis in H37Rv-infected Mφ ( and ). Collectively, these data from both
in vitro human and murine Mφ as well as the
in vivo experiments indicate that RIPK3 plays a critical
role in the necrosis pathway during the course of Mtb
infection.

## RIPK3 and pro-caspase 8 translocate from the cytosol to the mitochondria in
Mtb-infected Mφ
In cells undergoing genotoxic stress pro-caspase 8 forms a cytosolic
complex with RIPK1, RIPK3 and FADD termed the “riptoptosome”,
which can become a cytosolic cell death signaling platform ( , ). We
therefore investigated whether a similar complex exists in human Mφ
infected with Mtb. Here we found that RIPK1, RIPK3, and
pro-caspase 8 co-precipitate in the cytosol but not on mitochondria of human
Mφ prior to infection ( ,
 ) similar to the ripoptosome. At 2 h after infection of human
Mφ with virulent H37Rv or avirulent H37Ra, we observed that RIPK3, RIPK1
and pro-caspase 8 translocate from the cytosol to the mitochondria ( , right lane). In H37Rv-infected
pro-necrotic Mφ, the levels of pro-caspase 8 and RIPK3 increased on the
mitochondria over time ( ). In
contrast, in Mφ infected with the avirulent H37Ra, the levels of
pro-caspase 8 and RIPK3 on the mitochondria were markedly reduced by 24 h, which
is consistent with pro-caspase 8 becoming activated at 24 h to induce apoptosis
( ). The translocation of
cytosolic RIPK3 and pro-caspase 8 to the mitochondria cannot be explained by
contamination of the mitochondrial fractions with cytosolic proteins, because
mitochondrial preparations from uninfected Mφ do not contain significant
amounts of RIPK1, RIPK3 and pro-caspase 8 ( ). Moreover, using fluorescence confocal microscopy we demonstrate
that the levels of pro-caspase 8 and RIPK3 co-localizing with the mitochondria
are significantly increased in Mφ infected with the virulent H37Rv
strain ( ). Additionally,
the levels of cleaved caspase 8 were significantly higher in H37Rv infected
RIPK3 deficient Mφ compared to WT Mφ ( ) while there was no difference in Mφ
infected with H37Ra ( ). These data indicate that after infection
of Mφ with virulent Mtb the mitochondria acquire a
complex containing RIPK1, RIPK3 and pro-caspase 8 and RIPK3, which is critical
in preventing caspase 8 activation.

## RIPK3 and Bcl-xL prevent activation of pro-caspase 8 on the
mitochondria promoting necrosis in Mtb-infected
Mφ
Bcl-xL protects mitochondria against apoptosis by inhibiting
BAK activation ( ). RIPK3 and
pro-caspase 8 translocate to the mitochondria in H37Rv-infected Mφ as
shown by their presence in mitochondrial fraction after 6h and 24h of infection
( ). Bcl-xL is
required for this sequestration of pro-caspase 8 on the mitochondria in its
inactive form, as silencing of the Bcl-xL-gene leads to proteolytic
processing of pro-caspase 8 and disappearance of RIPK3 from the mitochondria 24
h post-H37Rv-infection ( ). Thus,
by binding of pro-caspase 8 to the mitochondria Bcl-xL contributes to
maintaining RIPK3 in an active form on the mitochondria ( ). In contrast, 24 h after infection with
avirulent H37Ra (which promotes apoptosis), the Bcl-xL levels on the
mitochondria are significantly diminished, which is also associated with
disappearance of pro-caspase 8 and RIPK3 from the mitochondria ( ). These findings are in agreement with a
study demonstrating that by outcompeting Bax via Bcl-xL, cells are
protected against apopotosis ( ).
Finally, we demonstrated that silencing Bcl-xL in H37Rv-infected
Mφ for 72 h significantly reduced necrosis ( and ). These
experiments collectively indicate that RIPK3 and Bcl-xL colocalize on
the mitochondria in a mutually dependent manner and suggest that the
colocalization leads to prevention of activation of pro-caspase 8 on the
mitochondria and increase of necrosis in Mtb-infected
Mφ.
The dual function of caspase 8 in initiation of apoptosis and
suppression of RIPK3-dependent necrosis ( – ), which has
been shown to be required for normal murine embryonic development and survival
( ) is well documented. Active
caspase 8 blocks necrosis by proteolytically inactivating RIPK1 and RIPK3 ( , , ). Thus we next
inhibited caspase 8 activation in H37Ra-infected Mφ using the selective
caspase 8 inhibitor z-IETD-FMK and then measured the levels of
mitochondria-associated RIPK3. As expected, in Mφ infected with
avirulent H37Ra pro-caspase 8 ( ) and
both apoptosis-executor caspases 9 and 3 were not activated in the presence of
z-IETD-FMK ( ) confirming an
essential role for the caspases 8, 9 and 3 in apoptosis of
Mtb-infected Mφ. Importantly, in H37Ra-infected
Mφ treated with z-IETD-FMK the levels of mitochondria-associated RIPK3,
Bcl-xL, and pro-caspase 8 were all increased to the similar
levels found in Mφ infected with the virulent strain H37Rv ( ) indicating that inhibition of
caspase 8, 9 and 3 - activation is required for the RIPK3-dependent necrotic
pathway to be initiated.
Finally, to test whether RIPK3 is also required for regulation of
Bcl-xL-mediated pro-caspase 8-persistence on the mitochondria we
silenced the RIPK3 gene in H37Rv-infected Mφ. At 24 h after infection,
reduction of mitochondrial Bcl-xL-accumulation correlated with
reduced pro-caspase 8-accumulation on the mitochondria ( ) suggesting that proteolytic processing of
pro-caspase 8 initiates apoptosis. Additionally, silencing of the RIPK3 gene
leads to caspase 3-activation, which is a key indicator of apoptosis ( ). In contrast to H37Rv infection,
apoptosis was significantly increased in H37Ra-infected Mφ as measured
by caspase 8 and 3 activation ( ) as well as increased apoptotic
surface marker ( ). However, presence or absence of RIPK3 had no significant
effect in Mφ infected with H37Ra. Collectively these data indicate that
induction of necrosis in Mtb-infected Mφ is critically
dependent on blocking activation of pro-caspases 8-, 9- and 3- mediated
apoptosis via RIPK3.
To determine whether in H37Ra-infected Mφ caspase 8-activation
is part of the intrinsic mitochondria-dependent apoptotic pathway, which
includes activation of BID to tBID and depends on BAX ( ) we evaluated activation of BID and BAX in
Mφ infected with H37Ra or H37Rv. After 10 min of infection with H37Ra
pro-caspase 8-activation led to activation of BID on the mitochondria to tBID
( , right panel). However, tBID
was not detectable on the mitochondria of H37Rv-infected Mφ ( , left panel). Most importantly,
silencing of the BAX gene in H37Ra-infected Mφ inhibits
apoptosis-executor caspase 3 ( )
indicating that activation of pro-caspase 8 on the mitochondria is initiated by
the intrinsic apoptotic pathway via BAX translocation, which is part of the
mitochondrial amplification loop of apoptosis and triggers degradation of RIPK3
from the mitochondria.

## RIPK3 mediates hexokinase II translocation to the mitochondria via
Bcl-xL in H37Rv-infected Mφ
As RIPK3 regulates ROS production following TNF-α treatment and
because ROS play an important role in regulation of cell death programs ( ), we next studied whether necrosis in
Mtb infected Mφ is ROS-dependent. We found that ROS
accumulation in Mφ infected with virulent H37Rv is significantly
increased in comparison to Mφ infected with the avirulent strain H37Ra
( ) and that RIPK3 is required
to increase ROS accumulation in H37Rv-infected Mφ because silencing of
the RIPK3 gene significantly reduced ROS production ( ). This increased production of ROS was
independent of mitochondrial mass as there was no difference in fluorescence
emission between the groups using MitoTracker Red FM, which is ROS-insensitive
(data not shown). Increased ROS accumulation triggers necrosis in H37Rv-infected
Mφ because scavenging of ROS with Tiron significantly reduces necrosis
( ). As hexokinase II (HKII) is
the limiting enzyme of glucose metabolism on the mitochondria and is essential
for mitochondrial energy production ( ),
we next focused on HKII to determine whether it contributes to ROS accumulation.
HKII binds to the voltage dependent anion channel (VDAC) in the mitochondrial
outer membrane. We first investigated whether HKII is required for ROS
accumulation. Kinetic studies of HKII-translocation to the mitochondria indicate
that the levels of HKII were significantly increased and maintained on the
mitochondria of H37Rv-infected Mφ compared to H37Ra-infected Mφ
( ). Increased binding of HKII
to mitochondria in Mφ infected with virulent H37Rv correlated with
enhanced ROS production, which was reduced after HKII gene silencing ( ). As NADH accumulation is required
for ROS production in a HKII-dependent manner ( ), NADH levels were diminished after silencing of the HKII gene
and the RIPK3 gene ( ). Further, NADH oxidase inhibitor
Diphenyleneiodonium (DPI) abolished ROS production that reduces necrosis in
H37Rv infected Mφ ( ). Interestingly, in H37Rv-infected Mφ, silencing of the
Bcl-xL gene diminished HKII recruitment to the mitochondria at
24h post infection ( ), while
silencing of the RIPK3 gene prevented HKII recruitment to the mitochondria as
early as 6h post infection that persisted up to 24h post infection ( ), which is an indication of a
potentially differential role for RIPK3 and Bcl-xL in HKII
recruitment. Collectively, these data indicate that in Mφ infected with
virulent Mtb, RIPK3 mediates HKII translocation to the
mitochondria via Bcl-xL and RIPK3 that leads to increased ROS
production.

## RIPK3 mediates MPT in Mφ infected with H37Rv
Increased mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT), a sign of
mitochondrial damage, induces pyridine nucleotide release from the mitochondria
( ), which causes decreases in
mitochondrial respiration and in cellular ATP-levels and leads to necrotic cell
death ( ). MPT increases electron
leakage predominantly from mitochondrial complex I and III and enhances ROS
production in the presence of sufficient NADH ( ). We have previously shown that virulent Mtb
induce MPT-dependent necrosis and that cyclosporin A (CsA), a selective
inhibitor of the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity of cyclophilin D
(CypD), blocks MPT mediated necrosis ( ,
 , ). The critical role of CypD in necrosis was demonstrated in
Ppif null mice, which lack the gene encoding CypD, as these
mice were protected against necrosis ( , ). Thus we were
wondering whether there is a link between RIPK3, CypD, and MPT in
Mtb-infected Mφ. We first showed that silencing of
the RIPK3 gene blocks H37Rv-induced MPT in Mφ after 48 and 72h
post-infection ( ). As we showed
that induction of MPT by RIPK3 is required for initiation of necrosis, we next
sought to determine how virulent Mtb initiates MPT. In
H37Rv-infected Mφ treatment with CsA inhibits ROS accumulation ( ) and necrosis ( ). CsA inhibits the interaction of CypD with
ANT in the inner mitochondrial membrane, which correlates with a block of MPT by
closing the permeability transition pore (PTP) ( ). We also found that in CsA-treated Mφ infected with
H37Rv, the levels of mitochondrial RIPK3, pro-caspase 8, Bcl-xL, and
HKII were diminished ( ). These
data correlate with a lack of CypD-binding to ANT in the mitochondria of
H37Ra-infected Mφ in comparison to H37Rv-infected Mφ ( ). Moreover, immunoprecipitation of
ANT from the mitochondria of H37Rv infected Mφ treated with CsA showed
that CypD binding to ANT was significantly decreased in comparison to
mitochondria of H37Rv infected Mφ in absence of CsA ( ). These data suggest that RIPK3 acts as a
regulator of CypD function to induce MPT leading to inhibition of ATP generation
and contributing to necrosis. To test whether RIPK3 causes MPT by initiating
CypD - binding to ANT and MPT- pore opening, we silenced RIPK3 in H37Rv-infected
Mφ and assessed the interaction of CypD with ANT. In the absence of
RIPK3 in H37Rv-infected Mφ the CypD/ANT interaction was diminished
( ), which correlated with the
reduction of MPT ( ).
Thus RIPK3 induces necrosis in H37Rv-infected Mφ, by at least
two independent, but interrelated mechanisms: 1) RIPK3 increases
Bcl-xL-dependent HKII recruitment to the mitochondria possibly
leading to enhanced glucose consumption and increased NADH accumulation and
increase of ROS generation; and 2) RIPK3 induces MPT in a CypD dependent manner,
which in presence of abundant NADH boosts accumulation of ROS by uncoupling of
the mitochondrial electron chain.

## RIPK3 deficient Mφ mediate resistance to pulmonary
Mtb infection
To translate our in vitro observation to in
vivo, we have utilized two in vivo models of
Mtb infection. In the first model, mice were
intravascularly infected with the high dose of H37Rv (1×106
CFU) and after 4 weeks of infection, there was a significant reduction in the
pulmonary bacterial burden of RIPK3−/− compared to WT
mice ( ). Interestingly, the number
of neutrophils (cellular marker of necrotic lung tissues) was significantly
reduced in Mtb infected RIPK3−/−
mice ( and ). However,
with the exception of TNFα, which was significantly reduced in
RIPK3−/− mice, the expression levels of other
cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-6, and IL12 were not markedly changed
( ). We next infected WT and
RIPK3−/− mice with a low dose (~50 CFU) of the
virulent strain H37Rv. After 5 weeks of infection,
RIPK3−/− mice had significantly lower lung
bacterial burden (~half log) in comparison to WT mice ( ). Considering the important role of T cells
in protection against Mtb infection, we next examined the
potential contribution of T cell mediated immunity in protection of
RIPK3−/− mice. Similar to other studies ( , ), we also found that the presence or absence of RIPK3 had no
effect on T cell proliferation in vitro ( ). At 5
weeks post-Mtb infection there was no significant difference in
frequency of pulmonary CD4+/CD8+ T cells ( ) as well as TB10.4-specific CD8+ T
cells ( ) or ESAT6-specific
CD4+ T cells between WT and RIPK3−/− mice
( ). Moreover, there was no
difference in total cell numbers of T cells or antigen-specific T cells ( ). Furthermore, ELISPOT experiments revealed that the
function of T cells was intact as they produced similar levels of IFN-γ
following stimulation with Mtb-antigens recognized by either
CD4+ or CD8+ T cells ( ). Thus
these data indicate that the function of T cells was not affected by RIPK3 and
the increased protection of RIPK3−/− mice after
Mtb infection was independent of T cell mediated
immunity.
To directly evaluate the protective role of RIPK3 in Mφ innate
immunity in the absence of any contribution from adaptive immune responses, we
utilized our established model of the adoptive transfer of
Mtb-infected Mφ ( , , ). We infected WT and
RIPK3−/− murine alveolar Mφ in
vitro with a low dose of the virulent strain H37Rv (MOI~1), then
transferred the cells by the intratracheal route into recipient mice deficient
in recombinase-activating gene 1
(Rag1−/−) mice. The number of
bacteria in WT and RIPK3−/− alveolar Mφ was
identical prior to transfer ( ). However, four weeks after adoptive
transfer, the pulmonary bacterial burden was significantly lower in
Rag1−/− mice that received
Mtb-infected RIPK3−/− Mφ
than in the recipients of Mtb-infected WT Mφ ( ). This experiment demonstrates that
transfer of infected RIPK3−/− Mφ, which are
resistant to necrosis restrict bacterial replication independent of adaptive
immunity in vivo. Thus RIPK3 plays an important role in early
Mφ immunity and protection against Mtb infection.

## DISCUSSION
Mtb hijacks Mφ cell death pathways to maintain an
environment for propagation within the host. We and others have previously
demonstrated that Mtb actively inhibits apoptosis, which plays a
protective role in both innate and adaptive immunity to Mtb
infection ( ). By inducing necrosis,
virulent Mtb is able to exit the Mφ and therefore escape
the Mφ’s anti-mycobacterial defense mechanisms ( ). Although we have shown that Mtb
induces necrosis by targeting the mitochondrial inner membrane ( , , ) and the plasma membrane repair mechanisms
( ), the molecular mechanisms involved in
necrosis remain largely unknown. Here we have extended these studies and show that
Bcl-xL and RIPK3 are involved in triggering Mφ programmed
necrosis during infection with virulent Mtb.
Recently a novel form of necrosis, necroptosis, was described, which depends
on the action of a cytosolic complex containing RIPK1 and RIPK3. Formation of this
complex is inhibited by the RIPK1 inhibitor necrostatin-1 ( ). However, similar to another infection model ( ), we found no effect of RIPK1 on necrosis
either by using necrostatin-1 or silencing RIPK1 (data not shown). As necroptosis
seems to be independent of the mitochondria and is a rapid early event ( ) the mechanisms involved in the
Mtb-induced necrosis, which develops slowly and reaches its
maximum between 72 – 96 h after infection, might be different from classical
necroptosis. Interestingly, a recent study suggests that induction of necroptosis by
RIPK3 requires inactivation of caspase-8 ( ). Similarly, our findings indicate that caspase 8 determines the fate of
Mφ infected with virulent Mtb. Following infection with
Mtb RIPK3 translocates from the cytosol to the mitochondria of
Mφ. Bcl-xL, an inhibitor of BAK ( , ) leading to a block of
caspase 8 activation and to apoptosis ( )
protects RIPK3 from caspase 8-dependent proteolysis ( ). We also found that mitochondrial Bcl-xL protects RIPK3
and pro-caspase 8 on the mitochondria and prevents caspase 8 activation inducing
necrosis in Mtb-infected Mφ. On the other hand in human
lymphoblastoid cell lines caspase 8 was shown to be associated with cardiolipin
rafts on the mitochondria located at contact points of the inner and outer
mitochondrial membranes leading to its activation. Cardiolipin was found to be
responsible for the translocation of caspase 8 to the mitochondria and for caspase 8
activation following death receptor stimulation ( ). Targeting of tBid to the mitochondria and mobilization of
cytochrome c are also cardiolipin dependent indicating their importance in the
transduction of the apoptotic signaling cascades ( ). Although binding of Bcl-xL to caspase 8 was reported
earlier ( ), we failed to find any binding
of Bcl-xL to pro-caspase 8 (data not shown).
Consistent with these studies we found that in Mφ infected with an
avirulent strain of Mtb, H37Ra, pro-caspase 8 is proteolytically
processed, which not only correlates with activation of the effector caspases 9 and
3 leading to apoptosis, but also with preventing necrosis by inactivation of RIPK3.
We currently do not know the exact mechanism of mitochondrial caspase 8 activation
in Mφ infected with an avirulent strain of Mtb.
Interestingly, Niture and colleagues ( )
have reported that the levels of Bcl-xL on the mitochondria are regulated
by a member of the phosphoglycerate mutase family 5 (PGAM5), which forms a bridge
between Bcl-xL and Kelch-like ECH-associated protein-1 (a sensor of
chemical and radiation-induced stress) and targets Bcl-xL degradation by
activating an E3 ubiquitin ligase. The involvement of this or additional mechanisms
in Bcl-xL-degradation or the role of signaling platforms such as
cardiolipin that promotes mitochondria-dependent caspase 8 activation remains to be
determined. Additionally, it is currently unclear whether Bcl-xL is the
only anti-apoptotic component on the mitochondria involved in this mechanism. It is
likely that other Bcl-2 family members including Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 ( , ) may also
contribute to RIPK3 mediated caspase 8 - inactivation in mitochondria leading to the
induction of necrosis.
The mitochondria are a major source of energy and ROS production, and
disruption of mitochondrial function significantly contributes to ROS generation as
well as to cell death. For example, blocking ROS accumulation in L929 cells prevents
necrosis ( ). Our results indicate that in
Mφ infected with virulent Mtb, increased ROS accumulation
contributing to induction of necrosis. Virulent Mtb induces
necrosis by several mechanisms including inhibition of ATP production, e.g. due to
blocking of mitochondrial ADP transport by ANT ( ), sustained JNK activation ( ) and release of toxic proteins from the permeable mitochondria ( ).
In cells with increased glucose consumption, NADH levels are drastically
increased, which can result in increased accumulation of ROS ( ). Our results indicate that in H37Rv-infected
Mφ increased ROS accumulation requires activation of two independent
mechanisms associated with mitochondria. First, the generation of sufficient amounts
of electron donors and increased HKII levels on the mitochondria lead to enhanced
production of glucose-6-phosphate, the rate-limiting step of glycolysis ( ). HKII is predominantly associated with VDAC
on the mitochondria and couples oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis essential
for ROS production. Thus reduction of mitochondrial HKII down-regulates glycolysis
as well as ROS generation. Interestingly, similar to H37Rv-infected Mφ, HKII
is highly up-regulated on the mitochondria of many tumors, which leads to increased
aerobic glycolysis known as the Warburg effect ( ). Second, RIPK3 induces MPT, which interrupts the electron chain in
mitochondrial complex I leading to electron-leakage and allows molecules with a size
up to ~1.5 kDa to exit the mitochondrial matrix. MPT is part of a cellular suicide
mechanism and its contribution to pathophysiology of several diseases including
heart injury ( ) is well documented.
Although it was proposed that induction of MPT is a mechanism, by which aging
mitochondria are earmarked for removal, there is no evidence of this mechanism in
studies using CypD knockout mice ( ). Thus
the role of MPT under physiological conditions is still unclear. In contrast, under
certain pathological conditions including Mφ infection with virulent
Mtb, MPT triggers induction of necrosis, which is essential for
the release of the bacilli from the host cell ensuring the vicious cycle of
infection. Here we have identified two different complementary mechanisms, MPT and
HKII accumulation, which act in concert to increase ROS accumulation triggering a
necrotic cell death program in Mtb-infected Mφ ( ).
How does RIPK3 induce MPT? Increased HKII binding to VDAC on the outer
mitochondrial membrane induced by virulent Mtb not only increases
generation of glucose-6-phosphate but also enhances CypD binding to the ANT ( ) in the inner mitochondrial membrane, which
opens the permeability transition pore causing MPT. The proline isomerase CypD, a
target for CsA, is essential for induction of MPT ( ). CypD keeps the MPT pore in the mitochondrial inner membrane in the
“open” position by binding to ANT ( ). We confirm here CypD-binding to ANT in virulent
Mtb-infected-Mφ undergoing MPT and demonstrate that
RIPK3 is required for binding of CypD to ANT to initiate ROS mediated necrosis.
Considering that several components of MPT are kinase substrates ( ) it is tempting to speculate that RIPK3 may
phosphorylate some components involved in MPT to disrupt their functions generating
increased levels of ROS.
RIPK3−/− mice were more resistant than WT mice in
both the low-dose aerosol and high-dose intravascular models of Mtb
infections. In addition, we observed significant decrease in the total number of
neutrophils in the lungs of Mtb infected
RIPK3−/− mice. Reduced number of neutrophils further
support the notion of less necrosis in RIPK3−/−
Mtb infected animals. However, this protection was mainly dependent
on Mφ immunity, considering that there were no qualitative or quantitative
differences in T cell mediated immunity between Mtb-infected
RIPK3−/− or WT mice. Additionally, Mφ
transfer experiments directly demonstrate that the fate of
Mtb-infected Mφ was the key determinant of the relative
resistance of these mice. Interestingly, a recent study by Albert’s group
has elegantly shown that RIPK3-mediated necroptosis is more effective in
cross-priming T cells than apoptosis ( ).
However, we speculate that during Mtb infection the host
potentially may compensate for the lack of necrosis-dependent T cell mediated
immunity via apoptosis to maintain an adequate T cell response to
Mtb infection ( – ). The links between
apoptotic/necrotic Mφ, DC, and T cell immunity in the control of
Mtb infection certainly requires further investigation.
The dramatic differences in behavior of avirulent versus virulent strains of
Mtb in induction of apoptosis and necrosis, respectively,
suggest the involvement of a specific pathogen-encoded inducer of RIPK3-dependent
necrosis, which needs to be elucidated. Several virulent strains of
Mtb encode specific genes, such as the nuoG gene, which
actively inhibits the apoptotic death pathway in Mφ ( ). The nuoG gene of Mtb encodes the
type I NADH dehydrogenase of Mtb, which neutralizes NOX-2 dependent
ROS production in the Mφ required for induction of apoptosis ( ). It will be interesting to know whether the
nuoG gene or other genes are involved in RIPK3-dependent necrosis.
There are several differences between our study and other previous published
data using various cell lines including HeLa, 293A, L929, and 3T3-cells ( , ,
 , ). We envision that these differences are mainly due to using cell
lines and soluble ligands versus primary Mφ and live-replicating bacteria.
For instance, addition of caspase inhibitors to L929 cells induces necrosis due to
autocrine production of TNF in the absence of active pro-apoptotic caspases ( ). In contrast, addition of caspase
inhibitors to primary human Mφ in the absence of Mtb
infection does not induce necrosis as autocrine TNF-production is minimal indicating
that the pathways leading to necrosis in certain cell lines and in primary
Mφ are significantly different.
Despite the world - wide application of BCG vaccination and other
anti-Mtb interventions, Mtb remains one of the
most successful human pathogens. More than 2 billion persons carry latent
tuberculosis infection, and approximately 20 million persons have currently active
tuberculosis, of which 2 million people die every year. ( ). The success of this pathogen is closely linked to
its ability to alter the intracellular environment of Mφ including induction
of cell death. Thus dissecting the molecular mechanisms involving mitochondria as
entities, which determine whether Mtb-infected Mφ undergo
apoptosis or necrosis is of significant importance in identifying the outcome of
host immunity to Mtb infection and might pave the road to
inhibiting the necrotic death program as a novel therapy.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Materials
Anti-caspase 8 (551242), and anti-RIP1 (551042) antibodies were from BD
Biosciences. Anti-caspase 8 (52183, for immunofluorescence), anti-RIPK3 (56164),
and anti-adenine nucleotide translocase (ANT, 109864) antibodies were from
Abcam. Anti-CypD (AP1035) antibody was from Calbiochem. Anti-hexokinase II
(2106), anti-BAX (2772), anti-Bcl-xL (2762), anti-caspase 3 (9662),
anti-caspase 9 (9502), anti-BID (2002), anti-GAPDH (2118), and anti-caspase 8
(Asp387, 14071, for flowcytometry) were from Cell Signaling Technology.
Anti-VDAC (SP5361P) antibody was from Acris Antibodies. Active caspase 3 for
flowcytometry was from BD. Anti-human mitochondria antibody (HMS-0100) was from
Immunovision. Dylight 650-conjugated Donkey anti-rabbit IgG antibody and Alexa
fluro 488-conjugated Donkey anti-human IgG antibody were from Jackson Immuno
Research Laboratory. The selective caspase 8 inhibitor z-IETD-FMK (FMK007) was
from R&D Systems. Gammabind protein G sepharose (17-0885-01) was from GE
Health Care. Cyclosporin A (30024), Tiron (89460) and Protease Inhibitor
Cocktail (P2714) from Calbiochem and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 1 (P2850)
was from SIGMA-ALDRICH. Mitochondria/Cytosol Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher
Scientific Mitochondrial Isolation kit #89874) and MitoTracker Red
CMXRos (M7512), MitoTracker Red CM-H2XRos (M7513), and LIVE/DEAD
Fixable Dead Cell Stain Kits (MP34955) from Invitrogen.

## In vivo M. tuberculosis infection
Six to ten week old C57BL/6 or
Rag1−/− mice were obtained from
Jackson Labs (Bar Harbor, ME);
RIPK3−/− mice were obtained from
Genentech. Mice were infected with virulent M. tuberculosis
(H37Rv) via the aerosol route using a nose-only exposure unit and received
approximately 50–100 CFU/mouse ( ) or intratracheally (0.5 × 106 CFU) or
intravenously (1×106 CFU)3. Mice were euthanized
by CO2 inhalation and the lung, spleen, and lymph node were
aseptically removed, minced, and pressed through 70-μl cell strainer
followed by red blood cell lysis to obtain single cell suspension.
Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed with PBS in mice infected intratracheally
( ) ( ).

## Adoptive transfer models of infection
Alveolar Mφ were collected from the BAL of naive WT and
RIPK3−/− mice and were
immediately suspended at a concentration 0.5 × 106 cells/500
μl RPMI medium with 10% FCS and infected in suspension using
virulent H37Rv (MOI ~ 1) for 30 minutes. Free bacteria were then removed by 6
washes with cold PBS, each time followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 1000
RPMI at 4°C. Cells were resuspended in PBS at 0.5 ×
106/40 μl and transferred by the intratracheal route into
naive C57BL/6 mice ( ) ( ).

## CFU determination
Following infection, mice were euthanized and their lungs removed and
individually homogenized in 0.9% NaCl-0.02% Tween 80 with a
Mini-Bead-Beater-8 (BioSpec Products). Viable bacteria were enumerated by
plating 10-fold serial dilutions of organ homogenates onto 7H11 agar plates
(Remel). Colonies were counted after 3 weeks of incubation at 37°C.

## Bacteria
The virulent Mtb strain H37Rv and attenuated stain
H37Ra (American Type Culture) were grown in Middlebrook 7h9 broth (BD
Biosiences) with BBL Middlebrook OADC Enrichment (Becton Dickson) and
0.05% (vol/vol) Tween 80 (Difco). Aliquots were distributed into small
tubes and stored at −80 °C. 100μl of the aliquot was
serially diluted 10-fold with 0.02% Tween 80 in PBS and plated on 7H11
agar plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific Remel Products, Lenexa, KS, USA). The
bacterial concentration of each batch was determined by colony counting after
4-weeks.

## Cells and cell culture
Human mononuclear leukocytes from buffy coat preparations (Research
Blood Component, Boston) were cultured for 7 days in Iscove’s modified
Dulbecco’s medium (IMDM) containing 10% (vol/vol) human AB serum
(Gemini bio-Products) at a density of 2.0×106 cells per ml in
six-well plates and 2.0×107 cells per ml in 10 cm plate, and
then were changed to IMDM with 2% (vol/vol) human AB serum 1 day before
challenged with varying MOI of Mtb. Bone marrow from 8- to
10-week-old mice was harvested from femurs and differentiated into Mφ
for 7 days in RPMI-1640 (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% L929 cell
(ATCC)-conditioned medium, 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine and 1 mM sodium
pyruvate, 1% essential and non-essential amino acids (Invitrogen), 100
U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin.

## In vitro infection
Adherent human Mφ were infected with H37Rv or H37Ra at different
MOIs. After 4h the Mφ were washed 3 times with HBSS to remove
non-adherent bacilli and replaced with fresh IMDM with 2% AB. Adherent
murine Mφ were infected with H37Rv at different MOIs. After 4h the
Mφ were washed 3 times with warm PBS to remove non-adherent bacilli and
replaced with fresh media containing FBS.

## FACS analysis
Cells were stained as previously described using antibodies specific for
mouse CD3, CD4, CD8, and CD19 (BD Biosciences) Ly6G, Ly6c, CD11b, F4/80, CD11c
(ebioscience) ( ). Antigen-specific
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were identified using
IAbESAT61–20 and
H2-KbTB10.44–11 tetramers, respectively
(National Institutes of Health Tetramer Core Facility, Emory University Vaccine
Centre, Atlanta, GA). Cleaved Caspase 8 Staining was performed in WT and
RIPK3−/− Mϕ. Cells were washed, collected and suspended
in formaldehyde to obtain a final concentration of 4% for 30 min at RT.
Cells were permeabilized by adding ice-cold 100% methanol slowly to
pre-chilled cells, while gently vortexing, to a final concentration of
90% methanol by incubating 30 min on ice. Cells were washed by with
buffer and PE-conjugated cleaved caspase 8 Ab was added for 1h at RT. Cell were
then washed and resuspended in buffer to be analyzed by flow cytometer. Flow
cytometry was performed by using a BD LSR-II (BD Biosciences) and FlowJo
analysis software (Tree Star).

## In vitro T Cell Proliferation
CD3+ T cells were purified from spleens of naive WT
and Annex1−/− mice using MACS column
purification procedure by negative selection (Pan T cell kit - MACS Miltylene).
The purity of CD3+ T cells was usually between
92–97%. Purified CD8+ T cells were stained
with 5 M CFSE in PBS containing 0.1% BSA at room temperature. Staining
was stopped after 8 min of incubation by addition of RPMI medium containing
10% FBS. T cells were then cultured with different concentration of
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28. After 3 days, T cell proliferation was measured by
reduction in CFSE expression (CFSElow) using flow cytometry.

## ELISPOT assay
The IFN-γ Elispot assay was conducted according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (R&D Sytems). Briefly, isolated cells
were seeded into a 96-well plate pre-coated with mouse IFN-γ capturing
Abs. Cells were then incubated for 24 h with or without antigenic stimulation.
The plate was developed and the spots were enumerated using a series A
immunospot plate reader, Image Acquisition version 4.0, and Immunospot version
3.2 analysis software (Cellular Technology).

## Isolation of mitochondria from Mφ
Mitochondria were isolated using the Mitochondria/Cytosol Fractionation
Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific Mitochondrial Isolation kit #89874)
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, cells were
washed twice with ice-cold PBS and then 1ml of Isotonic Mitochondrial Buffer
(containing protease inhibitors) was added. Cells were homogenized on ice by
passing through a 25-gauge needle (Becton Dickinson) after detachment from the
culture dish by using a cell scraper. The lysate was centrifuged at 600
× g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove the nuclei, debris and intact
cells. The supernatants were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 30 min at 4
°C. The enriched mitochondrial fraction was washed and lysed in 100
μl of a buffer containing Tris-HCl (50mM, pH7.4), NaCl (150 mM), EDTA (5
mM), Triton X-100 (1%), sodium ortho-vanadate (0.2 mM) and protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) at 4°C and stored at − 80 °C
together with the cytosolic fraction. The purity of the mitochondria was
determined by taking 10 μg of protein from the mitochondrial and
cytosolic fractions and measuring Bcl-xL and GAPDH levels by Western
blotting.

## Silencing of the genes encoding human RIPK3, Bcl-xL, hexokinase
II, MLKL and BAX
The target siRNA sequences for human RIPK3 specific siRNA
(5′-GGAAUGCCUACCAAAAACU-3′), the Bcl-xL siRNA
(5′-GGAGAUGCAGGUAUUGGUG-3′)( ), and for hexokinase II
(5′-CACGAUGAAAUUGAACCUGGU-3′) ( ), MLKL siRNA is a pool of 3 different duplexes
(5′-GGAAUACCGUUUCAGAUGUtt-3′,
3′-ACAUCUGAAACGGUAUUCCtt-5′;
5′-GGAAUAGUGAGGUUCACUUtt-3′,
3′-AAGUGAACCUCACUAUUCCtt-5′;
5′-GAAGGCUGUGAUUCUAAGAtt-3′,
3′-UCUUAGAAUCACAGCCUUCtt-5′) and RIPK3 second siRNA pool
(5′-CUGAGUGGCUAAACAAACUtt-3′,
3′-AGUUUGUUUAGCCACUCAtt-5′;
5′-GGAGACAACAACUACUUGtt-3′,
3′-UCAAGUAGUUGUUGUCUCCtt-5′;
5′-CUCCAAGAGUUACGAGUUtt-3′,
3′-UAACUCGUAACUCUUGGAGtt-5′ were generated by IDT. Human
BAX-specific siRNA (#6321) was from Cell Signaling Technology.
Mφ were cultured in IMDM with 10% (vol/vol) human AB serum and
in IMDM with 2% human AB serum 1 d before transfection. All siRNA was
transfected at 37 °C into the cells at a final concentration of 50 nM
with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (13778-150, Invitrogen). Mφ were infected
with Mtb 48–72 h after transfection.

## Immunoblot analysis
Protein was measured with the Bradford assay. Samples (5 μg)
were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and protein was transferred to a PVDF membrane at
4 °C. The membrane was blocked with 5 % dried milk in Tris HCl
buffer (10 mM), pH 8.0 containing NaCl (150 mM) and Tween 20 (0.5%) and
was incubated with the appropriate primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C.
After three washes blots were incubated with the corresponding HRP-conjugated
secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Enhanced chemiluminescence
reagent was added and the blots were exposed to Denville Hyblot CL film. Western
input of Mφ infected with H37Rv for RIPK3, RIPK1, procaspase8, and
loading control (actin and VDAC) is incorporated in .

## Co-immunoprecipitation
After centrifugation at 18 000 × g for 30 min the Mφ
lysates were immunoprecipitated overnight with immobilized monoclonal antibody
under gentle rotation at 4 °C. 50 μl of protein G beads - slurry
(50%) was added to the sample and the mixture incubated for another 1 h
at 4 °C. To remove non-specific bound material the beads were washed
with lysis buffer 3 times. The beads were then gently mixed with lysis buffer,
centrifuged at 4 °C and the supernatant removed. Twenty μl of
SDS-sample buffer was added to the samples and the samples were then loaded on
SDS-PAGE gels after boiling.

## Assessment of MPT
MPT was measured as described ( ). Briefly, human Mφ were cultured at a density of 1.5
× 106 mononuclear cells per well with 2 ml medium containing
IMDM with 2% AB serum in 6-well cluster plates (Corning Glass). After 7
days cells were pre-loaded with 1.5 nM DiOC6( ) in IMDM for 20 min at 37 °C, washed, and
incubated at 37°C for 10 min in medium containing 15 μg/ml
digitonin, washed, and fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde for 1 h at r t.
Mφ were then dislodged with a rubber policeman, washed with PBS and
resuspended in PBS with 1% (wt/vol) BSA. A FACSort flow cytometer (BD
Biosciences) was used for flow cytometry.

## Assay for apoptosis
Apoptosis was measured by determining caspase 3-activation using Western
blotting and flow cytometry because the caspases 3/10 are the direct
executioners of pro-apoptotic pathways. Apoptosis was also determined by flow
cytometry with Annexin V staining. Briefly, RIPK3−/−
Mϕ were infected with H37Ra (MOI 5) for 4h followed by washing and
incubation for 96h in BMDM media. Cells were harvested and incubated with
Annexin V dye in buffer recommended by manufacturer for 30 min. Mϕ were
resuspended with 7AAD for dead cell staining and acquired using flowcytometer
within 1h.

## Assay for necrosis
Mφ necrosis was evaluated in vitro and
in vivo by flow cytometry with the LIVE/DEAD fixable Dead
Cell Stain kit (Invitrogen, L34955) according to the instructions of the
manufacturer. Briefly, adherent infected and uninfected human Mφ (1.5
× 105 per well) were washed, 0.5 ml of 1% of
reconstituted fixable violet fluorescent reactive dye was added and the mixture
incubated at room temperature for 30 min in dark. Mφ were washed and
fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 1 h at room temperature. Mφ
were dislodged with a rubber policeman, washed and resuspended in PBS with
1% BSA. A FACSort flow cytometer was used for flow cytometry. In some
experiments necrosis was measured with cell death detection ELISAPLUS
photometric enzyme immunoassay (11 920685 001; Roche Applied Science).

## ROS assay
ROS accumulation was measured by using reduced rosamine-Mitotracker
probes (Invitrogen, M7513). Adherent Mφ were washed with IMDM medium,
stained with 200 nM Mitotracker Red CM-H2XRos in IMDM without serum
at 37° C for 30 min. Then the medium was removed, and the cells were
washed and fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 1 hour at room
temperature. After fixation, Mφ were washed and re-suspended in 0.5 ml
PBS with 1% BSA. Fluorescence intensity of ROS was measured using a flow
cytometer. To control for possible changes in the mitochondrial mass under the
different conditions the cells were tested with the ROS-insensitive mitotracker
dye red FM (Invitrogen). No differences in in fluorescence emission were seen
indicating that the mitochondrial mass was not different in the Mφ
subjected to the different experimental conditions.

## NADH determination
NADH in Mφ extracts was measured with the NAD+/NADH
Quantification Colorimetric Kit from BioVision according to the recommendation
of the manufacturer.

## Immunostaining and confocal microscopy
Mφ were cultured on poly-D lysine-coated cover slips in 24-well
plates at a density of 1.5 × 105 cells/well and were infected
for 24 h with mCherry labeled H37Rv. Mφ were then fixed for 1 h with
4% paraformaldehyde and blocked over night at 4 °C with PBS
containing 10% horse serum. Cover slips were incubated for 2h at room
temperature with anti-mitochondria, anti-caspase 8 or anti-RIPK3 (dilution,
1:100) ab. Mφ were then washed and stained for 1h at room temperature
with fluorescent secondary ab. Mφ were mounted and then subjected to
confocal and transmission light microscopy. Microscope images were acquired at
the Brigham and Women’s Confocal Core Facility with a Nikon TE2000-U
inverted microscope, Nikon C1 Plus confocal system, 60 × Nikon Plan
Apochromat objective, 10-mW Spectra Physics 488-nm argon laser, Melles Griot Red
HeNe 543-nm laser, Chroma 515-nm/30-nm and 543-nm emission filters and a
30-μm pinhole. Images were acquired under identical exposure conditions
and micrographs were compiled and analyzed with Nikon EZ-C1 v3.8 and Adobe
Photoshop v10.0.1. Colocalization of RIPK3 and pro-caspase 8 on the mitochondria
was quantified using Metamorph. Each channel (R, G, B) was considered separately
with each pixel assigned an intensity value (0–255) with care taken to
assure that no pixel was oversaturated in any image used for quantification. The
lower threshold is set whereby areas of the image without staining are excluded.
The software then calculates that area of caspase 8 or RIPK3 with mitotracker
and reports it in terms of percent positive cells. Quantification was done on
100–200 cells for every condition, and representative images are shown
from at least three independent experiments.

## Quantitative real time PCR
Total RNA was isolated with Trizol reagent from lungs of
Mtb infected animals. RNA was quantified with the help of a
NanoDrop spectrophotometer. The A260/A280 ratio of all samples was in the range
of 1.90 to 2.00. DNA contamination from RNA samples was removed by amplification
grade DNase (Abm according to manufacturer’s instructions). Briefly, RNA
samples (1μg) were incubated with DNase (1U) for 15 min in the reaction
buffer. After the incubation, DNase activity was terminated by stop solution.
Further, the samples were heated to 70°C for 10 min to inactivate DNase
activity. Real time PCR was performed using SYBR Green Master Mix Kit. Melting
curve analysis was performed to eliminate the possibility of non-specific
amplification. Results are represented in the arbitrary units. Analysis was done
by comparative Ct method, where Ct values were normalized against the
house-keeping control GAPDH.

## Statistics
Results are expressed as mean ± SD or SEM. The data were
analyzed by using Microsoft Excel Statistical Software (Jandel, San Rafael, CA)
using the t test for normally distributed data with equal variances. In some
experiments, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s
posttest or with Bonferroni’s posttest was performed using Prism version
5 for Windows (Graph-Pad Software).

## Ethics Statement
All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with Canadian
Council on Animal Care guidelines. The animal used protocol was approved by the
McGill Animal Care Committee (protocol number: 2010–5860).

## Supplementary Material

We are grateful to V. W. Hsu, E. Remold-O’Donnell and C. Geadas for helpful
discussions and Nancy Kedersha for supplying anti-mitochondrial antibody. This study
was supported by the US National Institute of Health Grant AI50216 to H.G.R. and the
Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR) Foundation Grant (FDN-333189) to
M.D.
 

## AUTHOR SUMMARY
Despite the world-wide application of BCG vaccination and other
anti–Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
interventions, Mtb remains one of the most successful human
pathogens. Approximately two million people die of tuberculosis annually and eight
to ten million new cases of active tuberculosis occur each year due to the large
reservoir of asymptomatic people chronically infected with Mtb. The
success of this pathogen is closely linked to its ability to alter the intracellular
environment of the alveolar macrophage (Mφ) including cell death programs.
Virulent Mtb escapes the hostile milieu of the host Mφ by
inducing necrosis, a type of cell death that favors
Mtb survival and facilitates bacillary spread into the
surrounding tissue for a new cycle of infection and dissemination. Additionally,
virulent Mtb actively inhibits
apoptosis, an alternate form of Mφ death
beneficial to the host, by killing intracellular bacilli and enhancing adaptive
immunity. In the current study we show that virulent Mtb induces
necrosis by involving receptor interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3) and the
Bcl-family member Bcl-xL, which prevents caspase 8 mediated apoptosis. We
furthermore demonstrate that inhibition of RIPK3 activity significantly enhances
immunity to Mtb infection. Thus dissecting the molecular mechanisms
involving Mtb-infected Mφ death modality is of significant
importance in identifying the outcome of host immunity to Mtb
infection and may lead to the development of novel therapies for this devastating
disease.