J Smooth Muscle ResJ Smooth Muscle Res3118jsmr9211664JSMRJournal of Smooth Muscle Research0916-87371884-8796Japan Society of Smooth Muscle ResearchPMC6997890PMC6997890.1699789069978903202356710.1540/jsmr.55.8105021Invited ReviewImplications of immune-inflammatory responses in smooth muscle dysfunction
and disease
Usui-KawanishiFumitake TakahashiMasafumi SakaiHiroyasu SutoWataru KaiYuki ChibaYoshihiko HiraishiKeizo KuraharaLin Hai HoriMasatoshi InoueRyuji 1Division of Biopharmaceutical Engineering, Department of
Pharmaceutical Engineering, Toyoma Prefectural University, 5180 Kurokawa, Imizu-shi,
Toyama 939-0398, Japan2Division of Inflammation Research, Center of Molecular
Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 3311-159 Yakushiji, Shimono-shi, Tochigi 329-0498,
Japan3Department of Analytical Pathophysiology, Hoshi University,
2-4-41 Ebara, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8501, Japan4Department of Physiology and Molecular Sciences, Hoshi
University, 2-4-41 Ebara, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8501, Japan5Department of Physiology, Fukuoka University School of
Medicine, 7-45-1 Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan6Department of Cardiovascular Physiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Kagawa University, 1750-1 Ido, Miki-machi, Kida-gun, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan7Department of Veterinary Pharmacology, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8657, JapanCorresponding authors: Fumitake Usui-Kawanishi, Division of Biopharmaceutical
Engineering, Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Toyoma Prefectural University,
Toyama, Japan; Hiroyasu Sakai, Department of Analytical Pathophysiology, Hoshi University;
Yoshihiko Chiba, Department of Physiology and Molecular Sciences, Hoshi University;
Lin-Hai Kurahara, Department of Cardiovascular Physiology, Kagawa University; Ryuji Inoue,
Department of Physiology, Fukuoka University School of Medicine052202020195533155181107188201920122019010120191002202013032026©2019 The Japan Society of Smooth Muscle Research2019https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivatives (by-nc-nd) License. (CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0:

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).In the past few decades, solid evidence has been accumulated for the pivotal significance
of immunoinflammatory processes in the initiation, progression, and exacerbation of many
diseases and disorders. This groundbreaking view came from original works by Ross who
first described that excessive inflammatory-fibroproliferative response to various forms
of insult to the endothelium and smooth muscle of the artery wall is essential for the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis (Ross, Nature 1993; 362(6423): 801–9). It is now widely
recognized that both innate and adaptive immune reactions are avidly involved in the
inflammation-related remodeling of many tissues and organs. When this state persists,
irreversible fibrogenic changes would occur often culminating in fatal insufficiencies of
many vital parenchymal organs such as liver, lung, heart, kidney and intestines. Thus,
inflammatory diseases are becoming the common life-threatening risk for and urgent concern
about the public health in developed countries (Wynn et al., Nature Medicine 2012; 18(7):
1028–40). Considering this timeliness, we organized a special symposium entitled
“Implications of immune/inflammatory responses in smooth muscle dysfunction and disease”
in the 58th annual meeting of the Japan Society of Smooth Muscle Research. This symposium
report will provide detailed synopses of topics presented in this symposium; (1) the role
of inflammasome in atherosclerosis and abdominal aortic aneurysms by Fumitake
Usui-Kawanishi and Masafumi Takahashi; (2) Mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of
hyper-contractility of bronchial smooth muscle in allergic asthma by Hiroyasu Sakai,
Wataru Suto, Yuki Kai and Yoshihiko Chiba; (3) Vascular remodeling in pulmonary arterial
hypertension by Keizo Hiraishi, Lin Hai Kurahara and Ryuji Inoue.

atherosclerosisinflammasomebronchial asthmahypersensitivitypulmonary hypertensionpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## (1) The role of inflammasome in atherosclerosis and abdominal aortic aneurysms

## Brief Synopsis
In recent years, much attention has been paid to the fact that chronic inflammation
contributes to lifestyle-related diseases such as hyperlipidemia, obesity, diabetes
mellitus and hypertension. In this study, we attempted to elucidate the role of the NLRP3
inflammasome in the sterile inflammation underlying atherosclerosis and aortic aneurysms.
Our findings suggest that caspase-1 plays critical roles in vascular inflammation and
atherosclerosis. We also show the evidence for the importance of the NLRP3 inflammasome in
initial inflammatory responses in abdominal aortic aneurysms. The NLRP3 inflammasome is
thus expected to be a therapeutic target for the progression of atherosclerosis and
abdominal aortic aneurysms and a good clue to clarifying the mechanism involved
therein.

## Introduction
Recently, the importance of inflammation has been recognized in the pathogenesis of
cardiovascular diseases, such as atherosclerosis, ischemic heart disease and heart failure
( ). The inflammation in these diseases does not
involve infectious agents, thus being called sterile inflammation. However, the molecular
basis for sterile inflammatory responses remains largely unclear. Therefore, we focused on
the innate immune system, in particular, the NLRP3 inflammasome. The NLRP3 inflammasome is
a large multi-protein complex in the cytosol and contains three components, the Nod-like
receptor NLRP3, the adaptor protein ASC and the interleukin (IL)-1β converting enzyme,
caspase-1 (1–3). When the cell senses sterile danger signals such as extracellular ATP,
monosodium urate crystals MSU and hyaluronic acid, these three components assemble to form
the inflammasome. Activation of capase-1 induces processing of IL-1β. Secretion of a
mature form of IL-1β initiates sterile inflammation. Clinical and experimental studies
have shown that IL-1β is important in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis ( , ). Abdominal
aortic aneurysm (AAA) is thought to be a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by
atherosclerotic changes where infiltrating macrophages release matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) that degrade extracellular matrix components including collagen and elastin ( , , ). Therefore, we hypothesized that the NLRP3
inflammasome may be a key mediator of initial inflammation in atherosclerosis and AAA
progression.

## Results and Discussion

## Atherosclerosis
To investigate whether the NLRP3 inflammasome is critical for the development of
atherosclerosis, we used ApoE deficient mice fed with western diet for 12 weeks because
they exhibit severe hypercholesterolemia and are an excellent model for human
atherosclerosis ( ). Sudan IV staining revealed
that atherosclerotic plaque areas in the whole aorta of ApoE and caspase-1 double
deficient mice were significantly decreased compared to mice solely deficient in ApoE.
Cross-sectional staining with Oil Red O and immunohistochemical analyses of aortic roots
also showed that the plaques and infiltration of macrophages were significantly reduced
by caspse-1 deficiency.
To further explore the role of caspase-1, we examined whether calcium phosphate
crystals can activate the inflammasome in macrophages in vitro because
it is known that vascular calcification actively participates in plaque progression and
instability via its actions on macrophages ( ).
Activation of the inflammasome via caspase-1 activation by TCP and MSU crystals was
confirmed by a fluorescent cell permeable probe (FLICA assay) that specifically binds to
activated caspase-1 in J774 macrophages. Similar to MSU crystals, TCP crystals also
stimulated a dose-dependent release of IL-1β. Because lysosomal destabilization and
cathepsin B activation have been shown to mediate the inflammasome activation in
response to cholesterol crystals ( , ), we tested the effects of bafilobycin, an
inhibitor of lysosomal acidification, and CA-074 Me, a specific cathepsin B inhibitor.
Treatment with these inhibitors significantly decreased TCP crystal-induced IL-1β
release. Collectively, our findings suggest that inflammasomes play a critical role in
vascular inflammation and atherosclerosis ( ).

## Abdominal aortic aneurysms
We first investigated inflammatory responses and ASC expression in tissues from human
abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA). ASC expression and inflammatory cell infiltration
(mainly CD68 positive macrophages) were clearly visible in the adventitia. Furthermore,
double-immuno-fluorescence staining revealed the colocalization of ASC with CD68
positive macrophages. These data were suggested the role of the inflammasome in the
process of AAA formation. Next, to further clarify the role of inflammasomes, we infused
ApoE deficient, ApoE and NLRP3 or ASC or caspase-1 double deficient mice either with
vehicle or angiotensin II (AII; 1,000 ng/kg per minute) for 28 days because AII-infused
ApoE deficient mice are widely used to investigate the pathogenesis of an induced
abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) model ( , ). As expected, the systolic blood pressure was
elevated at 28 days after AII infusion. AAA was formed in about 70% of ApoE deficient
mice. In contrast, only 15 to 20% of mice deficient in the inflammasome components
showed AAA formation. The maximal aortic diameter measured from these mice was also
significantly smaller than that in ApoE alone deficient mice. A quantitative RT-PCR
analysis showed that the mRNA levels of inflammatory cytokines (Il1β,
Il6, and Ccl2) and fibrosis factors (Mmp2,
Mmp9, Timp1, Col1a1, and Col3a1) were elevated in the AAA
tissues from ApoE deficient mice, whereas these elevations were lesser in those
deficient in the inflammasome-associated molecules. These findings suggest that the
inflammasome mediates inflammatory and fibrotic responses in the process of AAA
formation. To clarify the role of the inflammasome in AAA development, we assessed the
plasma IL-1β level. The plasma IL-1β level was elevated in ApoE deficient mice after AII
infusion, and this elevation was significantly decreased in the inflammasome component
molecule deficient mice. Interestingly, in an early time course after AII infusion (7
days), the plasma IL-1β level was markedly higher than that at 28 days in the ApoE
deficient mice. This elevation was also completely abrogated in the inflammasome
component molecule deficient mice. Thus, we tried a detailed analysis by using a
short-term 7-day model.
At 7 days after AII infusion, no morphological change was observed in the suprarenal
aortas between ApoE- and Caspase-1-deficient mice. However, interestingly, histological
analysis revealed that disrupted elastic lamellae and intramural hemorrhages were
clearly visualized in the vascular walls of ApoE-deficient mice. These
changes were not observed in caspase-1 deficiency. Messenger RNAs of inflammatory
cytokines and fibrosis factors were elevated in the suprarenal aortae from ApoE
deficient mice, whereas they were decreased in those from caspse-1 deficient mice. These
results suggest that inflammation and degradation of elastic lamina were induced in the
early phase of AAA formation via the inflammasome activation. To investigate the role of
macrophages, vascular smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts in the initiation of AAA
formation, we performed immunohistochemical analysis and found that, in the early phase
of AAA formation, macrophages were mainly accumulated in the adventitia in ApoE
deficient mice. This accumulation was reduced in caspsae-1 deficient mice. In addition,
ASC was highly expressed in adventitial macrophages suggesting the role of the
inflammasome in the initiation of AAA formation. Recently, the generation of
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) has been shown to activate the
inflammasome ( , , ). Therefore, we next determined
whether mtROS was generated in the ApoE deficient mice by using MitoSOX, DHE and
MitoTracker. Accumulation of mtROS was clearly visualized in the adventitia, however,
this was less prominent in caspase-1 deficient mice. This accumulation was further
confirmed by the finding that pretreatment with ROS scavenger Tiron completely
diminished mtROS accumulation. Furthermore, in situ zymography showed
that MMPs activities were increased in the adventitia of ApoE deficient mice, whereas
this increased activity was suppressed in caspase-1 deficient mice. These results
demonstrate that the inflammasome and MMPs were activated in the adventitial macrophages
during the initiation of AAA formation where mitochondrial ROS may mediate the
inflammasome activation.
To further investigate the molecular mechanisms by which AII activates the inflammasome
in macrophages, we used a macrophage cell line J774 and bone marrow-derived macrophages
(BMDMs) in vitro. We first confirmed the expression of the main AII
receptors, AT1R and AT2R, in both types of macrophages. To investigate the inflammasome
activation, we primed the cells with a low dose of lipopolysaccharide to ensure the
induction of pro-IL-1β, as described in previous studies ( , ). AII caused a
dose-dependent release of IL-1β in J774 cells. The ability of AII to stimulate IL-1β
release was also confirmed in BMDMs, which was completely inhibited in those from mice
deficient in inflammasome-associated molecules. Furthermore, the selective AT1R
antagonist losartan, but not the selective AT2R antagonist PD123319, significantly
inhibited AII induced IL-1β release. These findings demonstrate that in macrophages, AII
activates the inflammasome through an AT1R-dependent pathway. Next, we investigated the
possible involvement of mtROS, because mtROS was increased in the adventitial
macrophages in the early phase of AAA formation, we hypothesized that in macrophages,
AII activates the inflammasome via mtROS production. AII clearly induced mtROS
production in a time dependent manner, and this was completely prevented by treatment
with the AT1R inhibitor losartan. These data indicate that AII induces mtROS production
via the AT1R-signaing pathway. To corroborate this idea, we tested the mtROS inhibitors,
Cyclosporin A and MitoTEMPO. These inhibitors significantly inhibited IL-1β release
induced by AII treatment. Further, we determined the involvement of caspase-1 activity
by using the FLICA assay. AII induced caspase-1 activation was inhibited by cyclosporin
A. Finally, we observed that activation of MMP by AII was inhibited by cyclosporin A and
losartan. These results collectively suggest that AII induces mtROS production, which in
turn causes inflammasome activation and then MMP activation ( ).

## Conclusion
The major findings of this study indicate that the NLRP3 inflammasome is an essential
mediator of atherosclerosis and AAA formation, and that this inflammasome activation is
mediated by lysosomal destabilization and mtROS production in the macrophages ( ). Increasing evidence indicates that inflammation is a major contributing factor to
the progression of atherosclerosis and AAA. However, the exact mechanisms underlying
inflammation and its involvement in atherosclerosis and AAA formation remain unknown. The
results of the present study clearly demonstrated direct links of NLRP3 inflammasome
activation to atherosclerosis and AAA progression. Furthermore, our results clarify the
molecular events underlying the inflammation involved in atherosclerosis and AAA formation
and suggest that the NLRP3 inflammasome is a potential novel therapeutic target for
atherosclerosis and AAA progression.

## (2) Mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of hyper-contractility of bronchial smooth
muscle in allergic asthma

## Brief Synopsis
Airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) and inflammation are key pathophysiological features of
asthma. Enhanced contraction of bronchial smooth muscle (BSM) is one of the causes of the
AHR. It is thus important for the development of asthma therapy to understand the change
in the contractile signaling of airway smooth muscle cells associated with the AHR. In
addition to the Ca2+-mediated phosphorylation of myosin light chain (MLC),
contractile agonists also enhance the MLC phosphorylation level to a larger extent than
that caused solely by Ca2+ via inhibition of MLC phosphatase (MLCP) in various
types of smooth muscle including airway smooth muscle. This phenomenon is called
Ca2+ sensitization of contraction. To date, involvements of RhoA/ROCKs and
PKC/Ppp1r14a (also called as CPI-17) pathways in the Ca2+ sensitization have
been identified. Our previous studies revealed that the agonist-induced Ca2+
sensitization of contraction is markedly augmented in BSM of animal models of
allergen-induced AHR. In BSM of these animal models, the expression of RhoA and CPI-17
proteins were significantly increased, indicating that both the Ca2+
sensitizing pathways are augmented. Interestingly, incubation of BSM cells with
asthma-associated cytokines, such as interleukin-13 (IL-13), IL-17, and tumor necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α), caused up-regulations of RhoA and CPI-17 in BSM cells of naive animals
and cultured human BSM cells. In addition to the transcription factors such as STAT6 and
NF-κB activated by these inflammatory cytokines, an involvement of down-regulation of
miR-133a, a microRNA that negatively regulates RhoA translation, has also been suggested
in the IL-13- and IL-17-induced up-regulation of RhoA. Thus, the Ca2+
sensitizing pathways and the cytokine-mediated signaling including microRNAs in BSMs might
be potential targets for treatment of allergic asthma, especially the AHR.
Key words: bronchial asthma, airway hyperresponsiveness, Ca2+
sensitization, RhoA, CPI-17 (Ppp1r14a)

## Introduction
Pathophysiology of allergic asthma is characterized by the combination of airway
hyperresponsiveness (AHR), inflammation, and remodeling ( , , ). The AHR is defined by increased airway narrowing in response to a wide
range of stimuli, and is responsible for recurrent episodes of wheezing and
breathlessness. Enhanced bronchial smooth muscle (BSM) contraction is one of the causes of
AHR. In addition, the AHR correlates with the severity of asthma ( ) and with the amount of treatment needed to control symptoms ( ). The severity of hyperresponsiveness is associated
with severer symptoms and a steeper fall in forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1) ( ).
Allergic asthma is a Th2 lymphocyte-mediated inflammatory airway disease. Cytokines
derived from Th2 lymphocytes play a key role in the pathophysiology of asthma through the
induction of eosinophilic airway inflammation. These lead to variable airway obstruction
and AHR to nonspecific stimuli ( ). The
β-adrenergic drugs are the most potent dilators of BSM currently approved for clinical use
against asthma. Among the β-adrenergic agonists, the individual agents vary in their
rapidity of onset and action duration. Inhaled, short-acting, selective
β2-adrenergic agonists (SABAs) are the mainstay of acute asthma therapy,
whereas inhaled, long-acting, selective β2 adrenergic agonists (LABAs), in
combination with inhaled glucocorticoids, play a role in long-term control of moderate to
severe asthma. Rapid relief from airway limitation in asthmatic patients by SABA
inhalation suggests the involvement of augmented airway smooth muscle contraction in the
airway obstruction. Thus, it is important to understand the changes in the contractile
signaling of airway smooth muscle cells associated with AHR for the development of asthma
therapy. In this review, we will describe the pathophysiological mechanisms of augmented
BSM contraction in AHR.
In addition, it is worthy to mention here that all animal experiments were done according
to the guiding principles for the care and use of laboratory animals approved by the
Animal Care Committee of Hoshi University (Tokyo, Japan).

## Involvement of Augmented Ca2+ Sensitization in BSM Hyper-Contraction in
Allergic Asthma
To elucidate the pathogenesis of allergic bronchial asthma, various animal models have
been used by investigators including us. In an allergic asthma model using rats ( ), that were actively sensitized with
2,4-dinitrophenylated Ascaris suum extract antigen and repeatedly
challenged with aerosolized antigen, a marked augmentation of airway responsiveness to
inhaled acetylcholine (ACh), i.e., the AHR, was observed ( ). In this animal model of asthma, the ACh responsiveness of the isolated BSM was
also enhanced significantly ( ).
Similarly, in a mouse model of allergic asthma in which ovalbumin was used as an antigen,
both the in vivo AHR and the in vitro BSM
hyperresponsiveness have also been shown ( , ). These observations remind us of an idea that the
hyper-contractility of BSM per se is a cause of the AHR. Indeed, the
hyperresponsiveness of airway smooth muscle was also suggested in asthmatics ( ). At least, the BSM hyperresponsiveness to ACh
observed in the antigen-induced AHR animals is not explained simply by changes in its
receptor number: no significant difference in the muscarinic receptor density was observed
between the AHR and control animals ( ).
Furthermore, the ACh-mediated increase in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration measured
using the Fura-2-loaded BSM was within normal level whereas the contraction induced by ACh
was much enhanced in the AHR animals ( ).
We have tried to uncover the mechanism of the BSM hyperresponsiveness in allergic asthma.
 suggest that the agonist-induced
Ca2+ sensitization of contraction may be augmented in BSM of the AHR animals
( ). In BSM that were pre-incubated with ACh
(10−3 M) under Ca2+-free condition (in the presence of
10−6 M nicardipine and 0.05 mM EGTA), addition of Ca2+ induced a
concentration-dependent contraction ( ). The contractile response to Ca2+ of the ACh-stimulated BSM isolated
from the OA-challenged mice was markedly augmented as compared to that from the sensitized
control animals. By contrast, no significant difference in the response to Ca2+
of BSM depolarized with 60 mM K+ (in the absence of nicardipine and presence of
0.05 mM EGTA and 10−6 M atropine) was observed between the groups ( ). These findings suggest that, although the
contraction mediated by Ca2+ itself is not changed, the ACh-mediated
contractile signaling independent of cytosolic Ca2+ concentration, i.e.,
Ca2+ sensitization of contraction, is augmented in BSM of the AHR animals. To
confirm it in more detail, the BSM contractility was also determined by using
α-toxin-permeabilized BSM preparations in mice ( ). Application of free Ca2+ induced a concentration-dependent
reproducible contractile response, indicating successful permeabilization. As shown in
 , when the Ca2+
concentration was clamped at pCa 6.0, application of ACh
(10−5–10−3 M) in the presence of GTP (10−4 M) caused a
further contraction, i.e., ACh-induced Ca2+ sensitization, in an ACh
concentration-dependent manner. The ACh-induced Ca2+ sensitization was
significantly greater in BSM of the AHR mice as compared to those of control animals
( ). Similar results were also obtained
when a rat model of antigen-induced AHR was used ( ). It is thus strongly suggested that the Ca2+ sensitization of
contraction is augmented in BSM of the AHR animals.

## RhoA/ROCK Pathway as a Therapeutic Target of Asthma
Increased bronchial tone plays an important role in the pathophysiology of airway
diseases including asthma. Bronchial tone is mainly regulated by the contraction of BSM
cells (BSMCs). Smooth muscle contraction is mediated by the phosphorylation of the
regulatory myosin light chain (MLC). The MLC phosphorylation level increases when MLC
kinase (MLCK) is activated, whereas the level decreases when MLC phosphatase (MLCP) is
activated ( ). MLCP dephosphorylates MLC, leading
to the smooth muscle relaxation ( ). The MLCP
activity is highly regulated both by contraction and relaxation signaling pathways. A
monomeric GTPase, RhoA, plays a key role in the Ca2+ sensitization of
contraction in smooth muscle. Contractile agonists, such as G protein-coupled receptor
(GPCR) agonists, have an ability to activate RhoA. The precise nature of the activation of
RhoA by GPCR is not yet uncovered but involves guanine nucleotide exchange factors
RhoGEFs, such as p115RhoGEF, PDZ-RhoGEF and LARG ( ). The RhoGEFs activate RhoA by exchanging GDP- to GTP-bound form of RhoA
( ). The activated GTP-bound form of RhoA
activates its downstream ROCKs ( , , ), which in
turn phosphorylates myosin phosphatase targeting protein (MYPT), leading to an inhibition
of MLCP activity ( ). When the MLC phosphatase is
inhibited, the phosphorylated MLC cannot be dephosphorylated, resulting in a promotion of
the contractile state, that is Ca2+ sensitization of smooth muscle
contraction.
As described above, the ACh-induced Ca2+ sensitization was significantly
augmented in BSM of mice with allergic asthma. The augmented Ca2+ sensitization
was sensitive to Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme, an inhibitor of
RhoA, and Y-27632, an inhibitor of ROCK ( , ), indicating that the RhoA/ROCK pathway is involved
in the Ca2+ sensitizing signaling. Interestingly, protein expression of RhoA in
BSM was markedly increased in rat ( : Ref. ( )) and mouse ( : Ref. ( )) models
of allergic asthma. In addition, when BSM was stimulated with contractile GPCR agonists
such as ACh and endothelin-1, a higher expression of active form of RhoA was observed in
the AHR animals ( ). An augmented RhoA-mediated
Ca2+ sensitization in smooth muscle contraction has been reported in
experimental animal models of diseases such as hypertension ( , , ), and coronary ( , , ) and
cerebral ( , , ) vasospasms. Thus, the signaling of
RhoA and its downstream ROCKs are now considered as a therapeutic target of asthma ( , , , ), although
the exact mechanism of up-regulation of RhoA is still unclear.

## Inflammatory Cytokines Upregulate RhoA Expression in BSMs
Pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and tumor necrosis factor-α
(TNF-α) may enhance the inflammatory response in asthma and may be linked to the disease
severity. IL-1β and TNF-α have been shown to play a prominent role in developing airway
responsiveness and airway inflammation in bronchial asthma. Increased amounts of these
cytokines have been detected in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid ( , ), and in the culture
supernatants of alveolar macrophages from asthmatic patients ( , ). Furthermore, it has
been reported that inhaled TNF-α induced airway responsiveness to methacholine in humans
( ). Therefore, we examined the effect of TNF-α
on BSM contraction. Treatment of rat BSM with TNF-α resulted in a significant upward shift
in the dose-response curve to ACh, but not to high K+, compared with control
tissues. The effect of TNF-α was completely blocked by pretreatment with the p42/44 MAPK
inhibitor, U0126, or the protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide, but not with the p38
MAPK inhibitor, SB203580. TNF-α treatment induced the phosphorylation of p42/44 MAPK and
RhoA in the bronchial tissue. Furthermore, the TNF-α-induced upregulation of RhoA was
abolished by U0126 pretreatment ( ).
In addition, cytokines derived from Th2 lymphocytes, including IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-13
and IL-25, play a key role in the pathophysiology of asthma through the induction of
eosinophilic airway inflammation. In the AHR rat model, total IgE in the serum, and IL-4,
IL-6 and IL-13 in the BAL fluid were markedly and significantly increased compared with
the control rats ( ). An increased expression of
IL-4 has been demonstrated in the BAL fluid after segmental allergen challenge to
asthmatic patients ( ). IL-4 promotes eosinophilic
airway inflammation by increasing eotaxin expression and inhibiting eosinophil apoptosis
( ). IL-4 induces mucus hypersecretion ( ), which contributes to airway obstruction.
Interestingly, IL-4 also acts on airway smooth muscles directly, and can cause
hyperresponsiveness of airway smooth muscles ( ).
We thus examined the effect of IL-4 on the expression level of RhoA in human BSMCs
(hBSMCs). Incubation of hBSMCs with IL-4 induced a distinct phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6), a major signal transducer activated
by IL-4, indicating that IL-4 is capable of activating signal transduction in hBSMCs
directly. IL-4 also induced a significant increase in the expression level of RhoA ( ).
There is increasing evidence that IL-13 is also a central mediator of AHR induction
( , , , ). The human IL-13 gene is located on chromosome 5q in a region that has been
linked to asthma ( , ). An increased expression of IL-13 has been demonstrated in BAL
cells obtained from patients with symptomatic asthma ( , ). In addition, overexpression of
IL-13 in mouse airway epithelial cells using the Clara cell 10-kD protein gene promoter
induced AHR to aerosolized methacholine ( ).
Intratracheal instillation of recombinant IL-13 to naive mice also evoked AHR to inhaled
methacholine ( ) and intravenously administered
ACh ( ). To elucidate the role of IL-13 in the
induction of BSM hyperresponsiveness, the effects of IL-13 on both contractility and RhoA
expression in BSM were investigated. In vivo treatment of airways with
IL-13 by intranasal instillation induced a BSM hyperresponsiveness with RhoA upregulation
in BSM of naive mice. Moreover, IL-13 induced RhoA upregulation. The IL-13-induced
upregulation of RhoA was inhibited by leflunomide, a STAT6 inhibitor, in cultured hBSMCs.
( ).
Glucocorticoids are the most effective therapy currently available for the treatment of
allergic bronchial asthma. It is believed that in asthmatic patients glucocorticoids act
primarily as anti-inflammatory agents, that is, inhibition of inflammatory cell
recruitment and inhibition of release of pro-inflammatory mediators such as cytokines
( ). We have reported that systemic treatment
with glucocorticoid inhibited the BSM hypercontraction to the level of the control rats.
Furthermore, glucocorticoids inhibited the RhoA upregulation and augmented ACh-induced
activation of RhoA and phosphorylation of MLC ( ).
Many reports have demonstrated that glucocorticoids inhibited NF-κB activation in human
airway smooth muscle ( , , ). Hence, we investigated
the effect of glucocorticoids on the IL-13 and TNF-α-induced RhoA upregulation in hBSMCs.
The TNF-α augmented promoter activity of rat RhoA was abolished by an IκB
kinase (IKK) inhibitor. This observation suggests that the RhoA upregulation is induced by
TNF-α only via NF-κB, which was inhibited by glucocorticoids. However, the IL-13-augmented
promoter activity of rat RhoA was partly inhibited by STAT6 inhibitor or
IKK inhibitor, and abolished by both inhibitors together. These findings suggest that the
IL-13-induced RhoA upregulation is mediated via activation of both STAT6 and NF-κB. The
inhibitory effects of glucocorticoids on the IL-13-induced RhoA promoter
activity and RhoA upregulation were induced by NF-κB inhibition. Moreover, glucocorticoids
may not be able to inhibit STAT6-induced transcription. ( ). Taken together, glucocorticoids may inhibit NF-κB-induced transcription by
interacting with the glucocorticoid receptors, resulting in inhibition of RhoA
upregulation induced by IL-13 and TNF-α.

## Involvement of MicroRNAs (miRNA) in RhoA Expression in Smooth Muscle Cells
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a class of small non-coding RNA, are associated with a variety of
basic biological processes ( , , , ). Mature miRNAs regulate the expression of
protein-coding genes by targeting their mRNA, leading to translational inhibition or RNA
degradation ( ). It has been demonstrated that
cells transfected with miRNA generated contractility in vascular smooth muscle cells
( ) and myometrial cells ( ) by modulating gene expression.
The transcriptional/translational mechanism of RhoA is not well understood. However, it
has been suggested that miR-133 negatively regulates RhoA expression in cardiomyocytes
( ). RNA-hybrid analysis
(http://bibiserv.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/rnahybrid/) ( ) of human and mouse RhoA mRNA revealed putative binding
sites of miR-133a in the 3′-untranslated region ( ). Based on this information, we have tested the hypothesis that downregulation
of miR-133 induces RhoA upregulation in BSMs. We found that transfection of BSM cells with
a miR-133a antagomir upregulated RhoA expression, whereas transfection with pre-miR133a
downregulated it, suggesting that RhoA protein expression is negatively regulated by
miR-133a in BSMs. We have also revealed that IL-13 treatment upregulated RhoA expression
in hBSMCs ( , ). IL-13, one of the major cytokines upregulated in the airways of patients
with asthma, is important for the induction of AHR as described above. Thus, we speculated
that the mechanism of RhoA upregulation is that IL-13 increases in the airways of
asthmatic patients, inducing RhoA mRNA via STAT6 phosphorylation and RhoA
translation via miR-133a downregulation in hBSMCs. These findings provide new insight into
the roles of miR-133a in the suppression of excessive BSM contraction and suggest that the
miR-133a/RhoA pathway is a putative therapeutic target for asthma.

## Involvement of CPI-17 in Smooth Muscle Contraction
PKC-potentiated inhibitory protein for heterotrimeric MLCP of 17 kDa (CPI-17), which is
activated by PKC and acts on an MLCP-specific target, was isolated from pig aorta smooth
muscle extracts ( ). CPI-17 expression is highly
limited to smooth muscle tissues ( ). When a
contractile agonist binds to GPCR, PKC is activated via an increase in diacylglycerol (DG)
and in turn phosphorylates CPI-17. Activated CPI-17 induces MLCP inhibition. CPI-17 is
therefore important for the PKC-mediated Ca2+ sensitization in rabbit arterial
smooth muscle ( , ), human bladder smooth muscle ( ),
intestinal smooth muscle of rat ( ) and mouse
( ), human myometrium ( ) and rat BSM ( , , ).
In BSM of AHR animals, the mRNA and protein levels of CPI-17 were significantly increased
compared with the controls ( , Ref. ( )). Upon contractile agonist
stimulation of hyperresponsive BSM PKC/CPI-17 signaling activity increased by CPI-17
upregulation. Indeed, the phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate-mediated contraction was markedly
augmented in BSM of AHR animals ( ). ACh-induced
phosphorylation of CPI-17 at Thr38 was significantly increased in BSM of AHR animals
( ). Interestingly, pretreatment of AHR
animals with Y-27632 or calphostin C, a PKC inhibitor, inhibited the ACh-induced
phosphorylation of CPI-17 in bronchial tissues. Moreover, this pretreatment inhibited the
ACh-induced phosphorylation of MLC ( ). The
inhibitory effects of Y-27632 and calphostin C on agonist-induced phosphorylation of
CPI-17 have also been examined in rabbit femoral arterial smooth muscle ( ). Treatment with glucocorticoids (prednisolone or
beclomethasone) significantly inhibited the AHR, and markedly reduced both the protein and
mRNA levels of CPI-17 in BSM. The ACh-induced activation of CPI-17 was also significantly
inhibited by glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids prevented the augmented ACh-induced MLC
phosphorylation observed in rat AHR ( ).
Therefore, glucocorticoids may inhibit AHR through inhibition of CPI-17 overexpression and
activation ( ). To date, the transcription
factors involved in CPI-17 expression in BSMs are unclear. Taken together, an increase in
the PKC/CPI-17-mediated signaling is involved in the augmented BSM contraction in the
mouse antigen-induced AHR. Thus, in addition to the RhoA-mediated signaling described
above, the CPI-17-mediated signaling is also a putative therapeutic target for the AHR in
asthmatics. Furthermore, PKC/CPI-17 and RhoA/ROCK/CPI-17 signaling may play key roles in
the bronchoconstrictor-induced BSM contraction and MLC phosphorylation.

## Conclusion
We propose that upregulation of RhoA and CPI-17 is associated with increased BSM
contraction in asthma. Therefore, MLCP inhibitory signaling pathways via RhoA/ROCK,
PKC/CPI-17 and their combination may be potential targets for new treatment of AHR in
asthma. Furthermore, RhoA upregulation is induced in part by miR-133a downregulation,
presumably resulting in contraction augmentation.

## (3) Vascular remodeling in pulmonary arterial hypertension

## Introduction
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a serious and progressive disease characterized
by pulmonary arterial hypertrophy and raised pulmonary vascular resistance, which results
in diminished right-heart function due to increased right ventricular afterload. Estimates
of the incidence of primary PAH range from 1 to 2 cases per million people in the general
population. Before the development of recent therapeutic options, idiopathic pulmonary
arterial hypertension was rapidly progressive and led to right heart failure and death.
The research carried out between 1981 and 1985 indicated that the survival rates of PAH
patient are 68% at 1 year, 48% at 3 years and 34% at 5 years ( ). In recent studies, PAH patients’ estimated survival in the total
cohort was 86.4% at 1 year, 72.9% at 3 years, and 65.4% at 5 years, between 2000 and 2012
( ). Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD),
one type of PAH, shows the progressive obstruction of small pulmonary veins and without
therapeutic intervention few patients would be expected to survive more than two years
( ). The mechanism of causing PAH is poorly
understood although there are reports that portal hypertension, infection with the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and intake of appetite-suppressant drugs like fenfluramine
cause PAH ( ). In addition, heritable PAH
patients have the mutations of the bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 2 gene
(BMPR2), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) type 1 receptor activin-like kinase-type 1
(ALK1) and a TGF-β receptor complex subunit endoglin (ENG) ( , , , , ).
As a treatment strategy, five different classes of drugs are now available—i.e.,
endothelin receptor antagonists, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, soluble guanylate cyclase
stimulators, prostacyclin analogues, and prostacyclin receptor agonists ( , ).
These drugs mostly improve distal vessel shrinkage on the initial stage of PAH. It is thus
an urgent issue how to develop clinical methods targeting the process of vascular
remodeling per se in order to cure serious PAH.

## Arterial Remodeling of PAH
The majority of PAH patients show the hypertensive vascular disease involving
predominantly or exclusively muscular pulmonary arteries and arterioles associated with
pulmonary artery medial hypertrophy and plexiform lesions. Normally, blood flows from
right ventricle to lung via the pulmonary artery and fulfills gas exchange. However, PAH
causes the thickening of pulmonary arteries/arterioles to narrow their diameters
increasing the resistance of the pulmonary circulation. Therefore, to overcome this
resistance increase, it is necessary to enhance the blood pressure gradient against the
periphery of the pulmonary circulation, which often exceeds 25 mmHg at rest, or 30 mmHg
during exercise ( , ). The pathological background behind the blood pressure increase
in PAH patients is vasoconstriction, vascular wall remodeling like intimal and medial
thickening, and thrombus formation in situ ( ).
The plexiform lesion is a characteristic structure of the pulmonary arteriopathy in severe
PAH. According to the consensus view, the plexiform lesion is a complex and disorganized
pulmonary arterial proliferative lesion, which consists of a network or plexus of channels
lined by endothelial cells and separated by core cells ( ). However, it has not been determined whether the core cells are
myofibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, or undifferentiated cells ( ).
One major cause of PAH is vessel occlusion due to vascular endothelial remodeling.
Normally, endothelial cells form a flat monolayer to construct the vessel surface called
the endothelium. These cells generate constriction factors like endothelin and relaxation
factors like nitric oxide (NO) ( , ). Endothelial cells play important roles in
keeping tissue homeostasis, prevent thrombus formation and protect cells residing inside
of the vessel. In intimal and medial thickening, muscle-like cells increase exclusively
( ). The expression of smooth muscle α-actin
(α-SMA) within neointimal layer has been a long-standing question for pathologists of what
cell lineages contribute to the neointima ( ).
The most likely α-SMA positive cells that may contribute to the pathological neointimal
formation include, vascular smooth muscle cells undergoing dedifferentiation,
myofibroblasts derived from migrating adventitial fibroblasts, and endothelial cells
transitioning into mesenchymal cells ( ).
Expression of the endothelial von Willebrand antigen in plexiform lesions and
microsatellite analyses used to infer individual plexiform lesions both suggest monoclonal
expansions of endothelial cells ( ). The
endothelial-mesenchymal transition (EndoMT), which contributes to vascular fibrosis and
angiogenesis and is actively involved in vascular remodeling, represents a biological
process in which the endothelial cell progressively changes its phenotype into a
mesenchymal or myofibroblastic one. During this process, endothelial cells dissociate from
the monolayer of tightly cohesive cells at the abluminal surface of the vessel and migrate
toward the inner tissue. In human pulmonary arterial hypertension, neointimal lesions
contain cells that co-express endothelial clonal designator (CD) 31 or von Willebrand
antigen and α-SMA ( ). These cells may
participate in the endothelial phenotype transition that occurs with EndoMT where
endothelial cells are assumed to have a smooth muscle or mesenchymal cell profile and
contribute to neointima and plexiform formation.
During this remodeling process, vascular endothelial cells are exposed to a variety of
pathological stimuli, for example, oxidative stress, mechanical stress such as sheer
stress and elevated cytokine such as TGF-β, which is overactive in PAH ( , , ). TGF-β secretion augments cells transformation in
numerous cell types. The canonical TGF-β signaling pathway commences with binding of TGF-β
to a TGF-β type 2 receptor, which subsequently heterodimerizes with a TGF-β type l
receptor (TGF-βR1) to form an active TGF-βR1 complex. The activated TGF-βRl complex
phosphorylates the transcription factors SMAD-2 and SMAD-3, which in turn promotes
collagen synthesis ( , ). The phosphorylation of SMAD-2, a cytoplasmic signaling protein
downstream from the TGF-β receptor 1 (activin-like kinase-5, or ALK5), is increased in
plexiform lesions of patients with PAH ( ).
There are several types of TGF isotype, for example TGF-β1, TGF-β2 and TGF-β3, and they
have important roles in angiogenesis ( , , ).
These cytokines are known to cause the phenotypic transformation of endothelial cells to
mesenchymal cells, in other words, endothelial remodeling. Transdifferentiation of
epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells so called epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)
is known to be crucial for carcinogenesis and cancer cell migration ( , ). Recently several
groups have demonstrated that PAH is a disease of excess proliferation and impaired
apoptosis similar to neoplasia. This similarity raises the possibility that
antiproliferative and/or oncological drugs may exert therapeutic effects in PAH, too
( ). Loss-of-function mutations in the BMPR-2,
a member of the TGF-β superfamily, underlie the majority (> 80%) of the cases of
heritable PAH, identifying an important role for TGF-β signaling in the development of PAH
( ).

## Contribution of TRP Channels on Pulmonary Arterial Remodeling
Pulmonary arterial remodeling is induced by multiple physical and chemical stimuli.
Chronic hypoxic exposure induces changes in the structure of pulmonary arteries, as well
as in the biochemical and functional phenotypes of each of the vascular cell types ( ). It is known for long that cytosolic
Ca2+ level and membrane potential are crucial factors to initiate the signal
transduction cascades, leading to diverse vascular functions ( ). Amongst various kinds of ion channels that regulate ion
homeostasis, transient receptor potential (TRP) channels emerge as the important mediators
for a diverse range of vascular signaling. The characteristics of TRP channels, including
subunit heteromultimerization, diverse ion selectivity, and multiple modes of activation,
permit their multiple functional roles in vasculatures ( , ). Evidence demonstrates that
TRP channels participate in physiological and pathophysiological processes of vascular
system including pulmonary circulation ( , ).
TRP channels are a unique group of ion channels that serve as cellular sensors for a wide
spectrum of physical and chemical stimuli. There are 28 distinct members of the TRP
channels superfamily and 20 members of it express in mammalian organs. The discovery of
the TRP channels superfamily stems is due to the study of Drosophila phototransduction
( , ). All member of the TRP channel superfamily are expressed as polypeptides of
553–2,022 amino acids and have the six-transmembrane topology. Improvement of X-ray
diffraction and cryo-electron microscopy revealed the detail of the TRP channel’s
structure ( , ). Depending on the structure, TRP channels are categorized for 6 groups;
ankyrin (TRPA), canonical (TRPC), melastatin (TRPM), polycystin (TRPP), vanilloid (TRPV)
and mucolipin (TRPML).
In pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells (PASMC), accumulating data indicates that
elevated basal Ca2+ concentration occurs primarily via upregulation of TRPC
proteins, which comprise a subfamily of receptor-/store-operated Ca2+-permeable
nonselective cation channels, and this is required for PASMC growth and migration ( ). TRPC1 channel contribute to vascular remodeling
in PAH induced by hypoxia ( ). TRPV1 and TRPV4
are expressed in PASMC and implicated in the remodeling of pulmonary artery ( , ).
TRPM7 is a stretch- and swelling-activated channel, which is known to promote tissue
remodeling in the cardiovascular system, and critically contributes to vascular stress
fiber formation ( ). It has been reported that
endothelial proliferation/transformation of vascular endothelial cells are regulated by
TRPM7 activity through activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK)-mediated pathway ( ). Furthermore,
Ca2+ influx into the intracellular space via TRPM7 is shown to enhance
endothelial cell migration in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) ( ).
We investigated how TRPM7 affect EndoMT in human endothelial cells. To regulate TRPM7
channel activity, we employed a selective TRPM7 blocker, FTY720, a drug used to treat
multiple sclerosis ( , ). This agent is chemo-synthesized from myriocin, an ingredient of
Isaria sinclairii. Isaria sinclairii is native to
Asia, and is classified as an entomopathogenic fungus. It is the imperfect stage of
Cordyceps sinclairii (Clavicipitaceae) and is closely related to
Cordyceps sinensis Sacc., whose Chinese name, Dong Chong Xia Cao, means
“winter worm, summer grass”; this species was reclassified recently to
Ophiocordyceps sinensis ( ).
The Cordyceps sinensis has been shown to possess various therapeutic
benefits for fibrotic disorders ( , ).
We evaluated the effects of FTY720, Cordyceps sinesis, TRPM7-siRNA,
FYN-siRNA, and FYN mutants on TGF-β2 induced EndoMT and stress fiber formation in HUVECs
respectively by immunocytochemical, real-time RT-PCR and western blot analyses.
Immunocytochemistry indicated that the TRPM7 antagonist FTY720 and Cordyceps
sinensis suppress TGF-β2-induced stress fiber formation. Immunoblot analysis of
mesenchymal markers: N-cadherin and α-SMA and endothelial Markers: VE-cadherin and CD31
suggested that FTY-720 and TRPM7-siRNA effectively suppress TGF-β2 induced EndoMT.
The MCT rat model is a frequently investigated model of PAH, since it offers technical
simplicity, reproducibility, and low cost compared with the other models of PAH. MCT is a
toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloid present in the plant Crotalaria spectabilis.
Ingestion of MCT results in the progressive development of PAH in various animal species
and was first described after repeated oral ingestion in laboratory rats more than
40 years ago ( ). We observed that treatment of
Cordyceps sinensis on MCT-PAH rats ameliorated the development of
pulmonary artery thickening, cardiac fibrosis and right ventricle hypertrophy. Moreover,
the expression of TRPM7 was clearly upregulated at endothelial remodeling area and
plexiform lesion in the lung tissue from PAH patients. These findings can most
simplistically be interpreted that TRPM7 at least in part contributes to the EndoMT
process of vascular endothelial remodeling, and could thus become a novel target of
anti-remodeling therapy for many cardiovascular diseases. This new information will serve
as a groundbreaking strategy to treat fibrotic disorders in the cardiovascular system.
Not only limited to TRPM7, it is likely that multiple TRP channels avidly function in the
process of pulmonary vascular remodeling, many of which may be essential to cause PAH.
Hence, future therapeutic interventions should target multiple signaling pathways to
ameliorate the aberrant vascular remodeling that occurs in PAH.

## Presentation at a Symposium
This review is based on the symposium held at the 58th annual meeting of the Japan Society
of Smooth Muscle Research in Sendai, Japan.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest in this study.