PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC6786623PMC6786623.1678662367866233160028610.1371/journal.pone.0223620PONE-D-19-172471Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCell MembranesCoated PitsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyCardiovascular AnatomyBlood VesselsArteriesMesenteric ArteriesMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyCardiovascular AnatomyBlood VesselsArteriesMesenteric ArteriesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCell MembranesResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsAnimal ModelsMouse ModelsBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationSmall interfering RNAsBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNASmall interfering RNAsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyCardiovascular AnatomyBlood VesselsArteriesMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyCardiovascular AnatomyBlood VesselsArteriesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCell MembranesMembrane ProteinsResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentStainingCell StainingeNOS-NO-induced small blood vessel relaxation requires EHD2-dependent caveolae stabilization
EHD2-dependent eNOS regulationhttp://orcid.org/0000-0003-3242-1195MatthaeusClaudiaConceptualizationData curationInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft LianXiaomingInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing KunzSéverineData curationInvestigationWriting – review & editing LehmannMartinData curationInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – review & editing ZhongChengData curationFormal analysis BernertCarolaInvestigation LahmannInesData curationInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing MüllerDominik N.ConceptualizationWriting – review & editing GollaschMaikConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing DaumkeOliverConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Crystallography, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany2
Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Experimental and Clinical Research Center (ECRC), Campus Buch, Berlin, Germany3
Electron Microscopy Core Facility, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany4
Department of Molecular Pharmacology & Cell Biology and Imaging Core Facility, Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin, Germany5
Signal Transduction/Developmental Biology, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany6
Experimental & Clinical Research Center, a cooperation between Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany7
Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Medical Clinic for Nephrology and Internal Intensive Care, Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germany8
Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, GermanyObukhovAlexander G.Editor – ]. Caveolae are also involved in endocytic processes like cellular lipid uptake [ – ] or cholera toxin internalization [ – ]. In endothelial cells, Caveolin1 (Cav1) negatively regulates the activity of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) [ – ]. In addition, caveolae accommodate a variety of proteins involved in calcium influx and signaling (reviewed in ref. [ , ]). For example, the transient receptor potential cation channels (TRPC) TRPC1 and 4 channels localize to caveolae and facilitate Ca2+ influx within the store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) channel complex [ – ].
Caveolins (Cav1-3) and cavin proteins (cavin1-4) are the major caveolar coat proteins and are essential for the generation of caveolae (reviewed in ref. [ , , – ]). In addition, the BAR-domain containing protein PACSIN2/syndapin2 [ – ] or PACSIN3 [ ] generate membrane curvature during caveolar biogenesis and may stabilize the caveolar neck. A fourth structural component of caveolae is the Eps15 homology domain containing protein 2 (EHD2) [ , – ]. EHD2 belongs to the dynamin-related EHD family [ , ] that comprises four members in human and mice. We and others previously showed that loss of EHD2 results in increased caveolar turnover rate and mobility and detachment of caveolae from the plasma membrane [ , , ]. In adipocytes and fibroblasts, loss of EHD2 leads to increased fatty acid uptake, suggesting that EHD2 may be a negative regulator of caveolae function [ ]. Based on the structural and cellular data, we suggested that EHD2 forms ring-like oligomers surrounding the neck of caveolae, therefore stabilizing caveolae at the plasma membrane [ ].
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is abundantly expressed in endothelial cells that form the inner layer of blood and lymphatic vessels [ ]. An eNOS homodimer comprised of two 138 kD subunits catalyzes the production of L-citrulline and nitric oxide (NO) from L-arginine and molecular oxygen [ , ]. eNOS-derived NO diffuses across the plasma membrane and activates soluble guanylate cyclase in the surrounding smooth muscle cells leading to cGMP production and consequently to vessel relaxation. In addition, NO activates angiogenesis and smooth muscle proliferation. When released into the blood vessel lumen, NO inhibits platelet aggregation on the vessel wall [ ].
The involvement of eNOS and NO in a variety of endothelial signaling pathways implies that its activity and localization must be tightly regulated. eNOS localizes to cholesterol-rich domains of the plasma membrane [ , ] and its activity is inhibited by binding to Cav1 [ , ]. In turn, various external stimuli, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), acetylcholine or insulin lead to activation of eNOS by mediating its release from Cav1/caveolae into the cytosol [ , ]. For example, eNOS can be activated by phosphorylation of Ser-1177 via AKT/protein kinase B, protein kinase A (PKA), Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CamKII) [ – ] or AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Alternatively, dephosphorylation of the inhibitory sites (e.g. Thr-495 or Ser-113), for example by protein phosphatase 2A, also leads to eNOS activation [ ]. Also Ca2+-loaded calmodulin disrupts the Cav1-eNOS interaction by directly binding to eNOS, leading to eNOS activation [ , ].
Here, by characterizing an EHD2 knockout mouse model, we describe a novel function of EHD2 and caveolae related to eNOS regulation. In endothelium, loss of EHD2 results in the detachment of caveolae from the plasma membrane and inhibition of eNOS. Mice lacking EHD2 show reduced vessel relaxation due to impaired NO production. Furthermore, in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), we observe reduced cytosolic Ca2+ influx after EHD2 knockdown. Our data indicate that EHD2-dependent caveolae plasma membrane stabilization regulates correct eNOS localization and function as well as stimulated Ca2+ responses and is therefore involved in the physiological function of blood vessels.

## Methods & materials

## EHD2 delta E3 mouse strain
A mouse strain lacking exon 3 of EHD2 was generated as described previously [ ]. After backcrossing with C57BL/6N for 7 generations, EHD2 del/+ and EHD2 del/del mice were breed and newborn mice were genotyped. EHD2 del/+ mice were used as control group to reduce animal numbers. All mice experiments were performed with adult male mice (>20 weeks) accordingly to German Animal protection law (animal application Berlin LaGeSo G0154/14).

## Primary mesenteric artery culture
EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, and mesenteric arteries were carefully dissected. After removal of surrounding white adipose tissue (WAT), the arteries were cut in small pieces and cultivated on Matrigel (Sigma) in endothelial growth medium/10%FBS and endothelial supplement (Promocell). Every second day, the medium was changed and newly formed vessels were imaged by Zeiss Axiovert100.

## HUVEC cell culture
HUVEC (passage 2) were a kind gift from Holger Gerhard from Max-Delbrück-Center. The cells were cultivated in Endothelial growth medium (EM, Promocell) added with endothelial supplement (Promocell) and 10% FBS and 1% streptomycin/penicillin (Gibco) at 37°C and 5% CO2. HUVEC were split with 0.01% trypsin/EDTA/PBS (Gibco) every second day and seeded in fresh EM.

## HUVEC siRNA knockdown
Freshly split HUVECs (passage 2–6) were electroporated for EHD2 siRNA knockdown with the GenePulser XCell (Biorad). Briefly, HUVECs were split as described before and the obtained cell pellet was resuspended in OptiMEM/10%FBS (Gibco). After cell counting, the HUVEC cell suspension was diluted to 1.8x106 cells/ml and 300 μl were transferred into electroporation cuvettes (2 mm, Biorad). EHD2 stealth siRNA (Thermo Fisher) and siRNA negative control (medium GC content) were added to a final concentration of 300 nM. After mixing, the cuvettes were placed into the electroporation device and the pulse (160 μOHM, 500 μF, ∞ resistance) was applied. The electroporated cells were cultivated in EM/10%FBS for 48 h and EHD2 siRNA knockdown was analyzed by EHD2 antibody staining and Western blot.

## Echocardiography
In vivo heart function was analyzed by high frequency ultrasound imaging in B and M-mode (non-invasive, 2D conventional echocardiography) of 10, 20 and 52 week old EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice. Mice were anaesthetized with isoflurane, the fur was shaved and ultrasound imaging was performed with Vevo2100 transducer system (VisualSonics).

## Blood pressure measurement
The blood pressure was measured by the non-invasive tail-cuff method as previously described. Briefly, EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice were placed in a mouse restrainer of the CODA system (Kent Scientific) to prevent extensive movement. A cuff was applied around the tail and blood pressure was recorded by the CODA system.

## Running wheel activity
EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice were singly placed in cages containing a voluntary running wheel for 2 weeks, in which the running distance (in km) and running activity were monitored. All inspected mice did not run during the day. Therefore, the recorded running activity was analyzed exclusively during the night/ dark phase. The total distance after 1, 4, 8, 11 and 14 days (and nights) was monitored by using a bicycle computer attached to the running wheel. The activity was tracked by monitoring each rotation of the wheel and is displayed as count per logging interval (measurement every 5 min).

## Wire myography
The second branches of mesenteric arteries were isolated from EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice under inhalation anesthesia with isoflurane by cervical dislocation and then quickly transferred to cold (4°C), oxygenated (95% O2/5% CO2) physiological salt solution (PSS) containing 119 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 25 mM NaHCO3, 1.2 mM MgSO4, 11.1 mM glucose, 1.6 mM CaCl2. After cleaning the connective tissue with scissors without damaging the adventitia, the arteries were dissected into 2 mm rings. Each ring was positioned between two stainless steel wires (diameter 0.0394 mm) in a 5 mL organ bath of a Small Vessel Myograph (DMT 610M, Danish Myo Technology, Aarhus, Denmark). The organ bath was filled with PSS. The bath solution was continuously oxygenated (95% O2/5% CO2), and kept at 37°C (pH 7.4). COX inhibitors were not added as prostaglandin generation is strongly reduced in small mesenteric arteries [ , ]. The rings were placed under a tension equivalent to that generated at 0.9 times the diameter of the vessel at 100 mmHg (DMT Normalization module by CHART software). The software Chart5 (AD Instruments Ltd. Spechbach, Germany) was used for data acquisition and display. The rings were pre-contracted and equilibrated for 30 min until a stable resting tension was acquired. Thereafter, the rings were constricted with 1 μM phenylephrine (PE) to ensure viability and allow normalization of the relaxant response by acetylcholine (ACh, 1 μM) to confirm the eNOS functionality. In the end, the rings were constricted with isotonic external 60 mM potassium chloride (KCl) to again ensure the viability of arterial rings. The NO donor SNP was applied in different concentrations after PE (1 μM) application and relexation was recorded. The composition of isotonic external 60 mM KCl was 63.7 mM NaCl, 60 mM KCl, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 25 mM NaHCO3, 1.2 mM Mg2SO4, 11.1 mM glucose, and 1.6 mM CaCl2.

## Histology
EHD2 del/+ and EHD2 del/del mice were anesthetized with 2% ketamine/10%rompun, perfused by 30 ml PBS and 50 ml 4% PFA and afterwards vessels or hearts were dissected. After 24 h of fixation in 4% PFA, tissues were dehydrated in 70–100% EtOH and incubated in xylol (Merck) for 48 h. Next, the tissues were embedding in paraffin, 4 μm paraffin sections were obtained, and Masson Trichrome staining (Kit, Sigma) was applied accordingly to manufacturer´s protocol. Images were obtained at Zeiss Axiovert100 microscope.

## Immunohistostaining of cryostat sections for confocal and STED imaging
Perfused and fixed EHD2 del/+ and EHD2 del/del mice (as described before) were dissected and the investigated tissue pieces were further fixed for 4 h in 4% PFA, transferred to 15% sucrose (in PBS, Merck) for 4 h and finally incubated overnight in 30% sucrose. After embedding in TissueTek, the tissue is frozen at -80°C and 10 μm sections were obtained in a Leica cryostat at -30°C. For immunostainings, the cryostat sections were incubated with blocking buffer (1% donkey serum/1% TritonX100/PBS, STED: 1% donkey serum/0.1% TritonX100/PBS) before the first antibody was applied overnight at 4°C. After washing with PBS/1% Tween, the secondary antibody and DAPI was applied for 2 h, and afterwards the sections were embedded in ImmoMount (ThermoScientific #9990402) or STED imaging buffer (ProLong Gold antifade reagent, Molecular Probes #P36934). The stained sections were analyzed with Zeiss LSM700 microscope provided with Zeiss objectives 5, 10, 20, 40 and 63x, Zeiss LSM880 Airy Scan with 63x airy objective or Leica SP8 STED microscope with 100x objective. The obtained images were further investigated by ZEN or Leica software and ImageJ/Fij. STED images displayed in were deconvoluted by Huygens Software. eNOS staining intensity (Integrated Intensity value) of EHD2 del/+ and del/del mesenteric arteries was determined at different plasma membrane regions (300–400 μm2) of the investigated sections by ImageJ. 3 different mice/genotype were used to determine the mean eNOS staining intensity value, as depicted in . Antibodies: anti-Cav1-rabbit (abcam #2910, 1:200), anti-Cav1-mouse (Sigma #SAB4200216, 1:200), anti-eNOS-mouse (BD Transduction Laboratories #610297, 1:200–1:500), anti-EHD2-rabbit (self-made, previously used in [ ]), anti-Muscarinic Acetylcholine receptor M3-rabbit (abcam #ab150480, 1:80), anti-mouse-Alexa488 (Invitrogen #R37114, 1:500), anti-rabbit-Cy3 (Dianova #711-165-152, 1:500), DAPI (Sigma, 1:1000), anti-rabbit-Atto647 (Invitrogen #A27040, 1:800), anti-mouse-Atto546 (Invitrogen #A11030, 1:800).

## DAF staining
Determination of NO generated in mesenteric arteries or HUVEC was done by DAF staining as previously described [ , ]. Briefly, freshly prepared mesenteric arteries were cut in small pieces and incubated for 30 min in physiological buffer (125 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgSO4, 1 mM KH2PO4, 6 mM glucose, 25 mM HEPES, 2 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4, all obtained from Merck) at 37°C. 10 μM DAF-2FM (Molecular probes #D23842, diluted in DMSO) was added and arteries were incubated for further 30 min at 37°C, followed by 100 μM acetylcholine treatment and 10 min incubation. Afterwards, the tissue samples were embedded in TissueTek and flash frozen. To investigate DAF staining, frozen tissues were cryosectioned and counterstained with DAPI. HUVEC cells were washed with physiological buffer and 10 μM DAF-2FM was added for 30 min. After 10 min of 100 μM acetylcholine treatment, the cells were stained with DAPI, fixed with 4% PFA for 10 min and embedded in ImmoMount. Mesenteric arteries or HUVEC were incubated with 100 μM L-NAME for 30 min before DAF-2FM was added to the buffer. The staining was analyzed with confocal imaging Zeiss LSM700 and 40x or 63x objective.

## Calcium imaging
HUVEC cells were seeded on fibronectin coated glass dishes and after 2 days in culture incubated with Fura2-AM (Biomol, diluted in DMSO, 1 μg/ml) for 60 min at 37°C in culture medium. Glass dishes were transferred to the imaging chamber including pre-warmed Krebs buffer (125 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgSO4, 1 mM KH2PO4, 6 mM glucose, 25 mM HEPES, 2 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4, all obtained from Merck). Fluorescence intensities (FI) recordings were performed with Zeiss Axio Microscope, 63x water objective and the following settings: alternating excitation at 340 nm and 380 nm, 200 ms exposure time, cycle time 2 s, total recording 5 min, 3x3 binning. Cytosolic Ca2+ is calculated from FI(340 nm)/FI(380 nm). 30 μM ATP (Biomol) was freshly prepared in Krebs buffer and applied by perfusion into the imaging chamber during recordings. Data was analyzed by ImageJ/Fiji and GraphPad Prism.

## Transmission Electron microscopy (TEM)
Mice were fixed by perfusion with 4% (w/v) formaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer and hearts were dissected to 1–2 mm3 cubes. Tissue blocks and HUVEC cells were fixed in phosphate buffered 2.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde for 1–2 hours. Cells were pelleted, stabilized by 10% (w/v) gelatin and further processed as 1–2 mm3 cubes. Additional membrane contrast was added first by 1% tannic acid in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer and second by aqueous 2% uranylacetate. After 1% (v/v) osmium tetroxide treatment, tissue and cells cubes were dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and embedded in the PolyBed® 812 resin (Polysciences Europe GmbH), ultrathin sections (60–80 nm) were cut (Leica microsystems) and uranyl acetate and lead citrate staining was performed. Samples were examined at 80 kV with a Zeiss EM 910 electron microscope (Zeiss), and image acquisition was performed with a Quemesa CDD camera and the iTEM software (Emsis GmbH).

## In situ hybridization
In situ hybridizations were performed on 14 μm cryosections prepared from E18.5 C57BL/6N embryos as previously described [ ]. Digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes were generated using a DIG-RNA labeling kit (Roche), whereby EHD2 specific in situ probe was generated by PCR amplification of a 400 bp fragment from C57BL/6N cDNA (EDH2_ISH_FWD: 5’-CAGGTCCTGGAGAGCATCAGC-3’; EDH2_ISH_REV: 5’- GAGGTCCTGTTCCTCCAGCTCG-3’). The PCR product was cloned into pGEM-Teasy (Promega). T7 and sp6 polymerases were used to generate Ehd2-sense and antisense probes.

## Western blot
EHD2 del/+ and EHD2 del/del mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and mesenteric arteries were dissected and tissue disruption was performed in 1x RIPA buffer (Abcam) with a glass homogenizer, followed by 5 min ultrasonication and 10 min centrifugation at maximal speed. HUVECs were washed with ice-cold PBS and homogenized in 1xRIPA buffer, followed by 5 min ultrasonication and 10 min full speed centrifugation. Supernatant was transferred in a fresh tube and protein concentration was analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by Commassie staining. At least 10 μg protein/lane was applied to 4–12% SDS-PAGE NuPage (Invitrogen) and SDS-PAGE was performed according to the manufacture’s protocol with MOPS buffer (Invitrogen). Afterwards, proteins were blotted on nitrocellulose membrane (Amersham) at 80 V for 1 h, followed by blocking of the membranes with 5% milk powder (in TBST, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.1% Tween20) for 2 h at room temperature. To detect specific protein level antibodies against protein of interest (1:500–1:1000) was applied over night at 4°C. After washing with TBST, the secondary antibody labelled with HRP was applied to the membrane for 2 h. Detection of protein bands resulted from ECL detection solution and images were obtained by ChemiDoc XRS (Biorad). The following antibodies were used: anti-eNOS-mouse (BD Transduction Laboratories #610297, 1:200), anti-phospho-Ser1177-eNOS-rabbit (Cell Signaling #9571, 1:100), anti-phospho-AKT Ser473 and Thr308 (both raised in rabbit, AKT kit, Cell Signaling #9916, 1:100), anti-EHD2-rabbit (self-made, previously used in [ ]), anti-calmodulin-mouse (Invitrogen #MA3-917, 1:1000), anti-GAPDH-mouse (Novus Biologicals #NB300-221, 1:2000), anti-beta-actin-mouse (Sigma #A1978, 1:2000), anti-rabbit-HRP and anti-mouse-HRP (both Dianova, 1:10000).

## Statistical analysis
All applied statistical tests were calculated with Prism (GraphPad software). Normality distribution test (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test) was carried out for all experimental values, and if the data was normally distributed, Student t-Test (two-tailed P-value) was applied, otherwise Mann-Whitney-Rank-Sum (two-tailed P-value) test was used to calculate the significant difference between two groups. EHD2 and eNOS staining intensities were correlated for C57BL/6N mesenteric arteries ( ) by using Pearson correlation. Box plots, if not otherwise indicated in the figure legends, always represents median with whiskers from minimum to maximum, column bar graphs and line graphs represent mean with mean standard error of the mean (SE). For all experiments including the examination of mice or mouse tissue, n represents the number of mice which were used (Figs , , and , , and Figs) and all analyzed cryo/paraffin sections or caveolae are also indicated (e.g.: n = 80 caveolae/3 mice). For HUVEC cell culture experiments (Figs and , ) n represents the number of observed events (e.g.: staining intensity) and the number of independently performed experiments (e.g.: n = 80 measured DAF staining intensities/3 independent experiments). The following P-values were used to indicate significant difference between two groups: * P<0.05; ** P<0.001; *** P<0.0001.

## Results

## EHD2 expression in endothelial cells is essential for caveolae stabilization at the plasma membrane
EHD2 antibody staining in cryostat sections of adult C57BL/6N brown adipose tissue revealed high EHD2 expression in blood vessels ( ). Similarly, aorta cryostat sections showed a strong EHD2 signal co-localized with the endothelial marker protein eNOS ( ), in contrast to the complete lack of EHD2 staining in EHD2 del/del mesenteric arteries ( ). Also endothelial cells of lymphatic vessels displayed high expression levels of EHD2 ( ). In situ hybridization of EHD2 mRNA in E18.5 C57BL/6N embryo corroborated the antibody staining results ( ). In line with results from other cell types [ , ], Cav1 and EHD2 showed a striking co-localization in cryostat sections of small mesenteric arteries ( ) and HUVECs ( ).
 We previously described that adipocytes and fibroblasts in the EHD2 knockout mouse model contain an increased number of caveolae that are detached from the plasma membrane [ ]. In line with the results obtained from adipocytes, endothelial caveolae were more often detached from the plasma membrane in EHD2 del/del compared to EHD2 del/+ mice (control group), as analyzed by electron microscopy (EM, ). The absolute number of caveolae in small vessels lacking EHD2 was only slightly increased.

## Loss of EHD2 results in impaired vessel relaxation
Our localization experiment and ultrastructural analysis suggested a function of EHD2 in blood vessels. As previously reported [ ], loss of EHD2 did not impair embryonic development, further illustrated by the Mendelian distribution of EHD2 knockout offspring ( ). Furthermore, we cultivated small mesenteric artery pieces obtained from EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice and observed formation of new vessels in both genotypes ( ). These results argue against a major role of EHD2 in angiogenesis.
EHD2 del/+ and del/del mesenteric arteries were dissected and histological analyses revealed no gross changes in morphology ( ) and diameter ( ). Active force measurements of isolated small mesenteric artery rings revealed a similar contraction of EHD2 del/del and del/+ arteries induced by phenylephrine (PE) and KCl ( , see for complete KCl recovery traces). Strikingly, EHD2 del/del arteries showed a complete loss of acetylcholine (ACh)-induced relaxation in compared to immediate responses of acetylcholine on EHD2 del/+ mesenteric arteries ( ). Notably, muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M3 protein level assessed by immunohistostaining was not altered EHD2 del/del mesenteric arteries compared to EHD2 del/+ ( ).
 As relaxation of blood vessels is related to eNOS and NO generation [ ], the mesenteric artery rings were pre-treated with the eNOS inhibitor L-NAME. Under these conditions, EHD2 del/+ mesenteric arteries revealed impaired relaxation (4.9 ± 0.9% vs. untreated 58 ± 3% relaxation, relative to PE-induced contraction monitored after 3 min) due to the inhibition of NO production ( ). In contrast, L-NAME did not affect the contraction loss in EHD2 del/del arteries ( ). This suggests that the reduced relaxation capability in arteries lacking EHD2 is caused by an impaired eNOS/NO system.
To analyze if the eNOS/NO downstream signaling pathways (e.g. cGMP/protein kinase G pathways) are still functional in EHD2 lacking arteries, the NO donor sodium nitroprusside (SNP) was applied to EHD2 del/+ and del/del mesenteric arteries. In these experiments, EHD2 del/+ and del/del mesenteric arteries did not show any difference in their relaxation ability upon SNP treatment ( ) indicating that the reduced relaxation of EHD2 del/del arteries in response to ACh results from reduced eNOS enzyme activity but not from impaired eNOS downstream signaling. Of note, no difference in resting blood pressure was observed in EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice by using tail-cuff blood pressure measurements ( ).
Subsequently, we investigated the function of the eNOS/NO system in mesenteric arteries in more detail. By staining with the fluorescent dye DAF [ , ], NO can be directly visualized in small arteries. Indeed, cryosections of EHD2 del/+ mesenteric arteries showed strong NO-DAF staining in the endothelium. In contrast, we observed a reduced DAF staining intensity in small vessels dissected from EHD2 del/del mice compared to those from EHD2 del/+ mice, pointing to a decreased NO concentration in the vascular endothelium lacking EHD2 ( ). Consistent with the previous active force measurements, pre-treatment of vessels with L-NAME strongly reduced DAF staining in EHD2 del/+ mice by 77%.
 We reasoned that reduced NO concentration in EHD2 del/del mice may be caused by an impairment of eNOS activity or regulation. Therefore at first, eNOS localization in cryostat sections of mesenteric arteries was investigated by stimulated emission depletion microscopy (STED). In line with previous results, EHD2 del/+ arteries showed intense eNOS staining in the plasma membrane in close proximity to Cav1 ( , see co-localization). In contrast, eNOS staining at the plasma membrane was reduced in EHD2 del/del arteries ( ), although the total protein level of artery tissue lysates was not changed ( ). Instead, eNOS was redistributed from the membrane to the cytosol in EHD2 del/del arteries ( and ).
To further dissect the cellular mechanism of impaired eNOS/NO signaling and to determine eNOS localization in the absence of EHD2 in more detail, we resorted to the analysis of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). EHD2 expression was knocked down in HUVECs by specific siRNA, whereas a non-sense siRNA served as a negative control. Reduced EHD2 staining intensity in immuno-fluorescence experiments ( ) and reduced EHD2 protein levels ( ) confirmed the successful knockdown approach. Subsequently, HUVECs were stained against Cav1 and eNOS and the localization of eNOS was investigated by STED microscopy ( ). In confocal images, no striking difference of eNOS staining intensity was observed in HUVECs treated with EHD2 siRNA compared to control cells ( ). Within the STED images, membrane-bound caveolae appeared as ring-like Cav1 structures, in contrast to detached caveolae that were observed as filled Cav1 vesicles ( ). Cav1 fluorescence intensity plot profiles and Cav1 surface plots further illustrated the characteristic caveolae shapes for membrane-bound and detached caveolae ( ). Compared to EHD2 knockdown HUVECs, more ring-like Cav1 structures were found in control cells ( ). Importantly, detached caveolae in EHD2 siRNA HUVECs showed distinct eNOS staining suggesting that eNOS still localizes to Cav1 in these caveolae ( ). In addition, we observed an increased total eNOS staining intensity in single caveolae of EHD2 knockdown cells compared to HUVEC control cells ( ). This experiment indicate that the loss of EHD2 results in increased fraction of Cav1-membrane bound eNOS suggesting a reduced eNOS activity. EM analysis further confirmed that EHD2 knockdown resulted in increased number of detached caveolae ( ).
 

## EHD2 knockdown in HUVECs decreased cellular NO concentration and cytosolic calcium
Similar to the experiments in small arteries, we also analyzed NO concentration in EHD2 knockdown HUVECs by DAF staining. Control cells revealed strong DAF staining intensity after ACh treatment in line with high cytosolic NO concentrations ( ). Pre-treatment with L-NAME completely abolished DAF staining. Consistent with our in vivo results, EHD2 knockdown in HUVECs resulted in decreased NO concentrations ( ).
 It was previously reported that intracellular Ca2+ release (from internal or extracellular stores) induces eNOS activity and, consequently, NO production [ ]. To analyze the role of EHD2 dependent caveolae behavior on calcium signaling, cytosolic Ca2+ was monitored in HUVECs treated with EHD2 siRNA ( ). Control HUVECs revealed the characteristic 2-phase intracellular Ca2+ increase upon stimulation with ATP ( ), very similar to published ATP or ACh-induced Ca2+ events [ , ]. The first Ca2+ peak has been assigned to intracellular Ca2+ release from the ER, followed by the longer Ca2+ plateau induced by extracellular Ca2+ entry via Ca2+ channels (store-operated Ca2+ entry, SOCE). In contrast, EHD2 knockdown resulted in reduced Ca2+ responses triggered by ATP treatment ( ). Compared to control HUVECs, the Ca2+ events in HUVECs treated with EHD2 siRNA showed a reduced duration time ( ). The total Ca2+ levels in HUVECs, as measured by Fura2 fluorescence intensity (excitation 380 nm), were not reduced upon EHD2 knockdown ( ). This indicates that intracellular Ca2+ entry upon stimulation, likely via store operated calcium entry pathways, is affected in the absence of EHD2 [ ].
As it was previously described that phosphorylation of Ser1177 increased eNOS activity [ , ], we investigated eNOS phosphorylation levels by Western blotting. Indeed, HUVECs treated with EHD2 siRNA showed reduced Ser1177 phosphorylation compared to control cells ( ). AKT phosphorylation was not impaired in EHD2 knockdown HUVEC compared to siRNA-treated HUVECs ( ). In summary, these data suggests that reduced Ca2+ signaling and reduced phosphorylation of eNOS-Ser1177 lead to decreased eNOS activity in EHD2 knockdown cells (see also schematic overview in and ).

## Reduced running wheel activity in EHD2 del/del mice
Although the loss of EHD2 in vivo resulted in severe impairment of vessel relaxation, the resting blood pressure in EHD2 del/del mice was not changed, as measured by tail-cuff measurements ( ). We therefore tested the physical constitution and behavior of EHD2 del/del mice. Heart sections obtained from EHD2 del/del hearts did not reveal gross differences in tissue appearance ( ). Notably, echocardiographic recordings monitored a slightly increased left ventricular posterior wall thickness (LVPW, sys, 1.1 ± 0.1 mm for del/del vs. 0.9 ± 0.1 mm for del/+) and interventricular septum size (IVS, sys, 1.1 ± 0.1 mm for del/del vs. 0.9 ± 0.1 mm for del/+, ) in 20 weeks old EHD2 del/del mice compared to del/+ mice ( ). summarizes the specific echocardiographic parameters for EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice during the development.
 The echocardiographic changes prompted us to evaluate the physical fitness of EHD del/del mice by exposing them to a voluntary running wheel exercise. In these experiments, EHD2 del/del mice ( , red line) showed a reduced running activity compared to EHD2 del/+ mice that were running during the complete dark phase ( , black line). Total running distance over 2 weeks was significantly reduced from 63 ± 4 km in EHD2 del/+ mice to 32 ± 6 km for EHD2 del/del mice ( ). These data suggest that EHD2 del/del mice have a reduced physical fitness required for sustained running activity. Interestingly, no difference was found in heart rate ( ), body weight ( ) or left ventricle wall size ( , summary ) between EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice after exercise.

## Discussion
Cav1, the major caveolae protein, is an established regulator for eNOS activity in endothelial cells, and the molecular interaction of the two proteins has been studied in detail [ , , , ]. However, the physiological relevance of caveolae plasma membrane localization and stabilization in the context of vascular eNOS function has not been investigated. Here, we report that EHD2-dependent caveolae stabilization is required for correct function and regulation of eNOS. Upon loss of EHD2 in small vessels such as mesenteric arteries, the number of detached caveolae in the endothelium was increased. In addition, relaxation in these vessels was impaired due to insufficient NO production by eNOS. By super-resolution microscopy, we demonstrated that eNOS localization at the plasma membrane depends on the stable integration of caveolae. We also show that detached caveolae still contain eNOS.
So far, eNOS caveolae localization has been mainly studied by biochemical membrane isolation and fractionation [ , , ] experiments and immunogold labeling [ , ]. In this study, we analyzed eNOS localization in small vessels by STED microscopy which allowed us to evaluate the spatial parameters in a more quantitative fashion and at higher resolution. Indeed, we observed eNOS localized at the plasma membrane in the endothelium in the vessel sections. In EHD2 del/+ mesenteric arteries, eNOS localized to the endothelial plasma membrane in close proximity to Cav1. Surprisingly, eNOS was found non-homogenously distributed in clusters at the plasma membrane in control mice. In contrast, loss of EHD2 and therefore increased caveolae detachment from the membrane resulted in the redistribution of eNOS into the cytoplasm ( and , see also summary ). Notably, EHD2 knockdown HUVECs showed that detached caveolae still contained eNOS. This suggests that eNOS still interacts with Cav1 in internalized caveolae leading to eNOS inhibition, in agreement with the reduced NO levels observed in EHD2 siRNA-treated cells or EHD2 lacking arteries (Figs and ). This observation highlights the importance of caveolae plasma membrane stabilization, and not Cav1 expression alone, for correct eNOS localization and regulation. Sowa et al. (2001) already reported that Cav1 expression without formation of caveolae did not result in correct eNOS-Cav1 regulation [ ]. Furthermore, in the complete absence of caveolae due to Cav1 deletion, increased eNOS activity was observed [ ]. These results indicate that increased eNOS internalization due to caveolae internalization in EHD2 del/del cells mechanistically differs from eNOS translocation to the cytosol upon a physiological stimulus (see schematic summary in ). We therefore conclude that caveolae stabilization is essential for correct eNOS localization at the plasma membrane and activation.
We found that EHD2 deletion caused impaired eNOS activity that consequently resulted in reduced relaxation of small vessels. Previous observations demonstrated that prostaglandin i2 (PGi2) production and release in blood vessels can also induce relaxation of arteries. However, compared to NO, PGi2 plays only a minor role during vasodilation [ ]. Furthermore, increased PGi2 release would also result in increased relaxation of arteries which was not observed in EHD2 del/del mice. When analyzing the involvement of eNOS activation pathways, we observed a reduced phosphorylation of eNOS Ser1177 in EHD2 knockdown endothelial cells which is indicative of a reduced eNOS activity. Analysis of AKT phosphorylation levels (Ser473, Thr308) did not reveal major differences in HUVECs upon EHD2 knockdown compared to control cells ( ). However, activation of eNOS can be also triggered by increased cytosolic Ca2+ concentration [ , ]. Surprisingly, EHD2 siRNA-treated HUVECs showed a strong reduction in ATP-triggered Ca2+ responses ( ). Previously reported SOCE pathways depend on correct caveolae formation ( ) [ , , , , ]. The reduced stimulated Ca2+ responses in endothelial cells lacking EHD2 are therefore likely caused by an impaired SOCE response ( ). These results indicate that caveolae serve as a unique plasma membrane domain necessary for correct localization of various Ca2+ channels. Consequently, destabilization and increased internalization of caveolae due to EHD2 loss leads to reduced cytosolic Ca2+ responses.
Resting blood pressure, as measured by tail-cuff measurements, and heart function were not altered in EHD2 del/del mice. It should be noted that tail-cuff measurements are not the most accurate method for determining small changes in blood pressure. However, as we did not obtain any indication that the blood pressure is altered in EHD2 del/del compared to control mice, we discarded more sophisticated and invasive blood pressure measurements. Indeed, previously reported blood measurements in Cav1 knockout mice resulting in complete loss of caveolae also leads to only a moderate effect on blood pressure [ ]. Apparently, under laboratory conditions, endothelial cells can largely cope with caveolae loss. Nevertheless, the observed reduced relaxation of EHD2 del/del vessels in response to acetylcholine indicate that EHD2 deficiency might have effects on the physical appearance. Consistent with this idea, we detected a reduced running wheel activity of EHD2 del/del mice ( ). We speculate that besides the impaired vessel function also increased lipid accumulation in EHD2 del/del mice [ ] may contribute to fitness. Future studies with endothelial- or fat-specific EHD2 knockout mouse models will clarify the involved mechanism.

## Conclusion and outlook
We show in this manuscript that EHD2 at the caveolae neck is required for correct eNOS localization and signaling and therefore for proper endothelial function. In addition, we demonstrated that caveolae detachment from the plasma membrane results in decreased activation of eNOS via caveolae dependent Ca2+ entry pathways. Reduced eNOS activity and NO production are hallmarks of endothelial dysfunction, as found, e.g., in type 2 diabetes and obesity [ – ]. We therefore envisage that altered EHD2 function may also be found in some of these diseases.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Echocardiography of 20 weeks old EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice before and after 2 weeks running wheel training.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## EHD2 antibody staining in EHD2 del/+ vs. EHD2 del/del arteries.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Angiogenesis in EHD2 del/+ and del/del mesenteric artery pieces.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Functional analysis of EHD2 del/+ and del/del mesenteric arteries (related to ).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## STED imaging of eNOS and Cav1 in EHD2 del/+ and del/del mesenteric arteries (related to ).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## EHD2 siRNA knockdown in HUVEC (related to Figs and ).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Model of EHD2 function in endothelial cells.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Raw images of Western Blots files of eNOS and AKT phosphorylation in HUVECs.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Fig

## Raw images of Western Blots files of eNOS level in mesenteric arteries.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S9 Fig

## Raw images of Western Blots files of HUVECs treated with EHD2 siRNA.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Petra Stallerow for taking care of the EHD2 mouse strain, the Advanced Light Microscopy facility from MDC for their technical support, the Pathobiology platform from Arndt Heuser from MDC for tail cuff measurements and electrocardiography, Frederike Kemplin for helping with the running wheel experiment, Marcus Semtner for the calcium imaging set up, Maria Kamprath for helping with histological heart sections and Holger Gerhardt for critically reading the manuscript.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0223620.r001Decision Letter 0
ObukhovAlexander GAcademic Editor© 2019 Alexander G Obukhov2019Alexander G ObukhovThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
18 Jul 2019

PONE-D-19-17247
MAX-DELBRÜCK-CENTRUM FÜR MOLEKULARE MEDIZIN BERLIN-BUCH
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Matthaeus,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised by the reviewers.
While addressing the reviewers' concerns please specifically pay attention to the following points: 1) please make sure that all your conclusions are supported by experimental data. For example, the statement about eNOS and Cav1 interaction in internal pools would require additional experimental confirmation. 2) It is unclear why calcium imaging data are provided for ATP in HUVEC, whereas acetylcholine was used in ex vivo experiments. 3) To comply with the new PLOS One policy, please provide the entire, un-cropped Western blot images in Supplemental figures for ALL Western blot data included in the manuscript. 4) For isometric tension experiments, please provide traces with the complete recovery after KCl-induced contractions. Why was not a nitric oxide donor used to confirm that NO could still dilate the pre-contracted EHD2 del/del vessels? 5) Please confirm that the pre-contracted vessels cannot be dilated with an alternative endothelial-dependent vasorelaxant and provide experimental evidence that impaired acetylcholine relaxation in EHD2 del/del is not due to a reduced plasma membrane protein expression of muscarinic receptors.               
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Sep 01 2019 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewers. This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Alexander G. Obukhov, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Please amend the title either on the online submission form or in your manuscript so that they are identical.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Partly
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This study describes a connection between EHD2, caveolae and NO signaling. The study uses mostly immunofluorescence to look at colocalization along with other methods to show the importance of formed caveolae structures on NO signaling. The data and results are very nice with two exceptions that need to be resolved:
1 – The STED images are confusing. The images do not resemble the structures seen by high resolution methods.
2 - The cartoon in Figure 4 is not accurate. The G proteins that are responsible for calcium signals localize in caveolae which enhances calcium signals. The authors need to revise their model.
Reviewer #2: This article makes numerous interesting observations that link the physiological function of eNOS with the structural retention of caveolae at the PM. The authors demonstrate that loss of EHD2 results in functional changes in eNOS, impaired mesenteric artery relaxation, reduced NO synthesis, and changes in Ca2+ signalling in HUVEC cells that they claim are a consequence of re-distribution of caveolae away from the cell surface. The authors go on to demonstrate that loss of EHD2 does not affect viability of mice nor impact upon blood pressure but does affect the exercise fitness of the mice. The data and model put forward are of importance to the field and would be of interest to the readers of PLOS ONE. But there are a few key points to address which make the manuscript unsuitable for publication is its current state.
Major Points:
The authors claim that the loss of EHD2 from endothelial tissue results in a reduction in the total eNOS at the cell surface by STED microscopy on cryostat tissue sections. These findings are critical for the manuscript and their proposed model but the images provided are not as clear as the authors suggest. The authors claim that Figure 3 and S3 show a redistribution of eNOS to an internal pool in EHD2 KO arteries and that this can be quantified by “eNOS staining intensity” at the plasma membrane (Fig 3E). It is unclear from their methods how was this analysis performed - were subregions selected and analysed for fluorescence intensity? If so, Fig S1 demonstrates “normal” surface association of eNOS in arteries in EHD2 KO in some cells and reduced association in others – critically this reduction in PM intensity of eNOS also observed in the control EHD2 -/+ mice (S1A). To make these claims biochemical analyses are required to determine if there is a quantitative reduction in eNOS membrane association.
Moreover, the authors highlight the redistribution of eNOS from the PM to internal pools. In the discussion the authors suggest eNOS and Cav1 likely still interact in internal pools (i.e. on dissociated caveolae observed by their electron microscopy). However, from the images provided it is unclear if Cav1 and eNOS do interact away from the surface as these puncta appear to lack Cav1. This is an important point and one that should be addressed using the HUVEC cell model and STED microscopy.
Does loss of EHD2 in HUVEC cells affect the PM association of caveolae by electron microscopy?
Minor Corrections:
The affiliation of the authors has come up as the title of the article. I’m unsure if this is an error in the portal or a mistake by the authors.
Line 362: The sentence reads “Perfused and fixated…” this should read “Perfused and fixed…”
Reviewer #3: This well-written manuscript investigates Dynamin-related ATPase EHD2 in caveolae formation and eNOS NO release and vasodilation in vivo, ex vivo, as well as in HUVEC in vitro. The authors confirm the expression of EHD2 in adipocytes and vasculature and HUVEC, showing co-localization with eNOS. Presence of caveolae was confirmed in WT and EHD2 KO by EM, with significant changes in caveolae localization. Basic KCL and ACh vasoreactivity assays show a major decrease in Ach-induced vasorelaxation, with no effect of l-Name, suggesting reduced NO-dependent vasorelaxation. DAF imaging for NO show decrease staining in absence of EHD2 in tissues, and lower NO release and cytosolic Ca+ concentration supported these conclusion in HUVEC treated with EHD2 siRNA.
Major:
The way the results are described in the Results and Figure legends section is simply to succinct. There is no %, fold changes, there is simply not enough detail. Description of controls are barely discussed and sometimes omitted. Results should be better described, Legends should be more complete.
A decrease in vasorelaxation to ACh could also suggest a decrease in ACh muscarinic receptor, and therefore requires confirmation with vasorelaxation with another endothelial-dependent agonist. But this was not performed.
How about PGi2 on the myograph? Were these experiment performed in presence of a PGI2 synthesis inhibitor?
Minor:
Intro: 'Currently, it is not known if caveolae membrane domains or Cav1 alone is essential for correct eNOS localization and regulation. ' I think this sentence is inaccurate and requires an update. Work on mutant Cav1 has demystified the caveolae vs caveolin signaling question with regards to eNOS. (Sessa CircRes 2016, JCI 2010).
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0223620.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
31 Aug 2019

We would like to thank the editor and the three reviewers for their careful reading and the constructive comments which have helped to significantly improve our manuscript. Based on their comments, we carried out new experiments (please see new Fig. 2I, Fig. 4 and S3) and modified the manuscript at several positions, as indicated in our detailed point-by-point response below. We hope that with these changes, the manuscript can now be accepted for publication in PLOS ONE.
While addressing the reviewers' concerns please specifically pay attention to the following points:
1) Please make sure that all your conclusions are supported by experimental data. For example, the statement about eNOS and Cav1 interaction in internal pools would require additional experimental confirmation. 
We included additional STED data showing eNOS localization in detached caveolae in EHD2 knockdown HUVECs (Fig. 4). Furthermore, we toned down our conclusions on eNOS localization in isolated EHD2 del/del mesenteric arteries.
2) It is unclear why calcium imaging data are provided for ATP in HUVEC, whereas acetylcholine was used in ex vivo experiments.
Both acetylcholine and ATP are standardly and exchangeable used in the literature to activate eNOS via related signaling pathways (da Silva et al., Circulation, 2009, 119:871-879; Lohman et al., Cardiovas Research, 2012; 95:269-280). To allow comparability of our results to the existing literature, we followed in our manuscript protocols that were established for ATP-induced Ca2+ imaging specifically in HUVECs (Gifford et al., Journal of Endocrinology, 2004, 182:485-499; Lim et al., Placenta, 2015, 36:759-66; Sue et al., Pfluegers Archive Eur J Phy, 1999; Isshiki et al., PNAS, 1998, 95:5009-5014). Indeed, control HUVEC experiments showed the typically Ca2+ responses after ATP treatment as previously published (Nilius & Droogmans, Phys rev, 2001, 81:1416-1459; Gifford et al., Journal of Endocrinology, 2004, 182:485-499).
For the wire myography/ active force measurements, acetylcholine has been standardly used in our research (Järve et al, Exp Neurol. 2019, Lian et al, Front Physiol 2018, Szijártó et al. Hypertension 2018, Schmid et al., J Am Heart Assoc, 2018, etc.). Again, we followed established protocols to allow comparability of the results to previous data. 
3) To comply with the new PLOS One policy, please provide the entire, un-cropped Western blot images in Supplemental figures for all Western blot data included in the manuscript. 
All Western Blots with markers are included in Fig S7-9.
4) For isometric tension experiments, please provide traces with the complete recovery after KCl-induced contractions. Why was not a nitric oxide donor used to confirm that NO could still dilate the pre-contracted EHD2 del/del vessels?
As requested, we now included additional NO donor experiment to confirm general eNOS/NO downstream signaling functionality in EHD2 del/del arteries (Fig. 2I). Also as requested, we have included traces with complete recovery after KCl-induced contractions (Fig. S3A). The traces in Fig. 2 did not show a total recovery which requires more than 30 min. As only freshly prepared mesenteric artery pieces can be used for this experiment, we reduced the recovery time for KCl induced contraction to increase the number of experiments. We were therefore able to test 7-10 mesenteric artery pieces from one mice per day. Furthermore, after the KCl stimulus, the arteries were not used anymore. This is now mentioned in the legend of Fig. S3.
5) Please confirm that the pre-contracted vessels cannot be dilated with an alternative endothelial-dependent vasorelaxant and provide experimental evidence that impaired acetylcholine relaxation in EHD2 del/del is not due to a reduced plasma membrane protein expression of muscarinic receptors.
Our additional experiments demonstrate that phenylephrine and KCl-induced contractions and SNP-induced relaxations were normal in EHD2 del/del arteries. We provide a large number of different experiments demonstrating that EHD2 deficiency causes impaired eNOS activity (reduced NO levels in EHD2 knockout arteries and knockdown HUVEC, reduced eNOS phosphorylation in EHD2 siRNA HUVEC), which consequently results in reduced relaxation of small vessels. We also performed additional experiments indicating that muscarinic acetylcholine M3 receptor protein level is not altered in EHD2 del/del arteries (Fig. S3B). Together, we believe that the data present firm evidence that EHD2-dependent caveolae plasma membrane stabilization regulates correct eNOS localization and function in small arteries. As a consequence, insufficient NO production by the eNOS pathway is the primary cause of impaired relaxation observed in EHD2 del/del arteries.
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1.) Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming.
We changed the manuscript and the figures accordingly to the journal’s requirements.
2.) Please amend the title either on the online submission form or in your manuscript so that they are identical.
The title in both forms is now ‘eNOS-NO-induced small blood vessel relaxation requires EHD2-dependent caveolae stabilization’.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer #1: 
This study describes a connection between EHD2, caveolae and NO signaling. The study uses mostly immunofluorescence to look at colocalization along with other methods to show the importance of formed caveolae structures on NO signaling. The data and results are very nice with two exceptions that need to be resolved: 
Thank you very much for your excitement, we are very grateful for your comments.
1 – The STED images are confusing. The images do not resemble the structures seen by high resolution methods.
Compared to electron microscopy, STED analysis, especially in tissue sections, lacks resolution resulting in more diffuse images. The included STED images of mesenteric arteries illustrate eNOS and Cav1 localization, but the images do not show specific plasma membrane shapes, as seen in our EM analysis. In addition, distinct caveolae membrane forms cannot be distinguished. However, we observed a mislocalization of eNOS from the plasma membrane into the cytosol in EHD2 lacking tissue which based on our subsequent analysis most likely corresponds to detached caveolae. This observation was not seen with EM because the eNOS antibody did not work in immunogold-EM (we tested this before). Thus, in tissue sections, STED imaging was used to illustrate the mislocalization of eNOS, but details of the plasma membrane and caveolar shape could not be resolved.
To further characterize eNOS localization in caveolae, we now included new STED microscopy analysis of EHD2 knockdown HUVECs (Fig. 4), which allows us to visualize caveolae at much higher resolution compared to tissue sections. In these experiments, we can now resolve single caveolae. We show that detached caveolae still contain eNOS, therefore further supporting our previous data and our model. 
2 - The cartoon in Figure 4 is not accurate. The G proteins that are responsible for calcium signals localize in caveolae which enhances calcium signals. The authors need to revise their model.
Thank you very much for this valid concern. We changed the figure accordingly and also depicted G proteins within caveolae (Fig. 5).
Reviewer #2: This article makes numerous interesting observations that link the physiological function of eNOS with the structural retention of caveolae at the PM. The authors demonstrate that loss of EHD2 results in functional changes in eNOS, impaired mesenteric artery relaxation, reduced NO synthesis, and changes in Ca2+ signaling in HUVEC cells that they claim are a consequence of re-distribution of caveolae away from the cell surface. The authors go on to demonstrate that loss of EHD2 does not affect viability of mice nor impact upon blood pressure but does affect the exercise fitness of the mice. The data and model put forward are of importance to the field and would be of interest to the readers of PLOS ONE. But there are a few key points to address which make the manuscript unsuitable for publication is its current state.
Thank you very much for the overall positive assessment. We sought to address your concerns, as detailed below.
Major Points:
The authors claim that the loss of EHD2 from endothelial tissue results in a reduction in the total eNOS at the cell surface by STED microscopy on cryostat tissue sections. These findings are critical for the manuscript and their proposed model but the images provided are not as clear as the authors suggest. The authors claim that Figure 3 and S3 show a redistribution of eNOS to an internal pool in EHD2 KO arteries and that this can be quantified by “eNOS staining intensity” at the plasma membrane (Fig 3E). It is unclear from their methods how was this analysis performed - were subregions selected and analyzed for fluorescence intensity? If so, Fig S1 demonstrates “normal” surface association of eNOS in arteries in EHD2 KO in some cells and reduced association in others – critically this reduction in PM intensity of eNOS also observed in the control EHD2 -/+ mice (S1A). To make these claims, biochemical analyses are required to determine if there is a quantitative reduction in eNOS membrane association.
Thank you very much for this valid point. We now include a detailed description of the analysis in the methods part (please see immunohistology of cryostat sections). Indeed, we analyzed the plasma membrane region of the small mesenteric arteries in the STED images to determine eNOS staining intensity (Fig. 3E). Using this method, we observed reduced eNOS staining at the plasma membrane of endothelial cells in EHD2 del/del mesenteric arteries. In addition, we found distinct eNOS spots in the cytosol in EHD2 del/del small arteries, suggesting that eNOS is re-localizing from the plasma membrane into the cytosol.
However, the initial inspection of blood vessels by confocal microscopy (Fig. S1B, D) did not reveal a difference of eNOS localization in EHD2 knockout arteries because the resolution limit is 200 nm. This is now noted in the figure legend S1. Therefore, plasma membrane and cytosol cannot be distinguished in these images (Fig S1B, D). We exchanged the example image for EHD2 del/+ aorta (Fig. S1B) to better illustrate the homogenous eNOS staining in the endothelial cell layer of the vessels. 
Interestingly, our STED analysis revealed clustered eNOS localization at the plasma membrane in EHD2 control mice (Fig. 3). Compared to EHD2 lacking mice, eNOS staining intensity was strongly increased but we also observed sub-regions of plasma membrane with reduced eNOS staining suggesting eNOS might not be completely homogenously distributed at the endothelial cell surface. Please see discussion about eNOS localization. 
Moreover, the authors highlight the redistribution of eNOS from the PM to internal pools. In the discussion the authors suggest eNOS and Cav1 likely still interact in internal pools (i.e. on dissociated caveolae observed by their electron microscopy). However, from the images provided it is unclear if Cav1 and eNOS do interact away from the surface as these puncta appear to lack Cav1. This is an important point and one that should be addressed using the HUVEC cell model and STED microscopy.
Indeed, the STED images of the mesenteric arteries (Fig. 3) do not clearly demonstrate that the relocated eNOS still interacts with Cav1. To address this concern, we now included higher resolution STED analysis of eNOS in relation to Cav1 in EHD2 knockdown HUVECs (Fig. 4). We can now distinguish between membrane-bound and detached caveolae (Fig. 4B, C). Furthermore, we observed eNOS staining in plasma membrane-bound but also in detached caveolae. Compared to control HUVECs, EHD2 siRNA treated cells showed an increased eNOS intensity in their analyzed caveolae (Fig. 4E) suggesting that eNOS still localizes in close proximity to Cav1. 
Does loss of EHD2 in HUVEC cells affect the PM association of caveolae by electron microscopy?
We performed new EM analysis to address this concern (see Fig. 4F). Indeed, EM inspection of EHD2 knockdown HUVECs also revealed an increased number of detached caveolae (Fig. 4F), illustrating again that loss of EHD2 results in altered caveolae behavior and re-localization from the plasma membrane, similar to what we observed in our STED analysis (Fig. 4).
Minor Corrections:
The affiliation of the authors has come up as the title of the article. I’m unsure if this is an error in the portal or a mistake by the authors.
We apologize for this and changed the title in the submission form.
Line 362: The sentence reads “Perfused and fixated…” this should read “Perfused and fixed…”
Thank you, we changed this accordingly.
Reviewer #3: This well-written manuscript investigates Dynamin-related ATPase EHD2 in caveolae formation and eNOS NO release and vasodilation in vivo, ex vivo, as well as in HUVEC in vitro. The authors confirm the expression of EHD2 in adipocytes and vasculature and HUVEC, showing co-localization with eNOS. Presence of caveolae was confirmed in WT and EHD2 KO by EM, with significant changes in caveolae localization. Basic KCL and ACh vasoreactivity assays show a major decrease in Ach-induced vasorelaxation, with no effect of l-Name, suggesting reduced NO-dependent vasorelaxation. DAF imaging for NO show decrease staining in absence of EHD2 in tissues, and lower NO release and cytosolic Ca+ concentration supported these conclusion in HUVEC treated with EHD2 siRNA.
Thank you very much for the positive review. Please see below for our responses. 
Major:
The way the results are described in the Results and Figure legends section is simply to succinct. There is no %, fold changes, there is simply not enough detail. Description of controls are barely discussed and sometimes omitted. Results should be better described, Legends should be more complete.
We included the requested description of all experiments and also figure legends were extended. Please see the revised manuscript (new text/description is added in red).
A decrease in vasorelaxation to ACh could also suggest a decrease in ACh muscarinic receptor, and therefore requires confirmation with vasorelaxation with another endothelial-dependent agonist. But this was not performed.
In response to this concern, we further included ACh muscarinic M3 receptor analysis by staining mesenteric artery cryosections isolated from EHD2 del/+ and del/del mice (Fig. S3B). Indeed, we did not observe an altered M3 staining for EHD2 lacking arteries indicating that the M3 protein level is not reduced in these vessels. 
Bradykinin is another agonist that is used to analyze vasorelaxation. However, our own experience and other previous studies showed that bradykinin induced relaxation is not stable (for example, see Wirth et al., 1996, 354:38-43). Therefore, we did not perform this experiment. Instead, we now included additional experiments using a NO donor (SNP) to evaluate whether EHD2 deficiency affects eNOS function vs. downstream signaling. The results are presented in Fig. 2I and discussed in the text. The new data demonstrate that downstream signaling of eNOS is intact in EHD2 del/del arteries. These data support the general concept that EHD2 deficiency causes impaired eNOS activity that consequently results in reduced relaxation of small vessels. Our additional experiments demonstrate that PE and KCl-induced contractions and SNP-induced relaxations were normal in EHD2 del/del arteries. We provide a large number of different experiments demonstrating that EHD2 deficiency causes impaired eNOS activity (reduced NO amount in EHD2 lacking tissue or cells, reduced eNOS phosphorylation), which consequently results in reduced relaxation of small vessels. Together, we believe that the data present firm evidence that EHD2-dependent caveolae plasma membrane stabilization regulates correct eNOS localization and function in small arteries. As a consequence, insufficient NO production by the eNOS pathway is the primary cause of impaired relaxation observed in EHD2 del/del arteries.
How about PGi2 on the myograph? Were these experiment performed in presence of a PGI2 synthesis inhibitor?
Previous experiments from us showed that prostaglycin (PGi2) is not produced during acetylcholine relaxation in mesenteric arteries (Hercule et al., Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 2009, 29:54-60). Therefore, we did not included COX inhibitors in the experimental set up. This is mentioned now in the methods.
It was suggested that PGi2 can be produced and released in arteries. However, in general it only plays a minor role during vasodilation compared to NO (Majed & Khalil, Pharmacol. Rev., 2012, 64:540-582). Nevertheless, increased PGi2 release would also result in increased relaxation of arteries which was not observed in EHD2 del/del mice in our study. In contrast, we observed a strong inhibition of mesenteric relaxation and therefore excluded this possibility. This is now discussed. 
Minor:
Intro: 'Currently, it is not known if caveolae membrane domains or Cav1 alone is essential for correct eNOS localization and regulation. ' I think this sentence is inaccurate and requires an update. Work on mutant Cav1 has demystified the caveolae vs caveolin signaling question with regards to eNOS. (Sessa CircRes 2016, JCI 2010).
We concur, indeed, the Sessa lab determined the relationship between Cav1 and eNOS in great detail. We therefore removed the sentence from the introduction.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Matthaeus-et-al-Response-to-Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0223620.r003Decision Letter 1
ObukhovAlexander GAcademic Editor© 2019 Alexander G Obukhov2019Alexander G ObukhovThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
25 Sep 2019

eNOS-NO-induced small blood vessel relaxation requires EHD2-dependent caveolae stabilization
PONE-D-19-17247R1
Dear Dr. Matthaeus,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it complies with all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you will receive an e-mail containing information on the amendments required prior to publication. When all required modifications have been addressed, you will receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will proceed to our production department and be scheduled for publication.
Shortly after the formal acceptance letter is sent, an invoice for payment will follow. To ensure an efficient production and billing process, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, you must inform our press team as soon as possible and no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
With kind regards,
Alexander G. Obukhov, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: I am satisfied by the revised version of the manuscript, this paper is ready for publication.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0223620.r004Acceptance letter
ObukhovAlexander GAcademic Editor© 2019 Alexander G Obukhov2019Alexander G ObukhovThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
2 Oct 2019

PONE-D-19-17247R1 
eNOS-NO-induced small blood vessel relaxation requires EHD2-dependent caveolae stabilization 
Dear Dr. Matthaeus:
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
For any other questions or concerns, please email plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE.
With kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Alexander G Obukhov 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE