Nat Chem BiolNat. Chem. Biol.319nihpa101231976Nature chemical biology1552-44501552-4469pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC6202179PMC6202179.162021796202179NIHMS9557462976974010.1038/s41589-018-0060-1NIHMS955746NIHPA9557461ArticleIdentification of a S. aureus virulence factor by
activity-based protein profiling (ABPP)
LentzChristian S. SheldonJessica R. CrawfordLisa A. CooperRachel GarlandMegan AmievaManuel R. WeerapanaEranthie SkaarEric P. BogyoMatthew 
1Departments of Pathology
4Pediatrics
5Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA
2Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
3Department of Chemistry, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA,
USA#Corresponding author.
mbogyo@stanford.edu*These authors contributed equally to this work.
1652018620181463229776096172903201816112018161120182710201825062024Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the
content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject
always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsSerine hydrolases play diverse roles in regulating host-pathogen
interactions in a number of organisms, yet few have been characterized in the
human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Here, we describe a
chemical proteomic screen that identified 10 previously uncharacterized
S. aureus serine hydrolases that mostly lack human
homologues. We termed these enzymes Fluorophosphonate-binding hydrolases
(FphA-J). One hydrolase, FphB, can process short fatty acid esters, exhibits
increased activity in response to host cell factors, is located predominantly on
the bacterial cell surface in a subset of cells, and is concentrated in the
division septum. Genetic disruption of the fphB gene confirms
that the enzyme is dispensable for bacterial growth in culture but crucial for
establishing infection in distinct sites in vivo. A selective
small molecule inhibitor of FphB effectively reduces infectivity in
vivo, suggesting that it may be a viable therapeutic target for the
treatment or management of Staphylococcus infections.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## Introduction
The bacterium Staphylococcus aureus is a highly significant
human pathogen and a major cause of bacterial infections worldwide . While this bacterium is found as
part of the commensal skin and mucosal microbiome in about 30% of the human
population, it is usually held in check by the physical barrier of the skin.
However, upon breach of host defenses, S. aureus can disseminate
systemically, leading to life-threatening conditions such as endocarditis,
osteomyelitis, meningitis and sepsis . S. aureus often forms highly robust biofilms
in which the bacterium populates synthetic surfaces, e.g. on prosthetic devices,
surrounding itself in a biomolecular matrix that is largely impermeable to the
immune system and many antibiotics, causing infections that are complicated and
costly to monitor and treat .
Finally, an increased prevalence of community-acquired infections with
antibiotic-resistant strains is a
further reason why S. aureus remains a major human health threat
that requires new methods for rapid detection, treatment and therapy response
monitoring.
Hydrolytic enzymes have vital roles for maintaining bacterial homeostasis and
survival at the host-pathogen interface – and thus
represent potential anti-virulence and anti-infectivity targets , .
Serine hydrolases are one of the largest and most diverse enzyme classes in
eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteomes . One of the largest subgroups of serine hydrolases, the
α,β-hydrolases, are classified as enzymes that play important roles
in processing of metabolites, peptides and lipids as a means of controlling cell
signaling and metabolism. They also have been proven to be effective drug targets
for a variety of diseases – , yet the
functionalities of α,β-hydrolases in S. aureus
remain largely unknown.
Serine hydrolases proceed through an acyl enzyme intermediate during
processing of a substrate, thus a range of serine reactive electrophiles can be used
to covalently target these enzymes . In fact, flurophosphonate-based probes have been used to
globally profile serine hydrolases in animal tissues , ,
human cell lines , the pathogenic
bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis , 
and Vibrio cholerae
 and in archaea . Here, we describe a functional
proteomic screen in live S. aureus under biofilm-promoting
conditions using the serine-reactive activity-based probe (ABP)
fluorophosphonate-tetramethylrhodamine (FP-TMR) . This screen identified a set of 10
α,β-hydrolase containing enzymes that are expressed in live
S. aureus that have little or no homology to host-derived
serine hydrolases. Through the identification and use of a covalent inhibitor,
development of a highly-selective fluorescent ABP and the use of genetic knock-out
strains, we were able to characterize one of these hydrolases as a virulence factor.
This enzyme is localized at the bacterial surface, is heterogeneously distributed in
the bacterial population, can process short-chain lipid esters, is regulated in
response to host-cell derived factors and is important for infection of distinct
tissue sites in vivo. Our results demonstrate the power of a
focused functional proteomic screen in a relevant human pathogen such as S.
aureus to identify a group of hydrolytic enzymes whose functions are
likely to be important for various aspects of cellular physiology and host-pathogen
interactions. Given their accessibility to modification by chemical probes and lack
of human homologues, these enzymes may be promising targets for diagnosis, infection
monitoring or treatment of S. aureus infections.

## Results

## Serine hydrolase activity profiling and inhibitor screen
Global profiles of serine hydrolase activity can be generated by treating
intact cells with the fluorescent ABP FP-TMR followed by analysis of labeled
protein by SDS-PAGE analysis ( ).
ABPs also allow screening for inhibitors of newly identified enzyme targets
without the need to express the enzymes and identify substrates by competition
labeling ( ). Therefore, we set out
to identify novel serine hydrolase targets in S. aureus using
the FP-TMR probe. Since the biofilm form of S. aureus is highly
clinically relevant, we performed initial activity-based protein profiling
(ABPP) with FP-TMR in S. aureus cells (strain ATCC3556) that
were grown under biofilm-promoting conditions, removed from the matrix and
suspended in broth. This identified multiple prominently labeled enzymes that
were resolved by SDS-PAGE analysis of the total cellular lysates ( ). Without knowing the identity of these
targets, we screened a library of ~500 compounds that were designed to
covalently target serine proteases and hydrolases , using the competition labeling method ( , ).
Deconvolution of the original screening mixtures and secondary screening of
individual compounds identified potent and selective inhibitors of two of the
most efficiently labeled hydrolases ( , ).
Specifically, compound 1, the chloroisocoumarin JCP251, was
selective for a ~36 kDa hydrolase target at nanomolar concentrations ( ) and compound 2, the
sulfonyl fluoride JCP678, showed selectivity for a ~28 kDa hydrolase at low
micromolar concentrations ( ).
To identify the targets of these inhibitors along with the other
probe-labeled S. aureus serine hydrolases, we pretreated live
bacteria with JCP251, JCP678 or vehicle control, and then labeled them with the
biotin-tagged probe FP-biotin. Cells were lysed, enriched for biotinylated
proteins using a streptavidin-resin and samples analyzed by LC-MS/MS ( ). Using this strategy, we identified
peptides from 12 proteins predicted to contain an α,β-hydrolase
domain ( , , data
are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009210). All of these
proteins, with the exceptions of S. aureus lipases SAL1 and
SAL2 – , are poorly annotated with no
assigned cellular functions. We then examined the predicted domain structures,
cellular location, size and closest human homologs of each of the 12 hydrolases
( ). Given that none of the
enzymes (except Sal1 and Sal2) have been given names or have identifiable human
homologs, we named these 10 enzymes
‘Flurophosphonate-binding
serine hydrolases’ (Fphs) following the
nomenclature used for penicillin-binding proteins. We assigned sequential
letters (A–J) to each enzyme based on the predicted size of the proteins
with the largest protein being assigned the letter A. Two of these
uncharacterized hydrolases, FphE and FphG, were previously reported (but not
named or further studied) in a chemoproteomic study using β-lactam
probes that primarily target penicillin-binding proteins , . None of the other Fph targets were labeled by the
β-lactam probes . By
identifying specific hydrolases whose recovery was blocked by pretreatment with
the selective inhibitors, we identified the 36 kDa hydrolase as FphB and the
primary target of JCP251 and the 28 kDa protein as FphF and the target of JCP678
( , , , ).
To further confirm the identity of all of the major FP-TMR-labeled
hydrolases, we obtained strains from the Nebraska Transposon Mutant
Library with
insertions in individual fph genes. We transduced these mutants
into the well-characterized S. aureus Newman lab strain
background and performed FP-TMR labeling experiments to correlate individual
hydrolases with probe-labeled proteins by SDS-PAGE analysis ( ). For transposon mutants strains deficient in
either Sal1/2, FphA, FphB, FphE, FphF or FphH, we observed loss of a labeled
species of the corresponding molecular weight from the FP-TMR labeled proteome.
For the fphD mutant we observed loss of labeling of a hydrolase
of <30 kDa, which is smaller than the expected size of 33 kDa, but is
consistent with a previous observation . Among the available transposon mutant strains, we were
not able to identify FphC and FphG as probe-labeled bands in the SDS-PAGE gel.
This might be due to the low abundance of these enzymes in combination with
lower sensitivity and limited resolution of the SDS-PAGE- compared to the
MS-based assay, as well as different activity and permeability of the
biotinylated and fluorescent probes. Interestingly, the FphH-transposon mutant
displayed elevated labeling of several other serine hydrolase activities (e.g.
FphE and FphD) suggesting a possible level of functional redundancy and/or
compensation among these enzymes ( ).
Ultimately, we were able to identify 8 Fphs and Sal1/2 in the SDS-PAGE
experiment, as well as three additional labeled proteins whose identities have
yet to be confirmed ( ).

## Biochemical analysis of S. aureus FphB
Although we identified 10 serine hydrolases in our proteomic screen that
each likely serve important functions to the bacteria, we focused our initial
efforts on FphB due to its overall high activity in cells, lack of prior
characterization and the overall potency and selectivity of the JCP251 lead
inhibitor. FphB is predicted to be a 322 amino acid protein of 36.8 kDa size
( ). Bioinformatic analyses
suggest FphB does not have a classical signal peptide, is not secreted, but may
possess a short N-terminal transmembrane domain or cleavage site ( ).
Data mining of previously published transcriptomic datasets revealed that
fphB gene transcription was moderately upregulated (1.8
– 2.9-fold) upon exposure to various cell wall-acting antibiotics and
antimicrobial peptides (locus tags SA2323 , , and SA2549 , resp.). Similar upregulations in
fphB transcription were found in response to
neutrophil-associated azurophilic granules, hydrogen peroxide, hypochlorus acid,
(locus tag MW2456 acid shock
(locus tagSA2549) as well as
antibacterial skin fatty acids, (temporary upregulation, locus tag
SA2323) suggesting a
potential role for FphB under stress conditions at the host-pathogen interface.
We recombinantly expressed FphB and purified it as the full length,
His6- and T7-tagged fusion protein rFphB from E.
coli ( ). To determine if the protein was enzymatically
active, we tested a panel of commercially available fluorogenic substrates
( ). We found that the rFphB
protein cleaved fluorogenic esterase substrates, but did not process phosphate,
phosphonate, glycosidic substrates or the protease substrate FITC-casein ( ). Among the ester substrates tested,
it preferred C4 > C7 > C8 fatty acid
esters but was unable to cleave C2, C10 or longer fatty
acid esters. Using 4-Methylumbelliferyl butyrate as a substrate we measured the
inhibitory activity of JCP251 against rFphB and found that it has a fast
inactivation rate Kobs/[I] of 8.5 ± 1.6
*106 [M−1
s−1] consistent with its ability to block
labeling of FphB even at nanomolar concentrations in the competition labeling
studies.

## A fluorescent activity-based probe for S. aureus
FphB
JCP251 is an ideal starting point for the design of an ABP for imaging of
FphB activity in live bacteria. Our set of screening hits indicated that
substitution of the C3 methoxy group by a propyloxy or isopropyloxy
moiety (compound 3 (JCP174), compound 4 (JCP222) in
 ) largely
retained the activity profile of JCP251. We therefore tested an analog of JCP251
containing the bodipyTMR fluorophore attached through a linker at the C3 methoxy
substitution (compound 5 or JCP251-bT; ) . This fluorescent probe had similar potency compared to the
parent JCP251 inhibitor with only a ~3-fold lower inactivation rate
(Kobs/[I] = 2.6 ± 1.8
*106 [M−1
s−1]). When JCP251-bT was applied to S.
aureus cultures, it labeled a single protein that was observed
throughout exponential and stationary phase growth in liquid culture ( ).
Importantly, this specific labeling was lost in the FphB-transposon mutant
strain, confirming the high selectivity of the probe for FphB in live cells
( , ).
Interestingly, the probe labeled a small number of potential off targets when
applied to the soluble fraction of bacterial lysates instead of live cells
( ). This result could be due to limited membrane permeability of the
probe or the release and activation of hydrolase targets under lysis
conditions.
In order to further assess the selectivity of JCP251-bT for S.
aureus FphB over related hydrolases in other bacteria, we used the
probe to label various Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria ( ). All of these bacteria express multiple
serine hydrolase activities that were detected by the broad-spectrum FP-TMR
probe. We performed homology searches for FphB and found orthologs with
53–57% identity in other Staphylococcal
species, while putative orthologs in other prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms
showed only 25–39% identity ( ).
Accordingly, JCP251-bT labeled methicillin-sensitive and methicillin-resistant
S. aureus strains, as well as S.
epidermidis, but did not show any labeling of targets in a number
of other bacterial pathogens. To assess if JCP251-bT is sufficiently selective
for FphB to be used for imaging during an infection, we performed labeling
studies of live bacteria co-cultured with peripheral mononuclear cells and RAW
cells. The probe weakly labeled proteins in both host cell types alone, but upon
co-incubation of these cells with S. aureus, it predominantly
labeled FphB ( ) and allowed visualization of probe-labeled bacteria over
weak background fluorescence caused by non-specific probe uptake and/or labeling
of host cell proteins ( ).

## FphB activity is dynamically regulated
Given that expression levels of the fphB gene may be
altered by skin derived signals , we wanted to determine if activity levels (as measured by
the JCP251-bT probe) responded to host cell derived factors. Interestingly, we
observed that FphB labeling by JCP251-bT is significantly increased in the
presence of RAW cells and that the extent of this effect was dependent on the
ratio of bacterial cells to host cells ( and ). This ratio-dependency might be explained by
a contact-dependent mechanism where at high bacterial density the necessary
contact points on the macrophage surface are saturated resulting in a lower net
stimulation per bacterium. We observed that this stimulatory effect is retained
in both soluble and insoluble fractions from RAW cell lysates as well as in
PFA-fixed cells ( 
 ). Our data suggest that the increase in FphB activity is not
dependent on active metabolic processes in the host cell, but is rather mediated
through contact with a heat-stable component on the RAW cell surface. Notably,
we did not observe any secretion of FphB into the culture medium ( ).
Furthermore, the effect is not specific for macrophages. Bacteria reacted
similarly to exposure to PFA-fixed HepG2 and PFA-fixed HEK cells, as well as to
Fetalplex™ Animal Serum Complex. Notably, the stimulatory
components in the serum could partially be depleted by chloroform-extraction
suggesting they may be lipids or fatty acids. ( , ) Together, these data suggest that S.
aureus (both strains ATCC35556 and Newman) regulates FphB activity
in response to host cell derived signals.

## FphB labeling in the cell envelope is asymmetric and heterogenous
As the location of a protein provides clues to its physiological
function, we sought to experimentally determine the location of enzymatically
active FphB in the bacterium by labeling with JCP251-bT. To confirm probe
specificity, we used flow cytometry to quantify labeling on a population scale
in both WT and fphB transposon mutant bacteria ( , ). JCP251-bT
labeling was detected in Newman WT and FphE-mutant populations, while for both
the FphB-deficient bacteria and WT bacteria pretreated with JCP251 we only could
detect background autofluorescence. Interestingly, we observed that the probe
labeled only ~7–10% of Newman WT and a higher percentage of
cells were probe-positive in the FphE-deficient strain. This suggests that FphB
is heterogeneously expressed among individual cells within the bacterial
population. Confocal fluorescence microscopy experiments in Newman cells again
confirmed that JCP251-bT labeling is specific to FphB ( ). To better localize FphB activity, we
probe-labeled a Newman strain expressing a GFP reporter. We observed that FphB
activity levels vary dramatically among individual WT cells ( ) and as expected, pretreatment with JCP251
reduced fluorescent signals to background levels ( ). Importantly,
JCP251-bT labeling did not co-localize with the cytosolic GFP signal but rather
showed concentrated signals in specific regions of the cell envelope ( ). Furthermore, a subset of
dividing cells showed enriched probe labeling in the septal cross-wall, the
primary location of cell wall biogenesis in S. aureus ( ) suggesting that FphB might modify
substrates located in the bacterial cell wall.

## FphB is important for infection of distinct tissue sites in
vivo
Given that FphB activity is concentrated in the cross-wall of dividing
cells, we reasoned that it might be important for cell division. We therefore
monitored the fitness of the fphB transposon mutant during
in vitro growth. Surprisingly, the FphB-deficient strain
had no growth defect in liquid culture ( ) and showed a similar doubling time (55.4 ± 3.5 min) to
the WT (55.9 min ± 1.5 min). Furthermore, treatment of WT bacteria with
JCP251 to chemically block FphB activity did not alter bacterial growth, either
( ). Given these results, and the
fact that FphB activity levels are dynamic and change in response to host
cell-derived factors, we reasoned that it may be functionally important during
infection of a host organism. Using a systemic murine infection model, we
observed that mice infected with the FphB transposon mutant strain had
~10–100 fold reduced bacterial loads compared to the WT strain in liver
and heart tissues, but equal CFU numbers in the kidneys ( ). In contrast, infection with the FphE
transposon mutant only resulted in a small, but statistically significant
reduction of bacterial loads in the liver, but not in the hearts or kidneys of
infected mice ( ). The overall weight loss in the course of infection with
either mutant strain was comparable to that of WT-infected mice ( ). These
findings suggest the existence of distinct molecular mechanisms for the
colonization of these organs by S. aureus and establish that
FphB is important for S. aureus to infect heart and liver
tissues.
Finally, we wanted to determine if chemical inhibition of FphB prior to
infection would negatively affect the pathogen’s ability to establish
tissue infection in vivo. We reasoned that pretreating cells
with JCP251 would ‘chemically knock out’ FphB activity for early
events during infection, but would eventually be overcome by de
novo expression of the protein in vivo. Indeed,
pretreatment of S. aureus Newman with JCP251 before infection
reduced the bacterial burden in the liver to levels comparable to those observed
upon infection with the fphB transposon mutant strain ( ). In contrast, chemical knock-down of
FphB prior to infection was insufficient to reduce CFU levels in the heart or
kidneys ( ). These data suggest a
role for FphB activity during the early colonization/attachment phase of an
intravenous infection.

## Discussion
Although it is clear that serine hydrolases play important roles in various
aspects of both bacterial and host cell biology, surprisingly little is known about
this family of enzymes in S. aureus. This report describes the use
of the serine-reactive electrophilic probe FP-TMR to identify putative serine
hydrolase targets in S. aureus. Our profiling data confirm that
S. aureus expresses a number of active serine hydrolases during
normal and biofilm-like growth (in liquid culture and on agar) the majority of which
are poorly characterized, lack annotation and have few, if any, mammalian homologs.
The fact that this class of enzymes has so far largely escaped identification in
ingg vitro phenotypic screens might be due to functional
redundancy or functions in the host-pathogen interface that are difficult to capture
with in vitro model systems.
Functional studies of one of these newly identified hydrolases, FphB,
suggest that it responds to non-proteinaceous host-derived factors, is localized to
the cell surface as well as the division septum and plays important roles in the
early stages of infection in vivo. The finding that disruption of
FphB expression results in defects in infection of the heart and liver but not the
kidneys suggests FphB may help bacteria to functionally adapt during colonization.
The observed differences in infectivity for specific target organs could be linked
to a molecular surface architecture that may require different strategies for
attachment. Glycosaminoglycans are common receptors for bacterial attachment or
other aspects of bacterial pathogenesis . Murine kidney cells have been shown to have higher levels
of glycosaminoglycans such as heparan sulfate compared to liver and heart
tissues and might thus
facilitate FphB-independent tissue attachment. If FphB is in fact a key regulator of
initial contact of bacteria with host cells, it could represent an ideal target for
small molecules that could prevent the spread of a primary infection to other sites
that cause increased morbidity and mortality (i.e. heart valves and artificial
implants).
Although active during all culture stages and conditions tested, we found
increased levels of FphB activity after contact with structural components of
eukaryotic cell membranes and lipophilic serum components. Such contact is likely to
occur upon initial attachment with host cells during early stages of an infection,
where FphB activity could promote the establishment of infection. Thus, after
sensing a molecular environment corresponding to a certain niche, elevated FphB
activity might represent one element of a dynamic functional response of the
bacteria to colonize or survive in this new environment. As we observed FphB
activity only in a subset of cells, our results suggest that S.
aureus populations display a degree of functional diversity that might
facilitate their survival in a variety of biological niches.
How FphB mediates such effects and what its physiological substrates are,
remains speculative. Our substrate profiling experiments with recombinant FphB
suggest that the enzyme acts as a carboxylic acid esterase able to process
C4-C8 chain fatty acid esters. Yet, the true physiologic
substrate(s) may not have been accounted for in the limited set of synthetic
fluorogenic substrates tested. As FphB activity is increased in the presence of
host-derived components, one possible scenario is that the enzyme processes
exogenous biomolecules allowing bacteria to scavenge host-derived substrates for
their own metabolism. The ability to metabolize certain substrates may be key for
survival in certain biological niches during infection or colonization (e.g. heart
and liver), but may not affect growth in rich liquid culture media or other tissue
sites (e.g. kidneys), consistent with our observations of the FphB mutant.
The potential endogenous substrate space includes the bacterial membrane and
cell wall. As we did not observe cleavage of long chain fatty acid esters, we do not
expect FphB to act on canonical membrane lipids. A first indication that FphB might
directly act on substrates localized in the cell wall, is the observed enrichment of
JCP251-bT labeling in the cross-wall of dividing cells. The fact that several
studies found fphB gene expression moderately upregulated in
response to cell wall stress conditions induced by the antibiotics
oxacillin and
daptomycin , cationic
antimicrobial peptides , or the
lantibiotic mersacidin further
links FphB activity to this cellular location. Enzymes known to act in the
cross-wall of dividing cells are important for shaping the cell wall as a structural
scaffold protecting the inside of the bacterial cell (e.g. murein
hydrolases) or as an
outward-facing matrix for interaction with the environment (e.g. the Sortase
A) . Murein hydrolases
are crucial for cell wall integrity and cell division and mutations in their
corresponding genes invoke severe growth phenotypes in
vitro . We did not
observe a similar phenotype for the fphB mutant. In contrast,
Sortase A anchors secreted proteins with an LPXTG consensus sequence (e.g. adhesins,
protein A and further virulence factors) to the free amino-terminus of pentaglycine
in nascent peptidoglycan and deficiency in Sortase A attenuates pathogenicity
in vivo .
Thus, Sortase A is a prime example of a cell surface-modifying enzyme whose
functional relevance becomes evident in vivo, but not during growth
in liquid culture. Similarly, FphB activity might govern environmental interactions
by acting on cell-wall anchored proteins or structural components of the cell wall.
Structural modifications of cell wall polymers that have been been reported to
affect virulence, pathogenesis or colonization include O-acetylation at
C6 of N-acetylmuramic acid in peptidoglycan , 
and glycosylation and
D-Alanylation of wall
teichoic acid. While biosynthetic routes for the major cell envelope polymers are
mostly well understood, evidence of enzymes involved in their dynamic modification
or degradation is only emerging. Regulation of O-acetylation levels by the
O-acetylpetpidoglycan esterase Ape, a serine hydrolase, has been described in
different Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, but not S.
aureus , , suggesting this function may be inherent to
a previously uncharacterized hydrolase in this organism. A recent study on the
S. aureus methicillin-resistance factor FmtA demonstrated that
this enzyme acts as a teichoic acid-specific D-Ala esterase .
Interestingly, so-called Functional Membrane Microdomains (FMMs) are also
associated with septal invaginations of dividing cells. These dynamic
membrane-domains are organized through the scaffold protein flotillin, are largely
composed of saccharolipids derived from the carotenoid staphyloxanthin, and their
integrity is required for the activity of the cell-wall acting PBP2a, a mediator of
penicillin-resistance in MRSA .
Although FphB was not found among FMM-associated proteins in MRSA , it is conceivable that this
enzyme acts on membrane-associated substrates in a regulatory fashion that
translates into altered cell wall architecture with downstream effects on virulence.
Given the multitude of described effects that individual cell envelope components
have on bacterial virulence, regulated, dynamic chemical modifications of their
structure through hydrolytic enzymes such as FphB appears to be a plausible strategy
for bacteria to functionally adapt to their environment during infection or
colonization.
The identification of FphB and the further set of 9 uncharacterized Fph
serine hydrolases by ABPP provides a starting point for future elucidation of their
corresponding biological functions. Our study demonstrates that these enzymes are
ideal targets for the development of selective inhibitors and activity-based probes
that will facilitate the characterization of these hydrolase activities in their
physiological environments. Given these initial functional studies of FphB,
inhibition of this target may represent a new targeted strategy to prevent
S. aureus colonization in major organs, for example for
prophylactic treatment of MRSA-carriers before surgery. Furthermore, the ability to
selectively label FphB with a small molecule fluorescent probe renders this enzyme a
potential target for the development of targeted probes for localization and risk
stratification of Staphylococcus spp. infections. These types of
therapy and imaging agents could have a broad impact on diagnosis, treatment and
therapy response monitoring for diverse types of S. aureus
infections.

## Online methods

## Bacterial strains and growth conditions
All bacterial strains employed in this study are summarized in . S.
aureus strains ATCC3555, USA300, Newman or its isogenic mutants
were used as indicated. S. aureus and S.
epidermidis were routinely cultured in Difco tryptic soy broth
(TSB; BD, Sparks, MD), or on tryptic soy agar (TSA; BD). For compound screening
and hit validation, strain ATCC3556 was grown on TSAMg (Tryptic Soy Agar with
100 mM MgCl2) for 48–72 h. When required to select for
transductants, erythromycin and lincomycin were added to the media at
concentrations of 3 μg/mL and 20 μg/mL, respectively (Sigma
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). All incubations were performed at 37°C, and
liquid cultures were aerated by shaking at 180 rpm unless indicated otherwise.
The GFP plasmid pCM29 was
obtained from Dr. Alexander Horswill (University of Iowa) and transformed into
WT S. aureus Newman.
For growth curves of S. aureus Newman and its
fphB transposon mutant, overnight cultures were diluted
1:400 in 30 mL fresh TSB and grown in 125 mL culture flasks at 180 rpm,
37°C. Culture media included 1 μM JCP251 or the same volume
(0.1%) of vehicle (DMSO) under control conditions. Culture aliquots were
taken in 30–60 min intervals, diluted with TSB (1:1 – 1:3)
dependent on the growth phase and OD600 values were determined in a
Laxco DSM-Micro Cell Densitometer.
S. typhimurium and E. coli were grown
in Luria Bertani (LB) broth or on LB agar. L. monocytogenes was
grown in BHI broth or on BHI agar. H. pylori was grown in
Brucella broth or on Columbia agar.

## Cell lines and purification of peripheral mononuclear cells
RAW cells and HEK 293 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle Medium (supplemented with 10% Fetalplex™ Animal
Serum Complex (Gemini Bio-Products), 2 mM L-glutamine and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin). HepG2 cells were grown in DMEM with low
glucose, L-glutamine, sodium pyruvate (Caisson Labs DML28), supplemented with
10% Fetalplex™ Animal Serum Complex and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were grown to 90% confluency, washed 1x
with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and harvested with a cell lifter. Cell
pellets were centrifuged at 1,200 rpm, 3 min and taken up in the desired culture
medium. Whole human blood samples were received from the Stanford Blood Bank and
peripheral mononuclear cells (PMNs) were purified using the
EasySep™ Direct Human Neutrophil Isolation Kit (StemCell
Technologies).

## Genetic manipulation of S. aureus strain Newman
Oligonucleotides used in confirming successful transduction of serine
hydrolase mutants into S. aureus Newman can be found in . In brief,
transposon mutagenesis was used to generate insertion mutations in each
NWMN_0169, NWMN_0262, NWMN_0748, NWMN_1210, NWMN_1683, NWMN_2092, NWMN_2350,
NWMN_2379, NWMN_2434, NWMN_2480, NWMN_2528, and NWMN_2569. Homologs of the
aforementioned genes were first identified through the Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLASTn) in S. aureus USA300 FPR3757 (GeneBank ID
CP000255.1), and corresponding transposon mutants were identified and confirmed
in the Nebraska Transposon Mutant Library through PCR. The mutations were mobilized into
S. aureus Newman using transduction with phage ϕ85.
Successful transductants were confirmed through PCR and assessed for hemolysis
relative to wild-type S. aureus Newman and USA300 by streaking
on BD Trypticase Soy Agar II with 5% Sheep’s Blood (BD).

## FphB sequence analyses
The FASTA sequence of Q2FV90 (SAOUHSC_02844) was retrieved from Uniprot
and analyzed bioinformatically using the following webtools with settings for
Gram-positive bacteria, if applicable: Secretome P2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SecretomeP/), PSORTB Ver 3.0.2
(http://www.psort.org/psortb/) Signal P4.1 (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/), Signal-3L 2.0 and MemBrain
(http://www.csbio.sjtu.edu.cn) and TmPred (minimum length: 14,
maximum: 33) (http://www.ch.embnet.org/software/TMPRED_form.html).

## Phylogenetic analysis
The FphB protein sequence (Uniprot ID: Q2FV90, Strain NCTC8325, gene
SAOUHSC02844) was used as a blastp (protein-protein blast, https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) query sequence in a homology
search against the non-redundant protein sequences database for different
organisms. Top hits obtained for each organisms were subjected to a Clustal
Omega Multiple Sequence Alignment (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/) and the phylogenetic
tree was visualized using iTOL:interactive Tree Of Life (itol.embl.de).

## Cloning of SAOUHSC02844 (fphB) gene
Genomic DNA was purified from S. aureus ATCC35556 using
the Qiagen DNEasy Blood & Tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and used as a
template for PCR-amplification of the SAOUHSC_02844 gene using primers
SAOUHSC02844_Fw_BamHI and SAOUHSC02844_Rv_XhoI with BamHI and XhoI restriction
sites ( ). The
construct was cloned into the pET28a vector.

## Expression, purification and labelling of rFphB
The pet28a-FphB expression vector was transformed into chemically
competent BL21 (DE3) E. coli. An overnight culture of the
transformed bacteria in LB (+Kanamycin 35 μg/ml) selection
medium was diluted 1:400 into 2 L selection medium (in a 4 L flask) at 37
°C, 220 rpm. At OD600 0.1 – 0.2 the culture was
continued to grow at 27°C and protein expression was induced at
OD600 of ~ 0.4 by addition of IPTG (10 μM final
concentration). After growth for 3 h at 27°C, 220 rpm, cells were
harvested by centrifugation, transferred to two 50 mL conical tubes, centrifuged
again and bacterial pellets stored at −80°C.
Each pellet was thawed on ice, resuspended in 20 mL lysis buffer (50 mM
NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 1%
TritonX-10, pH 8.0) and lysed by sonication (6x 10 s, 1.5 s pulse, 30%
Amplitude, Branson Sonifier). Lysates were centrifuged at 4,500 g, 4 °C
for 45 min and the supernatant transferred to a 15 mL conical and a 50%
slurry of His60 Ni Superflow Resin (Clontech Laboratories) was added and
incubated at room temperature (RT), rotating for 60 min, then purified by
gravity flow. The resin was washed 3x with 20 mM NaH2PO4,
300 mM NaCl,20 mM imidazole, 1% TritonX-10, pH 8.0 and the
His6- and T7-tagged protein was eluted in 50 mM
NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 200 mM imidazole. Eluates were
labeled with 1 μM FP-TMR and analyzed by SDS-PAGE (TMR-fluorescence scan
and Coomassie stain). rFphB containing fractions were pooled and were further
purified using the Novagen T7 Tag Affinity Purification Kit as per the
manufacturer’s instruction (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). Finally,
purified rFphB was dialyzed 2x into 50 mM Tris-HCl, 300 mM NaCl and glycerol was
added to a final concentration of 10% for long-term storage at
−80°C. The concentration of purified rFphB was determined by
A280 measurements using a calculated E1% of 10.76.
For ABP-labeling experiments, rFphB (50 nM) in PBS/0.01% SDS was
pre-incubated with different concentrations of JCP251 or DMSO for 30 min at 37
°C, before JCP251-bdpTMR (100 nM) or FP-TMR (1 μM) were added
and the sample mixed by pipetting. Samples were incubated at for 37 °C
for 30 min, boiled in 1xSDS-Loading buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE.

## Bacterial labeling with fluorescent ABPs
After growth on agar plate or in liquid culture as indicated, bacteria
were suspended to the desired density in TSB and added to microtubes in a final
volume of 50 – 300 μL. For inhibitor pretreatment experiments,
the inhibitors were added from 100x-concentrated stock solutions in DMSO and
incubated for 60 min (37 °C, 300 rpm) prior to ABP-labeling. FP-TMR (1
μM) or JCP251-bT (10 nM or 100 nM) were added from 50–100X stock
solutions in DMSO and cells incubated for 30 min, at 37 °C, 300 rpm.
Samples were then taken up in 1x SDS-Loading Buffer and lysed by bead beating as
described below.
For comparative bacterial labeling experiments H.
pylori and L. monocytogenes were grown in 5 mL of
liquid culture. Cultures were spun down and cell densities adjusted to ~2E8
CFU/100 μL in TSB. All other bacterial strains were scraped off agar
plates and resuspended in TSB at equivalent concentrations. To 100 μL
aliquots of bacterial suspension was added 1 μL of 100 μM FP-TMR
or 10 μM JCP251-bT. Cells were mixed by pipetting and incubated at 37
°C for 30 min. 1 mL PBS was added and samples were centrifuged (8,000 g,
5 min, RT). The supernatant was taken off and cell pellets resuspended in 500
μL 1x SDS-Loading Buffer and lysed by bead-beating.

## Competitive activity-based protein profiling screen
Experimental details on the screening procedure are given in the
‘Small Moleule Screening Data Table’ ( ).

## Bacterial lysis
After probe labeling bacterial suspensions were prepared
PBS/0.1% SDS or already in 1xSDS-Loading Buffer. Suspensions were
transferred to 0.6 mL (400–500 μL samples) or 2.0 mL (1.0
– 1.2 mL samples) o-ring tubes filled ~half with 0.1 mm glass beads
(Biospec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA). Tubes were placed in pre-chilled
aluminum vial rack and samples lysed in a Mini-BeadBeater-96 (Biospec Prod) (3x
50 s with 2 min resting time on ice in-between) and centrifuged at 13,000g, 4
°C, 5 min.

## SDS-PAGE analysis of samples labeled with fluorescent ABPs
Lysate supernatants were combined with 4X SDS-Loading Buffer. Samples
were boiled at 95 °C for 10 min and separated by SDS-PAGE gel.
TMR-fluorescence was scanned on a Typhoon 9410 variable mode imager (TAMRA
channel, λex = 380, 580 BP filter).

## Preparation of RAW cell lysates and fractionation
At ~90% confluency RAW cells were washed 2x in PBS scraped off
plates and harvested in DMEM (+2 mM L-glutamine). Cells were spun down
by centrifugation at 1,200 rpm, RT and cells adjusted to a concentration of 1E5
cells/50 μL. Cell suspensions were cooled on ice, transferred into 7 mL
vials filled with ~ 3.5 mL of 0.1 mm glass beads and lysed by bead beating (1x
50 s). Supernatants were stored at −80°C or further fractionated
by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 g, 60 min, 4 °C in a
Optima™ MAX-TL Ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter,
Indianapolis, IN, USA).

## ABP labeling experiments in eukaryotic/bacterial cell co-cultures

## Labeling to assess the selectivity of JCP251-bT
RAW cells or PMNs (~50,000) were seeded out in RPMI/HEPES into
sterile flat-bottom 96-well plates. The plate was spun down at 1,200 rpm
(accel=5, brake=3) for 3 min and incubated at 37°C,
5% CO2 for 60 min. S. aureus ATCC3556
was grown overnight on TSA, scraped off the plate and adjusted to an
OD600 of 0.5 in DMEM (+2 mM L-glutamine). Eighty
μL of bacterial suspension (1E7 CFU, MOI=200) or medium were
added to either cell type or control wells containing medium only and
incubated for 60–90 min at 37°C, 5% CO2,
before JCP251-bdpTMR was added to a final concentration of 100 nM. Plates
were spun down, incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. 60
μL 4xSDS-Loading Buffer was added to lyse eukaryotic cells. Samples
were transferred to o-ring-tubes for lysis and SDS-PAGE analysis.

## FphB stimulation experiments
S. aureus ATCC35556 was harvested after growth on
TSA or S. aureus Newman was grown to exponential phase in
TSB, centrifuged. Bacteria were resuspended in serum- and antibiotic free
culture medium (DMEM, 2 mM L-glutamine or RPMI, 5 mM HEPES) and incubated
for 60–90 min in the presence of different stimulatory conditions
prior to labeling with 50 – 100 nM JCP251- bdpTMR. Stimulatory
conditions include: RAW cells or PMNs seeded in serum- and antibiotic free
culture medium, fixed RAW, HEK 293 or HepG2 cells (treated with
2% PFA for 10 min and washed 3x with PBS),
Fetalplex™ Serum (before and after extraction with an
equal volume of chloroform) full RAW cell lysate or soluble and insoluble
fractions after ultracentrifugation, as well as heat-inactivated lysate
fractions. Heat-inactivation of lysate fractions was done at 95°C
for 15 min. After probe labeling, cell lysis and SDS-PAGE analysis FphB
bands were quantified using Image Studio Lite software (LI-COR Biosciences).
Statistical analysis was done using Prism 7.0 (GraphPad Software)

## Fluorogenic substrate assays
Stock solutions of 4-Methylumbelliferyl(4-MU)-based fluorogenic
substrates were dissolved in DMSO (1 mM) and 0.3 μL were added to the
wells of an opaque flat-bottom 384 well plate. Thirty μL of a solution
rFphB in PBS/0.01%TritonX-100 (400 pM active enzyme) was added and
fluorescence (λex = 365 nm and λem
= 455 nm) was read at 37 °C in 1 min intervals on a Cytation 3
imaging reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA) for 60 min. Turnover rates in the
linear phase of the reaction (10 – 40 min) were calculated using Gen5
software (BioTek) as RFU/min. Rates were normalized by subtracting background
hydrolysis rates measured for each substrate in reaction buffer in the absence
of protein.

## Determination of inactivation constants
kobs/[I]
Inactivation rates kobs/[I] of recombinant
FphB by inhibitors JCP251 and JCP251-bT were measured under pseudo first-order
conditions at a substrate concentration of 1 mM 4-methylumbelliferyl butyrate
(4-MU butyrate). To 0.3 μL substrate (in DMSO) were added 0.3 μL
of inhibitor (in DMSO) to the wells of a 384-well plate and, after addition of
29.6 μL FphB (0.8 nM active enzyme) in PBS/0.01%TritonX-100, the
enzymatic reaction was monitored as described above at 37 °C for 30 min.
Data were normalized by subtracting background signal due to substrate
hydrolysis (in the absence of FphB) at each timepoint. The normalized progress
curve was fit to the formula P = V/kapp *(1 −
e kapp*t) + C with P = product formation, V
= initial velocity, t= time and kapp as the apparent
rate constant. A constraint was set for V as the rate determined for the linear,
uninihibited reaction for each experiment. The second order rate constant
kobs/[I] was then calculated using the formula
kobs/[I]
=kapp/[I] (1 +
[S]/KM) for three different inhibitor
concentrations (5 nM, 10 nM and 20 nM). The KM-value for this
substrate was experimentally determined as 52 ±11 μM. Mean
kobs/[I] values ± SD were determined from
3 independent experiments.

## FITC-casein assay
A stock solution of FITC-casein (5 mg/mL in water) was diluted 1:500 in
assay buffer (PBS/0.01%Triton X-100) and 50 μL added to the
wells of an opaque flat-bottom 96-well plate. Fifty μL FphB (2 nM active
enzyme), Trypsin (2 nM) or assay buffer were added and the plate incubated at 37
°C. After 30 min and overnight incubation fluorescein fluorescence
(λex = 485 nm and λem
= 538 nm) were measured on a Cytation 3 imaging reader.

## FP-biotin labeling of S. aureus serine hydrolases and sample
preparation for mass-spectrometry
S. aureus ATCC35556 was grown on TSBMg for 72 h and
resuspended to an OD600 ~100 in 13 mL TSB. 1 mL aliquots were
transferred to a 1.5 mL tube and JCP251 (300 nM, 1 μM), JCP678 (1
μM) or DMSO (5 μL) were added and cells incubated for 60 min at
37 °C, 700 rpm. Five μL of FP-biotin (1 mM in DMSO) were added
to the bacteria and incubated for 30 min, before samples were spun down (4,500
g, 5 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was aspirated. The cell pellet was
resuspended in 1.2 mL PBS/0.1%SDS and 100 μL Protease Inhibitor
Cocktail were added. The samples were transferred to 2.0 mL o-ring tubes
half-filled with 0.1 mm glass beads, tubes placed into pre-chilled aluminum
blocks and lysed by bead-beating (3x 50 s with 2 min on ice in-between) as
described above. Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 g, 4 °C.
Fifteen μL aliquots were taken for SDS-PAGE analysis and SA-HRP blot.
Protein concentration in the supernatant was adjusted to 0.8 mg/ml and 200
μL 10% TritonX-100 added to 0.8 mg of proteome and incubated at
4°C for 1 hr, rotating. Sample volume was brought to 2.5 mL and added to
a pre-equilibrated PD10 desalting column (GE LifeSciences) discarding the flow
through. Samples were eluted with 3.5 mL PBS and 10% SDS/PBS was added
to a final concentration of 0.5% SDS. Samples were boiled at 90
°C for 8 min, then cooled in a −20°C freezer for ~ 5 min
before ~80 μL of a prewashed 50% Streptavidin-agarose slurry was
added and samples were incubated at RT for 1 hr, rotating. Samples were
centrifuged at 300g for 2 min and washed 2x with 1% SDS, 2x with 6M urea
and 2x with PBS (each 10 ml). After the final wash, resin was resuspended in 500
μL 6 M urea, 25 μL of DTT (30 mg/ml solution in PBS) and heated
at 65 °C for 15 min. 25 μL of iodoacetamide (14 mg/mL in PBS)
were added and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Following incubation, 950
μL PBS was added, the resin spun down and the supernatant discarded. A
premixed solution of 200 μL of 2 M urea/PBS, 2 uL 100 mM
CaCl2 in water and 4 μL Trypsin solution (20 μg
lyophilized powder reconstituted in 40 μL 2 M urea/PBS) was added to the
resin and samples incubated at 37°C overnight, rotating. Tryptic peptide
digests were separated from the resin over a spin-filter column and resin washed
2x with 50 μL PBS. Fifteen μL of formic acid was added to the
combined eluates for each sample. Samples were stored at −20°C
until LC/LC-MS/MS analysis.

## Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass
spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. Peptide
digests were pressure loaded onto a 250 μm fused silica desalting column
packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). The peptides were
eluted onto a biphasic column (100 μm fused silica with a 5 μm
tip, packed with 10 cm C18 and 4 cm Partisphere strong cation exchange resin
(SCX, Whatman) using a gradient of 5–100% Buffer B in Buffer A
(Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid;
Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic
acid). The peptides were then eluted from the SCX onto the C18 resin and into
the mass spectrometer using 4 salt steps previously described. The flow rate
through the column was set to ~0.25 μL/min and the spray voltage was set
to 2.75 kV. One full MS scan (FTMS) (400–1800 MW) was followed by 8 data
dependent scans (ITMS) of the nth most intense ions.
The tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm using a
concatenated target/decoy variant of the NCTC8325 S. aureus
UniProt database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was
specified to account for alkylation by iodoacetamide. SEQUEST output files were
filtered using DTASelect. Proteins with less than 5 average spectral counts
among the three replicates of the control sample were filtered from the dataset.
Fold change was calculated as the quotient of the number of average spectral
counts for the control sample divided by the number of average spectral counts
for the compound treated sample. P values were calculated for the compound
treated samples and control samples.

## Flow cytometry
Labeled bacteria were were washed 2x in PBS, fixed in 2% PFA for
10 min and washed 3x with PBS. Bacteria were resuspended in PBS and analyzed on
a BD Accuri™ RUO Special Order System Flow Cytometer with BD
CSampler software (BD Biosciences, San Diego, USA). FSC-A threshold was set to
5,000 and 30,000 – 50,000 events in the bacterial cell gate were
recorded. BdpTMR-fluorescence was detected using a 552 nm laser and 586 nm
filter (FL2-detector).

## Fluorescence microscopy

## Imaging of RAW cells
1E5 RAW cells were seeded onto a sterile coverslip in a 24-well
plate in 400 μL DMEM (+2.5 mM L-glutamine) and incubated at
37 °C, 5% CO2. The next day S.
aureus ATCC3556 were harvested after growth on TSAMg and
adjusted to an OD600 of ~ 0.8 in DMEM (+2.5 mM
L-glutamine). Fifty μL (1E7 CFU) were added to the cells, incubated
for 60 min at 37°C, 5% CO2, before 5 μL
of 7 μM JCP251-bdpTMR (100 nM) was added and cells incubated for
another 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2. After 30 min of
labeling cells were washed 2x with PBS, fixed in 2%PFA for 10 min at
RT and washed 3x with PBS. Coverslips were mounted onto microscope slides
with VECTASHIELD Antifade Mounting Medium with DAPI (Vector
Laboratories).

## Imaging of bacteria only
A suspension of labeled and fixed bacteria in PBS was added onto an
agarose pad on a microscope slide and covered with a coverslip. Cells were
imaged at 63x using a Zeiss LSM 700 confocal microscope in the BodipyTMR and
GFP channels. Laser and gain settings were configured at the beginning of
each experiment and constant settings used for all samples.

## Murine model of S. aureus systemic infection
Two days prior to infection, S. aureus Newman and its
isogenic transposon mutants were streaked on TSA and incubated overnight at 37
°C. Single isolated colonies from the TSA plates were used to prepare
overnight cultures in 5 mL of TSB. Overnight cultures were back-diluted 1:100 in
5 mL of TSB, and grown for 2.5 h to mid-exponential phase. Cultures were
pelleted by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 10 minutes, and washed once in
sterile PBS. Cells were normalized to an OD600 of 0.4 in PBS,
corresponding to a cell density of approximately 1–2 x 108
CFU/mL. Each inoculum was quantified by serial dilution and plating on TSA.
For all murine experiments, female BALB/cJ mice were purchased from The
Jackson Laboratory and infected at 6–8 weeks of age. In brief, mice were
anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection with 125–250 mg/kg of
2,2,2-tribromoethanol and were subsequently infected with S.
aureus through injection of 100 μL of prepared cells
(~1–2 x 107 total CFU) into the retroorbital sinus. The
infection was allowed to proceed for 96 h, with frequent monitoring throughout
the course of the experiment.
Infection was allowed to proceed for 96 h, and the mice were assessed
for health and weight every 12 and 24 h, respectively. Following euthanasia by
CO2 inhalation, the kidneys, heart and liver were harvested. The
extracted organs were homogenized and serially diluted in sterile 1 x PBS before
plating for CFU on TSA. Plates were incubated overnight at 37°C and
counted the following day. All murine experiments were evaluated and approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IUCAC) of Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, and are in compliance with NIH guidelines, the Animal Welfare
Act, and US Federal law.

## In vivo inhibitor studies
To assess for the function of the JCP251 inhibitor in vivo, S.
aureus wild-type and fphB::ϕNΣ
cells were prepared as described above. Following washing and normalization in
PBS, the inocula were mixed with 1 μM of the JCP251 inhibitor, and
incubated with shaking at room temperature for 1 h. Mice were injected with 100
μL of the S. aureus-inhibitor mix, or with 100
μL of S. aureus in PBS with 1% DMSO, as a mock
control for the inhibitor. The infection was allowed to proceed as above and
bacterial burdens in the kidneys, liver and hearts were assessed after 96 h.

## Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses were done using GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad
Software Inc.). Details on sample size and statistical tests used are given in
the corresponding figure legends. Unless stated otherwise data from in
vitro experiments subject to statistical analysis was performed in
3 technical replicates and analyzed by unpaired Student’s t-Test.
Representative data shown was performed at least in two independent experiments
with a similar outcome. Data from S. aureus infection
experiments were pooled from 2–3 different experiments. If nonparametric
one way ANOVA (Kruskal Wallis test) indicated that median values of the
different experimental groups within a dataset varied significantly, individual
groups were compared by pairwise significance testing using unpaired, two-tailed
Mann-Whitney-U test. P-values <0.05 were considered significant.

## Extended Data
 

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary NoteSupplementary Tables and Figures
C.S.L. was supported through a postdoctoral research fellowship by the German
Research Foundation (DFG). This work was further supported through NIH grants
1R01GM111703 to M.B., 1R01GM117004 and 1R01GM118431-01A1 to E.W., 1R01AI101171 and
1R01AI069233 to E.P.S., and R21AI117255 to M.R.A. We thank Alexander Horswill
(University of Iowa) for sharing the GFP plasmid pCM29. We thank Neri Amara and Josh
Yim for help with NMR analyses and Shiyu Chen for LC-MS analysis of JCP678, and
Lauren Popov, Oliwia Zurek, Joe Romaniuk and Lynette Cegelski for helpful
discussions.
Author Contributions
C.S.L. and M.B. conceived the project. C.S.L designed and performed the
in vitro experiments, synthesized compounds and analyzed
data. J.R.S. designed and performed the in vivo infection
experiments and the genetic manipulation of S. aureus, and
analyzed data. L.A.C. and E.W. performed LC-MS/MS analysis. R.C. contributed to
the comparative bacterial labeling experiments. M.G. synthesized compounds. M.A.
contributed to the experimental design and analyzed data. E.P.S. designed and
analyzed in vivo infection experiments. M.B. supervised the
project, designed experiments and analyzed data. C.S.L. and M.B. wrote the
manuscript, all authors reviewed, discussed and edited the manuscript.
Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests as defined by Nature Research, or other interests that might be
perceived to influence the results and/or discussion reported in this paper.
Data availability and Code availability statements
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange
Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier
PXD009210 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/).