3815pheelsevierThe Dictionary of Cell & Molecular BiologyThe Dictionary of Cell & Molecular BiologyPMC71497057149705714970510.1016/B978-0-12-384931-1.00003-9C
LackieJM4120138888–1611342020Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2013.

c
(1) Single letter code for cysteine (in proteins) or cytosine (in nucleic acids). (2) Prefix used to denote the normal cellular form of, for example, a gene such as src (c-src) that is also found as a viral gene (v-src).
C0t curveA graphical method that can be used to indicate the complexity (or size) of DNA. The DNA is heated to make it single stranded, then allowed to cool. The kinetics of renaturation (reannealing) of the DNA can be followed spectroscopically and the rate is affected by the length of the DNA fragments and by the extent of repetition. Highly repetitive DNA anneals much faster than unique sequence DNA (single copies sequences). C0 is the starting concentration of the specific DNA sequence in moles of nucleotides per liter and t is the reaction time in seconds. The C0t value varies depending on the temperature of reassociation and the concentration of monovalent cations and it is usual to use fixed reference values: a reassociation temperature of 65°C and a Na+ concentration of 0.3 M NaCl. ( has a C0t value of 1.0). Detailed description: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK7567/

C1First component of ; actually three subcomponents, C1q (245aa), C1r (705aa) and C1s (688aa), that form a complex in the presence of calcium ions. C1q, the recognition subunit, has an unusual structure of collagen-like triple helices forming a stalk for its Ig-binding globular heads. Upon binding to immune complexes the C1 complex becomes an active endopeptidase that cleaves and activates and .
C1–C9Proteins of the mammalian system. See individual numbered components.
C2Second component of . A serine peptidase (C3/C5 convertase, EC 3.4.21.43, 752aa) cleaved by activated factor C1 into two fragments: C2b and C2a; C2a combines with complement factor 4b to generate the C3 or C5 convertase.
C2-8Cell permeable compound that potently inhibits polyglutamine (polyQ) aggregation in Huntington’s disease (HD) neurons. Suppresses neurodegeneration in Drosophila in vivo. Suspected to block the polymerization step of the polyQ aggregation. Article: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2034257/

C2-kininProbably an artifact, a kinin-like fragment thought to be generated from C2 but more likely to be bradykinin.
C3Third component of (1663aa). Both classical and alternate pathways converge at C3, which is cleaved to yield C3a, an anaphylotoxin, and C3b, which acts as an opsonin and is bound by ; C3b in turn can be proteolytically cleaved to iC3b (ligand for CR3) and C3dg by C3b-inactivator. C3b complexed with Factor B (to form C3bBb) will cleave C3 to give more C3b, although the C3bBb complex is unstable unless bound to properdin and a carbohydrate-rich surface. The C3b-C4b2a complex and C3bBb are both C5 convertases (cleave ). Cobra venom factor (1642aa, found in the venom of Naja kaouthia, the monocled cobra) is homologous with C3b but the complex of cobra venom factor, properdin and Factor Bb is insensitive to C3b-inactivator.
C3 nephritic factorAn autoantibody that binds to and stabilizes the C3 convertase enzyme of the alternate pathway (C3bBb) both in the presence and absence of serum regulatory proteins. Deficiencies are associated with type 2, dense-deposit membrano-proliferative glomerulonephritis and partial lipodystrophy. Article: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3848661

C3 plantsPlants that fix CO2 in photosynthesis by the . The enzyme responsible for CO2 fixation is ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase, whose products are compounds containing three carbon atoms. C3 plants are typical of temperate climates. Photorespiration in these plants is high.
C3GGuanine nucleotide exchange factor (RAPGEF1, 1077aa) that activates Rap1. C3G is involved in signalling from to JNK.
C3HAAn inbred strain of mice that originally was very suceptible to mammary tumours.
C4Fourth component of (1744aa), although the third to be activated in the classical pathway. Becomes activated by cleavage (by C1) to C4b, which complexes with C2a to act as a C3 convertase, generating C3a and C3b. The C4b2a3b complex acts on C5 to continue the cascade. Human C4 is polymorphic at two loci, C4A and C4B.
C4 plantsPlants found principally in hot climates whose initial fixation of CO2 in photosynthesis is by the HSK pathway. The enzyme responsible is PEP carboxylase, whose products contain four carbon atoms. Subsequently the CO2 is released and re-fixed by the . The presence of the HSK pathway permits efficient photosynthesis at high light intensities and low CO2 concentrations. Most species of this type have little or no photorespiration.
C5Fifth component of (1676aa), which is cleaved by C5-convertase to form C5a, a 74aa anaphylotoxin and potent chemotactic factor for leucocytes, and C5b. C5a rapidly loses a terminal arginine to form C5adesarg, which retains chemotactic but not anaphylotoxic activity. C5b combines with C6, C7, C8 and C9 to form a membranolytic complex.
C57BLInbred strain of black mice developed around 1920 by Clarence Cook Little, who later founded the Jackson Laboratory.
C6, C7Sixth (C6, 934aa) and seventh (C7, 843aa) components of the complement cascade. Contain EGF-like motifs. See and .
C8Eighth component of complement, a heterotrimer of α (584aa), β (591aa) and γ (202aa) peptides. The alpha and gamma chains are disulphide linked.
C9Ninth component of (559aa). Complexed with C5b, 6, 7 and 8 it forms a potent membranolytic complex (sometimes referred to as the membrane attack complex, MAC). Membranes that have bound the complex have toroidal pores any one of which may be enough to cause lysis. C9 is the pore-forming subunit of the complex.
c127 cellsA nontumorigenic mouse epithelial cell line, derived from mammary gland, widely used in in vitro transformation assays due to its normal morphological appearance and its very low levels of spontaneous transformation
Ca2+ puffsLocal intracellular signals generated by ligand-gated ion channels (inositol trisphosphate receptors, IP3Rs) that liberate Ca2+. Puff sites represent preestablished, stable clusters of IP3Rs. Free article: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2897231/?tool=pubmed

CAAT boxNucleotide sequence in many eukaryotic promoters usually about 75bp upstream of the start of transcription. Binds NF-1.
cabinA nuclear -binding protein (calcineurin inhibitor, 2220aa) with a negative regulatory role in the T-cell-receptor signalling pathway. It binds MEF2B, and probably all the MEF family of transcription factors and if intracellular calcium levels rise, activated calmodulin will displace the MEFs, allowing them to act. May also be required for replication-independent chromatin assembly.
cachectinProtein produced by macrophages that is responsible for the wasting (cachexia) associated with some tumours. Now known to be identical to tumour necrosis factor (TNFα). Has three 233aa subunits, all derived from a single highly-conserved gene.
Caco cellsCell line with epithelial morphology derived from a primary colonic carcinoma of a 72-year-old male Caucasian.
CAD
(1) A multifunctional protein (2225aa) responsible for the first three steps of the de novo pyrimidine synthesis pathway: glutamine-dependent carbamoyl-phosphate synthase (EC 6.3.5.5), aspartate carbamoyltransferase (EC 2.1.3.2) and dihydro-orotase (EC 3.5.2.3). It is allosterically regulated and when phosphorylated loses feedback inhibition. (2) See DFF.
CADASILCerebral arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), an autosomal dominant progressive disorder of the small arterial vessels of the brain leading to stroke and dementia. Caused by mutation in the Notch3 gene.
cadaverineSubstance formed by microbial action in decaying meat and fish by decarboxylation of lysine. The smell can be imagined. Like many of the other diamines (e.g. putrescine) has effects on cell proliferation and differentiation.
CadF
(1) An adhesion molecule (Campylobacter adhesin to Fn, 326aa) of the OmpA family, produced by Campylobacter sp., that allows binding of the organism to the extracellular matrix. Abstract: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16091041. (2) Cofilin/actin-depolymerizing factor homologue (see twinstar).
cadherinsIntegral membrane proteins involved in calcium dependent cell adhesion, usually tissue-specific. The cytoplasmic domain interacts with . Cadherin-1 (E-cadherin, uvomorulin, CD324, 882aa) is found in in epithelia, cadherin-2 (N-cadherin, 906aa) in neural cells and cadherin-3 (CDH3, P-cadherin, 829aa) in placenta. Cadherin-4 (916aa) is retinal cadherin, cadherin-5 is vascular endotherial cadherin (784aa). The cadherin family includes desmocollins, desmogleins and protocadherins. See also eplin, flamingo, nectin #3, nullo, otocadherin, plakophilins. Mutations in cadherin-1 are associated with many carcinomas, defects in cadherin-3 cause hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy and EEM syndrome.
Caenorhabditis elegansNematode much used in lineage studies since the number of nuclei is determined (there are 959 cells), and the nervous system is relatively simple. One of the first organisms to have its complete genome sequenced. The organism can be maintained axenically and there are mutants in behaviour, in muscle proteins, and in other features. Sperm are amoeboid and move by an unknown mechanism which does not seem to depend upon actin or tubulin.
caerulinAmphibian peptide hormone related to gastrin and . A decapeptide that is one of the main constituents of the skin secretion of Xenopus laevis.

caeruloplasminSee .
caesium chloride
US. cesium chloride Salt that yields aqueous solutions of high density. When equilibrium has been established between sedimentation and diffusion during ultracentrifugation, a linear density gradient is established in which macromolecules such as DNA band at a position corresponding to their own buoyant density.
CAF-1
(1) CCR4-NOT transcription complex subunit 7 (BTG1-binding factor 1, CCR4-associated factor 1, 285aa) an ubiquitous transcription factor involved in a wide range of processes. (2) See chromatin assembly factor.
caffeineA xanthine derivative that elevates cAMP levels in cells by inhibiting phosphodiesterases. In plants caffeine inhibits fusion of vesicles that form the new cross wall or cell plate. Only stubs of wall are formed at the cortex, resulting in an incompletely separated and therefore bi-nucleate cell.
caffeoyl CoA O-methyl-transferaseAn enzyme (CCOMT, EC 2.1.1.104, 121aa) that catalyses the formation of S-adenosylhomocysteine and feruloyl-CoA from S-adenosyl methionine and caffeoyl-CoA in the biosynthesis of lignin.
Caffey’s diseaseA disorder (infantile cortical hyperostosis) caused by mutation in the alpha-1 collagen type I gene (COL1A1) which is unusual because there is an episode of massive subperiosteal new bone formation beginning before five months of age and that resolves before two years of age.
caged-ATPA derivative of ATP that is not biologically active until a photosensitive bond has been cleaved.
Cajal bodiesSpherical structures (coiled bodies, 0.1–2.0 µm), varying in number from 1 to 5, found in the nucleus of proliferating cells like tumour cells, or metabolically active cells like neurons. Contain factors required for splicing (e.g. ), ribosome biogenesis and transcription and are dynamic structures.
CAKIn S. cerevisiae, CDK-activating kinase (CAK1, EC 2.7.11.22, 368aa), in humans, cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CAK1, 346aa). See .
calbindinsA family of calcium-binding proteins with multiple EF-hand domains that includes calmodulin, parvalbumin, troponin C, and S100 protein. Calbindin 1 (261aa) buffers intracellular calcium levels and is found in primate striate cortex and other neuronal tissues. Calbindin 2 (calretinin, 271aa) is found in cerebellar Purkinje cells and is is abundant in auditory neurons. Calbindin 3 (intestinal calcium-binding protein, S100-G, 79aa) is found in the intestine and is induced by vitamin D.
calceinA calcium-chelating agent that fluoresces brightly in the presence of bound calcium. The acetomethoxy derivative can be transported into live cells and the reagent is useful as a viability test and for short-term marking of cells.
calcicludinePolypeptide toxin (60aa) from Dendroaspis angusticeps (Eastern green Mamba). Blocks most high-threshold calcium channels (L-, N- or P-type). Structurally homologous to Kunitz-type serine peptidase inhibitors and dendrotoxins.
calciferolSee Table V1
Vitamin D.
calcimedinsSee Table A2
Annexins.
calcineurinA calmodulin-stimulated protein phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.16), the major calmodulin-binding protein in brain. and the only Ca2+-dependent Ser/Thr protein phosphatase. There are two-subunits, the A subunit (521aa) has the catalytic activity, the B subunit (170aa) confers calcium sensitivity. Dephosphorylates NFATc, heat shock protein beta-1 (HSPB1) and the protein tyrosine phosphatase slingshot homologue-1 (SSH1). It is inhibited by binding of immunophilin-ligand complex (immunophilin alone does not bind) and is the target for the immunosuppressive drugs ciclosporin A and FK506, being a key enzyme in T-cell activation. Calcineurin-binding protein (cabin-1, 2220aa) may be a negative regulator of T-cell receptor (TCR) signalling by inhibiting calcineurin (see ). Review article: http://www.biosignaling.com/content/7/1/25

calcinosisDeposits of calcium salts, primarily hydroxyapatite crystals or amorphous calcium phosphate, in various tissues of the body.
calciosomeA membrane compartment proposed to contain the intracellular calcium store released in response to hormonal activity and thought to be distinct from the ER. Now discredited.
calcipressinsA family of endogenous inhibitors with multiple alternatively spliced isoforms. Calcipressin 1 (regulator of calcineurin 1, Down’s syndrome critical region protein 1, DSCR 1, myocyte-enriched calcineurin-interacting protein-1, MCIP 1, Adapt 78, 252aa) interacts with calcineurin and inhibits NFAT-mediated transcriptional activation. Calcipressin 1 has greater capacity to inhibit calcineurin when phosphorylated at the FLISPP motif, and this phosphorylation also controls the half-life of calcipressin 1 by accelerating its degradation. Calcipressin 2 (197aa) and calcipressin 3 (241aa) are similar but with different tissue distribution.
calciseptinePolypeptide toxin (60aa) from Dendroaspis polylepis (Black Mamba) that is a specific blocker of L-type calcium channels and will cause relaxation of smooth muscle and inhibition of cardiac muscle but has no effect on skeletal muscle.

calciterminSee .
calcitoninA hormone produced by C-cells of the thyroid that causes a reduction of calcium ions in the blood. The precursor (141aa) is cleaved into calcitonin (32aa), which promotes incorporation of calcium and phosphate into bone and katacalcin (calcitonin carboxyl-terminal peptide, 21aa) which potently reduced plasma calcium levels.
calcitonin family peptidesFamily of small (32–51aa) highly homologous peptides that act through seven-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptors. Adrenomedullin (ADM; 51aa) is a potent vasodilator and has receptors on astrocytes; amylin (37aa) is thought to regulate gastric emptying and carbohydrate metabolism; calcitonin (32aa) is involved in control of bone metabolism; calcitonin-gene-related peptides one and two (37aa) regulate neuromuscular junctions, antigen presentation, vascular tone and sensory neurotransmission. Receptors are themselves regulated by RAMPs.
calcitriolThe form of vitamin D3 that is biologically active in intestinal transport and calcium resorption by bone.
calcium ATPaseUsually refers to calcium-pumping ATPase such as that present in high concentration as an integral membrane protein of the sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle (sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase, SERCA, EC 3.6.3.8: SERCA1, 1001aa; SERCA2, 1042aa). This pump lowers the cytoplasmic calcium level and causes contraction to stop. Normal function of the pump seems to require a local phospholipid environment from which cholesterol is excluded. Other calcium pumping ATPases are found in other tissues, e.g. calcium-transporting ATPase type 2C member 1 (919aa) (deficient in Hailey-Hailey disease).
calcium binding proteinsThere are two main groups of calcium-binding proteins, those that are similar to , and are called EF-hand proteins, and those that bind calcium and phospholipid (e.g. lipocortin) and that have been grouped under the generic name of annexins. Many other proteins will bind calcium, although the binding site usually has considerable homology with the calcium binding domains of calmodulin.
calcium blockerAny compound that blocks or inhibits transmembrane calcium ion movement. Most are potent vasodilators and some are anti-arrhythmic. Examples are nifedipine, verapamil and diltiazem.
calcium channelMembrane channel that is specific for calcium. Probably the best characterized is the voltage-gated channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum which is ryanodine-sensitive. See voltage-sensitive calcium channels, ryanodine receptor.
calcium currentInflow of calcium ions through specific . Critically important in release of transmitter substance from presynaptic terminals.
calcium dependent regulator proteinEarly name for .
calcium phosphate precipitationTechnique used for introducing DNA or chromosomes into cells; co-precipitation with calcium phosphate facilitates the uptake of DNA or chromosomes.
calcium pumpA transport protein responsible for moving calcium out of the cytoplasm. See .
calcium-sensing receptorIn humans, a plasma membrane multi-pass G protein-coupled receptor (1078aa) that is expressed in the parathyroid hormone-producing cells of the parathyroid gland and the cells lining the kidney tubule. It regulates parathyroid hormone secretion and calcium homeostasis. Mutations can lead to hypoparathyroidism. In Arabidopsis a chloroplast calcium sensor (387aa) modulates cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration and is crucial for proper stomatal regulation in response to elevated levels of external Ca2+.
calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinasesWidely distributed calcium-regulated kinases. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase 1 (CaMK1, EC 2.7.11.17, 370aa) phosphorylates synapsins, and and is involved in cellular processes such as transcriptional regulation, hormone production, translational regulation, regulation of actin filament organization and neurite outgrowth. It is involved in calcium-dependent activation of the ERK pathway. CaM Kinase II (EC 2.7.1.37) is a multi-subunit enzyme composed of four homologous subunits, α, β, γ, δ, all encoded by different genes and ~500aa. The heteromultimeric holoenzyme (500–600 kDa) has 10 or 12 subunits with the ratio of α,β,γ and δ reflecting that present in the cell. It has been implicated in various neuronal functions including synaptic plasticity. It is highly concentrated in the postsynaptic region and undergoes autophosphorylation at several sites in a manner that depends on the frequency and duration of Ca2+ spikes. Constitutively active CaMKII produces dendritic exocytosis in the absence of calcium stimulus. CaMKII activation is the primary event leading to inactivation of both CSF (cytostatic factor) and MPF (maturation promoting factor; ) in mammalian eggs.Other CaM kinases with restricted tissue distribution are also known, e.g. DAP kinases, protein kinase IV. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase 1 (CaMKK1, EC 2.7.11.17, 505aa) phosphorylates CaM kinases and is involved in regulating apoptosis.
calcivirusSee .
calcofluorA fluorochrome, extensively used in microscopy, that also exhibits antifungal activity and a high affinity for yeast cell wall chitin.

calcyclinProlactin receptor associated protein (S100-A6, 90aa), one of the S100 calcium-binding proteins, originally isolated from Erlich ascites tumour cells, but human and rat forms now identified. Regulated through the cell cycle. Binds to annexin II (p36) and to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.
calcyphosinCytoplasmic calcium binding protein (calcyphosine, 189aa) that contains an EF-hand motif involved in both Ca2+-phosphatidylinositol and cyclic AMP signal cascades. There is a calcyphosin-like protein (208aa) with similar properties. Calcyphosin-2 (557aa) is widely distributed.
caldesmonProtein (793aa) originally isolated from smooth muscle but also found in non-muscle cells. Regulates actomyosin interactions in smooth muscle and nonmuscle cells by stimulating the binding of tropomyosin to actin filaments. Calcium-calmodulin binding to caldesmon causes its release from actin, though phosphorylation of caldesmon may also affect the link with actin. Caldesmon can block the effect of gelsolin on F-actin and will dissociate actin-gelsolin complexes and actin-profilin complexes.
calelectrinProtein originally isolated from Torpedo (electric eel). Now known to be annexin A6, (calphobindin-II, chromobindin-20, lipocortin VI, protein III, p68, p70, 673aa) that may regulate the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores.
caleosinsProteins involved in storage lipid mobilization during seed germination and located on the surface of lipid bodies or associated with an ER-subdomain. For example, in Arabidopsis caleosin-1 (embryo-specific protein 1, 245aa). They are products of a large gene family found ubiquitously in higher plants and in several lipid-accumulating fungi. Characteristically have a well conserved EF-hand, a central hydrophobic region and a C-terminal region with several putative phosphorylation sites. See oleosins.
calexcitinsIn C. elegans, calcium and GTP-binding proteins (calexcitin-1, 204aa; calexcitin-2, 189aa) that interact with and activate the ryanodine receptor and activate the calcium ATPase. Calexcitins are high affinity substrates for PKCα and once phosphorylated move to membrane where they inactivate voltage-dependent K+ channels. Have two EF-hand motifs, and some similarities with ARFs (ADP-ribosylating factors).
CALFA file format (Compact ALignment Format) for computational bioinformatics; a CALF file records the base qualities and mapping qualities of the aligned reads, and unaligned read data. Details and protocols: http://www.phrap.org/phredphrap/calf.pdf

calgizzarinCalcium-binding protein of the S100 family (S100 calcium binding protein A11, 105aa), originally isolated from chicken gizzard, implicated in the regulation of cytoskeletal function through its calcium-dependent interaction with annexin I.
calgranulinsCalcium binding myeloid-associated proteins of the S100 family. Calgranulin-A (S100-A8, cystic fibrosis antigen, leukocyte L1 complex light chain, migration inhibitory factor-related protein-8, MRP-8, 93aa) is expressed by macrophages in chronic inflammation and has a range of other activities, including some antimicrobial properties. Calgranulin-B (S100-A9, migration inhibitory factor-related protein 14, 114aa) is expressed in inflammation and may inhibit protein kinases. Calgranulin-C (S100-A12, 92aa) is proteolytically cleaved to calcitermin (15aa), which possesses antifungal and some antibacterial activity.
calicinActin binding protein (588aa) that contains three kelch repeats. Found in the post-acrosomal calyx region of vertebrate sperm.
CaliciviridaeA family of non-enveloped viruses with a genome consisting of a single molecule of linear positive-sense, single-stranded RNA enclosed in a capsid with icosahedral symmetry. They usually infect a single species of vertebrate host. Genera include noroviruses and lagoviruses, a species of the latter having been deliberately (but prematurely) released to cause rabbit haemorrhagic fever as a biological control mechanism. N.B. often misspelt calcivirus. Virus database entry: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ICTVdb/ICTVdB/00.012.htm

calitoxinsSmall peptide toxins (79aa) from sea anemone Calliactis parasitica that lives commensally with hermit crabs. Acts on neuronal sodium channels.
calloseA plant cell-wall polysaccharide (a β-(1–3)-glucan) found in phloem sieve plates, wounded tissue, pollen tubes, cotton fibres, and certain other specialized cells.
callus
(1) In plants, undifferentiated tissue produced at a wound edge. Callus tissue can be grown in vitro and induced to differentiate by varying the ratio of the hormones auxin and in the medium. (2) In animals, either a mass of new bony trabeculae and cartilaginous tissue formed by osteoblasts early in the healing of a bone fracture or a skin thickening caused by persistent irritation or friction.
calmeginA calcium binding membrane protein (610aa) of the family, that probably plays a role in spermatogenesis.
calmidazoliumInhibitor of calmodulin-regulated enzymes; also blocks sodium channel and voltage-gated calcium channel.
calmodulinUbiquitous and highly conserved calcium binding protein (149aa) with four EF-hand binding sites for calcium (three in yeast). Ancestor of troponin C, leiotonin C, and parvalbumin.

calnexinCalcium-binding lectin-like protein (MHCclass I antigen-binding protein p88, 592aa) of endoplasmic reticulum that couples glycosylation of newly synthesized proteins with their folding. Calnexin and act together as chaperones for newly synthesized proteins and prevent ubiquitinylation and proteosomal degradation. Can be phosphorylated by II.
calpactinsCalcium-binding proteins from cytoplasm. Calpactin II is identical to lipocortin, and is one of the major targets for phosphorylation by pp60src. See annexin.
calpainsCalcium-activated cytoplasmic thiol endopeptidases (formerly EC 3.4.22.17) with broad specificity, containing the EF-hand motif in the larger catalytic subunit. The smaller regulatory subunit (268aa) has a calmodulin-like domain. Calpain-1 (EC 3.4.22.52, 714aa) is activated by micromolar calcium, and is inhibited by . Calpain-2 (EC 3.4.22.53, 700aa) requires millimolar calcium for activation. Many other tissue-specific calpains are now known e.g. calpain-9 (digestive tract-specific calpain, 690aa) and defects in some calpains are associated with disorders such as muscular dystrophy and diabetes.
calpastatinCytoplasmic inhibitor (708aa) of some . It consists of four repetitive sequences of 120–140aa (domains I, II, III and IV), and an N-terminal non-homologous sequence.
calpeptinA cell-permeable inhibitor.
calphobindinsAnnexins V and VI (320aa, 673aa) found in placenta (see Table A2). Have substantial sequence homology with lipocortin and may function like .
calphostin COne of a group of compounds isolated from Cladosporium cladosporioides that will inhibit protein kinase C with some specificity, though inhibits other classes of kinases if present in high concentration.
calponin homology domainA superfamily of actin-binding domains (CH domains) found in both cytoskeletal proteins and signal transduction proteins. Included are the actinin-type actin-binding domain (including spectrin, fimbrin, ABP-280) and the calponin-type. Usually present in pairs although itself has only one.
calponinsCalcium and calmodulin binding troponin T-like proteins involved in the regulation of smooth muscle contractility. Interact with F-actin and tropomyosin in a calcium sensitive manner and act as regulators of smooth muscle contraction (inhibit when not phosphorylated). Distinct from and myosin light chain kinase, but have some antigenic cross-reactivity with cardiac Troponin-T. Three human isoforms have been identified: calponin-1 (calponin H1, basic calponin, 297aa), calponin-2 (calponin H2, neutral calponin, 309aa), calponin-3 (acidic calponin, 329aa).
calregulinSee .
calreticulinUbiquitous calcium-binding protein (calregulin, high affinity calcium binding protein, HACBP, calreticulin-1, 417aa; calreticulin-2, 384aa) with lectin-like domains found in the endoplasmic reticulum. Act as chaperones for newly synthesized proteins, possibly in conjunction with . May be more selective in the proteins with which they associate than calnexin.
calretininSee .
calsarcinSee myozenin.
calsenilinSee DREAM.
calsequestrinsProteins that sequester calcium in the cisternae of sarcoplasmic reticulum (calsequestrin-1, calmitin, 390aa) is found in fast skeletal muscle, calsequestrin-2 (399aa) is the cardiac muscle form. Each molecule can bind between 18–50 calcium ions probably on a charged surface rather than a specific binding pocket.
calspectinNon-erythroid spectrin.
calsperminHigh affinity calcium/calmodulin binding protein ( type IV, EC 2.7.11.17, 474aa) found in rat. May be involved in transcriptional regulation, regulation of microtubule dynamics, spermatogenesis and consolidation/retention of hippocampus-dependent long-term memory.
calstabinA immunophilin (FK506 binding protein 1B, 108aa) that acts as a channel-stabilizing protein for the cardiac ryanodine receptor channel complex with four molecules of calstabin per receptor. Depletion can cause an intracellular calcium leak and trigger a fatal cardiac arrhythmia. Article: http://www.pnas.org/content/102/27/9607.full

calsynteninsType I transmembrane proteins of the cadherin superfamily. Calsyntenin-1 (Cst1, alcadein-alpha, Alzheimer-related cadherin-like protein, 981aa) is expressed in postsynaptic membranes of excitatory neurons, Cst2 (alcadein-gamma, 955aa) and Cst3 (alcadein-beta, 956aa) are associated with inhibitory GABAergic neurons. The calsyntenins interact with numerous other proteins including APBA2 (amyloid beta A4 precursor protein-binding family A member 2) and APP (Amyloid beta A4 precursor protein).
caltractinCalcium-binding (EF-hand) protein (centrin, 169aa) from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that is a major component of the contractile striated rootlet system that links basal bodies to the nucleus. One of the family.

caltrinIn Bos taurus an inhibitor (peptide YY-2, 80aa) of calcium transport into spermatozoa although it binds to calmodulin, not directly to calcium. Inhibits the growth of microorganisms and may act as an antibiotic by permeabilizing the bacterial membrane. In rat, caltrin (serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 3, 79aa) also inhibits calcium transport but its physiological function is to prevent the trypsin-catalyzed premature activation of zymogens within the pancreas. Not reported from humans.
caltropinObsolete name for the calponin-caltropin complex.
calumeninA calcium-binding protein (crocalbin, 315aa) localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and involved in protein folding and sorting. Calumenin is one of the superfamily.
calvariumOne of the bones that makes up the vault of the skull (in humans these are the frontal, 2 parietals, occipital, and 2 temporals). Calvaria are often used in organ culture to investigate bone catabolism or synthesis.
calvasculinAn actin bundling protein, (metastasin, placental calcium-binding protein, S100 calcium-binding protein A4, 101aa) member of the family of S100-related calcium-binding proteins, located on cytoskeletal elements of cultured mammary cells in a pattern which is identical to actin filaments stained with phalloidin. May be involved in the progression and metastasis of human colorectal neoplastic cells. Interacts, in a calcium-dependent manner, with liprin-beta-1.
Calvin-Benson cycleMetabolic pathway (Calvin cycle) responsible for photosynthetic CO2 fixation in plants and bacteria. The enzyme that fixes CO2 is ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (RuDP carboxylase). The cycle is the only photosynthetic pathway in and the secondary pathway in . The enzymes of the pathway are present in the stroma of the chloroplast.
calycin superfamilyA protein superfamily with obvious similarities of three-dimensional structure that are not easily discernible at the sequence level. There are three distinct families of ligand binding proteins within the superfamily: the lipocalins, the fatty acid-binding proteins (FABPs) and avidins. Article: ftp://salilab.org/jpo/www/PMDG/pmdg_2.html

calyculin ANon-protein toxin from marine sponge, Discodermia calyx; potent tumour promoter and an inhibitor of protein phosphatases of Types 1 and 2a.
CAMSee or .
CaM kinaseSee .
cambium
(1) In plants, a layer of cells (lateral meristem) which forms new cells on both sides and divides to thicken the plant during secondary growth. Located either in vascular tissue (vascular cambium), forming secondary xylem on the inside and secondary phloem on the outside, or in cork (cork cambium or phellogen). Cf.
apical meristems that increase the length of the tissue during primary growth. (2) In metazoa, the inner region of the periosteum from which osteoblasts differentiate.
camera lucidaAttachment for a microscope that permits both a view of the object and, simultaneously, of the viewer’s hand and drawing implement, thus facilitating accurate drawing of the object of interest.
CAMLA multi-pass membrane protein (calcium signal-modulating cyclophilin ligand, 296aa) involved in the mobilization of calcium as a result of the T-cell receptor /CD3 complex interaction. Binds to cyclophilin B and to one of the TNF receptor superfamily (TNFRSF13B).
cAMPSee .
campomelic dysplasiaA disorder of the newborn with various skeletal and extraskeletal defects caused by haploinsufficiency of sox9.
camptothecinCytotoxic plant alkaloid originally isolated from Camptotheca acuminata (Cancer tree, Tree of Life); inhibits DNA topoisomerase I.
CampylobacterGenus of Gram-negative microaerophilic motile bacteria with a single flagellum at one or both poles. Found in reproductive and intestinal tracts of mammals. Common cause of food poisoning and can also cause opportunistic infections, particularly in immunocompromised patients.
Camurati-Engelmann diseaseA disorder involving excessive bone growth (osteitis), particularly of the lower limbs. Some forms, but not all, are a result of mutation in the gene for TGFβ (transforming growth factor-beta).
canal cell
(1) One of the short-lived cells present in the central cavity of the neck of the archegonium in mosses. (2) Cells of Schlemm’s canal, irregular space or spaces in the sclerocorneal region of the eye that receive aqueous humor from the anterior chamber of the eye.
canaliculiIn bone, channels that run through the calcified matrix between lacunae containing osteocytes. In liver, small channels between hepatocytes through which bile flows to the bile duct and thence to the intestinal lumen.
Canavan’s diseaseA severe neurological disorder, fatal in early life, due to mutation in the gene encoding aminoacylase-2 (aspartoacylase).

canavanineOne of the non-protein amino acids (also known as secondary metabolites or anti-metabolites), that exist in plants especially legumes and their seeds. L-canavanine is an L-arginine antimetabolite shown to be a selective inhibitor of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS).
cancellous bone
trabecular bone Adult bone consisting of mineralized regularly-ordered parallel collagen fibres more loosely organized than the lamellar bone of the shaft of adult long bones. Found in the end of long bones.
cancerA general term for diseases caused by any type of malignant tumour.
cancer susceptibility geneSee tumour suppressor gene.
Candida albicansA dimorphic fungus that is an opportunistic pathogen of humans (causing candidiasis).
canine distemperParamyxovirus infection of dogs with secondary bacterial complications. Ferrets, foxes and mink are also susceptible.
Canis familiarisDog.
canker
(1) A plant disease in which there are well-defined necrotic lesions of a main root, stem or branch in which the tissues outside the xylem disintegrate. (2) Chronic eczema of the ear of dogs, often caused by mites.
cannabinoidGroup of compounds, all derivatives of 2-(2-isopropyl-5-methylphenyl)-5-pentylresorcinol, found in cannabis. Most important members of the group are cannabidiol, cannabidol and various tetra-hydrocannabinols (THCs). Bind to the and mimic actions of endogenous agonists anandamide and palmitoyl ethanolamine.
cannabinoid receptorsG-protein-coupled receptors for cannabinoids (and endogenous agonists such as anandamide). CB1 receptors (472aa) are mostly found in brain and may mediate the psychotropic activities; act by inhibiting adenylate cyclase and inhibit L-type Ca2+ channel current. The CB2 receptors (360aa) are more peripheral and found extensively in the immune system; the ligand is 2-arachidonoylglycerol and the receptor inhibits adenylate cyclase and may function in inflammatory responses, nociceptive transmission and bone homeostasis. CB1 cannabinoid receptor-interacting protein 1 (164aa) has two isoforms, one of which will suppress CB1-mediated tonic inhibition of voltage-gated calcium channels.
canolaVariety of oilseed rape (Brassica napus) grown extensively to produce oil for human consumption.
canonicalClassical, archetypal or prototypic. For example, the canonical polyadenylation sequence is AATAAA. A canonical pathway is the orthodox or accepted pathway.
cantharidinA pharmaceutical product obtained from the dried elytra of the Spanish fly (blister beetles) although can now be synthesized. Has potent vesicant properties and has been used topically in the treatment of warts and molluscum contagiosum but is considered dangerously toxic. Inhibits protein phosphatase 2A.
CAP
(1) Catabolite gene activator protein. (2) Cyclase associated protein. (3) See . (4) See .
cap binding proteinProtein (eukaryotic Initiation Factor 4E, eIF4E, 217aa) with affinity for cap structure at 5′-end of mRNA that probably assists, together with other initiation factors, in binding the mRNA to the 40S ribosomal subunit. Translation of mRNA in vitro is faster if it has a cap-binding protein.
CAP proteinsObsolete name for Fas-associated via death domain (FADD) proteins, cytotoxicity-dependent APO-1-associated proteins. CAP1 is FADD; CAP2 is hyperphosphorylated FADD; CAP3 is an intermediate of procaspase-8 processing, CAP4 is pro-FLICE; CAP5, CAP6 are cleaved prodomains of FLICE (caspase 8).
CAP3A DNA sequence assembly programme said to produce fewer errors than Phrap. Link: http://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/cap3.php

CAP-18Cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide (18 kDa cationic antimicrobial protein, CAP-18, 170aa). It is cleaved into the antibacterial proteins FALL-39 (39aa) and LL-37 (37aa) that bind to bacterial lipopolysaccharide.
cap-dependent translationProtein synthesis (translation of mRNA) that is dependent on binding of the eIF4F complex (see eukaryotic initiation factor) to the 5′-cap of eukaryotic mRNA as opposed to the cap-independent mode of translation initiation involving the internal ribosome entry site (IRES).
capacitance flickerBrief closings of an ion channel during its open phases, observed during patch clamp; or rapid transition of an ion channel between open and closed states such that the individual channel openings cannot be distinguished properly due to the limited bandwidth of the patch clamp amplifier.
capacitationA process occurring in mammalian sperm after exposure to secretions in the female genital tract. Surface changes take place probably involved with the acrosome which are necessary before the sperm can fertilize an egg.
CapGA ubiquitous gelsolin-family actin modulating protein (macrophage capping protein, MCP, 348aa) that binds to the barbed ends of microfilaments but does not sever them. Has considerable sequence homology with gelsolin, and like gelsolin responds to calcium and to phosphoinositides. Found in cytoplasm, nucleus and melanosomes. Not the same as , though functionally similar. The murine form is gCap39 (352aa).
capillaryA small blood vessel linking an arteriole and a venule. The lumen may be formed within a single endothelial cell, and have a diameter less than that of an erythrocyte, which must deform to pass through. Blood flow through capillaries can be regulated by precapillary sphincters, and each capillary probably only carries blood for part of the time.
capillary electrophoresisHigh resolution electrophoretic method for separating compounds, such as peptides, by electro-osmotic flow through long (~100 cm), narrow (<100 μm) silica columns. With sensitive detectors attomolar concentrations can be detected.
capnineSulphonolipid, a sulphonic acid derivative of ceramide, isolated from the envelope of the Cytophaga/Flexibacter group of Gram-negative bacteria. The acetylated form of capnine seems to be necessary for gliding motility. Reported to block synthesis of antibacterial proteins such as . Poster: http://mpkb.org/home/publications/marshall_metagenomics_2007

capnophilicOrganisms that grow best at concentrations of carbon dioxide higher than in air.
CAPONCarboxyl-terminal PDZ ligand of neuronal nitric oxide synthase protein (nitric oxide synthase 1 adaptor protein, 506aa) an adaptor protein involved in regulation of neuronal nitric-oxide synthesis. Forms a complex with NOS1 and synapsins.
capping
(1) Movement of cross-linked cell-surface material to the posterior region of a moving cell, or to the perinuclear region. (2) The intracellular accumulation of intermediate filament protein in the pericentriolar region following microtubule disruption by colchicine. (3) The blocking of further addition of subunits by binding of a cap protein to the free end of a linear polymer such as actin. See also , .
cappuccino
(1) Actin-nucleation factor (1059aa) of the formin homology family that regulates the onset of ooplasmic streaming in Drosophila. Like spire, a maternal-effect locus that participates in pattern formation in both the anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes of the early embryo. (2) The mouse protein cappuccino (215aa) is defective in a model of Herman-Pudlak syndrome and the human homologue (217aa) is a component of the BLOC-1 complex.
capsaicinMolecule in chilli peppers that makes them hot and will stimulate release of neurogenic peptides (Substance P, neurokinins) from sensory neurons. Acts on the vanilloid receptor-1 (VR1). Can be used to desensitise nociceptors to which it binds and kills.
capsazepineCompetitive antagonist.
CapsicumGenus that includes red peppers, pimentos and green peppers. See .
capsidA protein coat that covers the nucleoprotein core or nucleic acid of a virion. Commonly shows icosahedral symmetry and may itself be enclosed in an envelope (as in the Togaviridae). The capsid is built up of subunits (some integer multiple of 60, the number required to give strict icosahedral symmetry) that self-assemble in a pattern typical of a particular virus. The subunits are often packed, in smaller capsids, into 5- or 6-membered rings (pentamers or hexamers) that constitute the morphological unit (capsomere). The packing of subunits is not perfectly symmetrical in most cases and some units may have strained interactions and are said to have quasi-equivalence of bonding to adjacent units.
capsomeresSee .
capsule
(1) Thick gel-like material attached to the wall of Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria, giving colonies a ‘smooth’ appearance. May contribute to pathogenicity by inhibiting phagocytosis. Mostly composed of very hydrophilic acidic polysaccharide, but considerable diversity exists. (2) A multicellular aggregate of haemocytes or coelomocytes that isolates a foreign body too large to be phagocytosed. In some insects the capsule is apparently acellular and composed of melanin. (3) Dense connective tissue sheath surrounding an organ.
capZA heterodimeric microfilament capping protein (capping protein, cap32/34, α, 286aa; β, 277aa) originally found in Dictyostelium and Acanthamoeba that binds to the barbed ends of microfilaments and blocks further assembly; also binds to thin filaments in the Z-disc of striated muscle. Binding is not calcium sensitive and capZ does not sever filaments. Widely distributed in vertebrate cells, though in non-muscle cells is predominantly in the nucleus. Identical to β-actinin in chickens. CapZ-interacting protein (416aa) can be phosphorylated under conditions of stress and then binds to capZ limiting its ability to regulate actin filament dynamics.
carbacholParasympathomimetic drug (carbamoyl choline) formed by substituting the acetyl of acetylcholine with a carbamoyl group; acts on both muscarinic and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and is not hydrolyzed by acetylcholine esterase.
carbamoylThe radical, -CO-NH2.

carbamoyl phosphate synthetaseA mitochondrial enzyme (CPS-1, EC 6.3.4.16, 1500aaa) involved in the urea cycle of ureotelic animals, playing an important role in removing excess ammonia from the cell. Similar enzymic activity (glutamine-dependent carbamoyl-phosphate synthase, EC 6.3.5.5) present in one of the domains of CAD protein, responsible for a key step in pyrimidine biosynthesis.
carbamoylcholineSee .
carbendazimA systemic benzimidazole fungicide used extensively in plant disease control although there are concerns about its endocrine disrupting effects. Probably works as a fungicide by interfering with spindle formation at mitosis.
carbohydrate-deficient-glycoprotein syndromeA set of glycosylation-system defects causing deficiencies in the synthesis and processing of N-linked glycans or oligosaccharides on glycoproteins. In Type 1 (Jaeken’s syndrome, CDG1) phosphomannomutase-2 (EC 5.4.2.8, 246aa) is affected, in CDGIb mannosephosphate isomerase (EC 5.3.1.8, 423aa) and in CDGIc asparagine-linked glycosylation protein 6 (ALG6, EC 2.4.1.-, 507aa).
carbohydratesVery abundant compounds with the general formula Cn(H2O)n. The smallest are monosaccharides like glucose; polysaccharides (e.g. starch, cellulose, glycogen) can be large and indeterminate in length.
carbon monoxideSee .
carbon replicaA surface replica of a specimen for examination in the electron microscope. The specimen is coated with a structureless carbon film by vacuum deposition, and the film and specimen are subsequently removed by dissolving in an appropriate solvent.
carbonic anhydraseEnzyme (carbonate dehydratase, EC 4.2.1.1, 260aa) that catalyses reversible hydration of carbon dioxide to carbonic acid. An intracellular enzyme of the erythrocyte, essential for the effective transport of carbon dioxide from the tissues to the lungs. Zinc is a co-factor. Defects in the enzyme cause autosomal recessive osteopetrosis type three (Guibaud-Vainsel syndrome) and defects in isoform four cause a type of retinitis pigmentosa.
carbonyl groupBivalent =C=O group found in aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids.
carboxy terminusSee c-terminus.
carboxyglutamateAn amino acid (γ-carboxyglutamate) found in some proteins, particularly those that bind calcium. Formed by post-translational carboxylation of glutamate.
carboxyhaemoglobinHaemoglobin co-ordinated with carbon monoxide. The affinity of haemoglobin for CO is higher than for O2 and binding is almost irreversible, hence the toxicity of CO. Asphyxia occurs without cyanosis because carboxyhaemoglobin is pink.
carboxyl-terminal Src kinase homologous kinaseA negative regulatory kinase of the src tyrosine kinase family, subfamily (CHK, csk Homologous Kinase, probably the same as megakaryocyte-associated tyrosine-protein kinase, protein kinase HYL, tyrosine-protein kinase CTK, 507aa) generally believed to inactivate src-family tyrosine kinases by phosphorylating their consensus C-terminal regulatory tyrosine. Has been reported to regulate the expression of the chemokine receptor, CXCR4. Expression is limited to brain and hematopoietic cells. CHK overexpression in neuroblastoma and astrocytoma cells inhibits their growth and proliferation and loss of CHK expression is associated with human brain tumours. Not to be confused with (Chks). Paper (2005): http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/65/7/2840.long

carboxypeptidasesEnzymes (particularly of pancreas) that remove the C-terminal amino acid from a protein or peptide. Carboxypeptidase A1, (EC 3.4.17.1, 419aa) will remove any amino acid; carboxypeptidase B (EC 3.4.17.2, 417aa) is specific for terminal lysine or arginine. Carboxypeptidase D (EC 3.4.17.22, metallocarboxypeptidase D, 1380aa) releases C-terminal Arg and Lys from polypeptides. Carboxypeptidase N (EC 3.4.17.3, 458aa) degrades vasoactive and inflammatory peptides containing C-terminal Arg or Lys. Many others are known and the nomenclature is complex and may be based on mechanism (metallo-carboxypeptidases, EC 3.4.17.-; serine carboxypeptidases, EC 3.4.16.- and cysteine carboxypeptidases, EC 3.4.18.-) or on substrate specificity (e.g. glutamate carboxypeptidase).
carboxysomeInclusion body (polyhedral body; 90–500 nm diameter) found in some Cyanobacteria and autotrophic bacteria; contains ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (RUBISCO) and is involved in carbon dioxide fixation.
carcinoembryonic antigenCell membrane proteins of the immunoglobulin superfamily that are normally restricted to fetal tissue and absent in adults. Involved in adhesion and are sometimes used as markers for tumours. Examples include carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 (biliary glycoprotein 1, CD66a, 526aa) which exists in multiple isoforms, some of which are secreted, and carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 19 (carcinoembryonic antigen-like 1, 300aa) which is ubiquitous.
carcinogenAn agent capable of initiating development of malignant tumours. May be a chemical, a form of electromagnetic radiation, or an inert solid body.
carcinogenesisThe generation of cancer from normal cells, correctly the formation of a from epithelial cells, but often used synonymously with transformation, tumorigenesis.
carcinoidIntestinal tumour arising from specialized neuroendocrine cells with paracrine functions (APUD cells), also known as argentaffinoma. The primary tumour in the appendix is often clinically benign but hepatic secondaries may release large amounts of vasoactive amines to the systemic circulation.
carcinoma
Pl. carcinomata Malignant neoplasia of an epithelial cell: by far the commonest type of tumour. Those arising from glandular tissue are often called adenocarcinomas. Carcinoma cells tend to be irregular with increased basophilic staining of the cytoplasm, have an increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and polymorphic nuclei. See basal cell carcinoma, Gorlin’s syndrome, hepatocarcinoma, Merkel cell carcinoma, oat cell carcinoma, scirrhous carcinoma.
carcinoma in situCarcinoma that has not invaded or metastasised and remains in the tissue site of origin.
carcinomatosis
carcinosis Cancer widely disseminated throughout the body and thus highly malignant.
carcinosarcomaA rare tumour with histological features of both carcinoma and sarcoma.
carcinosisSee .
CARD domainA protein motif (caspase activation and recruitment domain) composed of a bundle of six alpha-helices that is a feature of a wide range of proteins, particularly those involved in inflammation and apoptosis, where it is involved in the formation of multi-protein complexes through interaction with other CARD domains. There are 521 CARD domains in 492 proteins in the SMART database, many in the MAGUK family. Numerous CARD proteins are known, for example, CARD11 (CARD-containing MAGUK protein 1, 1154aa) which is involved in T-cell receptor mediated T-cell activation and CARD14 (1004aa) which activates NFκB via BCL10 and IKK. CARD 8 is cardinal.
cardiac ankyrin repeat proteinA protein (CARP, ankyrin repeat domain-containing protein 1, cytokine-inducible nuclear protein, 319aa) mainly expressed in activated vascular endothelial cells. May act as a nuclear transcription factor that negatively regulates the expression of cardiac genes. Expression is upregulated in wounds and CARP may be important in revascularisation. See myopalladin.
cardiac cellStrictly speaking any cell of or derived from the cardium of the heart, but often used loosely of heart cells.
cardiac glycosideSpecific blockers of the Na
+
/K
+
pump especially of heart muscle, e.g. strophanthin.
cardiac jellyGelatinous extracellular material that lies between endocardium and myocardium in the embryo.
cardiac muscleSpecialized striated but involuntary muscle, able to contract and expand indefinitely (for a lifetime anyway), found only in the walls of the heart. Responsible for the pumping activity of the vertebrate heart. The individual muscle cells are joined through a junctional complex known as the intercalated disc, and are not fused together into multinucleate structures as they are in skeletal muscle.
CardifSee MAVS.
cardinalA CARD-domain protein found in some inflammasomes (caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 8, apoptotic protein NDPP1, 431aa) and that inhibits NFκB activation.
cardioblastAn embryonic mesodermal cell which will differentiate into heart tissue.
cardiofaciocutaneous syndromeA developmental disorder that can be caused by mutation in K-ras (see ras), BRAF (see raf), MEK1 or MEK2, all of which feed into the RAS/ERK pathway.
cardiolipinA diphosphatidyl glycerol, purified from beef heart, that is also found in the membrane of Treponema pallidum and is the antigen detected by the (obsolete) Wasserman test for syphilis.
cardiomyopathyAny disease affecting the heart muscle. See Danon’s disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Naxos disease.
cardiotoxinsActive components of cobra (Naja spp) venom; basic polypeptides of 57–62aa with four disulphide bonds (cobramine A, cobramine B, cobra cytotoxin, gamma toxin, membrane-active polypeptide); cause skeletal and cardiac muscle contracture, interfere with neuromuscular and ganglionic transmission, depolarize nerve, muscle and blood cell membranes, thus causing haemolysis.
cardiotrophin-1Cytokine (CT-1, 201aa) belonging to the IL-6 cytokine family. Binds to hepatocyte cell lines and induces synthesis of various acute phase proteins, is a potent cardiac survival factor and supports long-term survival of spinal motoneurons. Cardiotrophin-like cytokine factor 1 (B-cell-stimulating factor 3, novel neurotrophin-1, 225aa) stimulates B-cells.

Cardiovascular Gene Ontology Annotation InitiativeA resource for the cardiovascular-research community with more than 4000 cardiovascular associated genes (2009). Homepage: http://www.ucl.ac.uk/cardiovasculargeneontology/

cardiovirusGenus of viruses belonging to the Family Picornaviridae, isolated mostly from rodents; cause encephalitis and myocarditis.
carditisInflammation of the heart, including pericarditis, myocarditis and endocarditis, according to whether the enveloping outer membrane, the muscle or the inner lining is affected.
carmilIn Dictyostelium a protein (capping protein, Arp2/3 and myosin I linker, leucine-rich repeat-containing protein p116, 1050aa) that acts as a scaffold protein in a motor complex comprising microfialment capping proteins, the Arp2/3 complex, type I myosins (myoB and myoC) and carmil itself. Human RLTPR is related.
Carney complexA multiple neoplasia syndrome affecting a range of tissues. Multiple endocrine glands may be involved (see multiple endocrine neoplasia) and there are some similarities to McCune-Albright syndrome (see granins). Carney complex type 1 (CNC1) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding protein kinase A regulatory subunit-1-alpha. The Carney complex variant associated with distal arthrogryposis is caused by mutation in the myosin heavy chain-8 (MYH8) gene.
carnitineCompound that transports long chain fatty acids across the inner mitochondrial membrane in the form of acyl-carnitine. Sometimes referred to as Vitamin Bt or Vitamin B7. See table V1.
carnitine palmitoyltransferase systemSystem that regulates fatty acid oxidation/ketogenesis in the liver and is itself switched off by malonyl CoA. Carnitine palmitoyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.21) is a multi-pass membrane protein in the mitochondrial membrane that is responsible for catalyzing the coupling of carnitine to palmitoyl-CoA. CPT1 (liver isoform CPT1A, 773aa; muscle isoform CPT1B, 772aa; brain isoform, CPT1C, 803aa) is in the outer mitochondrial membrane, CPT2 (658aa) is in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
carnosineDipeptide (β-Ala-His) found at millimolar concentration in vertebrate muscle. It has anti-oxidant properties.
CarnoyHistological fixative containing ethanol, chloroform and acetic acid. Better for nuclear structure than for cytoplasm.
caronteIn chickens, one of the of bone morphogenic protein antagonists (272aa) that mediates the sonic hedgehog-dependent induction of left-specific genes in the lateral plate mesoderm.
carotenesHydrocarbon usually with nine conjugated double bonds. Beta-carotene is the precursor of Vitamin A, each molecule giving rise to two Vitamin A molecules.
carotenoid cleavage dioxygenasesEnzymes that catalyze the cleavage of carotenoids. In Arabidopsis, the CCD enzyme family includes four CCDs and five 9-cis epoxycarotenoid dioxygenases (NCEDs). The NCEDs are involved in the biosynthesis of abscisic acid (e.g. NCED2, chloroplastic 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase, EC 1.13.11.51, 583aa). CCD1 (538aa) cleaves a variety of carotenoids symmetrically at both the 9–10 and 9′–10′ double bonds. Review: http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/plantbiotechnology/26/4/26_351/_article

carotenoid pathwayCarotenoids are natural pigments (at least 700 have been characterized) that are produced by either the widely distributed C40 pathway, in which two molecules of geranylgeranyldiphosphate (GGDP) are condensed to form phytoene or the C30 pathway, found only in a few bacteria such as Staphylococcus and Heliobacterium, in which two molecules of farnesyldiphosphate undergo condensation to form 4,4′-diapophytoene (dehydrosqualene). Diagram of the pathway: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/6/13/figure/F1?highres=y

carotenoidsAccessory lipophilic photosynthetic pigments in plants and bacteria, including and xanthophylls; red, orange or yellow, with broad absorption peaks at 450–480 nm. Act as secondary pigments of the light-harvesting system, passing energy to and as protective agents, preventing photoxidation of chlorophyll. Found in chloroplasts and also in plastids in some non-photosynthetic tissues, e.g. carrot root.
carotid body cellsCells derived from the neural crest, involved in sensing pH and oxygen tension of the blood.
carpogenic germinationThe process of formation of apothecia from quiescent sclerotia.
carrageenan
carrageenin Sulphated cell wall polysaccharide found in certain red algae. Contains repeating sulphated disaccharides of galactose and (sometimes) anhydrogalactose. It is used commercially as an emulsifier and thickener in foods, and is also used to induce an inflammatory lesion when injected into experimental animals (probably activates ).
carrier
(1) In human genetics, a person heterozygous for a recessive disorder. (2) A non-radioactive compound added to a tracer quantity of the same compound, which is radiolabelled. (3) A molecule or molecular system which brings about the transport of a solute across a cell membrane either by active transport or facilitated diffusion. (4) An organism harbouring a parasite but showing no symptoms of disease, especially if infectious to others. (5) A more or less inert material used either as a diluent or vehicle (e.g. for the active ingredient of drug) or as a support (e.g. for cells in a bioreactor). (6) See .
carrier protein
(1) Protein to which a specific ligand or hapten has been conjugated, used for raising an antibody. (2) Unlabeled protein added into an assay system at relatively high concentrations which distributes in the same manner as the labeled protein analyte that is present in very low concentrations. (3) Protein added to prevent nonspecific interaction of reagents with surfaces, sample components, and each other; albumin is often used for this purpose. (4) Protein found in cell membranes, which facilitates transport of small molecules across the membrane.
CART
(1) The cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) peptide: a hypothalamic neuropeptide (116aa) implicated in the control of appetite. (2) A paired homoebox transcription factor (ALX homeobox protein 1, cartilage homeoprotein 1, CART-1, 326aa), that may be involved in chondrocyte differentiation and may influence cervix development.
cartilage
 dominated by extracellular matrix containing type II and large amounts of proteoglycan, particularly . Cartilage is more flexible and compressible than bone and often serves as an early skeletal framework, becoming mineralised as the animal ages. Cartilage is produced by that come to lie in small lacunae surrounded by the matrix they have secreted.
cartilage matrix proteinA major component (matrilin-1, 496aa) of the extracellular matrix of non-articular cartilage. It binds to collagen. Cf. .
cartilage oligomeric matrix proteinA protein (thrombospondin-5, 757aa), present at high levels in the matrix surrounding and involved in interactions between chondrocytes and other matrix proteins. A disulphide-linked homopentamer that binds calcium ions. Mutations cause pseudoachondroplasia or epiphyseal dysplasia. Cf. .
caryopsisA type of simple dry fruit, grains being the common example (e.g. those of wheat, rice).
caryotypeSee karyotype.
CasSee p130Cas, .
Cas-family proteinsLarge multidomain adapter molecules (Crk-associated substrate family) that transmit signals as intermediaries through interactions with signalling molecules such as FAK and other tyrosine kinases, as well as tyrosine phosphatases. After Cas is tyrosine-phosphorylated, it acts as a docking protein for binding SH2 domains of Src-family kinases. See p130cas. Members include Human enhancer of filamentation 1 (HEF1), Src-interacting protein (Sin)/Efs, Cas-L (Crk-associated substrate lymphocyte type), Nedd9.
casamino acidAcid hydrolyzed used as a nitrogen source in some culture media.
caseinGroup of proteins isolated from milk. The αs and β-caseins (185 and 226aa) have hydrophobic C-terminal domains that associate to give micellar polymers in divalent-cation rich medium. κ-casein (182aa) is a glycoprotein that stabilizes the micelles of α- and β-casein. See .
casein kinasesA group of kinases operationally defined by their preferred phosphorylation of acidic proteins such as caseins. Casein kinase 1 (EC 2.7.11.1, multiple isoforms, ~415aa) is involved in Wnt signalling and is a central component of the circadian clock. May be a negative regulator of circadian rhythmicity by phosphorylating period. Casein kinase II (CKII) is a tetrameric complex of two catalytic subunits, alpha (337 or 391aa) and alpha (350aa) and two regulatory beta subunits (phosvitin, 215aa). CKII is also involved in Wnt signalling and regulates a broad range of transcription factors and in the brain has been associated with long-term potentiation by phosphorylating proteins important for neuronal plasticity. Casein kinase II phosphorylates exposed Ser or sometimes Thr residues, provided that an acidic residue is present three residues from the phosphate acceptor site. Consensus pattern: (S/T)-x-x-(D/E).
caseous necrosis
caseation The development of a necrotic centre (with a cheesy appearance) in a tuberculous lesion.
CASKOne of the MAGUK family (membrane-associated guanylate kinases) a calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase (LIN2 homologue, EC 2.7.11.1, 926aa) a multidomain scaffolding protein with a role in synaptic transmembrane protein anchoring and ion channel trafficking. Contributes to neural development and regulation of gene expression via interaction with the transcription factor TRB1. CASK binds to syndecan-2, the actin-binding band 4.1 protein and presynaptic neurexin. The Drosophila homologue of CASK is CAKI or CAMGUK (898aa). LIN2 is C. elegans abnormal cell lineage protein 2 (961aa)
caskin
 -interacting protein 1 (1431aa) that binds the CaM kinase domain of CASK and forms a complex with LIN7 proteins that are involved in establishing and maintaining the asymmetric distribution of channels and receptors at the plasma membrane of polarized cells.

casoxinsProteolytic fragments of alpha-s casein (casoxin-D, 7aa) or kappa casein (casoxin-C, casoxin-6, casoxin-A, casoxin-B, casoplatelin). Casoxins A, B, C & D have opioid antagonist activity. Casoxin C binds to the complement C3a receptor, casoplatelin inhibits platelet aggregation.
Casparian bandRegion of plant-cell wall specialized to act as a seal to prevent back-leakage of secreted material (analogous to tight junction between epithelial cells). Found particularly where root parenchymal cells secrete solutes into xylem vessels.
caspasesFamily of cysteine-aspartic acid peptidases involved in processing of IL-1β (caspase-1 is interleukin-1 converting enzyme) and in apoptosis. See and 
.
caspofunginSee echinocandins.
CASPRContactin-associated proteins, of which there are several in human. Members of the neurexin superfamily and involved in transmembrane adhesion and signalling. Caspr-1 (neurexin-4, 1384aa) is involved in the formation of functionally distinct domains critical for saltatory conduction of nerve impulses in myelinated nerve fibres and in defining regions of axon-glia interaction. Other examples in human are contactin-associated protein-like proteins (caspr2, 1331aa; caspr3, 1288aa; caspr4, 1308aa; caspr 5, 1306aa) probably with similar roles.
cassetteA pre-existing structure into which an insert can be moved. Used to refer to certain vectors. See .
cassette mechanismTerm used for genes such as the a and α genes that determine mating-type in yeast; either one or the other is active. In this gene conversion process, a double-stranded nuclease makes a cut at a specific point in the MAT (mating type) locus, the old gene is replaced with a copy of a silent gene from one or other flanking region, and the new copy becomes active. As the process involves replacing one ready-made construct with another in an active ‘slot’ it is called a cassette mechanism.
CAST
(1) In mouse, a protein (CAZ-associated structural protein 1, ERC protein 2, 957aa) involved in the organization of the cytomatrix at the nerve terminals active zone (cytomatrix at the active zone, CAZ) which regulates neurotransmitter release. Binds directly to other such as rim1, bassoon and piccolo. Article: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2173811/. (2) The CAST family includes ELKS/Rab6-interacting/CAST family member 1 (Rab6-interacting protein 2, 1116aa) which is a regulatory subunit of the IKK complex and may also be involved in the organization of the cytomatrix at the nerve terminals active zone (CAZ). (3) CD3-epsilon-associated protein (CAST, DNA-directed RNA polymerase I subunit RPA34, 510aa). (4) In potato, calcium-binding protein CAST (199aa).
castanospermineAlkaloid inhibitor of α-glucosidase I isolated from seeds of Castanospermum australe (Blackbean). The effect is to leave N-linked oligosaccharides in their ‘high-mannose’, unmodified state.
Castleman’s diseaseDisease characterized by lymph node swelling, hypergammaglobulinaemia, increased levels of acute phase proteins and increased numbers of platelets. Probably caused by excess IL-6 production.
CATSee .
catabolinObsolete name for interleukin-1 (IL-1).
catabolismThe sum of all degradative processes, the opposite of anabolism.
cataboliteProduct of catabolism, the breakdown of complex molecules into simpler ones.
catabolite activator proteinProtein (CAP, cAMP regulatory protein, 210aa) from E. coli that regulates the transcription of several catabolite-sensitive operons. For example, CAP and the lactose repressor protein act together to control lactose utilization. If glucose is present CAP will not bind to DNA and the lac genes are not expressed even if lactose is available. In the absence of glucose cAMP levels rise, CAP binds cAMP, undergoes a conformational change, and is then capable of binding to DNA and promoting transcription of derepressed genes in the presence of lactose.
catabolite repressionInducible enzyme systems in some microorganisms (such as the lactose operon) that are repressed when a more favoured carbon source, such as glucose, is available (see ). Catabolite repression of the respiratory system is seen in yeast in high glucose concentrations, though the mechanism is different.
catalaseTetrameric haem enzyme (EC 1.11.1.6, 527aa) that breaks down hydrogen peroxide.
catalytic antibody
abzyme Antibody raised against a transition-state analogue (e.g. a phosphate analogue of a carboxylic acid ester transition state) that can then catalyse the analogous chemical reaction, though not as effectively as a true enzyme. They can, however, be selected to catalyze a reaction for which there is no endogenous enzyme.
catalytic RNASpecies of RNA that catalyse cleavage or transesterification of the phosphodiester linkage. Operates in the self-splicing of group I and group II introns and in the maturation of various tRNA species.
cataplerosisThe net loss due to consumption or degradation of intermediates in a biochemical cycle; the opposite of anaplerosis.
cataractOpacity of the lens of the eye. Can be a result of environmental factors but there are various inherited forms, mostly due to mutations in genes encoding although there are forms caused variously by mutation in genes for heat-shock transcription factor-4, phakinin, SLC16A12 solute-carrier, the alpha-8 subunit of the gap junction protein, maf, chromatin-modifying protein 4B, the PITX3 homeobox protein, 50 and beaded filament structural protein-2.
catch muscleSee adductor muscle.
catechinsPolyphenolic compounds found in a range of plants and, for example, in green tea, where there are four major ones, epicatechin (EC), epigallocatechin (EGC), epicatechin gallate (ECg) and epigallocatechin gallate (EGCg). Remarkable health benefits are said to be gained from these compounds.
catechol oxidaseAny of a family of oxidoreductases (EC 1.10.3.1, polyphenol oxidase) that are involved in catalysing oxidation of mono and ortho-diphenols to ortho-diquinones. Most are found in plants and contain copper; they are responsible for the brownish discolouration of, for example, potatoes and apples when cut open.
catechol-O-methyltransferaseAn enzyme (COMT, EC 2.1.1.6, 271aa) that catalyzes the O-methylation and inactivation of catecholamine neurotransmitters and catechol hormones. There are soluble and membrane-bound isoforms and two alleles with valine or methionine at position 158 and differeing in enzyme activity. A transmembrane form of the enzyme (catechol O-methyltransferase 2, LRTOMT2, 291aa) is required for auditory function.
catecholamineA type of biogenic amine derived from tyramine, characterized as alkylamino derivatives of o-dihydroxybenzene. Catecholamines include adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine, with roles as hormones and neurotransmitters.
catenateTwo or more circular DNA molecules where one or more circles run through the enclosed space of another, like links in a chain.

cateninsProteins that link the cytoplasmic domain of adhesion molecules such as cadherins to the cytoskeleton. Alpha-catenin (α1, 906aa; α2, 956aa; α3, 895aa) is a vinculin-related protein involved in adherens junction-mediated intercellular adhesion, Beta-catenin (781aa) is a key downstream component of the canonical Wnt signalling pathway although the majority of β-catenin is localized to the cell membrane and is part of E-cadherin/catenin adhesion complex, binding E-cadherin and N-cadherin. Ubiquitination of β-catenin is greatly reduced in Wnt-expressing cells. See dapper. Beta-catenin-interacting protein 1 (81aa) blocks interaction with TCF transcription factors and negatively regulates Wnt signalling. Gamma-catenin (desmoplakin-3, plakoglobin, 745aa), associates with N-cadherin and E-cadherin and is a major component of desmosomes. Delta-catenin-1 (p120, p120ctn, cadherin-associated src substrate, 938aa) is involved in cell-cell adhesion complexes together with E- , α-, β- and γ-catenins. It binds to and inhibits the transcriptional repressor ZBTB33 which may activate the Wnt pathway. It is tyrosine-phosphorylated by ligand-activated EGF-, PDGF- and CSF1-receptors and loss of expression is associated with some invasive tumours. Delta-catenin-2 (neural plakophilin-related armadillo repeat protein, δ- , neurojungin, CTNND2, 1225aa) functions as a transcriptional activator when bound to ZBTB33. Hemizygosity of the gene is associated with .
caterpiller familyFamily of proteins with a nucleotide-binding domain and a leucine-rich region. Have a role in immunity, cell death and growth, and diseases. The caterpiller proteins are structurally similar to a subgroup of plant-disease-resistance (R) proteins and to the apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (APAF1) and are genetically linked to several human immunological disorders. They have both positive and negative immunoregulatory activity and may be intracellular sensors of pathogen products. An example is protein NLRC3 (CARD15-like protein, caterpiller protein 16.2, nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain protein, 1065aa) that may modulate T-cell activation. See .
CATH databaseAn hierarchical domain classification of protein structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). Protein structures are classified using a combination of automated and manual procedures. CATH v3.4 is built from 104,238 PDB chains. Link to database: http://www.cathdb.info/

cathelicidinsA group of cationic antimicrobial peptides mostly found in the secretory (azurophil) granules of neutrophils, although may be found elsewhere. They are synthesized as precursor propeptides of that contain a structurally varied C-terminal cationic region corresponding to the antimicrobial peptide, joined to a conserved cathelin-like propiece of approximately 100aa. The mature peptide is liberated by limited proteolysis by elastase or proteinase 3. Examples are LL-37/hCAP18, CAP-18, SMAP-29, BMAP-27 and BMAP-28, protegrins and indolicidin.
cathelinA porcine (96aa) that was originally described as being a cysteine peptidase inhibitor though subsequent reports have suggested that this is due to contamination with PLCPI. Cathelin-like sequences are found upstream of several antimicrobial peptides (protegrins) and are expressed in the pro-peptides. See .
cathepsinsA large family of peptidases, mostly lysosomal and usually requiring processing before they are active. Cathepsin A (lysosomal protective protein, carboxypeptidase C, EC 3.4.16.5, 480aa) is essential for the activity of beta-galactosidase and neuraminidase; it associates with these enzymes and exerts a protective function. Defects cause galactosialidosis (Goldberg’s syndrome). Cathepsin B (EC 3.4.22.1, 339aa) is a cysteine endopeptidase cleaved into heavy (205aa) and light (47aa) chains which form a disulphide-linked heterodimer. Involved in intracellular degradation and turnover of proteins and possibly in tumour invasion and metastasis. Cathepsin C (EC 3.4.14.1, 463aa) is a dipeptidyl peptidase. Defects are a cause of Papillon-Lefevre syndrome, Haim-Munk syndrome and juvenile periodontitis. Cathepsin D (EC 3.4.23.5, 412aa) has pepsin-like specificity. Defects cause neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis Type 10. Cathepsin E (EC 3.4.23.34, 401aa) is endosomal and may process antigenic peptides during MHC class II-mediated antigen presentation. Cathepsin F (EC 3.4.22.41, 484aa) is involved in intracellular protein degradation and has also been implicated in tumour invasion and metastasis. Cathepsin G (EC 3.4.21.20, 255aa) is a serine protease with trypsin- and chymotrypsin-like specificity. Cathepsin H (EC 3.4.22.16, 335aa) has aminopeptidase activity. Cathepsin K (cathepsin O, EC 3.4.22.38, 329aa) is involved in osteoclastic bone resorption and defects cause pycnodysostosis. Several other cathepsins (L, N, S, W, Z) with different substrate specificities are also known.
cationic proteinsProteins of azurophil granules of neutrophils, rich in arginine. A chymotrypsin-like peptidase found in azurophil granules is very cationic as is cathepsin G and neutrophil elastase. Eosinophil cationic protein (160aa) is particularly important because it damages schistosomula
in vitro.
cationized ferritinFerritin, treated with dimethyl propanediamine, and used to show, in the electron microscope, the distribution of negative charge on the surface of a cell. The amount of cationic ferritin binding is very approximately related to the surface charge.
catsperA family of proteins (cation channel sperm-associated protein 1, catsper-1, 780aa; catsper-2, 530aa; catsper-3, 398aa; catsper-4, 472aa, catsper-B, 1116aa) that associate variously as heterotetramers to form a voltage-gated calcium channel that plays a central role in calcium-dependent responses such as sperm hyperactivation, the acrosomal reaction and chemotaxis towards the oocyte.
caudate nucleusThe most frontal of the basal ganglia in the brain. Damage to caudate neurons is characteristic of Huntington’s chorea and other motor disorders.
CaudoviralesAn Order of viruses (see virus taxonomy), tailed bacteriophages, comprising three families: Myoviridae, Podoviridae and Siphoviridae. The genome is a single molecule of linear double-stranded DNA. The phage has a head with icosahedral symmetry and a tail with helical symmetry. Virus taxonomy site: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ICTVdb/ICTVdB/02.htm

CaulimoviridaeDNA para-retroviruses that replicate in plants via a RNA intermediate evolved from LTR retrotransposons (probably of the Ty3/Gypsy family). The group can be subdivided into six genera: Badnavirus (e.g. Commelina yellow mottle virus), Caulimovirus (e.g. cauliflower mosaic virus), Cavemovirus (e.g. cassava vein mosaic virus), Petuvirus (e.g. petunia vein clearing virus), Soymovirus (e.g. soybean chlorotic mottle virus) and Tungrovirus (e.g. rice tungro bacilliform virus). Caulimoviruses may have genes encoding movement protein, the aphid transmission factor and the inclusion body matrix protein as well as genes necessary for the viral life cycle and transmission. Gypsy database: http://gydb.uv.es/index.php/Caulimoviridae

CaulobacterGenus of Gram-negative aerobic bacteria that have a stalk or holdfast. Found in soil and fresh water.
caulonemaOne of the two types of filamentous protonemata produced when bryophyte spores germinate. Caulonemata contain few chloroplasts and make angled cross-walls. Chloronemata (sing. chloronema) contain chloroplasts and make cross-walls at right angles to the main filament. See protonema.
caveola
Pl. caveolae. Small invagination of the plasma membrane characteristic of many mammalian cells and associated with endocytosis. The membrane of caveolae contain integral membrane proteins, that interact with heterotrimeric G-proteins. Caveolar membranes are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids and may be the efflux route for newly synthesized lipids. is not associated with caveolae.
caveolin scaffolding peptide-1Peptide corresponding to the -1 scaffolding domain, the region that is essential for caveolin interaction with signalling molecules. The peptide will block the ability of noradrenaline and histamine to induce changes in the internal calcium ion concentrations of vascular smooth muscle cells by inhibiting the activation of phospholipase C-beta3 and MAPK.
caveolinsIntegral membrane proteins that are essential structural components of caveolae and serve as a scaffolding onto which signalling molecules, particularly G-protein coupled receptors, are assembled, and also act as negative regulators of signal transduction. There are three closely-related human isoforms (caveolin-1, 178aa; cav-2, 162aa; cav-3, 151aa) that are differentially expressed in various cell types. Defects in caveolin-1 cause a form of lipodystrophy; defects in caveolin-3 cause a whole range of disorders including forms of muscular dystrophy, cardiomyopathy and long QT syndrome.
Cavia porcellasGuinea pig.
CAZ proteinsProteins involved in the CAZ (cytomatrix at the active zone) complex that determines the site of synaptic vesicle fusion. The c-terminal region has a PDZ-binding motif that binds directly to RIM (a small G protein Rab-3A effector). The complex includes bassoon, , Munc-13 and piccolo. Database entry: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/DisplayIproEntry?ac=IPR019323

C bandingMethod (centromeric banding) of defining chromosome structure by staining with Giemsa and looking at the banding pattern in the heterochromatin of the centromeric regions. Giemsa banding (G banding) of the whole chromosome gives higher resolution. Q banding is done with quinacrine.
CBDA neurological disorder (corticobasal degeneration) caused by defects in tau (a tauopathy) with features similar to Alzheimer’s disease, Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome and Parkinson’s disease.
CBF/DREB genesWidely distributed genes in higher plants that encode transcription factors which bind a DNA regulatory element and impart responsiveness to low temperatures and dehydration. The CBF gene family, belongs to the AP2/ERF (ethylene-responsive element-binding protein) superfamily.
CBHA
(1) A synthesized histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, m-carboxycinnamic acid bis-hydroxamide. (2) Cellobiohydrolase A (CbhA).
cblThe product (EC 6.3.2.-, 906aa) of a proto-oncogene (Casitas B-lineage lymphoma proto-oncogene) originally identified in a murine retrovirus. Cbl serves as a substrate for receptor and non-receptor tyrosine kinases and as a multi-domain adaptor protein, binding to Grb2, and p85 of PI-3-kinase. Acts as a negative regulator of tyrosine kinase signalling through its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity that ubiquitinates the receptors thereby promoting their degradation. This function is modulated through interactions with regulatory proteins including and PIX. The transforming mutant v-cbl lacks the ubiquitin ligase RING finger domain.
CBPSee .
CC10, CC16See Clara cell secretory protein.
CCAAT boxConsensus sequence for RNA polymerase, found at about -80 bases relative to the transcription start site. Less well conserved than the TATA box.
CCCPAn uncoupling agent that dissipates proton gradients across membranes.
CCFDNCongenital cataracts facial dysmorphism and neuropathy syndrome, a developmental disorder caused by mutation in the phosphatase.
CCKSee .
CCN familyFamily of proteins that includes cysteine-rich 61 (CYR61/CCN1, 381aa), connective tissue growth factor ( /CCN2, 349aa), nephroblastoma overexpressed (NOV/CCN3, 357aa), and Wnt-induced secreted proteins (WISP) 1, 2 and 3. (CCN4, 367aa; CCN5, 250aa; CCN6, 354aa). CCN proteins play a role in cell differentiation and function. Each has four conserved cysteine rich modular domains that have sequence similarity, respectively, to the insulin-like growth factor binding protein, von Willebrand factor, thrombospondin repeat and the C-terminal cysteine knot domain of growth factors. Probably act mostly through binding and activating cell surface integrins.
CCNA2Cyclin A2 (432aa) which accumulates steadily during G2 and is abruptly destroyed at mitosis.
CCRSee and .
CCR4-NOT core complexIn the nucleus a general transcription factor, and in the cytoplasm the major mRNA deadenylase involved in mRNA turnover. The complex in S. cerevisiae contains CCR4 (glucose-repressible alcohol dehydrogenase transcriptional effector, carbon catabolite repressor protein 4, 837aa), CAF1 (CCR4 associated factor, POP2), NOT1 (general negative regulator of transcription subunit 1, cdc39, 2108aa), NOT2, NOT3, NOT4, NOT5, CAF40 and CAF130. The NOT protein subcomplex negatively regulates the basal and activated transcription of many genes. There is a homologous CCR4-NOT complex in humans. N.B. CCR4 is also an abbreviation for the C-C chemokine receptor type 4.
CCR5A member of the beta family (CKR5, CD195, 352aa), a G-protein coupled receptor, present in various cells, especially macrophages, monocytes, and T-cells. It is the co-receptor that HIV uses to gain entry into macrophages and defective alleles of this gene have been associated with resistance to HIV infection. Ligands of this receptor include monocyte chemoattractant protein 2 (MCP-2), macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha (MIP-1α), macrophage inflammatory protein 1-beta (MIP-1β) and regulated on activation normal T expressed and secreted protein (RANTES).
CCSP
 secretory protein (CCSP, CC16; secretoglobulin 1A1, uteroglobin, 91aa) is an abundant 16-kDa homodimeric protein secreted by non-ciliated secretory epithelial cells in the lung. It has an important protective role against the intrapulmonary inflammatory process. Clara cell 10-kDa protein (CC10) also has anti-inflammatory properties. Both proteins are markers of lung irritation.
CCTA protein complex (chaperonin containing T-complex polypeptide 1, formerly TCP-1 complex) that is composed of 8 related proteins (~60 kDa) encoded by independent and highly diverged genes, arranged as two stacked multimers, that mediates folding of various cytoskeletal proteins including actin and tubulin. The complex is found in the leading edge of fibroblasts and neurons. But see . Article: http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/119235580/PDFSTART

CCT domainThe CONSTANS, CO-like, and TOC1 domain, a highly conserved basic module of ~43aa, found near the C-terminus of plant proteins often involved in light signal transduction. There is a putative nuclear localization signal in the motif.
CCVsSee .
CD antigensCell surface antigens, originally the ‘cluster of differentiation’ antigens found on different classes of lymphocytes but now no longer restricted to cells of the immune system. International workshops comparing molecules recognised by different monoclonal antibodies were the original basis of rationalizing the antigens being detected. By mid-2011 the numbering had reached CD363; earlier editions of this dictionary had a table listing the CD antigens but since various web-accessible versions are now available, this table has been omitted. List: http://www.immunologylink.com/cdantigen.html Wall chart: http://www.ebioscience.com/resources/literature-request.htm

CD2-associated proteinAn adapter protein (CAS ligand with multiple SH3 domains, 639aa) that links membrane proteins and the actin cytoskeleton. Involved in receptor clustering and cytoskeletal polarity in the junction between a T-cell and an antigen-presenting cell, may anchor the podocyte slit diaphragm to the actin cytoskeleton in renal glomerulus and required for cytokinesis. Mutations are associated with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 3. See p130Cas, .

CD3 complexT-cell surface molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily that mediate signalling from the T-cell receptor (TCR). The TCR/CD3 complex consists of either a TCR α/β or TCR γ/δ heterodimer coexpressed with the invariant CD3 gamma (CD3g, 182aa), delta (CD3d, 171aa), epsilon (CD3e, 207aa), zeta (CD247, 164aa), and (in the mouse) eta (CD247, 206aa) subunits. Defects in CD3delta cause severe combined immunodeficiency disease (T−B+NK+ SCID), defects in other members of the complex can also cause immune dysfunction.
CDAAn antibiotic (calcium-dependent antibiotic) produced by Streptomyces coelicolor, an acidic lipopeptide comprising an N-terminal 2,3-epoxyhexanoyl fatty acid side chain and several nonproteinogenic amino acid residues. It is effective against Gram-positive bacteria, producing trans-membrane channels which conduct monovalent cations in the presence of calcium ions. Abstract: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12445768

cdc genesCell division cycle genes, of which many have now been defined, especially in yeasts. See . The cyclin dependent kinases are also known as cdc2 kinases.
cdc42Product of the cell division cycle-42 (cdc42) gene, one of the rho GTPase family (191aa) that regulates signalling pathways controlling diverse cellular functions including cell morphology, migration, endocytosis and cell cycle progression. Thought to induce filopodium formation by regulating actin polymerization at the cell cortex by activating the Arp2/3 complex in concert with WASP family proteins. The product of oncogene Dbl catalyzes the dissociation of GDP from this protein. Alternative splicing gives rise to at least two transcript variants. Cdc42-interacting protein 4 (Felic, Salt tolerant protein, thyroid receptor-interacting protein 10, TRIP-10, 601aa) is one of the formin binding family of proteins and is required for translocation of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane in response to insulin signalling. Also involved in reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton during endocytosis. Binds to lipids such as phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and phosphatidylserine and promotes membrane invagination and the formation of tubules. Also promotes cdc42-induced actin polymerization by recruiting WASL/N-WASP which in turn activates the Arp2/3 complex.
cdc42 effector proteinsA family of proteins (CEPs, binders of Rho GTPases, Borgs) that act downstream of in regulating actin polymerization. CEP1 (Borg5, 210aa) induces membrane extensions in fibroblasts, CEP2 (Borg1, 210aa) induces pseudopod formation, as do the others (CEP3, Borg2, 254aa; CEP4, Borg4, 356aa; CEP5, Borg3, 148aa). Cdc42 small effector proteins (79aa and 84aa) act downstream of cdc42, inducing actin filament assembly and in activated T-cells, may be important for F-actin accumulation at the immunological synapse.
CDEPHuman protein (chondrocyte-derived ezrin-like protein, FERM, RhoGEF and pleckstrin domain-containing protein 1, FARP1, 1045aa) containing the ezrin-like domain of the band 4.1 superfamily, Dbl homology (DH) and pleckstrin homology (PH) domains. CDEP mRNA is expressed not only in differentiated chondrocytes but also in various fetal and adult tissues.
CDGsA family of severe inherited diseases (congenital defects in glycosylation) caused by deficient N-glycosylation of proteins. They are characterized by under-glycosylated serum proteins and there are a range of multi-system defects. One form is caused by mutation in the gene for GlcNAc-phosphotransferase.
CDGSH iron sulphur domain proteinsA family of proteins (CISD proteins, CDGSH iron sulphur domain proteins) that contain iron-sulphur (Fe2-S2) clusters and have a 39aa CDGSH domain. CDGSH1 (MitoNEET, 108aa) is located in the outer mitochondrial membrane and may be involved in the transport of iron into the mitochondrion and regulates the maximal capacity for electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation. CDGSH2 (MitoNEET-related 1, miner1, 135aa) is involved in calcium homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum and is mutated in one form of Wolfram’s syndrome. CDGSH3 (mitoneet-related 2, miner2, 127aa) is mitochondrial.
cdkSee .
cDNAComplementary DNA; DNA that has been synthesized by viral reverse transcriptase from an mRNA template. The cDNA can be used, for example, as a probe to locate the gene or can be cloned in the double-stranded form. Unlike the genomic coding region the cDNA does not contain introns.
cDNA-AFLPcDNA-amplified fragment length polymorphism analysis. A PCR-based method in which cDNA is synthesized from total RNA or mRNA using random hexamers as primers. The fragments are then digested with two restriction enzymes and adapters are ligated to the ends of the fragments. The first amplification step amplifies only fragments that were digested by both restriction enzymes and have different adapters at the end. In later amplifications the mixture is fractionated into smaller subsets by selective PCR amplification using primers with one or more extra nucleotides as well as the adapter. The method allows detection of genes expressed at low levels.
CDPSee cytidine 5′diphosphate.
CDRSee .
CDRPCalcium dependent regulator protein, an obsolete early name for .

CDS
(1) The enzyme CDP-DAG synthase (CDS-1, phosphatidate cytidylyltransferase 1, EC 2.7.7.41, 461aa; CDS-2, 445aa) that catalyzes the production of CDP-diacylglycerol, an important precursor for the synthesis of phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns), phosphatidylglycerol, and cardiolipin. (2) In S. pombe, a checkpoint kinase (cds1, EC 2.7.11.1, 460aa) responsible for blocking mitosis in the S phase.
cdt1A licensing protein (cdc10-dependent transcript 1, 546aa) that is recruited first to the origin of DNA replication, followed by cell division cycle 6 (Cdc6) and mini-chromosome maintenance proteins (Mcms). Drosophila homologue is Double-parked (Dup). Cdt1 is present in cells in G1 phase where it is required for initiation of replication but once replication has been initiated Cdt1 is either exported out of the nucleus or degraded, thereby preventing another round of replication. Also inhibited by geminin.
CEASee .
C-EBPA family of bZIP transcription factors (C/EBP, CCAAT-enhancer binding proteins: C/EBPalpha to zeta, ~250–360aa) that recognize two different motifs: the CCAAT homology common to many promoters and the enhanced core homology common to many enhancers. In Drosophila, C/EBP (slow border cell protein, 449aa) may be required for the expression of gene products mediating border cell migration.
cecropins
Antimicrobial peptides 30–40aa, act by permeabilizing the membranes of bacteria. Originally isolated from haemolymph of Hyalophora cecropia (silkmoth) pupae, and subsequently in several other species of endopterygote insects. A structural and functional equivalent, Cecropin P1, has been isolated from the pig intestine although subsequently it appears that this is probably the product of an intestinal nematode parasite, Ascaris suum.
ced genesGenes identified in after studies of developmental mutations in which cells did not die when expected. Implicated in the control of apoptosis. See interleukin-1 converting enzyme.
C.elegansSee .
celiacSee coeliac.
cellAn autonomous self-replicating unit (in principle) that may constitute an organism (in the case of unicellular organisms) or be a subunit of multicellular organisms in which individual cells may be more or less specialized (differentiated) for particular functions. All living organisms are composed of one or more cells. Implicit in this definition is that viruses are not living organisms – and since they cannot exist independently, this seems reasonable.
cell adhesionSee adhesins, , (CAMs), , DLVO theory, integrins, sorting out, uvomorulin and various specialized junctions (adherens junctions, desmosomes, focal adhesions, gap junction and zonula occludens).
cell adhesion molecule
CAM Although this could mean any molecule involved in cellular adhesive phenomena, it has acquired a more restricted sense; CAMs are molecules on the surface of animal tissue cells, antibodies (or Fab fragments) against which specifically inhibit some form of intercellular adhesion. Examples are LCAM (Liver Cell Adhesion Molecule) and NCAM (Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule), both named from the tissues in which they were first detected, although they actually have a wider tissue distribution. Others include LeCAM, SynCAM, VCAM and activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM).
cell aggregationAdhesion betwen cells mediated by cellular adhesion mechanisms rather than by a cross-linking or agglutinating agent.
cell bankCollection of cells stored by freezing that can be used to re-initiate cell cultures or, potentially, in the case of stem cells, to restore normal function to the organism from which they were removed.
cell behaviourGeneral term for activities of whole cells such as movement, adhesion and proliferation, by analogy with animal behaviour.
cell bodyUsed in reference to neurons; the main part of the cell around the nucleus excluding long processes such as axons and dendrites.
cell centreMicrotubule organizing centre (MTOC) of the cell, the pericentriolar region.
cell coatImprecise term occasionally used for the glycocalyx.
cell cultureGeneral term referring to the maintenance of cell strains or lines in the laboratory. See 
.
cell cycleThe sequence of events between mitotic divisions. The cycle is conventionally divided into G0, G1, (G standing for gap), S (synthesis phase during which the DNA is replicated), G2 and M (mitosis). Cells that will not divide again are considered to be in G0, and the transition from G0 to G1 is thought to commit the cell to completing the cycle and dividing.
cell deathCells die (non-accidentally) either when they have completed a fixed number of division cycles (around 60; the Hayflick limit) or at some earlier stage when programmed to do so, as in digit separation in vertebrate limb morphogenesis. Whether this is due to an accumulation of errors or a programmed limit is unclear; some transformed cells have undoubtedly escaped the limit. See apoptosis.

cell divisionThe separation of one cell into two daughter cells, involving both nuclear division (mitosis) and subsequent cytoplasmic division ( ).
cell electrophoresisMethod for estimating the surface charge of a cell by looking at its rate of movement in an electrical field; almost all eukaryotic cells have a net negative surface charge. Measurement is complicated by the streaming potential at the wall of the chamber itself, and by the fact that the cell is surrounded by a layer of fluid (see double layer). The electrical potential measured (the zeta potential) is actually some distance away from the plasma membrane. One of the more useful approaches is to systematically vary the pH of the suspension fluid to determine the pK of the charged groups responsible (mostly carboxyl groups of sialic acid).
cell fateOf an embryonic parent (progenitor) cell or cell type, the range and distribution of differentiated tissues formed by its daughter cells. For example, cells of the neural crest differentiate to form (among other things) cells of the peripheral nervous system.
cell fractionationStrictly this should mean the separation of homogeneous sets from a heterogeneous population of cells (by a method such as flow cytometry), but the term is more frequently used to mean subcellular fractionation i.e. the separation of different parts of the cell by differential centrifugation, to give nuclear, mitochondrial, microsomal and soluble fractions.
cell free systemAny system in which a normal cellular reaction is reconstituted in the absence of cells, for example, in vitro translation systems that will synthesize protein from mRNA using a lysate of rabbit reticulocytes or wheat-germ. Mostly superceded by systems in which pure enzymes are used, as in many molecular biological procedures.
cell fusionFusion of two previously separate cells occurs naturally in fertilization and in the formation of vertebrate skeletal muscle, but can be induced artificially by the use of Sendai virus or fusogens such as polyethylene glycol. Fusion may be restricted to cytoplasm or nuclei may fuse as well. A cell formed by the fusion of dissimilar cells is often referred to as a heterokaryon.
cell growthUsually used to mean increase in the size of a population of cells though strictly should be reserved for an increase in cytoplasmic volume of an individual cell.
cell junctionsSpecialized junctions between cells. See adherens junctions, desmosomes, tight junctions, gap junctions.
cell lineA cell line is a permanently established cell culture that will proliferate indefinitely given appropriate fresh medium and space. Lines differ from cell strains in that they have escaped the Hayflick limit and become immortalized. Some species, particularly rodents, give rise to lines relatively easily, whereas other species do not. No cell lines have been produced from avian tissues, and the establishment of cell lines from human tissue is difficult. Many cell biologists would consider that a cell line is by definition already abnormal and that it is on the way towards becoming the culture equivalent of a neoplastic cell.
cell lineageThe lineage of a cell relates to its derivation from the undifferentiated tissues of the embryo. Committed embryonic progenitors give rise to a range of differentiated cells: in principle it should be possible to trace the ancestry (lineage) of any adult cell.
cell locomotionMovement of a cell from one place to another.
cell mediated immunityImmune response that involves effector T-lymphocytes (T-cells) and not the production of humoral antibody. Responsible for allograft rejection, delayed hypersensitivity and in defence against viral infection and intracellular protozoan parasites.
cell membraneRather imprecise term usually intended to mean plasma membrane.
cell migrationImplies movement of a population of cells from one place to another, as in the movement of neural crest cells during morphogenesis.
cell movementA more general term than cell locomotion, that can include shape-change, cytoplasmic streaming, amongst others.
cell plateIn plants, the immature disk that is formed during cytokinesis by the phragmoplast and that separates the sister nuclei. It is made by Golgi-derived vesicles that fuse, forming a jelly-like disk that expands outwards (centrifugally) until it separates the mother cell into two compartments. Initially, the cell plate is rich in callose but matures over time with the addition of stronger cellulose microfibrils.
cell polarity
(1) In epithelial cells the differentiation of apical and basal specializations. In many epithelia the apical and basolateral regions of plasma membrane differ in lipid and protein composition, and are isolated from one another by tight junctions. The apical membrane may, for example, be the only region where secretory vesicles fuse, or have a particular ionic pumping system. (2) A motile cell must have some internal polarity in order to move in one direction at a time: a region in which protrusion will occur (the front) must be defined. Locomotory polarity may be associated with the pericentriolar microtubule organizing centre, and can be perturbed by drugs that interfere with microtubule dynamics.
cell proliferationIncrease in cell number by division.
cell recognitionInteraction between cells that is possibly dependent upon specific adhesion. Since the mechanism is not entirely clear in most cases, the term should be used with caution.
cell renewalReplacement of cells, for example those in the skin, by the proliferative activity of basal stem cells.

cell sapCasual term effectively equivalent to the term ‘cytosol’.
cell signallingRelease by one cell of substances that transmit information to other cells.
cell sortingThe process or processes whereby mixed populations of cells, e.g. in a reaggregate, separate out into two or more populations that usually occupy different parts of the same aggregate or separate into different aggregates. Cell sorting probably takes place in the development of certain organs. See differential adhesion, flow cytometry.
cell strainCells adapted to culture, but with finite division potential. See .
cell streamingSee 

cell synchronizationA process of obtaining (either by selection, or imposition of a reversible blockade) a population of growing cells that are to a greater or lesser extent in phase with each other in the cycle of growth and division.
cell traffickingThe movement of leucocytes through tissues, as for example the movement of lymphocytes from skin to lymph nodes, or from blood into tissues and back into the circulation.
cell wallExtracellular material serving a structural role. In plants the primary wall is pectin-rich, the secondary wall mostly composed of . In bacteria, cell wall structure is complex: the walls of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria are distinctly different. Removal of the wall leaves a protoplast or spheroplast.
cell wall looseningIn plant cells, the loosening of the chemical bonds that maintain the rigidity of the complex cell wall. The non-enzymatic protein expansin causes slippage between adjacent cellulose microfibrils, allowing the cell to expand. Enzymes such as pectin methylesterases and xyloglucan endotransglycosylases break other kinds of bonds during wall loosening.
cell-surface markerAny molecule characteristic of the plasma membrane of a cell or in some cases of a specific cell type. Enzymic marker for the plasma membrane, such as 5′-nucleotidase and Na+/K+ ATPase, have largely been superceded by antibodies directed against specific cell surface molecules that are characteristic of particular cell types (see ).
cellobiohydrolaseAn enzyme that hydrolyses 1,4-β-D-glucosidic linkages in cellulose, releasing cellobiose from the non-reducing end of the chain. Cellulose degradation requires, sequentially, endoglucanases which cut internal beta-1,4-glucosidic bonds; exocellobiohydrolases that cut cellobiose from the non-reducing end of the polymer and β-1,4-glucosidases which hydrolyze the cellobiose and other short oligosaccharides to glucose. Found in fungi such as Aspergillus (1,4-β-D-glucan cellobiohydrolase A, cellobiohydrolase D, EC 3.2.1.91, 452aa) and bacteria such as Clostridium thermocellum (Exoglucanase xynX, EC 3.2.1.91, 1,4-β-cellobiohydrolase, exocellobiohydrolase, 1087aa).
cellobioseReducing disaccharide composed of two D-glucose moieties β-1,4 linked. The disaccharide subunit of cellulose, though not found as a free compound in vivo.
cellubrevinVesicle-associated membrane protein 3 (VAMP-3, synaptobrevin-3, 100aa), a SNARE involved in vesicular transport from the late endosomes to the trans-Golgi network.
cellular engineeringThe use of techniques for constructing replacement parts of tissues for both fundamental investigation and as prosthetic devices. Often involves the interfacing of cells and non-living structures.
cellular immunityImmune response that involves enhanced activity by phagocytic cells and does not imply lymphocyte involvement. Since the term is easily confused with its use in this sense should be avoided.
cellular retinoic acid-binding proteinOne of the of lipid-binding proteins (fatty acid binding proteins), which occur in invertebrates and vertebrates, and that acts as an initial receptor for retinoic acid and regulates its transport to the nucleus where there are retinoic acid receptors. There are several isoforms, CRABP-1 (137aa), CRABP-2 (138aa) and CRABP-4 (retinoid-binding protein 7, 134aa).
cellular slime mouldSee Acrasidae.
cellulasesEnzymes that break down , and are involved in cell-wall breakdown in higher plants, especially during abscission. Produced in large amounts by certain fungi and bacteria. Degradation of cellulose microfibrils requires the concerted action of several cellulases. See .
cellulitisInflammation of the subcutaneous connective tissues (dermis), mostly affecting face or limbs. Streptococcus pyogenes is commonly the causative agent. Also known as erysipelas.
celluloseThe major structural component of plant cell walls where it is found as microfibrils laid down in several orthogonal layers. Cellulose is a straight chain polysaccharide composed of β(1–4)-linked glucose subunits. Cellulose-synthesizing particles in the plasma polymerize multiple polyglucan chains that crystallize to form a microfibril of very high tensile strength.
cellulose synthaseFamily of processive glycosyl synthetases involved in production of ; plant cellulose synthase (CESA) proteins are integral membrane proteins (~1000aa). The sequences all have considerable similarity but differ from genes found in Acetobacter and Agrobacterium sp. In Arabidopsis there are three different types of CESA proteins that contribute to the cellulose synthesizing complexes involved in making primary walls and another three in making secondary walls. Arabidopsis also has several cellulose synthase-like (Csl) genes. Review: http://genomebiology.com/2000/1/4/REVIEWS/3001/ref

cellulose synthesizing complexIn higher plants, a cluster of cellulose-synthesizing enzymes forming a transmembranous, hexagonal rosette. Rosettes are at least 25 nm (perhaps 50 nm) in diameter and protrude into the cytoplasm. In algae, the complex takes the form of linear terminal bars.
cellulosomeA large multienzyme complex used by many anaerobic bacteria for the efficient degradation of plant cell-wall polysaccharides such as cellulose. Consists of scaffoldins containing nine domains and a cellulose-binding domain, and at least 14 different enzymatic subunits, each containing a conserved duplicated sequence, or dockerin domain that is responsible for holding the complex on to the bacterial cell surface through a calcium-mediated protein-protein interaction between the dockerin module from the cellulosomal scaffold and a cohesin (Coh) module of cell-surface proteins located within the proteoglycan layer.
cenexinOuter dense fibre of sperm tails protein 2 (Odf2, 829aa) a major component of sperm tail outer dense fibres. Also involved as a scaffolding protein in the centriole.
cenocyteSee .
CENPsA large group of associated proteins. CENP-A (140aa) is a histone H3 variant and CENP-A nucleosomes directly recruit a proximal CENP-A nucleosome associated complex (NAC) comprising three other proteins, CENP-M, CENP-N and CENP-T, along with CENP-U, CENP-C and CENP-H. CENP-K, CENP-L, CENP-O, CENP-P, CENP-Q, CENP-R and CENP-S assemble on the CENP-A NAC. CENP-E (2701aa) is a kinesin-related microtubule motor protein that is essential for chromosome movement during mitosis. CENP-F (3210aa) is a microtubule-binding protein required for kinetochore localization of dynein, Lis1, NDE1 and NDE-L1, and regulates recycling of the plasma membrane by acting as a link between recycling vesicles and the microtubule network. In there are autoantibodies to CENPs.
centaurinsA large family of proteins involved in regulating cytoskeletal and membrane trafficking events. They are GTPase-activating proteins for the ADP-ribosylation factor family of small G-proteins (Arf-GAPs) and bind lipid signalling molecules from the phosphoinositide 3-kinase, phosphoinositide 4-P 5-kinase and phospholipase D pathways. Examples include centaurin-alpha-2 (Arf-GAP with dual PH domain-containing protein 2, 381aa), centaurin-beta-1 (ACAP-1, ARFGAP with coiled-coil, ANK repeat and PH domain-containing protein 1, 740aa), centaurin-delta-1 (ARAP-2, Arf-GAP, Rho-GAP domain, ANK repeat and PH domain-containing protein 2, PARX protein, 1704aa) and centaurin-gamma-3 (AGAP-3, Arf-GAP, GTPase, ANK repeat and PH domain-containing protein 3, CRAM-associated GTPase, 875aa). See .
centractinVertebrate actin-related proteins (centractin-alpha, Arp1A, actin-RPV, 376aa; Arp1B, 376aa) that have 54% sequence homology with muscle actin and 69% similarity with cytoplasmic actin. Centractins are associated with the vertebrate and are involved in microtubule-linked cytoplasmic movement as components of the dynactin complex.
central core diseaseA myopathy caused by mutation in the ryanodine receptor-1 (RyR1) gene.
central lymphoid tissueSee lymphoid tissue.
centrifugationThe process of separating fractions of systems in a centrifuge. The most basic separation is to sediment a pellet at the bottom of the tube, leaving a supernatant at a given centrifugal force. In this case sedimentation is determined by size and density of the particles in the system amongst other factors. Density may be used as a basis for sedimentation in density gradient centrifugation. At very high g values molecules may be separated, i.e. ultracentrifugation. In continuous centrifugation the supernatant is removed continuously as it is formed.
centrinsAcidic calcium-binding phosphoproteins involved in the duplication of centrosomes in higher eukaryotes, homologous to . Also found in striated flagellar roots of various algae and basal bodies of human sperm. There are three centrins in humans: centrin-1 (caltractin isoform 2, 172aa), centrin-2 (caltractin isoform-1, 172aa) and centrin-3 (167aa). A mutation in centrin causes genomic instability via increased chromosome loss in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

centriolar regionSee pericentriolar region or .
centrioleOrganelle of animal cells that is made up of two orthogonally arranged cylinders each with nine microtubule triplets composing the wall. Almost identical to basal body of cilium. The pericentriolar material, but not the centriole itself, is the major microtubule organizing centre of the cell. Centrioles divide prior to mitosis and the daughter centrioles and their associated pericentriolar material come to lie at the poles of the spindle. Various proteins are associated with the centriole: see ,
 , . Plants have a similar microtubule organising centre but no centriole.
centriolinA centriolar protein (CEP110, 2325aa) that is involved in cell cycle progression and cytokinesis. In the late stage of cytokinesis centriolin anchors exocyst and SNARE complexes at the midbody allowing secretory vesicle-mediated abscission.
centroblastStage of B-lymphocyte differentiation after antigen exposure and activation. Centroblasts are rapidly proliferating B-cells with little or no surface immunoglobulin. These cells undergo somatic mutation and class-switching of their immunoglobulin genes.
centrocyteNon-proliferating progeny of that re-express surface immunoglobulin and are thought to be positively or negatively selected by their affinity for antigen.
centrolecithalType of egg in which the yolk is in the centre.
centromereThe region (attachment constriction) in eukaryote chromosomes where daughter chromatids are joined together. The kinetochore, to which the spindle chromosomes are attached, lies adjacent to the centromere. The centromere region generally consists of large arrays of repetitive DNA. See .
centronuclear myopathyMuscle disorders (myotubular myopathies) characterized by slowly progressive muscular weakness and wasting. Can be caused by mutations in genes for dynamin-2, bridging integrator 1 or myotubularin.
centrophilinOld name for nuclear mitotic apparatus protein.
centrosomeThe microtubule organizing centre which, in animal cells, surrounds the , and which will divide to organize the two poles of the mitotic spindle. By directing the assembly of a cell’s skeleton, this organelle controls division, motility and shape.
centrosphereAlternative (rare) name for .
CepaeaGenus of land snails. Two species, C. hortensis and C. nemoralis have been much studied as convenient examples of polymorphism in colour and banding pattern.
cephalosporinsGroup of broad-spectrum beta-lactam (tetracyclic triterpene) antibiotics isolated from culture filtrates of the fungus Cephalosporium sp. Inhibit bacterial cell wall synthesis in a similar way to penicillins, and are effective against Gram-positive bacteria. Various modifications have been made to produce new variants such as cephaloridine, cefalexin and cefprozil.
cer/dan familySecreted antagonists of bone morphogenetic proteins that are involved in complex morphogenetic processes such as the development of left-right asymmetry. They have a characteristic cysteine-knot motif. Examples include , , , dan, gremlin and sclerostin.
ceramidesA family of lipids composed of sphingosine and a fatty acid; found in sphingomyelin and glycosphingolipids.

cerberusCysteine knot superfamily protein of the (DAN domain family member 4, 267aa), functioning as secreted-type BMP antagonist, consequently an antagonist of Nodal, Wnt, and BMP signalling. Cerberus function is required in the leading edge of the anterior dorsal-endoderm of the Xenopus embryo for correct induction and patterning of the neuroectoderm. Cerberus-short only inhibits nodal.
CERCAn acronym for members of the EF-hand superfamily (CREC family) found in endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi: Cab-45, Erc-55, reticulocalbin and .
cercidosomeSpecialized organelle of trypanosomes, site of terminal oxidative metabolism.
CercozoaSoil-dwelling amoeboflagellate protozoa, mostly heterotrophic and very abundant. Tend to form filopodia or reticulopodia. Some lineages have secondarily acquired chloroplasts (see ). Image and details: http://tolweb.org/Cercozoa/121187#Introduction

cerebellar ataxiaSee spinocerebellar ataxia.
cerebellumPart of the vertebrate hindbrain, concerned primarily with somatic motor function, the control of muscle tone and the maintenance of balance. Important model for cell migration in developing mammalian brain owing to well-studied migratory pathway of the granule cell and to the existence of the neurological mutant mouse weaver in which granule cell migration fails.
cereblonA protein (442aa) that may modulate cell surface expression of KCNT1 (T-type potassium channel) and may be involved in memory and learning. Defects are the cause of autosomal recessive mental retardation type 2A. Has recently been shown to have thalidomide-binding properties.
cerebral amyloid angiopathyA disease of small blood vessels in the brain in which there are deposits of amyloid protein in the vessel walls. Often a consequence of ageing but there are some forms caused by mutation in, variously, genes for amyloid precursor protein, cystatin C, integral membrane protein 2B (266aa) or associated with high density lipoprotein deficiency caused by mutation in the ABCA1 gene.

cerebral cavernous malformationsA set of disorders characterized by venous sinusoids and a predisposition to intracranial haemorrhage. Can be caused by mutation in genes for KRIT1, malcavernin or programmed death 10.
cerebral palsyA nonprogressive disorder of posture or movement, usually a consequence of perinatal damage but a few rare cases are caused by mutation in the gene encoding glutamate decarboxylase-1.
cerebroside
Glycosphingolipid found in brain (11% of dry matter). Sphingosine core with fatty amide or hydroxy fatty amide and a single monosaccharide on the alcohol group (either glucose or galactose).
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosisA lipid-storage disorder caused by a deficiency of the mitochondrial sterol 27-hydroxylase, CYP27.
cereolysinA general name for a variety of cytolytic toxins released by Bacillus cereus. Cereolysin A is a phospholipase C (EC 3.1.4.3, 283aa), cereolysin B is a sphingomyelinase C (EC 3.1.4.12, 333aa) and both hydrolyse membrane components. Another cereolysin is a thiol-activated cytolysin (inactivated by oxygen, reactivated by thiol reduction) which binds to cholesterol in the plasma membrane and rearrangement of the toxin-cholesterol complexes in the membrane leads to altered permeability.
cernunnosA protein involved in the process of repairing double-strand breaks in DNA (non-homologous end-joining factor 1, 299aa) (see NHEJ) and and V(D)J recombination. Defects in cernunnos lead to a severe immunodeficiency condition associated with microcephaly and other developmental defects in humans. Cernunnos physically interacts with the XRCC4/DNA-LigaseIV complex. NHEJ is required for the generation of diversity in the immune system.
ceroid lipofuscinosisSee Batten’s disease.
ceruleninAn antibiotic isolated from the culture broth of Cephalosporium caerulens that has a very broad range of antibacterial and antifungal activity and inhibits fatty acid and polyketide biosynthesis.
ceruloplasminA blue copper-binding dehydrogenase protein (EC 1.16.3.1, 1065aa) with 6–7 cupric ions per molecule, found in serum (200–500 mg/ml). Apparently involved in copper detoxification and storage, and possibly also in mopping up excess oxygen radicals or superoxide anions. Mutation in the ceruloplasmin gene is associated with iron accumulation in tissues. See Wilson’s disease.
cesium chlorideSee .
CFSEFluorochrome that readily enters cells where it is de-esterified by non specific esterases and remains trapped. Used as a vital dye for cell tracking and lineage studies.
CFTRSee .
CFU-EColony forming unit for erythrocytes.
CG islandSee .
CGDSee .
CGHComparative genomic hybridization, a method for analysing for copy number changes. DNA from subject tissue and from normal control tissue are labeled with different fluorescent tags, mixed and hybridized to normal metaphase chromosomes: using quantitative image analysis, regional differences in the fluorescence ratio of gains/losses vs. control DNA can be detected. The technique can also be used with DNA arrays rather than chromosomes.
cGMPSee .
CGRPSee calcitonin gene related peptide.
CGT
(1) In Bacillus sp. cyclomaltodextrin glucanotransferase (EC 2.4.1.19, 713aa) an enzyme that cyclizes part of a (1–4)-α-D-glucan chain. (2) In humans, ceramide UDP-galactosyltransferase (2-hydroxyacylsphingosine 1-β-galactosyltransferase, cerebroside synthase, EC 2.4.1.45, 541aa) an important enzyme in biosynthesis of the sphingolipids of the myelin sheath.
ch-TOGA human homologue of the xmap215 microtubule stabilizer (cytoskeleton-associated protein 5, CKAP5, colonic and hepatic tumour over-expressed protein, 2032aa).
chaconineToxic trisaccharide glycoalkaloid (α-chaconine) found in potatoes (Solanum tuberosum), where it is produced in increased amounts as a response to stress (and has insecticidal and fungicidal effect). Major alkaloid may be β-chaconine, a disaccharide breakdown product of α-chaconine. Related to solanine. Imparts an unpleasantly bitter taste. Has cytotoxic effects that have been investigated for tumour therapy and it has been reported that α-chaconine induces apoptosis of HT-29 cells through inhibition of ERK and, in turn, activation of caspase-3. Also has anti-cholinesterase activity. See solanidine.
chaeotropicSee .
chaetoglobosinsChaetoglobosin J is a fungal metabolite related to cytochalasins that will inhibit elongation at the barbed end of an actin microfilament. Chaetoglobosin A is produced by Chaetomium globosum. Chaetoglobosin K is a plant growth inhibitor and toxin from the fungus Diplodia macrospora.
ChaetognathaPhylum of hermaphrodite marine Coelomata with the body divided into three distinct regions: head, trunk and tail. Arrow-worms.

Chagas’ diseaseSouth American trypanosomiasis caused by Trypanosoma cruzi and transmitted by blood-sucking reduviid bugs such as Rhodnius.

chalaza
(1) The basal part of a plant ovule where nucellus and integument are joined. (2) One of two spirally twisted cords of dense albumen connecting the yolk to the shell membrane in a bird’s egg.
chalconeIntermediate in biosynthesis of flavanones, flavones and anthocyanidins by plants. Synthetic derivatives have been shown to have anti-inflammatory properties.
chalcone isomeraseEnzymes in the biosynthetic pathway for all classes of flavonoids. Chalcone isomerase 1 (chalcone-flavonone isomerase, EC 5.5.1.6, 246aa) is responsible for intramolecular cyclization of bicyclic chalcones into tricyclic (S)-flavanones. Many variants are known from different plants.
chalcone synthaseAn important enzyme (naringenin-chalcone synthase, EC 2.3.1.74, 395aa) in the flavonoid pathway. See apigenin.
chaloneCell-released tissue-specific inhibitor of cell proliferation thought to be responsible for regulating the size of a population of cells. Their existence has been doubted but myostatin appears to be an example.
Chanarin-Dorfman syndromeSee ichthyosiform erythroderma.
Chang liver cellsA human cell line with epithelial morphology, derived from non-malignant tissue but later shown to be a sub-line of HeLa cells. Extensively used in virology and biochemistry.
channel gatingSee gating current.
channel proteinA protein that facilitates the diffusion of molecules/ions across lipid membranes by forming a hydrophilic pore. Most frequently multimeric with the pore formed by subunit interactions.
channel-forming ionophoreAn ionophore that makes an amphipathic pore with hydrophobic exterior and hydrophilic interior. Most known types are cation selective.
channelopathiesAny disease that arises because of a defect in an ion channel which may be the result of alteration in the channel-forming subunit or in regulatory sub-units. Defects in channels for potassium, sodium, chloride and calcium ions are known, and a wide variety of diseases are the result. Many toxins from spiders, scorpions, snakes etc. act on ion channels.
channelopsinSee .
channelrhodopsinLight-gated ion (proton) channels from Volvox (channelrhodopsin-1, 837aa; channelrhodopsin-2, 747aa), originally isolated from the eyespot of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (channelopsin-1, archaeal-type opsin 1, 712aa) that can be used experimentally to activate cells by light-pulses. The channels open rapidly after absorption of a photon to generate a large permeability for monovalent and divalent cations. Recent paper: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2718366/

Chaos chaosGiant multinucleate fresh-water amoeba (up to 5 mm long) much used for studies on the mechanism of cell locomotion.
chaotropicDescribing an agent that causes chaos, usually in the sense of disrupting or denaturing macromolecules. For example, iodide is often used in protein chemistry to break up and randomise micelles. In molecular biology guanidium isothiocyanate is used to provide a denaturing environment in which RNA can be extracted intact without exposure to RNAases.
chaperonesCytoplasmic proteins of both prokaryotes and eukaryotes (and organelles such as mitochondria) that bind to nascent or unfolded polypeptides and ensure correct folding or transport. Chaperone proteins do not covalently bind to their targets and do not form part of the finished product. Heat-shock proteins are an important subset of chaperones. Three major families are recognized, the (groEL and hsp60), the hsp70 family and the hsp90 family. Outside these major families are other proteins with similar functions including nucleoplasmin, secB, and T-cell receptor-associated protein.
chaperoninsSubset of chaperone proteins found in prokaryotes, mitochondria and plastids - major example is prokaryotic GroEL (the eukaryotic equivalent of which is hsp60).
CHAPSZwitterionic detergent used for membrane solubilization.
Char’s syndromeA developmental disorder caused by missense mutations in the gene for transcription factor AP2beta which mainly affects neural crest cells.
CharaSee .
Characean algaeClass of filamentous green algae (Charophyceae) exemplified by the genus Chara, in which the mitotic spindle is not surrounded by a nuclear envelope. Probably the closest relatives, among the algae, to higher plants. The giant internodal cells (up to 5 cm long) exhibit dramatic and have been much used for studies on ion transport and cytoplasmic streaming.
Charcot-Leyden crystalsHexagonal bipyramidal crystals of galectin-10 (eosinophil lysophospholipase, EC 3.1.1.5, 142aa) found in human tissues and secretions in association with increased numbers of peripheral blood or tissue eosinophils, a feature of parasitic infections and allergic processes.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth diseaseA clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of motor and sensory neuropathies affecting peripheral nerves, the most common inherited disorders of the peripheral nervous system. The affected genes can be for connexin-32, early growth response-2, frabin, ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein-1, kinesin-like protein, KIF1B, LITAF, mitofusin-2, myelin protein zero, myotubularin-related protein-2, myotubularin-related protein 13, neurofilament light polypeptide, N-myc downstream-regulated-1, periaxin, peripheral myelin protein-22, SH3 domain and tetratricopeptide repeats-containing protein 2. Other loci are known to be affected but the genes have not yet been identified.
CHARGE syndromeA complex set of abnormalities (coloboma, heart anomaly, choanal atresia, retardation of mental and somatic development, genital hypoplasia, ear abnormalities and/or deafness) caused by mutation in the gene encoding the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein-7 or the semaphorin-3E gene. The PAX2 gene that is active in all the developmental primordia that are affected seems to be unaffected.
charonA Cerberus/Dan-family protein (243aa) that is a negative regulator of Nodal signalling during left-right patterning in zebrafish. Suppresses the dorsalizing activity of all three of the known zebrafish Nodal-related proteins (Cyclops, Squint and Southpaw).
chartinsObsolete name for microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) of 64, 67 and 80 kDa, distinct from tau protein and isolated from neuroblastoma cells. They are regulated by nerve growth factor (NGF) and may influence microtubule distribution.
charybdotoxinPeptide (37aa) isolated from Leiurus quinquestriatus hebraeus (Yellow scorpion) venom that is a selective blocker of high conductance (maxi-K), different intermediate and small conductance calcium-activated potassium channels (SK channels), as well as a voltage-dependent potassium channel (Kv1.3/KCNA3).
CHD proteinsProteins (chromo-ATPase/helicase-DNA-binding proteins) that regulate ATP-dependent nucleosome assembly and mobilization through their conserved double . Whether they act as activators or repressors depends upon associated proteins. For example, CHD1 (EC 3.6.4.12, 1710aa) is a component of the SAGA complex, CHD7 (2997aa) is mutated in , CHD9 (peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor A-interacting complex 320 kDa protein, 2897aa) is a transcriptional coactivator for PPARA.
che genesGenes involved in specifying components of the bacterial chemotaxis response system. CheW (167aa) bridges CheA to the methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins to allow regulated phosphotransfer to CheY (129aa) and CheB. CheA (EC 2.7.13.3, 654aa) is a histidine kinase activated by autophosphorylation in proportion to the degree of receptor methylation, and passes phosphate to CheB (a two-component system) or CheY. When phosphorylated or acetylated CheY exhibits enhanced binding to FliM (see fli genes) and reverses the direction of flagellar rotation (causes tumbling). CheB (EC 3.1.1.61, 349aa) is a methyl esterase activated by CheA phosphorylation, that demethylates (and upregulates) receptors that have been desensitized (methylated) by CheR (EC 2.1.1.80, 286aa). The degree of receptor methylation allows the bacterium to ‘remember’ chemical concentrations from the recent past, a few seconds, and compare them to those it is currently experiencing, thus ‘knows’ whether it is travelling up or down a gradient. Other proteins such as CheZ (214aa), CheC (CheY-P phosphatase, 219aa in B. subtilis) and CheD (chemoreceptor glutamine deamidase, EC 3.5.1.44, 166aa in B. subtilis) are involved in regulation. The details in Bacillus subtilis are slightly different from those in E. coli (given above), even though orthologous proteins are present. Comparative study of chemotaxis in E. coli and B.subtilis: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pbio.0020049

checkerboard assayVariant of the Boyden chamber assay for leucocyte chemotaxis introduced by Zigmond. By testing different concentrations of putative chemotactic factor in non-gradient conditions, it is possible to calculate the enhancement of movement expected due simply to chemokinesis and to compare this with the distances moved in positive and negative gradients. Good experimental design thus allows chemotaxis to be distinguished from chemokinesis.
checkpointAny stage in the at which the cycle can be halted and entry into the next phase postponed. Two major checkpoints are at the G1/S and G2/M boundaries. These are the points at which cdc proteins act.
checkpoint kinasesSerine/threonine kinases (EC 2.7.11.1, chk1, 476aa; chk2, 543aa) that act downstream of ATM in response to detection of DNA damage. Chk 1 is an essential gene for normal cell division and chk 2 has been found to be mutated in many human tumours. Chk2, along with ATM, was found to regulate the transcription factor p53 by preventing its ubiquitination by the RING E3 ligase Mdm2. Chk2 is mutant in Li-Fraumeni syndrome-2.
Chediak-Higashi syndromeAn autosomal recessive disorder, caused by mutation in the lysosomal trafficking regulator gene, characterized by the presence of giant lysosomal vesicles in phagocytes and in consequence poor bactericidal function. Some perturbation of microtubule dynamics seems to be involved. Reported from humans, albino Hereford cattle, mink, beige mice and killer whale.

chelationBinding of a metal ion by a larger molecule such as EDTA or protein (iron in haem is held as a chelate). The binding is strong but reversible and chelating agents can be used to buffer the free concentration of the ion in question.
chelerythrineAn alkaloid from the greater celandine (Chelidonium majus), and named from the red colour of its salts. Chelerythrine chloride inhibits PKC by binding to the catalytic domain.
chemerinAn adipokine (retinoic acid receptor responder protein 2, tazarotene-induced gene 2 protein, 163aa) whose expression is upregulated in vitro by the synthetic retinoid tazarotene. A secreted chemotactic protein for antigen-presenting cells which express chemokine-like receptor 1 (CMKLR1) and also potentiates insulin-stimulated glucose uptake.
chemical potentialIn biological systems the work required (in J mol−1) to bring a molecule from a standard state (usually infinitely separated in a vacuum) to a specified concentration. More usually employed as chemical potential difference, the work required to bring one mole of a substance from a solution at one concentration to another at a different concentration, Δm=RT.ln (c2/cl). This definition is useful in studies of active transport; note that, for charged molecules, the electrical potential difference must also be considered (see electrochemical potential).
chemical synapseA nerve-nerve or nerve-muscle junction where the signal is transmitted by release from one membrane of a chemical transmitter that binds to a receptor in the second membrane. Importantly, signals only pass in one direction.
chemiluminescenceLight emitted as a reaction proceeds. Can be used to assay ATP (using firefly luciferase) and the production of toxic oxygen species by activated phagocytes (using luminol or lucigenin as bystander substrates that release light when oxidized). See also bioluminescence.
chemiosmosisA theoretical mechanism (proposed by Mitchell) to explain energy transduction in the mitochondrion. As a general mechanism it is the coupling of one enzyme-catalysed reaction to another using the transmembrane flow of an intermediate species, e.g. cytochrome oxidase pumps protons across the mitochondrial inner membrane and ATP synthesis is ‘driven’ by re-entry of protons through the ATP-synthesizing protein complex. The alternative model is production of a chemical intermediate species, but no compound capable of coupling these reactions has ever been identified and chemiosmosis is generally accepted as being the correct model.
chemoattractionNon-committal description of cellular response to a diffusible chemical – not necessarily by a tactic response. Term preferable to ‘chemotaxis’ when the mechanism is unknown.
chemoautotrophChemotrophic autotroph (chemotroph). Organism in which energy is obtained from endogenous light-independent reactions involving inorganic molecules.
chemodynesisInduction of cytoplasmic streaming in plant cells by chemicals rather than by light (photodynesis).
chemokine receptorsChemokine receptors are G-protein-linked serpentine receptors that, in addition to binding , are used as co-receptors for the binding of immunodeficiency viruses (HIV, SIV, FIV) to leucocytes. They are named according to the class of chemokine that they bind (see 
). CXCR4 (which binds chemokine CXC12) is a co-receptor for T-tropic viruses, CCR5 for macrophage-tropic (M-tropic) viruses. Individuals deficient in particular CCRs seem to be resistant to HIV-1 infection.
chemokinesSmall secreted proteins (~100aa) that stimulate of leucocytes. Chemokines can be subdivided into classes on the basis of conserved cysteine residues. The α-chemokines (IL-8, NAP-2, Gro-α, Gro-γ, ENA-78 and GCP-2) have conserved CXC motif and are mainly chemotactic for neutrophils; the β-chemokines (MCP-1-5, MIP-1α, MIP-1β, eotaxin, RANTES) have adjacent cysteines (CC) and attract monocytes, eosinophils or basophils; the γ-chemokines have only one cysteine pair and are chemotactic for lymphocytes (lymphotactin), the δ-chemokines are structurally rather different being membrane-anchored, have a CXXXC motif and are restricted (so far) to brain (fractalkine). The receptors are G-protein coupled. See .
chemokinesisA response by a motile cell to a soluble chemical that involves an increase or decrease in speed (positive or negative orthokinesis) or of frequency of movement, or a change in the frequency or magnitude of turning behaviour (klinokinesis).
chemolithotrophAlternative name for a .
chemoreceptor
(1) A receptor that binds small molecules and triggers an intracellular signalling system. The term is not usually applied to hormone, neurotransmitter or cytokine receptors. (2) A cell or a group of cells specialized for responding to chemical substances in the environment.
chemorepellantA substance that repels cells and leads to their dispersion rather than their accumulation. The opposite of a chemoattractant.
chemostatApparatus for maintaining a bacterial population in the exponential phase of growth by regulating the input of a rate-limiting nutrient and the removal of medium and cells.
chemosynthesisSynthesis of organic compounds by an organism using energy derived from oxidation
of inorganic molecules rather than light (see and photosynthesis).
chemotacticSee .
chemotaxisA response of motile cells or organisms in which the direction of movement is affected by the gradient of a diffusible substance (chemotactic response). Differs from chemokinesis in that the gradient alters probability of motion in one direction only, rather than rate or frequency of random motion.
chemotherapyTreatment of a disease with drugs that are designed to kill the causative organism or, in the case of tumours, the abnormal cells.
chemotrophySystems of metabolism in which energy is derived from endogenous chemical reactions rather than from food or light-energy, e.g. in deep-sea hot-spring organisms.
chemotropismGrowth or possibly bending of an organism in response to an external chemical gradient. Sometimes used in error when the terms or should have been used. Do not confuse with chemotrophism (see ).
chenodeoxycholic acidA bile acid (chenodesoxycholic acid) synthesized in the liver from cholesterol.
CHFSee .
chi-squared
χ-squared Common statistical test to determine whether the observed values of a variable are significantly different from those expected on the basis of a null hypothesis.
chiasmaJunction points between non-sister at the first diplotene of meiosis, the consequence of a crossing-over event between maternal and paternally derived . A chiasma also serves a mechanical function and is essential for normal equatorial alignment at meiotic metaphase I in many species. Frequency of chiasmata is very variable between species.
chick heart fibroblastsThe cells that emigrate from an explant of embryonic chick heart maintained in culture. Often considered as archetypal normal cell and were used as the ‘normal’ reference cells in the original studies of contact inhibition of locomotion by Abercrombie.
chickenpoxA highly infectious ‘childhood disease’ caused by human herpes virus type 3 (varicella zoster, see Herpesviridae). The virus can remain latent in nervous tissue and may become reactivated as shingles under stress or immunodeficiency.
Chikungunya virusA positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus, an Alphavirus of the Togaviridae family (Buggy Creek virus). Carried by Aedes aegypti and new strains apparently by Aedes albopictus (Tiger mosquito), the virus causes severe flu-like symptoms. The name comes from the Makonde word for ‘that which bends up’, a reference to the positions that victims take to relieve the joint pain. Cases have begun to appear in Europe (2007).
ChilomonasGenus of small cryptomonad flagellate protists, 20–40 μm long.
chimeraOrganism composed of two genetically distinct types of cells. Can be formed by the fusion of two early blastula stage embryos or by the reconstitution of the bone marrow in an irradiated recipient, or by somatic segregation. Since female mammals have one or the other X-chromosome more-or less randomly inactivated they could also be considered chimeric.
chimerins
chimaerins GTPase-activating proteins with high affinity for phorbol esters and diacyl glycerol. N-chimerin (alpha-chimerin, 459aa) may be important in neuronal signal-transduction mechanisms. Found in neurons in brain regions that are involved in learning and memory processes. Mutations in α-chimerin are responsible for Duane retraction syndrome 2. Beta-chimerin (Rho GTPase-activating protein 3, 468aa) is found mostly in the brain and pancreas and expression is much reduced in malignant gliomas.
Chinese hamster ovary cellsCell line (CHO cells) that is often used for growing viruses and for the production of therapeutic proteins. The genome was sequenced in early 2011.
CHIP
(1) A co-chaperone and ubiquitin ligase (C-terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein, STIP1 homology and U box-containing protein 1, EC 6.3.2.-, E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase CHIP, 303aa) that interacts with Hsp70 through an amino-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR motif). Important in protection against physiologic stress. (2) Aquaporin-1 (Aquaporin-CHIP, CHIP-28, 269aa), see aquaporins.
chiral stationary phaseStationary phase for liquid chromatography that has a chiral molecule attached and has differential binding characteristics for enantiomers of molecules passed through the column. Can therefore be used to separate racemic mixtures.
ChironomusGenus of flies (midges). Larvae live in fresh water and have been much studied because of the giant polytene chromosomes in the salivary glands; haemolymph contains haemoglobin in solution.
ChiropteraBats. An Order of flying mammals, mainly insect or fruit-eating and nocturnal.
chitinPolymer (β-1,4 linked) of N-acetyl-D-glucosamine, extensively cross-linked; the major structural component of arthropod exoskeletons and fungal cell walls. Widely distributed in plants and fungi.

chitinaseEnzyme (EC 3.2.1.14) that catalyses the hydrolysis of 1,4-β linkages of chitin. In humans there is a cytoplasmic acidic chitinase (476aa) that may be important in defence against nematodes, fungi and other pathogens and has a role in the inflammatory response. See also . Plants have a range of chitinases that are important in defence against fungi (e.g. in Orzya sativa, Chitinase 1, Class I chitinase α, 323aa).
chitosanA polymer of 1,4-β-D-glucosamine and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine found in the cell wall of some fungi. Can be manufactured by deacetylation of chitin (from crustacean shells) and is sold as a health supplement, although of doubtful value. Is also used as a plant growth enhancer, and boosts the ability of plants to defend themselves against fungal infections.
chitosomeMembrane-bound vesicular organelle (40–70 nm diameter) found in many fungi. Contains chitin synthetase that produces chitin microfibrils that are released and incorporated into the cell wall.
chitotriosidaseIn humans a lysosomal enzyme belonging to the glycosyl hydrolase 18 family, chitinase class II subfamily (chitinase 1, 466aa) that degrades chitin, chitotriose and chitobiose.
chk
(1) See chokh mutant (2) Checkpoint kinases, CHK1 and CHK2. (3) Choline kinases. (4) Carboxyl-terminal Src kinase homologous kinase.
ChlamydiaeA phylum of bacteria, all obligate intracellular parasites. The phylum includes the genus Chlamydia: C. trachomatis causes trachoma in man and and the sexually transmitted infection, chlamydia; C. psittaci causes economically important diseases of poultry. The genome is small, about one-third that of E. coli.
ChlamydomonasA genus of unicellular green algae, usually flagellated. Easily grown in the laboratory and have often been used in studies on flagellar function – a range of paralysed flagellar (pf) mutants have been isolated and studied extensively.
chlamydosporeA type of survival spore produced by several groups of fungi (e.g. Zygomycota and mitosporic fungi), usually as a response to stress. May be formed at an apical or intercalary position and contains dense cytoplasm and storage compounds. The wall may be darkly pigmented.
chloragosomeCytoplasmic granule of unknown function found in the coelomocytes of annelids.
chloramphenicolAn antibiotic from Streptomycetes venezuelae that inhibits protein synthesis in prokaryotes and in mitochondria and chloroplasts by acting on the 50S ribosomal subunit. It is relatively toxic but has a wide spectrum of activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative cocci and bacilli (including anaerobes), Rickettsia, Mycoplasma, and Chlamydia.
chloramphenicol acetyltransferaseEnzyme (CAT, EC 2.3.1.28, 219aa in E. coli) that inactivates the antibiotic by acetylation. Widely used as a reporter gene.
ChlorarachniophytesAmoeboflagellate algae that acquired photosynthesis secondarily by engulfing a green alga and retaining its plastid (chloroplast) which is surrounded by four membranes with a nucleomorph, the reduced algal endosymbiont nucleus, between the plastid inner and outer membrane pairs. Bigelowiella natans is the model species. Article: http://www.pnas.org/content/100/13/7678.full

ChlorellaGenus of green unicellular algae extensively used in studies of photosynthesis.
chlorenchymaForm of parenchyma tissue active in photosynthesis, in which the cells contain many ; found especially in leaf mesophyll.
chlorhexidineAntiseptic and disinfectant that is used for dressing minor skin wounds or burns.
chloride channels
Ion channels selective for chloride ions. Various types including ligand-gated Cl-channels at synapses (the GABA- and glycine-activated channels), as well as voltage-gated Cl-channels found in a variety of plant and animal cells. The voltage-gated channels (ClCs) are produced by a single protein with 10–12 transmembrane domains. The ClC channel family contains both chloride channels and proton-coupled anion transporters that exchange chloride or another anion for protons. ClC-1 (CLCN1, 988aa) is involved in setting and restoring the resting membrane potential of skeletal muscle and is defective in various kinds of myotonia congenita. See also , MDR. Chloride channels can be blocked by other anions (I−, Br−, or SO4
2−), small compounds (e.g. niflumic acid) and some toxins ( , picrotoxin).
chloride currentFlow of chloride ions through chloride-selective ion channels.
chloride intracellular channel proteinsA family of proteins (CLIC proteins, ~240–250aa) expressed in a wide variety of tissues that may have diverse functions in addition to their role as chloride channels. Channel activity depends on the pH. They are expressed in the nucleus and in cytoplasmic locations. CLIC1 (241aa) is primarily expressed in the nucleus, CLIC4 (253aa) and CLIC5 (410aa) interact with the cortical actin cytoskeleton. Members of the family include parchorin, bovine p64.
ChlorobiA phylum of obligately anaerobic photoautotrophic bacteria, green sulphur bacteria, which use sulphite as an electron donor in photosynthesis. The ‘model organism’ is Chlorobium tepidum.

chlorocruorinA green respiratory pigment found in some Polychaeta. The prosthetic group is similar, but not identical, to reduced haematin.
ChloroflexiA phylum of bacteria that includes the class Chloroflexi, green non-sulphur bacteria which have green pigment in photosynthetic bodies called chlorosomes. It has recently been suggested that the phylum Thermomicrobia (a group of thermophilic green non-sulphur bacteria) should be considered as a class within the phylum Chloroflexi.
chloronemaSee .
chlorophyllThe photosynthetic pigment, a porphyrin with an associated magnesium atom, closely related to bacteriochlorophylls. Chlorophyll a is ubiquitous, chlorophyll b is found in most plants, chlorophylls c1 and c2 are found in various algae and chlorophyll d is found in Cyanobacteria. Core antenna complexes bind chlorophyll a, while apoproteins of peripheral antenna complexes bind both chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b. During leaf senescence, chlorophyll (chl) is degraded to colourless linear tetrapyrroles, termed nonfluorescent chlorophyll catabolites. In two subsequent reactions catalyzed by and Mg dechelatase, respectively, phytol and the central Mg atom are removed. Then the ring structure of pheophorbide (pheide) a is oxygenolytically opened by pheophorbide a oxygenase to produce red chlorophyll catabolite (RCC), which is rapidly converted to a primary fluorescent chlorophyll catabolite (pFCC).
chlorophyllasesEnzymes that begin the degradation of . Chlorophyllase 1 (EC 3.1.1.14, 324aa) hydrolyses an ester bond in chlorophyll a to yield chlorophyllide and phytol and is induced by methyl jasmonate. Chlorophyllase 2 (318aa) is similar in function but constitutively present.
chlorophyllide a oxygenaseThe chloroplast enzyme (CAO, EC 1.13.12.14, 536aa) that is involved in chlorophyll b biosynthesis, acting specifically on non-esterified chlorophyllide a. Chlorophyll b synthesis is partly regulated on a transcriptional level by the expression of the CAO gene and partly by the stability of the CAO enzyme.
ChlorophytaGreen algae. Division of algae containing photosynthetic pigments similar to those in higher plants and having a green colour. Includes unicellular forms, filaments and leaf-like thalluses (e.g. Ulva). Some members form , and the have branched filaments.
chloroplastPhotosynthetic organelle of higher plants. Lens-shaped and rather variable in size but approximately 5 μm long. Surrounded by a double membrane and contains circular DNA (though not enough to code for all proteins in the chloroplast). Like the mitochondrion, it is semi-autonomous. It resembles a cyanobacterium from which, on the endosymbiont hypothesis, it might be derived. The photosynthetic pigment, chlorophyll, is associated with the membrane of vesicles (thylakoids) that are stacked to form grana.
chloroquineAntimalarial drug that has the interesting property of increasing the pH within the lysosome when added to intact cells in culture. Chloroquine resistance seems to be due to enhanced ABC transporter activity (Plasmodium falciparum Chloroquine Resistance Transporter) that pumps chloroquine from the cell. Also used to treat some autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and SLE.
chlorosisYellowing or bleaching of plant tissues due to the loss of chlorophyll or failure of chlorophyll synthesis. Symptomatic of many plant diseases, also of deficiencies of light or certain nutrients.
chlorosomeElongated membranous vesicles attached to the plasma membrane of green photosynthetic bacteria; contain the light-harvesting antenna complexes of bacteria in the sub-Order Chlorobiineae. Pigments include bacteriochlorophylls and carotenoids.
chlorotoxinA peptide (36aa) in the venom of the scorpion, Leiurus quinquestriatus that blocks small-conductance chloride channels of epithelial cells.
chlorpromazineNeuroleptic aliphatic phenothiazine, thought to act primarily as dopamine antagonist, but also antagonist at α-adrenergic, H1 histamine, muscarinic and serotonin receptors. Used clinically as an anti-emetic. Has been shown to alter fibroblast behaviour.
CHMPsCharged multivesicular body proteins (CHMPs), for example charged multivesicular body protein 1b (CHMP1.5, chromatin-modifying protein 1b, vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 46-2, 199aa). Some (CHMP2, 3, 4 & 6) are components of the ESCRT complex, homologues of yeast Class E VPS proteins.
choanocytesCells (collar cells) that line the radial canals of sponges. Have long flagella that are responsible for generating the feeding current.
choanoflagellatesA group of flagellate protozoa that may be ancestors of sponges. Each has a single flagellum, surrounded by a ring of microvilli, forming a cylindrical or conical collar that capture prey drawn in by the water current generated by the flagellum. Usually sessile, being attached at the opposite pole to the flagellum, and in some cases are colonial. Resemble the of sponges.
chocolate agarA non-selective, enriched growth medium used for growing fastidious respiratory bacteria, such as Haemophilus influenzae. It contains red blood cells, lysed by heating very slowly to 56°C, and does not contain chocolate.
chokh mutantMutant zebrafish that lacks eyes from the earliest stages in development; the chk gene encodes the homeodomain-containing transcription factor, Rx3 (Retinal homeobox protein, 292aa) that is important in eye development.
cholangiocarcinomaMalignant tumours derived from the epithelium of the biliary duct system of the liver ( ). Most (90%) are adenocarcinomas, and the remainder are squamous cell tumours.
cholangiocyteEpithelial cells that line the bile ducts. Form an important transporting epithelium actively involved in the absorption and secretion of water, ions, and solutes. Can give rise to .
cholateThe sodium salt of cholic acid, that has strong detergent properties and can replace membrane lipids to generate soluble complexes of membrane proteins.
cholecalcinSee .
cholecystokininPolypeptide hormone (CCK, pancreozymin, 58aa and 33aa) secreted by I-cells of the duodenum. Stimulates secretion of digestive enzymes by the pancreas and contraction of the gall bladder. The C-terminal octapeptide is found in some dorsal root ganglion neurons where it presumably acts as a peptide neurotransmitter. The receptors are G-protein coupled (CCK-AR, 428aa; CCK-BR, 447aa).
choleraAn acute bacterial infection by Vibrio cholerae that causes severe vomiting and diarrhoea leading to dehydration, often fatal. Many of the effect are the result of acting on intestinal epithelial cells and causing hypersecretion of chloride and bicarbonate followed by water.
cholera toxinAn AB toxin from Vibrio cholerae, the bacterium responsible for cholera. The toxic A subunit (EC 2.4.2.36, 258aa) irreversibly activates adenyl cyclase by ADP-ribosylation of a Gs protein. The B subunit (124aa) has five identical monomers, binds to GM1 ganglioside and facilitates passage of the A subunit across the cell membrane.
cholesterolThe major sterol of higher animals and an important component of cell membranes, in which it has a buffering effect on fluidity. Synthesized in the liver (see HMG-CoA reductase) and transported in the esterified form by plasma lipoproteins.
cholesterol binding toxinsFamily of pore-forming toxins (~500aa) from various genera of bacteria including Streptococcus, Listeria, Bacillus and Clostridium. Apparently bind to cholesterol and oligomerise to form a pore (20–50 nm depending on concentration of toxin): as a result cause cell lysis and are lethal. See Streptolysin O. Other examples include Pneumolysin from S. pneumoniae, Cereolysin O from Bacillus cereus, Thuringolysin O from B. thuringiensis, Tetanolysin from Clostridium tetani, Botulinolysin from C. botulinum, Perfringolysin O from C. perfringens, Listeriolysin O from L. monocytogenes.

cholesteryl ester transfer protein
A phospholipid transfer protein (lipid transfer protein I, 493aa) that facilitates transport of phospholipids between lipoprotein particles. Deficiencies in the protein do not seem to have particularly deleterious effects. A member of the BPI/LBP/Plunc superfamily.
cholic acidA major bile acid with strong detergent properties. It can be used to solubilize membrane proteins.
cholineA saturated amine that is esterified in the head group of phospholipids (phosphatidyl choline and sphingomyelin) and acetylated in the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Otherwise a biological source of methyl groups.
choline acetyltransferaseThe enzyme that catalyzes the formation of acetylcholine from acetyl CoA and choline (choline acetylase, EC 2.3.1.6, 748aa). Defects cause congenital myasthenic syndrome with episodic apnea.
choline kinasesEnzymes (EC 2.7.1.32, CHKa, 457aa; CHKb, 395aa) that catalyze the phosphorylation of choline to phosphocholine in the biosynthesis of phosphatidylcholine (PC).
cholinergic neuronsNeurons in which acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter.
chondroblastEmbryonic cartilage-producing cell.
chondrocalcinA calcium-binding peptide (246aa) cleaved from alpha-1 type II collagen by ADAMTS3, found in developing cartilage and in growth plate cartilage. It appears to play a role in enchondral ossification.
chondrocyteDifferentiated cell responsible for secretion of extracellular matrix of .
chondrodysplasiaA clinically and genetically diverse group of bone growth disorders. Mutations in various genes cause distinct forms and include those encoding cartilage-derived morphogenetic factor-1, parathyroid hormone receptor, collagen COL10A1, mitochondrial RNA-processing endoribonuclease, emopamil-binding protein and arylsulfatase E. Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata can be caused by mutations in the PEX7 gene, which encodes the peroxisomal type two targeting signal (PTS2) receptor.

chondroitin sulphatesMajor components of the extracellular matrix and connective tissue of animals. They are repeating polymers of glucuronic acid and sulphated N-acetyl glucosamine residues that are highly hydrophilic and anionic. Found in association with proteins. ‘Chondroitin’ is sold as a dietary supplement to relieve osteoarthritis, but the evidence for efficacy is minimal.
chondronectinA 180 kDa homotrimeric protein (subunits 55 kDa) isolated from chick serum that specifically favours attachment of to Type II if present with the appropriate cartilage proteoglycan. Structurally and chemically distinct from fibronectin and laminin. Not in recent literature. Original report: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1003606/pdf/annrheumd00420-0005.pdf

chondrosarcomaA malignant tumour (sarcoma) derived from chondrocytes.
CHOPA nuclear protein (C/EBP homologous protein 10, DNA damage-inducible transcript 3, GADD153, 169aa) that is a dominant-negative inhibitor of the transcription factors C/EBP and LAP (liver activator protein).
CHORD domainA zinc-binding 60aa domain (cysteine and histidine rich domain) with uniquely spaced cysteine and histidine residues, highly conserved from plants to mammals. CHORD domain-containing protein 1 (cysteine and histidine-rich domain-containing protein 1, chp1, 332aa) may regulate NOD1 (see NOD proteins) through an interaction with HSP90AA1. See melusin.
chordamesodermEmbryonic mesoderm that gives rise to the notochord.
chordinDorsalizing factor (955aa) that binds to the ventralizing TGFβ family of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) during embryogenesis and antagonises their effects during development. In adults, the differential distribution and regulation of chordin in normal and osteoarthritic cartilage and chondrocytes suggests an involvement in osteoarthritis. Also found in other tissues.
chordomaA rare slow-growing primary bone cancer in the skull and spinal column derived from notochord remnants.
chordotonal organsInsect sense organs that are sensitive to pressure, vibrations and sound.
choreaInvoluntary repetitive jerky movements of the body. Seen in a number of neurological diseases including Sydenham’s chorea (or Saint Vitus’s dance) and Huntington’s chorea.
chorioallantoic membrane
(1) Protective membrane around the eggs of insects and fishes. (2) Extra-embryonic membrane surrounding the embryo of amniote vertebrates. The outer epithelial layer of the chorion is derived from the trophoblast, by the apposition of the allantois to the inner face of the . The chorioallantoic membrane is highly vascularized, and is used experimentally as a site upon which to place pieces of tissue in order to test their invasive capacity.
choriocapillarisThe vascular layer immediately adjacent to Bruch’s membrane in the choroid of the eye. Development: http://www.nature.com/eye/journal/v24/n3/full/eye2009318a.html

choriocarcinomaMalignant tumour of trophoblast.
chorion
(1) Protective membrane around the eggs of insects and fishes. (2) Extra-embryonic membrane surrounding the embryo of amniote vertebrates. The outer epithelial layer of the chorion is derived from the trophoblast, the inner from somatic mesoderm. See . (3)
Cf.
 .
chorionic gonadotrophinA heterodimeric glycoprotein hormone (chorionic gonadotropin) with an alpha subunit identical to that of luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and a unique beta subunit (165aa). Synthesized in the placenta it promotes the maintenance of the during the beginning of pregnancy causing it to secrete progesterone; will also stimulate Leydig cells to synthesize testosterone.
chorionic villus samplingMethod for diagnosing human fetal abnormalities in the sixth to tenth week of gestation. Small pieces of fetally derived chorionic villi are removed for chromosomal analysis and, increasingly, for DNA-based testing for disease-associated alleles.
choroidMiddle layer of the vertebrate eye, between retina and sclera. Well vascularized and also pigmented to throw light back onto the retina (the tapetum is an iridescent layer in the choroid of some eyes). Not to be confused with the .
choroid plexusA highly vascularized region of the roof of the ventricles of the vertebrate brain that secretes cerebrospinal fluid.
choroideremiaA disorder (tapetochoroidal dystrophy) in which there is degeneration of the choriocapillaris, the retinal pigment epithelium, and the photoreceptors of the eye. It is caused by mutation in the gene encoding rab escort protein-1 (653aa) which is involved in membrane trafficking.
chp
(1) Calcineurin homologous protein (calcium-binding protein p22, CHP, 195aa) required for constitutive membrane traffic. It inhibits GTPase-stimulated Na+/H+ exchange and calcineurin phosphatase activity. (2) CHORD domain-containing protein 1, chp1.
Christ-Siemens-Touraine syndromeSee hypohidrosis.

Christmas diseaseCongenital deficiency of blood-clotting factor IX (first described in a patient called Stephen Christmas and reported in the Christmas issue of British Medical J., 1952). Inherited in similar sex-linked way to classical haemophilia.
chromaffin cellsCells of the chromaffin tissue in the adrenal medulla that produce either adrenaline or noradrenaline (not both). The are associated with carrier proteins (chromogranins) in membrane vesicles (chromaffin granules). See granins. A chromaffinoma (phaeochromocytoma) is a tumour derived from chromaffin cells.
chromagenAny substance that can give rise to a coloured product when appropriately modified by, for example, an enzyme or the products of enzymic activity.
chromatic aberrationDistortions in an optical system as a result of different wave-lengths (colours) being brought to a focus at slightly different points. Good microscope objectives are corrected for this at two wave-lengths (achromats) or at three wave-lengths (apochromats), as well as for spherical aberration.
chromatidSingle chromosome containing only one DNA duplex. Two daughter chromatids become visible at mitotic metaphase, though they are present throughout G2.
chromatinStainable material of interphase nucleus consisting of nucleic acid and associated histone protein packed into nucleosomes. Euchromatin is loosely packed and accessible to RNA polymerases, whereas heterochromatin is highly condensed and probably transcriptionally inactive.
chromatin assembly factorHeterotrimeric protein complex that couples DNA replication to histone deposition in vitro, but is not essential for yeast cell proliferation. Depletion of CAF-1 in human cell lines demonstrates that CAF-1 is, however, required for efficient progression through S-phase. Has been used as a marker of the proliferative state because the expression of both CAF-1A and CAF-1B, is massively down-regulated during quiescence in several cell lines. The CAF-1 complex comprises CAF1A (CHAF1A, 956aa), CAF1B (CHAF1B, 559aa) and CAF1C (histone-binding protein RBBP4, retinoblastoma-binding protein 4, RBBP4, 425aa) is responsible for assembling histone octamers. During mitosis CAF1B becomes hyperphosphorylated and is displaced into the cytosol and during G- through S and into G2 it is progressively dephosphorylated. N.B. CAF-1 is also the name for CCR4-NOT transcription complex subunit seven.
chromatin bodyBarr body; condensed X chromosome in female mammalian cells.
chromatographyTechniques for separating molecules based on differential absorption and elution. A mixture is passed though a non-mobile matrix (paper in early methods, beads of resin or gel in more modern methods) and different elements are retained for differing times, sometimes very briefly because they are excluded from part of the matrix (size-exclusion chromatography), sometime until the ionic conditions are changed as eluent is passed down the column.
chromatophores
(1) Pigment-containing cells of the dermis, particularly in teleosts and amphibians. By controlling the intracellular distribution of pigment granules the animal can blend with the background.; when dispersed the colour is obvious, when condensed the effect is minimised. Melanocytes and melanophores are melanin-containing chromatophores. (2) Term occasionally used for chloroplasts in the chromophyte algae.
Chromobacterium viscosumSource of lipase B which seems to be identical to Burkholderia glumae (Pseudomonas glumae) lipase (triacylglycerol hydrolase, EC 3.1.1.3, 358aa). C. violaceum produces a purple pigment, violacein, that has antibiotic-like properties. Genus related to Neisseria. Reference: http://www.uniprot.org/citations/7786905

chromobindinSee annexin.
chromoblastAn embryonic cell that will differentiate into a .
chromobox proteinsA family of highly conserved adapter proteins characterized by an N-terminal and a C-terminal chromoshadow domain, separated by a hinge region. They are involved in heterochromatin packaging and are enriched at the centromeres and telomeres. Chromobox protein homologue 1 (CBX1, heterochromatin protein 1 homologue beta, 185aa) binds histone H3 tails that are methylated at Lys-9; chromobox protein homologue 2 (CBX2, 532aa) is a component of the polycomb repressive complex-1 (PRC1). Chromobox protein homologue 3 (CBX3, 183aa) also binds methylated histone H3 and is involved in the formation of a functional kinetochore through interaction with MIS12 complex proteins. Chromobox protein homologue 4 (CBX4, E3 SUMO-protein ligase, 558aa) facilitates SUMO1 conjugation by UBE2I and is a component of PRC1. At least 4 other chromobox protein homologues are known.
chromocentreCondensed heterochromatic region of a chromosome that stains particularly strongly although in the polytene chromosomes of Drosophila the chromocentre is of under-replicated heterochromatin and stains lightly.
chromodomainsChromatin Organization Modifier Domains, domains of ~50–60aa found in many proteins that are involved in chromatin remodeling and regulation of the gene expression in eukaryotes. First recognised in the Drosophila chromatin proteins HP1 and Polycomb. They are implicated in the recognition of lysine-methylated histone tails and nucleic acids. CHD (for chromo-ATPase/helicase-DNA-binding) proteins regulate ATP-dependent nucleosome assembly and mobilization through their conserved double chromodomains. See . Chromodomain database: http://www.uib.no/aasland/chromo/Chromo-table.html

chromograninsSee chromaffin tissue and granins.
chromomereGranular region of condensed . Used of chromosomes at leptotene and zygotene stages of meiosis, of the condensed regions at the base of loops on lampbrush chromosomes, and of condensed bands in polytene chromosomes of Diptera.
chromophoreThe part of a visibly coloured molecule responsible for light absorption over a range of wavelengths thus giving rise to the colour. By extension the term may be applied to UV or IR absorbing parts of molecules. Do not confuse with .
chromophore-assisted laser inactivationA method of disrupting intracellular elements; the target protein is expressed as a fusion protein with a chromophore (e.g. GFP) and the cellular region of interest illuminated with a tightly-focussed laser beam. The local release of reactive oxygen species inactivates proteins within about 5 nm of the fusion protein.
chromoplastPlant chromatophore filled with red/orange or yellow carotenoid pigment. Responsible for colour of carrots and of many petals.
chromoshadow domainDomain (40–70aa) found in some that mediates dimerization, transcription repression, and interaction with multiple nuclear proteins. Related to the , and found in proteins that also have a classical chromo domain. Chromodomain-containing proteins can be divided into two classes depending on the presence, e.g. in Drosophila
HP1, or absence, e.g. Drosophila
Polycomb (Pc), of the chromoshadow domain.
chromosomal passenger complexA multiprotein complex that acts as a key regulator of mitosis, ensures correct chromosome alignment and segregation and is required for chromatin-induced microtubule stabilization and spindle assembly. The components are Aurora B kinase, inner centromere protein (INCENP), borealin and survivin (BIRC5).
chromosomeA DNA duplex associated with proteins that is part of the DNA complement of the cell. In eukaryotes the DNA is subdivided into variable numbers of linear chromosomes, presumably for convenience of handling, the proteins include histones; in prokaryotes the chromosome is circular and not associated with histones. In eukaryotes the chromosomes (which are replicated into two chromatids during S phase) become more tightly packed at mitosis and become aligned on the metaphase plate. Each chromosome has a characteristic length and banding pattern. See C banding, G banding.
chromosome condensationThe tight packing of in metaphase, in preparation for nuclear division.
chromosome mapThe sequence of genes along a chromosome, originally based upon the probability of recombination between loci (see genetic linkage), but direct mapping is possible with fluorescence in situ hybridisation (see FISH).
chromosome paintingSee fluorescence
in situ
hybridization.
chromosome segregationThe orderly separation of one copy of each chromosome into each daughter cell at mitosis.
chromosome synapsisThe close apposition of homologous chromosomes before cell division, or permanently in giant polytene chromosomes.
chromosome translocationThe fusion of part of one chromosome onto part of another. Largely sporadic and random, there are some translocations at ‘hot-spots’ that occur often enough to be clinically significant. See Philadelphia chromosome and spectral karyotyping.
chromosome walkingA procedure to find and sequence a gene whose approximate position in a chromosome is known by classical genetic linkage studies. Starting with the known sequence of a gene shown by classical genetics to be near to the novel gene, new clones are picked from a genomic library by hybridization with a short probe generated from the appropriate end of the known sequence. The new clones are then sequenced, new probes generated, and the process repeated until the gene of interest is reached.
chronaxieThe shortest time required for excitation of a nerve when the electrical stimulus is twice the threshold intensity required to elicit a response if applied over a prolonged period.
chronicPersistent, long-lasting (as opposed to acute). Chronic inflammation is generally a response to a persistant antigenic stimulus.
chronic fatigue syndromeSee myalgic encephalomyelitis.

chronic granulomatous diseaseDisease, usually fatal in childhood, in which the production of hydrogen peroxide by phagocytes does not occur. Catalase-negative bacteria are not killed and there is no luminol-enhanced when the cells are tested. The absence of the oxygen-dependent killing mechanism is not itself fatal but seriously compromises the primary defence system. At least three separate lesions can cause the syndrome, the commonest being an X-linked defect in plasma membrane cytochrome (see p91-phox).
chronic lymphocytic leukaemiaSee leukaemia.
chronic myelogenous leukaemiaSee leukaemia.
chronic wasting diseaseA transmissible spongiform encephalopathy that affects cervids (deer).
chronospeciesA species that has diverged from the ancestral form by small continuous changes so that it no longer resembles the original either morphologically or genetically. It represents a form of evolution that is distinct from speciation by divergence in which an isolated subset of a species changes its characteristics to the point at which it cannot interbreed with the other subset and is recognised as a separate species.
ChrysiogenetesA bacterial phylum containing only a single species, Chrysiogenes arsenatis, which uses arsenate as its electron donor and can survive in arsenic-contaminated environments. Some selenate-respiring bacteria may also fall within this phylum. Description of selenate-respiring forms: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17435005

chrysolaminarinA modified laminarin found as a food reserve in Chrysophyceae.
ChrysophyceaeA Class of eukaryotic algae in the division Heterokontophyta. Golden-brown in colour due to high levels of the xanthophyll, fucoxanthin. Mostly found in fresh water and are single-celled or colonial. Also called Chrysomonadida by protozoologists.
CHUKKinase (conserved helix-loop-helix ubiquitous kinase, IκB kinase 1, IκBKA, EC 2.7.11.10, 745aa), a component of the IkappaB-kinase (IKK) core complex which consists of CHUK, IKBKB and IKBKG and is responsible for phosphorylation of IkappaB which dissociates from NFκB, allowing NFκB to move to the nucleus: the phosphorylated IκB is eventually degraded.
Churg-Strauss syndrome
allergic granulomatosis
ANCA-associated vasculitis, affecting mostly small blood vessels, in which there is no complement consumption and no deposition of immune complexes.
CHX
(1) Cycloheximide. (2) Chlorhexidine.
chylomicronColloidal fat globule found in blood or lymph; used to transport fat from the intestine to the liver or to adipose tissue. Has a very low density, a low protein and high triacylglyceride content.
chylomicron retention diseaseSee Anderson’s disease.
chymaseCathepsin G-like, serine peptidase, (EC 3.4.21.39, mast cell protease, 247aa) secreted by mast cells, that plays an important role in generating angiotensin II in response to injury of vascular tissues, and converts big endothelin 1 to the 31aa peptide endothelin1. chymosin Aspartic peptidase (EC 3.4.23.4, preprorennin, 381aa) from the abomasum (fourth stomach) of calf (Bos taurus) that has properties similar to pepsin. Will cleave casein to paracasein and is used in cheesemaking.
chymostatinLow molecular weight peptide-fatty acid compound of microbial origin that inhibits and papain.
chymotrypsinA secreted serine peptidase from pancreas that preferentially hydrolyzes Phe, Tyr, or Trp peptide and ester bonds. The chymotrypsin-family of peptidases are all endopeptidases. In humans chymotrypsinogen B (EC 3.4.21.1), is cleaved into chymotrypsin B-chain A (13aa), -chain B (131aa) and -chain C (97aa). Chymotrypsin-C (EC 3.4.21., caldecrin, 268aa) has chymotrypsin-type peptidase activity and hypocalcaemic activity. Chymotrypsin-like elastase family member 3B (EC 3.4.21.70, 270aa) preferentially cleaves Ala-|-Xaa and does not hydrolyze elastin. Various chymotrypsin inhibitors are known from a variety of plants (e.g. subtilisin-chymotrypsin inhibitor-2A, 84aa, from barley) and from the common earthworm (Lumbricus terrestris chymotrypsin inhibitor, 86aa).
chytridMember of the .
ChytridiomycotaThe only major group of true (chitin-walled) fungi that produce zoospores. Common as saprotrophs, facultative parasites and obligate parasites in moist soil and freshwater habitats. Chemotaxis of the rumen chytrid Neocallimastix frontalis has been extensively studied. Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis is capable of causing sporadic deaths in some amphibian populations and 100% mortality in others.
ciboulotG-actin binding protein (isoform A, 129aa; isoform C, 97aa) from Drosophila; plays a major role in axonal growth during brain metamorphosis. Has three thymosin-like (WH2) repeats and binds to G-actin in the same way as profilin and the complex can add to the barbed but not the pointed end of an F actin filament.
cicatrisationContraction of fibrous tissue, formed at a wound site, by fibroblasts, thereby reducing the size of the wound but causing tissue distortion and disfigurement. Once thought to be due to contraction of collagen but now known to be due to cellular activity.
Cicer arietinumChickpea, an important grain-legume in tropical and sub-tropical regions. Two main forms are cultivated, desi types (small seeds, angular shape, and coloured seeds with a high percentage of fibre) and kabuli types (large seeds, ram-head shape, beige coloured seeds with a low percentage of fibre). Not to be confused with chickling peas (Lathyrus sativus). Article: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/8/106#B3

ciclosporin
cyclosporine
BAN for cyclosporine, a cyclic undecapeptide isolated from Beauveria nivea (Tolypocladium inflatum), peptide drug used as an immunosuppressive to prevent transplant rejection. It binds to cyclophilin in T-cells and the complex inhibits and blocks the production of various cytokines, particularly interleukin-2, thus inhibiting cell-mediated immune responses. Can cause renal damage and the long-term consequences of suppressing immune function are not yet clear.
CIGCold insoluble globulin, an obsolete early name for fibronectin.
ciguatoxinA large, heat stable, polyether toxin produced by certain strains of the dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus toxicus. The toxin can accumulate in large, predatory fish and is responsible for the poisoning syndrome known as ciguatera; activates neuromuscular sodium channels. More information: http://www.cdc.gov/nczved/divisions/dfbmd/diseases/marine_toxins/

ciliary bodyThe circumferential tissue in the eye that includes the muscles that act on the eye lens to produce accommodation and the arterial circle of the iris. The ciliary body is covered by inner ciliary epithelium, continuous with the pigmented retinal epithelium, and the outer ciliary epithelium which secretes the aqueous humour.
ciliary ganglionNeural crest-derived ganglion acting as relay between parasympathetic neurons of the oculomotor nucleus in the midbrain and the muscles regulating the diameter of the pupil of the eye.
ciliary neurotrophic factorNeurotrophin (CNTF, 200aa) originally characterized as a survival factor for chick ciliary neurons in vitro. Subsequently shown to promote the survival of a variety of other neuronal cell types, and to promote the differentiation of bipotential O-2A progenitor cells to type-2 astrocytes
in vitro. Now considered to be one of the IL-6 cytokine family since it acts through a receptor containing gp130.
ciliary proteomeAn open source of ciliary and basal body proteomics data. Ciliary Proteome Web Server at http://www.ciliaproteome.org/

ciliataClass of Protozoa all of which have cilia at some stage of the life cycle, and that usually have a meganucleus.
cilium
Pl. cilia Motile appendage of eukaryotic cells that contains an axoneme, a bundle of microtubules arranged in a characteristic fashion with nine outer doublets and a central pair (‘9+2’ arrangement). Active sliding of doublets relative to one another generates curvature, and the asymmetric stroke of the cilium drives fluid in one direction (or the cell in the other direction).
CIN85An adaptor protein (Cbl-interacting protein of 85 kDa, SH3 domain-containing kinase-binding protein 1, 665aa) involved in different cellular functions including the down-regulation of activated receptor tyrosine kinases and survival of neuronal cells. Cbl (ubiquitin ligase) binds to the activated receptor, further binding of the CIN85/endophilin complex leads to clathrin-mediated internalisation. Has three Src homology 3 (SH3) domains, a proline-rich region (PRR), and a coiled-coil domain.
CINCIn rat Cinc1 is CXC chemokine-1 (growth-regulated alpha protein, 96aa) which has chemotactic activity for neutrophils and contributes to their activation during inflammation. Cinc2 (CXC-3, 100aa) is the homologue of MIP2, Cinc3 (CXC-2, 101aa) of MIP2α.
CINCAA rare congenital inflammatory disorder (chronic infantile neurologic cutaneous and articular syndrome, neonatal onset multisystem inflammatory disease, NOMID) caused by mutations in .
cinchocaine
dibucaine Long-lasting local anaesthetic.
cingulinRod-shaped dimeric protein (1197aa) found in cytoplasmic domain of vertebrate tight junctions. Contains globular and coiled-coil domains and interacts in vitro with several tight junction and cytoskeletal proteins, including the PDZ protein ZO-1. GEF-H1/Lfc, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for RhoA, directly interacts with cingulin. Cingulin-like protein 1 (CGNL1, paracingulin, 1302aa) may anchor tight junctions of the apical junctional complex to the actin cytoskeleton.
cinnamycinSee duramycin.
CIP/KIPA family (p21, p27, p57) of inhibitors (CKI) targeting CDK2.
circadian rhythmRegular cycle of behaviour with a period of approximately 24 hours. In most animals the endogenous periodicity, which may be of longer or shorter duration, is entrained to 24 h by environmental cues (zeitgebers), often light (see
 ). The biochemical basis is complex and involves oscillations in transcription regulated by positive and negative inputs. See period, and timeless. Dictionary of circadian physiology: http://www.circadian.org/dictionary.html#N86

circular dichroismDifferential absorption of right-hand and left-hand circularly polarized light resulting from molecular asymmetry involving a chromophore group. CD is used to study the conformation of proteins in solution. Cf.
linear dichroism.
circular DNADNA arranged as a closed circle. This brings serious topological problems for replication that are solved with DNA topoisomerase. Characteristic of prokaryotes but also found in mitochondria, chloroplasts and some viral genomes.
cirrus
Pl. cirri Large motor organelle of hypotrich ciliates: formed from fused cilia.
CISCytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (Protein G18, suppressor of cytokine signalling, 258aa) product of a gene activated by cytokine signals, part of the SOCS negative feedback system.
cis-activationActivation induced by something on the same cell or on the same chromosome. For example, the activation of a gene by an activator binding upstream on the same chromosome rather than by a diffusible product. Cis-activation of adhesion molecules can occur through protein-protein contacts in the plane of the membrane but not if the two molecules are in different cells. Cf. transactivation.
cis-dominanceA term applied to the situation in which a gene or promoter affects only gene activity in the DNA duplex molecule in which it is placed, as opposed to trans effects when a gene or promoter on one DNA molecule can affect genes on another DNA molecule. Cis-dominance is seen only when the appropriate pair or set of genes are all cis to each other.
cis-golgiSee Golgi apparatus.
cis-regulatory modulesShort stretches of DNA that help regulate gene expression in higher eukaryotes. They may be up to 1 megabase away from the genes they regulate and can be located upstream, downstream, and even within their target genes.
cis-trans testThe complementation test with two or more interacting genes placed in cis and in trans relationships to each other. A double mutant genome is used in the cis test, the recombination product of the two single mutant genomes used in the trans test. If the wild type phenotype is restored by both cis and trans arrangements it is concluded that the two mutations are in different genes and hence that the phenotype is determined by more than one gene. If the trans test is negative and the cis positive this means that the two mutations are in the same gene. If both tests are negative then at least one of the mutations must be dominant. Thus the double test provides a means of fine mapping of genes.
CISDSee .
cisplatinCytotoxic drug used in tumour chemotherapy. Binds to DNA and forms platinum-nitrogen bonds with adjacent guanines.
cisternaeMembrane-bounded saccules of the smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Operationally might almost be considered as an extra-cytoplasmic compartment since substances in the cisternal space will eventually be released to the exterior.
cisternal stackThe dispersed Golgi in plants.
cistronA genetic element defined by means of the cis-trans
 test for functional allelism; broadly equivalent to the sequence of DNA that codes for one polypeptide chain, including adjacent control regions.
citric acid cycleAlso known as tricarboxylic acid cycle or Krebs’ cycle.
Citrobacter freundiiA Gram-negative, facultatively anaerobic, rod-shaped member of the family Enterobacteriaceae; often the cause of significant opportunistic infections. C. freundii has also been associated with neonatal meningitis. Another species, Citrobacter koseri (formerly C. diversus) is responsible for urinary tract infections but can also cause meningitis.
citrullineAn α-amino acid not found in proteins. L-citrulline is an intermediate in the urea cycle.
Citrus tristeza virusA virus of the family Closteroviridae, that affects citrus trees and has had a major economic impact.
CJDSee .
CKIsSee .
CLA
(1) Conjugated linoleic acid. (2) Cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen.
cladisticsA method of classifying organisms into groups (taxa) based on ‘recency of common descent’, i.e. evolutionary relationship. Members of a clade possess shared derived characteristics.
cladogenesisSee anagenesis.
cladogramA branching diagram (dendrogram) showing the relationships between groups of organisms determined by the methods of .
clamp connectionIn many basidiomycete fungi a short lateral branch of a binucleate cell develops. This is the developing clamp connection. One of the nuclei migrates into it. Both nuclei then undergo simultaneous mitosis so that one end of the cell contains two daughter nuclei from each of the parental nuclei. The nucleus in the branch and the two nuclei are separated off from the centre of the cell by septa. A single nucleus remains in the central region. The clamp connection then extends towards and fuses with the central section so that a binucleate cell is reformed.
clans of peptidasesIn the MEROPS peptidase database, ‘clans’ are composed of peptidases that can be grouped on the basis of evolutionary relationship. Many clans contain peptidases of only a single family (e.g. serine peptidases in Clan SB which contains subtilisin Carlsberg, S8 and sedolisin, S53) but others, designated ‘P’ have members with mixed catalytic sites (e.g. Clan PC contains both cysteine and serine peptidases).
Clara cellsThe main epithelial cell type in small airways; play an important physiological role in surfactant production, protection against environmental agents, regulation of inflammatory and immune responses in the respiratory system. See .
clarinsA family of small integral membrane glycoproteins (clarin-1, Usher syndrome type-3 protein, 232aa; clarin-2, 232aa; clarin-3, transmembrane protein 12, Usher syndrome type-3A-like protein 1, 226aa) that may have a role in the excitory ribbon synapse junctions between hair cells and cochlear ganglion cells. Clarins belong to the hyperfamily of membrane proteins with 4 transmembrane domains (tetraspanins) that includes and . There is some sequence similarity to stargazin.
CLARPCaspase-like apoptosis regulatory protein (CASP8 and FADD-like apoptosis regulator, 480aa); does not have enzyme activity.
CLASP familyA family of proteins (ORBIT/MAST/CLASP family) that are associated with the plus ends of microtubules, where they promote the addition of tubulin subunits to attached kinetochore fibres during mitosis and stabilize microtubules in the vicinity of the plasma membrane during interphase. Human examples are -associated proteins. In plants CLASP protein (1440aa) is involved in both cell division and cell expansion. CLASPs in plants: http://www.plantcell.org/content/19/9/2763.full

class switchingPhenomenon that occurs during the maturation of an immune response in which, for example, B cells cease making IgM and begin making IgG that has the same antigen specificity. Switching between other immunoglobulin classes can occur.
clastogenSubstance that causes chromosome breakage.
clastogenicDescribing a mutagen (clastogen) that causes chromosome breakage. N.B. Clastogenesis has a different meaning in geology.
clathrinProtein composed of three heavy chains (clathrin heavy chain 1, 1675aa; clathrin heavy chain 2, 1640) and three light chains (248aa or 229aa), that forms the basketwork of ‘triskelions’ around a . There are two genes for light chains, each of which can generate two distinct transcripts by tissue-specific alternative splicing. See .
clathrin-associated adaptor protein complexesAdaptor protein complexes (AP-1, AP-2) involved in protein transport via clathrin-coated vesicles in different membrane traffic pathways. AP-1 is a heterotetramer composed of two large adaptins (gamma-type subunit AP1G1, 822aa and beta-type subunit AP1B1, 949aa), a medium adaptin (mu-type AP1M1, or AP1M2, 423aa) and a small adaptin (sigma-type AP1S1, 2 or 3, 158aa). The complex is involved in recruiting clathrin to the membrane, recognising sorting signals in the cytoplasmic domains of transmembrane cargo molecules and in recycling of coated vesicles. AP-2 is functionally similar to AP-1 but with different adaptins: two large adaptins (alpha-type subunit AP2A1, 977aa or AP2A2, 939aa and beta-type subunit AP2B1, 937aa), a medium adaptin (mu-type subunit AP2M1, 435aa) and a small adaptin (sigma-type subunit AP2S1, 142aa). N.B., there is a transcription factor complex AP2 which is completely different.
clathrin-coated vesiclesClass of important in the receptor-mediated endocytosis. They also mediate the transport of cargo from the trans-Golgi network to the endosomal/lysosomal compartment. Cf.
 .
claudinsIntegral membrane proteins with four transmembrane domains involved in tight junction structure in epithelial and endothelial cells, a family of 24 members displaying organ- and tissue-specific patterns of expression. Claudin-1 (senescence-associated epithelial membrane protein, 211aa) forms homopolymers and heteropolymers with some other claudins. It is also a co-receptor for hepatitis C entry into liver cells. See paracellin-1.
CLAVATAThe CLAVATA (CLV1 and CLV3) and SHOOT MERISTEMLESS (STM) genes specifically regulate shoot meristem development in Arabidopsis. CLAVATA1 is a serine/threonine receptor kinase (980aa) that probably binds the secreted peptide MCLV3 (12aa) derived from CLAVATA3 and activates a signal transduction cascade to restrict WUSCHEL expression. Article: http://dev.biologists.org/content/122/5/1567.full.pdf

clavulanic acidCompound isolated from Streptomyces clavuligerusa that acts as a competitive inhibitor of the beta-lactamases that confer resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics. Often used in combination with amoxicillin.

cleavageThe early divisions of the fertilized egg to form blastomeres. The cleavage pattern is radial in some phyla, spiral in others.
cleavage factor Im complexMulti-protein complex involved in pre-mRNA 3′-processing. Components include NUDT21/CPSF5 and CPSF6 or CPSF7 (see CPSF.
cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia syndromeA developmental disorder (Zlotogora-Ogur syndrome, Margarita Island ectodermal dysplasia) caused by mutations in nectin 1.
cleistotheciumAn enclosed ascocarp within which are randomly dispersed asci. Spore dispersal requires intervention, as for example by wild pigs breaking open truffles (which are cleistothecia). Cleistothecia of Aspergillus nidulans have a dark red colouration and are surrounded by Hülle cells. Cf.
ascothecium, perithecium.
Cleland’s reagentSee dithiothreitol.
CLISee .
CLIC proteinsSee .
climactericA particular stage of fruit ripening, characterized by a surge of respiratory activity, and usually coinciding with full ripeness and flavour in the fruit. Its appearance is hastened by ethylene at low concentrations.
CLIPsCytoplasmic linker proteins that link endocytic vesicles to microtubules. CLIP-1 (cytoplasmic linker protein-170, CAP-Gly domain-containing linker protein 1, Reed-Sternberg intermediate filament-associated protein, restin, 1438aa) is highly expressed in Reed-Sternberg cells. CLIP-1 binds to growing ends of microtubules that have bound plus end-binding proteins such as EB1 and is part of the microtubule plus end tracking system that regulates microtubule dynamics. CLIP-2 (CAP-Gly domain-containing linker protein 2, CLIP-115, 1046aa) links microtubules to the dendritic lamellar body and may be involved in control of brain-specific organelle translocations. CLIP3 (CLIP-170 related 59 kDa protein, 547aa) is involved in trans-Golgi/endosome dynamics. CLIP-associating protein 1 (multiple asters homolog 1, Orbit homolog 1, 1538aa) is a microtubule plus-end tracking protein that promotes the stabilization of dynamic microtubules and is required for the polarization of the cytoplasmic microtubule arrays in migrating cells. It is part of the . CLIP-associating protein 2 (1294aa) is similar.
CLLChronic lymphocytic leukaemia.
CLN2A yeast cyclin (545aa) that controls the G1/S (start) transition. See FAR1.
CLN3
(1) An evolutionarily conserved multi-pass membrane protein (CLN3, battenin, 438aa) that localizes in lysosomes and/or mitochondria and is mutated in Batten’s disease (neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 3). The S. pombe homologue of CLN3 regulates vacuole homeostasis but the function of battenin is uncertain. (2) In S. cerevisiae, a G1/S-specific cyclin (CLN3, 580aa) which may be an upstream activator of the G1 cyclins.
clocheZebrafish mutation that affects differentiation of endothelial and haematopoietic cells and probably acts upstream of flk-1. Full paper: http://dev.biologists.org/content/126/12/2643.full.pdf

clockA gene involved in control of circadian rhythm. It encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor (circadian locomoter output cycles protein kaput, hCLOCK, EC 2.3.1.48, Class E basic helix-loop-helix protein 8, 846aa) that, as a heterodimer with aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like protein 2, activates the transcription of period in a manner that can be regulated by input from cryptochromes. Period and timeless proteins block clock’s ability to activate period and timeless promoters in a negative feedback loop.
clonal deletionOne of the two main hypotheses advanced to explain the absence of autoimmune responses: now generally accepted. Clonal deletion is the programmed death of inappropriately stimulated, auto-reactive, clones of T-cells.
clonal selectionThe process whereby one or more clones, i.e. cells expressing a particular gene sequence, are selected by naturally-occurring processes from a mixed population. Generally the clonal selection is for general expansion by mitosis, particularly with reference to B-lymphocytes where selection with subsequent expansion of clones occurs as a result of antigenic stimulation only of those lymphocytes bearing the appropriate receptors.
cloneA propagating population of organisms, either single cell or multicellular, derived from a single progenitor cell. Such organisms should be genetically identical, though mutation events may change this.
cloningThe process whereby clones are established. The term covers various manipulations for isolating and establishing clones: in simple systems single cells may be isolated without precise knowledge of their genotype; in other systems (see gene cloning) the technique requires partial or complete selection of chosen genotypes; in plants the term refers to natural or artificial vegetative propagation.
cloning vectorA plasmid vector that can be used to transfer DNA from one cell type to another. Cloning vectors are usually designed to have convenient restriction sites that can be cut to generate sticky ends to which the DNA that is to be cloned can be ligated easily.
Clonorchis sinensisChinese liver fluke. Can infect man if inadequately cooked fish is eaten and can cause biliary obstruction as a result of liver infestation.
closed meristemDescribing a type of root meristem in flowering plants in which there is a distinct meristem for the root cap, as opposed to the situation in open meristems where there is a common meristem for both cap and cortex. Abstract: http://www.jstor.org/pss/2432028

ClostridiumGenus of Gram-positive anaerobic spore-forming bacilli commonly found in soil. Many species produce exotoxins of great potency, the best known being botulinum toxin from C. botulinum, and tetanus toxin from C. tetani. Among the toxins produced by C. perfringens are perfringolysin (theta toxin), an alpha-toxin (Phospholipase C), beta, epsilon and iota-toxins (act on vascular endothelium to cause increased vascular permeability), delta-toxin (a haemolysin), and kappa-toxin (a collagenase). C. difficile secretes an enterotoxin (toxin A, 2710aa) that is one of the peptidase C80 family.
CLSMConfocal laser scanning microscopy, the correct term for confocal microscopy which, in practice, depends upon a laser light source to work.
cluster of differentiation antigensSee .
cluster of orthologous groupClassification system for genes of orthologous sequence, a derivative of the Bidirectional Best BLAST Hits (BDBH) system. A COG consists of genes from different species that are genome-specific best hits as identified by sequence similarity searches using BLAST The database has some limitations: the same COG number may be assigned to genes of similar yet distinct functions, the same gene may be assigned multiple COG numbers and the classification does not provide any indication of likely function. Database: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG

clusterinA glycoprotein (aging-associated gene 4 protein, apolipoprotein J, complement cytolysis inhibitor, complement-associated protein SP-40, Ku70-binding protein 1, testosterone-repressed prostate message 2, 449aa) that is cleaved into clusterin alpha (222aa) and beta (205aa) chains. Clusterin is differentially regulated in several patho-physiological processes and invariably induced during apoptosis. Functions as extracellular chaperone.
c-mafOne of a family of b-Zip transcription factors, product (373aa) of the cellular proto-oncogene homologous to v-maf, the musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene. Expressed during development of various organs and tissues, involved in a variety of developmental and cellular differentiation processes and in oncogenesis.
CMC
(1) Carboxymethylcellulose, cellulose bearing negative charge and used in ion-exchange chromatography. Also used as a thickening agent. (2) Critical micelle concentration. (3) Cell-mediated cytotoxicity: term applied to the killing of cells by effector T-cells or NK cells.
CMD1
(1) In S. cerevisiae, the gene encoding calmodulin. (2) Chick homologue of myoD (298aa).
CML
(1) Cell-mediated lympholysis: the lysis of target cells by T-cells. (2) Chronic myeloid leukaemia.
CMVSee .
c-myc tagAn epitope tag (EQKLISEEDL) derived from the c-myc protein. Supplier datasheet: http://www.biochem.boehringer-mannheim.com/prod_inf/manuals/epitope/epi_toc.htm

CN hydrolasesA family of hydrolases involved in a wide variety of non-peptide carbon–nitrogen hydrolysis reactions in plants, animals and bacteria, producing important natural products such as auxin, biotin and precursors of antibiotics. The family includes vanins, choloylglycine hydrolase (conjugated bile acid hydrolase, CBAH, EC 3.5.1.24), penicillin acylase (EC 3.5.1.11) and acid ceramidase (EC 3.5.1.23). Database entry: http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/family?PF02275

CNFsSee .
CnidariaDiverse Phylum of diploblastic animals (Coelenterata) with radial or biradial symmetry, that includes Classes Hydrozoa (freshwater polyps, small jellyfish), Scyphozoa (large jellyfish), and Anthozoa (sea anemones and stony corals). They possess a single cavity in the body, the enteron, which has a mouth but no anus. Characteristically the ectoderm has specialized stinging cells (cnidoblasts) containing nematocysts.
cnidoblastDeveloping form of .
cnidocystSee nematocyst.
cnidocyteEctodermal cell of Cnidaria (coelenterates) specialized for defence or capturing prey. Each cell has a nematocyst that can be replaced once discharged.
CNP
(1) C-type natriuretic peptide, the major natriuretic peptide in the brain, an important regulator of skeletal growth and that may have a role as a neuromodulator. (2) 2,3-cyclic nucleotide 3-phosphodiesterase, see .
CNPaseA marker enzyme for oligodendrocytes (CNP, 2′, 3′-cyclic nucleotide 3′-phosphodiesterase, EC 3.1.4.37, 421aa). There are two isoforms, CNP1 and CNP2, both found abundantly in myelinating cells and at much lower levels in non-myelinating cells.
CNQX
AMPA receptor antagonist that does not affect NMDA receptors. See glutamate receptors.
CNSStandard abbreviation for the central nervous system, the brain and spinal cord.
CNTFSee .
CNTsConcentrative nucleoside transporters, a family of sodium dependent transporters (SLC28), structurally unrelated to the equilibrative (sodium-independent) transporters (ENTs) although both types are important in nucleotide salvage pathways. There are three isoforms in humans, CNT1 (SLC28A1, 649aa), CNT2 (SLC28A2, 658aa) and CNT3 (SLC28A3, 691aa), differentially distributed between tissues. CNT1 operates preferentially on pyrimidines, CNT2 on purines and CNT3 on both.
coacervateColloidal aggregation containing a mixture of organic compounds. One theory of the evolution of life is that the formation of coacervates in the primaeval soup was a step towards the development of cells.
coactosinActin-binding protein (146aa) originally isolated from Dictyostelium but since found in humans (coactosin-like protein, 142aa). Binds 5-lipoxygenase and F-actin through different sites. Has homology to the ADF/ family.
coagulase
(1) An enzyme (plasminogen activator, fibrinolysin, EC 3.4.23.48, 312aa) produced by Yersinia pestis that converts human Glu-plasminogen to plasmin. (2) An enzyme (636aa) produced by some species of Staphylococcus; causes clot formation by reacting with prothrombin to form staphylothrombin which converts fibrinogen to fibrin.
coagulation factorGeneral name for the blood clotting factors of plasma. See Table F1.
coat protein complexSee 

coatamerSee 

coated pitFirst stage in the formation of a .
coated vesiclesVesicles formed as an invagination of the plasma membrane (a coated pit) and surrounded by a protein meshwork (composed of coatamers). There are three types of coated vesicles, those in which the coat is of with associated adaptins, those with coat protein complex I (COP-I) and those surrounded by COP-II. The COP-I coated vesicles are involved in retrograde transport from the trans-Golgi to the cis-Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum. The coat is composed of seven equimolar subunits (alpha (alpha-COP, 1224aa; see xenin), beta-COP (953aa), beta (906aa), gamma (874aa), delta (archain, 411aa), epsilon (308aa) and zeta (177aa or 210aa)) which are recruited in association with ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs). COP-II vesicles are important for anterograde transport from ER to cis-Golgi and the coat consists of the essential proteins Sec23p, Sec24p, Sec13p, Sec31p, Sar1p and Sec16p. Sec24p and its two nonessential homologues Sfb2p and Sfb3p have been suggested to serve in cargo selection. Sar1p is involved in generating membrane curvature and vesicle formation. COPII coat proteins are required for direct capture of cargo and SNARE proteins into transport vesicles.
cobalaminSee vitamin B12.
cobra venom factorSee .
cobratoxinPolypeptide toxin (α-cobratoxin, long neurotoxin 1, neurotoxin 3, 71aa) from Naja kaouthia. One of the α-neurotoxins (curaremimetics), it binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors with high affinity.
cocaineAn alkaloid derived from the coca plant (Erythroxylum coca) that acts to increase extra-neuronal dopamine in midbrain by binding to the uptake transporters for dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin.
co-carcinogensSubstances that, though not carcinogenic in their own right, potentiate the activity of a carcinogen. Strictly speaking they differ from tumour promotors in requiring to be present concurrently with the carcinogen.
cocciBacteria with a spherical shape.
coccidiomycosisInfection with the fungus Coccidioides immitis. Responsible for chronic infection of cattle, sheep, dogs, cats and certain rodents.
coccidiosisInfection of animals and birds by protozoa of the genera Eimeria and Isospora, usually affecting the intestinal epithelium and causing enteritis.
Coccolithophores
Coccolithophorids Single-celled algae, protists and phytoplankton belonging to the Haptophytes. They are spherical (15–100 μm in diameter) and are covered in calcium carbonate plates (platelets or scales) 2–25 μm across called coccoliths and are important microfossils, responsible for the major chalk strata of, for example, SE England. Coccolithophores are almost exclusively marine and are found in large numbers throughout the surface euphotic zone of the ocean where they can be responsible for enormous algal blooms that appear white because of the coccoliths. A well-studied and abundant example is Emiliania huxleyi. Emiliana homepage: http://www.noc.soton.ac.uk/soes/staff/tt/eh/

CoccomyxaA genus of algae, in the family Chlorococcaceae. A symbiotic partner in the lichen Peltigera aphthosa. Article: http://pcp.oxfordjournals.org/content/5/3/297.abstract

cocculinSee picrotoxin.
cochlear hair cellsCells of the organ of Corti in the inner ear which have stereocilia (hairs: see stereovillus) on their apical surfaces. The mechanical displacement of the stereocilia caused by sound waves is converted into an electrical signal by opening membrane ion channels. Frequency is detected partly by the position of the responding cells in the cochlea. The inner hair cells are responsible for sound perception, the outer hair cells oscillate in response to electrical potential changes induced by the inner hair cells (see prestin) and improve the discrimination of different frequencies.
cochlinA secreted extracellular matrix protein (550aa) expressed in the cochlea and vestibule of the inner ear. Mutations cause a form of sensorineural deafness and may contribute to Meniere’s disease.
Cockayne’s syndromeA developmental disorder characterized by slow growth and abnormal development, caused by defects in the DNA excision repair system.
co-cultureGrowth of distinct cell types in a combined culture. In order to get some cells to grow at low (clonal) density it is sometimes helpful to grow them together with a feeder layer of macrophages or irradiated cells. The mixing of different cell types in culture is otherwise normally avoided, although it is possible that this could prove an informative approach to modelling interactions in vivo.
codaninA multipass membrane protein (1227aa) that may be involved in maintaining the integrity of the nuclear envelope. Reported to be cell cycle-regulated and active in the S phase. Mutations cause Type 1 congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia. The Drosophila homologue (protein vanaso, 1240aa) is the product of the gene disks lost. It is cytoplasmic, regulates cell proliferation and is essential for imaginal disk formation.
codocyteSee target cell.
codominantGenes in which both alleles of a pair are fully expressed in the heterozygote as, for example, AB blood group in which both A and B antigens are present. Cf. incomplete dominance.
codonA triplet of bases in mRNA (and the DNA from which the message was transcribed) that is recognized by anticodons on transfer RNA and specifies an amino acid to be incorporated into a protein sequence. The code is degenerate, i.e. most amino acids have more than one codon. The stop-codon determines the end of a polypeptide. See 
.
codon-optimizationA strategy that is intended to increase the expression of an engineered gene in an experimental system. The basis for the technique is that the multiple codons for some amino acids are not used with equal frequency and the high-frequency codons are not the same in prokaryotes and eukaryotes (for example). Thus in principle adjusting the codon usage to match the local pattern should optimize expression. Although the evidence for this is patchy there are a number of commercially available systems and algorithms for optimization. Controversial discussion: http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2009/04/is-codon-optimization-bunk.html

coelenterateAnimal of the Phylum . Mostly marine, diploblastic and with radial symmetry. Sea anemones and Hydra are well known examples.
coelenterazineAn imidazolopyrazine derivative which, when oxidized by an appropriate luciferase enzyme, produces carbon dioxide, coelenteramide, and light. Luciferin is coelenterazine disulphate.
coeliac disease
US. celiac disease. Gluten enteropathy: atrophy of villi in small intestine leads to impaired absorption of nutrients. Caused by sensitivity to gluten (protein of wheat and rye). Sufferers have serum antibodies to gluten and show delayed hypersensitivity to gluten; the risk factor is ten times greater in HLA-B8 positive individuals.
coelomBody cavity characteristic of most multicellullular animals (all coelomates). Arises within the embryonic mesoderm, that is thereby subdivided into somatic mesoderm and splanchnic mesoderm, and is lined by the mesodermally-derived peritoneum. May be secondarily lost and it is unclear whether it evolved once or several times.
coenobium
Pl. coenobia. Colony of cells formed by certain green algae, in which little or no specialization of the cells occurs. The cells are often embedded in a mucilaginous matrix. Examples: Volvox, Pandorina.

coenocytesOrganism that is not subdivided into cells but has many nuclei within a mass of cytoplasm (a syncytium), as for example some fungi and algae, and the acellular slime mould Physarum.
coenzymeA term that can be used to mean either a low-molecular weight intermediate that transfers groups between reactions (e.g. NAD) or a catalytically active low-molecular weight component of an enzyme (e.g. haem). The former is sometimes considered a cofactor, in the latter case the coenzyme and apoenzyme together constitute the holoenzyme.
coenzyme AA derivative of adenosine triphosphate and pantothenic acid that can carry acyl groups (usually acetyl) as thioesters. Involved in many metabolic pathways, e.g. citric acid cycle and in fatty acid oxidation.
coenzyme MA compound (2-mercaptoethanesulphonic acid, 2-sulfanylethylsulfonate) involved in the formation of methane from carbon dioxide by methanogenic bacteria. See methyl-coenzyme M reductase.
coenzyme QSee ubiquinone.
cofactorA compound that is required for the biological activity of a protein. Organic co-factors include flavin and haem; inorganic cofactors are usually metal ions or iron-sulphur clusters, see . See .
Coffin-Lowry syndromeA multisystem developmental disorder caused by mutations in the gene for ribosomal S6 kinase, a growth factor-regulated serine/threonine kinase.
cofilinA protein (166aa with muscle and non-muscle isoforms) that reversibly controls actin polymerization, in a pH-sensitive manner. Related to destrin and similar to ADF (actin depolymerizing factor).
COGSee .
cohesin domainCarbohydrate-binding domains found within scaffoldins that interact with dockerin domains and are responsible for maintaining the structural integrity and localisation of . Structure: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9083107

cohesinsProteins that are highly conserved in eukaryotes and have close homologues in bacteria. They form a multicomponent cohesin complex that holds sister chromatids together until anaphase, is required for efficient repair of damaged DNA and has important functions in regulating gene expression in both proliferating and post-mitotic cells. Two cohesin core subunits, Smc1 and Smc3, are members of the structural maintenance of chromosomes family (see SMC proteins), connected by the Scc1 subunit (a kleisin) and a number of other cohesin-associated proteins. See . Paper: http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/22/22/3089.full.pdf+html

coilIn describing the secondary structure of a protein, a motif that does not fit into standard classifications such as an alpha-helix.
coiled bodyAn ubiquitous nuclear organelle (Cajal body) containing the mRNA splicing machinery (U1, U2, U4, U5, U6 and U7 snRNAs), the U3 and U8 snRNPs that are involved in pre-rRNA processing, together with nucleolar proteins such as fibrillarin and . Ultrastructurally they appear to consist of a tangle of coiled threads and are spherical, between 0.5–1 μm in diameter. During mitosis, coiled bodies disassemble, coinciding with a mitotic-specific phosphorylation of p80 coilin.
coilinProtein (p80-coilin, 576aa) found in . A relatively short portion of the N-terminus seems to target the protein to the organelle.
co-isogenicA strain of animal that differs from others of the same inbred strain at only one locus.
Col-VA plasmid of E. coli that codes for V, that confers resistance to complement-mediated killing, for a siderophore to scavenge iron, and for F-like pili that permit conjugation (see sex pili).
colanic acidAn exopolysaccharide (M antigen), produced by many enterobacteria. It is a heteropolysaccharide containing a repeat unit with D-glucose, L-fucose, D-galactose, and D-glucuronate sugars that are nonstoichiometrically decorated with O-acetyl and pyruvate side chains. May serve as a protective barrier for pathogenic bacteria in the intestine.
colcemidMethylated derivative of .
colchicineAlkaloid (400 Da) isolated from the Autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale) that blocks microtubule assembly by binding to the tubulin heterodimer (but not to tubulin). As a result of interfering with microtubule reassembly will block mitosis at metaphase.
cold agglutininsIgM antibodies that react with blood groups I and i in humans (precursors of the ABH and Lewis blood group substances) and agglutinate erythrocytes more actively below 32°C. Cause Raynaud’s disease.
cold insoluble globulin
CIG Name, now obsolete, originally given to fibronectin prepared from .
ColeopteraBeetles. An Order of Insecta with the the fore-wings (elytra) thickened and chitinized. One of the largest of insect groups – which led JBS Haldane to remark “that God (if he existed) must have had an inordinate fondness for beetles”.
coleoptericinInducible antibacterial peptide found in the haemolymph of a tenebrionid beetle following the injection of heat-killed bacteria. Peptide A (glycine-rich, 74aa) is active against Gram-negative bacteria; Peptides B and C are isoforms of a 43aa cysteine-rich peptide that has sequence homology with defensins and is active against Gram-positive bacteria. See diptericins, , apidaecins, abaecins.
coleoptileClosed hollow cylinder or sheath of leaf-like tissue surrounding and protecting the plumule (shoot axis and young leaves) in grass seedlings.
coleorhizaClosed hollow cylinder or sheath of leaf-like tissue surrounding and protecting the radicle (young root) in grass seedlings.
colforsinSee forskolin.
colicinsBacterial exotoxins (bacteriocins) from coliforms that affect other bacteria. Colicins E2 and E3 are AB toxins with DNAase and RNAase activity respectively. Most other colicins are channel-forming transmembrane peptides. Coded on plasmids which can be transferred at .
coliformGram-negative rod-shaped bacillus. (1) May be used loosely of any rod-shaped bacterium. (2) Any Gram-negative enteric bacillus. (3) More specifically, bacteria of the genera Klebsiella or Escherichia.

coliform testTest for in water samples. Commonly involves passage of a volume of water through a sterile membrane, trapping bacteria, followed by incubation of the membrane on eosin-methylene blue agar which is selective for coliforms.
colipaseAn essential cofactor for pancreatic triglyceride lipase that anchors the enzyme-colipase complex to the lipid-water interface. Procolipase (112aa) is processed to release enterostatin and the mature peptide which forms a 1:1 complex with lipase.
colistinA polypeptide antibiotic (polymyxin E) produced by Bacillus polymyxa var. colistinus. Act against most Gram-negative bacilli.
collagenMajor structural proteins of extracellular matrix, unusual both in amino acid composition (very rich in glycine (30%), proline, hydroxyproline, lysine, and hydroxylysine; no tyrosine or tryptophan), structure (a triple helical arrangement of non-identical polypeptides giving a tropocollagen molecule, dimensions 300 nm×0.5 nm), and resistance to peptidases. Most types are fibril-forming with characteristic quarter-stagger overlap between molecules producing an excellent tension-resisting fibrillar structure. Type I collagen is trimeric (one alpha-2(I) (COL1A2) and two alpha-1(I) (COL1A1) chains; 1366aa and 1464aa respectively) and forms the fibrils of tendon, ligaments and bones. Type II collagen (COL2A1, 1487aa) is a homotrimer of alpha 1(II) collagen (chondrocalcin) specific for cartilaginous tissues and defects are the cause of a variety of chondrodysplasias. Type III collagen is found in soft connective tissues and is composed of three identical alpha-1(III) (COL3A1, 1466aa) chains. Collagen type IV does not form fibrils and is characteristic of basal lamina. Collagen type V is fibril forming, Collagen type VI acts as a cell-binding protein. Many other forms are known, often with restricted tissue distribution, some glycosylated (glucose-galactose dimer on the hydroxylysine), and nearly all types can be crosslinked through lysine side-chains. Defects in post-translational processing of collagen can arise if there is vitamin C deficiency, causing scurvy. Mutation in various collagen genes underly a wide range of pathological conditions. See FACIT collagens.
collagenaseProteolytic enzyme capable of breaking native collagen. Once the initial cleavage is made, less specific peptidases will complete the degradation. Collagenases from mammalian cells (EC3.4.24.7) are metallo-enzymes and are collagen-type specific. May be released in latent (proenzyme) form into tissues and require activation by other peptidases before they will degrade fibrillar matrix. Bacterial collagenases (EC 3.4.24.3) are used in tissue disruption for cell harvesting.
collapsin response-mediator proteinsFamily of cytosolic phosphoproteins important in neuronal morphogenesis. They are involved in the signal transduction of class 3 semaphorins (of which is one) that cause growth cone collapse and have a role in axon guidance, invasive growth and cell migration. Collapsin response-mediator protein-1 (CRMP-1, dihydropyrimidinase-related protein 1, unc-33-like phosphoprotein 3, 572aa) forms homotetramers or heterotetramers with other CRMPs. CRMP-2 enhances the advance of growth cones by regulating microtubule assembly and Numb-mediated endocytosis but when phosphorylated by rho kinase no longer binds to the tubulin dimer. In C. elegans unc-33 controls the guidance and outgrowth of neuronal cells. Although the CRMPs form tetramers like liver dihydropyrimidinase (DHPase) and share sequence similarity they lack the residues needed to bind the metal cofactor and do not seem to have enzyme activity.
collapsinsA family of semaphorins from chick brain (e.g. collapsin-1, semaphorin-3A, 772aa; collapsin-5, semaphorin-3E, 785aa) that act as a repulsive cue in development and inhibit regeneration of mature neurons. Cause the collapse of the nerve growth cone at picomolar concentrations. Bind to neuropilin. See .
collar cellSee .
collectinsFamily of C-type lectins (collagenous lectins) important in the first-line defence against viruses and in opsonizing yeasts and bacteria. In humans there are three collectins: collectin-10 (collectin liver protein 1, 277aa) that binds: galactose> mannose=fucose>N-acetylglucosamine>N-acetylgalactosamine; collectin-11 (collectin kidney protein 1, 271aa) that binds to LPS and binds fucose>mannose but does not bind to glucose, N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylgalactosamine; collectin-12 (collectin placenta protein 1, scavenger receptor class A member 4, 742aa) that promotes binding and phagocytosis of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and yeast. The family, which is structurally similar to complement C1q, includes surfactant proteins A and D, mannan-binding protein and .
collectrinA protein (transmembrane protein 27, 222aa) expressed in pancreatic beta cells and renal proximal tubular and collecting duct cells. Regulates the function of the SNARE complex and stimulates beta cell replication.
collenchymasPlant tissue in which the primary cell walls are thickened, especially at the cell corners. Acts as a supporting tissue in growing shoots, leaves and petioles. Often arranged in cortical ‘ribs’, as seen prominently in celery and rhubarb petioles. Lignin and secondary walls are absent; the cells are living and able to grow.
collenocytesStellate cells with long thin processes that ramify through the inhalent canal system of sponges.
colliculusA small mound or elevation. The superior and inferior colliculi are elevations on the dorsal surface of the mid-brain.
colligative propertiesProperties that depend upon the numbers of molecules present in solution rather than their chemical characteristics.
collimating lensLens that produces a non-divergent beam of light or other electromagnetic radiation. Simpler collimators involve slits. Essential in obtaining good illumination in microscopy and for many measuring instruments.
colloblastSpecialized mushroom-shaped cells in the outer layer of the epidermis of ctenophores that contain adhesive which can be released to capture prey. More detail: http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/cnidaria/ctenophora.html

collodionCellulose tetranitrate dissolved in a mixture of ethanol and ethoxyethane (1:7); the solution is used for coating materials and medically for sealing wounds and dressings.
collybistinA neurospecific rho-GTPase guanine nucleotide exchange factor (ARHGEF9, 516aa) of the Dbl family that is specific for Cdc42. Promotes the formation of gephyrin clusters and is negatively regulated by gephyrin. Mutations cause one form of startle disease.
colonization factorsBacterial surface features that facilitate adhesion to gut epithelial cells, for example the pili on enteropathogenic forms of E. coli that probably bind to GM1 gangliosides. Colonization factor antigens may be plasmid coded, are essential for pathogenicity and are strain-specific, for example K88 (diarrhoea in piglets), CFAI and CFAII on strains causing similar disease in man.

colony-forming unit
(1) A stem cell from bone marrow that forms a colony, originally in the spleen of an irradiated mouse when the immune system is reconstituted by the injection of cells from another animal or now more commonly, in methylcellulose-thickened growth medium in vitro. CFU-S are pluripotent and form colonies in the spleen, CFU-E are partially committed and only produce cells of the erythroid lineage. CFU-G give rise to granulocytes, CFU-GM to granulocytes and macrophages, CFU-M to macrophages, CFU-GEMM to granulocytes, erythrocytes, macrophages and megakaryocytes. See burst forming unit. (2) A measure of the numbers of live organisms in a diluted sample put into culture (e.g. a nutrient agar plate for bacteria) or of viruses plated onto a culture of host cells.
colony-stimulating factor
 involved in the maturation of various leucocyte, macrophage and monocyte lines. See .
ColostrininSee proline-rich polypeptide.
colostrumThe first milk secreted by an animal coming into lactation. May be especially rich in maternal lymphocytes and Ig and thus transfer immunity passively.
colour blindnessThe inability to distinguish the full spectrum of colours. Most often the defect is in the absorption spectrum of one of the three opsins in retinal cones. In protanopia, the defect is in the red-sensitive opsin (364aa), in deuteranopia (Daltonism) in the green-sensitive opsin (deutan, 364aa), in tritanopia the defect is in blue-sensitive opsin (348aa). Most of the red-green colour-vision defects (which are the commonest) arise as a result of unequal crossing-over between the red and green pigment genes. A defect in the alpha-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cGMP-gated cation channel can cause complete or partial colour blindness (achromatopsia) and although cones are present they are dysfuntional. In dichromatism only two of the three primary colours are recognised, probably the norm for most mammals other than primates.
columella
Pl. columellae. (1) In general, a small ‘column like’ part, often forming the central axis of a structure. (2) In molluscs, the central portion of a gastropod shell. (3) The central sterile portion of the sporangium in various fungi, sometimes the central axis of fruits and cones. (4) The central portion of the root cap in higher plants. (5) The fleshy external end of the nasal septum in mammals.
columnar cellsCells of columnar epithelium in which the area in contact with the basal lamina is less than the lateral cell-cell contact (in contrast to cuboidal and squamous epithelia).
comb platesLarge flat organelles formed by the fusion of many cilia. Vertical rows of comb-plates form the motile appendages of Ctenophores.
combination therapyTreatment of a disease with two or more drugs, classically used with several antibiotics in tuberculosis and now in cancer and AIDS.
combinatorial chemistryMethod by which large numbers of compounds can be made, usually utilizing solid-phase synthesis. In the simplest form carrier beads would be treated separately so as to couple subunits A, B, & C, mixed, re-divided, and then subunits A, B & C added in the three reaction mixtures. Thus bead+AA, AB, AC, BA, BB, BC etc. would have been synthesized – though the products are mixed and deconvolution of an active mixture will be necessary to identify the active molecule. Using a relatively small number of reactions enormous diversity can rapidly be generated. Increasingly the term is used loosely for any procedure that generates highly diverse sets of compounds – the more recent tendency is to prefer high speed parallel synthesis in which each reaction chamber contains only one compound.
combined immunodeficiencyCongenital immunodeficiency with thymic agenesis, lymphocyte depletion and hypogammaglobulinaemia: both cellular and humoral immune systems are affected, and life expectancy is low unless marrow transplantation is successful. See severe combined immunodeficiency disease.
combining siteAny region of a molecule that binds or reacts with a given compound. Especially of the region of immunoglobulin that combines with the determinant of an appropriate antigen.
combretastatinsCompounds originally derived from the bark of the African bush willow tree (Combretum caffrum), used in cancer treatment. They act by inhibiting tumour vascularisation by binding to tubulin in endothelial cells. Combretastatin A-4 is the most potent natural form but synthetic variants are emerging with slightly different efficacy. Details: http://www.chm.bris.ac.uk/motm/combretastatin/combv.htm

comC, comD, comEOperon involved in regulating competence for genetic transformation in Streptococcus pneumoniae. Com D, a transmembrane histidine kinase, binds (CSP-1 or CSP-2, encoded by comC1 and comC2 respectively) and activates the response regulator ComE. Allelic variation in ComD determines the pherotype – whether CSP-1 or CSP-2 elicits a response.
comet assaySingle cell gel (SCG) electrophoresis, a rapid and very sensitive fluorescent microscopic method to examine DNA damage and repair at individual cell level. Single cells embedded in agarose gel on a microscope slide, are lysed and DNA allowed to unwind before being subjected to an electophoretic field. Following staining with acridine orange the image is of a distinct head, comprising intact DNA and a tail, consisting of damaged or broken pieces of DNA. By adjusting the lysis and unwinding conditions the sensitivity can be adjusted to preferentially identify particular types of damage.
comitinIn Dictyostelium an actin binding protein (185aa) with a bulb-type lectin domain that has high affinity for both G-actin and F-actin. Binds to vesicle membranes via mannose residues and links these membranes to the cytoskeleton.
COMMDA multifunctional protein (copper metabolism MURR1 domain-containing protein 1, 186aa) that inhibits NFκB and has a copper metabolism (MURR1) gene domain. Mutation may cause copper deficiency (Menkes’ disease) or copper accumulation (Wilson’s disease). There is a family of conserved proteins (COMM domain-containing 1–10) that form multimeric complexes with COMMD1.
committed cellsCells that have become committed to a particular pathway of differentiation (see determination). This happens at different stages in embryogenesis; generally this is an irreversible event in mammalian cells although reversing such committment would potentially allow regeneration of tissues.
common source epidemicInfection or intoxication of a large number of people from a contaminated single source such as food or water. Distinguished from a host to host infection where a single infected individual infects one or more susceptible people who in turn pass on the disease.
communicating junctionSee gap junction.
compactionProcess that occurs during the morula stage of embryogenesis in which blastomeres increase their cell-cell contact area and develop gap junctions. In mice compaction occurs at the eight cell stage and after this the developmental fate of each cell becomes restricted.
companion cellRelatively small plant cell, metabolically very active and with little or no vacuole, found adjacent to a phloem sieve tube and originating with the latter from a common mother cell. Thought to be involved in translocation of sugars in and out of the sieve tube. Intermediary cells and transfer cells are variants.
compartmentConceptualized part of the body (organs, tissues, cells, or fluids) considered as an independent system for purposes of modelling and assessment of distribution and clearance of a substance or in development as a clonal territory. In the insect wing, for example, there are two compartments, anterior and posterior, each containing several clones, but clones do not cross the boundary. It seems from studies with homeotic mutants that cells in different compartments are expressing different sets of genes. The evidence for such developmental compartments in vertebrates is sparse at present.
compartmental analysisMathematical process leading to a model of transport of a substance in terms of and rate constants for input and output.
competence stimulating peptidePheromone (CSP-1, 41aa; CSP-2, 41aa) that is involved in a quorum-sensing mechanism that regulates competence for genetic transformation in Streptococcus pneumoniae and other species in that genus. Encoded by the comC gene. Receptor system is a two-component signal transduction system, ComD-ComE (TCS12). See .
competent cells
(1) Bacterial cells with enhanced ability to take up exogenous DNA and thus to be transformed. Competence can arise naturally in some bacteria (Pneumococcus, Bacillus and Haemophilus spp); a similar state can be induced in E. coli by treatment with calcium chloride. Once competence has been induced the cells can be stored at low temperature in cryoprotectant and used when needed. (2) Cells capable of responding to an inducer in embryonic development.
competitive inhibitionInhibitor that occupies the active site of an enzyme or the binding site of a receptor and prevents the normal substrate or ligand from binding. At sufficiently high concentration of the normal ligand inhibition is lost: the Km is altered by the competitive inhibitor, but the Vmax remains the same.
complementA heat-labile system of enzymes in plasma associated with response to injury. Activation of the complement cascade occurs through two convergent pathways. In the classical pathway the formation of antibody/antigen complexes leads to binding of , the release of active esterase that activates and that in turn bind to the surface. The C42 complex splits to produce C3b, an opsonin, and C3a (anaphylatoxin). C423b acts on to release C5a (anaphylatoxin and chemotactic factor) leaving C5b that combines with C6789 to form a cytolytic membrane attack complex. In the alternate pathway C3 cleavage occurs without the involvement of C142, and can be activated by IgA, endotoxin, or polysaccharide-rich surfaces (e.g. yeast cell wall, zymosan). Factor B combines with C3b to form a C3 convertase that is stabilized by Factor P (properdin), generating a positive feedback loop. The alternate pathway is presumably the ancestral one upon which the sophistication of antibody recognition has been superimposed in the classical pathway. The enzymatic cascade amplifies the response, leads to the activation and recruitment of leucocytes, increases phagocytosis and induces killing directly. It is subject to various complex feedback controls that terminate the response (see Factor H, Factor I). A third pathway, the lectin-mediated pathway is similar to the classical pathway but is initiated by the binding of mannose-binding lectin and ficolins, instead of C1q (the recognition subunit of C1). There are separate entries for most of the components: see also decay accelerating factor and . Summary: http://d3jonline.tripod.com/07-Immunobiology/The_Complement_System.htm

complement cytolysis inhibitorSee .
complement fixationBinding of as a result of its interaction with immune complexes (the classical pathway) or particular surfaces (alternative pathway).
complement receptorsReceptors, mostly on myeloid cells, that bind different complement components or fragments. CR1 (complement receptor 1, C3b/C4b receptor, CD35, 2039aa) is involved in the phagocytosis of opsonized bacteria and the uptake of immune complexes. CR2 (complement C3d receptor, CD21, 1033aa) is also present on lymphocytes and is the site to which the Epstein-Barr virus binds. CR3 (CD11b/CD18, MAC-1, integrin alpha-M, 1152aa and integrin beta-2, 769aa) binds C3bi (iC3b). CR4 (integrin alpha-X, beta-2, CD11c/CD18: CD11c is 1163aa) binds C3dg, the fragment that remains when C3b is cleaved to C3bi, and fibrinogen.
complement regulatory proteinIn mouse a regulator of the complement system (crry, p65, 483aa) that acts as a cofactor for complement factor I and as a decay accelerating factor. In early embryonic development is important in maintaining feto-maternal tolerance.
complementarity determining regionHypervariable region within the antigen binding site of immunoglobulin molecules and T-cell antigen receptors. The sequence in this region determines which antigen (epitope) will bind. Also used to refer to the genomic sequence encoding the hypervariable regions.
complementary base pairsThe bases in DNA that interact with one another and cause the two strands to be complementary: The pairings are guanine (G) with cytosine (c) and adenine (A) with thymine (T) (or uracil in RNA). The G-C pair has three hydrogen bonds, the A-T pair has only two.
complementary DNASee .
complementationThe ability of a mutant chromosome to restore normal function to a cell that has a mutation in the homologous chromosome when a hybrid or heterokaryon is formed – the explanation being that the mutations are in different cistrons and between the two a complete set of normal information is present.
complexinsCytosolic proteins involved in the regulation of neurotransmitter release, conserved SNARE-binding proteins that compete with alpha-SNAP for binding to synaptobrevin. Complexin I (synaphin-2, 134aa) is a marker of inhibitory synapses and is also involved in glucose-induced secretion of insulin by pancreatic beta-cells. Complexin II (synaphin-1, 134aa) mainly labels excitatory synapses and is also involved in mast cell exocytosis. Complexin-3 (158aa) and complexin-4 (160aa) regulate a late step in synaptic vesicle exocytosis.
Compton-North congenital myopathyA serious myopathy caused by mutation in contactin-1 with secondary loss of beta2-syntrophin and alpha-dystrobrevin from the sarcolemma.
COMTEnzyme (catechol-O-methyltransferase, EC 2.1.1.6, 271aa) thought to functionally modulate dopaminergic neurons. Catalyses reaction between S-adenosyl methionine and catechol to form S-adenosyyl-L-homocysteine and guiacol and methylates catecholamines, thereby terminating their signalling activity. There are two functional polymorphisms in humans with high enzyme activity (COMT Val) and low enzyme activity (COMT Met) variants, although the significance is still unclear.
Con ASee .
Con A binding sitesSee .
Con A receptorsA common misuse of the term receptor. Con A binds to the mannose residues of many different glycoproteins and glycolipids and the binding is therefore not to a specific site. It could be argued that the receptor is Con A and cells have Con A ligands on their surfaces: certainly this would be less confusing.
conalbumin
ovotransferrin Non-haem iron-binding protein (705aa) found in chicken plasma and egg white.
conantokinsClass of small peptides (17–21aa) from cone shells (Conus spp.) that inhibit the NMDA class of glutamate receptors.
conarachinA seed storage protein (662aa) from Arachis hypogaea (Peanut).
concanamycin A
folimycin Specific inhibitor of vacuolar H+-ATPase, isolated from Streptomyces sp.; inhibits perforin-based cytotoxic activity, mostly due to accelerated degradation of perforin by an increase in the pH of lytic granules. Other concanamycins have been isolated with slightly different characteristics.

concanavalin A
Con A A lectin isolated from the jack bean, Canavalia ensiformis. See Table L1 (Lectins).
concatamerTwo or more identical linear molecular units covalently linked in tandem. Especially used of nucleic acid molecules and of units in artificial polymers.
condensation
(1) Process of compression or increase in density. Chromosome condensation is a consequence of increased supercoiling that causes the chromosome to become shorter and thicker and thus visible in the light microscope. (2) A condensation reaction in chemistry is one in which two molecules combine to form a single larger molecule with the concomitant loss of a relatively small portion as water or similar small molecule. (3) The product of the process, for example water droplets that have formed on a cold surface exposed to water vapour.
condensin complexA multimolecular complex consisting of kleisin, structural maintenance of chromosomes proteins (SMC proteins) and three regulatory proteins (NCAPH/BRRN1 (Barren homolog protein 1), NCAPD2/CAPD2 and NCAPG). During interphase the complex is mostly cytoplasmic and to a minor extent, is associated with chromatin. Most of the complex becomes associated with chromatin during mitosis, providing structural support and rigidity. It dissociates from chomatin in late telophase.
condensing vacuoleVacuole (prozymogen granule) formed from the cis face of the Golgi apparatus by the fusion of smaller vacuoles. Within the condensing vacuole the contents are concentrated and may become semi-crystalline (zymogen granules or secretory vesicles).
conditional mutationA mutation that is only expressed under certain environmental conditions, for example temperature-sensitive mutants.
conditioned mediumCell culture medium that has already been partially used by cells. Although depleted of some components, it is enriched with cell-derived material, probably including small amounts of growth factors; such cell-conditioned medium will support the growth of cells at much lower density and, mixed with some fresh medium, is therefore useful in .
cone cellSee retinal cone.
cone dystrophyA retinal dystrophy in which there is progressive loss of retinal cones but the rods are unaffected. One form is caused by mutation in guanylate cyclase-activating protein, some other forms by mutation in the alpha or gamma subunits of cone-specific cGMP-phosphodiesterase or in the KCNV2 potassium channel. See .
cone-rod dystrophyA dystrophy in which there is loss of retinal cones followed by progressive loss of retinal rods. A range of mutations are known to be responsible, including those in the cone-rod homeobox-containing gene (CRX gene), the genes for a retina-specific ABC transporter (ABCA4), a membrane-associated phosphatidylinositol transfer protein (PITPNM3, 974aa), a guanylate cyclase (GUCY2D, EC 4.6.1.2, 1123aa) of the rod outer segment membrane, rab3A-interacting molecule-1 (RIM1, 1692aa), semaphorin 4a, the retina and anterior neural fold homeobox-like protein (RAXL1, 184aa). Other forms involve defects in ADAM9, prominin-1, protocadherin-21 or the retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator-interacting protein (RPGRIP1, 1286aa). Loci for other forms of CORD are mapped. See .
confluent cultureA cell culture in which all the cells are in contact and thus the entire surface of the culture vessel is covered. It is also often used with the implication that the cells have also reached their maximum density, though confluence does not necessarily mean that division will cease or that the population will not increase in size.
confocal microscopyA system of (usually) epifluorescence light microscopy in which a fine laser beam of light is scanned over the object through the objective lens. The technique is particularly good at rejecting light from outside the plane of focus, and so produces higher effective resolution than is normally achieved. There are various ways of achieving the scanning, the original method involved mechanical movement of the stage, other methods involve spinning disks (Nipkow disk), acousto-optic deflectors or programmable arrays and achieve faster imaging (shorter exposure times). Detailed description: http://www.physics.emory.edu/~weeks/lab/papers/ebbe05.pdf

conformational changeAlteration in the shape, usually the tertiary structure of a protein, as a result of alteration in the environment (pH, temperature, ionic strength) or the binding of a ligand (to a receptor) or binding of substrate (to an enzyme).
conformerA molecule that has the same structural formula but different conformation. Some conformers are energetically more favourable than others.
congenicDescribing organisms that differ in genotype at (ideally) one specified locus. Strictly speaking these are conisogenics. Thus one homozygous strain can be spoken of as being congenic to another.
congenital dyserythropoietic anaemiaA group of disorders affecting erythroid differentiation. One form is caused by mutation in the gene for codanin 1.

congenital insensitivity to painA condition in which there is an absence of the sensation of pain, either because of mutation in the SCN9A gene encoding a voltage-gated sodium channel or damage to or absence of the relevant nerves as in congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) where there is a defect in the neurotrophic tyrosine kinase-1 receptor (a nerve growth factor receptor).
congenital nephrosisSee alpha-fetoprotein.
congenital severe combined immunodeficiencySee severe combined immunodeficiency disease.
conglutininCalcium-dependent lectin-like protein (371aa) present in bovine serum that causes agglutination of antibody-antigen-complement complexes; binds C3bi.
Congo redNaphthalene dye that is pH sensitive (blue-violet at pH 3, red at pH 5). Used as vital stain, also in staining for amyloid.
conidiophoresA specialised stalk bearing in the asexual fruiting body of Ascomycetes (Ascomycota).
conidiumAn asexual fungal spore, borne at the tip of a specialized hypha (conidiophore) rather than within a sporangium. In blastic conidiogenesis the spore is already evident before it separates from the conidiogenic hypha from which it is produced; in thallic conidiogenesis a cross-wall appears in the hypha delimiting a cell which then develops into a spore.
conjugate
(1) Molecular species produced in a biological system by covalently linking two chemical moieties from different sources. (2) Material produced by attaching two or more substances together, e.g. a conjugate of an antibody with a fluorochrome or enzyme for use as a probe. (3) See .
conjugated trienolsOxidation products of alpha-farnesene probably involved in development of superficial scald in apple fruit, a postharvest disorder in which there is browning of the fruit skin.
conjugationUnion between two gametes or between two cells leading to the transfer of genetic material. In eukaryotes the classic examples are in Paramecium and Spirogyra. Conjugation between bacteria involves an F+ bacterium (with F-pili) attaching to an F−; transfer of the F-plasmid then occurs through the sex pilus. In Hfr mutants the F-plasmid is integrated into the chromosome and so chromosomal material is transferred as well. Conjugation occurs in many Gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia, Shigella, Salmonella, Pseudomonas and Streptomyces).
Conn’s syndromeUncontrolled secretion of aldosterone usually by an adrenal adenoma.
connectin
(1) Alpha-connectin is identical to titin-1, β-connectin to titin-2. Elastic connectin/titin molecules position the myosin filaments at the center of a sarcomere by linking them to the Z line. (2)
Drosophila connectin (CON) is a cell surface protein of the leucine-rich repeat family (682aa) expressed on the surface of a subset of embryonic muscles and on the growth cones and axons of the motoneurons that innervate these muscles. It is attached to the cell surface via a GPI linkage and mediates homotypic cell-cell adhesion in vitro.
connective tissueRather general term for mesodermally derived tissue that may be more or less specialized. Cartilage and bone are specialized connective tissue, as is blood, but the term is probably better reserved for the less specialized tissue that is rich in extracellular matrix ( , proteoglycan, etc.) and that surrounds other more highly ordered tissues and organs. See areolar connective tissue.
connective tissue diseasesA group of diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatic fever, scleroderma and others, that are sometimes referred to as rheumatic diseases. They probably do not affect solely connective tissues but the diseases are linked in various ways and have interesting immunological features which suggest that they may be autoimmune in origin.
connective tissue growth factorA cysteine rich regulatory protein (CTGF, CCN-2, insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 8, 349aa) of the , secreted by vascular endothelial cells. CTGF stimulates the proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes, induces angiogenesis, promotes adhesion of fibroblasts and epithelial cells, and binds to various other growth factors. Connective tissue growth factor-like (CTGFL/WISP-2, Wnt-1-induced signalling pathway protein-2, CCN5, 250aa) is expressed in primary osteoblasts and may modulate bone turnover. Inhibits osteocalcin production.
connective tissue-activating peptide IIICytokine (CXCL7, CTAPIII, low affinity platelet factor-4, 85aa) produced from platelet basic protein, that is chemotactic for leucocytes and acts as a growth factor. Various other active peptides such as neutrophil activating peptide are produced by cleavage.
connexinGeneric term for proteins with four membrane-passing domains isolated from gap junctions. Currently 24 human genes for connexins have been identified, each with tissue- or cell-type-specific expression. Most organs and many cell types express more than one connexin. Connexin phosphorylation has been implicated in connexin assembly, gap junction turnover, and responses to tumour promoters and oncogenes. Connexin43 (Cx43, Gap junction alpha-1 protein, 382aa), the most widely expressed and abundant gap junction protein, can be phosphorylated at several different serine and tyrosine residues. Mutations in connexin genes are associated with peripheral neuropathies, cardiovascular diseases, dermatological diseases, hereditary deafness and cataract. See .
connexonThe functional unit of gap junctions. An assembly of six membrane-spanning proteins ( ) having a water-filled gap in the centre. Two connexons in juxtaposed membranes link to form a continuous pore through both membranes.
conotoxinsToxins from cone shells (Conus spp). The α-conotoxins (13–18aa) are competitive inhibitors of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. The μ-conotoxins are small (22aa) peptides that bind voltage-sensitive sodium channels in muscle, causing paralysis. The ω-conotoxins are similar in size and inhibit voltage-gated calcium channels, thereby blocking synaptic transmission. See .
Consed/AutofinishA software tool for viewing, editing, and finishing sequence assemblies created with phrap. Link: http://www.phrap.org/phredphrapconsed.html

ConsensePart of the PHYLIP software package that reads a file of computer-readable phylogenetic trees and prints out a consensus tree. Description: http://nebc.nerc.ac.uk/bioinformatics/docs/consense.html

consensus sequenceOf a series of related DNA, RNA or protein sequences, the sequence that reflects the most common choice of base or amino acid at each position. Areas of particularly good agreement often represent conserved functional domains. The generation of consensus sequences has been subjected to intensive mathematical analysis.
conservative substitutionIn a gene product, a substitution of one amino acid with another having generally similar properties (size, hydrophobicity, etc.), such that the overall functioning is likely not to be seriously affected.
Conserved Domain DatabasePart of the NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information) Entrez database system that has annotated information about within proteins. Link: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=cdd

conserved domainsFunctional units within a protein that have been used as building blocks in molecular evolution and recombined in various arrangements to make proteins with different functions.
CONSTANS
CO Arabidopsis gene that promotes flowering in long days. Flowering is induced when CONSTANS messenger RNA expression coincides with the exposure of plants to light. A member of a family of 17 CO-like genes that are widely distributed in plants. Product is a nuclear zinc-finger protein (373aa).
constant regionThe C-terminal half of the light or the heavy chain of an immunoglobulin molecule. The amino acid sequence in this region is the same in all molecules of the same class or sub-class whereas the variable region is antigen-specific.
constitutiveConstantly present, whether there is demand or not. Thus some enzymes are constitutively produced, whereas others are inducible.
constitutive transport element
CTE. An RNA motif that has the ability to interact with intracellular RNA helicases and is essential for export of RNA from the nuclear compartment. Many retroviruses have such an element to ensure their unspliced mRNA is moved into the cytoplasm. See Tap protein.
constriction ringThe equatorial ring of microfilaments that diminishes in diameter, probably both by contraction and disassembly, as proceeds.
ConSurf DatabaseA database that provides evolutionary conservation profiles for proteins of known structure in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). It is often possible to identify key residues that comprise the functionally-important regions of the protein using this resource. Homepage: http://consurfdb.tau.ac.il/

contact activation pathwayThe process (formerly called the intrinsic pathway) of activation of blood clotting when collagen becomes exposed to platelets which bind via the Gp Ia/IIa receptor. Platelet adhesion is enhanced by recruitment of von Willebrand factor (vWF) and triggers the release of platelet granule contents which also play a part in initiating the complex cascade of events that culminate in cleavage of Factor I to form fibrin. See tissue factor pathway (formerly the ‘extrinsic pathway’).
contact followingBehaviour shown by individual slime mould cells when they join a stream moving towards the aggregating centre. at front and rear of cell may be involved in Dictyostelium.
contact guidanceDirected locomotory response of cells to an anisotropy of the environment, for example the tendency of fibroblasts to align along ridges or parallel to the alignment of collagen fibres in a stretched gel.
contact inhibition of growth/divisionSee density-dependent inhibition.
contact inhibition of locomotion/movementReaction in which the direction of motion of a cell is altered following collision with another cell. In heterologous contacts both cells may respond (mutual inhibition), or only one (non-reciprocal). Type I contact inhibition involves paralysis of the locomotory machinery, Type II is a consequence of adhesive preference for the substratum rather than the dorsal surface of the other cell.
contact inhibition of phagocytosisPhenomenon described in sheets of kidney epithelial cells that, when confluent, lose their weak phagocytic activity, probably because of a failure of adhesion of particles to the dorsal surface in the absence of locomotory ruffles.
contact sensitivityAllergic response to contact with irritant, usually a hypersensitivity.
contact sites ADevelopmentally-regulated adhesion sites that appear on the ends of aggregation-competent Dictyostelium discoideum (see Acrasidae) at the stage when the starved cells begin to come together to form the grex. Originally detected by the use of Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies, raised against aggregation-competent cells and adsorbed against vegetative cells, to block adhesion in EDTA-containing medium. (Cell-cell adhesion mediated by contact sites A, unlike that mediated by contact sites B, is not divalent cation-sensitive). The fact that a mutant deficient in csA behaves perfectly normally in culture is puzzling. Involved in linking the membrane to the actin cytoskeleton via ponticulin.
contact sites BSee .
contact-induced spreadingThe response in which contact between two epithelial cells leads to a stabilized contact and the increased spreading of the cells so that the area covered is greater than that covered by the two cells in isolation.
contactinhibinPlasma membrane glycoprotein of 60–70 kDa isolated from human diploid fibroblasts, which when immobilized on silica beads has been reported to reversibly inhibit the growth of cultured cells. Not in the UniProt database. Original report: http://jcb.rupress.org/content/111/6/2681.long

contactinsA family of neuronal cell surface proteins of the immunoglobulin superfamily that mediate cell interactions during development. In humans contactin-1 (1018aa) is involved in the formation of paranodal axo-glial junctions through an interaction with CNTNAP1 (contactin-associated protein 1, neurexin-4) and in oligodendrocyte generation by acting as a ligand of NOTCH1. It is GPI-anchored. Contactin-2 (axonin-1, 1040aa) is involved in the initial growth and guidance of axons. Contactin-3 (brain-derived immunoglobulin superfamily protein-1, BIG-1, Plasmacytoma-associated neuronal glycoprotein, 1028aa), contactin-4 (BIG-2, 1026aa), contactin-5 (neural recognition molecule NB-2, 1100aa) and contactin-6 (neural recognition molecule NB-3, 1028aa) are thought to have similar roles. Several other contactins are known. In Drosophila, contactin (1390aa) is required for organization of septate junctions (the equivalent of vertebrate tight junctions). See (contactin-associated protens).
contigColloquial term for a DNA sequence assembled from overlapping shorter sequences to form one large contigous sequence.
contractile ringSee .
contractile vacuoleA specialized vacuole of eukaryotic cells, especially Protozoa, that fills with water from the cytoplasm and then discharges this externally by the opening of a permanent narrow neck or a transitory pore. Function is probably osmoregulatory.
contrapsinTrypsin inhibitor (serine protease inhibitor A3K, serpin A3K, 416aa) from rat and other rodents.
control elementGeneric term for a region of DNA, such as a promoter or enhancer adjacent to (or within) a gene that allows the regulation of gene expression by the binding of transcription factors.
control regionGeneral name for genomic DNA that, though binding of transcription factors to its promoters, enhancers and repressors, modulates the expression level of nearby genes.
controlled drugsDrugs that can only be prescribed under guidelines laid down in legislation. Usually drugs that have the potential to cause addiction and dependence.
convulxin
Cvx Snake venom toxin, an octamer composed of four disulphide-linked αβ-heterodimers (158aa and 148aa) a from Crotalus durissus terrificus (South American rattlesnake), that activates platelets through the collagen receptor glycoprotein VI (GPVI)/Fc receptor gamma-chain (FcR γ-chain) complex leading to tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of the tyrosine kinase Syk and PLCγ2.
Coomassie Brilliant BlueBlue dye (Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250, Brilliant Blue R, Acid Blue 90, Kenacid Blue) that binds nonspecifically to proteins, used in Bradford method for protein estimation and for detecting proteins on gels. Originally developed as a dye for wool; in acid solution has an absorbance shift from 465 nm to 595 nm when it binds to protein.
Coombs’ testDiagnostic test to determine whether an individual’s red cells are coated with autoantibodies or immune complexes. The erythrocytes are mixed with anti-human immunoglobulin and if antibody is present the red cells will agglutinate. The direct test involves the addition of anti-immunoglobulin antibody to washed erythrocytes; the indirect test is for unbound antibodies against erythrocytes present in the serum.
cooperativityPhenomenon displayed by enzymes or receptors that have multiple binding sites. Binding of one ligand alters the affinity of the other site(s). Both positive and negative cooperativity are known; positive cooperativity gives rise to a sigmoidal binding curve. Cooperativity is often invoked to account for non-linearity of binding data, although it is by no means the only possible cause.
coordination complexComplex held together by coordinate (dipolar) bonds, covalent bonds in which the two shared electrons derive from only one of the two participants.
COP9 signalosomeA conserved regulatory complex (constitutive photomorphogenic-9 complex), present in diverse eukaryotes, that acts as a regulator of the ubiquitin conjugation pathway by mediating the deneddylation of the cullin subunit of SCF-type E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase complexes. There are eight subunits (CSN1 to CSN8; total 450 kDa) with some homologies to the proteasome. Subunits include Gps1 (491aa), Jab1 (334aa, a coactivator of AP-1 transcription factor), CSN5 (product of a candidate oncogene in human breast cancer), TRIP15 (thyroid hormone receptor interactor-15), SGN3 (which has homology to the 26S proteasome S3 regulatory subunit) and others. Remarkably, human GPS1 can substitute for FUS6 (the plant homologue) in the COP9 complex that represses photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis. Inactivation of the COP9 signalosome will impair T-cell development.
COPI, COPIISee .
copia-like retrotransposonsA super-family of viral-like LTR retrotransposons (Ty1-copia group retrotransposons, Pseudoviridae) originally described in Drosophila where there are large numbers of closely-related sequences (20–60 depending on the strain). The copia element is about 5000 bp with identical terminal repeats and inverted repeats. Copia-like retrotransposons are ubiquitous in plants. In Ty1/copia elements, the pol gene encodes the protease, integrase, reverse transcriptase (RT), and RnaseH domains in that order from the 5′ end of the gene, the order of the domains being peculiar to this group. The Gypsy Database (GyDB) of mobile genetic elements: http://gydb.uv.es/index.php/Ty1/Copia

CoprinusGenus of fungi that have gills that autodigest once spores have been discharged giving rise to a black inky fluid.
copy numberThe number of molecules of a particular type on or in a cell or part of a cell. Usually applied to specific genes, or to plasmids within a bacterium.
copy-number polymorphisms
CNPs A form of polymorphism that is becoming increasing recognised with the availability of high-density oligonucleotide microarrays for SNPs. Individuals differ by 11 CNPs on average, and copy number variation has been found in 70 different genes. Such polymorphisms occur in about 12% of human genomic DNA and variations may vary from about one kilobase to several megabases in size. Copy number polymorphism in the orthologous rat and human FcγRIIIb receptor genes is a determinant of susceptibility to immunologically mediated glomerulonephritis.
coracleA Drosophila
protein 4.1 homologue (1698aa), required during embryogenesis and localized to the cytoplasmic face of the septate junction in epithelial cells, where it interacts with the transmembrane protein neurexin IV.
CORDSee .
cord bloodBlood taken post-partum from the umbilical cord.
cord factorGlycolipid (trehalose-6,6′-dimycolate) found in the cell walls of Mycobacteria (causing them to grow in serpentine cords) and important in virulence, being toxic and inducing granulomatous reactions identical to those induced by the whole organism.
Cori’s diseaseA glycogen storage disease (Type IIIa) caused by mutation in the gene encoding the glycogen debranching enzyme.
cork cambiumA lateral meristem (bark cambium, pericambium or phellogen) found in the periderm of many vascular plants and responsible for secondary growth that replaces the epidermis in roots and stems.
corn
(1) In Europe a generic term for various edible grains (barley, wheat, oats, rye etc.) whereas in the US specifically maize. (2) A localized overgrowth of the keratinized layer of the skin at a site of mechanical irritation. Often has a focal centre.
corneaTransparent tissue at the front of the eye. The cornea has a thin outer squamous epithelial covering and an endothelial layer next to the aqueous humour, but is largely composed of avascular collagen laid down in orthogonal arrays with a few fibroblasts. Transparency of the cornea depends on the regularity of spacing in the collagen fibrils.
cornea planaA corneal defect in which the radius of curvature is larger than normal. Can be a result of mutation in the gene for keratocan.
corneal endothelial dystrophyA degenerative disease of the cornea. Fuchs’ endothelial corneal dystrophy is associated with mutation in the gene for the alpha-2 chain of collagen type VIII (COL8A2). Other forms include one caused by mutation in the SLC4A11 gene, which encodes a sodium borate cotransporter.
Cornelia de Lange syndromeA developmental disorder caused by mutation in the NIPBL gene, which encodes a component of the complex, or mutations in other components of the complex.
corneocyteCell of the stratum corneum, the outer layer of the skin, heavily keratinised and dead.
cornificationThe process of keratinization of the outer layers of the skin that eventually leads to death of keratinocytes (forming ) and ultimately to shedding of squames.
cornified epitheliumEpithelium in which the cells have accumulated keratin and died. The outer layers of vertebrate skin, hair, nails, horn and hoof are all composed of cornified cells.
cornulinA protein (squamous epithelial heat shock protein 53, 495aa) specifically expressed in upper layers of cells in squamous epithelium. One of the fused gene family of proteins.
corona radiataThe layer of cylindrical cells that surrounds the developing mammalian ovum.
coronal sectionA cross-section of the brain taken effectively where the edge of a crown would touch the head.
coronatineA phytotoxin produced by Pseudomonas syringae that functions partly as a mimic of methyl jasmonate.
CoronaviridaeFamily of single-stranded RNA viruses responsible for respiratory diseases. The outer envelope of the virus has club-shaped projections that radiate outwards and give a charateristic corona appearance to negatively stained virions. A coronavirus is responsible for SARS.
coroninF-Actin binding protein (p55, 445aa) of Dictyostelium. Associated with crown-shaped cell surface projections in growth phase cells. Accumulates at front of cells responding to a chemotactic gradient of cAMP. Amino-terminal domain has similarity to β subunits of heterotrimeric G-proteins; C-terminal has high α-helical content.
corpora allataInsect endocrine organs, located behind the brain, that secrete juvenile hormone. In some species paired and laterally placed, in others they fuse during development to form a single median structure, the corpus allatum.
corpus callosumBand of white matter at the base of the longitudinal fissure dividing the two cerebral hemispheres of the brain.
corpus luteum
Pl. corpora lutea. Glandular body formed from the Graafian follicle in the ovary following release of the ovum. Secretes progesterone.
corpus striatumA subcortical part of the forebrain in from of the thalamus that has a striated appearance. Sometimes considered to consist of the striatum and the globus pallidus.
corrallingThe proposed confinement of membrane proteins within a diffusion barrier, thereby limiting long-range translational diffusion rates without affecting short range properties (e.g. rotation rates).
cortactinA p80/85 protein (amplaxin, 550aa) first identified as a substrate for src kinase. An F-actin binding protein that redistributes to membrane ruffles as a result of growth factor-induced Rac1 activation. Has proline-rich and SH3 domains. Overexpression of cortactin increases cell motility and invasiveness. See shanks.
cortex
(1) In plants, the outer part of stem or root, between the vascular system and the epidermis; composed of parenchyma. (2) Region of cytoplasm adjacent to the plasma membrane. (3) In histology, the outer part of organ, the interior sometimes being the medulla.
cortexillinCalcium-independent homodimeric actin binding (bundling) protein from Dictyostelium (cortexillin-1, 444aa; cortexillin-2, 441aa). The bundles are of anti-parallel filaments and associate into meshworks. Cortexillin activity is crucial for cytokinesis; cortexillin is enriched in the cleavage furrow and dynacortin is depleted. Article: http://www.nature.com/emboj/journal/v20/n14/full/7593868a.html

cortical granulesIn sea urchin eggs, specialised secretory granules that fuse with the egg membrane following fertilisation. Granule contents include (1) hyalin which forms a layer immediately surrounding the egg, (2) a colloid that raises the fertilization membrane by imbibing water, (3) a serine protease that destroys receptors for sperm on the vitelline membrane (4) a protein termed vitelline delaminase that may cleave the connection between the vitelline membrane and the oolemma, (5) a structural protein, that in the presence of H202 is polymerized onto the inner surface of the old vitelline membrane, now called the fertilization membrane and (6) ovoperoxidase, a haem-dependent peroxidase that functions to block polyspermy by interacting with the structural protein.
cortical layerSee .
cortical meshworkSub-plasmalemmal layer of tangled microfilaments anchored to the plasma membrane by their barbed ends. This meshwork contributes to the mechanical properties of the cell surface and probably restricts the access of cytoplasmic vesicles to the plasma membrane.
cortical microtubule arrayInterphase microtubules associated with the plasma membrane in higher plant cells. Cortical microtubules, which are nucleated from dispersed initiation sites, self-organize to form this array of mainly parallel microtubules. Provides tracks for the movement of cellulose-synthesizing particles.
corticostatinPeptide (97aa) of the alpha-defensin family with anti-fungal and antiviral activity. It also inhibits corticotropin (ACTH) stimulated corticosterone production.
corticosteroids
Steroid hormones produced in the adrenal cortex. Formed in response to adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH). Regulate both carbohydrate metabolism and salt/water balance. Glucocorticoids (e.g. cortisol, cortisone) predominantly affect the former and minerocorticoids (e.g. aldosterone) the latter.
corticotrophic
corticotropic Describing something that stimulates the adrenal cortex. See adrenocorticotrophin, .
corticotrophin
corticotrophin See adrenocorticotrophin.
corticotrophin releasing factorSee and adrenocorticotrophin.
corticotropicSee .
corticotropin releasing hormone-binding proteinA secreted glycoprotein (CRH-BP, 322aa) that binds both (CRH) and urocortin with high affinity and is structurally unrelated to the CRH receptors. It is an important modulator of CRH activity. CRH-BP orthologues have been identified in multiple invertebrate and vertebrate species and it is strongly conserved throughout evolution.
corticotropin-releasing hormoneKey regulator of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, a peptide hormone (CRH, corticotropin-releasing factor, corticoliberin, 41aa) produced by the hypothalamus that stimulates corticotropic cells of the anterior lobe of the pituitary to produce ACTH (adrenocorticotrophin) and other biologically active substances (for example β-endorphin). Also produced by both the placenta and fetal membranes at term in man. Stressors cause a release of corticotrophin releasing hormone. The CRH hormone family has at least four ligands, two receptors (CRHR1, 444aa; CRHR2, 411aa, both G-protein coupled) and a binding protein.
cortisolThe major adrenal glucocorticoid; stimulates conversion of proteins to carbohydrates, raises blood sugar levels and promotes glycogen storage in the liver.
cortisoneNatural glucocorticoid (11-dehydroxy-cortisol) formed by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase action on hydrocortisone; inactive until converted into hydrocortisone in the liver.
cortistatinA neuropeptide (CST, 17aa) with high structural homology with somatostatin and able to bind to somatostatin receptors. Its mRNA is restricted to GABA-containing cells in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. CST modulates the electrophysiology of the hippocampus and cerebral cortex of rats; hence, it may be modulating mnemonic processes.
CorynebacteriaGenus of Gram-positive non-motile rod-like bacteria, often with a club-shaped appearance. Most are facultative anaerobes with some similarities to mycobacteria and nocardiae. C. diphtheriae (Klebs-Löffler bacillus) is the causative agent of diphtheria and produces a potent exotoxin, diphtheria toxin. Corynebacterium minutissimum is associated with a skin rash (erythrasma).
CorynebacterineaeA sub-Order of bacteria that includes the Families Mycobacteriaceae, Nocardiaceae and Corynebacteriaceae.
COS cellsSimian fibroblasts (CV-1 cells) transformed by SV40 that is deficient in the origin of replication region. Express large T-antigen constitutively and if transfected with a vector containing a normal SV40 origin have all the other early viral genes necessary to generate multiple copies of the vector and thus to give very high levels of expression.
cos sitesSites on a vector that are required for integration into host DNA. The two cohesive ends, known as cos sites, are 12 nucleotides in length and the chromosome circularizes by means of these complementary cohesive ends.
cosegregationOf two genotypes, meaning that they tend to be inherited together, implying close linkage.
CosmariumA very large genus of the Order Desmidiales of the , with the cells deeply constricted to form two semicells. Each semicell contains a single, large chloroplast with two pyrenoids. The cells are slowly motile by mucilage secretion. Usually found in fresh water.
cosmidA type of bacteriophage lambda vector. Often used for construction of genomic libraries, because of their ability to carry relatively long pieces of DNA insert, compared with plasmids.
costa
(1) Rod-shaped intracellular organelle lying below the undulating membrane of Trichomonas. Generates active bending associated with local loss of birefringence at the bending zone, probably as a result of conformational change in the longitudinal lamellae. Major protein approximately 90 kDa. (2) In Drosophila, a kinesin-like protein (costal 2, 1201aa) that is part of the hedgehog signalling
complex and may inhibit protein c from activating hedgehog target genes. Vertebrate (Xenopus, Danio) homologues have been identified.
costamereRegular periodic sub-membranous arrays of vinculin in muscle cells; link sarcomeres to the membrane and are associated with links to extracellular matrix. See dystrophin-associated protein complex.
Cot curveCommon mis-spelling of C
0
t (C(zero)t) which has become adopted by commercial suppliers of Cot-1 DNA.
Cot1 DNADNA that is enriched for repetitive DNA sequences and has a C
0
t value of unity. It is used to block non-specific hybridization in microarray screening. N.B. Should strictly perhaps be C0t C(zero)t since the enrichment of repetitive sequences is by their rapid reannealing and the C0t value is a measure of the similarity but ‘Cot1 DNA’ is a registered trademark. Details: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK7567/box/A496/?report=objectonly

cotinineA metabolite of nicotine that persists in the body for two to four days after tobacco use and thus serum or urine levels of cotinine provide a more accurate marker of smoking or smoke inhalation than questionnaires.
co-translational transportProcess whereby a protein is moved across a membrane as it is being synthesized. This process occurs during the translation of the message at membrane-associated ribosomes in rough endoplasmic reticulum during the synthesis of secreted proteins in eukaryotic cells.
cotton marker databaseA curated and integrated web-based relational database providing centralized access to all publicly available cotton microsatellites and single nucleotide polymorphisms. Link to database: http://www.cottonmarker.org/Downloads.shtml

Coturnix coturnix japonicaJapanese quail. Used extensively in developmental biology because quail nuclei can easily be distinguished from those of the chicken and this facilitates grafting experiments for fate mapping.
cotyledonModified leaf (‘seed leaf’), found as part of the embryo in seeds, involved in either storage or absorption of food reserves. Dicotyledonous seeds contain two, monocotyledonous seeds only one. May appear above ground and show photosynthetic activity in the seedling.
Coulter counterProprietary name for a particle counter used for bacteria or eukaryotic cells; works by detecting change in electrical conductance as fluid containing cells is drawn through a small aperture. (The cell, a non-conducting particle, alters the effective cross-section of the conductive channel).
coumarinPleasant-smelling compound (O-hydroxycinnamic acid) found in many plants and released on wilting (probably a major component of the smell of fresh hay). Has anticoagulant activity by competing with Vitamin K. Coumarin derivatives have anti-inflammatory and antimetastatic properties and inhibit xanthine oxidase and the production of 5-HETE by neutrophils and macrophages. Various derivatives have these activities including esculentin, esculin (6,7-dihydroxycoumarin 6-O-D-glucoside), fraxin, umbelliferone (7-hydroxy coumarin) and scopoletin (6-methoxy-7-hydroxy-coumarin).
Councilman bodyAn eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion body in liver cells that is a useful diagnostic indication of yellow fever infection.
counterionIon of the opposite charge to that of an immobilised ionised molecule, for example the carboxyl residue of N-acetyl neuraminic acid on cell surface glycoptotein. The consequence is to alter the composition of the environment immediately adjacent to the cell surface. See double layer.
counter-transportTransport system across a membrane in which movement of a molecule in one direction is matched by the movement of a different molecule in the opposite direction. If both are charged then no potential gradient will develop, provided equal numbers of charges are moved in each direction. The opposite of .
counterstainRather nonspecific stain used in conjunction with another histochemical reagent of greater specificity to provide contrast and reveal more of the general structure of the tissue. Light Green is used as a counterstain in the Mallory procedure, for example.
COUP-TFsTranscription factors of the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor family (chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factors). Although the ligands are unknown, their regulatory role is clear. COUP-TFI (423aa) plays a critical role in glial cell development and central nervous system myelination; it is expressed in cells of oligodendrocyte lineage. COUP-TF2 (414aa) regulates apolipoprotein A-I gene expression. See ARP-1. COUP-TF-interacting protein 1 (B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11A, 835aa) functions as a myeloid and B-cell proto-oncogene, COUP-TF-interacting protein-2 (894aa) is a tumour-suppressor protein aberrant in T-cell lymphomas.
coupled transporter
(1) A membrane transport system in which movement of one molecule or ion down an electrochemical gradient is used to drive the movement of another molecule up-gradient. Common example is Na+-coupled glucose transport that uses the considerable gradient in sodium ion concentrations, high outside and low within the cell, to drive glucose uptake. See symport and antiport.
(2) May be used loosely of a transport system that is controlled by, for example, G-proteins although the coupling is of a different kind.
couplingThe linking of two independent processes by a common intermediate, e.g. the coupling of electron transport to oxidative phosphorylation or the ATP-ADP conversion to transport processes.
coupling factorsProteins responsible for coupling transmembrane potentials to ATP synthesis in and mitochondria. Include ATP-synthesising enzymes (F1 in mitochondrion), that can also act as ATP-ases.
Cowden diseaseA rare autosomal dominant multiple-hamartoma syndrome caused by germ-line mutations in PTEN.
COX
(1) See . (2) COX1 is an alternative name for cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (EC 1.9.3.1) and COX is a prefixed abbreviation for many cytochrome oxidase subunits (e.g. COX-6B1, cytochrome c oxidase subunit VIb isoform 1).
Coxsackie virusesEnteroviruses of the Picornaviridae first isolated in Coxsackie, N.Y. Coxsackie A produces diffuse myositis, Coxsackie B produces focal areas of degeneration in brain and skeletal muscle. Similar to polioviruses in chemical and physical properties.
CPA
(1) Cyclophosphamide (2) cyclopiazonic acid (3) cyclopentyladenosine (4) Carboxypeptidase A.
cpDNAChloroplast DNA.
CPE
(1) Cytopathic effect. (2) Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element. (3)
Clostridium perfringens
enterotoxin.
CpG islandRegion of genomic DNA rich in the dinucleotide C-G (CG island). Methylation of the C in the dinucleotide is maintained through cell divisions, and profoundly affects the degree of transcription of the nearby genes, and is important in developmental regulation of gene expression.There are around 30,000 CpG islands in a typical mammalian genome, and these tend to be undermethylated and upstream of housekeeping genes.
CPKSee .
C polysaccharideA highly immunogenic polysaccharide (C-teichoic acid, C substance) released by pneumococci which contains galactosamine-6-phosphate and choline phosphate. It is mitogenic for T-cells. is so called because it will precipitate this polysaccharide through an interaction with the choline phosphate haptenic determinants.
CPP32Caspase-3. See (Caspases).
C proteinsStriated muscle thick filament-associated proteins (myosin-binding proteins, ~1141aa) that show up in the C-zone of the A-band as 43 nm transverse stripes. Immunoglobulin superfamily members, structurally related to various other myosin-binding proteins (twitchin, titin, myosin light chain kinase, skelemin, 86 kDa protein, projectin, M-protein).
CPSSee .
CPSFMulti-protein complex (cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor) comprising CPSF-1 (1443aa), CPSF-2 (782aa), CPSF-3 (684aa), CPSF-4 (269aa) and FIP1L1 (Pre-mRNA 3′-end-processing factor, 594aa) involved in mRNA polyadenylation. Complex binds the AAUAAA conserved sequence in pre-mRNA. CPSF5 (NUDT21, CFIM25, CPSF25, 227aa) and CPSF6 (551aa) or CPSF7 (471aa) are components of the that plays a key role in pre-mRNA 3′-processing. In Arabidopsis CPSF73-II (cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor 73 kDa subunit II, EC 3.1.27.-, 613aa), one of a superfamily of zinc-dependent beta-lactamase fold proteins, may function as mRNA 3′-end-processing endonuclease and also be involved in the histone 3′-end pre-mRNA processing. Diagram: http://www.reactome.org/cgi-bin/eventbrowser?DB=gk_current&FOCUS_SPECIES=Homo%20sapiens&ID=71994&

CPT
(1) Carnitine palmitoyltransferase. .
CR1See . (Also CR2, CR3, CR4).
CRABPSee .
cranial nervesAny of the ten to twelve paired nerves that have their origin in the brain of vertebrates (olfactory, optic, oculomotor, trochlear, trigeminal, abducens, facial, auditory / vestibulocochlear, glossopharyngeal, vagus, accessory and hypoglossal). Students often use mnemonics to remember the sequence: a polite one is ‘Old Officers Often Trust The Army For A Glory Vague And Hypothetical’.
craniolenticulosutural dysplasiaA disorder of craniofacial development caused by a mutation in the SEC23A gene (see ) leading to abnormal endoplasmic reticulum-to-Golgi trafficking.
craniosynostosisA disorder in which the bones of the skull fuse earlier than normal. See twist.
crassulacean acid metabolism
CAM Physiological adaptation of certain succulent plants, in which CO2 can be fixed (non-photosynthetically) at night into malic and other acids. During the day the CO2 is regenerated and then fixed photosynthetically into the . This adaptation permits the stomata to remain closed during the day, conserving water.
CRD domainThe carbohydrate recognition domain found in C-type (calcium dependent) lectins; there are 32 highly conserved residues in all C-type carbohydrate-recognition domains. Various CRDs have been structurally analysed.
CRE
(1) Gene of E. coli bacteriophage P1 (cre) that encodes a recombinase (343aa) that catalyzes site-specific recombination between two 34bp LoxP sites. One of the phage integrase family. Now used in vertebrate transgenics: see lox-Cre system. (2) Cyclic AMP response element, see #1
C-reactive proteinA protein of the pentraxin family (pentaxin 1, PTX1, 224aa) found in serum in various disease conditions particularly during the acute phase of immune response. C reactive protein is synthesized by hepatocytes and its production may be triggered by prostaglandin E1 or parogen. It consists of five polypeptide subunits forming a molecule of total molecular weight 105 kDa. It binds to polysaccharides present in a wide range of bacterial, fungal and other cell walls or cell surfaces and to lecithin and to phosphoryl- or choline-containing molecules. It is related in structure to serum amyloid. See also acute phase proteins and .
creatine kinaseDimeric enzyme (creatine phosphokinase, CPK, EC 2.7.3.2, 381aa) that catalyses the formation of ATP from ADP and phosphocreatine in muscle. Different isoforms are found in skeletal muscle (MM), myocardium (MB) and brain (BB). In mitochondria the enzyme (CKMT1, 417aa; CKMT2, 419aa) is an octamer associated with the inner membrane.
creatine phosphateSee phosphocreatine and .
CREB
(1) Basic leucine zipper (bZip) transcription factor (Cyclic AMP response element binding factor, CREB-1, 341aa) involved in activating genes through cAMP; binds to CRE element TGANNTCA. Phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) at serine-119 is required for interaction with DNA and phosphorylation at serine-133 allows CREB to interact with CBP ( ) leading to interaction with RNA polymerase II and with MECT1. Other forms of CREB are known (CREB3, 395aa; CREB5, 508aa). See . (2) In E. coli, CreB is a transcriptional regulator in the two-component regulatory system CreC/CreB involved in catabolic regulation. (3) In Aspergillus, creB is ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase (EC 3.4.19.12, 766aa) a component of the regulatory network controlling carbon source utilization through ubiquitination and deubiquitination involving CreA, CreB, CreC, CreD and AcrB. It deubiquitinates the CreA catabolic repressor.
CREB binding proteinTranscriptional co-activator (CBP, EC 2.3.1.48, 2442aa) of and of c-Myb. Only binds the phosphorylated form of CREB.
CREC familyA family of low affinity, Ca2+-binding, multiple EF-hand proteins that includes reticulocalbins, and other proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum where they regulate various activities. Sometimes ‘CERC family’ for Cab-45 (45 kDa calcium-binding protein, 362aa), Erc-55 (reticulocalbin-2), reticulocalbin and calumenin.
C-regionThe parts of the heavy or light chains of immunoglobulin molecules that are of constant sequence, in contrast to variable or V regions. The constancy of sequence is relative because there are several constant region genes and alleles thereof (see allotypes), but within one animal homozygous at the light and heavy chain constant region genes all immunoglobulin molecules of any one class have constant sequences in their C regions. The constant region sequences for the various different types of immunoglobulin, e.g. IgG, IgA, etc. will vary.
CREMA transcriptional regulator (cAMP response element modulator, 361aa) that binds the cAMP response element. Has a highly conserved leucine zipper dimerization domain and a basic DNA binding domain at its carboxyl terminus. There are multiple splice variants.
crenationDistortion of the erythrocyte membrane giving a spiky, echinocyte-like, morphology. Results from ATP depletion or an excess of lipid species in the external lipid layer of the membrane.
CREST syndromeA complex syndrome in which there is calcinosis, Reynaud’s phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly and telangielactasia, a variant of scleroderma. There are probably both genetic and environmental factors involved. Most patients have autoantibodies to (kinetochore proteins).
Creutzfeldt-Jacob diseaseRare fatal presenile dementia of humans, similar to kuru and other transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. Method of transmission unknown. Will induce a neurological disorder in goats 3–4 years after inoculation with CJD brain extract. A new variant, nvCJD, has recently been recognized and associated with bovine spongiform encephalopathy. See prions.
CRFSee corticotropin-releasing factor.
cri-du-chat syndromeA severe developmental disorder caused by loss of part of the short arm of chromosome 5 in man. Results in severe congenital malformation and affected infants produce a curious mewling sound said to resemble the cry of a cat. Deletion of multiple genes, including the telomerase reverse transcriptase gene (see hTERT), is responsible for the phenotype.
CRIB cellsA clone of MDBK cells that are resistant to bovine viral diarrhoea virus.
CRIB motifThe cdc42/Rac interactive binding motif, a consensus sequence found in various signalling proteins (e.g. PAK kinases) and involved in the binding of Cdc42. The CRIB motif itself is insufficient for high-affinity binding to Cdc42 but requires the sequence segment C-terminal to the CRIB motif for enhanced affinity.
cribriformPerforated, sievelike.
cribrostatinA family of antibacterial and anti-neoplastic compounds isolated from the blue marine sponge Cribrochalina sp. A total synthesis of cribrostatin-6 has been published. Paper: http://jmm.sgmjournals.org/content/53/1/61.full

Cricetulus griseus Chinese hamster.See CHO cells. The Syrian (Golden) hamster is Mesocricetus auratus.
Crigler-Najjar syndromeSee Gilbert’s syndrome.
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic feverA tick-borne disease caused by a Nairovirus.
crinkled
(1) In Drosophila, myosin VIIa (2167aa) an atypical myosin that is expressed in the setae, micro- and macrochaetae on the head, thorax and wing and is necessary for auditory transduction. (2) EDAR-associated death domain protein, see ectodysplasin.
crinophagyDigestion of the contents of secretory granules following their fusion with lysosomes.
cryptoA growth factor (epidermal growth factor-like cripto protein CR1, teratocarcinoma-derived growth factor 1, 188aa) found in humans and many other vertebrates. During early embryogenesis, has a role as a coreceptor for the TGFβ subfamily of proteins, including nodal. Cripto-1 has also been shown to function as a ligand through a Nodal/Alk4-independent signalling pathway that involves binding to glypican-1. Expression levels are elevated in gastric and colorectal carcinomas. In Xenopus, interacts with tomoregulin-1 during neural development. PMID: 16123806
CRISPSee .
critical concentrationConcentration (dose) of a substance at which adverse functional changes, reversible or irreversible, occur in a cell or an organ.
critical point dryingA method for preparing specimens for the scanning electron microscope that avoids the problems of shrinkage caused by normal drying procedures. Water in the specimen is replaced by an intermediate fluid, for example liquid carbon dioxide, avoiding setting up a liquid/gas interface, and then the second fluid is allowed to vaporise by raising the temperature above the critical point, the temperature at which the liquid state no longer occurs.
crkAn oncogene, originally identified in a chicken sarcoma. Encodes two alternatively spliced adapter signalling proteins, CRKI (204aa) and CRKII (304aa) that have SH2 and SH3 domains (see Grb2) and may recruit cytoplasmic proteins to associate with receptor tyrosine kinases. Both CRKI and CRKII have been shown to activate kinase signalling and anchorage-independent growth in vitro. Crk-like protein (CRKL, 303aa) has similar properties.
CRM
(1) Cis-regulatory modules. (2) See . (3) CRM elements are plant centromere-specific Ty3/Gypsy LTR retrotransposons. The chromodomain is rather unusual in these elements.
CRM-1Chromosomal region maintenance-1 (exportin-1, 1071aa), the main mediator, in many cell types, of export from the nucleus of cellular proteins that have a leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES) and of RNAs. Inhibited by leptomycin B. In the nucleus, in association with RANBP3, binds co-operatively to the NES on its target protein and to Ran-GTPase in its active GTP-bound form. Docking of this complex to the nuclear pore complex is mediated through binding to nucleoporins.
CRMP
(1) Collapsin response-mediated protein. (2) A haem-oxygenase (HO) enzyme inhibitor, chromium-mesoporphyrin (CrMP).
cro-proteinProtein (76aa) synthesied by lambda bacteriophage in the lytic state. The cro-protein blocks the synthesis of the lambda repressor (that is produced in the lysogenic stage, and inhibits cro-protein synthesis). Production of the cro-protein in turn controls a set of genes associated with rapid virus multiplication.
crocalbinSee .
crocinA yellow carotenoid pigment from Gardenia jasminoides and Crocus sativus; heat-stable and water-soluble but sensitive to oxidation.
Crohn’s diseaseInflammatory bowel disease that usually affects the terminal ileum and colon and seems to have both genetic and environmental causes; not well understood but generally considered to be autoimmune. Mutations in genes for CARD15 (caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 15) and NOD2) and polymorphism in the promoter for interleukin-6 are associated with susceptibility to Crohn’s disease in some cases. There is also an association with variation in the ATG16L1 gene that encodes autophagy-16-like-1, a component of a large protein complex essential for autophagy.

cross hybridizationHybridization of a nucleic acid probe to a sequence that is similar, but not identical, to the target.
cross_matchA general purpose software utility for comparing any two DNA sequence sets. It is slower but more sensitive than BLAST. Link: http://nbx8.nugo.org/bioinformatics/docs/cross_match.html

crossing overRecombination as a result of DNA exchange between homologous chromatids in meiosis, giving rise to .
crossoverProtein motif that describes the connection between strands in a parallel beta sheet. In principle, can be extended to the region between adjacent parallel alpha-helices.
croton oilOil from the seeds of the tropical plant Croton tiglium (Euphorbiaceae), causes severe skin irritation and contains a potent tumour promoter, phorbol ester.
crotoxinNeurotoxin of Brazilian rattlesnake (Crotalus durissus terrificus) venom. A complex of an acidic non-enzymic protein (8400Da), probably responsible for membrane-binding activity, and a phospholipase A2 derived from a precursor, crotoxin acid chain (crotapotin, 138aa). The two components in combination are necessary to produce high neurotoxicity; neither does alone. Bind to specific proteins on presynaptic membranes and blocks acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction.
crown gallGall, or tumour, found in many dicotyledonous plants, caused by Agrobacterium tumefaciens.
CRP
(1) C-reactive protein. (2) calreticulin.
CRP-ductinThe mouse homologue of DMBT-1 (deleted in malignant brain tumours 1 protein, 2085aa).
crumbs
Drosophila protein (crb, 2146aa) important in epithelial development. It determines the location of adherens junctions as a ring of adhesions around the cell through the SAC complex. The mammalian homologue (crumbs homologue-1, 1406) is important for photoreceptor morphogenesis, crb-2 (1285aa) is thought to be involved in determining cell polarity and crb-3 (120aa) regulates the morphogenesis of tight junctions.
CRYCryptochrome, the blue-light receptor from Arabidopsis, flavoproteins (CRY-1, BLUE LIGHT UNINHIBITED-1, ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL-4, OUT OF PHASE-2, 681aa; CRY2, 612aa) that induce gene expression in response to blue light. Mutants lacking both CRY-1 and CRY-2 are deficient in phototropism. In humans CRY1 (586aa) in conjunction with CRY2 (593aa) regulates circadian rhythms by acting on -induced transcription.
cryofixationFixation processes for microscopy, particularly scanning electron microscopy, carried out at low temperature to improve the quality of fixation. Often very low temperatures (liquid nitrogen or helium) and fast cooling (>10,000 degree/min) are used to prevent formation of ice crystals.
cryoglobulinAbnormal plasma globulin (IgG or IgM) that precipitates when serum is cooled. In cryoglobulinemia there is an excess of cryoglobulin that may be a result of a lymphoproliferative disorder, hepatitis C infection or an autoimmune disease.
cryomicroscopyMicroscopy, either light or EM, of samples that have been prepared by rapid freezing and are maintained in a frozen glass-like state. Frozen sections can be prepared and examined rapidly and are therefore important in pathological examination of biopsy material.
cryoprecipitateThe precipitate that forms when plasma is frozen and then thawed; particularly rich in fibronectin and blood-clotting Factor VIII.
cryoprotectantSubstance that is used to protect from the effects of freezing, largely by preventing large ice-crystals from forming. The two commonly used for freezing cells are DMSO and glycerol.
cryopyrinProtein (NACHT, LRR and PYD domains-containing protein 3, NALP3, caterpiller protein 1.1, cold autoinflammatory syndrome 1 protein, PYRIN-containing APAF1-like protein-1, angiotensin/vasopressin receptor AII/AVP-like, 1034aa) that may be an upstream activator of NFκB signalling in response to stimuli such as bacterial RNA and infectious agents, leading to upregulation of IL-1β and IL-18 production. See pyrin. Mutations cause familial cold urticaria, Muckle-Wells syndrome and chronic infantile neurological cutaneous and articular syndrome.
cryptDeep pit that protrudes down into the connective tissue surrounding the small intestine. The epithelium at the base of the crypt is the site of stem cell proliferation and the differentiated cells move upwards and are shed three to five days later at the tips of the villi.
cryptic plasmidPlasmid that does not confer a phenotype and is only detected by direct observation of the DNA. Many do, however, have open reading frames.
cryptobiontAn organism that lives hidden away or with all signs of life disguised as in dormancy.
cryptochromeSee .
cryptococcosisAn infection, usually of the lung but more seriously a meningitis, by the encapsulated yeast Cryptococcus neoformans (Filobasidiella neoformans, formerly Torula histolytica). Often opportunistic in immunocompromised individuals.

cryptomonadsSmall algae (cryptophytes) in the Hacrobia grouping that have plastids with nucleomorphs. Cryptomonas is one genus. Some have trichocysts (ejectisomes) that will explosively release a coiled protein filament as a startle/escape reaction.
CryptomonasGenus of flagellate protozoa with two slightly unequal flagella and a large chromatophore in some species.
cryptophycinsNaturally occurring macrolides from the cyanobacterium Nostoc that are potent antimitotic agents, causing cell death at picomolar or low nanomolar concentrations. Bind to beta-tubulin (sharing a binding site with dolastatin 10, hemiasterlin and phomopsin A) and deactivate bcl-2, causing apoptosis.
CryptosporidiumGenus of obligate parasitic apicomplexan protozoa, responsible for many cases of intestinal upset caused by drinking infected water. Sporulated oocysts, once in the intestinal tract (usually the ileum) release sporozoites that penetrate intestinal epithelial cells and divide to form merozoites which can propagate and infect other cells. Eventually meronts differentiate into either macro- or microgametocytes, microgametocytes penetrate the macrogametocytes to form a zygote that undergoes meiotic division, producing sporozoites within a resistant oocyst that is then released in faeces, completing the cycle.
crystal violetDeepest blue of the methyl violet dyes (Gentian violet; methyl violet 10 B), used in Gram stain, for the metachromatic staining of amyloid, and as an enhancer for bloody fingerprints. Also used as a pH indicator, turning yellow below pH1.8. Was used topically for skin infections but as a suspected carcinogen this is no longer advisable. Stains database: http://stainsfile.info/StainsFile/dyes/42555.htm

crystallinsMajor proteins of the vertebrate lens present in high concentrations in the cytoplasm of lens fibre cells. Unlike most proteins they do not turn over during the lifetime of the individual. The alpha-crystallins (α-crystallin-A, CRYAA, 173aa; α-crystallin-B, CRYAB, 175aa) are members of the small heat shock protein (HSP20) family and contribute to the optical properties of the lens, but have additional functions in other tissues. The beta and gamma crystallins form a single family (all 170–250aa). Immunological cross-reactivity suggests that the sequences of crystallin subunits are relatively highly conserved in evolution. Defects in crystallins, either mutational or from environmental damage, cause cataracts.
CSATMonoclonal antibody defining integral membrane protein of chick fibroblasts. Originally thought to recognize a trimeric complex, now thought to recognize two different β1 integrins (with different α chains).
CSDSee .
CSF-1
(1) See MCSF. (2) In S. cerevisiae, cold sensitive for fermentation protein 1 (2958aa), required for nutrient uptake at low temperatures.
CSIFCytokine synthesis inhibiting factor, obsolete name for interleukin-10.
CskProtein tyrosine kinase (c-src kinase, EC 2.7.10.2, 450aa) that phosphorylates tyrosine-504 in lck and other src family kinases, thereby allowing an inhibitory interaction with src kinase SH2 domain. (It is loss of the tyrosine residue phosphorylated by csk that makes v-src unregulated.) One of two kinases forming a subfamily, the other being .
CSPAmbigous abbreviation (often with a number suffix) for (1) Caveolin scaffolding protein. (2) Competence stimulating peptide. (3) Cysteine string protein. (4) Caspase. (5) Chiral stationary phase. (6) Circumsporozoite protein of Plasmodium vivax. (7) Common salivary protein, a secreted protein of the parotid gland. (8) Carotid sinus pressure. (9) Ciclosporin.
CSTSee .
CSTFCleavage stimulation factor, one of the factors required for polyadenylation and 3′-end cleavage of mammalian pre-mRNAs. The CSTF complex is composed of CSTF1 (431aa), CSTF2 (577aa) and CSTF3 (717aa). Interacts with BARD1.
c-strandA shorthand term for the complementary strand of a nucleic acid.
C-subfibreThe third partial microtubule associated with the A- and B- tubules of the outer axonemal doublets in the basal body (and in the ) to form a triplet structure.
C substanceSee .
CT-1See .
CTABCationic detergent (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide) used for membrane solubilization.
CTACKBeta-chemokine (CCL27, cutaneous T-cell attracting chemokine, ESkine, 112aa) produced by keratinocytes that is important in regulating the migration of lymphocytes and keratinocyte precursor cells into skin. Upregulated during wound healing and in psoriasis and atopic dermatitis. Binds to CCR10. Also produced by a wider range of cells in a non-secreted form (by alternative splicing) and this form (PESKY) is targeted to the nucleus and has effects on the actin cytoskeleton.
CTAP IIISee .

CTCFA transcriptional regulator protein (CCCTC-binding factor, 727aa) with 11 highly conserved zinc finger domains; depending upon where it binds, can act as either transcriptional activator or repressor through histone acetylation or de-acetylation. Mutations in this gene have been associated with invasive breast cancers, prostate cancers, and Wilms’ tumours.
CTDProtein domain (carboxy-terminal domain) unique to RNA polymerase-II that contains multiple repeats of the YSPTSPS sequence. The CTD plays an important part in organizing the various protein factors that regulate the processing of the 3′ end of mRNAs made by Pol-II. Phosphorylation of the CTD allows interaction with CTD-interacting factor 1 (704aa) and the CTD small phosphatase-like protein (EC 3.1.3.16, 276aa) inhibits this interaction.
CtenophoraPhylum of biradially symmetrical triploblastic coelomates. Lack nematocysts and cilia though have comb plates (costae) arranged in eight rows. The comb jelly or sea gooseberry is the best known example.
C terminal binding proteinsC terminal binding protein 1 (CTBP1, EC 1.1.1.-, 440aa) is involved in controlling the equilibrium between tubular and stacked structures in the Golgi, has dehydrogenase activity and is a transcriptional corepressor. CTBP2 (445aa) is an ubiquitous corepressor targeting diverse transcription regulators; ribeye is an alternatively-spliced isoform. CTBPs bind to the C-terminal portion of adenovirus E1A proteins and are important for adenoviral oncogenic properties.
c terminusThe carboxy terminal end of a polypeptide or protein, the 1-carboxy function of the c-terminal amino acid that is not linked to another amino acid by a peptide bond.
CTFLarge family of vertebrate nuclear protein transcription factors, (CCAAT box-binding transcription factors, TGGCA-binding proteins, ~400–600 aa), that bind to the palindrome TGGCAnnnTGCCA in a range of cellular promoters. Includes nuclear factor-1 (NF-1A, 509aa; NF1-B, 420; NF-1C, 508aa; NF-1X, 502aa.
CTGFSee .
CTLSee .
CTLA-4Type I transmembrane protein (CD152, 223aa) of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Found on activated T-cells and binds to CD80 on B-cells. Resembles CD28 but acts as a negative regulator of T-cell activation. Cytoplasmic domain interacts with SH2 domain of Shp2 (protein tyrosine phosphatase) and possibly with PI3-kinase. CTLA-4-deficient mice develop a severe lymphoproliferative disorder.
co-transportIn membrane transport describes tight coupling of the transport of one species (generally Na+) to another (e.g. a sugar or amino acid). The transport of Na+ from high to low concentration can provide the energy for transport of the second species up a concentration gradient. See secondary active transport.
CTX
(1) Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. (2) Ciguatoxin. (3) Cross-linked C-telopeptide of collagen Type I, a marker for bone degradation. (4) Cyclophosphamide. (5) (Ctx), , or cholera toxin. (6) Bacterial genes (CTX-M genes) that encode extended-spectrum beta-lactamases.
C-type lectinsOne of two classes of lectin produced by animal cells, the other being the S-type. The C-type lectins require disulphide-linked cysteines and Ca2+ ions in order to bind to a specific carbohydrate (cf. S-type lectins). The carbohydrate recognition domain of C-type lectins consists of about 130aa which contains 18 invariant residues in a highly conserved pattern. These invariant residues include cysteines which probably form disulphide bonds. So far, all identified C-type lectins are extracellular proteins and include both integral membrane proteins, such as the asialoglycoprotein receptor, and soluble proteins.
C-type virusOriginally C-type particles identified in mouse tumour tissue and later shown to be oncogenic RNA viruses (Oncovirinae) that bud from the plasma membrane of the host cell starting as a characteristic electron-dense crescent. Include feline leukaemia virus, murine leukaemia and sarcoma viruses.
CUB domainA widespread 110aa module (complement subcomponent C1r/C1s/embryonic sea urchin protein Uegf /bone morphogenetic protein 1 domain) found in functionally diverse, often developmentally regulated proteins, for which an antiparallel beta-barrel topology similar to that in immunoglobulin V domains has been predicted. CUB domains have been found in the dorso-ventral patterning protein tolloid, bone morphogenetic protein 1, a family of spermadhesins, subcomponents Cls/Clr and the neuronal recognition molecule A5. Acidic seminal fluid protein (aSFP) is built by a single CUB domain architecture. Not found in prokaryotes, plants and yeast.
cubilinThe intrinsic factor-cobalamin receptor (cubilin, 3623aa) is a cotransporter which facilitates the uptake of lipoprotein, vitamins and iron bound to their respective transport proteins (intrinsic factor for vitamin B12 for example). Defects can cause megaloblastic anaemia.
cubitus interruptusA segment polarity gene in Drosophila important for specifying the anterior and posterior regions of each segment. The response to hedgehog signals in the anterior part of the segment requires Smoothened (Smo) and the transcription factor Cubitus interruptus (Ci) which is the Drosophila
Gli homologue. Ci regulates the expression of the decapentaplegic (dpp) gene which encodes a TGFβ superfamily protein. Flybase entry: http://www.sdbonline.org/fly/segment/cubitus.htm

cuboidal epitheliumEpithelium in which the cells are approximately square in vertical section, with the area in contact with the basal lamina comparable to the area of lateral cell-cell contact. In contrast to columnar and squamous epithelia.
cucurbitacinsFeeding stimulants, glucosides, for diabroticite beetles, including corn rootworms and cucumber beetles. Have been used as anti-tumour agents because of their interference with STAT3 signalling. In fibroblasts interfere with lysophosphatidic acid signalling.
cuffingThe accumulation of white cells in tissue immediately adjacent to a blood vessel in certain infections of the nervous system.
Culex pipiensMost widely-distributed species of mosquito. Salivary glands have giant polytene chromosomes.
cullinsA family of proteins involved in cell cycle control in eukaryotes and components of ubiquitin-ligase complexes. Cullin-1 (cdc53, 776aa), cullin-2 (745aa) and cullin-3 (768aa) are components of multiple ECS (Elongin/cullin/SOCS-box protein) E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase complexes and the SCF ubiquitin protein ligase complex (see skp). Function is regulated by neddylation. Mutations in cullin-4B (913aa) are associated with Cabezas X-linked mental retardation syndrome. Cullin-5 (780aa) is the arginine vasopressin (AVP)-activated calcium-mobilizing receptor-1 (VACM1), a cell surface protein. The 3M syndrome is caused by mutation in cullin-7 (1698aa). Cullin-9 (2517aa) is a cytoplasmic anchor protein in p53-associated protein complex.
cultivarA subspecific rank used in classifying cultivated plants; particular cultivars have distinct properties that can be maintained by vegetative propagation or judicious crossing. Shown as ‘cv Name’ following the Genus and species names.
cultureTo grow in vitro.
cumulative median lethal doseEstimate of the total administered amount of a substance that is associated with the death of 50% of animals when given repeatedly at doses which are fractions of the median lethal dose.
cumulusCells surrounding the developing ovum in mammals, fancifully thought to resemble the eponymous clouds.
cupinsA superfamily of functionally diverse proteins, found in Archaea, Eubacteria, and Eukaryota, that share a conserved beta-barrel fold. There are enzymic (e.g. microbial phosphomannose isomerases, cereal oxalate oxidases) and non-enzymic (e.g. AraC- type transcriptional regulators, auxin-binding proteins, seed storage proteins) members of the superfamily. In plants the superfamily includes germin-like proteins, vicilins, NEP-1-like proteins and legumins. Many are seed allergens. Article: http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/18/4/593

CuprophanA thin membrane of natural cellulose manufactured using the the cuproammonium process. Used for dialysis and ultrafiltration. Can be produced as hollow fibres. Commercial website: http://www.medicell.co.uk/Cuprophan.htm

curacin AAn anti-mitotic compound from the marine cyanobacterium, Lyngbya majuscula, that binds to the same site on tubulin as colchicine.
curareCurare alkaloids (D-tubocurarine, alloferine, toxiferine and protocurarine) from Strychnos toxifera are the active ingredients of arrow poisons used by S. American Indians; they have muscle-relaxant properties because they block motor endplate transmission, acting as competitive antagonists for acetylcholine.
curcuminPrincipal pigment of turmeric, a polyphenol, with a natural yellow colour. Appears to have some anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant actions and has been extensively used in traditional medicine.
CURLThe compartment for uncoupling of receptors and ligands, the region where internalised receptor-ligand complexes are stripped of the ligand and recycled.
Currarino’s syndromeA developmental disorder (sacral agenesis) affecting the sacral region caused by mutation in the HLXB9 homeobox gene or mutations in rheb which is mapped to the same chromosomal region.
Cushing’s syndromeA type of hypertensive disease in man due probably to the over-secretion of due in turn to excessive secretion of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH). Adrenal tumours are the usual primary cause.
cuticleIn plants, the water-repelling waxy layer secreted by the epidermis of aerial parts.
cuticulinsComponents of the cuticle in C. elegans (cuticulin-1, 424aa; cuticulin-2, 231aa). Cuticulin-1 has a ZP domain which is probably involved in the formation of large polymeric aggregates. Abstract: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=pubmed&cmd=search&term=1864469

cutinWaxy hydrophobic substance deposited on the surface of plants. Composed of complex long-chain fatty esters and other fatty acid derivatives. Impregnates the outer wall of epidermal cells and also forms a separate layer, the cuticle, on the outer surface of the epidermis.
cutis laxaA connective tissue disorder characterized by loose, sagging, and inelastic skin. Can be a result of mutations in genes for elastin, fibulin-4 or -5, pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase, latent TGFβ-binding protein-4 or in the alpha-2 subunit of the V-type ATPase.
CV-1 cellsPseudodiploid cells (ATCC No CCL-70) derived from the kidney of a male African green monkey (Cercopithecus aethiops). Morphology is fibroblastic. Much used for transfection and for studies on viral infection.
C value paradoxComparison of the amount of DNA present in the haploid genome of different organisms (the C value) reveals two problems: the value can differ widely between two closely related species, and there seems to be far more DNA in higher organisms than could possibly be required to code for the modest increase in complexity.
CVFCobra venom factor, see .
CVSSee .
CWCV domainA rare amino acid sequence (cys-trp-cys-val) found in extracellular and cell surface molecules, for example testican. May be involved in binding growth factors.
CWDSee .
CXADRA single-pass transmembrane protein component (Coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor, 365aa) of the apical junctional complex in epithelia and essential for tight junctional integrity (interacts with ZO proteins). May be a homophilic cell adhesion molecule. Recruits MPDZ (multiple PDZ domain protein) to intercellular contact sites. Probably involved in transepithelial migration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes through adhesive interactions with AMICA1/JAML. There are multiple isoforms, some of which are secreted.
cy3, cy5Trade names for fluorescent cyanine dyes used for coupling to probes of various sorts.
cyanidinThe cyanidin gene codes for an enzyme that modifies dihydrokaempferol, directing it into the cyanidin pigment pathway, which produces deep red, pink and lilac-mauve hues.
Cyanobacteria
Cyanophyta Modern term for the blue-green algae, prokaryotic cells that use chlorophyll on intracytoplasmic membranes for photosynthesis. The blue-green colour is due to the presence of phycobilins. Found as single cells, colonies or simple filaments. Responsible in part for ‘algal blooms’ on lakes; some produce neurotoxins or geosmin, a compound imparting an earthy flavour to water. In Anabaena, in which the cells are arranged as a filament, heterocysts capable of nitrogen-fixation occur at regular intervals. According to the endosymbiont hypothesis Cyanobacteria are the progenitors of .
cyanocobalaminUsual form of Vitamin B12. See table V1.
cyanogen bromide
CNBr Agent that cleaves peptide bonds at methionine residues. The peptide fragments so generated can then, for example, be tested to locate particular activities.
CyanophytaBlue-green algae See .
cybrid cellSee hybrid cells.
CycadophytaA Division of the plants, gymnosperms, characterized by a stout woody trunk with a crown of large, hard and stiff, evergreen leaves. Palm-like, but unrelated to palms. Now mainly tropical or sub-tropical although more widespread in the Jurassic.
cyclase associated proteinProteins (adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 1, CAP-1, 475aa; CAP-2, 477aa) that bind actin monomers and regulate filament dynamics. Implicated in a number of complex developmental and morphological processes, including mRNA localization and the establishment of cell polarity. CAP homologues are found in many eukaryotes.
cyclic ADP-riboseSecond messenger (cADPR, adenosine 5′-cyclic diphosphoribose) synthesized by the multifunctional transmembrane ectoenzyme CD38 in various systems particularly platelets, microsomes and sea urchin eggs. Endogenous regulator of intracellular calcium. May act by regulating ryanodine receptor though other mechanisms are suggested.
cyclic AMPThe 3′5′-cyclic ester of AMP (cAMP). The first second-messenger hormone signalling system to be characterized. Generated from ATP by the action of adenyl cyclase that is coupled to hormone receptors by G-proteins (GTP-binding proteins). cAMP activates a specific (cAMP dependent) protein kinase (PKA) and is inactivated by phosphodiesterase action giving 5′AMP. Also functions as an extracellular morphogen for some slime moulds.
cyclic GMPThe 3′5′-cyclic ester of GMP (cGMP), a second-messenger in heart muscle and photoreceptors, generated by guanylate cyclase. See ANP, nitric oxide.
cyclic inositol phosphatesThe 1,2-cyclic derivatives of inositol phosphatide that are invariably formed during enzymic hydrolysis of phosphatidyl inositol species. Have been proposed as second messengers in hormone-activated pathways.

cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterasesEnzymes (EC 3.1.4.-) often casually referred to simply as phosphodiesterases. Multiple isoenzymes are known. PDE1 (531aa) is calcium/calmodulin regulated, hydrolyses both cAMP and cGMP, and is important in CNS and vasorelaxation, PDE2 (941aa) is cGMP-stimulated and hydrolyzes cAMP. PDE3 (PDE3A, 1141; PDE3B, 1112aa) regulates vascular and airway dilation, platelet aggregation, cytokine production and lipolysis; PDE4 (PDE4A, 886aa; inhibited by rolipram) is important in control of airway smooth muscle and inflammatory mediator release but also has a role in CNS and in regulation of gastric acid secretion. PDE5 (875aa) and PDE6 (860aa) are cGMP-specific. PDE5 is involved in platelet aggregation; PDE6 is regulated by interaction with transducin in photoreceptors. PDE7 (482aa) is abundant in skeletal muscle and present in heart and kidney. PDE8 (829aa) is found in thyroid, PDE9 (593aa) is a high affinity cGMP-specific phosphodiesterase, PDE10 (779aa) is found mainly in the CNS. PDE11 (933aa) is ubiquitous and acts on both cAMP and cGMP. PDE12 cleaves 2′,5′-phosphodiester bond (see 2–5A/RNase L system).
cyclic nucleotide-gated channelsIn Arabidopsis a family of cyclic nucleotide-gated channels (CNGCs) involved in the control of growth processes and responses to abiotic and biotic stresses. May contribute to cellular cation homeostasis, including calcium and sodium, as well as to stress-related signal transduction. Examples are CNGC1 (716aa), CNGC2, (DEFENSE NO DEATH 1, 726aa). In human, CNGC1 (cGMP-gated cation channel alpha-1, 690aa) is the rod photoreceptor cGMP-gated channel involved in the photoreception, CNCG2 is involved in olfaction. Paper: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/9/140/abstract

cyclic phosphorylationAny process in which a phosphatide ester forms a cylic diester by linkage to a neighbouring hydroxyl group.
cyclic photophosphorylationProcess by which light energy absorbed by photosystem I in the chloroplast can be used to generate ATP without concomitant reduction of NADP
+ or other electron acceptors. Energised electrons are passed from PS-I to ferredoxin, and thence along a chain of electron carriers and back to the reaction centre of PS-I, generating ATP en route.
cyclin-dependent kinaseFamily of serine/threonine kinases (cdks) including cdc28, cdc2 and p34cdc2 that are only active when they form a complex with cyclins. The complex is regulated by cdk-activating kinase. Cdk9 is atypical (see cyclin-T1).
cyclin-dependent kinase activating kinaseKinase that activates cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) by phosphorylation. In human cdk7 (346aa) is the catalytic subunit of the cdk-activating kinase (CAK) complex (cdk7, cyclin H and MAT1), a serine-threonine kinase that activates the cyclin-associated kinases cdk1, cdk2, cdk4 and cdk6 by threonine phosphorylation.
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
CKIs Two classes of CKIs are known in mammals, the p21CIP1/Waf1 class that includes p27KIP1 and p57KIP2 and that inhibit all G1/S (cdks), and the p16INK4 class that bind and inhibit only Cdk4 and Cdk6. The p21CIP1 inhibitor is transcriptionally regulated by p53 tumour suppressor, is important in G1 DNA-damage checkpoint, and its expression is associated with terminally differentiating tissues. Deletion of p21CIP1 is non-lethal in mice; deletion of p27KIP1 leads to relatively normal mice but with some proliferation disorders, deletion of p57KIP2 causes fairly major developmental abnormalities similar to Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. See also ICK1, Waf-1.
cyclinsThe proteins that change in concentration at different stages of the cell cycle. They interact with (cdks) and products of the cdc genes. The G1/S transition is regulated by G1/S cyclins, entry into mitosis by G2/M cyclins. Cyclin A (A1, 465aa; A2, 432aa) interacts with cdk2 and cdc2 and is essential at both G1/S and G2/M transitions; the G1/S transition also involves cyclin D (295aa) interacting with cdk4 and cdk6 and cyclin E (410aa) interacting with cdk2. Cyclin B1 (433aa) is essential for the G2/M transition and interacts with cdc2 to form a serine/threonine kinase holoenzyme complex (maturation promoting factor, MPF); it is ubiquitinated and destroyed abruptly at the end of mitosis. Cyclin B together with cdkK1 regulates the S to G2 progression. Various other cyclins are known: cyclin C (283aa) is a component of the mediator complex. Cyclin-F (786aa) is probably involved in control of the cell cycle during S phase and G2. Cyclin G1 (295aa) is associated with G2/M phase arrest in response to DNA damage. Cyclin-H (323aa) regulates cdk7, the catalytic subunit of the cdk-activating kinase complex. Cyclin-I (377a) does not change in concentration during the cell cycle, cyclin-J (372aa) has an unknown role but is phylogentically ancient. Cyclin-K (580aa) may play a role in transcriptional regulation, cyclin L1 is a transcriptional regulator involved in the pre-mRNA splicing process, cyclin-M (cyclin-related protein FAM58A, 248aa) may have a role in regulating the cell cycle; defects cause STAR syndrome. Cyclin-O (EC 3.2.2.-, uracil-DNA glycosylase 2, 350aa) will remove uracil residues accidentally incorporated into DNA or arising by deamination of cytosine. Cyclin-T1 (726aa) is the regulatory subunit of the CDK9/cyclin-T1 complex (positive transcription elongation factor B, P-TEFb), which is proposed to facilitate the transition from abortive to productive elongation by phosphorylating the (carboxy-terminal domain) of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II. Cyclin-Y (Cyclin fold protein 1, 341aa) is membrane associated.
cyclo-oxygenase
COX Enzyme complex responsible for the synthesis of prostaglandins and thromboxanes from arachidonic acid; inhibited by aspirin-like drugs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, NSAIDs), probably accounting for their anti-inflammatory effects. Two isoforms are known, COX-1 (prostaglandin G/H synthase 1, EC 1.14.99.1, 599aa) and COX-2 (604aa). Many NSAIDs inhibit both isoforms but selective COX-2 inhibitors such as celecoxib have the analgesic and anti-inflammatory activity without deleterious effects on the gastric mucosa. They do, however, have other side-effects and some have been withdrawn. Acetaminophen (paracetamol) has been postulated to act on a third isoform, COX-3, but this has remained elusive and there are alternative explanations. COX3: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15705740

cyclodextrinsCyclic polymers of six, seven or eight α-1,4-linked D-glucose residues. The toroidal structure allows them to act as hydrophilic carriers of hydrophobic molecules.
cycloheximideAntibiotic (281Da) isolated from Streptomyces griseus. Blocks eukaryotic (but not prokaryotic) protein synthesis by preventing initiation and elongation on 80S ribosomes. Commonly used experimentally.
CYCLOIDEAGene that regulates dorsoventral asymmetry in flowers. Encodes a transcription factor of the TCP family.
cyclolysinProtein (adenylate cyclase toxin, 1706aa), from Bordetella pertussis that is both an adenylate cyclase and a haemolysin; an important virulence factor of the organism. Article: http://cmr.asm.org/content/18/2/326.full.pdf

cyclopamineTeratogenic steroidal alkaloid produced by the skunk cabbage (Veratrum californicum) that causes developmental defects such as cyclopia (one eye in the middle of the face). Cyclopamine blocks activation of the Hedgehog response pathway, specifically the multipass transmembrane proteins Smoothened (Smo) and Patched (Ptch). Cyclopamine will block the oncogenic effects of mutations of Ptch in fibroblasts (see Gorlin’s syndrome) and inhibits the growth of cells lacking Ptch function.
cyclopentyladenosineA specific agonist of the adenosine A(1) receptor.
cyclophilinEnzyme (EC 5.2.1.8, 754aa) with PPIase activity; binds the immunosuppressive drug ciclosporin A. See immunophilin. In Arabidopsis there are at least 14 cyclophilin-like proteins that are likely to be involved in a range of different activities. Some are induced by stress. Arabidopsis cyclophilins: http://www.plantphysiol.org/content/134/4/1268.full

cyclophosphamideAn alkylating agent and important immunosuppressant. Acts by alkylating SH and NH2 groups especially the N7 of guanine.
cyclopiazonic acidA mycotoxin produced by Penicillium cyclopium that selectively inhibits the sarcoplasmic-endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA).
cyclosisCyclical streaming of the cytoplasm of plant cells, conspicuous in giant internodal cells of algae such as Chara, in pollen tubes and in stamen hairs of Tradescantia. Term also used to denote cyclical movement of food vacuoles from mouth to cytoproct in ciliate protozoa.
cyclosomeSee anaphase-promoting complex.
cyclosporin ASee .
CyclotellaA genus of small drum-shaped diatoms with cells 3–5 µm in diameter. Cyclotella meneghiniana is perhaps the commonest species, widely used in growth experiments. Image: http://silicasecchidisk.conncoll.edu

cylindrospermopsinA protein synthesis inhibitor, a tricyclic alkaloid hepatotoxin originally isolated from the cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii and subsequently found in other species of cyanobacteria. The mechanism of toxicity differs from that of microcystins.
CYP1ACytochrome P450-1A, see .
cypermethrinSynthetic pyrethroid used as an insecticide. Acts on sodium channels of neurons. Highly toxic to aquatic organisms, including fish. Usually a mixture of several isomers.
cypinA mammalian guanine deaminase (cytosolic PSD-95 interactor) that increases dendrite number when overexpressed. Cypin contains zinc binding, (CRMP) homology, and PSD-95, Discs large, zona occludens-1 binding domains. Binds tubulin via its CRMP homology domain to promote microtubule assembly; this interaction is blocked by snapin.
cyprisLarval stage of Cirrepedia (barnacles) following nauplius stage.
cyst
(1) A resting stage of many prokaryotes and eukaryotes in which a cell or several cells are surrounded with a protective wall of extracellular materials. (2) A pathological fluid-filled sac bounded by a cellular wall, often of epithelial origin, found on occasion in all species of multicellular animal. May result from a wide range of insults or be of embryological origin.

cystathionine γ-synthaseIn higher plants, the first enzyme (EC 2.5.1.48, 563aa) specific to methionine biosynthesis. It catalyses the reaction of succinyl-homoserine and cysteine to form cystathionine and succinate. Pathway of methionine biosynthesis in potato: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/8/65

cystatinsA large group of natural cysteine-peptidase inhibitors widely distributed both intra- and extra-cellularly. Family I is of stefins, Family II the cystatins, Family III the kininogens. Cystatin-1 (cystatin-SN, 141aa), cystatin-2 (cystatin-SA, 141), cystatin-4 (cystatin-S, 141) and cystatin-5 (cystatin-D, 142aa) are secreted in saliva. Cystatin 3 (cystatin C, CSTC, 120aa) is excreted in urine and is defective in Icelandic-type cerebroarterial amyloidosis. Cystatin-6 (cystatin-M, 149aa) is found in skin, cystatin-7 (cystatin-F, Leukocystatin, 145aa) is mainly found in peripheral blood cells and spleen.Cystatin-8 (cystatin-related epididymal spermatogenic protein, 142aa) is important in sperm development, cystatin-9 (159aa) may be involved in haematopoiesis and inflammation. Others are known and the various forms differ in their specific inhibitory capacity.
cysteine
Cys, C The only amino acid to contain a thiol (SH) group. In intracellular enzymes the unique reactivity of this group is frequently exploited at the catalytic site (as in cysteine endopeptidases). In extracellular proteins found only as half-cystine in disulphide bridges or fatty acylated.
cysteine peptidaseA clan of endopeptidases (thiol proteinase, thiol protease, subclass EC 3.4.22). All have a cysteine residue in the active site that can be irreversibly inhibited by sulphydryl reagents. Includes and papain. Natural inhibitors are alpha-2-macroglobulin and .
cysteine phosphatasesA large family of phosphatases that utilize a conserved ‘CX5R’ sequence motif to hydrolyze phosphoester bonds in proteins and in non-protein substrates. They can be divided into seven categories: (i) protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs); (ii) dual-specificity phosphatases (DSPs); (iii) Cdc25 phosphatases; (iv) myotubularin-related; and (iv) low molecular weight phosphatases; (v) inositol 4-phosphatases; and (vi) Sac1-domain phosphatases. Database: http://ptp.cshl.edu/

cysteine-rich PDZ-binding proteinA protein (CRIPT, 101aa) involved in the cytoskeletal anchoring of DLG4 (disks large homologue four) in excitatory synapses.
cysteine-rich receptor-like protein kinasesIn Arabidopsis a sub-family of more than 40 receptor-like protein kinases that contain the DUF26 motif (Domain of Unknown Function 26) in their extracellular domains (e.g. cysteine-rich receptor-like protein kinase 1, cysteine-rich RLK1, EC 2.7.11.1, receptor-like kinase in flowers 2, 615aa). Considered to have important roles in the regulation of pathogen defence and programmed cell death they are transcriptionally induced by oxidative stress, pathogen attack and application of salicylic acid. Transcriptional regulation: http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/1471-2229-10-95.pdf

cysteine-rich secretory proteinsA family of proteins (CRISPs) with 16 conserved cysteine residues. Cysteine-rich secretory protein-1 (CRISP-1, 249aa) is found in the male reproductive tract and may have a role in sperm-egg fusion; CRISP-2 (243aa) is found in testis and epididymis. CRISP-3 (245aa) is found in the salivary gland, pancreas and prostate, also in the specific granules of neutrophils. Some of the other members of the family have LCCL domains (e.g. CRISP-11, 497aa, which promotes matrix assembly). See helothermine, resistin.
cysteine string proteinsMembrane-associated protein (CSP, DnaJ homolog subfamily C member 5, 198aa), composed of a string of palmitoylated cysteine residues, a linker domain, and an N-terminal J domain characteristic of the DnaJ/Hsp40 co-chaperone family. May regulate calcium-dependent neurotransmitter release at nerve endings. In Drosophila, cysteine string protein (249aa) is also thought to be important in presynaptic function.
cystic fibrosisGeneralized abnormality of exocrine gland secretion that affects pancreas (blockage of the ducts leads to cyst formation and to a shortage of digestive enzymes), bowel, biliary tree, sweat glands and lungs. The production of abnormal mucus in the lung predisposes to respiratory infection, a major problem in children with the disorder. A fairly common (1 in 2000 live births in caucasians) autosomal recessive disease. See (CFTR).
cystic fibrosis antigenNow known to be MIF related protein 8 (MRP-8). See .
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
CFTR Product of a gene frequently mutated in ; a range of different mutations are known to occur, making preimplantation genetic diagnosis difficult. Gene encodes a chloride channel, an ABC protein (ABCC7, EC 3.6.3.49, cAMP-dependent chloride channel, 1480aa).
cystineThe amino acid formed by linking two residues with a disulphide linkage between the two sulphydryl (SH) groups. The analogous compound present within proteins is termed two half cysteines.
cystinosinLysosomal protein (367aa) responsible for cystine export. Defects lead to nephropathic cystinosis and mutations in the the cystinosin gene are the most common cause of inherited renal Fanconi syndrome. Highly conserved in mammals. Yeast Ers1 is a functional orthologue.
cystinosisAn autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by a defect in the lysosomal cystine carrier .
cystoblastIn Drosophila, a differentiating daughter cell derived from a germline stem cell as the first step in oogenesis. The cystoblast undergoes four rounds of synchronous divisions with incomplete cytokinesis to generate a syncytial cyst of 16 interconnected cystocytes, within the cyst one of the cystocytes differentiates into an oocyte. Cf. gonioblast.
cystocyteSee .
cytarabineSee .
cytidineNucleoside consisting of D-ribose and the pyrimidine base cytosine. Cytidine 5′diphosphate (CDP) derived from CTP is important in phosphatide biosynthesis; activated choline is CDP-choline.
cytidylic acidRibonucleotide of .
cytisineA natural alkaloid found in many of the Leguminosae family, and the main toxin of the common garden Laburnum. Has very high affinity for the α4β2-nicotinic ACh receptors.
cytobandSee .
cytocalbinsCytoskeleton-related calmodulin-binding proteins. Seemingly obsolete.
cytochalasinsA group of fungal metabolites that inhibit the addition of G-actin to a nucleation site and therefore perturb labile microfilament arrays. Cytochalasin B from Helminthosporium dematioideum inhibits at around 1 mg/ml but at about 5 mg/ml begins to inhibit glucose transport. Cytochalasin D from Metarrhizium anisopliae is preferable because it only affects the microfilament system.
cytochemistryBranch of histochemistry associated with the localization of cellular components by specific staining methods, as for example the localization of acid phosphatases by the Gomori method. Immunocytochemistry involves the use of labelled antibodies as part of the staining procedure.
cytochrome b6-f complexA multi-subunit complex that mediates electron transfer between photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI). The 4 large subunits are cytochrome b6 (petB, 222aa), subunit IV (PetD, 160aa), apocytochrome f (petA, 320aa) and the Rieske protein (petC), while the 4 small subunits (30–40aa) are PetG, PetL, PetM and PetN. The complex functions as a dimer. Inhibited by the quinone analogue DBMIB.
cytochrome oxidaseAn integral membrane protein of the inner mitochondrial membrane that is the last enzyme (EC 1.9.3.1.) of the electron transport chain. It accepts electrons from (i.e. oxidizes) cytochrome C and transfers the electrons to molecular oxygen. There are 13 subunits (COX1, COX2, etc.).
cytochrome P450A large group of mixed-function oxidases (EC 1.14.14.1) of the cytochrome b type, involved, among other things, in steroid hydroxylation reactions in the adrenal cortex. In liver they are found in the microsomal fraction and can be induced for the detoxification of foreign substances, including drugs. Found in most animal cells and organelles, in plants, and in microorganisms. They catalyze a wide range of oxygenation steps in plant metabolism. The genes and proteins are named ‘Cyp’ suffixed by family, sub-family and specific identifiers. Functional genomics of cytochrome P450 in Arabidopsis: http://www-ibmp.u-strasbg.fr/~CYPedia/

cytochromesEnzymes of the electron transport chain that are pigmented by virtue of their haem prosthetic groups. Very highly conserved in evolution.
cytogenetic bandA chromosomal subregion (cytoband) visible microscopically after special staining. See chromosome banding.
cytogeneticsThe study of the chromosomal complement of cells, and of chromosomal abnormalities and their inheritance.
cytohesinsA family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) GTPases. Cytohesin-1 (PH, SEC7 and coiled-coil domain-containing protein-1, SEC7 homologue B2-1, 398aa) is ubiquitous, and acts on ARF1 and ARF5. Cytohesin-2 (ARF nucleotide-binding site opener, ARNO, 400aa) acts on ARF1, ARF3 and ARF6, cytohesin-3 (general receptor of phosphoinositides 1, Grp-1, 400aa) acts on ARF1 and binds the inositol head group of phosphotidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate. Cytohesin-4 (394aa) is found mainly in leucocytes. Cytohesin-interacting protein (359aa) is a scaffolding and modulator protein that binds to cytohesin-1 and modifies the activation of ARF.
cytokeratinsGeneric name for the intermediate filament proteins of epithelial cells.
cytokine receptorsCytokine receptors can be classified into several sub-types: Type I recognize and respond to cytokines with four a-helical strands and are heterodimeric with different cytokine-binding and signalling subunits. The signalling subunits are often shared between receptors for different cytokines. Includes receptors for interleukins 2–7, 9, 11–13, 15, 21, 23 and 27, receptors for erythropoietin, GM-CSF, G-CSF, growth hormone, prolactin, oncostatin M and LIF. Type 2 receptors are only distantly related, are usually heterodimers or multimers with a high and a low affinity component and signal through JAKs. They include receptors for type1 and type 2 interferons and interleukins 10, 20, 22 and 28. Other cytokines (IL-1, IL-18) have receptors from the immunoglobulin superfamily or G-protein coupled chemokine receptors (IL-8). There are separate classes of receptors for the TNF superfamily and for TGFβ family.
cytokinesSmall proteins (in the range of 5–20 kDa) released by cells and that affect the behaviour of other cells. Not really different from hormones, but the term tends to be used as a convenient generic shorthand for interleukins, lymphokines and several related signalling molecules such as TNF and interferons. Generally growth factors would not be classified as cytokines, though TGF is an exception. Rather an imprecise term, though in very common usage. are a subset of cytokines; see .
cytokinesisProcess in which the cytoplasm of a cell is divided after nuclear division (mitosis) is complete. Cytokinesis in animal cells involves an actin-rich contractile ring that pinches the daughter cells apart. In plants, the microtubule-rich phragmoplast deposits the , a disk that grows outwards from the centre of the cell, eventually fusing with the mother cell’s wall.
cytokininsClass of plant growth substances (plant hormones) active in promoting cell division. Also involved in cell growth and differentiation and in other physiological processes. Examples: kinetin, zeatin, benzyl adenine.
cytologyThe study of cells. Implies the use of light or electron microscopic methods for the study of morphology.
cytolysisCell lysis.
cytolysosomeMembrane-bounded region of cytoplasm that is subsequently digested.
CytomegalovirusProbably the most widespread of the Herpetoviridae group. Infected cells enlarge and have a characteristic inclusion body (composed of virus particles) in the nucleus. Causes disease only in utero (leading to abortion or stillbirth or to various congenital defects), although can be opportunistic in the immunocompromised host. See viperin.
cyton
(1) The region of a neuron containing the nucleus and most cellular organelles. (2) In Cestodes (e.g. tapeworms) the syncytial epithelium that forms the tegument has the nucleated, proximal cytoplasm, or cyton, sunk deep in the parenchyma. The cyton region contains Golgi complexes, mitochondria, rough ER, and other organelles involved in protein synthesis and packaging (3) In cercaria of Schistosoma mansoni, an aggregate of subtegumental cells is found in a small, dorsoanterior area. These highly amorphous cells type, designated as cyton II, have a heterochromatic nucleus and a cytoplasm that is elaborated into coarse, tortuous processes.
cytonectinA 35 kDa adhesion protein, independent of divalent cations, expressed in a variety of organs and tissues, being evolutionarily conserved from human to avian species, overexpressed in Alzheimer’s disease entorhinal cortex. There is only one literature reference (2002) but a patent application is filed and antibodies are commercially available. Sole paper: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11895037

cytonemeA long thin projection from an epithelial cell, a filopodium.
cytophotometryExamination of a cell by measuring the light allowed through it following staining.
cytoplasmSubstance contained within the plasma membrane excluding, in eukaryotes, the nucleus.
cytoplasmic bridge
plasmodesmata Thin strand of cytoplasm linking cells as in higher plants, Volvox, between nurse cells and developing eggs, and between developing sperm cells. Unlike gap junctions, allows the transfer of large macromolecules.
cytoplasmic determinantsSlightly imprecise term usually applied to non-randomly distributed factors in maternal (oocyte) cytoplasm that determine the fate of blastomeres derived from this region of the egg following cleavage. Thus blastomeres containing cytoplasm derived from the apical region (animal pole) of the echinoderm egg form ectodermal tissues. Can be used even more generally of any feature in the cytoplasm that determines how a process or activity proceeds.
cytoplasmic inheritanceInheritance of parental characters through a non-chromosomal means; thus mitochondrial DNA is cytoplasmically inherited since the information is not segregated at mitosis. In a broader sense the organization of a cell may be inherited through the continuity of structures from one generation to the next. It has often been speculated that the information for some structures may not be encoded in the genomic DNA, particularly in protozoa that have complex patterns of surface organelles. See maternal inheritance.
cytoplasmic polyadenylation elementAn uridine-rich sequence element (CPE, consensus sequence 5′-UUUUUAU-3′) within the mRNA 3′-UTR that recruits the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB) to quiescent mRNA that has been stockpiled in the egg (and had the poly-A tail truncated). Maskin may repress translation of mRNA with a CPE.

cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding factorsRNA binding proteins (e.g. CPEB1, 566aa) that control polyadenylation-induced translation in germ cells and at postsynaptic sites of neurons. They bind to the and to maskin. In association with maskin repress translation of CPE-containing mRNA; repression is relieved by phosphorylation. Involved in the transport of CPE-containing mRNA to dendrites. CPEB recruits (cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor), which physically interacts with both CPEB and another sequence in the mRNA, to the 3′ side of the CPE, called the nuclear polyadenylation hexanucleotide. This particular sequence (AAUAAA) is required for cytoplasmic polyadenylation. CPSF, once bound to the mRNA, recruits the enzyme poly A polymerase to the mRNA.
cytoplasmic streamingBulk flow of the cytoplasm of cells. Most conspicuous in large cells such as amoebae, in vacuolated plant cells and the internodal cells of Chara where the rate of movement can be 50–60 μm/sec. Powered by the movement of myosin-coated organelles along actin filaments. See .
cytoplastFragment of cell with nucleus removed (in karyoplast); usually achieved by cytochalasin B treatment followed by mild centrifugation on a step gradient.
cytoproctCell anus: region at posterior of a ciliate where exhausted food vacuoles are expelled.
cytorrhysisProcess in which a plant cell wall collapses inward following water loss due to hyperosmotic stress. Cf. plasmolysis.
cytosinePyrimidine base found in DNA and RNA. Pairs with guanine. Glycosylated base is .
cytosine arabinoside
cytarabine Cytotoxic drug used in oncology (particularly AML) and against viral infections. Blocks DNA synthesis.
cytoskeletonGeneral term for the internal components of animal cells which give them structural strength and motility (plant cells and bacteria use an extracellular for structural support instead). The major components of the cytoskeleton are the microfilaments (of actin), microtubules (of tubulin) and intermediate filament systems in cells.
cytosolThat part of the cytoplasm that remains when organelles and internal membrane systems are removed.
cytosome
(1) The body of a cell apart from its nucleus. (2) A multilamellar body found in cells of the lung.
cytostomeA specialized region of various protozoans in which phagocytosis is likely to occur. Often there is a clear concentration of microtubules or/and microfilaments in the region of the cytostome. In ciliates there may be a specialized arrangement of cilia around the cytostome.
cytotactinSee tenascin.
cytotoxic drugsA term that could be applied to any drug that kills cells but usually used to mean those drugs used to treat cancer. In practice this means targeting rapidly proliferating cells so there are usually side effects. They include alkylating drugs, cytotoxic antibiotics (e.g. doxorubicin, bleomycin), anti-metabolites and anti-mitotic drugs (eleutherobin, maytansine, taxanes, vinca alkaloids). Other examples are bakuchiol, camptothecin, cisplatin, equisetin, gemcitabine, hadacidin, hexacyclinic acid, kosinostatin, pentostatin, psoralidin, reticulol and rottlerin.
cytotoxic necrotising factorsToxins (CNF1, CNF2, 1014aa) produced by some strains of E. coli. Induce ruffling and stress fibre formation in fibroblasts and block cytokinesis by acting on p21 Rho. A similar factor (CNFγ) is produced by Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Effect on neutrophils: http://www.jleukbio.org/content/68/4/522.full

cytotoxic T-cells
CTLs. Subset of T-lymphocytes (mostly CD8+) responsible for lysing target cells and for killing virus-infected cells (in the context of Class I histocompatibility antigens).
cytotrophicDescriptive of any substance that promotes the growth or survival of cells. Not commonly used except in the tissue-specific case of neurotrophic factors.
cytotropicHaving affinity for cells: not to be confused with cytotrophic.
cytotropismMovement of cells towards or away from other cells.
cytovillinSee ezrin.