3815pheelsevierNanostructures for Antimicrobial TherapyNanostructures for Antimicrobial TherapyPMC71524407152440715244010.1016/B978-0-323-46152-8.00006-8Antimicrobial Nanostructures for Neurodegenerative Infections
Present and Future PerspectivesMuthuramanArunachalam KaurJaspreet FicaiAnton GrumezescuAlexandru Mihai 1Akal College of Pharmacy and Technical Education, Sangrur, India2JSS University, Mysuru, Karnataka, India3University Politehnica of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania4University Politehnica of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania5Academy of Romanian Scientists, Bucharest, Romania962017139139–1671342020Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

## Abstract
Nanostructures have been widely involved in changes in the drug delivery system. Nanoparticles have unique physicochemical properties, e.g., ultrasmall size, large surface area, and the ability to target specific actions. Various nanomaterials, like Ag, ZnO, Cu/CuO, and Al2O3, have antimicrobial activity. Basically, six mechanisms are involved in the production of antimicrobial activity, i.e., (1) destruction of the peptidoglycan layer, (2) release of toxic metal ions, (3) alteration of cellular pH via proton efflux pumps, (4) generation of reactive oxygen species, (5) damage of nuclear materials, and (6) loss of ATP production. Nanomedicine contributes to various pharmaceutical applications, like diagnosis and treatment of various ailments including microbial diseases. Furthermore, nanostructured antimicrobial agents are also involved in the treatment of the neuroinfections associated with neurodegenerative disorders. This chapter focuses on the nanostructure and nanomedicine of antimicrobial agents and their prospects for the possible management of infections associated with neurodegenerative disorders.
Keywords: Antimicrobial agent, Nanomedicine, Nanostructure, Neurodegeneration, Neuroinfection, Neuropathic pain

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2017.

1.

## Introduction
Nanotechnology is a recent development in the art of the manipulation of materials especially at the atomic or molecular scale level; it builds the nanoscale structures of chemicals and devices ( , . The National Nanotechnology Initiative and ASTM International have defined nanotechnology as a term that refers to technologies that manufacture and manipulate materials with a dimension between 1 and 100 nm to exploit their novel properties. They are expanding the design, characterization, synthesis, limitations, toxicity, and applications of nanomaterials ( , ). Further, nanostructure is defined as a specified structural object with at least one dimension equal to or smaller than 100 nm. A wide variety of nanostructures have been identified, e.g., nanopores, nanorods, nanowires, nanoribbons, nanotubes, and nanoscaffolds ( , ). The most promising features of these structures are their size-dependent properties. They are also known as nanoparticles ( , ).
Early diagnosis of disease is essential for some diseases, like cancer and tumors, to provide better treatment. It increases the probability of curing the disease and achieving a significant reduction in mortality. Traditionally, it has been difficult to detect cancer; nowadays, the use of nanostructured devices in the early diagnosis of cancer is being realized ( , ).
In recent decades, many more studies have explored the formulation and use of nanostructured nanoparticles in the fields of chemistry, mathematics, and bioengineering. In addition, they have a wide range of applications in the fields of biology and medicine ( ). The term “nanotechnology” was first introduced by Professor Norio Taniguchi of the Tokyo Science University, in 1974. He described nanotechnology as the processing, separation, consolidation, and deformation of materials by one atom or by one molecule ( ). The European Science Foundation defines nanomedicine as “The science and technology of diagnosing, treating and preventing disease and traumatic injury, of relieving pain, and of preserving and improving human health, using molecular tools and molecular knowledge of the human body” ( ). The first therapeutic nanoparticle, i.e., albumin-entrapped paclitaxel (Abraxane), was successfully used as an anticancer nanomedicine ( , ). The applications of nanoparticles in the medical field are described as diagnostics, drug carriers, drug delivery vehicles, and therapeutic agents ( , ). This review focuses on the prospects of nanostructured nanoparticles and nanomedicine as antimicrobial agents in the possible management of neuroinfectious diseases associated with neurodegenerative disorders.

2.

## Relationship of Microbes in Neuroinfection-Assisted Neurodegeneration
Infectious diseases are the most common and potent disorders in the clinical setting. They occur when a pathogen (i.e., virus, bacterium, fungus, or parasite) and its proteins enter into the body and affect a specific organ, tissue, or system or the whole body ( ). They are also called communicable diseases because of their capacity to transfer from one person to another, e.g., malaria or tuberculosis, or one species to another, e.g., influenza ( ). Infectious diseases are broadly classified as: (1) old, generally well-known diseases, e.g., dengue, malaria, and tuberculosis; (2) new, previously unknown diseases, e.g., severe acute respiratory syndrome; and (3) diseases known to threaten in the near future, e.g., avian influenza ( ). Infection is the process of pathogenicity when a microbe enters with the capacity to induce damage or disease, at either a local or a systemic level, in the host organism. It may be an acute (with a short duration and severe course) or chronic (low grade and long lasting) infection. Neuroinfection is a major harmful condition of the nervous system and it induces neurodegenerative processes that lead to neurological disorders ( ).

3.

## Possible Approach Using Nanoparticles for the Treatment of Infectious Disease
Some antimicrobial agents are hydrophilic in nature and are unable to enter into the microbial cells. In addition, the internalized antimicrobial molecules are rapidly degraded by lysosomal activity, which leads to reduced antimicrobial activity of the drug ( , ). Therefore, the new technology is expected to release the antimicrobial drug within the microbial cells. It may be through the drug delivery system using passive action on infected cells via the mononuclear phagocytic system, which may enhance the therapeutic index of the antimicrobial along with a reduction in side effects ( ). In addition, the systemic administration of antimicrobials affects the host system. Therefore, nanoparticles and nanomedicine are the future of antimicrobial therapy because they produce cell- and target-specific actions in the nanoscale range without alteration of host cell functions ( , ). Regarding bacterial infections, the development of resistance against antibiotics is the major problem in antimicrobial therapy ( ). Resistance to antibiotics occurs for the following three reasons: (1) modification of the active sites of drug-binding proteins, (2) destruction or modification of the antibiotic by the enzymatic mechanisms of the organism, and (3) activation of the efflux mechanism for the antibiotic by the organism ( , ).
The hope is that nanoparticles can carry the antimicrobial agents at the nanoscale level and release them at the target site in the infectious organism. Therefore, nanoparticles have greater potential to eliminate the microbes and avoid the development of resistance ( , ). However, the mutation of some Mycobacterium to resist silver nanoparticles that are loaded with isoniazid has been documented. However, this resistance occurs only with silver nanoparticles, whereas CuSO4 and ZnSO4 particles do not produce the microbial resistance ( ). In addition, antimicrobial-loaded nanoparticles enter into host cells, including in the brain region, via the endocytosis process followed by the release of preloaded drugs in the microbes ( ). A nanoparticulate system shows enormous potential in targeted drug delivery, especially in neuroinfective conditions of the brain ( ). However, the implementation of nanomedicine in neuroinfectious diseases for antimicrobial therapy has significant challenges. Generally, a drug delivery system should have multifunctional actions, i.e., “switch on” and “switch off” functions when required. And, these multifunctional drug delivery systems must be harmonized in an optimal fashion ( , ). Nanoparticle-assisted antimicrobial drug delivery is challenged to produce improved efficacy and avoidance of resistance and it is extremely desired in the treatment of neuroinfective disease ( ).
However, nanomedicine has some special properties; it has the advantage of antimicrobial drug delivery and drug action against microbial infections in the nervous system ( , ). Antimicrobial nanoparticles possess six major properties supporting their use in the clinical setting. They are as follows: (1) the surface properties of nanoparticles can be changed for targeted drug delivery. In this case, small molecules, proteins, peptides, and nucleic acids, loaded into nanoparticles are not rejected by the immune system and effectively reach the target site of the specialized tissue ( ); (2) nanocarriers support the solubility or stability of the drug in the targeted cells and minimize the side effects in the host cells ( ); (3) nanotechnology allows the codelivery of two or more drugs in the form of combination therapy against multiple pathogens ( , ); (4) antimicrobial nanoparticles potentially can overcome microbial resistance, which is common in bacterial organisms ( ); (5) the administration of antimicrobial drug-loaded nanoparticles enhances the therapeutic index, with extended half-life in the systemic circulation leading to the controlled release of the microbial drug and improving the overall pharmacokinetics ( , ); and (6) the administration of antimicrobial drug-loaded nanoparticles is possible via different routes such as oral, nasal, parenteral, and intraocular ( , ). Therefore, there is great interest in developing antimicrobial nanoparticles as newer methods of drug therapy for neuroinfectious disease.

4.

## Properties of Nanostructured Nanoparticles
Various nanostructures are designed to develop nanoparticles and nanomedicines. In the medical system, they are widely used in diagnosis and as drug delivery systems for cancer treatment. Various nanomaterials, like Au, Ag, ZnO, Cu/CuO, TiO2, Al2O3, and CeO2, are used in nanomedicine for exploring their antimicrobial activity ( , ). These nanoparticles have unique physicochemical properties, e.g., ultrasmall size (less than 100 nm), controllable size, large surface area-to-mass ratio, high reactivity, no solubility, and target-specific actions. These properties of nanoparticles allow them to act as nanomedicines because the size of natural functional units in living organisms, like DNA (2 nm), small RNAs, ribosomes (20 nm), microtubules (25 nm), nuclear pores (50 nm), and various proteins and lipids is equal to or less than 100 nm ( , , ). Further, it is significant that innovative nanoparticles can overcome the limitations of traditional diagnostic and therapeutic agents. Furthermore, the small size of nanoparticles provides extreme mobility and capacity to interact with the biological system ( ). However, some research studies have suggested that smaller nanoparticles are expected to produce toxicity because of their higher reactivity with various biological proteins and peptides ( , ). This property of nanoparticles has raised safety issues with nanomedicine ( ). In fact, initial findings revealed that nanoparticles can easily penetrate and propagate in living organisms. A comparative study showed potential benefits in the diagnosis and cure of diseases without risk to the immune system, lungs, digestive mucosa, and skin. The primary goal of nanoparticles in medicine is to design target- and site-specific delivery systems with an accurate therapeutic dose ( ). In 2013, a biodegradable polymers was used for the delivery of drugs to a specific location owing to its potential inherent capacity ( ). This phenomenon attracted great interest in creating a revolution for the usage of nanomedicine in the field of pharmaceutical sciences.

5.

## Nanostructured Nanoparticles in Biomedical Research
Various structures of nanoparticles are found in their applications in biomedical research. Such nanoparticles are inorganic metal oxides, polymers, solid lipid, ferritin, liposomes, nanocrystals, nanotubes, nanofibers, nanopores, nanosheets, quantum dots, and dendrimers ( , ). These nanoparticles show promising results in drug delivery and neuroprotection systems with their own molecular mechanisms ( , ). The structures of various nanoparticles are illustrated in 
.
 5.1.

## Inorganic Nanoparticles
Inorganic nanoparticles, especially gold nanoparticles, have an affinity for drugs with covalent and noncovalent bonding and this property enhances the therapeutic efficacy. The combined action of gold nanoparticles and laser irradiation is useful in the controlled release of drugs ( ). The gold nanoshell–antibody complex is known to produce an ameliorative effect in cancer disease due to its selective transportation of drugs into cancer cell nuclei with conjugation of arginine–glycine–aspartic acid peptide and polyethylene glycol ( ). In contrast, it produces hyperthermia when using noninvasive radio frequency for tumor cells ( , , ). The silver-coated nanoparticle is one of the major nanoparticles in antimicrobial action. Various nanosized particles have been considered as novel antibacterial agents because of their high surface area and reactivity. The antimicrobial activity of nanostructured nanoparticles with conventional antimicrobial agents is enhanced compared to regular antimicrobial agents ( ). In addition, they are also shown to produce potent antimicrobial actions by inhibition of microbial growth and reproduction. This property is higher in silver-decorated polymer micelles and polymeric vesicles, antimicrobial polymer micelles and vesicles, and antimicrobial peptide-based vesicles ( , ).
Historically, various organic compounds such as hyaluronic acid, poly(γ-glutamic acid), and polyhydroxyalkanoates have been reported to produce wide-spectrum antimicrobial activity ( ). Some natural nanoparticles have been shown to produce antimicrobial activity; such compounds are metallic deposits, e.g., Au, Ag, Cd, Zn, or Fe; virus-like particles; or other nanoscale proteins ( , ). Silver nanoparticles have been identified as broad-spectrum bactericidal and virucidal nanomaterials and are also used in cosmetics, food packaging materials, disinfectants, cleaning agents, etc. ( ). Further, nickel nanoparticles are used in the purification of recombinant proteins for nanomagnetizable matrix preparation ( ). Silicon oxide nanoparticles are used in the early detection of cytotoxicity and also in the preparation of mucoadhesive nanosystems for vaginal microbicidal agents and optical molecular imaging materials for atherosclerosis ( , , ). The mesoporous silica material is used for the detection of the Neisseria meningitidis transformation process ( ). Current research is evaluating the antimicrobial activity of polymeric nanostructures in biomedicine ( , ).
Iron oxide nanoparticles are inorganic nanoparticles and are classified based on the size of the iron oxide, i.e., (1) standard size of superparamagnetic iron oxide is 60–150 nm, (2) ultrasmall size of superparamagnetic iron oxide is 5–40 nm, and (3) subset size of monocrystalline iron oxide is 10–30 nm. They have various unique properties like biocompatibility, intrinsic ability to enhance magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast, and capacity for surface modification that leads to enhanced tumor imaging activity ( ). The standard-size nanoparticles are composed of ferric (Fe3+) and ferrous (Fe2+) iron ( ). They have been trapped in the reticuloendothelial system through endocytosis or phagocytosis to explore their cytotoxicity profile due to the dissolving capacity of iron oxide under acidic conditions ( , ). In addition, Fe3+ ions can be stored in adult humans, accumulating up to 3–5 g of iron. Therefore, the solubility of the iron oxide nanoparticle is negligible and it avoids metal toxicity ( , ). For MRI of the cellular system, iron oxide nanoparticles are coated with contrast agents such as sugars, e.g., dextran, or synthetic polymers, e.g., silicone ( ). In addition, it also reported to produce limited toxicity compared other nanoparticles.
Rare earth materials, e.g., lanthanides and silica materials, are also used for the preparation of nanoparticles. The lanthanides are excellent building blocks of multimodal imaging probes and have luminescent and magnetic properties ( ). Gadolinium (Gd3+) has seven unpaired electrons and it shows a high paramagnetic relaxivity. Therefore, it is also used in the imaging system for MRI ( ). Other doped lanthanides, e.g., NaYF4 nanoparticles, are also used with Yb3+ and Er3+ particles ( , ). There is great interest in silica nanoparticles for the cancer cell imaging system because of their favorable properties; for example, they are inert, optically transparent, and easy to modify in structure and size. The hydrophilic surface of nanoparticles with silanol (–Si–OH) and deprotonated silanol (–Si–O–) groups is prepared at neutral pH and this makes the silica nanoparticles dispersible in water ( , ). It enhances the specific binding property of silica nanoparticles at targeted sites and avoids the aggregation of silica nanoparticles in vivo. In addition, silica nanoparticles are quite photostable with fluorescent dyes and reduce the photochemical oxidation by reactive oxygen species ( , ). Other silica materials, e.g., mesoporous ones, have great structural control and functionalization (magnetism and luminescence) properties due to their large surface area, high pore volume, nontoxicity, and good biocompatibility. And they are proven to be effective as a drug delivery system ( ). Moreover, mesoporous silica nanoparticles are also used for the radionuclide imaging process with labeling of radioisotopes ( ).

5.2.

## Polymeric Nanoparticles
These nanoparticles are structurally stable inorganic systems with porous characteristics and these biodegradable polymers are widely used for controlled drug delivery systems. The drug-loading processes in polymeric nanoparticles are entrapment, encapsulation, and dissolution or dispersion. These particles are used for the loading of a wide variety of hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs ( , ). This formulation is widely used for drug delivery, tissue engineering, and various biomedical applications. Furthermore, the surface of these polymeric nanoparticles contains various functional groups and can be modified for targeting ligands ( ). Clinically, the conjugation of the polymer–drug has an important role in drug efficacy and reduction of dosing frequency of conventional medicines ( ). These particles are providing greater efficacy to antiasthmatic ( ), antituberculosis ( ), pulmonary hypertension ( , ), and anticancer drugs ( ). In contrast, there is no report on the biodegradability and toxicity of polymeric nanoparticles in pulmonary formulations ( ). Research has found that typical ceramic nanoparticles such as silica and alumina also have potential drug delivery properties ( ). In addition, the newer biodegradable synthetic polymers and natural modified polymers such as chitosan and albumin are also involved in drug delivery systems ( , ). Furthermore, cytolytic peptide nanoparticles (“NanoBees”) and polymeric nanoparticles encapsulating curcumin are used for cancer treatment in humans ( ).

5.3.

## Solid-Lipid Nanoparticles
The preparation of solid-lipid nanoparticles is a lipid-based submicrometer colloidal carrier formulation. The widely used solid-lipid nanoparticles are glyce behenate, glycerol palmitostearate, lecithin, triglycerides, and tristearin glyceride ( ). In this case, a large amount of surfactants is needed for the stability of the formulation. These particles are used for the preparation of proteins and antigens for therapeutic purposes ( , ). This formulation produces good anticancer and antiviral potency ( , ). In addition, entrapment of a drug in solid-lipid nanoparticles has a potential penetration property (4–11 times that of traditional delivery) through the blood–brain barrier and it can treat the various central nervous system disorders ( , ). Formulations of indomethacin, ketoprofen, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and primaquine with solid-lipid nanoparticles have been reported to produce beneficial effects in the pulmonary, hematological, and gastrointestinal systems ( , ). The major limitation of this preparation is loading efficiency, owing to the formation of a lipid crystal matrix and changes in the physical state of the lipids ( ).

5.4.

## Ferritin Nanoparticles
Ferritin is a functional protein of living organisms. It is made up of 24 subunits and spontaneously assembled nanoparticles show a cage-like nanostructure. It has a 8-nm internal diameter and 12-nm external diameter ( ). These particles allow the loading of lead compounds on both sides, i.e., the inside and outside interfaces of the ferritin nanoparticles. The outer surface of ferritin particles can be modified by chemical or genetic materials and the cavity of the ferritin particles is able to carry a wide range of metals with high affinities ( ). Ferritin nanoparticles have been applied to carry a biovector on their surface and reach the target of C32 melanoma cancer cells ( , ). In addition, gadolinium-loaded ferritin nanoparticles have entered a specific tumor of the endothelial cells ( ). They are stable at pH 7.4. Therefore, they possess rigidness under physiological conditions and are easily broken down in an acidic environment ( ). Hence, they can be useful for target-specific action in the diagnosis and treatment of tumors and cancer cells.

5.5.

## Liposomal Nanoparticles
Liposomes are spherical lipid vesicles with a bilayered membrane structure and were introduced for drug delivery in the year 1965. These liposomal nanoparticles are frequently used for the delivery of antimicrobial drugs ( , ). Drug-loaded liposomes can be prepared according to the size range of the macrophage. These liposomes can be digested within the macrophage's phagosome by the phagocytosis process and release their drug contents ( , ). In addition, their liposomal membranes can also be incorporated with opsonins, which can activate endocytosis in other cell types. The major distinguishing feature of liposomes is their lipid bilayer structure that mimics the cell membranes of infectious microbes and can readily fuse with them ( , , ). Owing to this property, they play a great role in the delivery of antimicrobial drugs directly inside of microbes.

5.6.

## Nanotubes
Nanotubes are self-assembling sheets of atoms organized as tubes. Based on their structure, they are classified into two major categories: (1) single-walled cylindrical carbon nanotubes and (2) multiwalled carbon nanotubes, with multiple cylinders nested within other cylinders ( ). These particles have unique properties such as electronic, thermal, and structural characteristics. They produce a good drug delivery action in cancer cells and significantly reduce the cancer cell progression ( ). In addition, they also play a great role in the diagnosis of disease due to their potential biosensing property. And, they are used in the treatment of cancer disease with a low dose of conventional drugs because they possess target-specific action in cancer cells ( , ). However, the tolerance of this nanoparticle remains unidentified in humans.

5.7.

## Nanocrystals
Nanocrystals are clustered arrangements of molecules, and they wrap the drug molecule with a thin coating of surfactant. These materials are widely used in chemical engineering and in biological imaging systems compared to drug delivery systems ( ). They are prepared by using a hydrophobic compound coated with a thin layer of hydrophilic compound. The biological effects of nanocrystals depend on the chemical nature of the hydrophilic coating molecules. This hydrophilic layer also acts as an aid in the biological distribution and bioavailability of the crystalline drug material. These factors are responsible for drugs and drug delivery ( , ). A nanosuspension of this formulation can be used via the oral route to overcome difficulties in swallowing tablets by pediatric or geriatric patients.

5.8.

## Nanofibers
Nanofibers are prepared by the electrospinning method and are widely used for the drug delivery process. The nanofibers are arranged as a fibrous scaffold and it is able to entrap drugs, with a large loading capacity and high encapsulation efficiency due to its low weight and inherent large surface-to-volume ratio ( , ). Nanofibers are promising carrier molecules for the delivery of anticancer drugs. They are useful nanoparticles for postoperative local chemotherapy using surgical implantation of the scaffold ( , ). These nanoparticles are able to protect the encapsulated drugs from enzymatic and hydrolytic degradation ( , ). It is evidenced that insulin-loaded nanoparticles can preserve insulin activity and produce a lowering of the blood glucose level for up to 14 days in diabetic rats ( ).

5.9.

## Nanopores
The nanopore is a member of the nanoparticles and is a nanoscale-level channel or hole in a free-standing membrane. Solid-state nanopores such as silicon, SiO2, and Si3N4 act as biological sensors of biological transmembrane proteins ( , ). The α-hemolysin (α-HL) channel is one of the common nanoparticles used to detect single-stranded nucleic acids. A modified α-HL nanopore was used to distinguish the individual DNA mononucleotides ( ). It revealed that nanopores serve as potent regulators of DNA because of their direct sequencing action on single molecules of DNA ( ). And it is a reliable and low-cost nanoparticle for the DNA sequencing process in genomic research. A similar property is also expected to regulate the genetic information of cancer cells ( ). In addition, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) polymer has been used to produce microfluidic channels and microscale devices ( ). Briefly, this nanoscale device was prepared by sealing with PDMS polymer. It consists of two reservoirs connected by a pore of glass material and it is filled with an ionic solution. The potential difference across the pore was measured at constant applied current by a four-point technique ( , ). The working principle of the nanopore device is that the flow of DNA molecules passing through the pore creates a downward spike wave in the current recording profile. Each downward peak mimics the movement of a single DNA molecule in the nanopore device. This nanopore device helps to detect viruses and their viral proteins ( , ). Furthermore, it has been attached to the biological membrane with a covalent bond and acts as a probe molecule for detection of specific target sites. The nanopore supports the detection of antigen–antibody binding reactions ( ). Antibody was specifically bound to the colloidal surface of the nanopore and raised the diameter of the nanoparticle. A limitation arises in this material owing to significant current blockade and higher resistance in the current flow due to the larger diameter of the colloidal particles ( ). This device is used to detect the presence of Streptococcus group A, and the sensitivity of detection is four times faster than standard latex agglutination assay ( ). The major advantages of nanopores are the cost-effectiveness, simplicity, speed, and versatility of nanopore assays ( ). Therefore, this particle can be useful for the preparation of nanomedical devices for the diagnosis and treatment of neurological disorders.

5.10.

## Nanosheets
The nanosheet is another nanoparticle and it is arranged as a single- or multiple-layer two-dimensional array of atoms or molecules. Graphene is one of the nanosheet materials and it is arranged as a two-dimensional honeycomb crystal structure of a flat monolayer of carbon atoms ( ). It has high thermal conductivity (∼5000 W/m K), high specific surface area, high electron mobility (250,000 cm2/V s), biocompatibility, and thermal stability. Therefore, it is used for electrochemical immunosensors for the diagnosis of disease ( , ). The graphene oxide nanosheet (GO-nS) is used to detect in vivo cellular interactions and DNA cargo functions ( ). The interaction of fluorescence-labeled GO-nS and DNA molecules produces an aptamer/GO-nS complex and it is used as a real-time biosensing platform of living cells. This fluorescence-labeled ATP-binding aptamer (FAM-aptamer) can potentially be used in a biosensing system with GO-nS owing to its three basic actions, i.e., (1) high fluorescence quenching efficiency in vivo, (2) potent DNA transport action, and (3) efficient protection of oligonucleotides from enzymatic cleavage ( , ). In addition, the FAM-aptamer/GO-nS complex has high ATP specificity and sensitivity with a wide detection range, i.e., from 10 μM to 2.5 mM in vitro ( ). Therefore, this nanoparticle also expected to serve as a molecular tool for the diagnosis of genetic disease.

5.11.

## Quantum Dots
Quantum dots are inorganic fluorescent semiconductor nanoparticles and they are composed of 10–50 atoms with 2- to 10-nm diameters ( ). They are mainly used for biological imaging, sensing, and detection. In medicine, they are used for targeted drug delivery for the treatment of cancer ( ). Apart from the drug delivery process, quantum dots are also useful in the delivery of other biomolecules such as small interfering RNA (siRNA) ( , ). They have some limitations due to long-term in vivo toxicity and degradation properties ( , ).

5.12.

## Dendrimers
Dendrimers are well-structured globular macromolecules and they have three regions: (1) a core, (2) layers of branched repeating units, and (3) functional end groups on the outer layer of the repeating units ( ). The highly branched nature of dendrimers provides a large surface area and allows them to react with microorganisms in vivo ( ). Dendrimers with drug molecules are prepared by either complexation or encapsulation. They allow loading of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic agents. Hydrophobic drugs can be loaded inside the cavity in the hydrophobic core, whereas hydrophilic drugs are attached to the multivalent surfaces of dendrimers through covalent conjugation or electrostatic interactions. This formulation can be used for oral, transdermal, ocular, and intravenous routes of drug delivery ( , ). In addition, dendrimers have been shown to cross cell barriers by paracellular and transcellular pathways ( , ). The polyamidoamine dendrimers are most widely used for drug delivery because of their potential action of facilitating transport through the epithelial barrier ( , ). However, polyamidoamine dendrimers affect the function of platelets ( ). The structure–activity relationship of dendrimers revealed that they have a dual action on human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and herpes simplex virus (HSV), i.e., virucidal action on HSV and viral entry inhibitory action on HIV ( ). In addition, they carry siRNA and deliver it to a specific target site for the silencing of gene sequence ( ). They have great potential drug delivering capacity in the CNS ( ). Therefore, dendrimer particles can be useful for the delivery of siRNA in gene therapy as well as in nanomedicine for neuroinfectious disorders. A summary of various nanoparticles and their applications has been tabulated in 
.
 

6.

## Principle of Nanoparticle Entry Into Cellular System
The entry of nanoparticles along with ligands into the cellular system has great challenges due to multiple factors such as size, biocompatibility, stability, and affinity ( , ). The entry of nanoparticles into the cellular system has the following principles: (1) uptake of nanoparticles by the tissues and (2) cellular receptor–mediated endocytosis ( ).
6.1.

## Uptake of Nanoparticles by the Tissues
The major achievement of the treatment process with therapeutic agents is the entry into or uptake of drug by the targeted tissue because the membrane layers create an obstacle to entry of drugs due to inefficient partitioning capacity ( ). The partitioning capacity depends upon the polar and nonpolar properties of the drugs. Lipophilic molecules bypass this obstacle because they have a potent membrane permeativity via diffusion ( ). Nanoparticles are able to mask the therapeutic agent and provide efficient delivery into the cytosolic region. Nanoparticles are involved in the endocytosis process by natural phagocytosis, pinocytosis, and receptor-mediated endocytosis ( ). Phagocytosis involves the ingestion of materials up to 10 μm in diameter by a few cells of the reticuloendothelial system, e.g., macrophages, neutrophils, and dendritic cells. It is an uptake mechanism by almost all cell types and normally it involves the submicrometer range of material or substances in solution ( ). Larger microparticles enter into the cytosol by the action of phagocytic cells, whereas nanoparticles cross into all types of cell.

6.2.

## Cellular Receptor–Mediated Endocytosis
Receptor-mediated endocytosis has potential selectivity in the entry of molecules into cellular target sites. The nanoparticle surface binds to the extracellular surface and the cell allows carrying the ligands into the cytosolic region ( ). Sometimes, it transduces the signal to the intracellular space and triggers various biochemical pathways. Furthermore, it may also enhance the internalization of the ligand and its nanoparticle via the endocytosis process. This process is potentiated by biomolecules such as caveolin and clathrin ( , ). The cross-linking of receptors and nanoparticles is more prone to membrane enfolding and reunification leading to the formation of an endosome. Nanoparticles between 25 and 50 nm in size are involved in this kind of entry into the cellular system ( , ). Cellular endocytosis follows five steps to carry the nanoparticle with ligands into the cytosolic region. The steps are as follows: (1) association of nanoparticles with receptors on the cell membrane, (2) internalization of nanoparticles with ligands, (3) release of ligands (also known as endosomal escape) from nanoparticles by the endolysosomal process or lysosomal degradation of nanoparticles, (4) interaction of free ligands (therapeutic agent) with cytoplasmic organelles or proteins, and (5) exocytosis of nanoparticles via the endosomal recycling process ( , , , ). A summary of nanoparticle entry and elimination in the cellular system is illustrated in 
.
 

7.

## Application of Nanostructured Nanoparticles in Pharmaceutical Science
Nanoparticles have been successfully developed in the fields of material science, information technology, and chemical and tissue engineering science. In addition, the nanostructured particle has potent action against microbial organisms, and it has great potential action in the drug delivery process ( , ). The investigation of nanoparticles for medical applications is in the stage of preclinical and clinical trials. A few nanoparticles have been shown to produce their potential action in drug delivery, diagnosis of disease, molecular imaging of cellular function, and drug development ( , ). In addition, nanomedicine also has shown their therapeutic action in regenerative medicine, stem cell and gene therapy, brain tumors, cancer, implants, bone repair, drug discovery, and cosmetic applications ( , , , , , ). Some of the nanoparticles with antimicrobial agents have reached the market for the treatment of various microbial infections ( , , ). The postmarket surveillance is still under way. Nanostructured medicine has great scope in the treatment of life-threatening diseases such as cancer, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and neuroinfectious disease ( ).
Viral infections are the most important factor in neuroinfection-associated neurodegeneration, for example, HIV-1, human T-cell lymphotropic virus, Epstein–Barr virus, encephalitis viruses, HSV, and parainfluenza virus infection ( , , ). Viral infection causes the neurodegeneration of the central as well as the peripheral nervous system ( , ). In addition, Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus is known to cause neurodegenerative disease, i.e., multiple sclerosis (MS) ( ). The chronic stage of viral infection-associated neuronal damage is responsible for producing neurodegenerative disorders like HIV-associated dementia, Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), MS, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) ( ). Some nanoparticles are reported to prevent viral infection in the nervous system ( , ). Therefore, nanomedicine is expected to cure the neuroinfection-assisted neurodegenerative disorders. However, clinical evidence of nanomedicine therapies is limited. The novel medical applications of nanoparticles and nanomedicine are not exhaustive, but they need to be investigated in a scientific manner for the treatment of life-threatening diseases like neuroinfectious disease with suitable molecular mechanism and therapeutic efficacy as well as avoidance of any toxic principles.
7.1.

## Diagnostic Approach
Nanotechnology provides improvements in imaging systems for the human body through fluorescence microscopy or MRI scanning. Inorganic nanoparticles, e.g., quantum dots (QDs), possess luminescence properties and are employed as a novel tool for the diagnosis of biological functions and disease progress ( ). In addition, they have a strong fluorescent property under ultraviolet light illumination. The major application of QDs is to image tissues and cells, e.g., lymph nodes and tumors ( ). However, the other types of nanoparticles possess superparamagnetic iron oxide potential; therefore they are recognized to detect cancer cells and their progression such as in prostate cancer ( ). Furthermore, gold and silver nanoparticles are very commonly used for the diagnosis of various cancer cell types such as skin, ovarian, pancreatic, breast, and lung cancer ( , , ).

7.2.

## Drug Delivery Process
For the delivery of drugs by nanoparticles a variety of materials such as proteins, polysaccharides, and synthetic polymers are used. The selection of materials for nanoparticle preparation depends upon the size of the nanoparticles, inherent properties of the drug, permeability, and degree of biodegradability ( , , ). Nanoparticles have the ability to carry the drugs into various types of the cells, such as cancer, tumor, and human cells. The nanoparticle-mediated delivery of drugs has been observed in a cancer cell line ( ). Albumin-loaded nanoparticles are used for the delivery of paclitaxel into cancer cells, and they reduce the adverse side effects associated with the chemotherapeutic agent Abraxane ( ). In addition, nanoparticles help to deliver HIV antiviral agents into HIV-infected organisms and they have overcome the challenge of bioavailability of HIV antiviral agents due to their poor water-solubility ( ). The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved more than 250 nanomedicines for various pathological disorders in humans such as cancer, tumors, and infections ( , ). The clinically important nanomedicines and their therapeutic applications are listed in 
.
 7.2.1.

## Drug Delivery in Neurological Tumors
The delivery of drugs in the CNS is challenging because of the arrangement of the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Generally, the physiological barrier limits the brain's uptake of neurotherapeutic agents and neuroimaging contrast agents ( ). Anatomical and cellular manifestations of the CNS, such as the neurovascular capillary of endothelial cells, pinocytosis, and tight junctions, limit drug delivery. The brain microvasculature has four types of cells, i.e., endothelial cells, pericytes, astrocyte foot processes, and nerve endings, which contribute to the modulation of drug delivery in the CNS and prevent drug entry into the brain ( , ). In this case, lipid-mediated free diffusion and receptor-mediated endocytosis have a great role in the entry of molecules into the CNS. Therefore, lipid-derived nanoparticles like liposomes have contributed to the great success of drug delivery in the neurological system ( , ). Current investigation is focused on the delivery of nanostructured medicines in the treatment of neurological and neuroinfectious diseases such as glioblastoma, dementia, AD, PD, and ALS ( , ). The current concept of drug delivery in the CNS is focusing on low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles. The size of natural LDL particles is 22–27 nm in diameter, with a core of lipids, e.g., cholesteryl esters, with small amounts of triglyceride ( , ). Plasma-derived LDLs are used to deliver nanomedicines for neurological tumors (glioblastoma). Synthetic LDL nanoparticles also provide the efficient delivery of paclitaxel for glioblastoma ( ).

7.2.2.

## Drug Delivery in Neurovascular Disease
Vascular diseases contribute to the progress of neurological ischemia that leads to stroke, cerebral aneurysm, and intracranial hemorrhage ( , , ). The delivery of nanoparticles to the CNS helps to detect neurovascular disease, such as detection of atherosclerotic plaques. Similarly, it also acts to target and deliver therapeutic agents to these plaques. Tissue factor-targeted nanoparticles loaded with paclitaxel are shown to reduce smooth muscle cell proliferation ( ). In addition, nanoparticles loaded with fumagillin (antiangiogenic agent, targeted to aVb3-integrin epitopes of the vasa vasorum) have been documented to produce an antiangiogenic effect ( ). The utilization of taxol-loaded albumin nanoparticles limits the restenotic response in experimental animals ( ).

7.2.3.

## Drug Delivery in Neurodegenerative Diseases
The degeneration of the neurological system is triggered by infection, inflammation, and oxidative stress, and subsequently modulates the various cellular and molecular events in the nervous system ( , ). The nanoparticle has a great potential to regulate microbes with antimicrobial agents ( ). Nanoparticles are able to cross the CNS and alter the neurological proteins ( ). Based on this evidence they are expected to control the various neurological diseases. Conventional medicine is limited in treating neurodegenerative diseases by the difficulty of drug delivery and the toxicity profile of neurological as well as systemic organs ( , , , ). Therefore, nanoparticles and nanomedicine are a promising technology for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders. However, the experimental and clinical evidence exploring the role of nanomedicine in the treatment of neurodegenerative disease is limited. In contrast to their possible benefits, various nanoparticles are metallic in nature and metal compounds are well documented to produce neurological damage ( ). Chelators are reported to reduce the metal compounds associated with neuronal damage ( , ). On the other hand, metal chelators, e.g., desferrioxamine, exhibit serious neurotoxicity and neurological changes due to strong covalent binding properties with membrane proteins ( , ). LDL-receptor-targeted polymeric nanoparticles can potentially cross the BBB or be taken up by the brain endothelial cells and deliver drugs to the brain. And, they effectively mask the covalent bonds of chelators and facilitate the delivery of drugs and minimization of toxicity ( ). Therefore, nanoparticles can play the significant role in the management of neurodegenerative disease.

7.2.4.

## Drug Delivery for Infective Disease
The science of nanotechnology is expected to treat neuroinfective, neurodegenerative, cerebrovascular, and inflammatory diseases. The major challenges for drug delivery to the brain are the low permeability of the BBB and its role as the natural brain-protective layer against the entry of foreign substances and blood microbes ( , ). The usage of polymeric nanoparticles has demonstrated that they are potentially noninvasive drug carriers that can cross the BBB and enter into the brain ( , ). The antitubercular drug-loaded nanoparticle has the capacity to enter into the Mycobacterium tuberculosis organism and produce a potent efficacy against tuberculosis (TB) ( , ). The oral administration (five oral doses every 10 days) of coencapsulated poly(dl-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles with antitubercular drugs (e.g., rifampin, isoniazid, and pyrazinamide) produces complete bacterial clearance from the organs compared to conventional TB drugs in mice and guinea pigs ( , ).
Moreover, the oral administration of poly(dl-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles encapsulating ethionamide produces a potent tissue distribution and manages multidrug-resistant TB. And, the sustained release of ethionamide for 6 days in plasma comparable to the 6-h plasma concentration of free ethionamide in mice has been shown ( ). Therefore, nanoparticles have the potency to deliver drugs into the infective organism at the level of the nervous system.

8.

## Neuroinfection-Associated Neurodegenerative Disease
The nervous system has various self-defensive cells like glial cells, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, macrophages, and T and B cells ( , ). Generally, they play roles in central sensitization and protect the CNS, whereas overactivation of these cells is responsible for changes to the neurological function and at the extreme stage can cause neurodegeneration ( ). The abnormal activation of these cells is due to various internal and external factors such as stress, drugs, chemicals, trauma, surgery, heat, hormones, microbes, and peripheral nerve injury ( , , , , ). The mechanism of neurodegeneration takes place via the release of various proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor and leukotrienes), excitatory neurotransmitters (glutamate and aspartate), and oxidative stress in the neurons ( , , ). The endothelium of the CNS is the primary target site for neuroinfection and neuroinflammation ( ). Changes in the central endothelium affect neurological function via activation of neuronal glial cells, and at the chronic stage it undergoes the enhancement of neurodegeneration ( ). Infectious agents cause neuroinflammation by affecting the endothelium of the cerebral blood vessels and astrocytes ( , ).
Meningitis is a neuroinflammatory condition of the CNS, which is caused by bacterial (Streptococcus pneumonia, N. meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae, Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli, and M. tuberculosis), viral (varicella zoster, influenza, mumps, HIV, and HSV), fungal (Cryptococcus neoformans), and parasitic (cysticercosis) infections ( , ). Encephalitis is another neuroinflammatory condition of the CNS and it is caused by enteroviruses (herpes simplex), rabies virus, and arboviruses (Nile virus). The virus particle is most prone to causing neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration ( , ). Generally, viruses are able to infiltrate the nervous system. The entry of the virus particle into the nervous system involves two methods, i.e., transneuronal and hematogenous spreading methods ( , , ).
The exact mechanism of transneuronal spreading of viruses is not known yet. But it is expected to involve the virus and its proteins escaping from the immune system by traveling via the axons of the nerves ( , , ). In the hematogenous spreading method, the virus uses one of two main ways to enter into the brain. The first way is to infect an immune cell; thereafter, the infected immune cell carries the virus into the nervous tissue, for example, infection of B cells by John Cunningham virus (a type of human polyomavirus) and infection of CD4 T cells and macrophages by HIV ( , ). The second way is to cross the blood capillaries, similar to free virus or leukocyte entry ( ). Furthermore, neurons lack essential molecules for the binding of killer cells with viral peptides on the viral surface. Therefore, the neuron is a safe house in which the virus can replicate ( , ). Once a virus infects a neuron it can persist for the lifetime of the host. Further, it interferes with the function of neurons and their homeostasis of the nervous system, leading to the generation of neuronal damage and neurodegeneration ( ). The infective agents affect the neurological system and cause neurodegenerative diseases such as AD, PD, and ALS ( , , , ). Further, progressive infective neurodegeneration occurs with a wide range of molecular and cellular mechanisms leading to deterioration or loss of neurons in the CNS.
Infectious neurodegeneration occurs not only in the CNS. It also affects the peripheral nervous system and it enhances neuronal inflammation and neurodegeneration ( , ). This leads to peripheral neuropathy. Peripheral neuropathy mainly develops from infection with herpes varicella zoster (called shingles), HSV, or cytomegaloviruses ( , , ). Epstein–Barr virus and West Nile virus do not play a role in the development of peripheral neuropathy. Viral infections are able to affect the nervous system and cause severe damage to the sensory and motor nerves leading to sharp and severe pain ( , , ). Moreover, infection with West Nile virus, which occurs through mosquitoes, causes severe motor neuropathy along with various forms of inflammatory neuropathies. Infection of postherpetic neuralgia is also shown to produce long-lasting and intense pain after an attack of shingles ( ). HIV infection-associated neuropathy shows different forms depending on the nerves affected and the specific stage of active HIV disease ( ). Furthermore, bacteria can attack nervous tissue, causing peripheral nerve damage and neuropathic pain. Such bacterial infections are diphtheria, leprosy, and Lyme disease ( , , ). In addition, the tick-borne infection also contributes to neuroinfection-associated neuropathic pain. It is a rapidly developing infection that progresses to painful polyneuropathy that occurs within a few weeks of infection ( , ). Therefore, the prevention of neuronal infection may be a promising approach in the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.

9.

## The Mechanistic Approach of Nanomedicine for Neuroinfectious Neurodegenerative Disease
Nanoparticles and nanomedicines contribute to various pharmaceutical applications, like diagnosis of disease progression, drug delivery, and treatment of various ailments, such as cancer, thrombosis, wounds, osteoporosis, vertebral fracture, and microbial infective diseases, e.g., TB and HIV-associated opportunistic infections ( , , , , ). Furthermore, it is expected that they will produce potential therapeutic agents for neuroinfective disorders. The possible cellular and molecular mechanisms are as follows.

9.1.

## Cellular Mechanism of Nanomedicine for Neuroinfectious Disease
In the nervous system, nanomedicines can cross the BBB directly and regulate the physiological response of the BBB and brain functions. They can carry circulating immunocytes, such as monocytes, macrophages, and lymphocytes, and stem cells into the brain ( ). Further, they can release their cargo material and control the ongoing disease progress by clearing microbial infections, repairing the neuronal system, eliminating proinflammatory mediators, and inducing the antiinflammatory response ( ). The combined action of nanomedicine and neuronal function may restore the glial homeostasis function in the brain. The cellular mechanism of nanomedicine in the treatment of infectious neurodegenerative disease is illustrated in 
.
 
9.2.

## Molecular Mechanism of Nanomedicine for Neuroinfectious Disease
Nanostructured antimicrobial drugs are targeted mainly to the receptors of brain endothelial cells, such as the insulin, leptin, transferrin, and epidermal growth factor receptors for the transfer of lead molecules across the BBB ( , ). In addition, they are also targeted to the receptors of monocytes/macrophages, such as the folate, CD4, mannose, and CD44 receptors, to enhance cellular uptake of the nanomedicine for macrophage-based drug delivery in the brain via the BBB ( ). The nanomedicine follows six steps to eliminate microbes from the nervous system and other biological systems ( ). After entry of the nanomedicine into the nervous system it attracts and binds to the microbes. Thereafter, it carries out the following steps: (1) it destroys the peptidoglycan (membrane) layer of the microbe, leading to the control of microbial growth; (2) it releases toxic metal ions into the cytosolic region of the microbe and can cause microbial death; (3) it alters the cellular ionic environment by activating the proton efflux pumps, leading to a change in pH; (4) it enhances the generation of free radicals, especially reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to raised oxidative stress; (5) it damages the genetic material of the microbial organism, thus stopping the regulation of microbial growth and replication; and (6) it reduces ATP production, thus increasing energy demand and controlling microbial growth and proliferation ( , , , ). The molecular mechanism of nanomedicine for the elimination of microbes from the nervous system is illustrated in 
.
 Therefore, nanomedicine can achieve therapeutic action against neuroinfection-associated neurodegenerative disease. Based on this discussion, the approach of using nanostructured antimicrobial agents and nanomedicine can be useful in the treatment of neuroinfectious and neurodegenerative disease.

10.

## Toxicological Hazards of Nanoparticles
The imaging and drug delivery functions of nanoparticles have been successfully explored in pharmaceutical science. They can even produce a potent therapeutic ratio or index up to the marginal level. Nanoparticles can act as drug carriers and can reduce the toxicity of a drug. However, the toxic effect of the whole formulation (nanoparticle and drug) or the nanoparticle itself is not described yet. Therefore, the potential usage of nanostructured nanoparticles and nanomedicines remains questionable because of their potential toxicity, clinical efficacy, and adverse side effects ( , , ). And, scientific studies need to explore their complete safety and efficacy in humans. Further, studies on their bioavailability, biotransformation, environmental toxicity, etc., are needed ( , ). The true applications of nanoparticles for the treatment of disease require improvement in the specific formulations, more safety and efficacy, and minimized cellular toxicity. The opinion of toxicologists is that new science, methods, and protocols are needed with a higher safety profile for the utilization of nanoparticles and nanomedicines ( ).
Based on this discussion the following points must be considered for the development of nanostructured nanomaterials and nanomedicines: (1) proper testing of nanoparticles, nanomedicines, and devices with advanced techniques; (2) study of the pharmacokinetics (especially distribution and biotransformation) and pharmacodynamics properties of nanoparticles in the biological system; and (3) study of the effects of nanoparticle exposure to the biological and environmental levels with respect to degradation and toxicity ( , , ).
Toxic exposure can be overcome in the following way. The method of risk assessment for the nanomedicine and nanodevice must be appropriate. Further, assays are performed to detect all the potential risks. The methods of assays and techniques needed depend upon the type of nanoparticles used, whether biological or nonbiological in origin. As of this writing, the study of nanoparticles is lacking a basic understanding of nanoparticle pharmacokinetic behavior in biological systems, especially the distribution and biotransformation of nanoparticles at the organ and cellular levels. Because nanoparticles are very small sized particles, they may change bodily functions, pass through the BBB, and trigger abnormal blood coagulation pathways. The nanoparticles must be degraded without the development of harmful effects in animals, plants, and environmental natural resources. Therefore, the presence of nanoparticles must be detectable in biological and environmental systems at this stage. This will have major importance in detecting slowly or nondegradable nanoparticles.

11.

## Nanotoxicology
Nanotoxicology is a newer branch of science and it deals with the study and application of nanomaterials with regard to toxicity in humans and the environment. Mainly nanotoxicological studies are intended to determine the extent to which the toxic properties threaten the environment and human beings ( ). The types of toxic exposure of nanoparticle are as follows: (1) consumer exposure—usage of nanoparticle-containing personal care products, cosmetics, sunscreen preparations; (2) occupational exposure—for workers in nanomaterial manufacturing and research; (3) environmental exposure—the increasing concentrations of nanomaterials in groundwater and soil may produce a significant environmental risk ( ). Moreover, the toxicity of nanomaterials is broadly classified into two areas: (1) biological toxicity and (2) environmental toxicity. In biological systems, the nanostructured nanoparticles enter the body via six principle routes, i.e., oral, intravenous, dermal, subcutaneous, inhalation, and intraperitoneal. The particles enter the systemic circulation and are distributed to the various organs of the body and may remain structurally the same or be modified or metabolized. In cellular systems, they can cause biological toxicity by DNA damage or ROS generation. This leads to tissue damage, inflammation, cytotoxicity, and organ failure from the deposition of nanoparticles. And it also causes fibrosis and allergies ( , ). In environmental systems, nondegradable nanoparticles are ready to deposit in the groundwater, leading to production of environmental pollutants. Further, they may also be harmful to plants and microbes. The removal of nanoparticles from the environment is another challenging task in the management of nanotoxicity ( , ).

12.

## Challenge to Usage and Management of Nanoparticles
Nanoparticles are already exist in nature, e.g., volcanic ash, ocean spray, and forest fire smoke; and they are highly toxic. The existing chemical nanoparticles, e.g., carbon nanotubes, are also able to produce toxic effects ( ). It is argued that natural nanoparticles are not considerable as a new phenomenon because they come from daily human activities like mining, cooking, and combustion of materials ( ). Nanoparticle studies have shown that they have some special properties, i.e., (1) ultrasmall-sized particles have extreme mobility and higher propagation in living organisms if not controlled, (2) they can create more toxic effects per unit compared to larger particles of the same chemicals, (3) they can be absorbed more quickly by cells, and (4) they move more quickly, contaminating the environment through air, soil, and water, leading to damage of plants and animals ( ). Some kinds of nanoparticles are responsible for causing inflammatory reactions in the lungs, such as carbon black nanoparticles (QDs or polymeric nanoparticles). And, they cannot be considered as a uniform group of nanoparticles because they interact and behave in different manners depending upon several factors ( ).
The lack of data on the potential risks of nanoparticles and nanomedicines with respect to the human body and the environment, has raised some questions and issues. Scientific research must answer many questions to allow the utilization of nanoparticles in human beings with an environmentally friendly approach. Such questions are as follows: (1) How do nanoparticle pathways affect the human body? (2) How long can nanoparticles remain in the human body? (3) What are the nanoparticles’ effects on cellular and tissue functions? ( ). The main challenges of nanoparticle usage are the identification of toxicity-free nanoparticles, legal evaluation of the final medical products, and elimination of particles from biological and environmental systems. Nanomedicine remains challengeable because it does not fall into the traditional classifications of drugs or medical devices. Furthermore, the risk analyses of nanoparticles are complicated because of the lack of data, techniques, and issues ( , ).
The outcome of using nanomedicine for treatments must be satisfy regulatory, environmental, social, and ethical issues. The US FDA has effective regulations for the use nanoparticles with strong technologies and scientific advances. Generally, the FDA classifies the regulatory processes for medical products as drugs, devices, and biological or combination products. But it lacks regulation for nanomedicine in aspects such as lack of scientific expertise and classification difficulties ( , ). As for the environmental aspect, the excretory materials are mainly suspended in the air for long periods and cause respiratory disorders. The National Science Foundation and the Environmental Protection Agency are raising issues about the potential impact of nanomaterials on the environment and the adverse effects. A social issue is the usage of neurobiochips that stimulate the brain in humans and manipulate neuropsychological factors. Social and ethical issues are debated regarding implantable nanodevices that closely monitor illness, privacy rights, and risk of abuse. The prices of nanodevices would be very high, which is another social issue and one that affects the developing nations ( ). The ethical issues concern proving that nanoparticles are nontoxic, eco-friendly, unable to be used for terrorism purposes, and easy to remove when toxic effects are produced in the body ( , , ).

13.

## Future Perspectives
The major concern of nanoparticle applications is nanostructure toxicity and it depends upon the physical characteristics of the individual new particles. Ongoing research reports will give the answer and solve the biological and environmental toxicity. At this stage, nanostructured nanoparticles and nanomedicine will provide the high sensitivity, specificity, low cost, portability, and reusability of nanoparticles. It is a great invention in the field of pharmaceutical and medical sciences. Various technologies are being established to detect the very fine particles and scientific uncertainties surround the outcome of nanomedicine ( , ). The best case scenario brings the success of nanoparticle usage in the pharmaceutical and other fields. It will provide the fundamental basis to intensify the research in science and other disciplines. On one side, data are needed for scientific evidence and the toxicological profile of the nanoparticle. On the other side, the development of the nanoparticle process is not only a scientific task, but also requires answers to all the issues and questions. Jurists and legal scholars have reported that scientific discoveries following standard guidelines and providing the minimum safety standards are acceptable for protecting human health. In this point of view, nanotechnology offers an opportunity for major integration among the different disciplines and especially between science and law. Therefore, the nanostructured antimicrobial agent can be a future nanomedicine for neuroinfection-assisted neurodegenerative disorders.

14.

## Conclusions
Various nanomaterials have been reported for the drug delivery process with therapeutic levels in biological systems. They have great potential to enter into microbes and release a drug. Thus, drug delivery through nanostructured systems and their antimicrobial actions have been widely explored in preclinical as well as clinical research. The most important advantage of nanomedicine is low side effects and delivery of an accurate dose in site- and target-specific regions. Nanomedicine offers the possibility of preventing, diagnosing, and treating diseases and opens up a very promising area in the field of medicine. Therefore, nanostructural medicine is a future goal in the treatment of neuroinfection-associated neurodegenerative disorders like HIV-associated dementia, AD, PD, ALS, and MS, including neuropathic pain.

## Acknowledgment
The authors are thankful to all faculty members of Akal College of Pharmacy and Technical Education, Mastuana Sahib, Sangrur-148002, Punjab, India, for their valuable suggestions and support in completing this chapter.

## References