3814phenaturepgMolecular Genetic PathologyMolecular Genetic PathologyPMC71220387122038712203810.1007/978-1-4614-4800-6_25Molecular Virology
YeFeiPhD CuiMiaoMD KhasawnehRame HMD ShibataRobertMD WuJosephineDDS, CLSP(MB), CLDIR SharaanMonaMD ZhangDavid YMD, PhD, MPH ChengLiang ZhangDavid Y EbleJohn N ID1School of Medicine, Dept. Pathology, Indiana University, N. University Blvd. 550, Indianapolis, 46202 Indiana USA ID2Dept. Pathology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Gustave L. Levy Place 1, New York, 10029 New York USA ID3School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and, Indiana University, 635 Barnhill Drive, Indianapolis, 46202 Indiana USA 00251Department of Pathology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY USA 00252Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY USA 00253Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY USA ✉Corresponding author.
28122012655655–731642020© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.

## Abstract
This chapter describes common viral pathogens in humans with emphasis on the molecular diagnosis. Each section includes molecular characteristics, clinical presentation, and commonly used diagnostic methods (both conventional and molecular). Commercially available molecular diagnostic kits are preferentially described. Recommendations and guidelines (if available) for result interpretation and clinical approach are also included. For detailed methods, please refer to the chapter “Methodology and Instrumentation” in this book.
Keywords: Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Avian Influenza, Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractedno

## General

Limitation and pitfallsIn the past decade, molecular methods for detection and quantification of virus infections have replaced many traditional viral culture and serological methods
The molecular tests significantly improved clinical turnaround time and reduced hands-on time in addition to increase the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity
Many commercial assay kits and automatic instruments are available which allow many clinical microbiology laboratories to offer molecular tests
However, the routine implementation of nucleic acid (both DNA and RNA) amplification and hybridization methodologies in clinical laboratories is still associated with a number of limitationsIncreased cost/test due to expensive instrumentation and reagents
Amplification carryover contamination
Standardization of positive, negative, and quantitative controls
Integrated coamplified internal DNA control to demonstrate absence of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) inhibitors and amplification
Prevention of false-positive and false-negative reports due to antigenic and pathogen nucleic acid sequence drift and accurate interpretation of data and software analyses

SpecimensCollection of adequate specimens is important for molecular diagnosis of virus. These are specimen types commonly used for molecular diagnosis
Whole blood: 3–5 mls collected in an EDTA (lavender top) tube. Store at 4–25 °C. Do not freeze
Plasma: Collect 7–10 mls of whole blood in EDTA, ACD solution A, or PPT sterile tube. Store whole blood at room temperature (18–30 °C) for no more than 4 h. Remove plasma from cells within 4 h of collection by centrifugation at 1,000 × g for 10–15 min. Do not clarify by filtration or further centrifugation. Store plasma at –60 to –80 °C within 30 min of separation. Plasma may also be stored at –20 °C in nonfrost-free freezer for up to 72 h if colder freezer is not available. Ship on dry ice for overnight delivery. The minimum volume of specimen is 2 mls of plasma
Urine: first 10–20 mls of voided urine collected in a sterile urinalysis container (15 ml sterile screw cap tube preferred). Store at 4–25 °C for less than 24 h or store at –70 °C for long term
Bronchial lavage/tracheal aspirate: 1–4 mls, collected in a sterile tube. Store at 4–25 °C for less than 24 h
Bone marrow: 1–2 mls, collected in EDTA tube. Store at 4–25 °C. Do not freeze
Tissue: ∼0.5-cm tissue block collected in a sterile screw-top container, add small amount of saline to keep it moist. Avoid the use of viral transport media to avoid potential inhibition of PCR. Fresh tissues should be stored at –72 °C immediately to preserve the nucleic acidsParaffin-embedded tissue is acceptable. Usually 5–10 sections (5 μm thickness) are sufficient for PCR analysis. The tissue sections must be deparaffinized with xylene before DNA extraction

Fecal: sterile swab (plastic shaft only) or very small fecal sample placed in 1–2 mls sterile saline in a container with tight fitting lid. Do not use viral transport media to avoid potential inhibition of PCR
Swab: sterile swab (plastic shaft only) placed in 1–2 mls sterile saline. Do not use viral transport media to avoid potential inhibition of PCR
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF): 1–1.5 mls fluid, submitted in a sterile, leakproof tube, store at 4–25 °C for less than 24 h or store at –70 °C for long term

Assay performance analysisAnalytical performanceAnalytical sensitivity: to determine the lowest number of targets that can be detected by the assay
Cross-reactivity (specificity): to determine if the assay can produce false-positive results in the presence of high concentration of other similar or unrelated pathogens (bacteria, yeast, and virus)
Linearity: to evaluate the log differences from the expected concentration; this difference should be within ±0.1 log (or a ratio of observed mean quantitation to expected concentration within 95%)
Quantitative range: the measured concentrations within the linear range with a good reproducibility

Clinical performanceLimits of detection: the lowest concentration of target nucleic acids that can be detected (at or above the detection cutoff in 95% of replicates, usually 10 replicates)
Detection cutoff: the point on the assay quantitation scale such that 95% of negative specimens produce results below this cutoff with 95% confidence
Limits of quantification: the lowest concentration of target nucleic acids that can be quantified in 95% of replicates
Reproducibility: The reproducibility of the test is usually established by testing three to six sample panels with known concentrations of target in triplicate or quadruplicate. A commercial panel should be used to establish this parameter, if available. Reproducibility is expressed as percent correlation coefficient. For quantitative assays, the CVs range from 10% to 50%
Precision: the reproducibility of a test result (e.g., inter- and intratechnologist and inter- and intra-assay)
Sensitivity: true positive samples, % of true positive samples above the limits of detection
Specificity: true negative samples, % of true negative samples below the limits of detection

Quality controls: For quantitative assay, additional quality control procedures should be performed, including calibration and calibration verificationCalibration is the set of operations that establish, under specified conditions, the relationship between reagent system/instrument response and the corresponding concentration/activity values of an analyte. Calibration procedures are typically specified by a method manufacturer, but may also be established by the laboratory
Calibration verification denotes the process of confirming that the current calibration settings remain valid for a method
Recalibration or calibration verification and analytical measurement range validation must be performed at least once every 6 months
For each run, sensitivity controls should be included in addition to positive and negative controls. It is recommended that two levels of controls (high and low) should be included

## Human Immunodeficiency Virus

## General Characteristics

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is an RNA retrovirus belonging to the lentivirus family. HIV1 and HIV2 are genetically different; HIV2 shares 40% nucleotide homology with HIV1. HIV2 is more related to SIV than to HIV1. Both types appear to cause clinically indistinguishable AIDS. However, it seems that HIV2 is less easily transmitted, and the period between initial infection and illness is longer in the case of HIV2. Worldwide, the predominant virus is HIV1, and generally, when people refer to HIV without specifying the type of virus, they will be referring to HIV1. The relatively uncommon HIV2 is concentrated in West Africa and is rarely found elsewhere
Structure of HIV virion (Fig. )HIV virus consists of a spherical viral particle encased in a lipid bilayer derived from host cell covered by protruding peg-like structures composed of gp41 and gp120 glycoproteins
The virus core nucleocapsid contains the major capsid protein, p24; two copies of genomic RNA; and three viral enzymes (protease, reverse transcriptase, and integrase)

Viral replication (Fig. )The first step of infection is entry into the host cell, which requires binding of the gp120 molecule on the virus to CD4 molecules on the host cell’s surface, and is mediated by the gp41 molecule. Two surface molecules CCR5 and CXCR4, chemokine receptors for beta-chemokines and alpha-chemokines are also required for entry
Once bound, the viral envelope fuses with the cell membrane and the virus’ RNA and enzymes enter the cytoplasm
Reverse transcriptase catalyzes, first, the synthesis of a DNA copy of the viral RNA and, second, the synthesis of a second DNA strand complementary to the first one. Therefore, a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) is generated
Integrase then facilitates the integration of viral DNA into the cellular chromosome when the cell divides and provides latency enabling the virus to effectively evade host responses
Transcription of the DNA results in the production of RNA. This RNA can serve as the genome for new viruses and can be translated to produce viral proteins. Viral proteins are facilitated by protease and assembled into viral particles using the host cell’s protein-making machinery
Complete HIV particles are assembled. In macrophages, HIV buds out of the cell without rupturing the cell, and the cycle begins again. In T cells, HIV exits the cell by rupturing it, effectively killing the cell

The gag, pol, and env genes encode for structural proteins for new virus particles. The other six genes, tat, rev, nef, vif, vpr, and vpu, regulate the synthesis and assembly of viral particles
The phylogenic analysis of the nucleotide sequences of the env gene has enabled classification of HIV1 into three groups: M (major), N (non-M), and O (outlier). The group M of HIV1 infection has been classified into nine different genetic subtypes A–K. More than 90% of HIV1 infections belong to HIV1 group M. Subtype/class B is the most prevalent in the developed world
HIV is transmitted via sexual contact, blood (via transfusion, blood products, or contaminated needles), or passage from mother to child (in utero, during birth, or ingestion of breast milk). Although saliva can contain small quantities of the virus, the virus cannot be spread by kissing. HIV is not spread by the fecal–oral route, aerosols, insects, or casual contact

 

## Clinical Presentation

HIV is the causative agent of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), the leading cause of death in humans between the ages of 25–44 years
Two main targets of HIV: immune system and central nervous system. HIV targets CD4+ T cells, monocytes/macrophages, and Langerhans cells/dendritic cells causing severe immunosuppression and neuropathologic symptoms such as dementia, meningitis, and encephalopathy in the host
Common opportunistic infections: Pneumocystis carinii, candidiasis, tuberculosis, Cryptococcus, cytomegaloretinitis
Common malignancies: Kaposi sarcoma, lymphoma (non-Hodgkin and brain primary), and uterine carcinoma
Individuals who have HIV face a long challenging road. The disease has a steady natural history, starting with an asymptomatic state and progressing toward AIDS. Natural history includes three phasesEarly-stage HIV infection is defined as the presence of HIV with a CD4 count greater than 500. Early stage develops 3–6 weeks after initial exposure with self-limited flu-like symptoms resolving 2–4 weeks later in 50–60% of patients by high level of viral production, viremia, and widespread seeding of lymphoid tissues
Chronic phase HIV infection occurs when the CD4 count is between 200 and 500. Chronic phase is associated with a period of latency in which the immune system is intact, but there is continuous HIV replication that may last for years. Patients are either asymptomatic or develop persistent lymphadenopathy with minor opportunistic infections, such as candidiasis or herpes zoster
When the CD4 count drops below 200, the HIV infection has entered the crisis phase. This is when certain infections that are easily handled by an intact immune system take advantage of this immunocompromised state (opportunistic infections). Certain cancers may also appear for the same reason. When a patient has a CD4 count less than 200 and at least one opportunistic infection or cancer specifically seen in crisis phase HIV, he or she is officially designated as having AIDS

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimens – whole blood, serum, and plasma (Table )
Conventional tests and problemsLymphocyte countD4 cells (also called T cells or T-helper cells) are the primary targets of the HIV virus. Quantitation of CD4 cells was the first effective predictor of HIV progression. The CD4 count is one of many factors (including clinical status, HIV viral load, and medication adherence) that should be assessed before starting or changing antiretroviral (ARV) treatment
The CD4 cell count (<200 cells/mm3) is important in determining the staging of HIV disease and for indicating the need for prophylaxis against opportunistic pathogens
Most laboratories report the CD4 count as part of a list of several types of lymphocytes, as both an absolute count and a relative percentage. Measurement and trending of CD4 percentage in addition to absolute count must be performed prior to initiation or adjustment of ARV treatment management decisions
The CD4 percentage sometimes is used in coordination with the absolute value to assess the significance of changes in the absolute CD4 count. The absolute CD4 count can fluctuate as overall lymphocyte counts vary, but the CD4 percentage often remains stable during insignificant CD4 fluctuations. CD8 cell (or cytotoxic T cell) counts do not appear to predict clinical outcomes
For monitoring purposes, the CD4 count should be repeated approximately every 3–4 months both in stable untreated patients and in patients on stable ART. The CD4 count should be checked more frequently according to the clinical situation

Viral cultureAlthough very specific, single positive culture must be confirmed with a second specimen
Rarely used due to high cost, labor-intensive, and less sensitivity than antibody testing
Negative culture may be caused by technical problems, a defective virus, or the inability of the virus to replicate in culture

Serological studiesp24 antigenEarly developed assay to detect HIV infection and screen donated blood for HIV
Advantage is to detect HIV infection prior to development of antibodies
Disadvantage is limited utility due to the short window of time and should only be used when other tests are unavailable

Antibody screening assays (qualitative)Detection of antibodies to HIV is the most common way to diagnose HIV infection in adults and children >18 months old
These antibodies are usually detectable within 3–6 weeks after infection
Most individuals seroconvert by 12 weeks, although may not be detectable for months or years
The window period is the time between infection and the development of antibodies. When a person is infected with HIV, it takes a few weeks for the body to make antibodies to the virus. Most people develop antibodies within a month of infection, although some people can take up to 3 months. In very rare cases, it can take 6 months of the test to be positive. In general, repeat testing for HIV should occur at 3 months if there is a significant concern of recent HIV infection. Additionally, because the level of virus in blood is high during the window period, people can more easily transmit HIV
Serologic HIV antibody screening testing is highly sensitive (ELISA, rapid test, or home test), but requires followup of preliminary positive specimens with a highly specific HIV antibody confirmatory assay (Western blot) (Fig. )
ELISA method is most common and earliest developed antibody screening assay
Home Access HIV1 test system analyzes a dried-blood spot from finger stick collected on filter paper at home and sent to a testing facility
Rapid tests for HIV are assays that detect antibodies to HIV within minutes. The rapid test is highly specific: negative means negative except during window period; and the test is also highly sensitive: positive means most likely has HIV, but must be confirmed using Western blot for HIV diagnosis

Confirmatory antibody assays: Western blotGold standard for HIV diagnostic testing
The virus is disrupted, and the individual proteins are separated by molecular weight via differential migration on a polyacrylamide gel and blotted onto a membrane support. HIV serum antibodies from the patient are allowed to bind to the proteins in the membrane support, and patterns of reactivity can be visibly read
Detects three major proteins/viral bands: p24 core protein and two envelope proteins, gp41 and gp120/160
Reactive WB demonstrates antibody to two of the three major bands; nonreactive WB will have no detectable viral bands (Fig. )
Repeated reactivity by ELISA and reactivity by the confirmatory assay are reported as positive for antibody to HIV1
Nonreactive specimens by ELISA or repeatedly reactive by ELISA and nonreactive by the confirmatory assay are negative for antibody to HIV1
WB in which serum antibodies bind to any other combination of viral bands is considered indeterminate; followup blood specimen should be obtained 1 month later for repeat HIV antibody testing
Individuals with repeat indeterminate results should undergo further testing using molecular assays, such as PCR
At least as sensitive as and more specific than screening assays, although they are not as sensitive in the detection of early seroconversion
Disadvantages: more labor-intensive, more prone to subjective interpretation, and more costly than screening assays

Alternative antibody screening assay (qualitative)US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved assays that test body fluids other than blood to detect HIV1 antibodies, although sensitivity and specificity are less reliable
Utilizes same testing algorithm as serum (ELISA followed by WB)
Advantages are noninvasive sample collection, increased safety due to lack of needles, and disposal of infectious waste minimized
Oral fluid (oral mucosal transudate): antibodies detectable, but significantly lower (800– 1,000-fold) than those of serum
Urine: Interpretative criteria for a reactive WB requires only presence of visible band at gp160 region

Molecular methodsQualitative assay: viral identification assays – recommended for resolving indeterminate Western blot resultsDNA PCR (Roche)
The HIV DNA PCR test is a new technology used for HIV early detection testing. The new HIV PCR test looks for the DNA copy of the HIV virus itself in peripheral blood. It is extremely accurate, sensitive, and the cutting edge of HIV early detection testing
The average window period with HIV1 antibody tests is 25 days. Antigen testing cuts the window period to approximately 16 days, and HIV DNA test further reduces this period to 12 days
Detection of HIV DNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells by PCR is recommended for children <18 months old born to HIV1-infected mothers
False-positive reactions common due to small amounts of background “noise” or contamination
All initial positive DNA PCR reactions must be confirmed with a second PCR test on a separate specimen
Currently, recommended only for detection in infants born to mothers infected with HIV1. However, potential for false-positive result must still be recognized
Plasma HIV RNA
Surrogate marker of HIV disease progression
During acute infection, viral load levels are very high (ranging from 100,000 to over 10 million copies/mL) and detectable before seroconversion
Important to use both a plasma HIV RNA assay and antibody/Western blot testing to establish diagnosis in acute and primary infections
Low levels of virus (<5,000 copies/mL) may be indicative of a false-positive result and should not be considered diagnostic of primary HIV infection. Standard antibody testing should be repeated

QuantitativeViral monitoring (Table and Fig. )
Amplicor HIV1 Monitor and COBAS® AmpliPrep/COBAS® TaqMan® HIV1 Test,v2.0 (Roche) (FDA approved)Quantitation of HIV1 RNA in plasma
Standard assay limit of detection for Amplicor HIV1 Monitor: >400 copies/ml and used for monitoring patient not on ARV therapy
Ultrasensitive assay and v2.0: as low as 50 or 20 copies/ml and used for monitoring viral loads <400 copies/ml. Viral load results of <50 or 20 copies/mL do not necessarily indicate absence of HIV1 viral replication. Inhibitory substances may be present in the plasma specimen, leading to negative or falsely low HIV1 RNA results. Improper specimen collection or storage may falsely lower the plasma viral load results
Plasma specimens collected using ACD anticoagulant show quantitative HIV1 RNA levels that are ∼15% lower than those collected in tubes containing EDTA
Acute concurrent illness and/or recent vaccination may cause transient rise in viral load
Calculation of HIV viremia for Amplicor HIV1 Monitor and COBAS® AmpliPrep test is based on optical density reading. Input QS copies are lot specific and provided with each kit. Standard sample volume factor = 40; ultrasensitive sample volume factor = 4. OD450, optical density at 450nm; QS, quantitation standard. The well with the lowest OD450 reading between 0.2 and 2.0 is selected for calculation. (Figs. and )
The HIV TaqMan test v2.0 uses three LTR primers with one FAM-labeled LTR probe in conjunction with four GAG primers and one FAM-labeled GAG probe. Therefore, the v2.0 offers primers and probes that are used to amplify the gag and LTR regions; it also provides diagnostic accuracy of test results even if mutations occur in one of the two regions and compensates for the possibility of mismatch occurring with a primer/probe region. It also ensures enhanced reliability of test results and more confidence in assessing viral loads (Fig. )
A single HIV1 viral load test result should not be used as the only criteria to guide therapeutic decision and intervention in the clinical care of HIV1-infected patients. Viral load results should be correlated with patient symptoms, clinical presentation, and CD4 cell count
Due to the inherent variability in the assay, physiologic variation, and concurrent illnesses in the infected patients, <100-fold (<2 log) change in plasma HIV1 viral load should not be considered as significant change

Branched DNA (bDNA) (Bayer)The VERSANT@ HIV1 RNA 3.0 Assay (bDNA) is a signal amplification nucleic acid probe assay for the direct quantitation of HIV1 RNA in plasma of HIV1-infected individuals using the Bayer@ System 340 bDNA Analyzer. The test can quantitate HIV1 RNA over the range of 75–500,000 HIV1 RNA copies/ml
bDNA is based on a series of hybridization procedure followed by an enzyme substrate reaction. The basic principles and procedures for bDNA 3.0 include viral lysis, overnight hybridization of viral nucleic acid, and target capture in a 96-well plate, followed by wash steps and the serial addition of probes that allow for signal amplification, detection, and quantification
bDNA methods have progressed from first generation assays, which were accurate and reproducible but relatively insensitive, to third generation bDNA tests that are accurate, reproducible, highly sensitive, and automated laboratory tests for more optimal patient management. The results of this evolution in bDNA technology are FDA-approved methods for the detection and quantification of HIV1 (VERSANT HIV1 RNA 3.0 Assay)
HIV1 present in patient blood is disrupted to release viral RNA

Nucleic acid sequence-based assay (NASBA), NucliSens HIV1 QT assay, NucliSens EasyQ HIV1 assayNASBA is a sensitive, isothermal, transcription-based amplification system designed specifically for the detection of RNA targets. NucliSens HIV1 QT is both FDA approved and CE marked. The NucliSens HIV1 QT is a NASBA with endpoint electrochemiluminescence (ECL) detection. Further refinement has led to the development of the CE marked NucliSens EasyQ HIV1 – a combination of NASBA amplification and real-time detection using molecular beacons utilizing the NucliSens EasyQ analyzer
The NucliSens EasyQ HIV1 assay (bioMérieux, Boxtel, The Netherlands) is a quantitative, next generation amplification assay designed to overcome the labor and throughput obstacles in the earlier assays
Real-time detection of amplicons occurs during the NASBA reaction following primer exhaustion and continued production of antisense RNA from the T7 promoter. During the exponential phase of production, amplicons are detected using molecular beacon oligonucleotide probes that fluoresce upon binding to the specific target sequence
The published performance characteristics of the NucliSens EasyQ HIV1 v1.1 assay show that it is comparable to the NucliSens HIV1 QT, the Versant HIV1 RNA, and the COBAS Amplicor HIV1 Monitor v1.5 assays in linearity, specificity, and reproducibility
Although only plasma is FDA approved, can use CSF, lymph tissue, genital secretions, and cells
Purified nucleic acid may be used for other molecular testing, such as sequencing

GenotypingGenotypic resistance testing uses RT-PCR and DNA sequencing techniques to identify the presence or absence of resistance related mutations in the viral genome16 ARV approved for the treatment of HIV (Fig. ). ARV therapy slows the replication of HIV in the body. If patients are infected with HIV and are currently on active ARV therapy but the patients’ viral load continues to increase, then the patients may undergo either genotypic or phenotypic resistance testing
Phenotypic testing measures the ability of the HIV1 virus to grow in different concentrations of drug under artificial conditions in the laboratory. Although phenotyping is a direct measure of resistance, it is more complex than genotyping and therefore slower and more costly to perform
Genotyping testing detects viral sequence change and sequence entire HIV protease (codon 1–99) and HIV-RT (codon 40–335) to cover all known drug resistance mutations
No consensus on genotyping versus phenotyping; however, it is anticipated that genotyping will be used more often because of its greater accessibility, lower cost, and faster turnaround time

Mechanism of resistanceHIV is a highly polymorphic G virus (quasispecies) which during replication converts RNA to DNA by the action of the viral reverse transcriptase enzyme (RT)
The RT enzyme has very little proofreading (correction) capacity, and therefore errors are incorporated into the proviral DNA during replication. Over time, these errors, at concise drug binding sites, can provide a selection advantage for the virus in the presence of ARV drugs
The resistant virus predominates with a subsequent increase in viral load. However, the extent of such resistance and the implications for choice of therapy can be determined by reading the sequence of the genes encoding the protease and the RT enzymes
Taking medication exactly as prescribed is a very important part of avoiding resistance. Missing doses or not taking them on time lowers the amount of ARV chemicals in the body, which means the virus is not properly suppressed. The virus is then able to replicate faster, increasing the chance of it becoming resistant
Resistance to some ARVs can limit future treatment options. If HIV is resistant to one drug, it will sometimes be resistant to similar drugs in the same group. This is called cross-resistance and it means that some ARV drugs will not work even if they have not been used before

Indications for drug-resistant testingDrug-naïve patients with acute or recent infection
Therapy failure, including suboptimal treatment response, when treatment change is considered
Pregnant HIV1-infected women and pediatric patients with detectable viral load when treatment initiation or change is considered
Transmitted drug-resistant virus is common in some areas and is more likely to be detected earlier in the course of HIV infection; consider resistance testing earlier in the course of infection

One of the FDA-approved assay for DNA sequencing: TRUGENE™ HIV1 Genotyping and OpenGene DNA Sequencing System, Bayer HealthCare, Berkeley, CAIt is a two-step procedure which first amplifies the protease and reverse transcriptase regions of the HIV1 genome using RT-PCR
The amplified DNA is then sequenced to yield to the nucleotide profile of the virus using a sequencing gel
Once the sequence has been generated, it is compared to the wild-type HIV1 sequence and any differences that confer drug resistance are highlighted

Another FDA-approved assay for DNA sequencing is ViroSeq™ HIV1 genotyping system, Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA (distributed by Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Il)It is a two-step procedure which first amplifies the protease and reverse transcriptase regions of the HIV1 genome using RT-PCR and cycling sequencing
The amplified DNA is then sequenced to yield to the nucleotide profile of the virus using a capillary electrophoresis
The minimum input of viral RNA to the assay should be 1,000 copies/ml when using 1 ml of plasma to be successful in genotyping

Pitfalls of genotypingGenotypic variants comprising less than 20–30% of the sample may not be detected as genotyping results reflect the predominate subtype
Interpretation of genotyping results is based on the HIV1 clade B, the most prevalent clade in the developed world. However, other subtypes and recombinants of HIV1 may be undetected
Assessing HIV1 resistance is complicated by the replication kinetics of resistant mutants. Resistant mutants are often less fit than wild-type virus and may become undetectable with selective drugs. Nevertheless, these mutants persist in the patient and when the selective drug pressure is reapplied, the mutants replicate and a resistant population quickly predominates

 

## Clinical Utility

Plasma HIV RNA is a surrogate marker of HIV disease progression that is used to guide and monitor therapy and management
ARV therapy should be implemented in patients with any of the following clinical findings: symptomatic HIV infection or AIDS-defining condition, CD4 count ≤350 cells/mm3 or viral load ≥100,000 copies/ml (pregnant mothers: ≥1,000 copies/ml)
The initial highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) goal in the ARV therapy-naïve patient should be to attain a viral load of <50 copies/mL and should include the rational sequencing of ARV agents to achieve the maximum possible viral replication suppression
In ARV treatment-naïve patients or patients who are on a successful treatment regimen, monitoring of viral loads should be measured at baseline, every 2–4 weeks after initiation and every 3–4 months once maximal suppression is attained, although patients with CD4 counts >500 cells/mm3 may require less frequent viral load monitoring
Typically, in patients beginning therapy or in those changing therapy as a result of virologic failure, viral load measured 2–4 weeks after therapy initiation. A decrease by at least 1 log (10-fold) indicates effective therapy. Most patients reach the goal of <50 copies/mL within 6 months. An absent or incomplete response of the viral load to ARV therapy should raise concerns about poor patient adherence to therapy and/or viral resistance
If significant increase (3-fold increase or more) in viral load without clear explanation, viral load should be repeated to confirm virologic failure
Genotypic resistance testing should be performed prior to initiating treatment in ARV therapy-naïve patients and in patients with >1,000 copies/ml, or nonresponsive to ARV
Genotypic resistance testing is not recommended in patients with 500–1,000 copies/mL or less and has discontinued ARV therapy for more than 1 year

## Hepatitis C Virus

## General Characteristics

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) was first recognized in 1974 as a non-A, non-B hepatitis virus (NANBH) and first identified in 1989 using molecular methods. HCV is the major cause of non-A, non-B hepatitis (91%) affecting about 3% of the world’s population
The most common route of transmission is via blood and blood products, i.e., immune globulin, surgery, and intravenous drug abuse which has significantly reduced with the advent of routine blood screenings. Sexual transmission as well as vertically from mother to infant occurs; the rate of vertical transmission of HCV is 6%
HCV is a positive sense, single-stranded RNA virus that represents the third genus of the family Flaviviridae. The genome encodes for a single open reading frame coding structural (one core and two envelopes) proteins as well as a series of nonstructural proteins (Fig. )5′ untranslated region: most constant, used for HCV RNA assays and genotyping
Core region: constant, used in some genotype assays, core protein assay, PCR–RFLP, and RIBA tests
Envelope region: hypervariable region, associated with high rate of mutation in quasispecies
NS2 region: codes for protease
NS3 region: codes for protease/helicase, RIBA tests found in this region
NS4 region: c100p antigen used in anti-HCV, RIBA tests targeted this region
NS5a region: codes for interferon response element
NS5b region: codes for RNA polymerase, NS5 antigen used in anti-HCV, RIBA tests target this area

HCV consists of a heterogeneous group of genotypes based on the sequence homology of 5′ untranslated region. Currently, there are 6 types and over 90 subtypes. Types 1, 2, and 3 distributed worldwide, with types 1a and 1b responsible for approximately 60% of infections. Type 4 occurs primarily in the Middle East, type 5 in South Africa, and type 6 in Hong Kong. In the United States (US), approximately 72% of people infected with HCV have genotype 1, and most others are types 2 or 3 (genotypes 4, 5, and 6 are not common in the US)
There is little difference in the mode of transmission or natural history of infection among the different genotypes
Cure rates with antiviral therapy are notably higher with genotypes 2 and 3, and the duration of HCV therapy is shorter for these genotypes
Infection with HCV is curable by therapy, with the current standard treatment based on the combination of pegylated interferon alpha (IFNa) and ribavirin. Virus eradication, characterized by the sustained virological response, i.e., an undetectable HCV RNA 24 weeks after treatment completion, is achieved in 40–50% of patients infected with HCV genotype 1 and approximately 80% of patients infected with genotypes 2 and 3. The outcome of therapy is influenced by several parameters, including the treatment schedule, disease characteristics, viral factors, and recently identified genetic factors that include single nucleotide polymorphisms located upstream of the gene encoding IFNλ3 (IL28B)
MicroRNA-targeted therapy has been suggested as a potential means of combatting the virus but is not currently in use

 

## Clinical Presentation

Prior to the isolation of the virus in 1989, hepatic infection with HCV was previously known as non-A, non-B hepatitis
In the US, approximately four million have been exposed to the virus; three million are chronic carriersAcute infection is usually asymptomatic. 25% of patients develop acute hepatitis with jaundice and abnormal liver function (Fig. )HCV RNA can be detected in blood within 1–3 weeks and is present at the onset of symptoms
Antibodies to HCV are detected by enzyme immunoassay (EIA) in only 50–70% of patients at the onset of symptoms, increasing to more than 90% after 3 months RNA

Chronic infection: 60–85% patients eventually develop chronic infection and/or chronic hepatitis (Fig. )Persistence of HCV infection is diagnosed by the detection of HCV RNA in the blood for at least 6 months
The most important sequelae of chronic HCV infection are progressive liver fibrosis leading to cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
Patients are often asymptomatic or have nonspecific symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, and abdominal discomfortMild to moderate elevations of ALT (SGPT) or AST (SGOT)

Some asymptomatic patients have normal liver enzymesAs many as 44% have normal levels at initial evaluation
May have positive HCV antibody test despite normal liver enzymes20% patients eventually develop cirrhosis which takes decades to occur. The severity of liver cirrhosis does not correlate with liver enzymes and can only be evaluated by liver biopsy
All etiologies of cirrhosis increase the risk, and patients with cirrhosis have an annual risk of 1–6% of developing HCC
Approximately 250,000 patients die each year from HCV-related liver disease

 

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimens: blood plasma or serumCollection of samples in EDTA plasma
Rapid separation of serum or plasma from cells is recommended by centrifugation within 1 h of collection
Unseparated EDTA plasma is stable at room temperature up to 24 h after collection
Separated serum or plasma is stable at room temperature for up to 3 days, at refrigerator temperatures for up to 1 week, and frozen at –70 °C for years

Conventional tests and problemsSerological studiesEnzyme immunoassay (EIA)The detection of HCV antibodies is recommended as the initial test for the identification of HCV and is useful for screening at risk populations
EIA is comparatively inexpensive, reproducible, and carries a high sensitivity (99%) and specificity (99%)
EIA can detect antibodies average 2–10 weeks after infection. However, during this “window period,” a patient will have detectable viral RNA, but have undetectable levels of antibodies
A negative enzyme immunoassay is usually sufficient to exclude the diagnosis of HCV infection in immunocompetent patients
However, the test can be falsely negative in those with immunodeficiencies or end-stage renal disease
Conversely, false-positive EIAs may occur in patients with autoimmune disorders. In these patients, an assay for HCV RNA is necessary for diagnosis of chronic infection
Once patients seroconvert, they usually remain positive for HCV antibody. Thus, the presence of HCV antibody may reflect remote or recent infection
The immunoblot assay is still useful as a supplemental assay for persons screened in nonclinical settings and in persons with a positive EIA who test negative for HCV RNA
Other HCV antibody assays include anti-HCV IgM assays and avidity tests. The significance of the presence of anti-HCV IgM during HCV infection is unclear. Anti-HCV IgMs have been reported in 50–93% of patients with acute HCV and 50–70% of patients with chronic HCV
Therefore, anti-HCV IgM cannot be used as a reliable marker of acute HCV infection and, so far, IgM assays have not been used in clinical practice. However, increasing serial measurements of anti-HCV IgM titers early after the onset of the symptoms may help to identify patients with acute HCV. Alternatively, an increase in the anti-HCV IgG avidity index within a week after the onset of clinical symptoms has also been reported to indicate acute HCV infection. Both parameters could be used together before anti-HCV seroconversion occurs, or when no baseline sample is available to confirm the diagnosis of acute infection

A total HCV core antigen enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA HCV 3.0) and ORTHO® trak-C™ assay (Ortho Diagnostics) for detection and quantification of total core antigen in bloodThe HCV core protein is highly antigenic, induces specific cellular and humoral responses, and probably plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of HCV infection. The availability of an anticore monoclonal antibody allowed the development of an ELISA to detect HCV core Ag in peripheral blood of patients with HCV
It tests positive for anti-HCV antibodies and for prospective low-risk population screening
Total HCV core antigen ELISA (quantitative, Ortho Clinical Diagnostics) has sensitivity close to PCR assays in diagnosing acute HCV infection in windows period (before HCV antibodies developed)
It is also used in monitoring response to antiviral treatment
The ELISA HCV 3.0 uses three recombinant antigens (c22–3, c200, and NS5) originating from four regions of the viral genome (core, NS3, NS4, and NS5)
ORTHO® trak-C™ assay is a quantitative immunoassay for total (both free and antibody bound) HCV nucleocapsid core antigen. The assay uses a capture ELISA format. The difference between the two assays (ELISA HCV 3.0 and ORTHO® trak-C™ assay) is a step in this assay that disrupts immune complexes present in the sample. The assay’s intended use is testing for HCV core antigen either during preseroconversion (acute) or postseroconversion (chronic) phases of HCV infection
Less expensive and less prone to carryover than PCR testing and can be used as a rough screen as it correlates with HCV RNA load. However, it is less sensitive than PCR-based assays and individual variation is higher
Similar technology is used by the Architect HCV assay by Abbot Laboratories. The analytical sensitivity of the recently developed Architect HCV assay (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL) varies according to the HCV genotype from 500 to 3,000 international units of HCV RNA per milliliter (IU/mL)
A drawback of the total HCV core Ag ELISA is its lower limit of detection, and HCV-positive patients on dialysis often have low HCV RNA levels

Recombinant immunoblot assay (RIBA)RIBA has been developed for the simultaneous detection of anti-HCV antibodies and HCV core antigen
RIBA was used to confirm EIA results since the early generation. It had a high rate of false positives
Third generation of RIBA (RIBA 3.0) was developed to test HCV (which includes NS5 protein) after earlier generations. It has high specificity
A new combination assay has been developed and licensed in Europe (Monolisa HCV Ag/Ab ULTRA; Bio-Rad, Marnes la Coquette, France). Monolisa HCV Ag/Ab ULTRA is based on the combination of an indirect test for the antibodies and a sandwich test for Ag detection

Molecular methodsQualitative (Table )The qualitative HCV RNA test is used to confirm HCV diagnosis following a positive or indeterminate antibody test result. It differentiates between resolved and active infection and may be useful for detecting acute infection prior to seroconversion. It is especially useful for confirming diagnosis in people with indeterminate HCV immunoblot (RIBA) results, as well as in immunosuppressed or immunoincompetent individuals
Recommended sensitivity for testing is 50 IU/ml
APTIMA® HCV RNA Qualitative Assay (Gen-Probe)Target amplification based on sequences of the 5′ NC region of the HCV genome
Amplification of HCV RNA via transcription-mediated amplification method (TMA)
The detection limit of TMA is 10 IU/ml

Amplicor HCV test and COBAS Amplicor HCV test, v2.0 (Roche)Use the primers KY78 and KY80 to amplify a 244-bp sequence of within the highly conserved 5′ UTR of the HCV genome
Limit of detection (200 ul): 25–50 IU/ml depending genotypes (i.e., 1b = 25, 1a = 50)
Use of centrifugation or Ultracolumn (QIAGEN) to process a large volume (1 ml), the LOD can be further improved

Quantitative (Table )On average 1–2 log10 units/ml less sensitive than qualitative tests
Used to establish baseline viral load (prior to therapy) and to monitor changes in viral load during therapy
PCR – Two real-time PCR platforms are currently available for the detection and quantification of HCV RNA: the COBAS TaqMan platform, which can be used together with automated sample preparation with the COBAS AmpliPrep system (CAP–CTM; Roche Molecular System, Pleasanton, CA), and the Abbott platform (Abbott Diagnostic, Chicago, IL), which uses the m2000RT amplification platform together with the m2000SP device for sample preparation (ART). The lower limits of detection were 12 IU/ml for ART and 15 IU/ml for CAP/CTM
VERSANT HCV RNA 3.0, quantiplex assay (bDNA) (Bayer)Signal amplification directed to the 5′ NC region and core regions of the HCV genome
Microwell plate format
Equivalent detection of genotypes 1–6
LOD: 3200 HCV RNA copies/mL (5.2 HCV RNA copies/IU)
Broad dynamic range (615–7,690,000 IU/mL)
Comparative evaluations between Bayer bDNA and Roche PCR viral load assays demonstrated that PCR reported significant lower viral load (as much as 1 log10) at the higher range

HCV RNA detection and quantification are useful in clinical practice to diagnose chronic HCV infection, identify patients who need antiviral therapy, monitor the virological responses to antiviral therapy, and document treatment failure

GenotypingTRUGENE HCV 5′ NC Genotyping Kit (Bayer HealthCare LLC, Berkeley, California)This technique utilizes PCR fragments previously generated by the diagnostic Roche Amplicor HCV test
Simultaneous PCR amplification and direct sequencing (CLIP sequencing) of the 5′ noncoding region (5′ NCR)

VERSANT HCV genotype assay (LiPA; Bayer HealthCare LLC)The INNO-LiPA HCV II method uses 19 type-specific oligonucleotide probes attached to nitrocellulose strips to detect sequence variations found in the 5′ NC region of HCV
The biotin-labeled PCR product is hybridized to the probes on the strip under stringent conditions. After hybridization and washing, streptavidin-labeled alkaline phosphatase is added; followed by incubation with a chromogen, which results in the development of a purple-brown precipitate when there is a match between the probe and the biotinylated PCR product
Hybridization of the amplicon with one or more lines on the strip allows the classification of six major genotypes and their most common subtypes

Third Wave Technologies’ Invader assay (Third Wave Technologies, Madison, Wisconsin) is a new DNA-scanning method application, which has been termed cleavase fragment length polymorphism (CFLP)Relies on formation of unique secondary structure that results when DNA is allowed to cool following brief heat denaturation and serves as substrates for structure-specific cleavase I enzyme generating a set of cleavage products
Formation of secondary structures is sensitive to nucleotide sequences
The presence of sequence polymorphisms results in the generation of unique collections of cleavage products or structural fingerprints
It targets the well-conserved 5′ NCR of HCV

Determination of HCV genotype is needed before the initiation of therapy with pegylated IFNa and ribavirin because it determines both the dose of ribavirin and the treatment duration required

HCV resistance testingSeveral amino acid substitutions that confer resistance to directly acting antiviral molecules, such as protease inhibitors, have been identified. In case of a failure of the triple combination of pegylated IFNa, ribavirin, and either telaprevir or boceprevir, HCV variants that are resistant to these compounds are selected
Direct sequence analysis or reverse hybridization methods can be used to identify amino acid substitutions that confer resistance to antiviral drugs
Ultradeep sequencing methods, such as pyrosequencing, can detect minor resistant populations down to <1%
HCV GenoSure NS3/4A represents the first in a series of HCV drug resistance assays that have been developed at Monogram Biosciences to support the clinical evaluation of HCV direct-acting antiviral (DAA) agents and their use in the management of HCV infection. HCV GenoSure NS3/4A analyzes the genetic sequence for the nonstructural proteins NS3 and NS4A of HCV genotypes 1a and 1b that encode for an enzyme essential to viral replication. The assay detects mutations in NS3 and NS4A and specifically identifies those associated with boceprevir and telaprevir resistance

PitfallsIt is important to note that a “genotype bias” is possible for all HCV molecular assays because of the extensive genetic heterogeneity of the virus
False-positive results due to contamination (detected by negative control)
False-negative results due to amplification inhibition (detected by internal control) or due to a loss of bacteria during specimen preparation
“Home brew” PCR assays are not standardized and variations in sample handling and laboratory methods can affect the sensitivity of the assay

 

## Clinical Utility

HCV tests should be used in high-risk patients, such as intravenous drug users, children born to HCV-positive mothers, and HIV-positive patients. Figure shows the algorithm of HCV testing
Patients suspected of having chronic HCV infection should be tested for HCV antibodies. Patients suspected of having an acute infection should be tested for both HCV antibodies and also HCV RNA with a real-time PCR analysis. HCV RNA should be repeated as the patient is undergoing treatment, to better adjust the use of therapeutic agents
HCV RNA testing should be performed inPatients with a positive anti-HCV test
Patients for whom antiviral treatment is being considered, using a quantitative assay
Patients with unexplained liver disease whose anti-HCV test is negative and who are immune compromised or suspected of having acute HCV infection

HCV genotype should be determined in all HCV-infected individuals prior to treatment in order to determine the duration of therapy and likelihood of response. Genotypic analysis has shown some amino acid substitutions to correlate with resistance to therapy. No commercial test is yet available, although home brew kits have been made
The treatment of choice is peginterferon plus ribavirin

 

## Hepatitis B Virus

## General Characteristics

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is an enveloped dsDNA hepadnavirus. It is 47-nm spherical virus with three important polypeptides: HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) is an envelope protein, HBV core antigen (HBcAg) is a core protein, and HBV e antigen (HBeAg) is an early protein and a nonstructural protein coded by core gene. The envelope protein is involved in viral binding and released into susceptible cells. The inner capsid relocates the DNA genome to the cell’s nucleus where viral mRNAs are transcribed
HBV is a circular, partially double-stranded DNA virus of approximately 3,200 nucleotides. This highly compact genome contains four open reading frames encoding the envelope (PreS1, PreS2, S), core (core, precore), polymerase, and X protein (Fig. )
Although hepatocytes are most susceptible to infection, other cell types may be affected to a lesser extent. The life cycle of HBV begins when it attaches to the cell surface. In the cytoplasm, the DNA is still in the core but then capsid is removed and DNA passes into nucleus, where it forms a covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA)
HBV uses the host transcription machinery to replicate its genes and uses RNA polymerase II of the host. The (–) strand of the cccDNA will act as the template for this transcription. After transcription, the mRNAs are translated by the host’s protein synthesis machinery to form viral proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. The proteins are then assembled into virions that are secreted
HBV is recognized as endemic in China and other parts of Asia. Over one-third of the world’s population has been or is actively infected by HBV
HBV strains are classified into at least 10 HBV genotypes (A to J) and several subtypes and based on the nucleotide homology of the surface gene. Except for the newly identified genotypes I and J, the geographic and ethnic distributions of HBV genotypes and subtypes are well characterized. Genotype A is mainly found in Northwestern Europe (subtype A2), North America, and Africa (subtype A1 or A3), whereas genotypes B and C have been described in Southeastern Asian populations. At present, genotype B is divided into B1–B6 subtypes. Among them, B1 is isolated in Japan, B2–5 are found in East Asia, and B6 is found in indigenous populations living in the Arctic, such as Alaska, Northern Canada, and Greenland. Genotype C, including subtypes C1–C5, mainly exists in East and Southeast Asia. Genotypes E and F are seen in East Africa and the New World, respectively. Genotype D is most often found in southern Europe, parts of Central Asia, India, Africa, and the Middle East. Genotype G is a recently determined genotype in France, America, and Germany while genotype H has been reported in patients from Central America. Recently, genotype I, a novel intergenotypic recombination among genotypes A, C, and G, was isolated in Vietnam and Laos. The newest HBV genotype, J, was identified in the Ryukyu islands in Japan, and this genotype has a close relationship with gibbon/orangutan genotypes and human genotype C
Acute infection with genotypes A and D results in higher rates of chronicity than genotypes B and C. Compared to genotype A and B cases, patients with genotypes C and D have lower rates of spontaneous HBV e antigen (HBeAg) seroconversion; when this occurs, it tends to be delayed. Hepatitis genotypes C and D have lower response rates than genotypes A and B. Genotype C is also more associated with severe liver disease, including to hepatocellular carcinoma
The rate of new HBV infections has declined by approximately 82% since 1991, when a national strategy to eliminate HBV infection was implemented in the US. The decline has been greatest among children born since 1991, when routine vaccination of children was first recommended

 

## Clinical Presentation

Transmitted parenterally and sexually by contaminating open cuts or mucous membranes and has a long incubation period (45–120 days) (Fig. ). Asian patients are more likely to be vertically infected (mother to child) than African or Western patients
Majority of affected patients recover from the illness, characterized byAnorexia, nausea, vomiting, headache, fever, abdominal pain, dark urine, and sometimes jaundice
Elevated transaminases, hyperbilirubinemia, and elevated alkaline phosphatase may also occur
Extrahepatic manifestations include arthralgias, arthritis, nephritis, and dermatitis

10% of patients continue to carry the virus or markers of the active viral infection greater than 6 months after initial infectionSmall percentage may develop chronic persistent hepatitis with sequence fibrosis and cirrhosis
Incidence of HCC is increased with the viral genome found integrated in the cellular DNA in 75% of cases
May be associated with polyarteritis and cryoglobulinemia

Recently, several clinical scoring systems, or nomograms, consisting of previously confirmed independent risk predictors such as sex, age, family history of HCC, alcohol consumption, serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level, HBeAg status, serum HBV DNA level, and/or HBV genotype have been introduced. These easy-to-use nomograms are based on noninvasive clinical characteristics and have been found to accurately predict HCC risk in either community- or hospital-based HBV-infected persons

 

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimens: whole blood, serum, or plasma
Conventional tests and problemsSerological studiesViral antigens and particles (Fig. )Dane particledsDNA bilayered sphere
42 mm diameter; 22 nm core
Rarely identified in infectious serum
Thought to be infectious virus particle

HBsAgIndicative of prior HBV exposure
Located on surface of Dane particle
Previously known as Australia antigen

HBcAgRepresents acute or chronic infection
28 nm core of the Dane particle

HBeAgMarker of HBV infection
Present in HBsAg-positive patients
Strong correlation with large serum concentrations of Dane particle and HbsAg
HBeAg is associated with high infectivity

Antibodies (Fig. )Anti-HBsAntibody to surface antigen
Detected after disappearance of HbsAg
Protective properties

Anti-HBcAntibody to core antigen
Detected after appearance of HbsAg
Used to confirm HBV infection when HBsAg and Anti-HBs are absent (window phase)

Anti-HBeAntibody to HBeAg antigen protective properties
Associated with low risk of infectivity in presence of HBsAg

Interpretation of HBV serologic test results (Table )

Molecular methodsQualitativeCOBAS AmpliScreen HIV1/HCV/HBV Tests (Roche Molecular Diagnostics)It detects HBV DNA in human plasma
It is intended to be used to screen donors for HBV DNA
Detection limit is 100 copies/ml
It targets the S gene

QuantitativeUsed to establish baseline viral load (prior to therapy) and to monitor changes in viral load during therapy
Digene HBV DNA hybrid capture IIDetection and quantitation of HBV DNA in serum
Limit of detection: 4,700 HBV DNA copies/ml
Quantitative range: 1.4 × 105 and 1.7 × 109 HBV copies/ml

PCR – Amplicor HBV Monitor and its semiautomated COBAS HBV Amplicor Monitor test (Roche)Detection and quantitation of HBV DNA in serum or plasma
Use the primers HBV-104UB and HBV-104D to amplify a 104-bp sequence within the highly conserved precore/core region of the HBV genome
Amplify genotypes A to E equally and reduced amplification of genotypes F and G
Limit of detection: 200 copies/ml
Quantitative range: 103–4 × 107 copies/mL

Real-time PCR LightCycler/FRET hybridization probesIt targets 259-bp fragment of S gene,
Quantitative range: 250–5 × 108 copies/ml

Real-time PCR – Roche TaqMan AssayUtilizes FRET technology and probes based on the detection of amplicon during temperature cycling
It targets S gene
Limit of detection: 50 copies/ml
Quantitative range: 5 to 2 × 108 HBV IU/mL (30–107 copies/ml; 1 IU = 5.82 copies)

bDNA assay – (VERSANT Hepatitis B Virus DNA 3.0 Assay) (Bayer Corporation)Signal amplification directed to the 5′ NC region and core regions of the HCV genome
Microwell plate format
Limit of detection: 2,000 copies/ml
Quantitative range: 2.0 × 103 to 1.0 × 108 HBV DNA copies/ml
Equivalent detection of genotypes A through F

Genotyping and mutation analysis – currently used mainly for epidemiological purposes, rarely needed for clinical purposesLine probe assay-LiPA; INNO-LiPA HBV Genotyping assay, Innogenetics N.V., Ghent, BelgiumThis method is based on the reverse hybridization principle, such that biotinylated amplicons hybridize to specific oligonucleotide probes that are immobilized as parallel lines on membrane-based strips. The amplified region analyzed overlaps the sequence encoding the major hydrophilic region of HbsAg

TRUGENE® HBV Genotyping Kit (Bayer Corporation)Sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the pre-S1/pre-S2 region of the HBV genome
Identifies HBV genotype, drug resistance mutations, and anti-HBs escape mutations based on comparison of DNA sequence

PitfallsThe analytical sensitivity and specificity of current real-time PCR assays allow for accurate quantification over a range of approximately 7–8 logs. They are not sufficient to quantify the very high HBV DNA levels that can be found in certain HBV-infected patients, which necessitates retesting these samples after dilution, a factor of quantification errors
Equal quantification of all HBV genotypes and robustness of quantification in case of nucleotide polymorphisms has not been validated for the current commercial real-time PCR assays
There is currently no uniform tendency to report HBV DNA levels in standardized units (such as copies/ml or genome equivalents/ml or IU/ml)
Not all assays are currently registered for use with plasma and serum
No precise thresholds of HBV DNA have been established that could guide medical decisions

 

## Clinical Utility

Viral load testing is used for the assessment and monitoring of responses to therapy in HBV infection (Fig. )
In HBV carriers with active liver disease, HBV DNA loads are measured not only to assess patients regarding the need for either interferon alpha or lamivudine (a DNA polymerase inhibitor) antiviral therapy but also to monitor their effectiveness
An increase in HBV viral load is also used as a marker of the emergence of lamivudine-resistant viral mutants
Active chronic infections with HBV treated with lamivudine require surveillance for the emergence of lamivudine-resistant viral mutants. During lamivudine monotherapy, point mutations at the active site of the polymerase gene (YMDD variants) occur with a frequency of 14–32% after 1 year in phase III studies, and in 42% and 52% of Asian patients after 2 and 3 years of therapy, respectively. The emergence of lamivudine resistance is detected by a rise in HBV viral load and confirmed by sequencing of the active site of the DNA polymerase gene
The presence of HBV precore mutants may cause active liver disease despite the absence of HBeAg, the common marker for active hepatitis in HBV infection. This may be due to either a premature stop codon point mutation in the precore gene (G1896A) or a mutation in the basal core promoter region downregulating HBeAg production, both of which can only be reliably detected genotypically

 

## Cytomegalovirus

## General Characteristics

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a viral genus of the viral group known as Herpesviridae or herpesviruses, sharing a number of characteristics with chicken pox, the various herpes viruses, and the Epstein–Barr virus (EBV). The species that infects humans is commonly known as human CMV (HCMV) or human herpesvirus (HHV) 5. It is the largest of the HHVs characterized by 240 kb double-stranded linear DNA virus (Fig. ) with 162 hexagonal protein capsomeres surrounded by three distinct layers: a matrix or tegument, a capsid, and an outer envelope
CMV can reside latent in the salivary gland cells, endothelium, macrophages, and lymphocytes. CMV infection is asymptomatic
The virus acts by blocking cell apoptosis via the mitochondrial pathway and causing massive cell enlargement, which is the source of the virus name
Clinically symptomatic patients are infants and immunocompromised adults. For infants, the mode of transmission is from the mother via the placenta, during delivery or during breast-feeding
For adults, CMV transmission occurs from close contact with individuals excreting virus in saliva, urine, and other bodily fluids. Transmission of CMV has been reported from blood transfusion and organ transplant
By the age of 30, approximately 40% of individuals are infected by CMV; by the age of 60, 80–100% of the population has been exposed to the virus
Human CMV is difficult to culture as it slowly grows only in human fibroblasts since CMV is very specific in term of species and cell type to be infected

 

## Clinical Presentation

CMV elicits both humoral and cellular immune responses. CMV presents as primary, latent, reactivated, and reinfection
CMV is transmitted by direct person-to-person contact with a person excreting the virus in their saliva, urine, or other body fluids; contact with infectious body fluids (e.g., urine on a diaper); or contact with fomites (e.g., a child’s toy that has infectious virus on it). CMV can be sexually transmitted and can also be transmitted via transplanted organs and blood transfusions. Infectious CMV may be shed in the bodily fluids of any previously infected person, and thus may be found in urine, saliva, blood, tears, semen, and breast milk. The shedding of virus may take place intermittently, without any detectable signs
The incidence of primary CMV infection in pregnant women in the US varies from 1% to 3%. Healthy pregnant women are not at special risk for disease from CMV infection. When infected with CMV, most people have no symptoms and very few have a disease resembling mononucleosis. But can be severe and life-threatening in immunocompromised patients including organ recipients and AIDS patients. It is their developing unborn babies that may be at risk for congenital CMV disease and occurs in about 1% of all newborns. 10–20% of these infants will develop complications before school age. CMV remains the most important cause of congenital viral infection in the US
In infants and young children, typical features of the infection include hepatosplenomegaly, extramedullary cutaneous erythropoiesis and thrombocytopenia, and petechial hemorrhages. Encephalitis often leads to severe mental and motor retardation
For immunocompromised patients, CMV disease is an aggressive condition. CMV hepatitis can cause fulminant liver failure. CMV infection can also cause CMV retinitis and CMV colitis

## Diagnostic Methods

SpecimensWhole blood, urine, CSF, amniotic fluid, bone marrow, biopsies

Conventional tests (Table )CMV cytology and histology testsGeneralThe CMV cytologic and histologic examination detects within cells evidence of CMV in urine or other body fluids or tissues. It also called CMV inclusion body detection. It is used to evaluate and manage CMV infection
The CMV cytologic and histological diagnosis is often considered the “gold standard” for diagnosing end-organ disease. Conventional H&E stains reveal enlarged (cytomegalic) cells that are often two- to fourfold larger than surrounding cells, usually with large eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions, sometimes surrounded by a clear halo, and smaller cytoplasmic inclusions. Its sensitivity shows ranging widely from 10% to 87%. It is important to note that 37.5% of patients with gastrointestinal CMV disease fail to demonstrate any inclusions
Immunohistochemistry with monoclonal antibodies directed against CMV immediate early antigen increases diagnostic yield of CMV compared to routine H&E staining. Sensitivity of immunohistochemistry for detecting CMV infection can approximate 93%

AdvantagesSpecific and definite diagnosis
Confirm end-organ disease along with virus infection diagnosis

PitfallsInvasive procedure required
Insensitive

Viral cultureConventional cultureViral culture is the traditional method of virus detection for demonstrating viremia and sometimes for establishing end-organ disease. Conventional CMV culture involves isolation of the virus in fibroblast tissue culture where it produces a distinctive cytopathogenic effect that is easily confirmed by fluorescent antibody stains
Presence of the virus (positive cultures) can often be determined in as little as 1–2 days, but cultures that are negative for the virus must be held for 3 weeks to confirm the absence of CMV because the virus may be present in very low numbers in the original sample and/or the CMV strain may be slow-growing
CMV culture can be performed on blood, tissue, urine, saliva, or respiratory swabs. Blood culture has a sensitivity of 45–78% but a very high specificity, approaching 89–100% for detecting disease. CMV detection in blood is more strongly associated with disease than detection in urine or saliva, with a positive predictive value of 60%
AdvantagesGold standard test for CMV detection
Able to recover other viruses from the same specimen

PitfallsLow sensitivity compared to newer techniques, such as antigenemia and PCR and nucleic acid probe
Lack of virus quantitation
A long incubation period (1–3 weeks), lack of virus quantitation
False-negative results if cell culture inoculation is delayed

Shell vial assayAnother CMV culture (shell vial culture) method is rapid viral culture. The shell vial culture with immunofluorescence staining is used for the early diagnosis of CMV infection
In immunocompromised patients, a sensitivity of 78% and a specificity of 100% have been claimed
Specimens are centrifuged into fibroblast monolayers, incubated briefly, and then stained with a fluorescent monoclonal antibody to early antigens, before the appearance of cytopathogenic effect. Results are available much earlier than with conventional CMV culture, usually within 24–48 h
The cells are read under a fluorescent microscope
AdvantagesHigher sensitivity than conventional methods
Quantitative shell vial cultures are available, but not widely used

PitfallsMay need large amount of biomass for virus recovery

Serological studiesCMV antibody testingAntibody testing can be used to determine if someone has had recent or past exposure. There are two types of CMV antibodies that are produced in response to a CMV infection, IgM and IgG, and one or both may be detected in the blood
IgM antibodies are the first to be produced by the body in response to a CMV infection. CMV IgM antibodies are detected within a week or two after primary infection and lasts 3–4 months. After several months, the level of CMV IgM antibody usually falls below detectable levels
It is not detectable in recurrent infection except in immunocompromised patients where it is detectable in about a third of the cases
CMV IgG antibody is produced early in primary infection and provides protection from primary infections. Levels of IgG rise during the active infection then stabilize as the CMV infection resolves and the virus becomes inactive. After a person has been exposed to CMV, he or she will have some measurable amount of CMV IgG antibody in their blood for the rest of their life
CMV IgG avidity test to distinguish primary CMV infection from past or recurrent infection (reactivation or reinfection). CMV IgG avidity is low (<30%) in primary infection
Prenatal diagnosis of congenital CMV infection is performed only in the case of primary maternal infection as transplacental transmission of CMV is higher in 40% of primary maternal CMV infection. Whereas it is low in the case of recurrent infection 1–4%
CMV IgG antibody testing can be used, along with IgM testing, to help confirm the presence of a recent or previous CMV infection

CMV antigenemia testThis test is based upon the detection of pp65, a structural protein expressed on the surface of infected polymorph nuclear lymphocytes
The specimen must be processed within 6–8 h of collection, but results can be available within 8–24 h
The number of infected leukocytes present had been reported to correlate with the severity of infection
This test is usually applied to blood and cerebrospinal fluid, with a sensitivity of 60–100% and a specificity of 83–100%
Commercial kitThe CMV Brite™ Turbo Antigenemia Kit uses the well-defined C10/C11 antibody cocktail to detect the CMV lower matrix phosphoprotein (pp65), an early antigen in virus replication, which is abundantly present in antigen-positive polymorphonuclear cells
The CMV Brite Turbo Kit is a rapid new version of the first FDA-registered immunofluorescence antigenemia kit for in vitro CMV diagnosis

AdvantagesInexpensive kits are commercially available
May be able to detect CMV before development of symptoms

PitfallsLabor-intensive
Require skilled personnel
Subjective interpretation
Although an improvement over CMV viral culture, this technique is only semiquantitative, and the reading of results is somewhat subjective
Poor sensitivity in urine samples. The assay is adversely affected by low leukocyte counts

Molecular methods (Table )GeneralCMV DNA tests can be qualitative or quantitative. The two major techniques used are hybrid capture and PCR. PCR appears to be more sensitive than hybrid capture
Different tissues and body fluid compartments can be used for PCR including whole blood, plasma, leukocytes, buffy coat specimens, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, target organ tissue, or stool. Whole blood PCR testing is more sensitive than plasma PCR testing
Higher CMV viral loads seem to correlate with symptomatic disease
Stool CMV DNA testing is a technique that is noninvasive and would detect infection even when located in the right colon, out of the reach of a sigmoidoscopic examination. Stool CMV DNA also is possibly more sensitive than blood CMV DNA for detecting colonic disease, as it is more organ specific
CMV DNA testing in blood is a very promising technique for diagnosing CMV disease. Its advantages include quick results (6–48 h) and high sensitivity

QualitativeCMV DNA by hybrid capture assay (Digene): FDA clearedThe Digene Hybrid Capture CMV test is a molecular assay that detects the presence of CMV DNA in white blood cells from blood collected in EDTA. It is more sensitive than CMV culture and has a sensitivity and specificity comparable to the CMV antigenemia assay for the detection of CMV viremia
Unlabeled CMV probes hybridized with viral DNA, then immobilized on a solid phase before being measured by conjugated antihybrid antibody

CMV mRNA by NASBAAssay of CMV mRNA by nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA) has been investigated for the detection of active viral gene expression and replication
CMV-specific mRNA may be a more specific marker for CMV than culture or DNA PCR since it would theoretically be indicative of CMV replication
Since late transcripts such as pp67 mRNA reflect a complete replication cycle of CMV, they could be indicative of disease
NucliSens CMV pp67 Assay (Organon Teknika Inc., Durham, NC) is an FDA-cleared test. NucliSens CMV pp67 measures replication of CMV in blood using NASBA RNA amplification technology
This assay detects messenger RNAs coding for the matrix tegument protein pp67 of CMV, a true late protein, which is only expressed during viral replication
The NASBA technology selectively amplifies RNA in a DNA background and allows direct testing in whole blood
It is a direct route for diagnosing an active CMV infection and monitoring treatment efficacy

QuantitativePCRAmplicor CMV MONITOR test (Roche Molecular Systems) is a quantitative microtiter-based PCR assayCMV viral DNA in the specimen was quantitated by coamplifying a region of the CMV DNA polymerase gene in the presence of a known quantity of quantitative standard
The primers used were specific for the CMV polymerase gene and amplified a 362-bp fragment of the gene
An internal quantitation standard (QS) that is added at a known concentration during specimen processing so that extraction and recovery of DNA, in addition to amplification and detection, can be monitored
The lower limit of sensitivity of the assay is 400 copies/ml of plasma. The linear range of the assay is 400–400,000 copies of CMV DNA per mL
The inherent sensitivity of molecular detection of CMV poses a problem since latent CMV genomes, present in most seropositive individuals, may be detected. Therefore, it is critical to adjust the sensitivity of the PCR so that latent genomes are not detected

AdvantagesSensitive enough to detect virus before symptom development
Specimen could be stored and transported
Rapid and less expensive

PitfallsFalse positive
Contamination must be prevented

Real-time PCRThe COBAS® AmpliPrep/COBAS® TaqMan® CMV Test is a real-time PCR-based quantitative assay for CMV DNA detection in human plasma using the COBAS® AmpliPrep Instrument for automated specimen processing and the COBAS® TaqMan® Analyzer or COBAS® TaqMan® 48 Analyzer for automated amplification and detection. The test can quantitate CMV DNA over the range of 150–10,000,000 copies/mL
Various home brew methods were developed either using real-time TaqMan PCR (ABI prism 7700) or real-time LightCycler PCR
AdvantagesQuick result: turnaround time for the real-time PCR assay is 6–48 h
High sensitivity
CMV DNA testing also has greater than 80% concordance with CMV antigen test results, but also has the added benefits of increased specimen stability, smaller required specimen volume, and with the ability to be performed in patients with depressed white blood cell counts results

PitfallsFalse-positive results due to contamination (detected by negative control)
False-negative results due to amplification inhibition (detected by internal control) or due to a loss of bacteria during specimen preparation
There is a lack of standardization of this process, with different techniques and assays, different quantitation methods, and different tissues and blood compartments being tested, thus making interpretation of results across studies challenging. Quantitative PCR is more sensitive than qualitative PCR, and CMV DNA values obtained with “in-house” quantitative assays are 3- to 10-fold higher than the commercial assay
Different quantitation methods include reporting results as genomic copies/mL, copies/mL, copies/microgram of total DNA, copies/106 leukocytes, and copies/2 × 105 leukocytes; such varied quantitation methods can make comparison of results almost impossible
No clearly defined cutoff values for determining CMV disease, this method has low specificity and low positive predictive value. Most of CMV cutoff on plasma ranging from 400 to 10,000 copies/mL of CMV DNA

Antiviral susceptibility testing of CMV isolatesGeneralResistance of CMV to antivirals was a major clinical problem in patients with AIDS. Currently marketed anti-CMV drugs, namely, ganciclovir (GCV), its oral prodrug valganciclovir (vGCV), foscarnet (FOS), and cidofovir (CDV), all target the viral DNA polymerase
CMV infection remains a major problem in transplantation, and resistance to antivirals is encountered in all forms of transplantation
In general, it takes weeks to months for CMV to develop resistance to antivirals. In patients with AIDS, some studies showed a 10% prevalence of resistance to ganciclovir by 3 months of therapy; similar time courses were found for foscarnet and cidofovir

Phenotypic methodsPlaque reduction assayThe gold standard for antiviral susceptibility testing of CMV is plaque reduction assay
In this assay, a standardized inoculum of a stock virus is inoculated into cultures and incubated in the presence of the antiviral agent
The cultures are then observed for the presence of viral plaques
The IC50 of the agent for the isolate is defined as the concentration of agent causing a 50% reduction in the number of plaques produced
Plaque reduction assays are labor-intensive
Plaque reduction assays are limited by the excessive time required completing the assay (4–6 weeks) and the lack of a standardized method validated across different laboratories
In addition, repeated passage of isolates to prepare viral stocks may influence the results of assays by selecting CMV strains that are not representative of the original population of the viruses

DNA hybridization assayWhole genomic DNA is extracted and transferred by capillary action onto negatively charged nylon membranes after incubation with a specific agent
The membranes are hybridized to a 125I-labeled human CMV probe (Diagnostic Hybrids, Athens, Ohio), rinsed, washed, and counted in a gamma counter
Mean hybridization values (in counts per minute [cpm]) for each concentration of antiviral agent are calculated and expressed as a percentage of the cpm in control cultures
The IC50 is defined as the concentration of antiviral agent resulting in a 50% reduction in viral nucleic acid hybridization values (i.e., DNA synthesis) compared with the hybridization values of controls
Disadvantage of DNA hybridization assays is that they require the use of radiolabeled probes
DNA hybridization assays have the advantage over plaque reduction assays of eliminating the variation due to subjective errors resulting from plaque counting by different individuals

Viral load assays (e.g., antigenemia or quantitative DNA)CMV viral load assay may rise as an indicator of antiviral resistance, but other factors (including compliance and declining immune function) may be responsible
The assay can measure viral DNA concentration exposed to a range of drug concentrations and is grown for 4 days in the presence or absence of drug then the IC50 is determined
Quantitative antigenemia assays are less exact than quantitative polymerase chain reaction
In many patients, certain CMV diseases (e.g., gastrointestinal disease or retinitis) are not always associated with measurable viral loads

Other phenotypic methods: Viral production is measured by using immunofluorescence-, immunoperoxidase-, ELISA-, or flow cytometry-based methods for detection and quantitation of cells expressing CMV antigens (immediate–early, early, or late)

Genotypic methodsGeneralViral UL97 kinase and UL54 DNA polymerase gene mutations are well-documented mechanisms of resistance to current antivirals
The mutation of the viral phosphotransferase gene (UL97) coding sequence, which may confer resistance only to ganciclovir (GCV). One of seven canonical UL97 mutations (M460V/I, H520Q, C592G, A594V, L595S, and C603W) is found in over 80% of GCV-resistant clinical CMV strains
Although UL97 mutations do not affect susceptibility to FOS or CDV, UL54 mutations can confer resistance to all current drugs and may emerge after prolonged GCV therapy to increase the level of resistance conferred by a preexisting UL97 mutation. Mutations in UL54 are often accompanied by mutations in UL97, showing higher levels of resistance to ganciclovir with possible cross-resistance to foscarnet and/or cidofovir
The viral polymerase gene UL54 occurs in regions between codons 300 and 1,000 (Fig. )

Genotypes for CMV antiviral resistanceDetection of mutations is based on PCR amplification of the specific region of the genome followed by restriction enzyme analysis or direct sequencing of the amplification product
Standard dideoxy sequencing can detect an emerging resistance mutation when it exceeds approximately 20% of the sequence population
Pyrosequencing has been reported to detect mutant subpopulations at an approximately 6% level at codons 460, 520, and 592–607 of UL97, but the short sequence reads are unsuitable for analyzing the full range of codons needed for genotypic diagnosis (e.g., UL97 codons 335–670 and UL54 codons 300–1,000)
An additional method “real-time PCR” with melting curve assay can also detect drug resistance mutations. The advantages are that low copy numbers without cell culture can be detected, mixed virus populations can be analyzed semiquantitatively, and multiplex reaction to different mutations can be detected simultaneously. The disadvantages are that polymorphisms near known mutations may affect the melting curve and give false-positive result and different probes are needed to identify each mutated codon. Besides, the assay may not be able to differentiate different point mutations that occur in the same codon, such as M460I (ATT/ATA) and M460V (GTG)

 

## Clinical Utility

Quantitative PCR determination of CMV viral load in solid organ transplant recipients can predict CMV disease and relapse (Table ) as well as for initiating antiviral therapy
Viral load testing in patients with HIV infection is currently used to predict CMV disease and to monitor the efficacy of treatment
PitfallsUsing restriction enzyme analysis, not all of the presently confirmed resistance mutations are accompanied by alteration of known restriction enzyme recognition sites which lead to false-negative results, and base changes not associated with drug resistance can produce new restriction sites which lead to false-positive results
PCR assays are not standardized, and variations in sample handling and laboratory methods can affect the sensitivity of the assay
Well-defined CMV DNA standards are needed to avoid variation of viral load values obtained with commercial and home brew assays

Clinical utility: The standardization of automated sequencing methods and the characterization of mutations associated with drug resistance will offer routinely genotypic resistance testing in a time frame that impacts clinical care

## Epstein–Barr Virus

## General Characteristics

EBV is a dsDNA virus of the herpes family (HHV type 4) characterized by icosahedral capsid and a glycoprotein-containing envelope. It is one of most common viruses in human
The genome is a linear dsDNA molecule with 172 kbp. The viral genome does not normally integrate into the cellular DNA but forms circular episomes which reside in the nucleus
Most common mode of transmission of EBV is through exposure to infected saliva from asymptomatic individuals. Virus is relatively fragile and does not survive long outside the human host fluids. Primary infection of the virus occurs by oral transmission from asymptomatic individuals. EBV preferentially infects B lymphocytes and remains latent, affecting more than 95% of population
The genome is large enough to code for 100–200 proteins but only a few have been identified. The proteins characterized thus far fall into the following group: (1) Latent proteins, including EB viral nuclear antigen complex (EBNA), latent membrane protein (LMP), terminal protein, and lymphocyte-detected membrane antigen (LYDMA); and (2) lytic cycle proteins, including membrane antigen (MA), early antigen complex (EA), and viral capsid antigen complex (VCA). Critical viral target genes: EBNA1, LMP1, and LMP2 (Fig. )

 

## Clinical Presentation

EBV causes infectious mononucleosis, an acute but self-limiting disease affecting children and young adults. After primary infection, the virus persists indefinitely in B lymphocytes, only to reactivate when cellular immunity is impaired
In infected young children remain asymptomatic or developed nonspecific viral illness
EBV causes infectious mononucleosis, associated with PTLD, linked to several malignancies such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) among Chinese males and Burkitt lymphoma (BL) in children of Central Africa/New Guinea. In HIV-infected individuals, EBV is associated with diseases such as oral hairy leukoplakia and AIDS-related non-Hodgkin lymphoma; EBV might imply a higher risk of some autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and multiple sclerosis
EBV is a ubiquitous virus which causes persistent, latent infection that can be reactivated. More than 90% of the adult population is estimated to demonstrate serologic evidence of prior exposure with EBV
Primary infection in young children is often asymptomatic or causes nonspecific minor illness
For adolescents and young adults, primary infection is typically manifested as infectious mononucleosis (IM), usually a self-limiting condition characterized by fever, sore throat, myalgias, lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly
A strong association between EBV and Burkitt lymphoma in children of Central Africa/New Guinea and nasopharyngeal carcinoma among Chinese males
In HIV-infected individuals, EBV is associated with diseases such as oral hairy leukoplakia and AIDS-related non-Hodgkin lymphoma, i.e., oral hairy leukoplakia and CNS lymphoma
Patients undergoing transplantation are prone to develop posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD)
Although the correlation between EBV burden and disease status is incompletely understood, several studies have shown an association between symptomatic infection and elevated DNA loads in clinical samples. Increasing virus burden is also believed to be a rapid indicator of immunopathological changes preceding and/or underlying the B lymphocyte-driven changes caused by EBV. Therefore, determining EBV DNA loads in EBV-related disorders in immunocompromised populations is an important step toward disease diagnosis, management, and treatment

## Diagnostic Methods

SpecimensWhole blood, plasma, CSF, biopsy

Conventional tests and problems (Table )EBV antibodies: EBV antibodies are used to help diagnose Mono if people are symptomatic but have a negative Mono test. EBV antibodies include (1) viral capsid antigen (VCA)-IgM, VCA-IgG, and D early antigen (EA-D) – to detect a current or recent infection; and (2) VCA-IgG and Epstein–Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA) – to detect a previous infectionHeterophile IgM antibodyPresent in 90% of adults during the course of illness
Nonspecific serologic response to EBV infection

Classic Paul–Bunnell testMeasures agglutination of sheep RBCs by patient serum; limited by false-positive agglutinins in sera of normal individuals (Forssman agglutinins), patients with serum sickness, etc

Monospot test: detects agglutinins to formalized horse RBCs not removed by prior absorption with guinea pig kidney
Viral capsid antigen antibody (Fig. )IgM – indicates recent infection, lasts only 4–8 weeks
IgG – peaks during week 3–4 of infection, can persist for more than 1 year or entire lifetime

Early antigen antibody, Anti-DDiffusely nuclear and cytoplasmic staining of infected cells
Present in 40% of infectious mononucleosis patients
Persists for 3–6 months
Detected in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma

Early antigen antibody, Anti-RStains cytoplasmic aggregates
Found in atypical protracted cases of infectious mononucleosis
Found in patients with African Burkitt lymphoma

Epstein–Barr nuclear antigen antibodyAppears 3–4 weeks after infection
Persistent for life
Found in patient with Burkitt lymphoma

Molecular methods (Table )In situ hybridization (Biogenex, San Ramon, CA)Used for tissue biopsy
The EBV EBER Probe is specific for EBER RNA transcripts and is intended for the detection of latent EBV infection
The EBV Not I/Pst I DNA Probe is specific for the Not I/Pst I repeat sequence of EBV and is intended for the detection of active EBV infection

Quantitative competitive PCRSpecific primers are specifically designed to the EBV viral latent membrane protein 2a (LMP2a) and internal competitor DNA (ssDNA) that is confirmed against a known number of Namalwa cells (B cell lymphoma cell line containing two integrated copies of the EBV genome per cell)
Four separate PCR reaction tubes each containing internal competitor DNA (8 copies/μl, 40 copies/μl, 200 copies/μl, or 1,000 copies/μl) are placed in competition with EBV-specific primers for amplification of patient DNA
PCR amplicons are examined by electrophoresis through a 2% agarose gel and visualized using a gel imaging documentation system. The band densities are quantitatively measured using Bio-Rad Quantity One software and used to calculate EBV copies
Although highly accurate and reproducible, such assays are rather laborious and require intensive post-PCR handling. Each sample has to be spiked with different amounts of internal standard to achieve precise quantification

Real-time PCRLightCycler® EBV quantitative kit (Roche)Detection of LMP gene in EBV viral genome
EBV is amplified with specific primers in a PCR reaction. The amplicon is detected by fluorescence using a specific pair of hybridization probes
A melting curve analysis is performed after the PCR run to differentiate positive samples from non-EBV species; i.e., other herpes virus family
The internal control is a synthetic double-stranded DNA molecule with primer binding sites identical to the EBV target sequence, comprising a unique hybridization probe binding region that differentiates the internal control from the target-specific amplicon. It is added already to the lysed sample before the purification step and copurified/amplified with the EBV DNA from the specimen in the same PCR reaction (dual color detection)
The kit allows quantification in a range of 102–106 copies per reaction. The lower detection limit of the kit is ≤10 copies per reaction (95% confidence interval; probit analysis)

Other commercial assays and reagentsOther commercial assays and reagents included Nanogen EBV Q-PCR Alert, Argene EBV R-gene™, QIAGEN artus® EBV (LC and RG) PCR Kits, Cepheid affigene® EBV trender and SmartEBV™, ELITech/Epoch EBV ASR, and Quantification of HHV4 PrimerDesign™ Ltd
The range of EBV PCR targets included EBNA1, EBNA2, BNRF1 p143, BXLF1, EBER1, BALF5, and BamHI-W
Amplification platforms included Roche LightCycler® 1.5, 2.0, and 480 systems, Applied Biosystems™ 7300, 7500, 7500 Fast, and 7900 HT Fast Real-Time PCR Systems, Agilent Mx3000P® quantitative PCR System, QIAGEN Rotor-Gene™ Q and Rotor-Gene™ 3000, and Cepheid SmartCycler™ II

Real-time PCR using SYBR Green I dyeTo maximize detection rates and reduce false-negative results, two primer sets targeting the highly conserved EBV regions, (1) Epstein–Barr nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1) and (2) BamHI fragment H rightward open reading frame 1 (BHRF1), used to detect and measure absolute EBV DNA load in clinical settings with different EBV-associated diseases. Two separate real-time quantitative PCR assays using SYBR Green I dye and a single quantification standard containing the two EBV genes
PCR products analyzed by an amplification curve, melt analyses, and amplification efficiency
The lower limit of detection for both EBV regions was 2.0 × 103 copies/ml
Sensitive and cost-effective

PitfallsQuantitative PCR requires analysis of absolute lymphocyte count, which inversely affects viremia; real-time PCR does not
Important to note that real-time PCR assay requires sequential analysis of run data prior to result reporting to prevent false positives (i.e., pseudoamplification and amplification of non-EBV species) and false negatives (i.e., shifted melting curve for EBV variants)
PCR assays are not standardized and variations in sample handling and laboratory methods can affect the sensitivity of the assay

 

## Clinical Utility

Serial viral load testing can be used to monitor disease burden and assess efficacy of immunosuppressive therapy in posttransplant patients
Detection of EBV in tissue biopsy assists the diagnosis of EBV-related malignancies, including lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma

## Herpes Simplex Virus

## General Characteristics

Family of enveloped icosahedral nucleocapsid viruses with total nine members
Herpes simplex virus (HSP), type 1 and type 2, demonstrates an 83% DNA homology in protein-coding regions
The genetic map of the two viruses is colinear, and the genomes are of approximately the same size, HSV1 of 152 kbp and HSV2 of 155 kbp
Humans are the only known reservoir
Direct contact with lesion or secretions necessary for transmission. After direct exposure to infectious material (i.e., saliva, genital secretions), initial viral replication occurs at either the skin or mucous membrane entry site, typically of epithelial cells
HSV1 and HSV2 most common. HSV1 acquired early in life, usually associated with oral lesions. HSV2 acquired after onset of sexual activity, associated with genital lesions. Both viral types can cause oral–facial and genital infections and maybe clinically indistinguishable
Risk of transmission of HSV from HSV-infected mother during vaginal delivery to infant is 50%, estimated to be between 1 in 2,000 and 1 in 5,000 births
Beyond the neonatal period, most childhood HSV infections are caused by HSV1. The seroprevalence of HSV1 antibodies increases with age and is 20% by age 5 years. No increase occurs until age 20–40 years, when 40–60% of individuals are HSV1 seropositive
Latent infections reside in neurons (trigeminal, sacral, and vagal ganglia) and can be activated by a stimulus (e.g., physical or emotional stress, fever, ultraviolet light) causes reactivation of the virus in the form of skin vesicles or mucosal ulcers, with symptoms less severe than primary infection

## Clinical Presentation

Primary infection usually with a 2–20 days incubation period
Cutaneous vesicles characterized by ulcers that eventually pustulate, dry, and crust; mucosal vesicles appear as shallow punctuate ulcers that often coalesce
Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis/pharyngotonsillitis (HSV1): Most cases are asymptomatic. Most cases are between 6 months and 5 years. Characterized by generalized malaise, fever, linear gingivitis, and lymphadenopathy
Primary herpes genitalis (HSV2): Genital HSV2 infection is twice as likely to reactivate and recurs 8–10 times more frequently than genital HSV1 infection. A classic vesicular rash may be noted or progressive lesions (pustules or painful ulcerative lesions). Lesions may persist for as many as 3 weeks. Painful inguinal lymphadenopathy, dysuria, and vaginal discharge are frequent complaints. Most primary genital HSV infections are asymptomatic, and 70–80% of seropositive individuals have no history of symptomatic genital herpes. HSV can be transmitted in the presence or absence of symptoms
Primary cutaneous herpetic infections can occur in wrestlers and rugby players with contaminated abrasions (herpetic gladiatorum or scrumpox)
HSV keratitis presents with an acute onset of pain, blurring of vision, chemosis, conjunctivitis, and characteristic dendritic lesions of the cornea
HSV meningitis1–7% of all cases of aseptic meningitis
HSV2 > HSV1
20–45% with meningitis have recurrent episodes
HSV accounts for 10–20% of all cases of sporadic viral encephalitis in the US. The clinical hallmark of HSV encephalitis has been the acute onset of fever and focal neurologic (especially temporal lobe) symptoms. Clinical differentiation of HSV encephalitis from other viral encephalitides, focal infections, or noninfectious processes is difficult
Neonates (<6 weeks) have the highest frequency of visceral and/or CNS infection of any HSV-infected patient population

HSV infection of visceral organs usually results from viremia, and multiple organ involvement is common
Recurrent infection at sites of primary infectionActivation of latent virus form neurons of cervical ganglia (herpes labialis, HSV1) or sacral ganglia (HSV2)
Self-inoculation of fingers and thumbs (herpetic whitlow) can occur in children with orofacial herpes, although less common
Antiviral prophylaxis recommended for persistent recurrent cases
Some cases of erythema multiforme (EM) are believed to represent an allergic response to recurrent HSV infection

## Diagnostic Methods

SpecimensVesicular fluid, ulcerated lesions, pharyngeal and throat swabs, urine, CSF, autopsy and biopsy material, ocular exudates, and vaginal swabs
Specimen is best collected within the first 3 days after appearance of lesion but no more than 7 days

Conventional tests and problemsViral cultureConventionalCell culture requires the collection of live virus samples that require special care in transport to the laboratory to retain viability. When viable samples are used, culture can be highly specific (if typing is performed) and positive results are generally reliable
The sensitivity of culture declines rapidly as lesions begin to heal, and for this reason, frequently nonpositive result can be falsely negative. Type-specific serology tests should be used in these cases to confirm a clinical diagnosis of genital herpes
Many commercial cell lines are used (A549, RK, ML, HNK, MRC5, etc.)
Diagnosed by observation of cytopathic effect (CPE) induced by virus which usually occurs in 1 week after initial inoculation

Shell vial assayA centrifugation-enhanced culture technique used to obtain rapid culture results. Generally less sensitive than conventional culture
The test can detect HSV in shell vial cultures (MRC5 cells) before the development of cytopathic effect (pre-CPE)
Immunofluorescent assay (IFA) staining of shell vial for viral detection and typing

CytologyIntranuclear inclusion bodies
Multinucleated, molded giant cells
Margination of nuclear chromatin
Indicates the presence of herpesvirus (HSV1/2 or varicella zoster virus [VZV]) and excludes coxsackievirus and nonviral entities

Serological studiesLimited by cross-reacting antigens between HSV1 and HSV2
ELISAPerformed on fluids or other samples using HSV-specific antibody that is bound to a solid surface
Antibody captures antigen to which anti-HSV antibodies labeled with enzymes are added. These attach to the bound antigen and cause a color change

IFA and immunoperoxidase (IPA) assayDetect HSV antigen in smears or tissues. HSV-specific antibodies are labeled with fluorescent dyes or enzymes (peroxidase)
Labeled antibodies are incubated with the specimen and bind to HSV antigens in the specimen, if present
Attached fluorescent dye or enzyme can be visualized in appropriate regions of infected cells under a microscope
Used in conjunction with shell vial culture

ELVIS® (enzyme-linked virus inducible system)Technique combines cell culture amplification with HSV-activated reporter genes
The test produces results that are equal to conventional culture

Molecular methodsReal-time PCR (LightCycler® – HSV1/2 detection kit, Roche)Detection and differentiation of HSV1/2
HSV1/2 is amplified with specific primers in a PCR reaction. The amplicon is detected by fluorescence using a specific pair of hybridization probes
A melting curve analysis is performed after the PCR run to differentiate positive samples in HSV1 or HSV2. Melting points for HSV1 and HSV2 are significantly different (HSV1 at 53.9 °C, whereas HSV2 at 67.1 °C) and allow clear determination of the HSV type
The internal control is added already to the lysed sample before the purification step and copurified/amplified with the HSV DNA from the specimen in the same PCR reaction (dual color detection)

Real-time PCR (HSV1/2 PCR kit, Abbott Molecular)The HSV1/2 PCR kit is for the detection and differentiation of HSV 1 and 2 DNA using PCR in the ABI PRISM® 7000 and 7900HT sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems)
The HSV TM Master contains reagents and enzymes for the specific amplification of a 148-bp region of the HSV genome
The amplicon is detected by measuring the FAM fluorescence (HSV1) and NED fluorescence (HSV2) in the ABI PRISM® SDS
In addition, the HSV1/2 PCR kit contains a second heterologous amplification system to identify possible PCR inhibition. This is detected as an internal control (IC) by measuring the VIC fluorescence
External positive controls (HSV1 LC/RG/TM QS 1–4 and HSV2 LC/RG/TM QS 1–4) are used to allow the determination of the pathogen load

AdvantagesHSV real-time PCR-based assay is highly sensitive and specific, and it can detect the virus even during the low viral shedding
PCR-based technique was shown to increase the overall rate of HSV detection by 61–71%. Even in patients with visible genital ulcerations, PCR detected 88% more infections than virus culture

Sensitivity and specificityThe lower limit of detection (analytical sensitivity) for HSV qualitative PCR is 25 copies/reaction (∼1,250 copies/ml)
The sensitivity of PCRHSV in skin lesions: sensitivity 83–100% and specificity 100%
CSF: sensitivity 70–100%

HSV was detected more frequently by PCR than by viral culture regardless of whether samples were obtained from HSV lesions, or from genital or oral secretions during a period of subclinical shedding. Yield of virus positivity is four times greater by PCR than by culture, and the results are more reliable, especially in settings in which transport or climate may interfere with the yield from viral culture
Due to the sensitivity of PCR, many labs now only offer PCR tests and culture is used only when sensitivity test is needed
CSF culture∼80% positive with first attack
0% with recurrent episodes
Multiplex PCR could be performed for HSV1, HSV2 and VZV, CMV, and HSV6 from the same sample

PitfallsImportant to note that PCR assays are not standardized and variations in sample handling and laboratory methods can affect the sensitivity of the assay
PCR cannot always diagnose HSV encephalitis in the first few days of illness, and serial evaluations of CSF by PCR during the first week of illness are necessary

## Clinical Utility

Diagnosis of herpes encephalitis in neonates and immunocompromised patients by detection of HSV in CSF
CSF PCR for HSV DNA should be performed in patients with febrile encephalopathy even in the absence of focal features, initial CSF pleocytosis, or abnormal CT. Mild or atypical HSV encephalitis may be associated with infection from HSV1 or HSV2
In addition to CSF, other specimens can be used for PCR, including mucosal secretion, skin lesion, etc
Current treatment guidelines for herpes include three antiviral therapies, acyclovir, famciclovir, and valacyclovir, and should begin as soon as possible after symptoms begin. Antiviral therapy may be effective when taken during onset of prodromal symptoms; i.e., tingling
Antiviral therapy will reduce the duration of outbreak by approximately 2 days
Suppressive therapy is highly effective and can dramatically reduce the frequency of recurrences. Suppression can be continued for years with very low risk of toxicity or development of drug-resistant HSV. Suppressive therapy will also reduce the frequency of asymptomatic HSV shedding

## Varicella Zoster Virus

## General Characteristics

VZV is a human alpha herpes virus, a member of herpes family (HHV3) with a linear, double-stranded DNA genome
The VZV genome is 125kb
Isolated in patients with chicken pox (primary), subsequent latency followed by reactivation of virus, known as shingles (recurrent). The virus is spread via contact with vesicular fluid or inhalation of respiratory droplets
Multiple recurrences are common and can be triggered by immunosuppression, exposure to cytotoxic drugs, radiation, and malignancy

## Clinical Presentation

Varicella (chicken pox)Chicken pox, which is caused by the VZV, is one of the most contagious childhood diseases. Nearly every unvaccinated child becomes infected with it
Mild self-limited illness common in school-aged children with fever followed by vesicular eruption on skin and mucous membranes
Spreads by respiratory secretions with a 10–14 days incubation period
More severe in adults, pneumonia common

Herpes zoster (shingles)Recurrent infection, usually in adults that may be activated by trauma, neoplasm, or immunosuppression
Virus remains latent in sensory ganglia of spinal or cranial nerves causing dermatomal pain and vesicular eruptions, fever, and malaise. Commonly occurs in trunk, but may affect any dermatome
Associated with encephalitis and delayed cerebral vasculitis

Zoster sine herpete occurs in the event of recurrence in the absence of vesicle formation
Post herpetic neuralgia: pain lasting longer than 1 month after an episode, occurs in as many as 14% of affected individuals, particularly those over 60 years of age. Most neuralgias resolve within one year with 50% experiencing resolution within 2 months
Ramsay Hunt syndrome: combination of cutaneous involvement of herpes zoster infection of external auditory canal and ipsilateral facial and auditory nerve. Syndrome can cause facial paralysis, hearing deficits, and vertigo

## Diagnostic Methods

SpecimensSkin vesicle fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, nasopharyngeal secretion, bronchial washings, blood, amniocentesis fluid, and urine

Conventional tests and problems (Table )Viral cultureConventionalVirus is difficult to grow in cell culture. Unlike other HSVs (HSV1 and HSV2), VZV manifests a very narrow range of hosts
Viral isolation should be attempted in cases of severe disease, especially in immunocompromised persons
The best results are obtained from vesicular fluid with lower yield from other sites (nasopharyngeal secretion, blood, urine, bronchial washings, and cerebrospinal fluid)
Diagnosed by observation of cytopathic effect (CPE) induced by virus which usually occurs in 1 week after initial inoculation

Shell vial assayA centrifugation-enhanced culture technique used to obtain rapid and more sensitive culture results
It provides results within 2–3 days

CytologyIntranuclear inclusion bodies
Multinucleated, molded giant cells
Margination of nuclear chromatin

Serological studiesEnzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) range in sensitivity from 86% to 97% and range in specificity from 82% to 99%
Latex agglutination (LA) is a rapid, simple to perform assay to detect antibodies to VZV glycoprotein antigen96% is positive in convalescent-phase serum specimens
61% is positive in persons after vaccination

Fluorescent antibody to membrane antigen (FAMA) testIt is highly sensitive and is the gold standard for screening for immune status for VZV
100% positive in convalescent-phase serum specimens
77% positive in persons after vaccination

Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA)Using fluorescein-labeled monoclonal antibodies specific for either HSV or VZV antigens
Results are obtained within several hours
Specimen is best collected from the base of a skin lesion, preferably a fresh fluid-filled vesicle
The use of DFA may be positive when viral cultures are negative because infected cell viral proteins persist after cessation of viral replication

Molecular methods (Table )Conventional PCR targets VZV orf 29 gene, and detection limit is 500 copies/ml
Real-time PCR (artus® VZV LC PCR kit, QIAGEN)artus® PCR Kits are used for identification of pathogens including the herpes viruses CMV, EBV, HSV1/2, and VZV
Harmonized amplification profiles allow the parallel testing of these four different herpes viruses in a single run on LightCycler® Instruments
Analytical sensitivity: five copies/reaction
Specificity: 100%

LightCycler® VZV Qualitative KitIt targets orf gene 28, DNA polymerase, orf gene 29, orf gene 38, or DNA binding protein
It is 91% more sensitive than the shell vial cell culture assay from dermal specimens

Real-time quantitative PCR (TaqMan®) techniqueIt targets orf gene 28, orf gene 38, or glycoprotein B
Assay results range from 10 copies/ml to 1 × 1010 copies/ml
It is 53.8% more sensitive than cell culture from dermal specimens

PitfallsImportant to note that PCR assays are not standardized and variations in sample handling and laboratory methods can affect the sensitivity of the assay

 

## Clinical Utility

Although the varicella vaccine is routinely given as a childhood vaccine, certain high-risk groups and scenarios require careful monitoring (i.e., immunocompromised patients)
Intrauterine infection of the fetus with VZV can be detected by PCR testing of amniocentesis fluid
It can be applied on different specimens including mucosa secretion, skin lesion, etc
Diagnosis of encephalitis in immunocompromised patients by detection of VZV in CSF
Early initiation of VZV-specific antiviral therapy may prevent serious morbidity among HIV-infected patients

## Human Papillomavirus

## General Characteristics

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a member of the Papillomaviridae family that can completely integrate with the DNA of the host cell. Humans are the only known reservoir for HPV
Papillomaviruses are nonenveloped viruses of icosahedral symmetry with 72 capsomeres that surround a genome containing double-stranded circular DNA with approximately 8,000 base pairs
The expression of viral genes is closely associated with an epithelial localization and linked to the state of cellular differentiation. Most viral genes are not activated until the infected keratinocyte leaves the basal layer. Production of virus particles can occur only in highly differentiated keratinocytes. Therefore, virus production only occurs at the epithelial surface where the cells are ultimately sloughed into the environment
Over 100 genotypes of HPV have been identified based on DNA sequence heterology. A specific group, termed high-risk genital HPV types (especially 16, 18, 31, 45, and 58, but also 33, 35, 39, 51, 52, 56, 59, 68, 73, 82), is recognized as a necessary factor for the development of cervical cancer
The genome HPV virus is circular (Fig. ). The genome has eight open reading frames that encode ten proteins. The genes for these are divided into an early region that are expressed in the skin’s infected basal cells that have yet to differentiate, and a late region with two genes whose protein products exist only in cells after cell differentiation

The E5 (changes the cellular responses to programmed cell death or apoptosis), E6 (binds to tumor suppressor protein, p53), and E7 (binds and inactivates retinoblastoma protein, Rb) proteins are early viral proteins expressed upon infection and cause destabilization of the infected cell and induces replication
As the cell differentiates, it migrates upward and induces expression of the E1, E2, and E4 genes; E1 and E2 cause viral replication and E4 destabilizes the cytoskeleton and prevents cellular differentiation
In the upper epithelial cell layers, the late viral proteins L1 (major capsid protein) and L2 (minor capsid protein) are expressed. They bind the viral DNA and autoassemble, giving rise to the complete virions, ready for a new infection that is released as the keratinocytes desquamate
The most common mode of transmission is via contact; i.e., sexual or autoinoculation

 

## Clinical Presentation

HPV is by far the most common sexually transmitted disease. An estimated 80% of sexually active adults have been infected with one or more genital HPV strains. The vast majority of infected adults experience transient infectivity and are unaware of the condition; however, they may be able to infect others
However, most women infected with high-risk HPV, especially women under 30 years of age, do not develop cervical cancer. Their immune system effectively clears the infection over the course of several months
Specific factors that determine which HPV infections persist and develop into squamous intraepithelial lesions currently are unknown. Cigarette smoking, ultraviolet radiation, pregnancy, folate deficiency, and immune suppression have been implicated as possible cofactors
Low-risk HPV types (6, 11, 42, 43, and 44) produce benign epithelial tumors of the skin and mucous membranes. Infection with certain types of HPV (high risk) can also increase the risk of developing cervical and other cancer types. Conditions associated with HPVVerruca vulgaris (common wart) – associated with HPV2, HPV4, and HPV40. Highly contagious and can spread to other sites of skin or mucous membranes via autoinoculation
Condyloma acuminatum (venereal wart) – associated with HPV6, HPV11, HPV16, and HPV18 and is considered a sexually transmitted disease with lesions occurring in sites of sexual contact or trauma (i.e., mucous membranes of genitalia, perianal region, oral cavity, and larynx)
Flat warts are most commonly found on the face or forehead and are most common in children and teens
Plantar warts are found on the soles of the feet
Subungual and periungual warts form under the fingernail (subungual) and around the fingernail or on the cuticle (periungual) and are a subtype of the common skin wart. They may be more difficult to cure than warts in other locations
Butcher warts are caused by HPV7 and occur in people handling meat, poultry, and fish
Focal epithelial hyperplasia (Heck disease) is caused by HPV13 (and possibly HPV32) and commonly occurs in Native American and Inuit populations. A childhood condition characterized by multiple soft, nontender flat papules and plaques of the oral mucous membrane
Laryngeal papillomatosis – frequently recurs and may require repetitive surgery when interferes with breathing. Rare cases can progress to laryngeal cancer (HPV30 and HPV40)
HIV-associated papillomatosis – HPV7 and immunocompromised states
Cervical cancer – History of HPV (high-risk types) infection is strongly associated with development of cervical cancer. However, most HPV infections do not progress to cervical cancer. Because the progression of transforming normal cervical into cancerous cells is a slow process, cancer occurs in people who have been infected with HPV for a long time, usually over a decade. High-risk HPV types 16 and 18 are together responsible for over 70% of cervical cancer cases; type 16 alone causes 41–54% of cervical cancers
Anal/rectal cancer – Although rare, anal/rectal cancer is becoming more prevalent in the US. Similar to cervical cancer, the main cause of anal cancer is HPV and is most commonly acquired through anal intercourse. However, anal cancer can also be acquired from other genital areas that are infected with HPV, particularly from the vulva or penis. High-risk HPV types (16, 18, 31, 33 and 35) are associated with anal squamous intraepithelial lesions and account for approximately 80% of cervical and anal cancers
Head and neck squamous cell cancer – HPV16 is the most common type detected in head and neck squamous cell cancers (HNSCCs). HPV16 accounts for 78.6–100% of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cases. HPV type 18 accounts for 1% of oropharyngeal, 8% of oral cavity, and 4% of laryngeal HPV-positive SCCs. HPV16 and HPV18 genotypes are associated with a better prognosis in squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck. Furthermore, the HPV-positive tumors are also more sensitive to radiation and chemotherapy. Coinfections are possible and most frequently include HPV16. HPV33 is often reported and has been identified in up to 10% of HPV-positive HNSCCs. Numerous other HPV types have been rarely detected in HNSCCs and include types 6, 11, 35, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, and 68
Other cancers – HPV (including 16, 18, and 31) may also cause vulvar, nonmelanoma skin cancers, and (rarely) penile cancer. High-risk types of HPV can cause intraepithelial neoplasias, or abnormal and precancerous cell growth, in the vulva and cervix, which can progress to cancer

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimens – cervical washings/brushings collected in liquid media (i.e., PreservCyt), Digene specimen collection tube (Hybrid Capture only), or biopsies
Conventional tests and problemsViral cultureHPV cannot be reliably cultured and is not identified using this technique

CytologyKoilocytosis describes the combination of perinuclear clearing (halo) with a pyknotic or shrunken nucleus

Serological studies are not useful for diagnosis

Molecular methods and genotypingNucleic acid hybridizationIn situ hybridization (INFORM HPV DNA test, Ventana Medical Systems Inc., Tucson, AZ)Use tissue sections, liquid-based cytology specimens, and cervical smears
On slide detection of high- and low-risk HPV genotypes
16 probe cocktail for high-risk HPV genotypes 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 51, 52, 56, 58, and 66
6 probe cocktail for low-risk HPV genotypes 6 and 11

Nucleic acid hybridizationDigene Hybrid Capture II (Digene Corporation, Gaithersburg, MD)Method utilizes an RNA probe mix for the detection of the L1 gene of HPV. Assay can identify HR HPV types 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, and 68. In addition, a kit detecting low-risk virus (6, 11, 42, 43, 44) is also available
Manual, semiautomated (rapid capture), and automated (utilizing QIAGEN’s QiaSymphony extraction system) platforms available
Signal amplification is based on immunocapture of DNA/RNA hybrids that are immobilized on a 96-well microplate, reacted with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated antibodies specific for the RNA:DNA hybrids and detected with a chemiluminescent substrate
Can detect 5,000 viral copies per sample, or one picogram of HPV DNA per sample

Signal amplificationInvader Assay Cervista HPV assays (Hologic, Madison, WI)The Invader assay is an isothermal linear signal amplification using structure-specific oligonucleotide cleavage and has been applied to DNA-based genotyping. This method uses two types of isothermal reactions: a primary reaction that occurs on the targeted DNA sequence and a secondary reaction that produces a fluorescent signal
Invader utilizes an internal control for human HIST2HBE to assure DNA quality and quantity in each reaction
Two diagnostic qualitative assay formats that utilize the Invader chemistry are available: Cervista HPV HR (detects pool of 13 HPV genotypes) and Cervista HPV16/18 (detects HPV16 and/or HPV18)
Cervista HPV HR uses isothermal signal amplification to detect 13 h HPV types utilizing three probe pools based on phylogenic relatedness. 3 probe pools include A5/A6 [51, 56], A7 [18, 39, 45, 59, 68], and A9 pool [16, 31, 33, 35, 52, 58]. Assay cannot determine the specific HPV genotype present
The Cervista HPV16/18 test is a diagnostic test to genotype HPV16 and HPV18 in cervical specimens
Can detect 1,250–5,000 viral copies per specimen

Target amplificationTMA – APTIMA HPV assay (Gen-Probe; San Diego, CA)The APTIMA HPV assay is an in vitro nucleic acid amplification test for the qualitative detection of E6/E7 viral messenger RNA (mRNA) from 14 high-risk types of HPV in cervical specimens
Detects HPV subtypes: 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, and 68, but does not distinguish between the 14 high-risk types
The assay is used with the TIGRIS DTS system, one of the first diagnostic instruments to truly automate nucleic acid testing (NAT) from start to finish by from sample preparation, amplification, and detection to reporting results
The TIGRIS system can process approximately 450 samples in an 8-h shift, and up to 1,000 samples in approximately 13.5 h
The APTIMA HPV assay involves three main steps, mainly: target capture, target amplification by transcription-mediated amplification (TMA), and detection of the amplification products (amplicon) by the hybridization protection assay (HPA) that measures the emitted relative light units (RLU) in a luminometer
Can detect 100–300 viral copies per sample

Real-time PCR – COBAS® HPV test (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN)The COBAS HPV test is a clinical diagnostic qualitative assay to detect HPV in patient samples using the COBAS 4800 system that automates specimen extraction, amplification, and detection. The assay utilizes amplification of HPV DNA by real-time PCR and nucleic acid hybridization to detect 14 high-risk HPV genotypes in a single reaction tube that target the polymorphic L1 region of the HPV genome
The assay specifically genotypes HPV16 and HPV18 while concurrently detecting the other high-risk genotypes in a pooled fashion (31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 51, 56, 58, 59, 66, 68)
The COBAS HPV test is based on two major processes: (1) automated specimen preparation to simultaneously extract HPV and cellular DNA and (2) PCR amplification of target DNA sequences
Using both HPV- and β-globin-specific complementary primer pairs and real-time detection of cleaved fluorescent-labeled HPV- and β-globin-specific oligonucleotide detection probes
The master mix reagent for the COBAS HPV test contains primer pairs and probes specific for the 14 high-risk HPV types and β-globin DNA
The detection of amplified DNA (amplicon) is performed during thermal cycling using oligonucleotide probes labeled with four different fluorescent dyes. The amplified signal from 12 high-risk HPV types (31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66 and 68) is detected using the same fluorescent dye, while HPV16, HPV18, and β-globin signals are each detected with their own dedicated fluorescent dye
An additional primer pair and probe target the human β-globin gene (330-bp amplicon) to provide a process control
Can detect 300–1,200 viral copies/ml

GenotypingRoche linear array (Fig. )Qualitative test that utilizes amplification of HPV target DNA by PCR and nucleic acid hybridization bases on four major steps: (1) sample preparation, (2) PCR amplification of target DNA using HPV-specific complementary primers, (3) hybridization of the amplified products to oligonucleotide probes, and (4) colorimetric detection of the probe-bound amplified products
Uses a pool of biotinylated primers to define a sequence of nucleotides for the L1 region of the HPV genome designed to amplify HPV DNA from 37 HPV genotypes, including 13 high-risk genotypes (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, and 68)
β-globulin gene is concurrently isolated and ensures adequacy of cellularity, extraction, and amplification for each processed sample

Sensitivity and specificity

Overall, the sensitivity for cytology for detecting HGSIL ranges from 50% to 70% and specificity of 86–98%
Overall, the sensitivity of HPV DNA test for detecting HGSIL is about 80–98% and specificity of 64–95%
Overall, the sensitivity of COBAS HPV assay for detecting HGSIL is about 69–71% and specificity of 90–94%
Overall, the sensitivity of Cervista HPV assay for detecting HGSIL is about 93–100% and specificity of 43–44%
Overall, the sensitivity of APTIMA HPV test for detecting HGSIL is about 87–93% and specificity of 60–63%
However, the sensitivity and specificity are influenced by the age and prevalence (Table )

PitfallsPresently available assays provide only qualitative results and do not correlate the magnitude of the positive assay signal to meaningful quantitative results
The effects of other potential variables such as vaginal discharge, use of tampons, douching, personal lubricants, topical medicaments, and specimen collection variables may affect the performance of the assay
A negative HPV result does not exclude the possibility of present or future cytologic abnormalities
COBAS HPV assayStrong laboratory information system needed to support automation of bar coding
Invalid results frequent

APTIMA HPV assayAssay does not detect E6/E67 mRNA of HPV low-risk types
Performance characteristics based only on ThinPrep 2000 processor

Cervista HPV assayIndeterminate test results caused by insufficient mixing, pipetting error, or inadequate genomic DNA
Exhibits cross-reactivity to HPV67 and HPV70 genotypes

Digene hybrid capture assayLimited sensitivity (1 pg/ml)
Mixed high-risk and low-risk probes, cannot distinguish specific HPV types
Manual platform is labor-intensive

 

## Clinical Utility

To screen patients with ASCUS (atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance), Pap smear results to determine the need for referral to colposcopy. The results of this test are not intended to prevent women from proceeding to colposcopy (Table )
In women 30 years and older, the hc2 high-risk HPV DNA test can be used with Pap smear to adjunctively screen to assess the presence or absence of high-risk HPV types. This information, together with the physician’s assessment of cytology history, other risk factors, and professional guidelines, may be used to guide patient management (Table )
Recently, a new test scheme was proposed (Fig. )

 

## Influenza A, B, and C Viruses

## General Characteristics

Influenza is part of the Orthomyxoviridae family and can be classified into three basic types, influenza A, B, or C (Table ). Each influenza virus type is an enveloped single-stranded RNA virus that shares structural and biological similarities but differs antigenically. Type A influenza virus which causes pandemic is found in a variety of warm-blooded animals. Types A and B are predominantly human pathogens. Type C is found in humans and pigs
Influenza viruses have a segmented RNA genome (Fig. ). Influenza A and B contain eight distinct segments and are covered with surface glycoproteins, hemagglutinin (HA), neuraminidase (NA), and matrix 2. Influenza C has seven segments and one surface glycoprotein. The viruses are typed based on these proteins. For example, influenza A (H3N2) expresses hemagglutinin 3 and neuraminidase 2
Influenza is a dynamic virus that may evolve in two different ways via antigenic drift and antigenic shift resulting in genetic diversity. Antigenic shift occurs when two different strains of influenza viruses combine with antigenically different HA and NA by reassortment of viral RNA segments; this process occurs every 10–40 years. Antigenic drift occurs by random point mutation in viral RNA leading to amino acid substitutions in HA glycoproteins. Influenza type A viruses undergo both antigenic shift and drift; influenza type B viruses undergo antigenic drift
Each influenza RNA segment is further encapsulated by nucleoproteins to form ribonucleotide–nucleoprotein complexes surrounded by matrix proteins
Influenza virus infections rank as one of the most common infectious diseases in humankind. However, influenza may potentially cause severe epidemics and kills an average of 20,000 individuals in the US
Influenza virus infection occurs after transmission of respiratory secretions from an infected individual to a person who is immunologically susceptible
A number of different subtypes are classified within the influenza A type based on two viral surface proteins: hemagglutinin and neuraminidase. The most common prevailing human influenza A subtypes are H1N1 and H3N2. Each year, the distributed vaccine contains A strains from H1N1 and H3N2, along with an influenza B strain. A novel influenza A H1N1 strain emerged in March 2009 and is the causative agent of the current public health emergency
In March 2009, an outbreak of influenza-like illness occurred in Mexico and the US; the CDC reported seven cases of novel A/H1N1 influenza. Preliminary genetic characterization found that the hemagglutinin gene was similar to that of swine flu viruses present in US pigs since 1999, but the neuraminidase and matrix protein genes resembled versions present in European swine flu isolates. The six genes from American swine flu are themselves mixtures of swine flu, bird flu, and human flu viruses
Recently, several studies reported the novel A/H1N1 strains carried a prominent amino acid change at position 222 (D222N) within the primary hemagglutinin receptor binding site. Previously, enhanced virulence associated with the change, D222G, has been clinically linked to severe morbidity and mortality

 

## Clinical Presentation

Although the presentation of influenza virus infection is variable, typical symptoms may include the following: fever, sore throat, myalgia, headache, rhinitis, fatigue, and coughing. Onset of illness may be abrupt
Patients with a preexisting immunity or received vaccination may have mild and less severe symptoms
Acute encephalopathy has recently been described to be associated with influenza A virus. Clinical features included altered mental status, coma, seizures, and ataxia
In young infants, influenza may produce a sepsis-like picture with shock; occasionally, influenza viruses can cause croup or pneumonia
In April 2009, a novel influenza A (H1N1) virus was identified in Mexico and has since spread rapidly worldwide. The unique genetic and antigenic features of this virus have resulted in a high incidence of infection, with an epidemiologic profile that is different from that of previous seasonal influenza infections. As a consequence, a surge of pediatric patients has been presenting to emergency departments and physician’s offices across the country during this 2009–2010 flu season
Vomiting and diarrhea have been reported more often with 2009 H1N1 influenza virus infection than with seasonal influenza
The incubation period typically ranges from 18 to 72 h

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimens (Table )Nasopharyngeal aspirate/swab/washing, tracheal aspirate, or bronchoalveolar lavage
TransportCulture/DFA – 3 mL (minimum 1 ml) of respiratory sample in viral transport media (Microtest M4) or in sterile leakproof container at 2–8 °C
Serologic – 1 mL (minimum 0.5 ml) serum in an SST tube at 2–8 °C

Unacceptable specimens: dry swabs or wood and calcium alginate swabs that may inactivate the virus for culture. Plasma or hemolyzed, lipemic, icteric, turbid, bacterially contaminated, or heat-inactivated serum is inadequate for serological test
All respiratory specimens should be kept at 4°C for no longer than 72 h before testing and ideally should be tested within 24 h of collection. If storage longer than 72 h is necessary, clinical specimens should be stored at –70 °C. Freezing at higher temperatures (e.g., –20 °C) can reduce the likelihood of virus detection

Conventional tests and problems (Table )Viral cultureThe criterion standard for diagnosing influenza A and B is via viral propagation in embryonated hen eggs or Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells
Laboratory diagnosis of influenza is established once specific cytopathic effect is observed or hemadsorption testing findings are positive
After culture isolation, final identification via immunoassays or immunofluorescence
Staining the infected cultured cell lines with fluorescent antibody confirms the diagnosis
The viral culture process requires 2–10 days to complete
Primary method for vaccine production

DFA testingDFAs are widely available, have variable sensitivity (range 47–93%) for 2009 H1N1 influenza virus, and a high specificity (≥96%). DFAs detect and distinguish between influenza A and B viruses but do not distinguish among different influenza A subtypes
The technique is more rapid (24 h) to result; it is less sensitive than culture methods

Serologic studiesTwo samples should be collected per person. One sample within the first week (acute) of symptoms and a second sample (convalescent) 2–4 weeks later. If antibody levels increase from the first to the second sample, influenza infection likely occurred
Because of the length of time needed for a diagnosis of influenza by serologic testing, other diagnostic testing should be used if a more rapid diagnosis is needed
Inability to differentiate between current and previous infection. Cannot be used for rapid diagnosis

Rapid influenza diagnostic test (RIDT) (Table )RIDTs are widely available but have variable sensitivity (range 10–70%) for detecting 2009 H1N1 influenza when compared with real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR), and a negative RIDT result does not rule out influenza virus infection
RIDTs have a high specificity (>95%). Depending on which commercially available RIDT is used, the test can either (1) detect and distinguish between influenza A and B viruses or (2) detect both influenza A and B but not distinguish between influenza A and B viruses
Fastest method of currently available diagnostic tools. Result may be obtained in <30 min
However, the technique has a sensitivity of 70–80%

Molecular methods (Table )General informationNucleic acid amplification tests, including rRT-PCR, are the most sensitive and specific influenza diagnostic tests
But they may not be readily available, obtaining test results may take one to several days, and test performance depends on the individual rRT-PCR assay. As with any assay, false negatives can occur
Not all nucleic acid amplification assays can specifically differentiate 2009 H1N1 influenza virus from other influenza A viruses
Several rRT-PCR assays have been evaluated and authorized by the FDA under an emergency use authorization (EUA) to diagnose 2009 H1N1 influenza virus infection, such as Roche real-time-ready influenza A/H1N1 test, Cepheid Xpert® flu A panel for the diagnosis of 2009 H1N1 Influenza virus infection, ELITech Molecular Diagnostics 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus real-time RT-PCR test, Focus Diagnostics influenza A H1N1 (2009) real-time RT-PCR, IMDx 2009 influenza A H1N1 real-time RT-PCR assay from IntelligentMDx, and QIAGEN artus® influenza A H1N1 2009 LC RT-PCR kit

RT-PCR: artus® influenza A H1N1 2009 LC RT-PCR kit (QIAGEN Diagnostics)The assay is for the detection of influenza A viral RNA and the detection and differentiation of 2009 H1N1 influenza virus RNA in nasopharyngeal swabs of symptomatic patients
The assay utilizes the EZ1 Advanced instrument with the EZ1 DSP Virus Card v. 2.0 (QIAGEN) and the EZ1 DSP virus kit (QIAGEN) for viral nucleic acid extraction. The LightCycler 2.0 instrument with software v. 4.1 (Roche) is used for amplification and detection
The limit of detection for influenza A (seasonal H1N1) is 57.0 TCID 50 (tissue culture infectious dose 50) /ml, and the limit of detection for 2009 H1N1 influenza is 4.217 PFU (plaque-forming unit)/ml

RT-PCR: Cepheid Xpert® flu panel (ASR)Accurate detection and differentiation of Influenza A from Influenza B infection and simultaneous identification of 2009 H1N1 flu strain
Less than 2 minutes hands-on time improves lab workflow efficiencies
Accepts nasal aspirate/washes (NA/W) or nasopharyngeal (NP) swab to accommodate wide range of specimen types

RT-PCR: Roche real-time-ready influenza A/H1N1 detection setIn mid-November 2009, the test received emergency use authorization (EUA) from the US FDA
The test for the 2009 H1N1 influenza virus detects RNA from the 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus and provides a rapid means of identification of patients infected with this virus duration of the declaration of emergency

Influenza antiviral resistance testIn the US, four antiviral drugs are FDA approved for use against influenza: amantadine, rimantadine, zanamivir (Relenza®), and oseltamivir (Tamiflu®). The adamantane drugs (amantadine and rimantadine) are approved for influenza A, while the neuraminidase inhibitor drugs (zanamivir and oseltamivir) are approved for both influenza A and influenza B
To date, 2009 H1N1 influenza, influenza A (H3N2), and influenza B viruses have been detected by surveillance. All three virus strains typically are sensitive to oseltamivir and zanamivir, but the influenza A strains have been resistant to the adamantanes. While, sporadic oseltamivir-resistant 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus infections were identified
The oseltamivir-resistant 2009 influenza A (H1N1) is commonly described point mutation in the virus neuraminidase gene (histidine to tyrosine at position 275 of the N1 neuraminidase, commonly referred to as H274Y in N2 numbering), which is known to confer high-level resistance to oseltamivir
Influenza viruses A (H1N1) carrying the H274Y mutation have reduced ability to replicate and transmit efficiently when compared with parental, susceptible virus, but the clinical implications of infection with these viruses have been largely unknown
RT-PCR along with sequencing (Sanger sequence or next gen sequence such as pyrosequence) is usually used for influenza antiviral resistance test

Sensitivity and specificitySensitivity of DFA methodology is dependent upon adequacy of the specimen, i.e., >20 cells. Otherwise, specimen may be inadequate for accurate interpretation resulting in false negatives
Rapid diagnostic testing is approximately >70% sensitive for detecting influenza and approximately >90% specific. Thus, as many as 30% of samples that would be positive for influenza by viral culture may give a negative rapid test result; some rapid test results may indicate influenza when a person is not infected with influenza

PitfallsDue to the length of time required to perform viral culture, the assay has poor efficacy as results are obtained much after the patient has left the office or well past the time when drug therapy could be effective
Development of PCR-based assays must always consider antigenic drift and random mutations due to viral evolution that may result in false negatives

 

## Clinical Utility

Because of cost, availability, and sensitivity issues, diagnosis of influenza is often based on clinical criteria and presentation
RT-PCR assays provide a rapid and specific diagnosis of influenza to allow for early therapeutic intervention and prophylactic treatment in high-risk patients, i.e., geriatric care facility
Molecular diagnosis will play a large role in epidemiologic surveillance, vaccine strain selection, and surveillance of emergent novel influenza viruses, i.e., the Hong Kong H5N1 outbreak with sequence analysis

## Avian Influenza (Bird) and Influenza (Flu) A Viruses

## General Characteristics

Influenza viruses that infect birds are called avian influenza viruses, and commonly known as “bird flu.” Only influenza A viruses and subtypes infect birds
There are substantial genetic differences between the subtypes that typically infect both people and birds. Within subtypes of avian influenza A viruses, there also are different strains
The incubation period of avian influenza A virus is typically 2–5 days but can be as long as 8–17 days
These influenza viruses occur naturally among birdsWild birds worldwide carry the viruses in their intestines, but usually do not get sick from them
However, avian influenza is very contagious among birds and can make some domesticated birds, including chickens, ducks, and turkeys, very sick and kill them

There are many different subtypes of type A influenza viruses (Fig. )These subtypes differ because of changes in certain proteins on the surface of the influenza A virus (hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins)
There are 16 known hemagglutinin subtypes and 9 known neuraminidase subtypes of influenza A viruses
Many different combinations of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins are possible. Each combination represents a different subtype
Avian influenza A H5 and H7 viruses can be distinguished as “low pathogenic” and “high pathogenic” forms on the basis of genetic features of the virus and the severity of the illness they cause in poultry; influenza H9 virus has been identified only in a “low pathogenicity” form
Each of these three avian influenza A viruses (H5, H7, and H9) theoretically can be partnered with any one of nine neuraminidase surface proteins; thus, there are potentially nine different forms of each subtype (e.g., H5N1, H5N2, H5N3, H5N9)

 

## Clinical Presentation

The reported signs and symptoms of avian influenza in humans have ranged from eye infections (conjunctivitis) to influenza-like illness symptoms (e.g., fever, cough, sore throat, muscle aches) to severe respiratory illness (e.g., pneumonia, acute respiratory distress, viral pneumonia) sometimes accompanied by nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, and neurologic changes
CDC and WHO recommend oseltamivir, a prescription antiviral medication, for treatment and prevention of human infection with avian influenza A viruses. Analyses of available H5N1 viruses circulating worldwide suggest that most viruses are susceptible to oseltamivir. However, some evidence of resistance to oseltamivir has been reported in H5N1 viruses isolated from some human H5N1 cases. Monitoring for antiviral resistance among avian influenza A viruses is important and ongoing
The first avian influenza virus to infect humans occurred in Hong Kong in 1997. The epidemic was linked to chickens and classified as avian influenza A (H5N1). Human cases of avian influenza A (H5N1) have since been reported in Asia, Africa, Europe, Indonesia, Vietnam, the Pacific, and the Near East. Hundreds of people have become sick with this virus. Slightly more than 60% of those who became ill have died

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimen: see Influenza A, B, and C section
Viral culture: see Influenza A, B, and C section
Serological test: see Influenza A, B, and C section
Molecular testReal-time RT-PCROn February 3, 2006, the FDA announced clearance of the influenza A/H5 (Asian lineage) virus real-time RT-PCR
Primer and probe set and inactivated virus as a source of positive RNA control for the in vitro qualitative detection of highly pathogenic influenza A/H5 virus (Asian lineage)
Two genetic lineages of influenza A/H5 viruses exist: Eurasian (Asian) and North American. The primer and probe set, developed at CDC, is designed to detect highly pathogenic influenza A/H5 viruses from the Asian lineage associated with recent laboratory-confirmed infections of avian influenza in humans in east Asia and, most recently, in Turkey and Iraq
The test is limited to laboratories designated by the Laboratory Response Network (LRN), which consists of approximately 140 US laboratories in 50 states

LimitationDue to the limitation of the assay, negative results do not preclude influenza virus infection and should not be used as the sole basis for treatment or other patient management decisions

## Adenovirus

## General Characteristics

Adenovirus is ubiquitous in humans and is endemic
Adenoviruses are medium-sized (90–100 nm), nonenveloped icosahedral viruses containing double-stranded DNA (Fig. )
There are at least 52 known immunologically distinct types (seven subgenera: A–G) that can cause human infections. Types 4 and 7 are common in military recruit outbreaks; type 14 is commonly associated with severe and sometimes fatal respiratory illnesses
Adenovirus transcription can be defined as a two-phase event, early and late, occurring before and after DNA replication
Early transcription is accompanied by a complex series of splicing events, with four early “cassettes” of gene termed E1, E2, E3, and E4. Early genes facilitate DNA replication and result in the transcription and translation of the late genes (Fig. )
Adenovirus produces cytolysis in different tissues and induces host inflammatory responses and cytokine production
The route of entry is usually by droplet nuclei or by oral infection. Transmission of adenovirus is via direct contact, the fecal–oral route, and occasionally waterborne

 

## Clinical Presentation

Most adults have measurable titers of antiadenovirus antibodies, implying prior infection. Most adenovirus infections occur early in life, and by age 10, most children have been infected by at least one serotype. However, most infections are asymptomatic
Some adenovirus types can establish persistent subclinical infections in tonsils, adenoids, and intestines of infected hosts with viral shedding occurring for as long as several months to years
Adenovirus may infect multiple organ systems and is recognized as the etiologic agent of a variety of diverse syndromes: acute respiratory disease (ARD), pharyngoconjunctival fever, epidemic keratoconjunctivitis, acute hemorrhagic cystitis, gastroenteritis, and adenoviral infections in immunocompromised hosts
Infection with serotypes 1, 2, and 5 is most frequent in the first years of life, and all serotypes can occur during any season, but infections are most frequent in late winter and early spring. Historically, 1–5% of all respiratory infections have been caused by adenovirus. The prevalence of adenovirus respiratory infection in children has ranged from 2% to 14%. Adenovirus also causes 5–15% of acute diarrheal infections in children

## Diagnostic Methods

SpecimensRespiratory, stool, and blood

Conventional tests and problemsViral cultureThe “gold” standard for adenovirus testing is viral culture
Collected samples are layered on a monolayer of cells in test tubes. If present, adenovirus will present as cytopathic effect of rounded cells
The best cell line for testing adenovirus is A549. This is a human carcinoma continuous cell line
When samples are collected within 1–3 days of clinical onset, cell culture generally is positive within 4–7 days. Samples collected after 3 days may take 1–3 weeks to produce cytopathic effect
Slow growth – not ideal for acute identification: The viral culture can confirm an adenovirus diagnosis, but it may not provide timely results for immediate patient care

Shell vial cultureShell vial is another cell culture test but the results are ready in 3 days
Vials of A549 cells are inoculated with collected samples and centrifuged. The vials are then incubated and stained at day three with immunofluorescent antibodies specific to adenovirus
The cells infected with adenovirus will light up with examination under a fluorescent microscope
It is recommended that the shell vial testing is for diagnosing ocular adenovirus infection

Serologic studiesSeroreactivity to adenovirus is common; measuring adenovirus-specific IgM or rising level of IgG antibody can be helpful. Positive adenovirus titers occur in 50% of individuals >4 years old
Serology is less useful in the acute clinical setting
For a serologic diagnosis, serum should be obtained as early as possible in the clinical course, followed by a second titer 2–4 weeks later. A 4-fold rise in acute titers to convalescent titers is diagnostic
Serological assays have been used over the years to measure adenovirus-specific IgM or rising levels of IgG antibody; however, serology is no longer for diagnosis because it is slow and less specific than antigen or DNA detection

ImmunofluorescenceDFA or indirect IFA may be used for direct examination of tissue. It uses a mouse antibody against an adenovirus group-specific hexon antigen
This method has shown to have poor sensitivity compared to other tests, and shell viral cultures are run concurrently to improve sensitivity
Several commercial kits are (1) Light Diagnostics™ IFA and DFA respiratory viral screening kits for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), Flu A, B, parainfluenza 1, 2, 3, and adenoviruses (Millipore Corp.); and (2) MonoFluo® RSV, Flu A, B, parainfluenza 1,2, 3, and adenoviruses (Bio-Rad Laboratory)

Molecular methodsPCR: Marked improvement in sensitivity when compared to viral culture
Most of these assays amplify conserved regions of the hexon gene
Most of real-time quantitative PCRs are designed to detect adenovirus DNA from all major subgroups of the virus
Four common multiplex assays are the MultiCode-Plx assay (EraGen), the ResPlex III assay (Millipore), ADENOVIRUS R-gene™ CE Marked PCR Assay, which detects and quantifies all the 52 adenovirus serotypes, and the xTAG RVP assay (Luminex Molecular Diagnostics). The xTAG RVP is the only FDA-approved test and has a reported sensitivity of 78.3% and a specificity of 100%

PitfallsDevelopment of PCR-based assays must always consider antigenic drift and random mutations due to viral evolution that may result in false negatives
Important to note that PCR assays are not standardized and variations in sample handling and laboratory methods can affect the sensitivity of the assay

## Clinical Utility

PCR assays provide a rapid and specific diagnosis of adenovirus to allow for early therapeutic intervention and prophylactic treatment in high-risk patients, i.e., geriatric care facility and immunocompromised patients
Detection of high viral load in blood and monitoring of viral load during treatment can correlate with disseminated adenovirus disease in immunosuppressed patients. Adenovirus is increasingly important in solid organ and bone marrow transplant patients; infections in pediatric transplant cases can exceed 22% with mortality rates as high as 60%

## Respiratory Syncytial Virus

## General Characteristics

RSV is a negative sense, enveloped RNA virus. The virion is variable in shape and size (120–300 nm), is unstable in the environment (surviving only a few hours on environmental surfaces), and is readily inactivated with soap and water and disinfectants
RSV is a member of the paramyxovirus family that produces a characteristic fusion of human cells (syncytial effect) in tissue culture
RSV is a medium-sized, enveloped virus with an antisense single-stranded RNA genome
RSV has two heterotypic strains of viruses that are antigenically distinct, and are classified as subgroups A and B
The major difference between these subgroups is the antigenic properties of the G surface glycoprotein
Transmission is from aerosolized respiratory droplets via close contact with infected persons or contact with contaminated surfaces
Most prevalent in infants aged 2–6 months, but children of any age with underlying cardiac or pulmonary disease or who are immunocompromised are at risk for serious complications from RSV infection

## Clinical Presentation

RSV infections typically occur in temperate climates during late fall through early spring and account for 5–15% of community-acquired pneumonias. 50% of children ≤1year are infected and 100% are infected by 3 years. Immunity wanes with age. Disease may reoccur in patients >65 years
Two subtypes have been identified. Subtype A involves a severe clinical presentation and predominates in most outbreaks. Subtype B predominates in most asymptomatic strains of the virus that the majority of the population experiences
RSV bronchiolitis presents with a 2–3-day “prodromal” phase, which resembles a common viral upper respiratory tract infection. Additional symptoms include rhinorrhea, wheezing, coughing, low-grade fever, and pneumonia. Circumoral and nail bed cyanosis may occur in severely affected infants
In the majority of patients with RSV bronchiolitis, symptoms resolve within 5–7 days

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimens – respiratory swabs and bronchoalveolar lavage
Conventional tests and problemsViral cultureRSV has a high liability and any specimens should be transported to the laboratory promptly and inoculated into cell cultures
Nasopharyngeal aspirates, nasal washes, or tracheal secretions are generally the best specimens for isolation
Specimens should not be subjected to major temperature changes such as freezing and thawing
Human heteroploid cells, such as HEP2 and HeLa, generally provide the best tissue culture for the isolation of RSV
RSV produces a characteristic CPE consisting of syncytia formation and appears in 4– 5 days
Decreased sensitivity in adults from reduced viral shedding during acute infections as compared to adolescents

Rapid antigen detectionDirect and indirect immunofluorescence (IF) methodsAbility to perform direct screening with low cost
Both direct and indirect IF utilizing either polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies are available which possess a high degree of sensitivity and specificity
The general sensitivity of IF is 80–90% and for monoclonal antibody 95–100%. The specificity is at least 94%
IF techniques are fast and easy to perform, but the interpretation of results is subjective and the specimen must contain adequate nasopharyngeal cells
Incorrect and indeterminate results may occur for specimens with few epithelial cells or when nonspecific antibody reagents are used

ELISA (BD Directigen™ RSV)
ELISA assays do not require expensive laboratory equipment, take only 15–20 min, and are inexpensive compared to cell culture
ELISA techniques offer the advantages of objective interpretation, speed, and the possibility of screening a large number of specimens. Disadvantages include a generally poorer sensitivity and a “gray zone” of equivocal results, which requires confirmation by a time-consuming blocking ELISA procedure

SerologyAcute and convalescent phase sera are required for the serologic diagnosis of RSV
A fourfold increase in antibody titer or the appearance of specific IgM antibody is required for serologic confirmation of infection
It includes complement fixation (CF) antibody titers, ELISA, neutralization to specific A and B subtypes, and indirect IF
It is unlikely to be of help in the management of the patient because of the length of time required. Furthermore, the serological response in young infants may be poor and not detectable by some antibody assays
Seroconversion does not occur for at least 2 weeks and may require 4–6 weeks. CFTs are less sensitive than neutralization and ELISA assays

Molecular methodsNASBA-beaconNucliSens EasyQ RSV A + B assay (bioMérieux)
Real-time PCR-based assay utilizing NASBA technology containing internal control and specific molecular beacon mix targeting fusion protein of RSV
Limit of detection is 22 input copies of RSV
Improved time to result, <4 h

Cepheid SmartCycler® System – RSV (ASR)The RSV Type A or B Primer ASR contains primers designed to detect RSV type A or B
The RSV Type A or B Probe ASR contains FAM-labeled probes designed to detect RSV type A or B

xTAG® Respiratory Viral Panel (RVP) (Luminex)The RVP is a qualitative nucleic acid multiplex test intended for the simultaneous detection and identification of multiple respiratory virus nucleic acids in nasopharyngeal swabs from individuals suspected of respiratory tract infections
The xTAG RVP has been designed to simultaneously probe for 12 viral targets in a single patient specimen: influenza A, influenza A subtype H1, influenza A subtype H3, influenza B, RSV subtype A, RSV subtype B, parainfluenza 1, parainfluenza 2, and parainfluenza 3, human metapneumovirus, rhinovirus, and adenovirus. All viruses are probed for in a single multiplex reaction
xTAG RVP incorporates multiplex Reverse RT-PCR and multiplex target-specific primer extension (TSPE) with Luminex Molecular Diagnostic proprietary Universal Tag sorting system on the Luminex xMAP platform. xTAG RVP is compatible with both the Luminex 100/200 IS systems

Sensitivity and specificityImproved sensitivity and specificity when compared to conventional tests, particularly in the adult population
No cross-reactivity was shown for PIV13; influenza A and B; measles; adenovirus types 1 and 5; hMPV A1, A2, B1, and B2 indicating that the assay is specific for RSV

PitfallsAlthough the RSV virus can be cultured from an infected individual, the delay in definitive diagnosis of 3–5 days decreases the clinical utility

## Clinical Utility

Ease of assay, rapid turnaround time, and improved sensitivity have enhanced clinical utility in early detection of respiratory illness

## Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome

## General Characteristics

Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is a recently identified respiratory illness that first infected individuals in parts of Asia, North America, and Europe in late 2002 and early 2003
The SARS-associated coronavirus belongs to the Coronaviridae family, a family of large, enveloped positive-stranded RNA viruses. It is the first example of a coronavirus causing serious disease in humans
The SARS-coronavirus (SARS-CoV) genome is 29,272 nucleotides in length with 41% being G/C residues
SARS is spread mainly through contact with infected saliva or droplets from coughing. Vertical transmission from mother to infant does not appear to occur

## Clinical Presentation

The SARS virus produces an atypical pneumonia that often leads to respiratory failure, with pulmonary edema and hyaline membrane formation similar to that seen with adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
During the early phase of the disease, fever greater than 38 °C (100.4 °F) is the hallmark symptom. This finding is often associated by myalgia, rigors, and other flu-like symptoms
During the second week, patients develop a dry, nonproductive cough, shortness of breath, and lung infiltrates with rapid progression to respiratory distress
The cause of death is respiratory failure, with the best predictor of mortality being old age. The fatality of SARS is less than 1% for people aged 24 or younger, 6% for those 25–44, 15% for those 45–64, and more than 50% for those over 65
Except for ventilation, no effective treatment is currently available

## Diagnostic Methods

SpecimensRespiratory sample: nasal wash, nasopharyngeal swab, BAL, bronchial wash, or sputum
Transport: 1 ml (minimum volume 0.5ml for adults and pediatrics) respiratory sample in viral transport media (Microtest M4) or in sterile leakproof container at 2–8 °C
Unacceptable conditions: Dry swabs are not acceptable. Respiratory aspirates collected in containers with tubing as samples tend to leak, compromising the specimen

Conventional tests and problemsViral cultureRequires BSL3 facility
Difficulty in culturing the virus from infected individual late in the outbreak during late stages of illness due to possible genetic drift of virus

Serologic studiesUtility of serologic testing is poor due to late seroconversion of infected patients, i.e., 2–4 weeks
Antigen detection with monoclonal antibodies or monospecific polyclonal antibody against the N protein was found to be a sensitive and specific test for the diagnosis of SARS
For antibody testing, the indirect immunofluorescent antibody test is more commonly performed than the neutralizing antibody test since the former involves minimal manipulation of infectious virus and therefore carries less risk of a biohazard. The test is generally not useful during the first week of illness

Molecular methodsRT-PCRMultiple RT-PCR assays have been developed to detect SARS RNA in clinical specimens utilizing nested, nonnested, one-step or two-step conventional, or real-time RT-PCR assays
Most nucleic acid amplification tests are designed with the Orf1b or nucleoprotein gene. The latter gene has the theoretical advantage of being more abundant in infected cells and therefore of higher sensitivity, but this has not been clearly proven in clinical studies
LightCycler SARS-CoV quantitation kit [Roche Diagnostics Corporation] for use with the LightCycler instrumentReady to use which amplifies a 180-bp target sequence of the replicase 1AB/polymerase gene of SARS CoV
The analytical sensitivity for the SARS-CoV test is about 20 copies/PCR reaction

RealArt HPA-coronavirus RT-PCR kits [artus] for use with the LightCycler instrument, the ABI PRISM 7000, 7700, and 7900H instrumentsAmplifies an 80-bp region of the SARS-CoV genome

EraGen Biosciences MultiCode-RTx (research only)EraGen’s platform increases size of the genetic “alphabet” from the two DNA base pairs to six pairs with the development of eight new synthetic bases
It is a new multiplexed real-time PCR platform
Only standard PCR primers need to be designed. Since reporters are placed directly onto the primers and not on probes
It targets nucleocapsid (nuc) or polymerase (pol) gene

Sensitivity and specificitySensitivity of commercial assays ranged from 36% to 80% and specificity ranged from 80% to 100%
The absolute sensitivity of the RT-PCR assays ranged from 10 to 100 genome equivalents per reaction

PitfallsWhen present, SARS antibodies can be detected in serum at any point during the course of the disease. However, most patients do not seroconvert until after the second week, highlighting the importance of an RT-PCR assay for early diagnosis of the virus
Positive results must be confirmed by repeat testing using an aliquot of the original specimen and/or another laboratory before reporting. Alternatively, testing of a second gene region may be helpful. Furthermore, testing of one sample from a single source does not rule out the presence of SARS-associated coronavirus
A negative result does not rule out SARS as the presence of PCR inhibitors in the patient specimen, poor RNA quality, or nucleic acid concentrations below the level of detection of the assay may occur

## Clinical Utility

During the first week, serum and plasma are preferred for RT-PCR. Between 1 and 3 weeks, these sample types are less effective; stool and respiratory samples are the preferred types. After 3 weeks, stool is the preferred sample type for RT-PCR. Viral load in the upper respiratory tract and feces is low during the first 4 days of infections and peaks at approximately the 10th day of illness
During the 10th–15th day of illness, high viral loads are independent predictors of poor clinical outcomes

## Enterovirus

## General Characteristics

Enteroviruses represent one of the most common human viruses, affecting an estimate 50 million individuals in the US and potentially one billion worldwide. Enterovirus infections most commonly occur in temperate zones during the summer and early fall
Enteroviruses are a diverse group of small, nonenveloped ssRNA viruses of 6–7 kb that are transmitted by the fecal–oral route. Enteroviruses comprise a group of human viruses that includes polioviruses, echoviruses, coxsackie A viruses, coxsackie B viruses, and various enterovirus subtypes. The original classification of human enteroviruses has been substituted by a taxonomic scheme based on molecular and biological properties of the viruses. This revised classification recognizes at least 90 subtypes and separates them into four species
Several modes of transmission exist for these viruses, including fecal–oral, respiratory, transplacental, perinatal, and self-inoculation modes, but the majority are fecal–oral
Although enteroviruses undergo rapid replication in the GI tract, they rarely cause significant GI disease. Instead, they travel via the bloodstream to target organs where they further replicate and induce pathologic alteration

## Clinical Presentation

Most infections are subclinical, although may cause a variety of acute and chronic diseasesAcute: mild upper respiratory illness (common cold), febrile rash (hand, foot, and mouth disease and herpangina), aseptic meningitis, pleurodynia, encephalitis, acute flaccid paralysis, and neonatal sepsis-like disease
Chronic: myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and neuromuscular disease

The highest incidence of enterovirus infection is in infants and young children

## Diagnostic Methods

SpecimensNon sterile sites: nasal/throat swabs, and feces where the presence of the virus might merely indicate coincidental carriage
Sterile sites: vesicular fluid, CSF, serum, urine, or gathered at autopsy, are more reliable
Samples transported in viral transport media, were either transported directly to the laboratory or were stored at 4 °C for a maximum of 24

Conventional tests and problemsViral culture and shell vial cultureGold standard to detect enterovirus
Time-consuming methods and insensitive methods, relying on the presence of viable virus
Inability to fully characterize some enterovirus strains associated with late inadequate collection, handling and processing of samples, or because of intrinsic insensitivity to cell lines used
It can take up to 8 days for CPE to appear when virus is present in low titers (e.g., in CSF specimens), and some type A coxsackievirus do not grow in cell culture
Although shell vial culture using monoclonal antibodies has decreased the culture time compared with that for tube culture, it is less sensitive than conventional culture

SerologySerotype is usually irrelevant to individual management
The absence of a widely shared antigen has hampered the development of immunoassays for the enterovirus
Reports of monoclonal antibodies that cross-react with multiple enterovirus serotypes are promising, but further testing is required to determine the clinical relevance of those observations

Molecular methodsReal time RT-PCR – ABI Prism (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.)Improved speed and accuracy using TaqMan assay platform
Targets conserve sequences of the 5′ NTR and VP 1 and 2 (capsid protein). The 5′ NTR is the most highly conserved region and is involved in viral protein translation (Fig. )
An enterovirus real-time TaqMan PCR analysis of serum or plasma may be a good alternative for the enterovirus culture of feces, particularly in neonates with sepsis

AnDiaTec® Enterovirus real time RT-PCR KitThe kit is a screening assay for the detection of enteroviruses (coxsackie A, coxsackie B, and echovirus) in the capillary system of the LightCycler (Roche)
Targets conserve sequences of the 5′ NTR

Cepheid SmartCycler® SystemIt detects a 115-bp region of the 5′ NTR

NASBANASBA-electrochemiluminescently (ECL) and NASBA-beacon are not significantly different in sensitivity and specificityTargets conserve sequences of the 5′NTR

NASBA-ECLNucliSens basic kit has proved of equal or greater sensitivity for detection of enteroviruses
In the NucliSens basic kit, amplified RNA products are detected by hybridization using ECL-labeled probes, a highly sensitive methodology

NASBA-beaconNucliSens EasyQ Enterovirus Test (bioMerieux, Durham, NC), which utilizes real-time molecular beacons as probes (NASBA-beacon)
Real-time RT-PCR using TaqMan to shorten both technical hands-on time and time to result

Enterovirus consensus, Argene Biosoft (for research use only in the US)One-step RT-PCR of all enterovirus serotypes in one single reaction tube
Amplified region is in the 5′ NCR of the genome
Detection is performed with a biotinylated enterovirus generic probe

Sensitivity and specificityNASBA-ECL and NASBA-beacon were similar in sensitivity, 100% and 94.5%, respectively
RT-PCR sensitivity is 97%, while culture sensitivity is 54.5%
Real-time RT-PCR sensitivity is 100% and the specificity is 96.2%

PitfallsParechoviruses may cause similar clinical illnesses but are not detected by enterovirus testing
Poor handling of CSF or CSF collected during late infection can yield false-negative results
Enteroviruses can be shed in high titers in stool for prolonged periods. Therefore, a positive result in stool alone may not correlate with current disease

 

## Clinical Utility

Enteroviral meningitis is common in the US and leads to a large number of hospitalizations per year due to an inability to distinguish from bacterial meningitis. Therefore, enterovirus differentiation from bacterial illness can significantly reduce hospitalizations, antimicrobial use, and diagnostic testing
Rarely, dual infections (enteroviral and bacterial) can occur. Therefore, a positive enterovirus result with clinical features incompatible with benign viral meningitis should not lead to discontinuation of antibiotics

## JC/BK Virus

## General Characteristics

The BK virus (BKV) and JC virus (JCV) are small, nonenveloped, closed circular, double-stranded DNA virus and belong to human polyomaviruses, members of the Papovaviridae family
They were first isolated in 1971 and named JC and BK after the initials of the patients in which they were first discovered. JCV was isolated from the brain tissue of a patient with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML); BKV was isolated from the urine of a renal transplant patient who developed ureteral stenosis postoperatively
BKV and JCV share 75% homology at the level of nucleotide sequence. Each is 70% homologous to simian virus 40 (SV40), which belongs to polyomaviruses and was introduced in the human population, between 1955 and 1963, by contaminated polio vaccines produced in SV40-infected monkey cells
The two are not cross-reactive serologically, and serologic tests for antibodies are able to distinguish between BKV and JCV
More than 70% of the adult population has antibodies to BKV and JCV, with primary infections typically occurring in childhood
After an initial infection, polyomaviruses establish latency in various tissues. The primary sites of latency are uroepithelial cells for BK virus and B lymphocytes and renal tissue for JCV. Additional sites of latency for both viruses include the ureters, brain, and spleen

## Clinical Presentation

Both BKV and JCV have been associated with human tumors. The recent evidence that SV40 may be a cofactor in the etiology of specific human tumor types has raised again the interest on the two human polyomaviruses as possible agents involved in human oncogenesis
In immunocompetent individuals, primary BKV infections usually cause a mild respiratory illness and, rarely, cystitis, whereas primary JCV infections are typically asymptomatic. BKV seroprevalence peaks at ∼90% at age 5–9 years old
Reactivation of latent as well as primary BKV and JCV infections may occur in immunocompromised individuals, i.e., organ transplantation, AIDS, and leukemia. BKV infections can lead to interstitial nephritis, tubulitis, hemorrhagic cystitis, and kidney allograft rejection
JCV is responsible for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a fatal demyelinating disease of the central nervous system seen in up to 70% of AIDS patients

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimens: urine, plasma, CSF, and tissue biopsy
Conventional tests and problemsCytology and immunohistocytochemistry for urine sampleIt can be used to confirm BKV reactivation diagnosis
The urine sample can be stained with JC/BK and SV40 monoclonal antibodies

Viral cultureJC virus is difficult to culture
The most sensitive cell type for JCV is primary human fetal glial cells, which is not an easy reagent to acquire
BK virus will grow in common cell lines, such as human diploid fibroblasts, but several days and weeks are required before CPE is evident

Serologic studiesHemagglutination inhibition or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay methods can measure titers of antibodies to JCV and BKV
Serological tests of blood and CSF for anti-JCV and BKV antibodies are not useful in the diagnosis of PML and immunosuppressed individuals because antibodies to JCV and BKV are common and many patients with PML or immunosuppressed patients fail to develop a significant rise in antiviral antibody titers in serum or CSF

Molecular methods (Fig. )PCR, quantitativeSeminested PCR to measure serum BKV DNA has been shown to have a higher specificity of 88% (50% positive predictive value) to detect BKV nephropathy. It was also shown to have a sensitivity of 100% for detecting BKV nephropathy
Serial quantification of BKV DNA levels through PCR can aid in managing BKV nephritis by measuring increasing or decreasing activity levels noninvasively
PCR analysis of JCV DNA in spinal fluid is a noninvasive method of detecting active JCV infection which is 95% specific and 80% sensitive
JC/BK Consensus Complete kit, Argene Biosoft (US: For research use only). The kit is for the detection and typing of JC and BK viruses by PCR and hybridization on microwell plates, and offers high sensitivity, up to 1 copy per PCR for BKV and 10 copies per PCR for JCV primers/probe product is designed to amplify JCV/BKV using 5′ nuclease real-time assay. The targeted sequence corresponds to a fragment of 197/198 bp located in the gene of large T antigen
Real-time TaqMan PCR and LightCycler Probes (Homebrew) targets highly conserved sequence of JCV/BKV genomes (VP2 gene)

Sensitivity and specificityAnalytical specificity: no cross-reactivity with HSV family viruses, simian virus, adenovirus, and HIV. Absolute sensitivity: 10 JC/BK virus detection
PCR has been able to detect JCV in CSF in 80–90% of PML patients
The specificity of diagnosis is influenced by the choice of primers and extraction methods but can approach 100%

PitfallsSequence variation of polyomavirus genome and within various JC/BK subtypes that may cause difficulty in primer and probe design
Competition between JC and BK viruses due to sensitivity may lead to false-negative PCR result

 

## Clinical Utility

Detection of the virus by PCR may be indicative of an active infection. Therefore, the identification of viral DNA may warrant the institution of antiviral therapies and/or a decrease of immunosuppressive therapies
Determination of viral DNA presence or concentration in transplant patients is useful in establishing the cause of allograft rejection. Viral load may also be useful in immunocompromised patients
BKV nephropathy is associated with BK viremia of >5,000 copies/mL (plasma) and BK viremia >107 copies/mL and is seen in approximately 8% of kidney transplant recipients
Though latency is typically associated with the absence of viremia, low levels (<2,000 copies/mL plasma) are seen in some asymptomatic individuals

## HHV6

## General Characteristics

HHV6: two variants (A and B)Type B is most common as primary infections in US, Japan, and Europe
Type A is most common among asymptomatic children in Africa

Nearly 100% of population infected by 3 years of age
Virus becomes latent or persistent until reactivated (immunocompromised hosts). Can be present in mononuclear cells, saliva, and the central nervous system
1% of population shows vertical transmission
Congenital infection also reported

## Clinical Presentation

Most infants develop an undifferentiated febrile illness
20% present as roseola infantumHigh fever, followed by maculopapular rash on face, neck, and trunk
Febrile seizures are most common neurologic complication
Encephalitis and encephalopathy is also reported

Reactivated HHV6 presents as fever, rash, and encephalitis
Differentiating reactivated from latent infection is very difficult, especially following stem cell or organ transplant

## Diagnostic Methods

Specimens: HHV6 can be isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells
Conventional tests and problemsSerologic testingPrimary infection causes an IgM spike in the first week of illness followed by IgG rise approximately 2 weeks later. IgG antibody persists indefinitely
Tests include indirect immunofluorescence, immunoblot, and enzyme immunoassays. Viral culture can also be used but is time-consuming
However, gap between onset of infection and rise of titer does not allow a timely diagnosis

Molecular methodsPCRQualitative nested polymerase chain reaction
Can be performed on plasma, mononuclear cells, whole blood, saliva, urine, cervical swabs, and placenta
Studies have shown results in plasma showed a sensitivity to diagnose reactivated or primary HHV6 infection with 75–95% sensitivity
Additionally, DNA can be detected in absence of viral replication
Specificity was reported to be 84% compared with viral culture

RT-PCRIncreased sensitivity and specificity (90% and 98%, respectively)

Quantitative PCRViral load may be helpful
Primary infection usually ranges from 4.4 to 4.9 log (10) genome equivalent copies (gec)/106 PBMCs
Asymptomatic individuals are lower (1.5–3.7)
Viral load with individuals with latent infection does overlap with immunocompromised host. However, plasma can be used to distinguish between the two (as latent individuals do not have plasma positive viral DNA)
Viral loads can be separated into very high (integrated virus), intermediate (primary, reactivated, or integrated virus) and low (latent infection)

PitfallsSome overlap does occur with latent and immunocompromised hosts (as listed above)
Contamination is an issue, given that the techniques use signal amplification

## Clinical Utility

HHV6 can be especially dangerous in immunocompromised hosts
HHV6 is present in a very large percentage of the population (100% of individuals greater than 3 years of age)
Testing is required to determine if the host has a primary or latent infection
Standard testing (viral capture or serology) is too time-consuming
Quantitative PCR and RT-PCR can especially be useful

## Contributor Information
Liang Cheng, Phone: 317491-6442, FAX: 317491-6419, Email: liang_cheng@yahoo.com.
David Y. Zhang, Phone: 212659-8173, Email: david.zhang@mssm.edu
John N. Eble, Phone: 317 274 1738, Email: jeble@iupui.edu

## Further Reading