PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7505586PMC7505586.1750558675055863295641310.1371/journal.pone.0239462PONE-D-20-126291Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsCarcinomaHepatocellular CarcinomaMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsGastrointestinal TumorsHepatocellular CarcinomaMedicine and Health SciencesGastroenterology and HepatologyLiver DiseasesHepatocellular CarcinomaMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsBreast TumorsBreast CancerMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsColorectal CancerMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsGastrointestinal TumorsGastric CancerBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell ProcessesCell ProliferationMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyMetastasisMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyBasic Cancer ResearchMetastasisMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsAdenomatous polyposis coli-binding protein end-binding 1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma growth and metastasis
EB1 is involved in the progression of HCChttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-5658-2730AiyamaTakeshiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesValidationWriting – original draft OrimoTatsuyaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6203-8528YokooHidekiConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyResourcesWriting – review & editing http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1994-5349OhataTakanoriData curationInvestigation HatanakaKanako C.Data curationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing HatanakaYutakaData curationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesWriting – review & editing FukaiMotoData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing KamiyamaToshiyaConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing TaketomiAkinobuSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Gastroenterological Surgery I, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan2
Department of Surgical Pathology, Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo, Hokkaido, JapanLeeJung WeonEditor ]. HCC is known to have a high relapse rate and to be characterized by high vascular invasiveness, which accounts for poor overall patient survival [ , ]. Fujii et al. previously investigated new biomarkers for HCC by proteomics analysis, and showed that the expression level of end-binding 1 (EB1), an adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)-binding protein, was higher in hepatoma cell lines compared with normal hepatocyte cell lines [ ]. Orimo et al. confirmed the same result in HCC tissues compared to normal liver tissues and reported that the overexpression of EB1 in HCC tissues correlated with poor prognosis [ ]. Interestingly, the correlation between poor prognosis and EB1 overexpression in tumors applies to other cancers, such as esophageal cell carcinoma, breast cancer, gastric adenocarcinoma, colorectal cancer, and glioblastoma [ – ].
EB1 was originally identified by Su et al. as a protein that interacts with the tumor suppressor protein APC [ ]. EB1 is now recognized to be an evolutionarily conserved microtubule tip-associated protein that localizes at the growing plus ends of microtubules and at the centrosome [ , ]. Therefore, as an important regulator of microtubule dynamics, EB1 is critically involved in many microtubule-mediated cell activities, such as establishment and maintenance of cell polarity, localization and capture of chromosomes during mitosis, and positioning of the mitotic spindle during asymmetric cell division [ – , ]. However, little is known about the mechanism of EB1 involvement in HCC development.
Here we investigated the role of EB1 in HCC and its potential utility as a predictive prognostic marker for HCC patients. We further investigated the importance of EB1 expression for the proliferation, migration, and invasion of HCC cell lines. Moreover, we analyzed genes coordinately expressed with EB1 to identify new candidate biomarkers or potential targets of cancer therapy.

## Materials and methods

## Patient samples
We prepared HCC tissue samples from 235 HCC patients on whom we performed curative surgery at Hokkaido University Hospital between January 1997 and December 2006. The clinicopathological features of the patients are presented in . None of the patients received preoperative therapy. The median observation period was 5.40 years (range, 0.04–16.07 years). Tumors were classified according to the World Health Organization and International Union Against Cancer tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification systems [ ]. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients prior to their enrollment in the study, and the study design and protocol were approved by the Institutional Review Board of Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo, Japan (Clinical Research Approval Number 013–0071).
 

## Immunohistochemical staining
We used an EnVision+ System-HRP Kit (Dako Japan, Tokyo, Japan) to perform immunohistochemistry following the manufacturer’s instructions. Detailed procedures are as reported previously [ ]. As a primary antibody, we used a polyclonal rabbit anti-human EB1 antibody (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA; SC-15347). As reported previously, we selected the bile duct epithelium as an internal control for positive staining [ ]. Two independent observers measured the percentage of EB1-positive tumor cells in a blinded fashion and categorized the results into groups ranging (increments of 10%) from 0% to 100%. Based on the average percentage EB1-positivity, if >30% of the HCC cells were stained, we defined the tumor as EB1-positive HCC.

## Cells
The human HCC cell lines HuH7, HepG2, JHH4, HLF, HLE, and PLC/PRF/5 were obtained from the Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources Cell Bank (JCRB, Osaka, Japan). Li-7 were obtained from RIKEN BioResource Research Center (RIKEN BRC, Tsukuba, Japan). Hep3B were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD, USA). All cell lines were maintained in DMEM (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan) supplemented with 10% FBS at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere.

## siRNA transfection
Control and EB1-targeting siRNAs were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA; HSS117899 and HSS177032). The sequences of the EB1-targeting siRNAs were: 5′-CCGAAGAAACCUCUCACUUCUAGCA-3′ (siEB1-1) and 5′-GGAUCAAUGAGUCUCUGCAGUUGAA-3′ (siEB1-2). The cells were transfected with 10 nM of each siRNA. After 48 h of incubation, the efficiency of protein knockdown was confirmed by western blot analysis and quantitative real-time PCR. The cells were then used for experiments.

## Generation of EB1-knockout (KO) cell lines
EB1-KO cell lines were generated by following the procedure reported by Fukuhara et al [ ]. Plasmid pX330 [ ], encoding hCas9 and single-guide RNA, was obtained from Addgene (plasmid #42230). The fragments of single-guide RNA targeting the EB1 gene were inserted into the Bbs1 site of pX330 to generate pX330-EB1. HuH7 cells were transfected with pX330-EB1, and clones were established by the single-cell isolation technique. To screen for EB1-KO clones, mutations in the target loci were determined by a surveyor assay. Deficiency of protein expression was confirmed by western blot analysis.

## Re-expression of EB1 in EB1-KO cell lines
Full-length EB1 was amplified by PCR, and the products were digested and ligated into the Lenti-X vector (Takara, Tokyo, Japan). Empty vector or Lenti-X EB1 vector was co-transfected into 293T cells (Takara) to produce control or recombinant EB1-expressing lentiviruses, respectively. The lentiviral particles were harvested and used to infect EB1-KO cell lines. After several days, the infected cells were sorted, and expression of EB1 was confirmed by western blot analysis.

## Quantitative real-time PCR
Quantitative real-time PCR was carried out using SYBR Fast qPCR Mix (Takara Bio) and the primers listed in . The specificity of the PCR products was confirmed after each amplification by a melting curve analysis, and the data were analyzed with LightCycler software (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The target mRNA levels in each sample were normalized to β-actin mRNA.

## Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed in NP40 cell lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were incubated with polyclonal rabbit anti-human EB1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; sc-15347) or monoclonal rabbit anti-human β-actin (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; #4970) primary antibodies and then with a horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Cell Signaling Technology). Densitometric analysis of western blots was performed using a ChemiDoc XRS Plus system with Image Lab Software (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).

## Cell proliferation assay
Cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 103 cells/well in 96-well plates and incubated for 1–4 days. A CellTiter 96 AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Promega Corporation, Mannheim, Germany) was used to determine viable cell numbers on days 1–4 according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Migration and invasion assays
Migration and invasion assays were performed by placing cells into the upper chambers of a Transwell plate (BD Biosciences) without or with 100 μg/cm2 Matrigel coating. Cells were added in serum-free medium, and medium supplemented with 10% FBS was added to the lower chamber as a chemoattractant. After incubation for 22 h, cells remaining on the upper side of the membrane were removed with a cotton swab, while cells adhering to the lower side were stained with Diff-Quik (Sysmex, Kobe, Japan) and visualized by light microscopy. The numbers of cells in five random fields (original magnification, ×200) were recorded.

## Animal studies
We purchased four-week-old female BALB/c nu/nu mice from CLEA Japan (Tokyo, Japan). We kept the mice under specific pathogen-free conditions in laminar-flow hoods during the experiments as previously reported [ ]. All procedures involving animals and their care were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of National University Corporation Hokkaido University and were conducted under National University Corporation Hokkaido University Regulations on Animal Experimentation. To detect the effect of EB1 on HCC tumor growth, we mixed 1 × 107 EB1-KO HuH7 cells infected with EB1-expressing or empty-vector lentiviruses with 50 μl PBS and 50 μl Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and subcutaneously injected the mixture into the flanks of each mouse (n = 5; EB1-re-expressing EB1-KO HuH7 cells in the right flank and control cells in the left flank). The sizes of the subcutaneous tumors were measured every week. After 4 weeks, the mice were euthanized by isoflurane inhalation followed by cervical dislocation and the tumors were excised and weighed. Tumor volumes (in mm3) were calculated as: (shorter diameter)2 × (longer diameter) × 0.5.

## Microarray analysis
Total RNA was extracted from EB1-KO HuH7 cells infected with EB1-expressing or empty-vector lentiviruses using a QIAamp RNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen). After properly converting the extracted RNA to the cRNA labeled with Cy3 as recommended by the manufacturers, 0.6 μg of the cRNA was fragmented and hybridized at 65°C for 17 h to an Agilent SurePrint G3 Human GE v3 8x60K Microarray (Design ID: 072363) containing a total of 58,201 probes excluding control probes. For data analysis, the intensity values of each scanned feature were quantified using Agilent Feature Extraction software version 11.5.1.1. Normalization was performed using Agilent GeneSpring software version 13.1.1 (per chip: normalization to 75 percentile shift). Differences in transcript levels were quantified by the comparative method. We defined a ≥2.0-fold change in signal intensity as a significant difference in gene expression in this study.

## Statistical analyses
We used JMP Pro Windows version 11 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) for all statistical processing. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Comparisons of continuous data between two groups were performed using Student’s unpaired t-test. The correlations between EB1 expression and clinicopathological features were evaluated by Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables and the Mann–Whitney U test for continuous variables. The time to recurrence and overall survival were calculated from the date of first resection of the primary tumor to the date of first radiological evidence of recurrence or death, respectively. All time-to-event endpoints were computed by the Kaplan–Meier method. Patients who died without recurrence were censored in the evaluation of recurrence. Potential prognostic factors were identified by univariate analysis using the log-rank test. P values lower than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

## Results

## Expression of EB1 is associated with poor prognosis of patients with HCC
First, we investigated whether EB1 expression in HCC tissue samples was correlated with the clinicopathological features and survival of our patients. The cytoplasm of tumor cells, bile duct epithelial cells, and inflammatory cells showed immunohistochemical staining of EB1, whereas no immunostaining was observed in hepatocytes in normal liver tissue areas ( ). The correlations between EB1 expression and clinicopathological data are shown in . In 235 samples, positive EB1 expression (>30% of cells stained) was significantly correlated with histological differentiation (P < 0.0001), serum α-fetoprotein level (P = 0.01), serum protein induced by vitamin K absence level (P < 0.02), TNM stage (P < 0.0001), tumor size (P = 0.001), portal vein invasion status (P < 0.0001), and intrahepatic metastasis status (P = 0.009) ( ). Moreover, we investigated the correlations between EB1 expression in HCC tissue and prognostic data on HCC patients. As shown in , patients who had EB1-positive HCC had significantly worse prognosis than those who had EB1-negative, in regard to both cumulative recurrence rate (P < 0.0001) and overall survival rate (P < 0.0001; the median survival times of patients with EB1-positive and negative HCC were 16.5 and 3.9 years, respectively). These data suggest that EB1 is associated with tumor growth and invasion and may serve as an important predictive factor for disease recurrence and prognosis in patients with HCC.
 

## Knockdown of EB1 by siRNA decreases the proliferation, migration, and invasion of HCC cell lines
We examined the expression of EB1 mRNA and protein in eight human HCC cell lines ( ), and selected HLF, HLE, and HuH7 for further experiments. Efficient knockdown of EB1 by siEB1-1 and siEB1-2 in these cell lines was confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR and western blot analysis ( ). To assess the role of EB1 in tumor growth, we measured cell proliferation. Knockdown of EB1 in HLF, HLE, and HuH7 significantly decreased cell proliferation compared with control cells (P < 0.05, ). Next, we assessed tumor metastasis and invasion potential using Transwell chamber migration and Matrigel invasion assays, respectively. Similar to the effect on proliferation, EB1 downregulation significantly decreased the ability of HCC cells to migrate and invade compared with control cells (P < 0.05, ). These results indicate that EB1 regulates the proliferation, migration, and invasion of HCC cell lines.
 

## Re-expression of EB1 in EB1-KO HCC cells increases proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro
To confirm these observations, we generated two EB1-KO HuH7 cell lines using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing, and infected the cells with control or EB1-expressing lentiviruses. Efficient KO and re-expression of EB1 in the four cell lines were verified by western blot analysis ( ). The cells were then analyzed in proliferation, migration, and invasion assays. We found that re-expression of EB1 in both EB1-KO HuH7 cell lines significantly increased cell proliferation, migration, and invasion compared with control cells (P < 0.05, ). These results demonstrate that EB1 plays a crucial role in malignancy-related behavior of HCC cell lines.
 

## Re-expression of EB1 in EB1-KO HCC cells promotes tumor growth in vivo
We further investigated the effect of EB1 re-expression on the growth of EB1-KO HuH7 cells injected subcutaneously into nude mice. EB1-KO HuH7 cells expressing empty vector were injected into the contralateral flank of each mouse as a control. After 4 weeks, the weight (EB1 re-expressing EB1-KO HuH7 cells, 2.23 ± 1.13 g; EB1-KO HuH7 cells, 0.85 ± 0.54 g; P < 0.05, ) and volume (EB1 re-expressing EB1-KO HuH7 cells, 2474 ± 1044 mm3; EB1-KO HuH7 cells, 872 ± 605 mm3, P < 0.05, ) of tumors with EB1 re-expression were higher than those of control tumors. Immunohistochemical staining of EB1 in the excised tumors confirmed the depletion and re-expression of EB1 in the cells carrying the empty vector and EB1 expression vector, respectively ( ). These results demonstrate that EB1 plays an important role in tumor growth in vivo.
 

## Genes expressed in association with upregulated EB1 expression
Finally, we performed an RNA microarray analysis (Agilent SurePrint G3 Human GE v3 8x60K Microarray, Design ID: 072363) to identify genes differentially expressed in the presence of EB1. Comparison of gene expression in EB1-KO HuH7 cells infected with control and EB1-expressing lentiviruses identified a number of genes upregulated upon EB1 re-expression ( ). Among them, Delta-like 1 homolog (Dlk1) was the most significantly upregulated, followed in descending order by Hepcidin antimicrobial peptide (HAMP), and Solute carrier organic anion transporter family member 1B3 (SLCO1B3) ( ). We suggest that upregulation of EB1 expression correlates with the expression of these genes.
 

## Discussion
In the present study, we showed that EB1 expression is an important predictive marker for survival and disease recurrence in patients with HCC. EB1 overexpression was significantly correlated with poor histological differentiation, advanced TNM stage, large tumor size, advanced portal vein invasion status, and high intrahepatic metastasis status. In vitro studies revealed that overexpression of EB1 promoted HCC cell proliferation, motility, and invasion. Our in vivo study validated the in vitro findings by demonstrating that expression of EB1 promoted the growth of HCC tumors. Moreover, our microarray analysis indicated that EB1 expression might correlate with the expression of genes such as those encoding Dlk1, HAMP, and SLCO1B3 ( ). Our findings thus suggest that EB1 plays an important role in the growth, migration, and invasion of HCCs and that these genes may be involved in the mechanism of EB1-associated tumor development.
High expression of EB1 has been reported in several malignancies to date, including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, glioblastoma, colon cancer, gastric carcinoma, breast cancer, and HCC [ – ]. In particular, EB1 expression was associated with histological grade, pathological TNM stage, and lymph node metastasis in breast cancer [ ] and with serum α-fetoprotein level, TNM stage, tumor number and size, histological differentiation, portal vein invasion status, and intrahepatic metastasis in HCC [ ]. Our data are consistent with these reports and strongly suggest that EB1 expression is correlated with tumor growth and invasiveness. Moreover, EB1 was reported to be a significant independent predictor of overall survival in patients with glioblastoma, colon cancer, and HCC [ , – ]. In this study, we validated that EB1 was an important predictor of prognosis and recurrence in our cohort of patients with HCC. These observations strongly suggest that EB1 is involved in the progression of HCC.
EB1 was originally identified in 1995 by Su et al. [ ] who used a yeast two-hybrid screen to identify proteins that bind to the tumor suppressor APC. Since APC regulates the canonical Wnt signaling pathway [ , ], we hypothesized that EB1 may be a component of this pathway. However, using a β-catenin/Tcf luciferase reporter system [ ], we found no evidence that EB1 promotes Wnt3a-induced activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling ( ), in contrast to a previous report [ ].
A recent study showed that EB1 can promote Aurora-B kinase activity by preventing its inactivation by protein phosphatase 2A [ ]. However, when we examined this in our HuH7 EB1-KO cell system, we did not observe increased Aurora-B kinase activity in EB1-KO cells after re-expression of EB1 ( ).
In addition, our data revealed that EB1 promoted not only cell proliferation, but also cell migration and invasion. These are complex processes requiring coordinated re-organization of the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons under both physiological and pathological conditions, including angiogenesis and tumor cell metastasis [ – ]. Filopodia, lamellipodia, and invadopodia are protrusive structures localized at the cell front during mobility [ ] and invasion [ ]. Microtubules cooperate with the actin cytoskeleton to elongate invadopodia during invasion [ ] and to maintain cell polarization at the leading and trailing edges during cell migration [ – ]. These microtubule functions are controlled or mediated by microtubule plus-end tracking proteins, including EB1 [ ]. Indeed, knockdown or overexpression of EB1 decreased or increased cell migration or invasion, respectively, in glioblastoma cell lines [ ], colon cancer cell lines [ ], melanoma cell lines [ ], and our HCC cell lines. Therefore, we suggest that EB1 is necessary to maintain cell polarity and direction during migration or invasion of cancer cells.
However, these observations leave us with the unanswered question of how EB1 is involved in the development and progression of HCC. Our microarray analysis revealed that EB1 overexpression might be correlated with upregulation of the expression of genes encoding Dlk1, HAMP, and SLCO1B3. Dlk1 is an imprinted gene and is only transcribed from the paternal allele in humans [ , ]. Intriguingly, previous work showed that Dlk1 plays a vital role in liver development and HCC oncogenesis [ – ]. Moreover, Xu et al. [ ] recently reported that Dlk1-positive HCC cells show more robust proliferation and tumorigenicity compared with Dlk1-negative cells. The HAMP gene encodes hepcidin, which is primarily produced in the liver and is a key iron-regulatory hormone [ ]. The levels of serum hepcidin in patients with non-small cell lung cancer, breast cancer, and pancreatic cancer are significantly higher compared with those of healthy individuals or those with benign disease [ – ]. Moreover, high levels of serum or cellular hepcidin in patients with non-small cell lung cancer or pancreatic cancer is associated with metastasis, TNM stage, and poor prognosis [ , ]. The gene encoding SLCO1B3 is a member of the SLCO gene superfamily, which encodes organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP). OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 deficiency causes human Rotor syndrome by interrupting the reuptake of conjugated bilirubin reuptake into the liver [ ]; however, high levels of OATP1B3 transcripts are significantly associated with colorectal cancer and prostate cancer, suggesting that OATP1B3 represents a promising biomarker for those cancers [ , ]. Therefore, we suggest that by upregulating the expression of these genes, EB1 promotes cell proliferation, tumor growth, and metastasis of HCC.
There are several limitations to our study. First, there are some inconsistency of immunohistochemistry data compared with those of Orimo et al [ ]. This may be explained by the differences of the immunohistochemical staining method and the differences in patients’ backgrounds as we conducted a retrospective analysis. Further investigation is required to improve accuracy and reproducibility in the assessment of EB1 expression in the clinical setting. Second, although the p values of the results of our experiments indicate significant differences, statistical power may be insufficient because of the limited number of samples. Nevertheless, our data are consistent with findings of others that elevated EB1 expression significantly correlates with the proliferation, migration, and invasion of cancer cells [ , , ]. Third, the mechanism by which EB1 regulates the expression of the above candidate genes is unclear. For example, Sun et al. [ ] reported that EB1 binds to and regulates the activity of Aurora-B kinase. Thus, EB1 may regulate the expression of the candidate genes by binding to a protein that regulates their expression. However, further investigation is required to clarify this issue.
In conclusion, our data show that EB1 expression is significantly correlated with various clinicopathological parameters, leading to a poor prognosis in patients with HCC. We further found that genes such as those encoding Dlk1, HAMP, and SLCO1B3 may be involved in the mechanism by which EB1 supports HCC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. The present findings suggest that an unknown EB1 axis may represent a new therapeutic target for HCC.

## Supporting information
S1 Checklist(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## The relation between EB1 and Wnt signaling.
SuperTopFlash 293 reporter cells containing the αβ-catenin/Tcf reporter system 19 were transfected with empty or EB1 expression pcDNA3.1 plasmid, stimulated with Wnt3a-conditioned medium, and measured for their luciferase activities. Although EB1 elevation was detected at the protein level, there was no difference in luciferase activities in the cells transfected with the empty or EB1 expression plasmid.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## The relation between EB1 and aurora-B kinase activity.
There was no significant activation of aurora-B kinase in EB1-KO HuH7 cells re-expressing EB1 compared with EB1-KO HuH7 cells.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Raw images(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Primers.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank the members of Department of Gastroenterological Surgery I and Department of Surgical Pathology, especially the laboratory assistants, Nozomi Kobayashi, Sayaka Miyoshi and Ayae Nange, for helpful technical assistance. We thank Tadasuke Tsukiyama (Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan) for helpful discussions and technical assistance with Wnt signaling. We thank Takasuke Fukuhara and Yoshiharu Matsuura (Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka, Japan) for technical assistance with CRISPR/Cas9 technology and supporting of generation of EB1-KO cell lines. Finally, we thank Anne M. O'Rourke, PhD, and Alison Sherwin, PhD, from Edanz Group (www.edanzediting.com/ac) for editing drafts of this manuscript.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0239462.r001Decision Letter 0
LeeJung WeonAcademic Editor© 2020 Jung Weon Lee2020Jung Weon LeeThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
12 Jun 2020

PONE-D-20-12629
Adenomatous polyposis coli-binding protein end-binding 1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma growth and metastasis
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Yokoo,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Two experts have reviewed the manuscript and foudn that the study needs to be strengthened with more clear presentatinos via more critical statistic analysis, controls, and WB or images in higher qualities.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 27 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jung Weon Lee, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Our staff editors have determined that your manuscript is likely within the scope of our Cancer Metastasis Call for Papers. This editorial initiative is headed by a team of Guest Editors for PLOS ONE: Joe Ramos (University of Hawai'i), Shengyu Yang (Penn State University), Helen Fillmore (University of Portsmouth) and Tobias Zech (University of Liverpool). The Collection will encompass a diverse range of research articles about metastasis, including mechanisms of cell motility, invasion and the tumor microenvironment, as well as advances in the development of anti-metastatic therapies.  Additional information can be found on our announcement page: https://collections.plos.org/s/cancer-metastasis
If you would like your manuscript to be considered for this collection, please let us know in your cover letter and we will ensure that your paper is treated as if you were responding to this call.  Please note that being considered for the Collection does not require additional peer review beyond the journal’s standard process and will not delay the publication of your manuscript if it is accepted by PLOS ONE. If you would prefer to remove your manuscript from collection consideration, please specify this in the cover letter.
3. Thank you for including your ethics statement: 'All procedures involving animals and their care were approved by the Ethics Committee of Hokkaido University'  
(a)  Please state whether the provided ethics committee contains animal welfare experts or whether an animal ethics or IACUC committee reviewed and approved the study. Please provide the full name of the committee that reviewed and approved the study  
(b) Once you have amended this/these statement(s) in the Methods section of the manuscript, please add the same text to the “Ethics Statement” field of the submission form (via “Edit Submission”).
For additional information about PLOS ONE ethical requirements for human subjects research, please refer to " ext-link-type="uri" xlink:type="simple">http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-human-subjects-research."
4. Please provide additional information about each of the cell lines used in this work, including any quality control testing procedures (authentication, characterisation, and mycoplasma testing). For more information, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-cell-lines.
5. To comply with PLOS ONE submissions requirements, please provide the method of euthanasia in the Methods section of your manuscript.
6. As part of your revision, please complete and submit a copy of the ARRIVE Guidelines checklist, a document that aims to improve experimental reporting and reproducibility of animal studies for purposes of post-publication data analysis and reproducibility: https://www.nc3rs.org.uk/arrive-guidelines. Please include your completed checklist as a Supporting Information file. Note that if your paper is accepted for publication, this checklist will be published as part of your article.
7. We noticed minor instances of text overlap with the following previous publication(s), which need to be addressed:
(1) https://www.pnas.org/content/105/20/7153.full
The text that needs to be addressed involves the Introduction section.
In your revision please ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed.
8. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In the manuscript, the authors described a study to determine the clinical significance of adenomatous polyposis coli-binding protein end-binding 1 (EB1) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The authors performed various experiments and concluded that elevated expression of EB1 promotes tumor growth and metastasis of HCC, suggesting using EB1 as a HCC biomarker. While evidence from multiple experiments seems supportive of the conclusion, the sample sizes are small in most of the experiments, and the statistical significance of many tests seems marginal.  A few comments:
[Page 9, 10; Table 1] For numerical variables like age and tumor size, it would be good to provide standard deviation in addition to the mean values.  For categorical variables, the p-values calculated seem different from those by Fisher's exact tests.
[Page 12; Fig 2c, d, and e]
The sample size may be too small to draw meaningful conclusion, and it would be good to state the mean and standard deviation values for proliferation, migration, and invasion in the manuscript.
[Page 12; Fig 3b, c, and d]
The sample size is too small, and the p-values may not be valid.  It might be better to include more biological replicates.
[Page 13; Fig 4]
Again the sample size is too small to draw any conclusion with statistical significance.  More samples would be recommended.
[Page 14; Fig 5b]
While the list of up-regulated genes is interesting, it would be of interest to analyze any potential functional or pathway enrichment.
Reviewer #2: The manuscript by Aiyama and coworkers confirms the involvement of EB1 in HCC by showing that its expression is associated with poor survival and high recurrence rate. Additionally, in vitro and in vivo experiments show involvement of EB1 in proliferation, migration, invasion and tumor growth. The study appears solid, but there are a few issues, mainly regarding lack of information in the methods, that should be addressed.
1) Was the assesment of staining done just by eye or was imageJ or equivalent used ? Where is the 30% staining cutoff based on (Orimo 2008 study used 50%?!), and how was this exactly determined?
2) For all-in vitro experiments information is lacking regarding technical replicates and the number of independent experiments performed.
3) Is it certain the b-actin mRNA remains stable upon EB1 knockdown or overexpression ? It is standard to use 2-3 genes for qPCR normalization, not just 1.
4) Same for WB normalization, is b-actin proven to remain stable? Has normalization also been done using a whole protein stain?
5) In the migration assays, was the membrane of the transwell plate completely uncoated? And for invasion, what was the volume of matrigel used to coat the transwells?
6) Fiugre 2a: to choose HLF, HLE and HuH7 appears a bit random as all but JHH4 and HepG2 appear suitable. Please rephrase line 220.
7) Why was specifically HuH7 chosen fort he knockout experiments? Please clarify.
8) All data in figure 3 should be shown in comparison to the original HuH7 cells, especially to confirm efficient knockout.
9) Line 300 : Unclear why SLCO1B3 is discussed and for instance NPTX2 and HMSD not. Additionally, the data from the microarray should be validated by at least qPCR before these can be considered reliable enough to thoroughly discuss in line 341 to 359.
10) Line 363-364 is unclear, this statement requires further explanation.
11) Overall, the Western blot images quality is quite poor and higher resolution images are needed.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0239462.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
27 Jul 2020

July 27, 2020:
Jung Weon Lee, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Lee,
Thank you for the opportunity to submit a revised version of our manuscript (PONE-D-20-12629) titled, “Adenomatous polyposis coli-binding protein end-binding 1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma growth and metastasis,” for publication as a Research Article in PLOS ONE. We greatly appreciate the reviewers’ incisive comments that have helped us to significantly improve the manuscript. Our point-by-point responses to these comments are stated on the next page. And we appreciate your consideration for the collection of “Cancer Metastasis Call for Papers”. In addition, we uploaded the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot results reported in our submission’s figures. We hope that our paper is now suitable for publication in the PLOS ONE.
Sincerely,
Hideki Yokoo
Department of Gastroenterological Surgery I
Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine
N-14 W-5, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8648, Japan.
E-mail: hi-yokoo@mua.biglobe.ne.jp
Tel: +81-11-706-5927
Fax: +81-11-717-7515.
 
Reviewer(s)' Comments to Author:
Reviewer: 1
Comments and our Responses:
#1. [Page 9, 10; Table 1] For numerical variables like age and tumor size, it would be good to provide standard deviation in addition to the mean values. For categorical variables, the p-values calculated seem different from those by Fisher's exact tests.
Response: Thank you for your advice. We have added the standard deviation in our table, and corrected the p-values (Page 10, 11; Table 1).
#2. [Page 12; Fig 2c, d, and e] The sample size may be too small to draw meaningful conclusion, and it would be good to state the mean and standard deviation values for proliferation, migration, and invasion in the manuscript.
Response: Thank you for your comment. We noticed several mistakes of data analysis in migration and invasion assay and have changed the figure. In addition, We have added the following sentence in the figure legend. “The data are presented as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments in triplicate.” The mean and standard deviation values for all assays are as follows.
Proliferation assay (n=3):
HuH7 control siRNA, 1.16 ± 0.10; HuH7 EB1 siRNA1, 0.83 ± 0.05; HuH7 EB1 siRNA2, 0.57 ± 0.02.
HLF control siRNA, 0.80 ± 0.07; HLF EB1 siRNA1, 0.63 ± 0.06; HLF EB1 siRNA2 0.28 ± 0.03.
HLE control siRNA, 1.10 ± 0.04; HLE EB1 siRNA1, 0.86 ± 0.06; HLE EB1 siRNA2, 0.55 ± 0.12.
Migration assay (n=3):
HuH7 control siRNA, 179.3 ± 29.7; HuH7 EB1 siRNA1, 72.0 ± 5.2; HuH7 EB1 siRNA2, 82.0 ± 6.0 migrated cells / 5HPFs.
HLF control siRNA, 392.0 ± 43.8; HLF EB1 siRNA1, 222.0 ± 8.1; HLF EB1 siRNA2 62.0 ± 4.5 migrated cells / 5HPFs.
HLE control siRNA, 1544.3 ± 198.8; HLE EB1 siRNA1, 804.3 ± 113.3; HLE EB1 siRNA2, 347.0 ± 89.7 migrated cells / 5HPFs.
Invasion assay (n=3):
HuH7 control siRNA, 138.3 ± 29.7; HuH7 EB1 siRNA1, 68.3 ± 3.0; HuH7 EB1 siRNA2, 85.3 ± 10.0 invaded cells / 5HPFs.
HLF control siRNA, 151.3 ± 11.5; HLF EB1 siRNA1, 55.6 ± 13.2; HLF EB1 siRNA2 18.6 ± 11.2 invaded cells / 5HPFs.
HLE control siRNA, 133.6 ± 16.4; HLE EB1 siRNA1, 100.0 ± 9.84; HLE EB1 siRNA2, 53.6 ± 9.8 invaded cells / 5HPFs.
#3. [Page 12; Fig 3b, c, and d] The sample size is too small, and the p-values may not be valid. It might be better to include more biological replicates.
Response: Thank you for your comment. We have conducted a cell counting proliferation assay for EB1-KO HuH7 cells (starting with 10 million cells per well, counting in day4), and the results were consistent with the MTS proliferation assay described in our manuscript (EB-KO HuH7 #1 Empty, 91.1 ± 4.7; EB1-KO HuH7 #1 EB1 re-expressing, 178.6 ± 23.5 million cells per well (n=3). EB-KO HuH7 #6 Empty, 60.0 ± 5.7; EB1-KO HuH7 #6 EB1 re-expressing, 80.6 ± 3.5 (n=3)). However, we noticed a mistake of data analysis in migration assay and have changed the figure. In addition, We have also added the following sentence in the figure legend. “The data are presented as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments in triplicate.” The mean and standard deviation values for all assays are as follows.
Proliferation assay (n=3):
EB-KO HuH7 #1 Empty, 0.92 ± 0.11; EB1-KO HuH7 #1 EB1 re-expressing, 1.36 ± 0.09.
EB-KO HuH7 #6 Empty, 0.68 ± 0.02; EB1-KO HuH7 #6 EB1 re-expressing, 0.89 ± 0.05.
Migration assay (n=3):
EB-KO HuH7 #1 Empty, 469.0 ± 61.2; EB1-KO HuH7 #1 EB1 re-expressing, 658.3 ± 82.8 migrated cells / 5HPFs.
EB-KO HuH7 #6 Empty, 83.8 ± 8.4; EB1-KO HuH7 #6 EB1 re-expressing, 155.2 ± 25.9 migrated cells / 5HPFs.
Invasion assay (n=3):
EB-KO HuH7 #1 Empty, 25.6 ± 6.4; EB1-KO HuH7 #1 EB1 re-expressing, 69.2 ± 9.9 invaded cells / 5HPFs.
EB-KO HuH7 #6 Empty, 61.6 ± 23.1; EB1-KO HuH7 #6 EB1 re-expressing, 343.3 ± 109.1 invaded cells / 5HPFs.
#4. [Page 13; Fig 4] Again the sample size is too small to draw any conclusion with statistical significance. More samples would be recommended.
Response: Thank you for your advice. We re-evaluated the data of the animal studies. However, the p-values were under 0.05. We have added the mean ± SD of tumor weight and volume in the result section (Page 265 to 267)
Tumor weight (n=5):
EB1-re-expressing EB1-KO HuH7 cells (EB1), 2.23 ± 1.13 g; Control EB1-KO HuH7 cells (Empty), 0.85 ± 0.54 g; P 0.05.
Tumor volume (n=5):
EB1, 2474 ± 1044 mm3; Empty, 872 ± 605 mm3; P 0.05.
#5. [Page 14; Fig 5b] While the list of up-regulated genes is interesting, it would be of interest to analyze any potential functional or pathway enrichment.
Response: Thank you for an interesting proposal. We are interested in the association between Dlk-1 and EB1, and analyzing it. We can not show the data, but we know that the mRNA and the protein of Dlk-1 is increased in the EB1-re-expressing EB1-KO HuH7 cells compared with the control EB1-KO HuH7 cells. We hope to publish the results in the future.
Reviewer: 2
Comments and our Responses:
#1. Was the assesment of staining done just by eye or was imageJ or equivalent used ? Where is the 30% staining cutoff based on (Orimo 2008 study used 50%?!), and how was this exactly determined?
Response: Thank you for your comments. The assessment of immunohistochemical staining was done by eyes of two independent observers in a blinded fashion. The 30% staining cutoff value was decided by calculating the average of the EB1 positive percentage. There were 10 patients with 10% EB1 positive, 12 with 20%, 8 with 30%, 3 with 40%, 2 with 50%, 1 with 60%, 3 with 70%, 4 with 80%, 0 with 90%, 4 with 100%, so the average was 34.5%. Therefore, we analyzed our clinical data with 30% staining cutoff value. If we analyzed our data with 50% staining cutoff value, the median survival times of patients with EB1-positive and negative HCC were 15.0 and 2.1 years, respectively (P 0.0001).
#2. For all-in vitro experiments information is lacking regarding technical replicates and the number of independent experiments performed.
Response: Thank you for your pointing out. We have added the following sentence in the figure legends. “The data are presented as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments in triplicate.” (Page 12, line 241 and 242; Page 13, line 258 and 259)
#3. Is it certain the b-actin mRNA remains stable upon EB1 knockdown or overexpression ? It is standard to use 2-3 genes for qPCR normalization, not just 1.
Response: Thank you for your advice. We have checked that the b-actin mRNA remains stable upon EB1 knockdown with siRNAs transfection comparing with GAPDH mRNA. The data is uploaded as a supplementary figure S3.
#4. Same for WB normalization, is b-actin proven to remain stable? Has normalization also been done using a whole protein stain?
Response: Thank you for your advice. We have checked that the b-actin protein remains stable upon EB1 knockout and re-expressed. The data is also uploaded as a supplementary figure S3.
#5. In the migration assays, was the membrane of the transwell plate completely uncoated? And for invasion, what was the volume of matrigel used to coat the transwells?
Response: Thank you for your questions. In the migration assay, the membrane of the transwell plate was completely uncoated. And for invasion, the volume of matrigel used to coat the transwell was 100 µg/cm2 according to manufacturer’s catalogue.
#6. Fiugre 2a: to choose HLF, HLE and HuH7 appears a bit random as all but JHH4 and HepG2 appear suitable. Please rephrase line 220.
Response: Thank you for your comment. We have rephrased it. (Page 11, line 223)
#7. Why was specifically HuH7 chosen for the knockout experiments? Please clarify.
Response: Thank you for your comment. As the generation of EB1-KO cell line using the CRISPR/Cas9 technology was supported by Takasuke Fukuhara and Yoshiharu Matsuura (Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka, Japan), they recommended to use HuH7 cell line. Therefore, we chose HuH7 and succeeded to generate EB1-KO cell lines.
#8. All data in figure 3 should be shown in comparison to the original HuH7 cells, especially to confirm efficient knockout.
Response: Thank you for your advice. You have raised an important point; however, we generated EB1-KO HuH7 for another reason. Before generating EB1-KO HuH7, we tried to generate an EB1 overexpressing cell line with lentivirus vector. However, our attempt was unsuccessful. So, we changed our mind, and thought generating an EB1 re-expressing EB1-KO cell line would be a substitute for an EB1 overexpressing cell line. Therefore, we compared EB1-KO HuH7 cell lines with EB1 re-expressing EB1-KO HuH7 cell lines without the original HuH7 cell line.
#9. Line 300: Unclear why SLCO1B3 is discussed and for instance NPTX2 and HMSD not. Additionally, the data from the microarray should be validated by at least qPCR before these can be considered reliable enough to thoroughly discuss in line 341 to 359.
Response: Thank you for your comment. NPTX2 (Xu C, et al. NPTX2 promotes colorectal cancer growth and liver metastasis by the activation of the canonical Wnt/B-catenin pathway via FZD6. Cell Death Dis. 2019) and HMSD (Chen F, et al. RNA-seq analysis identified hormone-related genes associated with prognosis of triple negative breast cancer. J Biomed Res. 2020) are also reported to be associated with cancer. We discussed about Dlk1, HAMP, and SLCO1B3, because those genes were the top three of the candidate genes which might be correlated with EB1 expression. We revised the sentence (page 15, line 306 and 307) not to mislead the readers of the journal. Additionally, to validate the microarray results, we performed quantitative real-time PCR. Indeed, the Dlk1 mRNA levels were 6.5-fold higher in EB1-KO HuH7 cells re-expressing EB1 compared with control cells. The data is uploaded as a supplementary figure S4.
#10. Line 363-364 is unclear, this statement requires further explanation.
Response. Thank you for your comment. We have revised the sentences to clarify the first limitation of our study as described below (Page 17, line 370 to 375).
#11. Overall, the Western blot images quality is quite poor and higher resolution images are needed.
Response: Thank you for your advice. We changed some Western blot images (Fig2 and Fig3). It might be better.
10.1371/journal.pone.0239462.r003Decision Letter 1
LeeJung WeonAcademic Editor© 2020 Jung Weon Lee2020Jung Weon LeeThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
26 Aug 2020

PONE-D-20-12629R1
Adenomatous polyposis coli-binding protein end-binding 1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma growth and metastasis
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Yokoo,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
The rpevious reviewers found that the revised manuscript wa simproved but certain points should be explained further for the publucation.
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 10 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jung Weon Lee, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors have addressed most of my comments. One key remaining concern is that for most of the statistical analyses, the sample sizes are small due to limited number of replicates (n=3). Although the p-values are often significant, the power of the tests could be small. This may be addressed by stating the limitations of the small sample sizes used in statistical tests, as part of the discussion section.
Reviewer #2: All of my comments have been adequately addressed. However, it would be appreciated if the responses to my comments #1 (explanation of how immunostainings were scored and the cut-off value obtained) and #5 (the concentration of Matrigel used) could also be added to the method section of the manuscript.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0239462.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
8 Sep 2020

September 8 2020
Jung Weon Lee, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Lee,
Thank you for your careful consideration of our manuscript (PONE-D-20-12629R1) titled “Adenomatous polyposis coli-binding protein end-binding 1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma growth and metastasis.” We greatly appreciate the opportunity to submit a revised version for consideration for publication as a Research Article in PLOS ONE. We thank the reviewers whose incisive comments helped us to significantly improve the manuscript. Our point-by-point responses to their comments are stated on the next page. We hope that our paper is now suitable for publication in PLOS ONE.
Sincerely,
Hideki Yokoo
Department of Gastroenterological Surgery I
Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine
N-14 W-5, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8648, Japan.
E-mail: hi-yokoo@mua.biglobe.ne.jp
Tel: +81-11-706-5927
Fax: +81-11-717-7515.
 
Reviewers' Comments to Author:
Reviewer: 1
Comments and our Responses:
The authors have addressed most of my comments. One key remaining concern is that for most of the statistical analyses, the sample sizes are small due to limited number of replicates (n=3). Although the p-values are often significant, the power of the tests could be small. This may be addressed by stating the limitations of the small sample sizes used in statistical tests, as part of the discussion section.
Response: We revised the Discussion to address the limitations of the small sample sizes as follows: “Although the p values of the results of our experiments indicate significant differences, statistical power may be insufficient because of the limited number of samples. Nevertheless, our data are consistent with findings of others that elevated EB1 expression significantly correlates with the proliferation, migration, and invasion of cancer cells [9, 10, 29].” (Page 18, line 378 to 382)
Reviewer: 2
Comments and our Responses:
All of my comments have been adequately addressed. However, it would be appreciated if the responses to my comments #1 (explanation of how immunostainings were scored and the cut-off value obtained) and #5 (the concentration of Matrigel used) could also be added to the method section of the manuscript.
Response: We added the missing information to the Methods section as follows:
1. “Two independent observers measured the percentage of EB1-positive tumor cells in a blinded fashion and categorized the results into groups ranging (increments of 10%) from 0% to 100%. Based on the average percentage EB1-positivity, if >30% of the HCC cells were stained, we defined the tumor as EB1-positive HCC.” (Page 4, line 81 to 85).
2. “Migration and invasion assays were performed by placing cells into the upper chambers of a Transwell plate (BD Biosciences) without or with 100 µg/cm2 Matrigel coating.” (Page 7, line 137 to 139)
10.1371/journal.pone.0239462.r005Decision Letter 2
LeeJung WeonAcademic Editor© 2020 Jung Weon Lee2020Jung Weon LeeThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
8 Sep 2020

Adenomatous polyposis coli-binding protein end-binding 1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma growth and metastasis
PONE-D-20-12629R2
Dear Dr. Yokoo,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Jung Weon Lee, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0239462.r006Acceptance letter
LeeJung WeonAcademic Editor© 2020 Jung Weon Lee2020Jung Weon LeeThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
10 Sep 2020

PONE-D-20-12629R2 
Adenomatous polyposis coli-binding protein end-binding 1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma growth and metastasis 
Dear Dr. Yokoo:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Jung Weon Lee 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE