Nat MetabNat Metab319nihpa101736592Nature metabolism2522-5812pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC7377265PMC7377265.173772657377265NIHMS15505953269477210.1038/s42255-020-0175-zNIHMS1550595NIHPA15505951ArticlePTH Hypersecretion Triggered by a GABAB1 and
Ca2+-sensing Receptor Heterocomplex in
Hyperparathyroidism
ChangWenhanhttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-6583-7176 TuChia-Ling Jean-AlphonseFrederic HerbergerAmanda ChengZhiqiang HwongJenna HoHanson LiAlfred WangDawei LiuHongda WhiteAlex D. SuhInsoo ShenWen DuhQuan-Yang KhanafsharElham ShobackDolores M. XiaoKunhong VilardagaJean-Pierrehttp://orcid.org/0000-0002-1217-1435 1Endocrine Research Unit, Department of Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, and University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.2Laboratory for GPCR Biology, Department of Pharmacology and
Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261,
USA.3Graduate Program in Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.4Department of Surgery, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA.5Department of Pathology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
W.C., A.H., D.M.S., C.-L.T., and J.-P.V. designed the study. W.C.,
A.H., C.-L.T., J.H., H.H., A.L., Z.C. and J.-P.V. conducted the study. W.C.,
A.H., A.D.W., F.J.-A., C.-L.T., J.H., H.H., A.L., Z.C. and J.-P.V. collected
data. Q.-Y.D., W.S., and I.S. evaluated the patients, obtained informed
consent, and conducted the surgeries for all human PTG studies. E.K.,
D.M.S., and A.H. reviewed clinical and pathology records related to human
PTG samples. K.X. provided expertise with mass spectroscopy and performed MS
experiments with support of H.L. and D.W. W.C., A.H., C.-L.T., and J.-P.V.
performed data analyses. W.C., A.H., E.K., D.M.S., C.-L.T., and J.-P.V.
interpreted the data. W.C. and J.-P.V. wrote the manuscript with support of
A.H., C.-L.T., D.M.S. and H.K. W.C. and J.-P.V. take responsibility for the
integrity of the data analysis.
*Corresponding Authors: W.C. (wenhan.chang@ucsf.edu)
or J.-P.V. (jpv@pitt.edu)093202032020233619282432551402202009092020090920202407202016062024Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the
content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject
always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsMolecular mechanisms mediating tonic secretion of parathyroid hormone
(PTH) in response to hypocalcemia and hyperparathyroidism (HPT) are unclear.
Here we demonstrate increased heterocomplex formation between the
calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) and metabotropic GABAB1 receptor
(GABAB1R) in hyperplastic parathyroid glands (PTGs) of patients
with primary and secondary HPT. Targeted ablation of GABAB1R or
glutamic acid decarboxylase 1 and 2 in PTGs produces hypocalcemia and
hypoparathyroidism and prevents PTH hypersecretion in PTGs cultured from mouse
models of hereditary HPT and dietary calcium-deficiency. Co-binding of
CaSR/GABAB1R complex by baclofen and high extracellular calcium
blocks the coupling of heterotrimeric G-proteins to homomeric CaSRs in cultured
cells and promotes PTH secretion in cultured mouse PTGs. These results combined
with the ability of PTG to synthesize GABA support a critical autocrine action
of GABA/GABAB1R in mediating tonic PTH secretion of PTGs and ascribe
aberrant activities of CaSR/GABAB1R heteromer to HPT.

Parathyroid glandsCa2+-sensing receptorGABAB1 receptorhyperparathyroidismPTH secretionFamily C GPCRpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesLand vertebrates develop a unique regulatory mechanism to maintain constant serum
[Ca2+] against both hypocalcemic and hypercalcemic challenges to support
vital physiologic functions. This mechanism begins with PTGs responding to small
decreases in serum [Ca2+] by rapidly increasing PTH secretion, which in turn
stimulates systemic calciotropic activities in the kidney, gut, and bone to raise serum
[Ca2+] . Once restored
to normal blood levels, continuous increases in extracellular [Ca2+]
([Ca2+]e) suppress PTH secretion, thereby preventing the
development of hyperparathyroidism (HPT) and hypercalcemia, through activation of
homomeric CaSRs, a member of family C G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR-C) that
stimulates Gi- and Gq/G11-mediated signaling cascades in parathyroid cells
(PTCs) . Defects in the latter
CaSR-mediated negative feedback pathways cause HPT, a prevalent human disorder
characterized by PTH hypersecretion that inappropriately raises serum Ca2+
levels and causes multiorgan complications in bone, kidney, gastrointestinal tract,
heart, and central nervous system , .
Primary HPT (1° HPT) is a common endocrinopathy occurring in up to 1 in
300 postmenopausal women . Most cases
are due to single adenomas in PTGs that can be cured by surgical removal of glands
(i.e., parathyroidectomy). Many patients with multigland disease or genetic forms of
HPT, however, have recurrent hypercalcemia and require long-term follow-up and multiple
surgeries to control the disease. Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) develop
secondary HPT (2°HPT), often with severe PTH excess from 4-gland hyperplasia.
This form of 2° HPT causes severe mineral disturbances, disabling bone disease,
and ectopic calcifications, contributing to the high morbidity and mortality rates of
CKD , . Medical therapies (such as active vitamin D analogs,
calcimimetics, phosphate binders) are used to prevent progression of 2° HPT, but
the most severe cases, which are refractory to medical therapies, often require subtotal
or total parathyroidectomy. Among medical therapies, vitamin D analogs are effective in
early 2° HPT, but less so as the disease advances with reduced vitamin D receptor
expression in the PTG – and the side-effects of drug therapy
(hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia) are intolerable for patients. Calcimimetics,
allosteric agonists of the CaSR, potentiate homomeric CaSR activation to suppress PTH
secretion in patients with 2° HPT. They are, however, limited by gastrointestinal
toxicity , and hypocalcemia. Thus, better mechanistically
directed therapies are sorely needed in CKD.
Reduced CaSR expression is also a hallmark in parathyroid adenomas commonly found
in patients with 1°HPT – . Although reduced activities of
homomeric CaSR are ascribed to PTH hypersecretion in PTCs and to PTH excess in
circulation, molecular mechanisms mediating tonic hypersecretion of PTH in lieu of
reduced CaSR expression or chronic dietary Ca2+ deficiency have never been
established. Insights into the latter mechanisms are required for future designs of more
effective drug management strategies for HPT. Given that GPCR-C members function
exclusively in multimeric forms – and that the
GABAB1R, another member of GPCR-C, can physically interact with the CaSR
in neurons and
chondrocytes to mediate
trafficking and surface expression of CaSR as well as CaSR-dependent signaling and
cellular functions, we investigated whether PTGs express GABAB1Rs and other
GPCR-C members to alter CaSR signaling and secretory functions of the glands. We further
investigated whether PTCs express the rate-limiting enzymes, GAD1/2, to synthesize GABA
as an autocrine factor underlying tonic PTH secretion in physiology and diseases.

## RESULTS

## Expression of GABAB1R and GAD1/2 and Synthesis of GABA in
PTGs
As the CaSR also interacts with other GPCR-C members, including
GABAB2R , and
metabotropic glutamate receptors 1 and 5 , we performed a general survey for expression of GPCR-C
members in normal mouse PTGs to identify potential players that can regulate
CaSR signaling by heteromerization. By RNA assessment, we found that the
GABAB1R is the only GPCR-C member remarkably coexpressed with the
CaSR in the glands ( , top panel and
 ), however, at a lower level (≈20%) compared to CaSR
expression. Interestingly, the expression of GABAB2R, a close dimeric
partner of GABAB1R in the CNS , , was
undetectable ( ).
Immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting confirmed the expression of core
(≈100 kD) and glycosylated (≈130 and 150 kD) GABAB1R
proteins in mouse PTGs ( , -upper panel, and , ).
In the CNS, GAD 1 and 2 (GAD1/2) convert glutamic acids to GABA, which in
turn binds and activates GABAB1R/GABAB2R
heteromers , . A series of molecular biology
approaches (qPCR, immunohistochemistry, and immunoblotting) revealed the
expression of GAD1 (67-kD) and GAD2 (65-kD) at the RNA ( , bottom panel) and protein ( , -bottom panel, and ) levels, as well as the presence of their end product GABA in
mouse PTGs and/or human parathyroid adenomas ( and ).
While expression patterns of GABAB1R and GAD1/2 proteins in PTGs are
comparable to those in mouse hippocampi ( , mHIPP), the amount of endogenous GABA in cryopreserved human PTG
(10.63 ± 1.88 ng per gram) is well below the level that found in mouse
brain (198.29 ± 22.1 μg per gram) ( and ), thus implying an autocrine rather than
endocrine action of GABA in PTGs. To further confirm the ability of GAD1/2 to
synthesize GABA in PTGs, we incubated human PTG extracts with deuterated
d5-glutamate, the precursor of GABA, and measured the resulting
d5-GABA. Using the multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) protocol
illustrated in the , we detected d5-GABA in the
reactions by matching its MS fragmentation and retention time, and this
d5-GABA signal was absent in reactions without d5-glutamate
( ), thus demonstrating the
ability of parathyroid GADs to synthesize GABA.

## Impact of Parathyroid GABAB1R and GAD1/2 on PTH Secretion
To define the actions of GABAB1R, GABA, and GAD1/2 in PTGs, we
studied the impact of GABAB1R agonists, baclofen (Bac) and GABA, and
antagonist CGP54626 (CGP), on the [Ca2+]e-mediated
secretory responses in PTGs freshly isolated from male wild-type C57/B6 (B6:Wt)
mice or from mice lacking expression of GABAB1R (hereafter referred
to as GABAB1R-KO or
PTGGABAB1R−/− mice) or GAD1/2
(Gad1/2-DKO) specifically in the glands. We first confirmed the ability of the
PTH-Cre driver to excise the
Gabbr1 genes specifically in PTCs of
PTGGABAB1R−/− mice by PCR
analyses of their genomic DNA ( ) and to abrogate GABAB1R protein
expression by immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry ( and , respectively). The ability of the PTH-Cre to
ablate GAD1/2 was also confirmed by the absence of GAD1/2 ( ) and GABA ( ) by immunoreactivity in PTGs
isolated from the Gad1/2-DKO mice.
When treated with vehicle (0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO) alone, PTGs
from wild-type C57/BL6 (B6:Wt) mice secreted PTH at a mean maximal rate
(PTH-Max) of ≈ 200 pg/hr/gland at [Ca2+]e of
≈0.75 mM ( , top panel, red
circle) and displayed a mean Ca2+ set-point (defined as the
[Ca2+]e at which there was 50% suppression of the
Ca2+-suppressible PTH secretion) of 1.31 ± 0.05 mM as
better shown in a concentration-effect curve normalized to the basal activity at
0.5 mM Ca2+ ( , bottom
panel, red circle). Adding a saturating concentration of GABA (300 μM)
significantly (p<0.01) shifted the Ca2+ set-point to 1.63
± 0.08 mM ( , bottom panel,
green triangle) without a significant change in PTH-Max ( , top panel, green triangle). In contrast,
baclofen (Bac), a selective GABAB1R agonist, markedly (p=0.01)
enhanced PTH-Max to ≈580 pg/hr/gland ( , top panel, blue square) in the lower range of
[Ca2+]e without significantly changing the
Ca2+ set-point ( ,
bottom panel, blue square). These results indicate the ability of
GABAB1R agonists to stimulate acute PTH secretion, particularly
in the lower range of [Ca2+]e encountered in hypocalcemic
states. As homomeric CaSRs are anticipated to be inactive at low
[Ca2+]e, our data reveals an additional
GABAB1R-mediated mechanism, other than the simple inactivation of
homomeric CaSR, in promoting tonic PTH secretion.
Further supporting the GABAB1R action was the ability of a
specific GABAB1R antagonist CGP54626 (CGP) to significantly
(p<0.01) reduce PTH-Max ( ,
top panel, green triangle) and left-shift the Ca2+ set-point from
1.22 ± 0.01 mM to 0.87 ± 0.03 mM ( , bottom panel, green triangle) in B6 PTGs. These actions of
CGP on secretory properties (i.e., PTH-Max and Ca2+ set-point) could
be replicated in PTGs isolated from
PTGGABAB1R−/−
(GABAB1R-KO) mice with Cre/loxP-mediated deletion of both
Gabbr1 genes in their PTCs (see for the generation of the mice). These
KO PTGs showed a reduction in tonic PTH secretion (PTH-Max) ( , top panel, GBR1-KO-Veh vs Cont-Veh), a
left-shifted Ca2+ set-point from 1.35 ± 0.07 mM in control
PTGs to 1.15 ± 0.08 mM ( ,
bottom panel, GBR1-KO-Veh vs Cont-Veh), and inability of Bac to increase PTH-Max
in the GABAB1R-KO vs control PTGs ( , top panel, GBR1-KO-Bac vs Cont-Bac). These data not only support
a critical role of GABAB1R in promoting tonic PTH secretion at low
[Ca2+]e, but also specify the receptor as a target of
Bac in PTGs.
We next tested whether production of endogenous GABA in PTGs is required
for PTH secretion by examining the secretory properties of PTGs lacking GAD1/2.
As we anticipated, PTGs from the mice with concurrent ablation of both
Gad1 and Gad2 genes in PTCs (GAD1/2-DKO)
displayed a left-shifted Ca2+ set-point (from 1.29 ± 0.06 in
Cont to 0.95± 0.08 mM in DKO) ( , bottom panel). However, they showed an increased PTH-Max ( , top panel) instead of a reduced
PTH-Max as seen in GABAB1R-deficient PTGs ( , top panel). It is plausible that the
differential effects of GABA vs GABAB1R KO on the
secretory properties of PTG are due to the ability of GABAB1R to
interact with other ligands made in PTGs to drive tonic PTH secretion in the
absence of GABA. Nevertheless, given the higher efficacy and selectivity of Bac
for GABAB1R in PTGs, we utilized Bac in subsequent experiments to
better define GABAB1R actions of in PTCs.

## Impact of Parathyroid GABAB1R and GAD1/2 on Growth and Systemic
Homeostasis
We next examined systemic impacts of parathyroid GABAB1R and
GAD1/2 by comparing changes in growth, mineral, hormonal, and skeletal
homeostasis in the PTGGABAB1R−/−
(or GABAB1R-KO) and PTGGAD1/2−/−
(or GAD1/2-DKO) mice vs their control (Cont) littermates. Both
male and female mice were studied at 3 months of age and did not show
significant sex differences. We, therefore, only reported data from the male
mice. The GABAB1R-KO mice showed smaller body sizes ( ) and weights by ≈10% ( , red vs gray circles), and all characteristics
of hypoparathyroidism with significant lower serum PTH (sPTH) and
Ca2+ (sCa) levels ( ).
Additionally, bones of the GABAB1R-KO mice were smaller and
osteopenic ( ), likely due to chronic
PTH and Ca2+ insufficiency. On the other hand, GAD1/2-DKO mice did
not show a significant change in body weight ( ), but manifested significantly lower sPTH and sCa levels ( ). Remarkably, GAD1/2-DKO mice showed
enlarged PTGs (by ≈45%) compared to control (Cont) PTGs ( ), indicating a glandular hyperplasia in lieu
of chronic hypocalcemia. This could explain the increased PTH-Max of their
glands ( , top panel). Nevertheless,
these data together reveal previously unknown extraneuronal actions of
GABAB1R and GAD1/2 in PTGs that critically regulate growth and
skeletal development by maintaining adequate serum PTH and Ca2+
levels.

## Heteromerization Between GABAB1R and CaSR in PTGs and in HEK293
Cells
To test our hypothesis that GABAB1R interacts with CaSR to
regulate PTH secretion, we first confirmed the formation of native
CaSR/GABAB1R heteromers in mouse PTGs ( , left panels) and human parathyroid adenomas
( , left panels) using a
proximity ligation assay (PLA) with selective antibodies against the N-termini
of these receptors. These PLA signals were considered specific as they were
absent in PTGs from PTGGABAB1R−/−
mice ( , right panels) or human PTGs
incubated with anti-CaSR antibody only ( , right panels). The formation of GABAB1R/CaSR heteromer
in PTGs was further supported by specific co-immunoprecipitation of the CaSR
with the GABAB1R from human parathyroid adenomas ( ), as this signal was profoundly reduced in
samples co-immunoprecipitated with non-immune sera ( ).
We further evaluated the propensity of GABAB1R and CaSR in
heteromerization by a series of fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
experiments using cultured human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293 cells expressing
recombinant receptors. Specific intermolecular FRET was detected between CaSR
and GABAB1R, which were C-terminally tagged with CFP and YFP,
respectively ( ), with an efficacy
similar to the FRET signals recorded for the well-established
GABAB1R/GABAB2R heteromer ( ). The specificity of this
CaSR/GABAB1R interaction is supported by minimal FRET signals
between the plasma membrane-tagged CFP and YFP (CFPm and YFPm, respectively), or
between CFP and YFP fused to the C-terminus of GABAB1R
(GABAB1RCFP) and PTH receptor (PTHRYFP),
respectively ( ). We further
corroborated the selectivity of CaSR/GABAB1R heteromer through a
bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assay. This assay is based on
the generation of functionally complemented fluorescent protein (FP) by physical
association of two halves (N− and C−) of FPs that are brought in
close proximity by specific interactions of two molecules tagged with the
complementary FP fragments – .
Specifically, HEK-293 cells were transfected with equal molar ratio of cDNA to
express simultaneously (i) the CaSR C-terminally fused to the N-terminus
fragment of CFP (residues 1–158) (CaSRN-CFP), (ii) the
GABAB1R C-terminally fused to N-terminus fragment of YFP
(GB1RN-YFP), and (iii) the GABAB1R C-terminally fused
to the C-terminus fragment of CFP (residues 158–239)
(GABAB1RC-CFP/YFP), which is identical to and
functionally exchangeable with the C-terminus fragment of YFP. The relative
amount of CaSRN-CFP/GABAB1RC-YFP heteromer vs
GABAB1RN-YFP/GABAB1RC-YFP
homomer was then determined by recording BiFC-CFP vs BiFC-YFP fluorescence,
respectively. We observed only a saturable CFP (CaSR/GABAB1R) signal
( , ) and minimal YFP (GABAB1R/GABAB1R) signal,
indicating a preference in the formation of CaSR/GABAB1R heteromer
over GABAB1R/GABAB1R homomer. The propensity of
CaSR/GABAB1R heteromerization was again comparable to that of
GABAB1R/GABAB2R heteromerization as indicated by their
comparable BiFC signals ( ). Taken
together, our data reveal strong propensity of CaSR and GABAB1R to
form heteromers in transfected cells and PTCs.

## Impact of GABAB1R/CaSR Heteromer on Signaling Responses of
Homomeric CaSRs
Given the ability of CaSR to chaperone GABAB1R to cell
surface in the form of heteromer in transfected HEK293 cells , we tested whether GABAB1R
traffics with homomeric CaSR to cell surface and interfere with signaling
responses of the latter receptor there, particularly in response to binding to
GABAB1R agonists. As previous studies , suggested that homomeric CaSR mediates the inhibitory
action of extracellular Ca2+ on PTH secretion through
Gq/G11 and Gi activation, we first confirmed this notion by
assessing PTH secretion in PTGs cultured from mice with PTG-specific deletion of
Gαq in the background of germ-line Gα11 KO
(PTGGq−/−//G11−/−)
and in wild-type PTGs treated with pertussis toxin (PTx) to block Gi activation,
respectively. We showed that ablation of Gnaq and
Gna11 genes in PTCs blocked the ability of raising
[Ca2+]e to suppress PTH secretion as indicated by
right-shifted Ca2+ set-points in a gene dosage-dependent manner
( ), while PTx
enhanced PTH secretion, particularly in the lower range of
[Ca2+]e in which baclofen promotes PTH secretion
( ). Interestingly,
in PTGs cultured from the
PTGGq−/−//G11−/−
mice lacking Gαq and Gα11, we observed increases in PTH
secretion with raising [Ca2+]e in the lower range of
[Ca2+]e (0.5 to 1.5 mM) ( ). The latter effects were,
however, absent in PTGs cultured from mice lacking both alleles of
Casr genes ( ). These data not only confirmed the requirement of both Gq/11
and Gi activation in mediating the high [Ca2+]e-induced
suppression of PTH, but also unveiled a Gq/11-independent action of
Ca2+/CaSR, likely by activating the CaSR/GABAB1R
heteromer to promote PTH secretion.
We then measured time courses of G-protein (Gq or Gi) activation using
FRET-based biosensors , in HEK-293 cells expressing
the recombinant CaSR and/or GABAB1R. Application of Ca2+
to single cells expressing the CaSR alone induced a fast increase in FRET ratios
reflecting Gq ( ) or Gi ( ) activation. Co-expression of
GABAB1R with the CaSR suppressed the maximal activation of Gq
( ) and Gi ( ) mediated by Ca2+ by
≈30–50% ( , ). These inhibitory effects were further
exacerbated by addition of baclofen ( , ), thus indicating reduced
homomeric CaSR signaling when CaSR/GABAB1R complexes are activated by
baclofen ( , ). Baclofen did not affect Gq or Gi activation via
CaSR alone ( , ), nor did Ca2+ affect G-protein
activation via GABAB1R when each receptor was expressed alone in
HEK-293 cells. Similar inhibitory action of baclofen on Ca2+-mediated
Gq activation were obtained in rat parathyroid-derived PTH-C1 cells ( ) with (left panel) or without
(right panel) supplementation of exogenous CaSR and GABAB1R
cDNAs.
The ability of baclofen to inhibit Ca2+-mediated Gi or Gq
activation, when GABAB1R was coexpressed, was also observed at the
second-messenger level. Specifically, we studied effects of high
[Ca2+]e on receptor-mediated activation of total
inositol phosphate turnover (IPTotal) and inhibition of cAMP in cells
pretreated with cholera toxin (CTx) that induces persistent activation of the
Gs/adenylate cyclase/cAMP pathway as readouts of downstream Gq and Gi signaling,
respectively. In cells expressing CaSR alone, high [Ca2+]e
stimulated IPTotal in a concentration-dependent manner ( , black circles). This effect of high
[Ca2+]e decreased markedly when GABAB1R was
coexpressed, and baclofen further decreased this effect by ≈15% ( , blue circles, and ). Pretreatment of PTH-C1 cells expressing CaSR
alone with CTx increased the basal level of cAMP, and high
[Ca2+]e markedly decreased the production of cAMP
( and ). Coexpression of GABAB1R
decreased the efficacy of high [Ca2+]e to block cAMP
accumulation ( ), and baclofen
further prevented the inhibitory action of high [Ca2+]e
( ). The observed effect of
baclofen likely resulted from a direct binding to GABAB1R because
addition of a competitive GABAB1R antagonist, CGP54626, reversed the
action of baclofen and restored the cAMP response to a level similar to that was
caused by high [Ca2+]e in the absence of baclofen ( ). Baclofen did not modulate
IPtot or cAMP production by itself, thus indicating that these
effects were dependent on the coactivation of both CaSR and GABAB1R
by their respective ligands. These signaling data together suggest that
following baclofen binding, a conformational change transmitted from the
GABAB1R to the homomeric CaSRs reduces efficacy of Gq and Gi
activation (extent and duration of G protein signaling) of the latter receptors
as a molecular basis to promote PTH secretion.

## Increased GABAB1R/CaSR Heteromers in Hyperplastic PTGs from
1°HPT and 2°HPT Patients
We reasoned that reduced CaSR expression in PTG, a well-established
characteristic of both 1° and 2° HPT, renders a receptor
stoichiometry favoring the formation of CaSR/GABAB1R heteromers, thus
promoting PTH secretion. To test this hypothesis, we compared the expression of
CaSR and GABAB1R by immunohistochemistry and expression of
CaSR/GABAB1R heteromer by PLA in PTGs surgically removed from
patients who were clinically diagnosed with 1° HPT or 2° HPT
( ) to the levels in normal PTG tissues that were excised during
parathyroid exploration or thyroidectomy for thyroid cancer. In the hyperplastic
PTGs from both 1° HPT ( ,
regions 3 and 4) and 2° HPT ( , regions 3 and 4) patients, we observed significant increases in the
expression of GABAB1R/CaSR heteromer by 3.4- and 5.2-fold ( ), respectively, along with
>50% reduction in CaSR expression ( and ) and 30–40% reductions in
GABAB1R expression ( 
and ), when compared to adjacent normal parathyroid tissue and to
normal PTGs ( , : regions 1 and 2, and ). These data associate increased expression of
GABAB1R/CaSR heteromer with PTH hypersecretion in these diseases.

## The GABAB1R-mediated PTH Hypersecretion in CaSR-insufficient and
calcium-deficient states
To test whether GABAB1R/CaSR heteromers contribute to PTH
hypersecretion in states of CaSR insufficiency, as seen in 1° and
2° HPT, we studied effects of deleting Gabbr1 genes in
mice lacking 1 ( PTGCaSR+/–) or 2 (
PTGCaSR−/−) alleles of
Casr gene in their PTGs. As shown previously , the
PTGCaSR+/– mice, a hereditary mild 1°HPT
model, developed normally along with increased body weights ( , blue circles), mild PTH excess ( ), and hypercalcemia ( ). Reducing or completely blocking
GABAB1R/CaSR heteromerization by concurrent ablation of single
(PTGCaSR+/–//GABAB1R+/–)
or both
(PTGCaSR+/–//GABAB1R−/−)
alleles of Gabbr1 gene in PTCs of the mice, respectively,
produced gene-dosage effects in alleviating serum PTH excess ( ) and hypercalcemia ( ). In fact, the
PTGCaSR+/–//GABAB1R−/−
mice had a sPTH level, which was lower than the level in control
(PTGCaSR+/+//GABAB1R+/+) mice,
likely due to the markedly reduced PTH-Max ( , top panel) and left-shifted Ca2+ set-point ( , bottom panel) in their PTGs. As seen
in wild-type PTGs treated with GABA or baclofen ( , top panel, blue square), PTGs from the
PTGCaSR+/– mice displayed biphasic secretory
responses to [Ca2+]e: increasing PTH secretion at
<1.0 mM Ca2+, and decreasing PTH secretion at > 1.0 mM
Ca2+ ( , blue circle).
The increasing phase of secretory response in the lower range of
[Ca2+]e was completely abrogated in the PTGs of
PTGCaSR+/–//GABAB1R−/−
mice lacking both alleles of Gabbr1 genes ( , magenta square). These data suggest that
increasing activation of CaSR/GABAB1R complexes may underlie the
tonic PTH hypersecretion in the lower range of [Ca2+]e,
particularly when the GABAB1R:CaSR stoichiometry is reduced in the
condition of decreasing CaSR expression (in this case, due to deletion of one
Casr gene allele).
The PTGCaSR−/− mice with homozygous
deletion of Casr genes in their PTGs, produced much more severe
HPT, failed to thrive, and died before 3–4 weeks of age with reduced body sizes ( , CaSR-KO), ≈7-fold increase in
sPTH ( , brown circle), and
≈70% increase in sCa levels ( , brown circle), when compared to 3-month-old control littermates.
Remarkably, concurrent deletion of 1
(PTGCaSR−/−//GABAB1R+/–)
or 2
(PTGCaSR−/−//GABAB1R−/−)
alleles of Gabbr1 gene rescued the mice from early death and
permitted a relatively normal growth, albeit with a slight decrease (≈5%)
in body weight ( , orange or yellow
circle). The severe HPT phenotypes were significantly alleviated as indicated by
the much reduced sPTH ( ) and sCa
( ) levels, when compared to
3-week-old PTGCaSR−/− mice ( , ,
brown circle). PTGs cultured from the
PTGCaSR−/−//GABAB1R−/−
mice also showed a much reduced PTH-Max when compared to the glands of
PTGCaSR−/− mice ( , top panel, yellow square vs brown circle),
despite the lack of apparent inhibitory responses to raising
[Ca2+]e in both groups, when compared to control
littermates ( , bottom panel, gray
circle). These data not only confirm nonredundant roles of GABAB1R in
mediating PTH hypersecretion in conditions of CaSR deficiency, but also suggest
that GABAB1R may also contribute to tonic PTH secretion through a
CaSR-independent pathway.
To test whether the parathyroid GABAB1R is involved in PTH
hypersecretion resulting from chronic Ca2+-deficiency, we subjected
the GABAB1R-KO mice and their control littermates to a continuous low
Ca2+ diet (0.02% vs 1% in the normal diet) for 4 weeks. Our data
showed that the ability of this diet to increase serum PTH levels (by
≈50%) in control littermates was completely lost in the
GABAB1R-KO mice ( , left
panel), despite the fact that their serum [Ca2+] remained lower than
control mice ( , right panel),
supporting a role for the GABAB1R in mediating hypocalcemia-induced
PTH hypersecretion.

## DISCUSSION
Our data unveil a biological action of the GABA/GABAB1R system in
mediating PTH secretion to maintain mineral balance and normal skeletal development
and a pathological role in enabling PTH hypersecretion in HPT states. Our
demonstrations of GAD1/2 expression and GABA biosynthesis in PTGs and the ability of
GAD1/2 KO to produce hypoparathyroidism further support an autocrine scheme in which
PTCs release GABA to alter PTH secretion by attenuating homomeric CaSR signaling
through allosteric interactions between the CaSR and GABAB1R receptors
( ). We speculate that inherent
declines in CaSR expression in 1° and 2° HPT disease conditions
decreases levels of CaSR homomers and at the same time increases the likelihood for
GABAB1R/CaSR heteromer formation. However, concurrent reductions of
GABAB1R and CaSR expression in PTGs of 1° HPT and 2°
HPT patients suggest that mechanisms other than simple stoichiometric ratio changes
in receptor expression (i.e., GABAB1R over CaSR) could also be involved
to alter the propensity of GABAB1R/CaSR heteromerization.
A notable observation is the distinct pharmacological profiles of Bac and
GABA in mediating PTH secretion. The former tends to increase PTH-Max, while the
latter shifts the Ca2+ set-points ( ). Given that the only structural difference between GABA- and
baclofen-occupied GABAB1R is the orientation adopted by its N-terminal
extracellular residue W276 , , the distinct efficacy and
potency, by which GABA and baclofen act on GABAB1R/CaSR heteromer to
interfere with the homomeric CaSR, might reflect distinct conformational change of
the GABAB1R/CaSR heteromer when it interacts with GABA- vs.
baclofen-bound GABAB1R. These differential signaling responses are also
reflected by the different phenotypic manifestations between GABAB1R-KO
and GAD1/2-DKO mice. GABAB1R-KO mice appear to produce more severe growth
defects than the GAD1/2-DKO based on their body weights ( vs ).
GABAB1R KO also had more profound impact on reducing PTH-Max than
GAD1/2 DKO in the PTGs ( vs ).
Several questions remain to be answered to further understand the mechanism
of the process described here. Among them are the following:
How does the CaSR heteromerize with the GABAB1R? While covalent
disulfide bonding in the N-terminal extracellular domain (ECD) of the CaSR is
involved in its homodimerization ,
the ability of CaSR-ECD (a.a. 1–579) alone to complex with the
GABAB1R that
lacks a corresponding cysteine-rich domain in its ECD, however, supports critical
noncovalent interactions between the ECDs of the receptors in
CaSR/GABAB1R heteromerization. Given that a polar interface, instead of
hydrophobic action seen in the dimerization of mGluRs, is critically involved in
GABAB1R/GABAB2R heterodimerization and that GABAB1R and
GABAB2R mutually compete for heterodimerization with CaSR , it is an attractive hypothesis
that formations of ionic salt-bridges between the ECDs of CaSR and
GABAB1R as well as the helix:helix interactions in the hydrophobic
transmembrane domains are needed to mediate the complex formation and perhaps their
binding to the respective ligands (GABA and Ca2+). Mapping of the
interaction sites between these two receptors may permit new strategies for blocking
the formation and/or functions of CaSR/GABAB1R heteromers as a new
pharmacological means to prevent PTH hypersecretion.
How does GABAB1R interfere with the coupling of homomeric CaSRs
to downstream Gq/11 and Gi signaling responses? This interaction may take place in
an acute dynamic fashion between two or more complexes (i.e.,
CaSR/GABAB1R heterodimers and CaSR/CaSR homodimer) immediately after
binding to their respective ligands. However, given that simply coexpressing
GABAB1R (without Bac) is sufficient to reduce coupling of CaSR to
down-stream signaling responses, we prefer the model involving a pre-assembled
higher-order receptor complex (e.g., trimer, tetramer, etc.) containing both
CaSR/GABAB1R heterodimers and CaSR/CaSR homodimer with a
pre-determined stoichiometric composition. In transfected HEK cells, we observed
colocalization of recombinant CaSR and GABAB1R as early as in the
perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum , suggesting that this pre-assembled complex may take place
immediately after protein synthesis.
Can additional parathyroid GPCRs be upregulated in pathological conditions
and interact with CaSR and/or GABAB1R? This is particularly pertinent
given that GPR64, an orphan adhesion GPCR whose expression is upregulated in
parathyroid adenomas has been
proposed to physically interact with the CaSR.
Can the GABAB1R regulate PTH secretion independently of the CaSR?
While our present results demonstrate the interaction between CaSR and
GABAB1R as a means to regulate PTH secretion from PTGs, the robust
PTH secretion in the absence of CaSR in the PTGs of the
PTGCaSR−/− mice ( , top panel, brown circles) and profound abrogation
of this hypersecretory activity in PTGs of
PTGCaSR−/−//GABAB1R−/−
mice with concurrent GABAB1R KO ( , top panel, yellow squares) raise the possibility of a
CaSR-independent action of GABAB1R in promoting PTH secretion.
Alternatively, a minute amount (≈10%) of CaSR due to incomplete
Casr gene excision could readily interact with
GABAB1Rs to promote PTH secretion, as we showed previously that
PTH-Cre permits ablation of ≈90% of CaSR in the PTGs of the
PTGCaSR−/− mice .
While future studies are required to address these questions, our results
unveil the unexpected and determinant role of GABA and GABAB1R in
regulating CaSR signaling and PTG functions. Considering that the GABAB1R
and CaSR, are expressed in central neurons and many vital peripheral tissues, we
anticipate that the regulation of CaSR signaling and function by the
GABAB1R also impacts biological processes beyond mineral and skeletal
homeostasis. Development of targeted pharmaceuticals against cell and/or subcellular
domain-specific heteromers could also improve the effectiveness of disease treatment
and prevent the unwanted side-effects of more generalized pharmaceutics such as
baclofen that has been used to treat neurological disorders.

## METHODS
Detailed information on experimental design and reagents included in the
study is attached in the affiliated “Reporting Summary” document.

## Mice
All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee of the San Francisco Department of Veteran Affairs Medical Center
(Protocol numbers: 2012–035, 2015–029, and 2015–003).
Wild-type C57/B6 and PTH-Cre mice (Stock No:005989) were purchased from Jackson Laboratory
(JAX; Bar Harbor, Maine, USA). Floxed-GABAB1R mice were provided by
Dr. Bernhard Bettler (University of Basel, Switzerland) . Floxed-GAD1;GAD2 mice , were generated by Dr. Richard Palmiter (University of
Washington) and obtained from Dr. Qi Wu (Baylor College of Medicine).
Floxed-CaSR mice were made previously . PTH-Cre, Floxed-GABAB1R, and/or Floxed-CaSR
mice were bred to obtain male
PTGCaSR+/–//GABAB1R+/–
and female CaSRflox/wt//GABAB1Rflox/wt mice,
which were then used to produce
PTGGABAB1R−/−,
PTGCaSR+/–,
PTGCaSR−/−,
PTGCaSR+/–//GABAB1R+/–,
PTGCaSR+/–//GABAB1R−/−,
and
PTGCaSR−/−//GABAB1R−/−
mice and control (Cont) littermates. The latter controls carry 1 or 2 alleles of
floxed-CaSR and/or floxed-GABAB1R without PTH-Cre transgene. PTH-Cre
and Floxed-GAD1;GAD2 mice were bred to obtain
PTGGAD1−/−//GAD2−/−
and female GAD1flox/flox//GAD2flox/flox mice which were
then crossed to produce
PTGGAD1−/−//GAD2−/−
double KO (or PTGGAD1/2−/− and GAD1/2-DKO)
mice and control (Cont) mice carrying floxed-GAD1 and floxed-GAD2 alleles
without PTH-Cre expression. Mice carrying floxed-Gnaq alleles in the background
of germline Gna11 KO were provided by Dr. Jurgen Wess (National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD) and were bred with PTH-Cre mice to produce
PTGGq−/− ,
PTGGq−/−//G11+/–,
and
PTGGq−/−//G11−/−
mice and control littermates. All transgenic mice were bred into C57/BL6
background before studies were performed at 12 weeks of age, or as specified,
along with their control littermates. All mice were kept in a climate-controlled
room with a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle with standard diets as previously
described . Both male
and female mice were studied and did not show significant sex differences. We,
therefore, only reported data from male mice. For dietary experiments, 12-wk-old
male PTGGABAB1R−/− and control
littermates were fed with normal (1%) or low Ca2+ (0.02%) diets for 4
weeks. All serum and tissue collections were performed under anesthesia by
Isoflurane at the specified ages. All animal experiments were performed in
accordance with the ARRIVE (Animal Research Reporting of In Vivo Experiments)
guideline.
Mouse genotypes were determined by PCR analysis of genomic DNA extracted
from tail snips using primer sets reported previously , . To detect the presence of the exon8-less
Gabbr1 allele, genomic DNA from different tissues of
PTGGABAB1R−/− and their
control littermates were analyzed by PCR using primers flanking the exon 8 the
gene (upper primer, 5’-ATC TCT TCC TTG GCT GGG TCT TTG CTT CGC
TCG-3’; lower primer, 5’-GGG TTA TTG AAT ATG ATC GGA ATT CCT CGA
CT-3’) to
give a 0.36 kb DNA fragment indicative of gene excision. PTG-specific ablation
of the exon 7 of the Casr gene in
PTGCaSR−/− mice was determined as
described previously .

## Cell Culture, Transfection and plasmids
Cell culture reagents were obtained from Corning (CellGro). Human
embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293; ATCC, Georgetown, DC) stably expressing the
recombinant mouse CaSR were grown in selection medium (DMEM, 10% FBS,
penicillin/streptomycin 5%, 500 μg/ml neomycin) at 37°C in a
humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. The parathyroid PTH-C1 cells
were generously given by Dr. Maria Luisa Brandi and cultured in DMEM/F12
(Corning #10–090-CV) .
For transient expression, cells were seeded on glass coverslips coated with
poly-D-lysine (50 μg/ml H2O) in 6-well plates and cultured for
24 hours prior transfection with the appropriate cDNAs using Fugene-6 (Promega)
or Lipofectamine 3000 (Life Technologies) for 48–72 hrs before
experiments. We optimized expression conditions to ensure the expression of
fluorescently labeled proteins was similar in examined cells by performing
experiments in cells displaying comparable fluorescence levels. Plasmids used to
express recombinant receptors and FRET-based sensors were previously reported:
for cAMP , Gi and Gq
proteins , and for
CaSR and GABAB1R .

## Ex vivo PTG cultures
Mouse PTGs were isolated, dissected free of thyroid and surrounding
fibrous tissues, and cultured to assess PTHmax (maximal PTH secretion
rate) and Ca2+ set-point ([Ca2+]e needed to
suppress 50% of PTHmax) , . Briefly,
PTGs were incubated with a series of DMEM media containing increasing
[Ca2+]e sequentially with or without compounds to be
tested. The PTHmax and Ca2+ set-points were extrapolated
from each Ca2+/PTH response curve and used for statistical analyses.
After secretion assays, some PTGs were compressed into 120 μm-thick discs
using a pair of standard glass slide and coverslip with a Secure-Seal™
spacer (S24737, Invitrogen by Thermo Fisher Scientific) during fixation by 4%
paraformaldehyde. After 3 washes, PTG disks were stained with blue fluorescent
DAPI dye, and imaged. Glandular volumes were calculated individually as the
products of glandular areas x 120 μm and used for statistical
comparisons.

## Human PTGs
Deidentified parathyroid tissues (nine 1°HPT, seven 2°HPT,
and five normal controls; see ), were obtained by endocrine surgical
collaborators in the Department of Surgery, University of California San
Francisco as a routine patient treatment procedure, after obtaining a general
informed consent. The PTG samples were later retrieved by Dr. Khanafshar from
the archives of Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco
under a human research protocol (#15–17253) approved by UCSF
Institutional Review Board based on the following clinical criteria verified by
medical record review by Drs. Khanafshar, Shoback, and Herberger. Criteria used
for selection of the tissues for study were the following. 1° HPT: (i)
serum Ca ≥ 10.2 and ≤ 13.5 mg/dL; (ii) elevated serum PTH levels
in setting of hypercalcemia; and (iii) the absence of a known genetic basis for
the 1° HPT (e.g., MEN1). 2° HPT: (i) CKD stage 5 on dialysis; (ii)
elevated serum PTH levels; and (iii) symptoms of uremic 2° HPT
necessitating surgical intervention as determined by referring nephrologists.
Normal PTGs: (i) glands inadvertently removed during thyroid operations
identified in the pathologic specimens; (ii) no known abnormality in serum Ca
homeostasis; and (iii) PTGs classified as histologically normal by attending
pathologists. The PTGs were fixed in 4% PFA, embedded in paraffin, sectioned in
5-μm thickness, and subjected to PLA assay and immunohistochemical
detection for CaSR and/or GABABR1 as described below.

## Immunohistochemistry
Mouse PTGs microdissected free of thyroid and other soft tissues from
wild-type C57/B6 mice and
PTGGABAB1R−/− and control
littermates were embedded in paraffin, and sectioned in 5 μm thickness.
Immunohistochemical detection of CaSR, GABAB1R, GABA, and GAD1/2 in
mouse and/or human PTG sections were performed with a rabbit custom-made rabbit
polyclonal anti-N-CaSR (VA609, ADDDYGRPGIEKFREEAEERDI) (1
μg/ml) , a
guinea pig anti-GABAB1R-C (CPSEPPDRLSSDGSRVHLLYK) (1
μg/ml) , a
rabbit anti-GABA (Cat.# A2052, SIGMA), or a rabbit anti-GAD1/2 (Cat.Ab49832,
Abcam), and corresponding peroxidase- or FITC-conjugated secondary antibodies,
and 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB)-substrate as previously
described . The
specificity of anti-GABAB1R-C, anti-N-CaSR, Anti-GAD1/2 and Anti-GABA
antibodies was confirmed by the lack of immunoreactivity in protein lysates
( , ) or tissue sections ( and 
and and ) of PTGs isolated from
PTGGABAB1R−/−,
PTGCaSR−/− , and
PTGGAD1/2−/− mice, respectively. The
specificity of anti-GABA was further verified by the lack of immunoreactivity in
adjacent tissue sections subjected to non-immune IgG controls ( ).

## PLA assays
This technique permits the detection and quantification of
protein–protein interactions. In brief, when two selective antibodies are
in proximity (< 30 nm) due to protein complex formation, complementary
DNA strands attached to the secondary antibodies are allowed to be ligated,
massively replicated, and visualized with fluorescence-conjugated DNA probes
 . To detect
in situ CaSR/GABAB1R complexes, proximity
ligation assays (PLA) were performed using Duo link in Situ Detection kits
(Sigma-Aldrich Corp., St Louis, MO) according to manufacturer’s
instruction on sections of PTGs from
PTGGABAB1R−/− mice and
control littermates and sections of human PTGs. Briefly, deparaffinized mouse
and human PTG sections were rehydrated, washed, permeabilized with 1% NP-40 in
phosphate-buffered saline for 5 min, and incubated in blocking buffer (5% horse
serum, 1% BSA, 0.01% Tween-20) for 30 minutes. Sections were incubated with a
mouse monoclonal antibody against the N-terminus of GABAB1R (Abcam
ab55051; 20 μg/ml) and anti-N-CaSR (VA609; 4 μg/ml) at 4°C
overnight, followed by sense and anti-sense oligonucleotide-conjugated secondary
antibodies at 37°C for 1 hour. DNA ligation was performed with DNA ligase
(25U/ml) at 37°C for 1 hour, followed by DNA amplification by polymerase
I (12.5U/ml) for 100 min at 37°C. After incubation with red
fluor-conjugated DNA probes and washing, the sections were mounted with
DAPI-containing mounting medium, imaged with a Zeiss Axio Imager 2 Microscopes
(Carl Zeiss, Germany), and quantified using automated TissueQuest Analysis
software (TissueGnositics USA, Ltd, Tarzana, CA). Total PLA activities in the
regions of interest (ROIs) were divided by total DAPI-positive cell number in
the ROI to obtain mean PLA activity/cell. The specificity of
anti-N-GABAB1R (Abcam ab55051) was demonstrated by the lack of
PLA signaling in the
PTGGABAB1R−/− mice ( ).

## Immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting
Membrane proteins (400 μg) extracted from human parathyroid
adenoma were immunoprecipitated with 7.5 μg of mouse monoclonal antibody
against CaSR C-terminal tail (1C7E4–1B, CKSNSEDRFPQPERQKQ) or guinea pig
polyclonal antibody against GABAB1R or pre-immune guinea pig IgG as
described previously .
Immunoprecipitated and naive membrane protein (50 μg) were
electrophoresed on polyacrylamide gels, transferred onto PDVF membrane, and
immunoblotted with a guinea pig polyclonal antibody against GABABR1 (1:1000
dilution) or a rabbit polyclonal antibody against CaSR (VA609; 1:1000 dilution)
as previously described , . Protein reactivity was detected
using the Clarity Western ECL substrate (BIO-RAD laboratories, Inc., Hercules,
CA) and visualized by a LAS4000 imaging system (Fujifilm Life Science, Stamford,
CT). The data presented are representative of 4 independent experiments.
Total proteins (50 μg) extracted from mouse hippocampus and PTGs
were immunoblotted with a custom-made rabbit anti-CaSR antibody (1 μg/ml,
AB1511, Millipore Corp. USA), a guinea pig anti-GABAB1R, or a rabbit
anti-GAD1/2 antibody (1 μg/ml, Cat.Ab49832, Abcam), and/or corresponding
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated antibodies (2 μg/ml) using
standard blotting techniques , . Uncrooped
Uncropped immunoblots for and and are shown in , , and , respectively.

## Microscopic FRET measurements of G-protein activation
FRET experiments were performed as previously described . In brief, cells grown on
coverslips were maintained in HEPES buffer (137 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 0.25 mM
CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 20 mM HEPES, 0.1% (w/v) bovine
serum albumin (BSA), pH 7.4) at room temperature and placed on a Zeiss inverted
microscope (Axiovert 200) equipped with an oil immersion 60X objective and a
dual emission photometric system (TILL Photonics). Samples were excited with a
xenon lamp from a polychrome V (TILL Photonics). FRET was monitored as a YFP/CFP
emission intensity ratio upon excitation at 436 nm (filter 436 ± 10 nm
and a beam splitter dichroic long-pass (DCLP) 460 nm). The emission fluorescence
intensities were determined at 535 ± 15 nm (YFP) and 480 ± 20 nm
(CFP) with a beam splitter DCLP of 505 nm. The FRET ratio for single experiments
was corrected according to as previously detailed : (1)Ratio(FYFPFCFP)=FYFPex436/em535−a×FCFPex436em480−b×FYFPex500/em535FCFPex436/em480 Where and represent respectively the emission intensities
of YFP or Venus (recorded at 535 nm) and CFP or Cerulean (recorded at 480 nm)
upon excitation at 436 nm; a and b represent correction factors for the
bleed-through of CFP or cerulean into the 535 nm channel (a = 0.40) and the
cross-talk due to the direct YFP or Venus excitation by light at 436 nm (b =
0.07). represents the emission intensity of YFP or
Venus (recorded at 535 nm) upon direct excitation at 500 nm. To ensure that CFP-
and YFP-labeled molecule expression were similar in examined cells, we performed
experiments in cells displaying comparable fluorescence levels. The means of
intermolecular FRET experiments were calculated according to to normalize for different
expression levels of CFP and YFP molecules: (2)NFRET=FRETratioFCFPex436/em480×FYFPex500/em535
To determine agonist induced changes in FRET, cells were continuously
superfused with the HEPES buffer and the agonist was applied using a
computer-assisted, solenoid-valve controlled rapid superfusion device (ALA-VM8,
ALA Scientific Instruments; solution exchange 5 to 10 ms). Signals detected by
avalanche photodiodes were digitalized using an analog to digital converter
(Digidata1322A, Axon Instruments) and stored on PC computer using Clampex 9.0
(Axon Instruments). Data were analyzed using OriginPro 8.0 and plotted in
GraphPad Prism 7.0.

## Photobleaching experiments
FRET between CFP and YFP in cells expressing the receptor constructs was
also determined by donor recovery after acceptor bleaching . The emission intensity of CFP was first
recorded at 436-nm excitation (CFPbefore), followed by direct
illumination of YFP at 500 nm for 3–5 min. Subsequently, the emission
intensity of CFP was recorded again (CFPafter). FRET efficiency was
calculated according to .
(3)FRETefficiency=1−CFPbeforeCFPafter

## Serum chemistries
Blood was drawn from mice by cardiac puncture under anesthesia by
isoflurane inhalation, followed by tissue harvest. Serum samples were prepared
by centrifugation and analyzed for total serum calcium by an automated ACE Alera
Clinical Chemistry bioanalyzer (Alfa Wassermann, Inc, West Caldwell, NJ, USA)
and serum PTH by commercial intact PTH ELISA kit (Immutopics, San Clemente, Ca,
USA), following manufacturer instructions.

## Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) analyses for gene expression
Total RNA was isolated from human adenomas and microdissected mouse PTGs
devoid of thyroid and fibrous tissues by an RNA STAT60 kit (Amsbio LLC,
Cambridge, MA), reverse transcribed by M-MLV reverse transcriptase into cDNA,
and subjected to qPCR for
gene expression profiles using commercial TaqMan-based sets of primers and
probes (Applied Biosystems). Expression levels of genes of interest were
presented as the percentage of level of the mitochondrial ribosomal protein
L19.

## Skeletal analyses by micro-computed tomography (μCT)
To compare bone mineral content and structural parameters, we performed
micro–computed tomography (μCT) scans at two sites: distal femur
for trabecular (Tb) bone and tibio-fibular junction (TFJ) for cortical (Ct) bone
as described . Briefly,
femurs and tibias were isolated, fixed in 10% Neutral Buffered Formalin (PBF)
for 24 hours, stored in 70% ethanol, and scanned by a SCANCO viva CT 40 scanner
(SCANCO Medical AG, Basserdorf, Switzerland) with 10.5 μm voxel size and
55-kV X-ray energy. For Tb bone in the distal femoral metaphysis, 100 serial
cross-sectional scans (1.05 mm) of the secondary spongiosa were obtained from
the end of the growth plate extending proximally. For Ct bone, 100 serial
cross-sections (1.05 mm) of the tibia were obtained from the TFJ extending
proximally. A threshold of 420 mg hydroxyapatite (HA)/mm was applied to segment total mineralized
bone matrix from soft tissue. Linear attenuation was calibrated using a
μCT HA phantom. 3-D image reconstructions and analyses were performed
using the manufacturer’s software to obtain the following structural
parameters: Tb tissue volume (Tb.TV), Tb bone volume (Tb.BV), Tb bone fraction
(Tb.BV/TV, %), Tb number (Tb.N), Tb connectivity density (Tb.CD), Tb thickness
(Tb.Th), Tb spacing (Tb.Sp), Ct tissue volume (Ct.TV), and Ct bone volume
(Ct.BV).

## Live cell cAMP signaling
PTH-C1 cells were transiently transfected with CaSR, GABAB1R
and the intramolecular cAMP FRET sensor (epac1-CFP/YFP) using lipofecatamine
3000 (Thermofischer). Cells were next plated on 25 mm glass coverslips coated
with collagen and mounted in Attofluor cell chambers (Life Technologies),
maintained in HEPES buffer and transferred on a Nikon Ti-E equipped with an oil
immersion 40× N.A. 1.30 Plan Apo objective and a moving stage (Nikon
Corporation). FRET measurement was monitored as previously describe (NCB 2017).
Cells pretreated with cholera toxin (CTx) for 1 hour to elevate basal cAMP then
changes in cAMP dynamics were monitored following the addition of CaSR and/or
GABAB1R ligands.

## Inositiol Phosphate signaling
Levels of total inositol phosphates (InsPs) including all isomers of
InsP3, InsP2, and InsP1 as an index of PLC
activation were determined in HEK-293 cells transiently transfected with CaSR
and GABAB1R cDNA individually or in combination after incubating the
cells with different [Ca2+]e (0.5–10 mM) with or
without baclofen (300 μM) for 60 min as reported previously . Prelabeling of membrane
polyphosphoinositides with 3H-myoinositol was done before stimulating
the cells.

## Detection of GABA by mass spectrometry
(1) Sample preparation. Human PTG and mice brain tissues were
homogenized individually by RIPA buffer (20 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1
mM EDTA, 1% Triton-X100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) with freshly added
PMSF to 1 mM and with freshly added aprotinin and leupeptin to 5 μg/ml
just before use. Additionally, 50 μΜ d5-glutamic acid
and 50 μΜ pyridoxal 5′-phosphate hydrate were added into
the lysate to synthesize d5-GABA. Proteins were precipitated by
acetonitrile with 0.5% TFA. The supernatant was dried in vacuum and resuspended
in acetonitrile and water (50:50, v/v) for C18-desalting. Finally, the desalted
product was dried and stored at −80°C until the LC-MS/MS analysis.
(2) GABA measurement by using liquid chromatography–tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Calibration standards for GABA were prepared at
concentrations of 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1,000, 2,500 nM in
acetonitrile and water (50:50, v/v). Quality control (QC) samples were prepared
independently, including low, middle, and high concentrations (10, 500, and
5,000 nM). All samples were stored at −80°C until the
LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography was achieved by an ACQUITY UPLC System
(Waters) and separation was carried out using a BEH HILIC column
(2.1×50 mm, 1.7 μm) at 30 °C. Acetonitrile
was used as the mobile phase, and 0.3% formic acid in water was used as the
aqueous phase. The flow rate was set at 0.4 mL/min, and the injection volume was
5 μL. The UPLC system was coupled to a Waters Xevo TQD mass
spectrometer (Waters). The ESI mode was positive ionization with following
parameters: capillary voltage, 3.05 kV; nebulizer gas (N2) flow rate,
10.8 L/min; gas temperature, 450°C. A triple quadrupole mass spectrometer
in Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) mode was employed to identify and quantify
GABA (transition: m/z 104.02 [M+H]+→87.1, collision energy
8 V) and IS (d5-GABA, transition: m/z 110.02
[M+H]+→93.1). The Q1 mass analyzer first filters the parental
ion of GABA (m/z 104.02). Only ions whose m/z value is 104.02 enter the
collision cell for fragmentation. The transition of m/z 104.02 →87.05 is
followed for GABA detection and quantitation in the Q3 mass analyzer. All data
were analyzed using the MassLynx software package (Waters).

## Statistics
Comparisons between groups were subjected to statistical analysis using
2-tails Student’s t test for two groups or one-way or two-way ANOVA
followed by Sidak’s for multiple comparisons using Prism 8 (GraphPad
Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Animal, organ culture, and cultured cell
sample sizes were determined by a power analysis using the following parameters:
standard deviation=5–10% depending on the assay, two-sided test, p
value=0.05, power of the test=0.8. Data from two groups were represented as mean
± standard error of the mean (s.e.m.). Significance was assigned for
P-value < 0.05.

## Extended Data
 

## Supplementary Material
1550595_Supp Figs. 1–5 and Table 11550595_Supp Fig6-Fig8

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dr. Bernhard Bettler (University of Basel), Drs. Richard Palmiter
(University of Washington) and Qi Wu (Baylor College of Medicine), and Maria Luisa
Brandi (University of Florence) for providing the floxed-Gabbr1
mice, floxed-Gad1;Gad2 mice, and PTH-C1 cells, respectively. This
work was supported by: the Department of Veterans Affairs grant
IK6BX004835–01, I01BX001960 and I01BX003453 (to W.C.); the National Institute
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDKK), the National Institute of
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and skin diseases (NIAMS), and the National Institute
for General Medicine (NIGMS) of the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) under
award numbers R01-DK087688, R01-DK102495, and R01-DK11142 (to J-P.V.),
R01DK121656–01, R01-AR067291 and P30-AR066262 (to W.C.), R01DK122259 (to W.C.
and J-P.V), R01-AR056256 (to C.L.T.), F32DK107177 (to A.H.), and the Cotswold
Foundation Fellowship Award (F.G.J-A, and A.D.W.).
Data Availability: All materials, data, animal models, and
associated protocols will be made available to all qualified investigators from
the corresponding authors upon reasonable request or with a simple institutional
material transfer agreement.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing
interests.