PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7482849PMC7482849.1748284974828493291150910.1371/journal.pone.0226450PONE-D-19-326781Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer TreatmentMedicine and Health SciencesPharmacologyDrugsCarbacholMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsBreast TumorsBreast CancerPhysical SciencesChemistryChemical CompoundsAlkaloidsAtropinePhysical SciencesChemistryChemical CompoundsEstersMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsBreast TumorsBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationSmall interfering RNABiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNASmall interfering RNAMedicine and Health SciencesPharmaceuticsDrug TherapyDrug AdministrationThe metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triple negative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype
Metronomic therapy in breast cancer and M2 receptor subtypehttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-8222-4259EspañolAlejandro J.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigation SalemAgustinaData curationFormal analysisInvestigation Di BariMaríaInvestigationMethodology CristofaroIlariaInvestigationMethodology SanchezYamilaInvestigationMethodology TataAda M.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administration SalesMaría E.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administration 1
Center of Pharmacological and Botanical Studies (CEFYBO), CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentine2
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentine3
Department of Biology and Biotechnologies Charles Darwin, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy4
Center of Neurobiology Daniel Bovet, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, ItalyLebedevaIrina V.Editor , ]. Luminal and triple negative (TN) represent the two opposite ends of the molecular classification of breast tumors and they thoroughly differ regarding treatment and patients´survival [ ]. The TN tumors are typically larger in size, higher grade than other breast cancers, and they also exhibit an aggressive clinical behavior, frequently resulting in early metastatic dissemination, particularly to visceral sites. As a result of these characteristics, TN breast cancers are associated with poor prognosis in comparison to luminal breast tumors [ , ]. Considering the treatment of TN tumors, classical modalities have improved the overall outlook and quality of life for women with this type of breast cancer. However, because of recurrence and/or the development of resistance to cytotoxic drugs administered to patients, produced by a complex mechanism mediated by different types of proteins such as ATP “binding cassette” (ABC) transporters, a considerable amount of patients still succumb to this disease highlighting the need to find new therapeutic approaches [ ]. Regarding the latter, the administration of low dose chemotherapy with short drug free intervals, named metronomic therapy emerged as a novel regimen for cancer treatment [ ]. It exerts very low incidence of side effects and could add new beneficial actions on immune system and tumor microenvironment [ ]. This new strategy also needs the identification of new therapeutic targets to improve the benefits for breast cancer patients.
Non-neuronal cholinergic system (nNCS) has been involved either in physiological or in pathological processes. The nNCS is formed by acetylcholine (ACh), the enzymes that synthesize and degrade ACh and cholinergic receptors expressed in non-neuronal cells. Muscarinic receptors belong to this group of proteins and have been involved in the progression of different type of tumors such as lung, colon and prostate [ – ]. We demonstrated that muscarinic receptors are expressed in tumor samples from patients with breast cancer in different stages and also in human MCF-7 cells derived from a luminal, estrogen-dependent adenocarcinoma, the most frequent type of breast tumor in women [ , ]. Muscarinic receptors belong to the G-protein coupled receptors family which constitutes the largest family of cell surface receptors involved in signal transduction. Five subtypes have been identified by molecular cloning: M1-M5. Their role in the regulation of important cell functions like mitosis, cell morphology, locomotion and immune response which are key steps during tumor progression has been documented [ , ]. The long-term activation of these receptors with the agonist carbachol stimulates cytotoxicity either in human or in murine breast tumor cells [ , ]. In the last years, several reports demonstrated that the activation of subtype 2 muscarinic (M2) receptor subtype by a selective agonist was able to arrest cell proliferation in different tumor cell lines [ , ]. Moreover, M2 receptor activation reduced cell survival, inducing oxidative stress and severe apoptosis in malignant cells derived from human glioblastoma [ ]. MDA-MB231 is a human cell line derived from a TN breast tumor, which does not express estrogen/progesterone receptors or HER2 protein.
The aim of our work is to investigate the ability of a combination of paclitaxel (PX) with a muscarinic agonist both at low doses to inhibit different steps of TN breast tumor progression. In this work, we identified different subtypes of muscarinic receptors in MDA-MB231 cells by Western blot, and demonstrated that the combination of PX plus carbachol or arecaidine propargyl ester (APE), a non-selective or an M2 selective agonist respectively, reduced cell viability, migration, vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) expression as well as in vivo angiogenesis. We also observed a down-regulation in the expression of ABCG2 transporter and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in tumor cells by Western blot, after PX plus carbachol or APE administration revealing that both proteins could be involved in the mechanism of action of this treatment.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
The human breast adenocarcinoma cell line MDA-MB231 (CRM-HTB-26) and MDA-MB468 (HTB-132) were acquired from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Manassas, USA) and cultured in DMEM (Invitrogen Inc., Carlsbad, USA) with 2 mM L-glutamine and 80 μg/ml gentamycin, supplemented with 10% heat inactivated FBS (Internegocios SA, Mercedes, Argentine) at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 air. The MCF-10A cells (CRL-10317) were also bought from ATCC and constitute a non-tumorigenic cell line derived from human mammary tissue. These cells were grown on tissue culture plastic dishes in DMEM:F12(1:1) (Invitrogen Inc., Carlsbad, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS, hydrocortisone (0.5 μg/ml), insulin (10 μg/ml), and hEGF (20 ng/ml). Cell lines were detached using the following buffer: 0.25% trypsin and 0.02% EDTA in Ca2+ and Mg2+ free PBS from confluent monolayers. The medium was changed three times a week. Cell viability was determined by Trypan blue exclusion test and the absence of mycoplasma was observed by Hoechst staining [ ].

## Detection of muscarinic receptors by Western blot
Cells (2x106) were washed twice with PBS and lysed in 1 ml of 50 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM NaF, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 1% Triton X-100 and 10 μg/ml trypsin inhibitor, aprotinin and leupeptin, pH 7.4. Then, lysates were left 1 h in an ice bath, and later centrifuged at 800 g for 20 min at 4°C. Supernatants were saved at -80°C and protein concentration was analyzed by the method of Bradford [ ]. Samples (80 μg protein per lane) were subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE minigel electrophoresis, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and incubated overnight with goat anti-human M1, M2 or M3 receptor polyclonal antibodies or rabbit anti-human M4 or M5 receptor polyclonal antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., USA) all diluted 1:200. Then strips were incubated with anti-rabbit IgG or anti-goat IgG coupled to horseradish peroxidase, both diluted 1:10000 in 20 mMTris-HCl buffer, 150 mM NaCl and 0.05% Tween 20 (TBS-T) at 37°C for 1 h. Bands were visualized by chemiluminescence. The results of densitometric analysis were expressed as optical density (O.D.) units relative to the expression of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., USA) [ ].

## M2 muscarinic receptor silencing
To silence M2 receptors, tumor cells were transfected with four different small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting specific sequences of human M2 receptor (ID1129) (Riboxx Life Sciences, Radebeul, Germany). A positive control of transfection Chromo-GAPDH-siRNA (Riboxx Life Sciences, Radebeul, Germany) and a negative control for siRNA assays (NC-siRNA) (SI03650318) (Quiagen, Hilden, Germany) were used. The sequences for M2-siRNAs were the following:
(siRNA 1129–1) sense, 5´- AUUUACUACUAAAUCCUCCCCC-3´, antisense 5´-GGGGGAGGAUUUAGUAGUAAAU-3´;
(siRNA 1129–2) sense 5´- AUGUAGCCCAUUUCUUCCCCC-3´, antisense 5´-GGGGGAAGAAAUGGGCUACAU-3´;
(siRNA 1129–3) sense 5´-UCCUUUGAGUUUCAGGCUGCCCCC-3´, antisense 5´- GGGGGCAGCCUGAAACUCAAAGGA-3´;
(siRNA 1129–4) sense 5´-AGUUACACCUUGACCUAACCCCC-3´, antisense 5´-GGGGGUUAGGUCAAGGUGUAACU-3´.
The cells were seeded in 6-well plates (104 cells/well) and cultured in 2 ml DMEM with 10% FBS until they were 60–70% confluent. The siRNAs were mixed with Riboxx-Fect according to manufacturer’s instructions and then added to wells. The efficiency of the transfection was evaluated by transfecting in separate wells Chromo-GAPDH-siRNA (Riboxx Life Sciences, Radebeul, Germany). The ability of the siRNA pool to down-regulate M2 muscarinic receptor expression was tested 72 h after transfection with 40 nM/well of siRNA and evaluated by Western blot detecting M2 receptor protein expression (23).

## Cell viability assay
The inhibition in cell viability exerted by different treatments for one or three cycles of 48h was analyzed employing the soluble tetrazolium salt 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) colorimetric assay (Life Technologies, Eugene, USA). When cells are alive, MTT is reduced to formazan. 4x103cells/well were seeded in 96-well plates in culture medium supplemented with 5% FBS and then left to attach overnight. When cells reached 60–70% of confluence they were deprived of FBS 24 h previous to the assay to induce the synchronization of cultures. Then, cells were treated with PX (Bristol-Myers Squibb, Vicente López, Argentine), carbachol or APE (non-selective or selective M2 receptor agonist respectively) alone or in combination in medium supplemented with 2% FBS, during 48 h in triplicate. Also the effect of doxorubicin (Glenmark Generics S.A., Pilar, Argentine) alone or combined with muscarinic agonists was analyzed. To inhibit the action of cholinergic agonists, cells were previously treated with atropine at 10−9 M or methoctramine at 10−5 M (non-selective or M2 receptor selective antagonist respectively).
After treatment, to detect viable cells, the medium was replaced by 110 μl of MTT solution that was prepared by diluting 10 μl of 5 mg/ml MTT in PBS, in 100 μl medium free of phenol red and FBS to each well. After incubation for 4 h at 37°C, the production of formazan was measured by analyzing the absorbance at 540 nm with an ELISA reader (BioTek, Winooski, USA). Values are mean ± S.E.M and results are expressed as the percentage of inhibition in cell viability in comparison to control (cells without treatment).

## ATP binding cassette transporter G2, epidermal growth factor receptor and vascular endothelial growth factor-A detection by Western blot
Cells (2x106) were treated during three cycles of 48h/each and samples were prepared as it was indicated to detect muscarinic receptors. Then, samples (80 μg protein per lane) were subjected to 8–10% SDS-PAGE minigel electrophoresis, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and incubated overnight with a rabbit anti-human ABCG2 polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Dallas, USA) diluted 1:200, a rabbit anti-human EGFR monoclonal antibody (EMD Millipore-MERCK, Temecula, USA) diluted 1:1000 or a rabbit anti-human VEGF-A polyclonal antibody (Abcam, Eugene, USA) diluted 1:1000. Then strips were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-linked anti-rabbit IgG, diluted 1:10000 in TBS-T at 37°C for 1 h. Bands were visualized by chemiluminiscence. Quantification of the bands was performed by densitometric analysis using Image J program (NIH) and was expressed as O.D. units in comparison to the expression of GAPDH that was used as loading control [ ].

## Cell migration assay
To quantify the ability of tumor cells to migrate, an in vitro wound healing assay was performed according to previously described methods [ ]. Cells (1.5x105/well) were seeded in 24-well plates with 0.5 ml of DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS and left to adhere. Then, cells were deprived of FBS to synchronize them. Then, the cell monolayer was scratched to produce a wound with a 200 μl pipette tip, washed twice with PBS and fresh culture medium without FBS containing different drugs was added. The migration of cells was photographed at regular intervals from the beginning of the assay during 28 h and the uncovered area was integrated with image J software (NIH). The results were expressed as the percentage of covered area. The conditions selected, allowed us to quantify cell migration, considering negligible cell division, since MDA-MB231 cell doubling time is longer than total experimental lasting for each assay.

## Tumor-induced angiogenesis
Female NUDE [N-NIH Nu/Nu(spf)] mice (3 months old and 25 g/mouse) were purchased from the animal facility of the Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, La Plata National University (La Plata, Argentine). These animals are frequently used in xenogeneic assays with human cells. Mice were kept under specific pathogen-free conditions following the protocol designed by the National Institute of Health (NIH, USA) in the Guidelines for the care and handling of laboratory animals (1986). They were kept in metallic cages (3 animals/cage) with a wood shaving bedding, changed every 48 h, in 12:12 h light:dark cycle at 21±2 ºC, with water and food ad libitum. Experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Committee for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (CICUAL) from the School of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires (Protocol number 20020170100227BA).
Neovascularization induced by tumor cells, was analyzed using an in vivo bioassay previously described [ ]. Briefly, MDA-MB231 cells were washed with PBS and detached with trypsin, and adjusted to a concentration of 3x106 cells/ml in DMEM. Then, 0.1 ml of cell suspension were injected intradermically into the area surrounding the third mammary fat pad in each flank of mice under sterile conditions in the laboratory. Animals were treated intraperitoneally (i.p.) 24 h post-injection of cells, with carbachol (0.94 pg/mouse) or APE (4.66 μg/mouse) alone or in combination with PX (0.51 ng/mouse). Treatments were randomly assigned to each animal and were administered in three doses with 48 h intervals. Atropine (0.17 ng/mouse) or methoctramine (3.5 μg/mouse) were inoculated i.p. 20 min before other drugs. Drugs were dissolved in PBS under sterile conditions. Doses were calculated considering the concentrations added to cells in vitro, the amount of inoculated cells and the lasting of treatment. Each experiment includes 10 different treatments with 3 animals per treatment/group repeated 3 times.
On day 6, animals were sacrificed by CO2 inhalation and the skin was exposed. Using a dissecting microscope (Konus Corporation, Miami, USA) at a 6.4 X magnification, the vascular response was examined in the inner surface of the skin. Pictures were taken of the inoculation sites with an incorporated digital camera (Canon Power Shot A75, Canon Inc., Lake Success, USA). Then, the pictures were projected onto a reticular screen to count the number of vessels per mm2 of skin. Angiogenesis was quantified as vessel density, determined by the formula: Σ number of vessels in each square/total number of squares of each inoculation site [ ].

## EC50 calculation
Using the GraphPad Prism 6 program, dose–response data were transformed, changed to percentage and fitted using to a sigmoidal curve following a maximal effective concentration (Emax) model with at least six data points. The EC50 and Emax values were obtained from this analysis. Only data with less than 20% in the coefficient of variation for EC50 values were considered.

## Statistical analysis
Results were expressed as mean ± S.E.M. The GraphPad Prism6 computer program was used employing one-way ANOVA analysis for paired samples to obtain the significance of differences between mean values in all control and test samples. The analysis was complemented by using a Tukey test to compare among mean values. Differences between means were considered significant if P<0.05. The data and statistical analysis complied with the recommendations on experimental design and analysis in pharmacology [ ]. When it was necessary, values were also analyzed using Chou Talalay method to evaluate drug combination effects [ ].

## Drugs
All drugs were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, USA) unless otherwise stated. Solutions were prepared fresh daily.

## Results

## Muscarinic agonists modify MDA-MB231 cell viability
In this work, we demonstrated by Western blot the expression of M1, M2, M4 and M5 receptors in MDA-MB231 cell lysates ( ). The non-tumorigenic mammary cell line MCF-10A lacks all subtypes of muscarinic receptors ( ).
 In addition, we analyzed the effect of increasing concentrations of the non-selective muscarinic agonist carbachol added to MDA-MB231 cells in culture. shows that carbachol produced an inhibition in cell viability in a concentration-dependent manner (EC50: 1.2x10-11M). Also APE was effective to reduce tumor cell viability at concentrations higher than 10-5M (EC50: 3.1x10-5M) ( ). Due to the absence of muscarinic receptors in non-tumorigenic MCF-10A cells, neither carbachol nor APE modified cell viability at any concentration tested ( ). We confirmed the cytotoxic activity of PX on breast cancer cells. In our system, this chemotherapeutic agent produced a decrement in cell viability at concentrations ≥ 10-8M, when it was added to tumor cells (EC50: 8.5x10-7M). As an undesirable action, PX also reduced MCF-10A cell viability from10-7M ( ).
 

## Effects produced by the combined treatment of paclitaxel with muscarinic agonists on MDA-MB231 cells
In order to determine the ability of muscarinic agonists to synergize the action of PX on tumor cells, we performed concentration-response curves of this drug in the presence of the EC25 of carbachol or APE (8.6x10-12M or 1.1x10-5M respectively) to evaluate cell viability ( ). The addition of carbachol shifted to the left the dose-response curve of PX modifying the EC50 value by more than one order of magnitude (EC50 PX: 8.5x10-7M; EC50PX+carbachol: 1.1x10-8M) ( ). Similar results were obtained when APE was added to the concentration-response curve of PX (EC50: PX+APE: 3.5x10-8M) on tumor cells ( ). These results and the combination index (CI)<1 calculated by the Chou Talalay method using CompuSyn Software (PX+carbachol: 0.10077; PX+APE: 0.13951) indicated a synergism of potentiation for both pairs of drugs.
 Taking into account the undesirable effect induced by chemotherapy at usual doses (≥10-6M), we analyzed the ability of PX at the first effective concentration (10-8M) combined with the EC25 of carbachol or APE on the viability of tumor cells in order to mimic the dosage of metronomic therapy ( ). The combination of PX plus carbachol significantly reduced cell viability of MDA-MB231 cells. This effect was prevented in the presence of 10-9M atropine, a non-selective muscarinic antagonist. This combination did not exert any action on non-tumorigenic MCF-10A mammary cells ( ). Considering that M2 receptors are expressed in tumor cells, we analyzed the effect of the M2 selective agonist APE in combination with PX. The addition of APE (1.1x10-5M) combined with PX potentiated the effect of PX alone to reduce tumor cell viability ( ). The action of APE plus PX was reverted by the previous addition of the M2 selective antagonist methoctramine (10-5M) revealing the main participation of this receptor subtype in the reduction of tumor cell viability ( ). In addition, we confirmed the participation of M2 receptor by pretreating cells with a specific M 2-siRNA that prevented the action of APE plus PX on MDA-MB231 cell viability ( ). We also proved that the addition of carbachol, APE and/or PX at the same concentrations did not modify MCF-10A cell viability ( ).
 To confirm that muscarinic agonists can synergize the action of another cytotoxic drug reducing tumor cell viability, we tested the effect of 10-8M doxorubicin (the first effective concentration) a drug frequently used in breast cancer treatment combined with carbachol or APE both at EC25 on MDA-MB231 cells ( ).
 Either the presence of carbachol or APE potentiated the effect of doxorubicin by reducing tumor cell viability. The effect was prevented by preincubating cells with atropine or methoctramine. Moreover, in MDA-MB468 cells derived from another subtype of TN tumor, we observed that the addition of carbachol or APE at the EC25 (1.1x10-10M or 1.3x10-7M respectively) to the first effective concentration of PX (10-9M) was also effective to reduce cell viability. These tumor cells also express all subtypes of muscarinic receptors ( ). The addition of atropine or methoctramine before the combined treatment significantly reduced this effect ( ).
 We confirmed that the combination of PX at the first effective concentration plus carbachol or APE at the EC25 added in three cycles potently reduced cell viability of MDA-MB231 cells by more than 60%. This effect was prevented by the previous addition of atropine o methoctramine respectively ( ).
 In order to investigate the mechanism of action involved in the effect produced by the combinations, we analyzed the expression of ABCG2 and EGFR in tumor cells. The addition of PX with carbachol ( ) or APE ( ) significantly reduced the expression of ABCG2 (PX plus carbachol P = 0.0270; PX plus APE P = 0.0425 vs. control). The addition of carbachol, APE or PX alone did not modify the expression of this transporter in tumor cells ( ).
 It has been documented that the constitutively activation of EGFR or its transactivation could contribute to drug resistance in different types of tumor cells [ ]. As it is shown in , MDA-MB231 cells express this receptor and the addition of three cycles of PX plus carbachol significantly reduced protein expression by more than 40% in comparison to control (P = 0.0477) ( ). Similarly, Western blot analysis showed that the treatment with APE combined with PX also down-regulated EGFR protein by more than 41% respect to control (P = 0.0460) ( ).

## Effect produced by the combined treatment of muscarinic agonists and paclitaxel on MDA-MB231 cell migration
Since invasion is an important step in tumor progression, we analyzed the effect of PX plus carbachol or APE on tumor cell migration in an in vitro wound healing assay ( ). At the end of experimental time (28 h) control wound was covered by 79±8% while the addition of PX plus carbachol or APE prevented wound covering by 42±4% or 42±6% respectively. Both effects were reverted in the presence of atropine or methoctramine.
 

## The combined treatment reduces vascular endothelial growth factor-A and tumor induced-angiogenesis
Taking into account that metronomic administration of drugs can exert additional benefits in comparison to traditional chemotherapy, we analyzed the ability of both drug combinations to exert anti-angiogenic actions. The addition of PX plus carbachol to MDA-MB231 cells in culture for three cycles significantly down-regulated VEGF-A expression by almost 39% (P = 0.0490) ( ). Moreover, the addition of APE to the combination exerted a similar reduction in VEGF-A expression in MDA-MB231 cells (37±3%) (P = 0.0257) ( ). We also analyzed the ability of MDA-MB231 cells to induce blood vessel formation in the skin of NUDE mice ( ). The inoculation of tumor cells increased by 31±5% (P = 0.0362) skin neovascularization in comparison to sham skin. The i.p. administration of carbachol plus PX at metronomic doses to tumor bearers for three cycles potently reduced tumor induced-angiogenesis. This effect was reverted when animals were treated i.p. with the non-selective antagonist atropine previously to the combination. Also, APE combined with PX at low doses significantly reduced tumor neovascularization and the pre-treatment of tumor bearers with methoctramine, a selective M2 antagonist, prevented the latter effect. Neovascular response in the skin of tumor bearing mice treated with PX plus carbachol or APE did not differ from the vascular density exhibited by skin obtained from sham animals (3.07±0.10). Representative photographs of sham skin, positive neovascularized skin induced by MDA-MB231 cells (Control) and the inhibition of angiogenic response produced by the in vivo treatment of NUDE mice with PX plus carbachol or APE are shown in .
 

## Discussion and conclusions
In this work, we demonstrated for the first time, the expression of different muscarinic receptor subtypes (1, 2, 4 and 5) in MDA-MB231 cells derived from a human TN mammary adenocarcinoma. We also observed that the long-term addition of carbachol or APE (non-selective and M2 receptor selective agonist, respectively) reduced cell viability in these tumor cells. Previous results from our group and also from other authors pointed to the ability of these muscarinic agonists to produce cell death in murine breast, bladder and neuronal tumor cells [ – ]. These results allowed us to consider muscarinic receptors as specific therapeutic targets for the treatment of breast tumors, in particular TN since they are classified as very aggressive and malignant. Previous reports indicated that TN tumor bearers benefit from the addition of PX in the adjuvant therapy, supporting the conclusion that taxanes are useful for this group of patients [ , ]. Our results confirmed the ability of PX to decrease TN breast tumor cell viability, but it also produced similar actions on normal MCF-10A breast cells as an undesirable effect. The latter is one of the reasons why specific adjuvant regimens for TN breast cancer are still under revision, and third generation chemotherapy regimens utilizing dose dense or metronomic poly-chemotherapy are thought to be more effective and less harmful than traditional chemotherapy. Considering the latter, together with our previous findings in MCF-7 cells that were sensible to a low dose metronomic therapy focused on muscarinic receptors [ ] we designed a metronomic administration of PX plus muscarinic agonists at low concentrations. This strategy, besides focusing on muscarinic receptors as novel targets for the treatment of TN tumors, could be less aggressive for normal mammary cells that lack of these receptors [ , ]. Moreover, our results reveal the possibility of generalizing the usage of this combination of drugs since it is also effective when PX is replaced by doxorubicin. It is also important to consider that the administration of PX plus carbachol or APE is effective on MDA-MB468 cells, derived from a different TN tumor than MDA-MB231 classified as Basal A with amplified EGFR [ ].
It is important to note that M2 receptor mediates the main cytotoxic action of this low dose combined therapy, since similar results were obtained by replacing carbachol with APE, a selective M2 agonist, in the combination. The participation of this receptor subtype was confirmed by preventing the effect of the combination either with the selective M2 antagonist methoctramine or by transfecting cells with a specific M2-siRNA. In line with our findings, similar effects were demonstrated in human glioblastoma cell lines and in glioblastoma cancer stem cells [ , ].
One of the most important side effects of traditional chemotherapy is the resistance to drugs. In fact, the most commonly observed mechanism conferring drug resistance in cancer cells is the over-expression of ABC transporters that mediates the efflux of endogenous and exogenous substances using energy provided by ATP hydrolysis. ABCG subfamily plays pivotal roles in the transport of anticancer drugs out of cells, generating the development of drug resistance [ ]. Here we analyzed the expression of ABCG2 since this protein is expressed in CD44+/CD24- stem cell population that is abundant in MDA-MB231 tumor. The ABCG2 expression was potently down-regulated by the combination of PX either with carbachol or with APE. In relation with our results, Farhana et al. reported that malignancy of colon cancer cells induced by bile acids promotes cancer stemness in colonic epithelial cells by up-regulating M3 receptor together with ABCG2 expression [ ].
Several aggressive tumors present an overexpression of the HER2 marker considering it a target in cancer therapy [ , ]. A variant with high homology to this marker is the EGFR which is also over-expressed in cancer [ , ]. Its expression and/or activity can be modulated by muscarinic receptors [ ]. Several authors consider that the sole up-regulation of EGFR expression is a bad prognosis marker and an indicator of chemoresistance in TNBC patients or cell lines [ – ]. Our results demonstrated that the combination of PX plus carbachol or APE drastically reduced EGFR expression in tumor cells and this effect should be beneficial in the treatment of this type of tumor. Recently, it has been described that the inhibition of EGFR activity in glioblastomas produces a decrement in drug resistance activity mediated by the ATP-dependent membrane transporter, ABC [ ]. Although we only evaluated a down-regulation in the expression of EGFR due to drug treatment, more experiments could be useful to evaluate its activity in our system.
It should be important to consider that, the reduction in cell viability produced by the combination of PX with carbachol or APE could be related to a decrement in the number of cancer stem cells which are present at very high levels in TN tumors and are generally positive to ABCG2 transporter as it was previously reported [ , ]. In addition, the over-expression/activation of EGFR leads to VEGF-A production and is closely related to the proliferative behavior of breast cancer cells as well as tumor endothelial cells [ ].
Invasion and/or migration are the most important steps in tumor progression since they are linked to metastasis and aggressiveness that are usually observed in TN breast cancer patients. Our results show for the first time the ability of low dose combined therapy to reduce tumor cell migration targeting M2 receptor. In addition, angiogenesis has been broadly considered as a switch-on mechanism in tumor growth and metastasis. One of the additional benefits of metronomic therapy to be tested is its ability to reduce tumor-induced angiogenesis [ ]. Here we confirmed that the treatment of TN tumor cells with the combination of PX plus muscarinic agonists is able to reduce the expression of VEGF-A, and also the in vivo neovascular response induced by tumor cells. The treatment of tumor cells with the combination of PX plus muscarinic agonists produced a decrement in VEGF-A levels in vitro. We cannot discard that the anti-angiogenic actions observed in vivo could also be due to a decrement in the number of tumor cells, or to a down-regulation of other angiogenic factors produced by tumor cells and/or by stromal cells. More experiments are needed to clarify these aspects in our model.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that low doses therapy combining PX with a non-selective or a selective M2 agonist could be a useful strategy to treat TN breast tumors. In particular, the treatment focused on M2 receptor appears as a new promising therapeutic target to counteract not only breast cancer cell survival, but also to reduce invasion and pathological neo-angiogenesis, suggesting a possible prevention of chemoresistance by reducing ABCG2 and EGFR expression.

## Supporting information
S1 Checklist

## The ARRIVE guidelines checklist.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Muscarinic subtype 2 receptor expression silencing.
A) Western blot assay to detect muscarinic (M) receptor subtype 2 in MDA-MB231 cells in the absence or presence of NC-siRNA or M2-siRNA. Molecular weights are indicated on the right. Densitometric analysis of the bands is expressed as optical density (O.D.) units relative to the expression of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) protein used as loading control. One representative experiment of 3 is shown. (*P<0.01 vs. cells without M2-siRNA). B) Effect of the combination of paclitaxel (PX) (10-8M) with arecaidine propargyl ester (APE) (1.1x10-5M) in the absence or presence of M2-siRNA. Results are expressed as percent of inhibition in cell viability respect to control (cells without treatment). Values are mean ± S.E.M. of 3 experiments performed in duplicate. (*P<0.05 **P<0.001 vs. control or PX).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Raw images(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Raw images(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Dataset(XLS)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Dataset(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors want to thank Mr. Francisco Sanchez, Mr. Daniel Gonzalez and Vet. Marcela Vázquez for their excellent technical assistance and to Mrs. Patricia Fernández for her excellent management of financial support. We also want to thank Dr. Federico Penas for providing NC-siRNA, Dr. Fernanda Troncoso and Lic. Vanina Vacheta from INQUIFIB-CONICET for providing MDA-MB468 cell line.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0226450.r001Decision Letter 0
BatraSurinder K.Academic Editor© 2020 Surinder K. Batra2020Surinder K. BatraThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
4 Feb 2020

PONE-D-19-32678
The metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triple negative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Espanol,,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process, particularly on presentation of the data in Figures.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Mar 20 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Surinder K. Batra
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
1. We noticed you have some minor occurrence(s) of overlapping text with the following previous publication(s), which needs to be addressed:
https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612822666160229115317
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2016.09.004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.03.013
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2015.03.018
https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.12834
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057572
https://doi.org/10.1080/01635581.2017.1328605
http://dx.doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v22.i30.6876
In your revision ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the Methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed.
2. As part of your revision, please complete and submit a copy of the ARRIVE Guidelines checklist, a document that aims to improve experimental reporting and reproducibility of animal studies for purposes of post-publication data analysis and reproducibility: https://www.nc3rs.org.uk/arrive-guidelines. Please include your completed checklist as a Supporting Information file. Note that if your paper is accepted for publication, this checklist will be published as part of your article.
3.
In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
4.
PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In this study authors demonstrate the role of metronomic therapy employing a traditional anti-cancer drug, paclitaxel plus muscarinic agonists at low doses on Triple negative tumors. In general, this study is well-performed and qualified to accept to PLOS ONE for publication if the authors address two major comments as below:
1. It is recommended to run all the samples of proteins in the single gel in Figure-1A and Figure-1B and present the westernblot data together and not individually.
2. GAPDH levels for MCF10A cells are not comparable with MDAMB231 cells. It seems that the amount of total protein is less in the MCF10 cells thus the comparison M-receptors are not accurate. This experiment needs to be done more convincingly.
Reviewer #2: The manuscript entitled “The metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triple-negative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype”. Espanol AJ and colleagues were trying to identify the role of muscarinic receptors on cancer cell growth and migration. In this study, authors used carbachol or arecaidine propargyl ester along with traditional anti-cancer drugs paclitaxel and their inhibitory effect on breast cancer cells. Also, they have shown the chemoresistance mechanism due to the overexpression of ABCG2 and EGFR expression. EGFR activation is more important than just expression, moreover, EGFR signaling is highly activated other breast cancer subtypes rather than TNBC. Authors need to provide full blot rather than crop in Figure 1 and sup Fig.1. Bar diagram would be a better representation of the quantification of wound healing experiments (Figure 7A and B). In Figure 8A and B, the expression of VEGF is not showing any clear difference.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0226450.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
13 Mar 2020

We thank the editor and reviewers for your useful suggestions that helped our manuscript improve. 
RESPONSE TO ACADEMIC EDITOR AND REVIEWERS
1. We noticed you have some minor occurrences of overlapping text…
We rephrased or cited all duplicated text found in the manuscript.
We rephrased the following sections (line number corresponds to “Manuscript with track Changes”):
In Material and Methods; Cell culture: 
• We replaced “obtained” by “acquired”. Line 105.
• We replaced “purchased” by “bought”. Line 109.
• We replaced “detached” by “removed”. Line 113.
• We replaced “replaced” by “changed”. Line 115.
• We replaced “assayed” by “determined”. Line 116.
• We replaced “confirmed” by “observed”. Line 117.
In Material and Methods; Detection of muscarinic receptors by Western blot:
• We replaced paragraph from line 120 to line 135 by paragraph from line 136 to line 151.
In Material and Methods; Cell viability assay:
• We replaced paragraph from line 155 to line 175 by paragraph from line 176 to line 196.
In Material and Methods; Tumor-induced angiogenesis:
• We replaced paragraph from line 236 to line 255 by paragraph from line 256 to line 276.
The following references were added: 
• Sales ME, Español A, Salem A, Pulido P, Sanchez Y, Sanchez F. Role of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in breast cancer. Design of metronomic chemotherapy. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 2019; 14: 91-100.
• Schettini F, Buono G, Cardelasi C, Desideri I, de Palacios S, Del Mastro L. Hormone receptor/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive breast cancer: where we are now and where we are going. Cancer Treat Rev. 2016; 46: 20-26.
• Sales ME. Muscarinic receptors as targets for metronomic therapy in breast cancer. Curr Pharm Des. 2016; 22: 2170-2177.
• Dai X, Zhang J, Guo G, Cai Y, Cui R, Yin C, et al. A mono-carbonyl analog of curcumin induces apoptosis in drug-resistant and mitochondrial dysfunction. Cancer Manag Res. 2018; 10: 3069-3082.
• Hu T, Li Z, Gao CY, Cho CH. Mechanisms of drug resistance in colon cancer and its therapeutic strategies. World J Gastroenterol. 2016; 22: 6876-6889.
The following reference was removed: 
• Hayes DF, Thor AD, Dressler LG, Weaver D, Edgerton S, Cowan D, et al. Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) Investigators. HER2 and response to paclitaxel in node-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:1496-506.
2. As part of your revision, please complete and submit a copy of the ARRIVE Guidelines checklist.
We attached the corresponding file named “ARRIVE Guidelines PONE-D-19-32678”.
3. Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study´s minimal underlying data set.
We attached the corresponding excel file named “S2 minimal data set”.
4. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported.
We attached the corresponding PDF file named “S1 raw images”.
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In this study authors demonstrate the role of metronomic therapy employing a traditional anti-cancer drug, paclitaxel plus muscarinic agonists at low doses on Triple negative tumors. In general, this study is well-performed and qualified to accept to PLOS ONE for publication if the authors address two major comments as below:
1. It is recommended to run all the samples of proteins in the single gel in Figure-1A and Figure-1B and present the western blot data together and not individually.
Western blot assays for muscarinic receptors/GAPDH were done again and we made the Figure according reviewer´s suggestions (Fig 1).
2. GAPDH levels for MCF10A cells are not comparable with MDAMB231 cells. It seems that the amount of total protein is less in the MCF10 cells thus the comparison M-receptors are not accurate. This experiment needs to be done more convincingly.
See response in item 1, please.
Reviewer #2: The manuscript entitled “The metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triple-negative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype”. Espanol AJ and colleagues were trying to identify the role of muscarinic receptors on cancer cell growth and migration. In this study, authors used carbachol or arecaidine propargyl ester along with traditional anti-cancer drugs paclitaxel and their inhibitory effect on breast cancer cells. Also, they have shown the chemoresistance mechanism due to the overexpression of ABCG2 and EGFR expression. 
1. EGFR activation is more important than just expression, moreover, EGFR signaling is highly activated in other breast cancer subtypes rather than TNBC. 
Even though that the activation of EGFR is important in the regulation of tumor growth; several authors consider that the up-regulation of EGFR expression is a bad prognosis marker and an indicator of chemoresistance in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients or cell lines:
a. Zhang et al., Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:357485 pointed to the distinct expression of EGFR and the prevalence of BRCA1 mutation indicating that EGFR, and BRCA1 might be unique biomarkers for targeted therapy and prognosis in TNBC.
b. Turner et al., Sci Rep. 2020 Jan 30;10(1):1493 concluded that EGFR is highly expressed in basal-like PDXs, cell lines, and patients, and high expression of this gene reduces metastasis-free survival, suggesting that targeting of this protein holds promise for potential clinical success in TNBC.
c. Islam et al., in J Cell Physiol. 2020 Jan 20. doi: 10.1002/jcp.29466 indicate that, the chemotolerance mechanism of TNBC has not yet been studied in detail. Infrequent messenger RNA expression, gene amplification (10-32.5%), and mutation (1%) of EGFR were seen in the TNBC samples irrespective of therapy, suggesting the importance of EGFR protein stabilization in this tumor. Thus, this study showed that reduced nuclear expression of Y654-p-β-catenin in NACT samples due to down-regulation of EGFR protein through promoter hypomethylation-mediated up-regulation of SH3GL2, resulting in low proliferation index/CD44 prevalence with better prognosis of the NACT patients, might have an important role in the chemotolerance of TNBC.
d. Fleisher et al., Breast Cancer (Dove Med Press). 2019 Jul 23; 11:231-241 postulated that EGFR is frequently overexpressed in TNBC, and the EGFR-overexpressing TNBC presumably escapes EGFR inhibitor therapy by up-regulating autophagy and inhibiting apoptosis. To parse the autophagy-apoptosis crosstalk pathway as a potential targeted therapy in TNBC, the activity of an EGFR inhibitor, osimertinib, alone and in combination with an autophagy inhibitor, chloroquine, was examined in EGFR-overexpressing TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-231.
2. Authors need to provide full blot rather than crop in Figure 1 and sup Fig.1. 
It is not possible to make Western blot assays using antibodies against the 5 muscarinic receptor subtypes in the same individual membrane, at the same time, because they have very similar molecular weights which makes difficult their identification. 
See response in item 1 to Reviewer 1, please.
3. Bar diagram would be a better representation of the quantification of wound healing experiments (Figure 7A and B).
We changed Figure 7A-B by bar graphics according reviewer´s suggestions.
4. In Figure 8A and B, the expression of VEGF is not showing any clear difference.
We made new Western blot assays according reviewer´s suggestions. The Images included in Fig 8A-B shows the differences among experimental groups.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0226450.r003Decision Letter 1
LebedevaIrina V.Academic Editor© 2020 Irina V. Lebedeva2020Irina V. LebedevaThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
1 Jun 2020

PONE-D-19-32678R1
The metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triple negative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Español,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
It is necessary to determine not just the expression, but the activity of EGFR upon muscarinic receptor activation.
Additional titrating experiments are needed for APE and methoctramine.
Scratch assay is not an invasion assay but a migration assay. Please add the details of how this assay was performed (controls etc.)
Tumor angiogenesis assays were set up inappropriately. Angiogenesis requires the tumor to be formed, which process may take a few weeks in this particular strain.  Thus any changes in the vessel density observed within 6 days post injection may reflect the death of the injected cells.  Please modify you conclusions appropriately.
Finally, the manuscript has numerous typos and grammatical errors and would benefit significantly from scientific writer editing from a native English speaker.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 16 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Irina V. Lebedeva, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
Reviewer #4: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Partly
Reviewer #4: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All questions have been addressed in the revised manuscript entitled 'The metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triple negative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype'
Reviewer #3: The authors have addressed most of comments from previous reviewers except one point from reviewer 2 about EGFR activation (see below). I have several other concerns that need to be addressed.
1. As with other G protein coupled receptors, muscarinic receptors can trans-activate EGFR, leading to increased cell proliferation and migration. Therefore, as pointed out by the reviewer 2, it is important to determine the activity of EGFR but not just its expression if the author attempts to link the downregulation of EGFR expression by muscarinic receptor activation to the inhibition of cancer cell growth and migration.
2. APE and methoctramine are not absolute muscarinic receptor M2-selective agonist and antagonist. With the concentrations used in the studies, they cannot distinguish which muscarinic receptor subtypes are involved in the effect of muscarinic receptor activation. The author has to either revise the manuscript to remove the description of specific involvement of the M2 receptor or perform additional experiments by titrating the dose of drugs used.
3. How was the wound healing assay performed? Was an inhibitor of cell proliferation included? If not, then the effect of treatment on wound healing may be secondary to its effect on cell proliferation.
4. The studies appear to be a replicate of the similar studies performed by the same group as noted in ref 16 and 17, except for using different cell lines. What are the new information provided in this manuscript?
Reviewer #4: The authors have addressed the reviews they received in the initial round of peer review to a satisfactory level.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0226450.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
28 Jul 2020

We thank to the editor and reviewers for your useful suggestions that helped to improve our manuscript 
RESPONSE TO ACADEMIC EDITOR AND REVIEWERS
1.- It is necessary to determine not just the expression, but the activity of EGFR upon muscarinic receptor activation. 
As with other G protein coupled receptors, muscarinic receptors can trans-activate EGFR, leading to increased cell proliferation and migration. Therefore, as pointed out by the reviewer 2, it is important to determine the activity of EGFR but not just its expression if the author attempts to link the downregulation of EGFR expression by muscarinic receptor activation to the inhibition of cancer cell growth and migration.
Regarding transactivation of EGFR by G protein coupled receptors like that produced by muscarinic receptors, it is important to consider that:
The mechanism of EGFR transactivation triggered by cholinergic agonists like acetylcholine or carbachol has been studied mainly in colon cancer cells besides other normal cell lines. 
Most authors indicated that acetylcholine or carbachol exerts transactivation when added at concentrations ≥ 1uM and during short periods of time (0-60 min) to cultures. The last conditions are totally different from ours. Moreover, we did not observe transactivation when agonists, carbachol or APE was added alone, since they did not modify tumor cell viability.
In addition, transactivation was frequently due to an activation or up-regulation of M3 receptor subtype, which is absent in MDA-MB231 cells. 
(Uwada et al., Cellular Sig 2017 vol 35; Xie et al., Am J Physiol Gastroint Liver Physiol 2009 vol 296; Xie & Raufman, J Cancer Metastasis Treat 2016 vol 2; Tang et al., J Biol Chem 2002 vol 277; Ukegawa et al., J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2003 vol 129). 
Moreover, a previous report indicated that carbachol at 1mM was not able to modify EGFR expression in a transactivation model performed in keratinocytes. Only the addition of exogenous EGF induced EGFR internalization in this model. (Ockenga et al., Int J Mol Sci 2014 vol 15). Our results are completely different since we observed a down-regulation in EGFR protein expression in tumor cells after the treatment (48h) with the combination of paclitaxel plus carbachol or APE at low doses.
Even though that the activation of EGFR is a main factor in the regulation of tumor growth; several authors consider that an up-regulation of EGFR expression is a bad prognosis marker and an indicator of chemoresistance in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients or cell lines:
a. Zhang et al., Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:357485 pointed to the distinct expression of EGFR and the prevalence of BRCA1 mutation indicating that EGFR, and BRCA1 might be unique biomarkers for targeted therapy and prognosis in TNBC.
b. Turner et al., Sci Rep. 2020 Jan 30;10(1):1493 concluded that EGFR is highly expressed in basal-like PDXs, cell lines, and patients, and high expression of this gene reduces metastasis-free survival, suggesting that targeting of this protein holds promise for potential clinical success in TNBC.
c. Islam et al., in J Cell Physiol. 2020 Jan 20. doi: 10.1002/jcp.29466 indicate that, the chemotolerance mechanism of TNBC has not yet been studied in detail. Infrequent messenger RNA expression, gene amplification (10-32.5%), and mutation (1%) of EGFR were seen in the TNBC samples irrespective of therapy, suggesting the importance of EGFR protein stabilization in this tumor. Thus, this study showed that reduced nuclear expression of Y654-p-β-catenin in NACT samples due to down-regulation of EGFR protein through promoter hypomethylation-mediated up-regulation of SH3GL2, resulting in low proliferation index/CD44 prevalence with better prognosis of the NACT patients, might have an important role in the chemotolerance of TNBC.
Although we cannot assure that EGFR present in tumor cells are fully functional, we measured a decrement in EGFR and ABCG2 expression due to the same treatment. Liu et al (Brain Res. 2015. 1611:93-100) reported an important link between EGFR expression and ABCG2 in U251 cells. They documented that leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulin-like domains 1(LRIG1) can improve the chemosensitivity of these tumor cells. The presence of LRIG1 can reverse MDR by inhibiting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and secondary inhibiting ATP-binding cassette, sub-family B member 1(ABCB1) and ATP-binding cassette, sub-family G (WHITE), member 2 (ABCG2). A similar mechanism can be addressed in our model since the treatment with paclitaxel plus APE reduced the expression of both mentioned proteins.
However, this is only an assumption given the impossibility of conducting new experiments in the context of the current COVID-19 pandemia and the strict quarantine decreed by the Argentine government and the lack of an activity restart date. 
Paragraphs were modified for a better understanding of the results:
In Discussion and Conclusions:
• We removed ”possible”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 526.
• We added “to”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 527.
• We removed “of”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 527.
• We removed “, and whose”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 527.
• We added “. Its expression and/or activity”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 528.
• We removed “is related to the increment in proliferation and invasion, and”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 528-529.
• We added “Several authors consider that the sole up-regulation of EGFR expression is a bad prognosis marker and an indicator of chemoresistance in TNBC patients or cell lines [39-41].”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 529-531.
• We added “Although we only evaluated a down-regulation in the expression of EGFR due to drug treatment, more experiments could be useful to evaluate its activity in our system.”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 536-538.
• We removed “Considering the link previously stated between ABC transporters´ expression and EGFR in glioblastomas, EGFR should be considered when designing a treatment for TN tumors in breast cancer patients.”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 538-540.
In References:
• We removed the reference “Xu R, Shang C, Zhao J, Han Y, Liu J, Chen K, et al. Activation of M3 muscarinic receptor by acetylcholine promotes non-small cell lung cancer cell proliferation and invasion via EGFR/PI3K/AKT pathway. Tumor Biol. 2015; 36:4091-4100.”. References. Lines 691-693.
• We added the reference “Cristofaro I, Alessandrini F, Spinello Z, Guerriero C, Fiore M et al. Cross Interaction between M2 Muscarinic Receptor and Notch1/EGFR Pathway in Human Glioblastoma Cancer Stem Cells: Effects on Cell Cycle Progression and Survival. Cells. 2020; doi: 10.3390/cells9030657.”. References. Lines 694-697.
• We added the reference “Li Zhang, Cheng Fang, Xianqun Xu, Anling Li, Qing Cai, Xinghua Long. Androgen receptor, EGFR, and BRCA1 as biomarkers in triple-negative breast cancer: a meta-analysis. Biomed Res Int. 2015; doi: 10.1155/2015/357485.”. References. Lines 698-700.
• We added the reference “Turner T, Alzubi M, Harrell J. Identification of synergistic drug combinations using breast cancer patient-derived xenografts. Sci Rep. 2020; doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-58438-0.”. References. Lines 701-703.
• We added the reference “Islam S, Dasgupta H, Basu M, Roy A, Alam N, Roychoudhury S et al Reduction of nuclear Y654‐p‐β‐catenin expression through SH3GL2‐meditated downregulation of EGFR in chemotolerance TNBC: Clinical and prognostic importance. Cell Physiol. 2020; DOI: 10.1002/jcp.29466.”. References. Lines 704-707.
2.- Additional titrating experiments are needed for APE and methoctramine. 
APE and methoctramine are not absolute muscarinic receptor M2-selective agonist and antagonist. With the concentrations used in the studies, they cannot distinguish which muscarinic receptor subtypes are involved in the effect of muscarinic receptor activation. The author has to either revise the manuscript to remove the description of specific involvement of the M2 receptor or perform additional experiments by titrating the dose of drugs used.
We want to add additional results confirming M2 receptor participation in the effect exerted by APE + PX by silencing M2 receptor subtype with specific si-RNA obtained in Western blot and viability assays. These results show that the action of the combination on cell viability was similarly decreased by silencing the expression of M2 receptor or by pretreating cells with methoctramine, confirming the participation of this receptor subtype. 
Paragraphs were modified for a better understanding of the results:
In Materials and Methods:
• We added the item “M2 muscarinic receptor silencing”. Materials and methods. Lines 133-155.
In Results:
• We added “In addition, we confirmed the participation of M2 receptor by pretreating cells with a specific M2-siRNA that prevented the action of APE plus PX on MDA-MB231 cell viability (Supplementary Fig 1). ”. Results. Lines 333-336.
In Discussion and Conclusions:
• We added “of the combination either”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 509.
• We removed “preferential”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 510.
• We added “or by transfecting cells with a specific M2-siRNA”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 510-511.
In Acknowledgments:
• We added “Dr. Federico Penas for providing NC-siRNA,”. Acknowledgments. Lines 577-578.
In Supporting information:
• We added the item “S1 Fig. Muscarinic subtype 2 receptor expression silencing.”. Supporting information. Lines 726-737.
• We added “S1 Fig”.
3.- Scratch assay is not an invasion assay but a migration assay. Please add the details of how this assay was performed (controls etc.)
How was the wound healing assay performed? Was an inhibitor of cell proliferation included? If not, then the effect of treatment on wound healing may be secondary to its effect on cell proliferation.
In this migration protocol, after adherence, cells were deprived of FBS to synchronized them. Then, the wound in the cell monolayer was done with a 200 µl pipette tip, washed twice with PBS and fresh culture medium without FBS containing different drugs was added.
Starvation conditions and total time for these experiments allowed us to quantify only cell migration, negligible considering cell division, since MDA-MB231 cells doubling time is greater than the time employed in each assay (https://physics.cancer.gov/docs/bioresource/breast/NCI-PBCF-HTB26_MDA-MB-231_SOP-508.pdf). 
Paragraphs were modified for a better understanding of the results:
In Materials and Methods:
• We added “supplemented with 10% FBS.” Materials and methods. Line 199.
• We added “Then, cells were deprived of FBS to synchronized them.”. Materials and methods. Line 200.
• We added “to produce a wound”. Materials and methods. Line 201.
• We added “a”. Materials and methods. Line 201.
• We added “without FBS”. Materials and methods. Line 202.
• We added “The conditions selected, allowed us to quantify cell migration, considering negligible cell division, since MDA-MB231 cell doubling time is longer than total experimental lasting for each assay.”. Materials and methods. Lines 205-207.
4.- Tumor angiogenesis assays were set up inappropriately. Angiogenesis requires the tumor to be formed, which process may take a few weeks in this particular strain. Thus any changes in the vessel density observed within 6 days post injection may reflect the death of the injected cells. Please modify you conclusions appropriately
Although other protocols have been described to determine angiogenesis, the one presented here was specially design to study tumor-induced angiogenesis in vivo by our group in 1996 (Monte et al., Eur J Cancer. 1997 vol 33) . With our methodology the intradermical administration of tumor cells (in the optimal concentration obtained by titration tests) in both flanks of mice allows, after 5 or 6 days of inoculation to determine the number of vessels induced by tumor cells and to discard those induced only by inflammation after injection. Also blind vessels and loops, typical of malignant vascularization can be distinguished and counted in amplified photographs of inoculated sites. In our method, the interactions among tumor, endothelial and other stromal cells can be considered while in other methods it is not possible to consider them simultaneously. 
Our method has been accepted by several reviewers in numerous publications from our lab listed down, including PLOS one in 2013.
-Effect of low dose metronomic therapy on MCF-7 tumor cells growth and angiogenesis. Role of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors.Salem AR, et al., Int Immunopharmacol. 2020 84:106514. 
-Angiogenesis signaling in breast cancer models is induced by hexachlorobenzene and chlorpyrifos, pesticide ligands of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Zárate LV, et al. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2020 15;401.
-Denatonium and Naringenin Promote SCA-9 Tumor Growth and Angiogenesis: Participation of Arginase.Dmytrenko G, et al. Nutr Cancer. 2017;69:780 
-Synthetic stigmasterol derivatives inhibit capillary tube formation, herpetic corneal neovascularization and tumor induced angiogenesis: Antiangiogenic stigmasterol derivatives.
Michelini FM, et al., Steroids. 2016;115:160.
-Hexachlorobenzene promotes angiogenesis in vivo, in a breast cancer model and neovasculogenesis in vitro, in the human microvascular endothelial cell line HMEC-1. Pontillo C, et al. Toxicol Lett. 2015 19;239.
-Autoantibodies against muscarinic receptors in breast cancer: their role in tumor angiogenesis. Lombardi MG, et al. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e57572. 
-A natural antiviral and immunomodulatory compound with antiangiogenic properties. Bueno CA, et al. Microvasc Res. 2012, 84(3):235.
-Role of non-neuronal cholinergic system in breast cancer progression. Español A et al. Life Sci. 2007 ;80: 24.
-Activation of muscarinic cholinergic receptors induces MCF-7 cells proliferation and angiogenesis by stimulating nitric oxide synthase activity. Fiszman GL, et al. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 6:1106.
- Muscarinic receptors autoantibodies purified from mammary adenocarcinoma-bearing mice sera stimulate tumor progression. Fiszman G et al., Int Immunopharmacol . 2006 6:1323.
- Muscarinic receptors are involved in LMM3 tumor cells proliferation and angiogenesis.Rimmaudo LE, et al. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005; 334:1359.
-Muscarinic receptors participation in angiogenic response induced by macrophages from mammary adenocarcinoma-bearing mice.de la Torre E,et al. Breast Cancer Res. 2005;7: R345-52.
-Different mechanisms lead to the angiogenic process induced by three adenocarcinoma cell lines.
Davel LE, Rimmaudo L, Español A, de la Torre E, Jasnis MA, Ribeiro ML, Gotoh T, de Lustig ES, Sales ME.Angiogenesis. 2004;7(1):45.
-Arginine metabolic pathways involved in the modulation of tumor-induced angiogenesis by macrophages.Davel LE, et al., FEBS Lett. 2002;532:216-20. 
-Nitric oxide synthase-cyclooxygenase interactions are involved in tumor cell angiogenesis and migration.Davel L, et al., J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2002 16:181-9.
Paragraphs were modified for a better understanding of the results:
In Materials and Methods:
• We added “These animals are frequently used in xenogeneic assays with human cells. Mice.” Materials and methods. Lines 212-213.
• We removed “present a deprived immune system that allows inoculation and proliferation of human cells. Animals”. Materials and methods. Lines 213-214.
• We added “Briefly”. Materials and methods. Line 223.
• We removed “Concisely”. Materials and methods. Line 223.
• We added “and adjusted to”. Materials and methods. Line 224.
• We removed “form”. Materials and methods. Line 224.
• We added “of cell suspension”. Materials and methods. Line 225.
• We removed “containing 3x105 cells”. Materials and methods. Line 225.
• We added “into the area surrounding the third mammary fat pad in”. Materials and methods. Line 226.
• We removed “female NUDE”. Materials and methods. Line 227.
In Discussion and Conclusions:
• We added “The treatment of tumor cells with the combination of PX plus muscarinic agonists produced a decrement in VEGF-A levels in vitro. We cannot discard that the anti-angiogenic actions observed in vivo could also be due to a decrement in the number of tumor cells, or to a down-regulation of other angiogenic factors produced by tumor cells and/or by stromal cells. More experiments are needed to clarify these aspects in our model.”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 560-565.
5.- The studies appear to be a replicate of the similar studies performed by the same group as noted in ref 16 and 17, except for using different cell lines. What are the new information provided in this manuscript?
Here, we demonstrated for the first time the efficacy of metronomic therapy targeting M2 receptors, with a low dose combination of paclitaxel plus APE. This combination produced a decrement in cell viability concomitantly with a down regulation in ABCG2 and EGFR expression. These results may be encouraging in relation to a decrement in resistance during the treatment of triple negative breast cancer. Moreover we proved for the first time the efficacy of the in vivo administration of the later combination to exert anti-angiogenic actions in a human triple negative breast cancer model. We also extended our observation to the usage of another traditional chemotherapeutic agent as doxorubicin at low doses in the combination. Furthermore, another type of triple negative cell line (MDA-MB468) was successfully treated with the combination obtaining similar effects on cell viability.
6.- Finally, the manuscript has numerous typos and grammatical errors and would benefit significantly from scientific writer editing from a native English speaker.
Corrections of typing and grammatical errors was performed by a native English speaker.
Paragraphs were modified for a better understanding of the results:
In Abstract:
• We removed “(M2)”. Abstract. Line 38.
• We removed “M2”. Abstract. Line 43.
• We added ”subtype 2 muscarinic”. Abstract. Line 43.
In Introduction:
• We removed “yet”. Introduction. Line 47.
• We added ”still”. Introduction. Line 47.
• We added ”acetylcholine”. Introduction. Line 67.
• We removed “acethylcholyne”. Introduction. Line 68.
• We added ” subtype 2 muscarinic (M2)”. Introduction. Line 82.
• We removed “The”. Introduction. Line 85.
• We removed “of low doses”. Introduction. Line 88.
• We removed “and”. Introduction. Line 89.
• We added ”with”. Introduction. Line 89.
• We added ”both at low doses”. Introduction. Line 89.
• We removed “non selective”. Introduction. Line 92.
• We added ”non-selective”. Introduction. Line 93.
• We removed “a”. Introduction. Line 93.
• We added ”an”. Introduction. Line 93.
• We added ”respectively”. Introduction. Line 93.
In Materials and Methods:
• We removed “by”. Materials and methods. Line106.
• We added “from”. Materials and methods. Line106.
• We removed “removed”. Materials and methods. Line110.
• We added “detached ”. Materials and methods. Line110.
• We removed “seen”. Materials and methods. Line128.
• We added “visualized”. Materials and methods. Line128.
• We removed “the”. Materials and methods. Line128.
• We removed “of the bands”. Materials and methods. Line129.
• We added “expressed”. Materials and methods. Line 129.
• We removed” displayed”. Materials and methods. Line129.
• We removed “the”. Materials and methods. Line129.
• We removed “arecaidine propargyl ester (”. Materials and methods. Line166.
• We removed “)”. Materials and methods. Line166.
• We added “during”. Materials and methods. Line 183.
• We removed “for”. Materials and methods. Line 183.
• We added “/each”. Materials and methods. Line 183.
• We removed “with the treatments”. Materials and methods. Line 183.
• We added “three”. Materials and methods. Line 230.
• We removed “3”. Materials and methods. Line 230.
In Results:
• We removed “Because of”. Results. Line 283.
• We added “Due to”. Results. Line 283.
• We added “produced a decrement in cell”. Results. Line 287.
• We removed “decreased”. Results. Line 287.
• We added “, when it was added to”. Results. Line 288.
• We removed “in”. Results. Line 288.
• We removed “method of”. Results. Line 309.
• We added “method”. Results. Line 309.
• We removed “indicate”. Results. Line 310.
• We added “indicated”. Results. Line 310.
• We added “This”. Results. Line 325.
• We removed “The latter”. Results. Line 325
• We added “Considering”. Results. Line 328.
• We removed “Taking into account”. Results. Line 328
• We added “a drug”. Results. Line 350.
• We removed “confirm”. Results. Line 380.
• We added “confirmed”. Results. Line 380.
• We removed “for”. Results. Line 381.
• We added “added in”. Results. Line 381.
• We added “could contribute”. Results. Line 401.
• We removed “contributes”. Results. Line 401.
• We added “exert”. Results. Line 443.
• We removed “exerted”. Results. Line 443.
In Discussion and conclusions:
• We added “long-term”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 481.
• We removed “long term”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 481.
• We added “of”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 482.
• We removed “either”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 482.
• We removed “breast”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 483.
• We added “of breast tumors, in particular TN”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 486-487.
• We removed “breast tumors”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 487.
• We added “but it also produced similar actions on normal”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 491.
• We removed “also that it affects simultaneously non-tumorigenic”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 491-492.
• We added “an undesirable”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 492.
• We removed “side”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 492.
• We added “the administration”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 503.
• We added “than MDA-MB231”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 505.
• We added “preventing”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 509.
• We removed “reversing”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 509.
• We removed “on one hand”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 542.
• We removed “On the other hand”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 543-543.
• We added “In addition”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 545.
• We removed “in MDA-MB231 cells”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 546.
• We removed “In light of this background, it is expected that the combination of drugs designed in this work reduces proliferation and angiogenesis as observed in our results obtained in vitro and in vivo respectively.”. Discussion and conclusions. Lines 548-550.
• We added “and/or migration are the”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 551.
• We removed “is one of the”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 551.
• We added “they are”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 552.
• We removed “it is”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 552.
• We added “a”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 568.
• We added “of”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 571.
• We removed “in drug”. Discussion and conclusions. Line 571.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your new study´s minimal underlying data set.
We attached a new excel file named “S4 minimal data set (S1 Fig)”.
PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported.
We attached a new PDF file named “S3 raw images (S1 Fig)”.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: R2-Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0226450.r005Decision Letter 2
LebedevaIrina V.Academic Editor© 2020 Irina V. Lebedeva2020Irina V. LebedevaThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
19 Aug 2020

The metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triple negative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype
PONE-D-19-32678R2
Dear Dr. Español,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Irina V. Lebedeva, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #4: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments are addressed properly in the manuscript entitled "The metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triplenegative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype"
Reviewer #3: The author has largely addressed the reviewers' comments. The M2 silencing studies provided strong evidence for the involvement of this receptor in enhancing the activity of paclitaxel.
Reviewer #4: The authors have addressed all comments appropriately, and no significant concerns remain. Would recommend publication.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0226450.r006Acceptance letter
LebedevaIrina V.Academic Editor© 2020 Irina V. Lebedeva2020Irina V. LebedevaThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
25 Aug 2020

PONE-D-19-32678R2 
The metronomic combination of paclitaxel with cholinergic agonists inhibits triple negative breast tumor progression. Participation of M2 receptor subtype. 
Dear Dr. Español:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Irina V. Lebedeva 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE