Cell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC7213061PMC7213061.172130617213061NIHMS15849543229445110.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.077NIHMS1584954NIHPA15849541ArticleDistinct Roles for Rac1 in Sertoli Cell Function during Testicular Development and Spermatogenesis
HeinrichAnna PotterSarah J. GuoLi RatnerNancy DeFalcoTony 1Division of Reproductive Sciences, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA2Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA3Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA4Lead ContactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, A.H., S.J.P., N.R., and T.D.; Methodology, A.H., S.J.P., and T.D.; Investigation, A.H., S.J.P., L.G., and T.D.; Resources, N.R.; Writing – Original Draft, A.H. and T.D.; Writing – Review & Editing, A.H., S.J.P., N.R., and T.D.; Supervision, T.D.; Project Administration, T.D.; Funding Acquisition, T.D.
*Correspondence: tony.defalco@cchmc.org144202031235740410751310751315042020110520201105202016062024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
Sertoli cells are supporting cells of the testicular seminiferous tubules, which provide a nurturing environment for spermatogenesis. Adult Sertoli cells are polarized so that they can simultaneously support earlier-stage spermatogenic cells (e.g., spermatogonia) basally and later-stage cells (e.g., spermatids) apically. To test the consequences of disrupting cell polarity in Sertoli cells, we perform a Sertoli-specific conditional deletion of Rac1, which encodes a Rho GTPase required for apicobasal cell polarity. Rac1 conditional knockout adults exhibit spermatogenic arrest at the round spermatid stage, with severe disruption of Sertoli cell polarity, and show increased germline and Sertoli cell apoptosis. Thus, Sertoli Rac1 function is critical for the progression of spermatogenesis but, surprisingly, is dispensable for fetal testicular development, adult maintenance of undifferentiated spermatogonia, and meiotic entry. Our data indicate that Sertoli Rac1 function is required only for certain aspects of spermatogenesis and reveal that there are distinct requirements for cell polarity during cellular differentiation.

## In Brief
Testicular Sertoli cells are polarized supporting cells that simultaneously support germ cells at various stages of differentiation. Heinrich et al. use a Sertoli-specific conditional deletion of Rac1, a Rho GTPase required for apicobasal cell polarity, to reveal the distinct requirements for Sertoli cell polarity during testicular differentiation and function.

## Graphical Abstract
 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Sertoli cells are supporting cells that intimately communicate with the male germline and nurture its development from prospermatogonia into sperm. Sertoli cells are the first sex-specific cell type detected in the fetal testis and express sex determination genes such as Sry and Sox9, which drive bipotential gonadal somatic cells toward the Sertoli pathway ( ). Sertoli cells and germ cells in utero form testis cords, which are tubule-like structures that hollow out at approximately postnatal day 14 (P14) to form the seminiferous tubules, the sites of spermatogenesis that represent the functional units of the mammalian testis ( ).
At different stages of life, Sertoli cells have unique properties that enable them to perform various functions. During fetal stages into the first 2 weeks of postnatal life in mice, Sertoli cells actively divide and increase in number ( ; ), so that they can establish niches for spermatogonial stem and progenitor cells. By 2 weeks of age, Sertoli cells enter into mitotic arrest and exit the cell cycle, and do not re-enter active cell cycle in adulthood. Upon maturation under the influence of hormones such as testosterone, insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and others, Sertoli cells undergo a number of changes, including downregulation of the SOX9 target gene Amh, upregulation of the transcription factor GATA1, and nuclear translocation of the androgen receptor (AR) ( ). In addition, Sertoli cells form the blood-testis barrier (BTB), which is a series of tight junctions that physically sequester meiotic and post-meiotic germ cells within the luminal compartment of the tubule. Given that neo-antigens from meiotic and post-meiotic cells likely arise after the establishment of tolerance, a functional BTB is required to prevent deleterious immune infiltrate into the seminiferous tubules. The BTB is also called the basal ectoplasmic specialization (ES), which is a unique Sertoli-Sertoli structure, separate from the apical ES, which is a Sertoli cell-germ cell F-actin cytoskeletal structure that ensures the proper attachment and alignment of developing spermatids to the Sertoli cell before spermiation ( ; ).
Spermatogenesis is a series of proliferative and differentiating steps that lead to the formation of spermatozoa from a germline stem cell population called spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) or, more broadly, as a stem-progenitor population called undifferentiated spermatogonia ( ). Under the influence of glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) secreted from Sertoli and peritubular myoid cells ( , ; ), SSCs are maintained in the basal-most compartment of the seminiferous tubule, where they transition into transit-amplifying undifferentiated spermatogonia, and then, under the influence of retinoic acid (RA), into differentiating spermatogonia. Later, also in response to RA, they subsequently progress into preleptotene spermatocytes, at which point they transit across the BTB into the adluminal compartment of the tubule. The adluminal compartment contains all of the spermatocyte populations, in addition to round, elongating, and condensing spermatids just before spermiation and release from Sertoli cells as testicular spermatozoa (reviewed in ; ).
Each Sertoli cell can support a species-specific, limited number of germ cells, ranging from 11 in humans to 35 in mice (reviewed in ). The maximum capacity of spermatogenesis and the number of SSC niches within the testis is largely dictated by the number of Sertoli cells, as has been demonstrated in rodent models of hypothyroidism that increase Sertoli cell number ( ; ; ). Each Sertoli cell simultaneously interacts with undifferentiated spermatogonia, differentiating spermatogonia, meiotic spermatocytes, and post-meiotic spermatids in the mammalian testis, which requires extensive apicobasal polarity. Sertoli cell polarity is evident by the specific localization of tight-junction components in the BTB, as well as the specific apical or basal compartmental localization of at least 3 separate polarity protein complexes: the PAR3/PAR6/aPKC complex, the Crumbs/PATJ/PALS1 complex, and the Scribble (SCRIB)/DLG/LGL complex ( ; ; ). Activity of the PAR3 and Crumbs complexes promotes BTB function, while activity of the SCRIB complex is upregulated upon disassembly of the BTB during stages VII–VIII, when germ cells transit through the BTB upon entry into meiosis ( ). Therefore, the localization and function of these three polarity complexes are critical for Sertoli cell apicobasal polarity and the progression of spermatogenesis ( ; ; ).
Another family of proteins that is linked to cell polarity are the Rho GTPases, which have a functionally diverse repertoire of potential cellular functions, including regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, cell movement, cell adhesion, cell division, cell death or survival, and membrane trafficking ( ). One of the most well-known members of this family is RAC1. Rac1 has a broad range of roles in development and disease, but little is known about the specific function of Rac1 in reproduction. Rac1 is required in SSCs to transmigrate the BTB during testicular germline transplantation, but is also expressed in adult Sertoli cells ( ). Recently, a study of a Sertoli cell-specific conditional deletion of Raptor, an essential component of the mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway, proposed that RAC1 acts downstream of mTORC1 to establish Sertoli cell cytoarchitecture ( ). However, specific roles for Rac1 in spermatogenesis are not well defined; additionally, the idea that cell polarity is required for spermatogenesis is generally well appreciated, but the timing of its action developmentally is not well understood.
In this study, we show that Rac1 function in Sertoli cells has specific and distinct roles in spermatogenesis. Rac1-deficient Sertoli cells can proliferate in the fetal testis and are present in the fetal and postnatal testis, but in adults show severe defects in cell polarity, as manifested by mislocalization of polarity protein complexes and disruption of the BTB. Sertoli Rac1 function is, surprisingly, not required for the maintenance of undifferentiated spermatogonia in the adult testis nor for germ cell entry into meiosis. In addition, Rac1 function in Sertoli cells is dispensable for fetal testicular differentiation, suggesting that Sertoli Rac1 is not absolutely required for early somatic and germline differentiation in the testis or for early stages of steady-state spermatogenesis. Rac1 is, in contrast, required for the progression of spermatogenesis past the round spermatid stage, likely due to polarity defects in Sertoli cells. Overall, these findings suggest that Rac1 has differential functions in Sertoli cells and also indicate that Sertoli cell polarity is dispensable for certain aspects of spermatogenesis and testicular function.

## RESULTS

## Dhh-Cre Is Highly Specific and Efficient at Targeting Sertoli Cells Starting at the Onset of Testicular Differentiation
We and others have shown, through cell-type-specific transcriptomic analyses ( ) ( ) and single-cell RNA sequencing ( ) of fetal testicular cells, that Rac1 is expressed in Sertoli cells throughout all stages analyzed (embryonic day [E]11.5–E16.5); additionally, a study demonstrated that RAC1 is expressed in adult Sertoli cells ( ). Therefore, Rac1 may function in Sertoli cells at any point between fetal testis differentiation and adulthood. To target Rac1 specifically within Sertoli cells, we used a Cre line driven by Dhh (Dhh-Cre), which is active in Sertoli cells starting early in testicular differentiation ( ). Using a Cre-responsive Rosa-tdTomato reporter mouse line, we confirmed that Dhh-Cre is active starting by at least E12.5, immediately after testis differentiation has begun, specifically in SOX9+ Sertoli cells ( ). In addition, we lineage traced Dhh-Cre-expressing cells into adulthood (3 months of age) and determined that Cre activity is almost 100% efficient in Sertoli cells, with no activity observed in germ cells or interstitial cells ( – ).

## Rac1 Function Is Required for Sertoli Cell Development in the Adult Testis
In 3-month-old adult Dhh-Cre;Rac1flox/flox conditional knockout (cKO) males, we observed that testicular development was severely disrupted: cKO testis weight was significantly reduced (85% reduction) relative to control littermates, the tubule cross-sectional area was reduced by 75%, and there were approximately 25% fewer SOX9+ Sertoli cells per tubule ( , , and – ). Consistent with decreased tubule contribution to the testis, we observed a greater proportion of interstitial tissue, which contained Leydig cells, peritubular myoid cells, and vasculature, in testicular cross-sections of cKO testes as compared to controls at various postnatal and adult stages ( – , and – ). In particular, quantification revealed a significant increase in the number of Leydig cells relative to seminiferous tubules in cKO testes ( ).
To determine whether there were any defects in Sertoli cell differentiation in Rac1 cKO testes, we examined the expression of several Sertoli-specific markers. We found that the Sertoli cell maturation marker GATA1 was expressed in cKO Sertoli cells, although GATA1 was expressed in all of the tubules within the cKO testis, as opposed to expression in a subset of tubules in control testes ( and ), which is regulated by feedback from differentiated germ cells in various stages of spermatogenesis ( ). While anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), which is normally downregulated in the mature testis, was not ectopically expressed ( and ), we observed strong expression of GDNF, which is required for the maintenance of SSCs ( and ). Quantitative real-time PCR did not indicate any increase in Gdnf mRNA levels relative to control testes ( ), suggesting that strong GDNF staining was likely because of denser Sertoli cell cytoplasm in cKO tubules due to a reduced number of germ cells ( and ). In addition, we saw that AR, which is nuclear localized within Sertoli cells in control testes, was localized diffusely throughout the entire Sertoli cell within cKO testes ( and ), indicating some defects in Sertoli cell development or function. Initial quantitative real-time PCR analyses suggested that Sox9 and Ar expression were upregulated ( ), which was probably due to an increase in the relative proportion of Sertoli cells relative to other cells in cKO testes after a loss in germ cells; however, when normalized to Sox9 expression to account for changes in Sertoli cell contribution to the total testis due to the loss of germ cells, there was no significant Ar upregulation ( ).

## Rac1 Is Not Required for the Onset of Quiescence in Postnatal Sertoli Cells
As Rac1 has been proposed to promote cell-cycle progression and cell division ( ; ), we examined whether Sertoli cells in Rac1 cKO adults showed altered cell-cycle status. In 3-month-old cKO testes, we saw that Sertoli cells were consistently MKI67−, similar to control littermate testes ( and ). We also observed that germ cells remained in active cell cycle in cKO testes, similar to controls ( and ). Since Sertoli cells normally enter cell-cycle quiescence at around 2 weeks of age, we also assessed whether there was a change in the timing of quiescence in postnatal cKO males. cKO testes at both P18 and P24 appeared similar to controls, in which all Sertoli cells were MI67− ( – ), suggesting that the onset of quiescence occurred at the proper timing in cKO Sertoli cells.

## Rac1 Conditional Deletion Leads to Increased Cell Death in the Testis
To assess whether there was increased apoptosis in cKO testes, we examined the levels of cleaved caspase 3. While there were few apoptotic cells in control testes, there was increased cell death in the testes of cKO mice ( – ). Co-stains with Sertoli and germ cell markers suggested that increased cell death in cKO testes was occurring slightly more often in Sertoli cells, as compared to germ cells ( – ). While apoptotic germ (TRA98+) cells occurred regularly in cKO testes, It was difficult to detect apoptotic cells expressing either GATA1 or GATA4 (i.e., Sertoli cells), possibly due to rapid protein degradation during apoptosis in Sertoli cells; while this protein degradation precluded the ability to assess the rate of Sertoli cell apoptosis definitvely, it is likely that there was significant apoptosis of Sertoli cells in cKO testes.

## Rac1 Function Is Required for the Progression of Adult Spermatogenesis
To determine whether germ cell death was due to a failure to differentiate, we assessed spermatogenesis in adult Dhh-Cre; Rac1flox/flox cKO males, and observed severe defects. At 3 months of age, there was a dramatic reduction in germ cell number, with 20% of tubules being Sertoli-cell-only tubules in cKO testes (n = 3 independent males, 25 tubules each) and other tubules with a severe reduction in germ cell number (see and quantification in ). To address how the loss of Sertoli Rac1 influenced germ cell development, we examined spermatogenic cell types in cKO testes. Undifferentiated spermatogonia, as labeled by GFRA1 and ZBTB16 (also known as PLZF), were observed in cKO testes ( – ). GFRA1+ cells were present at slightly higher numbers in cKO tubules that contained GFRA1+ cells ( ), and were always observed in their normal basal location ( and ).
To determine whether undifferentiated spermatogonia could transition into A1 differentiating spermatogonia, we used the marker STRA8, which turns on at lower levels starting in differentiating spermatogonia ( ), and co-expresses along with low levels of ZBTB16 ( – ). STRA8 was present at higher levels in preleptotene spermatocytes, and STRA8-bright cells were found in a subset of tubules in cKO testes as in control testes ( – ). Quantification of STRA8+ cells in adult (P90) testes revealed a similar percentage of tubules with STRA8+ cells in cKO testes (19.0% ± 7.1% tubules in controls versus 29.5% ± 11.5% tubules in cKO testes; n = 3 independent males, 35 tubules each; p = 0.253).
We next examined γH2AX (official name: H2AFX), which is expressed diffusely in leptotene spermatocytes and gradually becomes restricted and enriched in the XY sex body by pachytene stages, as well as H1T (official name: HIST1H1T), a testis-specific linker histone that appears during pachytene stages and is maintained through round spermatid stages. We observed both γH2AX+ cells and H1T+ cells throughout adult cKO testes ( – ), and found that γH2AX was enriched in the XY sex body of spermatocytes ( ). Nuclear morphology and H1T expression also revealed that round spermatids were regularly found in cKO testes ( ). However, elongating and condensing spermatids (as determined by nuclear morphology) were never observed in the tubules of cKO mice. Quantitative real-time PCR analyses revealed that germ cell gene expression was significantly decreased in cKO testes ( ), as mRNA levels were reduced for genes expressed in undifferentiated spermatogonia (Pou5f1 [also known as Oct4], Gfra1, and Id4), differentiating spermatogonia, and preleptotene spermatocytes (Stra8 and Ddx4 [also known as Mvh]), and later spermatocyte stages (Ddx4).

## Rac1 cKO Males Exhibit Disruptions in FSHand Inhibin B Hormone Production
We next determined whether disruptions in spermatogenesis or Sertoli cell function were due to or resulted in defects in hormone production ( ). We found no change in protein or mRNA levels of steroidogenic enzymes such as Cyp11a1 and Cyp17a1 at P7, but there was increased Cyp11a1 expression at P90 in cKO testes, likely due to an increased relative proportion of Leydig cells in adult cKO testes (as mentioned above). We also measured levels of testosterone (T), luteinizing hormone (LH), and FSH in 3- to 4-month-old cKO mice; however, we did not observe any significant changes in the levels of these hormones at this age ( ).
While we saw no statistically significant differences in T, LH, and FSH levels at 3–4 months, there were some disruptions in 6- to 7-month-old testes. We saw a slight, statistically significant decrease in T levels (∼30% reduction) at 6–7 months of age, but there was no change in testicular or serum LH levels at 6–7 months, suggesting that there was minimal, if any, disruption in systemic T signaling. In contrast, we saw a significant, more severe (∼65%–70%) reduction in FSH levels at 6–7 months in cKO testes. Finally, we measured the levels of the Sertoli-produced hormone inhibin B and found that serum levels were significantly reduced at both 3–4 months (∼80%–85% reduction) and 6–7 months (∼85%–90% reduction) in cKO males ( ).
We also assessed the expression of other Sertoli-expressed paracrine signaling factors and nuclear factors in cKO testes via quantitative real-time PCR analyses. In P90 cKO testes, we found that Sox9 and Ar were upregulated, while Inhbb, Dhh, Gdnf, Fshr, Pdgfa, and Gata1 expression were unaffected ( ). However, after normalization to Sox9 to account for changes in Sertoli cell contributions to the testis after germ cell loss, we found that the expression of Inhbb, Dhh, Gdnf, Fshr, Pdgfa, and Gata1 were reduced to 10%–25% of control levels ( ).

## Rac1 Function Is Required for Apicobasal Polarity of Sertoli Cells
We next sought to determine the effects of Rac1 deletion on Sertoli cell polarity, one aspect of which is nuclear localization within the cell. Unlike the consistent basal localization seen in control Sertoli cells, cKO Sertoli cell nuclei (SOX9+/GATA1+) were found in the centers of >60% of the seminiferous tubules, ranging from lone nuclei to intratubular clusters of 10–20 nuclei ( and ; see also , , , , and ). Another Sertoli-expressed protein, vimentin, is normally localized in the cytoplasm basally near the nucleus, but it was ectopically localized throughout the entire Sertoli cell in cKO testes ( and ; see also and ). A component of the basal polarity protein complex, SCRIB, was expressed in the basal domain of the Sertoli cell near to and along the BTB in control testes. SCRIB localization was not altered in cKO testes ( and ). As an additional marker of the BTB and to highlight the basal and apical ES, we used phalloidin to label F-actin. F-actin localization in cKO testes was severely disrupted, with phalloidin brightly staining throughout the entire tubule, as opposed to the specific ES and BTB staining in control tubules ( , , and – ). Two additional markers of the BTB, CTNNB1 (β-catenin) and CLDN11 (Claudin 11) were dramatically mislocalized within cKO Sertoli cells, as they were expressed throughout the cells ( and ). Finally, two apical markers of Sertoli cells, PARD3 (Par3) and ITGB1 (β1-integrin), were disrupted in cKO Sertoli cells and were mislocalized diffusely throughout the cell ( – ).
To determine whether the disruption of polarity proteins in cKO testes resulted in a functionally compromised BTB, we tested barrier function via a biotin tracer assay, in which a large-molecular-weight tracer was injected into the interstitium of the testis. At P30, at which point BTB integrity should be well established, we observed the biotin tracer in control testes only within the interstitial compartment and in the basal-most layer of spermatogenic cells (i.e., spermatogonia) in certain tubules ( ). However, in cKO testes, we observed widespread tracer penetration into the center of tubules ( ), indicating that the BTB was functionally disrupted.
To assess whether any of the observed changes in cKO Sertoli cells were merely due to the loss of germ cells, we examined a number of Sertoli and polarity markers in two mouse models of germ cell deficiency, Dnd1Ter/Ter and KitW/KitW-v. On a C57BL/6J background, Dnd1Ter/Ter mutant mice exhibit a complete loss of germ cells, with no teratoma formation, while KitW/KitW-v mutants possess a reduced number of undifferentiated spermatogonia, but no differentiated germ cells. Sertoli cell phenotypes in both germ cell-deficient models were similar: the BTB marker CLDN11 and the basal marker SCRIB were normally localized, but the BTB marker CTNNB1 and the apical marker PARD3 were mislocalized throughout the entire Sertoli cell ( ). However, we saw that GATA1+ Sertoli cell nuclei were in their normal basal location and that AR protein was largely localized to the Sertoli cell nucleus, although not as strongly as in control testes ( ). These findings suggest that most Sertoli defects in Rac1 cKO testes cannot be attributed solely to a loss of germ cells.

## Rac1 Sertoli Function Is Not Required for the Maintenance of Undifferentiated Spermatogonia
To determine whether SSCs or transit-amplifying undifferentiated spermatogonia were maintained by Rac1 cKO Sertoli cells, we examined 7-month-old cKO testes, as by this point, defective SSCs or progenitors would lead to a loss in steady-state spermatogenesis; for example, Zbtb16 mutant (Plzf mutant) testes, which have defects in SSC maintenance and proliferation of transit-amplifying progenitors, show a severe loss in germ cells more clearly at 6 months of age as compared to younger mice ( ; ). We observed that TRA98+ germ cells were still present in 7-month-old Rac1 cKO testes ( and ). We specifically examined undifferentiated spermatogonia and regularly observed these cells in cKO testes, comparably to controls and in the normal basal position within cKO tubules ( – ). We also examined markers of differentiating spermatogonia (KIT and STRA8) and spermatocytes (STRA8 and DDX4) and found these germ cell types in cKO testes, although as expected, in fewer numbers relative to controls ( – ). Finally, H1T staining revealed cells only up to the round spermatid stage in cKO testes ( and ), similar to what we observed at 3 months of age.

## Germ Cell and Sertoli Cell Death in cKO Testes Precedes BTB Disruption
We next investigated when defects in testicular development began in cKO testes. We examined testes at P24, a stage at which the BTB has been established for at least 1 week and meiotic cells are widespread in the seminiferous epithelium. We observed occasional patches of germ cell loss already in P24 cKO testes ( and ), which resulted in the vacuolization of Sertoli cells within tubules and a 40% reduction in tubule cross-sectional area ( ). cKO testes at this stage already exhibited a reduction in the number of Sertoli cells per tubule ( ) and a large increase in the number of tubules with Sertoli cell nuclei mislocalized to the lumen ( ). However, we did not observe any reduction in the percentage of tubules containing GFRA1-expressing spermatogonia in cKO testes (30.7% ± 10.1% tubules in controls versus 41.3% ± 6.1% tubules in cKO testes; n = 3 independent males, 25 tubules each; p = 0.192), and saw a slight increase in the number of GFRA1+ cells per tubule within those tubules in cKO testes ( ).
As for Sertoli cells, AR protein in P24 cKO Sertoli cells was localized throughout the entire cell, unlike the nuclear localization observed in control testes ( and ). Examination of AMH expression revealed similar levels of expression in cKO and control testes ( and ). There were common irregularities of the BTB in cKO testes, such as aggregates of CLDN11 in the center of the tubule ( and ), suggesting that the BTB structure is already disrupted in P24 cKO testes. Roughly 40% of tubules in cKO testes contained cleaved caspase 3+ cells ( ); cell death appeared to occur less frequently in germ cells than in somatic cells ( ), suggesting that Sertoli cells likely make up the majority of apoptotic cells in P24 cKO testes.
We next looked at an earlier postnatal stage, P7, to assess whether there were any earlier defects in Rac1 cKO testes. The tubule area was unchanged between control and cKO testes, and we did not see any overt disruptions in spermatogenesis, as there were no reductions in germ cell number, protein expression, or mRNA levels (in either undifferentiated or differentiating spermatogonia) ( – , and – ). However, we did observe a decrease in AMH and GATA1 protein expression in Sertoli cells via immunofluorescence (although quantitative real-time PCR did not reveal any significant change in Amh or Gata1 mRNA levels), in addition to a 25% reduction in the number of SOX9+ Sertoli cells ( – , , and ). This reduction in Sertoli cell number could be due to an increase in cell death, as seen by GATA4+ cells expressing cleaved caspase 3 ( – ); consistent with this finding, quantifications indicated that most of the apoptotic cells in tubules were TRA98− ( ). Despite being the minority of apoptotic cells, germ cells were also undergoing cell death at an increased rate in cKO testes ( , , and ); however, we did not see any decreases in DDX4+ germ cell number at this stage ( ). We also observed that the radial migration of germ cells to the basement membrane was normal in cKO tubules ( – ), and we saw a slight increase in the number of GFRA1+ cells per tubule ( ). Consistent with these results, cell-cycle status (as visualized by MKI67 expression) was normal in both germ and Sertoli cells in cKO testes as compared to controls ( and ).

## Immune Cells Infiltrate into Postnatal cKO Tubules
One potential consequence of disrupted Sertoli cell barrier function is the increased infiltration of immune cells into the testis and, in particular, into the interior of seminiferous tubules. We observed in adult cKO testes that there was a significant increase in CD45+ cells, mostly AIF1+ (IBA1+) macrophages ( – ). However, in cKO testes, there was also an increase in CD45-bright cells, which were CD4+ T cells ( and ), and were rarely observed in control testes. We also observed an increase in immune cell infiltration into cKO tubules at P7 and P24 ( – ), although at P7, there was no observable difference in total CD45+ immune cell numbers ( and ). Quantification revealed that immune cells were never found inside the tubules of control testes at P7, P24, and P90, but they were observed in 11%, 18%, and 26% of tubules in cKO tubules at those stages, respectively ( ). When macrophages were inside tubules, they were rounder and larger than interstitial macrophages and were often observed engulfing both germ and Sertoli cells ( ).

## Apicobasal Cell Polarity Is Not Yet Fully Established in the Fetal Testis
While previous studies showed that certain markers of adult Sertoli polarity, such as CTNNB1, are expressed in Sertoli cells in late fetal stages ( ), it is not clear whether polarity proteins have specific subcellular localization in the fetal testis. We examined markers of cell polarity in the fetal testis and saw that a subset of apicobasal polarity genes, such as Rac1, Pard3 (Par3), Scrib (Scribble), and Pard6a (Par6), were either expressed in the fetal testis ubiquitously (i.e., not specifically in Sertoli cells) or not at all ( , and – ), unlike other well-characterized Sertoli-specific genes (e.g., Dhh; see ). At the protein level, cell polarity complex proteins such as PARD3 and SCRIB were not localized apicobasally in fetal Sertoli cells at either early (E13.5) or late (E18.5) fetal stages of testis differentiation, and instead, were localized throughout the entire Sertoli cell ( – ). Therefore, it seems that cell polarity complexes are not yet specifically localized in fetal Sertoli cells.

## Rac1 Sertoli Function Is Dispensable for Fetal Testis Differentiation
To determine whether Sertoli Rac1 function is required for fetal testis differentiation, we examined several parameters of Sertoli and germ cells in E18.5 control and cKO fetal testes. We saw that cKO tubules had a similar size, structure, and number of SOX9+ Sertoli cells per tubule as compared to controls ( , , and ). Leydig cell development and male-specific vascularization of the testis, which are driven indirectly by Sertoli cells, were also normal in cKO testes ( and ). We did see a significant increase in the amount of cell death in cKO testes, which quantifications revealed occurred almost exclusively in Sertoli cells ( , , and ); however, this increase in cell death did not appear to affect testicular development. In cKO testes, germ cells were in cell-cycle arrest (as evidenced by MKI67 immunonegativity), similar to control germ cells, and cKO Sertoli cells maintained active cell-cycle status (MKI67 immunopositivity) and strong AMH expression, similar to controls ( – ). We also saw that the expression of CTNNB1 in tubules was similar between cKO and control testes ( and ). We observed CD45+ immune cells within tubules in cKO testes more often than controls ( and ), likely due to an increase in cell death in tubules; however, this difference was not statistically significant ( ), as a small percentage of control tubules also contained immune cells at E18.5. Furthermore, there did not appear to be an overall increase in the number of CD45+ immune cells in fetal cKO testes ( and ). Overall, we found that Sertoli Rac1 function was dispensable for fetal aspects of testicular and germ cell development.

## DISCUSSION
In this study, we definitively demonstrate that Sertoli cells require Rac1 function for the normal progression of spermatogenesis to occur, which we propose is due to the role of Rac1 in establishing apicobasal polarity. By conditionally deleting Rac1 in Sertoli cells, we aimed to address the importance of apicobasal cell polarity at distinct stages of testicular development and spermatogenesis. Consistent with previously characterized roles for Rac1 in cell polarity in other contexts, the disruption of Sertoli Rac1 expression had a significant impact on testicular structure and function in adult stages. The most apparent was the dramatic decrease in testis weight and seminiferous tubule size due to the decreased number of germ cells, along with a decrease in the number of Sertoli cells. Germ cells were still present in cKO animals, in particular, undifferentiated spermatogonia, but their overall numbers were diminished. Specifically, there were no elongating spermatids or later spermatogenic stages in cKO testes, demonstrating that complete spermatogenic arrest occurred at the round spermatid stage. Consequently, adult cKO males were azoospermic. Overall, our data show that although Rac1 function in adult Sertoli cells is required for later stages of spermatogenesis and spermiogenesis, it is dispensable for the establishment and maintenance of undifferentiated spermatogonia and for fetal testis differentiation.
The proteins responsible for BTB structure and apicobasal polarity were examined in cKO testes, and we found that while virtually all of the apical proteins observed were significantly mislocalized, SCRIB, a basally located complex, retained normal localization. The disruption of these apical polarity complex proteins, along with the disperse localization of F-actin, could serve as explanation for the loss of the elongating spermatids observed in cKO testes, since the cellular architecture may be compromised and unable to sustain and tether germ cells to the seminiferous epithelium. Alternatively, these proteins are normally present in structures associated with elongating and condensing spermatids that are never observed in cKO testes, and therefore, mislocalization of these proteins may be a secondary effect caused by the absence of late-stage spermatid populations. However, the intact localization of SCRIB suggests Rac1 is at least dispensable for its expression and localization, but it is necessary for the regulation of other major polarity complexes. This finding suggests that the basal compartment of the Sertoli cell retained some identity in cKO Sertoli cells and that this residual basal Sertoli identity was sufficient to maintain stem-progenitor spermatogenic cells in cKO testes and localize them to the basement membrane.
While some Sertoli function may remain due to some residual basal identity of cKO Sertoli cells, it is also possible that interstitial cells could compensate for disrupted Sertoli cell function in promoting at least some aspects of spermatogenesis, as interstitial cells of different lineages (e.g., immune cells, vasculature, peritubular cells) have been implicated in testicular differentiation, spermatogenesis, and activity of the SSC niche ( ; ). Cytokines and growth factors such as GDNF ( ; ) secreted by these interstitial cells may work in concert with Sertoli cells and perhaps even compensate when Sertoli cell function is disrupted, in an attempt to maintain spermatogenesis and fertility.
Considering that Rac1 is expressed in Sertoli cells as early as E11.5, we were surprised to observe relatively normal testicular structure and function in fetal and early postnatal cKO testes. At P7, there were some early signs of altered Sertoli cell function (e.g., reduced Sox9 and Ar mRNA levels) and an increase in apoptotic cells, yet overall germ cell numbers, cell-cycle status, and tubule size were not affected. At E18.5, even fewer distinctions were observed between control and cKO testes. These findings are supported by our investigation into the expression of polarity complexes at embryonic time points. While fetal Sertoli cells appear to localize their nuclei and express several polarity complex proteins, these complexes do not demonstrate any specific subcellular localization during fetal stages. Therefore, our studies suggest that Rac1 function and, potentially, apicobasal polarity are largely inconsequential during fetal stages. It is possible that the loss of polarity only begins to affect testicular development during the postnatal stages, when polarity is more critically required to accommodate the simultaneous presence of early- and late-stage spermatogenic cells. Our findings in P24 and P30 cKO testes support this idea, as we observed significant germ cell loss and tubule vacuolization, in addition to disruptions of nuclear AR localization and functional disruption of the BTB, at those stages.
In addition to cell polarity, it is equally important to discuss other aspects of Sertoli cell function in cKO testes. The disruption of Sertoli cell number, gene expression, or hormone production could contribute to some aspects of the disrupted testicular development and spermatogenic arrest that are observed in cKO animals. For example, non-nuclear localization of AR has been associated with the increased apoptosis of germ cells ( ). Our data suggest that androgen signaling is only partly disrupted due to aberrant AR subcellular localization in Rac1 cKO testes, since Sertoli-specific Ar knockout (SCARKO) mice cannot complete meiosis ( ; ), but Rac1 cKO testes can produce postmeiotic round spermatids. While our data did not indicate any major defects in the T-LH signaling axis, there were large reductions in FSH and inhibin B levels. It is possible that these defects are symptoms, rather than causes, of testicular defects seen in cKO testes, since Fshb-deficient or Inhbb-deficient males are fertile and have qualitatively normal spermatogenesis ( ; ); however, one caveat is that the reduction of FSH in Fshb-deficient mice does impair the capacity of individual Sertoli cells to support a large number of germ cells ( ). Furthermore, inhibin B levels respond to the presence of different germ cell populations and are sometimes reduced as a consequence, rather than as a cause, of arrested spermatogenesis ( ; ). Therefore, it is unlikely that the early spermatogenic arrest in Rac1 cKO testes is simply due to low levels of FSH or inhibin B; it is likely due to multiple defects in Sertoli cell function, initiated by defective cell polarity and cytoarchitecture downstream of Rac1 deletion, which inhibit the completion of spermatogenesis. We additionally found that levels of several paracrine signaling factors were reduced in cKO testes, such as Dhh, Gdnf, and Pdgfa; however, given that testis cord morphogenesis, vascularization, Leydig cell differentiation, and SSC maintenance, which are dependent on these factors, were grossly normal, it is unlikely that any potential disruption of these paracrine signaling factors had functional consequences with regard to the development of cKO testes.
In our analysis of germ cell-depleted testes of Dnd1Ter/Ter and KitW-Wv males, we determined that certain aspects of Sertoli cells, such as specific subcellular localization of PARD3 and CTNNB1, were disrupted, even though Sertoli cells are ostensibly unaffected, at least directly, by these particular mutations. These findings suggest that adult Sertoli cell function is at least partly regulated by germ cell feedback, similar to GATA1 expression ( ); thus, we cannot conclude that PARD3 and CTNNB1 disruption is solely due to Rac1 deletion. However, most aspects of Sertoli cell polarity were maintained in the absence of germ cells in these two models. Knockdown of individual polarity complexes, possibly with genetic or small interfering RNA (siRNA) experiments, would help uncover mechanisms regulating specific Sertoli cell polarity complexes during spermatogenesis and how germ cells are important for the nucleation of polarity complexes within Sertoli cells.
In terms of potential functions for Rac1 aside from cell polarity, our data did not support a role for Sertoli Rac1 in regulating cell-cycle activity, which has long been proposed as a potential role of Rac1 ( ; ), in Sertoli or germ cells. However, Sertoli cell survival was regulated by Rac1 to some degree, as we saw apoptosis of Sertoli cells beginning in the late fetal stages and continuing into adulthood. Further studies are required to determine whether increased cell death in cKO testes is directly or indirectly linked to disruptions in cell polarity or cytoarchitecture.
Consistent with our observance of the breakdown of the BTB beginning at ∼P24–P30, we frequently noted macrophage infiltration into cKO seminiferous tubules, sometimes even in the process of phagocytosis. Phagocytic action of testicular macrophages is normally observed in the interstitial compartment of wild-type testes, but within the tubule, Sertoli cells perform the phagocytic function of clearing apoptotic germ cells ( ), since macrophages are excluded from the adult tubular compartment due to the functions of BTB and Sertoli cells ( ). Increased apoptosis within cKO testes may provide an explanation for the increased incidence of macrophage infiltration in cKO tubules: the increase in apoptotic cells, along with perturbed Sertoli cell function in cKO testes, may lead to macrophages necessarily or opportunistically taking over a phagocytic role within tubules, even during fetal and early postnatal stages. It is also interesting to note that BTB structure was disrupted in cKO testes and macrophage-infiltrated tubules, but meiotic and post-meiotic germ cells were still present in 3- and 7-month-old cKO testes, suggesting that BTB activity is not solely responsible for establishing an immunosuppressive environment in the testis ( ); perhaps some immunomodulatory function was retained in cKO Sertoli cells.
Overall, our studies have provided insight into the distinct roles of Rac1 within Sertoli cells over the course of testicular differentiation, with a particular focus on the apicobasal polarity of Sertoli cells. While it is assumed that Sertoli cells undergo a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition during fetal development and become polarized, our data indicate that Sertoli cells are not polarized yet at that stage, at least at the cell-intrinsic level. Only when the BTB forms and the Sertoli cell must simultaneously accommodate a wide diversity of germ cell stages does the disruption of cell polarity affect spermatogenesis or testicular function. The regulation of apicobasal polarity by Rac1 appears to play specific roles in the adult testis, in which it is required for latter stages of spermatogenesis, but it is dispensable for most other aspects of spermatogenesis, such as maintenance of undifferentiated spermatogonia, basal localization of spermatogonia, and entry into meiosis. The distinct functions and requirements of Sertoli cell polarity, as well as the complex interactions of Sertoli cells with germ and interstitial cells, will be fruitful areas for future research and will help us understand the underlying mechanisms that drive spermatogenesis and ensure male fertility.

## STAR★METHODS

## LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Tony DeFalco (tony.defalco@cchmc.org).
Key resources including details of key reagents are available in the . This study did not generate any new unique reagents.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

## Mice
All mice used in these experiments were housed in the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center’s animal care facility, in compliance with institutional and National Institutes of Health guidelines. All experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center. Animals were housed in a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle and had access to autoclaved rodent Lab Diet 5010 (Purina, St. Louis, MO, USA) and ultraviolet light-sterilized RO/DI constant circulation water ad libitum. Dhh-Cre (Tg(Dhh-cre)1Mejr) ( ; ) (obtained from Dies Meijer, University of Edinburgh) and Rac1flox (Rac1tm1Djk) ( ) (obtained from Yi Zheng, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center) alleles were maintained on a C57BL/6J background. Dhh-Cre hemizygous;Rac1flox/+ heterozygous males were crossed to homozygous Rac1flox/flox females and their offspring were genotyped and used for analysis. In this study, only male (XY) animals were used due to our focus on testis development. Dhh-Cre;Rac1flox/flox conditional knockout mice begin to exhibit partial hind limb paralysis around 3 weeks but can live a normal lifespan if continuously provided with food on the floor of their cages after weaning ( ). Dhh-Cre was genotyped using primers (5′ to 3′) ACCCTGTTACGTATAGCCGA and CTCCGGTATTGAAACTCCAG, and confirmed via the presence of a 400bp band. The Rac1flox allele was genotyped using primers TCCAATCTGTGCTGCCCATC, GATGCTTCTAGGGGTGAGCC, and CAGAGCTCGAATCCAGAAACTAGTA to determine the presence of Rac1flox (240bp), Rac1KO (170bp), or WT (120bp) alleles. Both Cre-negative; Rac1flox/flox homozygous and Cre-positive; Rac1flox/+ heterozygous littermates were used as controls. Adult KitW/KitW-v compound heterozygous males (WBB6F1/J-KitW/KitW-v/J) were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (stock #100410), on mixed background of WB/ReJ and C57BL/6J. Dnd1Ter mice ( ; ) were obtained from Blanche Capel (Duke University Medical Center); Dnd1Ter mice were originally on a 129T2/SvEmsJ background, but were backcrossed to C57BL/6J for 3 generations to eliminate the occurrence of testicular teratomas while maintaining complete germ cell depletion ( ). Dnd1Ter/Ter homozygous mice were obtained via intercross of Dnd1Ter/+ heterozygous animals and were genotyped using a Custom TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay (Applied Biosystems/Thermo Fisher #4332077). Rosa-tdTomato mice (B6.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm14(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J) were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (stock #007914) and were maintained on a C57BL/6J background. Outbred CD-1 mice (Charles River) were used for E13.5 wild-type analyses. For embryonic/fetal time points, timed matings were arranged, and noon on the day that vaginal plugs were detected was considered E0.5.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Immunofluorescence
Testes were dissected in PBS and fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) with 0.1% Triton X-100. To assist with fixation of adult testes, the capsule was superficially punctured 10–12 times with a 27-gauge needle before fixation; after overnight fixation, testes were cut in half transversely with a fresh razor blade the next morning and placed again in 4% PFA for 2 additional hours to continue fixing. After several washes in PBS + 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBTx), samples were processed through a sucrose:PBS gradient (10%, 15%, 20% sucrose) before an overnight incubation in a 1:1 mixture of 20% sucrose and OCT medium (Sakura) rocking at 4°C. Samples were embedded in OCT medium at −80°C prior to cryosectioning. After cryosectioning at 16–20 μM (depending on age of sample), samples were washed several times in PBTx, then incubated in blocking solution (PBTx + 10% fetal bovine serum [FBS] + 10% bovine serum albumin [BSA]) for 1 hour at room temperature. Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking solution and applied to samples overnight at 4°C. Primary antibodies used were: rabbit anti-ACTA2 (SMA) (Abcam, 1:500); rabbit anti-AIF1 (IBA1) (Wako, 1:1,000); goat anti-AMH (MIS) (Santa Cruz, 1:500); rabbit anti-AR (Santa Cruz, 1:300); rat anti-CD4 (clone RM4–5) (BioLegend, 1:300); rat anti-CD45 (clone 30-F11) (BioLegend, 1:300); goat anti-KIT (C-KIT) (R&D, 1:400); rabbit anti-cleaved Caspase 3 (Asp175) (Cell Signaling, 1:250); rabbit anti-CLDN11 (Thermo Fisher, 1:1,000); goat anti-CTNNB1 (Santa Cruz, 1:400); goat anti-CYP17A1 (Santa Cruz, 1:500); rabbit anti-DDX4 (MVH) (Abcam, 1:1,000); rat anti-GATA1 (clone N6) (Santa Cruz, 1:1,000); goat anti-GATA4 (Santa Cruz, 1:100); rabbit anti-GDNF (Santa Cruz, 1:500); goat anti-GFRA1 (Neuromics, 1:200); rabbit anti-Histone H2A.X, phospho (Ser139) (Millipore, 1:1,000); guinea pig anti-H1T (Mary Ann Handel ( ), 1:2,000); goat anti-ITGB1 (Novus/R&D, 1:500); rat anti-MHC Class II (I-A/I-E) (clone M5/114.15.2) (eBioscience/Thermo Fisher, 1:500); rabbit anti-MKI67 (Ki67) (clone SP6) (GeneTex, 1:300); rabbit anti-PARD3 (Par3) (Novus, 1:100); goat anti-PECAM1 (R&D, 1:300); rat anti-PECAM1 (clone MEC13.3) (BD Biosciences, 1:250); rabbit anti-SCRIB (Santa Cruz, 1:300); rabbit anti-phospho-Scribble (Ser1220) (clone D8A2) (Cell Signaling, 1:500); rabbit anti-SOX9 (Millipore, 1:4,000); rabbit anti-STRA8 (Abcam, 1:3,000); rat anti-TRA98 (clone TRA98) (Abcam, 1:1,000); mouse anti-TUBB3 (clone TUJ1) (BioLegend, 1:1,000); chicken anti-Vimentin (BioLegend, 1:1,000); rat anti-Vimentin (clone W16220A) (BioLegend, 1:1,000); and mouse anti-ZBTB16 (PLZF) (clone 2A9) (Millipore, 1:250). After several washes in PBTx, fluorescent secondary antibodies (Alexa 488-, Alexa-555-, Alexa-647-, or Cy3-conjugated; from Molecular Probes/Thermo Fisher or Jackson Immunoresearch, all at 1:500 dilution) and nuclear dye (2 μg/ml Hoechst 33342, #H1399, Molecular Probes/Life Technologies/Thermo Fisher) were diluted in blocking solution and applied for 1 hour at room temperature. After several washes in PBTx, samples were mounted on slides in Fluoromount-G (SouthernBiotech). Samples were imaged either on a Nikon Eclipse TE2000 microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) with an Opti-Grid structured illumination imaging system using Volocity software (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA) or on a Nikon A1 Inverted Confocal Microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). Unless otherwise noted, at least 3 sections from at least n = 3 independent, individual animals (i.e., n = 3 independent biological replicates) were examined for each time point (i.e., fetal stage or age) and/or experimental condition.

## Cell counts and tubule area quantification
Fiji/ImageJ (NIH) was used to analyze images for both cell counts and tubule area quantifications. For cell counts, the Cell Counter plug-in was used to manually count positive cells per tubule. For measuring tubule cross-sectional areas, the perimeters of individual tubules were outlined using the Polygon Selection tool, and the area in pixels was calculated with the Measure function. Pixel area was then converted to square microns based on the pixel dimensions of each image. For cell counts and tubule quantifications, measurements were taken from at least 3 different cryosections (cross-sections) per testis, from n = 3 testes, each from an independent male. Sample sizes used for each experiment are noted in the corresponding figure legend, but generally were between 10–50 tubules analyzed per testis (30–150 total tubules). Graph results are shown as mean ± SD. Statistical analyses were performed using a two-tailed Student t test, and a P value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted and processed for quantitative real-time PCR. Tissue was homogenized by vortexing in 800 μL TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen/Thermo Fisher). RNA extraction was then performed using a TRIzol/isopropanol precipitation method. Briefly, 200 μL of chloroform was added to the Trizol/tissue mixture, shaken by hand, incubated at room temperature for 3 minutes, and centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The upper aqueous layer was carefully recovered and added to 400 mL isopropanol, which was rocked at room temperature for 10 minutes. After centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C, supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with 500 μL of ethanol. After another centrifugation (with same parameters), the RNA pellet was briefly air-dried and diluted in nuclease-free water. RNA quality was assessed by spectrophotometric analysis via absorbance at 260 and 280 nm, in which only RNA samples with a 260/280 ratio greater than or equal to 1.6 was used for quantitative real-time PCR analysis (sample ratios were usually between 1.7–2.0). An iScript cDNA synthesis kit (BioRad) was used on 500ng of RNA for cDNA synthesis, as per manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using the Fast SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems/Thermo Fisher) on the StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems/Thermo Fisher). The following parameters were used: 95°C for 20 s, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 3 s and 60°C for 30 s, followed by a melt curve run. Primer specificity for a single amplicon was verified by melt curve analysis. Gapdh was used as an internal normalization control. Fold change in mRNA levels was calculated relative to controls using a ΔΔCt method. A two-tailed Student t test was performed to calculate P values, in which p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Sequences of primers used in this study are listed in .

## Hormone measurements
Testosterone (T), luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), and inhibin B measurements were performed by the Ligand Assay and Analysis Core of the University of Virginia Center for Research in Reproduction. For testis homogenate measurements, whole adult testes were mechanically lysed with mortar and pestle in 500 uL PBS, sonicated for 60 s to ensure cell disruption, and centrifuged at 12,000 × g at 4°C for 10 minutes to remove cellular debris. Supernatant was collected and stored at −80°C until analyzed. For serum measurements, whole blood was collected from the posterior vena cava, allowed to clot at room temperature for 90 minutes, after which a sterile pipet tip was run along tube’s interior wall to disrupt adhesion of the clot to the tube wall. Samples were centrifuged at 2,000 × g for 15 minutes at room temperature. After centrifugation, serum was removed and stored at −80°C until analyzed.

## Biotin tracer injections
One-month-old (P30) male mice were anesthetized via inhaled isoflurane before a small incision was made in the lower abdomen, exposing the abdominal cavity. Using forceps to grip the epididymal fat pads, the testis was then gently pulled out of the abdomen. Twenty microliters of either 1mM CaCl2 (in PBS) alone for one testis, or 1mM CaCl2 with 10 mg/mL Biotin (EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin, No-Weigh Format; Thermo Fisher #A39257) for the contralateral experimental testis was injected. Testes were then replaced into the abdominal cavity and the incision closed. Mice were kept under anesthesia via isoflurane for an additional 30 minutes before being euthanized by cervical dislocation. Testes were harvested, fixed, and prepared for cryosectioning and immunofluorescence as described above. To detect biotin binding in testicular cryosections, Alexa Fluor-555-conjugated streptavidin (Thermo Fisher #S21381, 2 μg/ml) was used for 1 hour at room temperature, along with Hoechst 33342 dye to stain nuclei.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical details of experiments, such as the exact value of n, what n represents, precision measures (mean ± SD), and statistical significance can be found in the Figure Legends.
Statistical analysis was performed using Excel (Microsoft). Statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05. For cell counts and tubule area quantifications, a two-tailed Student t test was performed on control versus cKO samples. For quantitative real-time PCR, a two-tailed Student t test was performed based on delta Ct values (normalized to Gapdh) for each gene for control versus cKO samples.

## DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
This study did not generate or analyze any unique datasets or code.

## Supplementary Material
12

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank C. Moon for animal husbandry; B. Capel, D. Meijer, and Y. Zheng for providing mice; and M. Handel for the H1T antibody. We also acknowledge S.K. Dey and S.H. Namekawa for antibodies. We also thank B. Bhandary for helpful discussions, and B. Waller, C. Spinner, and M. White for preliminary experiments. This work was supported by Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center funding and by National Institutes of Health grants R35GM119458 and R01HD094698 to T.D.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.077.
 

## Highlights
Sertoli Rac1 function is required for later stages of spermatogenesis
Rac1-deficient Sertoli cells exhibit severe defects in apicobasal cell polarity
Rac1 is dispensable for testis differentiation and germline stem cell maintenance
Sertoli cells do not yet show hallmarks of complete apicobasal cell polarity