pmcNat Cell BiolNat Cell Biol358wtpa100890575Nature cell biology1465-73921476-4679pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleUKPMC Funders Author ManuscriptsPMC7615745PMC7615745.35876157457615745EMS1407293516541810.1038/s41556-022-00843-wEMS140729WTPA140729WTMS140729UKMS140729358ArticleMitochondrial fission links ECM mechanotransduction to metabolic
redox homeostasis and metastatic chemotherapy resistance
RomaniPatrizia NirchioNunzia ArboitMattia BarbieriVito TosiAnna MichielinFederica ShibuyaSoichi BenoistThomas WuDanchen HindmarchCharles Colin Thomas GiomoMonica UrciuoloAnna GiamoganteFlavia RoveriAntonella ChakravartyProbir MontagnerMarco CalìTito ElvassoreNicola ArcherStephen L. De CoppiPaolo RosatoAntonio MartelloGraziano DupontSirio 
1Department of Molecular Medicine (DMM), University of Padua,
Italy
2Department of Biology (DiBio), University of Padua, Italy
3Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology (DiSCOG),
University of Padua, Italy
4Institute of Child Health, NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Great
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, UCL, London, United Kingdom
5Department of Medicine, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON,
Canada
6Department of Industrial Engineering (DII), University of Padua,
Italy
7Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine (VIMM), Padua, Italy
8Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica (IRP) Città della
Speranza, Padua, Italy
9Department of Biomedical Sciences (DSB), University of Padua,
Italy
10Bioinformatics Platform, The Francis Crick Institute, London,
United Kingdom
11Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology (DiSCOG),
University of Padua, Padua, Italy, and Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS,
Padua, Italy
*corresponding author:
sirio.dupont@unipd.it22022142202224245811116818007012022180320241803202409072026https://www.springernature.com/gp/open-research/policies/accepted-manuscript-termsUsers may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the
content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject
always to the full Conditions of use: https://www.springernature.com/gp/open-research/policies/accepted-manuscript-termsSoftening redox homeostasis in cancer cells
24222022133134Nature cell biology10.1038/s41556-022-00845-8PMC972471235165419Author Correction: Mitochondrial fission links ECM mechanotransduction to metabolic redox homeostasis and metastatic chemotherapy resistance.
372026Nat Cell Biol10.1038/s41556-026-02031-642399457Metastatic breast cancer cells disseminate to organs with a soft
microenvironment. Whether and how local tissue mechanical properties influence
their response to treatment remains unclear. Here we found that a soft ECM
empowers redox homeostasis. Cells cultured on a soft ECM display increased
peri-mitochondrial F-actin promoted by Spire1C and Arp2/3 nucleation factors,
and increased DRP1- and MIEF1/2-dependent mitochondrial fission. Changes in
mitochondrial dynamics lead to increased mtROS production and activate the NRF2
antioxidant transcriptional response, including increased cystine uptake and
glutathione metabolism. This retrograde response endows cells with resistance to
oxidative stress and ROS-dependent chemotherapy drugs. This is relevant in a
mouse model of metastatic breast cancer cells dormant in the lung soft tissue,
where inhibition of DRP1 and NRF2 restored cisplatin sensitivity and prevented
disseminated cancer cell awakening. We propose that targeting this mitochondrial
dynamics- and redox-based mechanotransduction pathway could open avenues to
prevent metastatic relapse.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesThe physical and mechanical properties of the tissue microenvironment, and the
ensuing forces to which cells are subjected, are important clues driving cell behavior.
Among these, extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness is a universal signal that controls
cell proliferation, differentiation, and death. ECM stiffness is an important regulator
of physiological tissue function and contributes to aberrant cell behavior observed in
disease - .
Cells measure ECM stiffness by actively developing myosin-dependent contractile
forces through the actin cytoskeleton and integrin-mediated adhesions. Downstream of
this core system, forces are then translated into biochemical signals to enable a
coherent biological response, including the rapid reinforcement of the actomyosin
cytoskeleton and of focal adhesions, and the regulation of gene expression , .
In cancer, much attention has been devoted to stiffening of the primary tumor
microenvironment, which promotes tumor growth and invasiveness . However, when breast cancer cells
disseminate to distant organs such as the bone marrow, brain, lung and liver they find
themselves in a soft environment, and the consequences of this new mechanical
environment for metastatic growth and therapy are unknown , . Given the
importance of metabolism for cancer therapy, and the recent observation that ECM
mechanical cues regulate metabolism , we explored metabolic traits potentially relevant for therapy and
regulated by ECM mechanical cues.

## Results

## ECM mechanotransduction regulates glutathione metabolism
Metabolic profiling previously indicated that MCF10AneoT human
transformed mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A-RAS) treated with ROCK
(Rho-associated kinase) and MLCK (myosin light chain kinase) inhibitors, which
recapitulates the reduced cell contractility observed on a soft ECM, display
increased lipid synthesis .
In the same dataset we also observed a striking increase in both cystine, the
disulfide form of cysteine that is transported across the plasma membrane, and
of cysteine, occurring as late events ( ). This increase in cysteine was associated with a significant
increase in all the intermediates of the glutathione cycle, where cysteine is
used for glutathione synthesis ( ,
see scheme in ). We
observed increased cystine uptake also in cells treated with the Non-muscle
Myosin Type-2 (NMII) inhibitor Blebbistatin, and in cells cultured on soft or
stiff hydrogels ( and ). Moreover, similar
results were obtained using MCF10A immortalized human mammary epithelial cells
and mouse D2.0R metastatic breast cancer cells ( ), indicating a general effect of ECM stiffness on cysteine
metabolism.

## ECM stiffness regulates glutathione redox homeostasis
In cells with reduced ROCK and MLCK activity, reduced glutathione (GSH)
levels were initially reduced and subsequently recovered ( ), while oxidised glutathione (GSSG) showed a late
increase ( ). This suggested initial
oxidation of GSH, followed by increased GSH synthesis together with continued
oxidation. We validated this idea using cytoplasmic and mitochondrial
ratiometric glutathione sensors , which confirmed an early and sustained shift towards
glutathione oxidation in cells with reduced contractility and on a soft ECM
( and - see below, for similar data in D2.0R in vitro and in vivo).
This was independently confirmed by direct glutathione quantification ( ). Collectively, this
suggested that cells on a soft ECM increase cystine uptake and glutathione
metabolism to achieve redox balance in the face of increased glutathione
oxidation.
Glutathione oxidation can be due to increased ROS or to decreased
NADPH-dependent reduction. We measured the redox state of NADP+/H with an
established ratiometric sensor , but failed to detect significant steady-state alterations
( ). In contrast,
we observed a consistent increase of general and mitochondrial ROS (mtROS)
production in conditions of reduced contractility in multiple cell lines ( and ). ROS increase was detectable as soon as 1
hour after treatment, thus preceding glutathione oxidation and cystine uptake,
up to 24 hours ( ,i).
As for the magnitude, ROS production was less in cells with reduced
contractility compared to detached cells - ( ) or to cells subjected to oxidative
stress ( ).
Consistent with increased ROS production, we observed the formation of
cytoplasmic 8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OHG) adducts ( ). This was not linked to genotoxic damage, as we failed to
detect nuclear 8-OHdG or γ-H2AX ( ). We also detected increased lipid peroxides ( ), and a
corresponding increase in 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE) adducts ( ). By using these in
situ read-outs we detected increased ROS in D2.0R cells cultured up to 7 days on
a soft ECM, indicating a long-lasting effect in response to ECM stiffness ex
vivo and in vivo (see below ).
Finally, ROS induction also occurred in the absence of protein translation,
indicating a direct response ( ).
Thus, altered glutathione metabolism on a soft ECM is associated with increased
ROS.

## ECM stiffness regulates the KEAP1/NRF2 pathway
Uptake of extracellular cystine occurs via the system Xc-transporter,
encoded by SLC7A11. In our cells, we found that reduced actomyosin contractility
upregulated SLC7A11 gene expression ( and ). This upregulation follows the increase in ROS, but
precedes the import of cystine. To establish whether these events were causally
linked we treated cells with the N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) antioxidant, which
prevented upregulation of SLC7A11 expression ( ) and cystine uptake ( ). We thus concluded that ROS
activates some transcriptional response to induce cystine uptake.
To identify the mechanism underlying this response, we focused on the
notion that SLC7A11 expression is regulated by the NRF2
transcription factor (Nuclear factor erythroid 2 Related Factor 2, or NFE2L2)
 . In the presence of
ROS, the NRF2 protein is released from KEAP1 (Kelch-like ECH Associated Protein
1) inhibition and turns on the expression of a general antioxidant program
 , . To test for NRF2 activation we checked
induction of multiple established NRF2 targets by qPCR and found them
consistently upregulated across several cell lines when contractility was
reduced ( and ). Among these targets were key
enzymes regulating glutathione synthesis, in line with metabolomics results.
This was further confirmed by increased endogenous NRF2 nuclear levels ( and ) and by reduced interaction of endogenous NRF2
with KEAP1 ( ) in conditions of
reduced contractility. Importantly, NRF2 was required for upregulation of these
target genes ( and , and see below ) as well as for increased cystine
uptake ( ) in cells cultured on a
soft ECM, indicating a functional axis.

## Widespread activation of NRF2 target genes on a soft ECM
To expand the generality of our findings, we searched for NRF2
“footprints” - among genes regulated by ECM
stiffness in MCF10A , mouse
D2.0R , human MDA-MB-453
breast cancer cells and primary cultures obtained from the mouse MMTV-PyMT
breast cancer model ( ). We also used data
on breast cancer patients before and after successful neoadjuvant therapy ( ) , when the stiffness of primary
tumors is greatly reduced ,
and a recent microarray of human keloids ( ) , a fibro-proliferative disease caused by stiffening of
the dermis . In all these
experiments we found upregulation of NRF2 targets on a soft ECM, or in the
softer tissue condition. As a control, the targets of the mechanosensitive
YAP/TAZ and SREBP1/2 factors were coherently regulated , . We also monitored the targets of another ROS-sensitive
transcription factor, HSF1 , , which we found inhibited in
MCF10A cells on a soft ECM ( ), as in Ref. .
This was however incoherent with ROS, but coherent with mechanically-regulated
YAP/TAZ ( ), in line
with Ref. , suggesting this
regulation is uncoupled from ROS. Collectively, these analyses indicate that
regulation of NRF2 by the physical properties of the ECM is a conserved
process.

## A soft ECM empowers cell resistance to oxidative stress
We next addressed the functional consequence of NRF2 activation on a
soft ECM. We first tested if this limits production of endogenous toxic ROS.
NRF2 knockdown led to higher ROS and higher glutathione oxidation ( and ), indicating a feedback effect. However, this
did not affect cell viability on a soft ECM ( ,l and ). We then tested the alternative possibility that ROS induce NRF2 to
bestow on cells increased tolerance to oxidative stress, a mechanism known as
hormesis - . As shown in and , cells on a soft ECM display enhanced survival to exogenous
oxidative stress, and this was dependent on NRF2. In line, knockdown of the NRF2
inhibitor KEAP1 enhanced survival on stiff plastics ( ), while NRF1 (Nuclear factor
erythroid 2 Related Factor 1 or NFE2L1) had no effect ( ). To further challenge this
hypothesis we induced ferroptosis, a form of cell death caused by lipid
peroxidation - . As shown in and , cells on a soft ECM were also less
sensitive to induction of ferroptosis. These results suggest that cells on a
soft ECM have increased capacity to resist oxidative stress, which is not
observed upon loss of the NRF2 transcription factor.

## The antioxidant response to softness depends on mtROS
On a soft ECM we observed increased production of cytoplasmic,
mitochondrial and membrane lipid ROS. We thus asked what is the most relevant
source of ROS inducing the antioxidant response. For this we inhibited
mitochondrial ROS, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and ER-stress-associated
ROS, or membrane-associated NADPH oxidases . As shown in only MitoTEMPO rescued both cytoplasmic and mitochondrial ROS,
suggesting a mitochondrial origin of ROS. Accordingly, treatment of cells
cultured on a soft ECM with MitoTEMPO also prevented activation of NRF2 targets
( ) and cystine uptake ( ). The contribution of other ROS
sources remains to be fully determined.
Mitochondrial ROS can be produced by multiple mechanisms including
changes in oxidative phosphorylation and altered activity of enzymes such as
mitochondrial NADPH and monoamine oxidases . However, treatment of cells with inhibitors for these
enzymes did not prevent ROS production ( ). Cells cultured on a soft ECM did not display significant
changes in basal respiration either ( and ), as also previously found by others , ,
which suggests the soft matrix does not lead to major defects in oxidative
phosphorylation. Finally, NRF2 activity is increased when respiration is
enhanced , , but cells of soft ECM displayed reduced
maximal respiratory capacity (see ), and increased NRF2 (see above). We thus looked for other
mitochondria-related mechanisms that increase ROS production.

## ECM stiffness regulates mitochondrial fission through DRP1
While doing the above experiments we noticed that cells on a soft ECM
had an altered mitochondrial network. We then quantified mitochondrial
morphology and observed that upon conditions of reduced contractility, cells
display fragmented or punctate mitochondria ( and )
without reduction in overall mitochondria content ( ). We confirmed this observation by
an independent quantitative analysis and with an automated image analysis system
based on machine learning algorithms ( and ).
A shift towards shorter mitochondria can be due to more fission or to
fewer fusion events . The
activity of DRP1 (Dynamin Related Protein 1), the main mitochondrial fission
factor, can be visualized by the formation of puncta at mitochondrial sites
undergoing fission . On a
soft ECM we observed an increased number of endogenous DRP1 puncta ( and see below ), as well as of DRP1’s active form which is
phosphorylated at serine 616 This occurred without changes in DRP1 expression ( ). As an additional
read-out of DRP1 activity, we built on the notion that activation of DRP1 leads
to reduced ER-mitochondria contacts , . Strikingly,
we found a reduced number of shortrange ER-mitochondria contacts on a soft ECM,
which was rescued by inhibition of DRP1 with Drpitor1a, a specific inhibitor of
DRP1 GTPase activity ( ). Finally, inhibition of DRP1 induced
the elongation of mitochondria on a soft ECM ( ), as well as on a stiff ECM as expected, which is overall
consistent with increased DRP1 activity and increased mitochondrial fission on a
soft ECM.
We then probed the functional relevance of DRP1 in producing cell
tolerance to oxidative stress on a soft ECM. First, knockdown of DRP1 or
treatment with the MDIVI1 and Drpitor1a DRP1 inhibitors, at concentrations
ensuring specificity , , , prevented mtROS production on a soft ECM ( and ). Second, the same results were achieved by
depleting MIEF1 and MIEF2 (Mitochondrial Elongation Factors 1 and 2, also known
as MiD49 and MiD51) mitochondrial DRP1 adaptors - 
( and ). In these experiments mtROS levels
were not directly related to oxidative phosphorylation, because a soft ECM
reduced maximal respiratory capacity even in cells with inhibited DRP1 ( ). Third, DRP1 was
required for NRF2 activation by looking at selected targets ( ) and at global gene expression
( ). Of note, the genes altered
by NRF2 and by DRP1 overlap very significantly with those regulated by ECM
stiffness (4-fold overrepresented over the random expectation,
P=3.6*10^-147 for DRP1 targets,
P=2.9*10^-49 for NRF2 targets by
Fisher's exact test), confirming a strong link. Finally, inhibition of
DRP1 reduced cystine uptake ( ) and
restored sensitivity to cumene hydroperoxide on a soft ECM ( ), phenocopying the loss of NRF2 (see above).
Collectively, this data indicates that a soft ECM induces mitochondrial fission
through activation of DRP1, and shows that DRP1 is instrumental to the
regulation of mtROS, NRF2 and the cell’s antioxidant capacity.

## ECM stiffness regulates peri-mitochondrial Factin
A remaining question is how ECM stiffness controls mitochondrial
morphology. Some data suggests that contractile F-actin bundles can be in a
reciprocal equilibrium with other F-actin structures that depend on the Arp2/3
complex - . Interestingly, peri-mitochondrial F-actin and
fission also depend on the Arp2/3, as well as on the INF2 (Inverted Formin 2)
and Spire1C F-actin nucleation factors - , suggesting a
potential crosstalk based on different F-actin pools.
We first developed a method to visualize peri-mitochondrial F-actin
specifically, based on proximity-ligation assays (PLA) between F-actin and the
mitochondrial outer-membrane protein TOMM20. To capture actin filaments we used
two approaches, one based on the incorporation of WT Flag-Actin, but not of the
R62D unpolymerized mutant 
( ), and another based on
phalloidin ( ). We obtained specific
and discrete PLA signals ( ) which
colocalized with DRP1 puncta ( ).
Strikingly, these F-actin/mitochondria “contacts” were increased
upon ROCK/MLCK inhibition, and this was abolished by also inhibiting Factin or
Arp2/3 ( ). F-actin and Arp2/3 were
also required for the formation of DRP1 puncta observed upon reduced
contractility ( ). This suggests
that when actomyosin is inhibited, the number of F-actin/mitochondria
“contacts” is increased, which is causal for DRP1 recruitment and
oligomerization.
To address the functional role of peri-mitochondrial F-actin, we then
inhibited the INF2 and Spire1C factors. Inhibition of mitochondrial Spire1C
rescued mitochondria elongation and mtROS on a soft ECM ( ), while knockdown of INF2 did not ( ). This suggests that INF2 and
Spire1C do not always work together, consistent with the findings of others
 - . In aggregate these findings suggest that
decreased contractility of the actomyosin cytoskeleton directly or indirectly
tips the balance towards formation of peri-mitochondrial F-actin driven by
Spire1C and Arp2/3 and this enhances fission.

## ECM mechanotransduction regulates chemotherapy resistance
Some chemotherapeutics work by inducing oxidative stress, so that the
antioxidant response triggered by NRF2 is known to favor chemotherapy
resistance, including on plastics , . To test
whether this is regulated in response to ECM stiffness we selected drugs that
kill by inducing ROS, such as Cisplatin and Arsenic trioxide
(As2O3) ( and ). We found that cells cultured on a soft ECM display increased
resistance to these drugs ( and
 ). As a
specificity control, cell death induced by Doxorubicin occurred independently
from both ROS and ECM stiffness in our cells ( ). Importantly, inhibition of DRP1 or NRF2
reinstalled cell death on a soft ECM ( and ), indicating that ECM softness increases resistance to
ROS-dependent drugs through DRP1 and NRF2.
 

## Lung stiffness regulates the ROS/NRF2 axis
D2.0R cells are a model for late-relapsing or “dormant”
ER-positive breast cancer metastasis to the lung , .
Late relapse of breast cancer remains a clinically unmet problem in patients
 . The transition of
metastatic D2.0R cells from dormancy to relapse has been linked to ECM
composition: these cells remain quiescent on a basement-membrane (BM) ECM and in
the normal lung microenvironment, while they actively grow on a collagenous ECM
and in collagen-rich fibrotic lungs. Moreover, if cultured long enough, these
cells secrete Collagen-I to self-enable adhesion and resume proliferation
 , , .
The amount and cross-linking of Collagen-I are key factors contributing
to tissue ECM stiffness. We thus re-examined the dormancy-to-relapse transition
of D2.0R cells in light of ECM mechanics (see scheme in ). In vitro, cells cultured up to 1
week on a BM ECM display inhibition of the mechanosensitive YAP/TAZ factors, in
line with ECM softness; after 2 weeks, however, cells secreted Collagen-I and
underwent a morphological shift indicative of increased adhesion, coupled to
activation of YAP/TAZ, indicating a stiffened microenvironment ( ). Strikingly, this was accompanied by
a reduction of ROS markers ( ), and
by a corresponding restored sensitivity to Cisplatin treatment at 2 weeks ( ). This overall suggested a prolonged
activation of ROS/NRF2 on a soft ECM, which is inhibited when cells remodel and
stiffen the ECM.
We then asked if the lung ECM can be a relevant input to control our
phenotypes. Lung elasticity, as measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM),
approximated that of soft hydrogels and of the normal mammary gland, while it
was softer than a primary tumor induced by D2.0R orthotopic injection into the
mammary fat pad ( and ). This supports the
idea that metastatic dissemination to the lungs occurs towards a softer tissue
microenvironment. We then cultured D2.0R cells on slices of decellularized mouse
lung ECM - , which increased ROS markers
compared to cells on stiffer slices obtained either from fibrotic lungs
 or by increasing
collagen cross-linking in vitro with ribose , ( and ). Furthermore, cells infiltrated into normal
lung ECM display increased NRF2 target genes compared to cells infiltrated into
fibrotic lung ECM ( and ). This indicates that
a physiologically relevant variation of lung ECM stiffness is sufficient to
regulate the ROS/NRF2 axis.
Finally, we asked whether this also happened in vivo. For this we
induced metastatic dissemination by injecting D2.0R cells in syngeneic female
BALB/C mice, and compared normal lungs, lungs bearing early disseminated
quiescent cells, and lungs with late outgrowing macroscopic metastases. Using
atomic force measurements, Collagen-I expression and YAP/TAZ localization, we
found that early disseminated cells are found in a soft microenvironment, while
late metastatic outgrowths are stiffer ( ). Strikingly, this was associated with corresponding higher ROS
markers in early disseminated cells ( ), recapitulating the above in vitro and ex vivo results.
Overall, this supports the view that the mechanical properties of the lung ECM
regulate the ROS/NRF2 axis in disseminated D2.0R cells.

## DRP1 and NRF2 protect metastatic cells from chemotherapy
Dormant metastatic cancer cells are notoriously refractory to
chemotherapy , which has
been ascribed in the past to their proliferative quiescence. Our results instead
suggest an active mechanism, i.e. increased antioxidant capacity in response to
a soft microenvironment. To verify this idea in vivo we induced
metastatic lung dissemination and then treated mice with Cisplatin during the
early quiescent phase (see scheme in ). Cells expressing control shRNA remained dormant for
6-7 weeks and then resumed proliferation developing into overt metastases, and
were marginally sensitive to Cisplatin treatment ( ). NRF2 knockdown did not affect early metastatic spread,
but slowed down cell growth at the metastatic site ( and ). Most importantly, NRF2 knockdown made quiescent cells
vulnerable to Cisplatin treatment, leading to a more effective reduction of
cancer cells and preventing relapse up to 28 weeks ( ). This was associated with increased cleaved
Caspase-3 in cancer cells, indicating the induction of apoptotic cell death
( ). Finally, this
was strikingly recapitulated by knockdown of DRP1 ( and ), indicating a key role of mitochondrial fission in regulating
chemotherapy sensitivity in vivo. This is in line with a general role of NRF2 in
promoting therapy resistance and with general anti-cancer effects of DRP1 and
MIEF1/2 inhibition observed by others , , , , and is compatible with the view that a soft metastatic
niche potentiates breast cancer cell ability to resist chemotherapy by fostering
DRP1 and NRF2 activity.

## Discussion
Here we identify a link between the physical properties of the ECM and the
cell antioxidant homeostasis. When cells are in a soft microenvironment they
increase mtROS production, which bestows on cells increased tolerance to oxidative
stress via NRF2 ( ). In
contrast, when cells are detached from the ECM and unable to generate tension,
endogenous ROS production becomes toxic - , . In this view, this represents a hormetic response
by which a physiological level of ECM elasticity maintains a beneficial level of
mtROS that entrain cells’ antioxidant metabolism , - . Scattered elements of this
pathway were described in other cells , , , suggesting widespread conservation. Moreover, the
finding that a similar pathway is relevant for neural stem cell commitment in the
mouse brain , the softest among
tissues, suggests this link may have other roles beyond resistance to oxidative
stress.
The antioxidant response to ECM elasticity is centered on mitochondrial
dynamics, and provides a physiologically-relevant context in which
peri-mitochondrial F-actin controls DRP1 activity and mitochondrial fission
 , , . The
requirement for MIEF1/2, together with the observation that these bear a broad
potential for F-actin interaction , , suggest these
factors might serve as a specific interface in response to ECM stiffness. Based on
the molecular requirements, this fission modality resembles actin-mediated
mitochondrial reshuffling , , while it is different from other
fission events, including toroidal mitochondria , , , . In
future, it will be interesting to understand whether mechanosensitive and
peri-mitochondrial F-actin pools directly compete for a steady-state amount of actin
monomers , , or whether more specific signalling mechanisms
are involved. More in general, this provides an example of how organelle structure
and dynamics is intimately linked with extracellular forces.
Our results suggest that resistance of disseminated metastatic cells to
cisplatin is actively instructed by mechanical signaling at the metastatic niche,
and support the view that ECM softness is a double-edged sword in cancer, opposing
cell proliferation and invasion, but also favoring chemotherapy resistance. Since
the main organs targeted by breast cancer metastasis (the lung, bone marrow, brain
and liver) share an elastic modulus in the soft range, it will be interesting to
test if the mechanism we here describe also applies to other metastatic sites. In
future, these findings may pave the way to testing pharmacological inhibition of
NRF2 or DRP1 as a strategy to help eradicate disseminated cells and reduce the risk
of metastatic disease relapse in patients.

## Methods

## Plasmids and Reagents
Cyto-Grx1-roGFP2 (Addgene #64975), mito-Grx1-roGFP2 (Addgene #64977),
mito-Clover and mito-RFP (De Stefani), FLAG-Actin and FLAG-R62D-Actin (Posern),
iNap1 and iNapC (Yang), deltaKIND and mWH2 dominantnegative Spire1c (Manor),
OMM-GFP1-10 and ER-beta11 (Calì). All plasmid preps used for transfection
were endotoxin-free and sequence-verified.
Compounds (Source, concentration) were: Y27632 (Axon 1683, 20 microM);
ML7 (Sigma I2764, 20 microM), Blebbistatin (Sigma B0560, 20 microM);
Cycloheximide (Sigma 247502); Cisplatin (STCB sc-200896); As2O3 (Sigma 202673);
Doxorubicin (Sigma D1515); N-Acetyl-L-cysteine (Sigma A7250, 5 mM); MitoTEMPO
(Sigma SML0737, 15 microM); Drpitor1a (Stephen Archer, 0.5 microM); MDIVI1
(Sigma M0199, 10 microM); KI696 (MCE HY-101140, 10 microM); TUDCA (SelleckChem
S3654, 1milliM); Pargyline (Sigma D026, 2.5 mM); VAS2870 (Cayman 19205, 10
microM); Sulfasalazine (Cayman 15025, 0.5 mM); Erastin (MCE HY-15763); RSL3
(Sigma SML2234); DHEA (Sigma 700087P, 100uM); Diamide (Sigma D3648 50uM),
Wortmannin (Sigma W1628 5uM).

## Cell culture, substrata and transfections
MCF10A and MCF10AneoT (MCF10A-RAS) human mammary epithelial cells were
cultured in DMEM/F12, 5%HS, 10 microg/ml Insulin (Sigma), 20 ng/ml hEGF
(Peprotech), 100 ng/ml Cholera Toxin (Sigma), 0.5 microg/ml Hydrocortisone
(Sigma). Univocal identification was based on exon PCR sequencing to identify
coding point mutations present in MCF10AneoT (MAP3K12 A662D),
MCF10AT1 (also known as MCF10AT1k, or MCF1oA MII - PCSK5 M452I)
and MCF10CA1a cells (also known as MCF10A MIV - PCSK5 M452I and
PIK3CA H1047R)
 . D2.0R mouse metastatic
breast cancer cells were cultured in DMEM, 10%FBS. Glutamine was freshly added
to a final concentration of 2mM to all media. General media, serum and
supplements were from Thermo. Cell lines were cultured without antibiotics and
routinely tested with ATCC Universal Mycoplasma Detection Kit to exclude
contaminations. Stable MCF10AneoT or D2.0R Grx1-roGFP1 reporter lines were
obtained by retroviral infection followed by puromycin selection (2 and 50
microg/ml, respectively). Stable MCF10AneoT iNapC and iNap1 reporter lines were
obtained by retroviral infection followed by puromycin selection. D2.0R EGFP/luc
cells were obtained by lentiviral infection followed by sorting of
light-emitting cells by flow cytometry in the presence of luciferin.
Stiff (E≈15kPa) and soft (E≈0.5kPa) Fibronectin-coated
polyacrylamide hydrogels were assembled in-house by standard protocols
 . For selected
experiments, we used commercial Collagen-I-coated polyacrylamide hydrogels of
E≈50kPa and E≈0.2kPa stiffness (Matrigen). Matrigel (BD) was
diluted 2% vol/vol in 1xPBS to coat stiff tissue-culture dishes (E≈GPa),
while it was used pure and gelled at 37°C to obtain thick and soft
substrata (E≈250Pa).
Cell transfections were carried out with Transit-LT1 (MirusBio),
Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo) or with Lipofectamine RNAi-MAX (Thermo). siRNAs were
selected among FlexiTube GeneSolution 4 siRNA sets (Qiagen) and reordered after
validation as dTdT-overhanging 19nt RNA duplexes (Thermo). siRNA sequences were:
hNRF2 1 CAU UGA UGU UUC UGA UCU A; hNRF2 2 GGU UGA GAC UAC CAU GGU U; hNRF1 1
GAU GGU UCC AGG ACU ACA A; hNRF1 2 GGC AGG AUU CAG CAC AAC A; hKEAP1 1 CCA GCG
CCC UGG ACU GUU A; hKEAP1 2 GAG UGU UAC GAC CCA GAU A; hMFF 1 AGU CGA AUU CAG
UAC GAA A; hMFF 2 CGC UGA CCU GGA ACA AGG A; hFIS1 1 GGC CAU GAA GAA AGA UGG A;
hFIS1 2 GGC UCA AGG AAU ACG AGA A; hMIEF1 1 GGU GCG UCG UGA GAA UCC A; hMIEF1 2
GUA UGA GCG UGA CAA ACA U; hMIEF2 1 GGU GCC UGA UGG UAG GUA U; hMIEF2 2 GCU GAG
AGA AGG UGA CUU A; hINF2 1 GGA UCA ACC UGG AGA UCA UCC GC; hINF2 2 GCA GUA CCG
CUU CAG CAU UGU CA ; hINF2 CAAX isoform 1 ACA AAG AAA CUG UGU GUG A; hINF2 CAAX
isoform 2 CCC UGA UUC UGA UGA UAA U; hDRP1 AAC AAA GUC UCA GUA UUA C; AllStars
Negative Control siRNA (Qiagen - the sequence is a proprietary information).
shRNAs were selected among 5 different predesigned pLKO-1 vectors (Sigma) stably
integrated in D2.0R cells by lentiviral infection and puromycin (50 microg/ml)
selection. shRNA sequences were: mNRF2 A TRCN0000054658 CCA AAG CTA GTA TAG CAA
TAA; mNRF2 B TRCN0000054659 CTT GAA GTC TTC AGC ATG TTA; mDRP1 A TRCN0000321169
CGG TGG TGC TAG GAT TTG TTA; mDRP1 B TRCN0000012606 GGC AAT TGA GCT AGC GTA TAT;
Control TTC TCC GAA CGT GTC ACG T.

## Flow Cytometry
Staining for ROS and FITC-cystine uptake were carried out by incubating
cells in plate at the end of the experiments with the indicated reagents in full
medium w/out phenol red (DCFDA 1 microM 10 min, MitoSOX 1 microM 10 min,
C11-Bodipy-581/591 5 microM 15 min, FITC-cystine 5 microM 30 min). After
trypsinization and a brief wash in 1xHBSS, quantification was run on live cells
in 1xHBSS (Ca- and Mg-free). For detection of stably expressed Grx1-roGFP2
sensor fluorescence ratio, cells were fixed after trypsinization with 4% PFA at
4°C for 7 min. Analysis was carried out on a LSRFortessa X20 cell
analyzer (BD). Cells were gated based on SSC-A or FSC-A to eliminate cell
debris, and on SSC-W to eliminate cell doublets. DCFDA and FITC-cystine were
measured using a FITC-A filter. MitoSOX with a PE-A filter. The MFI (median
fluorescence intensity) was measured for each independent biological sample,
based on at least 3*104 gated events. For C11-BODIPY-581/591 the
signals from both non-oxidized C11 (PE-TexasRed) and oxidized C11 (FITC-A) were
acquired, and the ratio of FITC-A to PE-TexasRed was calculated for each sample.
For Grx1-roGFP, the signals from both non-oxidized (FITC-A) and oxidized
(BV510-A) were acquired, and the ratio of BV510-A to FITC-A was calculated for
each sample. See ,
 , for representative
gating schemes.

## Survival assays
Cells were seeded in 96-well plates with the indicated coatings (5000
MCF10A-RAS cells/well, 4000 D2.0R cells/well), in parallel with standards in the
linear range of detection (8000, 4000, 2000, 1000, 500, 250 cells/well). Where
pertinent, siRNA transfection was performed in bulk the day before seeding. 24
hours after seeding, culture medium was renewed by adding the indicated
chemicals or the corresponding amounts of vehicle. MCF10A-RAS were in
glucose-free medium. After 48 hours of treatment, cells were washed with 1xPBS
and incubated with Resazurin (Sigma R7017, 100 microM) in culture medium and
incubated at 37°C for 2 h. Absorbance at 544/590 nm was measured on live
cells, by checking that the signal was in the temporal linear range. Absolute
cell number was then calculated based on the standard curve, after background
subtraction (medium without cells). Relative survival was calculated as % of
remaining cells compared to control cells (100%).

## qPCR
Total RNA was isolated using commercial kits with DNAse treatment
(Norgen). cDNA synthesis was carried out with M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase
(Thermo) and oligo-dT primers. qPCR reactions were assembled with FastStart SYBR
Green Master Mix (Roche) and run on a QuantStudio6 thermal cycler (Thermo).
GAPDH expression levels were used to normalize gene
expression between samples, based on
eff(gene)^-ΔCt(gene) /
eff(GAPDH)^-ΔCt(GAPDH), where
eff is the primer amplification efficiency experimentally
determined from three consecutive five-fold dilutions of one control sample
cDNA, centered on the dilution used for all other samples. Gene expression
levels for each biological sample was quantified as the mean between three
technical replicates.
Primer sequences for human genes: ANKRD1: ACT TGG GCC
GGT ATT TCT TC; TGG GCT AGA AGT GTC TTC AGA T. CTGF (CCN2): AGG
AGT GGG TGT GTG ACG A; CCA GGC AGT TGG CTC TAA TC. CYR61
(CCN1): CCT TGT GGA CAG CCA GTG TA; ACT TGG GCC GGT ATT TCT TC.
DRP1: TCA AGA ACC AAC CAC AGG CA; CAC AAT CTC GCT GTT CCC
GA. GAPDH: CTC CTG CAC CAC CAA CTG CT; GGG CCA TCC ACA GTC TTC
TG. GCLC: TCC AGG TGA CAT TCC AAG CC; GAA ATC ACT CCC CAG CGA CA.
GCLM: CTC CTG CTG TGT GAT GCC A; CTC GTG CGC TTG AAT GTC
AG. HMOX-1: AGT CTT CGC CCC TGT CTA CT; GCT GGT GTG TAG GGG ATG
AC. NFE2L2: TTC TCC CAA TTC AGC CAG CC; GGG AAT GTC TGC GCC AAA
AG. NQO1: GCA CTG ATC GTA CTG GCT CA; CCA CCA CCT CCC ATC CTT
TC. SLC7A11: TTT TCT GAG CGG CTA CTG GG; CAG CTG GTA GAG GAG
TGT GC. DRP1: TCA AGA ACC AAC CAC AGG CA; CAC AAT CTC GCT GTT
CCC GA; NFE2L1: GAT GTG ACA GGC CCA GAC AA; CCA CAT CCT GCT CCT
TCT GG; FIS1: CAA GGA GGA ACA GCG GGA TT; TGC CCA CGA GTC CAT
CTT TC; MFF: CCA AAC GCT GAC CTG GAA CA; TGT TTT CAG TGC CAG
GGG TT; MIEF1 (MID49): GGT TCA TTG ACA GGG CCA CT; GAT CAG TTT
CTG CAG GCC CT; MIEF2 (MID51): ATT CGG GGA AAA GGA GCT GG; TCG
AAG GTG GAG GAG TCT GT; KEAP1: TCG TCT CCT TTA TGC CGT GG; TGC
TGT GAT CAT TCG CCA CT; INF2: GCC AAG AAG AGC CTG AAC CT; TCA
ATC TCG TGC TTC TCG GG; HIST1H4A: GGA AGG GTT TGG GTA AGG GG;
ACC AGA GAT CCG CTT CAC AC; HIST1H4D: AAT CAC CAA GCC CGC TAT
CC; TGA CAG CAT CGC GGA TTA CA; HSP90AA1: CAC GTC TCT GCA TTC
CCT GT; GTT GGT CTT GGG TCT GGG TT; EFEMP1: CAT TCC CTC CAA CCC
TTC CC; TGA TGC ACA CTT GGT CTG CT; SERPINH1: CCG ACC ACC CCT
TCA TCT TC; TCG TCT CGC ATC TTG TCA CC.
Primer sequences for mouse genes: Ankrd1: CTG TGA GGC
TGA ACC GCT AT; TCT CCT TGA GGC TGT CGA AT. Ctgf (Ccn2): CTG
CCT ACC GAC TGG AAG AC ; CAT TGG TAA CTC GGG TGG AG. Cyr61
(Ccn1): GCT CAG TCA GAA GGC AGA CC ; GTT CTT GGG GAC ACA GAG GA.
Drp1: CAG GTG GTG GGA TTG GAG AC; CGG GCA GAC AGT TTT CTT
GC. Gapdh: ATC CTG CAC CAC CAA CTG CT ; GGG CCA TCC ACA GTC TTC
TG. Gclc: CAG CTG CAG AGG AGT ACA CC; ATA CTG CAT CGG GTG TCC AC.
Gclm: GTT CCC AAA TCA GCC CCG AT; GAG CAT GCC ATG TCA ACT
GC. Hmox-1: AGC CCC ACC AAG TTC AAA CA; CAT CAC CTG CAG CTC CTC
AA. Nfe2l2: AAC AGA ACG GCC CTA AAG CA; CCA GGA CTC ACG GGA ACT
TC. Nqo-1: GCG AGA AGA GCC CTG ATT GT; TCG AGT CCT TCA GCT CAC
CT. Slc7a11: TGG CTA TCA TCA CAG TGG GC; GCA ACA AAG ATC GGG
ACT GC. Drp1: CAG GTG GTG GGA TTG GAG AC; CGG GCA GAC AGT TTT
CTT GC.

## Immunofluorescence and PLA
Immunofluorescence was performed as in - with
minor modifications: 15 min 1.5 mg/ml glycine in PBS before permeabilization to
reduce background; blocking in 10% BSA. Images were acquired sequentially with a
Zeiss LSN700, a Leica SP8 or a Leica Stellaris confocal microscope equipped with
a CCD camera using ZEN 2 or Leica LASX softwares. Typical acquisition settings
for IF were: image size 1024x1024 pixels; acquisition mode xyz; pixel size
0.15mm; image depth 8 bits; acquisition speed 5/10, with average 2;
Plan-Apochromat 63x/1.40 oil DIC M27 objective. For multichannel acquisitions,
we used a main beam splitter 405/488/555/639. Raw images (saved in .czi or .lif
formats) were opened in Fiji v.1.0 for analysis. Figure panels were assembled
with Inkscape v.1.1.1.
For mitochondrial morphology analysis, cells were fixed 10 min at
4°C with 4% FA and washed with cold PBS before permeabilization. We
measured: the length of mitochondria major axis; mitochondrial fragmentation
count (MFC) , i.e. the total
mitochondrial number divided by the total mitochondrial area in each confocal
microscopy image; and the percentage area of punctate, intermediate, or
filamentous mitochondria .
Quantitative analysis of 8OHG and 4HNE was based on single-plane
confocal images. Intensity was calculated in a ROI covering the whole cytoplasm
with ImageJ as the mean pixel intensity, normalized to area. Analysis of 8OHdG
was based on RNAse-treated cells, and the percentage of positive nuclei. For
Grx1-roGFP, a ROI of fixed size randomly chosen in the cytoplasm was measured at
510nm upon excitation at 405nm (oxidized) and 488nm (reduced) for each cell. The
ratio between 405/488 was calculated for each cell.
For PLA (Duolink proximity-ligation assays) we followed
manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma DUO92102) with minor modifications:
cells were fixed in 4% FA for 10min at 4°C; after a brief wash, cells
were incubated 15 min with 1.5 mg/ml Glycine in PBS before permeabilization and
then blocked 1h at RT with Duolink Blocking Solution (Sigma); primary antibodies
were incubated with 2% Goat Serum at 4°C ON. Primary antibodies for
F-actin PLA were: TOMM20, FLAG (mouse or rabbit), and biotin-phalloidin (Sigma
P8716) together with an anti-biotin antibody.
For Multiplex Immunofluorescence we used the TSA-based Opal method
(Akoya Biosciences) on the Leica BOND RX automated immunostainer (Leica
Microsystems). FFPE tissue sections were deparaffinized and subjected to
heat-induced epitope retrieval (HIER) pretreatments at 97 °C using BOND
Epitope Retrieval (ER) Solutions ER1 and ER2 (Leica Biosystems). Tissue sections
were blocked with Normal Goat Serum (Vector Laboratories) for 10 minutes before
applying primary antibodies. A fluorescent singleplex was carried out for each
biomarker to determine the optimal staining conditions and the order in which
the primary antibodies would be applied in the multiplex protocol. Primary
antibodies were added sequentially on the slides. The HRP-conjugated secondary
antibodies goat anti-rabbit (Vector Laboratories), goat antichicken (Abcam) and
goat anti-rat (Vector Laboratories) were incubated for 10 minutes. The
TSA-conjugated fluorophores Opal 540, 650 and 480 (Akoya Biosciences) were then
added for 10 minutes. Slides were rinsed with a washing buffer after each step.
Finally, the spectral DAPI (Akoya Biosciences) was used as a nuclear
counterstain, and slides were mounted in ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant (Life
Technologies). Multiplex stained slides were imaged using the Mantra
Quantitative Pathology Workstation (Akoya Biosciences) at 20X magnification. For
each sample, only areas comprising tumor cells were considered. The inForm Image
Analysis software (version 2.4.9, Akoya Biosciences) was used to unmix
multispectral images using a spectral library built from acquisition of single
fluorophore-stained control tissues, and containing fluorophores-emitting
spectral peaks. A selection of representative multispectral images was used to
train the inForm software to create algorithms to apply in the batch analysis of
all acquired multispectral images. Cell density and percentage data were
reported as the mean of all acquired fields from the same tissue slide (at least
20 fields at 20X magnification for each stained slide).
Primary antibodies (catalogue number) were: 8OH(d)G (SCBT sc-66036);
4HNE (ABCAM ab48506); NRF2 PS40 (ABCAM ab76026); DRP1 (BD 611738); FLAG mouse
monoclonal (Sigma M2); FLAG rabbit monoclonal (CST BK14793); Alexa647-Phalloidin
(Thermo A22287); TOMM20 (Thermo STD4-72); Cleaved Caspase-3 (CST 9661S); GFP
(Abcam AB13970); CD31 (Optistain DIA310); Collagen-I (Abcam AB34710); KEAP1 used
for WB and PLA (STCB sc-365626); NRF2 used for WB (Proteintech 13396-1-AP); NRF2
used for PLA (CST 12712); DRP1p616 for IF and WB (CST#4494); DRP1p637 for WB
(CST #4867). Secondary antibodies were: Alexa-488 anti-mouse (Thermo A21202);
Alexa-568 anti-rabbit (Thermo A11036); Alexa-568 anti-mouse IgG1 (Thermo
A21124); Alexa-647 antimouse IgG2b (A21242).

## Oxygen Consumption Rate analysis
An XF24 extracellular flux analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience) was used to
detect real-time changes in cellular respiration rates as in . Standard XF24 plates were
coated with 70ul of 2% Matrigel (stiff), or with 25ul of 100% Matrigel (soft)
which was evenly distributed with a micropipette tip before gelling at
37°C. 90000 cells/well MCF10A-RAS or 120000 cells/well D2.0R were seeded
24 hours before performing the measures. Measurements were performed following
manufacturer’s instructions with at least 5 biological replicates for
each condition in each experiment, and normalized to cell number quantified by
DAPI staining after extracellular flux analysis.

## Mouse lung decellularized ECM
Procedures on animals were performed in accordance with local approvals
and under license released from the UK Home office. Wild-type male adult CD1
mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation in accordance with local animal
guidelines and approvals (in the UK, Home Office guidelines under the Animals
Scientific Procedures Act 1986). After opening the rib cage, a 2mM EDTA solution
was injected through the inferior vena cava to prevent coagulation. Following
removal of the thymus, the aortic artery, right superior vena cava, and left
superior vena cava were divided. The pulmonary artery was perfused with 2mM EDTA
to remove blood in the pulmonary circulation. The heart was dissected and
removed. A 24G catheter was inserted into the trachea and secured using 3-0 silk
sutures. The trachea was separated right below the cricoid cartilage, and the
whole lung was extracted. Perfusion of the lung was confirmed by gently
injecting a PBS solution through the cannula.
Decellularization was performed with the intent to preserve the overall
lung structure and extracellular-matrix composition, as previously reported
 , with minor modifications. Briefly,
decellularization reagents were intermittently inflated (for 30 s) and deflated
(for 30 s) through the trachea with automatically controlled peristaltic pumps.
One cycle of decellularization consisted of 4 series of inflation/deflation with
double distilled water, 4 series with 2% Sodium Deoxycholate (Sigma D6750), 8
series with PBS supplemented with 1% p/s, 4 series with 0.00225% DNAse (Sigma
D5025) in a 9 g/l NaCl, 1 g/l CaCl2 solution, and 8 series with PBS supplemented
with 1% p/s. 9 cycles of decellularization were performed in total.
Decellularized lungs were embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature (OCT)
tissue embedding compound (Electron Microscopy Science) and snap-frozen in dry
ice. Samples were cut to a final thickness of 50μm with a cryostat
(Thermo A78900003). Slices were placed on 13 mm-diameter poly-lysine coated
coverslips. Slices were equilibrated in PBS, sterilised under UV light for 25
min and stored at 4°C until needed. Slices on coverslips were incubated
at 4°C with 1xPBS 44 mM NaHCO3 25 mM HEPES, without or with 250 mM Ribose
for 5 days to induce non-specific collagen crosslinking.

## Bleomycin-induced fibrosis
Animal studies were approved by the University College London Biological
Services Ethical Review Committee and licensed under the Animals (Scientific
Procedures) Act 1986 (Home Office, London, United Kingdom). The bleomycin model
were performed under the UK Home Office Animal Research project license
P36565407. Wild-type male age-matched CD1 mice (Charles River Laboratories, body
weight: 35-45 g) were randomly divided into bleomycin-treated and sham groups.
Anesthesia was maintained by inhalation of 4% isoflurane. 50 μL of either
1.25U/mg bleomycin (Apollo scientific, UK) or PBS were administered
endotracheally. 14 days after bleomycin administration, the mice were
euthanized. Lungs were harvested for decellularization. The fibrotic mouse lung
decellularized ECM were selected based on increased Collagen-I immunofluorescent
staining compared to control samples.

## Recellularization experiments
Prior to recellularization, decellularized lung ECM from both
bleomycin-treated and control mice were sterilised by γ-irradiation. The
right and left lungs were separated by ligation of the right main bronchus, and
the left lung was used for cell seeding. The right lungs were immediately dried
and snap-frozen. The left lung was perfused with D2.0R cells culture medium and
equilibrated for 1h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. A single-cell suspension of
D2.0R cells (107 cells in 0.5 ml) was injected into the left lobe
with a 1 mL-syringe and incubated overnight at 37 °C and 5% CO2 submerged
in culture medium. The day after the recellularized lung was perfused with a
1mL-syringe to remove nonadherent cells, and cultured for additional 48 hours.
Then, the recellularized lobe was retrieved and the upper airway was removed at
the level of the left main bronchus. The lung was dried and snap-frozen. All the
lung samples were weighed before snap-freezing and stored at -80 °C. As a
control, in parallel to the lung recellularization, 5 × 105
cells were seeded in a 10 cm Petri Dish and cultured in standard conditions.
Cells were harvested in Trizol reagent with a pestel homogenizer for RNA
extraction. Decellularized lung ECM without infiltrated cells was devoid of
tissue RNA.

## AFM measurements
Tissue samples were embedded into OCT without prior fixation, and
sectioned at the microtome (20 um) onto poly-lysine coated slides, or embedded
in low-melting agarose and sectioned at the vibratome (400 um) with similar
results. Sections were dried to allow attachment and rehydrated in 1xPBS. All
the samples were analyzed by using an Atomic Force Microscope mounted on an
Inverted Optical Microscope (XEBio, Park Systems, Korea) to position the AFM tip
on the area of interest of the samples . Force-displacement curves were collected in 1xPBS at
RT using PPP-CONTSCR-10 pyramidal tips mounted on Si3N4 cantilevers with a
nominal spring constant of 0.2 N/m precalibrated by the manufacturer
(NanoSensors, Neuchatel, Switzerland). Force curves were acquired at indentation
rates in the range of 0.3-1 um/s. Young’s modulus was calculated by
applying a fit of the Hertz model to the force curve, assuming a Poisson ratio
of 0.5. The moduli of at least 3 samples for each condition were calculated as
an average over 3-6 sites per sample. Moduli of acrylamide hydrogels of defined
stiffness and soft Matrigel substrata were used as positive controls.

## In vivo metastasis assay
Animal experiments were performed according to Italian laws, as approved
by the University Animal Welfare Commission (OPBA) and authorized by the
Ministry of Health (615-2020-PR). D2.0R-EGFP/Luc cells were trypsinized, washed
with 1xPBS, and then resuspended before injecting into the tail vein of 6- to
8-week-old female BALB/C mice (100 microl per mouse) using a 26 G needle. D2.0R
cells expressing exogenous fluorescent proteins can be used for metastasis
assays in immune-competent syngeneic BALB/C mice - .
Mice were kept in SPF cages with a limit of 5 mice per cage, with a 12-hour
light/dark cycle, ad libitum feeding and drinking, at an average temperature of
19-24°C and with ambient humidity.
For quantification of D2.0R extravasation, 5 × 105
D2.0R-mCherry cells (serving as internal quantitative reference) were injected
together with 5 × 105 D2.0R-EGFP/Luc cells expressing the
different shRNAs. Three days after injection lungs were cleared of cells
remaining in the vessels by postmortem intracardiac perfusion of 50 ml 1xPBS,
and fixed in 4% PFA. The ratio of red/green cells was calculated based on
quantification of 10 sections for each mouse, whose mean value is a single point
indicated in the figure.
For quantification of D2.0R cell growth, 1 × 106
D2.0R-EGFP-Luc cells expressing shRNAs were injected (day 0). Each cell line was
injected in n=12 different mice, chosen randomly. At day 7, mice were randomly
divided in two groups, and treated by four sequential i.p. (intra peritoneal)
injections of 200 microl Cisplatin (6 mg/Kg day 7 - 4 mg/Kg day 14 - 6 mg/Kg day
21 - 4 mg/Kg day 32) , or
of the corresponding volume of vehicle (1xPBS). Cell growth was monitored by
intravital bioluminescence imaging on anesthetized mice at day 0, before each
cisplatin injection, and every 11 days thereafter. For this we injected i.p.
D-Luciferin solution (PerkinElmer 122799, 200 microl 15 mg/ml in 1xPBS) in
anesthetized mice, waited 10 minutes to allow its absorption, and acquired the
total photon emission over 60 s. in a ROI spanning the whole chest. Background
was measured by using an equivalent ROI positioned over the lower abdomen, which
was subtracted to the chest ROI values. Metastatic growth was normalized in each
mouse to injected cells, i.e. the total photon emission at day 0 (100%). Mice
with relapsing lung metastatic growth, or with growth of cells close to the
injection site at late time points, were culled at the first signs of
distress.

## RNA sequencing
Library generation was based on Quant Seq 3' mRNA-seq Library
Prep kit (Lexogen) with oligo-dT priming. Sequencing was performed on NextSeq500
ILLUMINA instruments and based on at least 5 million reads (75bp SE) for each
sample. The reads were trimmed using BBDuk (BBMap v. 37.87), with parameters
indicated in the Lexogen data analysis protocol. After trimming, reads were
aligned to the Mus musculus genome (GRCm38.p6) using STAR (v. 2.7.6a). The gene
expression levels were quantified using featureCounts (v. 2.0.1). Genes were
sorted removing those that had a total number of counts below 10 in at least 3
samples. All RNA-seq analyses were carried out in the R environment (v. 4.0.0)
with Bioconductor (v. 3.7). We computed differential expression analysis using
the DESeq2 R package (v. 1.28.1). Normalization to CPM has been performed
exploiting the cpm function from the edgeR package (v. 3.32.0).

## Statistics and Reproducibility
All data are based on independent experiments with independent
biological replicates. Independent experiments were carried out by thawing a new
aliquot of cells, deriving from the same original stock. Most results were
qualitatively replicated across two different cell lines and with independent
techniques providing coherent results. All n values are pooled between
independent experiments. No samples or experiments were excluded. Experiments
were not blind.
Experimental data are presented as mean and single points or mean and
SD, as indicated in the figure legends. Significance tests were unpaired
twotailed Student’s t-tests, or unpaired two-tailed Dunnet’s tests
for multiple comparisons to a single control. The tests have been performed
under the assumption that values follow a normal distribution and have similar
variance. Tests were run with Prism v.9 or Excel v.16.55.

## Extended Data
 

## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Diego De Stefani for help with plasmids and advice on toroidal
mitochondria; to Luca Scorrano and Margherita Zamberlan for protocols to measure
mitochondrial morphology and reagents to study DRP1; to Cecilia Laterza for help
with tissue sectioning; to Jessica Weedon who contributed to the setup of the
Bleomycin model; to Ildiko Szabo for help with the TEM and for critically reading of
the manuscript. Support: Worldwide Cancer Research Grant 21-0156, AIRC Foundation
Investigator Grant 21392 and CARIPARO Excellence Grant to S.D. P.R. is supported by
a Veronesi Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship. AIRC Foundation Investigator Grant
2018-ID 2135, AIRC Foundation Investigator Grant 5 per mille 22759, Ministero della
Salute RCR-2019-23669115, Ministero della Salute NET-2016-02361632, Istituto
Oncologico Veneto to A.R. Giovanni Armenise–Harvard Foundation, ERC Starting
Grant (MetEpiStem) to G.M. Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) Foundation
Grant, National Institutes of Health R01-HL071115, 1RC1HL099462, a Tier I Canada
Research Chair, the William J. Henderson Foundation to S.L.A. Longfonds (Voorhen
Astma Fonds) BREATH Consortium, NIHR GOSH Biomedical Research Centre, the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR-RP-2014-04-046) to P.D.C. F.M. is supported by a
GOSH BRC Catalyst Fellowship. University of Padua STARS Consolidator Grant 2019 to
T.C. University of Padua TWINING-VELT 2017 Grant to N.E. Fondazione IRP Città
della Speranza to A.U.

Author contributions

P.R. carried out experiments and analyzed data with help from N.N. M.A.
retrieved raw data for GSEA and performed RNAseq analysis, with support from
G.M. A.T. and V.B. performed IHC and helped with mouse experiments, with support
from A.R. D.W. performed mitochondrial morphology analysis, C.C.T.H. and S.L.A.
provided Drpitor1a and support. F.M. S.S. and T. B. prepared mouse lung
decellularized ECM slices and performed lung infiltration experiments, with
support from P.D.C. M.G. and A.U. performed AFM measurements, with support from
N.E. F.G. helped with SPLICs experiments, with support from T.C. A.R. performed
GSH/GSSG quantifications. P.C. and M.M. helped with GSEA analysis. S.D.
conceptualized, coordinated and supervised the project, and wrote the
manuscript.

Competing interests

The invention of Drpitor1a is the subject of a US Patent Application
20200323829 from D.W. and S.L.A. The remaining authors declare no competing
interests.

## Data availability
Previously published metabolomics data have been deposited to Figshare
database and available at DOI 10.6084/m9.figshare.7338764. RNA sequencing data have been deposited
to GEO database as GSE189803 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE189803).
Source data are provided with this study. All other data supporting the findings of
this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.