PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7135279PMC7135279.1713527971352793225148810.1371/journal.pone.0230981PONE-D-19-324651Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaFungiCryptococcusCryptococcus NeoformansBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensFungal PathogensCryptococcus NeoformansMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensFungal PathogensCryptococcus NeoformansBiology and Life SciencesMycologyFungal PathogensCryptococcus NeoformansBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell ProcessesCell DeathAutophagic Cell DeathResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsModel OrganismsSaccharomyces CerevisiaeResearch and Analysis MethodsModel OrganismsSaccharomyces CerevisiaeBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaFungiYeastSaccharomycesSaccharomyces CerevisiaeResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsYeast and Fungal ModelsSaccharomyces CerevisiaeBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesVacuolesBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaFungiResearch and Analysis MethodsComputational TechniquesSplit-Decomposition MethodMultiple Alignment CalculationResearch and Analysis MethodsDatabase and Informatics MethodsBioinformaticsSequence AnalysisSequence AlignmentBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsFungal GeneticsBiology and Life SciencesMycologyFungal GeneticsBiological functions of the autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans
Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformansRobertoThiago NunesData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft LimaRicardo FerreiraData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareWriting – review & editing PasconRenata CastiglioniConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyResourcesWriting – review & editing IdnurmAlexanderConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6929-0566VallimMarcelo AfonsoConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft 1
Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Diadema, São Paulo, Brazil2
Departamento de Infectologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil3
School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaTrajkovicVladimirEditor ]. The highest incidence of the disease is caused by C. neoformans, a global opportunistic pathogen prevalent in immunodeficient patients, mainly HIV-positive individuals [ ]. The therapy against cryptococcosis requires a long period of treatment with antifungal drugs used singly or in combination, some of which are highly toxic to the patient [ ]. Due to the long period of clinical treatment, some reports indicate that fungi of the genus Cryptococcus may have a high potential to antifungal resistance, which could explain the therapeutic failures and recurrent relapses in the patients with cryptococcosis [ ]. Thus, further studies for new strategies that contribute with the knowledge about the treatment of this mycosis, leading to the deficiency of growth, multiplication, and/or survival of the fungus in the host are of great importance. In this context, the elucidation of autophagic pathways in fungi may provide new insights into the relationship established during the infection process between pathogen and host [ ].
Autophagy is an intracellular mechanism responsible for degradation and recycling of macromolecules and organelles. It is conserved in eukaryotic organisms and is essential for biological processes such as homeostasis, aging, differentiation, development, and pathogenesis [ , ]. Defects in the autophagy pathway can cause cell death and the manipulation of specific components of this system, occurring exclusively in pathogenic microorganisms but not in higher eukaryotes, may lead to a new therapeutic strategy [ ]. Autophagy is a conserved process responsible for cell survival against adverse conditions such as nutritional deprivation, hypoxia or changes in carbon source [ , ]. This mechanism can be divided in three main types: chaperone-mediated autophagy, microautophagy, and selective and non-selective macroautophagy. In addition, in the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae there is an exclusive process called Cvt (Cytoplasm to vacuole targeting), characterized as a specific type of selective macroautophagy [ , ]. Macroautophagy, hereafter referred as autophagy, is the best characterized type, responsible for the sequestration of cytoplasmic contents, involving a double-membrane vesicle termed the autophagosome, that subsequently fuses with the vacuole to promote the degradation and recycling of the transported cargo [ – ].
More than 40 autophagy-related (ATG) genes have been identified in fungi, however, some of them occur exclusively in a specific type of autophagy [ ]. Among the central proteins involved in the autophagy pathway in S. cerevisiae, Atg8 is an essential ubiquitin-like protein that plays an important role in the formation of the double-layer membrane that constitutes the autophagosome vesicle [ , ]. The synthesis of the double-layer membrane depends on a set of autophagy-related proteins, especially Atg8 that needs to be in the conjugated form with the lipid phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), in order to perform its function [ , ]. In S. cerevisiae the conjugation of Atg8-PE is initiated by Atg4 that cleaves the arginine (residue 117) located in the C-terminal portion, exposing a conserved glycine residue. After that, Atg8 with the exposed glycine interacts with Atg7 and is then transferred to Atg3 that finally promotes the conjugation with PE [ , ]. In a second mode of action, Atg4 mediates the delipidation between Atg8 and PE, releasing Atg8 present in the external membrane of the autophagosome, thereby promoting the recycling of Atg8 in the system [ ].
Recently, the autophagy mechanism involving autophagosome formation has been extended from yeast model S. cerevisiae, showing the need to emphasis the differences in autophagy machinery in different species. In the filamentous fungus Aspergillus oryzae, Atg8 is an essential protein for autophagy, and it accumulates in the vacuole after starvation or rapamycin induction. ATG8 gene deletion results in impaired aerial hyphal growth, conidia formation and germination [ ]. In Sordaria macrospora, a coprophilic filamentous ascomycete, Atg4 processes Atg8 in the C-terminal region, ensuring its localization in the autophagosomal vesicle. Moreover, the gene disruption leads to impaired vegetative growth and ascospore germination [ ]. For the plant-pathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea Atg4 plays a crucial role in autophagy by processing Atg8 [ ], which is important for the formation of autophagic bodies under starvation condition [ ]. Besides, it was observed that both autophagy-related proteins are required for vegetative development, conidiation, and virulence in plant tissues [ , ]. In the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae, Atg4 interacts and processes Atg8, leading to accumulation of autophagic bodies in the vacuole by nitrogen starvation. In addition, Atg4 is fundamental for hyphal development, conidiation, appressorium formation, and pathogenesis [ ]. In Ustilago maydis, a plant pathogenic fungus, Atg8 impacts on the accumulation of autophagic bodies in the vacuole, cell survival under carbon starvation condition, and teliospores formation [ ]. Atg8 is also important for virulence and sporulation in the chestnut blight fungus, Cryphonectria parasitica, and may be a target for a mycovirus that causes a reduction in pathogenicity [ ].
For the human pathogenic fungus C. neoformans, a variety of studies were carried out to characterize the genes associated with the autophagy pathway. Hu et al. [ ] described the importance of gene VPS34 in the autophagy process and, using RNAi, knocked down the Atg8 expression and demonstrated that this protein is important for virulence in a mouse model of cryptococcosis. Oliveira et al. [ ] showed that atg7 mutants have reduced autophagic body formation and decreased cell viability under nitrogen deprivation. Beyond defects in the autophagy pathway, the ATG7 gene in C. neoformans contributes to cellular size and survival in mice lungs. Gontijo et al. [ ] reported that the predicted cargo protein aspartyl aminopeptidase-like (Ape4) is important for survival at 37°C, cell size, antifungal susceptibility, capsule formation, survival within macrophages, and virulence in mice infected with C. neoformans. Also, these authors pointed out that of 33 genes involved in S. cerevisiae autophagy, C. neoformans bares in its genome only 21 of them, indicating that likely the autophagy in the latter may function slightly different from what has been described for the former. Furthermore, Ding et al. [ ] found that C. neoformans ATG genes ATG1, ATG7, ATG8 and ATG9 are required to maintain amino acid levels in a nitrogen depleted condition, contribute to sensitivity to the proteasome inhibitor BTZ and affect the virulence in a murine model of infection. Hence, it has been established for Cryptococcus the importance of Atg-related proteins in different biological aspects, yet the molecular mechanisms involving the autophagy regulation have not been fully explored. Thus, the present study aimed to investigate the C. neoformans Atg4 and Atg8 proteins by analyzing their complementarity of function with homologous proteins of S. cerevisiae, role in the regulation of autophagy pathway, and impact of mutant strains in response to multi-stress conditions.

## Materials and methods

## Fungal strains and culture conditions
The yeast strains used in this study are presented in . The mutant strains were generated in the C. neoformans var. grubii (KN99α) and S. cerevisiae (BY4741) backgrounds. Cultures were commonly maintained on rich medium YPD (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone and 2% glucose). Synthetic dextrose (SD) medium was prepared either with or without ammonium sulfate and amino acids (Sigma). In order to investigate the direct protein-protein interactions by the yeast two-hybrid system, DDO (SD/+N, -Leu -Trp), QDO (SD/+N, -Leu -Trp -Ade -His), QDO/X (QDO supplemented with 40 μg/mL X-α-Gal) and QDO/X/A (QDO/X with 200 ng/mL Aureobasidin A) media were used, as indicated by the manufacturer (Clontech). Cultures were incubated at 30°C or 37°C, in a rotary shaker with 150 rpm when required.

## In silico analysis of autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8
The C. neoformans ATG4 (CNAG_02662) and ATG8 (CNAG_00816) genes were identified by BLASTp similarity search against the C. neoformans H99 database (taxid: 235443) available at the NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information) and using the amino acid sequences of S. cerevisiae Atg4 and Atg8 as a query (SGD accession numbers YNL223W and YBL078C, respectively). The protein conserved domains and signatures were obtained using the CDD (Conserved Domain Database) platform available online at NCBI. The illustration of the protein domains was made using the IBS 1.0.3 software (CUCKOO Workgroup). Multiple alignment of homologous amino acid sequences was performed using the ClustalW program [ ]. Phylogenetic analysis was conducted using the Neighbor-Joining method with 1,000 bootstrap replicates [ ], using the software MEGA v. 10.0.5 [ ].

## Protein-protein interactions by yeast two-hybrid assay
The direct protein-protein interactions were performed using the Matchmaker® Gold Yeast Two-Hybrid System (Clontech, Takara Bio), following the manufacturer’s recommendations. For all the experiments the strain Y2HGold and the vectors pGBKT7 (bait) and pGADT7 (prey), supplied with the kit, were used. The coding sequence of each gene of interest was amplified by PCR using the specific primers listed in . C. neoformans ATG8 (CNAG_00816) cDNA was cloned into GAL4 DNA-binding domain vector pGBKT7, while ATG3 (CNAG_06892); ATG4 (CNAG_02662) and ATG7 (CNAG_04538) cDNAs were cloned into the GAL4 transcriptional activation domain vector pGADT7. Then, the cloned vectors were individually transformed into the strain Y2HGold, according to the Yeastmaker™ Yeast Transformation System 2 (Clontech, Takara Bio) protocol, selected on SD/-Leu or SD/-Trp, and tested for the autoactivation. The activation of the reporter genes was evaluated by plating the cells on selective medium supplemented with 40 μg/mL X-α-Gal and 200 ng/mL Aureobasidin A. After autoactivation analysis, each pair of bait (pGADT7) and prey (pGBKT7) was co-transformed in Y2HGold and the transformants were selected on DDO medium. In addition, two independent clones were used to verify the interaction between bait and prey. Colonies growing in DDO were streaked onto QDO, QDO/X and QDO/X/A plates. The growth was observed after 5 days of incubation at 30°C. The positive interactions were detected by cell survival in selective media that activate the reporter genes (AUR1-C, ADE2, HIS3, and MEL1) after bait and prey interaction. For this experiment, the plasmids pGBKT7-53 and pGADT7-T were used as a positive control, and pGBKT7-Lam and pGADT7-T were used as a negative control.

## Yeast complementation and starvation challenge
For the yeast complementation assay we amplified by PCR the coding sequence of ATG4 (CNAG_02662) and ATG8 (CNAG_00816) C. neoformans genes, using the primers indicated in . The coding sequence fragments were cloned into the HindIII and XbaI restriction sites of the yeast expression vector pYES2 (Invitrogen) using the Gibson Assembly® Master Mix (New England BioLabs). The recombinant plasmids were introduced into the S. cerevisiae (BY4741) atg4Δ and atg8Δ null mutants, whose construction is described below, following the lithium acetate (LiAc)/single-stranded DNA (SS-DNA)/polyethylene glycol (PEG) transformation protocol [ ]. The transformants were selected by uracil prototrophy. The functional complementation effect was tested under nitrogen starvation as proposed by Matsuura et al. [ ] with some modifications. First, the cells were cultured in YPD broth for 2 days at 30°C with 150 rpm. Then yeast cells were washed with sterile saline 0.9%, transferred to liquid SD/-N/-AA (2% glucose and 0.17% yeast nitrogen base with neither amino acids nor ammonium sulfate) and incubated for a period of 20 days at 30°C with 150 rpm in a rotary shaker. Lastly, the culture suspension had the OD530 adjusted to 0.6 and the suspension had the concentration reduced in a 10-fold serial dilution. Five microliters of each serial dilution were spotted on YPD plates and incubated for 48 hours at 30°C, before comparing the growth ratio between the wild type, mutant and/or complemented strains. The starvation challenge for C. neoformans was also performed using the nitrogen starvation protocol, in order to check the starvation-sensitive phenotype in the autophagy-related mutant strains. All the experiments independently were repeated three times.

## Gene deletion and fungal transformation
The S. cerevisiae atg4Δ and atg8Δ mutants were generated by substituting the ATG4 (YNL223W) and ATG8 (YBL078C) coding regions with the KanMX6 selectable marker, which confers resistance to G418 (Geneticin). The gene replacement was performed by a homologous recombination strategy, using the primers listed in . The selective marker was overlap-PCR amplified from plasmid pFA6-S65TGFP-KanMX6. The PCR fragments were introduced into S. cerevisiae BY4741 strain using the LiAc/SS carrier DNA/PEG heat shock transformation methodology [ ]. The transformants were selected on YPD plates containing 200 μg/mL G418 and the deletion was confirmed by diagnostic PCR. The C. neoformans gene deletions were constructed by replacing, via homologous recombination, the ATG4 (CNAG_02662) and ATG8 (CNAG_00816) coding regions by a selectable marker hygromycin phosphotransferase. Sequences of all the oligonucleotides primers designed for gene-disruption are indicated in . Briefly, the selectable marker was amplified from vector pPZP-Hyg2 (hygromycin resistance cassette) (donated by Dr. J Heitman [ ]) by overlap-PCR extension, based on double-joint PCR methodology [ ]. Whereas, the flanking regions of a target gene to be deleted were PCR amplified using the KN99α gDNA as template. The generated fragments were introduced in wild type strain (KN99α) by biolistic transformation using the Biolistic® PDS-1000/He Particle Delivery System (BioRad) [ ]. Subsequently, the mutants were plated and selected on YPD medium supplemented with 200 μg/mL hygromycin. After the gene deletion, reconstituted strains were generated by PCR amplification of the wild type native locus, that was biolistically delivered back into the mutant, co-transformed with the plasmid pPZP-Neo1 (G418 resistance cassette) (donated by Dr. J Heitman [ ]). Reconstituted transformants were selected on YPD with 200 μg/mL G418. The gene replacements were tested by diagnostic PCR and confirmed by Southern blot analysis. The yeast genomic DNA extraction was performed following a previously described methodology [ ] and the Southern blot technique was performed according to the protocol proposed by Sambrook et al. [ ].

## GFP fusion cassette and fluorescence microscopy
The C. neoformans ATG8 coding region was amplified by PCR and inserted into the BamHI and SpeI cloning sites of the vector pCN50 [ ], resulting in a plasmid with the gene fused in frame to the C-terminus of GFP (green fluorescent protein). The primers to generate the fragments are presented in . The cloned vectors were introduced into wild type KN99α and atg4 mutant strains by biolistic transformation. The selection of transformants was carried out in YPD agar containing 200 μg/mL G418 (Geneticin). The cellular localization of autophagy-related protein Atg8 was evaluated by fluorescence microscopy. In general, the yeast cells expressing the GFP fused proteins were grown overnight in liquid YPD at 30°C with 150 rpm. The cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed twice in a phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Then, cells were inoculated to a final concentration of OD600 1.0 in one milliliter of YPD and SD/-N/-AA. Each condition was incubated for 4 hours at 30°C and 37°C in a rotary shaker. For the vacuole membrane staining, 1 μg/mL of FM4-64 dye (Invitrogen) was added to the culture after 3 h of incubation [ ]. The samples were analyzed using an Olympus BX51 fluorescent microscope with an Olympus DP73 digital camera (Olympus). A total of one hundred cells per treatment distributed in different visual fields were evaluated. All acquired images were captured with 100× objective lens and processed with the program cellSens Dimension 1.16 (Olympus). Microscopy analyses were done in biological triplicate. The data were statistically analyzed in GraphPad Prism 7.0 software using two-way ANOVA, to compare different groups with more than one variable.

## Protein extraction and western blotting
For the total protein extract preparation, yeast cells were first cultured in YPD broth until they reached the mid-log phase at 30°C. Autophagy was then induced by transferring the cells to liquid SD without ammonium sulfate and amino acids. Nitrogen starvation induction was performed from 0–4 hours at 30°C and 150 rpm. After induction, the yeast cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 500 μL lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM PMSF, 10 mM orthovanadate, 50 mM NaF, 0.5% NP-40) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich). Glass beads were added to the cellular suspension and cells were lysed using a Mini-Beadbeater-16 (BioSpec). The protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay [ ]. For western blotting, 50 μg of total protein were separated by SDS-PAGE on 10% polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad) using the Trans-Blot® SD Semi-Dry Transfer Cell (Bio-Rad) at 15 V for 1 hour. Then, the membranes were blocked in 5% skimmed milk in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.1% Tween 20. Membranes were further incubated with primary mouse anti-GFP (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or rabbit anti-histone (Cell Signaling) in a 1:2,000 dilution. Following this, the membranes were incubated with anti-mouse IgG or anti-rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling) secondary antibodies conjugated to horse-radish peroxidase in a 1:5,000 dilution. The immunoreactive bands were detected using SuperSignal™ West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and visualized using ImageQuant LAS (GE Healthcare). This experiment was carried out three times independently.

## Stress sensitivity assay
The procedure to evaluate yeast growth under stress conditions was performed by incubating overnight the C. neoformans strains in 5 mL YPD broth at 30°C in a rotary shaker. The cells were precipitated by centrifugation, washed twice in sterile saline and diluted to a concentration of 2 × 106 CFU/mL and 10-fold diluted until to 2 × 102 CFU/mL. Five microliters of each dilution were spotted on plates containing the stress-inducing agents. For the stress analysis, YPD agar was supplemented with 0.5%-0.75% Congo Red (cell wall integrity), 0.03%-0.04% SDS (cell membrane integrity), pH adjusted from 6 to 8 (alkaline stress), 0.75–1 M KCl (osmotic stress), 0.75–1 M NaCl (saline stress), 2.5–4 mM H2O2 (oxidative stress), and 1–2.5 mM NaNO2 (nitrosative stress); furthermore, SD agar was supplemented with different combinations of ammonium sulfate and amino acids (starvation stress). The spotted cells were incubated at 30°C and 37°C for a period of 2 days and then photographed. Each condition was repeated in duplicate.

## Sensitivity to the proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ)
The growth inhibition effect of Bortezomib (BTZ) upon C. neoformans strains (wild type and mutants) was tested as previously described by Ding et al. [ ]. Briefly, an isolated colony was inoculated in 5 mL YPD and incubated overnight at 30°C with 150 rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed three times in a phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and diluted to a final concentration of 106 cells/mL in liquid SD/-N/-AA, supplemented or not with 50 μg/mL BTZ (Accord/Intas Pharmaceuticals). The culture was incubated for a period of 48 hours at 30°C in a rotary shaker. To determine the fold change of the initial CFU, cells were plated at 0 and 48 h on YPD and incubated at 30°C for 48 hours. The CFU was calculated and the data were statistically analyzed in GraphPad Prism 7.0 software using unpaired t test for comparison of two groups. The experiment was performed in two independent biological replicates.

## Results

## Identification of ATG8 in C. neoformans
We initiated our study by identifying the ATG8 orthologue gene in the genome of C. neoformans. The amino acid sequence of S. cerevisiae Atg8 protein (SGD accession number: YBL078C) was used as a query for the BLASTp similarity search against the Cryptococcus neoformans H99 database (taxid: 235443) available at the NCBI. The result revealed a putative microtubule binding protein containing 126 amino acids with 78% identity to the S. cerevisiae Atg8 protein, encoded in C. neoformans by the CNAG_00816 gene on chromosome 1 and confirming the identification previously published by other authors [ , ]. Next, we performed the phylogenetic analysis of multiple alignment using eight protein sequences with homology to Atg8 belonging to basidiomycetes and ascomycetes species. We verified that the Atg8 protein of C. neoformans is grouped in the same cluster of C. gattii and, moreover, C. neoformans Atg8 is phylogenetically closer to other ascomycetes species such as Neurospora crassa, Aspergillus flavus and Magnaporthe oryzae than S. cerevisiae ( ). Nevertheless, when comparing the structural sequence of different Atg8 homologous proteins between those same fungal species, we verified the presence of some conserved domains ( ). The data using the CDD platform (Conserved Domain Database, NCBI) showed the presence of the Ubiquitin-like superfamily (UBQ) domain and predicted Atg4 and Atg7 proteins binding sites (filled and unfilled arrows, respectively). In addition, it was possible to verify the presence of the conserved glycine residue, necessary for the cleavage of the C-terminal portion by the cysteine protease Atg4, allowing the subsequent conjugation of Atg8 with PE [ ] ( ). These results indicate that C. neoformans Atg8 is highly conserved with orthologues from different fungal species.

## Interactions of Atg8 with autophagy-related proteins Atg3, Atg4 and Atg7
It is known that in S. cerevisiae Atg8 binds directly to other autophagy-related proteins such as Atg3, Atg4 and Atg7, which are responsible for the processing of Atg8 to a form required for autophagosome vesicle synthesis [ , ]. Since C. neoformans Atg8 has predicted binding sites for Atg4 and Atg7 ( ), we investigated whether in C. neoformans there would also be direct interaction of Atg8 with these proteins, including Atg3. Direct protein-protein interactions were performed by yeast two-hybrid analysis. C. neoformans full-length cDNA sequences were used to construct both bait (pGBKT7) and prey (pGADT7) plasmids with the Matchmaker™ Gold Yeast Two-Hybrid System (Clontech). The results of the two-hybrid experiments performed with two independent clones demonstrated that, individually, bait and preys do not autoactivate the reporter genes ( ); however, when co-transformed, the bait pGBKT7-ATG8 interacted with all prey containing ATG3 (CNAG_06892), ATG4 (CNAG_02662) or ATG7 (CNAG_04538) sequences in all selective media ( ). These observations suggest that Atg3, Atg4 and Atg7 are proteins that, by interacting with Atg8, may be involved in the autophagy pathway in C. neoformans.
 

## Characterization of autophagy-related protein Atg4 in C. neoformans
Since the Atg8 protein in C. neoformans shows the glycine residue (Atg8G117) in the C-terminus portion ( ) and interacts directly with Atg4 via two-hybrid system ( ), we decided to include in our study the analysis of Atg4. In order to identify the ATG4 orthologous gene, we used the amino acid sequence of S. cerevisiae Atg4 (SGD: YNL223W) as a query. The search in the BLASTp algorithm against the genome database of C. neoformans H99 (taxid: 235443) revealed similarity with the gene CNAG_02662 located in chromosome 3 and with 33% identity with the Atg4 of S. cerevisiae. In C. neoformans, ATG4 encodes a putative cysteine ​​protease with 1,185 amino acids. As observed in S. cerevisiae, Atg4 from C. neoformans has a conserved domain of the Peptidase_C54 Superfamily between the amino acids 480–982: this domain is present in a group of proteolytic proteins capable of hydrolyzing the peptide bond. Moreover, when aligning the multiple sequences of Atg4 homologous proteins, we observed the catalytic residue of cysteine, which is conserved in all fungi species analyzed ( ). These results suggest that the functions of Atg4 in Saccharomyces and Cryptococcus may be conserved.

## ATG4 and ATG8 of C. neoformans functionally complement the atg4 and atg8 mutants of S. cerevisiae
As we observed that Atg proteins Atg8 and Atg4 are highly conserved in different fungal species, we next performed an assay to verify the hypothesis that the autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8 of Cryptococcus have the same functions as their well-studied counterparts in Saccharomyces. For this study, heterologous complementation in S. cerevisiae mutants was tested. First, we obtained the atg4Δ and atg8Δ null mutants by homologous recombination in S. cerevisiae ( ). Then, the full-length cDNA sequences of C. neoformans Atg4 and Atg8 were cloned into the expression vector pYES2 (Invitrogen) and transformed, respectively, into the atg4Δ and atg8Δ mutants of S. cerevisiae. After 20 days of culture in SD/-N/-AA broth medium, it was possible to observe a nutritional deprivation sensitivity phenotype for the S. cerevisiae atg4Δ and atg8Δ mutants. However, when these mutants were complemented with the Cryptococcus proteins, we observed that CnATG4 and CnATG8 recovered their growth defects, restoring the cell survival on nitrogen-lacking medium to the wild type strain level ( ). Therefore, these results indicate that Atg4 and Atg8 of C. neoformans are functionally homologous with the S. cerevisiae autophagy-related proteins.
 

## Involvement of proteins Atg4 and Atg8 in the autophagy pathway
In S. cerevisiae the ATG gene deletions leads to mutants with sensitivity to nitrogen starvation [ ]. Based on that, we decided to investigate the response to starvation for ATG4 and ATG8 disrupted genes in C. neoformans. For this study, we first obtained individuals atg4 and atg8 mutants using the double-joint methodology ( ). After confirming the gene deletion by Southern blot analyses ( ), we reconstituted the ATG8 gene into the atg8 mutant by PCR amplification of the CNAG_00816 gene, which was co-transformed with the plasmid pPZP-Neo1 (G418 resistance). For the atg4 mutants we tested two independent strains, since we did not manage to restitute the wild type copy back into the mutant. For the starvation sensitivity experiment, we induced the autophagy in the wild type (KN99α), reconstituted (atg8+ATG8) and atg mutant strains by culturing the cells for 20 days in liquid SD/-N/-AA. After this period of starvation challenge, we observed the loss of cell viability for atg4 and atg8 mutants, compared to wild type and reconstituted phenotypes ( ).
 

## Atg4 processes Atg8 during nitrogen starvation
In order to elucidate in C. neoformans the processing of Atg8 involving the cysteine protease Atg4 upon autophagy induction, as described in S. cerevisiae [ ], we introduced into KN99α and atg4 mutant strains the GFP-Atg8 plasmid. We next examined by western blot the vacuolar proteolysis of Atg8 under nitrogen starvation from a period of 0–4 h. When the wild type strain expressing GFP-Atg8 was incubated in SD/-N/-AA broth it was possible to visualize over time the bands of the GFP-Atg8 fused protein as well as the free GFP bands ( ). The KN99α data suggest a normal autophagic flux, with Atg8 being degraded by releasing the GFP fragment in the course of time. On the other hand, in the atg4 mutant only the full length GFP-Atg8 bands were detected ( ), suggesting that the autophagosome synthesis was blocked and, consequently, Atg8 was not degraded.
 

## Atg8 intravacuolar localization occurs in an Atg4-dependent manner
In S. cerevisiae, the ATG4 gene knockout generates mutant cells defective in delivering Atg8 to the vacuole during the autophagy pathway, resulting in GFP-Atg8 diffuse distribution in the cytoplasm and, consequently, indicating that Atg8 processing by Atg4 is necessary for its subsequent vacuolar association [ ]. To further understand the impact of ATG4 deletion in the mechanism of autophagy in C. neoformans, we next evaluated the Atg8 cellular localization by fluorescence microscopy, using the strains containing the GFP fused proteins. For that, we monitored the GFP-Atg8 localization upon cell cultivation in rich medium (YPD) and starvation medium (SD/-N/-AA) for 4 hours at 30°C and 37°C, after labeling the vacuole membrane with FM4-64 ( ). In KN99α, the fluorescence visualization of cells growing in rich medium revealed that most of the GFP-Atg8 was distributed in the cell cytoplasm. However, after autophagy induction by starvation, we observed a significant translocation of GFP-Atg8 to the vacuolar lumen at 30°C and 37°C ( ). In contrast, for the atg4 mutants cultured in YPD, Atg8 fused with GFP was dispersed in the cytoplasm. On the other hand, when these cells lacking the protein Atg4 were cultured in SD/-N/-AA, we observed that GFP-Atg8 remains localized in the cytoplasm, demonstrating that Atg4 is required for the shifting of Atg8 to vacuole lumen ( ). When comparing the GFP localization according to the temperature, we observed a similar percentage of GFP-Atg8 in cells growing at 30°C and 37°C; in which for the wild type 86.3% and 82.3% of GFP-Atg8 were located in the cytoplasm (30°C and 37°C, respectively) and for atg4 mutant 93.3% and 93.7% were located intravacuolar (30°C and 37°C, respectively). The data were statistically significant only for the wild type strains, for which we observed for cells cultured in YPD an average of 93% of GFP localized in the cytoplasm and, for cells growing in SD/-N/-AA, we found around 84% of GFP-Atg8 localized intravacuolar ( ).
 Together, these results support the idea that Atg4 and Atg8 proteins in C. neoformans are involved in an autophagic mechanism, since the lack of both proteins impairs yeast growth in an autophagy induced environment. Moreover, the ATG4 gene deletion affects the vacuolar breakdown of Atg8, indicating that Atg8 was not processed and could not form the autophagosome vesicle during the autophagy pathway. Additionally, the correct Atg8 intravacuolar localization occurs in an Atg4-dependent manner.

## Requirement of autophagy-related genes during stress growth condition
Recently it was shown that in C. neoformans functional autophagy pathway is important to several biological events related to pathogenesis [ – ]. To better characterize the effect of a defective autophagy process, we performed experiments to evaluate the growth phenotype in multi-stress conditions for the wild type (KN99α), atg4 (two independent strains), atg8 and reconstituted atg8+ATG8. The stress conditions tested were those performed by many authors to access the effect of several mutations throughout the C. neoformans genome that are thought to be important for pathogenesis [ , ]. For this analysis, we could not observe any phenotypic difference for the mutants growing under starvation (SD+/-N+/-AA), alkaline (pH), osmotic (KCl), saline (NaCl), nitrosative (NaNO2), and cell membrane integrity (SDS) stress (data shown in ). However, compared to the wild type, it was possible to notice growth differences between atg4 and atg8 strains in response to YPD supplemented with H2O2 and Congo Red, as shown in . The ATG4 and ATG8 gene deletion resulted in an increased tolerance to hydrogen peroxide, supposedly affecting the fungal antioxidant defense and improving the yeast growth in the presence of H2O2. For the oxidative stress experiment, the atg4 and atg8 showed a growth improvement on YPD with 4 mM H2O2 at 30°C. When incubating the cells at 37°C, we observed for the autophagy mutants an increment of resistance to hydrogen peroxide on YPD containing 3 mM H2O2 and a slight cell growth on 4 mM H2O2, when compared to wild type strain ( ). Furthermore, the atg4 and atg8 growth was impaired by incubating the cells on YPD supplemented with 0.65% and 0.75% Congo Red at 30°C and 37°C. Therefore, the disruption of the autophagy pathway somehow impairs C. neoformans to efficiently respond to this stressful condition ( ).
 It is known that the autophagy and ubiquitin-proteasome pathways (UPP) help to maintain the amino acid homeostasis in the cell [ – ]. Ding et al. [ ] described that disrupting the UPP by the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ at 50 μg/mL) had an amplified effect upon autophagy mutants when growing under nitrogen starvation. Therefore, we decided to evaluate the impact of BTZ presence when growing atg4 and atg8 mutants under nitrogen depletion medium. As described previously by Ding et al. [ ] and observed in our analysis, BTZ reduced the growth pattern of the wild type strain (KN99α) after 48 hours under nitrogen deprivation, but it was not a significant decrease in the CFU ( ). However, the growth impairment was rather pronounced for the atg8 mutant treated with BTZ, which had the growth reduced to 88% compared with the same strain without treatment. As expected, this impact was remediated when a wild type copy of ATG8 was reintroduced in the atg8 mutant, confirming the results published by Ding et al. [ ]. shows that the two atg4 independent mutants have significantly reduced their proliferation by 88% and 93% in the presence of BTZ, compared with the same strain without BTZ. This experiment allows us to suggest that the lack of Atg4 and Atg8 impairs the progression of the autophagy mechanism; additionally, the deficiency of autophagy in combination with the inhibition of proteasome formation causes an unbalance in the amino acid homeostasis, leading to a drastic drop on nutrients recycling, that might impairs the cell to grow and/or survive under nitrogen deprivation.
Overall, these results indicate that in C. neoformans the autophagy mechanism may prepare the cell to respond to adverse environmental conditions by recycling nutrients likely, contributing to yeast survival.

## Discussion
Due to the fact that C. neoformans causes infections mainly in immunodeficient individuals [ ], affecting up to 223,000 individuals per year [ ] and that there is a constraint regarding treatment; it is necessary to broad the knowledge on this fungus biology in order to search for alternatives for treatment and disease control. Understanding the molecular mechanisms that connect both pathogenicity and autophagy could provide us new insights into the relationship established during the fungal infection [ ]. One of the central steps of the autophagy pathway is the autophagosome formation in which, in yeast model S. cerevisiae, Atg4 is important to start the autophagosome synthesis by processing Atg8 [ ]. Therefore, we characterized in the present study the autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8 in C. neoformans, hoping to clarify new information about their roles in the biology of this pathogenic fungus.
The multiple protein sequence alignment revealed that Atg8 in C. neoformans contains the C-terminal glycine (Gly117) that is highly conserved in the fungi species analyzed in our study, and also reported in other organisms like Bipolaris maydis, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Arabidopsis thaliana, Rattus norvegicus, Homo sapiens, etc [ , ]. Moreover, we found by two-hybrid analysis that C. neoformans Atg8 interacts with Atg3, Atg4 and Atg7. In S. cerevisiae, Atg8 is processed in the C-terminal region by Atg4, to expose the glycine residue; then processed Atg8 is activated by an E1-like enzyme Atg7 and, subsequently, transferred to the E2-like enzyme Atg3, to promote the Atg8 conjugation with PE (Atg8-PE). Atg8-PE is essential for the double membrane autophagosome formation [ ]. Among the three confirmed interactions, we decided to better investigate the autophagy-related protein 4.
Atg4 is a cysteine protease of Clan CA and family C54 that is a crucial for both Atg8-PE conjugation and subsequent delipidation [ ]. Atg4 was first identified in yeast by Lang et al. [ ], who demonstrated that this protein was essential for the process of delivering the autophagic vesicles to the vacuole lumen in S. cerevisiae. Since then, Atg4 has been an important target to study autophagy in different eukaryotic organisms. In our analysis of Atg4 we observed that, as in S. cerevisiae, the C. neoformans cysteine protease has the conserved domain of Peptidase_C54 Superfamily. The protease database MEROPS [ ] describes the family C54 as a group of endopeptidases that hydrolases a peptide bond, with specificity to glycyl bonds. Furthermore, in S. cerevisiae, the catalytic residue of cysteine (Cys147) was identified as responsible for initially processing Atg8 at the C-terminus, exposing the glycine residue and allowing Atg8 to conjugate with PE (Atg8-PE) [ ]. Comparing the Atg4 multiple sequence alignment with fungal species, the C. neoformans putative catalytic residue of cysteine (Cys568) is conserved. Other authors studying alignments of Atg4 homologues found that the Cys residue was highly conserved among different species, beyond those presented in this study, including Botrytis cinerea, Candida glabrata, Fusarium graminearum, Penicillium oxalicum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Mus musculus, Homo sapiens, and others [ , , ].
Evidence that Atg4 and Atg8 in C. neoformans are highly conserved led us to validate their functions by heterologous complementation in Saccharomyces. In fungi, functional complementation of autophagy genes in Saccharomyces mutants was demonstrated for Botrytis cinerea [ , ], Magnaporthe oryzae [ ], and Sordaria macrospora [ ]. Here, we analyzed the growth viability of the mutants and the complemented strains after cultivating for 20 days in starvation medium (SD/-N/-AA). In general, S. cerevisiae atg null mutants tend to lose their ability to survive in nitrogen starvation conditions [ ]. In our study we observed that the S. cerevisiae atg4Δ and atg8Δ strains had defective growth in SD/-N/-AA. However, the phenotypes were recovered to the wild type level, once each mutant was complemented with their respective C. neoformans homologous gene. The same was observed when evaluating specifically the C. neoformans autophagy mutated strains, in that atg4 and atg8 also show a sensitivity phenotype after cultivated in depleted nutrient condition. In addition, Gontijo et al. [ ] studying 21 putative genes involved in autophagy, showed that in C. neoformans the ATG4 and ATG8 gene transcription is induced by nitrogen starvation at 30°C and 37°C. Onodera and Ohsumi [ ] reported that the loss of cellular viability in these atg mutants, cultured in nutritional deprivation, may be due to failure to sustain the amino acids supply, leading to inability to synthesize new proteins. Besides that, Suzuki et al. [ ] presented that the cell death of atg mutants is in consequence of deficiency in respiratory function. The authors showed that, under starvation condition, the autophagy-defective mutants tend to accumulate reactive oxygen species (ROS), causing inhibition of mitochondrial DNA replication and resulting in cells unable to maintain mitochondrial function.
In most eukaryotic organisms, Atg8 is a central protein used to infer the progress of autophagy. Based on that, a reliable method to better understand the autophagy molecular mechanism is through monitoring the vacuolar delivery and proteolysis of GFP-Atg8 [ ]. Here, we demonstrated that the fusion protein GFP-Atg8 can be also used to monitor the autophagy pathway in C. neoformans. Our western blot analysis revealed that Atg4 is essential for Atg8 vacuolar proteolysis, as the observations evidenced in yeast model S. cerevisiae [ ]. Confirming our findings, the results obtained previously by other authors show that although Atg8 is expressed in the atg4 mutant cells, the protein cannot be processed in the C-terminal region to form the Atg8-PE conjugate, interrupting the autophagosomal membrane synthesis and, by that, blocking the GFP-Atg8 degradation in the vacuole lumen [ , ]. Furthermore, fluorescence microscopy analysis allowed us to observe the GFP-Atg8 flux during nitrogen starvation. We demonstrated in C. neoformans that GFP-Atg8 is localized inside the vacuole in an Atg4-dependent manner. As previously published for S. cerevisiae, in wild type cells growing in a normal autophagy condition, GFP-Atg8 can be visualized as a puncta close to the vacuole, indicating that Atg8 is located in the pre-autophagosomal structure (PAS), in which the Atg-related proteins are recruited for autophagosome formation [ ]. Although we could not see in C. neoformans a perivacuolar puncta signal for GFP-Atg8 when KN99α cells were cultured in starvation medium (SD/-N/-AA), we believe that the starvation induction for a period of 4 hours provided us with information on the later steps of the autophagy pathway. In this case, the GFP signal was concentrated within the vacuole, suggesting that the autophagosome double membrane was formed, fused with the vacuole, and lastly, the inner autophagosome membrane covered with GFP-Atg8-PE was delivered to the vacuole and degraded by vacuolar proteases [ ].
Recently, new studies have reported that Atg proteins are involved in other biological process beyond autophagy. Oliveira et al. [ ] showed that ATG7 deletion in C. neoformans impairs not only the autophagy mechanism, but also affects the cellular size, reduces the pathogenicity in infected larvae, impairs the colonization in mice lung, and decreases the cell resistance to fungicidal activity of neutrophils. Ding et al. [ ] found that ATG1, ATG7, ATG8, and ATG9 genes in C. neoformans are involved in the autophagy mechanism and contribute to the virulence of the fungus. The authors observed that these mutants presented impaired maintenance of amino acids homeostasis under nitrogen starvation, reduced levels of virulence in a murine inhalation model, and contribute in different ways to the immune response and ability to promote the virulence. In our study, we found that both ATG4 and ATG8 deletion in C. neoformans resulted in cells that were more resistant to oxidative stress when cultivated with hydrogen peroxide, defective growth in the presence of Congo Red maybe as a result of a cell wall integrity damage, and sensitivity to the proteasome inhibitor BTZ.
Several studies have found evidence for an interaction between autophagy and ROS. Most of the data in the literature have shown that autophagy can be also controlled by ROS, which are responsible for the modulation of survival or cell death cascades, under oxidative inductions [ ]. Experiments performed in Saccharomyces by Pérez-Pérez et al. [ ] show that Atg4 is one of the autophagy-related proteins controlled by reactive oxygen species. The authors observed that Atg4 activity is inhibited by oxidation, in a H2O2 concentration-dependent manner, thereby affecting the autophagic machinery. In most cases, basal levels of ROS play an important homeostatic role for cell survival but, at high levels, ROS are lethal to the cells [ ]. For C. neoformans we observed that atg4 and atg8 mutants are tolerant to higher concentrations of hydrogen peroxide (3 and 4 mM H2O2) compared to the wild type strain. It is important to note that a similar finding was obtained in mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) cells: atg5 mutant cells were more resistant to cell death after exposure to H2O2, attributed by subsequent compensatory activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), which might interfere with cell survival against the oxidative damage [ ].
Moreover, in C. neoformans, atg4 and atg8 mutants have an impaired growth in the presence of 0.65% and 0.75% Congo Red at 30°C and 37°C. Congo Red is cell wall-perturbing agent with high affinity for chitin, that causes weakness in the cell wall, activating the stress response [ ]. For the endophytic fungus Harpophora oryzae, the ATG5 gene displays an important role in autophagy, sporulation and cell wall integrity. In the presence of Congo Red the growth is highly inhibited in the atg5 mutants, affecting the mycelial development [ ]. Another finding in our investigation was the fact that ATG4 and ATG8 gene disruption resulted in sensitivity to the proteasome inhibitor BTZ. In accordance with our results, Ding et al. [ ], studying the role of BTZ in the absence of a nitrogen source, reported that deletion of ATG1, ATG7, ATG8 and ATG9 genes in C. neoformans causes BTZ hypersensitivity cells, by inhibiting the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In addition, the authors pointed out that the autophagy mechanism is upregulated to compensate the proteasome inhibition; however, the effect of BTZ in ATG mutant cells is exacerbated when autophagy is compromised, resulting in a decrease in the availability of amino acids and other nutrients to the cell.
Taking these results together and based on Saccharomyces autophagy studies, we hypothesize the scenario that during the autophagy pathway in C. neoformans, Atg4 processes Atg8 by exposing the C-terminal glycine (Gly117). Thereby, processed Atg8 interacts with Atg7 and Atg3 to promote its conjugation with PE (Atg8-PE), allowing the double membrane autophagosome assembly/expansion, followed by the autophagosome-vacuole fusion and delivery of cargo to the vacuolar lumen. However, further experiments need to be developed to confirm our hypothesis. In conclusion, our study suggests that for C. neoformans the proteins Atg4 and Atg8 are involved in an autophagy mechanism under starvation induced conditions. The results also show that functional autophagy pathway may be part of distinct biological process in C. neoformans.

## Supporting information
S1 Raw images(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Yeast strains used in this work.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## List of oligonucleotides used in this study.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Evolutionary analysis of the amino acid sequence with members of Atg8 family in different species of fungi.
The tree was constructed by the Neighbor-Joining method using the software MEGA v. 10.0.5. The evolutionary distances were computed using the Poisson correction method. The values of the branches indicate the percentages of replicates in which the associated taxa clustered in the bootstrap analysis (1,000 replicates).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Multiple alignment of homologous amino acid sequences of the Atg8 family.
Alignment using the ClustalW program [ ]. Identical amino acids in all sequences are indicated in gray. Conserved glycine (G) residues in the C-terminal region are highlighted with a black background. The Ubiquitin-like superfamily domain is indicated by the dashed line. Filled arrows = predicted Atg4 protein binding sites; unfilled arrows = predicted Atg7 protein binding sites. Species and protein accession number: Sc = Saccharomyces cerevisiae (YBL078C); Ca = Candida albicans (CAWG_00835); Cn = Cryptococcus neoformans (CNAG_00816); Cg = Cryptococcus gattii (CGB_A9330C); Nc = Neurospora crassa (NCU01545); Af = Aspergillus flavus (AFLA_022400); Mo = Magnaporthe oryzae (MGG_01062); Um = Ustilago maydis (UMAG_05567).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Bait and prey autoactivation analysis.
The cloned vectors do not autonomously activate the reporter genes. (A) Growth of Y2HGold yeast strain transformed with the indicated bait (pGBKT7-ATG8). (B) Growth of Y2HGold yeast strain transformed individually with the indicated preys (pGADT7-ATG3/ATG4/ATG7). Two independent clones were tested in a total of n = 2 independent experiments. Plates incubated for 5 days at 30°C. Assay performed with the Matchmaker™ Gold Yeast Two-Hybrid System (Clontech). SD: synthetic dextrose medium; Leu: leucine; Trp: tryptophan; X: 40 μg/mL X-α-Gal; A: 200 ng/mL Aureobasidin A; (+): pair of plasmids pGBKT7-53 and pGADT7-T used as positive control.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## In silico analysis of Atg4 from C. neoformans.
(A) Atg4 from S. cerevisiae (YNL223W); 494 amino acids. (B) Atg4 from C. neoformans (CNAG_02662); 1,185 amino acids. Illustration of the protein domains using the IBS 1.0.3 software (CUCKOO Workgroup). Domains identified using the NCBI platform (Conserved Domain Database) [ ]. (C) Multiple alignment of Atg4 homologous amino acid sequences. Region surrounding the active cysteine residue. Identical amino acids in all sequences are highlighted in gray. Catalytic residue of cysteine among the different members of the Atg4 family is indicated in black. Alignment using the ClustalW program [ ]. Species and GenBank accession number: Sc = Saccharomyces cerevisiae (YNL223W); Cn = Cryptococcus neoformans (CNAG_02662); Cg = Cryptococcus gattii (CGB_K2500C); Nc = Neurospora crassa (NCU02433); Af = Aspergillus flavus (AFLA_104050); Mo = Magnaporthe oryzae (MGG_03580); Um = Ustilago maydis (UMAG_05142).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Deletion of the ATG4 (YNL223W) and ATG8 (YBL078C) genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (BY4741).
(A) Schematic representation of ATG4 deletion by homologous recombination. (B) Confirmatory deletion performed by diagnostic PCR. Atg4ScF + Atg4ScR: atg4Δ amplicon with 2,927 bp; Atg4ScF + KanMXR: atg4Δ amplicon with 610 bp. Colonies 1, 2, 4 and 5 are atg4Δ. (C) Schematic representation of ATG8 deletion by homologous recombination. (D) Confirmatory deletion performed by diagnostic PCR. Atg8ScF + Atg8ScR: atg8Δ amplicon with 2,889 bp; Atg8ScF + KanMXR: atg8Δ amplicon with 587 bp. Colonies 1, 2 and 5 are atg8Δ. Atg4ScF, Atg4ScR, Atg8ScF, Atg8ScR and KanMXR: primers used in PCR. Lanes 1–5: colonies growing in selective medium. KanMX6: G418 resistance. WT: wild type BY4741 gDNA, (–): negative control. 1 Kb+: GeneRuler 1 Kb Plus DNA Ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Deletion of the ATG4 (CNAG_02662) and ATG8 (CNAG_00816) genes in Cryptococcus neoformans (KN99α).
(A) Strategy to confirm ATG4 deletion by double-joint methodology. (B) Southern blot analysis confirming ATG4 deletion. Lanes 1–6: colonies growing in selective plates. Genomic DNA digested using EcoRI (G^AATTC) restriction enzyme. Restriction fragment sizes expected after the hybridization signal: KN99α with 5,943 bp and atg4 with 1,032 bp, as indicated in the schematic representation. Transformants 1–6 are atg4. (C) Strategy to confirm ATG8 deletion by double-joint methodology. (D) Southern blot analysis confirming ATG8 deletion. Lanes 1–4: colonies growing in selective plates. Genomic DNA digested using EcoRV (GAT^ATC) restriction enzyme. Restriction fragment sizes expected after the hybridization signal: KN99α with 1,996 bp and atg8 with 6,150 bp, as indicated in the schematic representation. Transformants 2 and 4 are atg8. HygR: hygromycin resistance. KN99α: wild type gDNA. Arrows indicate the molecular weights based on GeneRuler 1 Kb DNA Ladder (Fermentas).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Evaluation of wild type (KN99α) and atg4 and atg8 growth phenotype under multi-stress conditions.
(A) Starvation stress (SD+/-N+/-AA). (B) Alkaline stress (pH). (C) Osmotic and saline stress (KCl and NaCl, respectively). (D) Nitrosative and cell membrane integrity stress (NaNO2 and SDS, respectively). Yeast cells were spotted by 10-fold serial dilutions. The plates were incubated at 30°C and 37°C for 48 h. All the experiments are n = 2 independent replicates.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors would like to thank Accord/Intas Pharmaceuticals for kindly providing the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0230981.r001Decision Letter 0
TrajkovicVladimirAcademic Editor© 2020 Vladimir Trajkovic2020Vladimir TrajkovicThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
13 Jan 2020

PONE-D-19-32465
Biological functions of the Atg4 and Atg8 autophagy pathway components in Cryptococcus neoformans
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr Vallim,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Reviewer 1:
This manuscript reported the roles of Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans. The authors found that Atg4 interacts with Atg8 and controls Atg8 localization and degradation. In addition, the author presented that Atg4 and Atg8 are required for nitrogen starvation and stress response. This manuscript contains meaningful results to understand for autophagy process and fungal biology. However, this manuscript should be improved before publication in PLoS One. 
- The Atg8-related results in Figures 5 and 8 have already been published elsewhere, so it may be worth focusing on Atg4 in this paper. 
- Lines 324-348, it is questionable whether this section is required for this manuscript. Atg8 has been characterized other study. In Figure 1, the authors just aligned several sequences, but detailed results about the function of this domain or residues have not been studied in this manuscript. Therefore, Figure 1 may not be necessary for in this manuscript.
- Lines 361-362, In this section, the authors just checked protein interaction, but not autophagosome synthesis. So please revise this subtitle. 
- Lines 390-392, Please provide proper reference or result.
- Figure 3, it may not be necessary in the main body and can be moved to Supplementary figure.
- Lines 447-462, While the authors mentioned that they used two independent mutants, Atg4 complemented strains should be needed.
- Lines 477-481, the authors just checked Atg8 degradation, but we cannot know Atg8 degradation in vacuolar lumen.
- Localization of Atg4 can be examined.
Reviewer 2:
This is an interesting and well-written manuscript.  Whilst the findings are not, perhaps, that surprising, it nonetheless reports a helpful and important advance for the field.  The work builds on previous findings from Ding and colleagues (reference 32) and characterises Atg4 and Atg8 in the human pathogenic fungus Cryptococcus neoformans.
Overall, I think this is an interesting, high-quality paper and have only relatively minor comments.
1. The title is somewhat misleading.  Whilst the authors characterise Atg4/8, they do not really address the question of autophagy within the manuscript.  Consequently, I would recommend rephrasing to “Biological functions of Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans”
2. Line 72: does blocking autophagy actually seem like a viable treatment for invasive fungal disease? This is also mentioned in the discussion. Surely any attempt to block fungal autophagy would also impact on host autophagy.  I would recommend rephrasing.
3. Figure 2. The yeast 2 hybrid experiments should include additional controls to ensure ATG 8 is specifically binding to ATG3,4, 7 and not indiscriminately to other proteins.  For instance, have other ATG proteins been tested?   
4. Figure 6.  Was this a single experiment or a representative of multiple replicates? If so, how many?
5. Line 456: “For the atg4 mutants we tested two independent strains, since we did not manage to restitute the wild type copy back into the mutant.”  This is intriguing – can the authors speculate why complementation was so challenging?  Is there evidence that atg4 overexpression may be lethal, for instance?  
6. Line 607: remove “basically”
7. Line 682: “puncta” should be “punctate”, I think?
8. Line 690: change “others” to “other”
9. Line 743: development and pathogenesis were not examined here, so this comment should be removed.
10. Ensure that the number of technical and biological replicates is clearly stated in all figure legends.  In some cases the information is there (e.g. “biological triplicate”) but would be better expressed as “n=3 independent experiments”.
Reviewer 3:
In this work entitled “Biological functions of the Atg4 and Atg8 autophagy pathway components in Cryptococcus neoformans” Nunes Roberto and co-workers described the that Atg4 and Atg8 are conserved proteins that interact physically with each other. ATG gene deletions resulted in cells sensitive to nitrogen starvation. ATG4 gene disruption affects Atg8 degradation and its translocation to the vacuole lumen, after autophagy induction. The mutants showed a more resistant phenotype to oxidative stress compared to the wild type and had an impaired growth in the presence of the cell wall perturbing agent Congo Red, and are sensitive to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ). The authors conclude based on their results that the autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8 play an important role in the autophagy pathway; which are required for autophagy regulation, maintenance of amino acid levels and cell adaptation to stressful conditions in C. neoformans.
The manuscript is well written, and the experiments interpretation support the authors hypothesis. 
Minor comments:
Line 37 - Delete OF from the sentence “responsible for delivering OF the cargo from the cytoplasm to the vacuole lumen.”
Line 502 – “But” is an informal adverb, the authors should use a more formal one.
Lines 594 -596 – This sentence is confusing, consider revising.
Discussion Lines 599 – 612  - This first paragraph is a little repetitive, because iit is well described in the introduction.
Line 661 – there is verb conjugation problem – the authors should use SHOWED or HAD SHOWN.
The authors should perform infection assays with the mutants to show if there is any alteration.
Line 684 – “we believe that the starvation induction for a period of 4 hours provided us information on the later steps of the autophagy pathway”. Did the authors perform different time point analysis?
Figure 5 - The authors should discuss in more details the smaller number of cells in the mutants, they should perform a growth curve of the mutants growing in distinct conditions.
In figure 8 no visual difference in growth is observed, that´s why a growth curve would be useful.  
Figure 6 - determine the intensity of the bands in order to have a quantitative analysis of the degradation.
==============================
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Feb 27 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Vladimir Trajkovic
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This manuscript reported the roles of Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans. The authors found that Atg4 interacts with Atg8 and controls Atg8 localization and degradation. In addition, the author presented that Atg4 and Atg8 are required for nitrogen starvation and stress response. This manuscript contains meaningful results to understand for autophagy process and fungal biology. However, this manuscript should be improved before publication in PLoS One.
- The Atg8-related results in Figures 5 and 8 have already been published elsewhere, so it may be worth focusing on Atg4 in this paper.
- Lines 324-348, it is questionable whether this section is required for this manuscript. Atg8 has been characterized other study. In Figure 1, the authors just aligned several sequences, but detailed results about the function of tis domain or residues have not been study in this manuscript. Therefore, Figure 1 may not be necessary for in this manuscript.
- Lines 361-362, In this section, the authors just checked protein interaction, but not autophagosome synthesis. So please revise this sub-title.
- Lines 390-392, Please provide proper reference or result.
- Figure 3, it may not be necessary in the main body and can be moved to Supplementary figure.
- Lines 447-462, While the authors mentioned that they used two independent mutants, Atg4 complemented strains should be needed.
- Lines 477-481, the authors just checked Atg8 degradation, but we can not know Atg8 degradation in vacuolar lumen.
- Localization of Atg4 can be examined.
Reviewer #2: Review of PONE-D-19-32465.
This is an interesting and well-written manuscript. Whilst the findings are not, perhaps, that surprising, it nonetheless reports a helpful and important advance for the field. The work builds on previous findings from Ding and colleagues (reference 32) and characterises Atg4 and Atg8 in the human pathogenic fungus Cryptococcus neoformans.
Overall, I think this is an interesting, high-quality paper and have only relatively minor comments.
1. The title is somewhat misleading. Whilst the authors characterise Atg4/8, they do not really address the question of autophagy within the manuscript. Consequently, I would recommend rephrasing to “Biological functions of Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans”
2. Line 72: does blocking autophagy actually seem like a viable treatment for invasive fungal disease? This is also mentioned in the discussion. Surely any attempt to block fungal autophagy would also impact on host autophagy. I would recommend rephrasing.
3. Figure 2. The yeast 2 hybrid experiments should include additional controls to ensure ATG 8 is specifically binding to ATG3,4, 7 and not indiscriminately to other proteins. For instance, have other ATG proteins been tested?
4. Figure 6. Was this a single experiment or a representative of multiple replicates? If so, how many?
5. Line 456: “For the atg4 mutants we tested two independent strains, since we did not manage to restitute the wild type copy back into the mutant.” This is intriguing – can the authors speculate why complementation was so challenging? Is there evidence that atg4 overexpression may be lethal, for instance?
6. Line 607: remove “basically”
7. Line682: “puncta” should be “punctate”, I think?
8. Line 690: change “others” to “other”
9. Line 743: development and pathogenesis were not examined here, so this comment should be removed.
10. Ensure that the number of technical and biological replicates is clearly stated in all figure legends. In some cases the information is there (e.g. “biological triplicate”) but would be better expressed as “n=3 independent experiments”.
Reviewer #3: In this work entitled “Biological functions of the Atg4 and Atg8 autophagy pathway components in Cryptococcus neoformans” Nunes Roberto and co-workers described the that Atg4 and Atg8 are conserved proteins that interact physically with each other. ATG gene deletions resulted in cells sensitive to nitrogen starvation. ATG4 gene disruption affects Atg8 degradation and its translocation to the vacuole lumen, after autophagy induction. The mutants showed a more resistant phenotype to oxidative stress compared to the wild type and had an impaired growth in the presence of the cell wall perturbing agent Congo Red, and are sensitive to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ). The authors conclude based on their results that the autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8 play an important role in the autophagy pathway; which are required for autophagy regulation, maintenance of amino acid levels and cell adaptation to stressful conditions in C. neoformans.
The manuscript is well written, and the experiments interpretation support the authors hypothesis.
Minor comments:
Line 37 - Delete OF from the sentence “responsible for delivering OF the cargo from the cytoplasm to the vacuole lumen.”
Line 502 – But is an informal adverb, the authors should use a more formal one.
Lines 594 -596 – This sentence is confusing, consider revising.
Discussion Lines 599 – 612 - This first paragraph is a little repetitive, because iit is well described in the introduction.
Line 661 – there is verb conjugation problem – the authors should use SHOWED or HAD SHOWN.
The authors should perform infection assays with the mutants to show if there is any alteration.
Line 684 – “we believe that the starvation induction for a period of 4 hours provided us information on the later steps of the autophagy pathway”. Did the authors perform different time point analysis?
Figure 5 - The authors should discuss in more details the smaller number of cells in the mutants, they should perform a growth curve of the mutants growing in distinct conditions.
In figure 8 no visual difference in growth is observed, that´s why a growth curve would be useful.
Figure 6 - determine the intensity of the bands in order to have a quantitative analysis of the degradation.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: Lysangela Ronalte Alves
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0230981.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
19 Feb 2020

Reviewer #1
Reviewer comment:
(1) Comm.: “The Atg8-related results in Figures 5 and 8 have already been published elsewhere, so it may be worth focusing on Atg4 in this paper.”
Answer: Figure 5 (current Figure 3) shows that C. neoformans atg4 and atg8 mutants have their cellular viability decreased after 20 days of nitrogen starvation. Figure 8 (current Figure 6) shows C. neoformans atg mutants growth phenotype under stress condition. Figure 5 (current Figure 3) is an experiment conducted for C. neoformans strains, so far not published elsewhere. Figures 8A and B are not published elsewhere and Figure 8C (current Figure 6C) has been partially published by Ding et al. (2018), which have previously demonstrated that C. neoformans atg8 mutant is sensitive to Bortezomib (BTZ), we included the wild-type and atg8 mutant in our experiment and used the data in the graphic to validate our atg4 analysis. By saying that, we intend to keep both figures in the main body of this manuscript.
(2) Comm.: “Lines 324-348, it is questionable whether this section is required for this manuscript. Atg8 has been characterized other study. In Figure 1, the authors just aligned several sequences, but detailed results about the function of this domain or residues have not been studied in this manuscript. Therefore, Figure 1 may not be necessary for this manuscript.”
Answer: Indeed C. neoformans Atg8 has been studied previously by Hu et al. (2008) and Ding et al. (2018), but they did not study and correlate the domains with autophagy pathway. So far, the authors have identified and shown the role of Atg8 for virulence in a murine model of infection, importance to sustain the amino acid levels and atg8 mutant is sensitive to proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ). Although our phylogenetic analysis showed that C. neoformans ATG8 did not cluster with Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATG8 (Supplementary Figure 1), we demonstrated in Figure 1 (current Supplementary Figure 2) that those proteins are highly conserved, presenting the predicted Atg4 and Atg7 proteins binding sites and C-terminal glycine residue, important in Saccharomyces during the autophagy pathway, allowing the conjugation of Atg8 with PE and, consequently, promoting the autophagosome synthesis. This information indicated us that C. neoformans Atg8 could be involved in autophagy mechanism and could work in a similar way to that reported for S. cerevisiae. We think that Atg8 characterization section is important and necessary for this study, so we choose to keep it in the main body of this manuscript. However, we moved the Figure 1 from the main body to Supplementary Figure section.
(3) Comm.: “Lines 361-362, in this section, the authors just checked protein interaction, but not autophagosome synthesis. So please revise this subtitle.”
Answer: We agree and the subtitle was edited and now one can read: “Interactions of Atg8 with autophagy-related proteins Atg3, Atg4 and Atg7”.
(4) Comm.: “Lines 390-392, please provide proper reference or result.”
Answer: We added the numbers of the figures for the results described in the sentence.
(5) Comm.: “Figure 3, it may not be necessary in the main body and can be moved to Supplementary figure.”
Answer: As suggested we moved the Figure 3 from the main body to Supplementary Figure section. 
(6) Comm.: “Lines 447-462, while the authors mentioned that they used two independent mutants, Atg4 complemented strains should be needed.”
Answer: We made several unsuccessful attempts to restitute back the wild-type native locus into the atg4 mutant and, therefore, we used two independent mutants in our analysis. This strategy has been used by other authors in the field, p.e. Fu et al. 2018. Genetics, 208: 639–653 (Heitman’s group), Martho et al. 2016. PLoS One, 11(10):e0163919 (Pascon’s group), among others.
(7) Comm.: “Lines 477-481, the authors just checked Atg8 degradation, but we cannot know Atg8 degradation in vacuolar lumen.”
Answer: As we did not perform an experiment to prove Atg8 degradation in vacuolar lumen, we revised the sentence and now one can read: “The KN99α data suggest a normal autophagic flux, with Atg8 being degraded by releasing the GFP fragment in the course of time. On the other hand, in the atg4 mutant only the full length GFP-Atg8 bands were detected (current Figure 4), suggesting that the autophagosome synthesis was blocked and, consequently, Atg8 was not degraded.”
(8) Comm.: “Localization of Atg4 can be examined.”
Answer: Atg4 is a cytoplasmic protein that is not carried along the autophagy pathway, unlike Atg8 protein that is transported from cytoplasm to vacuole. Therefore, by analyzing the literature, we believe that would not be enlightening to include in this study an experiment to verify the localization of the autophagy-related protein Atg4.
Reviewer #2 
Reviewer comment:
(1) Comm.: “The title is somewhat misleading. Whilst the authors characterize Atg4/8, they do not really address the question of autophagy within the manuscript. Consequently, I would recommend rephrasing to “Biological functions of Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans”.”
Answer: We changed the title as suggested, but we included the term “autophagy-related proteins”. Therefore, the title has been rephrased to “Biological functions of the autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans”.
(2) Comm.: “Line 72: does blocking autophagy actually seem like a viable treatment for invasive fungal disease? This is also mentioned in the discussion. Surely any attempt to block fungal autophagy would also impact on host autophagy. I would recommend rephrasing.”
Answer: It is important to understand the autophagy mechanism in different species, since there are some autophagy-related genes uniquely codified in a single organism. It was previously reported by Gontijo et al. (2017) that some pathogenic fungi like C. neoformans, C. albicans and A. fumigatus have fewer autophagy genes not codified in their genome, when compared to S. cerevisiae. Besides that, in their review Lynch-Day and Klionsky (2010) discuss the idea that is important to identify receptors and unique factors occurring in the autophagy pathway in higher eukaryotes. So, when specific higher eukaryotes autophagy components are identified and differentiated from pathogenic microorganisms, blocking a particular fungal Atg protein could not impact on host autophagy and, consequently, could be a target for new antifungal treatment. The sentence was rephrased as suggest, to clarify the information above.
(3) Comm.: “Figure 2. The yeast 2 hybrid experiments should include additional controls to ensure ATG8 is specifically binding to ATG3,4, 7 and not indiscriminately to other proteins. For instance, have other ATG proteins been tested?”
Answer: In the current Supplementary Figure 3 we demonstrate that, individually, bait (pGBKT7-ATG8) and preys (pGADT7-ATG3/ATG4/ATG7) do not autonomously autoactivate the two-hybrid reporter genes, in the absence of an interactant protein. This result confirmed that Atg8 is not indiscriminately binding to other proteins and, by that, our yeast two-hybrid interactions results are validated.
(4) Comm.: “Figure 6. Was this a single experiment or a representative of multiple replicates? If so, how many?”
Answer: The Figure 6 (current Figure 4) is a representative of an experiment conducted three times independently. As suggested elsewhere, we included “n=3 independent experiments” in the figure legend.
(5) Comm.: “Line 456: “For the atg4 mutants we tested two independent strains, since we did not manage to restitute the wild type copy back into the mutant.” This is intriguing – can the authors speculate why complementation was so challenging? Is there evidence that atg4 overexpression may be lethal, for instance?”
Answer: We made several attempts without success to restitute back the wild-type native locus into the atg4 mutant and, therefore, we used two independent mutants in our analysis. There is no evidence in the literature on atg4 overexpression lethality. However, this far we do not have an explanation for our frustrated attempts, nonetheless we can speculate that the wild-type PCR fragment amplified could be too big (5,031 bp) for the homologous recombination, though experiments should be conducted to explore this speculation. Nevertheless, other groups have used independent mutants to validate their results without using a reconstituted strain, please see for example: Fu et al. 2018. Genetics, 208: 639–653 (Heitman’s group), Martho et al. 2016. PLoS One, 11(10):e0163919 (Pascon’s group).
(6) Comm.: “Line 607: remove “basically””
Answer: The word “basically” was removed from the sentence.
(7) Comm.: “Line 682: “puncta” should be “punctate”, I think?”
Answer: In the literature the perivacuolar accumulation of GFP-Atg8 is referred to as a fluorescent puncta signal. Therefore, we maintained the term “puncta”, but rephrased the words “puncta structure” to “perivacuolar puncta signal”.
(8) Comm.: “Line 690: change “others” to “other”.”
Answer: The word “others” was corrected to “other” in the sentence.
(9) Comm.: “Line 743: development and pathogenesis were not examined here, so this comment should be removed.”
Answer: We agree and removed the comment.
(10) Comm.: “Ensure that the number of technical and biological replicates is clearly stated in all figure legends. In some cases the information is there (e.g. “biological triplicate”) but would be better expressed as “n=3 independent experiments”.”
Answer: We have edited all the figures legends, expressing the numbers of replicates as suggested, to ensure that this information is clearly stated. 
Reviewer #3
Reviewer comment:
(1) Comm.: “Line 37 - Delete OF from the sentence “responsible for delivering OF the cargo from the cytoplasm to the vacuole lumen”.”
Answer: The preposition “of” was deleted from the sentence.
(2) Comm.: “Line 502 – “But” is an informal adverb, the authors should use a more formal one.”
Answer: We agree and changed the adverb to “However”.
(3) Comm.: “Lines 594-596 – This sentence is confusing, consider revising.”
Answer: We revised the sentence mentioned and now it reads: “Overall, these results indicate that in C. neoformans the autophagy mechanism may prepare the cell to respond to adverse environmental conditions by recycling nutrients likely, contributing to yeast survival”.
(4) Comm.: “Discussion Lines 599-612 – This first paragraph is a little repetitive, because it is well described in the introduction.”
Answer: The paragraph was rephrased.
(5) Comm.: “Line 661 – there is verb conjugation problem – the authors should use SHOWED or HAD SHOWN.”
Answer: We replaced the verb “shown” to “showed”.
(6) Comm.: “The authors should perform infection assays with the mutants to show if there is any alteration.”
Answer: We performed some inconclusive assays that showed for C. neoformans atg4 mutant no difference in virulence in Galleria mellonella. Besides that, Hu et al. (2008) and Ding et al. (2018) have already reported that C. neoformans atg8 mutant presented attenuated virulence in a BALB/c mouse host.
(7) Comm.: “Line 684 – “we believe that the starvation induction for a period of 4 hours provided us information on the later steps of the autophagy pathway”. Did the authors perform different time point analysis?”
Answer: When we first performed the experiment, it was tested the induction with 2 and 4 hours. But, with 2 hours we did not see any difference between the wild type and atg4 mutant fluorescence signals; the GFP-Atg8 signals was spread all over the cytoplasm for WT and mutant strains. So, when we increased the period of starvation induction to 4 hours, we saw the differences related in this manuscript (current Figure 5). Therefore, with this knowledge, we proceed the biological replicates considering only the inductions for a period of 4 hours.
(8) Comm.: “Figure 5 - The authors should discuss in more details the smaller number of cells in the mutants, they should perform a growth curve of the mutants growing in distinct conditions. In figure 8 no visual difference in growth is observed, that´s why a growth curve would be useful.”
Answer: The fourth paragraph in the discussion section presents more details about the smaller numbers of cells in C. neoformans atg4 and atg8 mutants under nitrogen starvation (Figure 5, current Figure 3). As observed in S. cerevisiae, “atg null mutants tend to lose their ability to survive in nitrogen starvation conditions”; C. neoformans “atg4 and atg8 also show a sensitivity phenotype after cultivated in depleted nutrient condition”. Based on information reported in the literature we discuss that the loss of cellular viability in atg mutants, growing in nutritional deprivation condition, could be due to failure to sustain the amino acids supply and/or to mitochondrial failure, causing deficiency in respiratory function. A visual difference in growth was observed in Figure 8 (current Figure 6) for atg4 and atg8 mutants growing in YPD with 3 mM H2O2 (37°C) and 4 mM H2O2 (30°C), and in YPD supplemented with 0.65% and 0.75% Congo Red (30°C and 37°C). The serial dilution spot test is better to visualize these results since hydrogen peroxide is an unstable compound and Congo Red is not used in growth curve.
(9) Comm.: “Figure 6 – determine the intensity of the bands in order to have a quantitative analysis of the degradation.”
Answer: The experiment performed was qualitative and aimed to monitor the GFP-Atg8 degradation. We do not intend to quantify the bands at this moment. In this case, the visual analysis of the free GFP bands was enough to demonstrate the Atg8 degradation under nitrogen starvation.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.doc
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0230981.r003Decision Letter 1
TrajkovicVladimirAcademic Editor© 2020 Vladimir Trajkovic2020Vladimir TrajkovicThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
13 Mar 2020

Biological functions of the autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans
PONE-D-19-32465R1
Dear Dr. Vallim,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it complies with all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you will receive an e-mail containing information on the amendments required prior to publication. When all required modifications have been addressed, you will receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will proceed to our production department and be scheduled for publication.
Shortly after the formal acceptance letter is sent, an invoice for payment will follow. To ensure an efficient production and billing process, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, you must inform our press team as soon as possible and no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
With kind regards,
Vladimir Trajkovic
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed. Therefore, this manuscript is suitable for publication in PLoS ONE.
Reviewer #2: I had only minor comments on the original submission and these have all been addressed in this revision.
Reviewer #3: The authors answered all the questions appropriately, no further comments or experiments should be performed in my opinion.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: Lysangela R Alves
10.1371/journal.pone.0230981.r004Acceptance letter
TrajkovicVladimirAcademic Editor© 2020 Vladimir Trajkovic2020Vladimir TrajkovicThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
18 Mar 2020

PONE-D-19-32465R1 
Biological functions of the autophagy-related proteins Atg4 and Atg8 in Cryptococcus neoformans 
Dear Dr. Vallim:
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
For any other questions or concerns, please email plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE.
With kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Prof. Vladimir Trajkovic 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE