1894elifeeLifeeLifeeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC7156269715626971562693223421010.7554/eLife.55564CSF1R blockade induces macrophage ablation and results in mouse choroidal vascular atrophy and RPE disorganization
YangXiao ZhaoLian CamposMaria M Abu-AsabMones OrtolanDavide HotalingNathan BhartiKapil WongWai T TaniguchiTadatsuguSenior Editor SmithLoisReviewing Editor 1Section on Neuron-Glia Interactions in Retinal Disease, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, United States2Section on Histopathology, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, United States3Section on Ocular and Stem Cell Translational Research, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, United States4Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan5Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, United States✉Corresponding author.
1420209e55564e555641642020This is an open-access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

## Abstract
The choroid, which provides vascular supply to the outer retina, demonstrates progressive degeneration in aging and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). However mechanisms that maintain or compromise choroidal homeostasis are obscure. We discovered that the ablation of choroidal macrophages via CSF1R blockade was associated with choroidal vascular atrophy and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) changes including structural disruption, downregulation of visual cycle genes, and altered angiogenic factor expression. Suspending CSF1R blockade following ablation enabled spontaneous macrophage regeneration, which fully restored original macrophage distributions and morphologies. Macrophage regeneration was accompanied by arrested vascular degeneration and ameliorated pathological RPE alterations. These findings suggest that choroidal macrophages play a previously unappreciated trophic role in maintaining choroidal vasculature and RPE cells, implicating insufficiency in choroidal macrophage function as a factor in aging- and AMD-associated pathology. Modulating macrophage function may constitute a strategy for the therapeutic preservation of the choroid and RPE in age-related retinal disorders.
Research organism: Mouse

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 Jan 29; Accepted 2020 Apr 1; Collection date 2020.

## Introduction
The choroid of the mammalian eye comprises a dense vascular network located external to the retina and provides necessary material transport to the outer retina across the retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) layer constituting the outer blood retinal barrier ( ). The functional significance of the choroidal supply is underscored by the implication of choroidal vascular atrophy as a significant contributor to degenerative diseases of the outer retina, particularly age-related macular degeneration (AMD) ( ; ), a current leading cause of blindness in the developed world ( ). While progressive loss of choroidal vasculature has been observed with aging and AMD ( ; ), the mechanisms that either actively drive choroidal atrophy or fail to sustain choroidal homeostasis are not well understood, and treatments that can successfully preserve choroidal structure are unavailable.
Like in vascular networks located at border regions surrounding the brain within the dura mater, subdural meninges and choroid plexus ( ; ), the choroid of the eye contains a large constituent population of innate immune cells in the form of resident choroidal macrophages ( ; ). Under normal conditions, these macrophages are distributed across the entire choroid in the perivascular space in close juxtaposition with choroidal vessels. As they possess ramified cellular processes that demonstrate dynamic behavior, choroidal macrophages can potentially survey the perivascular environment and exchange signals with nearby vascular and RPE cells ( ). While activated choroidal macrophages have been implicated in contributing to pathological changes in posterior uveitis ( ) and choroidal neovascularization ( ), their endogenous functions under healthy conditions are obscure, and if and how they may contribute to homeostasis in the choroid are not understood.
Dysfunction in choroidal macrophages has been linked to choroidal vascular alterations detected in aging and in AMD. Altered macrophage morphology and distribution have been correlated with attenuation of the choriocapillaris in the aged mouse choroid ( ), and increased density and expression of activation markers in macrophages have been documented with the onset of AMD in human eyes ( ), suggesting a causal relationship between macrophage changes and vascular loss. The implication of choroidal vascular loss as a driver of drusen accumulation and RPE disruption in AMD pathogenesis ( ; ; ) have prompted strategies aimed at maintaining choroidal vascular health and improving vascular supply to the outer retina ( ; ), but the intrinsic mechanisms that maintain vascular and RPE integrity in the choroid have not been elucidated, limiting translational efforts.
We investigated here the homeostatic relationship that choroidal macrophages have with choroidal vasculature and RPE cells. We found that pharmacological CSF1R inhibition, which has been found to ablate tissue-resident innate immune cells in different CNS compartments, but relatively sparing circulating monocytes, induced the ablation of choroidal macrophages in a sustained manner. We discovered using in vivo structural imaging and histopathological and molecular analyses that choroidal macrophage ablation was associated with progressive vascular atrophy and with multiple structural and functional changes in the RPE layer, in ways resembling those observed in the aging and AMD eyes. We also discovered that residual choroidal macrophages, following depletion, can undergo regeneration upon suspension of CSF1R inhibition. Although normally non-proliferative in nature, residual macrophages following depletion proliferated in situ and underwent morphological maturation to fully reconstitute features of the endogenous macrophage population. These regenerated macrophages appear to restore endogenous macrophage homeostatic functions, as their repopulation of the choroid was associated with the arrest of vascular atrophy and the amelioration of pathological RPE alterations.
Taken together, our findings implicate a previously unappreciated constitutive function for resident choroidal macrophages in maintaining structural and functional homeostasis of choroidal vasculature and RPE cells and the ability of macrophages to regenerate the full complement of cells following depletion. These suggest a potential etiological mechanism of macrophage insufficiency for pathological choroidal vascular atrophy and highlight choroidal macrophage renewal as a phenomenon that may be potentially harnessed in regenerative strategies in the outer retina. Modulating choroidal macrophage presence and phenotype may be therapeutically effective in maintaining choroidal vasculature and consequently delaying AMD progression.

## Results

## Age-related progressive choroidal thinning and vascular atrophy are associated with alterations in choroidal macrophages
Aging has previously been associated with negative changes in the human choroid, including reductions in choroidal thickness on in vivo imaging ( ; ; ) and decreased choriocapillaris density on histopathological analysis ( ), however mechanisms underlying this association are largely unelucidated. To examine whether similar age-related choroidal changes were present in our model of the mouse choroid, we examined and compared the vascular structure of the young adult (3 month-old) with aged (24 month-old) BALB/cJ mice. Consistent with observations in human subjects, the choroid of aged mice showed significantly decreased thickness on in vivo enhanced-depth OCT imaging in both the nasal and temporal quadrants relative to young adult mice ( ). Quantitative analysis of choriocapillaris structure in sclerochoroidal flatmounts of DiI-perfused animals also showed decreased vascular area coverage ( ). We observed that these age-related changes in choroidal vasculature were associated with alterations in macrophages located in the perivascular space of the vascular choroid. Examination of MHCII-immunopositive macrophages in sclerochoroidal flatmounts showed that these were significantly increased in overall density in the aged choroid ( ) compared with the young choroid, but the macrophages in the aged choroid demonstrated decreased ramification as evidenced by significantly decreased cell area, dendritic field area, and number of cellular processes per cell ( ). This association suggested that age-related changes in choroidal macrophages may be contributory to negative alterations of the vascular choroid.
 

## Sustained depletion of resident macrophages in the choroid is accompanied by progressive choroidal thinning and vascular atrophy
To investigate the endogenous contribution of resident macrophages to the structure of the adult mouse choroid, 3 month old young adult mice were administered a diet containing PLX5622, an inhibitor of the macrophage-expressed receptor CSF1R, which regulates macrophage survival ( ). Compared with the choroid of control animals fed a regular diet, which had a typical network of ramified MHCII+ and IBA1+ resident macrophages ( ; ), the choroid in PLX5622-administered animals demonstrated a widespread depletion of macrophages in all topographical areas, and possessed only a small number of residual MHCII+, IBA1+ cells showing a non-ramified morphology ( ). Following 1 week of PLX5622 administration, the density of MHCII+, IBA1+ macrophage decreased to ≈10% of that in control animals and was sustained at these levels with continuous PLX5622 administration for up to 7 weeks ( ). Expression of Iba1 mRNA in sclerochoroidal tissue was correspondingly decreased from baseline levels at week 1 and week 7 of PLX5622 administration ( ), indicating that CSF1R inhibition resulted in a rapid and comprehensive depletion of resident myeloid cells from the choroid.
 As macrophage depletion has been causally associated with vascular changes in pathological contexts in the retina ( ) and elsewhere ( ), but is of lesser consequence to normal adult retinal vasculature ( ), we investigated whether choroidal macrophages exert a trophic influence in the healthy adult vascular choroid by examining the effects of macrophage depletion. In vivo enhanced-depth OCT images captured in a longitudinal manner before and during PLX5622 administration revealed significant and progressive reductions in choroidal thickness across the entire area of the choroid; measurements made in both the nasal and temporal quadrants showed time-dependent decreases with sustained PLX5622 administration, declining to ≈70% of baseline values by 7 weeks ( ). By contrast, the structure of the laminated retina and total retinal thickness measurements in the same experimental animals were unchanged during PLX5622 administration ( ).
 
Histological analyses of choroidal vascular structure in stained retinochoroidal methacrylate-embedded sections demonstrated corresponding significant decreases in the mean thickness of the vascular layer of the choroid ( ). Quantitative analysis of vascular lumina found reductions in the mean cross-sectional area of vascular lumina and the mean density of choroidal vessels ( ). To visualize the choriocapillaris, vessels were perfused and labeled with Dil lipophilic dye. Quantitative analysis of choriocapillaris structure in sclerochoroidal flatmounts of DiI-perfused animals showed decreased vascular area coverage by choriocapillaris vessels ( ). Together these findings demonstrate that sustained depletion of choroidal macrophages was associated with generalized vascular atrophy in the adult mouse choroid, a feature not observed in the adult retina. These vascular changes were not associated with a marked loss and disorganization of the population of smooth muscle actin (SMA)-expressing choroidal perivascular cells in the choroid ( ), as evidenced by their maintained organization and morphology in macrophage-depleted animals ( ).

## Sustained depletion of choroidal macrophages is associated with aberrant RPE structure, gene expression, and function
As choroidal macrophages have been implicated in influencing RPE physiology in the context of macrophage-RPE-vascular interactions ( ; ), we investigated whether macrophage depletion from the healthy adult choroid exerted influences on the overlying RPE layer. Following 7 weeks of PLX5622 administration, immunohistochemical analysis of the RPE layer showed decreased immunopositivity of RPE65, a constitutively expressed, RPE-specific enzyme that is required to maintain visual cycle function ( ). Immunopositivity for RPE65, which was prominent and uniform in control animals, was decreased in depleted animals in a patchy, heterogenous manner, with a reduction in overall expression ( ). These changes corresponded to a decrease in Rpe65 mRNA expression ( ), as well as in significantly decreased mRNA expression of genes mediating visual cycle function (Lrat, Rlbp1), RPE differentiation (Mitf), and tight junction structure (Tjp1/Zo1) ( ). Electron microscopic analysis of RPE cell structure showed disrupted apical microvilli structure and increased vacuolation in depleted animals relative to control animals ( ). In depleted animals, increased irregularity in the cell areas of individual RPE cells was noted on F-actin labeling; the mean overall RPE cell density was significantly decreased, corresponding to an increased proportion of enlarged cells (cell area >900 µm2) ( ). Enlarged cells in depleted animals showed an abnormal increase in cellular nuclei (usually 3–4 nuclei), a feature not observed in control animals ( ). While the proportions of mono- and binucleated cells which constituted the majority of RPE cells were unchanged with depletion, RPE cells demonstrated a generally increased intracellular vacuolation on light microscopy. These changes in RPE morphology and expression of genes mediating RPE function were associated with concurrent reductions in electroretinographic responses in the form of decreased scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes ( ). Together, these data indicate that resident choroidal macrophages constitutively maintain aspects of RPE organization and gene expression that are important for RPE function in the healthy adult animal.
 

## Altered angiogenic factor expression in the RPE-choroid complex is associated with choroidal macrophage depletion
As vascular structure of the adult choroid requires constitutive trophic support provided by angiogenic factors, in particular vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), for homeostatic maintenance ( ; ), we investigated whether choroidal macrophage depletion influences endogenous angiogenic factor expression in the RPE-choroid complex. We found that mRNA levels of Vegfa and Vegfc ( ) and protein levels of VEGF ( ) were significantly reduced in the RPE-choroid complex following 7 weeks of macrophage depletion. Consistent with this, we observed that immunopositivity for VEGF in cross-sections of the RPE-choroid complex, which is detected predominantly in the RPE layer in control animals, was decreased following macrophage depletion ( ). We also analyzed the expression of pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), a secreted, multi-functional anti-angiogenic agent capable of suppressing choroidal neovascularization ( ; ). We found that Serpinf1 (Pedf) mRNA and PEDF protein levels ( ), as well as PEDF immunopositivity in the RPE layer, were all significantly increased following macrophage depletion ( ). In contrast, mRNA and protein expression levels of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) ligands, PDGF-AA and PDGF-BB, factors implicated in pericyte recruitment and vascular stabilization in the retina ( ), were not markedly altered by macrophage depletion ( ). These data suggest that altered expression of trophic factors generally, and a decrease in the ratio of VEGF/PEDF secretion specifically ( ), occurs in the RPE-choroid with macrophage depletion, and may constitute a mechanism contributing to the choroidal vascular atrophy observed.
 
 
Past studies had indicated that RPE-derived VEGF are required for vascular survival in the choroid ( ; ), and that TGF-β1 can induce VEGF expression in the RPE cells ( ). We found that Tgfb1 mRNA levels and TGFB1 immunopositivity were reduced in the choroid following 7 weeks of macrophage depletion ( ). Taken together, these data suggested that changes in angiogenic factor expression may underlie macrophage-mediated vascular support.

## Macrophages in the choroid demonstrate spontaneous regeneration to repopulate the choroid following depletion
We and others have previously demonstrated that microglia normally resident in the adult retina can demonstrate spontaneous repopulation following depletion ( ; ). However, whether choroidal macrophages in the adult choroid can regenerate is unknown. To investigate this, we depleted choroidal macrophages in young adult mice using a PLX5622-containing diet for 3 weeks, a time-point when significant choroidal thinning has occurred (depletion phase), and then reverted these animals to a standard diet for another 4 weeks (repopulation phase) ( ). An age-matched group fed a standard diet served as a control. We observed that when macrophage-depleted animals were returned to a standard diet, MHCII+, IBA1+ macrophages reappeared rapidly in the choroid, with cell density reaching 50% of control levels after 1 week of repopulation, attaining 100% of control levels at 4 weeks, and remaining stable at that level thereafter ( ). This increase in macrophage cell numbers was at least in part enabled by local proliferation of residual IBA1+ cells; while resident macrophages in the choroid of control animals were mostly non-proliferative and negative for the proliferation marker Ki67, prominent numbers of Ki67+,IBA1+ cells were detected at 1 week of repopulation when macrophage numbers were rising sharply ( ). At 4 weeks repopulation, Ki67+ cell counts decreased back to control levels at a time when macrophage numbers have recovered to control levels. We cannot rule out that infiltrating monocytes from the circulation may contribute to the repopulation process, but it is likely that repopulated macrophages are, at least in part, originating from the proliferation of the local residual macrophages. These observations reveal a previously uncharacterized regenerative capability of choroidal macrophages in which local proliferation of myeloid cells in the choroid likely contributes to the recovery of the macrophage population following depletion.
 
During the repopulation process, choroidal macrophages demonstrated features of phenotypic maturation in situ. Although all choroidal macrophages in the control animals showed immunopositivity for both MHCII and IBA1, we observed that a fraction of IBA1+ macrophages at 1 week in the repopulation phase were MHCII-negative, while no MHCII+ macrophages were IBA1-negative ( ). This fraction of MHCII-, IBA1+ macrophages diminished with time and was undetectable at 6 weeks of repopulation, indicating MHCII as a later marker acquired by repopulating macrophage during maturation in situ. Repopulating macrophages also demonstrate maturation in terms of their morphological features. At 1 week of repopulation, although IBA1+ cell numbers had risen substantially to about 50% of control levels, most macrophages showed a deramified morphology with only a few short rudimentary processes. From 2 to 6 weeks of repopulation, macrophages developed progressively increased ramification, increasing in cell area, number of cellular processes, and dendritic field area, to acquire morphological features that were similar from choroidal macrophages in control animals ( ).

## Recovery of macrophages via regeneration is accompanied by an arrest in depletion-related degenerative changes in the RPE-choroid
To investigate the functional implications of choroidal macrophage regeneration following depletion, we evaluated the structure of the RPE-choroid complex during and following repopulation. We compared (1) animals that were subjected to macrophage depletion for 3 weeks and then allowed to repopulate for another 4 weeks (the depletion/repopulation group) with (2) animals subjected to continuous depletion for a total of 7 weeks (the continuous depletion group) ( ). We found on OCT imaging that while choroidal thicknesses in the continuous depletion group declined progressively over 7 weeks, those in the depletion-repopulation group stabilized upon the initiation of macrophage repopulation, and were significantly higher than those in the continuous depletion group at the end of the 7 week experiment ( ). Assessment of choriocapillaris structure in choroidal flatmounts also found that areal coverage by choriocapillaris vessels decreased progressively over 7 weeks in the continuous depletion group, those in the depletion-repopulation group stabilized between 3 to 7 weeks during macrophage repopulation ( ). These findings suggested that repopulating macrophages functionally support the vascular structure of the choroid, further implicating the constitutive contribution of choroidal macrophages to vascular maintenance.
 We similarly assessed the function of repopulating macrophages in the support of RPE layer in these two experimental groups ( ). In the continuous depletion group, mean RPE density at 3 weeks of depletion were similar to untreated controls but decreased at 7 weeks of depletion; in the depletion-repopulation group, mean RPE density was largely unchanged across 7 weeks ( ). Analysis of the distribution of individual RPE cell areas showed that while RPE cells in continuously depleted animals showed a corresponding shift towards an increased prevalence of larger cells at 7 weeks depletion, those in the depletion-repopulation group were similar to those in untreated controls ( ). Further, macrophage repopulation also prevented the increase of multinucleated cells (≥3 nuclei) induced with 7 weeks depletion ( ). These findings indicated that structural changes in RPE cells, a phenotype of later onset apparent at 7 weeks but not at 3 weeks of depletion, can be prevented if the choroidal macrophage population were reinstated by repopulation.
 
 
The effects of macrophage repopulation on RPE structure were also observed in analyses of RPE gene expression. Relative to the continuous depletion group, the depletion repopulation group showed amelioration in depletion-induced decreases in mRNA ( ) and protein ( ) expression of RPE65, and mRNA expression of visual cycle genes (Lrat and Rlbp1), Mitf, and Tjp1/Zo1 ( ). In addition to the RPE morphology and gene expression changes, the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes decreased significantly at 3 weeks of depletion in the continuous depletion group and decreased slightly further in the scotopic b-wave amplitude at 7 weeks of depletion while the scotopic a-wave amplitude remained stable. However, in the depletion-repopulation group, while similar decrease in the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes were observed at 3 weeks of depletion, the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes were unchanged between 3 to 7 weeks during macrophage repopulation ( ). Depletion-induced reductions in Vegfa and Vegfc mRNA and VEGF protein expression were largely reversed with repopulation ( ), while there was a trend towards a reversal of depletion-induced increases of Serpinf1 (Pedf) mRNA and PEDF protein expression ( ). Taken together, these data demonstrate that structural and gene expression changes induced in the RPE-choroid complex upon macrophage depletion were significantly ameliorated or stabilized upon macrophage repopulation, supporting the notion of a homeostatic supportive function for choroidal macrophages.
 

## Discussion
Tissue-resident innate immune cells, in addition to playing multiple inflammation-related functional roles, have been recently recognized to carry out constitutive homeostatic functions in adult tissues ( ). In the adult brain, these cell populations comprise of microglia, which are located behind the blood-brain barrier (BBB) within the brain parenchyma ( ), and border-associated macrophages, which are located external and adjacent to the BBB in the meninges and choroid plexus ( ). How these populations mediate CNS homeostasis under normal conditions is an active area of investigation ( ). In the eye, microglia resident within the healthy retina help maintain the structural and functional integrity of neuronal synapses ( ), but the role of resident macrophages within the choroid of the eye is less well understood ( ). Significantly, deficiencies in maintaining long-term structural homeostasis of the choroid feature importantly in ocular pathologies; the vascular choroid in in clinical studies has been found to undergo progressive atrophic thinning with normal aging ( ; ; ) and with increasing severity of AMD ( ), which are supported by histopathological and molecular evidence of vascular dropout and attenuation in these scenarios ( ; ; ; ). Previous studies have associated AMD severity with increased choroidal macrophage number and activation ( ), however whether age-related and AMD-related choroidal changes may arise from deficient homeostatic function of resident macrophages has not been previously explored.
In the current work, we discover that choroidal macrophages may indeed play a previously unappreciated trophic role in maintenance of the vascular structure of the choroid. We found that the ablation of a significant majority of choroidal macrophages was accompanied by a generalized and progressive atrophy of the choroidal vasculature affecting choroidal vessels at multiple levels. This atrophic process extended to multiple levels of the vascular choroid, resulting in an overall decrease in choroidal thickness and choriocapillaris attenuation at the border of the RPE-Bruch’s membrane interface. The ability of resident innate immune cells to maintain local vasculature appears to vary according to tissue context; within the CNS, the depletion of retinal or brain microglia results induces changes in vessel structure and permeability in developing systems ( ; ), but not in adult systems ( ; ). In the adult gut, the depletion of resident macrophage subsets results in vascular alterations in the submucosa ( ), a feature observed analogously in the adult choroid. In the choroid, resident macrophages are distributed in a manner suitable for vascular regulation; they are found in close proximity to choroidal vessels at all levels and possess a dendritiform ramified morphology with dynamic cellular processes that constitutively survey the perivascular space ( ; ). As such, choroidal macrophages may function to integrate cues from the local environment to shape vascular organization and blood supply, adapting to ongoing physiological needs in the outer retina. Interestingly, the phenotype of choroidal vascular attenuation that accompanied macrophage ablation resembled that occurring with aging in which vascular structural losses were accompanied by a general deramification of choroidal macrophages and thus a potential decrease in macrophage-vasculature interactions. This similarity supports the notion that macrophages can signal endogenously to the vascular choroid in ways that facilitate their constitutive maintenance.
We observed here that the trophic influence of choroidal macrophages may extend also to the maintenance of RPE structure and function. The nature of RPE changes accompanying macrophage depletion has a notable resemblance to structural and functional alterations seen with aging and AMD in the RPE layer, including increased cellular disorganization and decreased cell density in the RPE monolayer ( ; ), increased numbers of multinucleated cells ( ), and increased RPE dedifferentiation ( ). Previous studies have connected microglia/macrophage activation with RPE alterations, but these had been in pathological situations in which increased production of inflammatory mediators induces RPE cell changes ( ; ; ). Contrastingly, our findings here suggest that trophic macrophage-RPE signaling may be constitutively present under normal conditions, indicating that not only macrophage overaction, but also insufficiency of endogenous macrophage function, may contribute pathogenically to changes in the choroid and RPE layer observed in age-related retinal degeneration.
In our experiments here, we have employed pharmacological CSF1R inhibition to ablate choroidal macrophages to evaluate their agency in choroidal homeostasis. PLX5622 had been designed to target CSF1R with high specificity, and demonstrates 200-fold higher selectivity over KIT and FLT3, the two most homologous receptors of CSF1R ( ), indicating improvements over earlier less selective precursors (e.g. PLX3397) and decreasing the likelihood of off-target effects. While other methods exist to ablate innate cell populations ( ), longer-term sustained ablations such as those featured in our experiments are currently possible only with pharmacological CSF1R inhibition. While it cannot be ruled out that PLX5622 may have induced off-target effects that produce the phenotypes observed here independently of CSF1R inhibition and macrophage depletion, there has not been evidence from the multiple studies involving its use in which deleterious effects, including vascular degenerative phenotypes, have been detected in the brain ( ), spinal cord ( ), or retina ( ) in non-disease states. In our previous work, we had noted that CSF1R inhibition using PLX5622 additionally ablates microglia in the healthy adult retina and that neuronal synapses in the plexiform layers in close proximity to retinal microglia showed structural and functional degeneration ( ). While we have related choroidal vascular and RPE changes to the ablation of choroidal macrophages, which are in close physical proximity and have been shown to be capable of exerting their influence, we cannot rule out the possibility that the ablation of more distant microglia in the inner retina may also contribute to these associated phenotypes, although this ‘action-from-a-distance’ capability have not been previously demonstrated.
Our findings here indicate the existence of cellular and molecular mechanisms that may underlie trophic relationships between choroidal macrophages, choroidal vasculature, and RPE cells. Multiple studies have shown that the maintenance of vasculature in the adult choroid is highly dependent on the nearby presence of viable RPE cells, and specifically on RPE-expressed angiogenic factors ( ; ). Measures that ablate RPE cells ( ; ), or otherwise deplete or prevent the delivery of RPE-derived VEGF ( ; ), resulted in prominent atrophy of choroidal vessels. This dependence of the choroidal vasculature on constitutive RPE support indicates that it is possible that choroidal macrophages may contribute to vascular maintenance indirectly via their effects on RPE cells ( ). In our experiments, we observed that macrophage depletion is accompanied by a significant decrease in ratio of VEGF/PEDF factors that are expressed in the RPE-choroidal complex, with a significant decrease in VEGF immunopositivity and an increase of PEDF in the RPE cells layer, indicating that macrophage depletion may induce vascular atrophy by decreasing RPE-mediated angiogenic support. One mode of macrophage-to-RPE signaling that is potentially relevant in this mechanism involves TGFβ; TGFβ ligands, particularly TGFB1, is prominently expressed by tissue macrophages ( ; ). Signaling via TGFBR1/2, which is expressed in RPE cells, has been shown to potentiate RPE production and secretion of VEGF ( ; ). We observed that Tgfb1 expression is significantly decreased in the RPE-choroidal complex with choroidal depletion, suggesting that TGFB1 secretion by choroidal macrophages to TGBR1/2 on RPE cells may contribute here. Verification of this mode of signaling, as well as other potential modes, await studies involving inducible macrophage-specific loss-of-function interventions in suitable in vivo models. Alternatively, it is possible that macrophage-vasculature signaling may occur directly, and that the RPE structural changes observed here may be secondarily induced by a resulting deficiency of choroidal supply. VEGF-secreting choroidal macrophages can directly potentiate choroidal neovascularization, as demonstrated in experimental studies ( ) and suggested by macrophage presence in neovascular membranes in exudative AMD ( ). However, our immunohistochemical data do not indicate that macrophages in the healthy choroid constitutively secrete significant levels of VEGF, unlike those in neovascular membranes ( ; ). Future studies identifying constitutive angiogenic factors expressed by macrophages in the healthy choroid will help address this mechanism of direct macrophage-vascular signaling.
We additionally discover here that macrophages in the adult choroid, which under normal conditions are non-migratory and demonstrate little constitutive proliferation ( ), can be induced by depletion to initiate a regenerative program de novo, in ways akin to barrier-associated macrophages in the brain ( ). The cellular source for repopulating macrophages in this context is yet undetermined, and may involve the proliferation of residual resident macrophages, as observed for microglia in the adult retina ( ), or the infiltration of circulating monocytes, as occurs in models of retinal injury ( ). Our observations here highlight that the regeneration process involves the in situ proliferation of repopulating cells in the choroid, morphological and marker maturation during repopulation, and an accurate recapitulation of original macrophage density, distribution, and morphology, akin to the repopulation of microglia in the retina ( ) and brain ( ). The ability of regenerated macrophages to recapitulate the endogenous function of the original macrophages is supported here by the arrest of choroidal vascular atrophy and RPE degenerative change, and the recovery of angiogenic factor balance upon the full restoration of macrophage numbers in the choroid. Interestingly, we did not observe a complete reversal of vascular and RPE degenerative changes that recovers the original, pre-depletion anatomy in the RPE-choroid, suggesting that aspects of degenerative change may be permanent and resist restoration by reinstituted trophic signals. This ability to regenerate choroidal macrophages presents a new potential therapeutic opportunity for immune modulation in the choroid in which depletion-repopulation measures may be employed to ‘reset’ the immune environment in the choroid in pathological situations in which choroidal macrophages demonstrate chronic activation. The feasibility of this approach will require further elucidation of the nature of macrophage repopulation in models of retinal pathology.
Taken together, our results here have significant relevance to understanding choroidal degeneration in aging and AMD progression ( ) and to ongoing translational efforts to preserve or restore the vascular choroid in age-related disease ( ). Additional to the concept that abnormal and imbalanced immune activation within the choroid involving proinflammatory and complement-mediated mechanisms can exert deleterious effects on choroidal vascular structure, our findings show that non-inflammatory trophic influences from resident choroidal macrophages may be additionally important in maintaining choroidal structural integrity across the lifespan of the organism. Our findings suggest that age- and AMD-associated degeneration in the RPE-choroid complex may be contributed to by multiple immune influences that combine inappropriate inflammatory activation and insufficient trophic support. The balance between these possibly simultaneous mechanisms may influence the relative severity of degeneration between the choriocapillaris vs. the adjacent RPE layer, which may influence the progression to the atrophic vs. the neovascular forms of AMD as hypothesized from histopathological studies ( ). As such, immunomodulatory interventions aimed at preserving the integrity of the RPE-choroid complex should optimally enable both increased macrophage trophic influences and decreased inflammatory damage. These perspectives add to the strategy of choroidal macrophage-targeted interventions as potential therapies aimed at choroidal preservation in diseases like AMD.

## Materials and methods
 

## Experimental animals
Experiments were conducted according to protocols approved by the National Eye Institute Animal Care and Use Committee and adhered to the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology statement for the use of animals in ophthalmic and vision research. Animals were housed in a National Institutes of Health (NIH) animal facility under a 12 hr light/12 hr dark cycle with food ad libitum.
Adult 3 month-old female wild type BALB/cJ mice (The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) and 3 month-old albino transgenic mice, containing a transgene with a α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) promoter driving the expression of green fluorescent protein in perivascular cells in the choroid ( ), were used to analyze cellular changes in the choroid and the RPE following macrophage depletion.

## Model for macrophage depletion-repopulation in the choroid
We employed a model for macrophage depletion in the adult mouse choroid which involved the dietary administration of PLX5622 (Plexxikon, Berkeley, CA), a potent and selective inhibitor of the CSF1R that we previously demonstrated to deplete microglia in the retina ( ). Animals were placed on a rodent chow containing PLX5622 (at 1200 parts per million, formulated by Research Diets Inc New Brunswick, NJ) for up to 7 weeks to induce depletion macrophages resident in the choroid. To allow for the repopulation of choroidal macrophages, animals subjected to depletion with PLX5622-containing diet for 3 weeks were switched back to a standard diet; the first day of control diet resumption was designated day 0 of the repopulation phase.

## Immunohistochemical analysis of sclerochoroidal tissue
Mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation. Enucleated eyes were dissected to form posterior segment eyecups which were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 1 hr at room temperature. Eyecups were either processed for vibratome sectioning (100 µm thick sections, VT1000, Leica) or dissected to obtain sclerochoroidal flatmounts, which were then immersed for 1 hr in a blocking buffer (1 × PBS containing 10% normal goat serum and 0.5% Triton X-100) at room temperature. Primary antibodies, which included IBA1 (1:200; Wako), MHC-II (1:200; BD Pharmingen), RPE65 (1:200; Millipore), VEGFA (1:200; Abcam), or PEDF (1:200; Abcam) were diluted in blocking buffer and added to sections/flat-mounts to incubate for 24 hr at 4°C. After washing in 1 × PBS with 0.2% Triton X-100, sections/flat-mounts were then incubated overnight with secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor 488– or 568–conjugated anti-rabbit, rat or mouse IgG). Phalloidin (1:500; Invitrogen) was added and incubated for 4 hr label F-actin that enables visualization of RPE cell morphology. DAPI (1:500; Sigma-Aldrich) was added to label cell nuclei. Stained samples were imaged with confocal microscopy (Zeiss LSM700). To visualize macrophage distributions over the entire choroid, tiled images of sclerochoroidal flatmounts were obtained under a 10x objective and stitched together with image analysis software (Zen, Carl Zeiss Microscopy). For visualization of RPE monolayer, multiplane z-series were captured under a 40x oil-immersion objective. Resulting images were subjected to computer-assisted analysis (ImageJ, NIH); the density of choroidal macrophages was assessed across the entire choroid and expressed as number per unit area. The number of nuclei per RPE cells were manually assessed from high-magnification images of RPE flat-mounts captured at or near the midpoint between the optic nerve and the peripheral edge of the flat-mount.

## Automated RPE morphological analysis
Sclerochoroidal flatmounts immunolabeled with RPE65 and phalloidin were imaged with confocal microscopy (Zeiss LSM880) and multiplane z-series images were captured under a 40x oil-immersion objective. Morphological analyses of RPE mosaics were performed in an automated manner using REShAPE software, as previously described ( ). Briefly, individual RPE cells were segmented at their borders using MATLAB and a binary ‘mask’ has been generated to measure cell morphological features. RPE cell density was calculated as cell numbers per unit area and the area of individual RPE cells was determined from cell segmentation.

## In vivo optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging of the choroid
Mice were anesthetized with intraperitoneal ketamine (90 mg/kg) and xylazine (8 mg/kg) and their pupils were dilated. Choroidal and retinal structure was assessed using OCT imaging (Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering) in anesthetized animals through a dilated pupil. OCT images in the enhanced depth imaging (EDI)-mode were captured longitudinally in individual experimental animals in the same matched fundus location (with images captured using ‘follow-up’ mode in the instrument software). The imaging was performed using a 30x objective (Heidelberg) and scan fields, measuring 6.5 by 4.4 mm and centered on the optic nerve (1000 A-scans/horizontal B-scan, 25 horizontal B-scans, average of three frames per B-scan, each spaced 182 µm apart) were captured in each imaging session. Repeat OCT imaging was performed at 1, 3, 5, and 7 weeks following the initiation of PLX5622. Thickness measurements in OCT images were made using the instrument manufacturer software; choroidal thickness measurements (defined as the axial distance from the Bruch’s membrane to the outer edge of the choroid) were measured at 300 µm temporal and nasal from the optic nerve on the horizontal meridian, and average retinal thickness measurements per eye (defined as the axial distance from the vitreal surface to the Bruch’s membrane) were made at 300 µm temporal and nasal from the optic nerve in corresponding locations.

## Direct labeling and visualization of choroidal vessels
Choroidal vessels are labeled by cardiac perfusion of an aqueous solution containing 1,19-dioctadecyl-3,3,39,39-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate (DiI, D-282, Invitrogen/Molecular Probes, Carlsbad, CA), a lipophilic dye that incorporates into membranes of endothelial cells revealing the structure of choroidal vessels as previously described ( ). Briefly, experimental mice were euthanized by carbon dioxide inhalation and the thoracic cavity opened to expose the heart. A volume of 100 µL of DiI stock solution (6 mg/ml in 100% ethanol) was dissolved in 5 ml of diluent comprising 1xPBS and 5% glucose in a 1:4 ratio and the resulting solution delivered via cardiac perfusion at a rate of 1–2 mL/min. This was immediately followed by the perfusion of 6 mL of PBS. The animals were immediately enucleated and the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)-sclera-choroid complex dissected from the harvested globes after fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde. These flat-mount preparations were mounted on glass slides in Fluoromount (Sigma-Aldrich) with the RPE cell layer uppermost. Confocal multiplane z-stack images of Dil-labeled endothelial cells were obtained with confocal microscopy (Zeiss LSM700) under a 63x oil-immersion objective at 300–600 µm temporal and nasal from the optic nerve. Images of labeled vessels in the choriocapillaris were used to compute the fraction of vascular coverage as the fractional area of the imaging field occupied by DiI-labeled vessels using ImageJ Software (NIH).

## Quantitative reverse transcription PCR analysis
Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR analysis of isolated mouse choroid was performed to identify the molecular changes after macrophage depletion. RPE-sclerochoroidal tissue were acutely isolated from euthanized animals and total RNA was extracted using a RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen) and amplified to cDNA using the PrimeScript 1st strand cDNA synthesis kit (TaKaRa Bio) per manufacturers’ instructions. cDNA in 1 µL volume was used for real-time PCR analysis using SYBR Green PCR Mastermix (Affymetrix) on the CFX96 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad). Levels of mRNA expression were normalized to those in controls as determined using the comparative CT (2ΔΔCT) method. GAPDH was used as an internal control. Tgfb1 primer was purchased from Bio-Rad (Assay ID qMmuCID0017320), and other oligonucleotide primer pairs used are listed in the Key Resources Table.

## Histological analysis of Choroid-RPE sections
Eyes from control and 7 weeks PLX5622-treated animals were isolated and fixed for 30 min in 4% glutaraldehyde followed by 10% formalin for at least 24 hr. Fixed eyes were embedded in methacrylate, serially sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Images were taken with a Zeiss microscope and mean thickness of the choroid from temporal and nasal quadrants and mean cross-sectional area of vascular lumina were measured using ImageJ software (NIH).

## Transmission Electron Microscopy of RPE sections
The eyes from control and PLX5622-treated mice were isolated and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde. The specimens were prepared for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) as previously described ( ). Briefly, specimens were embedded in Spurr's epoxy resin and processed into ultrathin sections (90 nm) which were then stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and imaged with a transmission electron microscope (JEOL, JM-1010).

## Protein quantitation in choroid-RPE-complex
Mouse RPE-choroidal samples were isolated from the following groups: untreated control group, group treated with 7 weeks of PLX5622, group treated with 3 weeks of PLX5622 and switched to regular diet for another 4 weeks to allow macrophage repopulation. Four biological replicates were obtained for each group. Pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) protein levels were measured in the samples using the Mouse SERPINF1/PEDF ELISA kit (LifeSpan BioSciences; LS-F36110). Protein levels of VEGF, PDGF-AA and PDGF-BB were analyzed using a Magnetic Luminex Assay kit (R and D Systems, LXSAMSM-11).

## Electroretinographic (ERG) analysis
ERGs were recorded using an Espion E2 system (Diagnosys). Mice were dark-adapted for 12 hr and their pupils were dilated prior to ERG assessment. Mice were anesthetized and flash ERG recordings were obtained simultaneously from both eyes using gold wire loop electrodes, with the reference electrode placed in the animal’s mouth and the ground subdermal electrode at the tail. ERG responses were obtained at increasing light intensities over the ranges of 1 × 10−4 to 10 cd·s/m2 under dark-adapted conditions, and 0.3 to 100 cd·s/m2 under a background light that saturates rod function. The stimulus interval between flashes varied from 5 s at the lowest stimulus strengths to 60 s at the highest ones. Two to ten responses were averaged depending on flash intensity. ERG signals were sampled at 1 kHz and recorded with 0.3 Hz low-frequency and 300 Hz high-frequency cutoffs. Analysis of a-wave and b-wave amplitudes was performed using customized Espion ERG Data Analyzer software (v2.2) that digitally filters out high-frequency oscillatory potential wavelets. The a-wave amplitude was measured from the baseline to the negative peak and the b-wave was measured from the a-wave trough to the maximum positive peak. ERGs were recorded before and after macrophage depletion. The a- and b-wave measurements of animals with or without macrophage depletion were compared using a two-way ANOVA.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 7.0d (GraphPad). For comparisons involving two data columns, t tests (paired or unpaired) or nonparametric tests (Mann–Whitney U) were used, depending on whether the data followed a Gaussian distribution as determined by normality tests. A normality test (D’Agostino and Pearson) was used to analyze the distribution of all datasets. For comparisons involving three or more data columns, a one-way ANOVA (with Dunnett’s multiple-comparisons test) was used if the data in an experimental group were found in a Gaussian distribution, and a nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis test (with Dunn’s multiple-comparisons test) was used otherwise.

## Acknowledgements
This work is supported by National Eye Institute Intramural Research Program.

## Funding Statement
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.

## Contributor Information
Wai T Wong, Email: wongw@alum.mit.edu.
Tadatsugu Taniguchi, Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan.
Lois Smith, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, United States.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grant:
National Eye Institute
Intramural Research Program to Xiao Yang, Lian Zhao, Maria M Campos, Mones Abu-Asab, Davide Ortolan, Nathan Hotaling, Kapil Bharti.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing.
Software, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing - review and editing.
Resources, Methodology, Writing - review and editing.
Resources, Methodology, Writing - review and editing.
Software, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing - review and editing.
Software, Methodology, Writing - review and editing.
Resources, Supervision, Methodology, Writing - review and editing.
Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - review and editing.

## Ethics
Animal experimentation: This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. All of the animals were handled according to approved institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) protocols (NEI-665) of the National Eye Institute.

## Additional files
Transparent reporting form

## Data availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files.

## References
 

eLifeeLife10.7554/eLife.55564.sa1Decision letter
SmithLoisReviewing Editor SmithLoisReviewer SunYeReviewer 1Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, United States2Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, United States3Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, United StatesIn the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.
Acceptance summary:
Mechanisms that maintain choroidal homeostasis are not well understood, yet are important in aging and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). The authors report that ablation of choroidal macrophages via CSF1R blockade is associated with choroidal atrophy and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) changes, decrease in visual cycle gene expression, and altered angiogenic factor expression. Suspending CSF1R blockade allowed macrophage regeneration, which arrested vascular degeneration and reversed RPE alterations. The study suggests that choroidal macrophages help maintain choroidal vasculature and RPE cells, and macrophages may be a factor in AMD pathology.
Decision letter after peer review:
Thank you for submitting your article "CSF1R blockade induces macrophage ablation and results in vascular atrophy and RPE disorganization in the mouse choroid" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, including Lois Smith as the Reviewing Editor and Reviewer #1, and the evaluation has been overseen by Tadatsugu Taniguchi as the Senior Editor. The following individual involved in review of your submission has agreed to reveal their identity: Ye Sun (Reviewer #2).
The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.
Summary:
The choroid degenerates in aging and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Mechanisms that maintain choroidal homeostasis are not well understood. The authors report that the ablation of choroidal macrophages via CSF1R blockade was associated with choroidal vascular atrophy and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) structural disruption, down regulation of visual cycle genes, and altered angiogenic factor expression. Suspending CSF1R blockade then enabled spontaneous macrophage regeneration, which fully restored original macrophage distributions and morphologies. Macrophage regeneration arrested vascular degeneration and reversed RPE alterations. These findings suggest that choroidal macrophages help maintain choroidal vasculature and RPE cells, implicating choroidal macrophage depletion or malfunction as a factor in aging- and AMD-associated pathology.
Essential revisions:
1) Please add the number of mice and eyes assessed in each sub figure.
2) The purpose of this manuscript is to show a relationship with macrophages and visual function, if there is experimental recovery of macrophages is there recover of visual function? This significantly strengthens the conclusions.
3) Were the mice perfused before the eyes were collected. How much of the observed staining is intravascular cells? It is difficult with the whole mounts to determine if the decrease in vascular structure is because of lost functional choroidal cells, or because of reduced number of white blood cells in the blood circulation causing the vessels to look smaller and less stained.
4) None of the figures have staining controls presented. Secondary antibody staining controls should be provided, at least as a supplement.
eLifeeLife10.7554/eLife.55564.sa2Author response
1420209e55564e55564Collection date 2020.

Essential revisions:
1) Please add the number of mice and eyes assessed in each sub figure.
We apologize for the omission. The number of mice and eyes assessed in the experiments have been added to the figure legend in all the supplementary figures.
2) The purpose of this manuscript is to show a relationship with macrophages and visual function, if there is experimental recovery of macrophages is there recover of visual function? This significantly strengthens the conclusions.
We appreciate the reviewer’s query. While we have associated the depletion of choroidal macrophages with degenerative changes in choroidal and RPE structure, as well as decreases in ERG physiological function, we found that the repopulation of choroidal macrophages was associated with the recovery of some but not all of these phenotypes. Phenotypes such as choroidal thickness were stabilized upon macrophage repopulation but did not recover back to baseline levels.
With regards to the potential recovery of ERG function with macrophage repopulation, we have now added Figure 8—figure supplement 2 to describe the changes in ERG function. This experiment involved the analysis of two separate groups of age-matched animals: (1) the continuous depletion group which was administered a PLX5622 diet continuously over 7 weeks and assessed with ERG at baseline, 3 weeks and 7 weeks, and (2) the depletion-repopulation group which was administered PLX5622 for only the first 3 weeks and resumed on a regular diet thereafter; these animals were also assessed at baseline, 3 weeks and 7 weeks. We found that in the continuous depletion group, the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes decreased significantly from baseline at 3 weeks of depletion. and then decreased only a small amount further at 7 weeks of depletion. In the depletion-repopulation group, a similar decrease in the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes were observed at 3 weeks of depletion, but the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes stabilized and were unchanged between 3 to 7 weeks during macrophage repopulation. These changes in ERG changes upon macrophage repopulation resembled the changes in choroidal thickness which stabilized but did not recover after macrophage repopulation.
In the Results section, we have added the following description:
“In addition to the RPE morphology and gene expression changes, the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes decreased significantly at 3 weeks of depletion in the continuous depletion group and decreased slightly further in the scotopic b-wave amplitude at 7 weeks of depletion while the scotopic a-wave amplitude remained stable. However, in the depletion-repopulation group, while similar decrease in the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes were observed at 3 weeks of depletion, the scotopic a- and b-wave amplitudes were unchanged between 3 to 7 weeks during macrophage repopulation (Figure 8—figure supplement 2A).”
“Taken together, these data demonstrate that structural and gene expression changes induced in the RPE-choroid complex upon macrophage depletion were significantly ameliorated or stabilized upon macrophage repopulation, supporting the notion of a homeostatic supportive function for choroidal macrophages.”
The following figure legend was added to Figure 8—figure supplement 2:
“Figure 8—figure supplement 2. Changes in ERG amplitudes during macrophage depletion and subsequent macrophage repopulation. […] n = 10 eyes from 5 animals in each treatment group.”
3) Were the mice perfused before the eyes were collected. How much of the observed staining is intravascular cells? It is difficult with the whole mounts to determine if the decrease in vascular structure is because of lost functional choroidal cells, or because of reduced number of white blood cells in the blood circulation causing the vessels to look smaller and less stained.
All experimental mice referenced in this section were perfused prior to enucleation with DiI-containing perfusate; the incorporation of DI into endothelial cell membranes enabled labeling of the choroidal vascular structure. It is possible that the removal of intravascular cells may have introduced some alterations in the vascular structure of choroidal vessels, however because all animals were similarly perfused, the detected vascular structural differences between depleted and non-depleted animals do not arise from this potential influence. These differences between the DiI-labelled vascular structures of depleted vs. non-depleted animals were corroborated by comparisons using H&E-stained choroidal sections and in vivo OCT imaging – techniques that do not involve vascular perfusion. As such, we are of the opinion that vascular perfusion did not constitute a confounding factor in our study.
For clarification, we added the sentence “to visualize the choriocapillaris, vessels were perfused and labeled with Dil lipophilic dye”in the Results section.
4) None of the figures have staining controls presented. Secondary antibody staining controls should be provided, at least as a supplement.
We had used the same secondary antibody in the immunohistochemical analysis for VEGF, PEDF and TGFβ1 in the vibratome sections. Image panels showing secondary antibody staining controls for VEGF, PEDF and TGFβ1 in vibratome sections are now added as the Figure 5—figure supplement 2; these showed no positive staining in the absence of the primary antibody.
The following figure legend was added to Supplementary file 3. “Figure 5—figure supplement 2. Secondary antibody staining control. […] n = 3 animals in each treatment group.”
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Transparent reporting form

## Data Availability Statement
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files.