822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC8832467883246788324673499546110.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00746Molecular Probes, Chemosensors, and Nanosensors for
Optical Detection of Biorelevant Molecules and Ions in Aqueous Media
and Biofluids
KrämerJoana KangRui GrimmLaura M De ColaLuisa PicchettiPierre BiedermannFrank †Institute
of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT), Hermann-von-Helmholtz Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany‡Dipartimento
DISFARM, University of Milano, via Camillo Golgi 19, 20133 Milano, Italy§Department
of Molecular Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Instituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, IRCCS, 20156 Milano, Italy*F.B.: email, frank.biedermann@kit.edu.
*P.P.: email, pierre.picchetti@kit.edu.
712022122334593459–36361122022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Synthetic molecular
probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors used
in combination with innovative assay protocols hold great potential
for the development of robust, low-cost, and fast-responding sensors
that are applicable in biofluids (urine, blood, and saliva). Particularly,
the development of sensors for metabolites, neurotransmitters, drugs,
and inorganic ions is highly desirable due to a lack of suitable biosensors.
In addition, the monitoring and analysis of metabolic and signaling
networks in cells and organisms by optical probes and chemosensors
is becoming increasingly important in molecular biology and medicine.
Thus, new perspectives for personalized diagnostics, theranostics,
and biochemical/medical research will be unlocked when standing limitations
of artificial binders and receptors are overcome. In this review,
we survey synthetic sensing systems that have promising (future) application
potential for the detection of small molecules, cations, and anions
in aqueous media and biofluids. Special attention was given to sensing
systems that provide a readily measurable optical signal through dynamic
covalent chemistry, supramolecular host–guest interactions,
or nanoparticles featuring plasmonic effects. This review shall also
enable the reader to evaluate the current performance of molecular
probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors in terms of sensitivity and
selectivity with respect to practical requirement, and thereby inspiring
new ideas for the development of further advanced systems.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Aug 25; Issue date 2022 Feb 9.

1.

## Introductory
Remarks
Since its beginning, supramolecular chemistry has
received increasing
attention due to the wide range of possibilities for new practical
applications. − Among those, novel molecular probes, supramolecular binders, and
chemosensors may in combination with innovative assays lead to a revolution
of sensing and medical diagnostics. To date, instrumental-based analytics, e.g., well-known, highly sensitive, and powerful methods,
such as HPLC-MS, GC-MS, or NMR, are commonly used for biofluid analysis
in clinics. However, these methods require the use of large and complex
machines that are difficult to operate and therefore cannot be used
in private households or in point-of-care applications for routine
diagnostics. In the last decades of research, molecular recognition-based
diagnostics have produced varied and promising results in terms of
sensing technology. So far, these are mainly based on biological building
blocks and processes, namely immune-based diagnostics (antibody–antigen
interactions), , genetically modified receptor
proteins, DNA and RNA technologies (including
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test), − and enzymatic reaction-based
diagnostics. , Sensing methods adapted from
electrochemistry are already highly advanced but are mainly restricted
to the small subset of redox active analytes. Synthetic, non-biobased
chemistry and particularly supramolecular chemistry has by now contributed
relatively little to diagnostic applications. This somewhat disappointing
status quo was summarized in 2013 by Otto S. Wolfbeis in his editorial
article as “Probes, Sensors, and Labels: Why is Real
Progress Slow?”, which
still serves as a blueprint for describing the situation in 2021.
There are some inspiring exceptions demonstrating the future potential
of synthetic artificial chemosensing systems for medical diagnostics.
For instance, the molecular recognition-based glucose sensors developed
separately by Senseonics ( a) and GlySure Ltd. ( b) are based on fluorescent boronic acid
probes. These devices can be used for monitoring the intravenous glucose
levels in real time over the period of several months. , Moreover, cation-selective chemosensors have been utilized in developing
a supramolecular sensor cassette distributed by OPTI Medical Systems,
Inc., which can be used for the detection of Na+, K+, Ca2+, CO2 (indirectly), and pH in
untreated whole blood ( c). , 
 In this review article,
we focus on molecular probe, chemosensor,
and nanosensor developments that are either already operational in
aqueous environments or that have the potential to be developed into
functional chemosensors in aqueous media. We were particularly interested
in highlighting literature reports on molecular recognition-based
sensing coupled to an optical readout. Moreover, we provide a general
overview of the most important small molecule analyte classes found
in biofluids and compare different molecular probes, chemosensors,
and nanosensors for each analyte. In this respect, our review article
is meant to be complementary to other review articles that are organized
according to design principles or classifications of probes or chemosensors.
For further reading, we can recommend the excellent review articles
by Anslyn and coworkers (2015), Levine
and coworkers (2020), and the comprehensive
textbooks on chemosensors (2011) and
artificial receptors (2010), as representative
literature materials. We cover the important developments of molecular
sensors, probes, and assays made in the last two decades but also
present challenging tasks to the reader that chemists have yet to
face. While there is some ambiguity in the literature about the terms,
we follow the widely accepted convention and classify the chemical
sensing systems into three categories, i.e., molecular probes, chemosensors,
and nanosensors, see .
 (Molecular) probes are systems that form strong, essentially
irreversible bonds with their target analytes ( a). This is coupled to the emergence of a
pronounced optical response, e.g., changes in fluorescence
emission or absorbance bands. Typically, molecular probes undergo
covalent-like bonding through organic reaction mechanisms. However,
metal complexes are also considered as molecular probes if the binding
of the target analyte results in strongly bonded, kinetically nearly
inert metal–analyte complexes.
Chemosensors are defined in this review as systems
that (under the experimental assay conditions) reversibly bind their
target analytes ( b). Most chemosensors engage in noncovalent bonding through, e.g., hydrogen-bonding and electrostatic interactions with
the analytes. However, also metal complexes that form labile, readily
exchanging complexes with their ligands (= analytes) can function
as chemosensors. According to the definition used here, chemosensors
generate an optical signal in the presence of the analyte. Importantly,
chemosensors can be used for monitoring of (bio)chemical and (bio)physical
processes such as enzymatic reactions and analyte diffusion through
membranes in real time because they readily adjust (= equilibrate)
to the changes in the composition of the sample, whereas molecular
probes typically report a static picture.
Nanosensors can be obtained by combining molecular
probes or chemosensors with nanoparticles (NPs) ( c). According to the IUPAC
and the EU definitions of nanomaterials, NPs have at least one external
dimension in the range of 1–100 nm , and feature unique physicochemical characteristics, e.g., modulated optical properties (plasmon resonances). , Besides, many authors extend the term “nanoparticle”
to include particles larger than 100 nm (up to several hundred nanometers)
as long as physicochemical properties other than in the bulk phase
are observed. , Nanoparticles can be functionalized
with one or multiple copies of the same as well as with different
probes or chemosensors. In addition, they can be co-functionalized, e.g., with additional dyes, performance enhancers, or cellular
targeting molecules, and can serve as colloidal carriers for water-insoluble
molecular probes and chemosensors. , When molecular
probes or chemosensors are coupled to NPs, different photophysical
features can emerge, e.g., as a result of energy
transfer between the probes/chemosensors and NPs. For instance, plasmonic
gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have been extensively researched for the
preparation of nanosensors, as they can be readily functionalized
with molecular probes or chemosensors and show tunable plasmonic properties. − In addition to surface-functionalized NPs, there are also some examples
of nanosensors based on porous organic or inorganic materials, such
as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) or mesoporous silica particles,
where confinement effects, e.g., aggregation-induced
emission, or quenching, can be exploited for signal transduction.
Both affinity and selectivity of chemosensors and probes are often
the main practical limitation for their use in realistic diagnostic
applications, e.g., in biofluids such as urine, saliva,
and blood. Therefore, we emphasize herein the typical concentration
ranges in which the analyte of interest occurs in the biofluid compared
to the reported assay conditions. Moreover, we consistently specified
and tabulated the experimental conditions, i.e.,
co-solvents used (if any), presence of salts, and the pH, under which
the assays were carried out because the binding parameters of molecular
recognition-based chemosensors and probes can strongly depend on these
factors. For example, chemosensors based on the cucurbit[n]uril (CBn) macrocycles display unprecedently high
binding affinities in water for many hydrophobic and/or positively
charged guests. , However, CBn also interact competitively with metal cations such as Na+ and K+, , which are ubiquitously occurring
in millimolar concentrations in biofluids, leading in most cases to
greatly reduced actual binding affinities of CBn and
biorelevant target analytes in saline biofluids (see, for instance,
the binding parameters for CBn complexes that are
made accessible at SupraBank.org). Current obstacles that are encountered
when attempting to extrapolate the binding properties of chemosensors
reported in pure water or low concentrated salt buffers to their performance
in complex biofluids are pointed out in this review. Additionally,
possible strategies to overcome these barriers are presented.
We assume that the reader has already come across different assay
types used for optical signal generation such that we keep the following
introduction to this topic brief. The interested reader can find more
information in several literature reviews. − 
Most
probes and some chemosensors operate in a direct binding assay
(DBA), meaning that analyte binding directly results in an easily
quantifiable signal change, such as the emergence or disappearance
of a spectroscopic feature ( a). If applicable, this assay type is often the easiest
and most practical choice. Particularly attractive DBAs are those
in which the target analyte provides a unique spectroscopic response
upon binding that can be distinguished from the signal caused by cross-reactive
analytes.
 For those probes and chemosensors
that are not chromophoric/emissive
or that do not produce a significant spectroscopic response upon analyte
binding, the so-called indicator displacement assay (IDA) , is a viable option ( b). In an IDA, an indicator dye is first pre-complexed with
the receptor molecule and displaced again when a stronger binding
or higher concentrated analyte is present. Counterbalancing their
simplicity, IDA-based sensing may fail to distinguish the target analyte
from cross-reactive analytes (of unknown concentrations) because the
displacement of the indicator from the chemosensor leads to an analyte
independent spectroscopic response.
On some occasions, it can
be advantageous to first complex the
analyte (= guest) by the receptor and then displace it through subsequent
addition of the indicator dye, which we recently introduced as a guest
displacement assay (GDA). However, in an analytical context, it may
be better referred to as an analyte displacement assay (ADA, c). , 
Finally, sometimes it has been feasible to establish associative
binding assays (ABA) ( d). , Suitable receptors for ABA are
capable of simultaneously binding dye and analyte, thereby bringing
them in close spatial contact and enabling their electronic coupling.
This unique binding mode offers interesting opportunities for distinguishing
analytes from each other through the resulting analyte-specific spectroscopic
fingerprints (see also ).
As already pointed out, we directed our efforts
towards identifying
sensors and their corresponding assay types that are potentially applicable
for diagnostics and thus functional in biofluids. One interesting
biofluid is urine, as it is becoming increasingly more evident that
urinalysis can provide diagnostic data which is difficult to obtain
otherwise. − shows representative
small molecules (metabolites) that are commonly found in the human
urine metabolome, whereas lists representative small molecules (metabolites)
commonly found in human saliva. For human urine, we selected those
compounds that are typically present at concentrations of >10 μM/mM
creatinine. 
 This small subset of compounds
already demonstrates that urine
is a rather complex mixture of many substances and substance classes
that share structural similarities. In fact, there are several thousands
of different metabolites, most occurring at trace levels but some
also reaching micromolar concentrations that are regularly found in
this protein-free biofluid. A rich metabolome
is of great diagnostic value because it can be used to identify and
distinguish many different diseases and body dysfunctions. − Furthermore, urine is a sterile biofluid that can be conveniently
obtained even by the layman on a daily basis. Urinalysis has therefore
the potential to revolutionize diagnostics in home-use and in point-of-care
units if sensing systems become available that are easy to use and
cost efficient. However, the molecular composition complexity of urine
is also a challenge to be embraced when designing selectively responding
chemosensors and probes. Note also that it is not only required to
detect the target analyte in urine, but that the real information
lies in its concentration profile, such that both quantitative and
qualitative sensing methods are needed. In addition, inorganic cations
and anions are present in urine at varying concentrations (depending
on the volume that is excreted), and the pH of urine typically varies
from 4.5 to 7.8 even for healthy patients. These fluctuations in the matrix background further challenge the
development of functional chemical sensor systems for urinalysis.
It is generally desirable to measure the urine composition regularly
over a long period of time due to the highly varying urine composition
from patient to patient, as well as the temporal metabolite fluctuations
during a day. , In this way, normal concentration
variations can be distinguished from systematically occurring changes
that may indicate the emergence of a disease or body malfunction.
The development of chemosensors and molecular probes for the facile
and low-cost detection and quantification of target analytes in urine
is one promising approach to fulfil these practical requirements.
Similar approaches can be put forward for developing chemosensing
methods for the use in saliva or blood. We have aimed to provide the
reader a comprehensive overview on the status of molecular probes,
chemosensors, and nanosensors for application in aqueous media, including
fresh and wastewater sources and particularly biofluids.

2.

## Amino Acids
Amino acids are a class of organic molecules
that are composed
of a basic amino group and an acidic carboxyl group bonded directly
to a central carbon atom called the α-carbon, which carries
an organic residue. Except for glycine, all amino acids are chiral,
while most naturally occurring amino acids are S-configured. shows the chemical
structure of the 20 genetically encoded proteinogenic amino acids,
which are the building blocks of proteins. Both amino acids and their
derivatives are commonly found in biofluids, typically in the micromolar
to millimolar concentration range (e.g., and and ) and are important
targets for molecular diagnostics. Many
diseases are linked and/or indicated by the alteration of the relative
concentration of amino acids, − thus only an exemplary number of them are presented
herein. For a detailed discussion of the amino acid catabolism and
its associated diseases, which is beyond the scope of this review,
we would refer the interested reader to other excellent literature
sources. − Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most common congenital disorder of
the amino acid metabolism and is characterized by abnormal concentrations
of phenylalanine (Phe) in the body. On
the basis of plasma concentrations of Phe, different types of PKU
can be classified, namely classical PKU (c(Phe) > 1200 μM),
moderate PKU (600 μM < c(Phe) < 1200 μM), and hyperphenylalaninemia
(Phe = 120–600 μM). , When untreated,
PKU can lead to intellectual disability, seizures, behavioral problems,
and psychological disorders. , Tyrosinemia type 1
is an example of impaired tyrosine catabolism that is characterized
by elevated levels of tyrosine in the blood and can lead to liver,
kidney, and peripheral nerve damage if left untreated. , , Tryptophan (Trp) is another essential
amino acid that both itself as well as its metabolites are directly
or indirectly involved in many physiological processes, including
neuronal functions, immunity, and gut homeostasis. − Because of
the strong link between altered tryptophan metabolism and physiology,
abnormal Trp concentrations in biofluids such as plasma, serum, and
urine are considered as potential biomarkers that can be associated
with disorders of the central nervous system such as psychiatric and
neurological diseases. , , Abnormal levels of histidine and its metabolites are associated
with diseases such as aging-related disorders, metabolic syndrome,
atopic dermatitis, ulcers, inflammatory bowel diseases, ocular diseases,
and neurological disorders. For example,
it was reported by the Zhai group that the ratio of branched-chain
amino acids to histidine can potentially be used as a biomarker for
osteoarthritis. Sulfur-containing amino
acids, i.e., methionine, cysteine, and homocysteine,
play an important role in the maintenance and integrity of cellular
systems by participating in cellular redox reactions and affecting
the ability of cells to detoxify from free radicals and reactive oxygen
species. Therefore, genetic defects that
affect the regulation of the sulfur containing amino acids can be
the cause for a variety of diseases, including homo- and cystinuria,
homo- and cysteinemia, and neural tube defects as well as vascular
disease, Alzheimer’s disease, HIV, and special types of cancer. For example, high levels of homocysteine (in
serum or plasma) were shown to be a risk factor for cardiovascular
diseases, especially for people with significant carotid stenosis. , , , Overall, amino acids play an essential role in the human body, and
their detection in aqueous media and biofluids holds a great potential
for molecular diagnostics applications.
 2.1.

## General
Approaches for Amino Acid Detection
Amino acids are popular
targets for chemosensors and probes as
they offer several reactive moieties, for instance their −NH2 and −COOH groups that can be used as chemical anchors
( ). They possess additional functional groups that can
be targeted by molecular recognition or chemically reactive sites, e.g., thiol or amino groups. Other unique features are intrinsic
azaheterocyclic moieties, e.g., for His, that can
serve as ligands for metal ions and metal–organic complexes.
Additionally, positively charged side chains (e.g., lysine) or negatively charged side chains (e.g., glutamic acid) are of utility when designing chemosensors and probes.
Furthermore, the hydrogen bonding capabilities of the −CONH2 amide moieties found in asparagine and glutamine and that
of the −OH hydroxyl moieties found in serine and threonine
might be considered, even though intermolecular H-bonding is generally
screened by water as a solvent. Finally, the hydrophobic aromatic
residues (e.g., tryptophan) and the hydrophobic aliphatic
residues (e.g., leucine) can be exploited as target
sites for chemosensor binding.
 In the following, first,
molecular probes and chemosensors are
described that have a broad scope, i.e., that detect
all or a wide range of amino acids. Then, chemosensors and probes
that were designed to target specifically the side chains of certain
amino acids are discussed. In addition, we refer the reader to a specialized
critical review by Zhou and Yoon on the matter of amino acid sensing
by probes and chemosensors. Lastly, it
is worth pointing out that enzyme-based assay kits for the detection
and quantification of several amino acids in biofluids have become
commercially available. Therefore, any probe or chemosensor that is
hoped to reach practical utility must outperform the existing technology,
for instance, in terms of sensitivity, ease of handling, assay times,
and costs.

2.2.

## Molecular Probes for Amino
Acids (and Proteins)
Most known molecular probes for amino
acids operate through a chemical
reaction with the amino functionality. Several (pro)dyes have been
developed that feature a readily visible color change or become emissive
after the reaction with amino acids. The molecular probes discussed
within this section are summarized in and .
 For instance,
ninhydrin (P2.1) is a popular amino
acid reactive probe that gives a deep-blue or purple color, known
as Ruhemann’s purple, when reacting with primary amines through
a sequence of condensation and decarboxylation steps ( ). − Ninhydrin is widely used to detect fingerprints − because it
yields a clearly visible stain in the presence of amino acids, peptides,
and proteins (mostly the −NH2 groups of lysine)
that are deposited on a surface upon touching it. It has been proposed
that even the gender of a “person of interest” can be
determined from fingerprints through a ninhydrin-based, LC/HPLC-coupled
colorimetric assay because the amino acid content in male and female
fingerprints is different. 
 The spiro compound fluorescamine (P2.2) that forms
highly fluorescent products upon reaction with primary amino groups
in basic aqueous media is a representative emission-based probe for
amino acids and amines ( ). While fluorescamine is generally selective toward primary amines,
also amino acids and their derivatives containing secondary amines,
such as proline, can be detected by using a modified protocol. 
 Ninhydrin and fluorescamine indiscriminately react with all accessible
(primary) amino moieties. Furthermore, these probes are not selective
for metabolites and also label and detect proteins. On the one hand,
this is an advantage as, for instance, fluorescamine is useful for
determining protein concentrations. − On the other hand,
these probes can therefore only be used for detecting and quantifying
amino acids and their derivatives if proteins are not present in the
biofluid (e.g., in urine of healthy patients) or
if the biofluid is first purified from proteins, which is, for example,
required for blood serum samples.
Dialdehydes such as o-phthaldialdehyde (P2.3) and naphthalene-2,3-dicarboxaldehyde
(P2.4) are useful and highly sensitive fluorescent probes
for the detection
of amines and amino acids in alkaline aqueous media. , For P2.3 and P2.4, the co-addition of
a nucleophile such as a thiol or a cyanide salt is required for the
formation of fluorescent isoindoles ( ). Thus, P2.3 and P2.4 can also be applied for the detection of other
nucleophiles such as thiols, , carboxylic acids, and cyanides in
biofluids in an alternative assay protocol.
Very recently, an exciting
new class of amine-reactive probes and
labels that can be used for the detection of amines, amino acids,
and proteins, as well as for biolabeling, was disclosed by Bouffard,
Kim, and coworkers. Unlike other known
pentafluorophenyl esters or NHS-ester reactive dyes, these amine-reactive meso-ester BODIPYs motifs (P2.5 and P2.6 in ) did not only form stable amide bonds with
primary NH2-groups but also provided both changes in their
absorbance and emission spectra (Δλ = 70–100 nm)
as well as an emission intensity increase (up to 3000-fold) in a practically
convenient time scale (5 min). The authors demonstrated that the large
emission turn-on response is an outstanding reflection of the extreme
sensitivity of meso-ester BODIPYs to modest electronic
differences between esters and amides. Furthermore, probe P2.6 was used for protein labeling in living cells. This new class of
amine-reactive probes will certainly find a wide range of applications
in the life sciences given the already successful examples for monitoring
food spoilage and for staining of proteins on electrophoretic gels
or in living cells.
 Aforementioned (commercial) probes for amino acids cannot directly
distinguish different amino acids from each other, and hence they
are often used in combination with separation methods such as (high-performance)
liquid chromatography. This causes certain restrictions in terms of
assay times and parallelization opportunities. Thus, general amino
acid binding probes with which many or all amino acids can be directly
distinguished from each other, e.g., through reactivity
differences or on account of analyte-indicative spectroscopic fingerprints,
are also of interest.
Severin and coworkers developed a colorimetric
indicator displacement
assay (IDA)-based on the combination of a reactive rhodium complex
(P2.7 in ) and three colorimetric indicator
dyes (gallocyanin, xylenol orange, and calcein blue). With this assay,
which was conducted in aqueous buffers (MES, CHES, or phosphate buffer,
pH 5.7–9.0) with an analyte concentration of 750 μM,
it was possible to distinguish the 20 proteinogenic amino acids from
each other in a stepwise process (“decision tree”) and
through coupled multivariate analysis ( b). 
 Anslyn and coworkers introduced an enantioselective IDA that
was
used to determine the enantiomeric excess (ee) of
α-amino acids in methanolic buffer mixtures in the low millimolar
concentration range. The assay exploited
the ability of the CuII-complex (P2.8 in ) to coordinate with amino acids, providing an analyte-indicative
spectroscopic information. The maximum absorbance value difference
between the L- and the D-form of the amino acids
were used for enantioselective sensing. The authors demonstrated the
capability of their assay for high-throughput screening applications, e.g., the ee values of 96 amino acid samples
were determined with acceptable accuracy. 
 In some cases, it was possible to distinguish amino acids from
each other using just one simple probe. For instance, Glass and coworkers
presented an aldehyde-functional amino coumarin probe (P2.9) that was found to react with amino acids (and amines) through the
formation of hydrogen bonding stabilized iminium bonds in 50 mM HEPES
buffer containing 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.4 ( ). While the binding affinities are rather low,
restricting its applicability to high millimolar analyte concentrations
and above, this emission turn-on probe nevertheless showcases that
different amino acids can be distinguished from each other by taking
the complementary information on their Ka values and their signal response factors into account.
 In a real-life scenario, metabolites
have to be detected, quantified,
and distinguished from several other possible interferents commonly
found in biofluids. Nonselective probes such as ninhydrin or fluorescamine
are suitable for the task of quantifying the total amino (acid) amount
of a sample. However, IDAs can in principle distinguish different
amino acids from each other will likely provide a convolute response
when applied to real biofluidic samples of unknown mixture compositions.
The development of more selectively reacting or responding probes
for amino acids and their derivates remains an important task for
the future.
2.2.1.

## Molecular Probes for Thiol Containing Amino
Acids (and Glutathione)
A wide range of different thiol-reactive
probes has been developed already, which can roughly be divided into
two classes: (i) probes that form stable covalent conjugates with
the thiol-containing analytes, and (ii) systems in which the thiol
triggers the chemical cleavage of the probe, resulting in an uncaging
event or the release of a chromophoric/emissive indicator. We restrict
our focus here to systems that are applicable to sensing in aqueous
media and refer the reader to the excellent reviews on thiol probes
available in the literature. , − The chemical structures of thiol-containing amino acids and derivatives
are depicted in .
 With respect to probes that react
with thiols forming covalent
conjugates, the ability of thiols to undergo Michael addition, SN-type reactions, and addition-condensation reactions are most
commonly exploited.
Typical Michael-type reactive probes contain
maleimides or other
α,β-unsaturated acyl species. For instance, promising
results were reported by the Nagano group that designed the maleimide-pendant
BODIPY fluorophore (P2.10 in ), which showed an up to 350-fold emission enhancement upon
reacting with thiols, e.g., N-acetylcysteine
(NAC), in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. Through a systematic variation of the substituent pattern,
the authors had arrived at an optimum where the probe–thiol
conjugate possessed a large emission quantum yield, while the emission
of the probe itself was nearly fully quenched due to a donor-excited
photoinduced electron transfer (PET). A maleimide-linked chromenoquinoline
(P2.11 in ) was synthesized by Talukdar and coworkers, which
showed nanomolar detection limits for cysteine (Cys), homocysteine
(Hcys), and glutathione (GSH) in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4. Furthermore, the fast reactivity of maleimides
with thiols was utilized by Gunnlaugsson and coworkers, who designed
a TbIII-cyclen maleimide-based lanthanide luminescence
turn-on probe (P2.12 in ) that responded with an emission enhancement
in the presence of GSH, Cys, and Hcys but not to other (non-thiol
functional) amino acids in 20 mM HEPES buffer containing 135 mM KCl,
pH 7.4. 
 Lin and coworkers installed an
α,β-unsaturated keto
moiety on a (diethylamino)coumarin through a facile synthetic sequence. Probe P2.13 ( ) responded with an emission
enhancement (factor >200) to the presence of thiols and showed
a submicromolar
detection limit in 25 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. Reactivity
differences were found between different thiols (reaction rate: Cys
> Hcys > GSH) that were rationalized by steric effects. Furthermore,
the authors succeeded in determining the total thiol concentration
in urine of healthy individuals. Kim and coworkers found that the
addition reaction of the weakly fluorescent coumarin malononitrile
conjugate P2.14 ( ) with thiols led to an approximately 10× emission
intensity increase in 100 mM HEPES containing 33% DMSO, pH 7.4. A modest kinetic selectivity for cysteine was
obtained with another coumarin-based probe (P2.15 in ) featuring an α,β-unsaturated keto moiety as
the reactive site. The faster reaction rate for cysteine compared
to other thiols was ascribed to steric differences and a lower pKa value, corresponding to a higher nucleophilicity
of cysteine in the used reaction mixture of 10% DMSO in 10 mM PBS
at pH 7.4. 
 Akkaya and coworkers covalently
attached a nitroalkene unit to
a water-soluble BODIPY dye, obtaining the thiol-responsive probe P2.16 ( ) that showed a higher emission enhancement
upon reacting with Cys than with Hcys and GSH in an aqueous-organic
medium of 20% MeCN in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.2. 
 A squaraine-based chromophore
(P2.17 in ) reported by Ajayaghosh and
coworkers was highly reactive
towards Cys and GSH, enabling its use as a ratiometric fluorescent
probe for the detection of aminothiols in blood plasma. The detection of Cys was investigated in 50%
MeOH in 10 mM CHES, pH 9.6. In fact, the probe correctly indicated
the known increase of thiols in the blood of smokers. While the authors
stressed the detection of Cys and GSH in their original report, other
thiols may cause a similar emission response.
 Probes that form stable conjugates with thiols
in a one-step-reaction
typically suffer from the same issue already pointed out for general
amino-acid-reactive probes, i.e., it is difficult
or impossible to distinguish different thiols from each other. Thus,
their use may be restricted to examine the total thiol content of
a sample for which established protocols with commercially available
probes such as Ellman’s reagent or Aldrithiol , are competitive options.
To distinguish thiols from each other, which is of diagnostic relevance, − a probe design that capitalizes on the presence of a second recognition
point, e.g., the amino group in thiol-containing
amino acids, appears to be promising. Strongin, Yang, and coworkers
designed a benzothiazole fluorophore with an adjacent phenyl acrylate
moiety (P2.18 in ) that undergoes
a Michael addition with thiols, causing an emission turn-on of the
probe in the blue wavelength range (λex = 304 nm,
λem = 377 nm). Importantly,
probe P2.18 can undergo a rapid (<10 min) addition–elimination
reaction with Hcys. The uncaging of the probe causes an emission signal
increase with a maximum at 487 nm. The homologous thiol amino acid
Cys also follows this addition–elimination cycle, however,
at a reduced kinetic rate. The authors also demonstrated that their
probe remains functional in deproteinized human plasma. In contrast,
many alternative acrylate-based probe designs feature a kinetic selectivity
for the addition–elimination reaction with cysteine over homocysteine
and glutathione, for instance, a 1,8-naphthalimide-based probe (P2.19 in ) developed by Liu and coworkers. This emission turn-on probe reached a detection
limit of 1.8 μM for cysteine in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4.
 A thiol- and amine-reactive
probe (P2.20 in ), which leads
to the uncaging of a two-photon active merocyanine dye, was introduced
by Wong, Li, Dong, and coworkers. P2.20 was utilized
for cellular imaging application. Their probe-based cysteine quantification
assay displayed linearity in the concentration range from 0.5 to 40
μM. The subsequent amine-moiety triggered addition–elimination
mechanism was found to occur faster for cysteine than for homocysteine
or glutathione in 50% DMSO in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4. 
Following a similar design idea, Guo and coworkers
more recently
introduced an acrylate-type Michael acceptor probe for thiols, particularly
for cysteine in 50% DMSO in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4. Their probe (P2.21 in ) responds with an emission turn-on response in the near-infrared
(NIR) region of the electromagnetic spectrum and features a Ph3P+-R group as a mitochondria-targeting group. The
authors demonstrated the functionality of the probe for imaging applications
of cysteine inside living cells. Fluorescein acrylates (P2.22 in ), which
can be easily prepared in a one-step reaction from commercial fluorescein,
have been presented by Chen and coworkers as cysteine-selective molecular
probes and provided an excellent detection limit of around 100 nM
in mixed aqueous-organic media such as 20% EtOH in 20 mM phosphate
buffer, pH 7.4. Bao, Zhu, and coworkers
also utilized the discussed addition–elimination mechanism,
arriving at a thiol reactive probe P2.23 that was (kinetically)
selective for cysteine over homocysteine, glutathione, and non-thiol-functional
amino acids and that can be applied for imaging in cells ( ). The authors reported a detection limit of 88
nM for cysteine in 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, containing 20% MeCN with their
rhodamine–fluorescein based probe.
 Molecular probes that are selective for homocysteine have
been
devised by exploiting the formation of a six-membered thiazine ring.
This motif emerges upon addition of the −SH and −NH2 moieties of the target analyte to the probes’ aldehyde
group that is adjacent to a chromophoric aromatic system. In favorable
cases, this conjugation reaction can cause an emission turn-on of
the probe in the presence of homocysteine but not with cysteine, glutathione,
or other amino acids. This was indeed observed for a pyrene–aldehyde
based probe reported by Lee, Shin, Yoon, and coworkers. In their design, an additionally present acrylate
or acetate moiety (P2.24 and P2.25 in ) engaged in a hydrogen bonding contact with the −NH
group of the formed thiazine ring. A low detection limit in the submicromolar
range, fast reaction times (∼5 min), and strong signal response
factors (∼50× emission enhancement) were found in 10%
DMSO in 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4. The probe is applicable for homocysteine
detection in living cells. In contrast, P2.26 ( ) was shown to
react with both homocysteine and cysteine alike, leading to nearly
identical ratiometric emission responses in the presence of these
amino acids in 75% DMF in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4. Likewise, an aldehyde-functionalized silacyclopentadienes
(silole) derivative P2.27 ( ) was used by the Tang group to distinguish
homocysteine from cysteine based on their kinetic rates of thioaminal
formation, which was found to be faster for cysteine in 60% DMSO in
10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4. Thus, it appears
that the aforementioned hydrogen bonding capability of an adjacent
acrylate or acetate moiety installed in P2.24 and P2.25 was of key significance for tuning the selectivity towards
homocysteine.
 Bunz, Dreuw, and coworkers have
synthesized a water-soluble aromatic
aldehyde (P2.28 in ) that was shown
to respond with emission turn-on to cysteine through thioaminal formation
in phosphate buffer (pH 11). This probe
was generally not reactive to other amino acids. However, lysine and
potentially all primary amines are interfering species due to their
cross-reactivity in imine-formation. Also, α,β-unsaturated
aldehydes are reactive towards amino thiols, resulting in the formation
of a cyclic addition–condensation product with the −CHO
moiety. For instance, the commercially available P2.29 ( ) was
introduced in a seminal report by Strongin, Rusin, and coworkers as
a cysteine selective probe, which responds to the presence of Cys
with a decrease in its absorbance at 400 nm. In this way, low micromolar concentrations of cysteine were detected
in aqueous buffers (100 mM carbonate buffer, pH 9.5).
 Conversely, a naphthalimide-based glyoxal hydrazone (P2.30 in ), introduced by Guo and coworkers, showed
a ratiometric emission response for both Cys and Hcys in 50% DMSO
in 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.4. Apparently
both amino thiols form a cyclic reaction product that engages in intramolecular
hydrogen-bonding interactions. Interestingly, glutathione can also
be selectively detected though aldehyde-based thiol-(amine)-recognition.
Wang, Zhao, and coworkers installed a −CH2CHO moiety
on the spirolactam-N of a rhodamine derivative, which was only weakly
emissive. Through reaction of the probe P2.31 ( ) with GSH but not with other thiols, the ring-opening of the spirolactam
occurred, resulting in an emission turn-on response in 20 mM PBS at
pH 5.8.
 For the authors of this review,
it remains so far not fully predictable
under which circumstances aldehyde-based probes for amino thiols will
be selective for homocysteine, cysteine, toward both, and toward other
thiol species. It is also worth noting that biogenic amines, e.g., putrescine, cadaverine, or the amino acid lysine,
can potentially react with aldehyde-based probes to form imines. This
possibility should be considered when developing quantitative assays
for cysteine and homocysteine sensing in living cells and biofluids.
An innovative method for selective thiol sensing was exploited
by the Xu group, who designed probe P2.32 ( ) that features an aryl azide. With P2.32, it
was possible to distinguish Cys as well as GSH from Hcys and hydrogen
sulfide in mixed aqueous-organic media, such as 50% MeCN in HEPES
buffer, pH 7.4, with a detection limit of 90 nM. Here, the additional amine reactivity of homocysteine causes
a further decomposition of the thiol-azide intermediate, leading to
a weakly emissive compound, whereas the addition products of cysteine
and glutathione and other non-amino reactive thiols, such as N-acetylcysteine, convert via a rearrangement
reaction into stable and emissive conjugates ( ).
 A conceptually different approach, exploiting the
nucleophilicity
of thiols in SN-type reactions, has been often successful
for detecting glutathione. Typically, the probes are designed in such
a way that either an emission-quenching moiety is displaced through
a substitution reaction, or an aforequenched fluorophore is uncaged
upon the reaction with the target analyte.
A conceptually simple
yet powerful probe was introduced by the
Chen group, who functionalized fluorescein with two dinitrophenol
moieties, causing a complete emission quenching ( ). The authors then demonstrated
that upon GSH addition an emission turn-on response occurred after
15–30 min through uncaging of the fluorescein fluorophore.
None of the other amino acids tested caused a significant emission
turn-on response. Probe P2.33 showed an excellent detection
limit of 22 nM for glutathione, in mixed aqueous-organic medium such
as 30% EtOH in 20 mM PBS, pH 7.4, and can be used for cellular imaging.
The authors reasoned that the two carboxylate moieties present in
glutathione enhance the rate of the nucleophilic substitution reaction.
Indeed, the peptide Glu-Cys-Glu, possessing three carboxylate functionalities,
showed even higher reaction rates than glutathione.
 In the same year, Yang, Li, and Strongin communicated a rhodol
thioester P2.34, which is a rhodamine derivative that
can distinguish GSH from Cys and Hcys through emerging unique emission
colors, i.e., red in the presence of GSH and blue
for Cys and Hcys in 30% DMF in 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 ( ). In the first step, all thiols
displace the quencher 4-nitrothiophenol to form a fluorescent thiol
ester featuring the typical rhodol emission at 587 nm. However, thiol-conjugated
Cys and Hcys rapidly undergo a subsequent addition–elimination
mechanism through involvement of their accessible amino groups (S,N-acyl shift reaction), leading to the
formation of a thermodynamically stable spirolactam. The probe was
designed in such a way that the intramolecular spirocyclization led
to a “quinone-phenol”-type signal transduction of rhodol
dyes due to an excited state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT)
process that caused the emergence of the 2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)benzothiazole
(HBT) emission at 454 nm. For GSH, the S,N-acyl shift reaction is kinetically impaired. Noteworthy,
the rhodol thioester has been successfully applied to the differential
sensing of GSH and cysteine in breast cancer cells and in reduced
human blood serum.
 The dual use of a Michael-type acceptor and quencher moiety,
and
of an additional displaceable quencher moiety, has been put forward
by the Sun and Yi group in 2015. Their
tailor-made probe P2.35 has an extremely low residual
emission in the absence of thiols and thereby reaches a detection
limit of 20 nM for Cys, Hcys, and GSH in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4 ( ).
 In the same year, the Zhu group introduced a dual-response S,N-fluorescent probe P2.36 for Cys, Hcys, und GSH containing two thiol-reactive moieties installed
on a BODIPY chromophore ( a). Through their design, it is possible to distinguish GSH from Cys/Hcys
through the emerging different emission colors in 20 mM HEPES, pH
7.4, containing 50% MeCN. Like the aforementioned rhodol-based system,
distinction between the biorelevant thiols is again based on their
reactivity differences, e.g., thiol and amine reactivity
of Cys and Hcys and exclusive thiol reactivity of glutathione.
 The use of cleavable
sulfonyl and sulfonamide moieties is another
popular strategy for the development of thiol-reactive probes, as
for instance demonstrated by the groups of Yao, Peng, Ma, Li, Deng,
and Wang. , , − An amino-coumarin that was conjugated through a sulfonamide group
to a dinitrophenyl quencher uncaged in the presence of thiols, resulting
in a strong emission enhancement (P2.37 in b). This probe reacted equally well with cysteine
and glutathione in 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 9.0. Note that the basic
pH chosen increases the nucleophilicity of the thiol analytes and
thus the reaction rate of the probe. Similar observations were made
for a sulfonamide linked naphthalimide–dinitrophenyl conjugate P2.38 ( c) that possesses a lysosomal thiol-targeting moiety. Also, this
probe reacted indiscriminately with Cys, Hcys, and GSH within 10 min
at 37°C, displaying a low micromolar detection limit in aqueous-organic
media, i.e., 30% DMSO in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4,
and the potential for two-photon imaging applications. 
The dinitrobenzylsulfonyl moiety can
analogously be employed to
conjugate a thiol-cleavable quencher to hydroxyl-functional dyes,
as was shown for Nile red as the fluorophore (P2.39 in ). This probe reacts with Cys, Hcys, and GSH in a similar
fashion but has been shown to provide an extrapolated thiol-detection
limit in the nanomolar regime in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, containing 50%
DMSO. The same design concept can also
be applied to BODIPY fluorophores (P2.40 in ), leading to a
similar performance in terms of detection limit and signal response,
albeit with a somewhat unexpected overall selectivity for cysteine
over homocysteine and glutathione in 50% DMSO in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.8. 
 A conceptually related probe design has been shown to furbish kinetic
selectivity for aromatic thiols over aliphatic thiols and showed very
high sensitivity with a detection limit of 20 nM in 10 mM phosphate
buffer, pH 8.0 (P2.41 in a). Similar reactivity differences were also observed
for a nitrobenzofurazan (NBD)-based probe P2.42 ( b) that reacted
much faster with aromatic than with aliphatic thiols because of the
lower pKa value of aromatic thiols and
thus their higher nucleophilicity at pH 7.3 in 10 mM phosphate buffer. 
 Besides sulfonamide and sulfonyl esters, thioesters can also be
utilized as thiol amine reactive moieties that undergo native chemical
ligation combined with spirocyclization. This was demonstrated by
Guo, Yang, and coworkers through probe P2.43 ( ), achieving ratiometric
distinction of homocysteine and cysteine in aqueous organic mixtures, i.e., 40% EtOH in 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. Furthermore, probe P2.43 displayed
excellent selectivity for Cys and Hcys over other thiols that lack
an adjacent amino functionality ( ).
 The inherent reactivity
of NBD derivatives towards nucleophilic
species can be directly exploited to design thiolamine reactive probes,
as demonstrated for instance by Yang and coworkers with their probe P2.44 ( ). Typically,
the more nucleophilic SH-group first attacks the NBD chromophore and
causes the departure of the leaving group, e.g.,
a halogen or thiophenol residue. Subsequently, the probe–thiol
conjugate rearranges then via an intramolecular displacement
reaction to form an amine-linked NBD fluorophore that has a much higher
emission quantum yield than its thiol-linked analogue in 20 mM phosphate
buffer, pH 7.4, containing 25% MeCN. The amine reactivity of homocysteine
and cysteine allows for distinguishing them from glutathione that
does not undergo the rearrangement reaction. The Song group has exploited
this feature by designing a NBD-coumarin-conjugated probe (P2.45 in a) that
responds with a coumarin-based emission increase in the presence of
glutathione, whereas the combined emission of NBD-amine and coumarin
is observed upon addition of cysteine or homocysteine. This system
showed a micromolar detection limit in aqueous-organic mixtures (30%
MeCN in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4). Moreover,
by using a nitrobenzothiadiazole chromophore for the probe design,
Yoon, Yin, and coworkers demonstrated that only cysteine but not homocysteine
reacts with P2.46 ( a) when the pH is adjusted to 6 (due to
the lower pKa value of Cys compared to
Hcys), while at pH 7.4 both amino thiols undergo the same reaction
sequence in 10 mM HEPES (containing 1% DMSO). Note that amines are also directly reactive towards NBD
derivatives, nevertheless, in the neutral pH range, the reaction rate
is so low that amines do not effectively interfere with thiol amine
sensing.
 Thiols are also known
to engage in disulfide exchange reactions. shows the operational principle of the commercial Ellman
(P2.47) and Aldrithiol (P2.48) probes. These reactions are obviously not analyte selective
but rather serve as a general thiol detection method. In some cases,
the diselenide exchange reaction can be advantageous for thiol sensing,
as the Han group has demonstrated by an emission turn-on assay (P2.49 in ) that responds within milliseconds to the
presence of glutathione under physiological conditions (20 mM PBS,
pH 7.4). The diselenide-based probe
can be applied for live cell imaging. Moreover, probes containing
N–Se bonds also rapidly undergo an exchange reaction in the
presence of thiols. This was utilized by Chen and coworkers for a
cyanine-based probe P2.50, that upon uncaging emits in
the NIR region and that was operational in physiological buffers (15
mM PBS, pH 7.4) in cells and in tissues. 
 Tang and coworkers designed a rhodamine-based probe P2.51 ( ), where
a nitrophenol quencher was attached through a thiol-cleavable N–Se
bond. This probe can detect thiols with
a nanomolar detection limit in 1% DMSO in PBS, pH 7.4, requiring less
than 10 min of incubation time. Kim, Kang, and coworkers developed
a disulfide reaction-based probe P2.52 ( ) that was successfully applied
to the detection of thioredoxin, a class of small redox proteins found
in the mitochondria of living cells. Interestingly, this probe showed a much lower reactivity with cysteine,
homocysteine, and glutathione.
Advanced probes can both form
thiol- and amine-conjugate products
that show strong but wavelength-shifted fluorescence emission signals,
allowing for the ratiometric sensing of GSH (thiol-conjugate) as well
as Cys and Hcys (amine-conjugate). Yang and coworkers have developed
such a probe P2.53 in , based on a chlorinated
BODIPY-chromophore that responds with a bathochromic emission shift
upon reacting with glutathione, while a hypsochromic shift is observed
upon reacting with Hcys and Cys in 5% MeCN in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4. The authors also demonstrated the utility of
their probe for ratiometric imaging of glutathione in living cells.
 A powerful new strategy
for thiol amine detection and differentiation
was introduced by the Guo group that designed a chlorinated coumarin-hemicyanine
probe (P2.54 in ) with three potential
binding sites. The authors rationalized
that the activated para-position of the coumarin
dye should be the favored reaction side for thiol conjugation through
a SNAr mechanism. If the thiol does not contain a free
amino functionality, such as N-acetylcysteine, the
reaction stops here and yields only a weakly fluorescent product ( a). For the glutathione–probe
conjugate, its dangling amine was expected to proceed with a nucleophilic
attack on the benzothiazolium cation for steric reasons ( b). In contrast,
for Cys and Hcys, the amino group can participate in a rearrangement
reaction to form amino coumarin with an altered emission profile.
The displaced −SH moiety can subsequently undergo a Michael
addition with the α,β-unsaturated keto moiety ( c). This reaction
sequence was expected to be fast for cysteine and slow for homocysteine
due to kinetic differences for the formation of a seven- and an eight-membered
ring, respectively. Overall, the chlorinated coumarin–hemicyanine
probe was uniquely capable of distinguishing cysteine from homocysteine
and glutathione, e.g., in 10 mM phosphate buffer,
pH 7.4, to which 1 mM of CTAB was added. Moreover, probe P2.54 was successfully applied for the simultaneous monitoring of Cys
and GSH in COS-7 cells through multicolor imaging ( d).
 While most thiol-reactive probes exploit the nucleophilic or redox
properties of thiols in organic reactions, it is also possible to
develop thiol probes that capitalize on the strong, near-covalent
bonding interactions of thiols with soft transition metal ions functional
in aqueous media. For instance, our group has recently communicated
the smallest green emissive fluorophore HINA (3-hydroxyisonicotinealdehyde)
known so far (P2.55 in ) and found that
its binding to a PtII-complex results in its emission quenching
in 900 μM CTAB in 25 mM carbonate buffer, pH 9.4. Through subsequent addition of a thiol, e.g., cysteine, to the in situ formed probe P2.55, the HINA indicator is released within seconds, providing an emission
turn-on response. The assay can be used for general thiol detection
in buffered aqueous media with micromolar sensitivity.
 The emission-quenching metal–organic compound P2.56 ( ) was considered by the Chan group as a probe for thiol-based
amino acids. While the −SH moiety
expectedly exchanges chloride on the platinum center, the charge promoted
hydrogen-bonding between the ammonium group of the amino acid and
the carboxyl functional group of the probe assists in providing a
modest binding selectivity for cysteine (Ka = 7.9 × 104 M–1) over homocysteine
(Ka = 4.5 × 103 M–1) and 1-octanethiol (Ka = 8.5 × 102 M–1) in 80% DMSO in
Tris buffer, pH 7.2. Other proteinogenic amino acids did not cause
a noticeable emission quenching of the probe. However, a slight emission
increase was observed upon addition of the metal-coordinating amino
acid histidine, which may indicate its binding to the probe. Detection
of thiols by this probe is possible in the (high) micromolar concentration
regime, but its applicability is so far limited by the need for organic
solvents.
 Thiols also strongly bind to Au+ metal centers,
which
inspired Yang, Tae, and coworkers to design the AuI-complex P2.57 as a thiol probe. They
first prepared a substituted rhodamine dye that featured a binding
station for Au+ and then exposed the resulting metal–organic
probe to different amino acids, including Cys, Hcys, and GSH ( ). Only Cys and Hcys gave rise to a readily visible colorimetric
and emission turn-on response, which was much stronger in magnitude
for Cys than for Hcys. While a binding constant of only ∼103 M–1 has been reported for the interaction
of the probe with Cys, it has been experimentally demonstrated that
100 nM cysteine can be detected in water (1% MeOH) by using 1 μM
of the probe.
 Copper- and mercury-based metal complexes (P2.58 and P2.59 in ) have been utilized
for the detection of
thiol amino acids (and of histidine, see next section), but in these
instances, often an indicator displacement assay strategy has been
pursued. In the first step, CuII or HgII salts
were introduced to a fluorescent dye, typically causing quenching
of its emission, which was then restored in the presence of thiols
such as cysteine due to competitive binding to the metal ion species. − The aforementioned systems are suitable for the detection of thiols
in the micromolar range in aqueous media.
 The development of chromophoric and emissive probes for thiol-containing
amino acids and their derivatives is certainly one of the greatest
achievements in the area of optical chemosensing. It was not until
2004 that one of the first emission turn-off probes that is applicable
for thiol determination in human plasma was showcased by the Martínez-Máñez
group (P2.60 in ). Only in 2007, one of the first visible light
excitable probes for homocysteine and cysteine in 70% MeOH in HEPES
buffer, pH 7.0, was introduced by Huang and coworkers (P2.61 in ). Not even two decades later, there is now a
library of probes available that can be used for selective sensing
of cysteine, homocysteine, as well as glutathione, alongside the many
broad-range thiol detection probes that are known. The probes have
also much improved in terms of sensitivity and applicability to cellular
imaging applications. Additionally, many fully water-soluble systems
are now available.
 When searching and comparing literature reports, we made some curious
observations. Many reports on new thiol probes start with the potential
diagnostic advantages that could be unleashed when homocysteine, cysteine,
or glutathione levels are accurately and rapidly determined in a routine
biofluid diagnostics. Indeed, the sensitivity of current thiol probes
appears sufficient for detecting thiols at the diagnostically relevant
micromolar concentration range in biofluids; see and for comparison. However, we
have hardly found any medical reports where such probes are considered.
In fact, most research reports from the medical and clinical area
discuss data for thiol-containing metabolites that were obtained by
simple unselective probes, resulting in the total thiol concentration
of the biofluid. Besides, the concentration profile of individual
thiols is commonly obtained through chromatographic methods such as
HPLC-MS. There is surely more work to do for bringing selectively
binding thiol-reactive probes into molecular diagnostics.
 We have also noticed a certain
imbalance between the most popular
thiols tested for the design of new probes, i.e.,
homocysteine, cysteine, glutathione, and the thiol-containing species
present in biofluids. For instance, thiol amino acid derivatives, e.g., N-acetylcysteine, thioglycolic acid,
and the dipeptide Cys-Gly, all occurring at a similar concentration
level in human urine as homocysteine, are rarely considered as potential targets or cross-reactive interferents
in the developers of new thiol-reactive probes. For instance, it would
be very interesting to observe if the Cys-Gly dipeptide can be distinguished
from cysteine because both contain reactive −SH and −NH2 moieties that are arranged in a similar distance/angle. Moreover,
several thiol-functional drugs, e.g., tiopronin, d-penicillamine, methimazole, propylthiouracil, and thioguanine,
that are routinely prescribed to patients, are excreted in urine. It would be likewise informative to see experimental
data if their presence interferes with the current probe-based assays
for thiol detection in biofluids.
The vast number of publications
found for the development of thiol-reactive
probes also presents some contrast to the comparably low attention
thiols have received so far in molecular diagnostics, e.g., compared to carbohydrates, keto compounds, or neurotransmitters
that are much more frequently discussed in the medical journals. In
our view, this imbalance clearly pinpoints those current abilities
and standing limitations that govern the design of molecular probes
and not yet the practical medical needs.

2.2.2.

## Molecular
Probes for Non-thiol Containing
Amino Acids
There appear to be only a few systems that form
covalent-like bonding motifs with amino acids side chains other than
thiols (see ). In fact, we are only aware of probes capable of selectively detecting
the amino acid histidine.
 Soft transition metals are
known to coordinate strongly to azaheterocycles,
and thus nonsurprisingly can also bind the amino acid histidine. This
feature has been exploited by the Wong group that reported a water-soluble
metal organic probe P2.62 ( a), which is selective
for histidine and histidine-rich proteins such as bovine serum albumin
(BSA). The available data suggested
that the bidentate complexation of one equivalent of histidine is
accompanied by the displacement of two weakly coordinated solvent
molecules. Thus, it is somewhat surprising that four equivalents of
His were needed to reach a signal saturation with an emission enhancement
by a factor of 180 in 1× PBS (pH 7.0). The probe was found to
be highly selective for histidine over other natural amino acids.
In terms of application potential, it was found that the IrIII-based probe can be used for staining of proteins in a Western blot
and enables the detection of as little as 1.5 ng of a poly(amino acid)
per band after 10 min of reaction time.
 Very recently, the Hu group synthesized a structurally related,
luminescence-quenched iridium complex (P2.63 in b) that became
emissive upon exchange of its two acetonitrile ligands for one equivalent
of His. It was verified that histidine
functions as a chelating ligand by simultaneous involvement of its
azaheterocycle ring and amino group. Probe P2.63 shows
a low LOD of 0.6 μM for histidine in HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, and
was verified to be highly selective for its target analyte over all
other proteogenic amino acids, including also Cys and GSH. Again,
the histidine-rich protein BSA also caused a strong emission enhancement
of the probe. It appears that free His and BSA can be distinguished
through their characteristic spectral shift by the probe. The reaction
times needed, e.g., >40 min for completion of
the
reaction of 10 μM probe with 200 μM histidine in aqueous
media, are unfortunately somewhat limiting the practical prospects.
A self-assembling luminescent metal–organic probe was introduced
by our group that responds to a range of azaheterocyclic compounds,
such as the metabolites histamine, histidine, and the drugs nicotine,
clotrimazole, fluconazole, and miconazole. This probe is covered in more detail the commencing section on “Chemosensors
and Probes for Drug Sensing” ( ).
There are many other literature
examples for histidine detecting
systems that were introduced as probes but which should be preferably
termed chemosensors because they form reversible bonding motifs with
modest binding energies. Those systems are covered in .

2.3.

## Chemosensors for Amino Acids (and Proteins)
Amino acids are popular choices as potential guests for newly discovered
synthetic binders, e.g., macrocyclic hosts, and thus,
a vast number of binding parameters have become available for systems
that noncovalently bind amino acids; see, for instance SupraBank.org. In the spirit of this review, we will only discuss those
systems that provide a useful optical response, be it directly or
as part of an indirect detection method such as IDA. Moreover, we
give preference to those systems that are operational in aqueous media
and that can possibly, either already or with some future improvements,
be adopted for realistic sensing applications in biofluids. Readers
interested in the fundamentals of the molecular recognition of amino
acids by synthetic binders and hosts, e.g., calix[n]arenes (Cxn), cucurbit[n]urils (CBn), pillar[n]arenes,
and cyclodextrins ( ), are referred to one of the many literature
sources that are available. − Within this section, discussed chemosensors are summarized in .
 To date, two classes of hosts
are most widely utilized for amino
acid sensing applications, i.e., the Cxn and CBn due to their comparably high binding affinity
values for these target analytes. , , Both (unmodified) hosts have an inherent binding
preference for positively charged amino acids, e.g., Lys and Arg, due to attractive cation···π
interactions and cation···O=C interactions.
However, these macrocyclic hosts differ in many other characteristics.
Calixarenes can be readily modified at their rim with charged residues,
and thereby their binding preference can be tuned and directed towards
negatively charged analytes, including negatively charged amino acids.
Cucurbit[n]urils are comparably difficult to functionalize, , and when successful, equatorial-substituted derivatives are often
obtained that do not appear to show significant binding selectivity
differences compared to the parent hosts. However, cucurbit[n]urils generally provide one of the strongest binding affinities
of any known host because of high-energy cavity water release. , − CBn particularly favor the binding of hydrophobic
species such as the amino acid phenylalanine, as well as peptides
and proteins (e.g., insulin) with an accessible N-terminal
Phe residue. , − Cucurbit[n]urils generally discriminate against
negatively charged species, e.g., the amino acids
aspartate and glutamate are not bound at all. In the following, we
discuss several representative examples where calix[n]arene and cucurbit[n]uril-based systems have been
used for sensing of amino acids.
Both parent calix[n]arenes and cucurbit[n]urils are optically silent, i.e., they
are not emissive and absorb light in the UV region, which is practically
not suitable for optical sensing applications. Thus, binding of the
analyte does not result in a detectable optical response and both
unmodified Cxn and CBn are not inherently
chemosensors. However, both systems are ideally suited for setting
up an IDA or GDA; see also  . , , , 
Chemosensors bind their
target analytes reversibly and usually
with faster binding kinetics than probes, which is a distinct advantage
when striving to monitor biophysical processes and enzymatic reactions.
This concept, which was pioneered by the Nau group, has been successfully
applied in a broad number of applications, ranging from surveying
enzymatic reactions to the monitoring of membrane permeation of label-free
analytes in real time. , − In the following, only a few of the highlights related to amino
acid and peptide target molecules are presented.
The low but
differential selectivity of CBn complexes
for amino acids and proteins can be an advantage for designing general
assays capable of monitoring chemical transformations. For instance, if the product of an enzymatic
reaction is a stronger binder than the reactant, the equilibrium of
host, dye, and reactant/product (= guest) shifts towards the formation
of a CBn•guest complex. This was termed a
product-selective tandem assay. Likewise, if the enzymatic substrate
to product conversion yields a weaker host-binding species, the host-dye
equilibrium shifts towards higher concentrations of the host•dye
complex during the enzymatic reaction. This is called a substrate-selective
tandem assay.
The cleavage of the Thr-Gly-Ala-Phe-Met-NH2 peptide
by the endopeptidase thermolysin monitored by the CB7•acridine
orange (AO) chemosensor (C2.1) serves as one representative
example for a product-selective tandem assay ( ). The affinity of the indicator
dye for CB7 (Ka = 2.0 × 105 M–1 in water, pH 7.0) lies between that of the peptidic substrate (Ka = 1.3 × 104 M–1) and that
of the produced dipeptide Phe-Met-NH2 (Ka = 1.5 × 107 M–1),
both in 10 mM ammonium phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, 37 °C. Thus,
during the enzymatic reaction, the indicator dye is subsequently set
free by the competitive binding of the produced Phe-Met-NH2 dipeptide to the host CB7. This process can be monitored conveniently
by fluorescence spectroscopy in real time. Such assays can be utilized
to determine the enzymatic key parameters, such as catalytic rate
constant (kcat) and Michaelis constant
(Km) in a label-free fashion and can be
employed for screening enzyme inhibiting drugs (unless they display
a strong competitive binding for the host). With respect to possible
use in diagnostics, the elegant combination of an enzymatic reaction
that provides a high substrate specificity and a chemosensor-based
signal transduction step, may solve the binding selectivity problem
of conventional assays. For instance, several amino acids (e.g., His, Arg, Lys, Tyr, Trp) can be selectively detected
by a CB7-based tandem assay through the use of a substrate-specific
decarboxylase enzyme, e.g., lysine decarboxylase. The decarboxylase was shown to selectively
act only on its intended substrate even when other amino acids were
present in the mixture, resulting in the exclusive formation of the
corresponding, more strongly CB7-binding, biogenic amine, e.g., cadaverine. During the enzymatic reaction, the indicator
dye, e.g., dapoxyl, is therefore displaced from the
CB7•dye chemosensor (e.g., CB7•dapoxyl, C2.2) by the competitive action of the formed biogenic amine
( a). The corresponding characteristic kinetic profile
can be monitored by fluorescence spectroscopy and correlated to the
amount of biogenic amine produced. Thus, the initial amount of the
amino acid substrate present in the sample can be calculated. Importantly,
any background binding of matrix components to the host that causes
partial displacement of the host•indicator complex is a static
effect and thus can be distinguished from the dynamic information
available from the enzymatic time-course data ( b). Indeed, Nau and coworkers succeeded
in detecting representative amino acids in the low micromolar regime,
even in mixtures of amino acids in 10 mM ammonium acetate buffer,
pH 6.0. The assay can be applied to the cost-efficient microplate
reader format.
 Spectacularly, this assay format was adopted for determining the
enantiomeric purity of amino acid samples within an enantiomeric excess
wide range of 64 to 99.98 ee% because D-amino
acids cannot be converted by decarboxylases ( ). Additionally,
the Nau group demonstrated that their sensing format is also capable
of monitoring the course of two sequentially operating enzymes (“enzymatic
cascades”), e.g., lysine decarboxylase and
diamine oxidase, by combining a product-selective and a substrate-selective
tandem assay. 
Notably, the IDA
format is also applicable to other signal transduction
methods besides absorbance and fluorescence spectroscopy. For instance, 129Xe can be used as an NMR indicator to follow in
vitro and in vivo binding of spectroscopically
silent analytes to CB6 and CB7, as has been demonstrated by the Dmochowski
group, the Albert group, and by Schröder, Hennig, and coworkers. − 
In some cases, the interaction of native proteins with CBn-based chemosensors can also be exploited. Urbach and coworkers
demonstrated the selective targeting of the natural proteins insulin
and the human growth hormone (hGH) by CB7•AO (C2.1) in an IDA format, thereby providing a path towards their detection
and quantification in biological fluids. , In these cases, protein binding to CB7 leads to a displacement of
the indicator dye because the host binds sterically accessible amino
acid residues, such as the N-terminal Phe of insulin ( ). In contrast, BSA is recognized by a CB7•brilliant
green (C2.3) chemosensing ensemble, resulting in the
formation of a ternary complex that shows a strongly enhanced emission
compared to the CB7•dye and the BSA•dye pairs in aqueous
media. This effect, which was discovered
by Bhasikuttan, Nau, and coworkers, can be used for BSA detection
and quantification in the low micromolar concentration regime.
 Fluorescent cucurbit[n]uril analogues have been
introduced by the Isaacs group who installed chromophoric and emissive
aromatic moieties into the host’s cavity wall. These hosts
bind, like the parent cucurbit[n]urils, a wide range
of analytes, including amino acids. For instance, a cyclic fluorescent
CB6-analogue (C2.4 in a) was shown to
bind Phe, Tyr, and Trp with affinities of Ka = 4.2 × 104 M–1, 5.7 × 104 M–1, and 3.2 × 106 M–1, respectively, in 50 mM sodium acetate buffer, pH
4.7. Surprisingly, the more hydrophilic
amino acid tyrosine is even slightly stronger bound than phenylalanine
by this CB6 analogue, while the parent CBn hosts
strongly favor the binding of the more hydrophobic Phe. , Moreover, unlike for CB6, the biogenic diamines cadaverine and putrescine
are only weakly bound by C2.4. Nevertheless, like cucurbit[n]urils, also this cyclic analogue shows a rather broad
analyte spectrum and thus may be of limited utility for sensing applications
in complex biofluids. For instance, besides the aforementioned amino
acids, also the neurotransmitter dopamine (see also ), and the nucleobases adenine,
thymine, uracil, and cytosine are bound with 103–104 M–1 affinities by C2.4 in
the same medium. 
 Isaacs, Anzenbacher Jr., and coworkers developed
a CB6 analogue
(C2.5 in b), where the chromophore naphthalene is attached on the outside
of the cavity. The maintained cavity
shape of the CB6 binds basic amino acids, e.g., Lys
(Ka = 1.6 × 103 M–1), Arg (Ka = 1.8 ×
103 M–1), ornithine (Ka = 9.9 × 102 M–1),
and His (Ka = 1.7 × 103 M–1), but also the derived biogenic amines cadaverine,
agmatine, putrescine (each Ka > 106 M–1), and histamine (Ka = 1.7 × 104 M–1) in
water, pH 7.0. In fact, the use of a EuIII salt was required
as an additive to furbish a quantifiable emission change upon guest
binding. The EuIII cation binds to the carbonyl-fringed
rim of the host and partially quenches the emission of the naphthalene
fluorophore through energy transfer. Upon guest binding, EuIII is displaced and the emission intensity is restored. This chemosensing
ensemble can distinguish large analytes from smaller analytes. Large
analytes completely fill the host cavity and displace EuIII from both portals, whereas smaller analytes only cause partial EuIII displacement. The authors demonstrated that the analytes
can be correctly classified through multivariate analysis methods.
To judge the potential of the host for amino acid sensing in diagnostic
applications, it remains to be seen how the system performs in mixtures
of analytes as found in biofluids. One step toward this direction
has been achieved by Isaacs, Anzenbacher Jr., and coworkers for the
sensing of addictive over-the-counter (OTC) drugs in human urine by
the same system; see the following section
( ) on drug
detection in this review.
A ratiometric indicator displacement
assay was established by Ni,
Tao, and coworkers using the self-aggregating bipyridinium phenylene-vinylene
dye, which self-assembles in the presence of nitrate salts. Upon addition
of the partially methyl-substituted CB6 derivatives, Me4CB6 (C2.6) and Me6CB6 (C2.7),
the dye is disaggregated through its binding inside the host cavity
and the emission color is hypsochromically shifted by 120 nm ( ). These chemosensing ensembles
selectively responded to the presence of lysine (Lys) and methionine
(Met), whereas other proteinogenic amino acids did not cause a significant
fluorescence change. It is noteworthy that Me4CB6 and Me6CB6 display different analyte binding preferences compared
to the parent CB6 host, which can be rationalized by the elliptical
distortion of substituted CB6 derivatives. , Thus, it should be possible to set up differential sensing arrays
for amino acids and other metabolites using CB6 and its partially
methylated analogues.
 Isaacs and coworkers introduced a set of acyclic cucurbit[n]urils, e.g., C2.8 ( c), that adopt
a tweezer-like conformation and contain chromophoric and emissive
aromatic moieties as part of the cavity walls. , These hosts are promiscuous binders, forming complexes with structurally
diverse guests, e.g., blockbuster drugs, neuromuscular
blocking agents, hydrocarbons, and carbon nanotubes. , − On the one hand, using these compounds for analytical sensing tasks
in complex biofluids likely faces selectivity challenges. On the other
hand, the wide analyte-binding scope of synthetic binders can be a
very useful feature for setting up general analytical assays.
 We have recently utilized acyclic cucurbit[n]urils
(C2.8 in ) in combination with CD spectroscopy
for chirality sensing. It was found that the complex formation of
nonchromophoric amino acids and other chiral guests, such as terpenes,
steroids, and drugs, in combination with chromophoric achiral hosts,
lead to the formation of chiral, chromophoric complexes that display
characteristic spectroscopic fingerprints. Capitalizing on this concept,
it was also feasible to monitor base-catalyzed racemization of amino
acids and peptides in various solvents. This chirality-sensing approach was extended to other host classes, e.g., molecular tweezers (e.g., CLR01, C2.9 in c), that were introduced by Schrader and Klärner and
that have a strong binding preference for Lys and Arg. − Molecular tweezers that have so far mainly be utilized to target
protein misfolds and viruses with sterically accessible Lys and Arg
residues , − may therefore become useful chemosensors for Lys and Arg in biofluids,
particularly if their signal transduction capabilities are further
improved.
A larger member of the
cucurbit[n]uril family,
namely CB8, offers additional exciting possibilities for modifying
the binding affinities and installing a signal transduction moiety.
CB8 uniquely can form 1:1:1 heteroternary complexes with aromatic
guests, allowing the setting up of associative binding assays (ABA; ). It has been early noticed by Kim and coworkers, and was
later further investigated by the Urbach group, that CB8 can simultaneously
complex an electron-poor aromatic compound such as methyl viologen
(MV, ) and an electron-rich aromatic molecule
such as naphthol or the amino acids Trp and Phe in a face-to-face
π–π stacking orientation. , , , − ABAs with self-assembled CB8•dye complexes overcome certain
shortcomings of indicator IDAs, e.g., with CB7•dye
reporter pairs. First, the ABA sensing method does not “waste”
the binding energy of the analyte for displacing a dye, and thus,
the analyte detection sensitivity is higher with ABA than in the IDA
format. , , , For instance, with liposome encapsulated chemosensors,
even the submicromolar to nanomolar analyte detection range can be
accessed while comparable IDA-based sensors require orders of magnitude
higher analyte concentrations. Furthermore,
the ABA sensing format possesses superior analyte-differentiation
potential. Firstly, CB8•dye complexes show mostly a binding
preference towards analytes with at least one aromatic recognition
motif, whereas CB7•dye reporter pairs that operate through
an IDA mechanism bind both aromatic and aliphatic guests, e.g., Phe and Lys. Secondly, different analytes can be identified
by clearly distinguishable spectroscopic fingerprints that arise from
the “communication” between the dye and the analyte
inside the cavity of CB8. The ternary complexes are typically uniquely
colored due to charge transfer (CT) interactions between both aromatic
guests. , Upon binding by CB8•MV (C2.10), different analytes, e.g., Phe and Trp, can be
spectroscopically distinguished from each other based on the emerging
CT bands. The CT bands in the absorbance spectra correlate to the
HOMO–LUMO gap between the electron-rich aromatic analyte and
the accepting electron-poor dye. Unfortunately,
such CT bands are rather weak in magnitude, requiring typically an
operational concentration of ≫100 μM for both the analytes
and the CB8•MV chemosensor for reliable signal transduction
by absorbance spectroscopy. More pronounced CT bands were found for
aryl-substituted viologens as the dye component. Moreover, the complexation of inherently fluorescent analytes, e.g., Trp and its derivatives as well as peptides, by C2.10 causes a strong quenching of their emission, which can
be monitored also at low μM concentrations. , 
 Fluorescence-based associative
binding assays with CB8•dye-based
chemosensors can be established by utilizing the combination of CB8
and size-matching fluorescent dyes ( ). For instance,
Kaifer and coworkers have self-assembled 1:1 complexes of CB8 with
2,7-dimethyldiazapyrenium (MDAP) or with 2,7-dimethyldiazaphenanthrenium
(MDPT), furbishing promising chemosensors for catechol and indole
derivatives. , Biedermann, Nau, and coworkers
have later utilized such systems for the monitoring of enzymatic reactions
and of membrane permeation processes of aromatic compounds, including
Trp, its derivatives, and peptides in the micromolar concentration
range in water or low salt buffers, e.g., 10 mM HEPES
or 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH ∼7.0. , , , Phenylalanine
is bound by CB8•MDAP (C2.11) but only provides
partial quenching of the fluorescence of the chemosensor. The more
electron-poor fluorescent dye tetramethyl benzobis(imidazolium) (MBBI)
introduced by Urbach, Bielawski, Scherman, and coworkers can be used
as an alternative when aiming to detect Phe and its derivatives and
peptides because the CB8•MBBI complex responds with nearly
complete emission quenching upon binding of most aromatic compounds. , Other suitable fluorescent dyes used as components for self-assembled
CB8-based chemosensors are perylene bisdiimides (PDI; Scherman and
coworkers) and perylene monoimides (PMI; Huang, Hunter, and coworkers). , − Noteworthy, the corresponding self-assembled
CB8•PDI chemosensor preferentially binds and responds with
emission quenching to either rather electron-poor, e.g., MV and azobenzene or significantly electron-rich aromatic compounds
such as Trp species. In contrast, the
CB8•PMI complex (C2.12) dissociates upon addition
of micromolar quantities of Phe-containing peptides, providing an
indicator displacement assay with emission quenching in aqueous media. High binding affinities for Trp- and Phe-type
compounds and useful spectroscopic responses (emission, absorbance,
CD) can be achieved with CB8-based chemosensors that utilize the methylated
diazaperoperylenium (MDPP) as dye. , Di, Xu, and
Hu utilized the CB8•MDPP chemosensor (C2.13) to
visualize the enzymatic activity of cytosolic enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
1 (IDO1) in living cells. This enzyme
catalyzes the oxidation of tryptophan into N′-formylkynurenine,
which is a much weaker binder and poorer fluorescence quencher for
the chemosensor. Thus, the enzymatic activity of IDO1 in malignant
HeLa and HepG2 cells overexpressing IDO1 was readily monitored by
following the emission turn-on response of the chemosensor upon consumption
of Trp.
Even better analyte differentiation capabilities are
achieved when
induced circular dichroism (ICD) is recorded for the complexes formed
by CB8•dye with chiral guests (see also ). The cofacial arrangement of the dye and
the aromatic moiety of a chiral analyte induces chiroptical properties
in the CB8•dye chemosensor complex, e.g.,
a distinct CD signal. These CD signals
contain much more analyte-related information than conventional absorbance
and emission spectra. Indeed, by using CD spectral fingerprints generated
by chiral analyte binding to CB8•MDAP (C2.10)
and CB8•MDPP (C2.13) chemosensors, it was possible
to differentiate Phe-containing from Trp-containing analytes. Besides,
it was possible to distinguish N-terminal from C-terminal positioned
peptidic aromatic amino acids. Even Trp-containing peptides differing
in their adjacent nonaromatic amino acids were distinguishable by
their ICD signals. Also penicillin-type
antibiotics and the protein insulin can be detected in low salinity
buffers in this way.
Alternatively, array-based sensing formats
are attractive strategies
for enhancing amino acids distinction capabilities. Bunz and coworkers
self-assembled an eight-element sensor array based on the combination
of poly[para-phenyleneethynylene] dyes (PPE) and
a supercharged green fluorescent protein (GFP) variant. The assay
was combined with different additives such as metal salts and CB7•AO
(C2.1) to increase the responsivity of the assay in order
to distinguish all 20 natural amino acids from each other (each at
25 mM concentration in water). The extension
of the sensor array to different mixtures of analytes and biofluids
will be exciting. Recently, it was reported by Wei and coworkers that
combining CBn and CD recognition elements through
immobilization on MoS2 nanosheets dramatically improves
the distinguishability of amino acids in an IDA-type format. Astonishingly, 39 amino acids (19 l-amino acid, 19 d-amino acids, glycine) were classifiable
and distinguishable from each other at a 0.5 mM concentration level.
The authors also reported the application of their surface-immobilized
chemosensor to the differentiation and identification of bacterial
peptidoglycans and bacterial species.
Besides the selectivity
problems that one faces when choosing cucurbit[n]urils
as a host for binding and detecting analytes, their
millimolar binding affinities with alkaline
and earth alkaline metals cations also cause competitive weakening
of their complexes with amino acids and other analytes in buffered
aqueous media or any biofluid. Thus, many reports for CBn-based sensing applications were conducted in deionized water or
minimal buffers, e.g., 10 mM phosphate buffer. It
will be an important step forward in the field when more binding data
in physiological buffers or biofluids become available.
The
rotaxanated CB8•dye-based chemosensor C2.14 in was reported by the Urbach group utilizing
mechanical bonding as a strategy to prevent chemosensor disintegration
caused by competitive binding of matrix components. This system can be used for the detection of the fluorescent
amino acid tryptophan (Ka = 1.8 ×
104 M–1 in 5 mM sodium phosphate buffer,
pH 7.4) and of its derived biogenic amine tryptamine (Ka = 1.1 × 105 M–1),
whose emission is quenched upon binding to the rotaxanated chemosensor.
While the authors were primarily interested in the binding difference
of their rotaxanated system in aqueous and organic solvents, we believe
that a similar strategy will be useful to arrive at fluorescent CB8-based
chemosensors for applications in biofluids.
 The same group developed a dilution-stable chemosensor
by linking
CB7 covalently to tetramethyl rhodamine (C2.15 in ). It was found that this system retains a high binding affinity
for representative guests, e.g., Ka = 6.3 × 106 M–1 and
6.7 × 106 M–1 for Phe-Gly-Gly binding
to the chemosensor and to CB7 in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH
7.4, respectively. These findings indicated
that the dye is only weakly interacting with the CB7 host. Nevertheless,
analyte binding to this covalent CB7–dye conjugate caused partial
emission quenching, which was exploited to detect the permeation of
some analytes into cells that were beforehand incubated with the chemosensor.
This system is likely to respond similarly to all analytes that are
known CB7 binders, and thus can be used for the detection of the amino
acids Phe and Lys, as well as derivatives and peptides thereof, in
the micromolar concentration regime in aqueous media. We have shown
recently that dilution-stable, unimolecular CBn-based
chemosensors can be obtained by covalently linking an indicator dye
to CBn through a flexible tether. Here, the tethered dye forms an inclusion complex with
the host and thus tunes the selectivity of the chemosensor towards
strongly binding guests. This design strategy improved the tolerance
of the chemosensors towards salts, allowing for sensing applications
in human urine, saliva, and concentrated buffers. It also provides
a promising pathway to establish a practically exploitable kinetic
binding selectivity between different analytes.
 A novel concept to overcome the negative impact of salts on the
detection of amino acids was introduced by the Hof group. A fluorescent
calix[4]arene-type chemosensor (C2.16) that forms dimers
in aqueous media, leading to emission quenching, was utilized ( ). The authors showed that the
strong binding guest trimethyllysine disrupts the dimer and thus restores
the emission, while lysine itself shows only a weak interaction. Importantly,
the dimerization is not affected by salts, and thus the chemosensors
retain their sensing performance in physiological buffers. It was
possible to successfully apply the “DimerDye Disassembly Assay”
(DDA) to monitor the activity a methyltransferase under physiological
conditions in real time. The DDA approach offers an interesting alternative
for monitoring enzymatic methylation of Lys residues over previous
assays that were limited to minimal buffers , and over commercial assays that are limited to end-point measurements
requiring time consuming sample post-treatment steps. A similar concept was later successfully applied
by the same group to the detection of illicit drugs in saliva; see in for more details.
 Hooley, Zhong, and coworkers developed a conceptually related system
for detecting trimethylated peptides as well as trimethyllysine and
the determination of histone demethylase activity. Their negatively charged cavitands (C2.17 in ) show a binding preference for positively charged guests
and form aggregates in 1× PBS, pH 7.4, in the presence of fluorophores
that carry a trimethylammonium side chain. The aggregates, which show
quenched emission, disrupt upon binding of competitive guests such
as histone peptides carrying a trimethyllysine residue. This assay
was found to be salt tolerant, and control over the aggregation can
be achieved by addition of chaotropic anions.
 Recently, Kursunlu and
coworkers introduced a pillar[5]arene chemosensor
that features 10 pendant BODIPY groups ( ). The chemosensor C2.18 displayed
an emission enhancement upon binding to asparagine in 50% DMF in water,
while 12 other tested amino acids did not provide a signal change
in the blue emission channel. The host displayed a surprisingly high
binding affinity for asparagine, Ka =
2.5 × 108 M–1, suggesting that improved
pillar[n]arene derivatives may become viable for
the detection of amino acids in aqueous media.
 Cyclodextrins (CDs), particularly dye-tethered cyclodextrins as
unimolecular chemosensors, − are also attractive for amino
acid sensing. Unlike most synthetic hosts, cyclodextrins are inherently
chiral and therefore can be used for chiral discrimination of enantiomeric
amino acids and their derivatives. However, the chiral discrimination
factors of the shape-flexible CDs are rather low, and typically multiple
molecular recognition events are required to achieve a practical chirality
sensing method. This occurs when separating chiral substances with
cyclodextrin-functionalized stationary phases through chromatographic
methods.
Inoue, Yang, and coworkers have overcome this problem
by introducing
an enantiomeric helicene that is conformational rigid, axial chiral,
and fluorescent to the primary rim of β-CD ( ). The resulting diastereomeric
β-CD–helicene conjugate (C2.19) did not
only show a fluorescence response upon binding of amino acids but
was also capable of distinguishing the l- and d-form
of hydrophobic amino acids with high discrimination factors, e.g., Ka = 1.2 × 104 M–1 and 1.0 × 103 M–1 for l-Leu and d-Leu, respectively,
and Ka = 3.6 × 102 M–1 and 4.2 × 103 M–1 for l-Trp and d-Trp, respectively, in aqueous
media at pH 7.3. Corradini and coworkers have prepared improved cyclodextrin-based
chirality chemosensors (C2.20 in b) by introducing an additional amino acid
binding motif, i.e., a metal-binding site on the
tether that connects the fluorescent indicator dye. In the presence of CuII ions, the chiral host
and amino acid are interacting with each other through an additional
metal-coordination binding motif. By assessing the different binding
affinities of the chiral analytes to the chiral host, the authors
were able to distinguish enantiomeric amino acids from each other
through fluorescence-based titrations. Furthermore, the applicability
of the assay to the microwell plate format was demonstrated, where
the enantiomeric excess of valine and proline samples was determined
in the submillimolar concentration regime.
 The coordination of carboxylates by CuII centers was
utilized by the Huang group to arrive at a tweezer-like chemosensor
(C2.21 in ) that contains two anthracenyl
moieties as signal transduction units. Upon carboxylate binding, the emission quenching behavior of the
CuII center is reduced and therefore, the emission of the
chemosensor is enhanced. This chemosensor can be used for the detection
of alanine, aspartate, and glutamate, and the dipeptide Phe-Gly, each
of which show affinities in the millimolar range in mixed aqueous
organic media (50% MeOH in Tris buffer, pH 7.4). Moreover, a high
affinity discrimination factor of ∼10 was found between l- and d-mandelate with this chiral chemosensor.
 2.3.1.

## Selective Sensing of Amino Acids by Metal
Complex-based Chemosensors
2.3.1.1.

## Metal Complex-based
Chemosensors for Histidine
Some amino acids and their derivatives
can be selectively targeted
by metal complex-based chemosensors. For instance, histidine contains
nitrogen atoms that are part of a heterocyclic aromatic ring and which
therefore possess unique metal-binding properties amongst the class
of amino acids. Inspired by the wide occurrence of the [His2ZnCys2] binding motif in zinc finger proteins, − the affinities of ZnII centers for histidine have been
exploited in the design of chemosensors in a biometric fashion. The
chemosensors discussed within this section are summarized in .
In 2004,
Yang and coworkers described a zinc porphyrin complex
with a covalently attached pyrene functionality as a signal transducer. The complex C2.22 in was immobilized on plasticized polyvinyl chloride membranes,
which then were successfully used for histidine detection in aqueous
media. In the presence of the target analyte, two equivalents of such
porphyrin complexes were brought in close spatial proximity through
the bridging function of histidine. This can be easily observed through
the emerging pyrene excimer emission. The sensor membrane can be used
for determining histidine in the submicromolar to millimolar concentration
regime and showed a high selectivity over other amino acids. Pleasingly,
adverse binding by potentially ZnII binding anions, such
as isothiocyanate, fluoride, chloride, nitrite, sulfate, and salicylate,
were not detected. In fact, the authors demonstrated that blood serum
levels of histidine can be reliably measured with their sensor. The
sensor membrane was found to be washable and reusable.
 Another histidine-selective chemosensor (C2.23) was
prepared by Yu, Pu, and coworkers in 2013, which complements other
previously reported zinc complexes for histidine sensing. The authors combined a crown ether moiety and
a terpyridine unit to provide two binding stations for ZnII ( ). As a result of the simultaneous binding of the heterocyclic
“N”, the −NH2 and
the −COO– moieties of the target analyte,
this system selectively responded to micromolar concentrations of
histidine in 25 mM HEPES containing 1% THF, pH 7.35, with a strong
emission enhancement, while all other proteinogenic amino acids give
no response under the same conditions. It is noteworthy that neither
N-protected and O-protected histidine nor imidazole and derivatives
also caused any fluorescence response. However, it can be expected
that nucleosides are cross-reactive with C2.23 because
structurally analogous chemosensors, e.g., C6.4 in in , were utilized for adenosine triphosphate (ATP) detection.
 Other researchers put their focus on CuII ions to form
chelate complexes with histidine. For example, two structurally related
coumarin-based dyes have been introduced in consecutive years ( ). , Both dyes feature a metal-ion
binding station and experience emission quenching upon CuII binding. Such dyes can thus also be utilized for the detection of
CuII ions. In the presence of histidine, the emission intensity
of both histidine chemosensors C2.24 and C2.25 is restored because the target analyte competitively binds CuII ions. Chemosensor C2.24 was developed by Li,
Yu, and coworkers for the detection of histidine in the low micromolar
concentration regime with 0.5% DMSO in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4. C2.24 was found to be unresponsive to all amino acids but
histidine and cysteine, even if they were added at 100× molar
excess. To a certain extent, this chemosensor can also be used to
distinguish His from Cys, as the latter only gave a modest emission
enhancement. Indeed, the authors also succeeded in the parallel quantification
of His concentration in human urine and fetal calf serum. The analogous chemosensor C2.25 introduced by Chan, Leung, and coworkers showed similar sensitivity
and selectivity for histidine detection. It is noteworthy that the
authors demonstrated that biothiols such as Cys also cause an emission
enhancement due to their binding to CuII ions. This system has been successfully utilized
for monitoring of intracellular histidine in human glioblastoma cells.
Conceptually related systems that operate through histidine-triggered
release of CuII ions have been reported by others, e.g., Chattopadhyay, Das, and coworkers, and the Li group. Likewise,
these systems displayed cross-reactivities with other thiols.
 An alternative copper-based design has been pursued by Yu,
Pu,
and coworkers that reported the simple coordination complex terpyridine–CuIICl2 as a chemosensor (C2.26 in c) for histidine
(and cysteine). This system was proposed
to associatively bind His without displacement of the CuII ions, giving rise to a remarkable 1000-fold emission enhancement.
The binding affinity of the chemosensor for histidine was reported
as Ka = 9 × 103 M–1 in 25 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, which restricts the
sensitivity of the assay to the submillimolar concentration regime.
Additional practical challenges are the cross-reactivity for cysteine
and the somewhat practical limiting short excitation wavelength (298
nm) of the chemosensor.
The His-coordination ability of CuII-bound chemosensors
was utilized by the Fabbrizzi group, who investigated the complexation
of amino acids by a dimetallic cyclophane, e.g.,
by C2.27. It was demonstrated
that an emission turn-on response can be achieved through involving
eosin Y as an indicator dye ( a). Importantly,
while the dimetallic cyclophanes bind a wide range of amino acids,
histidine stood out as the strongest binder (Ka ≥ 107 M–1 in 50 mM HEPES
buffer, pH 7.0). Therefore, it was possible to tune the selectivity
of the chemosensing ensemble exclusively to His by using the strongly
binding indicator dye eosin Y (Ka ∼
107 M–1) that can only be displaced by
His but not by other, more weakly binding amino acids. However, the
structural similarity of C2.27 to a nucleoside chemosensor
(C6.6 in in ) again suggests a possible cross-reactivity.
 An unusual approach
for histidine sensing has been proposed by
Lin, Chen, and coworkers, who exploited the catalytic function of
copper ions for alkyne-azide click reactions. Specifically, an azide-functional coumarin dye and a small
molecule alkyne are added to the sample solution, as well as CuII salt and ascorbate. The resulting chemosensing mixture is
herein labelled as C2.28. If no CuII-binding
species is present in the sample solution, an emission turn-on response
is observed as the azide-functional coumarin dye is catalytically
converted into a fluorescent compound. Conversely, if histidine is
present, the CuII-ions are sequestered, and the catalytic
reaction does not take place ( b). The authors succeeded in determining histidine
in the lower μM regime with an estimated LOD of 76 nM in 1×
PBS and in cellular homogenate.
It appears that most copper-based
chemosensors for histidine are
cross-reactive towards bio-thiols, − , , which limits their use for cell imaging applications
due to the relatively high concentrations of cysteine (Cys, about
100 μM), reduced glutathione (GSH, in mM concentrations), and
thiol-functional proteins found inside living cells.
In an effort
to arrive at a chemosensor useful for histidine imaging
in live systems, Ye and coworkers proposed the use of NiII-centers as binding motifs. Indeed,
nickel ions as well as later discussed nanoparticles are widely being
exploited in the His-tag technology for protein purification and labeling. − The authors attached a NiII targeting motif to a [RuII(bpy)2(phen-dpa)] (bpy = bipyridine, dpa = dipicolylamine,
phen = phenantroline) complex, whose phosphorescence was quenched
upon binding of a paramagnetic NiII ion ( ). This dimetallic chemosensor
(C2.29) responded to the presence of micromolar concentrations
of histidine with an emission enhancement at 603 nm on account of
the competitive removal of the NiII quencher, which is
strongly complexed by histidine in 40% EtOH in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.2.
Remarkably, other potential competitors such as the biothiols Cys,
GSH, and Hcys as well as various anions, ascorbic acid, DNA, BSA,
and 12 tested amino acids, did not trigger a phosphorescence response.
Cell imaging results demonstrated that the chemosensing ensemble is
membrane permeable and that it can be applied for visualizing histidine
in live cells. The utility of the system was further highlighted by
employing it for phosphorescence imaging of histidine in larval zebrafish
and Daphnia magna.
 A vitamin B6 derived
ligand that can efficiently bind to Al3+ ions (Ka = 4 × 105 M–1 in HEPES buffer, pH 7.7) was developed by
Oliveira, Lodeiro, and coworkers ( ). Interestingly, subsequent binding of two equivalents
of histidine results in a strong additional 100× emission enhancement,
making this system a promising emission turn-on chemosensor for this
amino acid. The authors also reported that even in the absence of
Al3+, the ligand behaves as a chemosensor (C2.30a) and responds with emission turn-on to the presence of histidine,
albeit with a lower signal enhancement factor. A detection limit of
300 nM histidine was found with C2.30a in HEPES buffer,
pH 7.7. The authors also discussed the high selectivity of the Al3+-bound chemosensor C2.30b for histidine over
other proteogenic amino acids and demonstrated its applications for
histidine detection in human urine.
 
2.3.1.2.

## Metal
Complex-based Chemosensors for Aspartate,
Arginine, and Phosphatidyl-serine
Besides the already discussed
selective sensing strategies for histidine and thiols, several other
amino acids can be detected through their metal-ion coordinating ability.
An aspartate-selective chemosensing ensemble (C2.31) has been introduced by the Anslyn group, which capitalized on the
cooperative chelation between a ZnII complex and amino
acids that are bound via their carboxylate and amine
functionalities ( ). To introduce
a binding selectivity for aspartate, positively charged guanidinium
moieties were installed in strategic positions on the receptor scaffold.
Moreover, the indicator dye pyrocatechol violet was introduced to
furbish an easily quantifiable ratiometric absorbance signal response
through dye displacement upon addition of the target analytes. Pleasingly,
this system showed the anticipated selectivity for aspartate over
other amino acids, including glutamate in 50% MeOH in 10 mM HEPES,
pH 7.4 (Ka = 1.5 × 105 M–1 for aspartate and Ka ∼ 104 M–1 for Phe, Val, Gly,
Asn, Glu, and succinic acid). While these results were instructive
and promising in a fundamental sense, future research is needed to
make this system applicable for aspartate detection in pure aqueous
media and biofluids.
 By attaching a crown ether moiety to a ZnII-terpyridine
complex, Wu and coworkers arrived at a chemosensor (C2.32) that shows a selective hypochromic fluorescence response for arginine
in 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 ( ). The authors reasoned that the combination of H-bonds, electrostatic,
and van der Waals forces caused the observed binding selectivity.
It was found that other amino acids, including lysine, and the arginine-derived
nonproteinogenic amino acid citrulline, do not cause a noticeable
change of the emission properties of the chemosensor. The sensitivity
of the chemosensor is limited to the submillimolar range because the
binding affinity of Ka = 1.8 × 104 M–1 in HEPES buffer is only modest. Moreover,
it has to be assumed that the performance of the chemosensor is adversely
affected by Na+ and K+ ions present in biofluids,
which competitively bind the crown ether unit. Nevertheless, this
system showed promising results for the detection of the arginine-
and His-rich protein BSA in HEPES buffer.
 Artificial binders that are covalently connected to an indicator
dye can serve as dilution-stable, unimolecular chemosensors. For example,
Jolliffe and coworkers developed a coumarin labelled fluorogenic chemosensor C2.33 that can be utilized for recognizing and detecting phosphatidylserines
on cell surfaces through an intramolecular indicator displacement
mechanism ( ). The chemosensor
design capitalized on the binding preference of ZnII ions
for “hard” anions, e.g., carboxylates
and phosphates. The use of an appropriately designed spacer ensured
that the binding affinity is maximized for the phosphatidyl serine
target analyte.
 

2.4.

## Nanosensors for Amino Acids and Proteins
Menon and coworkers reported the use of p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene
thiol-functionalized gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) for fluorescence-based
detection of the basic amino acids lysine, arginine, and histidine
in phosphate buffered solution at μM concentrations (N2.1 in ). At physiological
pH, protonated amino groups of the analytes bind via electrostatic interactions with the negatively charged p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene moieties. In the case of histidine, additional
host–guest interactions came into play when binding to N2.1, which were mediated by the imidazole moiety. After binding
with amino acids, the electrostatic repulsive forces between the particles
decreased, which was concluded from the distinct color change in the
dispersion of N2.1 as the surface plasmon resonances
changed upon aggregation. The degree of aggregation was measured by
UV–vis absorption spectroscopy and correlated with the amount
of basic amino acid in solution. The authors showed that other amino
acids (e.g., Gly, Ala, Leu, Val, Pro, Ser, Asp, and
Glu) also triggered a colorimetric response. All nanosensors discussed
within this section are summarized in .
 Quantum
dots (QDs) are characterized by high fluorescence quantum
yields, size dependent emission wavelengths, and good resistance against
photobleaching, which are desirable properties for the development
of new fluorescent nanosensors. Willner
and coworkers reported the preparation of β-cyclodextrin (β-CD)
decorated Se/ZnS QDs for enantioselective and fluorescence-based detection
of l-tyrosine (Ka = 2.2 ×
103 M–1) and l-phenylalanine
(Ka = 3.05 × 103 M–1) in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 10.3, at μM
concentrations (N2.2 in ). Upon light excitation of QDs, efficient energy
transfer occurs from the nanoparticle to the host-bound rhodamine
B dye, causing its sensitized emission, while particle emission is
quenched. However, in the presence of aromatic l-amino acids,
the rhodamine dye is displaced from the macrocyclic host by the stronger
binding amino acid, resulting in the increase of the fluorescence
of the QD. Further examples of enantioselective detection using CD-functionalized
QDs have been reported for the detection of tyrosine, methionine,
and histamine. , 
 Although QDs possess exquisite photophysical properties to be used
for the preparation of fluorescent-based nanosensors, they can cause
toxicity issues when applied for in vitro or in vivo application. However,
the toxicity of QDs can be reduced by building a biocompatible and
protective shell around the particles, which prevents unwanted metal
ion dissolution into biological environments. Tang, Liu, Tang, and
coworkers developed β-CD functionalized and silica coated QDs
for the enantioselective detection of His in PBS at μM concentrations
(N2.3 in ). Upon addition of l-His to a dispersion of N2.3, an increased fluorescence emission intensity was observed, whereas
the addition of d-His resulted in a much lower fluorescence
enhancement. This enantioselective response was explained by the preferred
binding of l-His to the β-CD moieties. It has been
speculated that the observed luminescence enhancement after His binding
is caused by rigidochromic effects. Besides the beneficial biological
properties of a silica shell around QDs, coating of a nanoparticle
also facilitates further surface functionalization via simple alkoxy-silane chemistry. For instance, other silica-based
nanomaterials for the detection of amino acids were prepared from
epitope-imprinted mesoporous silica particles or molecularly imprinted silica particles. 
 Carbon-based nanomaterials such as single-walled
carbon nanotubes
(SWCNTs) are attractive candidates for sensing applications because
they can serve as NIR-emitters which have good transparency to biological
tissues. The optical properties of such fiber-like structures strongly
depend on their surface (corona) composition. The use of polymer-functionalized
SWCNTs for the detection of albumin in urine samples has been recently
reported by Heller and coworkers (N2.4 in ). In this example, the authors
functionalized SWCNTs with various polycarbodiimide polymers that
have polyethylene glycol and amine moieties. These functional groups
are thought to bind human albumin through electrostatic and hydrophobic
interactions. Once albumin interacted with the polymer layer, a hypsochromic
shift in the emission of N2.4 emission was observed,
which was attributed to the previously described solvatochromic behavior
of SWCNTs and was used for protein quantification.
The sensitivity obtained for albumin detection in urine samples (3
mg L–1) was comparable to commercial immunoturbidimetry
assays used in clinics (1 mg L–1), indicating the
potential of N2.4 as a functional sensor for detection
of microalbuminuria.
 König and coworkers designed phospholipid-based vesicles
with thrombin-binding aptamers and fluorescent dyes embedded in the
membrane (N2.5 in ). These vesicles have been successfully applied
for fluorescence-based detection of thrombin at μM concentrations
in 25 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4. Proteins present in the sample bind
to the aptamer moiety, resulting in an increase of emission from the
receptor dye (pyrene or rhodamine dye derivatives). The increase in
fluorescence was explained by the conformational change of the aptamer
upon protein binding. The use of vesicle presents a useful strategy
when multifunctional nanoparticles need to be prepared for sensing
and drug delivery applications. , Nevertheless,
a main disadvantage of phospholipid-based vesicles is their insufficient
shelf-stability. Covalently cross-linked polymersomes or more stable vesicular structures, such as
quatsomes, may be suitable alternatives.
 Metal–organic
frameworks (MOFs) are micro- to mesoporous
crystalline materials that are composed of metal ion (clusters) and
organic ligands as the building blocks. Lanthanide-MOFs are interesting
nanoparticles for the preparation of fluorescence-based sensors due
to their high stability and monochromaticity of emission. Yang, Fan, and coworkers recently reported
the preparation of a novel and fluorescent anionic MOF, [[Eu2K(bpda)4(C2H5OH)]·(H3O)·(H2O)x]n (bpda = 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylic
acid), for the detection of cysteine in water and artificial blood
samples at μM concentrations (N2.6 in ). The [Eu(bpda)2]− subunits were linked through K+ cations
forming N2.6. When the MOF is immersed in Fe3+ solutions, its emission is efficiently quenched due to the adsorption
of iron cations in the porous framework, where they quench the lanthanide
luminescence via electron transfer processes. However,
when cysteine was added, it promoted the depletion of ferrous ions
from the MOF, restoring its fluorescence properties. The authors showed
that other possible interfering species (e.g., Na+, K+, Cl–, PO42–, GSH, His, Lys, glucose, dopamine, phenylalanine,
and ascorbic acid) did not affect the performance of N2.6.
 Other systems for protein detection using nanosensors have
been
demonstrated with array-based sensing platforms (“chemical
nose/tongue”) in which multiple sensing elements on the surface
of the nanoparticles, i.e., fluorescent dyes or proteins, interact
with the target analytes to produce a unique pattern of optical response
that enable analyte identification. This approach offers unique opportunities
compared to highly specific sensing elements such as antibodies, as
these relatively simple cross-reactive arrays provide unique opportunities
for identifying changes in complex biological mixtures. Notable work
on the development of nanoparticle-based “chemical noses”
has been reported by the Rotello group, , , which showed that these array-based
sensors excel at discriminating small changes in complex mixtures
and represent promising systems that can serve as new tools for future
sensing technologies. Because the topic of array-based sensors with
“chemical noses” has already been extensively covered
in the literature, we refer the reader to these reviews for a detailed
presentation on this type of array-based nanosensors. , 
To evaluate the current state-of-the-art of probes, chemosensors,
and nanosensors for potential applications in molecular diagnostics
of amino acids, peptides, and proteins, lists the typical
concentration of amino acid occurrence in biofluids. By now, there
is a range of systems available that are operational in water, buffers,
or even biofluids, with affinities and sensitivity high enough to
warrant a practical application. However, a major limitation appears
to be the lack of selectivity, which still hampers the use of such
systems for single- or multiparameter diagnostics.

3.

## Amines
(Other than Amino Acids)
Polyamines are a class of natural
and synthetic organic amines
with at least two or more amino groups and exist as polycationic species
at physiological pH ( ). Endogenously, polyamines
are synthesized from ornithine by the activity of ornithine decarboxylase,
resulting in the formation of putrescine, the building block for further
biosynthesis of other polyamines such as spermidine and spermine. Because of their positive charge, polyamines
can interact with negatively charged biomolecules such as DNA, RNA,
and proteins through electrostatic interactions. Therefore, this class
of amines is involved in many biological processes, most of which
are related to cell growth, survival, and proliferation. , At normal concentrations, some polyamines have cardioprotective
and neuroprotective effects, improve age-related metabolic decline,
and stimulate immune surveillance against cancer. , Furthermore, other types of polyamines such as cadaverine and agmatine
are produced by microorganisms that play an important role in the
human microbiome. , − As major components of the polyamine metabolic pathway, putrescine,
spermidine, and spermine can be linked to many diseases such as cystic
fibrosis, stroke, − renal failure, , Parkinson’s disease, as well as heart failure and cardiac infarction. , For example,
a significant decrease in spermidine and spermine levels alongside
with an increased putrescine level was observed in the plasma of stroke
patients within the first 20 days after their stroke. Impaired polyamine and arginine metabolism
were found in humans with mild cognitive impairments (MCIs) and Alzheimer’s
disease (AD). − For example, spermidine levels in plasma
were lower in both groups of MCIs and AD patients compared to the
healthy group, and the concentration of spermine was increased in
the MCI group but decreased in the subgroups of MCIs patients who
transitioned to AD. In addition, high
polyamine levels are usually found in cancer cells, , , and their urinary and plasma
concentrations may be useful markers of cancer. − For example, urinary diacetylspermine has been identified as a biomarker
for lung and ovarian cancer. − Importantly, diacetylspermine in urine can
be a more sensitive marker for various cancers in humans than commonly
used biomarkers and can be used to identify colorectal or breast cancers
at an early stage. With the exception
of aromatic amine neurotransmitters, an important class of analytes
highlighted in , biogenic amines are often formed as product of a catabolic pathway
and, at elevated concentrations, can be harmful to many organisms,
including human beings. Indeed, biogenic amines such as putrescine
and cadaverine are known food spoilage indicators and highly toxic
in larger quantities ( ). , The offensive odor that many
amines display is in fact a universal indicator for danger arising
from the exposure to amines. Likewise, many stimulating or hallucinogenic
drugs and neurotoxic substances are amines, for instance, ephedrine
or tryptamine and its derivatives, e.g., 5-MeO-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine. In general, for psychedelic drugs, achieving a good detection limit
is of high priority (∼ng drug per mL biofluid), explaining
why contemporary analytical methods are based on LC-MS coupled formats. In comparison, the detection of biogenic ubiquitous
amines is less challenging because they naturally occur in the micromolar
to millimolar concentration range in cells and biofluids. In this review, we focus our attention on probes
and chemosensors which are somewhat selective for amines over amino
acids. As before, we restrict our attention in this review toward
the detection of analytes in aqueous media and biofluids. The molecular
probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors discussed within this section
are summarized in – .
 3.1.

## Molecular
Probes for Amines (Other than Amino
Acids)
In the previous section, we have described probes
for the detection of amino acids, such that we herein focus on probes
that selectively detect amines.
In 2011, Severin and coworkers
demonstrated that an aldehyde-containing coumarin probe (P3.1 in ) selectively reacts with primary biogenic
amines, such as spermine, spermidine, cadaverine, tryptamine, tyramine,
and histamine, in 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, that contains sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as the surfactant. Probe P3.1 provided ratiometric changes in the absorbance
spectra (350–500 nm) for most amines and a fluorescence turn-on
response through the formation of a set of different products, including
enamines and imines. Notably, the tested amino acids, glycine (Gly),
histidine (His), cysteine (Cys), glutamic acid (Glu), and γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) showed a much weaker response, possibly because the negatively
charged SDS micelles prevent their encounter with the probe through
charge repulsion. While the assay can detect amines in the micromolar
concentration range, its prolonged reaction time of hours and need
for high temperature around 50°C limits its utility, e.g., for practical diagnostic purposes.
 Wang, Cao, and coworkers recently
showcased a nanoaggregate forming
probe (P3.2) that responds to amines by bond detachment
of, e.g., B–N bonding motifs, and uncaging
of fluorophores ( ). Probe P3.2 was found to be particularly reactive towards primary
amines with a reaction rates in the following order n-hexylamine >1,6-hexylenediamine ≫ spermine and spermidine
in 50% dioxane in water. The authors also demonstrated that food spoilage, e.g., of shrimps, can be monitored when P3.2 is deposited on filter strips.
 Creatinine, which is
shown in , is an aminofunctional
heterocyclic compound that is produced in the organism through a reaction
involving creatine phosphate and adenosine triphosphate (ATP). In
healthy individuals, creatinine is mainly removed from the blood by
the kidneys, and little to no tubular reabsorption occurs. Thus, elevated
blood creatinine concentrations are an important kidney dysfunction
indicator. Creatinine levels are also routinely checked in urine,
and urinary biomarkers are frequently reported as a normalized ratio
to urinary creatinine concentration to compensate for variations in
urine volumes. Creatinine can be detected
by a long known colorimetric assay, the Jaffe reaction first introduced
in 1886, which is based on the reaction of creatinine with alkaline
picrate that yields an orange-red complex in alkaline medium within
a few minutes of assay time. However, neither the exact structure
of the formed product is clear nor is the reaction selective. It has
been reported that various in biomedia omnipresent compounds such
as glucose, ketone bodies, or bilirubin produce
a Jaffe-like chromophore that can interfere with creatinine quantification.
These problems are particularly pronounced for creatinine determinations
in blood serum. In urine, the Jaffe method is less prone to interferences
due to the high abundance of creatinine and the lower number of interfering
chromogens in this biofluid. Alternative methods for creatinine determination
in blood (and urine) are therefore still on demand. Nowadays laboratories
also routinely apply enzymatic assay kits with creatininase or creatinine
deaminase − as well as GC-MS, LC-MS, and HPLC , for quantitative
analysis of creatinine. , 
 In 2016, a fluorescence turn-on probe was disclosed by the Dhara
group that is applicable for the selective detection and quantification
of creatinine in 10 mM PBS and biofluids. The authors exploited the metal-coordinating property of creatinine,
which was found to displace “Pd” from the ethylene–diamine
binding station that was installed to a naphthalimide core ( ). Displacement of the emission quencher caused a 27-fold
increase in the fluorescence intensity of the probe in 0.5% MeCN in
10 mM PBS, pH 7.2, at 37°C. This probe was shown to be applicable
for the determination of creatinine in human blood serum. The side-by-side
evaluation of the new probe-based assay and the Jaffe method for creatinine
quantification in seven blood serum samples gave promising results,
suggesting that P3.3 may be applied in clinical and toxicological
analysis. The probe shows wide applicable concentration range and
a superior detection limit of 0.3 μM in 10 mM PBS (up to 300
μM creatinine were tested). Importantly, P3.3 is
also more selective for creatinine than the Jaffe reagent, e.g., glucose is not cross-reactive with P3.3. However, compared to the Jaffe method, this probe-based assay requires
a longer assay time as the reaction of P3.3 with creatinine
is not completed after 30 min.
 A recurring theme of this review is the difficulty to distinguish
structurally similar analytes from each other by means of modestly
selectively artificial receptors. Again, the most prudent strategy
available today appears to set up array-based sensing formats that
exploit differentially selective probes. In a proof-of-concept study,
Bunz and coworkers established a sensing assay for the distinction
of 11 different amines through an array that was composed of six reactive
probes. The distyrylbenzenedialdehyde-type
probes (P3.4) were designed to form Knoevenagel adducts
with the amines in 10% THF in water and provided characteristic, analyte-indicative
spectroscopic fingerprints in the emission spectra upon reaction with
the amines ( ). The reaction times for the different
probes varied between a few minutes to nearly an hour, and the detection
limit for the amines ranged from 75 μM to 7.5 mM depending on
the combination of probe and amine used. The probes were typically
employed at low micromolar concentrations.
 
3.2.

## Chemosensors
for Amines (Other than Amino
Acids)
Unlike reactive probes that typically target nucleophilic,
deprotonated amines, many chemosensor exploit the formation of ion-pairs,
charge assisted hydrogen bonds, and cation−π interactions
for the noncovalent binding of protonated amines.
Capitalizing
on the molecular recognition-based selectivity enhancements in self-assembled
systems, Severin and coworkers designed a charge-frustrated amphiphile
with a highly fluorescent and negatively charged pyrene-1,3,6-trisulfonate
head group and a hydrophobic eicosane (−C20H41) tail ( ). This self-assembled
chemosensor C3.1 selectively responds through emission
quenching to the presence of polycationic spermine, while other biogenic
amines, including spermidine, cadaverine, serotonin, as well as amino
acids, e.g., Cys, Lys, and Phe, provided a much weaker
signal change. Spermine can be detected in the low nanomolar regime,
and only 200 nM suffice for a naked-eye detection in 800 μM
MOPS buffer, pH 7.0. In 2016, Xu and coworkers included a squaraine
dye into a pyrene-1,3,6-trisulfonate surfactant-based assembly (C3.2), thereby achieving a fluorescence turn-on assay for
spermine. It remains to be seen if such
systems can be operational in biofluids containing high millimolar
concentrations of salts that may interfere with the charge-mediated
recognition process between the negatively charged micelle and the
polycationic analyte.
 A step toward an applicable
urine test for spermine, which functions
as a tumor marker, − has been made by the Kim group, establishing
analyte-directed formation of emissive excimers in the presence of
polyamines, particularly spermine. The
emission turn-on probe (C3.3 in ) was operational in 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, and in artificial
urine. Its spermine detection limit of 0.6 μM makes it potentially
suitable for diagnostic applications.
 Sulfonatocalix[n]arenes can be
used for the detection
of amines in aqueous media and show respectable binding affinities
for amines. One representative example of an emissive p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene that can be used for the micromolar detection
of spermine in borate buffer at pH 8.5 was introduced by the Geremia
group. The authors found that 2:1 and
1:1 calixarene•spermine complexes are formed, both showing
only a slight emission quenching. However, when a tetracationic porphyrin
was added to C3.4 as a signal modulator, the fluorescence
titration curve became significantly steeper upon spermine addition,
enhancing the sensitivity of the assay ( ).
 Cucurbit[n]uril-based host–guest chemistry
can be exploited for the detection of biogenic amines through IDA.
For instance, a complex of CB6 as host with a chromophoric aminonaphthalimide–putrescine
conjugate was reported by the Pischel group (C3.5 in ). The detection of low micromolar concentrations of biogenic
amines, i.e., putrescine and cadaverine, at slightly
acidic or under physiological pH was possible. 
 Moreover, a recent example reported by Biedermann, Hirtz, and coworkers
showed that CBn-based microarrays can be used for
multiplex and highly sensitive detection of biogenic amines, e.g., spermine, cadaverine, and amantadine, in dry air state
and microfluidic channel. By this design, nM concentration regimes
of cadaverine can be detected. However,
as it was pointed out before, the competitive binding of other metabolites
and metal cations to the host always needs to be considered when attempting
to extend CBn-based assays to applications in biofluids.
It is noteworthy that chirality sensing of amines is not directly
possible with CBn-based chemosensors in an IDA format
because CBn macrocycles are achiral. Isaacs and coworkers
made a step towards chirality sensing of amines by preparing a chiral nor-seco-cucurbit[6]uril derivative as a racemic mixture
that showed diastereoselective recognition of chiral amino acids and
amines (see ). Moderate
to good levels of diastereoselectivity towards Phe (88:12), and its
derived amino alcohol (S)-2-amino-3-phenylpropanol
(76:24) were deduced from 1H NMR experiments in D2O. Interestingly, it was even possible to distinguish between the
enantiotopic groups of the meso-compound (1R,2S)-1,2-diphenylethane-1,2-diamine (74:26).
When (chiral) indicator dyes become available for this host, it may
find future use for absorbance or fluorescence-based sensing of chiral
amines in aqueous media.
 Notable efforts were also made to develop chemosensors
for the
detection of creatinine in aqueous media. The design of receptors
that can strongly bind creatinine in water is a challenge due to the
high hydrophilicity of the target analyte. A possible work-around
was presented by the Bell group, who designed a hydrogen-bonding receptor C3.6 which is capable of binding creatinine in chlorinated
organic solvents that were saturated with water. Under such conditions, the binding affinity was relatively
strong, i.e., Ka = 2 × 106 M–1 in aq CHCl3. The unique color signal
response upon binding the target analyte was proposed to stem from
an intramolecular proton shift from one end of the receptor to the
other; see for a schematic depiction of the binding
mechanism. The system was found to be selective for creatinine relative
to sodium, potassium, and ammonium ions. However, the suggested perspective
on a potential applicability of the chemosensor in blood serum appears
difficult and was not reached yet. In general, the transfer of binding
principles developed and tested in organic solvents or aqueous-organic
solvent mixtures to pure water, saline buffers, or biofluids has often
proven to be a challenging obstacle. , Recently,
Pischel, Ballester, and coworkers introduced calix[4]pyrrole phosphonate-cavitands
as receptors for the detection of creatinine through an indicator
displacement assay in chloroform (Ka ∼
4 × 105 M–1). It remains to be seen if this new design is applicable
for chemosensors that are operational in aqueous media and biofluids.
 
3.3.

## Nanosensors
for Amines (Other than Amino Acids)
Li and coworkers prepared p-sulfonatocalix[6]arene-modified
gold nanoparticles (N3.1 in ), which were used as colorimetric nanosensors for the selective
detection of constitutional isomers of diaminobenzenes at μM
concentrations in water, pH 6.1. Upon
addition of ethanolic solutions of meta- or para-diaminobenzene to aqueous dispersions of N3.1, a distinct color change from red to blue occurred, which was attributed
to the nanoparticle aggregation. No changes were observed in the presence
of ortho-diaminobenzene. The distinct color response
can be explained by host–guest interactions that preferentially
occur between p-sulfonato[6]calix-arenes and m- as well as p-diaminobenzenes, causing
a change in the plasmon resonance. These isomers crosslink the nanoparticles
by forming supramolecular bridges between the particles. The selectivity
of N3.1 was investigated against other aromatic amines,
such as nitroaniline, chloro-aniline, toluidine, and aniline, which
did not trigger particle aggregation due to weaker interactions with p-sulfonatocalix[6]arenes.
 More recently, a colorimetric-based
nanosensor (N3.2 in ) with structural
isomer selectivity towards
phenylenediamines was reported by Zou and coworkers using β-cyclodextrin
(β-CD)-functionalized silver nanoparticles. The authors were able to distinguish all three different
isomers, i.e., o-, m-, and p-phenylenediamine by examining distinct
color changes induced by each of the isomers. As depicted in , the different
color outcome was attributed to specific NP aggregations based on
different degrees of host–guest interactions for each isomer-β-CD-combination.
For example, the addition of p- and m-phenylenediamine resulted in a color change from the initial red
appearing particle dispersion to black and magenta, respectively.
The ortho-isomer gave slightly orange-colored dispersions.
Constitutional isomers of phenylenediamines were detected spectroscopically
with moderate detection limits in water (LOD, 50 μM).
 A unique approach for the colorimetric detection
of small organic
amines was reported by Corma, García, and coworkers, who prepared
a supramolecular inclusion complex between a gold nanoparticle (AuNP)
or Au clusters and the macrocyclic host cucurbit[7]uril (CB7, N3.3 in ). The encapsulation
of approximately 1 nm-sized AuNPs in CB7 was achieved by gas-phase
adsorption of gold atoms into cucurbit[7]uril powders, and the successful
formation of the inclusion complex was deduced by absorption and energy
electron loss spectroscopy. Colorimetric detection of amines with N3.3 was carried out by absorption measurements. N3.3 responds with large changes in the plasmonic energies, and therefore
in the absorption of the nanoparticles as the amines displace the
gold nanoparticle from the cavity of the macrocycle. The authors demonstrated
that the displacement of gold nanoparticles occurred with methylamine
but not with triphenylamine, indicating the sensor size selectivity
towards small and sterically simple amines. Methylamine can be detected
at concentrations of about 0.3 mM in water.
 A sensitive fluorescence turn-on nanosensor for the detection of
biologically active polyamines in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, was
reported by Kim and coworkers. The citrate-capped
and BODIPY-functionalized gold nanoparticles (N3.4 in ) showed quenched BODIPY emission due to an energy transfer
processes between the plasmonic nanoparticle and the dye. The selectivity
of the nanosensor towards spermidine and spermine over primary alkylamines
can be rationalized by the stronger electrostatic interactions of
the negatively charged nanoparticles with polyamines than with monoamines.
 Kailase and coworkers reported the use of gold nanoparticles doped
with oxidized tyrosine for the colorimetric detection of spermine
and spermidine at μM and nM concentrations in 1× PBS, pH
6.0, and in biological samples (N3.5 in ). The electrostatic interaction
of the negatively charged N3.5 with polyamines leads
to the formation of large N3.5-amine aggregates. These
aggregates exhibit a bathochromic shift in their SPR absorption band
compared to non-aggregated N3.5, such that a visible
color change from originally blue to red is observed as the aggregates
absorb red light. Moreover, quantitative polyamine detection was also
demonstrated by fluorescence spectroscopy. The authors showed that
the presence of several (alkali) metals, halogen anions, as well as
biological relevant amines and amino acids, urea, and heparin did
not affect the performance of N3.5. It was therefore
possible to determine spermine and spermidine in spiked serum and
urine samples with good recoveries (>99%).
 Smartphone-based and femtomolar detection of spermidine
in Milli-Q
water was recently reported by Chandran, Ramamurthy, and coworkers
through the analysis of surface plasmon coupled emissions (SPCE) of
rhodamine using gold-silica nanohybrids (AuSils) as spacers (N3.6 in ). In this
example, a newly SPCE device with reverse Kretschmann configuration was developed with which SPCE emissions were
analyzed by using an extended cavity interface. To prepare the plasmonic
and amine responsive device, poly(vinyl alcohol) dispersions of AuSils
were deposited on a rhodamine-coated silver substrate. The treatment
of such films with aqueous solutions of spermidine led to an 88-fold
increase (compared to untreated films) in SPCE fluorescence of rhodamine.
The increase in SPCE emission was explained by the ability of polyamines
to coordinate and crosslink AuSils and therefore trigger interparticle
aggregation on films, ultimately shortening intraparticle distances
and creating optimal plasmonic hotspots for rhodamine. The modulation
in the fluorescence was recorded using a smartphone camera, and color
processing was analyzed using a smartphone application. Other biogenic
polyamines such as cadaverine and putrescine did not significantly
increase the sensor response. However, spermine was found to produce
an SPCE emission signal, but it was orders of magnitude lower (the
relative emission compared to spermidine is only about 25%). The authors
attributed the lower signal intensities of spermine to excessive clustering
of AuSil due to the increased amount of −NH functionalities
in spermine compared to spermidine. To evaluate the full potential
of N3.6 for polyamine detection in a more realistic scenario,
future performance studies of N3.6 will need to include
biofluids, as cations or other positively charged species in such
fluids might lead to clustering of AuSils, which would cause adverse
signal interference.
 Nanometer-sized aggregates,
composed of trinuclear CuII complexes, were used by Kaur
and coworkers for colorimetric detection
of spermine and spermidine at nM detection in water (N3.7 in ). The nanosensors
showed a characteristic enhanced fluorescence compared to the monomer
dissolved species due to the aggregation-induced emission enhancement
(AIE). When polyamine solutions were added to dispersions of N3.7 in water (pH 6.0–11.0), a significant change in
UV–vis absorption spectra and decreasing fluorescence intensities
were observed. The change in photophysical properties was caused by
the diffusion of polyamines into the pores of the nanoparticles ( a), where they
change the coordination sphere of CuII by displacing solvent
molecules ( b).
 A fluorescent nanosensor for the μM detection
of biogenic
polyamines in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, blood and urine samples
was reported by Ganguly, Chatterjee, and coworkers (N3.8 in ). In this
work, the authors used emissive 3-((7-hydroxy-4-methylcoumarin)-methylene)aminophenylboronic
acid-doped agarose nanoparticles, which showed increased fluorescence
intensity in the presence of the polyamines spermine and spermidine.
The enlarged photoluminescence quantum yield was attributed to the
formation of complexes with H-bonding interactions between ammonium
groups, imines, and boronic acids. The authors showed that N3.8 is not adversely affected by other biomolecules, e.g., nucleobases, sugars, metal cations, and inorganic anions. In spiked
urine and blood serum samples, N3.8 was able to detect
spermine with a linear signal response of 3–100 μM. There
was a good correlation with spermine concentrations obtained from
HPLC. Other biorelevant molecules, i.e., adenine,
thiamine, uracil, cytosine, guanine, and several cations and sugars,
did not cause any interferences in HEPES buffer.
 Recently, Huan, Lan, Song, and coworkers reported the use of carbon
dots and cadmium tellurite quantum dots (CdTe QDs) for the emission-based
ratiometric detection of spermine in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.0, and
pork meat samples at μM concentrations (N3.9). The characteristic red fluorescence of CdTe
was effectively quenched by samples which contained spermine, whereas
the blue fluorescence of carbon dots remained unaltered, enabling
ratiometric detection. The particles can be deposited on paper stripes via a simple impregnation procedure, retaining their characteristic
fluorescent response to polyamines. The change in the photoluminescence
properties of N3.9 in the presence of spermine was attributed
to the formation of multiple hydrogen bonds and strong electrostatic
interaction between the analyte and the CdTe QDs.
Quintana and
coworkers prepared α-cyclodextrin (α-CD)
and cucurbit[6]uril (CB6) decorated gold nanoparticles for the colorimetric
sensing of μM concentrations of cadaverine in water (N3.10 and N3.11 in ). The analyte was detected by the formation of host–guest complexes,
which triggered interparticle crosslinking and aggregation, resulting
in a color change of the nanoparticle dispersion. While the interaction
of CB6 with polyamines is known for its high affinity, , it is curious that α-CD functionalized N3.10 also
responded to polyamines despite the only weak inclusion complex formation
of CDs with positively charged guests. Although simple to use, both N3.10 and N3.11 require long assay times (approx.
4 h) for reaching acceptable detection limits. The nanosensor N3.10 was reported to show cross-reactivity with 4,4′-oxydianiline,
whereas N3.11 reacted with 4,4′-oxydianiline and
dopamine.
 Martínez-Máñez and coworkers
utilized mesoporous
silica particles covalently functionalized with the fluorescent amine-probe
2,4,6-triphenylpyrylium (N3.12 in ) for the detection of aliphatic amines in water (pH 7.0–10.0). The hydroxyl groups present on the surface
of the nanoparticles were derivatized with hexamethyldisilazane to
increase the long-term stability of silica nanoparticles in aqueous
solutions. In the presence of primary amines, aqueous dispersions
of N3.12 produced a distinct color change from magenta
to yellow, which was attributed to the ability of amines to form a
pyridinium adduct with 2,4,6-triphenylpyrylium. Remarkably, the change
in color was only observed for amines with medium chain length, such
as n-heptylamine, n-octylamine,
and n-nonylamine. This selectivity was explained
by the hydrophobic nature of the particle, which makes it unfavorable
for hydrophilic short-chain amines to diffuse towards reporter dyes
located in the pores of N3.12. Likewise, the reaction
of the long-chain amines n-undecane- and n-dodecylamine with N3.12 was prevented for
steric reasons. The authors reported the possibility to detect medium-chain
amines in water at mM concentrations by correlating the change in
color recorded via UV–vis absorption spectroscopy.
 Peng, Cheng, and coworkers
reported a colorimetric-based detection
method for creatinine at μM concentrations in water, pH 5.0,
artificial urine, and real urine samples using uric acid functionalized
and Hg2+-doped gold nanoparticles (N3.13 in ). The design of their nanosensor
is based on a system previously reported by the same group, in which
the authors found that uric acid and creatinine can adsorb on the
surface of gold when Hg2+ cations are added to the system. Although N3.13 formed stable colloidal
dispersions in aqueous dispersions, additions of creatinine triggered
the aggregation of the particles, as observed by a visible color change
of the dispersion from red to blue due to a change in the plasmonic
surface resonance energies. The aggregation of N3.13 in
the presence of creatinine was explained by its ability to coordinate
with both Hg2+ cations and uric acid, forming a stable
molecular bridge between the particles. The authors also showed that
their nanosensor is selective for creatinine over metal cations or
inorganic anions.
 In the same year, Menon
and coworkers designed a picric acid-capped
silver nanoparticle (N3.14 in ) for the detection of creatinine at μM concentrations
in phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, blood samples, and cerebrospinal fluid
samples. Creatinine interacts with the
nitro group of picric acid on N3.14via H-bond interaction, triggering the aggregation of the particles,
and the color of the particle dispersion changed from initially yellow
to orange ( b). It was shown that the selectivity of N13.4 is not
affected by other inorganic anions (e.g., Br–, SO42–), metal cations
(e.g., Fe3+, Ca2+, Zn2+, Na+), or bilirubin. The performance of the nanosensor
was tested in the analysis of three different types of spiked human
serum (e.g., icteric blood, hemolyzed blood, and
normal blood) and spiked cerebrospinal fluid with recoveries in the
range of 96.7–99.9%.
 The combination of the unique optical, electronic, and catalytic
properties of hybrid metal quantum clusters with the inherent biological
properties of proteins make protein-noble metal nanoclusters promising
candidates for various biomedical applications such as imaging, sensing,
delivery, and therapeutics. For example,
Joseph and coworkers reported a hybrid nanoparticle composed of multiple
gold quantum clusters (about 25 Au atoms, as detected by fluorescence
spectroscopy) in a stabilizing gluten shell functionalized with picric
acid (N3.15 in ). The typical red fluorescence of gold nanoclusters is quenched due
to electron transfer processes with picric acid, while the presence
of creatinine restored fluorescence (61% recovery of fluorescence),
as creatinine displaced the fluorescence quencher from the surface
of N3.15 in phosphate buffer, pH 9.0. The selectivity
of the sensor was tested with biomolecules (e.g.,
monosaccharides, amino acids, urea), inorganic anions (e.g., NO3–, SO42–, S2–, PO43–, F–, I–, CH3COO–, and CO32–), or metal
cations (e.g., Fe3+, Mg2+,
Zn2+, Na+), which did not affect the properties
of N3.15. As such, N3.15 enabled fluorescence-based
detection of creatinine in phosphate buffer, pH 9.0, and spiked blood
samples.
 Blackburn and coworkers reported the use of plasmonic
silver nanoparticles
(AgNPs) for the detection of creatinine in 10 mM NaOH, pH 12.0, and
basic human urine samples (N3.16 in ). Creatinine-dependent aggregation
of citrate-capped silver nanoparticles was visualized by the color
change of a particle dispersion from yellow to black, and the degree
of aggregation was correlated with the amount of creatinine. The authors
proposed that the aggregation of N3.16 in alkaline media
is triggered by the formation of a stable H-bonded network between
the carbanion/oxoanion amino tautomers of creatinine and the negatively
charged carboxylate groups of citrate-capped silver nanoparticles.
The authors further tested the selectivity of their nanosensor. Fortunately,
metal cations (e.g., Na+, K+, Ca2+, Zn2+, Fe2+, and Fe3+) or biomolecules (e.g., ascorbic acid, glucose,
glutamic acid, urea, glycine, and uric acid), did not cause interferences
for creatinine detection.
 Delgado-Lòpez, Ramírez-Rodríguez,
and coworkers recently reported a fluorescence-based nanosensor composed
of europium-doped amorphous calcium phosphate nanoparticles (N3.17 in ) that allows for μM detection of
creatinine in 100 mM citrate buffer, pH 7.4, and human urine samples. Luminescent inorganic nanoparticles such as
lanthanide-based nanophosphors are attractive candidates to serve
as novel nanosensors. Characteristic for them are long luminescence
lifetime, high luminescence quantum yield, sharp emission bands, and
good resistance to photobleaching. In
this work, the authors observed that the characteristic fluorescence
emission of the nanoparticles (λex = 390 nm, λem = 600 nm) was increasingly quenched by addition of creatinine.
The observed fluorescence quenching was attributed to the presence
of creatinine acting as a primary internal filter. As such, the decrease in emission intensities was successfully
correlated to the amount of creatinine present in citrate buffer and
spiked human urine samples with good recovery ranges (∼98 %).
 Recently, Lee and coworkers reported the use of plasmonic nanocomposites
of CB7 and citrate-capped AuNPs as nanocomposites (N3.18 in ) for both colorimetric and quantitative
surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)-based detection of creatinine
in water and synthetic urine at sub-μM concentrations. In this approach, the authors utilized the
complexation of creatinine by CB7 in aqueous solution. The addition
of AuNPs caused nanoparticle aggregation due to the adsorption of
the CB7–creatinine complex on the AuNP surface, reducing the
negative surface charges which are required for colloidal stability.
A dispersion of aggregated nanoparticles was analyzed by UV–vis
absorbance spectroscopy because aggregation involves a shift in the
surface plasmon absorption band of the nanoparticles, allowing for
a simple colorimetric-based quantification of creatinine (LOD: 530
nM in water). Moreover, highly sensitive SERS measurements were carried
out in the absence and presence of creatinine. In fact, with SERS,
an LOD of 42 nM in water and 111 nM in spiked artificial urine samples
was achieved.
 A turn-on fluorescence sensor for creatinine based
on quinoline-modified
metal–organic framework (MOF) was recently reported by Jia
and coworkers (N3.19 in ). The authors prepared amino-modified UiO-66
MOFs, which were subsequently post-synthetically modified using 8-hydroxy-2-quinolinecarboxaldehyde
as a ligand that provides abundant metal coordination sites for Al3+-doping. The fluorescence of the MOF was significantly quenched
by Al3+, while in the presence of creatinine, the fluorescence
of the MOF nanoparticles was restored. The authors explained this
effect by the ability of creatinine to form stable coordination complexes
with Al3+, thus displacing the fluorescence quencher from N3.19. Other biorelevant molecules such as cysteine, glycine,
aspartic acid, glucose, dopamine, ascorbic acid, uric acid, urea,
bilirubin, or inorganic cations, e.g., Na+, K+, and Mg2+, did not cause a strong emission
response. Finally, the authors successfully demonstrated that their
nanosensor can determine creatinine in diluted spiked serum (recovery
∼99%) and spiked urine samples (recovery ∼98%) at μM
concentrations.
 A considerable number of both probes and chemosensors has already
been developed that detect amines through their nucleophilic reactivity
or by their positive charge that biogenic amines adopt under physiological
conditions through protonation. Furthermore, nonprotonated amines
are excellent electron donors, enabling their detection through photoinduced
electron transfer (PET) quenching. Such
a design motif has been widely used to detect small molecule amines
from the gas phase, e.g., in combination with emissive
conjugated polymers, for which several excellent literature sources
can be consulted. − It is worth pointing out that many powerful probes and chemosensors
for amines that are operational in organic solvents have already been
reported, for instance, by the Wolf group. − Intuitively, aforementioned amine-reactive probes such as ninhydrin
can react with amines in general, even though this was not expected
by the time ninhydrin was first described for amino acid detection. − Very recently, Wolf and coworkers demonstrated that the chiral chromophoric
adduct formed under mild conditions from the reaction of chiral amines
with ninhydrin can be used for chirality sensing of the nonchromophoric
amine analytes in a practically convenient and inexpensive method. We would like to refer the reader to the original
literature and reviews , as we focus herein on those
systems that operate in aqueous media. In fact, it is rather challenging
to design simple probes and chemosensors that only recognize amines
but not amino acids, but several sophisticated systems have appeared
that can achieve that goal.
Similar to the findings for amino
acids, comparison of the sensitivity
needs for amine detection in biofluids (low micro- to submicromolar
concentration range, see ), and the achievements that
have been made with probes, chemosensors and nanosensors are rather
promising ( – ), albeit in some cases further improvements are
still needed to reach the submicromolar concentration range. Curiously,
mostly spiked blood serum or urine samples were analyzed, pointing
to potential matrix-effect problems with real biofluids obtained from
different patients. Standing problems are likely again caused by the
lack of selectivity of artificial chemosensing systems limiting the
utility of the probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors for sensing absolute
amine concentrations in real biofluid samples.
 

4.

## Neurotransmitters
Neurotransmitters (NTs) are a class of chemical messenger molecules
found in living organisms that are typically secreted by nerve cells
to trigger important signaling processes, making them essential for
almost all vital functions. NTs affect
the electrical excitability of a neuron, increasing or decreasing
the likelihood that the cell will generate an action potential. Therefore,
their abnormal concentration fluctuations are causes or markers of
diseases. − For example, abnormalities in cholinergic,
catecholaminergic (noradrenergic, dopaminergic), and serotonergic
(5-HT) transmission patterns are linked to depression, anxiety, and
even bipolar disorders. − A well-known example of a disease caused
by inhibition of the dopaminergic system and characterized by a disturbed
dopamine/acetylcholine balance is Parkinson’s disease. Therefore, it is not surprising that known
NT precursors are being considered for the treatment of this disease.
For example, oral doses of l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-DOPA) are administered as Parkinson’s medication, which
is converted into dopamine in the brain. , Anomalies in the bodies catecholamine concentrations have been associated
with diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease and the presence
of tumors. − For example, elevated NT levels are found
in pheochromocytoma, , a type of tumor that grows in
the adrenal glands and produces an excess of catecholamines. Furthermore,
it has been suggested that abnormal catecholamine concentrations found
in the urine of neuroblastoma patients can provide some information
regarding the prognosis of this aggressive cancer of the nervous system. , 
Other common diseases, besides neurological disorders and
tumors,
that are associated with abnormal neurotransmitter levels, making
them important biological markers of disease, include irritable bowel
syndrome and sudden infant death syndrome. − Additionally, factors such as infections in the body or stress can
alter catecholamine levels. , Serotonin and melatonin
are indole-based NTs that are essential to the human body as they
are involved in a variety of functions, including (infant) development,
cardiovascular function, cognition, and mood − as well as day–night rhythm and timing for the endogenous circadian system that modulates memory
processes. Abnormal concentrations of
such neurotransmitters in biofluids may serve as markers of severe
neurological and psychiatric disorder and of suboptimal drug dosing
for the treatment of these diseases, e.g., drugs
that target serotonin receptors. shows some selected examples of small, important NTs
such as dopamine and serotonin and their functional groups that can
serve as chemical anchors/recognition motifs for the development of
probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors.
 4.1.

## General
Approaches for Neurotransmitter Detection
Continuous efforts
are devoted to the development of simple, cost-effective,
and easy to use sensing methods that are applicable to amino acid-derived
neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitter sensing in clinical diagnostics
currently relies on antibody-based immunoassays or instrumental analytical methods, such as coupled HPLC-MS
measurements, and therefore remains applicable only to specialized
diagnostic laboratories. Moreover, natural receptor-based fluorescent
protein mutants have been developed for the detection and imaging
of neurotransmitters, , but their large-scale preparation
is expensive and their handling cumbersome. Another common strategy
for the detection of dopamine and some other electron-rich NTs, e.g., glutamate, is the use of electrochemical biosensors,
however, this is out of the scope of this review. For electrochemical-based
detections of neurotransmitters, we refer the reader to the recently
published review by Slaughter and coworkers. For less electron-rich aromatic amino acid-derived neurotransmitters
such as serotonin, or the electron-poor histamine, electrochemical
sensing methods are less attractive, and therefore molecular probes,
chemosensors, and nanosensors are even more sought-after alternatives.
The primary or secondary amino group of neurotransmitters are usually
targeted as the main recognition point in contemporary designs of
molecular probes and chemosensors. For instance, probes typically
operate by exploiting the high nucleophilicity of unprotonated −NH2 moieties, while chemosensors often establish ion pair bonding
or charge-assisted hydrogen bonding motifs with −NH3+ groups found in the physiological form of amine neurotransmitters.
Additional functional moieties such as aromatic residues, e.g., found in catecholamine neurotransmitters, and carboxylate
groups as can be found in glycine, aspartate, glutamate, and GABA,
are recognition motifs that can be addressed to enhance the binding
affinity and selectivity of the chemosensor or probe.

4.2.

## Molecular Probes for Neurotransmitters
Aldehyde groups
and arylboronic acids have attracted much attention
in the development of probes/chemosensors for catechol-type neurotransmitters.
Aldehyde groups condense with amines under imine-bond formation. Arylboronic
acids have the unique feature to form reversible covalent complexes
with 1,2- or 1,3-substituted Lewis base donors, e.g., hydroxyl- or aminofunctional groups. All molecular probes discussed within this section are summarized
in .
 Glass and coworkers reported several probes, e.g., P4.1 and P4.2, that target
catecholamine
neurotransmitters ( a). These probes possess an aldehyde functionality that condenses
with amines to form imine bonds. , Additionally,
probe P4.2 has a boronic acid moiety that reacts with
aromatic 1,2-diols to yield boronic esters. Because of the interplay
of two recognition units, the probes selectively bind catecholamines
with a primary amino group, such as norepinephrine, whereas other
biogenic amines, e.g., glutamate, or secondary amine
neurotransmitters, such as epinephrine, form no or much weaker adducts.
Therefore, the aldehyde–boronic acid-based probe P4.2 can be used for staining of norepinephrine-enriched chromaffin cells
and was shown to be functional in living and fixed secretory cells. To date, one remaining drawback for the use
of such probes in diagnostic or imaging applications is their shortcoming
in quantitative neurotransmitter sensing.
 Likewise, other researchers, e.g., Coskun and
Akkaya, or Schrader and coworkers, incorporated boronic acids as recognition
motifs into fluorescent probes, resulting in the probe structures
presented in . Similarly to probe P4.2,
probe P4.3 also shows binding affinities for various
catecholamines with Ka values in the order
of 103 M–1 in water, whereas probe P4.4 and P4.5 display
similar binding strengths to catecholamines in 50% MeOH. Interestingly, the additional aldehyde group,
which is present in P4.5 but not in P4.4, did not significantly affect the binding properties and affinities
of the probe. A potential drawback for the boronic acid recognition
motif is the pH dependency of the reversible bond formation between
the boronic acid and the catechol. The competing equilibria of the
boronated species occurs near physiological pH. Additionally, boronic
acids are known to bind unselectively all 1,2-diols, e.g., diol-decorated carbohydrates such as fructose (see in this review). Schrader
and coworkers developed two acyclic phosphonate–boronate compounds
(probe P4.6 and P4.7), but unfortunately, the anticipated improvement via installation of the additional bisphosphonate recognition
elements was not investigated. Indeed, counterintuitively, the design
turned out to yield lower binding affinities for catecholamines compared
to the other, simpler boronate-based receptors. However, at least P4.6 and P4.7 offer a good selectivity against
non-catechol species.

4.3.

## Chemosensors for Neurotransmitters
Host–guest systems using macrocycles such as cucurbit[n]urils (CBn), p-sulfonatocalix[n]arenes (Cxn), or cyclodextrins (CDs)
can provide good affinities for neurotransmitters such as serotonin,
dopamine, and structurally similar NTs. The chemosensors discussed
within this section are summarized in . For serotonin, which is an important neurotransmitter
connected to depression or certain tumors, Koner and coworkers recently
published a supramolecular study regarding the encapsulation of serotonin
to CB7. However, CB7 and the other aforementioned
hosts are spectroscopically silent and thus must be used in combination
with dyes to furbish IDA, GDA, or ABA type assays for practical sensing
considerations.
 Ternary complexes with CB8 have been used for neurotransmitter
detection in water and low salt buffers. For example, Scherman and
coworkers described the detection of dopamine in the presence of epinephrine
and norepinephrine with the help of PDI as reporter dye and CB8 as
the host (C4.1 in ). A detection limit below 2 × 10–5 M in water was reported, and assay times of 5–10 min without
the need of presampling or functionalization steps were reached. For
dopamine, binding affinities ≥105 M–1 to C4.1 were found even in the presence of ascorbic
acid, which is a major interferent in the electrochemical detection
of dopamine.
 γ-Hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), a precursor
to the neurotransmitter
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), is one of the most dangerous illicit
drugs of abuse today. Garcia and coworkers combined four common fluorescent
tricyclic cationic dyes with CB7 and CB8 as hosts, reporting the successful
preparation of chemosensor arrays (C4.2 in ) based on colorimetric- as well as emission-based
detection mode. Upon addition of a co-solvent
such as acetone, which has been shown to be an essential component
in reducing solvation effects that interfere with the interaction
between C4.2 and GHB, the detection of the target drug
was possible in the concentration range of 10–3 M
even by naked eye.
 Issacs and coworkers transformed
the small and spectroscopically
silent CB-homologue CB6 into a fluorescent chemosensor (C4.3) by incorporating chromophoric and emissive (bis)phthalhydrazines
into the walls of the macrocycle ( ). With the help of C4.3, neurotransmitters,
aromatic nitro compounds, amino acids, dyes, and other size-fitting
species can be detected. For dopamine, a binding affinity of Ka = 7.1 × 104 M–1 was found in 50 mM NaOAc, pH 4.7, which is slightly lower than that
for catechol (Ka = 2.9 × 105 M–1). As previously discussed, no
analyte specific detection can be reached with cucurbit[n]urils due to their promiscuous binding properties.
 Utilizing p-sulfonatocalixarenes
(sCx4) as a high-affinity
host for choline and acetylcholine (Ka ∼ 105 M–1), Nau, Liu, and coworkers
developed a supramolecular tandem assay for these neurotransmitters.
Their assay made use of the chemosensing ensemble C4.4 that generates a fluorescence signal through the IDA mechanism. , Importantly, enzymes were used to achieve high selectivity ( ), and the authors successfully extended their approach
towards the monitoring of enzymatic reactions of acetylcholinesterase
and choline oxidase, which catalyze the hydrolysis of acetylcholine
to choline and the oxidation of choline to betaine. The system is
based on the strong static fluorescence quenching of the sCx-complexed
lucigenin. , Extending their studies on C4.4 as chemosensor, Nau and coworkers showcased in 2015 the
first indicator displacement assay inside living V70 and CHO cells.
A fluorescence turn-on response of the intracellular chemosensors
was observed as the added choline, acetylcholine, or protamine translocated
into the cells. So far, the assay can
only be used semiquantitatively, as acetylcholine and choline are
not distinguishable by the chemosensor, whereas protamine and betaine
can be distinguished from the two aforementioned analytes by their
characteristic binding affinities. Shoeib and coworkers used sCx4,
taking advantage of its relatively strong binding affinity in the
104–105 M–1 range for
these and other structurally related analytes, to prepare a direct
binding assay. Absorbance-based detection of l-carnitine
and choline was possible due to the strong change in the absorbance
signal upon binding of sCx4 to the analytes. The authors compared the performance of their chemosensor to the
official U.S. Pharmacopeia method and found linear ranges within 10–160
μM for choline and 10–180 μM for l-carnitine.
 Jin and coworkers detected acetylcholine by utilizing
sCx8•rhodamine
800 complexes (C4.5) as IDA-type chemosensors that feature
a desirable near-infrared fluorescence response ( ). The authors found
a respectable selectivity for acetylcholine over dopamine, GABA, glycine,
and l-aspartate; the former binds with an association constant
of Ka = 6.0 × 103 M–1 in PBS, pH 7.2.
 Histamine is another important
neurotransmitter and is connected
to allergies caused by histamine intolerance. This circumstance makes its detection in blood or in food
products important to identify potential risk factors. Amorim and
coworkers recently reported a new histamine-selective electrode based
on CB6 as ionophore and a polymeric membrane. Moreover, 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether was used as a solvent
mediator, and potassium tetrakis(4-chlorophenyl)borate functioned
as anionic additive. The addition of multiwalled carbon nanotubes
as electrical conductors in the membrane extended the lifetimes of
the electrodes, shortened the response times, and enabled a detection
limit of 100 nM for histamine. Therefore, the assay becomes attractive
for applications in biofluids.
Abd Karim and coworkers prepared
zincII salphen complexes
(C4.6 in ) that showed fluorescence
increase in the presence of histamine. The enhancement is ascribed to the electron transfer from histamine
to the ZnII metal center. C4.6 was immobilized
on silica microparticles, thereby achieving histamine detection in
PBS, pH 7.4, with a linear working concentration range of 10–11–10–6 M. The system showed selectivity for
histamine and cadaverine over other amines, such as 1,2-phenylenediamine,
triethylamine, and trimethylamine. The authors also demonstrated the
detection of histamine in spiked shrimp samples and reported 90–96%
accuracy.
 There are only a few
studies that addressed tyramine as neurotransmitter.
Mohanty and coworkers developed a tyramine chemosensor based on sulfobutylether-β-cyclodextrin
and thiazole orange (C4.7). This chemosensor was found
to be selective for tyramine compared to other aminofunctional neurotransmitters
such as dopamine or melatonin ( ). In artificial
mixtures of 11 amino-type analytes, a significant fluorescence quenching
(52%) was observed only in the presence of tyramine, whereas in the
absence of tyramine, only about 20% quenching of the C4.7 emission occurred in water. Interestingly,
a good performance of C4.7 was witnessed even after several
heating and cooling cycles, indicating a high robustness of the chemosensor.
 Additionally, the binding affinity of histamine for transition
metals has been exploited to prepare fluorescence turn-on chemosensors
that operate through the competitive binding of metal ions to histamine
and the corresponding release of these emission quenchers from their
dye–metal complexes. In this way, Ojida and coworkers were
able to detect high micromolar concentrations of histamine with CoII complex of a cyanine dye (C4.8) in Hank’s
balanced salt solutions (HBSS = sodium bicarbonate buffer, ). Similarly, Imato and
coworkers detected histamine in living cells (RAW264 cells) that were
washed with Dulbecco’s PBS (1× DPBS) and then treated
with chemosensor C4.9, which holds Nile Red as dye and
a NiII–iminodiacetic acid complex as the histamine
binding site. They investigated also
various other metal ions, e.g., CoII,
CuII, FeII, and ZnII, out of which
the fluorescence response for the CuII and NiII complexes were by far the largest. Moreover, the NiII complex showed an astonishing selectivity for histamine over a wide
range of biogenic amines, whereas the CuII complex was
less selective. Importantly, functionalized variants of the chemosensors
can be anchored in cell membranes and retain their sensing functionality.
Thus, the degranulation of histamine from mast cell granules was monitorable
by fluorescence microscopy in real time. Conceptually related approaches
for the detection of the amino acid histidine are presented in of
this review.
 Recently, Hwang, Oh, Kim, and
coworkers exploited the high binding
affinity of CB7 for amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS) through an organic
transistor setup where functionalized CB7 macrocycles were deposited via spin-coating on surfaces of water-stable semiconducting
polymers (C4.10 in ). An impressive picomolar detection limit for
amphetamines was reported in buffers, while a nanomolar detection
limit was achieved in spiked urine.
 In short summary, the development
of robust and fast responding
probes and chemosensors for neurotransmitters could open exciting
new possibilities for home-use and point-of-care diagnostics that
cannot be realized with existing technologies. , We hope that the discussed design strategies inspire the reader
to tackle the challenging task of constructing practically applicable
chemosensors for neurotransmitters.

4.4.

## Nanosensors
for Neurotransmitters
Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are particularly
attractive for the development
of nanosensors because their surface can be readily functionalized
with molecular recognition units for neurotransmitters. For instance,
boronic acids, aromatic aldehydes, carboxylic acids, or succinimide
esters were installed on the surface of AuNPs for targeting catechol
derivatives. − AuNPs, which are plasmonic nanoparticles, possess distinct spectroscopic
properties, e.g., absorption of light, due to the
existence of surface plasmon resonances (SPRs). Colorimetric nanosensors for neurotransmitters can be prepared
by using boronic acid functionalized AuNPs, as the SPRs strongly depend
on the aggregation/disaggregation of the nanoparticles in the presence/absence
of catecholamines, e.g., dopamine. The resulting
change in SPRs upon interaction of the AuNP-based nanosensors with
analytes can be easily detected by spectroscopic methods, e.g., UV–vis spectroscopy. The nanosensors discussed
within this section are summarized in .
 The detection of norepinephrine
at μM concentrations in 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 6.5, and
spiked urine samples was described by Martínez-Máñez
and coworkers. In this work, AuNPs were
functionalized with 4-mercaptophenylboronic acids (MBA) and 4-(liponyloxy)benzaldehydes
that allow for norepinephrine binding, leading to nanosensor aggregation
(N4.1 in ). This caused a spectroscopically
measurable shift in the SPR absorption energies of the system that
was dependent on the analyte concentration. The authors showed that
no colorimetric response was observed in the presence of l-Tyr, Lys, glucose, uric acid, glutamic acid, and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic
acid (main degradation product of serotonin found in urine).
 Following a similar strategy, Tian and coworkers
described the
preparation of MBA and dithiobis(succinimidylproprionate) (DSP)
functionalized AuNPs (MBA-DSP-AuNPs, N4.2), which allowed for nM detection of dopamine
in water. Dopamine added to dispersions of N4.2 caused
crosslinking of the AuNPs and therefore triggered their aggregation.
The amount of dopamine present in the sample was determined via absorption spectroscopy. In another example, Chen and
coworkers reported the use of citrate-capped AuNPs (N4.3) in combination with melamine for colorimetric-based detection of
dopamine in Tris-HCl buffer and spiked serum at nM concentrations. For nanosensor N4.3, the authors
found that melamine triggered aggregation only when dopamine was present
in particle dispersions. As a result, a clear color change of the
particle dispersion from red to blue was observed and correlated with
the amount of dopamine added to the sample. The mechanism of particle
aggregation was explained by the ability of melamine to crosslink
AuNPs that adsorbed dopamine on their surface via H-bond interactions.
In addition to the functionalization
of AuNPs with small molecules,
aptamers have been used in combination with plasmonic particles and
were successfully applied for colorimetric-based detection of dopamine
at μM concentrations (N4.4–N4.6). − For example, Kelley-Loghnane and coworkers
used aptamer-functionalized AuNPs (N4.7), which allowed
for selective serotonin detection in PBS containing 1 mM MgCl2 and fetal bovine serum at μM concentrations with rapid
readouts (within 5 min). Despite the
improved selectivity and good sensitivity for serotonin, e.g., over 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, the aptamer functionalized nanosensors
suffered from a low stability over time when stored at room temperature,
which was attributed to DNA degradation. Fortunately, the aptamer
functionalized AuNPs remained functional for a few weeks when stored
at 4°C.
An alternative approach for colorimetric-based
sensing with AuNPs
was reported by Mancin, Gabrielli, and coworkers, who described a
unique 19F NMR spectroscopy-based displacement assay for
the detection of dopamine at μM concentrations (N4.8 in ). To this
end, the authors coated AuNPs with thioundecyl-d-glucopyranosides,
which are capable of adsorbing a 19F NMR active indicator.
In this nanoparticle-bound state, the indicator provided only broad 19F NMR signals. Upon addition of dopamine to N4.8, sharper and more intense 19F NMR signals were observed
as the indicator was no longer subjected to prolonged relaxation times
upon displacement from the nanosensor surface.
 Carbon dots (C-dots) have attracted attention for the preparation
of fluorescence-based nanosensors because of their good dispersibility
in aqueous media, simple preparation, and outstanding fluorescence
properties, such as excitation-wavelength-dependent emission color
and excellent photostability. , Zhou, Shen, and coworkers
developed bifunctional fluorescent C-dots bearing boronic acid and
amino groups (N4.9 in ) and used these
for molecular recognition-based dopamine detection in water. Interestingly, the fluorescence intensity of
the C-dots increased in the presence of dopamine and was directly
dependent on the analyte concentration, whereas other compounds (e.g., glucose, ascorbic acid, levulose, maltose, and cysteine)
caused no change in fluorescence. Therefore, fluorescence measurements
were performed to detect dopamine in human serum samples (nM concentrations)
using the standard addition method and recoveries of approximately
99% were reported. While not tested, it is likely that also other
catecholamines, e.g., (nor)epinephrine are detectable
by N4.9.
 Fe3+-doped carbon dots for neurotransmitter detection
were recently introduced by Qu and coworkers (N4.10 in ). The authors demonstrated
the detection of dopamine in a linear concentration range of 0.1–10
μM (LOD: 68 nM) in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.0. The carbon dots
were prepared by a hydrothermal synthesis protocol with (partially)
oxidized catechol groups on the surface. It was observed that the
fluorescence of the carbon dots was quenched when Fe3+ cations
were added to the particle dispersion, which can be explained by their
participation in nonradiative electron transfer processes from the
excited state of the C-dots. In addition, the authors argued that
part of the fluorescence quenching may be causes by the ability of
Fe3+ to oxidize remaining catechol groups of the C-dots
to quinones, which also participate in nonradiative electron transfer
processes. However, when dopamine was present in the samples, the
fluorescence of the nanosensor was restored, which the authors attributed
to the reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ (and the reduction
of quinones to catechols) by dopamine. It remains a point of interest if other reducing analytes are cross-reactive
with N4.10.
 Kaifer and coworkers prepared silica nanoparticles
functionalized
with the electron-deficient dicationic 2,7-diazapyrenium (DAP) dye,
which were used in combination with cucurbit[8]uril (CB8, N4.11 in ) for the detection of the electron-rich
neurotransmitter dopamine and catechol in phosphate buffer containing
100 mM NaCl, pH 7.0. The fluorescence
intensity of the DAP is strongly reduced in the presence of dopamine
and CB8 due to the formation of the ternary CB8-DAP-dopamine inclusion
complex ( a).
 Competitive binding assays based on magnetic resonance
imaging
(MRI) using superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIOs) (N4.12 in ) have been reported by Jasanoff and coworkers
for the detection of dopamine and serotonin. Because of the high sensitivity of MRI-based techniques, even subnanomolar
particle concentrations were effective for neurotransmitter detection.
The authors used two types of SPIOs that were functionalized either
with bacterial cytochrome P450-BM3 heme domain proteins (BM3h) or
tyramine. A 1:1 mixture of these particles aggregated due to the binding
of BM3h with tyramine, causing a darkening of the MRI signal. In the
presence of the neurotransmitters, and due to their stronger affinity
towards BM3h, the particle clusters were disrupted concomitant with
a whitening of the MRI signal. This displacement-based assay allowed
for μM dopamine detections in PBS and more importantly in rat
brains, showcasing its good sensibility and robustness for potential in vivo applications. By varying the surface functionalization
of the SPIOs, the authors also achieved the detection of serotonin.
 Luminescence-based
detection methods using near infrared (NIR)
light (λ = 800–2000 nm) are of special interest because
tissues have good transparency to this wavelength region. Single-walled
carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are important NIR emitters which have been
used by Strano and coworkers for the detection of dopamine in 10 mM
PBS, pH 7.4 (N4.13 in ). The authors described the preparation of a
fluorescence turn-on nanosensor using single-stranded DNA (ssDNA,
composed of 15 repeating units of guanine and thymine (GT)15) functionalized SWCNT that exhibit enhanced NIR fluorescence in
the presence of dopamine. This increase in fluorescence was attributed
to the interaction of dopamine with the nanosensor, mediated by π–π
interactions, resulting in partial removal of ssDNA and displacement
of quenching species such as solvent molecules from the surface of
the SWCNTs. Noteworthy, control experiments showed that the emission
enhancement was not generated by nanoparticle-mediated redox reactions.
The authors showcased that epinephrine, norepinephrine, l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine, and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid also
cause similar fluorescence responses and are therefore potential target
analytes but also interferents.
 The detection of dopamine at μM concentrations
in 20 mM PBS,
pH 7.4, and within cells with minimal interference from matrix components
has been reported by Shen and coworkers. The nanoparticles used in their study consisted of a fluorescent
fluorenylbenzothiadiazole polymer core and a polyethylene glycol (PEG)
shell, which ensured colloidal stability and reduced the immunogenic
response after injection into living organisms. To provide the nanoparticles
with dopamine-recognizing functional groups, additional arylboronic
acids (PBAs) were integrated into the final particle structure (N4.14 in ). In the presence of dopamine, emission
quenching of the fluorescent core occurred, which was attributed to
a dopamine-mediated photoinduced charge transfer process. The selectivity
of N.14 toward dopamine was confirmed, and other biomolecules
(e.g., ascorbic acid, tyramine, tyrosine, epinephrine
(100 nM), or norepinephrine (100 nM)) did not quench the fluorescence.
The particles were further investigated for in vivo application due to their apparent selectivity for dopamine at typical
concentrations found in the brain of some mammals (0.1–1.0
μM). For this purpose, N4.14 was microinjected into brain ventricles of fish larvae, and the
fluorescence intensities of the nanosensor decreased when exogenous
dopamine was injected into the brain.
 Pan and coworkers described
the preparation of a molecularly imprinted
nanoparticle-based assay strip for the detection of dopamine in 20
mM PBS, pH 7.4, and spiked urine samples from nM to μM concentrations. To this end, the authors prepared core–shell
particles in which the core consisted of blue-emitting quantum dots
(QDs), while the shell consisted of a molecularly imprinted polymer
in which red-emitting CdTe QDs were immobilized (N4.15 in ). Dopamine spontaneously bound to the
imprinted shell of the particles, resulting in a quenched red emission
from the CdTe QDs via energy transfer processes.
No comparable response was observed with catechol, gallate, quinone,
glutamic acid, and γ-aminobutyric acid, whereas levodopa and
norepinephrine yielded weak fluorescence quenching. Furthermore, the
authors immobilized the nanoparticles by a simple impregnation procedure,
obtaining paper-based test strips capable of detecting dopamine in
human serum at nM concentrations. Besides the aforementioned nanoparticle
and also other hard matter-based nanoparticles such as upconverting
nanoparticles (N4.16–N4.19), − carbon dots (N4.120–N4.23), − quantum dots (N4.24–N4.28), − silicon nanoparticles (N4.29), metal–organic frameworks (N4.30), and silica-based nanoparticles (N4.31–N4.33) − have been reported for sensing
of neurotransmitters.
 A new and modular receptor design strategy based
on microporous
hybrid zeolite receptors (N4.34 in ) was recently described by us. The detection of the
neurotransmitters serotonin and dopamine (amongst others) was possible
in buffers and real biofluids. Serotonin
and dopamine were shown to bind in the reporter dye-loaded pores of
the ZARs (= zeolite-based artificial receptors), exploiting both the
nonclassical hydrophobic effect and direct noncovalent recognition
motifs. Evidence for this unprecedented binding mechanism was obtained
by in-depth photophysical and calorimetric experiments in combination
with full atomistic modeling. In addition, N4.34 was
shown to be applicable for label-free monitoring of important enzymatic
reactions, (two-photon) fluorescence imaging, and high-throughput
diagnostics in biofluids such as urine, neurobasal medium, and human
serum. The presence of epinephrine, cadaverine, ascorbic acid, tyramine,
histamine, 5-hydroxytryptophan, indole, octopamine, phenethylamine,
TrpNH2, tryptamine, and l-tryptophan did not interfere
with the detection of serotonin or dopamine.
 The comparison of the diagnostic or biological sensitivity needs
for neurotransmitter detection and the current key parameters achieved
by probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors reveals some standing limitations.
While neurotransmitters can be found locally in millimolar concentrations
near their site of action (e.g., synaptic cleft),
their bulk occurrence in readily accessible biofluids such as urine
and blood serum are much lower (micromolar to nanomolar concentration
range, see ). With the exception of redox-reaction-based nanosensors for dopamine,
other molecular-recognition-based systems usually still fall short
in terms of sensitivity ( – ). Even more challenging
is the selective detection of neurotransmitters in real biofluids,
where a large excess of other potential interferents, e.g., amino acids and amines, can be found. It appears that most probes,
chemosensors, and nanosensors reported so far are not directly applicable
for neurotransmitter detection in biofluids and that alternative receptor
design strategies may be needed to close the performance gap. The
use of ZARs (N4.34) may be one promising avenue to consider.
 

5.

## Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are compounds containing polyhydroxy
aldehydes or
ketones, which can be subdivided into mono-, di-, oligo-, and polysaccharides
and are involved in a variety of biological processes. They are an
important energy source and storage (glycogen or starch) for all living
organisms, are mediators of cell–cell or cell-pathogen recognition, , and are part of the structural framework of RNA and DNA. A variety
of diseases such as infections, cancer, inflammation, cardiovascular
malfunctions, and many more can be correlated to carbohydrate-based
biomarkers. Fructose, for example, is a highly lipogenic sugar present
in processed food. Its excessive consumption is directly linked to
numerous diseases such as obesity, hypertension, the metabolic syndrome,
type 2 diabetes, and kidney disease. − In addition to diabetes, glucose
and its metabolites play a role in the aging process in the pathophysiology
of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and in the signaling processes
of some cancers. − Sialic acids, a class of α-keto acid sugars, are known to
mediate or modulate a variety of physiological and pathological processes.
For example, the density of sialic acids in glomerular basement membrane
appears to be critical for maintaining the normal filtering functions
of the kidneys, which is why they are considered as markers for many
diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, , inflammatory skin diseases, and coronary
heart diseases. Besides, the polysaccharide
heparin remains the most widely used anticoagulant and antithrombotic
agent for the treatment of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular, pulmonary
and renal diseases, and cancer. , Therefore,
the detection of carbohydrates is of great interest for the development
and improvement of diagnostics and therapeutics. , For more details about carbohydrates and their metabolism, we refer
the interested readers to literature reviews. − shows a representative selection of important
carbohydrates with their chemical structures.
 In recent years, carbohydrate sensing has become an important field
of research in which the use of probes and chemosensors has become
indispensable. However, there are two main challenges to enable effective
recognition of different carbohydrates in aqueous solution. Firstly,
binding selectivity amongst the different carbohydrates is difficult
to achieve as they do not differ in any structural motifs except for
their size (mono- vs di-/polysaccharides) and their
configuration at the stereocenters. Secondly, carbohydrates are usually
highly solvated in aqueous solution, making it difficult for artificial
receptors to overcome those “solvent barriers” and bind
to the carbohydrate. The importance of carbohydrate sensing for diagnostics
and therapeutics has caused a major push towards the development of
artificial sensors and probes, where the hydroxyl groups of the carbohydrates
are the easiest targetable functional groups. In nature, carbohydrate
recognition is moderated by a variety of protein classes of which
lectins are most intensively studied. − These proteins are
used as model systems to guide the design of artificial chemosensors
for effective carbohydrate recognition in aqueous media using noncovalent
interactions, such as hydrogen bonding. In contrast, molecular probe-based
approaches aim for covalent bond formation usually with the hydroxyl
groups of the carbohydrates. Moreover, the aldehyde moiety of reducing
sugars can be exploited for carbohydrate detection. Both methodologies
will be described in the following sections.
5.1.

## Molecular
Probes for Carbohydrates
In the early days of chemistry,
(reducing) carbohydrates were detected
through their reaction with copper salts, which leads to the appearance
of a blue color. During this so-called Fehling’s test, the
aldehyde group of the acyclic sugar is oxidized to yield an acid. Another common method for the sugar detection
uses the Tollens’ reagent, where silver nitrate is reduced
to elemental silver. These methods can be considered as the first
practically useful probes for saccharides. 
Molecular probes based on boronic acids have been developed
as attractive options to sense carbohydrates over the past decades.
The operating mode of most probes is based on the reversible covalent
interaction of boronic acids with diols forming five- or six-membered
cyclic esters, first studied by Lorand and Edwards using phenylboronic
acids. Because several detailed reviews
have already been published in the past years covering the broad outline
of probes for carbohydrate detection, − we provide here only a summary
of recent reports for carbohydrates sensing in aqueous media from
the year 2000 onwards.
The reaction of a boronic acid and a
1,2-diol is an equilibrium-based
process in aqueous media ( ). The addition of water
(or OH–) to the boronic acid leads to the formation
of the tetravalent boronate anion (Ktet), which can then form three covalent bonds in a sp2-type
geometry. Besides that, the boron center acts as a Lewis acid and
can form covalent bonds with a sp3-type geometry (Ktrig) with the diol. Consequently, for the calculation
of the binding constant (Ka), both processes
should be considered. Fortunately, Wang and coworkers established
a method that allows to determine Ka, Ktet, and Ktrig through titrations at different pH values. , 
 The reversible and relatively fast-equilibrating dynamic covalent
boronic acid–diol interaction renders boronic acids and their
derivatives attractive probes for the detection of carbohydrates in
aqueous media. The binding strength of boronic acids to carbohydrates
depends on the orientation of the target analytes’ hydroxyl
groups, which enables a differentiation between various carbohydrates.
Besides, there is a remarkable difference of the binding affinities
for monosaccharides between mono- and diboronic acids. Monoboronic
acids tend to show a higher selectivity for fructose over glucose,
as fructose interacts only with one boronic acid group. Conversely,
diboronic acids show increased selectivity towards d-glucose
because α-d-glucofuranose can bind two boronic acid
groups. , The selective sensing of d-glucose
in biofluids (mainly blood) is of special interest because d-glucose plays an important role in biological processes and is used
as an indicator parameter for diabetic patients. This might be the
reason why many more probes have been developed for d-glucose
compared to other saccharides so far. All molecular probes, chemosensors,
and nanosensors discussed within this section are summarized in – .
 
5.2.

## Molecular
Probes for d-Glucose and
Other Saccharides
A variety of molecular probes has been
designed for selective d-glucose sensing, and among these
a fluorescence-based signal transduction is commonly used. For example,
the boronic acid moiety can be combined with different fluorophores,
resulting in a fast and easy to detect emission change. The first
fluorescence-based d-glucose probes were introduced by the
groups of Czarnik and Shinkai in the 1990s, each using an anthracene
moiety as the fluorophore. − 
James and coworkers showed
a new design of a molecular probe bearing two phenylboronic acid groups
in combination with a pyrene group and alkyl linkers. By varying the
alkyl linker length from n = 3 to n = 8, the authors demonstrated that the hexamethylene-linked probe P5.1 provides optimal d-glucose sensitivity and selectivity
over d-galactose, d-mannose, and d-fructose
in phosphate buffer (52% MeOH). In 2010,
the influence of the fluorophore, e.g., pyrene, anthracene,
and naphthalene, and of the geometry of the two boronic acid linkers
on the selectivity for d-glucose over several monosaccharides
was studied by a variety of probes, e.g., P5.2 and P5.3. Fluorescence titration experiments showed
that the affinity for d-glucose is highly influenced by the
chemical nature of the probe. In addition, the structures of the complexes
formed were studied using CD spectroscopy. All six probes were found
to be d-glucose selective ( ). 
 The fluorescence enhancement
of the o-aminomethylphenyl
boronic acid probes upon carbohydrate binding is widely believed to
be caused by turning off the PET quenching after boronic acid–sugar
complexation. However, the groups of Larkin and Anslyn suggested an
alternative explanation that they deduced from the investigation of
the photophysical behavior of probe P5.4 upon its binding
to fructose in water containing 33% MeOH and upon the subsequent addition
of 50 mM NaCl ( ). The observed
increase in emission intensity upon fructose addition was attributed
to disaggregation of probe P5.4. Later, the authors put
forward the so-called “loose bolt effect” internal conversion
mechanism for explaining the emission enhancement of probe P5.5 upon its interaction with fructose. 
 In 2002, Wang and coworkers developed
a fluorescent diphenylboronic
acid-based probe (P5.6 in ) bearing two
symmetrical arranged anthracene groups that showed a high affinity
for d-glucose (Ka = 1472 M–1) in 50% MeOH in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4,
with 43- and 49-fold selectivity for glucose over fructose and galactose,
respectively. The functionalization
of this probe with an electron-withdrawing cyano group (P5.7) or nitro group (P5.8) at the phenylboronic acid moiety
resulted in an even higher apparent binding constant for d-glucose (Ka = 2540 M–1 and Ka = 1810 M–1),
whereas the fluorinated probe (P5.9) showed a lower affinity
(Ka = 630 M–1). In contrast,
the selectivity between glucose and fructose was reduced for all three
derivatives compared to the parent probe. 
 In 2009, the groups of Barwell
and James presented another approach
towards d-glucose selective sensing. They designed a molecular
tweezer-type probe (P5.10), which showed an almost equal
binding affinity for d-glucose and d-fructose (Ka = 2850 M–1 and Ka = 2660 M–1) in phosphate buffer containing
52% MeOH. Nevertheless, the two analytes were distinguished from each
other as exclusively d-glucose opens the tweezer by forming
a 1:1 complex with the boronic acid moieties, causing a quenching
of the pyrene excimer emission. In contrast, d-fructose yields
a 1:2 complex without disrupting the pyrene excimer emission ( ). 
 Another fluorescent molecular probe that uses both an aldehyde
and a boronic acid binding motif was developed by Glass and coworkers
in 2015. The boronic acid-containing
coumarin aldehyde P5.11 exhibits a remarkable glucosamine
selectivity over several structurally similar biomolecules in 25 mM
HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, containing 120 mM NaCl ( ). d-Glucosamine is one of today’s
most common nutraceutical products, used to treat osteoarthritis and
often administered as a dietary supplement, although the efficiency
of such treatments remains debated. , For glucosamine,
a high binding affinity with P5.11 (Ka = 4100 M–1) concomitant with a strong
fluorescence enhancement was observed, which can be traced back to
its “dual” functionality, as it binds with both the
boronic acid and the aldehyde group in a cooperative manner. The fluorescence
increase is explained by the reversible iminium formation of the primary
amine with the aldehyde group of P5.11, which induced
an ICT of the coumarin and caused a large red-shift in the excitation
spectrum. Accordingly, glucose showed almost no fluorescence change
and only a low binding constant, as it lacks an amine group. Notably,
norepinephrine, which also features amine and diol groups, is for
steric reasons only bound via its amine functionality
to P5.11 and shows a similar low binding constant as
glucose.
 The administration of heparin, an anticoagulant,
is a common medical
treatment of heart attacks, angina pectoris, and other cardiovascular
dysfunctions, which makes its monitoring important to adjust the treatment.
Heparin is a highly negatively charged oligosaccharide consisting
of repeating disaccharide units of 1 → 4 linked sulfated iduronic
acid and sulfated glucosamine. Anslyn and coworkers reported molecular
probe P5.12 for the colorimetric detection of heparin
within a preorganized macrocyclic cavity ( ).
 The binding of heparin
to P5.12 compared to structurally
similar polysaccharides such as hyaluronic acid was studied in an
IDA format in HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, containing 50% MeOH. A strong
alteration of the absorbance spectrum, i.e., a signal
decrease at 430 nm and a signal increase at 526 nm, was reported when
using pyrocatechol violet as the indicator dye. The binding constant
for heparin was determined to be Ka =
7100 M–1. It is noteworthy
that the binding is not only mediated by the reversible boronic ester
formation but also by ion pairing between the ammonium, carboxylate,
and sulfate moieties of heparin. To make the molecular probe applicable
in biological media, Anslyn and coworkers incorporated a fluorescent
scaffold into probe P5.13 ( ), which thus can be used in a direct binding
assay in crude serum. Indeed, a calibration
curve in the clinical relevant concentration range (0.08–3.2
μM) for unfractionated heparin and for low-molecular-weight
heparin was obtained. Probe P5.13 showed a significantly
enhanced affinity and selectivity for heparin in 10 mM HEPES buffer,
and the binding constant of P5.13 for UFH was determined
to be Ka = 1.4 × 108 M–1, which is 104 times higher than that of
probe P5.12.
The Schrader group combined dynamic
covalent binding and noncovalent
binding motifs for selective sensing of heparin. The fluorescent copolymer (P5.14 in ) contained binding sites tailored for recognizing
sulfated carbohydrates and allowed for specific detection of heparin
in 25 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.1, with a remarkably high sensitivity
(30 nM heparin).
 Hayashita and coworkers
have shown that a phenylboronic acid azoprobe/γ-CD
complex (P5.15 in a) exhibited
a high d-glucose selectivity by forming a 2:1 complex with
an apparent binding constant of Ka = 3.0
× 107 M–2 in water containing 1%
DMSO and 100 mM NaCl, pH 10.0. Interestingly, a dye analogue which
lacked the benzamide spacer showed no response to d-glucose. Following a similar supramolecular design idea,
Jiang and coworkers developed a 2:2 stilbeneboronic acid−γ-cyclodextrin
ensemble (P5.16), which allowed for the selective detection
of d-glucose over fructose and other monosaccharides in 1%
DMSO in carbonate buffer, pH 10.5, and even in artificial urine samples
at sub-mM levels ( b). The combination of boronic
acid-based carbohydrate recognition with cyclodextrin-based host–guest
chemistry could have several advantages, for instance, ensuring water
solubility of the probe that is often limiting for unmodified phenylboronic
acids. Moreover, the noncovalent binding of dye molecules opens new
possibilities for the fine-tuning of the probe. Therefore, several
probes using such boronic acid/cyclodextrin combinations for saccharide
detection have been reported within the last few years. − 
 A “light-up” molecular probe (P5.17)
with a high specificity for d-glucose was developed by Sun,
Tang, and coworkers. Advantages of the
probe are its simple preparation and the strong fluorescence enhancement
caused by the aggregation of bisboronic acid tetraphenylethylene fluorogenes.
Binding of d-glucose to the boronic acid moieties led to
the formation of linear oligomers that restricted the intramolecular
rotation of the tetraphenylethylene moiety (rigidochromic effect),
causing a fluorescence turn-on response. The specificity of P5.17 for d-glucose was verified by investigating
other monosaccharides, e.g., d-fructose, d-mannose, and d-galactose, as potential interferents.
Only with d-glucose, a fluorescence increase was observed
in carbonate buffer, pH 10.5, containing 2% DMSO, which was explained
by the fact that only d-glucose possesses cis-diol units that are essential for the oligomerization to occur.
The authors showed that the probe can be applied for the detection
of d-glucose in artificial urine at millimolar concentrations
( ).
 Hansen and coworkers
examined the binding properties of three BODIPY-containing
probes (P5.18–P5.20 in ) towards d-glucose in several buffers such
as 50 mM phosphate buffer, methanolic buffer, and 1× PBS. , The binding affinity of the fluorinated probes toward d-glucose was independent of the used buffers. In contrast, the binding
affinity for unsubstituted and methylated probes were significantly
reduced in buffered solutions (Ka <
2 M–1 in saline and phosphate buffer; Ka = 1 M–1 in methanolic phosphate buffer).
The fluorinated BODIPY-probe P5.18 displayed a strong
binding affinity towards d-glucose (Ka = 5.8 × 105 M–1). Because
of its high robustness in several buffers and its high Ka value sufficient for d-glucose detection at
physiological relevant concentration ranges, the use of P5.18 may be promising for d-glucose-monitoring in human blood.
 Qin and coworkers synthesized an unsymmetrical
BODIPY derivative via a Knoevenagel condensation
reaction to achieve an emission
shift towards higher wavelengths. The
obtained phenylboronic acid-BODIPY probe (P5.21 in ) showed a binding affinity of Ka = 55 M–1 toward d-fructose in
1 mM phosphate buffer, pH 9.0, but did not challenge the performance
of the unsubstituted probe P5.22, which offered a higher
binding affinity towards d-fructose (Ka = 297 M–1) and was therefore selected for
the application in polymeric optodes. The generated optodes showed
a reasonable selectivity for d-fructose over d-glucose
and d-galactose in the concentration range of 0.1–100
mM, with a d-fructose detection limit of 200 μM in
1 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 9.0.
 A redox-reaction-based approach for d-glucose
sensing
was introduced in 2015 by Qin, Jiang, and coworkers. The fluorescence
probe (P5.23) was obtained by the combination of an azaBODIPY
dye with two phenylboronic acid groups ( ). The detection
of d-glucose was possible due to the enzymatic reaction of
glucose oxidase, in which d-glucose was converted into gluconolactone.
The released hydrogen peroxide led to the transformation of the phenylboronic
acid moiety into phenolic groups, resulting in a red-shift of the
emission from 682 to 724 nm. d-Glucose was successfully detected
with high selectivity in a concentration range from 0.2 to 200 mM
in PBS, pH 7.4, containing 50% EtOH. In addition, the authors successfully
immobilized the probes into a thin polymer layer and were able to
determine d-glucose concentrations in 40-fold diluted whole
blood samples from sheep.
 In 2013, Jiang, James,
and coworkers developed the fluorescent
probe P5.24 composed of an amphiphilic monoboronic acid
with a pyrene fluorophore, which allowed for the sensitive and selective
ratiometric sensing of d-glucose in aqueous media. d-Glucose sensing was performed in
the presence of fructose and gave excellent selectivity results. Even
though P5.24 bound both monosaccharides, only d-glucose offered a dual binding motif to P5.24, which
caused the formation of aggregates in which the pyrene moieties came
in close proximity and displayed excimer emission. The binding constants
for d-glucose with probe P5.24 were reported
as Ka = 1.4 × 103 M–1 and 1.9 × 106 M–2 (assuming 1:2 binding) in 50 mM carbonate buffer, pH 10.0, containing
2% MeOH ( ).
 A pattern-recognition-based sensing strategy, which used functional
polymers for d-glucose detection in 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH
7.4, was introduced by the group of Bonizzoni in 2019. Polymeric poly(methacrylic
acid) (PMAA) was doped with acrylamido phenylboronic acid (AAPBA)
moieties to yield a water-soluble copolymer (PMAA-co-AAPBA) that acted as a supramolecular probe (P5.25 in ) for carbohydrates. Hematoxylin served as an indicator
dye that was displaced by the carbohydrates tested, as could be readily
witnessed by the resulting absorbance enhancement. With P5.25, it was possible to distinguish both mono- and disaccharides, e.g., glucose, fructose, and galactose, through an array-based
sensing protocol in which absorbance, steady-state fluorescence intensity,
and anisotropy were recorded. 
 Incorporation of boronic
acid-based probes within hydrogels was
carried out by the groups of Butt and Elsherif in 2018. The authors aimed to develop an optical d-glucose sensor that can be integrated into contact lenses.
Therefore, a holographic-diffuser structure was imprinted on a phenylboronic
acid motif, which was present in a hydrogel (P5.26).
When the hydrogel films were soaked in solutions of d-glucose
in 150 mM PBS, pH 7.4, swelling occurred, and the degree of swelling
was found to be glucose concentration dependent. The swelling reversibly
altered the focal length of the optical system, which was determined
by measuring the intensity of the light passing through this device
( ). As such, it was possible to detect the d-glucose in the concentration range of 0 to 100 mM. In addition,
the authors showed that their glucose-sensing contact lenses also
capture the analyte when placed on an artificial eye, suggesting that
this approach can be developed into a practical sensor for noninvasive d-glucose level monitoring.
 Practical (invasive)
glucose sensors that have already found clinical
and daily point-of-care use have been independently developed by Senseonics
and GlySure Ltd.
The Eversense system is used for the detection
of glucose through
an implantable sensor. This system is
constituted of fluorescent o-amino-methylphenylboronic
acids functioning as glucose-selective turn-on probes and was developed
by James, Sandanayake, and Shinkai. , , In the sensor design, probe P5.27 is
immobilized on poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) hydrogels and integrated
into an implantable poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) capsule, which
also contains a light-emitting diode for excitation and two photodiodes
for fluorescence signal read-out. This so-called “microfluorometer”
is depicted in a. In the absence of glucose, the fluorescence
of P5.27 is quenched, possibly due to an intermolecular
PET process ( b). When glucose is present, it reversibly binds with boronic acids
and causes fluorescence increase until all indicator binding sites
are occupied. Finally, the recorded emission intensities are converted
into an electromagnetic signal and sent to external devices such as
smartphones or personal computers for further processing and user
interaction. The Eversense system allows for dynamic subcutaneous
glucose monitoring (every 5 min) within a concentration range of 40
to 400 mg dL–1.
 The GlySure Ltd. system developed
by Arimori, Frimat, and James
in collaboration with Beckman and Coulter is based on hydrogel-immobilized,
fluorescent o-aminomethylphenylboronic acids (P5.28 in ). , This system enables
intravascular glucose monitoring through a disposable glucose sensor
that is inserted in a central venous catheter. Analogous to the previous
example, the emission of the probe is enhanced in the presence of
glucose, which can be dynamically detected in the physiologically
relevant concentration range of 40–400 mg dL–1.
 
5.3.

## Chemosensors
for Carbohydrates
Although
the molecular probes dominate in the field of carbohydrate sensing,
there are also many different chemosensors that have been reported
for carbohydrate detection. Carbohydrate complexation by chemosensors
mainly exploits dispersive interactions and hydrogen bonds as recognition
motifs. Especially, the CH−π interactions are considered
to be of importance for carbohydrate recognition in water as they
amplify the hydrophobic effect. 
Several synthetic lectins were developed in the past years with promising
results towards carbohydrate sensing. The first lectin-based artificial
receptors for d-glucose were designed according to a temple-like
structure ( ), consisting of apolar top and bottom
panels and two to four polar pillars. This design was inspired by the assumption that d-glucose
will form an inclusion complex, where its polar groups point equatorially
towards the pillars, whereas its C–H groups point axially towards
the aromatic “lids” of the temple structure. , 
 Davis and coworkers developed a tricyclic polyamide cage (C5.1 in ), which was able to bind carbohydrates
in water with good selectivity but low affinities. Contrary to the observed weak binding of d-glucose
(Ka = 9 M–1), the anomeric
methylated β-N-acetylglucosamine showed a binding
constant of Ka = 630 M–1 with this receptor in D2O. 
 In 2012, a “simple” glucose chemosensor C5.2 was reported that was not only synthetically accessible in fewer
steps but that also featured a fluorophore unit which allowed for
the direct monitoring of d-glucose binding. The reported
affinity of C5.2 for d-glucose, Ka = 56 M–1, was sufficient for d-glucose sensing at mM concentrations in phosphate buffer, pH 7.1
( ). This chemosensor also
showed a respectable selectivity for glucose over other common monosaccharides
such as galactose (factor 50 in Ka).
 Recently, another lectin
mimicking chemosensor (C5.3 in ) was reported by the Davis group, showing
a remarkable high binding affinity of Ka = 1.8 × 105 M–1 for d-glucose in D2O, which is comparable to the binding strength
of natural lectin proteins. The bicyclic
structure consists of hydrophobic triethylmesitylene roof and floor
panels, enabling CH−π interactions with d-glucose,
and urea moieties that provide several contact points for polar interactions
and hydrogen bonding. The periphery nonacarboxylates ensure the solubility
of the chemosensor in water. Because of its unique structure, d-glucose with its all-equatorial hydroxy groups can fit well
into the cavity, resulting in a high selectivity of this chemosensor
for d-glucose over other monosaccharides. Besides, it should
be noted that molecules other than carbohydrates do not bind at all.
The applicability of this chemosensor to the selective d-glucose
detection in aqueous phosphate buffer and human serum was demonstrated. 
 The sensing of oligo- or polysaccharides, such as heparin, typically
relies on a complete different chemosensor design principle: Usually
the chemosensor intercalates into the heparin structure causing aggregation.
Smith and coworkers developed a heparin responsive chemosensor persisting
of an arginine-functionalized thionine (C5.4 in ), called Mallard Blue. This chemosensor showed an absorbance decrease in the wavelength
region from 550 to 650 nm upon binding of heparin in 10 mM Tris buffer
containing 150 mM NaCl. Mallard Blue did not show a significant response
to other glycosaminoglycans such a hyaluronic acid. Thus, selective
heparin sensing was even possible in 100% human or horse serum, which
is not feasible with other common heparin binding dyes such as azure
A.
 Kanvah and coworkers developed the water-soluble
dicationic chemosensor C5.5 ( ) consisting of a pyridinium acceptor and
a (diethylamino)coumarin donor. C5.5 showed an outstanding
fluorescence selectivity and sensitivity towards heparin over its
analogues. The binding of heparin to C5.5 led to a decrease
of both the absorption and the emission intensity in HEPES buffer.
Besides that, the detection of heparin in 1% FBS serum was successful,
giving a (extrapolated) detection limit of 150 nM.
 
5.4.

## Nanosensor for Carbohydrates
Most
nanoparticle-based sensors for the detection of carbohydrates rely
on electrochemical or enzymatic reactions. Examples in which nanoparticles
were functionalized with molecular probes or chemosensors are relatively
rare. One prominent strategy for the detection of carbohydrates is
based on phenylboronic acid functionalized nanoparticles. For example,
Rujiralai and coworkers reported the preparation of 3-aminophenylboronic
acid functionalized AuNPs for the selective detection of sialic acid
at nM to μM concentrations in 5 mM phosphate buffer, pH 5.6,
and spiked serum samples (N5.1 in ). The boronic acid moieties
of N5.1 preferentially reacted with the diol groups of
sialic acid, causing aggregation of N5.1 that altered
the surface plasmon resonance absorption bands and therefore provided
a readily measurable absorbance signal read out. No interferences
with other sugars such as glucose, fructose, galactose, mannose, sucrose,
lactose, or maltose were observed and good recoveries (>97%) in
spiked
serum samples were reported.
 Graphene quantum nanodots (GQDs) are nanoparticles with a diameter
typically smaller than 100 nm. Their photophysical properties can
be controlled through heteroatom doping, surface functionalization,
or size tuning. Detection of glucose
in the mM concentration regime in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4,
using boronic acid-functionalized boron-doped GQDs (N5.2 in ) was reported by Qiu and coworkers. Because of the boronic acid moieties, the nanosensor
aggregated in the presence of glucose, which served as a molecular
bridge between the particles. The aggregation process reduced nonradiative
relaxation processes, which in turn led to the formation of aggregation-induced
emission.
 A ratiometric nanosensor
for the detection of glucose was recently
reported by Zou, Li, and coworkers (N5.3 in ). The nanosensor was based on boronic acid functionalized
carbon dots (C-dots) and utilized synchronous fluorescence quenching
as well as resonance light scattering (RLS) enhancement for detection. In this example, 3-aminophenyl boronic acid
and sodium citrate were used as precursor materials for the preparation
of the C-dots via a “synthesis-modification
integration” strategy. Under the assay conditions, the cis-diols of glucose reacted with the boronic acids upon
particle aggregation. Thereby, the emission of the nanosensor was
quenched, while a pronounced RLS enhancement was observed. Ratiometric
sensing of glucose at μM concentrations was achieved in 100
mM PBS, pH 8.0, and spiked urine samples (recovery <98 %). The
authors showed that N5.3 is selective for glucose, as
fluorescence quenching and RLS enhancement were negligible for fructose,
maltose, lactose, and sucrose. Recently, Das and coworkers reported
the use of phenylboronic acid functionalized C-dots (N5.4) for the detection of glucose in 100 mM PBS and in blood samples
at μM concentrations (N5.4 in ). The detection mechanism is presumably similar to the one described
for N5.3. This fluorescence turn-off nanosensor was successfully
employed to detect glucose with minimal interference from other biomolecules.
The authors also achieved immobilization of the boronic acid functionalized
C-dots on paper, allowing for paper strip-based sensing.
 Salimi and coworkers reported the use of a smartphone-assisted
glucose detection at μM concentrations in water and blood samples
using boronic acid functionalized C-dots (N5.5 in ). The nanosensor N5.5 was prepared from 4-carboxyphenylboronic acid, o-phenylenediamine, and rhodamine B and showed a remarkably
strong emission quantum yield (46%). Again, the presence of glucose
triggered the aggregation of the particles and, as a result, increased
C-dot and rhodamine emissions were observed and used to quantify the
glucose concentrations. Specifically, two wavelengths were recorded
simultaneously with both emission intensities increasing as the analyte
was bound to the boronic acid moieties of N5.5. The corresponding
colored images were processed with an RGB color model-based application
of a smartphone. Importantly, other biomolecules and metal cations
(e.g., GSH, dopamine, uric acid, catechol, fructose,
maltose, Ala, Arg, Cys, Hcys, Thr, Pro, Ser, Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Ca2+) did not affect the
performance of N5.5. The results obtained from spiked
blood samples (recoveries >99%) agreed well with quantitative measurements
with a standard blood glucose meter, as it is used in hospitals.
 Besides carbon-based
nanosensors for the detection of carbohydrates,
several polymeric probes have been investigated during the last years.
In 2017, Wang and coworkers reported the use of a sandwich boronated
affinity sorbent assay (SBASA) to sense glucose at μM concentrations
in aqueous solutions, pH 9.0, and serum samples using boronic acid
composite materials (N5.6 in ). The polymer was prepared
by polymerizing boronic acid-terminated 9-anthracene methyl acrylate
and methyl methacrylate via atom transfer radical
polymerization (ATRP), using a phenylboronic acid-labeled initiator.
The boronic acid functionalized nanoparticles bind to glucose by forming
boronic acid ester linkages and when the fluorescent polymer is subsequently
added, it can react with the residual sugar diols, forming a nanoparticle–sugar
polymer composite. The composite recovered, e.g.,
centrifugation, and after hydrolysis of the boric acid ester bonds,
the fluorescent polymer dissolves and its emission can be measured
and correlated to the amount of glucose present in the original samples.
The recoveries in spiked serum samples ranged from 90.5–100.0%
with a relative standard deviation of 1.2–3.8%. Overall, these
aggregation-based systems appear to be mechanistically robust and
selective for glucose (as other saccharides do not contain multiple cis-diols and therefore do not act as particle connectors),
but the lack of reversibility likely makes them unsuitable for dynamic
monitoring of glucose levels.
 Théato and coworkers prepared glucose-responsive polymeric
micelles formed by diol-mediated self-assembly between a phenylboronic
acid-based polymer and a diol-functionalized polymer. The resulting
micelles were doped with the diol-functional dye alizarin red S in
order to form nanosensors (N5.7 in a) that operate in an IDA fashion. Aqueous dispersions of N5.7 were initially
fluorescent due to the presence of boronic acid-bound alizarin red
S ( b).
However, the dye was displaced from N5.7 in the presence
of glucose, leading to a readily observable emission decrease. The authors demonstrated glucose detection
at mM concentrations in PBS, pH 7.4.
 A series of amphiphilic fluorescent molecules based
on tetraphenylethylene
(TPE) units, e.g., TPE4S and TPE4L ( ), was prepared by Xing and coworkers. The amphiphilic
TPEs spontaneously self-assemble into weakly emissive fluorescent
organic nanoaggregates (FONs) in water. N5.8 was used for the detection of ginsenosides at
mM concentrations in 67 mM PBS, pH 7.1. It was observed that the presence
of glycosylated ginsenosides triggered the formation of new and highly
emissive vesicle-like structures and N5.8. This was explained
by the ability of the glycosylated ginsenosides to displace the carbohydrate-based
interactions between molecules of N5.8 by forming new
and stronger bonds. The observed fluorescence enhancement was attributed
to aggregation-induced fluorescence enhancement (AIE) of the TPE units
in the densely packed vesicular structure. The TPE4S amphiphile that
contains four negatively charged sialic acid units and that is surrounded
by the TPE units showed the highest fluorescence enhancement in the
presence of polyglycosylated ginsenosides (e.g.,
RB1 in ). In contrast, no fluorescence enhancement was observed when TPE4L
was used, which was attributed to the inability of glycosylated ginsenosides
to interfere with the intermolecular carbohydrate interactions of
this TPE-based amphiphile (the strong intermolecular carbohydrate
interactions between TPE4L molecules were also confirmed by their
low critical micelle concentration (CMC) values when forming weakly
emitting aggregates). Finally, TPE4S was observed to be more selective
toward ginsenosides containing three or more glycosyl units, indicating
preferential formation of emitting vesicles when a larger number of
carbohydrate interactions are present.
 In summary, a variety of boronic acid-based molecular
probes and
nanosensors, as well as lectin-inspired chemosensors (temple design),
were developed for sensing carbohydrates. Many of the advanced systems
show good selectivity and affinity for certain carbohydrates, such
as glucose, fructose, or heparin, and are operational in water and
biofluids. Some have already reached the sensitivity as well as selectivity
required for practical use, e.g., compare the tabulated
data in – for the key parameters of synthetic probes, chemosensors,
and nanosensors, with the typical concentration range of carbohydrates
in biofluids ( ). Amongst the different carbohydrates,
glucose is the most targeted analyte, and (implantable) glucose sensor
devices have transitioned into clinical routines and daily point-of-care
use. The development of medically applicable artificial receptors
for glucose sensing is certainly one of the biggest achievements made
by analytical supramolecular chemistry so far. For comparison, detecting
fructose selectively at the medically relevant micromolar concentration
range in the presence of glucose will likely remain very challenging
by the current probe, chemosensor, and nanosensor designs. It will
be interesting to see if analogous concepts also succeed in targeting
other sugars and oligosaccharides that are of diagnostic relevance.
 

6.

## Nucleotides,
Nucleoside Phosphates, and Oligonucleotides
Nucleosides are
biomolecules essential for metabolic and anabolic
processes in all known living organisms and have an impact on cell
homeostasis and epigenetic plasticity. − For example, they are important cofactors
for biochemical reactions such as acylation and redox reactions, which
influence cellular signaling pathways and are also essential for the energy regulation of cells. Information on abnormal concentrations of nucleosides
in biological fluids can provide insights into pathophysiological
conditions such as inflammation, hypoxia, and cancer. , For instance, elevated levels of nucleosides have been found in
the urine of patients with AIDS; leukemia; , lung, liver, or breast cancer; − a lymphoma or renal cell carcinoma; and Hodgkin’s disease. Given
that nucleic acids and oligonucleotides are released into the blood
by apoptotic and necrotic cells, their
elevated levels in the blood can indicate a variety of pathologic
processes, including malignant and benign lesions, inflammatory diseases, and
trauma. Furthermore, nucleic acids present
in biofluids are important markers of viral infections. − Aside from their function as biomarkers for diseases, nucleotides,
nucleosides, and their derivatives are also used as drugs to treat
cancer , and viral infections. Regarding their use as new therapeutic agents, they have
become extremely attractive for oligonucleotide-based therapeutics,
e.g., as antisense oligonucleotide (ASO)-based therapies. , ASOs are oligonucleotides that can potentially repair abnormal genetic
alterations, thereby restoring a normal physiological situation in
the body. For the success of future ASO-based therapies, it is important
to be able to characterize the underlying distribution of oligonucleotide
species in biological fluids. Before introducing the reader to the
principles of detection of nucleotides, nucleosides, nucleoside phosphates,
and nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), it is convenient to briefly recall
the standard nomenclature and structural properties of this class
of compounds. Nucleosides are composed of a nucleobase (adenine, guanine,
cytosine, thymine, and uracil) and a ribose unit (in the case of RNA)
or 3′-deoxy ribose (in the case of DNA, ). Nucleotides are derived from nucleosides and have
an additional phosphate group at the 5′-position of the sugar
moiety. Nucleosides with two or three phosphates are referred to as
nucleoside di- or triphosphates or more generally as nucleoside phosphates.
Oligonucleotides are short strands of DNA and RNA (nucleic acids)
and are defined by the sequence of nucleotides linked by phosphodiester
bonds. Oligonucleotides and nucleic acids can bind to their respective
complementary counterparts in a sequence-specific manner to form double
helixes of DNA or RNA.
 6.1.

## General
Approach for Nucleotide, Nucleoside
Phosphates, and Oligonucleotide Detection
Nucleotides are
negatively charged in aqueous solutions (pH ∼ 7.0) due to the
strongly acidic nature of the phosphate groups (pKa ∼ 1–2). The aromatic purine- and pyrimidine-based
nucleobases remain noncharged at neutral pH values and thus have hydrophobic
character. The nucleobases are responsible for the distinct self-assembly
properties of oligomeric nucleotides into double stands, such as DNA,
and are mediated via Watson–Crick base-pairing
(H-bonds between complementary nucleobases) and π–π
stacking interactions. Nucleobases can
coordinate to soft cations. For example, the N3 atom of cytosine (pKa = 4.2 of its conjugate acid) is a “soft”
center and capable of coordinating “soft” metal cations
(e.g., Ag+ and Hg2+ cations),
while the nitrogen atom N7 of adenine and guanine is known to coordinate
“soft” (e.g., Pt2+ and Pd2+) and “hard” (e.g., Cu2+ and Zn2+) metal cations. The sugar moiety represents a functional building block
that can be used to distinguish DNA from RNA. The ribose present in
RNA contains a targetable 1,2-diol group; in the case of DNA, the
2′-hydroxyl group is absent. Considering these different chemical
properties, molecular probes and chemosensors selective for RNA or
DNA can be designed by capitalizing on electrostatics, H-bonding,
π–π-stacking, the presence of 1,2-diols, and metal
complexation interaction motifs.
Nucleosides and oligonucleotides
are typically separated by chromatographic or electrophoretic separation
methods and detected by mass spectrometry. In addition, chemiluminescence-based
chemical kits for the detection of nucleosides and nucleoside derivatives
(e.g., nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, NADH) , are commercially available. These chemiluminescence-based probes
rely on enzymatic or chemical transformations and are beyond the scope
of this review. In the following sections, we present molecular probes,
chemosensors, and nanosensors that have been recently published and
were used for the detection of nucleosides, nucleotides, oligonucleotides,
and DNA in aqueous solutions and biological fluids (see also – ). We highlight contemporary examples and challenges
in the development of new hosts for this class of compounds. In addition,
we would like to refer the reader to the recently published review
by Ahn and coworkers regarding the use of small-molecule probes for
the detection of adenosine triphosphate specifically within cells
and tissues. 
 
6.2.

## Molecular
Probes for Nucleoside Phosphates
and Their Structurally Related Derivatives
Rhodamine dyes
are attractive molecules for the design of fluorescence turn-on probes
because they can exist either in a non-fluorescent closed ring structure
or in a strongly emitting open-ring form ( ). Adoption of the open-ring structure is promoted
by the presence of nucleoside triphosphates that preferentially bind
the polar open form through electrostatic interactions and H-bonds.
Moreover, nucleoside triphosphate binding stabilizes the polar transition
state of the ring-opening reaction and minimizes the energy barrier
required for the reaction to proceed. Depending on the design of the rhodamine B dye, this reaction requires
seconds to several minutes (e.g., 40 min). Several
newly developed fluorescent molecular probes for nucleoside triphosphates
feature amino-functionalized rhodamine dyes suitable for fluorescent
turn-on detection in live-cell imaging. − 
 A recent example using a rhodamine-based fluorescence turn-on probe
(P6.1 in ) for the detection of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) was reported
by Tian and coworkers. P6.1 combined two dye moieties: firstly, an ATP-responsive spirolactam-rhodamine
group and secondly a ROS responsive naphthalimide-based boronic ester
moiety. P6.1 was shown to be functional in 10 mM PBS,
pH 7.4, but also in a zebrafish animal model. The binding of P6.1 to ATP resulted in an enhanced emission of the probe,
which can be explained by the subsequent formation of the fluorescent
open-ring form of rhodamine. Moreover, the naphthalimide moiety undergoes
a ROS-induced cleavage of the phenylboronic ester moiety concomitant
with a fluorescent emission enhancement.
 In the same year, Yuan
and coworkers described a Förster
resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based detection principle for the
intracellular detection of ATP at mM concentrations in 25 mM HEPES
buffer containing 10% EtOH, pH 7.4 (P6.2 in ). The authors used a far-red emitting, two-photon
excitable fluorophore (ACFPN) as the FRET-acceptor, while the rhodamine
moiety served as FRET-donor unit. Additionally, P6.2 featured
a piperazine unit that can bind ATP via H-bonding
interactions. As in the aforementioned example, ring opening of the
nonfluorescent spirolactam of P6.2 occurred in the presence
of ATP at mM concentrations, leading to the formation of the fluorescence-active
derivative of rhodamine (response time: 8 min). The authors demonstrated
the applicability of P6.2 for ATP imaging in living cells.
An alternative ATP detection approach targeting the 1,2-diol functionality
on the ribose building block of ATP was reported by Chang, Yuan, and
coworkers (P6.3 in ). In their
design, a boronic acid moiety was introduced to allow for covalent
conjugation of the probe with ATP by forming boronic esters. Again,
ATP binding results in the formation of the emissive open ring structure
of rhodamine, leading to a fluorescence enhancement (response time
approximately 20 s). The detection of ATP at millimolar concentrations
was achieved with P6.3 in Krebs buffer, pH 7.8, containing
60% glycerol, and within cells.
Despite the unique fluorescence
turn-on features of the above-mentioned
molecular probes, nucleoside biomarker analysis generally requires
detection limits below the mM concentration range. The following subsection
describes recently reported chemosensors that can be used for μM
detection of nucleotides and analogous structures.

6.3.

## Chemosensors for Nucleotides, Nucleoside Phosphates,
and Oligonucleotides
An early example of a luminescent chemosensor
for the detection of ATP and NADPH at μM concentrations was
reported by Lehn and coworkers (C6.1 in ). This acridine-functionalized
aza-crown-based chemosensor showed a good selectivity for ATP (Ka = 7 × 107 M–1) over other nucleoside phosphates (e.g., CTP, GTP,
UTP, ADP, and AMP) in 5 mM Tris-acetate buffer, pH 7.6, which was
rationalized by the stronger electrostatic attraction between the
triphosphate chain of ATP and the polyammonium moiety of C6.1. The detected fluorescence enhancement upon target analyte binding
was attributed to stacking interactions between the acridine moiety
of the chemosensor and adenine. The binding preference for NADPH (Ka ≥ 7 × 108 M–1) over NADH likely stems from electrostatic effects. The authors
also demonstrated selective binding of C6.1 to specific
polybase pair sequences. Soon after, Martínez-Máñez
and coworkers reported the use of rutheniumII complexes,
linked to a cyclam–CuII complex, for the detection
of nucleosides via fluorescence spectroscopy measurements. 
 Commercially available chemosensors
for the detection of vesicular-bound
ATP are often based on acridine-type fluorescent dyes, e.g., quinacrine (C6.2 in ). , Quinacrine exists as a dicationic species under physiological conditions
and thus effectively binds to polynucleotides via electrostatic interactions in aqueous solutions. An enhanced fluorescent
emission is typically observed upon binding to nucleosides, and as
such, quinacrine can be used for nonselective detection of nucleosides
and DNA at μM concentrations.
 A recent example for the detection of ATP from
μM up to mM
concentrations in 10 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.0, containing 10% DMSO,
was described by Anzenbacher Jr. and coworkers (C6.3 in ). In their design, a
bisantrene derivative that featured two imidazolium hydrazone moieties
allowed for the selective complexation of ATP mediated by electrostatic
and H-bonding interactions. The simultaneously arising π–π
interactions between the bisantrene moieties and adenine led to a
chelation-enhanced fluorescence response of the chemosensor C6.3. The binding constants derived from fluorescence titrations
in Tris buffer containing 10% DMSO were 1.3 × 103 M–1 and 1.0 × 102 M–1 for ATP and ADP, respectively. C6.3 preferentially
binds ATP over other nucleoside triphosphates; for instance affinities
of Ka = 3.8 × 102 M–1 (UTP) and Ka = 1.1 ×
102 M–1 (CTP) were reported. The authors
also verified that other anions, such as F–, Cl–, H2PO4–, or
HP2O73–, did not interfere
with the ATP sensing mechanism.
 Metal complexes based on divalent zinc cations have been successfully
developed for the selective detection of nucleoside phosphates. For
instance, Yoon, Park, and coworkers utilized a terpyridine–ZnII complex possessing hydrophilic polyether chains as a chemosensor
for μM detection of ATP in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, and in
cells (C6.4 in ). In buffered solutions and in the absence of
ATP, the fluorescence of C6.4 was quenched due to the
formation of nonemissive aggregates. The terpyridine moiety of C6.4 efficiently coordinates to the phosphate groups of ATP,
resulting in disaggregation and consequential emission intensity increase.
The selectivity of C6.4 against other anions (e.g., pyrophosphate, Br–, CH3COO–, ClO4–, F–, H2PO4–, HSO4–, I–, Cl–, N3–, NO3–, PO43–, and SCN–)
was tested, and it was observed that (only) pyrophosphate yields a
strong fluorescence response which can potentially interfere with
the detection of ATP. Note that C6.4 is likely cross-reacting
with the amino acid histidine because “His-selective”
chemosensor C2.23 ( in ) features similar binding motifs.
In addition to the propensity
of the aromatic N-atoms of nucleosides
to coordinate with “soft” metal centers, oxygen atoms
of phosphates can participate in the coordination of “hard”
lanthanide cations. , Because lanthanide ions have
relatively low absorption cross sections, their inherent luminescence
properties are relatively uninteresting for sensing applications.
However, the binding of nucleosides to certain lanthanide complexes
results in the formation of antenna systems that allow for efficient
energy transfer from the ligand to the metal center, thus enabling
efficient fluorescence-based detection. Shuvaev, Parker, and coworkers first reported the possibility of
determining the ADP/ATP ratio by measuring the circularly polarized
luminescence (CPL) generated upon binding
of the bimetallic zinc–europium complex (C6.5)
to ATP or ADP ( ). Interestingly,
the resulting CPL signal of the ADP-bound complex (log Ka ≈ 4.8 assuming a 1:1 binding model) had an opposite
sign compared to that of the ATP-bound complex (log Ka ≈ 4.7 assuming a 1:1 binding model) despite their
similar binding affinity. This can be explained by a different coordination
mode of the analytes with the chemosensor ( ). Thus, the nucleoside ratio was successfully
determined by analyzing the intensity of the total CPL signal obtained
from a mixture of the nucleosides at μM concentrations in 100
mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4.
 Taglietti and coworkers
reported an IDA-based chemosensor using
a dicopper(II)-polyaza-macrocyclic host and an indicator dye (e.g., the rhodamine derivative 6-TAMRA) for the detection
of ATP at μM concentrations in 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.0 (C6.6 in ). Effective
indicator displacement occurred in the presence of ATP due to the
high affinity of the macrocycle for this target nucleoside triphosphate
(log Ka = 8.0 ± 0.2 for the 1:1 adduct).
Through the displacement of the dye, the emission intensity increased
proportionally to the concentration increase of ATP in solution. Unfortunately,
it was found that similar fluorescence responses were obtained with
ADP (log Ks = 7.4 ± 0.2), AMP (log Ks = 5.3 ± 0.2), and pyrophosphate anions
(log Ks = 7.3 ± 0.2), indicating
the limitations of this chemosensor when it comes to the selective
detection of ATP. Moreover, the structural similarity of this chemosensor
to histidine chemosensor C2.27 ( in ) suggests a possible cross-reactivity.
More recently, Singh and coworkers reported the use of a sulfated
β-cyclodextrin combined with Zn2+ and the indicator
dye thioflavin T as a fluorescence turn-on chemosensor ensemble for
ATP detection (C6.7 in ). Zn2+ binds strongly to the negatively
charged sulfate groups of the cyclodextrin derivative and prevented
the binding of thioflavin to the macrocycle. However, when ATP was
added to a solution of the chemosensor ensemble in water, it efficiently
captured the metal cations from the sulfonated cyclodextrin. This
allowed for the formation of an inclusion complex of C6.7 with the positively charged thioflavin dye, which subsequently led
to an emission intensity increase. The authors were able to detect
ATP at μM concentrations in water and in diluted ATP-spiked
human serum samples. However, the chemosensor also showed a fluorescence
response in the presence of pyrophosphate, ADP, and histidine, indicating
its limited selectivity.
 A bisquinoline-functionalized
β-cyclodextrin was recently
introduced by Borovkov, Wu, Yang, and coworkers for colorimetric detection
and discrimination of AMP, ADP, and ATP at μM concentrations
in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4. Although
nucleoside phosphates generally have weak binding affinities to β-cyclodextrins
(Ka ≈ 40 M–1), , functionalization of CDs with cationic amino groups on the primary
side of the cyclic oligosaccharide framework has been shown to largely
increase binding strength (Ka of methylamino-β-cyclodextrin
with AMP and ATP are 1.3 × 105 and 3.1 × 106 M–1, respectively). As shown in , a fluorescent, dicationic
[CuII-bisquinoline] complex (C6.8) was prepared
that forms inclusion complexes with adenosine mono-, di-, or triphosphates
that can be distinguished from each other by their photophysical properties.
For instance, binding of AMP to C6.8 resulted in an increase
in the absorption maximum accompanied by a blue shift (Δλem = 50 nm) emission quenching. In this case, the phosphate
backbone of the nucleosides is assumed to interact with the metal
center present in C6.8, while the ribose moiety is engulfed
within the cavity of the β-cyclodextrin. In contrast, the complexes
of C6.8 with ADP and ATP displayed a small hypochromic
effect in the absorption spectra and an enhanced fluorescence emission
at 427 nm (λex = 315 nm).
 The importance of positively charged moieties for
the detection
of nucleoside phosphates was recently illustrated by Issacs and coworkers. In their work, an acyclic and positively charged
CBn-type molecular container (C6.9 in ) was prepared, which is able to bind various nucleoside
phosphates (Ka ≈ 103 M–1 for ATP, UTP, and ADP measured in 20 mM sodium
phosphate-buffered D2O, pD 7.4) due to combination of aromatic
moieties and electrostatic interactions.
 Other positively charged
chemosensors designed to promote nucleoside
phosphate binding are depicted in . For example,
Bencini and coworkers reported positively charged phenanthroline-based
polyamine receptors (C6.10 in a) that featured binding interactions with
nucleoside triphosphates with decreasing strength in the order ATP
≥ GTP < TTP < CTP in 1 mM Tris-buffer, pH 6.0. ATP engages in stronger π–π
stacking and electrostatic interactions with C6.10, leading
to a strong binding affinity, i.e., Ka ≈ 109 M–1 for the
[H6C6.10(ATP)]2+ complex. Upon binding of
ATP, the initial emission of C6.10 was quenched due to
the occurrence of photoinduced electron transfer (PET) between the
adenine moiety and the excited phenanthroline dye. It was shown that
μM concentrations of ATP can be detected by chemosensor C6.10.
 Lara and coworkers
uncovered that cyclophane-type macrocycles that
are functionalized with two anthraquinone groups (C6.11 in b)
can associate with nucleoside phosphates with increasing binding strength
in the order AMP < ADP < ATP. The
main forces stabilizing the complexes are believed to be the result
of ion pairing, stacking, and hydrophobic interactions. A hypochromic
effect in the absorbance spectra of the chemosensor was observed upon
nucleoside binding and was used to quantify nucleosides in 32 mM PBS,
pH 7.4, at μM concentrations.
Polycationic pyrenophanes
capable of binding nucleoside triphosphates
in deionized water (C6.12 in c) were described by Inouye and coworkers. For instance, a strong association complex
(Ka = 1.0 × 106 M–1) is formed between ATP and C6.12, while
nucleoside mono- and diphosphates are much more weakly bound (Ka ≈ 6 × 103 M–1). ATP can be detected at μM concentrations by recording the
absorption changes and the quenching of the excimer emission of the
chemosensor C6.12. Unfortunately, selective detection
of ATP over GTP and TTP was not possible due to the similar binding
affinities of C6.12 for such substrates.
While
most researchers focus on the development of chemosensors
for ATP, complementary systems for the detection of other nucleoside
triphosphates are also needed. In this respect, the recently published
work by Dorazco-González and coworkers reported an important
advance in the field by introducing dinuclear ZnII-dipicolylamine
(ZnII-dpa) complexes that can be used for the selective
detection of GTP at μM concentrations in 40 mM MOPS buffer,
pH 7.0, and artificial biological fluids (C6.13 in ). Although some ZnII–dpa complexes have been reported for the detection
of phosphates and AMP, , the rationally designed
asymmetric ZnII–dpa complex C6.13 allowed
for selective GTP binding over other nucleosides in water and artificial
biological fluids. Addition of GTP to C6.13 resulted
in a strong binding (Ka = 106 M–1 for a 1:1 complex) and in near-quantitative
emission quenching (λex = 325 nm, λem = 410 nm). It is assumed that the GTP coordinates via its N7 guanosine atom to one ZnII center of C6.13, while the other ZnII center interacts with the phosphate
groups of GTP. The authors explained the selectivity of their chemosensor
for GTP over ATP by the higher energetic cost of desolvating ATP and
by the asymmetric structure of C6.13.
 A host–guest system for the selective detection of GTP at
mM concentrations in 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, and biofluids
was reported by Ramaiah and coworkers, where 8-hydroxypyrene-1,3,6-trisulfonic
acid (HPTS) was used as an indicator dye (C6.14 in ). In the presence of
GTP, HPTS was displaced from the cyclophane host, thus resulting in
a 150-fold emission enhancement. The fluorescence response of C6.14 towards AMP, ADP, CTP, and UTP was negligible, but a
50-fold fluorescent enhancement was observed when ATP or ITP were
added to the chemosensor, indicating its cross-reactivity for such
nucleosides.
 Recently, Butler and
coworkers prepared EuIII- and TbIII-based anion
receptors that enabled fluorescence-based detection
of eight nucleoside phosphate anions in an array-based assay design,
taking advantage of the multiple emission bands and long emission
lifetimes associated with luminescent lanthanide complexes (C6.15 in ). The authors
showed that the relative position of the quinoline groups on the macrocycle
significantly affected the stability of the host–anion complex.
In addition, the anion affinity was increased by incorporating H-bond
donors into the quinoline moiety. The nucleoside phosphates ATP, ADP,
AMP, cAMP, GTP, GDP, GMP, and pyrophosphate were distinguished by
principal component analysis using variations in the emission bands
and fluorescence lifetimes of four EuIII complexes in 10
mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.0, at mM concentrations.
 Commercially available
dyes are widely used for quantitative analysis
of DNA (e.g., for staining in electrophoresis gels),
and selected examples are shown in . − Because of their cationic and aromatic nature, these dyes can interact
with the negatively charged phosphodiester backbone and intercalate
between the nucleobases of DNA. Such fluorescent dyes can be used
to detect picograms of DNA but lack sequence selectivity and can only
be applied for double-stranded DNA. Because of the importance of selective
probes and sensors, the following examples describe newer systems
that have an additional degree of structural selectivity, e.g., toward secondary DNA structures, specific base sequences
in DNA, or the ability to distinguish single-stranded DNA from double-stranded
DNA.
 G-Quadruplexes (G4) are secondary
DNA structures formed by guanine-rich
sequences in DNA and are known to play a role in vertebrate transcription
processes. − Therefore, the realization of chemosensors that can detect such
secondary structures is of great interest. For example, a fluorescence
turn-on chemosensor (C6.16 in ) that allows for the detection of G4 at μM concentrations
in buffered solution (K-100 buffer containing 10 mM LiAsMe2O2, 100 mM KCl, pH 7.2) and serum samples was reported
by Granzhan and coworkers. In this work,
the authors prepared a fluorescent chemosensor composed of the G4
targeting bis(quinolinium) pyridodicarboxamide (PDC) unit and the
fluorophore coumarin. Because of its aromaticity and size-matching
shape, PDC strongly interacts with the surfaces of G4 units via π–π interactions. Consequently, the
intramolecular PET processes between PDC and coumarin moieties were
disrupted, leading to the observed increased emission intensity upon
quadruplex addition.
 Gerasimova, Kolpashchikov,
and coworkers recently reported the
combined use of two single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and the dye dapoxyl-F
(C6.17 in a) for single-nucleotide
polymorphism detection at nM concentrations. The sensing experiments
were carried out in 20 mM Tris-HCl containing 200 mM KCl and 10 mM
MgCl2, pH 7.4, or 1× NASAB buffer, pH 8.5. The two ssDNA strands hybridize to their specific
oligonucleotide sequence found in DNA samples, forming a “binding
pocket” for dapoxyl-F ( b). This fluorescence turn-on assay allows
for the detection of single nucleobase mutations of DNA polymorphs.
 Mohanty, Pradeepkumar, Bhasikuttan, and coworkers
showed that thioflavin
T (C6.18 in ) selectively binds to G4-units
in dsDNA when working in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing 50 mM KCl,
pH 7.4. The authors observed that upon
binding to G4 units, the fluorescence emission intensities of C6.18 increased 2000-fold, whereas only a 250-fold increase
was observed while binding to other DNA forms, allowing for μM
detection of G4 units in DNA. The chemosensor C6.18 not
only showed a satisfactory binding affinity for G4 units in dsDNA
(Ka = (3.8 ± 0.4) × 105 M–1 for the 1:1 adduct in Tris-HCl buffer containing
50 mM KCl, pH 7.4) but was also shown to induce quadruplex folding
in ssDNA. It was hypothesized that the most likely binding mode for C6.18 is end-stacking interaction with G4, resulting in a
structure planarization and marked fluorescence increase.
 Tang, Meng, Luo, and coworkers reported the use of a triphenylamine-based
chemosensor (C6.19 in ), which has
different luminescence properties in the presence of dsDNA and ssDNA. C6.19 interacted with dsDNA via electrostatic interactions and was eventually bound
to the grooves of DNA, experiencing a structural stiffening that increased
its fluorescence quantum yield (rigidochromic effect). In addition,
a significant shift in the fluorescence emission wavelength of C6.19 from red to green was observed, which was explained
by a conformational twist of C6.19. Because ssDNA lacks
grooves, C6.19 remains weakly red-emissive when interacting
with ssDNA. The authors were able to detect selectively dsDNA at μM
concentrations in water. Additionally, the chemosensor was successfully
applied for the detection of DNA damage caused by UV-light irradiation
of blood samples.
 Nau, Hennig, and coworkers reported
the detection of dsDNA with
the use of a host–guest Förster resonance energy transfer
(FRET)-based pair formed by carboxyfluorescein-labelled CB7 (acceptor)
and the fluorescent dye DAPI (donor, a). When DNA samples were added to a solution of C6.20, DAPI dissociated from CB7 due to its stronger affinity
for the minor groove of DNA ( b). Upon relocation of DAPI, the FRET signal
from C6.20 significantly decreased and a new fluorescence
emission band from DNA-bound DAPI arose. By analyzing the ratio of
these two emissions intensities, the authors successfully detected
sperm DNA at μM concentrations (LOD, 78 μM) in 10 mM ammonium
phosphate buffer, pH 7.2.
 For more details on
similar concepts for DNA detection, we refer
the interested reader to the recently published review by Berdnikova
and Chernikova. 

6.4.

## Nanosensors
for Nucleoside Phosphates and
Oligonucleotides
Schmidt and coworkers reported dual fluorescent
silica particles for ratiometric fluorescence turn-on detection of
ATP at μM concentrations in 100 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4 (N6.1 in ). The core
of the silica particles was functionalized with the reference dye
rhodamine, whereas the surface of the particles was grafted with fluorescent
naphthalimide-based dipicolylamine ZnII-indicator complexes
(ndp–ZnII). The emission intensity of the surface-bound
ndp–ZnII increased upon analyte binding, while the
signal of the reference dye remained almost unaffected (around 11%
when compared to the fluorescence of the indicator dye). The authors
concluded that the phosphate group of ATP coordinates to the ZnII center weakening the ZnII–NH interaction. When the indicator dye was covalently linked
on the surface of the particles, it showed a lower binding affinity
for ATP (Ka = 3.3 × 103 M–1) compared to ndp–ZnII in
solution (Ka = 5.0 × 105 M–1), possibly due to steric hindrance reducing
the π–π stacking interaction between ATP and the
dye. In addition to ATP, N6.1 responded to GTP, UTP,
and CTP, indicating a cross-reactivity for other nucleoside phosphates.
The authors were able to show that N6.1 is internalized
in cells without exerting cytotoxic effects. Vesicle-based nanosensors
for the detection of nucleosides were developed by König and
coworkers. The authors embedded amphiphilic
indole-functionalized binuclear zinc–cyclen complexes (Zn2Trp) and TbIII diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
(DTPA)-based (Tb-1) emitters into the membrane of phospholipid vesicles
(N6.2 in ). Nucleoside binding to
Zn2Trp reduces the donor-dye ability to sensitize the emission
of the lanthanide due to spatial separation. The authors successfully
detected nucleoside triphosphates at μM concentrations in 25
mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, and further showed that the performance of N6.2 remains unaffected in the presence of monovalent and
divalent anions such as Cl–, Br–, AcO–, and CO32–.
 Nitschke and coworkers
developed water-soluble, tetrahedral cage-like
structures formed by fluorescent triazatriangulenium (TATA+) panels linked through their vertices by complexation of ZnII cations (N6.3 in ). Because of the cationic nature of TATA+, a positively charged interior space is formed that can interact
with negatively charged guest molecules. For example, the cage was
shown to favor binding of large inorganic anions (e.g., Mo6O19) over smaller anions (e.g., BF4–, ClO4–, TfO–), suggesting that both electrostatic and
size complementarity between the host’s cavity and the guest
are required for complexation. N6.3 was used for the
μM detection of ATP (Ka = 1.8 ×
103 M–1 in D2O), AMP (Ka = 1.3 × 102 M–1 in D2O) and GMP (Ka = 1.0
× 103 M–1 in D2O), whereas
the non-charged adenosine, guanosine, and uridine are not bound.
 In summary, probes based on amino-modified rhodamine derivatives
provide unique fluorescence turn-on properties that can be used for
the detection of nucleoside phosphates but have not yet achieved the
selectivity needed for routine use in diagnostics of complex biofluids
such as saliva, urine, and blood. The same applies for the design
of chemosensors, which ideally should be selective for mono-, di-,
and triphosphate nucleosides in addition to the ability of discriminating
between different nucleosides such as ATP and GTP. While the medically
relevant concentration range of ATP detection in blood (millimolar,
see ) has been reached by the reported molecular probes,
chemosensors, and nanosensors ( – ), their practically
preferred application in readily accessible biofluids such as saliva
still requires improvements in terms of binding strength and sensitivity
to be reliably used in the submicromolar nucleotide concentration
range.
 Some promising chemosensors, such
as supramolecular complexes with
the small molecules thioflavin T or dapoxyl dyes, have been successfully
used to selectively detect DNA polymorphism or secondary structures
within DNA samples (e.g., G4 quadruplexes). Compared
to many chemosensors and probes currently being explored for the detection
of nucleoside phosphates and DNA, the number of nanosensors reported
in the literature for nucleotide detection is relatively small, which
may encourage the development of other nanomaterials in this direction.
The fact that there are only a few examples of nanosensors may be
due to the successful and promising alternatives based on aptamer-
and ssDNA-functionalized nanoparticles through DNA nanotechnology.
We did not cover these technologies in this review, as they are comprehensively
covered elsewhere. − 

7.

## Carboxylates
Carboxylic acids are organic
compounds with one or more −COOH
groups bonded to a hydrocarbon residue. Because of their acidity,
carboxylic acids are partially deprotonated at physiological pH values
and are present in the form of their conjugated bases, known as carboxylates.
The negative charge in carboxylates is distributed over three atoms
(−COO) and carboxylates are generally well solvated in water
(see ). Carboxylates are widely distributed
in nature and are intermediates of the Krebs cycle, the key metabolic
pathway that links carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism and is
used by all aerobic organisms for energy production. Abnormal concentrations of carboxylates in various biofluids
have been repeatedly shown to be associated with diseases. For example,
scurvy is caused by a severe deficiency of ascorbic acid (vitamin
C), i.e., the concentration of ascorbate in serum
is less than 12 μmol/L. − In addition, there is evidence that low ascorbate levels can be
associated with diseases such as coronary vascular diseases, diabetes,
and strokes. Moreover, it was found
that the level of citrate is a potential marker for prostate cancer
tissue because malignant prostate tissue has a significantly lower
level of citrate compared to healthy tissue or its premalignant state. − Lactate is the end product of the anerobic glycolysis and is formed
during physical stress, such as strenuous exercise, in rather high
concentrations up to 20 mM. Detection
of lactate in the blood is of great importance because sustained hyperlactatemia
(clactate > 6.5 mM) can be associated
with several disorders such as sepsis or trauma. − Hippurate, a harmful uremic toxin, is involved in a variety of pathological
conditions, such as neurological disorders, chronic kidney diseases,
and some cancers. − For example, elevated hippurate levels are found in the serum of
patients with uremia, a condition in which elevated blood urea levels
are a result of inadequate kidney function. Recently, hippuric acid was confirmed to be significantly associated
with left ventricular hypertrophy, which is one of the most common
cardiac abnormalities in patients with end-stage renal disease. Besides hippurate, gluconate and gluconolactone
are carboxylates that are involved in chemical homeostasis and were
found to have antioxidant properties. Although gluconate metabolism is relatively unexplored in terms
of its potential role in disease development and indication, there
are several reports linking lower plasma gluconate levels to Alzheimer’s
disease and increased oxidative stress. , Furthermore, gluconate is not only a relevant biomarker for diseases
but is also used as a drug, e.g., in the form of
iron gluconate complexes for the treatment of anemic pediatric patients
with end-stage renal disease undergoing hemodialysis. , Interestingly, gluconate may be considered as a potential candidate
for cancer treatment, as it blocks citrate transport into cancer cells,
thus resulting in decreased tumor growth. It has been reported that salicylate levels found in serum samples
may be associated with Reye’s syndrome, a rare but serious
condition that causes swelling in the liver and brain. , Synthetic carboxylates such as aspirin or ibuprofen are nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and are commonly used to treat rheumatic
diseases. However, overdosage of such
NSAIDs can lead to microvesicular steatosis of the liver, and their concentration levels in biological
fluids are important indicators of misuse or incorrect dosing of these
drugs. A closer insight into drug sensing is given in .
 Looking at the overview
of common metabolites in urine (see ), it is evident
that in addition to zwitterionic amino acids, negatively charged carboxylates
are frequently found in this biofluid and as such represent attractive
target metabolites for the development of molecular probes and chemosensors
for diagnostic applications. Although there are some promising chemo-
and nanosensors described in the following section, it should be noted
that the detection of carboxylates in aqueous media appears to be
a more difficult task than, for example, the detection of amines or
thiols.
7.1.

## Molecular Probes for Specific Carboxylates
As for their chemical reactivity, carboxylates are “hard”
nucleophiles and are much less nucleophilic in aqueous media than,
for example, amines and thiols. As such, they do not easily engage
in Michael-type addition reactions with C=C-EWG moieties (=
Michael acceptors). For quantitative nucleophilicity scales, see for
instance the extensive work of the Mayr group and their online database
for reactivity parameters. − Additionally, carboxylates form much weaker metal–ligand
complexes in aqueous media with appropriate metal centers than for
instance thiols, which presents a challenge for designing metal-based
probes.
Given the difficulties in designing covalent bond-like
binding motifs for carboxylates, it is not surprising that only a
handful of probes capable of targeting these analytes in aqueous media
have been reported to date. The probes and chemosensors discussed
within this section are summarized in . In 2004, Anslyn
and coworkers demonstrated that the binding of α-hydroxy acids
to boronic acids can be used for setting up an indicator displacement
assay (IDA, P7.1 in ) that allowed
for the detection and quantification of these particular class of
carboxylates in the millimolar concentration range in 10 mM HEPES
buffer containing 75% MeOH, pH 7.4. The use of chiral boronic acids
as the binding motif made chirality sensing and the determination
of enantiomeric excess of α-hydroxy acids possible. 
 In the same year, the
James group reported axially chiral binaphthol
derivatives that featured two boronic acids moieties as recognition
motifs for α-hydroxy acid-based analytes (P7.2 in ). Uniquely, the two
enantiomers of the probe responded differently, one with fluorescence
increase and the other with fluorescence decrease, to the presence
of the chiral target analyte enantiomers, e.g., tartaric
acid. Additionally, the probes were used for the emission-based detection
and chirality sensing of sugar acids such as glucaric acid, gluconic
acid, and glucuronic acid in aqueous organic media (50 mM NaCl in
water containing 50% MeOH, pH 5.6–8.3) in the micromolar concentration
range.
 BODIPY-based boronic acid probes (P7.3 and P7.4 in ) were introduced by Christensen and coworkers
for the detection of lactate at physiological pH. The probes P7.3 and P7.4 showed
high selectivity for lactate in 25 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, containing
52% MeOH with binding affinities of Ka = 1.7 × 105 M–1 and 1.6 ×
105 M–1, respectively, allowing for its
mM detection. The authors showed that the binding of lactate caused
an emission enhancement, whereas no fluorescence response was observed
for non-α-hydroxy acids, e.g., glucose, fructose,
and mannose. However, P7.3 and P7.4 were
shown to also bind, although to a lesser extent, to l-malate
and l-ascorbate, indicating potential cross-reactivity with
other α-hydroxy acids.
 Ascorbic acid is a particular lactone-functional
metabolite for
which a redox chemistry coupled detection strategy can be exploited
due to its reducing properties. Several researchers have successfully
capitalized on the finding that nitroxides can be reduced by ascorbic
acid. , Nitroxides quench the emission of various
fluorescent dyes by electron transfer from the nitroxide to the fluorophore.
However, in the presence of reducing agents that convert the nitroxide
to hydroxylamine, the quenching mechanism is interrupted. Starting
from this principle, ascorbate selective probes were successfully
designed through tailoring of the substituents on the nitroxide moiety,
and a proper choice of the attached fluorophore.
For instance,
Fukuzumi, Yamada, and coworkers developed a Nile
blue nitroxide conjugate that was successfully used for fluorescence
turn-on detection and quantification of ascorbic acid in 100 mM PBS
containing 1% DMSO, pH 7.4, and in diabetic rat plasma (P7.5 in ). With this
probe, a low detection limit of 9.7 nM for ascorbic acid was achieved,
requiring approx. 20 min of reaction time. It was shown that blood
plasma from healthy and diabetic rats can be readily distinguished
which was further corroborated by HPLC analysis.
 Similarly, the Park group introduced
a nitroxide-based fluorescent
probe (P7.6 in ) for the detection
of ascorbic acid (LOD, 14 μM) that provided a dual electron
spin resonance (ESR) response. With
the use of P7.6, the authors were able to detect ascorbic
acid in fruit juices even in the presence of other biologically relevant
reducing agents such as thiols and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH). Previously, Du, Xiao, and coworkers have demonstrated that
the detection of ascorbic acid in 50 mM PBS, pH 7.0, human blood serum
and cell lysates can be achieved with a naphthalene imide–nitroxide
conjugate (P7.7 in ) that features an additional alkoxysilane
moiety to increase its hydrophilicity. The authors found a linear emission response of P7.7 in the ascorbate concentration range of 80 nM to 50 μM and
estimated a detection limit of about 20 nM in PBS. In addition, P7.7 was not affected by other biologically occurring reducing
agents such as glutathione. Wang and coworkers used the quenching
of hyperbranched conjugated polyelectrolytes by Cu2+ ions
for the design of the fluorescent turn-on probe P7.8. In the presence of ascorbate, Cu2+ is reduced to Cu+, and thereby becomes a much less efficient
emission quencher of the hyperbranched conjugated polyelectrolyte.
This system displays a nanomolar detection limit for ascorbate in
Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.1.
 
7.2.

## Chemosensors
for Carboxylates
Comparatively
more chemosensors than probes are known for the detection of carboxylates
in aqueous media, even though their range of application is still
limited. In a popular design strategy, multiple positively charged
binders (e.g., macrocyclic hosts) are constructed
to form several charge-assisted hydrogen bonding contacts with the
negatively charged carboxylate target analytes. However, many of the
concave, macrocyclic hosts, e.g., cucurbit[n]urils and pillar[n]arenes, which are
known to have record binding affinities for neutral or positively
charged guests, are comparably weak binders for anionic species because
their cavity interiors display a compressed electron distribution
and a negative electrostatic potential. , , , Gibbs and coworkers have shown that, despite unfavorable electrostatic
contributions, deep cavitands are efficient anion binders, especially
for chaotropic anions such as PF6–, driven
by the effects of counter cations and the solvation of “empty”
hosts. − Unfortunately, the rather kosmotropic carboxylates
are also not bound by this enveloping host family in an efficient
manner. Promising chemosensor designs for the detection of carboxylates
discussed in this section are summarized in .
 For instance, Glass and coworkers developed a pinwheel-shaped chemosensor
(C7.1) that featured four guanidinium moieties strapped
to a rigid but rotationally flexible aromatic scaffold ( ). In addition, two anthryl
units were tethered to the chemosensor as fluorescent reporter groups.
Upon binding with dicarboxylates such as malonate, C7.1 twists around its axis and adopts a conformation with a restricted
rotation. This brings the anthryl units in close spatial contact,
resulting in a characteristic fluorescence response. In contrast, C7.1 did not show this type of emission change in the presence
of monocarboxylates such as acetate, which were probably bound to
the chemosensor but did not promote an alteration of this conformation. C7.1 is capable of complexing two dicarboxylates cooperatively,
with Hill coefficients around 1.7–2.0 and ternary affinity
constants of 106–109 M–2 in 10 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.5, or 10 mM sodium acetate buffer. For
instance, C7.1 can be used for emission-based sensing
of oxalate, malonate, succinate, maleate, fumarate, glutarate, and
phthalate at μM concentrations. In contrast, the dicarboxylates
glutamate and aspartate provided no change in the emission signal,
which the authors attributed to the inability to induce a rotationally
restricted binding conformation in C7.1.
 In , we had showcased the work from the James group on
the design of
chiral, binaphthol-based probes for α-hydroxy acids. Utilizing a similar design idea, Bencini, Lippolis,
Pasini, and coworkers developed an enantioselective chemosensor (C7.2 in ) for (S,S)-tartaric acid in 5 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.0, by attaching two polyamine
moieties ([9]aneN3 azacrown ethers) to a chiral binaphthol
scaffold. The affinity of the deprotonated
state of C7.2 for (S,S)-tartaric acid was reported as log Ka = 5.8, which is much higher than that for meso-tartrate
(log Ka = 3.8), (R,R)-tartrate (log Ka = 3.1),
or other dicarboxylates such as succinate (log Ka = 3.7) and fumarate (log Ka =
2.7); all values were obtained in 100 mM NMe4Cl solution.
In addition, it was demonstrated that C7.2 does not or
only weakly responds to maleate and lactate. The authors concluded
that analyte binding causes the observed emission enhancement and
spectral red-shift through assisting an excited-state intramolecular
proton transfer (ESIPT) , of the binaphthol
chromophore.
 General binders for carboxylates,
including monocarboxylates, were
recently introduced by the Jiang group ( ), extending the design of molecular tubes introduced
by Glass and coworkers (see ). These protonatable, dicationic naphthotubes
(C7.3a and C7.3b in b) bind both aromatic and aliphatic carboxylates
with binding affinities ranging from 102 to 105 M–1 in acetate buffer (50 mM, pH 5.8). Complexation
of carboxylates can be easily monitored by fluorescence spectroscopy
because the fluorescence emission from the naphthotubes is quenched
upon binding of the analyte. For example, C7.3b possessed
a high binding affinity for phenylpyruvic acid (Ka ≈ 1.3 × 104 M–1) and was successfully used for its detection at μM concentrations
in acetate buffer, pH 5.8. The formation of a buried salt bridge and
the contributions of cavity water release most likely explain why
this chemosensor class shows these relatively high affinities and
markedly exothermic binding characteristics (ΔH ≈ −15 to −35 kJ mol–1), despite
the presence of potentially competing buffer anions. In addition,
the complexation of chiral carboxylates has been found to produce
analyte-indicative induced circular dichroism (ICD) signals, which
can be used for both analyte identification and chirality detection
(determination of ee% values).
 Nevertheless, the direct
use of the aforementioned dicationic carboxylate
binders for diagnostic applications is hampered by their low binding
selectivity. However, carboxylate sensing and differentiation is possible
by combining multiple chemosensors through the use of chemosensor
arrays and pattern recognition analysis, as it was demonstrated by
the Anzenbacher Jr. group in 2013 ( ). In their design, calix[4]pyrroles were functionalized
with different fluorophores to yield the anion-binding chemosensors
(C7.4–C7.11), which typically respond
with an analyte-dependent change in their emission spectrum (color)
upon complex formation ( a). The characteristic fluorescence response is the
result of an intramolecular partial charge transfer (IPCT) process
modulated by the hydrogen bonding interaction of the anionic analyte
with the protonated pyrrole moiety of the receptor and transmitted
through the −CH=CH– linker to the reporter dye
( b). The
authors demonstrated that this fortunate circumstance allows for distinguishing
different carboxylates at micromolar concentrations in water, pH 8.5,
from each another. In addition, a tripodal, turn-on fluorescent chemosensor
(C7.11 in a) prepared from (2,4,6-triethyl-1,3,5-trimethylamino)benzene
was described for the detection of aliphatic carboxylates in the presence
of other anions. However, C7.11 also responded with an
emission change to phosphate anions, which can therefore interfere
with the selective detection of aliphatic carboxylates. Nevertheless,
by using both colorimetric and fluorometric response of C7.4–C7.11, and by using an array-based sensing format
( c), the
authors were capable to distinguish 14 different carboxylates from
each other, even in the complex biofluid urine that contains several
potentially interfering (inorganic) anions ( c). Small sample volumes of 200 nanoliters
with typically 500 μM analyte concentration were sufficient,
and even semiquantitative identification of six nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (diclofenac, flurbiprofen, ibuprofen, salicylic acid, ketoprofen,
and naproxen) was possible at concentrations of 0.5–100 ppm.
This example is an important proof-of-concept that array-based assays
can also be developed for quantitative sensing, a task that has often
proven to be a real challenge for differential sensing methods.
 Recently, the Bunz group reported a fluorescence
sensor array (“chemical
tongue”), consisting of 11 components, for distinguishing 21
benzo- and phenylacetic acid derivatives from each other with high
reliability (>99%) in buffered solution at pH 7.0 and pH 13.0 ( ). This sensor array
consisted of four fluorescent poly(p-arylene ethynylene)s
(see b
for an example polymer) that produced an analyte-dependent fluorescence
response in the presence of aromatic carboxylates, allowing for mM
detection. Through a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), the authors
were able to distinguish between hydroxy substituted, iodine- and
amino-substituted benzoic acids as well as phenyl acetic acid analytes,
respectively.
 Alternative chemosensor
designs for the detection of carboxylic
acids involve the use of metal complexes that directly coordinate
carboxylates. For example, Gunnlaugsson and coworkers reported the
use of cyclam–TbIII complexes (C7.12 in ) for fluorescence turn-on detection of
aromatic carboxylates (e.g., aspirin) at sub-mM concentrations
in both 100 mM Tris and HEPES buffer, both enriched with 100 mM TMACl,
pH 7.4. Coordination of the carboxylate
to the TbIII metal center of C7.12 resulted
in increased fluorescence intensities of the lanthanide, as coordination
displaced labile water ligands in favor of analytes that can act as
antenna ligands. It is noteworthy that analogue EuIII-based
chemosensors do not respond to aromatic carboxylates, probably due
to their weaker affinity. We invite the reader to consult the comprehensive
study published in 2002 by the Gunnlaugsson group for a more detailed
description of the binding and signal transduction mechanism. 
 Alkyne-conjugated carboxamidoquinolines (C7.13 in ) were prepared by Qian, Zhu, and coworkers for ratiometric
fluorescent detection of oxalate at μM concentrations (LOD,
3 μM) in 10 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing 10% EtOH, pH 7.0. In this design, the simultaneous involvement
of two strategically placed ZnII metal centers in the coordination
of the two carboxylate moieties of the target analyte makes the probe
sensitive and selective enough for oxalate sensing and imaging in
living cells. C7.13 responded with emission quenching
(about 80 %) in the presence of oxalate, while for other carboxylic
acids (e.g., formic acid, acetic acid, malonic acid,
succinic acid, adipic acid, and phthalic acid) and inorganic anions
(e.g., PO43–, HPO42–, and H2PO4–), only 20% emission quenching was observed.
 Selective sensing is an important practical hurdle also for the
design of metal-based carboxylate chemosensors. Khajehsharifi and
coworkers reported the preparation of an array-based indicator displacement
assay (C7.14 in ) that allowed
for the discrimination of 11 biologically relevant carboxylates from
each other. The assay involves chromophoric
metal–ligand complexes that spontaneously formed from the pairwise
combination of four metal cations (Cu2+, Fe2+, Fe3+, and V4+) and two metal-coordinating
indicator dyes (pyrocatechol violet and eriochrome cyanine R). The
final assay was operational in the submillimolar concentration range
in borate buffer, pH 7.0. To evaluate its potential as a sensor component
for the detection of biologically relevant samples, carboxylic acids
were analyzed in analyte-spiked human urine samples and 100% classification
accuracy was reported.
 
7.3.

## Nanosensors
for Carboxylates
Similar
to the current situation for chemosensors and probes, carboxylate-sensing
nanoparticle systems are also comparably rare. All nanosensors discussed
within this section are summarized in .
 Ahn and coworkers reported o-(trifluoroacetyl)carboxanilide
(TFACA) functionalized gold nanoparticles (N7.1 in ) for the colorimetric detection of trans-fumarate and discrimination from cis-isomer in
water at mM concentrations (pH 7.8). Because of the strong electron withdrawing effect exerted by the
F atoms at the carbonyl group of TFACA, carboxylates can act as nucleophiles
to form covalent adducts that lead to particle crosslinking and aggregation,
which can be detected colorimetrically due to plasmon resonance effects. The selectivity for trans-fumarate
can be understood as follows: First, monocarboxylated analytes cannot
bridge between different particles, and second, dicarboxylates such
as cis-fumarate do not cause particle aggregation
because their involvement in bridging between particles is geometrically
unfavorable. It remains to be seen whether this design strategy can
be applied to trans-fumarate sensing in biofluids
and other complex mixtures. For instance, omnipresent monocarboxylates
may block the TFACA probe moiety and thus prevent the desired aggregation
reaction otherwise induced by the target analyte.
 A different strategy to detect
enantiomers of mandelic acid at
μM concentrations using l-tartrate functionalized gold
nanoparticles was recently reported by Li and coworkers (N7.2 in ). Here,
the selective detection of l-mandelic acid versus d-mandelic acid in Britton–Robinson buffer (40 mM H3PO4, 40 mM H3BO3, 40 mM acetic acid,
pH 4.0) was possible because N7.2 aggregated only in
the presence of the l-enantiomer, causing a color change
from red to blue. In this scenario, crosslinking of the nanoparticles
by l-mandelic acid was proposed to occur via enantiospecific H-bonding interactions with nanoparticle-bound tartrates.
The chiral selectivity of the nanosensor was tested with mixtures
of d- and l-mandelic acid, and the colorimetric
response was linearly related to the enantiomeric excess (ee) of l-mandelic acid, with a linear range from
−100% to 100%, consistent with the HPLC results. Potential
cross-reactivities were not reported such that the utility of N7.2 for practical sensing applications remains to be explored.
 An enantioselective and colorimetric
nanosensor that can be used
for the quantification and determination of the enantiomeric excess
(ee) of chiral carboxylic acids (CCAs) at μM
concentrations was reported by Wei and coworkers (N7.3 in ). In the
presence of Zn2+ salts, a positively charged complex is
formed on the surface of the particles that acts as chiral selector
for CCAs in water containing 20% MeOH and 100 μM ZnCl2, pH 9.0. For example, the binding constants (Ka) for the positively charged ZnII complex and d-/l-mandelic acid enantiomers were determined to be
5.2 × 107 and 1.2 × 107 M–1, respectively. The different binding affinities were explained by
the occurrence of transient diastereomeric interactions between the
chiral ZnII complex and CCAs, with only one enantiomeric
species binding strongly to N7.3. The addition of d-mandelic acid reduced the positive surface charge of N7.3 and thus triggered particle aggregation which was evident
from the distinct color change of the particle dispersion.
 Martínez-Máñez, Sancenón,
and coworkers
prepared silica particles that have been functionalized with both
chromogenic 3′,3′-dimethyl-6-nitrospiro[2H-1]benzopyran-2,2′-indoline (spirobenzopyran) and thiourea
units (N7.4 in ) and that were
applicable for the detection of aliphatic carboxylic acids at mM concentrations
in 1 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.0. Thioureas
are known to be excellent hydrogen bond donors, forming strong interactions
with hydrogen bond acceptors, such as carboxylates. Signal transduction upon analyte binding was achieved by
the spirobenzopyran moiety acting as a polarity-sensitive photochromic
moiety because its open and polar (merocyanine) state is destabilized
upon binding of aliphatic carboxylic acids (e.g.,
dodecanoate and hexanoate) to N7.4. As such, a less polar
spirocyclic state is adapted in the presence of the target analyte,
which can be readily monitored via UV–vis
spectroscopy and correlated to the amount of carboxylic acids adsorbed
on the surface of N7.4.
 Morey and coworkers described a nanoparticle-based
indicator displacement
assay (IDA) for the mM detection of mono- and dicarboxylates (e.g., acetate, tartrate, and benzoate) in 500 mM Tris-HCl
buffer, pH 8.0. The authors used squaramide-functionalized
and oleic acid capped magnetic Fe2O3 nanoparticles,
which hosted fluorescein as indicator dye (N7.5 in ). Squaramides are one of the strongest hydrogen-bonding
donors known and are therefore attractive as binding motifs for carboxylates. , Fluorescein, which has a carboxylate moiety, binds to the squaramide
nanoparticle conjugate whereby its emission is quenched by energy
transfer processes. When mono- or dicarboxylates were added to aqueous
dispersions of N7.5, the indicator dye was displaced
due to competitive hydrogen-bonding interaction of the analyte with
squaramides. After magnetic separation of the particles, the amount
of carboxylic acid can then be determined indirectly by measuring
the fluorescence intensity of the remaining “free” indicator
in the supernatant. Interestingly, tricarboxylic acids such as citrate
or cyclohexane-tricarboxylate and other inorganic anions (e.g., Cl–, Br–, NO3–, PO43–, and
SO42–) did not provide a signal response.
It has been reasoned that the selectivity of N7.5 towards
mono- and dicarboxylates is due to the higher probability of finding
one or two rather than three squaramide residues with suitable binding
conformations, causing inefficient binding of tricarboxylates.
 Similar to the probe examples presented in , ascorbic acid
can be readily detected
with nanosensors by exploiting its redox properties. Tang and coworkers
reported a selective nanosensor for the detection and imaging of ascorbic
acid at μM concentrations in different buffer solutions, i.e., 20 mM HEPES buffer, 20 mM PBS, and 20 mM MES buffer
in a pH range of 7.4–8.3, cell lysates and in mice (N7.6 in ). The sensing
system was prepared from persistent luminescence nanoparticles (PLNPs)
composed of Sr2MgSi2O7 : 1% Eu3+, 2 % Dy3+, and cobalt oxyhydroxide nanoflakes
(CoIIIOOH). The nanoflakes served as fluorescence quencher
that engage in Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) processes
with the PLNPs. However, in solutions that contain ascorbic acid,
Co3+ cations are reduced to Co2+, leading to
nanoflake dissolution and subsequent increase emission intensity of
the persistent luminescence nanoparticles (PLNPs). Fortunately, N7.6 is not affected by other potentially interfering species
(e.g., Al3+, Mg2+, Na+, Zn2+, Cu2+, K+, Ca2+, Cd2+, Co2+, NaClO, H2O2, t-BuOOH, hydroquinone, GSH, l-Cys, Tyr, l-Arg, Lys, Gly, Hcys, Trp, NaHSO3, NaH2PO2, H2C2O4, NaNO2, and Na2S2O3). Interestingly,
the detection of ascorbic acid in cells and in vivo was achieved without continuous external light excitation as PLNPs
have a persistent luminescence that, in principle, allows for the
removal of autofluorescence and scattering of light from biological
samples arising from external light excitation.
 Fe3+-doped carbon nanocages (CNCs, N7.7 in ) were prepared and used as a fluorescent
turn-on nanosensor for μM detections of ascorbic acid in Britton–Robinson
buffer (40 mM H3BO3, 40 mM H3PO4, 40 mM AcOH, 200 mM NaOH, pH 7.0) by Zhu, Tan, and coworkers. The fluorescence of CNCs was initially quenched
due the participation of Fe3+ anions in energy transfer
processes. In the presence of ascorbic acid, the fluorescence intensity
then increased sharply as Fe3+ is reduced to its nonquenching
Fe2+ oxidation state. A detection range for ascorbic acid
from 2 to 12 μM was stated for N7.7 by the authors.
Moreover, the nanosensor was successfully used for quantitative detection
(μM range) of ascorbic acid in vitamin C tablets with minimal
interference from matrix components. However, it was found that metal
cations such as Cd2+, Hg2+, Zn2+,
Mn2+, Cu2+, Mg2+, Co2+, and Fe2+ can adversely affect the performance of N7.7 as they induce moderate fluorescence quenching.
 A recent nanosensor for ascorbate (N7.8 in ) reported by Shamsipur and coworkers exploits
green
emitting carbon dots for the mM detection of ascorbic acid in 10 mM
PBS, pH 5.0, urine samples, and in cells. In this design, the emission from the nanoparticles was first quenched
by doping the emissive carbon dots material with Fe3+ ions.
When Fe3+ was subsequently reduced to Fe2+ by
the target analyte ascorbate, an increased fluorescence of N7.8 was recorded and correlated to the concentration of the targeted
analyte over a linear range from 0.2 to 11.0 μM. The authors
showed that other cations such as Na+, Ca2+,
Ba2+, Cu2+, Fe2+, Hg2+, Zn2+, Co2+, Mn2+, Ce3+, Al3+, and Cr3+ did not affect the performance
of N7.8, showcasing its robustness against potential
interferents.
 Carboxylates are one of the most challenging target
analytes for
probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors. While the detection of ascorbate
(due to its redox properties) and of some chelating carboxylic acids
(e.g., tartrate) can be performed with good selectivity
and sensitivity in aqueous media, much more advances are needed to
arrive at a molecular toolbox for carboxylate recognition in biofluids.
This undertaking is particularly worthwhile because many of the biorelevant
metabolites present in biofluids (e.g., in urine,
see in the
introduction section and for a list of typical carboxylate
concentrations in biofluids) have at least one carboxyl functionality.
Improved options for carboxylate recognition may become then of great
diagnostic utility, e.g., for the monitoring of betaines,
carnitines, short chain fatty acids, and other metabolites as indicators
for cardiovascular and other diseases. − 
 

8.

## Lipids
and Steroids
Lipids are a broad class of amphiphilic molecules
and include a
variety of compounds such as fatty acids, glycerolipids, glycerophospholipids,
sphingolipids, and sterols. More than
850 lipids, a stunningly high number, have been identified in the
human urine metabolome by instrument-based analytical methods (HPLC,
MS, NMR), making it the largest class of biorelevant compounds found
in this biofluid. , While most lipids only occur
in trace levels, it is well accepted in the medical literature that
lipids (and lipid droplets found in eukaryotic cells) are useful indicators
for diseases such as tumors, inflammations, and cardiovascular diseases. − Fatty acids are a broader group of molecules that belong to the
class of lipids and consist of a polar carboxyl head group linked
to a saturated or unsaturated hydrophobic hydrocarbon residue. Fatty
acids are an important component of a variety of cellular functions, e.g., as energy substrates, components of cell structure,
and signaling molecules. Increased fatty
acid levels in plasma, mainly due to a high-fat diet, have been confirmed
to contribute to the development of several diseases such as type
2 diabetes. , Glycerophospholipids are derivatives
of glycerophosphoric acid that contain at least one O-acyl, O-alkyl, or O-alk-1′-enyl
residue attached to the glycerol moiety. Together with sphingolipids, a class of lipids whose backbone consists
of aliphatic amino alcohols that include sphingosine, glycerophospholipids
are the major structural components of cell membranes. − However, both are known to have biological activities far beyond
simple structural components of single cells and are direct or precursors
of signaling molecules that mediate responses to physiological signals. − Apart from this, the brain is extremely enriched with lipids, and
alteration of their metabolism has been associated with many brain
diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases, neurological diseases,
and neuropsychiatric diseases. , Unlike phospholipids
and fatty acids, steroids have a fused ring structure, and although
they are not structurally closely related to other lipids, they are
sometimes grouped with them because of their hydrophobic and sometimes
amphiphilic character. The steroids progesterone, testosterone, and
cortisone play a critical role in regulating many life processes by
acting as signaling molecules in living organisms, regulating vital processes such as reproduction, inflammatory
responses, and gene expression. − For example, cholesterol
plays a critical role in regulating inflammasome activation, and elevated
cholesterol is considered an important trigger for cardiovascular
disease. , Sustained stress can lead to
the increase of cortisol excretion in the body, resulting in the suppression
of the immune system, modulation of metabolic processes, e.g., increased fatty acid and blood sugar levels, and affects the memory
capacity. , In addition, steroids also play
an important clinical role due to their potent anti-inflammatory and
immunomodulatory properties. For example, glucocorticoids are commonly
used to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, inflammatory bowel
disease, and asthma. , Steroid-mediated signaling events
in living organisms involve their dynamic concentration fluctuation,
typically in nM concentrations, over time. Thus, temporal information
about steroid composition in biological samples is important when
it comes to the diagnosis of diseases, , psychological
disorders, , or the characterization of complex
physiological responses such as stress. Currently, standard analysis methods for steroids in biofluids are
performed by using immunoassays. Given
the large number of lipids and their biological functions that we
cannot cover herein, we instead refer interested readers to other
recently published reviews on this topic. − The development of new, simple, and cost-efficient assays for the
detection and imaging of lipids and steroids in biological fluids,
or ideally directly in vivo, remains challenging
and is therefore of great interest. Similar to lipids, the design
of chemically reactive probes for steroidal compounds is hampered
by the absence of readily targetable functional groups and their poor
solubility in aqueous solutions (see ). The molecular
probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors discussed within this section
are summarized in and , respectively.
 8.1.

## Chemosensors
and Molecular Probes for Lipids
Being hydrophobic and shape
rigid, steroids are in principle excellent
target analytes for macrocyclic hosts with a hydrophobic cavity. For
instance, cucurbit[8]uril (CB8) was reported by Biedermann, Nau, and
coworkers to be a general steroid binder with micro- to nanomolar
affinities in aqueous media (Ka ∼
106 M–1 for CB8–steroid complexes
in water). While this affinity is still
orders of magnitude lower than that of antibodies and natural steroid
receptor proteins, it is much stronger than for any other synthetic
host or the carrier protein serum albumin. The smaller host homologue
CB7 preferentially binds the small steroid 19-nortestosterone (also
known as nandrolone), whereas larger analytes such as testosterone
bind (much) more weakly to CB7. The authors showed that both CB7 and
CB8 can be used as low-cost and biocompatible excipients to largely
increase the solubility of steroidal substances, e.g., drugs. To obtain a quantifiable spectroscopic
response for potential sensing applications, CB7 or CB8 can be considered
with suitable indicator dyes to furbish an IDA or GDA format, , and the assay can be extended to an array-based sensing format.
It has been shown that in special cases when using chromophoric hosts,
such as acyclic cucurbit[n]urils, some of the steroids
can be directly distinguished from each other by emerging spectroscopic
fingerprints, e.g., CD signals (see , C2.8 in ). While the μM detection limit of CBn-based IDA assays for steroid sensing is in a diagnostically
irrelevant range (pM to nM required), such supramolecular chemosensor
assays can find direct practical use, for instance for label-free
enzymatic reaction monitoring of steroidal drug interconversion in
real time. In another example, Hennig
and coworkers demonstrated that CB8-based IDA assays can be used to
monitor the depletion of steroids in bacterial cultures. In this review, the focus is restricted to
assays where steroids are detected via supramolecular
interactions beyond the use of steroid recognition units of biological
origins.
An important step forward for lipid sensing in blood
was recently made by the Guo group that developed a guanidinium-modified
calix[5]arene-based chemosensor (C8.1 in ) for the detection of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA)
at micromolar concentrations. LPA is
a biomarker for early diagnosis of ovarian and other gynecologic cancers
and occurs for healthy individuals in a concentration range of 0.1–6.3
μM, whereas largely elevated levels (<60 μM) are found
for patients suffering from these types of cancer. The target analyte
is complexed by the positively charged host C8.1 through
a combination of salt bridges, C–H···π
contacts, C–H···O contacts, and the hydrophobic
effect with an affinity of Ka = 1.6 ×
108 M–1 in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4.
This binding affinity was high enough to set up a sensitive emission
turn-on IDA for LPA by using fluorescein as a reporter dye (Ka = 5.0 × 106 M–1 for the host). Remarkably, only ATP turned out to be an even stronger
competitor for the host than LPA, but all other potential binders
tested, mostly organic anions, e.g., other nucleoside
mono- and triphosphates or aspartic acid, are much weaker binders
than LPA. The authors further demonstrated that the interference of
ATP can be resolved with differential sensing routines, and they successfully
set up a calibration curve for the target analyte LPA in the diagnostically
relevant concentration range.
 Other (deep cavity) cavitands and molecular capsules , are promising host molecules for the binding of lipid acids. Nearly
two decades ago, the Glass group had introduced fluorescent molecular
tubes that showed respectable binding affinities to fatty acids in
aqueous media, e.g., Ka = 2.7 × 104 M–1 for dodecanoic
acid in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.4 (C8.2 in ). , The molecular tubes respond
to guest binding with emission quenching, which in principle allows
for the construction of an emission-based assay for guest detection
in the millimolar concentration range. However, these hosts also strongly
bind to other guests such as heptylamine (Ka = 1.6 × 104 M–1), , , and possibly many other metabolites,
which likely limits their direct applicability for molecular diagnostics.
Recently, the fluorescent molecular tubes experience a revival due
to the contributions of the Jiang group. − 
 It has been experimentally confirmed, mainly by NMR, that lipid
binding can also occur for molecular capsules and deep cavitands based
on the resorcinarene scaffold. However,
because of the lack of an inherent optical response (e.g., these macrocyclic phenol-type hosts are usually not emissive),
one has to set up an indicator displacement assay analogous to the
aforementioned report by the Guo group for the detection of lipids.
The interested reader is referred to the cited review articles for
additional information on the host–guest binding properties
of cavitands. , 
We would like to inform
the reader now on the use of polarity-sensitive
fluorescent probes that can find use for cancer diagnostics. These
probes do not target single lipid molecules but rather “stain”
lipid droplets that are found in eukaryotic cells, and which differ
in their lipid composition, polarity, and fluidity between normal
and cancerous cells. − 
Environmentally sensitive fluorescent
probes, such as compounds
that show largely different emission spectra in apolar and polar solvents,
have long been known, although compounds
with extraordinary structural and photophysical properties continue
to emerge. − , It is therefore not surprising that tailor-made
probes can be designed for lipid droplet (LD) recognition but exciting
to see that probes can readily distinguish cancerous from normal cells
because the properties of LDs differ in terms of polarity, fluidity,
and composition (P8.1 in ). 
 As exemplary reading material on polarity-sensitive
fluorescent
probes for lipid staining (see for representative
dyes), we refer the reader to the recent works of Lin and coworkers
(P8.1), Fan, Dong, and
coworkers (P8.2), Liu,
Tang, and coworkers (P8.3–P8.7), − Sun, Liu, Li, and coworkers (P8.8), Pan, He, and coworkers (P8.9), Zhang, Hu, and coworkers (P8.10), Niko, Klymchenko, and coworkers
(P8.11), Lin and coworkers
(P8.12), Chang and coworkers
(P8.13), Qu, Yang and coworkers
(P8.14), Yin, Yuan, Chen,
and coworkers (P8.15), as
well as by Koner and coworkers (P8.16). Information on fluorescent probes for lipid droplet imaging
can be found in a timely review written by Sessler, James, He, and
coworkers. 
 
8.2.

## Nanosensors
for Steroids
Signal transduction
through plasmonic gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) is one popular and powerful
approach for achieving colorimetric sensing as AuNPs possess distinct
surface plasmon resonances (SPRs) that can be easily characterized via UV–vis spectroscopy and used for analyte quantification. , Furthermore, the surface of AuNPs can be easily functionalized with
multiple functional groups via thiol chemistry, which
enables the preparation of multimodal nanosensors. With this in mind,
a Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based nanosensor
for the detection of dehydrocholic acid in 10 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing
5% MeOH, pH 8.0, was reported by Yam and coworkers (N8.1 in ). In this
example, gold nanoparticles were functionalized with thiolated β-cyclodextrin
(β-CD), which reversibly binds to the RuII–adamantane
dye, resulting in its quenched fluorescence due to energy transfer
processes with the plasmonic nanoparticle. However, in the presence
of the steroid DHC, the RuII complex is displaced from
the β-CD decorated nanoparticle surface, leading to increased
fluorescence intensities that allow for the quantification of DHC
in the mM concentration range. Although the authors successfully described
the preparation of a simple and cost-effective steroid nanosensor,
the system still lacks in the sensitivity and selectivity required
for practical detection of DHC in biological relevant media.
 The detection of hydrophobic molecules with vesicular
systems,
such as pore sensors, , is particularly challenging,
as the analytes tend to diffuse into the membranes and remain undetected.
Matile and coworkers showed that this problem can be circumvented
by applying a “reactive signal amplification strategy”. , Fluorescence-based detection of cholesterol with vesicles was achieved
by implementing a chemical conversion of cholesterol to the hydrazone
A1S1 (amphiphilic anion or pR activator, N8.2 in ). This hydrazone
then associated with polyarginine to form a polyion complex, which
penetrated the vesicular bilayers of carboxyfluorescein (6-FAM)-loaded
unilamellar vesicles and triggered the extravesicular transport of
6-FAM. Re-location of 6-FAM resulted in increased fluorescence intensity
as it is no longer subject to strong self-quenching present inside
the vesicle. The authors showed that cholesterol can be detected in
10 mM Tris buffer containing 107 mM NaCl, pH 7.4, egg yolk, and human
serum samples with their approach. Robust
detection of cholesterol in blood samples (1.5–2.5 mg mL–1) was possible with good reliability as confirmed
by comparing the results obtained by UV–vis absorption spectroscopy
(detected: 1.2 ± 0.2 mg mL–1).
 Some of the aforementioned examples still await
their test for in vivo use, which could unleash many
applications for personalized
diagnostics, e.g., of hormone levels. When excited
by light, single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are near-infrared
(NIR) emitters and thus especially attractive for in vivo applications due to the higher transparency of tissues for NIR-light
compared to UV and visible light. It is known that synthetic polymers
can adsorb to SWCNTs via π–π-stacking
interactions, a phenomenon used, for example, for carbon nanotube
sorting and separation. − Tailor-made polymers can be designed to target steroids, thus mediating
the binding process of such analytes on the surface of SWCNTs, a concept
known as corona phase molecular recognition. A large step forward for steroid detection using nanosensors was
recently made by Strano and coworkers, who reported the preparation
of an implantable polymer-functionalized SWCNT nanosensor (N8.3 in ). In this
example, progesterone- and cortisol-binding polymers were first prepared
through a molecular imprinting method via reversible
addition–fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization
of styrene, acrylic acid, and acrylated cortisol or acrylated progesterone
( b). Once
covalently linked on the surface of SWCNTs, the polymer appendages
dynamically adsorb and desorb from the surface of the SWCNTs, eventually
forming steroid-binding cavities. Thus, when the targeted steroids
are present in 1× PBS containing 2% DMSO, they displace the polymeric
appendages, leading to an increased NIR emission of the SWCNTs (as
the composition of the corona phase changes). In this way, the authors
were able to detect progesterone at μM concentrations with good
selectivity over other steroids, e.g., testosterone,
estradiol, cortisone, aldosterone, or corticosterone, that do not
elicit a strong fluorescence enhancement of N8.3. In
a proof-of-principle for in vivo applications, the
authors immobilized the SWCNTs chemosensor within a hydrogel matrix
in the subcutaneous space of mice and showcased the sensing of progesterone
in rodents.
 As mentioned above, the main obstacle to the detection of steroids
using supramolecular systems is their suboptimal sensitivity for such
target analytes, which makes them not yet attractive for diagnostic
applications. Further, future work on the development of sensors for in vivo sensing of steroids is of great importance. New
concepts need to be developed to minimize cross-reactivities to improve
detection limits for steroids in the nano- and picomolar range in
biofluids and to increase the robustness and (long-term) stability
of the steroid-sensors in biological environments.
Given their
medical relevance, one would naively expect that chemists
have already reported several probes and chemosensors that can target
lipids and thereby complement or replace instrumental analytics for
lipid detection. Surely, there can be substantial health benefits,
if methods become available in which the lipid metabolome can be routinely
monitored by the layman at home or in point-of-care settings. However,
quite the opposite is the case, and we only found a limited number
of lipid-specific probes and chemosensors that have the potential
to become available for sensing applications in the near future. There
might be three reasons for that First, the hydrocarbon-based skeleton
of lipids represents an unattractive binding motif for developing
any reactive probe. Second, chemosensors may be able to efficiently
bind lipids in aqueous media driven by the hydrophobic effect and
dispersion interactions, yet it appears questionable how structurally
closely related, e.g., homologous lipids, that may
have completely different biological functions and diagnostic values,
can be distinguished from each other. Third, unlike amino acids and
some carbohydrates, the low concentration of lipids found in biofluids
and especially in urine (see for a summary of
concentrations of lipids and steroids in biofluids) requires the development
of particularly sensitive detection methods, matching stringent requirements
in terms of binding affinity and signal transduction capabilities.
Although higher (total) concentrations of lipids are found in the
blood serum, e.g., currently accepted threshold levels
for triglycerides and serum cholesterol are <100 mg/dL and <200
mg/dL, respectively, , and thus in the millimolar range,
blood serum imposes additional challenges in terms of selectivity
requirements and optical properties of the chemosensors.
 Just as the detection of lipids
with molecular probes and chemosensors
remains a challenge, the same is true for nanosensors. Another factor
impeding the development of nanosensors is that lipids themselves
are in many cases essential structural components of nanosensors, e.g., in liposomes or nanoparticles
coated with lipid layers, and are therefore
considered as useful building blocks rather than targetable analytes.
Nanosensors for lipid detection have, to our knowledge, not yet been
developed.

9.

## Selected Examples for Drug
Sensing
Information about the absorption, distribution and
excretion mechanisms
of bioactive molecules within a living organisms is of utmost importance
when it comes to the development of drugs with improved pharmacological
properties. Therefore, pharmacokinetic
features (e.g., bioavailability, circulation lifetime,
and duration of action) of newly designed or discovered drugs have
to be analyzed in various biological fluids as a function of time.
Current standard drug analysis techniques based on immunoassays, mass
spectrometry, and separation techniques, e.g., chromatography,
are comparably cumbersome and/or expensive to use, and therefore,
synthetic and supramolecular chemists became attracted to develop
molecular probes and chemosensors for the detection of drugs in biofluids.
It has become apparent that the actual effectiveness of treating diseased
individuals with already approved drugs can vary from patient to patient. , According to published data, current pharmaceutical treatments are
not effective in 30–60% of patients, and the proportion of
patients who develop adverse drug reactions may be as high as 30%. The reasons for these individual variations
can be diverse, e.g., due to age, gender, addictions,
ethnic factors, and drug-related factors (therapy with multiple drugs,
concomitant diseases). To increase the efficacy of therapies or even
to detect the occurrence of diseases at an early stage, more information
on the presence of drugs and metabolite concentrations in biofluids
will be important. Patients receiving
drug treatment could regularly monitor drug levels excreted in urine
or saliva, which, once the data is transmitted to a physician, could
offer unprecedented opportunities for personalized medical treatment.
In a bold vision for the future, side effects of medications will
be largely reduced when options for personal theranostics become widely
available, allowing for evidence-based selection of a drug and matching
of its dosage. Another topic of concern in which the detection of
drugs becomes important relates to the abuse of drugs. It is a major
public health problem, with fatalities attributed to overdoses numbering
7600 in the European Union and 70 000
in the United States in 2017. Probe-
and chemosensor-based assays can become a promising, cost efficient,
and facile approach for detecting illicit drugs (see for representative examples) in biofluids, e.g., urine or saliva.
 In the following section, we highlight a few examples of systems
that appear to match already (some of) the required performance parameters
for practical applications, see also and .
 9.1.

## Chemosensors
and Molecular Probes for Drug
Sensing
The Hooley group prepared water-soluble negatively
charged cavitands, which besides the detection of trimethyllysine
derivatives and proteins (see , ), were functional as sensors for cannabinols in 20
mM Tris buffer, pH 7.4, human urine, and saliva with micromolar sensitivity
(C9.1–C9.2 in b). Interestingly, the
authors found that different cannabinoid metabolites can be distinguished
from each other in urine through multivariate analysis but not in
saliva. Apparently, the higher salt concentrations found in urine
are less obstructive to the fluorescence-based IDA than the cationic
proteins excreted in saliva. It is worth noting that the cavitand
also binds strongly to steroids, including steroidal medical drugs. Thus, one would need to be aware of potential
false-positive results when using such host systems in routine use.
 Likewise, the Hof group utilized and improved their
“DimerDye
Disassembly Assay” (DDA) for trimethyllysine detection (see , ) and achieved
through parallel synthesis and screening a supramolecular emission
turn-on assay (C9.3 in ) for the micromolar
detection of therapeutic and illicit drugs (e.g.,
amphetamines, cocaine, lidocaine, and nicotine) in 10 mM phosphate
buffer, pH 7.4, and in saliva. Although
this sensing system behaves as a promiscuous binder, all 13 drugs
and drug metabolites tested provided a distinguishable response that
was assessed through multivariate analysis. Moreover, the tolerance
to saliva suggests that the salivary charged proteins were not interfering
with the calixarene-based chemosensing system. For comparison, sulfonated
calix[4]arene (Cx4) only displayed a modest affinity for the alkaloid
topotecan (Ka = 1.6 × 103 M–1 in 50% MeOH aq), which is a chemotherapeutic
agent. 
Isaacs, Anzenbacher
Jr., and coworkers combined multivariate analysis
methods with array-based sensing by cyclic and acyclic cucurbit[n]urils (C9.4 and C9.5 in ) for the detection and classification of addictive
over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. These
fluorescent cucurbit[n]uril analogues, previously
introduced in the amino acid section of this review (see , C2.5), show strong binding affinities for hydrophobic and/or positively
charged analytes such as acetaminophen (Ka = 6.9 × 103 M–1 for C9.4), pseudoephedrine (Ka = 8.6 × 103 M–1 for C9.5), doxylamine
(Ka = 1.1 × 105 M–1 for C9.5), and histamine (Ka = 5.1 × 104 M–1 for C9.4), which are found as mixtures in OTC cold remedies. Additionally,
antihistamines such as ranitidine (Ka =
1.7 × 105 M–1 for C9.5) and famotidine (Ka = 1.1 × 103 M–1 for C9.5) were bound to
the chemosensors on account of their positive charge. The analyte
binding selectivity was expectedly higher for the cyclic CB6-chemosensor
than for the acyclic variant (pre-organization and lock-and-key effect).
Importantly, the authors demonstrated that OTC drugs can be quantified
at μM concentrations even within binary and ternary mixtures,
both in water (pH 3.0 or pH 5.0) and in human urine of properly hydrated
volunteers that ingested the manufacturer-recommended amount of cold
medication. The authors concluded that their chemosensor-based method
provides a higher throughput, sensitivity, and a better LOD than extraction-based
methods available at that time (and likely still to date). Nevertheless,
care must be taken to avoid false positive results in the presence
of other substances excreted in the urine, e.g.,
drugs or food components, due to the low binding selectivity of CBn-based chemosensors.
 Our group recently reported a covalently-tethered
host–dye
conjugate that functions as a unimolecular chemosensor (C9.6 in ) for the selective micromolar detection
of Parkinson’s drug amantadine in urine and saliva. C9.6 was obtained by covalently
linking the macrocyclic host CB7 to the fluorescent indicator dye
berberine via a flexible tether through a copper-catalyzed
click reaction. As a result of the design, C9.6 is dilution-stable
and salt tolerant (e.g., remains in its folded form
even in 10X PBS), whereas other noncovalently bound CBn•dye ensembles are prone to disaggregate upon dilution or
in saline media. , The unimolecular chemosensor C9.6 displayed an excellent selectivity for amantadine in
human urine and saliva over potential interferents such as polyamines
(cadaverine, spermidine, and spermine) or the steroid nortestosterone.
Moreover, physiologically relevant concentrations of amantadine were
successfully determined in saliva and urine with C9.6 by a matrix-independent method, which provides a potential clinical
application scenario for amantadine monitoring in biofluids.
 In 2019, we had communicated
the first cucurbit[n]uril-based chemosensing system
that is applicable in blood serum.
Specifically, chemosensor C9.7 was assembled from CB8
and a novel methyl-pyridinium-paracyclophane indicator dye (MPCP),
see , that possesses a very high binding affinity
(Ka > 1012 M–1 in water). The required binding strength of the indicator dye was
rationally derived by mathematically simulating the performance of
different indicator dye–CB8 combinations for the matrix-independent
detection of Alzheimer’s drug memantine. As input parameters
typical concentration ranges of other metabolites and bioactive compounds
occurring in blood serum and their binding affinities for CB8 were
considered. C9.6 allowed for memantine quantification
through IDA in blood serum at the physiologically-relevant, low micromolar
concentration range. 
 Self-assembling probes
(SAPs, a) can offer
a much higher information content than IDA-type chemosensors, making
the concept attractive for future diagnostic application developments.
A representative example was introduced by us in which a self-assembled
luminescent metal–organic probe (C9.8 in b) responded
to a number of aza-heterocyclic compounds, such as histamine, histidine,
and the drugs nicotine, clotrimazole, fluconazole, and miconazole
in 1× PBS, pH 7.4 ( d). In contrast to the
previously described chemosensor assays, which establish analyte discrimination
by different binding affinities in an array-based system, the use
of only one probe was demonstrated to be sufficient to distinguish
24 different analytes by emerging analyte-characteristic spectroscopic
fingerprints, e.g., emission colors.
 
9.2.

## Nanosensors
for Drug Sensing
Compared
to the limited number of dedicated and selective probes and chemosensors
for drug sensing, there are considerably more reports on nanoparticle-based
sensors for the detection of drugs in aqueous media or biofluids.
Bahram and coworkers reported the use of melamine functionalized
AuNPs for the colorimetric detection of morphine and codeine in 10
mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, serum and urine samples (N9.1 in ). Opioids
are bound to the melamine moieties of N9.1via H-bonding interactions and induce particle aggregation by functioning
as “molecular bridges”. As a result of aggregation,
the surface plasmon resonances of N9.1 change in the
presence of opioids, which was used for their quantification at low
μM concentrations in opioid spiked-blood and urine samples (recovery
rates <95 %). The authors showed that potential interfering cations
and anions (e.g., Fe3+, Al3+, Na+, K+, PO43–, SO42–, NO3–, CH3COO–), biomolecules (e.g., ascorbic acid, glucose, urea, and several amino acids), and other
illicit drugs (e.g., tramadol, amphetamine, and methamphetamine)
do not produce a similar colorimetric response. However, codeine and
morphine cannot be distinguished from each other by N9.1.
 Sheta and coworkers recently reported the use of metal–organic
framework (MOF) nanoparticles (N9.2 in ) for the fluorescence-based detection of morphine
at nM concentrations in water and biological samples, i.e., urine and serum samples. The CrIII-based MOFs prepared in this work are characterized by good
stability in aqueous media and have high surface areas, which is a
beneficial feature for sensing applications in biological fluids.
Quantitative detection of morphine was possible due to its strong
H-bonding interactions with the pore interior of N9.2, thereby altering photoinduced electron transfer (PET) processes
and causing a blue-shift in the photoluminescence spectrum of the
nanosensor. The authors showed that other inorganic ions (e.g., Na+, Ca2+, and Cl–) and organic molecules (e.g., ascorbic acid, uric
acid, caffeine, and methamphetamine) did not produce a similar change
in the photophysical properties as observed for morphine. However,
the ability to discriminate various structurally analogous opioids
was not investigated. Finally, it was demonstrated that the nanosensor
was able to detect morphine in spiked (0.5–100 nM) urine and
serum samples with good recovery (>96%).
 Mesoporous silica particles (MSPs) are interesting
candidates for
the preparation of nanosensors based on “gated materials”.
In this respect, reporter molecules (e.g., fluorescent
dyes) are loaded in the pores of MSPs and subsequent pore blocking
units (or “gatekeepers”) are introduced, which prevent
reporter dye diffusion from the pores. The gatekeepers can be designed
in such a way that the presence of the target analyte triggers its
disassembly, allowing for the spontaneous release of the reporter
molecules. In this way, an amplified signal generation can be achieved,
as few analyte molecules can trigger the release of many reporter
dyes. With this in mind, Sancenón, Martínez-Máñez,
and coworkers developed fluorescein-loaded and pseudorotaxane-capped
MSPs as “gated material” for the detection of MDMA in
water, pH 7.0, at μM concentrations (N9.3 in ). In their design, the
gatekeeper consisted of pseudorotaxanes formed between cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) (CBPQT, the stop-cock) and naphthalene ligands
immobilized on the surface of the particles. It was shown that MDMA
displaced CBPQT from the naphthalene pending group due to its higher
affinity to this macrocycle. The selectivity of the nanosensor was
tested towards other opioids (e.g., morphine, methadone,
and heroin) and the tropane alkaloid cocaine, demonstrating that fluorescein
release only occurs in the presence of MDMA.
 An AuNPs-based displacement assay for the detection
of phenethylamine
(a designer drugs) was reported by Mancin and coworkers (N9.4 in ). In this work, AuNPs were decorated with sulfonic
acid derivatives, which form a negatively charged monolayer that functions
as the “binding unit” for phenethylamine drugs in deuterated
solvents (10 mM HEPES buffer/D2O) via hydrophobic
and electrostatic interactions. Analyte detection at μM to mM
concentrations was achieved though NMR spectroscopy, particularly,
by diffusion-based experiments (DOSY or diffusion filters) along with
magnetization (NOE-pumping) or saturation transfer protocols. Drugs
that strongly interact with the sulfonic acid monolayer experience
a greater shortening in the transverse T2 relaxation times,
a parameter that strongly varies on the association/dissociation rates
between analyte and nanoparticle. Thus, different analytes were quantitatively
distinguishable from each other, as their interaction strength with
the sulfonic acid monolayer is analytically indicative. However, the
analysis of multicomponent mixtures was not attempted.
Recently,
Dadfarnia, and coworkers reported the use of β-cyclodextrin
(β-CD) surface-functionalized AuNPs for the colorimetric detection
of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) nabumetone in urine
and wastewater samples (N9.5 in ). Nabumetone was shown
to form strong inclusion complexes with β-CD in the presence
of polyvinylpyrrolidone, which triggered particle aggregation and
acted as a supramolecular bridge. The aggregation of N9.5 is accompanied by a significant color change of the dispersion,
allowing for colorimetric-based nabumetone detection at μM concentrations
(LOD, 0.8 nM) in aqueous solutions (10 μM NaCl). Minor interferences
were observed from other drugs (e.g., salicylic acid,
mefenamic acid, paracetamol, 6-methoxy-2-naphthylacetic acid, or naproxen)
or biomolecules (e.g., sucrose, glucose, or lactose).
When the assay was applied to human urine and wastewater samples spiked
with nabumetone, good recoveries (> 96%) were found.
 The Heller group recently showcased the use of DNA-functionalized
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) for in vivo detection of doxorubicin in mice (N9.6 in ). The authors functionalized
SWCNTs with (GT)15 oligomers, which were bound to the nanotube via π–π interactions and further increased
the dispersibility of these hydrophobic nanoparticles in water. In
the presence of doxorubicin, the analyte irreversibly intercalated
between the DNA nucleobases via hydrophobic and stacking
interactions, thereby altering the corona composition and the photoluminescent
properties of N9.6 (see , ). The red-shifted and quenched emission
from the SWCNTs upon doxorubicin binding was used to quantify the
drug at μM concentrations in 20 mM HEPES buffer. However, the
authors observed some cross-reactivity of N9.6 with other
DNA intercalators, e.g., ethidium bromide or HOECHST
33258. Impressively, by immobilizing N9.6 in a hydrogel
matrix, the authors were able to prepare a nanosensor-based composite
that can be implanted subcutaneously in mice. The authors demonstrated
that the implanted composite produced a fluorescent response in mice
30 min after an intraperitoneal injection of doxorubicin (dose: 1
mL, 500 μM).
 A molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP)-based sensing approach for
the detection of the chemotherapeutic irinotecan at nM concentrations
(LOD, 16 nM) in water containing 75% acetonitrile and in deproteinized
human plasma was recently reported by Toffoli, Resmini, Berti, and
coworkers (N9.7 in ). The MIP was prepared by radical polymerization
of acrylamides in the presence of irinotecan as the binding pocket
template. Specifically, the reaction mixture was composed of acrylamide
(monomer), ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (crosslinker), and 7-acryloyloxy-coumarin
(fluorescent dye). After completion of polymerization, the drug template
was removed from the polymeric network by dialysis so that the final
MIPs had “imprinted” free binding sites for subsequent
irinotecan binding, which triggers a quenching of the fluorescence
by energy transfer processes. The degree of fluorescence quenching
was successfully correlated with the concentration of the target drug
in spiked human serum samples that were beforehand deproteinized to
avoid blocking of the MIP binding pockets.
 It transpires that many of the
currently available macrocyclic
hosts and chemosensors display particularly high binding affinities
to certain drug classes, e.g., adamantane-based drugs,
amphetamine-related structures, and alkaloids. This observation has
led many scientists (ourselves included) to direct the focus and efforts
to those targets to which the currently available chemosensor classes
and probes can efficiently and selectively bind. For the novice reader,
this approach may cause an overenthusiastic impression of the current
abilities. We are still far away from being able to design functional
and selective chemosensors for most available drugs. Nevertheless,
those drug classes that can be targeted by reported probes and chemosensors
do have practical relevance, such that establishing optical assays
in the praxis for these compounds could already have an important
impact (see for some concentration ranges found in
individuals treated with these drugs). We are optimistic that additional
classes of drugs can be (selectively) targeted, such that drug monitoring
by chemosensors and related systems may find wide practical utility
for diagnostics in the future.
 

10.

## Chemosensors
and Nanosensors for Xenobiotics,
Toxins, and Hydrocarbons
Xenobiotics are defined as anthropogenic
compounds that occur in
living organisms or ecosystems and that have the potential to cause
undesirable adverse effects. As such,
the term “xenobiotics” can be applied to a wide range
of chemical compounds that can enter the environment via pollution. Xenobiotic aromatic compounds (e.g.,
polyaromatic hydrocarbons) are produced, for example, during various
industrial processes such as petroleum extraction, petroleum refining,
or are formed during incomplete combustion. shows a selection of xenobiotics, toxins, and hydrocarbons.
The “Seveso disaster” is a well-known case of man-made
pollution in which a polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin,
namely 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD),
was released into the air and soil as a result of a factory explosion. TCDD is a known human carcinogen and a potent
endocrine disruptor that has a long half-life in humans due to its
lipophilicity. , Common examples of man-made
water pollution come from the textile, cosmetics, leather, food, pharmaceutical,
paint, and paper industries. Many toxic dyes such as methylene blue,
rhodamine B, methyl orange, congo red, methyl red, and crystal violet,
used by these industries often end up, accidentally or not, in freshwater. Compounds of pharmacological interest that
are used deliberately for medical and surgical purposes such as drugs
(e.g., diclofenac) or contrast agents (e.g., iopamidol) can be defined as xenobiotics, too, as these compounds
enter the environment after use through excretion with urine or feces.
Indeed, alarming studies indicate a worrying accumulation of xenobiotic
substances in the environment and drinking water. − 
 Xenobiotic aromatic compounds are usually more hydrophobic (e.g., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) than other metabolites
or naturally occurring substances and thus can often be readily targeted
by artificial binders and chemosensors. Nevertheless, a practical
scenario is the detection of trace amounts of xenobiotics in soil,
waste-, or drinking water, which in turn places stringent sensitivity
and accuracy requirements on the selected analytical detection method.
For example, guideline maximum concentration levels for benzene (1
μg/L, 78 nM) and benzo[a]pyrene (0.01 μg/L,
0.04 nM) in drinking water are rather difficult to reach with currently
available chemosensors and probes due to affinity limitations. Furthermore, the certified detection of xenobiotics
is already widely established and can be routinely carried out by
specialized analytical laboratories with powerful instrumental-analytical
capabilities. Whether probes and chemosensors will have a real application
scenario in this context remains an open question. However, in certain
specialized niche applications, probes and chemosensors for xenobiotics
may be of fundamental interest and potential practical utility, which
is described in the following. The chemosensors and nanosensors discussed
within this section are summarized in .
 For instance, the Nau group demonstrated that hydrocarbon
gases
(e.g., C1 to C5 hydrocarbons) can be detected at
micromolar concentrations in water or 50 mM acetate buffer, pH 5.5,
using a preassembled fluorescent host–dye complex formed from
CB6 and a putrescine-anchored 1-naphtylamine-5-sulfonate indicator
dye (C10.1 in a). Purging aqueous solutions of C10.1 with hydrocarbon
gases resulted in the displacement of the dye as evidenced by its
reduced emission intensities (factor >2, see b). In another example, Isaacs
and co-workers
have successfully employed the same indicator dye to monitor gas uptake
by acyclic CBn derivatives, which were already described
in (C2.8 in ). 
 The dye N,N-dimethylaminophenyltropylium perchlorate
(DMAT) investigated by Nau, Pischel, and coworkers, is an interesting
chromophoric indicator dye that displays strong color changes when
bound inside hydrophobic cavities. The
macrocyclic hosts CB7 and CB8 (C10.2 in ) were used in this assay in combination with DMAT
as a chemosensor ensemble in water, pH 4.0, to distinguish terpenes
(e.g., geraniol or linalool) and adamantanes (e.g., 1-amino-3,5-dimethyladamantane) from each. Because
of the high and similar binding affinities of DMAT for both CB7 (Ka = 2.1 × 107 M–1) and CB8 (Ka,effective = 1.6 ×
107 M–1; 1:2 complex formed) in water,
the chemosensor ensemble C10.2 can be used in the submicromolar
concentration regime for the detection of strongly binding analytes.
Because the fluorescence response of the chemosensor ensemble was
only tested in deionized water, it remains to be seen if such systems
can be applied in situations with potential interferents, e.g., CBn-binding salts. 
 The Mason group prepared
a homoternary complex (CB8-based ABA chemosensor)
from two CF3-bearing RuII-complexes and CB8
that can be used for NMR-based detection of cyclic hydrocarbons in
deuterated water (C10.3, in ). Upon analyte binding,
a ternary heterocomplex is formed and the resulting 19F
NMR “fingerprints” are analytically indicative. The
binding affinities for cyclic hydrocarbons were given relative to
benzene: Krel,cyclohexane = 160, Krel,cyclooctane = 130, Krel,cis-decalin = 8700, Krel,trans-decalin = 7500). CH−π
interactions and differences in hydrocarbon solvation were proposed
to significantly contribute to the binding process. Because the binding
studies were carried out via NMR experiments, the
applicability of this chemosensor for optical detection remains an
open question awaiting future analysis.
 Very recently, an indicator displacement assay using a 1:2 cucurbit[10]uril-acridine
complex (C10.4 in ) was developed
by Xiao, Liu, and coworkers for the detection of the pesticide dodine
(LOD, 1.8 μM) in water and food samples. In the absence of dodine, the emission of acridine is strongly
quenched, whereas in the presence of the analyte, emission turn-on
was observed as acridine is displaced from the macrocycle. Beside
acridine, other 19 commonly used pesticides (dinotefuran, oxadixyl,
penconazole, thiamethoxam, carbaryl, flutriafol, acetamiprid, ethiofencarb,
flusilazole, pyroquilon, pymetrozine, triadimefon, azaconazole, tricyclazole,
metalaxyl, triadimenol isomer A, paraquat, pyrimethanil, and tebuconazole)
were also detected when added in a 10-fold concentration excess to
solutions of C10.4. In addition, the authors demonstrated
the ability of their chemosensor to visualize pesticide residues in
samples of plant leaves and beans that had previously been exposed
to the pesticide.
 Hydrophobic analytes are notoriously difficult
to detect with structures
composed of bilipid layers because they simply tend to accumulate
in the hydrophobic membrane, making them inaccessible for detection
by probes or chemosensors. However, the Matile group showed that this
problem can be circumvented by using synthetic unilamellar vesicles
(N10.1) in combination with a polyion-counterion transport
system in 10 mM Tris-buffer containing 107 mM NaCl, pH 7.4. Their
assay allows for fluorescence-based detection of common hydrophobic
odorants (typically aldehydes and ketones) at μM concentrations. , As shown in , the vesicles used in this example were
loaded with the anionic reporter dye (8-hydroxy-1,3,6-pyrenetrisulfonate)
and the cationic fluorescence quencher (p-xylene-bis-pyridinium
bromide), resulting in an overall low fluorescence intensity of the
system. However, when the polyion-counterion transport system (cationic
amphiphiles complexes with calf-thymus DNA) was activated by a chemical
reaction of cationic peptidic hydrazides (the amphiphile precursor)
with aldehyde- functional odorant (the analyte), the transporter assisted
translocation of the fluorescent quencher out of the vesicle, and,
in turn, the fluorescence of the reporter dye increases. The authors
showed that overlap-free detection of many aldehyde/ketone-functional
odorants is possible by determining dose–response curves for
individual analytes with a large number of different reactive counterions
in combination with hierarchical clustering and principal component
analysis (PCA).
 We are aware that there are many reports on probes and chemosensors
dealing with the detection of organic toxins and xenobiotics, such
as pesticides. Nevertheless, we have only presented a few example
cases in this review because we feel that their practical utility
remains too limited unless it becomes clear how these assays can be
used for the detection of these analytes at trace levels, as for instance
required for drinking, fresh, and wastewater analysis. Moreover, selectivity
must be ensured such that xenobiotics can be detected in the presence
of a large concentration excess of naturally occurring substances, e.g., metabolites, when such assays should be applied for
diagnostic purposes.

11.

## Metal Cations
Although
in this review we focus on the state of the art in the
development of molecular probes and chemosensors for the detection
of small biorelevant molecules in aqueous media and biofluids, we
will nevertheless briefly review some of the successes that have been
achieved in the development of such sensors for metal cations. In
general, two categories of metal cations can be distinguished for
the human body, namely essential and nonessential metal cations. About
10 metal cations have been classified to be essential for humans.
Of these, the alkali and alkaline earth metal cations Na+, K+, Ca2+, and Mg2+ account together
for about 99% of the metal ion content in the human body. The other
five essential metal cations are those of manganese, iron, cobalt,
copper, zinc, and molybdenum. Most nonessential metal cations, e.g., mercury, lead, cadmium, or arsenic, are considered
toxic. Exposure to nonessential and
toxic metal cations can have several origins. First, some of the contrast
agents and drugs used for the diagnosis and treatment of disease are
complexes of nonessential transition metal cations. For example, 89Zr and 68Ga cations are common metals in contrast
agents , for positron emission tomography (PET),
GdIII complexes are used as contrast agents for magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), and PtII-complexes are well-known
cancer drugs. On the other hand, a typical
source of exposure to toxic metal cations comes from environmental
pollution, which leads to inhalation and ingestion of these cations.
While exposure from medically relevant contrast agents and drugs is
still somewhat acceptable because the doses administered are generally
safe and treatment with such agents contributes to an overall improved
treatment of diseases, bioaccumulation of toxic cations from environmental
pollution is a serious problem with disastrous health consequences.
Mercury poisoning, for example, manifests itself in typical neurological
and behavioral disorders. The mode of action by which mercury causes
severe toxicity is due to its irreversible inhibition of enzymes by
binding to sulfhydryl, phosphoryl, carboxyl, amide, and amine groups.
Cadmium is commonly used in industry, e.g., as an
anti-corrosion agent, as a stabilizer in PVC products, as a color
pigment, as a neutron absorber in nuclear power plants, and in the
production of nickel–cadmium batteries. There are three possible
routes of cadmium uptake: gastrointestinal, pulmonary, and dermal,
leading to various diseases in acute exposure, such as renal failure,
bone damage (Itai–Itai disease), respiratory distress, pulmonary edema, and destruction of mucous
membranes by cadmium-induced pneumonitis. In addition, cadmium can act as a metalloestrogen and as an endocrine
disruptor on reproductive tissues and fetal development in mammals,
including humans. Aluminum ions are
suspected of causing adverse health effects in humans, e.g., as a potential cause of tumors and neurogenerative diseases, and therefore the detection and imaging of
Al3+ cations in living organism has gained importance.
Despite the important functions of essential metal cations, abnormal
concentrations of these ions in the human body are known to cause
or be associated with disease and abnormal health conditions. Sodium
and potassium are found in all known biological systems and generally
function as electrolytes inside and outside of cells. Among alkali
metal cations, sodium cations are the most abundant species in the
extracellular fluid and account for about 90% of inorganic cations
in plasma (Na+ concentration in serum of healthy individuals
is around 136–145 mM). , The kidney is the
major organ regulating extracellular Na+ concentrations
in the body. Hyponatremia is a condition
that results from decreased plasma Na+ concentration, causing
symptoms such as nausea, general weakness, and mental confusion at
levels below 120 mM and confusion and seizures at levels below 105
mM. On the contrary, the increased Na+ concentration leads to hypernatremia with Na+ concentrations
in serum above 150 mM. Potassium ions
are the most abundant intracellular alkali metal cations and a major
component in the generation of the cell’s action potential
with their intracellular concentration regulated by ion transporters
(potassium ion channels). Known conditions associated with abnormal
K+ concentrations caused by altered potassium intake, excretion,
or transcellular shifts are hypokalemia (plasma K+ level
<3.5 mM) or hyperkalemia (plasma K+ level <5.0 mM). , Typical symptoms of hypokalemia include muscle weakness, irritability,
and paralysis and commonly occur in cancer patients. Hyperkalemia includes symptoms such as mental confusion,
weakness, tingling, and flaccid paralysis of the extremities. The
alkaline earth metal cation Ca2+ has vital functions in
the human body, e.g., it is involved in processes
of skeletal mineralization, signal transmission, muscle contraction,
and blood clotting. , Calcium deficiency, referred
to as hypocalcemia, in which serum Ca2+ levels are below
2.2 mM, is manifested by the development
of tetany associated with numbness and tingling in the mouth and fingertips
as well as painful aches and muscle spasms. Mg2+ deficiency is associated with a number of diseases,
including stroke, brain injury, Parkinson’s disease, and some
other brain pathologies such as neurosis, stress, and Alzheimer’s
disease. Copper cations are essential
transition metal cations for the function of enzyme activity. For
example, copper is an essential component of the catalytic center
of cytochrome-c oxidase, which catalyzes the reduction of molecular
oxygen to water, a key step in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Abnormal copper levels are associated with
the development of liver disorders, neurodegenerative changes, and
other diseases. For example, copper
and other metal cations such as iron and zinc have been shown to play
a critical role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease
(AD). − Metal cations and their metabolism are also
involved in many other diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease, , Friedreich’s ataxia, , transfusion-related
iron overload, and Wilson’s
diseases. The metabolism of metal cations
and its relationship to disease is a broad topic that is beyond the
scope of our work. In general, the detection and monitoring of metal
cations in body fluids such as urine, plasma, and sweat are important
measures in clinical diagnosis, and therefore the development of low-cost,
easy-to-use probes and sensors is attractive to chemists.
All
discussed molecular probes and chemosensors are summarized
in , and lists the typical concentration levels of metal cations that
are considered in this section.
 11.1.

## Molecular Probes and Chemosensors
for Metal
Cations
Many successful probes and chemosensors for metal
cations are already available and have even achieved real diagnostic
utility, e.g., for real-time monitoring of concentrations
of sodium and potassium in the blood of clinic patients. , Likewise, commercially available probes and chemosensors for Na+, K+, and Ca2+ are frequently used by
biologists to monitor cellular processes, e.g., signaling
events. These target analytes have
in common that they occur endogenously in the millimolar concentration
range, which have significantly lower sensitivity requirements for
the probes and chemosensors than, for example, the detection of neurotransmitters,
hormones, or even aromatic xenobiotics. Molecular probes and chemosensors
for the detection of trace metals or xenobiotic metals, e.g., Fe2+/3+, Ni2+, Cu+/2+, Cd2+, Hg+/2+, and Pb2+, are also common.
These metals have serious adverse effects on plant, animal, and human
health, and therefore detection and quantification of their presence
in the environment is well justified. While (“soft”
or highly charged “hard”) transition metal ions are
chemically easier to attack, probes and chemosensors for the detection
of toxic trace metals must be sensitive enough to operate in the (ultra)
low concentration range. For example, the current limit for lead in
drinking water is 10 μg/L (< 50 nM) and for cadmium, and
mercury it is only 3 μg/L (<30 nM) and 1 μg/L (<0.5
nM), respectively. 
In 2008, Thummel,
Hancock, and coworkers demonstrated that 2,9-di-(pyrid-2-yl)-1,10-phenanthroline
(DPP, P11.1 in ) has a high
affinity (log Ka,1 = 12.2)
and a good selectivity for Cd2+ ions in the presence of
other monovalent and divalent cations. The ligand exhibited a strong chelation-enhanced fluorescence (CHEF)
upon Cd2+ binding and target analyte concentrations down
to 10–9 M were detectable in 100 mM NaClO4 aq solutions. In comparison, millimolar and molar concentrations
of Ca2+ and Na+, respectively, were needed to
achieve a similar effect. Additionally, the probe P11.1 also complexes, but weaker, Zn2+ (log Ka,1 = 8.7), Pb2+ (log Ka,1 = 7.8), Ni2+ (log Ka,1 = 6.8), and Gd3+ (log Ka,1 = 5.1).
 Terpyridine-substituted tetraphenylethylenes were used by Tang
and co-workers in combination with a library of divalent and trivalent
metal cations (P11.2 in ) for fluorescence-based
detection of Zn2+ at μM concentrations in 1% THF
in water. The binding of Zn2+ resulted in a fluorescence emission enhancement of P11.2 concomitant with a bathochromic shift of the signal. The metal ions
Na+, K+, and Ag+ only weakly quenched
molecular probe P11.2, whereas Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Ru3+, and Rh3+ were
efficient fluorescence quencher. Interestingly, no colorimetric response
was observed in the presence of Fe3+, consistent with the
proposed signal transduction mechanism, which arises from a combination
of the metal ion binding event and subsequent structure/size changes
of the nanoaggregates formed by P11.2. In contrast, Shah
and coworkers found that an amide derivative of 1,10-phenanthroline
(P11.3 in ) gives a chromophoric response to Fe3+ at
micromolar concentrations in water containing 50% EtOH at pH 6.2. Furthermore, Liu and coworkers reported a
coumarin-based probe (P11.4 in ) for Fe3+ detection at mM concentrations
in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.2. The
effect of Fe2+ on P11.4 was not tested.
 Chang and coworkers reported a fluorescein-based
emission turn-on
probe (P11.5 in ), which allowed
for the selective detection of Hg2+ over other metal cations
(e.g., Zn2+, Pb2+, Cd2+ and Cu2+) in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.0, at μM
concentrations. Mercury levels in the
analytically relevant concentration range (0.1–8.0 ppm, corresponding
to 0.5 μM to 40 μM) were shown to be detectable in fish
tissue samples, demonstrating that P11.5 was able to
distinguish safe and toxic (>0.55 ppm, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) standard in 2005) levels of mercury in edibles. Two years later, the authors prepared a fluorescein-based
probe (P11.6 in ) in which the rotational modes of the
probe are restricted by the presence of an additional methyl group. As a result, a high emission quantum yield
of 0.72 in the presence of Hg2+ was observed. Rao and coworkers
reported the use of an anthracenylimino glucosyl conjugate, which
formed a 2:1 complex (P11.7 in ) with Hg2+ ions in MeOH/water
mixtures. The authors demonstrated that P11.7 can be
used for fluorescence-based detection of Hg2+ in blood
serum and milk, fulfilling EPA detection standards. 
 Frequently, dyes can form nonfluorescent aggregates
in aqueous
media, which obstructs their use as probes. Supramolecular host–guest
chemistry can be employed to overcome such obstacles. Pang and coworkers
reported the assembly of squaraine dye with cucurbit[8]uril as 1:1
complex (Ka = 2.4 × 105 M–1 in water) that bound two equivalents of Hg2+, forming a ternary complex (Ka = 4.6 × 1010 M–2) in water. Upon Hg2+ binding, the emission
of the CB8–squaraine complex was strongly quenched, allowing
for the detection of Hg2+ in the micromolar concentration
range.
In 2003, He and coworkers described an immobilizable,
visible light
emission turn-on chemosensor (C11.1 in ) for the detection of extracellular potassium levels
in Tris-HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, serum, or whole blood, which was adopted
and brought into clinical use by Roche. The chemosensor responded rapidly and reversibly to changes in potassium
concentrations (mM range) typical for whole blood samples. Sodium
interference was found to be minor, while no interference was caused
by physiological pH or the presence of Ca2+. In the same
year, the He group reported a chemosensor (C11.2 in ) for the detection
of Na+ in HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, in serum and whole blood
samples that was operational in the physiological concentration range
(120–160 mM). Also, this chemosensor
was introduced into clinical practice by Roche and mainly differs
from chemosensor C11.1 in its ionophore moiety. The mechanism
of signal generation for both chemosensors is based on the interruption
of the PET from the cryptand moiety to the dye upon binding of a metal
ion. , It is worth noting that two years earlier,
the Gunnlaugsson group reported a chromophoric azobenzene-based chemosensor
(C11.3 in ) that has the required affinity for Na+ over other cations in both 10 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.5, containing
50% MeOH and importantly also in blood samples. More recently, a crown-ether binding motif (C11.4 in )
for Na+ was used by Wipf and coworkers for selective sodium
sensing (1–1000 mM in water) in combination with gold-coated
silicon nanowire field effect transistors. 
 In 2005, the Verkman
group designed and evaluated a water-soluble
and cell-membrane-impermeable chemosensor for K+, consisting
of triazacryptands coupled to a 3,6-bis(dimethylamino)xanthylium fluorophore
(C11.5 in ). An up to 14-fold increase in fluorescence of C11.5 was
observed in the presence of K+ ions (0–50 mM) in
5 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.0, which was attributed to a decreased PET
quenching due to metal ion binding. The chemosensor showed high K+-to-Na+ selectivity (ratio >30) and rapid responses
(<1 ms) to K+ concentration changes and has therefore
been successfully used for dynamic K+ imaging in the cerebral
cortex of mice. Later, a cell-based fluorescence assay for K+ transport across cell membranes was developed in which the chemosensor
was bound to dextran polymers. The
same group also reported a slightly modified ionophore design (C11.6 in ) that further increased the selectivity for K+ over other alkali salts (especially Cs+ and Rb+) in HEPES buffer, pH 7.0. However,
the abovementioned ionophores are quickly saturated by intracellular
potassium concentrations (∼150 mM) due to their high binding affinity to K+ and thus cannot
respond to dynamic concentration changes in cells. The “obvious”
attempt to use ionophores with lower binding affinities, e.g., crown ethers, would cause detrimental reduction of the cation selectivity
by the chemosensor. Tian and coworkers overcame this problem by maintaining
a cryptand-like ionophore structure (ensuring high binding selectivity
for K+), whose affinity was reduced by the use of a strong
electron-withdrawing group in combination with an electron-donating
group (C11.7 in ). As a
consequence of the strong delocalization of electrons in the fluorophore,
the binding strength of the ionophore for cations decreased significantly.
This new chemosensor responded to K+ over a wide concentration
range up to 1.6 M in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.2, and was shown to
be suitable for the detection and imaging of K+ levels
in living cells.
 There are comparatively fewer reports for the detection of Cs+, which is understandable given its lesser biological significance.
One representative system for micromolar Cs+ detection
in 50 mM MES buffer, pH 7.0, was introduced by Leray, Valeur, and
coworkers (C11.8 in ). The water-soluble fluorescence turn-on chemosensor
is based on sulfonated calix[4]arene-bis(crown-6-ether) ionophore
incorporating two coumarin reporter dyes. The chemosensor is highly
selective for Cs+ (log Ka =
4.1 for the 1:1 complex and log Ka = 3.82
for the 2:1 complex) over K+ (log Ka = 1.71 for the 1:1 complex) and other cations (e.g., Li+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and Sr2+).
 Chemosensor designs for biorelevant divalent metal cations, e.g., Mg2+, Ca2+, and Zn2+, are also advanced and fulfill applicability criteria for use in
biological systems. For instance, two 8-hydroxyquinoline-based chemosensors
introduced by Farruggia, Iotti, Prodi, Savage, and Wolf (C11.9 and C11.10 in ) bind Mg2+ with micromolar affinity (Ka = 2.27 × 104 M–1 for C11.9 and Ka = 1.37 × 104 M–1 for C11.10) in Dulbecco phosphate buffer
(DPBS ≙ 1.4 mM PBS without Ca2+ and Mg2+ salts but containing 136 mM NaCl and 270 μM KCl) and in cells. These chemosensors exhibit the usual fluorescence
turn-on behavior as the process of photoinduced electron transfer
(PET) quenching is interrupted upon metal ion complexation.
 A conceptually related design has been established for Ba2+ ion sensing at low micromolar concentrations in 10 mM Tris buffer,
pH 10.2, by Nakatsuji, Akashi, and coworkers using pyrene as a fluorophore
and a monoazacryptand (C11.11 in ) as the ionophore. The authors showed that other cations, such as Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cs+,
Mg2+, and Ca2+ do not produce the same fluorescence
response as Ba2+ ions, indicating the good selectivity
of this chemosensor.
Many different chemosensors for Ca2+ have been reported,
which work in the low concentration regime (i.e.,
high-affinity chemosensors; Ca2+ concentration is <50
nM), and high concentration regime (i.e., low-affinity chemosensors;
Ca2+ concentration is <50 μM) − and several Ca2+ chemosensors for imaging are now commercially
available, such as the “Fura” (C11.12 in ) and “Indo”
dyes. − These chemosensors typically do not contain ionophores, but multiple
copies of negatively charged carboxylates that function as “EDTA-like”
binding motifs, where signal transduction again occurs by disrupting
the PET quenching processes of fluorescence upon cation binding. The
development of additional chemosensors for Ca2+ detection
and imaging may still be necessary for special applications. However,
Ca2+ detection in biofluids or in vivo seems no longer to be a conceptual challenge.
Intra- and extracellular
sensing of Zn2+ ions can be
achieved with a 2,7-dichloro-fluorescein-based chemosensor (C11.13 in a), which was introduced by Lippard and
coworkers. , The chemosensor was cell membrane
permeable and showed a remarkably low detection limit of 0.1 nM for
Zn2+ in 50 mM PIPES buffer, pH 7.0, containing 100 mM KCl,
with an emission turn-on response in the visible wavelength region
and near-unity emission quantum yields. In 2010, the Lippard group
presented a highly Zn2+-selective rhodamine-based chemosensor
(C11.14 in b) that shows a much enhanced emission response (factor
220 compared to factor 5 of the aforementioned fluorescein-based chemosensor)
at micromolar concentrations of the target cation (Ka = 1.37 × 104 M–1). Any new probe developed for the detection
of Zn2+ in biological media, e.g., to
study the structural and catalytic role of Zn2+ in proteins and its function in neurobiology, must be compared to these outstanding systems.
 While the usual and
arguably “best” approach in biological
and diagnostic application contexts is to design selectively binding
chemosensors, nonselective chemosensors can also be useful when the
binding of different analytes elicits unique responses. For instance,
chemosensor C11.15, which was introduced by Xu, Spring,
and coworkers, can be employed to detect several divalent metal ions, i.e., Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+,
and Hg2+ ( ). However, a conformational change of the chemosensor occurred only
in the presence of bound Zn2+, which led to the formation
of an imidic acid tautomer that showed a significantly different emission
spectrum, which enabled Zn2+ detection in the low micromolar
concentration range in 500 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, containing 5%
DMSO.
 A structurally simple but powerful fluorescence turn-on chemosensor
for highly selective micromolar detection and imaging of Al3+ in water containing 7% organic solvent and in living cells was recently
presented by Yan, Zhang, Zhao, and coworkers (C11.16 in ). For this purpose,
a negatively charged tetraphenylvinyl-type chromophore was used. Al3+ triggered the aggregation of C11.16 by binding
with the carboxyl moiety, causing aggregation-induced emission (AIE).
This allowed for the detection of Al3+ in the low micromolar
concentration range, which was consistent with EPA and U.S. FDA guidelines
for Al3+ in bottled drinking water (cmax = 7.4 μM). The chemosensor was found to be highly
selective for Al3+ over other metal cations, e.g., alkaline and earth alkaline metal cations as well as several transition
metal cations and was used for Al3+ imaging in HeLa cells.
 The ability to differentiate metal ions can be further improved
by using sensor arrays that contain differentially selective cation
receptors, as demonstrated by the Anzenbacher Jr. group in 2007. , The authors reported eight hydroxyquinoline-based ligands with extended
conjugated fluorophores that provided a ratiometric emission turn-on
signal output upon metal binding. The observed changes in the blue
and green channels of the RGB signal were used to distinguish various
metal cations, e.g., Mg2+, Ca2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, and Al3+, in the low
micromolar to millimolar concentration range. The following year,
the same group reported the ability to discriminate 10 metal ions
in water at different pH values with over 90% accuracy in the concentration
range between 10 μM and 5 mM, using nine cross-reactive metal
binders (C11.17–C11.25 in ). In addition, array-based
metal discrimination strategies using three structurally similar water-soluble
bis-triazolyl benzochalcogendiazole cycloadducts for the detection
and differentiation of Cu2+, Ni2+, and Ag+ in the low micromolar concentration range in water were reported
by Bunz and coworkers. 
 For a pattern recognition-based application scenario,
it may be
of interest to exploit the relatively strong binding affinity (millimolar
to micromolar) of cucurbit[n]urils for a wide range
of metal cations in water (see ). The macrocyclic hosts CB5, CB6, CB7, and CB8
each exhibit differential selectivity due to different size matching
(and other factors) that can likely be exploited to distinguish metal
ions from one to another. A chromophoric or fluorescent optical readout
can be readily achieved by IDA-based assays. , , 
 Self-assembled 1:1 complexes of CB7 and cation-binding
dye molecules
(e.g., N-(2-benz-imidazolylmethyl)-N,N-bis(2-pyridylmethyl)-amine, BIBPA), reported
by Cong, Lindoy, Wei, Fedorova, Isaacs, and Aliaga, showed promising
sensing properties for the detection of transition metal cations. − In the example reported by Cong and coworkers, cation binding did
not displace the indicator (BIBPA) from the macrocycle but led to
the formation of a 1:1:1 ternary complex (C11.26 in ), in which both the stabilizing interactions with
the carbonyl-fringed CBn portals and the rigid chromic
effect played a role. It was observed
that fluorescence enhancement occurs upon Zn2+ or Cd2+ binding in 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 6.5, while other cations
(e.g., Cr3+, Mn2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Ho3+) did not affect the photoluminescence
properties of C11.26.
 A supramolecular chemosensor (C11.27 in ) composed of carboxylate-functionalized pillar[5]arenes
and water-soluble perylenebisdiimide (PDI) derivatives was used for
the detection of Fe3+ at μM concentrations in aqueous
solution by Yin and coworkers. The
binding of Fe3+ induced a significant fluorescence enhancement
of the chemosensor, most likely due to an interruption of the PET
quenching mechanism. Other metal cations tested, e.g., Fe2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, and Hg2+, did not cause a change in emission or a modulated chromophoric
signal.
 While we have given
preference to optical signal transduction principles,
particularly to absorbance- and emission-based probes and chemosensors,
it is worth noting that a strong signal amplification can also be
achieved by chemical exchange saturation transfer (CEST), e.g., in combination with 19F magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). For instance, Bulte, McMahon, and coworkers demonstrated
that low Ca2+ levels, e.g., 500 nM, can
be detected by using 5,5′-difluorinated 1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (0.5
mM) as the ligand that undergoes fast exchange reactions with the
bound metal cations. Note that this
approach required large concentration excess of the fluorinated species.
In recent years, the Bar-Shir group applied this concept to supramolecular
host–guest complexes, through which significant improvements
of analyte detection in biofluids by NMR/MRI can be expected and realized. , 
Taking advantage of the AIE from tetraphenylethylenes, Zhang
and
coworkers reported the fluorescence turn-on based chemosensors C11.28 and C11.29 (see ) for the micromolar detection of Ag+ and
Hg2+ in water containing either 20% THF (C11.28) or 50% acetonitrile (C11.29). The addition of Ag+ or Hg2+ salts
led to the formation of aggregates that had increased emission intensities.
Importantly, it was observed that other cations such as K+, Cs+, Ag+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Ba2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Fe3+, Co2+, Ni2+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, and Cd2+ did not cause any change in
fluorescence. Although it is not the focus of this review, we would
like to highlight that Minami and coworkers have recently developed
an organic field-effect transistor (OFET) with an extended gate modified
by an artificial receptor for the detection of Hg2+ in
water. The authors reported that the
OFET sensors, which had a remarkably low detection limit of 9.9 ppb
(<50 nM) for Hg2+, can be used for low-cost on-site
Hg2+ detection because they are easy to prepare, reusable,
disposable, and portable.
 On the one hand, the
chemosensor-based detection of Na+, K+, and
Ca2+ ions has proven to be practically
feasible and has already reached commercial viability and wide applicability
in medical settings. Systems for sensing Mg2+, Zn2+, and even for Al3+ are also rather advanced, making them
competitive options for practical use. On the other hand, the instruments
available in analytical technology are still far superior in terms
of sensitivity and accuracy for the trace-detection of metal cations
in the environment. Usually, state-funded analytical laboratories
can afford such technologies to provide legally water-tight concentration
values for toxic heavy metals, e.g., in drinking
water, food, or soil. This limits a realistic application scenario
for optical-based molecular probes and chemosensors for the detection
of trace metals at present, even though their sensitivity and selectivity
values have already surpassed the legal thresholds for certain trace
metals (e.g., Hg2+). Molecular probes,
chemosensors, and nanosensors may become competitive options for routine
sensing applications if their scope is widened, e.g., if all legally relevant metal pollutants can be assessed by the
same optical technology, enabling the complete replacement of chromatographic
equipment in analytical laboratories.
Besides the “classical”
approach of developing highly
selective binders, alternative concepts such as the development of
sensor arrays containing differently selective cation receptors and
pattern recognition-based analysis have been attracting attention
in recent years. It remains to be seen if such methods have a real
application potential for molecular diagnostics or environmental pollution
monitoring in the future.

12.

## Inorganic
Anions
Chloride (Cl–) is the major inorganic
anion found
in extracellular fluids, and normal chloride plasma concentrations
range from approximately 99 to 109 mM (see ). Chloride anions are essential for a variety
of vital functions, such as the regulation of fluid secretion, e.g., of pancreatic juice into the small intestine, and
they are responsible for maintaining normal blood volume, blood pressure,
and blood pH. , The kidney is the main organ
involved in maintaining the total amount of chloride in the body.
Therefore, abnormal chloride concentration in the urine and blood
is an important indicator of kidney problems. For example, chloride loss in the body is caused by suboptimal
reabsorption by the kidney, which manifests as hypochloremia (Cl– in plasma <96–101 mM). Furthermore, when blood chloride levels are low, bicarbonate
reabsorption often increases proportionally, leading to metabolic
alkalosis (blood pH above 7.45). In
contrast, a high plasma chloride content, i.e., hyperchloremia
(Cl– in plasma >106–111 mM), is also an
important
indicator of renal dysfunction, e.g., renal damage
due to sepsis. Cystic fibrosis (CF)
is an inherited disease in which the function of the CF transmembrane
conductance regulator, a Cl– ion channel, is impaired. , As a result, Cl– is inefficiently transported
outside the cell, leading to liver damage and sticky mucus accumulation
in the lungs, which in turn results in increased susceptibility to
respiratory infections. Therefore,
information on chloride concentration in biofluids such as urine or
blood is important. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is an inorganic
compound that due to its pKa value of
about 6.8 occurs at physiological pH values predominantly in its deprotonated
state, i.e., as hydrogen sulfide anion (HS–). , Although the understanding of H2S/HS– metabolism and its biological functions in
humans is still not fully understood, many studies have already shown
that it plays a role in a number of biological processes, such as
blood vessel dilation, acting as a neuromodulator or neurotransmitter,
and regulating endocrine functions. − H2S is
formed in the body from cysteine by enzymatic activity, such as cystathionine-β-synthase
and cystathionine-γ-lyase. Abnormal
H2S/HS– concentrations in biofluids,
are associated with neurodegenerative diseases, heart muscle damage,
and eye diseases. , 
 Inorganic nitrate (NO3–) and nitrite
(NO2–) from endogenous or dietary sources
are metabolized in vivo to nitric oxide (NO) and other bioactive nitric
oxides. The nitrate–nitrite–NO pathway is shown to be
an important mediator in the regulation of blood flow, cell signaling,
energy supply, and tissue response to hypoxia. In addition, NO2– and NO3– levels in biofluids are important biomarkers
for the presence of oxidative and nitrosative stress and cardiovascular
disease. − For example, elevated NO2– levels cause hypotension and restricts oxygen transport
and delivery in the body through the formation of methemoglobin. As
a result of increased NO2– exposure,
hypoxia, impaired consciousness, cardiac arrhythmias, and death may
occur. Adverse health effects, particularly
to infants and babies, are also known to be caused by elevated NO3– levels in drinking water. Currently, 50 mg L–1 (800
μM) of nitrate in drinking water is the legally accepted concentration
limit (see also ). In addition to nitrate, anions such
as sulfate (SO42–), and phosphate (PO43–), which are introduced into the environment
on a large scale through the use of inorganic and organic (slurry)
fertilizers, are recognized as environmental pollutants if their occurrence
exceeds the “natural” threshold. Cyanides (CN–) are highly toxic anions and strong inhibitors of the enzyme cytochrome
C oxidase, an enzyme important for aerobic respiration. As a result of cyanide inhibition of cytochrome
C oxidase, the electron transport chain is interrupted so that the
cell cannot produce ATP for energy production. Thiocyanate (SCN–), as a final product of detoxification of CN–, is correlated with daily cigarette consumption and is considered
as a biomarker for distinguishing smokers and nonsmokers. The toxicity of thiocyanate is due to its
potent inhibition of the thyroid sodium-iodide symporter, a transmembrane
glycol protein that transports sodium and iodide anions into cells. It is generally accepted that exposure to
fluoride ions (F–) promotes oral health, which is
why many countries add fluoride to drinking water at a concentration
of 0.7–1.5 ppm. The beneficial properties of F– for dental health are based on its reaction with tooth enamel (Ca10(PO4)6), replacing the hydroxide anion
and forming a more stable fluorapatite (Ca5(PO4)3)F) that is more resistant to acidic pH levels caused
by bacteria. However, exposure to high fluoride concentrations (above
100 ppm) leads to a wide range of adverse effects including oxidative
stress, organelle damage, and apoptosis in individual cells. Because it is again not the goal to discuss
the biological role of inorganic anions in detail, we instead refer
the interested reader to other comprehensive literature examples. , , , 
12.1.

## Molecular Probes for Inorganic Anions
The cyanide anion is a nucleophilic anionic species and an excellent
ligand for many metals. Thus, many cyanide probes have been developed
capitalizing on these properties. In this review, we highlight only
a few representative examples, which are summarized in .
 For instance, in 2016, Shiraishi
and coworkers introduced a hydrogenated
coumarin–spiropyran dyad probe (P12.1 in a) that enables fluorescence-based detection of cyanide
at μM concentrations in 30% MeOH in 100 mM CHES buffer, pH 9.6.
As depicted in a, the nucleophilic attack of CN– on P12.1 promotes the opening of the spirocycle, resulting in
a strong emission increase (the emission quantum yields prior and
after reaction with CN– are <0.01 and 0.52, respectively). No fluorescence response was observed for
other anions such as F–, Cl–,
Br–, I–, AcO–, H2PO4–, ClO4–, NO3–, SCN–, S2–, and organic molecules (e.g, Cys, thiophenol, or n-propanethiol). This design
proved to be a major advance over previously reported spiropyrans,
which required UV irradiation to open the spiropyran form into a cyanide-reactive
merocyanine. , A conceptually related approach
was reported by Guo, Yang, and coworkers, in which nucleophilic attack
of cyanide on coumarin–hemicyanine dyes (P12.2 in b),
yields a rapid (3 min) colorimetric response, which can be used for
the detection of CN– in the low micromolar concentration
range in 50% MeOH in 10 mM carbonate buffer as solvent. 
 Lin, Zhang, and coworkers
reported that the acylhydrazone-based
probe (P12.3 in a) can selectively
react with cyanide in aqueous-organic mixtures (water:DMSO 4:1 v/v),
resulting in fluorescence enhancement. P12.3 can be used
to detect cyanide at μM concentrations (LOD, 97 nM). The authors
further showed that possible anion interferents (e.g., OAc–, F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, NO3–, HSO4–, H2PO4–, ClO4–, S2–, and SCN–) did not cause
a signal change. In 2013, Wu, Hua,
and coworkers described a triphenylamine fluorescence turn-off probe
that was used for the detection of CN– in pure water
and in living cells at μM concentrations (LOD, <11 nM, P12.4 in b). Again, no emission response
was observed in the presence of other anions (e.g., F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, NO2–, N3–, AcO–, H2PO4–, ClO4–, NO3–, SCN–, S2– CO32–, SO32–, HPO42–, and PO43–). A year later, a structurally similar
probe (P12.5 and P12.6 in ) bearing a luminogenic moiety
with the ability of AIE was communicated by the Yu group. This luminescence
turn-off probe can detect CN– (LOD, 0.2 μM
with a response time of 100 s) in water/CTAB mixtures containing 1%
DMSO. 
 It can be advantageous in certain applications,
such as imaging,
to employ fluorescence turn-on probes for the detection of cyanide.
Niu and coworkers achieved this by designing an oligothiophene-based
probe that was linked to a barbituric acid derivative (P12.7 in a), which can act as both an electron-acceptor
fluorescence quencher and as a cyanide reactive moiety. Upon addition of CN– to
the probe, its fluorescence is activated as intramolecular charge
transfer (ICT) is interrupted. Other anions, such as F–, Cl–, Br–, NO3–, N3–, AcO–, NO3–, SCN–, HSO4–, HCO3–, S2–, CO32–, and SO42–, did not produce a fluorescence response. By
using P12.7, low detection limits (40 nM) and fast reaction
times (20 s) were achieved for the detection of CN– in 30% THF in water in various fresh water sources and food extracts.
Several years earlier, Hua and coworkers reported a conceptually related
design idea in which the nucleophilic addition of cyanides to emission-quenched
probes restored their fluorescence properties, making them applicable
for cell imaging and as a chemodosimeter for cyanide with submicromolar
detection limits in HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, containing 30% DMSO (P12.8 in b). Unfortunately, this probe
required up to 60 min reaction time for full conversion.
 There are also several reports where Cu2+ complexes
were used as intermediary species for the detection of CN–. For such probes, Cu2+ is first bound to a cation-binding
indicator dye and is subsequently displaced by CN– anions due to the stronger affinity of copper for cyanides ( ). For instance, Ghosh, Das, and coworkers designed
a cyanide-specific turn-on phosphorescent probe (P12.9 in a)
that can be applied for cell imaging and for enzymatic reaction monitoring. The probe P12.9 showed a 0.2
ppm (32 nM) detection limit in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.6, containing
0.4% acetonitrile with no cross-reactivity towards other anions, such
as OAc–, F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, NO2–, NO3–, HSO4–, H2PO4–, P2O74–, ClO4–, IO4–, N3–, and benzoate. Park, Yoon, and coworkers (P12.10 in b), Yang and coworkers (P12.11 in c), as well as Jose and coworkers
(P12.12 in d), established similar
concepts for micromolar detection of cyanide in water.
 It is worth mentioning that a Cu2+ mediated indicator-displacement
assay that is functional in aqueous media has been established for
sulfide detection at micromolar concentrations, capitalizing on the
strong interaction of Cu2+ with S2– ions
(P12.13 in ). Thus, the detection of cyanide or sulfide with Cu2+-based
systems is always subject to possible interferences from other Cu2+-binding anions. − 
 Following a similar design strategy, the Wei group and Jiang group reported probes P12.14 (in water containing 10% EtOH)
and P12.15 (in 20 mM MES buffer, pH 6.0) for iodide ) that exploit the high affinity of I– for Hg2+ and Ag+, respectively, which competitively
displaced the metal cations from the indicator dyes (probes). Besides
anion selectivity concerns (e.g., potential cross-reactivities
with CN– and S2–) the use of heavy
metal ion additives may raise additional concerns for handling of
these probes.
 The Kim group recently
reported a Zn2+-based IDA (P12.16 in ) for S2– detection which
was tolerant to other anions, including CN– and
I–, in 10 mM Bis-Tris buffer, pH 7.0, and even allowed
for the Zn2+ detection in zebrafish. The detection limit of P12.16 for Zn2+ and for S2– were 0.3 and 2.4 μM, respectively,
and therefore lower than the requirements specified by the WHO guidelines
(76.0 and 14.7 μM) for drinking water.
 Exploiting the reactivity characteristics of S2– (and its conjugate acids HS– and H2S) is a promising alternative for sulfide detection, similar to the
probes discussed for cyanide detection. In 2013, Guo and coworkers
designed the (hydrogen)sulfide reactive probe P12.17 ( a) that undergoes a change from NIR to visible emission
by breaking the π-conjugation upon H2S addition. A detection limit of 0.14 μM was reached
in 10 mM PBS containing 30% acetonitrile, pH 7.4. Additionally, P12.17 can be used for intracellular H2S detection
and for HS– sensing in blood serum, as it is not
cross-reactive towards other anions, including CN– and I–, and biological thiols such as glutathione.
In the same year, Guo, He, and coworkers reported a ratiometric fluorescent
probe (P12.18 in b) that can be used for rapid detection
of hydrogen sulfide in 20 mM PBS buffer, pH 7.4, and in mitochondria. P12.18 was shown to be highly
H2S-selective over other anions (e.g.,
F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, CN–, NO3–, and SO42–) and biothiols
(e.g., Cys, Hcys, and GSH).
 Two years later, a highly sensitive ratiometric probe for H2S with a 70 nM detection limit and a fast response time (15
s) was introduced by Peng and coworkers (P12.19 in ). A large emission
shift (220 nm) and a strong signal response factor (168-fold in ratiometric
value) were observed when P12.19 reacted with H2S in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4, containing 30% acetonitrile. The probe can
be applied for imaging applications as the authors demonstrated with
MCF-7 cells and in living mice. The selectivity of P12.19 for HS– was tested in the presence of other ions
(e.g, K+, Na+, Mg2+, Zn2+, NO2–, NO3–, and SCN–) and thiols (Cys
and GSH), which did not affect the signal response.
 Fluoride ions have also received widespread interest
for the development
of chromophoric and fluorescent probes. They have unique properties,
such as a small ionic radius and a relatively high charge state (“hard”
anion), which makes it easy to exploit their characteristic chemical
reaction modes in a probe design. One of the unique properties of
F– is their ability to cleave silyl ether protecting
groups driven by the formation of strong Si–F bonds. Silyl-protected
phenols are an attractive moiety for designing fluoride-responsive
probes as the fluoride-induced deprotection realizes strong chromophoric
and fluorescence changes through phenolate formation. Indeed, this
approach has first been pioneered by the Swager group for the detection
of fluoride in organic solvents and
was later adopted for sensing in aqueous media. Several of such systems
have been described were the reaction rates, the selectivity, the
optoelectronic properties, and the solubility have been optimized.
We showcase here only a few representative examples.
Overcoming
shortcomings of previous fluoride probes, e.g., reaction
times >10 min for deprotection of the silyl group, Yang
and coworkers developed a rapid reacting probe (P12.20 in a) for the detection of fluoride ions at
μM concentrations in water (1% THF, 2 mM CTAB). The probe P12.20 displayed high
sensitivity (LOD, 5 μM) and provided two independent modes of
signal transduction, one based on the emission color and the other
based on the intensity of the fluorescence signal. A similar detection
limit was achieved by Lee and coworkers with a silyl protected and
fully water-soluble coumarin-based system (P12.21 in b), which required
10 min reaction time prior to the signal read-out. 
 At the same time, Ma, Du, Zhang,
and coworkers reported a simple
but selective colorimetric and ratiometric fluorescent chemodosimeter
(P12.22) for the detection of F– in
20 mM PBS containing 30% EtOH, pH 7.4, at μM to mM concentrations
and in live cells (P12.22 in ). As previously described
for other probes, P12.22 operated through the fluoride-based
silyl deprotection mechanism.
 In vivo two-photon imaging of fluoride ions, for
instance in zebrafish, is feasible using silyl-protected probes that
undergo a subsequent ring closure reaction after fluoride-based deprotection,
which was demonstrated by Lee, Kim, and Ahn (P12.23 in ). Also, fluorescein-based
dyes can be readily transformed into fluoride-probes through protection
of their OH groups with silyl entities (P12.24 in ). Deprotection of aliphatic
silyl ethers by fluoride ions can also be exploited for F– sensing if this structural change induce stacking/orientation differences
in the aggregates formed by the probe, as was demonstrated by Li,
Lu, Shen, and coworkers, using a pyrene-based probe design (P12.25 in ). This probe was used in water
(containing 50% THF) to detect fluoride ions at micromolar concentrations.
 In some cases, the direct influence of fluoride ions on aggregating
probes, e.g., based on a pyrene scaffold with an
attached boronic acid functioning as a fluoride recognition motif,
is sufficient to cause optical changes that can be used for micromolar
fluoride detection in water containing 5% dichloromethane (P12.26 in ). Likewise, there have been attempts to utilize
fluoride-promoted formation of strong H-bonds to design new F–-selective systems. 

12.2.

## Chemosensors for Inorganic Anions
Several
groups have mastered the design of inorganic anion binders,
and their contributions were summarized in a recent book section. Some representative examples of high-affinity
anion binders are the bambus[n]urils , − (Sindelar group), biotin[n]urils − (Pittelkow group), cyclopeptides, − (Kubik group) and anion binding rotaxanes − (Beer group). In the spirit of this review, we briefly discuss those
anion binding systems that provide an optical response to anion binding
and thus can be used as chemosensors (see also ).
 It has been a considerable challenge introducing a
signal transduction
mechanism into the anion binding receptors, as for instance the use
of PET quenching-based emission turn-on/off is less useful for anion
than for cation sensing. Thus, more advanced signal transduction strategies
were utilized. For instance, Beer and coworkers recently introduced
luminescent tris(bipyridine)rutheniumII moiety into their
anion-binding rotaxane (C12.1 in ), with the expectation that the luminescence of the
chemosensor would decrease upon iodide binding, as was found for the
acyclic complex. However, a notable
emission increase (6%) was observed upon I– binding
(Ka = 1.6 × 103 M–1 in D2O), which the authors attributed
to the increased rigidity of the anion bound system. Thus, the chemosensor C12.1 allowed for fluorescence-based detection of I– at mM concentrations in water. Other anions such as SO42– also bind to C12.1 (Ka = 4.5 × 102 M–1 in
D2O), generating an even higher fluorescence response (10%
emission increase). In comparison, the structurally related acyclic
system showed at least one order of magnitude lower affinities.
 In some cases, the time of the assays for anion detection, e.g., of cyanides, can be inconveniently long for probes
that undergo covalent bond formation with the target analyte. Zhang
and coworker overcame this problem by exploiting the self-assembly
of 4-amino-3-hydroxynaphthalene-1-sulfonic acid into fluorescent aggregates
(C12.2 in ) that are selectively and
rapidly emission-quenched by cyanide (Ka = 2.2 × 109 M–2) in water. The chemosensor detection limit for CN– in water was given as 0.4 μM, while other anions
(e.g., F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, AcO–, H2PO4–, HSO4–, and ClO4–) had
nearly no effect on the emission properties of C12.2.
The authors also showcased that their chemosensor can be used to prepare
paper strips for testing cyanides.
 Ye and coworkers had shown that
cyanides can be effectively bound
by the chemosensor C12.3 ( ) through a relay
of hydrogen bonding contacts in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.0, reaching
binding affinities up to 900 M–1 and a detection
limit as low as 5 μM. Furthermore,
this chemosensor design that utilized Ru(bpy)n complexes
as luminescent signaling units was shown to be tolerant towards other
hard and soft inorganic anions, i.e., OAc–, F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, NO3–, HSO4–, H2PO4–, ClO4–, N3–, HCO3–, and SCN–.
 Intracellular and extracellular concentrations of chlorides differ
significantly, e.g., ∼10 mM intracellular
and ∼100 mM extracellular in mammalian cells. Chloride imaging is therefore of particular
interest for neuroscientists that typically use either genetically
encoded, protein-based bioreceptors or fluorescent dyes, which are
dynamically quenched by chloride ions. − Both methods have their advantages and disadvantages but are not
in the scope of this review.
Probes and chemosensors that are
applicable in aqueous media for
the (selective) detection of chloride are rather rare. This biologically
relevant target anion has an intermediate softness–hardness
characteristic that makes it less likely to trigger chemical transformation
or to engage in binding interactions as previously shown with cyanide,
fluoride, iodide, or multiply charged anions such as phosphates (see ). An elegant
approach to increase the apparent affinity of a chemosensor (C12.4 in ) for chloride by nearly two order of magnitude
was demonstrated by the Severin group. The authors exploited the enhanced partition of an anion-binding
Rh-based metal–organic complex into cetyltrimethylammonium
(CTA) hydrogen sulfate micelles after chloride binding (Ka = 660 M–1 and Kapp > 104 M–1 for Cl– in the absence and presence of >20 mM CTA, respectively; both
in
50 mM MOPS buffer, pH 7.0). Moreover, the CTA micelles were co-loaded
with 8-hydroxypyrene-1,3,6-trisulfonate (HPTS) as a fluorophore, whose
emission is quenched in the presence of the metal complex, thereby
providing a fluorescent signal transduction readout for the detection
of chloride in water samples at μM to mM concentrations. Most
hard anions such as SO42–, NO3–, F–, and HCO3–, some of which occur in millimolar concentrations
in mineral waters, do not interfere the quantitative sensing of chloride
ions. Conversely, metal-binding anions such as cyanide, bromide, and
iodide were discussed as potential interferents, but their concentration
in biofluids and natural water sources is low, if present at all.
 Considering the accepted concentration limit for
nitrates in drinking
water, its concentration level appears attractive for the development
of probes and chemosensors for nitrate (or sulfates and phosphates),
nevertheless, the difficulties in targeting these hydrophilic “hard”
anions in a selective manner are considerable. Thus, many reports
have rather focused on the design of probes and chemosensors for inorganic
anions whose detection is easier, e.g., the “soft”
cyanide. Yet, cyanides typically only occur in the environment due
to accidental or deliberate spills, and thus their sensing is of lower
practical relevance.

12.3.

## Nanosensors for Inorganic
Anions
Several nanoparticle-based sensors have been reported
for the detection
of toxic cyanide anions in aqueous solutions and in biological samples
(see for a summary of the within this section
discussed nanosensors). For example, Kim, Jung, and coworkers reported
the use of bisindole-functionalized mesoporous silica particles (N12.1 in ) for the colorimetric-based detection
of cyanides in water/acetonitrile (7:1 v/v) mixtures at μM concentrations. When cyanide salts were added to aqueous dispersions
of N12.1, a distinct color change from orange to deep-yellow
was observed and quantified via UV-Vis absorption
spectroscopy. The color change was explained by the Michael addition
reaction occurring between the cyanide and bisindole, which alters
the absorption properties of the reporter dye. The photophysical properties
of N12.1 were not influenced by other anionic species,
such as F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, AcO–, H2PO4–, and HSO4–.
 A new type of metal complex-doped
silica nanoparticles (N12.2 in ) was reported by Wei and coworkers for
the detection of cyanides at μM concentrations (LOD, 80 nM)
in carbonate buffer, pH 11.0. The particles
were prepared by a micelle assisted synthesis method , by using the surfactant Pluronic F127 and yielded silica-core polyethylene
glycol shell particles that were emissive due to aggregation-induced
emission (AIE) of the encapsulated metal complexes. Fluorescence quenching
was observed in the presence of CN–. However, the
exact mechanism remains unclear. In fact, the authors demonstrated
that the CN– anions did not react with the metal
complex. The nanosensor N12.2 showed a good selectivity
towards CN– anions, as other possible interferants
such as F–, Cl–, Br–, CH3COO–, SCN–, NO2–, NO3–, IO3–, S2–, SO32–, CO32–, HPO42–, PO43–,
and EDTA4– did not cause fluorescence quenching
of N12.2.
 Lin and coworkers prepared fluorescein-loaded mesoporous silica
particles in combination with cyanide-responsive pseudorotaxanes as
gatekeepers (N12.3 in ) for fluorescent-based
detection of cyanide anions at millimolar concentrations in PBS, pH
7.4. The cyanide-responsive gatekeeper
consisted of a PdII-templated pseudo-rotaxane that disassembled
in the presence of cyanide anions due to a demetallation process that
yields the water-soluble [Pd(CN)4]2– complex.
After disassembly of the gatekeeper, the reporter dye spontaneously
diffused out of the particle pores, resulting in restored emissivity
of the dye that was recorded in the supernatant. Nanosensor N12.3 allows for mM detection of CN–. None
of the other potential interferants tested (e.g.,
F–, Cl–, N3–, and AcO–) triggered a gatekeeper disassembly.
 Recently, Klajn, and coworkers reported the use of water-soluble
polycationic [Pd6L4]12+ nanocages
with an encapsulated H-aggregate of 4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene (BODIPY) as a potential colorimetric nanosensors
for cyanide anions in water (N12.4 in ). The formation of
the nanocage BODIPY ensemble was induced by adding empty nanocages
to aqueous suspensions of the dye. The cage undergoes structural deformation
to trap a single H-dimer of BODIPY in its hydrophobic cavity. In the
presence of micromolar concentrations of CN–, the
dye-loaded nanocage disassembled and released BODIPY, which reassembled
in water to form J-aggregates that were detected
by their distinct spectroscopic features and correlated with the amount
of CN– present in water.
 A sensitive (LOD, 100 nM) nanosensor for the detection
of cyanide
anions at μM concentrations in 40 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4)
was reported by Ko and coworkers using polysorbate-stabilized and
fluorescein-doped gold nanoparticles (N12.5 in ). Fluorescence-based
detection was possible because the surface of N12.5 is
etched in the presence of CN–, which leads to depletion of the polysorbate and fluorescein
from the surface of the particles, causing an increase in the fluorescence
of the dye as it is no longer subject to quenching by an energy transfer
process with the gold surface. Alternatively, the authors showed that N12.5 was able to detect CN–via a colorimetric mode, as depletion of polysorbate also triggered
aggregation of the particles, resulting in a distinct color change
that was correlated with the concentration of the analyte. As expected,
the fluorescence signal response was more sensitive (0–10 μM)
than colorimetric detection (150–300 μM). The robustness
of N12.5 was investigated, and no cross-reactivity was
observed with F–, Cl–, Br–, CH3COO–, NO3–, CO32–, SO32–, SO42–, HPO42–, PO43–,
EDTA4–, and citrate.
 The same year, Farhadi and coworkers
prepared sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS) stabilized silver nanoparticles, which were used for colorimetric
detection of cyanides at μM concentrations in water samples
(N12.6 in ). In the presence of CN–, the particles dissolve,
which can be observed by a change in color of the particle dispersion
as localized surface plasmon resonances disappear. No colorimetric
response was observed with other anions such as F–, Cl–, Br–, NO2–, NO3–, SCN–, H2PO4–, HPO42–, C2O42–, CO32–, SO32–, and SO42–, but the applicability to
biofluids containing biothiols or proteins remains to be investigated.
 A colorimetric nanosensor for the detection of sulfate anions at
μM concentrations in 10 mM acetate buffer, pH 4.0, was reported
by Ye and coworkers. To this end, cysteamine
decorated gold nanoparticles (N12.7 in ) were prepared, which possessed good colloidal stability
in acidic media. However, sulfate anions adsorb on the surface of N12.7 and neutralize positive charges, which promotes particle
aggregation, and thus a color change due to a change of surface plasmon
resonances. The aggregation degree was quantified spectroscopically
and correlated to the amount of sulfate present in buffer solutions.
No cross-reactivity with F–, Cl–, NO3–, HCO3–, IO3–, B4O72–, S2O32–,
CO32–, PO43–, and BO33– was observed. In the presence
of SO32–, some aggregation was observed.
 More recently, Kubik
and coworkers reported the use of water-soluble
cyclopeptide-decorated and triethylene glycol-protected gold nanoparticles
(N12.8) for colorimetric-based detection of sulfates
in water containing 23 mM NaCl and 23 mM Na2HPO4 at mM concentrations ( ). Colorimetric detection was possible because the cyclopeptides bind
to sulfate on the surface of the nanoparticles in such a way that
a supramolecular bridge is formed between the nanoparticles, triggering
the aggregation of N12.8. The degree of aggregation can
be determined spectroscopically as modified plasmon resonances emanate
from these aggregates. The response of the nanosensor to possible
interfering species was evaluated and no aggregation of particles
was observed in the presence of Cl–, Br–, NO3–, CO32–, HPO42–, HAsO42–, and P2O74–.
 Chang, Ye, and coworkers communicated glutathione-capped
gold nanoparticles,
which have been surface-functionalized with a sulfide responsive aromatic
azide moiety and an amine reactive crosslinker (NHS-ester; N12.9 in ). This nanosensor allowed for the detection
of H2S/HS– at μM concentrations
in 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 9.0. In
the absence of sulfides, these particles display good colloidal stability,
whereas in the presence of sulfides, the aromatic azide was reduced
to an aniline functionality, which subsequently reacted with the NHS
ester moieties, leading to the formation of particle-crosslinking
amide bonds. Consequently, aggregation occurred which was detected
spectroscopically and correlated to the amount of the analyte. Presumably,
this system will show a cross-reactivity towards amine-functional
analytes and thus cannot be applied in biofluids.
 Ding and coworkers
reported the use of pyronine-functionalized
mesoporous silica particles (N12.10 in ) for the detection of H2S/HS– at μM concentrations in water containing 400 μM CTAB
and in sulfide-spiked blood and urine samples (recovery <99%). Pyronines are known H2S-selective
probes as the HS– are nucleophilic species which
react with such dyes through Michael addition, leading to the formation
of nonfluorescent derivatives. Thus,
the characteristic fluorescence quenching of the dye allowed for the
spectroscopic detection of H2S/HS– with
dispersions of N12.10. Interestingly, the authors found
that the addition of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) to an aqueous
dispersion of N12.10 increased the sensitivity of the
nanosensors because the surfactant neutralized negative charges on
the surface of the particles, facilitating the diffusion of HS– anions to the pyronine moieties. The authors found
no cross-reactivity with F–, Br–, NO3–, H2PO4–, HCO3–, Cys, Hcys, GSH,
H2O2, or Na2S.
 Recently, Hatai, Niemeyer, and
coworkers described the use of Pd(II)-based
metallosupramolecular coordination polymers (N12.11 in ) as fluorescent probes for the detection of HS– at μM concentrations in 500 μM phosphate
buffer, pH 7.4 (LOD, 15 μM), and real water samples. N12.11 was formed by the complexation
of the coumarin-bearing hydrazone ligand with PdII cations.
The emission of coumarin was quenched due to intramolecular charge-transfer
(ICT) processes arising from the presence of PdII. An increased
emission intensity was observed in the presence of HS– anions, which is explained by the ability of HS– to scavenge and deplete PdII from N12.11, such that coumarin is no longer subject to an ICT quenching process.
Other anions, such as F–, Cl–,
Br–, I–, SCN–, CO32–, SO42–, SO32–, S2O32–, and acetate (120 μM) did not affect the emission
signal of N12.11.
 Cuboid mesoporous silica particles
functionalized with o-safranin were designed as permanganate
selective fluorometric
nanosensors (N12.12 in ) by Yang, Liang,
and coworkers. In this example, the
particles were covalently linked with the fluorescent reporter dye o-safranin. In the presence of permanganate anions, fluorescence
quenching was observed and used to for quantification (LOD, 0.5 μM).
The observed decrease in fluorescence was explained by the formation
of strong R2NH+ and MnO4– interactions (R2NH+····O=Mn)
between the analyte and the urea moiety, giving rise to charge transfer
processes. Fluorescence quenching was not observed in the presence
of other anions, such as F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, NO3–, HCO3–, CO32–, SO42–, HSO3–, SO32–, Cr2O72–, CrO42–, HPO42–, and PO43–. The authors demonstrated in a proof-of-concept experiment that N12.12 can be used for in vivo imaging of
artificially administered permanganate ions in zebrafish models.
 Paul and coworkers
reported the use of sulfonated-calix[4]arene
(Cx4) decorated gold nanoparticles (N12.13 in ) for colorimetric detection of iodide at μM
levels in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4. N12.13 showed a
good selectivity over other common anions, e.g.,
F–, Br–, H2PO4–, ClO4–, NO3–, IO4–, BF4–, CN–, SCN–, CH3COO–, HSO4–, HSO3–, SO32–, and S2O42–. In the presence of I– anions,
particle aggregation was observed and monitored by UV–vis absorption
spectroscopy. It was reasoned that iodide adsorbed on the surface
of the nanoparticle, driven by energetic induction (I– – e– → Iadsorbed + e–). The adsorption of
iodide leads to a decrease of negative charges on the surface of N12.13, causing the detachment of Cx4, which in turn promotes
particle aggregation.
 A colorimetric-based detection for iodide at micromolar concentrations
in 200 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, urine, blood, and food samples
with the use of chitosan oligosaccharide lactate-capped plasmonic
silver nanoparticles (N12.14 in ) was reported by Vasimalai and coworkers. The authors showed that the presence of I– modulated the characteristic surface plasmon resonance
of the particles (decrease in absorbance), which was explained by
the formation of a new layer of insoluble AgI layer surrounding N12.14. Other anions, such as F–, Br–, NO3–, NO2–, H2PO4–, CN–, SCN–, SO42–, and CO32–, did not
affect the surface plasmon resonance of N12.14. The authors
showed that N12.14 can be used for μM detection
of I– in spiked urine and blood with good recovery
(>98%). Finally, it was demonstrated that the nanosensor can be
immobilized
on paper-strips and used for easy and practical I– detection.
 A mesoporous silica-based nanosensor for the detection of fluoride
anions was introduced by Sarkar and coworkers (N12.15 in ). Covalent
immobilization of nitrobenzoxadiazole dyes in the pores of mesoporous
silica particles results in strong emission quenching due to nonradiative
energy transfer processes occurring in this confined space (aggregation-induced
quenching). In the presence of F–, the covalent
Si–O–C bond which links the fluorescent molecule with
the silica surface is hydrolyzed. As a result, the dye molecules diffuse
out of the pores into the aqueous bulk, where their fluorescence intensity
is restored. Fluorometric analysis allowed for selective F– detection at micromolar concentrations in acidic MeCN/water (7:3
v/v) mixtures, pH 2.5.
 Recently, a ratiometric sensing strategy which is selective for
chloride anions has been evaluated by Wang and coworkers and used
for intracellular Cl– quantification. For this purpose, dual fluorescent silica
particles (N12.16 in ) were prepared
physically entrapping the [RuII(1,10-phenanthroline)3] complex (reference dye) and bearing on their surface the
Cl– responsive fluorescent dye N,N′-bis(carboxypropyl)-9,9′-biacridine (reporter dye), which was grafted onto the
surface of the particles by alkoxysilane chemistry. In the presence
of Cl–, the fluorescence lifetime of the reporter
dye decreases significantly as chloride quenches its fluorescence,
while the fluorescence lifetime of the reference dye remains unchanged.
This allowed the quantification of chloride anions in the concentration
range of 0–200 mM. Cell uptake experiments showed that N12.16 accumulates in lysosomes, where it remains functional.
Because the Cl– concentration is different in various
cell compartments, e.g., 5–20 mM in cytosol
and more than 80 mM in lysosomes, , N12.16 holds the potential to serve as a nanosensor for chloride imaging
in living cells, especially for studying lysosomal function.
 In summary, for the sensing of some inorganic anions,
namely cyanide,
fluoride, and (hydrogen)sulfides, powerful probes, chemosensors, and
nanosensors have become available that are usable in water, in biofluids,
and for imaging applications. Reactive probes and some nanosensors
appear to outperform chemosensors for these target anions in terms
of detection limits and anion selectivity. However, reversible anion-binding
chemosensors will be advantageous for monitoring of dynamic anion
concentration changes, e.g., in biological systems.
Again, the number of molecular probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors
available for a particular anion does not correspond to its biological
or environmental importance; cyanides and fluorides are rather rarely
encountered in biofluids and fresh water sources, and if, such as
in the event of a spillage, instrumental analytical methods may be
applicable and preferable ( ). On the contrary, the choice
of molecular probes, chemosensors, and nanosensors with an optical
readout is much more limited for the frequently encountered anions
such as sulfate, chloride, and nitrate.

13.

## Phosphates
13.1.

## Biological Role and Structure of Common Inorganic
Phosphates
Inorganic phosphates are essential anions for
all organisms as they are constituents hard tissues such as bone,
teeth, and cartilage. In addition,
inorganic phosphates are used by the body to synthesize vital biomolecules
already discussed in and , such as DNA, phospholipids, adenosine triphosphate, and are important
functional groups involved in posttranslational protein modifications. , Therefore, phosphates are crucial for maintaining homeostasis of
energy metabolism, cell signaling, regulation of protein synthesis,
skeletal development, and bone integrity. , Although calcium phosphates are the major inorganic constituents
of biological hard tissue, their insoluble precipitates can crystallize
in the body in undesirable ways, causing a variety of diseases, such
as urinary stones, , atherosclerosis, − dental calculus, , and chondrocalcinosis. In addition, elevated urinary phosphate levels
are also considered a biomarker for chronic kidney disease. The intake of inorganic phosphates in Europe
has been found to have doubled since 1990, mainly due to the increasing
consumption of processed foods, while their use is based on their
ability to increase shelf life. Therefore,
monitoring inorganic phosphates in biofluids is an interesting topic
for further risk assessment. For example, high serum phosphate concentrations
have been shown to be an important risk factor for increased cardiovascular
and overall mortality in patients with renal disease. , Because the focus of this review is not on a detailed explanation
of the metabolism of inorganic phosphates, we refer the interested
reader instead to other excellent reviews on this topic. , lists the
typical phosphate concentrations found in biofluids.
 The smallest
inorganic phosphate is the orthophosphate anion (PO43–), in which the central phosphorus atom is surrounded
by four tetrahedrally arranged oxygen atoms. Orthophosphate is derived
directly from phosphoric acid ( a). As depicted
in b, phosphoric
acids/phosphates are involved in a pH-dependent dissociation equilibrium,
with only undissociated H3PO4 existing at pH
< 1.0, while dihydrogen phosphate (H2PO4–) species predominate at pH 4.2 and hydrogen phosphate
(HPO42–) species at pH 8.2.
Only in strongly basic solutions (pH < 10), the fully deprotonated
orthophosphate prevails. Therefore, when designing molecular probes,
chemosensors, or nanosensors, it must be considered that H2PO4– and HPO42– predominate in biological media. In addition to the net negative
charge of the phosphate anions, the H-bond capability of phosphates
is of interest for the design of selective sensors.
 Another important class of phosphates are pyrophosphates,
which
consist of two phosphorus atoms connected by a P–O–P
bond ( a).
The pyrophosphate anion is a polyvalent anion that has a strong binding
affinity to divalent cations, e.g., Zn2+ or Ca2+, which is the property most exploited property
for phosphate detection by probes and chemosensors.

13.2.

## Molecular Probes and Chemosensors for Phosphate
and Pyrophosphate Anions
To date, the most efficient strategy
to bind phosphates is based on the use of “hard” transition
metal cations such as Zn2+, Cu2+, and Fe3+ that form strong Lewis acid–base interactions with
phosphate anions. When compared to other anions, the detection limits
for inorganic phosphates are not that stringent. Phosphates are commonly
found in urine at 4–12 mM and in blood at 1.4–2.2 mM
concentrations. , In this subsection, we mainly
focus on recent examples of chemosensors and recommend that the reader
consult the review by Yoon and coworkers for examples published before
2009. The chemosensors discussed within
this section are summarized in .
 The Molybdenum Blue
reaction is the most common approach for the
detection of orthophosphate anions in aqueous solutions and biological
fluids (P13.1 in ). In strongly
acidic solutions (pH < 1.0), MoIV salts react with phosphates
to form a Keggin-type anionic complex, which after reduction, e.g., by ascorbic acid, forms a deep-blue solution. The total amount of phosphate (inorganic and
organic) can thus be quantified by monitoring this distinct color
change using UV–vis spectroscopy. However, while the harsh
acidic environment is suitable for urine and deproteinized serum measurements, the Molybdenum Blue reaction cannot be applied
for live cell analysis and in vivo monitoring of
phosphates. More recently, the molybdenum reagent-based assay has
been simplified by the use of paper strips impregnated with molybdenum
blue, allowing for the detection of
phosphates at μM concentrations in aqueous media. Here, the
molybdenum blue agent was applied as an ethylene-glycol stabilized
complex, allowing not only an improved stability, sensitivity, and
selectivity but also a decreased risk of the exposure towards the
toxic molybdenum. The detection and quantification of phosphate was
achieved by a colorimetric readout resulting in a detection limit
between 1.3 and 2.8 μM in various aqueous media including seawater.
 A surprisingly simple
chemosensor based on the small molecule 1,3,5-trinitro-2,4-dimethyl-benzene
(C13.1 in a) used for the detection
of phosphate in urine at mM concentrations (LOD, 168 μM) was
reported by Lowdon and coworkers. In
this example, the detection of phosphates in urine samples was possible
as the analyte triggers a color change of C13.1 in 90%
DMSO in water, which can be explained by the coordination of the phosphate
to the electron-deficient trinitro compound, giving rise to charge
transfer (CT) interactions. The authors reported that the spectroscopic
properties of C13.1 are also affected by K+, Ca2+, Cl–, and SO42– ions that suppress the CT absorbance of the C13.1–phosphate complex, whereas Na+ and
HCO3– slightly enhance the signal. The
phosphate content of untreated urine samples was determined to be
560 ± 20 μg mL–1 when applying chemosensor C13.2, whereas the molybdenite assay typically used for phosphate
quantification indicated a value of 740 ± 10 μg mL–1. The lower values obtained with C13.1 can be attributed to possible negative interference from biomolecules
that do not affect the molybdenite assay. Although this example may
not be the most convenient alternative to existing phosphate probes,
the work presented demonstrates how a small and relatively simple
molecule can be utilized for the rapid and semi-quantitative detection
of biorelevant chemical species.
 Pyrophosphate anions are typically found at much lower concentrations
(low μM range) than orthophosphates,
and therefore the sensitivity requirements for probes and chemosensors
for pyrophosphate detection are more critical. Sukul and coworkers
were able to show that a chemosensor ensemble formed by aspartic acid-functionalized
perylene diimide and Cu2+ cations (C13.2 in b) can be used
for the detection of pyrophosphate at μM concentrations in 10
mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4. In aqueous
solutions, C13.2 forms nonemissive aggregates due to
aggregation-induced quenching. However, pyrophosphate anions have
been shown to strongly coordinate to Cu2+ and thereby disrupting
aggregation, thus leading to the formation of a highly emissive monomeric
species of C13.2 in aqueous solution. Other anions, e.g., F–, Cl–, Br–, NO2–, NO3–, HPO42–, SO42–, and CO32–, did not cause interferences, indicating a good selectivity of C13.2 for pyrophosphate detection.
A chemosensor for
the reversible fluorescence turn-off detection
of pyrophosphate at μM concentrations in HEPES buffer containing
20% DMSO and in rat adrenal cells was recently reported by Xu, Qing,
and coworkers (C13.3 in ). The chemosensor C13.3 was prepared
by adding Cu2+ salts to hemicyanine-labeled 2-(2′-hydroxyphenyl)-4-methyloxazole
(dye) yielding a nonemissive complex. The quenched fluorescence was
attributed to the paramagnetic nature of CuII, which promotes
energy dissipation from the excited state of the dye via nonradiative processes. Comparable to C13.2, the fluorescence
properties of C13.3 are also restored in the presence
of pyrophosphate anions as the analyte depletes CuII ions
from the chemosensor. Interestingly, the authors showed that the fluorescence
properties of C13.3 switches reversibly upon additions
of pyrophosphate and CuII ions. Additionally, C13.3 also has a good selectivity for pyrophosphate anions over other
phosphate species, such as PO43–, H2PO4–, ADP, and other common anions
such as F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, HCO3–, NO3–, HSO4–, SO42–, and CO32–.
 Recently, Zheng, Wu, and coworkers described sulfonated cyanine
dye derivatives in combination with TbIII cations as a
chemosensor ensemble for the micromolar detection of H2PO4– and pyrophosphate in hexamethylenetetramine-HCl
buffer, pH 7.0 (C13.4 in ). In the absence of phosphates, C13.4 forms aggregates that can be distinguished from the nonaggregated
dye by their characteristic absorption spectrum. However, because
of the stronger binding of phosphates to the “hard”
TbIII ions, the cyanine dye was depleted from the chemosensor
in the presence of phosphates. The authors showed that other ions
(e.g., Cl–, Br–, I–, SO42–, HCO3–, NO3–, Cu2+, Zn2+, Mg2+, Hg2+, Cd2+, Co2+, Ba2+, Al3+, and
Fe3+) or amino acids do not interfere with the detection
of H2PO4– or pyrophosphate.
However, the distinction between phosphate and pyrophosphate anions
remains difficult, as both elicit a similar concentration dependent
optical response. Furthermore, C13.4 was observed to
give cross-reactivities with organic phosphates (e.g., ATP and ADP) as they also coordinate TbIII cations.
Finally, the authors investigated the use of C13.4 for
the detection of phosphates in spiked saliva samples and found that
their chemosensor provided robust detection with good recoveries (>97%).
Additionally, the concentration results obtained were consistent with
measurements obtained from ion chromatography analysis.
 In the quest of chemosensors
with selectivity for pyrophosphate
anions, Li and coworkers recently reported a isoniazid functionalized
calix[4]arene chemosensor (C13.5 in ) that binds pyrophosphate anions (Ka = 6.68 × 105 M–1 for
1:1 complex) in 10 mM Tris-HCl solutions, pH 7.2, containing 100 mM
KCl. Inspired by naturally occurring
ion channels of cells, the authors prepared polyimide-based tubular
nanostructures whose channels were functionalized with C13.5. Conductivity measurements showed low K+ ion mobility
in the absence of pyrophosphate. In the presence of pyrophosphate
anions and due to their binding affinity to C13.5, an
increased K+ mobility was observed, which was correlated
to the amount of pyrophosphate (10–1 mM range). The increased
potassium ion mobility can be explained by the overlap of the electrical
double layer at the tip side of the negatively charged channel, resulting
in a concentration gradient that produces higher ionic conductivity
and ionic current. The authors showed that C13.5 offers
good selectivity towards pyrophosphate over H2PO42–, ATP, and ADP. The use of this chemosensor has
yet to be evaluated for real biological applications as the presence
of other cations typically found in such biofluids can potentially
negatively affect the performance of the sensor.
 
13.3.

## Nanosensors for Phosphate and Pyrophosphate
Anions
An early example for the detection of phosphates by
nanosensors was reported by Gunnlaugsson and coworkers (N13.1 in ). Although
the authors focused on the detection of the organic phosphate flavin,
the possibility to detect H2PO4– anions at μM concentrations in 100 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4,
was also considered. In this example, gold nanoparticles were decorated
with a EuIII–cyclen complex, which forms a highly
emissive complex upon addition of an aryl-substituted β-diketone
( ). However, in the presence of phosphate anions, the
emission of the lanthanides is quenched because the phosphate displaces
the β-diketone from the lanthanide complex, allowing for the
solvent molecules (H2O) to bind to the metal center, which
in turn results in O–H-mediated vibrational quenching of its
emission.
 Li
and coworkers designed a colorimetric assay using carboxylic
acid-functionalized AuNPs that aggregate in the presence of EuIII cations (N13.2 in ). This phenomena can
be explained by the ability of EuIII to bind to carboxylates,
which thus neutralizes the negative charges on the surface of the
particles responsible for the repulsive forces (see ). However, pyrophosphate
anions prevent aggregation of N13.2 due to their high
binding affinity to EuIII. Therefore, by measuring the
degree of N13.2 aggregation via UV–vis
absorption spectroscopy (surface plasmon resonances change upon particle
aggregation), a colorimetric-based detection of pyrophosphate at μM
concentrations was achieved in 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.4. The
authors showed that the nanosensor is not affected by other possible
interferents such as Cl–, Br–,
NO2–, NO3–, ClO–, SO42–, SO32–, ClO3–,
S2–, S2O32–, SDS, Cys, acetic acid, Ca2+, Mg2+, and Mn2+. Potential cross-reactivities with nucleosides, H2PO4–, or PO43– were not investigated.
 A sensitive colorimetric-based
nanosensor for the detection of
pyrophosphate at μM concentrations (LOD, 140 nM) in 10 mM
HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, was reported by Balasubramanian and co-workers
(N13.3 in ). In this example, gold nanoparticles were decorated with positively
charged resorcinarenes that served as recognition units for negatively
charged pyrophosphate anions. Thus, in the presence of pyrophosphates,
aggregation of N13.3 occurs, akin to the sensing mechanism
for N13.2. The aggregation of N13.3 was
determined by UV–vis absorption spectroscopy and correlated
with the concentration of pyrophosphate. The authors showed that other
anions such as F–, Cl–, CO32–, AcO–, SO42–, and NO3– do not
trigger any colorimetric response. The authors also confirmed that
H2PO4– and PO43– did not cause any colorimetric response. However,
organic phosphates such as ADP and ATP were found to interfere. The
authors argued that the selectivity of N13.3 for pyrophosphate
over H2PO4– and PO43– may be attributed the strength of pyrophosphate
binding by the resorcinarene cavitand.
 Recently, Wu, Zhang, and coworkers
reported a smartphone-based
detection system for pyrophosphate (LOD, 1 μM) in water and
in meat samples. To this end, polyvinylpyrrolidone
(PVP)-capped silver nanoparticles (N13.4 in ) were prepared that aggregate in the presence of divalent
ions such as Pb2+, which can be monitored colorimetrically.
However, pyrophosphate, which binds strongly to Pb2+, prevents
aggregation of the nanoparticles. Data analysis was performed by a
smartphone camera with a specially programmed application. Good selectivity
of N13.4 was demonstrated, as the nanosensor is not affected
by F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, S2–, CO32–, AcO–, NO3–, SO32–, SO42–, HCO3–, H2PO4–, HPO42–, and PO43–. Although the authors found that anions
such as S2– and SO42– do not cause a colorimetric response in their specific setup, they
could be potential cross-reactants in different scenarios. This is
because they are known to form Pb2+ salts with low solubility,
leading to PbS and PbSO4 precipitates, which are not detected
by N13.4.
 A simple fluorescent turn-on nanosensor
based on silk-fibroin capped
plasmonic silver nanoparticles for μM detection of pyrophosphate
in Britton–Robinson buffer and spiked urine samples was reported
by Shuang, Zhang, and coworkers (N13.5 in ). The authors observed
that the characteristic fluorescence of N13.5 is quenched
when the particles are doped with Cu2+ ions (Cu2+ cations are complexed by fibroid). However, the presence of pyrophosphate
restores the fluorescence of the nanoparticles as it binds to Cu2+ and thus sequesters the fluorescence quencher (indicator
displacement assay). Cross-reactivity with other ions (e.g., I–, NO3–, CN–, PO43–, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, Hg2+, Zn2+, Ni2+, Pb2+, and Fe3+) was not
observed, and the nanosensor N13.5 can be used to detect
pyrophosphate in diluted and spiked urine samples with good recovery
(>99%).
 Good detection limits
for pyrophosphate anions (LOD, 860 μM)
in urine samples were reported by Hu, Han, and co-workers using Fe3+-doped carbon dots (N13.6 in ). The fluorescence
of the carbon dots is initially quenched by Fe3+ through
energy transfer processes. However, in the presence of pyrophosphates,
Fe3+ ions were efficiently complexed and depleted from
the surface of the nanoparticles, resulting in increased fluorescence
of the carbon dots. No interference of other anions or biomolecules
(e.g., F–, Cl–, Br–, I–, NO3–, S2–, BrO32–, SO42–, SO32–, S2O32–, S2O82–, CO32–,
HCO3–, H2PO4–, HPO42–, Cys, deoxyribose,
ribose, lactic acid, folic acid, uric acid, and cholesterol) was observed,
and the authors demonstrated that N13.6 can be applied
for the detection of pyrophosphate at μM concentrations in spiked
urine samples with recoveries of up to 99%.
 The detection of orthophosphate
anions (PO43–) with hybrid carbon dot/zeolitic
imidazole framework-90 (ZIF-90)
particles was recently reported by Hu and coworkers (N13.7 in ). In this
work, carbon dots were incorporated into the ZnII-based
metal-organic framework (ZIF-90), where their fluorescence was efficiently
quenched by energy transfer processes. However, the luminescence was
restored upon the addition of ortho-phosphate anions,
as the ZIF-90 framework disassembled through the complexation of phosphates
with the ZnII centers. Fluorescence-based detection of
orthophosphate at μM concentrations in 10 mM Tris-HCl buffer,
pH 8.6, tap and lake water samples was demonstrated with good selectivity
over Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Ba2+, Hg2+, Cd2+, Mn2+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Fe3+, Cr3+, ClO–, CO32–, and S2O32–.
 Shu, Wang, and coworkers
reported that the addition of orthophosphate
or pyrophosphate to a mixture of EuIII, adenine, and 2,6-pyridinecarboxylic
acid triggers the formation of fluorescent nanoparticles (N13.8 in ) that can be used to determine the μM
concentrations of phosphates in 15 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, and
in diluted urine samples. It was suggested
that through phosphate co-binding, the EuIII–carboxylate
bonds shorten and that therefore energy transfer from the carboxylate-ligands
to EuIII becomes more efficient. No interferences were
caused by metal cations, anions, or other phosphor-containing substances.
Finally, N13.9 was shown to be useful for sensing inorganic
phosphates (orthophosphate and pyrophosphate) in diluted urine samples
without further sample treatment; the results obtained were in good
agreement with a phosphomolybdate blue assay.
 The chemical properties of phosphates, such as their pH-dependent
anion equilibria or ability to bind strongly to hard metal cations,
can be exploited to develop sensors for the rapid, simple, and reliable
detection of phosphates in biological fluids ( ). Indeed, commercial assays for the detection of total phosphate
(organic and inorganic) in biofluids already exist (e.g., molybdenum-based assays), but such assays require harsh reaction
conditions (use of MoIV salts and pH values <2) and
typically only indicate the amount of total phosphate (organic and
inorganic) in biological samples. Most assays currently in use for
phosphate detection are based on electrochemical and enzymatic reactions,
which we do not cover in this review. − Despite the promising recently reported molecular probes, chemosensors,
and nanosensors, the development of selective probes and sensors that
can distinguish, for example, orthophosphate and pyrophosphates or
pyrophosphates from ADP and ATP, is still a task of great interest.

14.

## Concluding
Remarks
In this review, we have attempted to provide an overview
of the
current status of probes and chemosensors for analytical applications.
We have focused our attention on systems that are already capable
of detecting small molecule targets in aqueous media or even biofluids
because we believe that functional supramolecular analytical assays
for clinics, for point-of-care applications, and for home use may
become a game changer in the area of medical diagnostics. In reviewing
the many systems and studies available, we noticed that there is already
a wealth of data and detailed understanding available. Yet almost
all studies using probes and chemosensors are executed and communicated
from the chemists’ perspective and rarely involving clinical
or “pure” analytical experts. Furthermore, the studies
are usually restricted to a very small number of biofluid samples.
In those few reports that had a strong focus on the medical diagnostic
use of molecular probes, chemo- and nanosensors, only simple probes, e.g., a general thiol-reactive probe, were investigated.
When comparing the status quo to other molecular recognition-based
research areas in which fundamental research and application are already
more closely linked, the question arises which hurdles need to be
overcome for bringing molecular probes, chemo- and nanosensors into
real-life use. Surely, the performance parameters of some molecular
probes and chemosensors still do not meet the practical requirements,
for instance, in terms of binding affinity and especially analyte
selectivity, but recent developments seem to close the gap. We believe
that one major obstacle is the imbalance between the modest number
and types of analytes tested in research laboratories and the richness
of the molecular composition of biofluids. Obviously, it is difficult
for chemists to evaluate their new chemosensor designs against hundreds
of possible small molecule target compounds. However, the common routine
of selecting a (very) small number of “cherry picked”
analytes and evaluation of their interaction with the molecular probes,
chemo- and nanosensors may lead to false conclusions. Moreover, many
reports differ in the assay medium, e.g., buffer
type, ionic strength, pH, cosolvents, or additives, whose selection
is surely guided by the best of intentions, but this strategy obscures
the comparison between different studies and may lead away from the
typical composition of biofluids. Also, the commonly performed spiking
experiments have to be critically evaluated unless different biofluid
matrixes, e.g., different urine or blood serum samples
from different sources/donors, are used in a blinded fashion. Oftentimes,
the molecular probes, chemo- and nanosensors were evaluated by comparing
the optical signal readouts of spiked samples versus blank samples,
but in a realistic scenario it is of utmost importance that matrix-to-matrix
variations do not affect the target analyte quantification.
Moreover, compared to biochemists (e.g., from
the area of proteomics, genomics, and metabolomics), there is still
a lack in electronically accessible databases and repositories when
it comes to pure chemistry. This complicates the evaluation of newly
designed molecular probes or chemosensors in comparison to findings
with other structurally related compounds and against previously used
experimental conditions. To improve this situation, our group has
recently launched the community-based, open-access, non-profit repository SupraBank.org, where the thermodynamic,
kinetic, and spectroscopic data of chemosensor–analyte (generally
host–guest) pairs can be stored and made electronically accessible
to the community. We hereby warmly invite any interest party to join
this undertaking.
Probes and chemosensors are likely to remain
rather unselective
binders compared to biosensors and are certainly not reaching the
detection limit and accuracy of instrumental-based analytical methods
such as HPLC-MS/MS in the near future. Therefore, we believe it is
unlikely that they will replace established analytical methods in
any application where legally reliable, and watertight data is needed,
for instance, in monitoring of drinking water quality or for identifying
subjects committing drug abuse in sports. In contrast, all kinds of
high-throughput applications, e.g., screening of
a large fraction of the society for tumor markers, development of
a metabolomic warning system for cardiovascular malfunctions, or personalized
drug dose adjustments for patients based on their individual drug
bioavailability levels, are currently not feasible with established
methods for socioeconomic reasons. Therefore, we believe that molecular
probes, chemo- and nanosensors will find a particularly great future
in these application areas where cost-effectiveness, robustness, parallelizability,
and handiness are of upmost importance and where demands on the sensitivity
and precisions levels are more modest.

## Acknowledgments
J.K., R.K.,
L.M.G., P.P., and F.B. acknowledge the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Emmy-Noether grant BI-1805/2-1).
J.K. thanks the Evonik foundation for financial support. R.K. acknowledges
the China Scholarship Council (CSC) for financial support. L.M.G.
and F.B. thank the Vector Stiftung for financial support (P2020-0135).
L.D.C. acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council
for ERC Advanced Grant (grant agreement no. 2009-247365) and AXA Fundings.

## Biographies
Joana Krämer
studied chemistry at the Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology (KIT) in Germany and completed her M.Sc. degree in 2019.
Afterwards, she joined the group of Dr. Frank Biedermann for her Ph.D.
at the Institute of Nanotechnology (INT) at KIT with an Evonik scholarship,
where she is working on the design of supramolecular chemosensors
for the detection of small bioanalytes such as amino acids.

Rui Kang received her Master’s
degree in Chemistry from
Shaanxi Normal University (SNNU), China, in 2018. She is currently
pursuing her Ph.D. studies at the Institute of Nanotechnology (INT)
of Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) under the supervision of
Prof. Luisa De Cola and Dr. Frank Biedermann. Her research is mainly
focused on the development of optical spectroscopy-based assays (e.g.,
fluorescence, absorbance, and chiral dichroism) for the detection
of biorelevant small molecules in aqueous media and biofluids.

Laura M. Grimm received her M.Sc. from
the Ruprecht-Karls-University
Heidelberg in 2017 before moving to the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT), where she completed her Ph.D. in 2021. She is presently a Postdoctoral
Fellow with a Vector Stipendium in the group of Dr. Frank Biedermann
at the Institute of Nanotechnology (INT), KIT. Her research focuses
on in biofluids functional chemo- and nanosensors by utilization of
inorganic porous materials and fluorescent dyes.

Luisa De Cola is a full professor at the University
of Milan and
holds a position as a researcher at the Mario Negri Institute. She
also holds a part-time position at KIT. She works in the field of
nanomaterials for biomedical applications and luminescent systems.
She is a member of the German Academy of Sciences, Leopoldina, and
Chevalier de la Légion d’Honneur. She has received an
ERC advanced grant, was recently awarded the 2019 Izatt-Christensen
Prize in Supramolecular Chemistry, and is the 2020 winner of the “Giulio
Natta” Gold Medal of the Italian Chemical Society.

Pierre Picchetti was born in Brunico, Italy.
He studied Chemistry
at the University of Vienna (Austria) and the University of Bologna—Alma
Mater Studiorum, Italy, and completed his Ph.D. in Chemistry with
special focus on functional and photonic materials at the University
of Strasbourg, France, under the supervision of Prof. Luisa De Cola.
In 2019, he had the opportunity to join the group of Prof. Hanadi
Sleiman at McGill University, Canada, where he worked on the design
of oligonucleotide-based nanoparticles as part of the MSCA-RISE-778133-Nano-OligoMed
project. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the group of Dr.
Frank Biedermann at the Institute of Nanotechnology (INT) at the Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology (KIT) in Germany, where his research focuses
on the design and preparation of chemosensors for bioanalyte detection.

Frank Biedermann is a trained supramolecular
chemist. In 2003,
he received his Ph.D. with Oren A. Scherman at the University of Cambridge,
UK. In the following years, he joined the groups of Werner M. Nau
(Jacobs University Bremen, Germany) and Luisa De Cola (Institute de
Science et d’Ingénierie Supramoléculaires, Strasbourg,
France) as a postdoctoral fellow to gather expertise in supramolecular-analytical
chemistry, materials chemistry, and photophysics. In 2016, Frank started
his independent career as an Emmy–Noether junior group leader
at the Institute of Nanotechnology (INT) at the Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology (KIT), Germany. His group is dedicated toward the development
of self-assembling probes, macrocyclic chemosensors, and microporous
nanosensors for the detection, imaging, and label-free reaction monitoring
of small bioactive molecules such as metabolites and neurotransmitters.
In 2021, Frank Biedermann received an Aventis Life Science Bridge
Award for his contributions to the development of synthetic chemosensors
and assays. Besides, he coordinates the SupraBank.org( ) development, an
open-access repository where thermodynamic and kinetic binding parameters
of host–guest complexes and supramolecular systems can be deposited
and found.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available
free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00746.
Abbreviations used in
this review (PDF)

## Special Issue
This paper is an additional
review for Chem. Rev. 2021, volume 121, issue (22), , “Molecular Self-Assembly”.

## Author Contributions
∥ J.K., R.K., and L.M.G. contributed equally
to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
cr1c00746_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
cr1c00746_si_001.pdf