1644pulmcircPulmonary CirculationPulm CircWileyPMC8679031867903186790313492575910.1177/204589402110539942021 Annual World Congress of the Pulmonary Vascular Research
Institute Webinar Series
14122021114204589402110539942045894021105399418122021© The Author(s) 2021Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)
which permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution
of the work without further permission provided the original
work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access
pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2021 Oct-Dec.

## 0001. Mortality of idiopathic/hereditary and connective tissue
disease-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension: the data from first
single-center prospective registry in Indonesia
Anggoro B. Hartopo
Dyah W. Anggrahini
Lucia K. Dinarti
Department of Cardiology and Vascular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Public
Health and Nursing Universitas Gadjah Mada, Dr. Sardjito Hospital,
Jogjakarta, Indonesia
Most pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) in Indonesia is associated with
uncorrected congenital heart disease (CHD). Other type of PAH has not been
reported from Indonesia, despite current availability of PAH-specific
medication. The aim of this study is to describe the characteristics of
non-CHD-associated PAH and its mortality. We had established the COHARD-PH
registry which is a prospective single-center study enrolling adult patients
with CHD-associated PAH. We also enrolled and followed subjects with
non-CHD-PAH into separate cohort. Layers of diagnostic procedures were
performed from echocardiography, HRCT thorax, MSCT pulmonary angiography and
right heart catheterization (RHC). The baseline data were collected during
the index of diagnosis of PH probability by echocardiography. The RHC was
performed to diagnose PAH. Subjects were followed up during their visit to
our PH clinic. Sixty-three patients were enrolled, 57 (90.5%) were
idiopathic/hereditary PAH (I/H-PAH), five (7.9%) connective tissue
disease-associated PAH (CTD-PAH) and one portopulmonary PAH (po-PAH). Most
subjects were young females (I/H-PAH 82.5%, 39.0 ± 14.0 years and CTD-PAH
80.0%, 41.2 ± 6.3 years). Most subjects had WHO functional class II. The RHC
was performed in 26 I/H-PAH subjects, with mean mPAP 62.3 ± 18.7 mmHg and
PVRi 29.2 ± 14.0 WU.m2. Most treatment was sildenafil monotherapy
(71%) and sildenafil+beraprost combination (12.7%). During follow-up, 12
(19.1%) subjects died. Those who died were younger (32.6 ± 10.8 years vs.
41.1 ± 13.7 years, p < 0.05). Subjects with CTD-PAH had the highest
mortality rate (two subjects (40%) and I/H-PAH had 15.8% mortality rate
(nine subjects)). The only poPAH subject died during follow-up. Among
I/H-PAH and CTD-PAH, higher right atrial diameter by echocardiography
significantly associated with mortality. In I/H-PAH, mortality had tendency
toward higher mPAP and PVRi. In conclusion, among non CHD-associated PAH,
CTD-PAH had worse outcome as compared with I/H-PAH. Younger age and higher
right atrial diameter by echocardiography were significantly associated with
mortality in I/H-PAH and CTD-PAH.

## 0002. Triple therapy in pulmonary arterial hypertension in an expert center
in Mexico City: real-life results
Humberto Garcia-Aguilar
Centro Médico Nacional 20 de Noviembre, ISSSTE, Mexico City, Mexico

Pulmonary arterial hypertension is a severe, progressive, and poor survival
disease. Current guidelines recommend combination therapies based on risk
stratification. We present a series of patients with triple therapy for PAH,
seen at the Mexico City Medical Center from 2014 to 2019. Seventeen patients
were studied in a cohort of 234. Majority of 76.4% were women, with an
average age of 31.5 years (ranges 15–65). This PAH type was observed; 53%
idiopathic, 41% related to congenital heart disease, and 6% connective
tissue disease. The most common treatments were:
macitentan + sildenafil + iloprost (58%),
bosentan + riociguat + treprostinil (11%) and
macitentan + riociguat + Iloprost (6%), macitentan +sildenafil + selexipag
(6%), bosentan + riociguat + iloprost (6%), and
bosentan + sildenafil + iloprost (6%). The most used ERA was macitentan
(82%); from the NO route group, it was sildenafil (76.4%) followed by
riociguat (23.5%), the most used prostanoid was iloprost (70.5%) followed by
treprostinil (23.5%). Our center has not used epoprostenol because it is not
available in Mexico. Another treatment in this group was septostomy,
performed in 12% of the cohort, with 100% survival of the procedure. The
WHO’s functional class was: CF II 24%, CF III 53%, and CF IV 23%. Survival
from the time of diagnosis was 14 years (range 1–19). The overall five-year
mortality is 24%. The most common cause of death was heart failure.
Conclusions: our center has a cohort of patients with triple therapy, which,
although based on the European PAH guidelines, is adjusted to the
accessibility of medications. They are young women, with more common
idiopathic PAH, with FC III and five-year survival of 76%, comparable with
other international reports due to the severity of the disease. We did not
find significant differences in morbidity and mortality events with
different etiologies.

## 0003. Biomarker analysis of the PULSAR study: an ongoing phase 2,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study to compare the efficacy
and safety of sotatercept (ACE-011) versus placebo when added to standard of
care for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
Marc Humbert
Vallerie McLaughlin
Simon Gibbs
Mardi Gomberg-Maitland
Marius M. Hoeper
Ioana Preston
Rogerio Souza
Aaron Waxman
Jennifer Barnes
Solaiappan Manimaran
Janethe de Oliveira Pena
David B. Badesch

1Assistance Publique Hopitaux de Paris, University Paris-Saclay,
Inserm U999, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France

2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

3National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
London, UK

4George Washington University, Washington, DC, UK

5Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School and
German Center of Lung Research, Hannover, Germany

6Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA

7University of São Paulo, Brazil

8Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

9Acceleron Pharma, Cambridge, MA, USA

10University of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA

Disruptions in transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) signaling are associated with PAH. BMP receptor type II gene
(BMPR2) mutations underlie the majority of familial
PAH cases; however, the relevance of the BMPR-II pathway extends beyond
familial PAH. Sotatercept, a first-in-class fusion protein, binds select
TGF-β superfamily ligands to suppress TGF-β signaling and rebalance BMPR-II
signaling. PULSAR (NCT03496207) released positive topline results this year.
One hundred and six patients enrolled: Group 1 PAH; functional classes
II-III; age ≥18; pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) ≥5 Wood units, on
stable PAH standard of care (SOC) therapy (all combinations allowed). Study
drug was administered by subcutaneous injection every 21 days for a 24-week
double-blind, placebo-controlled treatment period in three arms:
placebo + SOC, 0.3 mg/kg sotatercept + SOC, 0.7 mg/kg sotatercept + SOC.
24-week endpoints included PVR, 6MWD, NT-proBNP. Biomarkers were assessed at
baseline and during treatment: NT-proBNP, TGF-β1, activin A, GDF15, VEGFR1,
FSH, estradiol, testosterone, and BMPR2 mRNA expression. Sequence variation
of ACVRL1, BMPR2, CAV1, EIF2AK4, ENG, KCNA5, KCNK3, SMAD9
was assessed at baseline. During the treatment period, NT-proBNP and activin
A decreased rapidly in both sotatercept arms compared to placebo; no
differences observed in the other biomarkers. BMPR2 mRNA expression was
similar over time in all groups. Of 94 patients with reportable baseline
genetic results, 68.1% had no variations, 26.6% had ≥one
BMPR2 variation, and 5.3% had ≥one variation in
another gene. Change from baseline in PVR, 6MWD, or NT-proBNP was similar
regardless of BMPR2 mutation. Sotatercept induces change in
activin A and NT-proBNP expression, consistent with its observed clinical
efficacy in PULSAR and proposed mechanism of action. Of note, the treatment
effect of sotatercept was observed independent of BMPR2
status, and sotatercept treatment did not affect BMPR2 mRNA expression.
These results provide further evidence of sotatercept’s potential role in
the treatment of PAH.

## 0004. Switching from PDE5i to riociguat in patients with PAH: the REPLACE
study
R.L. Benza
H.-A. Ghofrani
H. Al-Hiti
S.A. Chang
P.A. Corris
S. Gibbs
E. Grünig
P. Jansa
J.R. Klinger
D. Langleben
V.V. McLaughlin
G. Meyer
J. Ota-Arakaki
A. Peacock
T. Pulido
S. Rosenkranz
D. Vizza
A. Vonk-Noordegraaf
J. White
M. Chang
F. Kleinjung
C. Meier
K. Paraschin
G. Simonneau
M.M. Hoeper

1Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

2University of Giessen and Marburg Lung Centre, Giessen, Germany,
and Imperial College London, London, UK

3Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine-IKEM, Prague,
Czech Republic

4Cardiovascular Imaging Center, Cardiac and Vascular Center,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Gangnam-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

5Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, UK

6National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, and
National Pulmonary Hypertension Service, Hammersmith Hospital, London,
UK

7Centre for Pulmonary Hypertension, Thorax Clinic at the
University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany

81st Faculty of Medicine, 2nd Medical Dept, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic

9Rhode Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown
University, Providence, RI, USA

10Centre for Pulmonary Vascular Disease and Lady Davis Institute,
Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada

11Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Health
System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

12Centro de Hipertensão Pulmonar, Complexo Hospitalar Santa Casa
de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil

13Universidade Federal de São Paulo – Hospital São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil

14Regional Lung and Heart Centre, Glasgow, UK

15National Heart Institute, Mexico City, Mexico

16Clinic III for Internal Medicine (Cardiology), and Centre for
Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany

17‘La Sapienza’ University of Rome, Rome, Italy

18VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

19University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA

20Global Medical Affairs, Bayer AG, Berlin, Germany

21Bayer AG, São Paulo, Brazil

22Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Bicêtre, Université Paris-Sud,
Laboratoire d’Excellence en Recherche sur le Médicament et Innovation
Thérapeutique, and Inserm U999, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France

23Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) treatment guidelines recommend patients
achieve/maintain a low-risk profile. Many patients treated with PAH-targeted
therapy do not meet this treatment goal. The aim of this study is to compare
switching to riociguat (RIO) with continued phosphodiesterase type 5
inhibitors (PDE5i) in intermediate-risk patients with PAH. REPLACE
(NCT02891850) was a randomized, open-label, 24-week Phase 4 study. Patients
in WHO functional class (FC) III, with 6-minute walking distance (6MWD)
165–440 m were randomized to remain on PDE5i or switch to RIO 2.5 mg
tid–max. Endothelin receptor antagonist pretreatment continued in both arms.
The blinded, centrally adjudicated composite primary endpoint was defined as
no clinical worsening (death from any cause, hospitalization for worsening
PAH or disease progression) plus clinical improvement (two of the following:
≥10%/≥30 m increase in 6MWD, WHO FC I/II, or ≥30% reduction in
N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide
(NT-proBNP)). Secondary endpoints included 6MWD, WHO FC (both blinded
assessments), NT-proBNP, and clinical worsening. Safety was evaluated
throughout. One hundred and eleven patients were randomized to RIO, 115 to
PDE5i. The primary endpoint was met in 45 patients (41%) treated with RIO
and 23 (20%) treated with PDE5i (odds ratio (OR) 2.8; 95% confidence
interval (CI) 1.5–5.1; p = 0.0007). Of those not achieving the endpoint, one
patient treated with RIO (1%) and 10 patients treated with PDE5i (9%) had
clinical worsening (OR 0.10; 95% CI 0.01–0.73; p = 0.0047) including three
patients treated with PDE5i (3%) who died. There were no deaths in the RIO
arm. AEs were similar between arms, with a higher incidence of serious AEs
with PDE5i (17%) than RIO (7%). In conclusion, REPLACE demonstrated that
patients on PDE5i at intermediate risk are more likely to show clinical
improvement without clinical worsening upon switching to RIO than those who
remain on PDE5i.
Disclosures: The REPLACE Study was co-funded by Bayer AG
(Berlin, Germany) and Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., a subsidiary of Merck
& Co., Inc. (Kenilworth, NJ, USA). RL Benza reports grants from
Actelion, Belleraphon, Bayer AG, and EIGER.

## 0005. A diagnostic miRNA signature for pulmonary arterial hypertension
using a consensus machine learning approach
Niamh Errington
James Iremonger
Josephine A. Pickworth
Sokratis Kariotis
Christopher J. Rhodes
Alexander M.K. Rothman
Robin Condliffe
Charles A. Elliot
David G. Kiely
Luke S. Howard
John Wharton
A.A. Roger Thompson
Nicholas W Morrell
Martin R. Wilkins
Dennis Wang
Allan Lawrie

1Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, University
of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

2Department of Infection, Immunity & Cardiovascular Disease,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

3National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
London, UK

4Sheffield Pulmonary Vascular Disease Unit, Royal Hallamshire
Hospital, Sheffield, UK

5National Pulmonary Hypertension Service, Imperial College
Healthcare Trust NHS, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK

6Department for Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK

7Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, UK
*These authors contributed equally 
a
These authors share senior authorship.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare but life-shortening disease,
the diagnosis of which is often delayed, and requires an invasive right
heart catheterisation. Identifying diagnostic biomarkers may improve
screening to identify patients at risk of PAH earlier. MicroRNAs are small,
non-coding molecules of RNA circulating miRNAs have been shown to be
dysregulated in PAH, and contribute to the disease process in animal models.
Diagnostic panels of microRNAs have had utility in other diseases, and there
is scope to utilise multiple machine learning approaches for defining a
diagnostic panel for PAH. Plasma from 64 treatment-naïve patients with PAH
and 43 disease and healthy controls were profiled for microRNA expression by
Agilent Microarray. Following quality control, analysis of variance and
normalisation, the cohort was split into a training and validation set. The
training set was then used to create a test panel. Four separate machine
learning feature selection methods (Boruta, XGBoost, Lasso and Rpart) were
applied. Twenty microRNAs were identified as relevant by consensus feature
selection from all four methods and compared with univariate analysis to
select potential biomarkers. Two consensus microRNAs (miR-636 and
miR-187-5p) were selected by all methods and used to predict PAH diagnosis
with high accuracy. Integrating microRNA expression profiles with their
associated target mRNA revealed that gene targets in a classification model
produced a 95% CI AUC 0.72–0.91 in a separate RNA dataset. In conclusion,
this consensus of multiple machine learning approaches identified two
consensus miRNAs that were able to classify PAH from disease and healthy
controls. These circulating miRNA, and their target genes may provide a
novel PAH signature, reveal novel regulators of disease and putative drug
targets.

## 0006. Tricuspid regurgitation, as proxy for acute pulmonary hypertension,
and its association with short-term outcome in severe Covid-19
C. Frostell
J. Norderfeldt
M. Eriksson
A. Liliequist
E. Weitzberg
C. Adding
P. Agvald
P.-A. Lönnqvist

1Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Karolinska
Institutet at Danderyd Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden

2Department of Clinical Physiology, Karolinska University
Hospital and Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

3Thoracic Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Perioperative Medicine
and Intensive Care, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden

4Anaesthesiology & Intensive Care, Department of Physiology
& Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

5Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

Critically ill Covid-19 patients are likely to develop the sequence of acute
pulmonary hypertension (aPH), right ventricular strain (RVS), and eventually
failure due to currently known pathophysiology (endothelial inflammation
plus thrombo-embolism) (1,2) that promotes increased pulmonary vascular
resistance and pulmonary artery pressure. Although case reports of acute cor
pulmonale exist (3), there is still no information on how frequently aPH
and/or RVS is associated with severe Covid-19 and whether it affects
outcome. Following approval from the National Ethics Committee, the medical
records of 50 consecutive Covid-19 ICU patients during one month were
reviewed. All trans-thoracic echocardiography examinations (TTE) were
performed by the same experienced echocardiographer per established TTE
guidelines (4,5). A tricuspid regurgitation (TR), large enough to allow the
assessment of systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP), was chosen as a
marker of aPH and RVS. Plasma NTproBNP and plasma D-dimer (same day as the
TTE examination) were used as biomarkers of cardiac failure and degree of
thrombo-embolism, respectively. Short-term outcome (mortality at 21-days
post-TTE) was also assessed. Twenty-six (52%) patients displayed a
measurable TR (group TRm), whereas 24 (48%) did not (group nTR). Left
ventricular ejection fraction was similar in both groups (Mann-Whitney;
p = 0.4827) as were D-dimer (p = 0.3363). NTproBNP was significantly higher
in group TRm, p = 0.0011. Twenty-one-day mortality was significantly higher
in group mTR (10/26; 38.5%) compared to group nTR (2/24; 8.3%) (Chi square
with Yates correction: p < 0.05). In conclusion, the
presence of a measurable TR (proxy for acute pulmonary hypertension and/or
right ventricular strain) was common in severely ill Covid-19 patients and
was linked to biomarker-defined cardiac failure. Furthermore, the presence
of a measurable TR was associated with increased short-term mortality.

## 0007. Venous and arterial thromboembolism in COVID-19: a systematic review
with meta-analysis
V. Mai
B.K. Tan
S. Mainbourg
A. Frigerri
L. Bertoletti
M. Douplat
Y. Dargaud
C. Grange
H. Lobbes
J.C. Lega
S. Provencher

1Pulmonary Hypertension Research Group of the Institut
Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec Research Center,
Laval University, Québec City, Québec, Canada

2Department of intensive care unit, Hôpital Lyon Sud, Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Pierre-Bénite, France

3Department of Internal and Vascular Medecine, Hôpital Lyon Sud,
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Pierre-Bénite, France

4University of Lyon, UMR – CNRS 5558, Laboratoire de Biométrie et
Biologie Évolutive, Claude Bernard University Lyon 1, France

5Service de Médecine Vasculaire et Thérapeutique, CHU de
St-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France; Université Jean-Monnet, UMR 1059,
St-Etienne, France; INSERM CIC 1408, St-Etienne, France

6Groupe d’Etude Multidisciplinaire des Maladies Thrombotiques
(GEMMAT), Hospices Civils de Lyon, France

7Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Lyon Sud, Service d’Accueil des
Urgences, Pierre Bénite, France

8Unité d’Hémostase Clinique, Hôpital Cardiologique Louis Pradel,
Lyon, France *Contributed equally to the study.

The prevalence of venous (VTE) and arterial (ATE) thromboembolism in patients
with COVID-19 remains largely unknown. In this meta-analysis, we
systematically searched for observational studies describing the prevalence
of VTE and ATE in COVID-19 from 1 January to 30 September 2020. We
identified 102 studies (28,684 patients). The frequency of COVID-19-related
VTE was 14.8% (95%CI 12.1–17.7%, I2 = 94%, 56 studies; 16,481
patients). The overall prevalence of pulmonary embolism (PE) and leg deep
vein thrombosis (DVT) were 7.8% (95%CI 6.2–9.4%, I2 = 94%; 66
studies; 23,117 patients) and 11.2% (95%CI 8.4–14.3%; I2 = 95%;
48 studies; 13,824 patients), respectively. The VTE prevalence was
significantly higher in ICU (23.2%; 95%CI 17.5–29.6%; I2 = 92%
vs. 9.0%; 95%CI 6.9–11.4%; I2 = 95%;
pinteraction < 0.01) and in series systematically screening
patients compared to series testing symptomatic patients (25.2% vs. 12.7%,
pinteraction = 0.04). The frequency of overall ATE, acute
coronary syndrome, stroke, and other ATE was 3.9% (95%CI 2.0–6.5%,
I2 = 96%; 19 studies; 8,249 patients), 1.1% (95%CI
0.2–3.0%, I2 = 96%; 16 studies; 7,939 patients), 1.6% (95%CI
1.0–2.2%, I2 = 93%; 27 studies; 40,597 patients), and 0.9% (95%CI
0.5–1.5%; I2 = 84%; 17 studies; 20,139 patients), respectively.
Meta-regression and subgroup analyses failed to explain heterogeneity of
overall ATE. High heterogeneity limited the value of estimates. In
conclusion, the prevalence of VTE is significant amongst patients
hospitalized for COVID-19, especially when admitted in the ICU with high
D-dimers levels. Further studies are needed to determine the best management
strategies.

## 0008. Therapeutically targeting endothelial cell metabolic dysfunction in
pulmonary arterial hypertension with apigenin
Iona Cuthbertson
Paola Caruso
Nicholas Morrell
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is an often-fatal disease, characterised
by the development of apoptosis-resistant, hyperproliferative, and
hyper-glycolytic endothelial cells (ECs), and elevated expression of
pyruvate kinase M2 isoform (PKM2) and poly-pyrimidine tract-binding protein
(PTBP1)1. The flavone apigenin has been recognised for its ability to
suppress PTBP1 and PKM2-driven warburg glycolysis and tumorigenesis 2.
Whether apigenin influences PTBP1/PKM2 expression, metabolism and function
in ECs is not known. Here, we examined the metabolic, genetic and proteomic
profiles of blood outgrowth endothelial cells (BOECs) obtained from healthy
volunteers and PAH patients with BMPR2 mutations, following
apigenin treatment or PTBP1/PKM2 knockdown. We hypothesised
that, in healthy and BMPR2 mutant BOECs, apigenin treatment
would reduce glycolysis by inhibiting PTBP1-driven splicing of
PKM into PKM2, and PKM2-dependent
expression of glycolytic pathway components. We also questioned whether
apigenin treatment is able to normalise EC metabolism and function. In
control and BMPR2 mutant BOECs, apigenin strongly reduced
PTBP1 expression. Apigenin only marginally suppressed HNRNPA2 and PKM2
expression, suggesting HNRNPA2 may compensate for the loss of PTBP1 to
maintain PKM2 expression in ECs. Whether apigenin influences PKM2 isoform
expression and localisation remains to be confirmed. In control BOECs,
apigenin suppressed lactate production, LDHA mRNA and protein expression,
and reduced LDHA expression in BMPR2 mutant BOECs. In
addition, apigenin appeared to marginally suppress PKM1 and PKM2 expression.
Apigenin also inhibited PUMA expression, and caspase 3/7 activity in both
control and BMPR2 mutant cells, with similar results
observed following knockdown of PTBP1 or
PKM2. Taken together, these data suggest apigenin may
induce downregulation of the glycolytic proteome, as well as suppressing
PKM2/PTBP1 driven apoptosis. In conclusion, apigenin treatment inhibits
PTBP1 expression, glycolytic output, and apoptosis in healthy and
BMPR2 mutant ECs. This encouraging data suggests that
apigenin may be an effective treatment for endothelial cell dysfunction in
PAH.

## 0009. Epigenome-wide profiling uncovers novel gene regulatory networks in
human pulmonary arterial hypertension
Prakash Chelladurai
Carsten Kuenne
Alice Bourgeois
Stefan Günther
Chanil Valasarajan
Robert J. Rottier
Charlotte Romanet
Mario Schmoranzer
Olivier Boucherat
Clemens Ruppert
Andreas Guenther
Thomas Braun
Mario Looso
Rajkumar Savai
Werner Seeger
Sébastien Bonnet
Uta-Maria Bauer
Soni Savai Pullamsetti

1Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Member of the
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Member of the Cardio-Pulmonary
Institute (CPI), Bad Nauheim, Germany

2Pulmonary Hypertension and Vascular Biology Research Group of
Quebec Heart and Lung Institute, Department of Medicine Laval University,
Quebec, Canada

3Department of Pediatric Surgery, Sophia Children’s Hospital, CN
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

4Department of Internal Medicine, Member of the DZL, Member of
CPI, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany

5Institute for Lung Health (ILH), Member of the DZL, Justus
Liebig University, Giessen, Germany

6Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Marburg,
Germany

Evidence of epigenome-wide alterations that facilitates normal vascular cells
to acquire and exhibit pro-proliferative, apoptotic-resistant,
pro-inflammatory phenotypes in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) remains
unexplored at a genome-wide scale. Our major objectives were to (1) employ
multiple next-generation sequencing (NGS) approaches to profile vascular
cell-specific epigenomic alterations in human setting, (2) identify gene
regulatory signatures, (3) identify transcription factor networks associated
with hypertensive phenotypes, (4) evaluate the therapeutic potential of
epigenetic intervention. Cell-specific transcriptome profiling revealed
differential expression of 2069 genes (two-fold) in ex vivo
isolated pulmonary artery adventitial fibroblasts (PAFBs) from idiopathic
PAH (IPAH) and human donors, which strongly indicated the existence of
genome-scale alterations in transcription regulatory mechanisms of PAH. To
map the PAH-associated epigenomic alterations in the chromatin landscape of
PAH vascular cells, we employed ChIP-seq to generate genome-wide maps for
RNA polymerase II occupancy, histone modifications associated with
euchromatin (H3K9/K14ac, H3K4me3, pan-H4Kac), heterochromatin (H3K27me3,
H3K9me3) and enhancers (H3K27ac, H3K4me1). Bioinformatic analysis confirmed
massive epigenetic alterations in both histone acetylation and methylation
pattern in IPAH, which corroborated with aberrant expression and recruitment
of histone-modifying enzymes in IPAH. KEGG analysis of epigenetic signatures
revealed association with ABC transporters, smooth muscle contraction,
cGMP-PKG, renin secretion, NF-κB, TGFβ and cancer-signaling pathways.
Integrative analysis also revealed acquisition of pro-hypertensive gene
expression signatures in PAH, that includes differential regulation of novel
transcription factor networks (SOX, ID, HES, GLI, GATA, REL) that may
altogether coordinate the pro-proliferative and pro-inflammatory phenotypes
in PAH. Aberrant epigenetic signatures in PAH were reversed by targeting
chromatin-modifying enzymes ex vivo and in
vivo. In conclusion, integrative analysis of vascular
cell-specific epigenomics data confirmed genome-scale alterations in the
chromatin landscape and DNA accessibility leading to aberrant
transcriptional responses in PAH. This genome-scale study also uncovered
novel regulatory factors, signaling networks and potential targets for
therapeutic intervention.

## 0010. Implication of the histone methyltransferase “G9a” in pulmonary
arterial hypertension
Awada Charifa
Bourgeois Alice
Habbout Karima
Nadeau Valérie
Breuils-Bonnet Sandra
Grobs Yann
Paulin Roxane
Provencher Steeve
Bonnet Sébastien
Boucherat Olivier
Pulmonary Hypertension Research Group, Centre de Recherche de l’Institut
Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec, Québec, QC,
Canada

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare, but lethal vascular disease
characterized by a mean resting pulmonary artery (PA) pressure that exceeds
20 mmHg. Pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) from PAH patients
exhibit a cancer-like hyperproliferative and apoptosis-resistant phenotypes
leading to pulmonary vascular remodeling. It is believed that these
alterations are influenced by epigenetic processes. However, it is still not
clear which gene are the drivers. For instance, “G9a,” a histone
methyltransferase, has been observed to be overexpressed in different types
of cancer. Given the similarities between PAH and cancer, we hypothesized
that G9a could be implicated in PAH pathogenesis. Using Western blot (WB)
and immunofluorescence (IF), we demonstrated that G9a is significantly
overexpressed in distal PAs and PASMCs from PAH patients (p < 0.01).
Similarly, G9a was increased (p < 0.05) in two PAH animal models; namely,
the monocrotaline rat and mice exposed to chronic hypoxia. In
vitro, we found that G9a pharmacological inhibition using
BIX01294 reduces PAH-PASMC proliferation (Ki67 and Edu assays, p < 0.001)
and survival (Annexin V assay p < 0.001). Through RNA sequencing analysis
conducted in PAH-PASMCs treated or not with BIX01294, we found that
upregulated genes were significantly enriched in “cholesterol biosynthesis,”
“apoptotic positive regulation” and “autophagy.” Consistently, G9a
inhibition was accompanied by an increased lipid accumulation (Oil red
staining) and an impaired autophagy flux as evidenced by the appearance of
numerous cytoplasmic vacuoles positive for LC3-II (IF, WB), an increased p62
expression (WB), the accumulation of merged yellow puncta in PAH-PASMCs
expressing the RFP-GFP-LC3 fusion protein and the unaffected LC3-II
expression after adding chloroquine, an autophagic flux inhibitor. In
conclusion, we showed for the first time that G9a is overexpressed in human
and experimental PAH contributing to the pro-proliferative and
anti-apoptotic phenotype of PAH. Current experiments aim to determine
whether G9a pharmacological inhibition provides therapeutic benefits
in vivo.

## 0011. Perinatal exposure to serotonin re-uptake inhibitor causes mild
pulmonary hypertension in adult female rats
Barbora Kaftanová
Olga Vajnerová
Václav Tichý
Pavlína Smolková
Marcela Minaříková
Václav Hampl
Department of Physiology, Charles University Second Medical School, Prague,
Czech Republic

Perinatal time is a critical period of development of the pulmonary vessels.
Stimuli acting at this time have more permanent effects than the same
stimuli acting at other life periods. Females are more susceptible to this
effect. Pulmonary hypertension is a group of disorders with poor prognosis.
While its mechanisms are multifactorial, one component involves serotonin
(5-HT) signaling. Pulmonary endothelial 5-HT synthesis is increased in
pulmonary hypertension. Inhibition of the 5-HT1B receptors reduces pulmonary
hypertension. Because 5-HT re-uptake inhibitors represent the key medication
for treating depressive disorders and their use during pregnancy is common
(3), we decided to study the long-term consequences of maternal ingestion of
selective 5-HT re-uptake inhibitor (SSRI; fluoxetine, 0.2 g/l in drinking
water) on adult offspring and to compare them with the known effects of
perinatal hypoxia. We found that mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) was
significantly elevated (P < 0.05) in adult females that
experienced hypoxia in the perinatal period (21.8 ± 2.0 mmHg) compared to
adult females that have never experienced hypoxia (15.4 ± 0.9 mmHg),
confirming our previous findings. When perinatally normoxic females were
exposed in utero to fluoxetine, their mPAP in adulthood was
similarly increased (to 21.8 ± 2.3 mmHg) as in the adult females exposed to
perinatal hypoxia. Male adults did not exhibit this effect (mPAP 17.9 ± 1.1
in controls vs. 14.9 ± 1.3 mmHg after maternal fluoxetine, P>0.05). We
conclude that in rats, maternal ingestion of fluoxetine (and possibly other
SSRIs) has a long-lasting effect on mPAP in their female (but not male)
offspring.

## 0012. Endothelial overexpression of Sirt3 protects the metabolic etiology
in PAH
Anandharajan Rathinasabapathy
Christy Moore
Santhi Gladson
Sheila Shay
Anna Dikalova
James West
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA

Growing evidence and our previous finding suggest that metabolic perturbation
is one of the etiological factors driving idiopathic and hereditary
pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). We and others have demonstrated that
loss of Sirt3 function is one of the major factors driving IPAH and HPAH.
However, the endothelial-specific role of Sirt3 in rescuing PAH in the
context of deacetylation of its downstream targets is unknown. In this
study, we have used sugen-hypoxia insult on wild-type and Sirt3OE
(endothelial specific Sirt3 overexpression) animals. We also have used human
lung microvascular endothelial cells (LMVECs) from control and HPAH subjects
to investigate the vascular leak. Molecular characterization experiments
such as morphometric staining, immunoprecipitation and Western blots were
performed on in vivo lung tissues, investigating the
downstream targets of Sirt3. Our in vivo study demonstrated
that endothelial-specific overexpression of Sirt3 (Sirt3OE)
reduced the development of PAH in sugen-hypoxia (Su-Hyx) animals. Molecular
characterization demonstrated that mitochondrial Sirt3 targets – ATP5a, LCAD
and IDH2 have little change in protein levels; however, they are
significantly acetylated at the lysine residue, which would be expected to
reduce function. In addition, we saw downregulation of targets of
b-oxidation (CPT1) and vascular leak (Occludin). All these molecular
abnormalities were rescued by Sirt3OE animals. Our ECIS study on
LMVECs demonstrated a significant vascular permeability in PAH. Further,
morphometric staining on BMPR2 PAH lung tissue (In vivo)
and Western blot analysis of LMVECs, Su-Hyx lung tissues and patient-derived
blood cells demonstrated that malfunction of SOD2 through its acetylation
contribute to the etiology of PAH. In conclusion, in this pilot study, we
have demonstrated that loss of function of Sirt3 targets, specifically
through their lysine acetylation contributes to PAH etiology. We have also
identified that these metabolic abnormalities are associated with the
dysregulation of endothelial integrity.

## 0013. Axl is a novel modulator of bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2 in
pulmonary arterial hypertension
Tatyana Novoyatleva
Nabham Rai
Baktybek Kojonazarov
Swathi Veeroju
Isabel Ben-Batalla
Paola Caruso
Mazen Shihan
Nadine Presser
Elsa Götz
Carina Lepper
Sebastian Herpel
Frédéric Perros
Henning Gall
Hossein Ardeschir Ghofrani
Norbert Weissmann
Friedrich Grimminger
John Wharton
Martin Wilkins
Paul Upton
Sonja Loges
Nicholas Morrell
Werner Seeger
Ralph T Schermuly

1Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC),
Excellence Cluster Cardio-Pulmonary System (ECCPS), Member of the German
Center for Lung Research (DZL), Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen,
Germany

2Institute for Lung Health, Giessen, Germany

3Department of Oncology, Hematology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation with section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald University
Comprehensive Cancer Center Hamburg, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

4Department of Tumor Biology, Center of Experimental Medicine,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

5Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK

6Université Paris–Saclay, AP-HP, INSERM UMR_S 999, Service de
Pneumologie et Soins Intensifs Respiratoires, Hôpital de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin
Bicêtre, France

7Centre for Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Department of
Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK

8Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim,
Germany

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a fatal disease characterized by a
pseudo-malignant phenotype. Previous reports indicate that a member of the
TYRO3, AXL (also known as UFO) and MERTK (TAM) family of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs), Axl controls cancer progression and metastasis. We
investigated the expression and the role of the receptor tyrosine kinase Axl
in experimental (i.e. monocrotaline and Su5416/hypoxia treated rats) and
clinical PAH. Axl expression was augmented in experimental PH. Axl
inhibition by R428 and Axl knockdown inhibited growth factor-driven
proliferation and migration of non-PAH and PAH PASMCs in
vitro. Conversely, Axl overexpression in PASMCs conferred a
growth advantage. R428 aggravated right ventricular hypertrophy and
dysfunction, abrogated bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor 2 (BMPR2)
signaling, augmented pro-inflammatory response, elevated pulmonary
endothelial cell apoptosis and loss, affecting pulmonary vascular
remodeling. Axl inhibitor led to alterations of endothelial cell
permeability and endothelial cell cytotoxicity and death in
vitro. Axl expression declined in blood outgrowth endothelial
cells (BOECs), in laser-assisted microdissected intrapulmonary vessels and
in the pulmonary endothelium of IPAH patients. Axl blockage by R428
inhibited BMP signaling and increased PAEC apoptosis, while BMP9 induced Axl
phosphorylation in a time-dependent manner. Outstandingly, Axl ligand
Gas6-induced SMAD1/5/8 phosphorylation and ID1/ID2 increase were both
blunted by BMP signaling obstruction. Furthermore, Axl knockdown diminished
BMP9-induced signaling in hPAECs at the level of ID1,
ID2, and E-selectin mRNA expression.
Proximity-ligation assays and immunoprecipitations revealed that Axl and
BMPR2 co-interacted in hPAECs, signifying a previously unrecognized
association between these two receptors. Axl association with BMPR2 was
facilitated by Gas6/BMP9 stimulation and diminished by R428. In conclusion,
Axl is a key regulator of endothelial BMPR2 signaling and potential
determinant of PAH.

## 0014. Equivalent outcomes for hereditary and idiopathic pulmonary arterial
hypertension in children: an analysis from a national Australian
registry
Katherine Kearney
Ingrid King
Michelle Rose
John Feenstra
Trevor Williams
Edmund Lau
Melanie Lavender
Clare O’Donnell
Robert Weintraub
Department of Cardiology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia

Paediatric pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare disease but causes
significant morbidity and mortality. Literature on survival is scant. Data
were extracted from the Pulmonary Hypertension Society of Australia and New
Zealand registry for all patients with a diagnosis of idiopathic (iPAH) or
heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension (hPAH), diagnosed between three
months of age and less than 21 years. Analysis was performed in Jupyterlab.
One hundred patients were diagnosed with iPAH or hPAH between 1988 and 2019
in the registry and had survival data available. Compared to hPAH patients,
iPAH patients had worse right atrial pressure and cardiac index at baseline,
despite similar mean pulmonary pressures, suggestive of worse right
ventricular function. Functional status was also worse and iPAH patients
were diagnosed at a younger age. Our data show transplant-free survival in
hPAH patients compared with iPAH, with no significant difference between the
curves (log rank test p = 0.13). An analysis of mortality-only also showed
no significant difference but suggested a trend towards improved survival in
hPAH patients, with a log rank test p = 0.06. In conclusion, heritable PAH
paediatric patients were diagnosed with better functional class and better
haemodynamic measures of right ventricular function compared to idiopathic
PAH. Despite this, survival was comparable between heritable and idiopathic
PAH. Contrasting with adults, where hPAH is associated with worse outcomes,
iPAH presenting in childhood is an equally severe disease, accounting for
similar outcomes between these two groups.

## 0015. Effect of macitentan across prognostic age groups in patients with
pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
Richard Channick
Sarah Medrek
Marion Delcroix
Pavel Jansa
Sanjay Mehta
Tomas Pulido
Bhaqavaula Sastry
Rogerio Souza
Adam Torbicki
Carol Zhao
Peter Agron
Olivier Sitbon

1University of California Los Angeles Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, USA

2University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA

3University Hospitals of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

4Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic

5Western University, London, ON, Canada

6Cardiopulmonary Department, National Heart Institute, Mexico
City, Mexico

7CARE Hospitals, Hyderabad, India

8University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil

9Centre of Postgraduate Medical Education, European Health
Centre, ECZ-Otwock, Poland

10Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA

11Université Paris-Saclay, APHP, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France

In PAH, patient characteristics vary with age. Younger patients can have
preserved functional capacity despite poor hemodynamics; geriatric patients
can have poor outcomes due to comorbidities. This post-hoc analysis of
SERAPHIN and GRIPHON identified prognostic age groups and determined
macitentan treatment effect by age. SERAPHIN and GRIPHON were
placebo-controlled trials evaluating macitentan and selexipag, respectively,
with a time to morbidity/mortality event (M/M) primary endpoint. The placebo
arms were used to define age thresholds differentiating M/M risk, using
C-statistics, receiver operator characteristics, and hazard ratio (HR) point
estimates. Cox regression models adjusted for functional class, PAH
background therapy, region, PAH etiology, sex, and race/ethnicity were used
to determine the macitentan 10 mg treatment effect in SERAPHIN by age group.
The risk of M/M was higher in younger and older patients with three age
thresholds identified:  < 35, 35–64, and ≥65 years. In the SERAPHIN
placebo arm (n = 250), patients  < 35 had a 73% greater risk of M/M than
those 35–64 (HR = 1.73, 95% CI 1.10–2.72) and patients ≥65 had a 55% greater
risk (HR = 1.55, 95% CI 0.89–2.69). In the GRIPHON placebo arm (n = 582),
patients  < 35 had an 82% greater risk of M/M than those 35–64
(HR = 1.82, 95% CI 1.29–2.57) and patients ≥65 had a 7% greater risk
(HR = 1.07, 95% CI 0.75–1.54). Macitentan reduced the risk of M/M versus
placebo in all age groups, with greatest reduction in the younger and
middle-aged patients:  < 35 (HR = 0.44; 95% CI: 0.25–0.78); 35–64
(HR = 0.50; 95% CI: 0.33–0.76); ≥65 (HR = 0.69; 95% CI: 0.30–1.58).
Incidence of AEs leading to macitentan discontinuation was similar across
age groups. In conclusion, this analysis identified age  < 35 as a risk
factor and confirmed the prognostic significance of age ≥65. Patients in all
age groups had a robust response to macitentan 10 mg.

## 0016. Validation of artificial intelligence artery-vein classification for
contrast CT imaging in PH subjects
P Nardelli
FN Rahaghi
R San José Estépar

1Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

2Applied Chest Imaging Laboratory, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

3Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Studies showed that pulmonary vascular disease has a different effect on
arteries and veins. We have recently proposed a method based on artificial
intelligence that automatically separates the lung arterial and venous
vasculature on non-contrast chest CT images. The purpose of this analysis
was to validate of our approach on CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) scans,
which introduces the effects of contrast, in a PH population. The
artery/vein classification followed two main steps. First, a scale-space
particle approach was used to extract the intraparenchymal pulmonary
vasculature. Then, a 3D convolutional neural network followed by graph-cuts
(GC) optimization to disambiguate the two vascular trees was trained with
manually annotated trees from non-contrast CT scans. Validation of the
technique was performed by comparing our automatic approach against manually
labeled vascular trees in the right lung of 62 subjects without and with PH
(Groups 1, 2 and 4) for which CTPA scans were available. Manual labeling
involved tracing the origin of the vessels to the main pulmonary artery and
left atrium. Classification sensitivity (TPR), specificity (TNR), positive
predictive value (PPV) and negative predicted value (NPV) were measured,
where arteries and veins were the positive and negative class, respectively.
Metrics were also stratified by lobe and vessel size (small, medium and
large). Linear mixed effect models were used to assess difference across
groups. Our data show the aggregated results by PH group. The overall
specificity and sensitivity for the artery-vein classification were
95.64 ± 2.1% and 83.31 ± 10.98%, respectively. TPR was higher than TNR,
while PPV was smaller than NPV across groups. Disease group was significant
effect for TNR, PPV and NPV (p < 0.001) but not TPR when considering lobe
and vessel size random effects. Lobe but not vessel size was a significant
effect for TNR, PPV and NPV when disease group was considered a random
effect. In this work, we have demonstrated that artificial intelligence is
effective and highly accurate for artery-vein classification in CT images
with contrast when compared to manually annotated scans. The method is
robust and shows very good performance with a moderate drop in performance
by PH status with respect to controls likely due to the presence of
parenchymal abnormalities in the disease group. Lobe but not vessel size was
associated with differences in performance characteristics. Results are also
likely to improve with specific training of the neural network on CTPA scans
from PH subjects. Automated arterial-venous metrics of vascular remodeling
may be used in clinical investigations without systematic differences in
comparison to manually annotated scans.

## 0017. Efficacy in patient subgroups in the INCREASE trial, a phase III
trial to evaluate inhaled treprostinil in patients with pulmonary
hypertension due to parenchymal lung disease
Victor Tapson
Steven D. Nathan
Reda E. Girgis
James R. Runo
Remzi Bag
Arunabh Talwar
Peter Smith
Lisa Edwards
Christine C. Park
Aaron B. Waxman

1Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA

2Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls Church, VA

3Michigan State University, East Lancing, MI

4University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI

5University of Chicago, Chicago, IL

6Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY

7United Therapeutics Corporation, Silver Spring, MD

8Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

INCREASE was a 16-week trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of inhaled
treprostinil (iTRE) in patients with pulmonary hypertension associated with
interstitial lung disease (PH-ILD). The study met its primary efficacy
endpoint of change in 6MWD, demonstrated by a 31 m improvement from baseline
(260 m). Secondary endpoints, including change in NT-proBNP and time to
clinical worsening, were also met. Post-hoc analyses were conducted to
investigate clinical endpoints within patient subgroups. Patient subgroups
were delineated by median values of the following baseline characteristics:
PVR (<5 WU, ≥5 WU), PCWP (<10 mmHg, ≥10 mmHg), mPAP (<35 mmHg,
≥35 mmHg), DLCO (<27% predicted, ≥27% predicted), FVC (<60% predicted,
≥60% predicted) and NT-proBNP (<504 pg/mL, ≥504 pg/mL). Clinical
worsening was defined as any of the following: cardiopulmonary
hospitalization, decrease in 6MWD >15% from baseline, all-cause death, or
lung transplantation. All 326 patients randomized in INCREASE were included
in the present analyses. 6MWD improvements were demonstrated in all
subgroups. Statistically significant improvements occurred in patients with
above median PVR, PCWP, mPAP; lower than median DLCO; and in both above
median and below median FVC and NT-proBNP cohorts (p ≤ 0.013 for all).
Statistically significant reductions in NT-proBNP were demonstrated in all
subgroups (p ≤ 0.028 for all). Statistically significant benefit in time to
clinical worsening with iTRE was observed in above median PVR, mPAP, and
NT-proBNP; and lower PCWP (p ≤ 0.0493 for all). Overall, response separation
in clinical endpoints indicated greater improvement for patients with above
median NT-proBNP and PVR. A similar trend of benefit was observed in lower
DLCO and higher mPAP subgroups. In conclusion, these analyses demonstrate
improvements in clinical endpoints with inhaled treprostinil across patient
subgroups. Patients with more advanced pulmonary vascular disease stand to
gain the most benefit with inhaled treprostinil therapy.

## 0018. Acetazolamide and high altitude pulmonary edema prevention after
rapid ascent to 4559 m
Erik R. Swenson
Larissa Schäfer
Lisa M. Schiefer
Mahdi Sareban
Franziska Macholz
Peter Schmidt
Magdalena Schimke
Kai E. Swenson
Benjamin Mayer
Josef Niebauer
Annalisa Cogo
Susie Kriemler
Stefan Schwery
Peter Bärtsch
Marc M. Berger

1Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, VA Puget Sound
Health Care System, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

2Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and General Critical
Care Medicine, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University,
Salzburg, Austria

3University Institute of Sports Medicine, Prevention and
Rehabilitation, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria

4Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Stanford
University, Palo Alto, CA, USA

5Institute of Epidemiology and Medical Biometry, University of
Ulm, Ulm, Germany

6Biomedical Sport Studies Center, University of Ferrara, Ferrara,
Italy

7Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Public Health Institute,
University of Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland

8Hospital of Valais, Switzerland

9Department of Sports Medicine, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany

10Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria

11Department of Anesthesiology, University Hospital Essen, Essen,
Germany

Acetazolamide inhibits hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in humans and might
prevent high altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE). We tested this hypothesis in a
prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study in 13
non-acclimatized subjects with a history of HAPE at 4559 m. They rapidly
ascended (<22 h) from 1130 m to 4559 m (Margherita Hut, Italy), with an
overnight stay at 3611 m. Treatment started 48 h before ascent
(acetazolamide: n = 7, 250 mg 3×/d; placebo: n = 6, 3×/d). HAPE was
diagnosed by chest radiography taken at 423 m and then daily at high
altitude. At low altitude and twice daily for three days, right
ventricular-atrial pressure gradient (RVPG) was assessed by
echocardiography, and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) were
measured. Acute mountain sickness (AMS) was evaluated with the Lake Louise
(LLS) and AMS-C scores. Acetazolamide reduced the incidence of HAPE from 67%
to 43%, but this was not statistically significant (p = 0.333). Ascent to
4559 m increased RVPG from 20 ± 5 to 43 ± 10 mmHg (p < 0.01) without a
group difference (p = 0.72). SpO2 fell from 97 ± 1% to 71 ± 10%
(p < 0.01) and was higher with acetazolamide at altitude (p = 0.06). At
first evaluation after ascent, LLS and AMS-C scores were 5.0 ± 1.9 and
0.58 ± 0.50 vs. 10.2 ± 4.8 and 1.78 ± 1.05 (acetazolamide vs. placebo, both
p = 0.01), and they remained lower with acetazolamide over the next two
days. Although acetazolamide reduced HAPE incidence by 35%, it did not
reduce PA pressure as hypothesized. The non-statistically significant
protection against HAPE was considerably less than reductions of >80%
with dexamethasone, tadalafil, and nifedipine (along with their associated
reductions in PA pressure) in previous studies at the same location.
However, the small number of subjects limits a definite conclusion regarding
acetazolamide for HAPE prevention, and a larger study is needed.

## 0019. Telomeric tankyrases: a novel and propitious target to ameliorate the
maladaptation phenomena at heights
Manjula Miglani
Manjari Rain
M.A. Qadar Pasha
Arpana Vibhuti

1SRM University, Haryana, India

2CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR-IGIB),
Delhi, India

Cellular exposure to extremities leads to the expression of multiple proteins
that participate in pathophysiological manifestations. At high altitude
(HA), oxidative stresses boost ROS production that may damage the telomeres.
Telomeres have long been known as important markers of Aging and cancer,
however, the role of telomeres at HA has not been studied so far. Tankyrases
(TNKS) belong to multiple telomeric protein complexes
and plays protective role during DNA damage, thereby acting as a positive
regulator of telomere length. It thus could be an important marker with
respect to HA adaptation or maladaptation. The present study investigated
the plausible roles of tankyrase SNPs, protein levels and expression profile
along with telomere length and telomerase activities with HAPE (high
altitude pulmonary edema) in three well-defined groups, namely HAPE-patients
(HAPE-p), HAPE-free sojourners (HAPE-r) and healthy highland natives (HLs).
Polymorphisms were studied using PCR-RFLP, the protein levels were estimated
using ELISA and expression study was carried out using RT-PCR. Tankyrase
SNPs, rs7015700G/A, rs12541709& rs11991621 were genotyped. The
TNKS heterozygotes rs7015700GA were prevalent in HLs
compared to the HAPE-p and HAPE-r. The plasma TNKS was significantly
decreased in HAPE-p than HAPE-r (p < 0.01).
TNKS was up-regulated 9.27 folds in HAPE-p
(p < 0.01) and down-regulated in HLs by 3.3 folds
(p < 0.05). The telomere length was shorter in
HAPE-p compared to HAPE-r (p < 0.05) and HLs
(p < 0.01). The telomerase activity was
significantly higher in HAPE-p compared to both HAPE-r
(p < 0.05) and HLs (p < 0.01). Our
findings reveal that tankyrases and telomeres are critical to study
adaptation and maladaptation at HA.

## 0020. The natriuretic peptide clearance receptor selectively causes right
ventricular dysfunction in a model of pulmonary hypertension and heart
failure with preserved ejection fraction
Vineet Agrawal
Niki Fortune
Julio Fuentes
Anna R. Hemnes

1Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA

2Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA

Right ventricular failure occurs in nearly 50% of patients with pulmonary
hypertension due to heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
(PH-HFpEF) and may be disproportionate to pulmonary artery pressure; the
mechanisms by which RV failure occurs in PH-HFpEF are not known. We
previously identified that the natriuretic peptide clearance receptor (NPRC)
is the most upregulated gene in the RV of a rodent model of obesity induced
PH-HFpEF. In this study, we hypothesized that treatment with an NPRC
specific agonist, ANP-4-23, directly contributes to RV failure. Adult, six
to eight-week old, AKR mice were treated with ANP-4-23 or saline control for
two weeks through an infusion pump, with and without high fat diet. After
two weeks, mice underwent echocardiography and direct, open-chest left and
right ventricular catheterization. In mice fed low fat diet, treatment with
ANP-4-23 led to an increase in RV internal diameter (1.4 ± 0.13 vs.
1.8 ± 0.13 mm, p =  0.003) and decrease in measured RV
stroke volume (3.5 ± 0.2 vs. 3.2 ± 0.1 µl, p = 0.03).
ANP-4-23 treatment, conversely, led to a decrease in LV internal diameter
(3.4 ± 0.05 vs. 3.2 ± 0.1 mm, p = 0.04) with no change in
LV stroke volume (4.0 ± 0.2 vs. 4.2 ± 0.5 µl). In the group fed high fat
diet, ANP-4-23 led to no statistically significant changes in the RV or LV.
High fat diet alone increased RV diameter, decreased RV stroke volume, and
increased in RV systolic pressure, but ANP-4-23 treatment had no significant
effect in this cohort. In conclusion, an NPRC specific agonist, ANP-4-23,
causes selective dilation and decreased contractility of the RV. This effect
occurred in the absence of any measured differences in RV systolic pressure,
suggesting that NPRC may function to selectively modulate RV function.

## 0021. N-Lysine methyltransferase Smyd2-mediated HIF-1A stabilization plays
a protective role in RV hypertrophy
Swathi Veeroju
Baktybek Kojonazarov
Argen Mamazhakypov
Aysel Ashir
Sandra BreuilsBonnet
Jochen Wilhelm
Norbert Weissmann
Soni Savai Pullamsetti
Steve Provencher
Sebastien Bonnet
Werner Seeger
Ralph T. Schermuly
Tatyana Novoyatleva

1Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC),
Excellence Cluster Cardio-Pulmonary Institute (CPI), Member of the German
Center for Lung Research (DZL), Justus-Liebig University, Giessen,
Germany

2Institute for Lung Health, Giessen, Germany

3Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim,
Germany

4Department of Medicine, Pulmonary Hypertension and Vascular
Biology Research Group, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de
Pneumologie de Québec, Université Laval, Québec, Canada

Pulmonary hypertension upon disease progression leads to heart failure.
Previous observations encompass that angiogenesis is severely dysregulated
in failing heart, and that targeting of angiogenesis might play a crucial
role in maintenance of RV function. Smyd2 is a protein methyltransferase
that methylates histones and diverse non-histone proteins. In
silico analysis demonstrated the presence of highly conserved
Smyd2-specific motif in HIF-1A protein sequence. In this study, we
hypothesize that Smyd2-mediated methylation plays a crucial role in HIF-1A
stabilization and HIF-1A-mediated angiogenesis. Expression analysis from
human right ventricles (RVs) demonstrated that Smyd2 and HIF-1A were
upregulated in compensated RVs which was declined in decompensated RVs. A
similar expression pattern was observed in pulmonary arterial-banded (PAB)
mice. Microarray analysis obtained from Smyd2 overexpression in neonatal rat
ventricular cardiomyocytes (NRCMs) showed significant upregulation of
pro-angiogenic genes. Hypoxia augmented Smyd2 expression in NRCMs and human
cardiac microvascular endothelial cells (HMVECs). Mass spectrometry analysis
revealed HIF-1A as a novel substrate of Smyd2 methyltransferase activity,
which was further substantiated by utilization of site-specific HIF-1A
methylation antibody and HIF-1A methylation-deficient mutant. The
interaction between HIF-1A and Smyd2 was studied by immunoprecipitation.
Nuclear/cytoplasmic extraction and immunofluorescence staining of cells
exposed to hypoxia indicated that Smyd2 exogenous expression leads to HIF-1A
stability and HIF-1A nuclear translocation. Smyd2-dependent HIF-1A
stabilization was markedly diminished by Smyd2 enzyme-deficient
overexpression. Furthermore, Smyd2 deletion reduced hypoxia-induced HIF-1A
protein stability both in NRCMs and HMVECs. Cardiomyocyte-specific
overexpression of Smyd2 using adeno-associated viral approach
(AAV9-CMVIVS-mSmyd2) in PAB mice resulted in a remarkable HIF-1A
stabilization, induction of pro-angiogenic markers and improvement of RV
function. Our data demonstrates that HIF-1A is a novel substrate of Smyd2
methylation, and Smyd2 mediated pro-angiogenic signalling has a
cardioprotective role in RV hypertrophy.

## 0022. Biological heterogeneity in idiopathic pulmonary arterial
hypertension identified through unsupervised transcriptomic profiling of
whole blood
Sokratis Kariotis
Emmanuel Jammeh
Emilia M. Swietlik
Christopher J. Rhodes
Pablo Otero
John Wharton
James Iremonger
Mark J. Dunning
Divya Pandya
Thomas S. Mascarenhas
Niamh Errington
A.A. Roger Thompson
Gerry Coghlan
Jim Lordan
Prof Paul Corris
Luke S. Howard
Robin A. Condliffe
David G. Kiely
Colin Church
Joanna Pepke-Zaba
Mark Toshner
Stephen Wort
Stefan Gräf
Nicholas W Morrell
Martin R. Wilkins
Allan Lawrie
Dennis Wang
On behalf of the NIHR BioResource – Rare Diseases (BRIDGE) PAH Consortium and
the UK National PAH Cohort Study Consortium.

1Department of Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
UK

2Department of Infection, Immunity & Cardiovascular Disease,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

3Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK

4National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
London, UK

5University College London, London, UK

6University of Newcastle, Newcastle, UK

7Sheffield Pulmonary Vascular Disease Unit, Royal Hallamshire
Hospital, Sheffield, UK

8University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

9Royal Papworth Hospital, Papworth, UK

10Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, UK *These authors contributed equally. #Joint senior
authors & joint corresponding authors.

Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) is a rare but fatal disease.
Diagnosis of IPAH is performed largely by the exclusion of other forms of
PAH resulting in a heterogeneous population of patients with less than 25%
attributable to genetics. In order to characterise the heterogeneity, this
study applied unsupervised machine learning to whole-blood RNA
transcriptomes from a large cohort of 359 patients with idiopathic and
heritable PAH. We identified five patient subgroups including three of the
largest patient subgroups accounting for 92% of the cohort, each with a
unique transcriptomic and clinical feature fingerprint. The three major
subgroups were associated with poor (53% five-year survival from sampling),
moderate, and good prognosis (78% five-year survival). The poor prognosis
subgroup was associated with upregulation of ALAS and downregulation of
several immunoglobulin genes, while the good prognosis subgroup showed
upregulation of the BMP signalling regulator NOG, and the C/C variant of
HLA-DPA1/DPB1 also recently associated with increased
survival. We subsequently validated in an independent cohort using clinical
signatures associated with the RNA subgroups. These findings provide
evidence for the existence of three major subgroups (endophenotypes) of
patients within the H/IPAH clinical classification group. The reported
clinical and molecular features could improve the current clinical
classification, risk stratification, and prognosis prediction as well as
offer novel insights into regulators of disease pathogenesis that can be
targeted by therapeutics as a precision medicine approach for PAH.

## 0023. Transcriptomic characterization of pulmonary arterial hypertension on
pathway level
Yajing Ji
Guoli Zhou
Richard R. Neubig

1Pharmacology and Toxicology Department, Michigan State
University, East Lancing, MI, USA

2Clinical & Translational Science Institute, Michigan State
University, East Lancing, MI, USA

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a severe and life-threatening disease
characterized by elevated pulmonary blood pressure. PAH can be categorized
into different subgroups, which include idiopathic PAH (IPAH) and PAH
associated with other diseases (APAH). While current treatments slow PAH
disease progression, they are ultimately not curative. This highlights the
need for further investigation of the underlying molecular mechanisms of PAH
pathogenesis, to ultimately discover new therapeutic targets. There have
been several studies which have transcriptionally profiled and compared
control and PAH samples using either gene expression microarrays or RNA-Seq.
One challenge is that each of these independent studies analyzed a small
number of patient samples, which limits the analytical methods that can be
performed. To circumvent this problem, we have pooled multiple publicly
available PAH gene expression datasets, which enables us to use more
sophisticated computational techniques. While the existing studies focused
on studying differential expression at a single-gene level, we leveraged
gene set-based computational techniques to study the transcriptional
alterations in PAH on a pathway level. We have identified differentially
expressed genes and gene signatures between control and PAH samples. Many of
them were associated with signalling pathways that have an established role
in PAH biology. But interestingly, we were also able to identify new genes
and pathways that have not been previously associated with PAH, and thus
warrant further experimental validation. This study also compared IPAH with
APAH samples with the goal of identifying subtype-specific transcriptional
signatures. We also tried to classify all the PAH samples based on their
transcriptomic profiles. Excitingly, the samples did not cluster based upon
their clinical subtype, but rather into several distinct expression-based
clusters, suggesting that PAH patients with different transcriptional
profiles may have shared/divergent drug responses. We provided valuable
findings for further validation and investigation to develop novel
treatments for PAH.

## 0024. Systematic follow-up of patients following acute pulmonary embolism
is associated with an increased incidence of chronic thromboembolic
pulmonary hypertension and less severe disease
C. Durrington
I. Armstrong
A. Charalampopoulos
R. Condliffe
T. Devey
C. Elliot
A. Hameed
N. Hamilton
C. Hill
J. Hurdman
R. Lewis
R. Maclean
Rajaram S.
A.M.K. Rothman
I. Sabroe
G. Saccullo
A.J. Swift
S. Thomas
A.A.R. Thompson
J.J. van Veen
J.M. Wild
Kiely DG
Sheffield Pulmonary Vascular Disease Unit, Royal Hallamshire Hospital,
Sheffield, Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease,
University of Sheffield, Pulmonary Embolism Clinic, Department of Thrombosis
and Haematology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS FT, Department of
Radiology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS FT, UK

There are limited data on the incidence of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension (CTEPH). The Sheffield Pulmonary Vascular Disease Unit (SPVDU)
serves a population of 15 million. In Sheffield (population 600,000), a
pulmonary embolism (PE) follow-up clinic was established in 2010. The study
aim was to assess the impact of a PE follow-up clinic on the diagnostic rate
and severity of CTEPH. Patients diagnosed with CTEPH (2010–2020) included
Sheffield patients referred from the PE clinic (Group1), those not referred
through the PE clinic (Group2), and patients with suspected PH referred from
outside Sheffield (Group3). CTEPH was defined according to international
guidelines and required multimodality imaging, a mean pulmonary artery
pressure (mPAP) ≥25 mmHg at right heart catheterisation, with other causes
of PH excluded. Eight hundred and seventy patients were diagnosed with
CTEPH. Of 1975 patients evaluated in the PE-follow-up clinic, 35 were
diagnosed with CTEPH with a cumulative incidence at two years of 1.5%. There
were 77 Sheffield patients with CTEPH (Groups1 and 2) giving a diagnostic
rate of 12.8/million/year based on a referral population of 600,000,
compared to 5.3/million/year for 790 patients with CTEPH referred from
outside Sheffield. Patients from Group 1 had median mPAP 32mmHg (IQR17) and
pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) 287dynes/sec/cm−5 (IQR236),
those from Group 2 had mPAP 41 mmHg (IQR14) and PVR 472 mmHg (IQR507) and
those from Group 3 had mPAP 46 mmHg (IQR17) and PVR 592
dynes/sec/cm−5 (IQR540), (p < 0.05 for all comparisons,
except mPAP Groups 1 vs. 2, p = 0.071 and PVR Groups 2 vs. 3, p = 0.65). In
conclusion, the introduction of an acute PE follow-up clinic identifies
patients with CTEPH with less severe haemodynamic disease. Integration of
such approaches with a national network of PH centres can achieve diagnostic
rates for CTEPH of 12.8/million/year.

## 0025. Women and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: the special
meaning of balloon pulmonary angioplasty
Alejandro Cruz-Utrilla
Miguel Calderón-Flores
María José Cristo-Ropero
María Jesús López Gude
Maite Velázquez Martín
José Luis Pérez Vela
Carmen Pérez-Olivares
Fernando Arribas-Ynsaurriaga
María Pilar Escribano-Subias

1Cardiology Department, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre,
Madrid, Spain

2Department of Cardiac Surgery, Hospital Universitario 12 de
Octubre, Madrid

3Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Universitaroi 12 de Octubre,
Madrid, Spain

Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is a rare form of
precapillary pulmonary hypertension due to obstruction and vascular
remodeling of pulmonary arteries. Treatment of choice is pulmonary
endarterectomy (PEA). However, around 40–50% of patients are classified as
non-operable. Alternative treatments for these inoperable cases or for those
patients with symptoms and elevated PVR after surgery include pulmonary
vasodilators and balloon pulmonary artery angioplasty (BPA). Interestingly,
previous works showed a differential treatment for women in comparison to
men in this disease, including PEA. The aim of this work was to describe
gender-specific differences regarding clinical presentation, haemodynamic
profile, management and prognosis in patients with CTEPH in a single
referral centre for the study of PH in Spain. Amongst 453 patients evaluated
between January 2007 and December 2018, 253 were women (55.9%). Median
follow-up time was 50.7 months (interquartile range – IQr – 30.0–75.2
months). Mean age was significantly greater in women (61.1 ± 1.0 years vs.
56.2 ± 1.1 years in men; p < 0.001). Regarding treatment, PEA was
achieved more frequently on men (123 men vs. 110 women. Absolute difference
of +18.0%; p < 0.001). Nevertheless, there was a trend towards BPA being
carried out more usually in women (32 men vs. 55 women, absolute difference
of −7.1%; p = 0.065). During follow-up, 15 men and 22 women died. There were
no differences in long-term mortality. After multivariate analysis, PEA and
BPA were protective factors. On the contrary, diabetes, shorter distance in
the six-minute walk test and higher levels of NtproBNP remained as
prognostic factors for mortality. In conclusion, this study demonstrates an
equivalent long-term survival between both genders, even though women were
older and more comorbid at diagnosis. A refined pulmonary artery angioplasty
program has probably been more beneficial and effective as a treatment
option in female patients.

## 0026. G protein-coupled receptor expression from single cell RNA sequencing
in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Gayathri Viswanathan
Nour Nazo
Ian Cumming
Asvin Ganapathi
Jack Haney
Helene Fradin Kirshner
David Corcoran
Yen Rei Yu
Sudarshan Rajagopal

1Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA

2Division of Pulmonary, Department of Medicine, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA

3Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
NC, USA

4Duke Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA

Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is a disease of the
pulmonary vasculature characterized by persistent thrombotic occlusion or
stenosis of the pulmonary arteries resulting in pulmonary hypertension (PH).
Although pulmonary thromboendarterectomy (PTE) remains the treatment of
choice for patients with CTEPH, not all patients will benefit from or
receive this highly specialized surgery. Patients whose CTEPH is deemed
inoperable are candidates for medical therapy, for which only riociguat, a
soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, is FDA approved. Other options include
off-label use of therapies for pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), a
related disease of the pulmonary arterioles. Thus, there is a significant
unmet need for novel medical therapies for CTEPH. However, specific cell
types that are involved in thrombotic lesions are poorly understood. Here,
by using insights from single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) of CTEPH
thrombus, we uncovered distinct populations of immune cells; phenotypically
modulated smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and typical cells of the pulmonary
vasculature. Cells derived from CTEPH thrombus have defects in angiogenesis
and proliferation. We extended our studies by performing GPCR profiling
globally, using data from scRNAseq. Global GPCR profiling allowed us to
differentiate receptor expression in different cell types in the
myofibroblasts, endothelial cells (ECs) and immune cells that compose the
thrombus. Over 50 GPCRs targets have been identified in different cell
types, in which ∼20 GPCRs are expressed in SMCs or ECs. Testing a few drug
targets in thrombus-derived cells revealed GPCRs, such as the type A
endothelin receptor (ETAR) and CXCR3, inhibited the endothelial cells and
smooth muscle cells proliferation. These novel findings may enable the
design of more precisely tailored CTEPH medical therapies.

## 0027. Study of the antifibrotic action of JAK inhibitors for the prevention
and treatment of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
A.A. Karpov
N.A. Anikin
A.M. Mihailova
E.S. Mihailov
L.A. Shilenko
S.S. Smirnov
D.D. Vaulina
D.Y. Ivkin

1Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Saint-Petersburg,
Russia

2Saint Petersburg State Chemical Pharmaceutical University,
Saint-Petersburg, Russia

3First Pavlov State Medical University of Saint Petersburg,
Saint-Petersburg, Russia

4N.P. Bechtereva Institute of Human Brain, Russian Academy of
Science, Saint-Petersburg, Russia

Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is one of the most severe
complications of pulmonary embolism. Aseptic inflammation and fibrous
remodeling of the vascular wall are important factors in CTEPH pathogenesis
and pharmacological targets to be corrected. The aim of this study was
investigating the antifibrotic effect of Janus kinase 1, 2 inhibitor (iJAK)
for CTEPH treatment. Wistar rats were used for the experiments. At the first
stage, repeated intravenous administration of partially biodegradable
microspheres from sodium alginate was performed to embolize the branches of
the pulmonary artery and trigger the CTEPH formation. Two weeks after,
animals were divided into following groups: low dose (L/D) iJAK –
ruxolitinib 0.43 mg/kg twice per day was administered per os during four
weeks; middle dose (M/D) iJAK – 1.29 mg/kg; high dose (H/D) iJAK –
2.14 mg/kg. In Control and Placebo groups, saline was administered in the
same regimen. At the end of experiment treadmill test, echocardiography
(TTE), right ventricular catheterization with measurement of right
ventricular mean pressure (RVMP) and histological examination of the lungs
were performed. According to histological examination, the hypertrophy index
of vascular wall was significantly higher in all experimental groups
compared with the Control (p < 0.01). Moreover, the hypertrophy index was
significantly lower in M/D iJAK group compared to Placebo (p = 0.012).
According to the treadmill test, exercise tolerance in the M/D iJAK group
was higher than in the Placebo group (p < 0.05). There were no
significant differences in the level of RVMP between the experimental
groups. According to TTE, there was a trend to decrease the fractional
shortening of the left ventricle in the (H/D) iJAK group (p = 0.061). In
conclusion, using M/D of iJAK in the experimental modeling of CTEPH reduces
the severity of pulmonary artery vascular remodeling and increases exercise
tolerance.

## 0028. Unilateral chronic thromboembolic pulmonary disease: do they benefit
from surgery?
Farid Rashidi
Rezayat Parvizi
Babak Mahmoodian
Eisa Bilejani

1Tuberculosis and Lung Disease Research Center, Tabriz University
of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran

2Cardiovascular Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran

3Medical Radiation Sciences Research Team, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran

Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is considered to be an
extreme variant of pulmonary thromboembolism. Unilateral CTEPH is extremely
uncommon. It is not clear if these patients benefit from pulmonary
thromboendarterectomy (PTE). Here we report three cases of CTEPH who
underwent successful PTE. In this case series, we report three symptomatic
patients with CTEPH and CTED patients with unilateral involvements. All the
patients underwent pulmonary thromboendarterectomy successfully. There were
no other reasons for patient’s symptoms. PFT were normal as well. The
patients underwent PTE because dyspnea which was otherwise unexplained.
First patient was a 37-year-old woman with exertional dyspnea in FC 2. Her
VQ scan showed unilateral defect in LLL. Six month after surgery, she was in
FC.1. Her 6MWD increased from 328 m to 441 m. Also, m.Pap decreased from
25 mmHg to 19 mmHg. There was no defect in VQ scan six months after the
surgery. Second patient was a 30-year-old woman with history of PE and DVT.
She had dyspnea in FC 2. VQ scan revealed unilateral segmental defect in
LLL. One year after surgery, she was in FC 1. 6MWD improved from 395 m to
474 m without desaturation. Also, her VQ scan test improved completely. The
third case was a 30-year-old woman with APS positive. She had history of PE,
DVT and CVA. She was symptomatic in FC 2. Her mean Pap at rest was 19 mmHg
and after exercise that increased to 32 mmHg. One year after PTE, she was in
FC.1. Her 6MWD increase from 260 m to 302 m and mean Pap after exercise
decreased from 30 mmHg to 24 mmHg. Although unilateral symptomatic CTEPH is
uncommon, but this diagnosis should be considered in evaluation of patients
with unexplained shortness of breath, since some of them may get benefit
from PTE.

## 0029. Novel TRAF2 variant and KDR
deletion are implicated in the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial
hypertension
Natalia Gallego
Shaun Pienkos
David F. Condon
Alejandro Cruz Utrilla
Nuria Ochoa
Julián Nevado
Pedro Arias
Spanish PAH Consortium
Stuti Agarwal
Hiral Patel
Ananya Chakraborty
Pablo Lapunzina
Pilar Escribano
Vinicio A. de Jesús Pérez
Jair Tenorio Castaño

1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), IdiPaz,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain

2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain

3Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Department
of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

4Pulmonary Hypertension Unit, Department of Cardiology, Hospital
Universitario Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain

5Centro de Investigación Biomedica en Red en Enfermedades
Cardiovasculares, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain

6ITHACA, European Reference Network on Rare Congenital
Malformations and Rare Intellectual Disability

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare disorder associated with
progressive elevation of pulmonary pressures that, if untreated, leads to
right heart failure and death. Specific genetic variants increase the
incidence of PAH in carriers with idiopathic PAH, hereditary PAH or
associated forms. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was carried out in a proband
with PAH and primary biliary cirrhosis. A custom pipeline for variant
prioritization was carried out to obtain candidate variants and Copy Number
Variants (CNVs). To determine the impact of TRAF2 in cell
proliferation, we performed an MTS assay on healthy lung pericytes
transfected with siRNA specific for TRAF2. To measure the
effect of loss of TRAF2 on NF-kappa-beta (NF-κB) activity,
we measured levels of Phospho-p65-NF-κB in siRNA-transfected pericytes using
western immunoblotting. WES of the proband revealed a de
novo protein-truncating variant in the TRAF2
gene and CNV analysis showed a 7703 Mb deletion with an unknown significance
at chromosome 4 which encompasses 52 genes, including KDR.
TRAF2 encode for immunomodulatory protein that regulate NF-κB
activation. The knockdown of TRAF2 increased NF-κB activity
in healthy lung pericytes, which correlated with a significant increase in
proliferation over 24 h. Loss of function variants in KDR
gene has been previously described in PAH individuals associated with
interstitial lung disease, but as far as we know, no CNVs that include
KDR has been detected so far in patients manifesting
PAH. In conclusion, we have identified a rare novel variant in
TRAF2 using WES and a 7703 Mb deletion which include
KDR gene. We speculate that loss of function in
TRAF2 promotes pulmonary vascular remodeling by
allowing overactivation of the NF-κB signaling activity; however, the
deletion can also play a role in the clinical manifestation of the patient,
suggesting a digenic contribution to the PAH phenotype.

## 0030. GP130 signaling promotes right ventricular dysfunction in pulmonary
arterial hypertension via microtubules
Sasha Z. Prisco
Lynn M. Hartweck
Rebecca Goldblum
Mark R. McClellan
Thenappan Thenappan
Melissa K. Gardner
Stephen L. Archer
Kurt W. Prins

1Cardiovascular Division, Lillehei Heart Institute, Department of
Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

2Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA

3Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

4Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

5Department of Medicine, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON,
Canada

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a lethal pulmonary arterial
vasculopathy that results in right ventricular dysfunction (RVD). We
previously showed that microtubule-mediated junctophilin-2 (MT-JPH2 pathway)
downregulation promotes t-tubule disruption and RVD, but the upstream
regulators of this pathway are unknown. Glycoprotein 130 (GP130) signaling
via its downstream mediator, signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) promotes microtubule remodeling in cardiomyocytes.
However, the relationship between GP130 signaling and the MT-JPH2 pathway in
RVD is unknown. We tested the hypothesis that antagonism of GP130 signaling
improves RV function by normalizing the MT-JPH2 pathway. Immunoblots of RV
extracts quantified levels of GP130 and the MT-JPH2 pathways. Quantitative
mass spectrometry analyzed the microtubule-associated protein fraction of RV
extracts. Metabolomics defined the RV metabolic signature. Echocardiography,
pressure-volume loops, and pulmonary vascular histology assessed RV function
and pulmonary vascular disease severity. Finally, we examined the
relationship between the GP130 agonist, IL-6 and RVD in PAH patients. GP130
antagonism with SC144 blunted RV STAT3 activation, normalized the MT-JPH2
pathway, and restored t-tubule architecture. SC144 restored the expression
of 2842 proteins in the microtubule-associated protein fraction as
determined by mass spectrometry, with significant changes in the expression
of mitochondrial proteins. Metabolomic profiling revealed an improvement in
RV metabolism in SC144 RVs. Finally, SC144 enhanced RV function (TAPSE
2.4 ± 0.2 vs. 1.9 ± 0.1 mm, p = 0.004), augmented RV-pulmonary artery
coupling (Ees/Ea 0.9 ± 0.1 vs. 0.4 ± 0.1, p = 0.002), blunted RV
hypertrophy, and improved survival (100 vs. 70%) compared to vehicle without
altering pulmonary vascular disease severity. In PAH patients, higher IL-6
levels were associated with higher NT-proBNP levels and lower RV fractional
area change despite no differences in pulmonary vascular disease burden. In
conclusion, inhibition of GP130 improves RV function and survival in
monocrotaline PAH via modulation of microtubules.
Disclosures: KWP receives modest consultation fees from
Actelion and grant funding from United Therapeutics. TT receives modest
consultation fees from Actelion and Gilead. The other authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.

## 0031. Loss of estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) worsens hemodynamic alterations
and right ventricular (RV) adaptation in female rats with pulmonary
hypertension (PH)
Andrea Frump
Bakhtiyor Yakubov
Amanda Fisher
Todd Cook
Jenny Cheng
Marcela Tabima
Naomi Chesler
Tim Lahm

1Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Occupational
Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA

2Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA

Women are more likely to develop pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) but
exhibit more favorable hemodynamics and increased survival compared to men.
These improved outcomes in women have been linked to protective effects of
17ß-estradiol (E2). While the E2 receptor ERα is protective in the systemic
vasculature, its function in the cardiopulmonary system has not been
explored. Our hypothesis of this study is that loss of ERα exacerbates
experimental PH. In vivo studies were performed in male and
female ERα mutant or wild-type (WT) littermates with monocrotaline (MCT)-or
Sugen/hypoxia (SuHx)-induced PH or pulmonary artery banding (PAB)-induced RV
failure (PAB-RVF). Hemodynamics, PA and RV remodeling, and molecular changes
were assessed. To study effects of E2 or ERα activation, E2 or PPT was
utilized in MCT-PH or PAB-RVF using prevention or rescue approaches.
p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. In MCT-PH and SuHx-PH,
loss of ERα resulted in more severe disease (demonstrated by increased RV
hypertrophy, RV systolic pressure (RVSP), total pulmonary resistance index,
as well as decreased cardiac index) compared to WT. This difference in
phenotypes was driven by more severe changes in female animals, whereas
changes in male ERα mutants were less pronounced. Conversely, treatment with
E2 or ERα agonist rescued MCT-PH and PAB-RVF (p < 0.05). In particular,
E2 or ERα agonist treatment was associated with less severe MCT- or
PAB-induced alterations in RVSP, RV hypertrophy, and RV structure and
function and increased survival (p < 0.05). In conclusion, loss of ERα
results in more severe PH. E2 treatment or selective ERα activation
attenuates PH. These data suggest that ERα exerts protective effects in PH.
The more severe phenotype in female ERα mutants with PH suggests that
alterations in ERα signaling may contribute to the female bias in PAH.
Selectively activating ERα signaling may be a novel strategy to treat PAH
and other types of PH.

## 0032. Breast cancer and heritable PAH due to BMPR2 mutation: an unexpected
discovery
Victoria Toro
Valérie Nadeau
Pierre Hélie
Junichi Omura
Yoan Grobs
Roxane Paulin
Francois Potus
Olivier Boucherat
Steeve Provencher
Sébastien Bonnet
Pulmonary Hypertension Research Group, Centre de Recherche de l’Institut
Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec, Québec, QC,
Canada

BMPR2 mutation is reported in 80% of familial PAH and 20% of idiopathic cases.
Recently, a new rat model of hereditary pulmonary arterial hypertension
(HPAH) with a BMPR2 loss-of-function mutation has been generated. Similar to
humans, only around 20% of the rats spontaneously developed mild HPAH.
Unexpectedly, we observed that 20% (95%CI: 12–28) of the 82
Bmpr2
+/Δ71
 rats (93% of females) versus 4% (95%CI: 0–9) of the 84 age-matched
wild-type littermates spontaneously developed mammary masses and ulcerations
requiring euthanasia. Interestingly, rats with tumor had elevated PA and
exhibit PAH signs. We hypothesized that mammary tumor exacerbates the
penetrance of PAH in the BMPR2-mutated female rats. BMPR2-mutated and
non-mutated female rats (50 days) were treated with the breast cancer
inducer 7, 12- diméthylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) or Vehicle. Five weeks after
the treatment, all rats, whatever the genotype, develop mammary tumors.
Compare to both vehicle treated and DMBA rats (no tumor), BMPR2-mutated rats
with DMBA-induced tumors had a significant increase in mean PA pressure
(p < 0.0001); total pulmonary resistance (p < 0.0001) and significant
decrease in cardiac output (P = 0.0293). Histologically, these changes were
associated with greater amount of pulmonary artery remodelling assessed by
EVG coloration. Mechanistically, the development of PAH in the BMPR2 mutated
rats with tumor was associated with a significant upregulation of BRD4
(Western blot) (p = 0.0149); IL-1β (p = 0.0052), BRD3 (p = 0.0791) and BIRC5
(p = 0.0166) mRNA expression levels. Co-culture experiments with breast
cancer cells and PASMC from both wild-type and BMPR2-mutated animals are
ongoing to identify whether cancer cells are realising factors responsible
of PASMC proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. We demonstrated for the
first time that breast cancer exacerbates PAH development in BMPR2-mutated
rats. Increased BRDs-driven pro-inflammatory signaling is associated with
PAH development in BMPR2-mutated rats. We are currently exploring whether
BMPR2 mutated person are more prone to breast cancer development or not and
whether PAH development occur more frequently in breast cancer patients.

## 0033. Smooth muscle Tsc2 deficiency leads to spontaneous pulmonary
hypertension and represents attractive molecular target for therapeutic
intervention
Yuanjun Shen
Tatiana Kudryashova
Dmitry Goncharov
Theodore Avolio
Baojun Chang
Andressa Pena
Ana Mora
Jeffery Baust
Andres Chavez Barragan
Arnab Ray
Evelyn Okorie
Sara Grunblatt
Matt Kart
Analise Rhode
Elena Goncharova

1Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis, CA, USA

2Heart, Lung, Blood and Vascular Medicine Institute, University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) manifests by remodeling of small muscular
pulmonary arteries (PAs) due to hyper-proliferation of pulmonary vascular
cells, resulting in maladaptive increase in PA pressure and right ventricle
(RV) dysfunction. We previously reported that stiffness-induced deficiency
of tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2) promotes hyper-proliferation and
apoptosis resistance of PA vascular smooth muscle cells (PAVSMC) from PAH
lungs through YAP/TAZ-mTOR, and that TSC2 restoration by SRT2104 reduces
hyper-proliferation and induces apoptosis in human PAH PAVSMC. The role of
TSC2 deficiency in the development of PAH/PH and potential attractiveness of
pharmacological restoration of TSC2 remain to be determined. To test the
role of VSM-specific Tsc2 deficiency in vivo, we developed
mice with VSM-specific heterozygous deletion of Tsc2 (cross-breeding
SM22-Cre and Tsc2flox/flox mice). Nine week-old male
SM22-Cre-Tsc2+/− mice developed spontaneous PH as evidenced
by significantly higher PA medial thickness (PA MT), systolic RV pressure
(sRVP) and RV hypertrophy (Fulton Index) compared to same-age controls. To
determine effect of pharmacological restoration of Tsc2 on severe
experimental PH, we used SU5416/hypoxia rat model. Six to eight-week-old
male rats received single dose of SU5416 (20 mg/kg) followed by three-week
exposure to 10% normobaric hypoxia and daily oral treatment with SRT2104 or
vehicle under normoxia for next five weeks. We found that SRT2104 restored
SMC Tsc2 in small PAs, reversed pulmonary vascular remodeling (PA MT:
42.4 ± 1.9% for SRT2104 vs. 62.0 ± 5.9% for vehicle), decreased percentage
of occluded PAs, and resolved PH (sRVP: 29.1 ± 0.9 mmHg for SRT2104 vs.
52.7 ± 9.6 mmHg for vehicle; Fulton: 0.37 ± 0.02 for SRT2104 vs. 0.48 ± 0.06
for vehicle; RV contractility index 56.2 ± 1.3 for SRT2104 vs. 47.5 ± 2.1
for vehicle). In conclusion, smooth muscle Tsc2 deficiency induces early
onset of mild spontaneous PH in mice. SRT2104 restores Tsc2 in small PAs and
reverses pulmonary vascular remodeling and severe experimental PH in
rats.

## 0034. Identification of ADORA1-PDE10A complex formation and its
bidirectional regulation of intracellular cyclic AMP levels as a novel
therapeutic target for treating pulmonary hypertension
Chanil Valasarajan
Julio Castro Palomino Laria
Nahomi Castro Palomino Laria
Astrid Wietelmann
Baktybek Kojonazarov
Ralph T. Schermuly
Friedrich Grimminger
Werner Seeger
Soni Savai Pullamsetti

1Max-Planck-Institute For Heart and Lung Research, Department of
Lung Development and Remodeling, Bad Nauheim, Germany

2Palobiofarma, Barcelona, Spain

3Department of Internal Medicine, Universities of Giessen and
Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member Of The DZL, Justus-liebig University,
Giessen, Germany

Despite substantial advancements in the treatment of pulmonary arterial
hypertension (PAH), obstacles still remain in achieving the optimal
outcomes. Various treatments have been developed to target signaling
pathways mostly leading to increased intracellular cAMP. Existence of
intracellular cAMP microenvironment and various cAMP regulators and
effectors as signalosome, adds a different level of complexity to the cAMP
signaling. In vitro studies involved mainly donor and IPAH
human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs). To study the cAMP
signalosome complex, we used co-immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence
staining and proximity ligation assay. Functional studies include performing
proliferation and apoptosis assay after targeting ADORA1/PDE10A using siRNAs
and inhibitors. cAMP levels were measured using ELISA kits. In
vivo studies involved treating the SU5416+Hypoxia- and
MCT-PAH rat models with ADORA1/PDE10A dual inhibitor followed by cardiac
MRI, right heart catheterization and lung morphometric analysis. From the
expression studies, it was observed that ADORA1 was highly expressed in IPAH
PASMCs. However, anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of ADORA1
inhibition was observed only in donor PASMCs, but not in IPAH PASMCs.
Further, screening for cAMP inhibiting PDEs (PDE3, PDE4, PDE10A) that can be
colocalized with ADORA1, we found that PDE10A was upregulated and was in
close proximity to ADORA1 compared to other cAMP-inhibiting PDEs exclusively
in IPAH PASMCs compared to donor PASMCs. Importantly, genetic and
pharmacological inhibition of both ADORA1 and PDE10A via increased cAMP
levels induced both, pro-apoptotic and anti-proliferative effect in human
IPAH-PASMCs. Impressively, in in vivo studies, the
ADORA1/PDE10A dual inhibitor treatment of SU5416+hypoxia and MCT-PAH rats
has shown better survival rate compared to the placebo. The hemodynamics and
MRI data have shown that dual inhibitor-treated rats were having lower
pulmonary vascular resistance, reduced right ventricular hypertrophy and
improved cardiac function. The morphometric analysis revealed that the rats
treated with dual inhibitor had reduced medial wall thickness and
muscularization compared to the placebo group. These results show that
targeting ADORA1/PDE10A signalosome regulated cAMP microenvironment is a
promising step towards having a better treatment for PAH.

## 0035. Downregulation of adenylate kinase 4 (AK4) improves the mitochondrial
respiration and inhibits the glycolytic switch of pulmonary arterial smooth
muscle cells
Tessa Wilke
Magdalena Wujak
Christine Veith-Berger
Cheng-Yu Wu
Zeki Ilker Kanbagli
Ralph T. Schermuly
Hossein A. Ghofrani
Werner Seeger
Friedrich Grimminger
Norbert Weissmann

1Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Justus Liebig University Giessen,
Giessen, Germany

2Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Universities of Giessen and Marburg
Lung Center, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, Germany

3Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, Collegium Medicum in
Bydgoszcz, Faculty of Pharmacy, Bydgoszcz, Poland

4Department of Internal Medicine, Universities of Giessen and
Marburg Lung Center, Institute for Lung Health, Cardio-Pulmonary Institute,
Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Giessen, Germany

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a hypoxia-driven vascular disease characterized
by increased proliferation and decreased apoptosis of pulmonary artery
smooth muscle cells (PASMCs), and a glycolytic switch similar to the Warburg
effect in cancer. The current findings support the concept that the
knowledge gained from cancer research may help in the treatment of PH.
Adenylate kinase isoenzyme 4 (AK4) is a mitochondrial enzyme that promotes
metabolic reprograming and metastasis of lung cancer. In
our study, we found that AK4 is up-regulated in human PASMC exposed to
hypoxia, in chronic hypoxia mouse model representing group III of PH
classification as well as in pulmonary vasculature of patients with
idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH). Under hypoxia, AK4
expression in human PASMC was regulated via hypoxia inducible factor-1α
(HIF-1α) and the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS). siRNA-mediated gene
silencing experiments showed that AK4 downregulation decreases the
phosphorylation of protein kinase B (AKT) which is a critical regulator of
cell survival and growth. We could show that AK4 silencing increased the
apoptosis of PASMC via elevating the level of a pro-apoptotic protein Bax.
Furthermore, AK4 downregulation inhibited a glycolytic switch of hypoxic
PASMC by decreasing the level of hexokinase II, lactate dehydrogenase and
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. Consequently, the AK4 depletion improved the
mitochondrial respiratory function of PASMC both under normoxic and
hypoxia-mimicking conditions. We conclude that AK4 is involved in the
regulation of the Warburg effect and mitochondrial function of human
pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells indicating its therapeutic potential in
the treatment of pulmonary hypertension. We acknowledge the support of the
European Respiratory Society, and the “Deutsches Zentrum für
Lungenforschung” (Fellowship LTRF 2018).

## 0036. Association between leflunomide and pulmonary hypertension
Thomas Lacoste Palasset
Chaumais Marie-Camille
Jason Weatherald
Laurent Savale
Xavier Jaïs
Laura C. Price
Charles Khouri
Sophie Bulifon
Andrei Seferian
Mitja Jevnikar
Athénaïs Boucly
Stefana Pancic
Celine Chabanne
Kaïs Ahmad
Mathilde Volpato
Nicolas Favrolt
Anne Guillaumot
Delphine Horeau-Langlard
Grégoire Prévot
Pierre Fesler
Laurent Bertoletti
Martine Reynaud-Gaubert
Nicolas Lamblin
David Launay
Gérald Simonneau
Olivier Sitbon
Frederic Perros
Marc Humbert
David Montani

1Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de Pneumologie,
Centre de Référence de l’Hypertension Pulmonaire, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le
Kremlin Bicêtre, France

2Université Paris Saclay, Faculté de Médecine, Le Kremlin
Bicêtre, France

3Inserm UMR_S 999, Hôpital Marie Lannelongue, Le Plessis
Robinson, France

4Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de Pharmacie
Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France

5Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Paris-Saclay, Chatenay Malabry,
France

6Division of Respirology, Department of Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Canada

7National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
Royal Brompton Hospital, UK

8Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble, Centre Régional de
Pharmacovigilance, Grenoble, France

9Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Canada

10Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, Service de
Cardiologie et Maladies Vasculaires, INSERM U1099, Rennes, France

11Hospices Civils de Lyon, Groupe Hospitalier Est, Service de
Pneumologie, Centre National de Référence des Maladies Pulmonaires Rares,
Lyon, France

12Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier, Service de
Pneumologie, Montpellier, France

13Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Service de
Pneumologie et Soins Intensifs Respiratoires, Dijon, France

14Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Nancy, Département
de Pneumologie, Hôpital de Brabois, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France

15Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes, Service de
pneumologie, Hôpital Laënnec, Nantes, France

16Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Toulouse, Hôpital Larrey,
Service de Pneumologie, Toulouse, France

17Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM
et Départment de Médecine Interne Lapeyronie, Montpellier, France

18Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Saint-Etienne, Service de
Médecine Vasculaire et Thérapeutique, INSERM U1059 et CIC1408, Université
Jean-Monnet, Saint-Etienne, France

19Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, Service de
Pneumologie CHU nord, Marseille, France

20Centre Hospitalier régional Universitaire de Lille, Université
de Lille, Service de Cardiologie, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France

21Centre Hospitalier régional Universitaire de Lille, Université
de Lille, Département de Médecine Interne et Immunologie Clinique, Lille,
France *MH and DM contributed equally.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) has been described in patients treated with
leflunomide. The objective of this study was to assess the association
between leflunomide and PH. We identified incident cases of PH in patients
treated with leflunomide from the French PH registry and through the
VIGIAPATH pharmacovigilance program between September 1999 and December
2019. PH aetiology, clinical, functional, radiologic, and haemodynamic
characteristics were reviewed at baseline and follow-up. A pharmacovigilance
disproportionality analysis using the World Health Organization’s (WHO)
global database was conducted. We then investigated the effect of
leflunomide on human pulmonary endothelial cells (h-PECs). Data are
expressed as median (min–max). Twenty-eight patients treated with
leflunomide before PH diagnosis were identified. Twenty-three (75%) had
another risk factor for PH and two had two risk factors. The median time
between leflunomide initiation and PH diagnosis was 32 months (1–120). Right
heart catheterisation confirmed precapillary PH with a cardiac index of 2.37
L.min−1.m−2 (1.19–3.1) and elevated pulmonary
vascular resistance at 9.63 Wood Units (3.6–22.1) without nitric oxide
reversibility. Five patients (17.9%) had no other risk factor for PH besides
exposure to leflunomide. No significant hemodynamic improvement was observed
after leflunomide withdrawal. The pharmacovigilance disproportionality
analysis using the WHO database revealed a significant overrepresentation of
leflunomide among reported PAH adverse drug reactions. In vitro studies
showed dose-dependent toxicity of leflunomide on h-PECs. In conclusion, PH
associated with leflunomide is rare and usually associated with other risk
factors. The pharmacovigilance analysis suggests an association reinforced
by experimental data.

## 0037. The estimand framework in PAH clinical trials
Youlan Rao
Lisa Edwards
Dana Johnson
C.Q. Deng
United Therapeutics Corp, Durham, NC, USA

An addendum to ICH Efficacy Guideline E9 (Statistical Principles for Clinical
Trials) was finalized and released in November 2019. The addendum introduced
the concept of estimands to ensure alignment of the objectives of a clinical
trial with its design, conduct, and analysis. The estimand framework is
defined by five inter-related attributes: the treatment condition of
interest, the population of interest, the variable (endpoint) to be
obtained, the way intercurrent events are handled, and the population level
summary for the variable. We discuss how the estimand framework and the five
estimand attributes may be applied to the common designs (measurement at
fixed time point or longitudinal measurement with fixed duration and
event-driven study) in PAH clinical trials. We illustrate how the estimand
framework can bring more alignment, clarity, and transparency to commonly
used endpoints such as time to clinical worsening events, change in
functional capacity measures (such as 6MWD, Peak VO2) from
baseline to a fixed, post-baseline assessment, and hemodynamic measures
(such as PVR). The common intercurrent events (such as early discontinuation
of the study drug and change in background PAH therapies) in PAH studies and
the strategies to handle them will also be discussed. We conclude with
recommendations for incorporating estimand framework when planning future
PAH clinical trials, hoping that this will drive further development of a
common framework based on the addendum that can be applied to protocols,
statistical analysis plans, and clinical study reports in the future.

## 0038. Risk stratification in pulmonary hypertension due to chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease
Athiththan Yogeswaran
Manuel J. Richter
Robert Naeije
Natascha Sommer
Werner Seeger
Hossein Ardeschir Ghofrani
Friedrich Grimminger
Khodr Tello
Henning Gall

1Department of Internal Medicine, Justus-Liebig-University
Giessen, Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center, Member of the
German Center for Lung Research, Giessen, Germany

2Department of Cardiology, Erasme University Hospital, Brussels,
Belgium

3Department of Internal Medicine, Universities of Giessen and
Marburg Lung Center, Institute for Lung Health, Cardio-Pulmonary Institute,
Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Giessen, Germany

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is common in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and treatment decisions should be goal orientated.
Recently, differentiation into COPD with PH and COPD with severe PH based on
mean pulmonary arterial pressure, pulmonary vascular resistance and cardiac
index was proposed. The ESC/ERS risk stratification scheme has been shown to
be predictive in patients with restrictive lung diseases. It is, however,
unclear how to assess risk in patients with COPD-PH. Incident patients with
COPD-PH who were enrolled between 1995 and 2018 in the Giessen PH Registry
were included. Risk stratification was performed either by classification
into severe and non-severe COPD-PH as proposed by Nathan and coworkers or by
a truncated version of the ESC/ERS risk stratification scheme as previously
described by us. Kaplan-Meier analyses and Cox-regression analyses were
utilized to evaluate mortality. Two hundred and seventy-four incident
patients with COPD-PH were included (38% female, median 70 [65; 78] years).
Prevalence of severe COPD-PH was 47%. Patients with severe COPD-PH showed
slightly increased mortality rates (five-year survival: 51% vs. 43%,
log-rank p = 0.143). ESC/ERS risk stratification did not predict mortality
in patients with COPD-PH (log-rank p = 0.163) and in a subgroup of patients
with severe COPD-PH (log-rank p: 0.574). Univariate Cox-regression revealed
that mPAP, PVR, 6MWD, FVC (% pred) and TAPSE/PASP ratio predict mortality.
Stepwise backward Cox-regression showed that solely 6MWD and TAPSE/PASP
ratio are independently associated with mortality. A scoring system based on
these parameters accurately predicts mortality (Cut-offs: 299 m and
0.35 mm/mmHg, Youden’s index). Five-year survival of patients with both, one
and no parameter above thresholds was 87%, 62% and 27%, respectively
(log-rank p < 0.001). In conclusion, risk stratification based on 6MWD
and TAPSE/PASP ratio as a surrogate marker for right ventricular pulmonary
arterial coupling precisely predicts mortality in patients with COPD-PH,
whereas commonly used risk scores are not appropriate.

## 0039. Small pulmonary vessels in severe pulmonary hypertension associated
with chronic lung disease
Dheyaa Alkhanfar
Yousef Shahin
Faisal Alandejani
Krit Dwivedi
Samer Alabed
Chris Johns
Allan Lawrie
A.A. Roger Thompson
Alexander M.K. Rothman
Juerg Tschirren
Johanna M Uthoff
Eric Hoffman
Robin Condliffe
Jim M Wild
David G Kiely
Andrew J Swift

1Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

2Department of Clinical Radiology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals,
Sheffield, UK

3Sheffield Pulmonary Vascular Disease Unit, Royal Hallamshire
Hospital, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield
UK

4VIDA Diagnostics Inc., Coralville, USA

5Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, UK

6Department of Radiology, University of Iowa, USA

7INSIGNEO, Institute for In Silico Medicine, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) in patients with chronic lung disease (CLD) is
associated with reduced functional status and high mortality. The
morphological changes of pulmonary blood vessels in patients with PH
associated with CLD is incompletely understood. The aim of this study was to
assess the association between computed tomography (CT)-derived quantitative
pulmonary vessel parameters and PH severity in CLD. Patients with CLD who
underwent baseline CT pulmonary angiography, pulmonary function tests (PFTs)
and right heart catheterisation were identified between October 2012 and
July 2018. Quantitative assessments of total pulmonary vessel, small
pulmonary vessel (vessel diameters  < 0.8/1.2/1.6 mm) and peel pulmonary
vessel volumes (outer 15/30/45 mm) were performed. One hundred and
sixty-eight patients were identified. Thirty-one had no PH and no lung
disease on CT or PFTs, 54 patients had COPD/emphysema, 54 patients had
interstitial lung disease (ILD) and 29 patients had combined pulmonary
fibrosis emphysema (CPFE) syndrome. Patients with ILD had lower total, small
and peel pulmonary blood vessel volumes, compared to other groups but higher
with COPD/emphysema than other groups (p < 0.05). Mean pulmonary artery
pressure (mPAP) was negatively associated with the volume of small pulmonary
vessels  < 0.8 mm,  < 1.2 mm and  < 1.6 mm in diameter in patients
with COPD/emphysema. In patients with ILD, a stronger correlation was
identified between mPAP and pulmonary vascular resistance with pulmonary
vessel volumes  < 0.8 mm,  < 1.2 mm and  < 1.6 mm and also with
lung volume. Patients with COPD/emphysema and ILD who had mean pulmonary
artery pressure >35 mmHg, had lower small pulmonary vessel volume. Higher
mortality was identified in patients with lower small vessel volumes
(Log-rank 6.7, p = 0.01). In conclusion, lower small pulmonary vessel volume
is associated with severe PH in COPD/emphysema and ILD. CT pulmonary vessel
analysis may provide a quantitative measure of small pulmonary vessel
remodelling in PH associated with CLD.

## 0040. A phase 1, open-label, crossover study of inhaled seralutinib to
assess potential effects on the pharmacokinetics (PK) of cytochrome P450
(CYP) and transporter substrates in healthy subjects
Jack Li
Matt Cravets
Emanuel DeNoia
Debbie Slee
Larry Zisman

1Gossamer Bio, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA

2ICON Clinical Research, LLC, Gaithersburg, MD, USA

Seralutinib (also known as GB002) is an inhaled, small molecule kinase
inhibitor specifically developed for the treatment of pulmonary arterial
hypertension (PAH), with an optimized kinase specificity profile that
targets PDGFRα/β, cKIT, and CSF1R and modulates BMPR2. Targeting these
pathways may reverse pulmonary vascular inflammation, cellular
proliferation, and fibrosis. In addition, by directly targeting the diseased
lung, inhaled seralutinib limits systemic exposure. Based on in vitro
predictions and given that multi-agent regimens are often required in
treating PAH, we evaluated the potential for drug–drug interactions (DDIs)
with inhaled seralutinib. Twenty-four healthy adults received a cocktail of
probe substrates: caffeine (CYP1A2), montelukast (CYP2C8), flurbiprofen
(CYP2C9), midazolam (CYP3A), digoxin (P-gp) and pravastatin (OATP1B1/1B3)
with or without seralutinib. PK and safety were evaluated. Geometric least
square mean ratios for Cmax and AUC of probe substrates
with/without seralutinib are shown. Seralutinib is a moderate CYP3A
inhibitor per the effect on midazolam. Based on the moderate effect,
seralutinib is not expected to cause clinically relevant DDIs with most PAH
drugs that are CYP3A substrates (tadalafil, riociguat, bosentan,
macitentan); these drugs may be co-administered without dose modification.
In the case of sildenafil, dose adjustments should be considered based on
risk–benefit assessment. In addition, clinically relevant DDIs with
substrates of CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, P-gp, or OATP1B1/1B3 are not
anticipated. Seralutinib was well tolerated with or without co-administered
agents.

## 0041. Cardiac MRI and risk stratification in pulmonary arterial
hypertension: evaluation of ESC/ERS thresholds for right atrial area
Faisal Alandejani
Samer Alabed
Euan Tubman
Yousef Shahin
Robert Lewis
Krit Dwivedi
Dheyaa Alkhanfar
Chris Johns
Pankaj Garg
Robin Condliffe
Abdul Hameed
Athanasios Charalampopoulos
Allan Lawrie
Jim M Wild
Andrew J Swift
David G Kiely

1Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

2Department of Clinical Radiology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals,
Sheffield, UK

3INSIGNEO, Institute for In Silico Medicine, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

4Sheffield Pulmonary Vascular Disease Unit, Royal Hallamshire
Hospital, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield,
UK

5Department of Cardiovascular Science, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, UK

The European Society of Cardiology/European Respiratory Society (ESC/ERS)
Guidelines specify right atrial thresholds for both echocardiography and
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI), to aid risk stratification of
patients with pulmonary atrial hypertension (PAH), as part of a
multi-parameter risk assessment. The aim of this study was to evaluate these
thresholds for risk stratification using cMRI. Consecutive incident,
treatment-naïve patients with PAH who underwent cMRI, were identified
between July 2007 and March 2017 from the ASPIRE (Assessing the Spectrum of
Pulmonary Hypertension Identified at a Referral Centre) registry. Data for
one-year mortality using ESC/ERS cMRI right atrial area thresholds were
assessed at diagnosis and follow-up. A total of 444 patients met the
inclusion criteria and 179 underwent a further cMRI after a minimum of three
months following initiation of treatment. There were 214 deaths during
follow-up. Figure 1 shows the one-year survival of patients with PAH
according to ESC/ERS risk thresholds for minimum and maximum right atrial
area. Figure 2 shows the Kaplan-Meier survival curves. In conclusion, using
cMRI, current ESC/ERS right atrial area thresholds can be used to identify
patients at high-risk of one-year mortality but do not identify patients at
low risk.

## 0042. Right heart catheterization is underused in elderly patients
suspected of pulmonary hypertension
Samara M.A. Jansen
Anna. E. Huis in ’t Veld
Peter Hans C.G. Tolen
Wouter Jacobs
Hans P. Grotjohan
Marc Waskowsky
Jan van der Maten
Arno van der Weerdt
Romke Hoekstra
Maria J. Overbeek
Sjoerd A. Mollema
Lahssan H. Hassan El Bouazzaoui
Joris W.J. Vriend
J. Milena M. Roorda
Ramon de Nooijer
Ivo van der Lee
Bart (A.J.) Voogel
Kathinka Peels
Thomas Macken
Jacqueline M. Aerts
Anton Vonk Noordegraaf
Frances S. de Man
Harm Jan Bogaard

1Amsterdam UMC location Vrije universiteit, Amsterdam

2Haga Hospital, The Hague

3Martini Hospital, Groningen

4Isala Clinics, Zwolle

5Medical Center Leeuwarden, Leeuwarden

6Antonius Hospital, Sneek

7Haaglanden Medical Center, The Hague

8Hospital group Twente, Almelo

9Spaarne Gasthuis, Haarlem

10Catharina hospital, Eindhoven

11Jeroen Bosch hospital’s, Hertogensbosch, The Netherlands
*These authors contributed equally.

The distinction between pre-capillary and post-capillary pulmonary hypertension
(PH) has important implications for treatment. However, this distinction
remains challenging, especially in non-referral centres where the access to
right heart catheterization (RHC) may be limited and pre-capillary PH is
rarely seen. It is currently unknown how clinicians in non-referral centres
deal with the diagnostic challenge in PH and what factors determine their
clinical decision making when to perform a RHC. Understanding clinical
decision making is essential to diminish the diagnostic delay in PH.
Therefore, we aimed to determine which patient characteristics and
echocardiographic parameters play a role in the decision to perform a RHC
for the diagnostic work-up of incident PH patients seen in non-referral
centres. The Dutch OPTICS registry was used to determine the clinical
characteristics of incident PH patients seen in 13 non-referral centres.
Clinical data included patient demographics, medical history, NT-proBNP and
echocardiography parameters. A total of 275 patients were included in the
analysis with a mean age of 71 ± 12 years. One hundred and fifty-seven
patients underwent a RHC (34 chronic thromboembolic PH, 38 PAH, 81
post-capillary PH, four miscellaneous PH) and 118 patients were labelled as
post-capillary PH without hemodynamic confirmation. As expected, absence of
diastolic dysfunction, right atrial dilation and moderate to severe PH
(tricuspid regurgitation velocity >3.7 m/s) were associated with a
positive decision to perform a RHC. However, on top of these factors, older
age (>73 years) was independently associated with the decision not to
perform a RHC. In conclusion, older age is one of the main reasons not to
perform a RHC in the diagnostic work-up of PH in non-referral centres. As
such, RHC might be underused in the elderly, which could cause
underdiagnoses of treatable pre-capillary PH in these patients.

## 0043. FOXO3: a new potential therapeutic target in pulmonary arterial
hypertension
Yann Grobs
Charlotte Romanet
Junichi Omura
Valerie Nadeau
Mark Orcholski
Tsukasa Shimauchi
Victoria Toro
Eve Trembley
Sarah-eve Lemay
Alice Bourgeois
Roxane Paulin
Steeve Provencher
Olivier Boucherat
Sébastien Bonnet
Universite Laval, Quebec City, Canada

Like cancer, pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by
exaggerated proliferation and resistance to apoptosis related to metabolic
alterations of pulmonary smooth muscle cells (PASMCs). These anomalies
result in a progressive narrowing of the pulmonary arteries, increasing
pulmonary resistance and leading to right heart failure and premature death.
In cancer cells, unphosphorylated and nuclear FOXO3 has been extensively
studied as a crucial protein that functions as a tumor suppressor by
regulating expression of genes involved in apoptosis and cell cycle arrest.
These functions combined with other FOXO3 attributes, including its key role
in communicating mitochondrial-nuclear signals, make the FOXO3 a suitable
candidate for controlling the cancer-like phenotype of PAH-PASMCs.
Interestingly, AKT and AMPK known to be implicated in PAH exert antagonistic
effects on FOXO3; AKT promoting its nuclear exclusion while AMPK favors its
nuclear and mitochondrial accumulation. We hypothesize that FOXO3’s nuclear
exclusion (secondary to AKT/AMPK imbalance) promotes metabolic reprogramming
towards glycolysis leading to enhanced proliferation/resistance to apoptosis
of PAH-PASMCs and vascular remodeling. Using Western blot and
immunofluorescence in isolated PASMCs from both PAH and control patients, we
found that nuclear (and mitochondrial) exclusion of FOXO3 due to its
phosphorylation is a feature of PAH-PASMCs. In vitro, we demonstrated that
pharmacological activation (nuclear localization) of FOXO3 using an
adenovirus expressing a constitutively active, non-phosphorylable form of
FOXO3 or trifluoperazine resulted in reduced PAH-PASMC proliferation and
resistance to apoptosis. These effects were accompanied by increased
expression of P27 and SOD2 and diminished expression of Survivin. In vivo,
we showed that FOXO3 activation using TPF improved established PAH in the
monocrotaline rats (reduced RVSP and increased Sv and CO, by right
catheterization) without any sign of toxicity. We showed that FOXO3 is
implicated in pulmonary vascular remodeling. Pharmacological activation of
FOXO3 may represent a novel avenue to improve PAH.

## 0044. Non-invasive surrogate markers of PH are associated with poor
survival in lung cancer patients
Michael Cekay
Bastian Eul
Soni Savai Pullamsetti
Khodr Tello
Jochen Wilhelm
Stefan Gattenlöhner
Ulf Sibelius
Friedrich Grimminger
Werner Seeger
Rajkumar Savai

1Department of Internal Medicine, Member of the German Center for
Lung Research, Member of the Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Justus Liebig
University, Giessen, Germany

2Institute of Pathology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen,
Germany

3Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Member of the
DZL, Member of CPI, Bad Nauheim, Germany

4Institute for Lung Health (ILH), Justus Liebig University,
Giessen, Germany

Approximately 60%–70% of patients with lung cancer have dyspnea at
presentation, and 90% experience it just prior to death. Considering case
reports describing the formation of pulmonary hypertension (PH) via
pulmonary tumor microemboli from gastric and gallbladder cancer. To
investigate the impact of PH in lung cancer, we retrospectively analyzed
measurements of pulmonary artery (PA) and ascending aorta (A) diameter from
pre-treatment images acquired with high-resolution computed tomography
scans. These data revealed that 293 of 670 (43.7%) lung cancer patients had
a mean PA size of ≥28 mm, indicating PH. Notably as a stronger surrogate
parameter for PH, 151 of 670 patients (22.5%) had a PA/A ratio>1. In
addition, we calculated the echo pulmonary artery systolic pressure (ePASP)
of 132 patients in whom echocardiographic data were available. The mean
ePASP in the PA/A ratio >1 group was 38.6 ± 13.1 mmHg, compared to
28.5 ± 7.5 mmHg for PA/A ratio ≤1. These changes were not accompanied by
indicators of right ventricular failure and left heart function was also not
significantly different in both groups. Next, to investigate the impact of
PH on the survival of lung cancer patients, we evaluated the
progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) using an adjusted
Cox PH regression analysis. Importantly, the median PFS was significantly
shorter in patients with lung cancer and PH when a cutoff PA size of ≥28mm
was used (median PFS PA  < 28 mm = 257 days; median PFS PA ≥28 mm = 197
days), and the difference was even more prominent, when a cut-off PA/A ratio
of >1 was employed (median PFS PA/A ratio ≤1 = 270 days; median PFS PA/A
ratio >1 = 133 days). Median OS was also significantly reduced for
patients with PA size ≥28 mm (375 days vs. 583 days) and PA/A ratio >1
(207 days vs. 568 days). Thus, a decrease in median OS of one year suggests
a marked impact of PH on survival of lung cancer patients. In summary, our
study confirms the previous finding that PH is present in a significant
proportion of lung cancer patients. Moreover, this is the first report to
show that the presence of PH has marked impact on the clinical outcome of
lung cancer patients including survival.

## 0045. The impact of chronic pulmonary hypertension on ventricular function
in extremely premature infants
Gabriela de Carvalho Nunes
Punnanee Wutthigate
Jessica Simoneau
Claudia Renaud
Adrian Dancea
Marc Beltempo
Gabriel Altit
Montreal Children’s Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal,
Canada

Extremely premature infants are at high risk of pathologic remodeling of the
pulmonary vascular bed due to cardiac or respiratory factors, culminating in
pulmonary hypertension (PH). Our objectives were to assess the prevalence
and characteristics of significant PH in premature newborns at 36 weeks
postmenstrual age (PMA). Retrospective cohort of infants born at <29
weeks’ gestational age, admitted between 2015 and 2019 and without genetic
or congenital anomalies. Measurements from the echocardiography acquired
closest to 36 weeks PMA were done by masked experts. PH was considered
significant when estimated systolic pulmonary pressure (SPAP) was >2/3 of
systemic systolic blood pressure. A total of 222 infants were included, 24
(11%) categorized as significant PH. PH was associated with increased
eccentricity index (1.31 ± 0.21 vs. 1.17 ± 0.19, p = 0.002), decreased
tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (median 0.79 cm (IQR 0.72–1.05)
vs. 0.87 cm (IQR 0.66–0.87), p = 0.002), smaller right ventricular (RV)
fractional area change (43.1 ± 9.3% vs. 47.3 ± 7.4%, p = 0.02) and presence
of a patent ductus arteriosus (74% vs. 23%, p < 0.001). Speckle-tracking
analysis demonstrated an association of PH with decreased RV peak
longitudinal strain (−19.3 ± 4.7% vs. −23.1 ± 5.7%, p = 0.003), RV peak
longitudinal strain rate in 1/s (−0.98 ± 0.37 vs. −1.12 ± 0.35, p = 0.01),
RV early diastolic strain rate in 1/s (0.90 ± 0.20 vs. 1.09 ± 0.36,
p = 0.02), RV fractional area change (37.6 ± 9.8% vs. 44.3 ± 8.0%,
p < 0.001) and left ventricle (LV) peak longitudinal strain (−22.7 ± 4.1%
vs. −25.0 ± 4.5%, p = 0.02). Other echocardiographic markers were similar.
PH was also significantly associated with death or severe BPD (29% vs. 12%,
p < 0.001). In conclusion, extreme premature infants with pulmonary
pressures >2/3 systemic blood pressure at their echocardiography closest
to 36 weeks PMA had right and left ventricular functional alterations.
Future studies should investigate further the involvement of biventricular
function, specifically the LV, in the pathogenesis of PH.

## 0046. Improving guidance for the correctability of congenital
cardiovascular shunts with increased pulmonary vascular resistance
Ronald W. Day
Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah and Primary Children’s Hospital,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Based upon expert opinion, guidelines have been proposed for the correctability
of congenital cardiovascular shunts with increased pulmonary vascular
resistance. This study reports the accuracy of published guidelines using a
dataset from the Inhaled Nitric Oxide as a Preoperative Test study. The
hemodynamic measurements and outcome of 71 patients with relatively high
pulmonary vascular resistance who underwent corrective surgery or heart
transplantation were used to determine how well recent guidelines would
accurately identify correctable and uncorrectable patients. The accuracy of
preoperative testing was 18%, 30% and 17% using a baseline indexed pulmonary
vascular resistance less than 4 units-m2, indexed pulmonary
vascular resistance less than 6 units-m2 and ratio of pulmonary
to systemic vascular indices less than 0.30 as criteria for correctable
shunts, respectively. Accuracy improved to 59%, 82% and 85% by using the
results of acute vasodilator testing with oxygen and nitric oxide instead of
baseline measurements. The accuracy of preoperative testing was 49% and 55%
using a baseline indexed pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 8
units-m2 and a ratio of pulmonary to systemic vascular
indices greater than 0.50 as criteria for uncorrectable shunts,
respectively. Accuracy improved to 87% and 89% by using the results of acute
vasodilator testing with oxygen and nitric oxide instead of baseline
measurements. Some patients would be inappropriately cleared for correction
and subsequently experience a poor outcome by using the results of
vasodilator testing instead of baseline measurements. However, a
substantially greater proportion of patients would be appropriately cleared
for correction and have a good outcome. In conclusion, guidelines using
baseline hemodynamic measurements do not provide accurate guidance for
identifying patients with correctable or uncorrectable congenital
cardiovascular shunts and increased pulmonary vascular resistance. The
accuracy of a preoperative evaluation can be increased with acute
vasodilator testing.