pmcACS NanoACS Nano822acssd101313589nnACS Nano1936-08511936-086Xpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC8613911PMC8613911.1861391186139113469918110.1021/acsnano.1c038001ReviewCell
Membrane-Coated Mimics: A Methodological Approach
for Fabrication, Characterization for Therapeutic Applications, and
Challenges for Clinical Translation
ChughVaishali Vijaya KrishnaK. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6292-4933PanditAbhay CÚRAM, SFI Research
Centre for Medical Devices, National University
of Ireland Galway, Galway H91 W2TY, Ireland*Email: abhay.pandit@nuigalway.ie.2610202123112021151139440117080171230505202113102021251120212611202117082024© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2021The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Cell membrane-coated
(CMC) mimics are micro/nanosystems that combine
an isolated cell membrane and a template of choice to mimic the functions
of a cell. The design exploits its physicochemical and biological
properties for therapeutic applications. The mimics demonstrate excellent
biological compatibility, enhanced biointerfacing capabilities, physical,
chemical, and biological tunability, ability to retain cellular properties,
immune escape, prolonged circulation time, and protect the encapsulated
drug from degradation and active targeting. These properties and the
ease of adapting them for personalized clinical medicine have generated
a significant research interest over the past decade. This review
presents a detailed overview of the recent advances in the development
of cell membrane-coated (CMC) mimics. The primary focus is to collate
and discuss components, fabrication methodologies, and the significance
of physiochemical and biological characterization techniques for validating
a CMC mimic. We present a critical analysis of the two main components
of CMC mimics: the template and the cell membrane and mapped their
use in therapeutic scenarios. In addition, we have emphasized on the
challenges associated with CMC mimics in their clinical translation.
Overall, this review is an up to date toolbox that researchers can
benefit from while designing and characterizing CMC mimics.

cell membranetemplatebiomimeticbiointerfacingdrug deliverypersonalized medicinetumor microenvironmentgood manufacturing practicedetoxificationtherapeutic
applicationsScience Foundation Ireland10.13039/50110000160213/RC/2073_P2European Regional Development Fund10.13039/501100008530NAScience Foundation Ireland10.13039/50110000160219/IFA/7447pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9nn1c03800document-id-new-14nn1c03800ccc-pricePharmacological/drug-based therapies
are the most common and foremost recourse prescribed for treating
diseases and disorders in the human body. In practice, for many years,
these therapies have improved health and extended lives without the
need for aggressive interventions. − However, the advent of nanomedicine has revolutionized this traditional
approach for disease diagnosis and treatment. Nanomedicine combines
the principles of nanotechnology, immunology, and biomaterials to
create delivery systems with significantly improved safety and efficacy. − 
Delivery systems have two main functions: to execute a specific
application that they are designed for and to interact favorably with
the complex physiological environment surrounding them to support
and enhance their function. Loading a drug of interest or modulating
its physiochemical properties can improve these functions partially.
However, it is vital to ensure that they have biointerfacing capabilities
to avoid roadblocks during clinical translation. − Biointerfacing
capabilities include improving stimuli responsiveness, reducing nonspecific
interactions, increasing circulation times, and evading uptake or
clearance by the reticuloendothelial system. − While PEGylation
offered some respite by introducing stealth properties, minimizing
nonspecific interactions and prolonging circulation, yet negative
immunogenic response and allergic reactions were unavoidable. , An alternative approach is incorporating ligands (antibodies, , aptamers, , peptides, , and small molecules , ) to improve target efficacy,
but this rendered the system overly complicated for scale-up. These
strategies were only partial remedies and not universally applicable
or sufficient for clinical translation.
Vital clues to improve
the biointerfacing capabilities of synthetic
delivery systems can be obtained by understanding the structure, function,
and homeostasis of cells in the complex physiological environment
surrounding them. Incorporating cell properties like shape, flexibility, , compartmentalization, − lipid bilayer structure, , autonomous and specific functionality, − and protecting
cargo , can be advantageous in delivery systems.
In this regard, researchers have attempted to use liposomes, , polymeric micelles, or naturally occurring
extracellular vesicles as delivery systems.
For example, Doxil and GenexoltPM are the first FDA-approved liposomal
and polymeric micelle formulations, respectively, translated into
the clinic and many more under different phase trials. , However, liposome and polymeric micelle’s long-term stability
issues, degradation during sterilization, and complex surface modifications
for active targeting still remain a challenge for large scale-up. − For avoiding surface modification complexity, extracellular vesicles
are viable alternatives as a delivery system. These are lipid bilayer
vesicles, naturally secreted by the cells that display the same proteins,
ligands, and targeting moieties like a cell on its surface. Unfortunately, the existing isolation and purification
methods for vesicle production cause functional heterogenicity and
low yield. − Besides, low drug loading efficiency also limits
their use for a wide range of applications. − The cell membrane
is a major structural component of a cell and extracellular vesicles
and replicates their surface functionality. If done correctly, the
cell membrane conserves this functionality post-isolation, and its
coating improves biointerfacing capabilities. Referred to as cell
membrane-coated (CMC) mimics henceforth, these intelligently engineered
delivery systems combine the biomimetic features of the cell membrane
and the functional versatility of a template. The template (spherical
or nonspherical) acts as the central scaffold that carries a payload
of interest and provides a structural basis. The cell membrane offers
surface functionality that mimics a natural cell to improve accumulation
and efficacy at the target site. Their
assembly process utilizes noncovalent interactions and physical and
soft techniques and eliminates a need for complex chemical processing
and traditional synthetic modifications. − Compared to
the conventional delivery systems, these CMC mimics demonstrate excellent
biological compatibility, stealth properties, and retain cellular
properties for active targeting using receptor–ligand interactions. − 
In this review, we focus on providing a detailed insight into
the
various aspects of designing CMC mimics. We begin with an overview
of different cell types, their inherent biological properties, and
suitability for specific therapeutic applications including cancer,
inflammatory diseases, infectious diseases, and their potential use
in personalized medicine. In the next section, we present protocols
for isolating cell membranes from both nucleus-free and nucleus-containing
cells with minimal nuclear and mitochondrial contamination. It is
vital to follow protocols that conserve their surface functionality
and mechanical stability during the isolation process. Next, we present
an overview of templates and their properties available for cell membrane
coating. Selecting the right template allows for the chemical and
genetic tunability of the mimics and improves bioimaging, , drug delivery, , , diagnostic, − biosensing, detoxification, , and phototherapy performance. , , We then highlight the processes used for CMC assembly and the challenges
for large-scale production, followed by physiochemical and biological
characterization techniques that validate their structural integrity
and functionality. The last part of the review presents examples of
CMC mimics designed for therapeutic applications and in vitro and in vivo models that evaluate their efficacy.
Finally, we conclude with an overview of current challenges en route
to clinical translation.

## Biological Properties of Different Cell Membranes
in CMC Mimics
The cell membrane is the outermost protective
layer of a cell with
a thickness of around 5–10 nm, mainly composed of lipids, proteins,
and carbohydrates, and it interacts and performs complex biological
functions with the surrounding environment for survival and proliferation. , Bilayer assembly of lipids incorporates structural rigidity and
fluidity, while carbohydrates are responsible
for cellular recognition, , and proteins play a
vital part in signaling and adhesion, briefly. The composition and properties of these three components
of the cell membrane differentiate them. The possibility of benefiting
from native functionalities originating from cell membranes has resulted
in significant research interest in CMC mimics. − 
 provides
a timeline of different cell sources utilized in the CMC mimics fabrication.
The idea of isolating RBC vesicles was explored in 1994 and gained significant research interest in
utilizing cell membrane vesicles for coating onto a template to design
CMC mimics in 2011. Until 2020, the natural
cell membrane has widely been used from different cell types, but
recently, the outer intracellular membrane from the mitochondria has
also been explored to enhance biointerfacing capabilities. This section describes the specific biological
function of the cell membrane of various cell types and the intracellular
organelle that they offer to a CMC mimic.
 

## Red Blood Cell Membrane
Red blood
cells (RBCs) are
the most abundant cell type of the human body, with the longest circulation
time of approximately 120 days. RBCs
transmembrane express protein cluster of differentiation 47 (CD47),
also known as the ‘do not eat me’ marker, selectively binds to signal-regulatory protein
alpha (SIRPα) glycoprotein expressed by macrophages to prevent
its uptake. , RBCs are also responsible for
oxygen transport to various tissues and organs in the body and are involved in pathogen removal by oxycytosis. Their membrane is rich in glycophorins that
attract pathogens to their surface to release oxygen for killing them. Thus, coating the template with an RBC membrane
improves long-term circulation, pathogens
removal, , and toxins absorption , for detoxification applications. These specific advantages have
popularized the use of RBC membrane-coated CMC mimics.

## Platelet Cell
Membrane
Platelets, also known as thrombocytes,
inhibit bleeding by forming clots and help in tissue repair. Platelets membrane like RBCs express CD47 receptor
proteins on their surface that help in evading macrophages. Additional
membrane proteins on platelets: integrin like αIIbβ3,
α6β1, and P-selectin help in targeting tumor cells, glycoprotein Ib (GPIb/IX/V) complex in binding
to exposed subendothelial collagen at the injury site in blood vessels
by interacting with von Willebrand factor (VWF), clusters of differentiation 55 (CD55), and clusters of
differentiation 59 (CD59) for immune modulation, toll-like receptors for pathogen removal. Platelets are involved in a cross-talk with inflamed endothelium
cells and bind with immune cells to redirect them to the injury site. Thus, coating the template with a platelet
membrane offers an escape from macrophage detection, selective adhesion
to tumor tissues or injured vessels, , targeting
of vascular disorders, , , and binding ability to circulatory tumor cells and pathogen removal. 

## Macrophage
Cell Membrane
Macrophages are part of the
innate immune system, known for removing unwanted or foreign materials/bacteria/viruses
from the human body by engulfing them (phagocytosis) using recognition
receptors such as scavenger receptors, mannose receptors, and toll-like
receptors ((TLR)-2, -4, -5). , Derived from circulatory
monocytes, they are present in all the tissues. During infections
or tissue damage, cytokines actively recruit monocytes where they
differentiate into macrophages. Chemokine
receptors on the macrophage membrane like C–C chemokine receptors
type 2 (CCR2), C–X–C chemokine receptor type 1 (CXCR1),
C–C chemokine receptor type 7 (CCR7), etc., facilitate their recruitment at the inflammation site. Along with other leukocytes, macrophage membranes
also express adhesions molecules like P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1
(PSGL-1), L-selectin, lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1),
L-selectin, and very late antigen-4 (VLA-4) that assist in their recruitment
and cell adhesion. , Thus, coating the template with
the macrophage membrane has the potential to bind pathogens and can
also easily escape from macrophage detection to provide active targeting
at inflammatory sites and tumors. , , 

## Neutrophil Cell Membrane
Neutrophils belong to the
innate immune system and constitute around 40–60% of the white
cell population in a healthy human body. In response to inflammation, their production rate in bone marrow
increases by at least 10-fold. After
leaving the bone marrow, their targeting abilities depend on their
phenotypic changes and surface. Neutrophils are usually resting when
circulating in healthy body receptors. , They become
activated by cytokines or chemokines like tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-α), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF),
interleukin 8 (IL-8), and interferon gamma (IFN-γ) which mobilize
them to the infection or inflammation site. Conformational changes in integrin adhesion receptors like very
late antigen-4 (VLA-4), lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1),
macrophage-1 antigen (Mac-1), P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1),
and L-selectin also facilitate neutrophil migration through extravasation
from blood vessels. , Thus, coating the template with
the activated neutrophil membrane actively targets the tumors , and inflammatory sites. 

## Natural Killer
Cell Membrane
Natural killer (NK) cells
are part of the innate immune system and the first line of defense
against tumor and virally infected cells that do not require any prior
activation like other immune cells (T cells, B cells). In human peripheral blood, the NK cells comprise
10–15% of the total lymphocyte population. These cells contain
many activating and inhibitory receptors on their surface that selectively
target tumor/virally infected cells without affecting healthy cells. Some of the important activating receptors
are NK group 2D (NKG2D), DNAX accessory molecule-1 (DNAM-1), natural
cytotoxicity receptor (NKp30), etc.; integrin adhesion receptors are LFA-1, VLA-4,
Mac-1, PSGL-1, and L-selectin (along with other leukocytes), etc., that help in extravasation from blood vessels. , These cells also activate other immune cells like T cells by releasing
cytokines and chemokines. NK cell lines,
for example, KHYG-1 and NK-92 membranes, also contain activating and
adhesion receptors like primary NK cell membrane, facilitating their
use in clinical trials. − These cell lines are also easy
to culture and expand in vitro. Therefore, utilizing
NK cell line membrane in CMC mimics could also be a potential alternative.
Recently, chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-NK and CAR-NK-92 technologies
began undergoing clinical trials for immunotherapy. , Thus, coating the template with the NK cell membrane has the potential
to actively target inflammation, infection, and tumor sites without
prior activation. , 

## T-Cell Membrane
T cells are part of the adaptive immune
system that can recognize antigens using T-cell receptors (TCR). TCRs cannot bind to antigens directly and require
peptides fragments of antigens for binding. These fragments are presented
to them by major histocompatibility complex molecules (MHC I or II)
present on antigen-presenting cells (dendritic cells or macrophages). Naive T cells recognize these specific fragments
and differentiate into subsets like cytotoxic, helper, or regulatory
T cells. Cytotoxic T cells express cluster of differentiation 8 (CD8)
coreceptor (CD8+ T cell) that recognizes antigens on MHC-I
molecules and can kill the infected cells (virus/bacteria/cancer cells)
by releasing cytotoxic granules or Fas/FasL interaction. Helper T cells express cluster of differentiation
4 (CD4) coreceptor (CD4+ T cells) recognize antigens on
MHC-II molecules and regulate immune response that indirectly affects
the infected cells. According to literature
reports, helper T cells play an important role in treating HIV due
to its high-affinity receptor (CD4+ T). CAR-T cell therapy is an FDA-approved therapy for multiple
myeloma (ABECMA) and is under evaluation for treating other cancer
types and avoid unwanted side effects. Therefore, utilizing the T-cell membrane in CMC mimics could be
a potential strategy for treating cancer and infectious diseases. , − 

## Dendritic Cell Membrane
Dendritic
cells (DCs) are central
players of the immune system that link innate and adaptive immune
systems. These cells are also known as “professional”
antigen-presenting cells (APCs). DCs
are the first immune cells to become activated in the human body post
a pathogenic attack (bacteria, virus, or cancer cells). , Even in their resting immature state, iDCs are involved in phagocytosis.
They encapsulate pathogens and process them, degrade them into fragments,
and present them on the MHC molecules on their surface. During this activation process, iDCs mature
and migrate to adaptive immune cells (T cells and B cells) and present
antigens for their activation. During antigen presentation, DCs upregulate
the expression of co-stimulatory receptors molecules CD86, CD83, CD80,
and CD40 on their cell membrane. These
molecules effectively bind to their corresponding receptors on T cells
and trigger the release of cytokines (interleukin, IL-12 or IL-10)
from DCs that differentiate T cells into their pro-inflammatory or
anti-inflammatory subsets. According to experimental reports, one
mature DC can stimulate up to 100–3000 T cells. , Thus, CMC mimics fabricated with mature dendritic cell membrane
can generate sufficient immune response to activating T cells, required
to treat several tumors and infectious diseases. , , 

## Cancer Cell Membrane
Cancer cells can escape the immune
system and are known for their rapid and infinite proliferation. Because
of their robust nature, it is easy to culture and expands them in vitro. Different types of cancer cell membranes express
numerous tumor-specific antigens and adhesion molecules on their surface.
Some of them include cadherins, integrins, galectin-3, lymphocyte-homing
receptors (like clusters of differentiation 44 (CD44)), epithelial
adhesion molecules, and mucoprotein-1 that play a vital role in cell-to-cell
and cell-to-matrix interactions. − Mainly, cancer cell
membranes have self-targeting abilities to adhere to their homologous
cells. , Thus, coating a template with the cancer
cell membrane allows it to escape from macrophage detection and for
homotypic tumor targeting − and helps in the development
of personalized medicine for cancer. 

## Stem Cell Membrane
Stem cells are known for their ability
to replicate indefinitely and differentiate into specialized cell
types in the body. Among other stem cells, mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-based
therapies have shown immense potential as regenerative medicine and have entered many clinical trials. , These cells can specifically target different cancerous and metastatic
diseases because of their intrinsic tumor tropic properties, − they are readily isolated, are stable through multiple in
vitro passages, and are produced under good manufacturing
practice (GMP) conditions. , Various chemokines
and cytokine receptors like CCR1, CCR2, CXCR1, CXCR2, etc., help the MSCs to migrate to the inflammatory or injured site. Like leukocytes, stem cells also undergo rolling,
adhesion, and an extravasation process. Thus, coating the template
with a stem cell membrane provides actively targeting abilities toward
tumor , , and degenerative
diseases. , 

## Bacterial Cell Membrane
Bacteria have an additional
peptidoglycan cell wall, unlike other mammalian cell types. Gram-positive
bacteria have a thick peptidoglycan cell wall and no outer membrane,
while Gram-negative bacteria have thin cell walls as well as lipopolysaccharide
outer membranes. Both the Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria secrete membrane vesicles. Gram-positive
bacteria secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs), whereas Gram-negative
bacteria secrete outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). These membrane vesicles express several immunogenic antigens
with adjuvant properties and pathogens-associated patterns that help
immune modulation. , Thus, coating the template with
the bacterial membrane vesicles (Escherichia coli (E. coli); Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus); Klebsiella pneumonia (K. pneumonia)) provides an antibacterial immune
response, vaccination against bacterial
infection, , , and tumor targeting abilities. , 

## Hybrid Cell
Membrane
The hybrid cell membrane coating
strategy fuses cell membranes from multiple cell types to incorporate
multiple cell-specific functional properties in a single mimic. , , For example, CMC mimics designed
using RBC and B16-F10 melanoma cancer cell membrane express both CD47
transmembrane protein from RBCs and self-recognition markers (glycoprotein,
gp100) from the cancer cell membrane. , Overall,
these RBC-cancer hybrid membranes provide several features like long-term
circulation, immune evasion, and homotypic targeting abilities in
the CMC mimics. Depending on the specific
target application, the relative amount of each membrane can be varied
for designing CMC mimics. Thus, hybrid membrane coating by coupling
different cell types (refer to previous sections) provides the possibility
of designing CMC mimics with multiple desired functionalities, thus
offering several advantages in various therapeutic applications. , , − 

## Intracellular Cell Membrane (Organelle)
Intracellular
membranes from organelles of eukaryotes display the same fundamental
structure as the plasma membrane, with the phospholipid bilayer responsible
for specific functions. Targeting intracellular
membrane functions can be an intelligent strategy for treating several
diseases. For example, the delivery of biomolecules across nuclear
membranes is considered safe and effective gene therapy. , For drug-resistant bacterial or viral infections, it is preferable
to block the alteration of intracellular membranes with pathogens
and inhibit their intracellular replication. Inducing permeability in the mitochondrial, nucleus, and lysosomal
membranes is a well-established strategy to overcome drug resistance
during cancer treatment. Recently, CMC
mimics fabricated using intracellular membranes were explored to targeted
detoxification and molecular detection in ABT-263-induced thrombocytopenia. Therefore, coating templates with the intracellular
membranes can be an innovative approach to probe the complex intracellular
machinery for several therapeutic applications.

## Protocols for
Cell Membrane Extraction
There are two categories of cells:
nucleus-free or nucleus-containing
cells. There are several reports on cell membrane isolation from various
cell types. An attempt has been made to simplify the procedure and
discuss the main steps involved during the isolation ( ).
 Cell membranes isolation protocols aim to separate
the cell membrane
from the cell with minimal or no nuclear/mitochondrial/cytosol contamination
depending on the cell type. Using a pure cell membrane helps in assembling
CMC mimics by enhancing an efficient and homogeneous surface coating
with maximal functional replication on the template surface. The extraction
buffers (pH 7–7.4) are supplemented with protease/phosphatase
inhibitor cocktails in ice-cold conditions to protect the membrane
proteins from degradation. , , , , Prior to isolation, cells are washed multiple times with 1×
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer to remove remnants from cell
culture media. Post-isolation, the cell membrane is lyophilized and
usually stored at −80 °C to maintain the long term stability
and function of membrane proteins. , , , , 
The cell membrane isolation mainly involves two steps depending
on the cell type ( ):(1)Gentle rupturing of cells using detergent-free
hypotonic treatment (osmotic imbalance) or a combination of hypotonic
treatment and physical disruption technique
(2)Separation and purification of the
cell membrane from intracellular components using multiple centrifugation
steps, differential centrifugation, or discontinuous sucrose density
gradient centrifugation.

In this section,
we have discussed the membrane isolation methodology
from nucleus-free, nucleus-containing cells and the recently explored
intracellular organelle (mitochondria) in designing CMC mimics. All
the different conditions (hypotonic buffers, physical disruption techniques,
and centrifugation speeds) used in cell membrane isolation are summarized
in and .
 

## Nucleus-Free
Cells
RBCs and platelets do not contain
nuclei, making their membrane extraction process relatively simple.
These cells are isolated first from whole blood using appropriate
methodologies. For RBCs, hypotonic treatment easily ruptures the cells
followed by centrifugation to collect a pink RBC membrane/ghost pallet.
Multiple cycles of centrifugation remove hemoglobin impurities from
the pallet. , , For platelets, it is common to use multiple freeze–thaw cycles
to damage their cell membrane by breakage of ice crystals to remove
the cytosol followed by centrifugations to obtain the cell membrane. , According to one report, the obtained platelet vesicles were subjected
to a discontinuous sucrose gradient (5%, 40%, 55%) step to remove
any free proteins, intact platelets, and high-density granules to
collect pure platelet vesicles from the interface of 5% and 40% sucrose
gradient. 
Bacteria are interesting
exceptions in this nucleus-free cell category. Besides containing
peptidoglycans in addition to the cell membrane, their cell membrane
extraction process can be laborious. , Therefore,
they undergo ultrafiltration to separate their membrane as OMV without
a cell lysis step. The reported protocols for isolating OMVs and EVs
from Gram-negative (E. coli, K. pneumonia) and Gram-positive
(S. aureus) bacteria, respectively, are quite similar.
In the first step, the bacterial cultures were centrifuged, and the
supernatant was collected. The supernatant was further vacuum filtered
through a micron filter and concentrated using ultrafiltration. Finally,
the obtained filtrate was subjected to ultracentrifugation to get
OMV pellets or EV pellets. , , 
Some groups reported further purification of these OMVs or
EVs
with some modifications. For example, after the first ultrafiltration
step, the concentrate was reprecipitated overnight using ammonium
sulfate (4 °C) and ultracentrifuged to get E. coli OMVs. , OMVs resuspended in PBS were further purified
using sucrose gradient (1 mL each of 2.5, 1.6, and 0.6 M sucrose),
separated by ultracentrifugation. In another report, after ultrafiltration
and ultracentrifugation steps, the obtained S. aureus EVs pellet was resuspended in 50% Optiprep/HEPES (2.2 mL). The suspension was applied to the bottom of
a step-density gradient (2.0 mL of 40% and 0.8 mL of 10% Optiprep
in 10 mM HEPES, supplemented with 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.0), and obtained
the pure S. aureus EVs floating at 1.16–1.20
g/mL.

## Nucleus-Containing Cells
For nucleus-containing cells,
cell membrane isolation and purification are slightly more tedious
than that with nucleus-free cells. Examples include immune cells (macrophages/monocytes,
neutrophils, NK cells, T cells), cancer stem cells, fibroblasts, and
β-cells. These cells can either be obtained from established
cell lines (like human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, 4T1), mouse
macrophage cell line (J447), human NK cell line (NK-92), etc.), or isolated from tissues or blood (neutrophils, cancer cells,
T cells, NK cells, stem cells).
On average, 200–300 million
cells are required for cell membrane isolation to assemble a CMC mimic. , These cells are ruptured using the hypotonic treatment and physical
disruption techniques, resulting in a mixture containing pure cell
membrane, intact cells, and high-density granules. Differential centrifugation
or discontinuous sucrose gradient ultrafiltration of the mixture finally
isolates the cell membrane. These methods are described in detail
below.
Differential centrifugation method: This method is the
one most
commonly used for isolating cell membranes. , , It works by a stepwise increase
in the centrifugation speed. The lower g at the beginning
of the process removes heavy particles like a nucleus. A gradual increase
in g removes other particles like mitochondria. Finally,
very high g is used to pellet down the cell membrane,
as it is lighter in weight. For example, the commonly reported centrifugation
speeds for isolating cell membrane are 800 g (4 °C,
10 min), followed by 10,000 g (4 °C, 30 min),
and finally 100,000 g (4 °C, 60 min) to isolate
pure cell membrane. , 
Discontinuous sucrose
gradient ultracentrifugation method: In this
method, sucrose concentration increases discretely from top to bottom,
aiding density-based separation of particles in the solution. The
particles move across the density gradient stopping in a region where
their density matches that of the medium. For example, this method
was used to demonstrate the isolation of leukocyte cell membrane using
55%, 40%, and 30% (w/v) sucrose gradients in a physiological saline
solution. The cell membrane was collected
from a 30/40% interface with minimal/no nuclear and mitochondrial
contamination. A similar approach has been preferred to isolate several
cell membranes using this method. , , 
During the membrane isolation there can be
a loss of functional
components like transmembrane proteins/receptors or structural components
like cholesterol from the membrane. Cholesterol is mainly responsible
for maintaining the rigidity of the cell membrane. , Such loss may result in a decrease in the mechanical stability of
the membrane. Therefore, to reduce protein loss and maintain membrane
stability, hypotonic buffers with divalent ions (like MgCl2) or the addition of cholesterol can be useful. These stabilize the
membrane skeleton by specifically binding to the junction complex
and other membrane proteins like tropomyosin, etc. , Additionally, mild lysis buffers, gentle
rupturing techniques, the right pH, and ice-cold conditions must be
used for membrane isolation to prevent the degradation of the transmembrane
proteins and receptors.

## Intracellular Organelle
Cell membrane
isolation of
intracellular organelle requires additional steps, unlike nucleus-containing
cells. Before cell membrane isolation, it is essential to first isolate
the desired organelle from nucleus-containing cells in their pure
form. Isolating organelles from cells is a three-step process: hypotonic
treatment, physical disruption, and ultracentrifugation. The final
step is carried out in a sucrose density gradient to get the purified
organelle in a specific sucrose band. The process is repeated with
the purified organelle to extract the pure cell membrane. The mitochondrial
outer membrane was isolated from the mouse liver using a similar protocol ( ).

## Choice of Template Based on Its Properties
The template is a central component of a CMC mimic that provides
a structural basis during its assembly. Inherent properties of templates
extend the application of CMC mimics for diagnosis, drug delivery,
and disease suppression/treatment.
There are two major categories
of templates (spherical or nonspherical):
organic and inorganic. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA), gelatin, and liposomes are examples of organic templates.
Mesoporous silica, gold and iron oxide (Fe3O4), upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs), persistent luminescent nanoparticles
(PLNPs), and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are examples of
inorganic templates. Organic templates offer features like biocompatibility,
biodegradability, and nontoxicity and are often straightforward choices. In comparison, inorganic templates display
additional features like magnetic, optical, and electrical properties
that determine their selection in a CMC mimic. 
In this section, we have provided the general overview
of the templates
categorized based on their properties in the context of CMC mimics
like Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval, biocompatibility,
biodegradability, and low toxicity to understand the clinical translation
perspective, phototherapy for cancer suppression/treatment, bioimaging
for disease diagnosis, and detoxification for enhancing the removal/absorption
of toxins (summarized in ).
 

## FDA-Approved, Biocompatible, Biodegradable, Low Toxicity Templates
CMC mimics are biocompatible, as the cell membrane protects every
template from the external microenvironment. For clinical translation,
it is also vital to consider template biodegradability and biocompatibility.
Byproducts after the biodegradation and their interaction with the
human body also determine their toxicity. Renal clearance helps to evade undesirable side effects. FDA-approved templates are considered the safest,
nontoxic, or nonhazardous to the human body in every aspect. These
properties help to protect the healthy cells in the body and avoid
any unwanted immune response.
Most organic templates are generally
thought to be safer than inorganic templates and were, therefore,
entered easily into clinical trials. , Examples
of organic templates used in CMC mimics are PLGA, gelatin, and liposomes
that are FDA approved, biocompatible, and biodegradable in nature.
In 2011, the possibility of designing these mimicking systems was
demonstrated using a PLGA nanoparticle as a template. PLGA is a versatile synthetic polymer that molds into both
nano- and micro-sized particles. It is the most common template used
for several cell membrane coatings like RBC, , , , platelets, , , , cancer cells, , , neutrophils, , cardiac stem
cells, macrophages, NK-92 cells, dendritic cells, and so on. Gelatin is a natural polypeptide
used in cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, the food industry, and in the
assembly of CMC mimics. For designing
CMC mimics, several cell membranes used for coating on gelatin templates
are RBC, stem cell, T cell, mosquito medium host Aedes albopictus (C6/36) cell, and patient-derived tumor cells. Liposomes
are spherical vesicles having at least one lipid bilayer. Liposomes
have been used for coating macrophages, RBCs, and cancer cell membranes. As reported in the literature, liposomes can
also easily fuse with cell membrane vesicles like RBC and NK-92 cells for designing CMC mimics. Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) are another example
of a regulatory-approved template. In 1989, PFCs (Fuosol-DA) were
approved in the US, Japan, and Europe for clinical use but were taken
off from the market after 5 years due to difficulties in their storage-related
issues. Nevertheless, PFCs are biocompatible
and biodegradable and have a high oxygen-carrying capacity. Many PFCs
have a capacity for oxygen dissolution that is nearly 20 times that
of water. They can, moreover, be easily fabricated at the nanoscale
for oxygen delivery even to the smallest capillaries. Therefore, several CMC mimics reported using
PFC can supply oxygen at the tumor sites to relieve hypoxic conditions. , 
Most of the inorganic templates are biocompatible, but toxicity
depends on the metal used for their synthesis and its degradation
in the cell. Among inorganic templates, mesoporous silica is considered
the safest (approved by FDA) and is biocompatible and biodegradable. It degrades into nontoxic silicic acid (water-soluble). It has been a popular template for many years
in research due to its high porosity, large surface area, and high
drug/photosensitizer loading capacity. CMC mimics reported with spherical silica nanoparticles used several
cell membranes from RBCs, cancer cells, and macrophages. Other templates like liposome-PEG, UCNPs, and PLNPs were used in combination with silica to increase their
drug/photosensitizer loading capacity. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles
are tunable to different sizes and shapes. , According to the reports, rod-shaped silica nanoparticles can enhance
antimicrobial properties and regulate
the endogenous reactive oxygen species for oxidative therapy. These tunable properties coupled with CMC mimics
could offer potential therapeutic benefits if explored further. Silica
templates can also have several desired surface functionalities post-chemical
modifications. For example, positively
charged 3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane (APTES) was used to modify the
surface charge of silica microparticles to coat a negatively charged
leukocyte membrane and platelet membrane
for CTC detections. For Fe3O4 nanoparticles, iron ions are its biodegradation byproducts
and are mostly nontoxic. Several CMC
mimics reported using Fe3O4 templates used cell
membranes like macrophage, MSCs, and HeLa cells. Similarly, MOFs are well-defined 3D architectures formed by the
complexation between organic ligands and inorganic metal ions. These are biocompatible, and their toxicity
depends on the nature of the metal and organic linker used. For example,
zinc-based MOFs (zeolitic imidazolate (ZIF-8)) release Zn2+ ions post-degradation, an endogenous element that causes a less
harmful effect on the human body if present in a low amount. MOFs of porphyrin (TPP)-based Gd/Zn nanocomposites
release gadolinium (Gd3+) and zinc (Zn2+) ions
post-degradation. Gd3+ can cause a toxic effect in the
abnormal functioning of kidneys and cross the blood–brain barrier
to accumulate in the brain. Several
CMC mimics reported using cancer cell membrane-coated MOFs for homologous
targeting. , − MOFs also have high porosity, large surface area, and high photosensitizer
loading capacity − due to their structural arrangement. Gold
particles are another commonly used biocompatible inorganic template
because of their inert nature. However, they are not biodegradable
and may be cause for concern. To overcome
these issues, the use of nano or ultrasmall templates to facilitate
rapid renal clearance is preferred. , Gold particles
are tunable to different shapes: nanoparticles, nanocages, nanorods,
and nanoshells, and all are used as templates for fabricating CMC
mimics. Examples of these are gold nanocages with RBC membrane coating and H22 liver cancer cell membrane coating, nanorods with RBC membrane and platelets membrane coating, and nanoshells with macrophage membrane coating for a specific application.

## Phototherapy
Phototherapy
is a noninvasive and effective
cancer treatment. It includes photothermal therapy (PTT) and photodynamic
therapy (PDT). With the right choice
of template, these photothermal or photodynamic properties can be
explored with CMC mimics. PTT involves the photo absorbing agents
to generate heat under near-infrared region (NIR) laser irradiation
to kill cancer cells thermally and is less harmful to other cells
or tissues. Gold templates have a large
NIR absorption cross-section and tunable localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR) band in the NIR region. This makes them most suitable to incorporate in CMC mimics for PTT. , Similarly, magnetic templates like Fe3O4 are
also good alternatives for their use in CMC mimics for PTT. Fe3O4 templates are efficient in photothermal conversion
and are outstanding options for hyperthermia treatment. Fe3O4 nanoclusters showed
a significant increase in NIR absorption, in contrast to their nanoparticles.
PDT involves reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation with photosensitizers under the light
of a specific wavelength for oxidation and killing cancer cells. Mainly
ROS are like singlet oxygen (1O2), superoxide
anion radical (O2-•), or hydroxyl radical
(•OH). Some combinations
of photosensitizers and templates used together in CMC mimics are
chlorin e6 (Ce6) in hollow mesoporous silica, merocyanine 540 (MC540) in UCNPs, zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPC) and MC540 in mesoporous silica encapsulated
UCNPs, 5,10,15,20-tetraphenylchlorin
(TPC) in (ROS)-responsive paclitaxel (PTX) dimer (PTX2-TK), and silicon phthalocyanine in PLPNs. PFCs used in combination with photosensitizers
provide an adequate oxygen supply to accelerate the generation of
reactive singlet oxygen (1O2) and enhance PDT
therapy. In porphyrin-based MOFs, , , porphyrin acts as a photosensitizer
due to its ability to readily absorb visible light and improve overall
ROS generation efficiency. The template
used in CMC mimics for both PDT and PTT is a semiconducting polymer
(SP) nanoparticles-poly(cyclopentadithiophenealt-benzothiadiazole)
(PCPDTBT)). SP nanoparticles are known for their excellent optical
properties and high NIR absorbing capacity and can generate signet
oxygen and heat. Verteporfin is a photodynamic
agent approved by the US FDA for eliminating abnormal blood vessels
in the eyes. Recently, platelet membrane-coated
verteporfin loaded PLGA nanoparticles reduced skin damage in PDT in
combination with solar radiation. Indocyanine
green (ICG) is an FDA-approved photosensitizer and photothermal agent
for template encapsulation. , , , 

## Bioimaging
Bioimaging
technology has significantly
enhanced the ability to diagnose, treat, and prevent diseases by enabling
early detection. It helps in imaging inside the animal and human body.
Bioimaging includes magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), near-infrared
(NIR) imaging, and fluorescence (FL) imaging.
Fe3O4 nanoparticles are the most commonly used as negative
(T2) contrast agents for MRI in CMC mimics. , , Currently, standard probes used
in MRI scans are gadolinium (Gd3+)-based compounds. These
are positive (T1) contrast agents in MRI and also have
been a preferred choice in the clinic for their better image resolution
and easy detection, tunable magnetic properties, and higher colloidal
stability. But these agents also limit
their use in patients with renal imparitment and have been reported
to cross blood–brain barriers to accumulate in the brain. Some examples of Gd3+-based templates
used in CMC mimics are PLGA-Gd-lipid , and MOFs like
porphyrin (TPP)-based Gd/Zn nanocomposites. Manganese (Mn2+) ions can also be a potential alternative
to gadolinium as positive (T1) MRI contrast agents. Since Mn2+ is one of the essential
elements in the human body, its intake in small amounts does not produce
toxic effects. Recently, CMC mimics
designed using porphyrin (TCPP)-based Zr4+ clusters MOFs-coated
with MnO2 nanosheets converted MnO2 into Mn2+ because of the generation of H2O2 in
the system used for MRI. Porphyrin-based
MOFs can absorb the energy produced by the excitation of light and
generates fluorescence for imaging. Gold
nanoparticles, PLNPs, UCNPs, and semiconducting polymer (SP) nanoparticles
are examples of templates in CMC mimics used for NIR imaging. Gold
templates have a large NIR absorption cross-section and a tunable
LSPR band in the NIR region, providing greater penetration depth in
the imaging. , PLNPs have a long-lasting near-infrared
afterglow and avoid tissue autofluorescence from in situ excitation. , SP nanoparticles have a high
NIR absorption capacity. UCNPs have
significant light penetration depth, narrow emission peaks, no background
fluorescence, and exceptional photostability. , Indocyanine green (ICG) is best known for NIR fluorescence imaging along with phototherapy.

## Detoxification
Detoxification removes infections caused
by pathogens. The RBC membrane alone or in combination with platelet membrane has toxin absorbing capabilities. There are also some templates/devices
used in the CMC mimics to enhance the detoxification process differently.
These include olive oil nanodroplets, Janus micromotors, redox-responsive
hydrogels, and a 3D bioprinted nanoparticle-hydrogel hybrid device.
RBC membrane wrapped olive oil nanodroplets were used to form biomimetic
oil nanosponges. In these nanosponges,
the olive oil core soaked nonspecific toxicants through the physical
partition, and RBC absorbed and neutralized toxicants through biological
binding. They also found greater detoxification than that obtained
with PLGA-RBC nanosponges. RBC membrane-coated antibiotic-loaded redox-responsive
hydrogels (RBC-nanogels) were reported to absorb and neutralize the
pore-forming toxins in the extracellular environment. This facilitated their intracellular uptake
into the bacteria. Once entered within the bacteria, the cross-linked
hydrogel cleaved to release the antibiotics to inhibit the bacterial
growth. These redox-responsive hydrogels were more effective in inhibiting
bacterial growth than the free antibiotics and nonresponsive hydrogels.
Further, RBC membrane-coated Janus micromotors were used to improve
the speed of absorption and neutralization of both nerve agent stimulants
and biological protein toxins. The water-driven
mimicking systems were designed by integrating RBC membranes, gold
nanoparticles, and alginate (ALG) onto the exposed surface areas of
magnesium (Mg) microparticles partially embedded in parafilm. This
partial embedding leads to a small hole in the Mg particles. Hydrogen
bubbles produced by the spontaneous redox reaction between Mg and
water provided the guided propulsion without any external fuel. The
3D bioprinted nanoparticle-hydrogel hybrid device was designed with
multiple inner channels for encapsulating many RBC nanoparticles. Many RBC nanoparticles in one device enhanced
the detoxification process while at the same time absorbing various
nonspecific toxins flowing through the channel.

## Assembly of Cell
Membrane-Coated Mimics
The most crucial step in designing
a CMC mimic is the assembly
of extracted cell membranes from the cell of interest with the template
of choice that can incorporate its physiochemical properties to the
CMC mimics. The isolated cell membrane may either be in the form of
fragments or of vesicles. Before coating, it may be necessary to include
an additional extrusion , , or sonication , , , steps to form cell membrane
vesicles ( ).
This section describes commonly employed CMC assembly techniques.
We have also highlighted other less explored assembly techniques such
as microfluidic electroporation, in situ polymerization,
and graphene nanoplatform-mediated cell membrane coating. Additionally,
we will emphasize the scope and challenges of assembly processes,
manufacturing difficulties (reproducibility and scale-up), and limitations
for clinical translation.

## Extrusion
Producing uniformly sized
particles by pushing
material through a porous membrane of the desired cross-section is
called extrusion. The formation of a
wide range of nanomaterials like nanoparticles, liposomes, nanotubes,
nanofibers, and emulsions use of extrusion technique is preferred.
The commonly used membrane extrusion strategies are vesicle extrusion
(for liposomes), membrane emulsification
(for emulsions), , precipitation extrusion (for
nanofibers and nanoparticles), and biological
membrane extrusion (for CMC mimics). , 
For
fabricating CMC mimics, a solution of the cell membrane vesicles and
the template repeatedly passes through a porous polycarbonate membrane
in a mini extruder. The mechanical force applied during the process
disrupts the membrane structure and helps it to wrap around the template.
In 2011, extrusion was reported for uniform coating of an RBC cell
membrane onto a PLGA nanoparticle template through 400 and 100 nm
polycarbonate porous membranes. Since
then, several groups have reported this technique for assembling CMC
mimics using different pore sizes of polycarbonate membranes, cells,
and template types. , , , , , After repeated extrusion, centrifugation
separates the left/unbound cell membrane vesicles from the mixture.
The main limitation of this technique is the loss of sample due to
the accumulation of the material on the porous membrane, leading to
difficulty in large-scale production.

## Sonication
Sonication
is the process of applying sound
energy to disperse the particles in the liquid using an ultrasonic
bath or probe sonicator. In this technique, both the cell membrane
and the template are co-incubated, followed by sonication in ice-cold
conditions for few minutes to fabricate CMC mimics. Sonication disrupts
the cell membrane layer, and the noncovalent interactions between
the template and the cell membrane facilitate their assembly. Several
groups have reported this technique for CMC mimic assembly using different
cell and template types, for example, RBC membrane coating onto cross-linked
2-hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA) hydrogel microparticles; cardiac stem cell membrane onto PLGA microparticles; and stem cell, platelet, neutrophil membranes onto PLGA nanoparticles; and a hybrid of RBC
and platelet membrane onto gold nanowires. After the sonication, centrifugation of the mixture separates the
left/unbound cell membrane vesicles. Sonication, unlike the extrusion
technique, avoids the loss of material during the coating process.
It requires optimization of parameters like inputs of power, frequency,
and time to avoid sample damage or denaturation of protein due to
heat energy. However, the resulting particles may vary in size and
uniformity of coating. , This technique might
also not be appropriate for soft/some templates, as it might affect
their size and stability. , 

## In
Situ Polymerization
In
situ polymerization is a technique of preparing nanocomposites.
It consists of polymeric molecules bound to nanoparticles (like carbon nanotubes, graphene oxide, etc.) or to biomolecules (like
DNA, RNA, or proteins, etc.) in a reaction polymerization
mixture to form linear conjugates or nanocapsules. The reaction mixture
consists of a monomer, initiator, and a cross-linker, exposed to a
source of heat or radiation to initiate the polymerization mechanism.
In 2015, this technique was reported using RBC membrane-derived
vesicles as a nanoreactor to synthesize polymeric cores via
in situ polymerization to prepare cell membrane-coated hydrogel
nanoparticles. , Membrane vesicles were prepared
by extruding a mixture containing RBC ghosts, monomer (acrylamide),
cross-linker (N,N′-methylene
bisacrylamide), and an initiator (lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzolyphosphinate)
through a polycarbonate membrane filter. A PEG-modified 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl
(TEMPO) inhibitor was added to this solution to prevent cross-linking
of monomers on the outside of the cell membrane vesicles. This inhibitor
selectively promotes in situ cross-linking, protects
outer cell proteins from denaturing, and inhibits nonspecific interactions
and leaking of inner monomers across the cell membrane. Upon UV exposure
for 5 min, monomers inside the cell membrane selectively polymerized
to form a stable template at room temperature. This process is opposite
to the traditional coating methods. It has the potential to be extended
for other cross-linking mechanisms and materials and for templates-cell
membrane combinations that are not currently feasible due to their
unfavorable surface properties. However, preparing cell membrane vesicles
using extrusion technique can lead to sample loss during large-scale
production.

## Microfluidic Electroporation
Electroporation
is a high-throughput
technique of incorporating nanoparticles within cells. , In this technique, cells subjected to rapid high-voltage electric
field pulses create temporary hydrophilic pores within the cell membrane.
In 2017, the microfluidic-assisted fabrication of CMC mimics was
demonstrated using electroporation. An
electroporation setup was integrated with a microfluidic chip with
an S-shaped channel to facilitate efficient mixing of RBC vesicles
and nanoparticles, fed through a Y-shaped polydimethylsiloxane microchannel.
During electroporation, the pores formed with the cell membrane allow
passive transport of nanoparticles within the RBC vesicles and fabrication
of uniformly coated RBC-Fe3O4 nanoparticles
with improved colloidal stability, uniform size, and in vivo efficacy. The advantages of this technique are in the autologous
extraction of RBCs, allowing for personalized diagnosis and therapy.
Scalability and storing capacity of this technique promote its feasibility
for industry translation.

## Graphene Nanoplatform-Mediated Cell Membrane
Coating
In 2019, a single-step methodology for extraction
and assembly of
the leukocyte cell membrane was reported. The design aimed to increase the antileukocyte targeting ability
of CMC mimics using a leukocyte cell membrane. The selective ability
of graphene nanosheets to extract phospholipids from the cells vigorously
was the innovative aspect of this CMC mimic. Initially, negatively
charged Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles were modified
with graphene and prepared by the layer-by-layer technique. A positively
charged polyethylenimine (PEI) facilitated the immobilization of negatively
charged graphene nanosheets onto Fe3O4 nanoparticles.
The CMC mimics were assembled in a quick single-step process by co-incubating
graphene-modified nanoparticles with leukocytes in serum-free media.
High phospholipid content on the surface of CMC mimics helped to immobilize
lipids for antibody conjugation to target epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM)-positive CTCs, for example, MCF-7 (the human breast
cancer cell line) and HepG2 (human hepatocellular cancer cell line).
They also demonstrated CMC mimics’ selectivity with a very
high antileukocyte targeting efficacy when tested in synthetic samples
(blood mixed with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-MCF-7 cells). The
advantage of this protocol is the selective extraction and immobilization
of phospholipids from different cell types and the efficient separation and proliferation of the captured CTCs
for several passages. Further, it is possible to use these CTCs to
design a biomimetic system with homotypic target abilities.

## Characterization
of CMC Mimics

## Physiochemical Characterization
After the fabrication
of a CMC mimic, it is essential to analyze its structural features
involving the cell membrane and template interface to enhance its
colloidal stability. The incomplete/unstable membrane may lead to
template exposure and impair the effectiveness of the CMC mimics.
Therefore, it is critical to perform qualitative and quantitative
evaluations of their structural integrity. The quantitative determination
of the number of templates coated with the cell membrane remains unexplored
even though this is an important parameter for its clinical translation.
In this section, we collate all reported physiological techniques
to quantify and visualize thickness, uniformity, stability of the
cell membranes, and deformable and permeability properties of CMC
mimics post-assembly ( ).
 

## Size
and Surface Charge
Size and surface charge are
two parameters monitored in real-time during the assembly of a CMC
mimic. Size (hydrodynamic radius) and surface charge of CMC mimics
can be measured using a dynamic light scattering (DLS) analyzer and
zeta sizer ( A).
 Post-assembly of CMC mimics, it is typical to note a negative
surface
charge close to that of the cell membrane and a few nanometers increase
in their size, confirming the coating. , , , , , Measuring size pre and post-CMC
assembly by using DLS helps to determine the thickness of the cell
membrane. However, the thickness of outer membrane coating can vary
depending on the number of layers and their extent of fusion with
the template. In this section, we have
mentioned a few variations of the template and cell membrane thickness
in different CMC mimics.
For example, a T cell membrane-coated
PLGA system was reported
with an observed size change from 88.3 ± 1.3 nm to 105.4 ±
4.4 nm (thickness ∼17.1 nm) and a surface charge of −29.5
± 1.2 mV similar to that of the cell membrane. In T1 cell membrane-coated cerium oxide dotted CS, there
was an increase in 20 nm size from 131.7 ± 5.2 nm to 152.8 ±
3.9 nm post-assembly with −26.1 ± 0.9 mV ζ potential
after cell membrane coating. In monocyte
membrane (U837)-coated PLGA systems, there was an increase of size
by ∼20–40 nm with −16.5 mV ζ potential
(PLGA: −8.3 mV; U837: −13.6 mV). In MDA-MB-231 cell membrane-coated mesoporous silica loaded
with ferric oxide, an increase in average size from 164 to 220 nm
(thickness ∼56 nm) with surface charge −20.88 ±
0.4 mV post-assembly was observed. In
fact, in MCF-7 cell membrane-coated mesoporous silica PEG-liposomes,
the size change from 74.07 ± 0.7 nm to 188.5 ± 3.3 nm (thickness
∼114 nm) with −23.8 ± 1.1 mV surface charge closer
to that of the cell membrane was observed. In addition to using a DLS analyzer, the thickness and coverage
of the cell membrane on each template can be visualized using microscopic
techniques discussed in the next section.

## Structure Integrity
Different microscopic techniques
help to visualize the structural integrity of CMC mimics. The three
microscopic techniques most often used to gain insight into the structural
integrity and uniformity of assembled CMC mimics are cryo-transmission
electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) or TEM, field-emission scanning electron
microscopy (FESEM) or SEM, and confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM) ( B).
CMC mimics have a characteristic core–shell structure. This
consists of a dense inner core of a template and a thin outer coating
of a cell membrane. Due to differences in composition, there is a
difference in electron density between these two layers. However,
TEM imaging visualizes the structure containing a dark core and a
light outer coating. The variation in the thickness of the cell membrane
in different CMC mimics was also visualized in TEM analysis, same
as observed in the above section. For example, in the leukocyte membrane-coated
silica-APTES system, the outer layer thickness could reach 500 nm
by increasing the membrane:particle ratio. For leukocyte cell membrane-coated Fe3O4-PEI-graphene-modified
nanoparticles, variable thickness of the membrane around 11.78 and
16.94 nm was observed. In case of hybrid
RBC and MCF-7 breast cancer cell membrane-coated melanin nanoparticles,
an ∼9.1 nm-thick membrane was reported. Similarly, for 4T1 cancer cell membrane-coated MOFs and RBC membrane-coated PFCs nanoparticles, an ∼10 and 20 nm-think membrane was
observed, respectively. Overall, TEM can provide a qualitative estimation
of the membrane homogeneity around the template post-coating, mostly
in the case of nanoscale CMC mimics.
SEM is another qualitative
technique used to visualize the change
in surface morphology/texture after the cell membrane coating and
complete/incomplete coverage of cell membrane, predominantly in the
case of microscale CMC mimics. For example, using SEM, the complete
coverage of leukocyte membrane onto APTES-silica microparticles and incomplete coverage of cardia stem fragments
onto PLGA microparticles were observed. In case of motor sponge designed using RBC membrane and gold nanowires
of 400 nm diameter and 3 μm in length, no change in the concave
end of the nanowire was observed after complete RBC membrane coating. Uniform RBC membrane coating onto Mg Janus
motors was observed with spherical geometry of size 20 μm and
a small circular opening of 2 μm. 
CLSM is a qualitative technique that provides an insight into
the
efficiency of the whole process of assembly by determining an estimation
of the number of templates that are well coated. For CLSM, the cell
membrane and the inner core are fluorescently tagged with different
dyes to aid visualization. 3,3′-Dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine
perchlorate (DiO), , , , 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindodicarbocyanine
perchlorate (DiD), , , 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine
perchlorate (DiI), fluorescein, rhodamine-DMPE (1,2-bis(dimethylphosphino)ethane), wheat germ agglutinin, rhodamine B (RhB), CellVue, and Cy5.5 are
examples of dyes exclusively used to label cell membranes.

## Coverage
The coverage of cell membrane onto the template
can be validated using an aggregation assay based on streptavidin-biotin
cross-linking ability, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET)
analysis, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and Fourier transform
infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy ( C).
In 2014, the completeness of RBC membrane
was demonstrated onto PLGA nanoparticles using the streptavidin-biotin
cross-linking chemistry (aggregation assay). The RBC membrane-coated biotinylated PLGA nanoparticles were mixed
with the streptavidin and monitored for a change in particle size.
When the membrane coverage is low, exposed biotin on the PLGA surface
binds to streptavidin and induces significant aggregation and size
change. Therefore, the suitable membrane to polymeric ratio can be
optimized when the aggregation or size changes upon the addition of
streptavidin impede. Such an aggregation assay helps in determining
the efficiency of membrane coating in CMC mimics.
TGA technique
measures the percentage loss in weight of samples
when heated. The TGA profiles can differ
from material to material (template, cell membrane, and the final
CMC mimic). The difference in percentage weight loss between the template
and the CMC mimic determines the amount of cell membrane-coated onto
a template. It also helps to study the stability of the membrane onto
a template. The temperature range in TGA depends on the thermal degradation
of the samples. For example, the amount and stability of leukocyte
membrane coating onto APTES-silica microparticles were demonstrated
in the range from 30 to 150 °C. About 15 wt % membrane and 8.0
wt % membrane were observed after 1 and 24 h incubation of CMC mimics
in PBS, respectively. In case of U-251
MG glioblastoma cell membrane-coated magnetic nanocubes (a hybrid
of Fe3O4 and MnO2), particles were
heated from 100 to 600 °C and observed 12% weight of cell membrane
absorbed on nanocubes. Similarly, for
LNCaP-AI prostate cancer cell membrane-coated CaCO3 capped
mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN@CaCO3), around 30%
weight of cell membrane was absorbed onto MSN@CaCO3 after
heating samples from 25 to 800 °C. 
FT-IR spectroscopy is another versatile technique to qualitatively
characterize cell membrane coating by comparing spectra before and
after CMC assembly. Only a few reports mentioned this technique to
confirm CMC mimics assembly are discussed in this section. The sharp
IR characteristics peaks of the template weaken after the cell membrane
coating confirms the immobilization of the membranes on the template
surface. Along with this, additional strong stretching vibration peaks
of C–H/C–N/C=O/N–H/O–H of cell
membrane phospholipids, proteins, and carbohydrates are observed if
there are no overlaps with the template characteristic peaks itself.
For example, the U-251 MG glioblastoma membrane coating was confirmed
onto magnetic nanocubes by observing an additional peak in the range
of 1500–3000 cm–1. The additional broad peak at approximately 1750 cm–1 was due to the C–N and C=O vibrations of the cell
membranes. In the case of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell membrane-coated
mesoporous silica nanoparticles (SiFePNs), an additional peak was
also observed around 2950 cm–1 by the C–H
band stretching vibration of the methyl group of cell membrane phospholipids
and weakening of the sharp IR peaks of SiFePNs after coating. The characteristic peak of C=O and −NH2 in the spectra was reported to confirm the RBC membrane coating
onto persistent luminescence nanocarriers. On occasion, additional peaks can also be attributed due to chemical
interaction between the cell membrane and the template surface. For
example, in the leukocyte membrane-coated APTES-silica microparticles,
two strong peaks were observed at 1652 and 1544 cm–1 that correspond to the amide I and II modes of the proteins of the
membrane. The C=O stretching vibrations
of the peptide bonds lead to the amide I band, while the C–N
stretch coupled with N–H bending mode leads to the amide II
band. This amide linkage arose from the peptide bonds between protein
residues and the covalent bond between the carboxylic moieties of
protein and the primary amines of the APTES molecule in the microparticles.
The spectra of CMC mimics also exhibited a weak peak for the Si–O
moieties and a strong peak for the C–H stretching compared
to that of the APTES-silica particles spectra. This leads to the immobilization
of the membranes on the particle’s surface, shielding the silicon
surface while exposing the long C–H and C–C chains of
phospholipids and proteins.
FRET is another assay used to characterize
CMC mimics as they assemble
using one or two different cell membranes. In this study, each cell
membrane labels with a donor or acceptor fluorescent dye from FRET
pairs. 7-Nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl (NBD) and RhB (rhodamine),
DiI, and DiD are the commonly used FRET pairs. This study identifies
the molecular distance between the fluorophores using the energy transfer
mechanism. Donor energy minimizes when energy transfer occurs from
the donor to the acceptor when they are nearby.
For example,
fusion of NK cell membrane and liposome to create
CMC mimics was validated using a FRET study. The two sets of liposomes were tagged with fluorescence donor (PE-NBD)
and fluorescent acceptor (PE-RhB) and mixed them with NK cell membrane.
As the coating progressed, FRET was masked by the NK cell membrane,
resulting in a decrease in the fluorescent intensity of the acceptor
and an increase in the fluorescent intensity of the donor. Similarly,
FRET study has been used to confirm fusion of various cell membranes,
for example, the fusion of platelet and RBC membrane using DOPE-RhB/C6-NBD-doped
platelet membrane, fusion of the B16-F10
cancer cell membrane and RBC membrane using DiD/DiO-doped B16-F10
cancer cell membrane, fusion of liposomes
and RBC membrane using DHPE-RhB/C6-NBD-doped liposomes, and the fusion of RBC and MCF-7 cancer cell
membrane using DOPE-RhB/C6-NBD-doped MCF-7 cancer cell membrane. 
FRET also helps to validate the fusion
of the cell membrane onto
a template. In this case, the cell membrane and template are both
doped with a FRET pair. For example, the fusion of RBC membrane onto
PLGA was confirmed by doping the RBC membrane with NBD-PE and PLGA
with RhB-egg phosphatidylcholine (PC). As the distance between the NBD-labeled RBC membrane and RhB-labeled
polymeric core becomes shorter, NBD-energy donor fluorophore becomes
more efficient in donating energy to RhB-energy acceptor fluorophore,
therefore increasing the fluorescent intensity of the acceptor and
decreasing the fluorescent intensity of the donor.

## Membrane
Permeability
The permeability of the cell
membrane in the CMC mimics has been little explored. The cell membrane
in the live cells is permeable in nature and controls the in and out
of the ions using their ion pumps. It helps to understand the better
control of the drug encapsulation and release in CMC mimics. The permeability
of RBC-PLGA systems was investigated by using the cell membrane permeable
molecular probe. The permeable molecular
probe succinimidyl 6-(N-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazoyl-4-yl)- amino)hexanoate
(NBD-NHS) was used to label both the sides of the RBC membrane and
dithionite (S2O42–) ion for
quenching the NBD fluorescence. It was observed that the RBC-PLGA
has a higher permeability to the dithionite ions than to living RBC
cells and egg-PC/cholesterol liposomes ( D).

## Deformability
Deformability is a vital design parameter
that affects the behavior of particles on both the micro and nanoscales. , It is mostly dependent on the shape and average particle elasticity.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and compression testing machine/universal
testing machines are some of the techniques used for measuring the
mechanical properties of CMC mimics. The multiparticle tracking (MPT)
method and microfluidic technique help to validate and visualize the
deformability of CMC mimics.
There are ongoing efforts to incorporate
the elastic properties ( ) in the designed particle system for enhancing mobility and
biodistribution in animal studies. For example, RBC-shaped microparticles
(RBC-MPs) were prepared using an electrospinning-based technique and
showed intraparticle elasticity (IED), which was measured by AFM. The Young’s modulus (E) of the dent in the RBC-MPs was <100 MPa, whereas that of the
thick rim was 100–300 MPa. The difference in the E value of the dent and the rim in RBC-MPs shaped the particles. This
shape helped these particles to deform and retain their original shape
after passing through a membrane filter with 1 μm pores. These
RBC-MPs also showed less accumulation in the lungs and the spleen.
The same group used these RBC-MPs for RBC membrane coating to mimic
the shape and the surface structure of RBC for increasing its circulation
time in blood. 
 In 2011, the Prof. DeSimone group also prepared tunable elastic
RBC-shaped hydrogel microparticles (RBCMs) in the nonwetting templates
(PRINT) technique. They tested their
mechanical properties (bulk modulus) with a Universal Testing Machine
(Instron) with a strain rate of 5 mm/min. They achieved tunable modulus
of the hydrated polymer from 63.9 to 7.8 KPa by varying the cross-linker
from 10% to 1%, respectively, which overlapped with the reported modulus
of RBCs (26.7 KPa). They successfully demonstrated the deformability
of RBCMs under the flow condition using microfluidic models of vascular
constriction. Microfluidics has also widely been used to study the
deformability of cells like RBCs, leukocytes, etc. Therefore, microfluidics
can also be explored to analyze and visualize the flexibility of CMC
mimics.
Recently, the mechanical properties of the yolk–shell
structured
MCF-7 cancer-cell-membrane-coated mesoporous silica nanoparticles
supported liposome (CCM@LM) was validated using AFM and demonstrated
using MPT method. These yolk–shell
structures showed moderate rigidity with young’s modulus around
40 MPa. During filtration, these CMC mimics could also transform into
an ellipsoidal shape. These properties facilitated its penetration
through spheroids in vitro. They evaluated its ECM
diffusion capability using the MPT method in which the MPT medium
was collagen (I) hydrogels. The MSD value of CCM@LM was approximately
7.1- and 2.6-fold higher than that of LM and PLGA nanoparticles, respectively.
Incorporating the elastic properties in CMC mimics can enhance its
mobility and penetration in the tumors. This property in CMC mimics
needs to be explored more in-depth.

## Biological Characterization
of CMC Mimics
The cell
membrane provides surface functionality to the CMC mimics that allows
communication with other cells and helps to escape from macrophages
and circulate more in the bloodstream. For example, the CD47 receptor
on the RBC membrane selectively binds to signal-regulatory protein
alpha (SIRPα) glycoprotein expressed by macrophages to prevent
its uptake. , Therefore, for CMC mimics to
function efficiently, the cell membrane must maintain the right orientation
post-coating and contain the maximum amount of translocated protein
on its surface. The isolated membrane should have minimal nuclear,
mitochondrial, and cytosol contamination, and the transmembrane proteins
must face outward for active targeting and accumulation at the intended
site. Improper membrane orientation (integral protein exposed onto
the other surface of the mimics) will affect cell-to-cell communication,
overall function, and risk of macrophage detection and causes unwanted
side effects. Therefore, proper qualitative and quantitative evaluation
of intact membrane proteins, purity, and orientation is required in
CMC mimics to improve their functional efficiency and reproducibility
for clinical translation. All the properties are also summarized in .

## Protein Analysis
The protein composition and expression
on the isolated cell membrane and CMC mimics can be analyzed, identified,
and quantified using several techniques. These include bicinchoninic
acid assay (BCA)/Bradford assay, sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), Coomassie brilliant blue staining,
Western blot/dot blot, flow cytometry, and liquid chromatography-mass
spectroscopy (LC-MS) ( ).
 Before the protein analysis,
the proteins need to be extracted
from the isolated cell membrane and CMC mimics using lysis buffer
(for example, radioimmune precipitation (RIPA) buffer). The lysis
buffer should be supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor
cocktail and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) to prevent degradation
of proteins and stored at −80 °C for protein analysis.
BCA assay and Bradford assay are most commonly used for colorimetric
detection and quantification of total protein concentration from various
cell membrane and CMC mimics. , , , , , , Although most of the studies have discussed the use of these assays,
there are only a few reports that have mentioned the amount of total
protein translocated onto the isolated cell membrane or CMC mimics.
In addition, there are no standards reported on total protein content
that should be present on CMC mimics for their therapeutic effects.
For example, around 300 mg of protein content was found in NK cell
(NK-92) membranes extracted from 1 × 107 cells using
the Bradford assay. A 7.9 ± 2.0
wt % protein loading yield of the bacterial cell membrane onto the
gold nanoparticles, 2.8 ± 0.5 wt
% protein loading yield of the MIN6 cell membrane onto fibers, and 18.6 ± 5.7 wt % protein loading yield
of the RBC membrane coating onto mesoporous silica nanoparticles were found using BCA assay. In fact, determination
of the protein content before and after the cell membrane coating
can also provide an insight into validate the membrane coating onto
a template.
The protein profile in the cells, isolated cell
membrane, and CMC
mimics can be visualized, analyzed, and compared qualitatively by
loading and running the same amount of protein in a specific % of
SDS-PAGE gel that allows the separation of protein-based on mass. , , , After the separation of proteins, these gels can be stained with
irreversible Coomassie brilliant blue dye. This binds nonspecifically
to proteins because of ionic interactions between sulfonic acid groups
and positive protein amine groups through van der Waals attractions
and appears as blue protein bands. , , , , , The intensity of the blue protein
bands helps to compare the total protein profile translocated from
a natural cell to the isolated cell membrane and CMC mimics. This
is the basic analysis that is reported in almost every literature
to validate the successful coating of cell membrane onto a template.
Western blot is the most widely used technique to identify and
compare the expression of specific proteins from among a mixture of
proteins on the cell lysate, isolated cell membrane, and CMC mimics.
For example, using Western blot, comparable presence of CD47 receptor
on natural RBC lysate, RBC membrane and RBC membrane-coated Fe3O4 nanoparticles was observed. Similarly, comparable DNAM-1, NKG2D, and CD56 (neural cell
adhesion molecule receptors) on the NK cell lysate, NK cell membrane,
and its membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticle and mPEG-PLGA nanoparticle were found,
respectively. In the case of hybrid RBC and MCF-7 cancer cell membrane-coated
melanin nanoparticles, comparable RBC-specific
membrane proteins (band 3, GPA, CD55, and CD47) and MCF-7 specific
membrane proteins (EpCAM, N-cadherin, galectin-3) on hybrid RBC-MCF-7
vesicles and its membrane-coated mimics were also observed. The enrichment
of protein-like clusters of differentiation receptors (CD11c, CD86,
CD40) expression was found on the dendritic cell membrane and its
membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles than dendritic cell lysate. Similarly, the significant protein enrichment
for LPS binding proteins (CD14, TLR4), cytokine binding receptors
(CD126 and CD130 for IL-6, CD120a, and CD120b for TNF, and CD119 for
IFN-γ) was observed on macrophage membrane and membrane-coated
PLGA nanoparticles than macrophage cell lysate. Similarly, the enrichment of surface protein like TNF alpha
R, IL-1R, LFA-1 receptors was also observed on the neutrophil membrane
and its membrane-coated PLGA as compared to the neutrophil lysate. 
Dot blot is another blotting technique
that requires only a few
microliter samples directly onto the PVDF or nitrocellulose membrane
followed by blotting procedures. Dot blot is a quick and fast technique
used to identify the position of isolated membrane fraction in the
sucrose gradient using specific protein markers. For example, leukocyte
cell membrane was isolated using 55–40–30% sucrose (w/v)
gradient. The gradient was divided into
10 different fractions, analyzed for the specific markers using dot
blot, and found the lipid ring between 40 and 30% sucrose interface
(fractions 5 and 6) enriched with plasma membranes. Similarly, a 44–40–5%
sucrose gradient was performed and divided the gradient into eight
fractions for the dot blot analysis and
found that the majority of platelet membranes were present in the
lipid ring between 5 and 40% sucrose interfaces. There are very few
reports that have used dot blot to identify the expression of a specific
protein on the isolated cell membrane and CMC mimics because it does
not provide information on the actual size of the target protein like
a Western blot. For example, the presence of CD47 and glycophorin
A (GPA) on the RBC membrane and its coated PLGA-Gd nanoparticles was
reported using both dot blot and Western blot. Western blot or dot blot also helps to determine the purity
of isolated cell membrane by using nuclear or mitochondrial or cytosol
specific antibodies that help to assist in detecting its content in
the membranes. For example, histone H3 , or nucleoporin
p62 antibodies as a nuclear marker, cytochrome c-oxidase (COX IV) , , or ATP5a antibody as a mitochondrial
marker, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) , , as cytosol marker and P-cadherin or Na+/K+-ATPase , , as plasma membrane markers have been used.
Flow cytometry is a powerful qualitative and quantitative technique,
useful to identify and quantify specific protein on the CMC mimics
by measuring the fluorescent intensity. Only a few reports explore
this technique for some protein analysis. For example, the fluorescence
intensity of CD42b, CD47, CD41, and CD61 on platelet membrane-coated
APTES modified silica nanoparticles and
the fluorescence intensity of CXCR4 on U87 cancer cell membrane-coated
PLGA nanoparticles was identified. An
equal amount of LFA-1 receptor on a neutrophil membrane-coated PLGA
nanoparticles and neutrophil cells was
observed. Similarly, the comparable fluorescence intensity of MHC-II
protein on dendritic cell membrane-coated mimics and natural dendritic
cells with an equal amount of MHC-II surface protein was observed. Therefore, this technique has a lot of potential
to analyze and compare the amount of specific protein on CMC mimics
with the natural cell in a given batch that may overcome the reproducibility
issues.
LC-MS/proteomics analysis is a quantitative large-scale
protein
study. This study involves fractionation of complex peptide or protein
mixtures, acquiring the data necessary to identify individual proteins
using mass spectroscopy, and finally, analyzing and organizing the
mass spectroscopy data using bioinformatics. The total number of proteins identified can be further characterized
based on their cellular function (integral or peripheral plasma proteins,
cytoskeletal or junctional protein), biological process (transport,
immunity, cell–cell adhesion, developmental process, proteolysis,
lipid metabolism, etc.), and molecular function (GTP
(guanosine triphosphate) binding, protein binding, GTPase activity,
GDP (guanosine diphosphate) binding, actin-binding, etc.). , , For example,
the shotgun proteomics method identified 868 distinct proteins on
human NK cell membrane-coated mPEG-PLGA nanoparticles. They also analyzed specific proteins on CMC
mimics like immunity-related GTPase family M protein 1 (IRGM1), cannabinoid
type 1 receptor (CB1), ras-related protein encoded with RAB10 gene
(RAB 10), and receptor activator of nuclear factor κ-Β
ligand (RANKL) involved in the polarization of M1-macrophages and
NKG2D, DNAM-1 in targeting tumor cells. 2215 common proteins were
identified on U-251 MG cell membranes and their coated magnetic nanocubes. Those identified proteins were clusters of
differentiation 59 (CD59), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
CD44, tight junction protein 1 (TJP1), myosin light-chain kinase (MYLK),
and others. A label-free quantification proteomics method identified
474 membrane proteins on RBC membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles and 148 common proteins in erythroliposomes
(a hybrid of RBC vesicles and liposomes) and RBC vesicles. All the research papers reported above have
provided a long list of proteins identified on the cell membrane and
their CMC mimics.

## The Orientation of Cell Membranes (Right-Side-Out)
The orientation of the cell membrane in the CMC mimics helps in
determining
the direction of the receptors while coating onto a template. The
extracellular proteins must be directing outward, whereas the intracellular
proteins should be directing inward, to maintain the functionality
of the CMC mimics. Among the techniques/method for studying the orientation
are immunogold staining, antibody binding assays, quantification of
glycoproteins or sialic acid content, and quantification of transmembrane
or internal membrane proteins ( ).
 Immunogold staining or labeling is a qualitative
technique used
in electron microscopy for the identification and distribution of
a specific protein of interest located on the interior or the exterior
of the cell membrane of the CMC mimics. It utilizes gold nanoparticles
conjugated with the secondary antibody of interest and, in turn, attaches
to the primary antibody designed to bind a specific protein on the
CMC mimic. The gold nanoparticles are visible as a black spot under
electron microscopy and help visualize the arrangement of a specific
protein onto CMC mimics. Some of the reported specific biomarkers
on RBC membrane are CD47 and CD235a, platelet membranes are CD61 and CD47, and MCF-7 breast
cancer cell membrane is CD340 that have
been used in the immunogold staining and analyzed under TEM. The orientation
of the HeLa membrane onto PLGA nanoparticles was also demonstrated
using immunogold staining, but tagged the gold nanoparticles with
AS1411, a nucleic acid aptamer that targets the extracellular region
of nucleolin in the cell membrane and is analyzed under a transmission
electron microscope. 
Antibody
binding assay was reported to examine the coating and
sidedness of RBC membrane onto gold nanoparticles. Two distinct anti-CD47 antibodies (exoplasmic and cytoplasmic)
conjugated polystyrene microspheres were used for the interaction
with the membrane and further analyzed under TEM.
Glycans and
sialic acid groups are asymmetrically distributed on
the extracellular side of the cell membrane. Hence, their quantification
has also been reported for validating the sidedness of the RBC membrane
in a CMC mimic. , , The glycoprotein content and terminal sialic groups were first enzymatically
removed from CMC mimics using trypsin and sialidase, respectively.
Further, the glycoprotein content was quantified using a periodate-based
glycoprotein detection assay or mouse glycoprotein ELISA kit and sialic
acid content using a sialic acid quantification kit.
Transmembrane
protein and/or internal membrane protein in a CMC
mimic can also be identified, quantified, and compared with the cell
source using flow cytometry or immunoblotting or fluorescence microscopy
to validate the orientation of the cell membrane. The localization
of CD3z (intracellular) and LFA-1 (extracellular) proteins on leukocyte
membrane-coated mimics was determined using both flow cytometry and
immunoblotting. The fluorescence intensity of LFA-1 on CMC mimics
was observed to be three times higher than that of the leukocyte vesicles
but detected CD3z signals only after permeabilization. The comparable intensity of major histocompatibility
complex II (MHC-II) protein (extracellular) on dendritic cell membrane-coated
mimics and dendritic cells was confirmed using flow cytometry. Similarly, the comparable intensity of LFA-1
(extracellular) protein on neutrophils membrane coated mimics and
neutrophils cell and comparable intensity
of CD47 antibody (extracellular) on RBC membrane-coated mimics and
RBC ghosts was observed using flow cytometry. In the case of platelet membrane-coated mimics, two anti-CD41
(glycoprotein (Gp) IIb/IIIa integrin) primary antibodies were used
for binding to the N-terminal and C-terminal of CD41 present on the
extracellular and intracellular regions, respectively. Extracellular CD41 intensity was observed four
times higher than that in its intracellular domain on the outer surface
of CMC mimics using flow cytometry. Similarly, for UM-SCC-7 membrane
(human squamous carcinoma cell line) and its mimics, two anti-CXCR4
antibodies were used to bind the extracellular and intracellular region. A comparable fluorescence intensity of CXCR4
on CMC mimics and cells using a fluorometer was observed. Epifluorescence
microscopy has also been reported to analyze the immunostained CD3
receptor (extracellular) on T cell membrane-coated mimics. Fluorescence intensity per particle using ImageJ
software was quantified and observed that 40% of the CMC mimics displayed
some or all the CD3 receptors in the correct orientation.

## Role of CMC Mimics in Various Therapeutic Applications
CMC
mimics have gained attention in several therapeutic applications
like cancer, inflammatory diseases, and infectious diseases. The purpose
of designing these mimics is to achieve target efficacy and accumulation
at the target site. presents an overview of the different cell membrane and template
combinations used for applications, along with a summary of in vitro and in vivo models used to validate
their efficacy in .
 

## Cancer Therapy
Cancer causes abnormal and uncontrolled
growth of cells in the human body. The primary tumor is the initial
region from where the cancer cells begin to spread. These tumor cells
secrete various chemokines to redirect the platelets, immune cells
(neutrophils, macrophages, T cells, NK cells) to facilitate their
growth and progression in different parts of the body. , Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) rapidly spread to the blood and lymph
nodes and cause life-threatening metastasis. , Therefore, during chemotherapy, delivering the drug at the metastatic
site and neutralizing the CTCs in the blood and lymph nodes is crucial.
Chimeric antigen receptor T cell immunotherapy (CAR-T), , adoptive immunotherapy, , immune checkpoint
blockade therapy, , vaccines, treatment with oncolytic
viruses, , monoclonal antibodies, cytokines, and
immunomodulatory treatment are immunotherapies
currently under consideration. However, tumor heterogeneity, immune
cell dysfunction, acquired resistance to immunotherapy, and immunotoxicity
complicate their clinical translation. − Therefore, there is
a pressing need to discover and deliver tumor neoantigens to activate
the patient’s immune system efficiently.
Incorporating
a cancer cell membrane within a CMC mimic provides the required neoantigens,
particularly in the case of highly mutagenic tumors. Current treatment
options include modifying nano/microparticle surfaces, delivering
immunomodulators, and chemo drugs. To resolve the complexity of modification,
several CMC mimics with natural biocompatible characteristics have
been designed with various combinations of the cell membrane and templates
to effectively target primary, metastatic, and CTCs. If required,
the cell membrane can be modified further with desired active targeting
moieties using lipid insertion , , , or membrane fusion , , , to increase its target efficacy toward tumor cells in various organs
(brain, breasts, lungs, cervical, colon, pancreas, etc.). This section discusses CMC mimics used for cancer treatment,
as summarized in .
RBC membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles were designed in Zhang’s
lab to enhance the low circulation half-life of nanoparticle drug
delivery systems by utilizing CD47 receptors on the RBC membrane. Compared to the PEGylated systems, the half-life
of these mimics improved by at least 2-fold, and they remained in
circulation for up to 72 h post-injection. Following this work, RBC
cell membrane coating of gold nanocages, Fe3O4 nanoparticles, and PFCs improved their circulation times. Additionally,
this enhanced their suitability for bioimaging and phototherapy applications. , , , Due to the lack of tumors targeting proteins on the RBC membrane,
many researchers have attempted modifying with peptides or fusing
it with another cell membrane to enhance its targeting efficacy toward
specific primary or metastatic tumors. For example, arginyl glycyl
aspartic acid (RGD)-modified RBC membrane-coated paclitaxel loaded
polycaprolactone (PCL) nanoparticles inhibited the growth of the primary
tumor in breast cancer and lung metastasis significantly. Similarly, brain-targeted peptide (DCDX, T7, , and NGR − )-modified RBC membrane facilitated CMC mimic’s
crossing of the blood–brain barrier and improved their ability
to target glioma.
Platelet cell membranes gained interest in
designing CMC mimics
for targeting CTCs due to the effective interaction between P-selectin
and CD44 receptors on platelets and tumor cells. According to these reports, platelet membrane-coated mimics
captured and killed CTCs in blood and lymph nodes and inhibited breast
cancer metastasis effectively. , Further, TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) modified platelet membrane-coated
templates also eliminated CTCs effectively. TRAIL additionally activates
apoptosis in tumor cells by binding to the death receptors (DR4, DR5)
on the cell surface. , , Additionally, coating a hybrid membrane of platelets and leukocytes
on commercially available immunomagnetic beads was very effective
in isolating pure CTCs from clinical blood samples collected from
breast cancer patients, demonstrating the possibility of extending
these CTCs for in vitro applications and their potential
for use in personalized medicine. 
The cancer cell membrane is known for its homologous targeting
abilities attributed to the presence of different adhesion molecules
on their surface. These adhesion molecules play an important role
in the development of invasive and distant metastasis. Designing mimics using cancer cell membranes
could be a potential strategy to develop personalized tumor-specific
therapies or vaccines. In this context, CMC mimics of cisplatin-loaded
gelatin nanoparticles coated with the patient-derived tumor cell membrane
(head and neck squamous cell carcinoma) ( ) were fabricated and tested for efficacy
in a patient-derived xenograft model. These autologous cell membrane-coated mimics were able to ablate
the tumor completely and inhibit tumor recurrence. However, the mismatch
of membrane donors and hosts resulted in weaker targeting. Numerous
cancer cell membrane-coated mimics using different templates are developed
for such homotypic targeting ( ). , , , , , , , , , , 
 Recently, CMC mimics
were redesigned as nanovaccines for cancer.
These vaccines combine the cancer cell membrane with an adjuvant that
facilitates delivery of tumor-associated antigens to dendritic cells
and stimulates the tumor antigen specific-T cells. For example, B16-F10
(murine melanoma cell line) membrane-coated PLGA mimics were designed
as nanovaccines for cancer. They incorporated an adjuvant, monophosphoryl
lipid A, MPL (FDA-approved LPS derivative) that binds specifically
to toll-like receptor 4 to boost the immune response. Additionally,
CMC mimics of cancer cell (B16-OVA) membrane and PLGA nanoparticles
were formulated as nanovaccines to specifically targeted antigen-presenting
cells (APCs) and enhance their uptake to trigger cell maturation.
Imiquimod R837, an adjuvant and agonist for toll-like receptor 7 (TLR-7),
was preloaded into PLGA particles and coated with a mannose-modified
cell membrane. These mimics effectively
inhibited the growth of melanoma tumors when combined with antiprogrammed
cell death protein 1 (PD-1) checkpoint blockade therapy. Viruses also
have natural adjuvant properties that initiate an immune response.
For example, the oncolytic virus replicates inside tumor cells by
releasing tumor antigens and causes tumor lysis without affecting
healthy cells. Antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) engulf these antigens and redirect dendritic and T cells toward
the infected site. Therefore, coating adenovirus serotype-5 virus
particles with the melanoma (B16.F10) and lung cancer (LL/2) cell
membranes can help explore their properties and treat aggressive melanoma
and lung tumor. Despite coating the
virus with different cancer cell membranes, binding efficacy was maximized
using homologous and tumor-matched cell membranes.
Macrophages
are the most abundant cells in the tumor microenvironment
of solid tumors. Interactions between α4 and β1 integrins
present on the macrophage surface with the vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 (VCAM-1) present on cancer cells are responsible for progression
and metastasis of tumor. − Using these interactions, CMC mimics of
macrophages (RAW 264.7) and emtansine-loaded liposomes targeted and
inhibited lung metastasis in breast cancer models. In another report, using CCL2/CCR2 chemokines interactions,
macrophages were recruited. Quercetin-loaded bismuth selenide nanosystems
acted as the templates for mimic assembly. Post-targeting, nanosystems inhibited primary cancer and lung metastasis
by photothermal therapy. Quercetin released inhibited thermoresistant
tumors by damaging their heat shock protein 70 (HSP70). Subsequently,
several groups have reported the fabrication of CMC mimics with macrophage
membranes on various templates that target breast cancer for photothermal
therapy. , , 
Inflammatory neutrophils are activated and directed by the
granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor (G-CSF) and C–X–C chemokines (CXCL1,
CXCL2, CXCL5) toward early premetastatic niche formation. , Inspired by this mechanism, neutrophil membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles
loaded with carfilzomib were designed. These mimics neutralized CTCs, prevented early lung metastasis,
and inhibited the progression of already-formed lung metastasis in
breast cancer.
Among other immune cells, NK cells can detect
and target tumor
cells without preactivation. These cells also regulate immune response
and T cell activation to kill tumor cells. The NK cell membrane from murine NK cells and NK-92 cell line-coated
on poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether-block-poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (mPEG-PLGA) nanoparticles loaded with 4,4′,4″,4‴-(porphine-5,10,15,20-tetrayl)
tetrakis (benzoic acid) (TCPP) were
able to polarize M1 macrophages, kill primary tumors, and inhibit
the growth of distant tumors. Further, the fusion of the NK cell membrane
from NK-92 with liposomes to create NKsomes loaded with doxorubicin
demonstrated an excellent tumor homing potential of NKsomes against
breast cancer cells. 
MSCs have
inherent tumor-targeting properties and exhibit immunomodulatory
activities. , However, biosafety concerns,
stability, and reproducibility issues limit their use in clinical
applications. Taking advantage of MSCs
mechanism, adipose-derived MSCs membrane-coated Fe3O4 nanoparticles were constructed as a proof-of-concept to inhibit
prostate tumor cells via hyperthermia mechanism.
Furthermore, bone marrow-derived MSC membranes were used to coat doxorubicin-loaded
gelatin nanogels and UCPNs to enhance the target efficacy toward cervical
tumor cells. The presence of tumor recognition receptors and adhesion
molecules on T-cells surfaces has prompted their use for fabricating
CMC mimics. 
Taking advantage of
T-cell receptors, human cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
cell membrane-coated paclitaxel-loaded PLGA nanoparticles were designed
in combination with low-dose irradiation (LDI) to target gastric tumor
cells. These mimics inhibited gastric
tumor growth significantly when used in combination with LDI than
mimics alone. Further, an azide-modified T-cell membrane was modified
with azide and assembled with a PLGA template for biorthogonal targeting
of bicyclo[6.1.0]nonyne (BCN)-modified tumor cells. Modified cell membrane-coated mimics showed a 1.5-fold
higher accumulation around Raji tumor cells.
Dendritic cells
(DCs) are the initiators of the primary immune
response and capable of activating naïve T cells. DC-based cancer vaccines have drawn attention
in immunotherapy for treating prostate cancer with one of their variants
approved by the US FDA. There is also
evidence that immunotherapy could benefit patients with ovarian cancer. − Recently, in a clinical phase 1 study for ovarian cancer patients,
DC vaccines initiated T-cell responses in only half of the total patients.
Their clinical efficacy was affected by low immunogenicity of tumor-associated
antigens (TAAs), immunosuppressive tumor-associated microenvironment,
restricted migration due to physiological barriers, and downregulation
of major histocompatibility complex (MHC). − To overcome these limitations and utilize interesting functions
of DCs, cell membranes from mature DCs (primed by ovarian cancer cell
lysate) were coated on interleukin-2 (IL-2)-loaded PLGA nanoparticles
to fabricate mini DCs. These mini DCs
enhanced the activation of the T-cell immune response and effectively
inhibited the progression and metastasis of ovarian cancer.
There are reports of CMC mimics designed from the cell membrane
of AF to target fibroblast-associated cancer cells. This approach
enabled crossing the protective physical barriers built around tumor
cells by cancer-associated fibroblasts for delivering anticancer drugs. Chemically modified nanoparticles are known
for their ability to target and kill cancer-associated fibroblasts,
prevent biological interactions between tumor and stroma, and enhance
chemotherapy. Based on these reports,
CMC mimics were designed using activated fibroblast cell membranes
and semiconducting polymeric nanoparticles and compared their efficacy
to that of 4T1 cancer cell membrane-coated mimics in breast cancer
models. The AF and 4T1-coated mimics
showed superior targeting efficacy for cancer-associated fibroblast
and 4T1 cells, respectively, due to their homologous targeting capabilities.
OMVs have the potential to induce the production of antitumor cytokines
and trigger the antitumor immune response. − Utilizing their mechanism of action, cell membranes of OMVs, and
cancer cells were fused to induce both an immune response and increase
the homotypic ability. The hybrid cell membrane of E. coli DH5α membrane vesicles and B16-F10 cell membrane coating on
hollow polydopamine nanoparticles significantly inhibited melanoma
growth and stimulated DC maturation in lymph nodes. 

## Inflammation and Immune Diseases
Inflammation is a
physiological process that protects the body from harmful stimuli
using immune cells, blood vessels, and molecular mediators and promotes
tissue repair. Chronic or uncontrolled
inflammation causes diseases like atherosclerosis, ischemic diseases
(myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, hindlimb ischemia), rheumatoid
arthritis, and acute liver failure. Modulation of inflammatory responses
to balance the immune homeostasis helps to overcome the disease progression. Some of the inflammation-related cells that
play a vital role in shaping its microenvironment are neutrophils,
NK cells, macrophages, lymphocytes, platelets, and stem cells. These
cells are in their resting state during circulation but are activated
by cytokines or chemokines during inflammation and migrate to the
infected site. , Therefore, designing CMC mimics
using these cells has considerable potential to treat inflammatory
diseases.
Atherosclerosis is a condition caused by the accumulation
of lipids, cholesterol, and fibrous elements in the artery wall that
restricts blood flow. The primary challenge
of this disease is it is asymptomatic until the very late stages.
Surgically stenting the artery is often the preferred intervention
route. However, this can lead to potential side effects such as restenosis
and stent thrombosis, eventually triggering neointimal hyperplasia. , Using a noninvasive strategy to image and monitor plaque development
would be the preferred mode of treatment, as platelets are responsible
for hemostasis in the body and are involved in atherogenesis. − CMC mimics assembled with their cell membranes may provide a viable
alternative to the existing line of treatment. The platelet membrane-coated
PLGA nanoparticles loaded with docetaxel were reported for restenosis
therapy. Their results concluded that
CMC mimics localized better than the drug alone at the plaque site
and inhibited neointima growth. Further, the MRI-based platelet membrane-coated
PLGA nanoparticles localize better at the plaque-forming and atherosclerosis
areas than the PLGA or RBC membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles, providing
crucial information for managing atherosclerosis. The nonthrombogenic and stent-free restenotic therapy was
also treated using platelet membrane-coated nanoclusters of poly(amidoamine)
and polyvalerolactone (PAMAM-PVL). These
dendritic, unimolecular nanoclusters were preloaded with an endothelium-protective
epigenetic inhibitor (JQ1) before coating. Comparing the efficacy
of the JQ1 and rapamycin (endothelium-toxic status quo drug) showed
up to a 60% reduction of neointimal hyperplasia. However, rapamycin
impairs the endothelial recoverage, while JQ1 protects the endothelial
coverage in the inner artery wall. Therefore, these noninvasive platelet
membrane-coated mimics loaded with MRI contrast agents or endothelium-protective
inhibitors or drugs have the potential for live imaging to assess,
prevent, and manage the development of atherosclerosis at an early
stage.
Restricted blood flow in blood vessels resulting in tissue
damage
or dysfunction is a characteristic of ischemic disease. Mesenchymal stem cells are a promising candidate
for their treatment as they can interact effectively with the stromal-derived
factor (SDF) overexpressed in ischemic tissue through their CXCR4. , Researchers have tried to overexpress the CXCR4 receptor on stem
cells to increase its efficiency. For example, they bioengineered
human adipose-derived stem cell (hASCs) membranes to overexpress CXCR4
receptors for coating PLGA nanoparticles loaded with vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF). These particles showed a higher accumulation
at the ischemic site than the hASC-coated mimics. Likewise, a neural stem cell membrane overexpressing CXCR4
was coated on PLGA nanoparticles loaded with glyburide for testing
in ischemia stroke models. Even in the
injured brain, these CMC mimics could effectively cross the blood–brain
barrier for drug delivery. PLGA microparticles loaded with secretomes
were coated with cardiac stem cell membrane for myocardial infarction. Their functional efficacy was comparable to
cardiac stem cell therapy and allowed for surgical transfer intramyocardially.
Acute liver failure causes deterioration of liver function and
requires liver transplantation to cure the patient. Stem cell therapy can be a promising treatment for liver
failure, as MSCs secret anti-inflammatory factors reducing inflammation
and promote healing. Cultured MSCs with
20 μm in diameter are larger than the width of the microcapillaries
of the lung; therefore, intravenously
infused MSCs are short-lived and easily filtered by the lungs and
do not reach the liver. Thus, using
RBC membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles loaded with MSCs regenerative
factors of 200 nm in size resolved this size issue. The small size of the mimics helped them pass through the
lungs and reach the liver, and additionally, the RBC membrane coating
prolonged their circulation time.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
is another autoimmune disorder that leads
to joint damage and disability. Current treatment focuses on targeting
the inflammatory responses such as inhibiting the interleukin (IL)-1
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). , Various chemoattractant are known to promote neutrophil migration
into the joints during RA. Microvesicles
produced by neutrophils can readily enter cartilage and protect joints. Therefore, neutrophil membrane-coated PLGA
nanoparticles were designed. These mimics
neutralized pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β and TNF-α),
suppressed synovial inflammation, targeted cartilage matrix, and protected
chondrocytes against damage. Apart from neutrophils, other cell membrane-like
T cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, and monocytes are present in
the primary stage of RA, working together for its progression. Therefore,
CMC mimics using the membrane of these cells have the potential to
show stealth properties for the treatment of RA. , 

## Infectious Diseases
Pathogens, viruses, and bacteria
cause infectious diseases by interacting and penetrating the host
cell membrane. , A lack of effective drugs, specific
treatment options, and increasing drug-resistant strains caused by
overuse of antibiotics are the main challenges to their treatment.
CMC mimics can target viruses, bacteria, and multidrug-resistance
bacteria and absorb toxins.

## Viral Infection
Infections caused
by viruses are the
most difficult to treat, as viruses do not follow a regular cell division
process for their growth. They replicate by binding to the receptors
on the host cell membrane and infusing genetic material inside them.
CMC mimics can be potential alternatives to neutralizing virus-caused
infections. Many cells are rich in virus binding receptors, and fabricating
CMC mimics from the cell membrane of these cells diverts viruses from
host cells. This mechanism is employed for treating infections caused
by the influenza virus, zika virus, and human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), and recently by COVID-19 ( ).
 The surface of the influenza virus is rich in hemagglutinin,
a
glycoprotein that has a high affinity toward sialic acid residues
present in cells. RBCs membrane is rich
in sialic acid and glycoproteins. Designing CMC mimics using their
cell membrane can favorably interact with the influenza virus shown
by RBC membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles. These mimics bind efficiently with the influenza virus and form
clusters that can be readily isolated in vitro by
magnetic extraction.
COVID-19 is a viral infection caused by
severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The spike protein (S) of SARS-CoV-2
consists of S1 and S2 subunits. The S1 subunit engages human angiotensin-converting
enzyme II (ACE2) for binding with the host cells, and the S2 subunit
facilitates the entry and fusion of the virus within the host cells.
Preclinical and clinical studies report that monoclonal antibodies
targeting interleukin 6 (IL-6) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) can prevent the infection caused by SARS-CoV-2. , Based on these reports, the human embryonic kidney 293T cell membrane
genetically engineered to express ACE2 receptor and monocyte THP-1
cell membrane with abundant cytokine binding receptors were combined
to form vesicles. These fused vesicles
effectively bind and neutralize IL-6 and GM-CSF, suppressing the immune
disorders and lung injury in the acute pneumonia mouse model. The
ACE2 receptor on SARS-CoV-2 also binds to CD147 expressed on the host
cells, human alveolar epithelial type II cells, and human macrophages. , PLGA nanoparticles coated with their cell membrane effectively target
SARS-CoV-2. Overall epithelial and macrophage-based
CMC mimics are preferable for inhibition and neutralization of SARS-CoV-2
( ).
Zika virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus, transmitted by Aedes
mosquitos (Aedes albopictus, Aedes aegypti). , They can easily pass physiological barriers
like the brain–blood barrier and placental–blood barrier,
causing fetal microcephaly and other neurological complications. , In general, the nanoparticles cannot enter the immune-privileged
sites. Coating gelatin-nanoparticles
with the Aedes albopictus (C6/36) cell membrane circumvents
this limitation. These CMC mimics divert
the Zika virus away from the fetal brain, suppress fetal microcephaly
in pregnant mice, negate virus-induced degenerative changes, prevent
replication, and improve overall survival rate.
HIV infects
leukocytes via interaction between
glycoproteins on its surface (gp120) and cluster of differentiation
4 (CD4) receptor, C–C chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5), or
CXCR4 coreceptors on CD4+ T cells. CD4+ T-cell membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles
effectively treated two distinct HIV strains: X4 and R5. These mimics neutralized the strains and prevented
the HIV-1 from binding to and entering the healthy CD4+ T cells.

## Bacterial Infection
Bacteria show
both positive and
negative impacts on the human body. While probiotic bacteria aid the
digestive process, other bacterial strains (Gram-positive: S. aureus and Gram-negative: E. coli, K. pneumonia) cause mild to severe infections and host cell death. Additionally,
excessive use of antibiotics results in drug-resistant bacterial strains
(e.g., methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), carbapenem-resistant K. pneumonia (CRKP)) in the human body, posing additional therapeutic challenges.
This section highlights antimicrobial activity and toxin neutralization
using bacterial- and cell membrane-coated mimics.
The α-toxins
are a class of pore-forming toxins secreted by bacteria (E.
coli, S. aureus, MRSA, etc.) that create
pores in the host cell membrane, causing cell lysis. RBCs and platelets express several surface markers (e.g., glycophorin A in RBCs, toll-like receptors in platelets )
that readily interact with such pathogens. Using these receptors,
RBC membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles sequestered α-toxins and platelet membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticles delivered vancomycin to MRSA252. Platelet membrane-coated
particles loaded with vancomycin (PNP-Vanc) showed superior efficacy,
specificity, and retention due to the presence of platelet-specific
serine-rich (SraP) adhesion sites on MRSA252. Similarly, RBC membrane-coated vancomycin-loaded redox
responsive hydrogels absorbed α-toxins and killed MRSA. The intracellular reducing environment of the
bacteria triggered vancomycin release from the hydrogels. Other examples
include acoustic nanorobots of gold nanorods coated with the hybrid
membrane (platelet and RBC). These fuel-free nanorobots accelerated
toxin neutralization and removal of bacteria (MRSA USA300). RBC membrane coating on carbon nanotubes-based
field transistors resulted in rapid detection of several pore-forming
toxins. These biomimetic nanosensors could quantitatively detect live
pathogens without involving traditional colony-counting methods. 
Homotypic targeting utilizes the membrane
of the targeted pathogen
for specificity. For example, bovine serum albumin nanoparticles coated
with CRKP bacterial membranes enhanced the immune response by secreting
cytokines from macrophages and activating dendritic cells. Similarly, S. aureus membrane-coated
PLGA nanoparticles showed superior targeting efficacy toward S. aureus-infected macrophages. These mimics actively targeted all organs except the liver and showed
improved efficacy in kidneys and lungs prone to a higher risk of S. aureus infections. Similarly, E. coli membrane-coated gold nanoparticles coated with E. coli membrane removed E. coli bacterial infection. They also activated dendritic cells in lymph
nodes and increased the production of IFN-γ and IL-17, but not
IL-4 generating type 1 T-helper cell (Th1) and type 17 T-helper cell
(Th17)-based cell responses against bacterial infections.

## Current Challenges
Ingraining complex biological functionalities
in delivery systems
is a significant outcome of coating with cell membranes that differentiates
them from synthetic mimics. Throughout this review, we have emphasized
why these CMC mimics utilizing surface functional properties of cells
are better suited for therapeutic applications over their synthetic
counterparts. Thus far, fabrication and in vitro and in vivo evaluation studies on CMC mimics are limited to
the lab setting. However, the actual therapeutic dose of materials
required and conditions for clinical studies are higher and stringent.
In this context, it is vital to have standardized protocols and well-established
characterization tools for scale-up and GMP production of these mimics
to maintain quality and reduce batch-to-batch variability. Herein,
we discuss some of the challenges associated with their clinical translation.(1)Large-scale expansion:
Cell membrane
isolation requires at least a 100 million cells that maintain their
phenotype, purity, and quality while passaging. A standardized and
well-established cell culture protocol specific to each cell type
is essential for large-scale production. In this regard, one can benefit
from the existing well-established biomanufacturing platforms using
3D bioreactors (like stirred-tanked bioreactor, WAVE bioreactor, etc.) for the ultralarge scale-up of stem cells, T cells,
and dendritic cells. − 
(2)Cell membrane yield:
Lab-scale procedures
for cell membrane isolation are multistep and specific to each cell
type and may result in loss of sample, functional receptors, and nuclear/mitochondrial/cytosol
contamination. Therefore, there is a requirement for an established
protocol with minimal manual steps for cell membrane isolation with
high yield and purity for various cells, especially for nucleus-containing
cells.
(3)Assembly of
CMC mimics: In CMC assembly,
it is vital to control the cell membrane layers coated onto each template
while achieving a homogeneous coating. The physiological effects of
differences in membrane layers on CMC mimics remain unexplored. Using
automated technology to improve the coating efficiency and avoid uneven
coating can be a viable alternative. For example, assembly of RBC-coated
CMC mimics using the microfluidic electroporation technique resulted
in uniform-sized mimics. 
(4)Long-term storage: Optimizing long-term
storage conditions and membrane stability of CMC mimics are critical
to improve their shelf life. Post-lyophilization isolated cell membranes
can be stored in cold conditions and resuspended in buffers before
use. However, shelf life studies to determine the stability and functional
efficacy of isolated cell membranes remain unexplored.
(5)Quantitative evaluation of CMC mimics:
An in-depth quantitative characterization of CMC mimics is essential
to avoid batch-to-batch variability in their biological efficacy.
These include the number of templates coated evenly with and without
the cell membrane and the amount of transmembrane protein translocated
on the mimics in the correct orientation.
(6)Quality control: A standard quality
control criteria must be defined to ensure that the cell membranes
are free of contamination like viruses, bacteria, or pyrogens. Additionally,
removal of denatured proteins from the CMC mimics avoids potential
immune responses to endogenous antigens. Also, every assembly step
(isolation of cell membrane, synthesis of template, fabrication of
CMC mimics) should be carried out under sterile conditions to avoid
chemical and biological contamination and maintain GMP requirements.
(7)Unwanted proteins on the
CMC mimics:
There are several proteins present on the cell membrane. Some are
accountable for effective targeting and evading immune responses,
and others are involved in interacting with the host environment affecting
biodistribution, immune response, and toxicity profile. Optimizing
protocols to selectively retain proteins of interest and remove unwanted
proteins from the cell membrane can enhance the CMC performance and
remains to explore.
(8)Surface modification of cell membrane:
Numerous membrane modification strategies are known, but not all of
them offer proper orientation, linkage strength, and conserve membrane
protein functionality. For example, noncovalent modifications protect
the membrane protein functionality, but the interactions are weaker
in linkage strength. Conversely, covalent
bonding with a template is robust, but there is a risk of altering
the natural membrane functionality and compromising the protein profiles.
Changes in the ζ potential only primary measure the membrane
modification, creating a necessitous
gap in qualitative and quantitative evaluation techniques. It is also
complicated to observe small-molecule conjugation on the cell membrane
and evaluate the overall impairment.
(9)Autologous cells: For designing CMC
mimics, most studies have utilized immortal cell lines. However, certain
cell types (like leukocytes) can be heterogeneous and induce hemolysis
during a blood transfusion. In such cases, autologous cells are the
most suitable option, but would require screening of the donors to
prevent the use of allogeneic cells as membrane sources.

## Author Contributions
† These authors contributed equally.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This publication has emanated from research conducted
in part by a grant from Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) and the European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) under grant number 13/RC/2073_P2.
K.V.K. has received funding from Science Foundation of Ireland (SFI)
Industry Fellowship under grant number 19/IFA/7447. The authors would
also like to acknowledge the editorial assistance of Dr. Raghvendra
Bohara and Mr. Anthony Sloan and the graphic design support of Mr
Maciek Dozkyk.

## Vocabulary
Biointerfacepoint of interaction
between nano/microparticles and the surrounding cells
personalized medicinemodifying disease treatment to suit the patient’s genetic
profile
autologous therapyutilizing patient-derived cells for disease treatment
tumor microenvironmentcellular environment surrounding tumors consisting
of immune cells, blood vessels, and extracellular matrix that facilitates
their growth
receptorproteins present on the cell surface that binds selectively
to a ligand to transmit signals.