pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC8715676PMC8715676.187156768715676NIHMS17628483487928410.1016/j.celrep.2021.110075NIHMS1762848NIHPA17628481ArticleHypothalamic steroid receptor coactivator-2 regulates adaptations to fasting and overnutrition
YangYongjie HeYanlin LiuHailan ZhouWenjun WangChunmei XuPingwen CaiXing LiuHesong YuKaifan PeiZhou HyseniIlirjana FukudaMakoto TongQingchun XuJianming SunZheng O’MalleyBert W. XuYong 1Children’s Nutrition Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA2Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA3Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA4Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA5Present address: Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Brain Glycemic and Metabolism Control Department, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70808, USA6Present address: Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA7Present address: State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, Yunnan, China8Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Y.Y. was involved in experimental design and most procedures, data acquisition, and analyses and writing the manuscript. Y.H. assisted in electrophysiological recordings, and Hailan Liu helped with histology studies. C.W. and W.Z. helped with the behavioral experiments. P.X., X.C., Hesong Liu, K.Y., Z.P., I.H., and J.X. assisted in production of experimental mice, surgical procedures, and blinded evaluation of mouse behaviors. Z.S., M.F., Q.T., and B.W.O. were involved in study design and editing the manuscript. Y.Y. and Y.X. are the guarantors of this work and, as such, had full access to all the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
*Correspondence: yongjiey@bcm.edu (Y.Y.), yongx@bcm.edu (Y.X.)07122021371039670711007511007521122021291220212912202111062024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
The neuroendocrine system coordinates metabolic and behavioral adaptations to fasting, including reducing energy expenditure, promoting counterregulation, and suppressing satiation and anxiety to engage refeeding. Here, we show that steroid receptor coactivator-2 (SRC-2) in pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons is a key regulator of all these responses to fasting. POMC-specific deletion of SRC-2 enhances the basal excitability of POMC neurons; mutant mice fail to efficiently suppress energy expenditure during food deprivation. SRC-2 deficiency blunts electric responses of POMC neurons to glucose fluctuations, causing impaired counterregulation. When food becomes available, these mutant mice show insufficient refeeding associated with enhanced satiation and discoordination of anxiety and food-seeking behavior. SRC-2 coactivates Forkhead box protein O1 (FoxO1) to suppress POMC gene expression. POMC-specific deletion of SRC-2 protects mice from weight gain induced by an obesogenic diet feeding and/or FoxO1 overexpression. Collectively, we identify SRC-2 as a key molecule that coordinates multifaceted adaptive responses to food shortage.

## In brief
Yang et al. demonstrate that SRC-2 in POMC neurons coordinates multifaceted adaptive responses to food shortage, including reducing energy expenditure, promoting counterregulation and suppressing satiation and anxiety to engage refeeding. These effects are mediated by SRC-2 functions to regulate POMC gene expression and modulate POMC neuron activities.

## Graphical Abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
During the course of evolution, animals (including humans) are often challenged by periods of food shortage. Upon food deprivation, the neuroendocrine system coordinates enormous metabolic and behavioral adaptations to help ensure animal’s survival ( ). These include suppression of energy expenditure to preserve energy ( ), prevention of severe hypoglycemia to keep the brain nourished and alert ( ), reducing anxiety and fear to facilitate searching for food that may be associated with danger ( ; ; ; ), and suppression of satiation to ensure efficient refeeding when food becomes available again ( ).
The hypothalamus integrates information regarding the body’s nutritional status and orchestrates endocrine and behavioral responses to maintain energy homeostasis ( ; ; ). In particular, pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons in the arcuate nucleus of hypothalamus (ARH) have been identified as the first-order neurons that respond to multiple hormonal and nutritional signals to regulate energy and glucose metabolism ( ; ; ). Genetic ablation of POMC neurons in the ARH leads to hyperphagia and obesity in mice ( ; ). POMC gene deficiency causes massive obesity in mice ( ) and in humans ( ; ; ). On the other hand, hyperactivity of ARH POMC neurons results in hypophagia and body weight loss ( ). These findings indicate that normal POMC gene expression and POMC neuron activity are fundamentally required to maintain normal energy balance. Importantly, the excitability of POMC neurons can be inhibited by food deprivation ( ); the expression of the POMC gene itself is dramatically suppressed by fasting ( ; ). However, the roles of POMC neurons in coping with food deprivation are not fully understood.
Steroid receptor coactivator-2 (SRC-2) belongs to a family of nuclear receptor coactivators that regulate the ability of nuclear receptors and transcription factors to modulate target gene expression ( ; ). SRC-2 mediates energy adaptations through its actions in various peripheral tissues, e.g., liver ( , ), fat ( ), and muscle ( ). In the brain, SRC-2 is expressed in the ARH, ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH), medial preoptic area, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, supraoptic nucleus, and suprachiasmatic nucleus ( ), including hypothalamic neurons expressing progesterone receptors ( ). However, SRC-2’s functions in the brain are not clear. In the present study, we examined the functions of SRC-2 in POMC neurons in various metabolic and behavioral adaptations during the fasting-refeeding transition, delineated mechanisms by which SRC-2 regulates POMC neuron activity and POMC gene expression, and explored the roles of SRC-2 in the regulation of energy balance in the face of overnutrition challenge.

## RESULTS

## SRC-2 in POMC neurons suppresses energy expenditure during fasting
We found that abundant SRC-2 is expressed by a number of neural subpopulations within the ARH and VMH, including neurons expressing POMC, Agouti-related peptide (AgRP), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), or estrogen receptor-α ( and – ). The present study focused on the physiological functions of SRC-2 in POMC neurons. To this end, we generated pomcSRC-2-knockout (KO) mice lacking SRC-2 selectively in POMC neurons ( , , and ). When fed regular chow ad libitum, pomcSRC-2-KO mice displayed comparable body weight and fat or lean mass as their control littermates ( and ). Interestingly, after a 24-h fasting, pomcSRC-2-KO mice lost significantly more body weight and fat storage than controls ( , , and ). We then adapted a cohort of body-weight-matched mice into the Comprehensive Laboratory Animal Monitoring System (CLAMS) metabolic cages and subjected them to a 3-day protocol with 24-h feed ad libitum, 24-h fast, and 24-h refeed. Although control mice responded to fasting with significant reductions in energy expenditure, this fasting-induced suppression in energy expenditure was significantly attenuated in pomcSRC-2-KO mice ( , , and ). Energy expenditure during the ad libitum feeding and refeeding conditions was not different between the two genotypes ( , , and ). Thus, these results indicate that loss of SRC-2 in POMC neurons impaired animal’s capability to suppress energy expenditure during food deprivation, which accounted for the bigger body weight loss observed in these mice.
To reveal the cellular mechanisms by which SRC-2 in POMC neurons regulates energy balance, we then compared the electrophysiological properties of POMC neurons (labeled by the POMC-EGFP allele; ) in fasted control versus pomcSRC-2-KO mice. We found that loss of SRC-2 significantly enhanced the basal firing rate of POMC neurons without alterations in the resting membrane potential ( – ). The enhanced POMC firing activity may account for the impairments in energy expenditure suppression during fasting. Further, we found that the amplitude, but not the frequency, of the miniature inhibitory post-synaptic currents (mIPSCs) was significantly reduced in POMC neurons from pomcSRC-2-KO mice compared to controls ( – ). Consistently, the expression of multiple subunits of the GABAA receptor was significantly lower in POMC neurons lacking SRC-2 than in controls ( ). Thus, we suggest that SRC-2 maintains the responsiveness of POMC neurons to inhibitory GABAergic inputs via cell-autonomous regulations on the GABAA receptor expression.

## SRC-2 in POMC neurons facilitates counterregulatory response
Consistent with previous reports ( ; ; ), we found that 57.69% of POMC neurons in control mice were glucose-excited (GE) neurons (excited by high glucose but inhibited by low glucose), while 21.15% of POMC neurons were glucose-inhibited (GI) neurons (inhibited by high glucose but excited by low glucose; and ). The percentage of GI-POMC neurons was not affected in pomcSRC-2-KO mice (pomcSRC-2-KO mice: 20.00% versus control: 21.15%; p = 0.90 in χ2 test), and their sensitivity (as demonstrated by changes in firing rate and resting membrane potential in response to low glucose) was not altered ( and ). On the other hand, the percentage of GE-POMC neurons was significantly reduced in pomcSRC-2-KO mice (pomcSRC-2-KO mice: 37.14% versus control: 57.69%; p < 0.05 in χ2 test; and ). In other words, deletion of SRC-2 diminished the GE property of about 20% of POMC neurons. Even for those that remained to be GE-POMC neurons in pomcSRC-2-KO mice, their sensitivity was significantly reduced compared to GE-POMC neurons in control mice ( and ). ATP-sensitive potassium channel (KATP) has been reported to mediate the glucose-sensing function of POMC neurons ( ; ). Consistently, we found that, in control mice, pharmacological blockade of the KATP channel, by tolbutamide, abolished the glucose-sensing properties of GE-POMC neurons ( and ). Further, we observed that lower glucose triggered robust KATP currents in GE-POMC neurons from control mice, but this effect was significantly blunted in GE-POMC neurons from pomcSRC-2-KO mice ( and ). Consistently, the expression of all three subunits of the KATP channel was significantly reduced in GE-POMC neurons lacking SRC-2 ( ). These results indicate that SRC-2 is required to maintain the glucose-sensing properties of GE-POMC neurons via regulations on the expression of the KATP channel.
Impaired glucose-sensing properties of POMC neurons have been reported to cause whole-body glucose dysregulations ( ; ; ). Here, we found that administration of 2-DG (2-Deoxy-D-Glucose), which triggers glucopenia and mimics fasting, induced significant glucose elevations in control mice, but this effect was blunted in pomcSRC-2-KO mice ( and ). We then performed hyperinsulinemic-hypoglycemic clamp in a cohort of body-weight-matched control and pomcSRC-2-KO littermates ( ). When blood glucose was clamped at 50 mg/dL, pomcSRC-2-KO mice required significantly higher glucose infusion to maintain this hypoglycemic level ( and ), indicating an impaired counterregulatory response. Consistently, the plasma level of glucagon, a major counterregulatory hormone, was significantly lower in pomcSRC-2-KO mice than in controls ( ), although the corticosterone level was not significantly different ( ). On the other hand, pomcSRC-2-KO mice and controls showed similar glucose clearance in response to a glucose bolus challenge ( ). Thus, we suggest that SRC-2 in POMC neurons, although playing a minor role in hyperglycemic conditions, is essential for the counterregulatory response, a defensive mechanism to prevent severe hypoglycemia.

## SRC-2 in POMC neurons promotes refeeding
Food intake of pomcSRC-2-KO mice, when fed chow ad libitum, was comparable to that of controls, and there was no alteration in the circadian pattern of feeding ( – ). However, the 4-h refeeding (after a 24-h fasting) was significantly lower in pomcSRC-2-KO mice than in control mice ( and ). Interestingly, after a 24-h fasting, control mice showed significantly enhanced maximal meal size and meal duration in the refeeding phase compared to the ad libitum feeding phase; on the other hand, these adaptations in feeding pattern were absent in pomcSRC-2-KO mice ( and ). These results indicate that, although SRC-2 in POMC neurons plays a minor role in controlling food intake when fed ad libitum, it is required to enhance refeeding after food deprivation presumably by suppressing satiation.
Other important adaptations during refeeding include changes in mood that promote animals to search for food that is often associated with danger ( ; ; ; ; ). In particular, hunger can suppress anxiety, which facilitates animal’s food-seeking behavior ( ; ). In an elevated plus maze test ( ), mice avoid the open arms, which are associated with potential risks and therefore promote anxiety. Interestingly, we found that fasted control mice spent significantly more time in the open arms when chow pellets were present compared to empty open arms ( – ), indicating that hungry mice can overcome anxiety to pursue food. Strikingly, this behavioral adaptation was abolished in fasted pomcSRC-2-KO mice ( – ). Similarly, mice avoid the anxiogenic center region in the open-field test ( ). Although the presence of chow pellets in the center significantly increased time spent in the center by fasted control mice, this behavioral adaptation was abolished in fasted pomcSRC-2-KO mice ( – ). Importantly, fasted control and pomcSRC-2-KO mice showed comparable anxiety-like behaviors when there was no chow pellet available in the anxiogenic zones ( – ). These results indicate that SRC-2 in POMC neurons does not regulate anxiety per se but rather facilitates animal’s mood adaptations to seek for food that is associated with potential danger.

## SRC-2 coactivates FoxO1 transcriptional activity to regulate gene expression
In cultured cells, we found that SRC-2 strongly interacts with Forkhead box protein O1 (FoxO1) ( ). Given that FoxO1 directly suppresses POMC expression ( ), we then tested whether SRC-2 regulates FoxO1’s transcriptional activity on POMC expression. It is known that fasting triggers the translocation of FoxO1 from the cytosol to the nucleus ( ; ; ). Thus, we first demonstrated that FoxO1 was primarily distributed in the cytosol of cells incubated in 10% serum (mimicking the “fed” condition), although incubation with 2% serum (stripped with charcoal) led to significant nuclear translocation of FoxO1 in these cells, which resembles the “fasted” condition ( ). Interestingly, using a POMC-luciferase assay, we found that fasted cells showed significantly lower POMC expression than fed cells, and overexpression of SRC-2 in fasted cells further decreased POMC expression ( ). Importantly, SRC-2 overexpression did not alter POMC expression in fed cells ( ), suggesting that nuclear FoxO1 is required for the suppressing effects of SRC-2 on POMC expression. Further supporting this notion, we showed that FoxO1 knockdown with small interfering RNA (siRNA) blocked the effects of SRC-2 on POMC expression in fasted cells ( and ). Consistent with these in vitro observations, we detected the interaction between endogenous SRC-2 and FoxO1 in the mouse hypothalamus and further found that this interaction was significantly enhanced in fasted mice compared to mice fed ad libitum ( ). We then examined the effects of insulin, leptin, or cold exposure on this interaction between hypothalamic SRC-2 and FoxO1 but failed to detect significant changes ( – ). Importantly, deletion of SRC-2 from POMC neurons significantly enhanced POMC expression in fasted mice ( ). Collectively, these results suggest that SRC-2 interacts with FoxO1 to facilitate its suppressing effects on POMC gene expression.
SRC-2 is known to interact with estrogen receptor α (ERα) and androgen receptors (ARs) to regulate gene expression ( ). Here, we found that overexpression of SRC-2 in 10% serum-incubated cells had no effect on POMC luciferase activity, either in the absence or in the presence of ERα/17β-estradiol (E2) or AR/dihydrotestosterone (DHT), suggesting that SRC-2’s interactions with ERα or with ARs do not influence POMC expression ( and ). We also used luciferase assays to examine the effects of SRC-2 on the transcription of the GABAA receptor subunits and KATP channel subunits in cultured cells. We found that overexpression of SRC-2 significantly increased transcription of all these tested subunits ( – ). Importantly, knockdown of FoxO1 attenuated SRC-2’s transactivity on the majority of these subunits except for Kcnj8 ( – ). Thus, our results suggest that the interactions between SRC-2 and FoxO1 regulate the expression of multiple genes.

## SRC-2 in POMC neurons mediates FoxO1’s orexigenic effects during overnutrition
We found that high fat-diet (HFD) feeding can enhance the hypothalamic SRC-2/FoxO1 interaction ( ). To examine the role of SRC-2 in HFD-induced obesity, we fed pomcSRC-2-KO mice and their control littermates with HFD ad libitum. During the 7-week HFD feeding, pomcSRC-2-KO mice gained significantly less body weight and fat mass compared to control mice ( and ), associated with a significant decrease in HFD intake ( ). Given the known roles of FoxO1 in POMC neurons in mediating diet-induced obesity ( ; ) and the functional interaction of SRC-2 and FoxO1, we postulated that SRC-2 coactivates FoxO1 in POMC neurons to promote body weight gain during HFD feeding. To test this, we constructed an AAV-FLEX-FoxO1AAA-GFP virus, which expresses a constitutively active nuclear mutant FoxO1AAA (Thr24/Ser256/Ser319→alanine; ( ) in a Cre-dependent manner ( ). Stereotaxic injections of this AAV vector into the ARH (both sides) of POMC-Cre mice resulted in overexpression of FoxO1AAA selectively in POMC neurons ( ). This FoxO1AAA overexpression caused significant increases in body weight gain, fat mass, and food intake in HFD-fed POMC-Cre mice, compared to wild-type (WT) littermates receiving the same AAV injections ( – ). Importantly, these FoxO1AAA-induced obese and hyperphagic phenotypes were partially blunted in pomcSRC-2-KO mice ( – ), demonstrating that SRC-2 in POMC neurons facilitates orexigenic functions of FoxO1.

## DISCUSSION
A series of coordinated responses are crucial for animals to survive periods of scarce food. When food is not available, animals need to suppress energy expenditure, which preserves energy storage; animals also need to promote counterregulatory responses in order to avoid severe hypoglycemia. Meanwhile, animals need to overcome anxiety and fear to seek for food that is often associated with danger ( ; ; ; ). Once the food is found, animals need to engage in efficient refeeding to prepare for the next potential fasting. Interestingly, we found that SRC-2 in POMC neurons is required for all these responses during the fasting-refeeding transition.
In response to food deprivation, mice lacking SRC-2 in POMC neurons are unable to effectively suppress energy expenditure. Importantly, the mutant mice lost more body weight and fat storage after food deprivation, indicating that the small deficits in suppressing energy expenditure in these mice are sufficient to result in significant damage to energy balance. In addition, the loss of SRC-2 in POMC neurons also impairs counterregulatory responses and causes glucose dysregulations, especially during the hypoglycemic challenge. These deficits would render major disadvantages to animals’ survival if they lived in a real wild environment with frequent periods of fasting. When food becomes available, these mutant mice show insufficient refeeding associated with enhanced satiation and discoordination of anxiety and food-seeking behavior. Interestingly, all these deficits are not apparent when mice are fed ad libitum. Thus, SRC-2 is an essential gene to help animals survive the scarcity of food.
As a transcriptional co-activator, SRC-2 functions primarily through regulations on gene expression. One key gene in POMC neurons that is regulated by SRC-2 is the POMC gene itself. We observed increased POMC mRNA levels in mice lacking SRC-2 in POMC neurons. Consistently, SRC-2 overexpression can inhibit POMC transcription in cultured cells. In addition, we provided several pieces of evidence to suggest that SRC-2 regulates POMC gene expression through coactivating FoxO1’s suppressing effects on the POMC promoter. First, we showed that SRC-2 and FoxO1 form a protein-protein complex in cells and in the mouse hypothalamus. Second, SRC-2 can suppress POMC expression only in fasted cells where FoxO1 exists in the nucleus, but these effects are not present in fed cells with FoxO1 primarily localized in the cytosol. Further, SRC-2’s inhibitory effects on POMC expression are abolished by FoxO1 knockdown. Importantly, we showed that POMC-specific overexpression of a constitutively active nuclear mutant FoxO1AAA increases body weight and food intake in mice, but these responses are blunted in mice lacking SRC-2 in POMC neurons. Together, these observations support a model that SRC-2 coactivates the suppressing effects of FoxO1 on POMC expression. Notably, loss of FoxO1 in POMC neurons results in similar impairment in fasting-induced refeeding ( ), as we observed in mice lacking SRC-2 in POMC neurons, further highlighting an important role of SRC-2/FoxO1 signaling in physiological responses during the fasting-refeeding transition. However, POMC-specific deletion of FoxO1 also decreases food intake and body weight when mice are fed chow ad libitum ( ), phenotypes that are not recapitulated by SRC-2 deficiency. Thus, we suggest that, although SRC-2 is required for a portion of FoxO1 functions, FoxO1 likely also recruits other coactivators for other functions.
We also observed that loss of SRC-2 decreases the expression of multiple subunits of the GABAA receptor in POMC neurons. Consistently, POMC neurons in mutant mice show decreased mIPSC amplitude, associated with increased basal firing rate. In addition, glucose-sensing properties of GE-POMC neurons are impaired in mutant mice, presumably due to reduced expression of the KATP subunits. Thus, we suggest that SRC-2 regulates basal activity of POMC neurons and their response to glucose fluctuations through influencing the expression of the GABAA receptor and KATP subunits. Notably, the glucose-sensing properties of GI-POMC neurons are not affected by SRC-2 deletion, suggesting that different ionic mechanisms likely exist in GI neurons to regulate their responses to glucose fluctuations ( ; ), which are not influenced by SRC-2 transcriptional coactivity. Interestingly, our data indicate that SRC-2 stimulates the expression of many of these GABAA receptor and KATP channel subunits in a FoxO1-dependent manner. The expression of one KATP subunit, Kcnj8, can be enhanced by SRC-2 via a FoxO1-independent mechanism, suggesting that SRC-2 may coactivate other transcription factors for such an effect.
It is interesting to note that SRC-2 in other metabolic tissues has been shown to facilitate various adaptive responses to counteract food deprivation. For example, during fasting-induced refeeding, SRC-2 in the liver increases bile acid secretion in the gut; this SRC-2-mediated bile acid secretion is essential to promote energy intake through increasing fat absorption from the gut without increasing feeding per se ( ). Hepatic SRC-2 is also shown to promote gluconeogenesis during food deprivation ( ), which also contributes to the prevention of severe hypoglycemia. Further, SRC-2 in brown adipose tissue inhibits functions of PPARγ (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor) and PGC1α (PPAR gamma coactivator 1) and therefore suppresses thermogenesis and energy expenditure ( ). Similarly, SRC-2 in the muscle functions to suppress energy expenditure via inhibiting mitochondrial uncoupling in muscle cells ( ). These observations from the peripheral tissues, together with our findings in the hypothalamus, support a model where SRC-2 in various tissues functions synergistically, although via different biological processes and molecular mechanisms, to inhibit energy expenditure and to promote energy intake and ultimately ensures survival during periods of food scarcity. Although many genes are essential for survival during food shortage over evolutionary time ( ), their energy-preserving functions may become detrimental in the face of excess nutrition that is more common in the modern environment. Supporting this notion, we found that mice lacking SRC-2 in POMC neurons mice were partially protected from HFD-induced obesity, associated with decreased HFD intake.
In summary, we showed that SRC-2 in POMC neurons is the key regulator of many metabolic and neurobehavioral adaptations essential for animals to survive food deprivation. These include suppression of energy expenditure and promotion of counterregulatory responses during fasting. When food becomes available, SRC-2 suppresses satiation and anxiety, allowing animals to refeed efficiently. Interestingly, these SRC-2 functions become detrimental in mice challenged with an obesogenic diet and promote obesity development. At the mechanistic level, we showed that SRC-2 controls the excitability of POMC neurons and their electric responses to glucose fluctuations. Further, SRC-2 coactivates FoxO1 to regulate the expression of multiple genes. Collectively, our results identified hypothalamic SRC-2 as a key molecule that coordinates multifaceted adaptive responses to food shortage and promotes body weight gain in the context of overnutrition.

## Limitations of the study
SRC-2 is known to coactivate receptors of gonadal hormones, including ERα and ARs ( ). Indeed, we observed a robust co-localization of SRC-2 and ERα in the ARH and VMH. However, we failed to observe a functional interaction of SRC-2 and ERα or ARs to regulate POMC gene expression in an in vitro assay. In addition, most of the animal experiments were conducted in male mice only. Thus, our results could not exclude the possibility that SRC-2 proteins, e.g., those co-expressed by ERα neurons in the ARH and VMH, may influence signaling of gonadal hormones to regulate energy balance ( ; ). Another limitation of the study is the incomplete deletion of SRC-2 in a small portion of POMC neurons, which may have confounded the phenotypic outcome in pomcSRC-2-KO mice. In addition, because POMC-Cre induces DNA recombination during early development ( ), we could not exclude the potential contributions of altered POMC neuron development to the phenotypes we observed in these mutant mice.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Dr. Yong Xu (yongx@bcm.edu) is the lead contact of this work.

## Materials availability
Animal models and viral vectors generated in this work will be made available upon request under MTAs.

## Data and code availability
All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request. This paper does not report original code. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
We crossed POMC-Cre transgenic mice ( ) and SRC-2lox/lox mice ( ). This cross produced pomcSRC-2-KO mice (those that are homozygous for SRC-2lox/lox and also carry the POMC-Cre transgene) and control mice (those that are homozygous for SRC-2lox/lox but do not carry the POMC-Cre transgene). These littermates were used to characterize the metabolic profile. For histology validation, electrophysiological recordings, and single neuron qRT-PCR, we crossed the POMC-eGFP mouse allele ( ) onto pomcSRC-2-KO and control mice to label mature POMC neurons with GFP. In addition, we crossed the Rosa26-LSL-tdTOMATO mouse allele ( ) onto POMC-Cre (control) and pomc-SRC-2-KO mice to label all POMC-lineage neurons for histology validation. Further, we crossed the Rosa26-LSL-tdTOMATO mouse allele onto AgRP-IRES-Cre ( ) to label AgRP neurons for histology; ERα-Zs-Green mice ( ) were also used to label ERα-expressing neurons. Mice were housed in a temperature-controlled environment in groups of two to five at 22°C-24°C using a 12 hr light/12 hr dark cycle. The mice were fed standard chow (6.5% fat, #2920, Harlan-Teklad, Madison, WI) or a high fat-diet (HFD, 60% fat, #D12492, Research Diets). Water was provided ad libitum.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Histological analysis of SRC-2 expression in hypothalamic neurons
To examine the expression of SRC-2 in AgRP and ERα neurons, AgRP-IRES-Cre/Rosa26-LSL-tdTOMATO mice and ERα-ZsGreen mice were transcardially perfused with saline, followed by 10% formalin. The brain sections were cut at 25 μm and collected into five consecutive series. One series of the sections were blocked with 3% normal donkey serum for 1.5 hours, incubated with rabbit anti-SRC-2 antibody (1:1,000; #ab10491, Abcam, Boston, MA) on shaker at 4°C for overnight, followed by the donkey anti-rabbit AlexaFluor 488 (1:500; #A21206, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) or donkey anti-rabbit AlexaFluor 594 (1:500; #A21207, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) for 2 hours. Slides were coverslipped and analyzed using a Leica 5500 OptiGrid fluorescence microscope. To check the co-expression of SRC-2 and TH in the ARH, wild-type mice were perfused and sectioned. The brain sections were blocked with 3% normal goat serum for 1.5 hours, then incubated with rabbit anti-SRC-2 antibody (1:1,000; #ab10491, Abcam, Boston, MA) and chicken anti-TH antibody (1:2,000; #ab76442, Abcam, Boston, MA) on shaker at 4°C for overnight, followed by the donkey anti-rabbit AlexaFluor 488 (1:500; #A21206, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) and goat anti-chicken AlexaFluor 594 (1:500; #A11042, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) for 2 hours. Slides were coverslipped and analyzed using the Leica 5500 OptiGrid fluorescence microscope.

## Validation of SRC-2 deletion in mature POMC neurons
POMC-eGFP mice and pomcSRC-2-KO/POMC-eGFP mice were perfused at 9 weeks of age, and therefore GFP-labeled neurons were identified as mature POMC neurons at this age. Brain sections were cut at 25 μm (1:5 series) and subjected to dual immunofluorescent staining for GFP and SRC-2. Briefly, the sections were incubated in the primary rabbit anti-SRC-2 antibody (1:1000; #A300–345A, Bethyl Laboratories, Inc., Montgomery, TX) overnight, followed by donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594 (1:500; #A21207, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) for 1.5 hr. Then, the sections were incubated in primary chicken anti-GFP antibody (1:5000; #GFP-1020, Aves Labs, Inc., Tigard, OR) overnight, followed by the goat anti-chicken Alexa Fluor 488 (1:500; #A11039, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) for 1.5 hr. Slides were coverslipped and analyzed using the Leica 5500 OptiGrid fluorescence microscope. As shown in , while SRC-2 was co-expressed by the majority of GFP-labeled neurons in control mice, it was absent in these mature POMC neurons in pomcSRC-2-KO mice.
Since POMC-Cre may also cause DNA recombination in broad populations of neurons during early development ( , ), we compared the expression of SRC-2 in tdTOMATO-labeled POMC-lineage neurons in POMC-Cre/Rosa26-LSL-tdTOMATO (control) and pomc-SRC-2-KO/Rosa26-LSL-tdTOMATO mice. Similarly, these mice (9 weeks of age) were perfused and fixed brains were cut at 25 μm (1:5 series). Brain sections were incubated in the primary rabbit anti-SRC-2 antibody (1:1000; #A300–345A, Bethyl Laboratories, Inc.) overnight, followed by donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (1:500; #A21207, Invitrogen) for 1.5 hr; red tdTOMATO fluorescent signals were directly visualized without any immunostaining process. As shown in and , while POMC-Cre-induced tdTOMATO expression in the medial subdivision of the ARH (presumably AgRP/NPY neurons) and in the hippocampal DG region, SRC-2 was not deleted in these POMC-lineage neurons in pomcSRC-2-KO mice. Consistent with the previous report ( ), scattered TOMATO-labeled POMC-lineage neurons were also observed in the septal nucleus, the preoptic area, the amygdala, the central thalamus, the interpeduncular fossa, the periaqueductal gray, the area postrema, the nucleus of solitary tract and the cochlear nucleus, but SRC-2 was not deleted in these neurons in pomcSRC-2-KO mice (data not shown but available upon request).

## Characterization of energy homeostasis
pomcSRC-2-KO mice and their control littermates were weaned at week 4 on the standard chow (6.5% fat, #2920, Harlan-Teklad) and singly housed. Some mice were switched to the HFD (60% fat, #D12492, Research Diets) from 7 weeks of age. Body weight and food intake were measured weekly. Body composition was determined using quantitative magnetic resonance (QMR). At the end of monitoring, the mice were deeply anesthetized with inhaled isoflurane and sacrificed, and the gonadal white adipose tissue, the inguinal white adipose tissue, and the interscapular brown adipose tissue were isolated and weighed.
To characterize the responses to food deprivation, some mice (4 months of age) were subjected to a 24-hour fasting, and body weight and body composition were measured before and after the fasting. Fasting-induced refeeding was assessed in a cohort of mice after a 24-hour fasting in their home cages. To further characterize the food intake and energy expenditure, another male cohort (pomcSRC-2-KO mice and their control littermates, 3 months of age) were acclimated into the Comprehensive Laboratory Animal Monitoring System (CLAMS). Mice were housed individually at room temperature (22°C) under an alternating 12:12-h light-dark cycle. After adaptation for 3 days, mice were subjected to a 3-day protocol with 24-hour (6 am-6 am) feed ad libitum, 24-hour fast and 24-hour refeed. O2 consumption, CO2 production and energy expenditure were monitored; meal size and meal duration were analyzed with the CLAMS system. Note that, the body weight and body composition were measured before the mice entered the CLAMS cages, and no difference was observed in body weight, fat mass, and lean mass.

## Anxiety tests with or without food
Fasted control and pomcSRC-2-KO mice (male, 3–4 months of age) were subjected to the open field tests and the elevated plus maze tests, similarly as we did before ( ). Note that all the behavioral tests were performed at around 1–4 pm during the light cycles. Briefly, the open-field test was performed in a clear Plexiglas open-field arena (40 cm X 40 cm X30 cm). Mice, after a 20-hour fasting, were placed into the center of the arena and allowed to explore for 30 min. Overhead lighting and white noise were present to provide ~800 lux illumination and ~55 dB sound inside the arena. Data were collected in 2 min intervals by a computer-operated Digiscan optical animal activity system (RXYZCM, Accuscan Electronics). For the current study, the data over the total 30-min test session were analyzed. Center time (the time traveled in the center of the arena) were recorded. The same experiments were repeated in fasted mice with chow pellets placed in the center of the arena.
On a different day, these mice were subjected to the elevated plus maze (EPM). The EPM was constructed of Plexiglas with two open arms (30 × 5 cm) and two enclosed arms (30 × 5 × 15 cm) at an elevation of 50 cm above the floor. The arms of the maze form a cross with the two open arms facing each other. The maze was cleaned with 70% ethanol solution after each session and allowed to dry between the sessions. The mice were placed in the center of the junction of the arms of the maze facing an open arm and the behavior was analyzed for 10 min. The time spent exploring the open and closed arms was recorded and analyzed using the ANY-maze software (Stoelting Co., Wood Dale, IL). The same experiments were repeated in fasted mice with chow pellets placed in the open arms.

## Electrophysiology
POMC-eGFP or pomcSRC-2-KO/POMC-eGFP mice were used for electrophysiological recordings. Mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane and transcardially perfused with a modified ice-cold sucrose-based cutting solution (pH 7.3) containing 10 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 195 mM Sucrose, 10 mM Glucose, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 2 mM Na-Pyruvate, 0.5 mM CaCl2, and 7 mM MgCl2, bubbled continuously with 95% O2 and 5% CO2. The mice were then decapitated, and the entire brain was removed and immediately submerged in the cutting solution. Slices (250 μm) were cut with a Microm HM 650V vibratome (Thermo Scientific). Three brain slices containing the ARH were obtained for each animal (Bregma −2.06 mm to −1.46 mm). The slices were recovered for 1 h at 34°C and then maintained in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF, pH 7.3) containing 126 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 2.4 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 5.0 mM glucose, and 21.4 mM NaHCO3) saturated with 95% O2 and 5% CO2 before recording.
Slices were transferred to a recording chamber and allowed to equilibrate for at least 10 min before recording. The slices were superfused at 34°C in oxygenated aCSF at a flow rate of 1.8–2 ml/min. GFP-labeled mature POMC neurons in the ARH were visualized using epifluorescence and IR-DIC imaging on an upright microscope (Eclipse FN-1, Nikon) equipped with a movable stage (MP-285, Sutter Instrument). Patch pipettes with resistances of 3–5 MΩ were filled with intracellular solution (pH 7.3) containing 128 mM K-Gluconate, 10 mM KCl, 10 mM HEPES, 0.1 mM EGTA, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.05 mM (Na)2GTP and 0.05 mM (Mg)ATP. Recordings were made using a MultiClamp 700B amplifier (Axon Instrument), sampled using Digidata 1440A and analyzed offline with pClamp 10.3 software (Axon Instruments). Series resistance was monitored during the recording, and the values were generally < 10 MΩ and were not compensated. The liquid junction potential was +12.5 mV, and was corrected after the experiment. Data were excluded if the series resistance increased dramatically during the experiment or without overshoot for action potential. Currents were amplified, filtered at 1 kHz, and digitized at 20 kHz. In order to examine the glucose-sensing functions, neurons were recorded under the current clamp mode in response to a 5→1→5 mM extracellular glucose fluctuation protocol ( ; ; ). The values for resting membrane potential and firing rate were averaged within 2-min bin at the 5 mM glucose or 1 mM glucose aCSF condition. A neuron was considered depolarized or hyperpolarized if a change in membrane potential was at least 2 mV in amplitude. Tolbutamide (100 μM, a KATP blocker) ( ) was added in some experiments to determine if it can block or attenuate changes in firing rate and resting membrane potential induced by glucose fluctuations.
To directly record KATP currents, slices were perfused with an external solution that contained 140 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM glucose and 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4). The pipette (intracellular) solution contained 130 mM potassium gluconate, 20 mM HEPES, 10 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 1.0 mM Mg-ATP, and 0.3 mM Tris-GTP (pH 7.2) ( ). The neural membrane potential was held at −60 mV in voltage clamp model when KATP current was recorded when glucose was changed from 5 mM to 1 mM. Tolbutamide (100 μM) was added in some experiments to determine if it can block or attenuate the currents. Miniature inhibitory post-synaptic currents (mIPSCs) were recorded in whole-cell voltage-clamp mode, by holding the membrane potential at Vh = −70 mV in the presence of 1 μM TTX, 30 μM CNQX and 30 μM D-AP5. The CsCl-based pipette solution containing of: 140mM CsCl, 10mM HEPES, 5mM MgCl2, 1mM BAPTA, 5mM (Mg)ATP, and 0.3mM (Na)2GTP (pH 7.30 adjusted with NaOH; 295 mOsm kg−1). After the recording of each neuron, an Alexa Fluor 594 dye was injected into the recorded neuron via the pipette. Slices were fixed with 4% formalin in PBS at 4°C overnight and then subjected to post hoc identification of the anatomical location of the recorded neurons within the ARH.

## qRT-PCR
To examine gene expression specifically in POMC neurons, we manually picked up GFP-labeled neurons from POMC-eGFP or pomcSRC-2-KO/POMC-eGFP mice. To this end, the mice brain was removed and immediately submerged in ice-cold sucrose-based cutting solution (adjusted to pH 7.3) containing (in mM) 10 NaCl, 25 NaHCO3, 195 Sucrose, 5 Glucose, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2 Na pyruvate, 0.5 CaCl2, 7 MgCl2 bubbled continuously with 95% O2 and 5% CO2. The slices (250 μm) were cut with a Microm HM 650V vibratome (Thermo Scientific and recovered for 1 h at 34°C and then maintained at room temperature in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF, pH 7.3) containing 126 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 2.4 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 11.1 mM glucose, and 21.4 mM NaHCO3 saturated with 95% O2 and 5% CO2 before recording. Slices were transferred to a chamber, and GFP-labeled neurons were visualized using epifluorescence and IR-DIC imaging on an upright microscope equipped with a moveable stage (MP-285, Sutter Instrument). In some experiments, these neurons were first subjected to electrophysiological recordings to determine whether they were GE neurons or not, as described above. Single GE neurons were then manually picked up by the pipette and 2 neurons were combined as a sample for RNA extraction and reverse transcription using the Ambion Single-Cell-to-CT Kit (Ambion, Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, 10 μL Single Cell Lysis solutions with DNase I was added to each sample, and the supernatant after centrifuge were used for cDNA synthesis (25°C for 10 min, 42°C for 60 min, and 85°C for 5 min). The cDNA samples were amplified on a CFX384 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad) using SsoADV SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad). Results were normalized against the expression of the house-keeping gene (b-actin). Primer sequences were listed in .
In some experiments, fasted control and pomcSRC-2-KO mice (male, 4–5 months of age) were sacrificed and the hypothalami were quickly collected. Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and reverse transcription reactions were performed from 2 μg of total RNA using a High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kits (Invitrogen). cDNA samples were amplified on an CFX384 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad) using SsoADV SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad). Results were normalized against the expression of house-keeping gene (cyclophinlin). Primer sequences were listed in .

## Glucose tolerance test and 2-DG assay
Control and pomcSRC-2-KO mice (male, 3–4 months of age) received i.p. injections of glucose (1 g/kg). Blood glucose was then measured at 0, 15, 30, 60 and 120 min after injections. Similarly, control and pomcSRC-2-KO mice (male, 3–4 months of age) received i.p. injections of saline or 2-DG (500 mg/kg). Blood glucose was then measured at 0, 15, 30, 60 and 120 min after injections.

## Hyperinsulinemic-hypoglycemia clamp
Body weight-matched control and pomcSRC-2-KO mice (male, 3–4 months of age) were sent to the NIH-funded Baylor Mouse Metabolism Core for the hyperinsulinemic-hypoglycemic clamp studies. As we described before ( ), a micro-catheter was inserted into the jugular vein by survival surgery and waited for 4–5 days for complete recovery. Studies were then performed in conscious mice. Overnight-fasted conscious mice received a priming dose of HPLC-purified [3–3H] glucose (10μCi) and then a constant infusion (0.1 μCi/min) of label glucose for ~2.5–3.0 hr. After ~1h of infusion, mice were primed with regular insulin (bolus 10 mU/kg body weight) followed by a ~2-hr constant insulin infusion (10 mU/Kg/min). Using a separate pump, 25% glucose was used to maintain the blood glucose level at 50 mg/dl, as determined every 6–9 min using a glucometer (LifeScan, NJ). The glucose infusion rate (GIR) was then measured. Blood samples were collected during the hypoglycemic condition and processed to obtain plasma. These samples were sent to the VUMC (Vanderbilt University Medical Center) Hormone Assay & Analytical Services Core to measure glucagon; corticosterone was measured using Corticosterone ELISA kit (Enzo Life Sciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Overexpression of FoxO1AAA in POMC neurons
AAV-FLEX-FoxO1AAA-GFP was constructed by sub-cloning the full length of Foxo1AAA ( ) into the pAAV-hSyn1-FLEX-2A-GFP vector ( ). Virus was packaged at Neuroconnectivity Core at Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute with serotype AAV2/8. WT, POMC-Cre and pomcSRC-2-KO mice (male, 4–5 months of age) were anesthetized with isoflurane and received stereotaxic injections of AAV-FLEX-FoxO1AAA-GFP into both sides of the ARH (250 nL/site, −1.7 mm posterior, ± 0.25 mm lateral and −5.8 mm ventral to the Bregma, based on Franklin & Paxinos Mouse Brain Atlas). In addition, another group of pomcSRC-2-KO mice (male, 4–5 months of age) received AAV-GFP injections into the ARH. One week after the virus injections, mice were fed on HFD for 3 weeks. Body weight and food intake were monitored weekly. Body weight composition was measured at the end of HFD feeding. To validate accurate and sufficient infection of AAV vectors, all mice were perfused with 10% formalin. Brain sections were cut at 25 μm (5 series) and subjected to histological validation. Only those mice with GFP in both sides of the ARH were included in data analyses.

## SRC-2 and FoxO1 interaction
For in vitro SRC-2 and FoxO1 interaction, HEK293 (Human embryonic kidney 293) cells were transfected with Flag-tagged FoxO1 or empty vector using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Two days after transfection, cells were lysed with cell lysis buffer: 50 mM Tris, 50 mM KCL, 10 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, supplied with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail A (Santa Cruz). The lysates were incubated with a proper amount of anti-Flag-beads (Sigma) for 4 h at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer, and proteins were released from beads in SDS-sample buffer and analyzed by immunoblotting. The blot was probed with anti-Flag-HRP (1:3,000–10,000, A8592, Sigma), rabbit polyclonal anti-SRC-2 antibody (1:1,000, ab10491, Abcam) or mouse monoclonal anti-β-Actin-HRP (1:5,000, #12262, Cell Signaling), and the secondary antibody was goat anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch), followed by development with the SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Pierce).
In vivo interaction between SRC-2 and FoxO1 was investigated under different conditions. For fed and fasted conditions, C57Bl6j male mice (3 months of age) were sacrificed at fed condition or after a 24-hour fasting. For Insulin or Leptin treatment, C57Bl6j fed male mice were i.p. injected with saline, insulin (3U/kg) or leptin (5 mg/kg), and the hypothalami were collected 30 min after the injections. For cold exposure, singly caged C57Bl6j fed male mice were kept at 4°C or room temperature (RT) for 6 hours before the hypothalami were collected. For chow and HFD feeding conditions, C57Bl6j male mice (3 months of age) were fed on regular chow or the HFD for 2 weeks ad libitum, and then sacrificed at fed condition. Harvested hypothalami were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM KCl, 20 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 5 mM EDTA, and 0.5% Nonidet P-40) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail A (Santa Cruz). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 18,000 × g for 10 min and used for immunoprecipitation or directly for immunoblotting. Equal amounts of tissue lysates were incubated with rabbit monoclonal anti-FoxO1 (1:100, #2880, Cell Signaling) for 1 hr. at 4°C and pulled down with Protein G magnetic beads (70024, Cell Signaling). The proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting with rabbit monoclonal anti-FoxO1 antibody (1:3,000, #2880, Cell Signaling) or mouse monoclonal anti-FoxO1 antibody (1:3,000, #97635, Cell Signaling), rabbit polyclonal anti-SRC-2 antibody (1:1,000, ab10491, Abcam) or mouse monoclonal anti-β-Actin-HRP (1:5,000, #12262, Cell Signaling), and the secondary antibody was rabbit anti-mouse IgG or goat anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch), followed by development with the SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Pierce).

## POMC-luciferase assay
For the POMC-luciferase assay, an embryonic mouse hypothalamic cell line, N46 (CELLutions), was cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta), 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 ng/ml streptomycin. To verify the FoxO1 intracellular localization under different nutritional conditions, N46 cells were cultured in full media (containing 10% FBS) or “fast” media (2% charcoal-stripped FBS) for overnight. The FoxO1 was stained with anti-FoxO1 (#2880, Cell Signaling) and combined with Donkey anti-Rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 594 (A21207, Thermo fisher scientific). To measure SRC-2 activity on the POMC promoter, N46 cells were seeded into a 24-well plate overnight and then transfected with 500 ng of the POMC-luciferase reporter plasmid combined with 100 ng of pCR3.1-SRC-2 or the control empty plasmids, according to the Lipofectamine LTX protocol (Invitrogen). Twenty four hours after the transfection, the cells were switched to full media culture (containing 10% FBS) or “fast” media (2% charcoal-stripped FBS) for overnight. The luciferase activity was measured using the Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To further investigate the effect of SRC-2/FoxO1 interaction on the POMC promoter activity, FoxO1 siRNA (mouse-specific #6468, Cell Signaling) or control siRNA (#6568, Cell Signaling) was transfected into the N46 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen). Twenty four hours after the transfection, the cells were further transfected with 500 ng of the POMC-luciferase reporter plasmid combined with 100 ng of pCR3.1-SRC-2 or the empty control plasmids using Lipofectamine LTX. Twenty four hours after the transfection, cells were switched to “fast” media (2% charcoal-stripped FBS) for overnight culture and then the luciferase activity was measured using the Luciferase Reporter Assay System. The FoxO1 siRNA knockdown effects were confirmed by immunoblotting 2 days after the transfection of the FoxO1 siRNA or the control siRNA, with monoclonal anti-FoxO1 (1:3,000, #2880, Cell Signaling) and anti-Actin antibody (#C-11, Santa Cruz).
To test the effects of the interaction between SRC-2 and ERα or AR on the regulation of POMC expression, POMC-luciferase reporter was co-transfected with pCR3.1-SRC-2 or the empty control plasmids, with or without pcDNA3.1-hERα ( ) or pCMV-FLAG-hAR (a gift from Elizabeth Wilson, Addgene plasmid # 89080) ( ) as described above. Forty hours after the transfection, cells were treated with or without 17β-estradiol (0.2 μg/ml, E-060, Sigma) or DHT (10 nM, D-073, Sigma) for 8 hours, and then the luciferase activity was measured using the Luciferase Reporter Assay System.
To further test how SRC-2 regulates the expression of GABAA receptor subunits and KATP channel subunits, the promoter region of each gene was cloned into pGL3-basic Luciferase Reporter Vector (primer sequences shown in ), and each luciferase reporter was co-transfected with pCR3.1-SRC-2 or the empty control plasmids for two days. To further investigate the effect of SRC-2/FoxO1 interaction on these promoters activity, similar method was used for the FoxO1 knockdown and the luciferase assay was performed as described above.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The minimal sample size was pre-determined by the nature of experiments. For most of the physiological readouts (body weight, food intake, etc.), at least 6 mice per group were included. For electrophysiological studies, at least 8 neurons per group were included. The data are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism to evaluate normal distribution and variations within and among groups. Methods of statistical analyses were chosen based on the design of each experiment and are indicated in figure legends. p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

## Study approval
Care of all animals and procedures were approved by the Baylor College of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

## Supplementary Material
1

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The investigators were supported by grants from the NIH (R01DK114279, R01DK109934, and R21NS108091 to Q.T.; R00DK107008 to P.X.; R01DK104901 and R01DK126655 to M.F.; K01DK119471 to C.W.; R01DK115761, R01DK117281, and R01DK125480 to Y.X.; R01DK120858 to Q.T. and Y.X.; R01DK111436, R01ES027544, RF1AG069966, HL153320, and AG070687 to Z.S.; R01HD07857, R01HD008818, and P01DK059820 to B.W.O.; P01DK113954 to Y.X., J.X., and B.W.O.; and P20 GM135002 to Y.H.), USDA/CRIS (51000-064-01S to Y.X. and M.F.), American Diabetes Association (1-17-PDF-138 to Y.H.), and American Heart Association awards (16POST27260254 to C.W.). Measurements of body composition, food intake, and energy expenditure were performed in the Mouse Metabolic Research Unit (MMRU) at the USDA/ARS Children’s Nutrition Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, which is supported by funds from the USDA ARS (https://www.bcm.edu/cnrc/mmru). The SRC-2lox/lox mouse line was provided by Dr. Pierre Chambon (IGBMC/GIE-CERBM). The authors acknowledge the expert assistance of Mr. Firoz Vohra and the MMRU Core Director, Dr. Marta Fiorotto. The open-field test and elevated plus maze test were performed in the Mouse Neurobehavior Core, Baylor College of Medicine, which is supported by NIH P30HD024064. The AAV vector expressing FoxO1AAA mutant was packaged by Baylor IDDRC Neuroconnectivity Core directed by Dr. Benjamin Arenkiel.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110075.
 

## Highlights
SRC-2 inhibits POMC neurons to suppress energy expenditure during fasting
SRC-2 maintains POMC responses to low glucose to trigger counterregulation
SRC-2 in POMC neurons suppresses satiation and anxiety during refeeding
SRC-2 in POMC neurons mediates diet-induced weight gain