pmcEMBO Mol MedEMBO Mol Med1758emmolmed101487380EMMMEMBO Molecular Medicine1757-46761757-4684Nature Publishing GroupPMC8988205PMC8988205.1898820589882053525472110.15252/emmm.202114817EMMM2021148171ArticleArticlesEarly disruption of photoreceptor cell architecture and loss of vision in a humanized pig model of usher syndromes
Sophia Grotz et al
GrotzSophia SchäferJessica WunderlichKirsten A wolfrum@uni-mainz.deEllederovaZdenka AuchHannah BährAndrea Runa‐VochozkovaPetrahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3691-0340 FadlJanet ArnoldVanessa ArdanTaras VeithMiroslavhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6254-436X SantamariaGianluca DhomGeorg HitzlWolfganghttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7696-1479 KesslerBarbarahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7036-238X EckardtChristian KleinJoshua BrymovaAnna LinnertJoshua KuromeMayuko ZakharchenkoValeri FischerAndrea BlutkeAndreas DöringAnna SuchankovaStepanka PopelarJiri Rodríguez‐BocanegraEduardo DlugaiczykJulia StrakaHans May‐SimeraHelenhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9477-4036 WangWeiweihttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3518-9328 LaugwitzKarl‐Ludwig VandenbergheLuk H WolfEckhardhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0430-9510 Nagel‐WolfrumKerstin PetersTobiashttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9187-4904 MotlikJan FischerM Dominik WolfrumUwehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4756-5872 KlymiukNikolaihttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3532-1659 n.klymiuk@tum.de

1

Chair of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology
LMU Munich
Munich
Germany

2

Center for Innovative Medical Models
LMU Munich
Munich
Germany

3

Institute of Molecular Physiology
Molecular Cell Biology
Johannes Gutenberg University (JGU)
Mainz
Germany

4

Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics
Czech Academy of Science
Libechov
Czech Republic

5

Large Animal Models in Cardiovascular Research
Internal Medical Department I
TU Munich
Munich
Germany

6

Ophthalmology Clinic
University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady
Praha
Czech Republic

7

Biostatistics and Data Science
Paracelsus Medical University
Salzburg
Austria

8

Veterinary Faculty
Small Animal Clinics
LMU Munich
Munich
Germany

9

Institute of Experimental Genetics
Helmholtz Center Munich
Neuherberg
Germany

10

Institute of Experimental Medicine
Czech Academy of Science
Prague
Czech Republic

11

Centre for Ophthalmology
University Eye Hospital
University Hospital Tübingen
Tübingen
Germany

12

Institute for Ophthalmic Research
Centre for Ophthalmology
University Hospital Tübingen
Tübingen
Germany

13

Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery
University Hospital Zurich (USZ)
University of Zurich
Zurich
Switzerland

14

Faculty of Biology
LMU Munich
Planegg
Germany

15

Institute of Molecular Physiology
Cilia Biology
JGU Mainz
Mainz
Germany

16

Grousbeck Gene Therapy Center
Mass Eye and Ear and Harvard Medical School
Boston
MA
USA

17

Institute of Developmental Biology and Neurobiology
Johannes Gutenberg University (JGU)
Mainz
Germany

18

Oxford Eye Hospital
Oxford University NHS Foundation Trust
Oxford
UK

19

Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology
NDCN
University of Oxford
Oxford
UK

20
Present address:
Department of Physiological Genomics
LMU Munich
Munich
Germany

*
Corresponding author. Tel: +49 6131 3925148; E‐mail: wolfrum@uni-mainz.de

Corresponding author. Tel: +49 151 522 95 921; E‐mail: n.klymiuk@tum.de

†
These authors contributed equally to this work as first authors

‡
These authors contributed equally to this work as senior authors
07320224202214440492510.1002/emmm.v14.4e14817
0422022
0972021
0922022
070320221104202225082024© 2022 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licensehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common form of monogenic deaf‐blindness. Loss of vision is untreatable and there are no suitable animal models for testing therapeutic strategies of the ocular constituent of USH, so far. By introducing a human mutation into the harmonin‐encoding USH1C gene in pigs, we generated the first translational animal model for USH type 1 with characteristic hearing defect, vestibular dysfunction, and visual impairment. Changes in photoreceptor architecture, quantitative motion analysis, and electroretinography were characteristics of the reduced retinal virtue in USH1C pigs. Fibroblasts from USH1C pigs or USH1C patients showed significantly elongated primary cilia, confirming USH as a true and general ciliopathy. Primary cells also proved their capacity for assessing the therapeutic potential of CRISPR/Cas‐mediated gene repair or gene therapy in vitro. AAV‐based delivery of harmonin into the eye of USH1C pigs indicated therapeutic efficacy in vivo.

The full phenotypic spectrum of Usher Syndrome is reflected in a pig model carrying a patient‐specific mutation after partial humanization of the porcine USH1C gene. Retinal function in USH1C pigs was improved when harmonin expression was reconstituted by AAV‐mediated gene therapy.
 

gene therapyimpaired visionphotoreceptor morphologypig modelUsher syndrome

## Subject Categories
DevelopmentGenetics, Gene Therapy & Genetic DiseaseDeutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
10.13039/501100001659FI 2336/1‐1MA 6139/3‐1KA1398/1WO548/9KL 2405/2‐1Foundation Fighting Blindness
10.13039/100001116TA‐GT‐0316‐0693‐JGUTA‐GT‐0316‐0694‐JGUPPA‐0717‐0719‐RADUSHER2020FAUN Stiftung Following previous attempts to generate pig models (Kurome et al, ; Vochozkova et al, ), single‐cell clones (SSCs) were generated from primary cells, nucleofected with the modification components, and screened for the desired modification (Fig  and Appendix Fig E and F). Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) was used for establishing founder animals from verified genetically modified SSCs (Fig  ). Female cell clones with both USH1C alleles modified were further lipofected with Cre‐mRNA in order to excise the selection cassette prior to their usage in SCNT experiments (Fig  ). Out of 12 embryo transfers, 4 litters were produced, delivering a total of 18 piglets. Genetic analysis confirmed excision of the neo cassette in 5 out of 15 founder animals, constituting a remnant single lox site in intron 1 (Fig  G and H), the humanized fragment (Fig  ) as well as the correct conjunction of the modification to the porcine sequence at the 3′‐end of the modification in the animals (Appendix Fig G).
Strikingly, all cloned founder animals showed a pronounced circling phenotype at birth (Movie ), correlating with a dysfunctional vestibular system (Ernest et al, ; Johnson et al, ). For this reason, animals were raised in a rescue deck from birth on (Egerer et al, ). After 48–72 h of interval feeding by hand, circling essentially ceased and USH1C piglets were able to feed themselves from the nurturing unit. We interpret this as central vestibular compensation and re‐weighting of multisensory input to the balance system.
In general, USH1C pigs developed and acted normally, but stress‐induced circling proved a consistent hallmark in the case animals found themselves challenged by new situations. At an age of 3–6 months, we occasionally observed a spontaneous nystagmus of the eyes (Movie ) in some animals. This is very likely caused by an asymmetrical tonic firing of vestibular afferents from the right and left labyrinth (Baloh et al, ; Dougherty et al, ) and has been anecdotally described in USH patients (Moller et al, ; Bonneau et al, ). 8‐month‐old USH1C pigs were fertile and 3 sows became pregnant after insemination with wild‐type (WT) sperm and gave birth to F1 litters, comprising heterozygous offspring (Appendix Fig A). F2 USH1C piglets were produced by mating F1 animals with each other or by inseminating of the cloned founder sows with sperm from one of their heterozygous offspring. In all USH1C offspring, a circling phenotype appeared as it had been observed in the F0 generation produced by SCNT. During breeding, it became obvious that some of the founder animals carried two distinct mutations of the USH1C alleles. One constituted the c.C91T/p.R31X mutation, while the other was a large genomic disruption, deleting exon 2 of the USH1C gene (Appendix Fig B). Genomic evaluation by endpoint PCR and qPCR and transcriptional analysis of heterozygous animals confirmed this hypothesis (Appendix Fig C and D and Appendix Fig ). Details on animals used for experimental and breeding purposes are shown in Appendix Table  .

## Motion analysis demonstrates vestibular dysfunction and visual deficits in USH1C pigs
To quantify changes in visually guided behavior, animals were challenged in distinct settings. In a barrier course in which animals had to bypass vertical shields to reach a food bowl (Barone et al, ), USH1C pigs did not show obvious differences to WT controls regarding duration or gait instability (Movies , and Fig  and Appendix Fig ). Interestingly, however, USH1C animals hesitated to enter the course in the dark (average 2.9 lux), turned around more often within the course, and had more frontal contacts with obstacles than WT control animals while these differences were less pronounced under light conditions. A more complex obstacle course was carried out on a cohort of 5 USH1C and 5 age‐matched WT controls. Over an age of 7–12 months, animals had to repeatedly walk through a parcour in which they had to cross or bypass distinctly shaped hurdles in varying constellations (Movies , and Appendix Fig ). In the dark (0.1–12 lux), USH1C pigs had significantly more contacts with hurdles, while their speed was similar to WT (Fig  and Appendix Fig ). In the light (50–150 lux), USH1C pigs did not only touch hurdles more often, but were also significantly slower than WT controls. Plotting the data points for individual animals supported the interpretation of a general difference between USH1C pigs and WT control animals (Appendix Fig ). Remarkably, USH1C pigs had difficulties to pass hurdles taking a pronounced vertical movement and therefore requiring balance (such as the red cavaletti) as well as obstacles challenging stereopsis and peripheral vision (such as the hanging or standing blue barrel and the step board) (Fig  ). While the interpretation of an impaired vestibular system was further supported by the clearly different gait pattern in USH1C pigs (Movies and ), the interpretation of a reduced visual function in these animals was corroborated by a more detailed analysis of the movement in the obstacle course (Fig  ). It became obvious that USH1C pig trajectories were longer (TrajLength and TrajDistance) compared to WT, with more frequently abrupt changes in direction (lower Emax). In addition, they took more time to complete the course (TrajDuration) while their step length was shorter.
 

## Clinical examinations confirm hearing loss and vision impairment in USH1C pigs
Auditory brainstem response (ABR) documented severe hearing deficits in USH1C pigs as early as 3 weeks and up to 2 years of age, indicated by a lack of response even upon click stimulus at sound pressure levels of up to 120 dB sound pressure level (SPL) (Figs  and Fig  ). The findings of sensorineural hearing loss (Cvejic et al, ) correlated with changes in the arrangement of hair cell cilial bundles and the lack of stereocilia in inner ear hair cells (Fig  ), as well as with the findings in Ush1c mouse models (Johnson et al, ; Lefevre et al, ) and the congenital deafness in human patients (Koenekoop et al, ). The hearing threshold of heterozygous USH1C+/− pigs was slightly elevated compared to WT littermates at distinct ages (Figs  and E and F). Hearing thresholds for both WT and heterozygous animals slightly declined with increasing test frequency, while thresholds in USH1C animals deteriorated further for higher frequencies. In line with their profound sensorineural hearing loss, USH1C piglets did not react on their mother´s call for nourishing (Movie ). Most of them needed nudging for waking up, while heterozygous littermates arrived at their mother within 15 s (Fig  ). Consistently, some USH1C piglets were within the faster group, presumably awoken from being sideswiped by their littermates.
 Clinical examination of the eyes in USH1C pigs at 1 year of age revealed changes comparable to early stages of USH in human patients. A reduction of cone photoreceptor function was evident in the central visual streak area analyzed by multifocal electro‐retinography (ERG, Fig  B and C). Both rod and cone photoreceptor cell (PRC) responses were markedly attenuated in USH1C pigs compared to age‐matched wild‐type animals at 12 months of age (Fig  and Appendix Fig ). USH1C animals showed > 70% reduction in the scotopic standard flash a‐wave amplitude ([mean value ± SD] 21 ± 18 µV in USH1C vs. 79 ± 2 µV in WT animals) and a > 50% reduction in scotopic b‐wave amplitude (75 ± 32 µV in USH1C vs. 154 ± 39 µV in WT animals). Responses after photopic standard flash stimuli showed a 50% reduction of a‐wave amplitude ([mean ± SD] 10 ± 0.1 µV in USH1C vs. 20 ± 5 µV in WT animals) and a 60% reduction in the respective b‐wave amplitude (86 ± 49 µV in USH1C vs. 215 ± 50 µV in WT animals). Confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (cSLO) of the retina and choroid layer showed no differences between WT and USH1C pigs (Appendix Fig ). Interestingly, spectral domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Fig  ) revealed only minor differences in retinal architecture between WT and USH1C pigs with good preservation of outer retinal layers containing the PRCs, suggesting a large therapeutic window.

## Lack of harmonin in sub‐cellular structures disrupts photosensitive disc architecture
Previous studies of USH1C/harmonin expression, particularly in the mouse retina, were inconsistent but indicated localization of harmonin in PRC, MGC, and secondary retinal neurons. (Reiners et al, ; Reiners & Wolfrum, ; Williams et al, ; Sahly et al, ). In WT pigs, we detected harmonin in the PRC layer, the outer limiting membrane (OLM) and outer plexiform layer (OPL) (Appendix Fig  ). More specifically, the protein was found in the PRC outer segment (OS), the OS base, in calyceal processes (CP) and synaptic pedicles. Harmonin abundance in MGC microvilli tips and the cell adhesion region of the OLM is in line with expression profiles and subcellular localization of harmonin in the human retina (preprint: Nagel‐Wolfrum et al, ). In both, USH1C and WT pigs, USH1C transcripts were detected in multiple but not all organs (Fig  A and B). Sanger sequencing confirmed correct splicing of the humanized exon 2 in USH1C pigs (Appendix Fig A and B). While in some tissues (colon, duodenum), RT–PCR indicated considerable proportions of transcripts lacking exon 13 (Fig  ), splicing out of exons 13 or 14 appeared only at very low levels in the retina (Appendix Fig C). USH1C_b splice variants were found at low level in general, but clearly indicated a lack of exon 27 in all transcripts and alternative splicing of exon 20 (Appendix Fig D and E). We did not detect transcripts without exon 11, a core characteristic of USH1C_c, indicating that USH1C_a1 is the dominant transcript of USH1C in the pig retina. At the protein level, harmonin was consistently lacking in Western blot analysis (Fig  ) and in tissue sections (Fig  ), confirming the sufficient suppression of harmonin translation by the premature R31X nonsense mutation. No changes were observed in protein levels of SANS (encoded by USH1G), whirlin (encoded by WHRN (USH2D)), and myosin VIIa (encoded by MYO7A (USH1B)) in the retina (Fig  ). In contrast, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was considerably upregulated in the USH1C retina already at an age of 3 weeks (Fig  A and B), suggesting gliosis, a phenomenon often seen in inherited retinal diseases (Hippert et al, ) or injury‐mediated degradation processes (Bringmann et al, ).
 While the general structure of the retina appeared grossly intact in USH1C pigs (Figs  and , and Appendix Fig ), subcellular analysis revealed specific disruptions in the architecture of compartments containing harmonin. In line with its proposed scaffold function in ribbon synapses (Gregory et al, ), the loss of harmonin results in significantly reduced extension of the cone synaptic pedicles. This was confirmed by both the quantitative determination of cone‐specific peanut agglutinin (PNA) stretches at synapses (Fig  ) and the direct measurement of synapse width in transmission‐electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig  ). We also found significant increases in length of the connecting cilium (CC) in rod PRCs, as determined by quantitative measurements of the ciliary marker GT335 stretches (Fig  A–C) as well as by direct examination of TEM ultrathin sections (Fig  D and E). Aiming at identifying a consistent relevance of harmonin for cilia formation, we examined primary cilia in dermal fibroblast of USH1C and WT in pigs and humans (Fig  ). While the number of ciliated cells in USH1C pigs was reduced compared to WT (Fig  ), the length of the primary cilia was consistently elongated in fibroblasts isolated from USH1C pigs and a USH1CR31X/R80fs patient after induction of ciliogenesis (Fig  G and H). Most striking, however, was the deprivation of rod OS architecture in PRC. While this is normally characterized by a strictly horizontal stacking of parallel photosensitive membrane discs (Fig  ) (Sjostrand, ), we detected vertically orientated membrane discs (Fig  ) in animals as early as 3 weeks of age. This aberrant structuring became even more prominent at 12 months when the stacking of discs was further infringed by interstitial gaps and vesicle‐like structures at the OS base (Fig  K–M). In contrast to rods, the OS architecture in cones remained normal throughout the first year of life (Fig  ).
 

## USH1C pigs facilitate testing of therapeutic approaches in vivo and ex vivo

Besides its usage in studying disease progression and its underlying mechanisms, the USH1C pig will also support the development of novel treatment approaches. The defined genetic cause of the model, the disruption of exon 2, affects all relevant USH1C splice forms and, therefore, facilitates the testing of a broad spectrum of treatment options. We addressed fundamental questions by examining the tropism of distinct serotypes of adeno‐associated viruses (AAV) for transducing cells of the retina in vivo, by testing the gene therapy and gene repair approaches in vitro and by exploring the potential to restore eye function in vivo after sub‐retinal injection of AAV expressing USH1C mRNA.
For testing the distribution of AAV vectors, defined amounts (200 µl, 2 × 1010 vg/eye) of established AAV8, AAV9, or a modified Anc80 vectors, each of them expressing eGFP under control of a CMV promoter (Vandenberghe et al, ; Carvalho et al, ), were injected into the sub‐retinal space of the eye in WT pigs followed by examination of eGFP expression after 5 weeks. While AAV8 transduced only PRCs efficiently, AAV9 and Anc80 transduced both, PRC and MGC (Fig  , lower panel). Anc80 was much less effective in transducing cells of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) than AAV9 and, in particular, than AAV 8 (Appendix Fig ), indicating that the target specificity in the eye can be controlled by the appropriate choice of the AAV capsid. No relevant other off‐target expression of eGFP was noted for the tested AAVs.
 The capability for correcting the causative USH1CR31X
 mutation in the humanized exon 2 by CRISPR/Cas‐mediated gene repair was evaluated by applying distinct constellations of human‐specific gRNA and repair oligo‐nucleotides into pig primary kidney cells (PKCs), isolated from USH1C founder animals (Figs  and ). The efficacy of transforming the nonsense codon TGA into an Arginin‐encoding CGA by homology‐directed repair (HDR) reached 40%, determined in DNA preparations from mixed cell clones. Upon clonal selection, the analysis of 68 single cell clones (SSCs) confirmed that 40% of the clones underwent gene correction, while non‐homologous end‐joining (NHEJ) was seen in 31% of the SSCs. Occasionally, HDR was accompanied by additional mutations, either small insertions/deletions or single nucleotide exchanges. For the specific positioning of the gRNA, a considerable proportion of mutations that appear in intron 2 would not affect the correct transcription and translation of USH1C.
 For exploring the potential of harmonin restoration by gene therapy, we transfected a vector encoding the human harmonin_a1 splice variant into primary skin fibroblasts derived from USH1C pigs. By using the number of ciliated cells as well as the length of the primary cilium as therapeutic readout (Fig  G and H), we confirmed that treated fibroblasts differed significantly from untreated USH1C cells and reached the levels determined in WT fibroblasts for both parameters (Fig  ).
The potential to compensate for the lack of harmonin in USH1C pigs was explored by applying a volume of 200 µl, 1 × 1011 vg Anc80.CMV.harmonin_a1 vector into the sub‐retinal space of one eye while the other eye was sham‐treated with PBS. In one 3.5‐year‐old USH1C pig, we detected harmonin in histological sections and in Western blot after 12 months in the treated eye (Fig  ). Furthermore, amplitudes of the a‐ and b‐waves were significantly increased in the scotopic and photopic ERG, compared to the sham‐treated eye, similarly to another animal that was treated accordingly at an age of 3.5 years and examined after 3 months (Figs  and ).
 

## Discussion
Combining hearing deficits, vestibular dysfunction, and vision loss, the USH1C pig is the first animal model to reflect the full syndromic phenotype in human USH1 patients. The early onset of symptoms makes it suitable for studying the basic mechanisms of the disease as well as for evaluating strategies of therapeutic intervention. The persistence of a largely intact retinal architecture throughout the first year of life provides a wide therapeutic window and the potential to revert the pathogenesis by targeting dysfunctional, but still viable photoreceptor cells. The specific design of the genetic modification allows the examination of a broad diversity of therapies, including classical additive gene therapy, human‐specific gene repair, and translational read‐through or cell replacements. The establishment of breeding populations (Appendix Fig ), the provision of distinct therapeutic options in vitro and the success of AAV‐based delivery of harmonin in exploratory experiments in vivo (Figs  , , and ) collectively demonstrate the potential of the model for evaluation of therapeutic interventions. Consequently, USH1C pigs can now be used for systematic pre‐clinical examination in vivo, similar to recent ventures in genetically engineered pig models (Langin et al, ; Regensburger et al, ; Moretti et al, ). In such studies, housing USH1C pigs under standardized conditions will minimize environmental confounding, whereas the pronounced genetic diversity of conventionally produced pigs needs consideration. While presenting a statistical challenge for pre‐clinical proof‐of‐principle studies, this heterogeneity is, of course, much more likely to reflect the scenario in clinical trials and might thus lead to a more robust predictive power of the model in the translation of new therapeutic strategies (Ebermann et al, ).
The manifestation of an ocular phenotype in USH1C pigs is striking, taking into account the multiple efforts that have been made in creating such models in other species with so limited success (Williams, ). Our results reinforce some of the multiple sentiments that have been postulated as reasons for the lack of a vision phenotype in rodents. The onset of retinal dysfunction in pigs within the first year of life argues against the notion that the limited life span of mice prevents the developing of a similar phenotype in the mouse eye. While a potentially distinct function of the USH proteins in the retinae of different species cannot be readily excluded, the degree of sequence conservation of harmonin and its immediate interaction partners is remarkable (Fig  and Appendix Fig ), insinuating a conserved and consistent nature of the USH1 interactome across species.
Crucially, porcine harmonin appears to be localized to CP (Fig  ) which is thought to stabilize the OS structure in the PRC of different species, although not in rodents (El‐Amraoui & Petit, ). A recent publication demonstrated the absence of CP in cone PRCs and a pronounced outgrowth of disc membranes at the base of rod OS upon partial knock‐down of the USH1F‐encoded protein pcdh15 in the clawed toad (Schietroma et al, ). While the complete lack of harmonin in pig did neither show outgrowth of disc membranes nor affect the formation of CP to a similar extent, it explicitly disturbed the photosensitive disc architecture in rods (Fig  I–N). Considering the actin‐binding properties of harmonin, the changes in disc architecture and CC dimensions (Fig  A–E) link the retinal pathology in USH1C pigs to the proposed role of the actin cytoskeleton as driving force in disc neogenesis and in the structural maintenance of the PRC OS (Corral‐Serrano et al, ; Spencer et al, ). Specifically, ciliogenesis has been shown altered upon dysregulation of the actin cytoskeleton at a molecular level (Kim et al, ), an effect that has been also associated with neurodegenerative diseases (Karam et al, ). The consistent elongation of CC in PRC and primary cilia in dermal fibroblasts (Figs  and ) further confirms the tight interaction of the ciliary actin system with axonemal microtubules in PRCs (Wolfrum & Schmitt, ; Corral‐Serrano et al, ) and the general role of the actin system in the organization of ciliary axonemes (Kiesel et al, ). Although precise mechanistic insights into the role of harmonin in cilia function require further studies, our data provide clear evidence that USH is a true retinal ciliopathy in its fundamental aspects (Bujakowska et al, ).
Remarkably, the significantly disturbed photosensitive disc architecture in rod OSs and the ciliary aberrations (Fig  ) are associated with a significant (c. 70%) reduction in rod‐derived ERG responses (Fig  ). The apparent decline in cone‐derived ERG (c. 50%) and the reduced width of cone synaptic pedicles (Fig  C and D) indicate the early onset of cone‐specific alterations as well. Both, structural and clinical observations thus support the notion of a rod‐cone dystrophy phenotype in USH1C pigs, reflecting the situation in human patients quite well (Koenekoop et al, ; Khateb et al, ). The early onset of PRC malfunction was in line with the up‐regulation of GFAP in MGC (Fig  A and B) and with reports of visual deficits in early childhood of USH patients (Stingl et al, ). Interestingly, the changes in subcellular morphology, the reduction in electrophysiological PRC function and the observed changes in visually guided behavior (Fig  ) come along with only very mild effects on overall retinal morphology (Fig  and Appendix Fig ). It needs to be considered, however, that the retinal phenotype in USH1 patients varies widely, ranging from intact central retinal architecture and excellent visual acuity at 45 years to advanced central retinal damage and legal blindness by their early 30s (Lenassi et al, ). Such a phenotypic heterogeneity is observed in most if not all forms of inherited retinal diseases and is thought to arise from genetic or environmental confounding factors or a combination thereof (Veleri et al, ). The possibility to examine the USH1C pig model under standardized conditions will help to discern the effect of the mutation from other influencing factors.
In our work, we give also first indications for a potentially impaired hearing ability in heterozygous USH1C carriers (Figs  and E and F). As the results were consistent at distinct ages, in different groups of animals and across the examined frequencies, we interpret this as a slight but significant biological effect. It must be considered that we are not aware of reports on impaired hearing in human USH1C carriers and so we cannot seriously estimate if these findings are of clinical relevance for human USH1C carriers. Taking into account the very low numbers of patients carrying distinct USH1C mutations, however, we would definitely exclude an evolutionary benefit of heterozygous USH1C defects, as it has been reasoned for the spreading of genes such as HBB (Piel et al, ) or CFTR (Gabriel et al, ; Pier et al, ) in the human population.
For the different aging processes in pig and human, a direct correlation of ages between the species is misleading. Instead, we propose to correlate the manifestation of fertility at 5–8 months in pigs, compared to 12–15 years in human beings, suggesting that a 12‐month‐old pig may fairly correspond to a biological age of 15–25 years in humans (http://www.age‐converter.com/, https://unleashpetphotography.com/animal‐age‐calculator). Accordingly, the phenotype in USH1C pigs appears to reflect patients well within the published spectrum of disease severity and progression. As a consequence, we would also suppose that translating clinically established endpoints (as measured e.g., by ERG or OCT) from human to pig will support the assessment of future pre‐clinical studies in our model. Vice versa, the multi‐disciplinary examination of the model described here defined novel disease hallmarks, which may give rise to alternative endpoints for future clinical trials. The value of additional read‐out parameters such as motion analysis (Fig  ) is corroborated by a pivotal study documenting the success of the voretigene neparvovec AAV‐based drug in the multi luminance mobility test (MLMT) as primary endpoint (Russell et al, ).
The specific wavelength sensitivity of cones (Kostic & Arsenijevic, ) and the complex interaction of vision with other sensory organs required substantial effort in the investigation of visually guided behavior. Parcour tests were conducted under distinct light conditions, but calculated luminance levels in the pig eye suggested that the experiments took place at the lower and upper limit of mesopic sensing (Zele & Cao, ). Albeit this prevents a clear discrimination of rod‐ and cone‐based vision in the motion analysis, essential conclusions can be drawn. First, the similarity of core parameters such as duration and snout contacts in the hurdle parcour between USH1C animals and WT controls in the dark confirms that pigs substantially rely on non‐vision sensing and denies an exclusive or dominant effect of vestibular dysfunction on movement. Second, the clear differences in illuminated environment and the characteristic difficulties that USH1C pigs have in the recognition of defined objects (Fig  A–C) document their substantial problems in orienting within a structured 3D space. Although an influence of the bilateral vestibular dysfunction on orientation cannot be excluded (Kremmyda et al, ), the faster and smoother locomotion (Fig  ) of WT control pigs, specifically under light conditions, demonstrates how a normal visual function promotes effective clearance of obstacles and “elegant” motion.
Taken together, the generation of an USH1C pig model has substantially improved our molecular understanding of the disease. We now have several lines of evidence how harmonin supports PRC function and the particular integrity of the OS. The early onset of basic defects in the retina and the impairment during the first year provides an ideal foundation for following the natural history of USH1C. Combining quantitative motion analysis with clinical examination tools will promote the definition of read‐out parameters in pre‐clinical studies and in clinical trials for treating the Usher syndrome, but also in trials involving patients with other progressive blinding or audiovestibular diseases. The long‐term maintenance of retinal structures and, moreover, the success of exploratory gene therapy approaches in older animals is highly relevant as it indicates a large window of therapeutic opportunity for USH1 patients.

## Material and Methods

## Regulatory statement
Work on USH pigs has been conducted under the supervision of the responsible regulatory authorities: the Regierung von Oberbayern has approved animal experiments involving somatic cell nuclear transfer, maintenance of pigs, and longitudinal monitoring at LMU Munich under the file number AZ 02‐17‐136. The State Veterinary Administration of the Czech Republic approved animal experiments on maintenance, sub‐retinal intervention and longitudinal monitoring at IAPG Libechov under the experimental protocol number 75/2019. Human primary cells were provided by University of Tuebingen, Germany, work on the cells was carried under approval of the ethics committee of the Landesaerztekammer Rheinland‐Pfalz under the file number 837.413.17. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects providing skin biopsies. The experiments on human fibroblasts conformed to the principles set out in the WMA Declaration of Helsinki and the Department of Health and Human Services Belmont Report.

## Antibodies, oligos, and gene synthesis
see .

## Generating USH1C pigs

## Bioinformatics evaluation

USH1C loci were identified in macaque, marmoset, cattle, sheep, pig, horse, cat, dog, rabbit, mouse, and rat by BLAT using human exonic sequences and extracted from the respective reference genomes (www.ensembl.org). Multi‐species alignments were done by a combination of DiAlign and CHAOS (Brudno et al, ). Proposed regulatory elements were extracted from the USCS Genome browser (genome.ucsc.edu) as DNase sensitive elements (Thurman et al, ), ENCODE ChIP‐Chip (Wang et al, ), FANTOM5 enhancer elements (Andersson et al, ), GeneHancer elements (Fishilevich et al, ), FAIRE ENCODE regions (Giresi et al, ) and PreMod (Ferretti et al, ). Any identified regulatory element was localized within the alignment in BioEdit (https://bioedit.software.informer.com/7.2/) and a density plot was created. Both, a homology plot at nucleic acid level and a protein conservation plot were calculated in BioEdit on the basis of the nucleotide summary assessment and entropy calculation functions, respectively. Coverage maps of the augmented alignment were plotted by JalView (Waterhouse et al, ).

## Personalized R31X allele
For introducing a patient‐specific segment, we analyzed a 1.6 kb fragment from an individual carrying an USH1CR31Xmutation. The PCR product was amplified with the primers hush1c_2f and hush1c_2r, cloned into a plasmid vector and sequenced. For avoiding the misinterpretation of potential PCR mistakes, the sequence of the R31X‐allele was based on 6 distinct clones and the other allele on 3 distinct clones. Consistently appearing polymorphisms were defined as SNPs.

## Targeting construct
The porcine USH1C gene has been annotated to chr2:42Mb, with the exons largely corresponding to the human USH1C transcript variant b3, GenBank no. NM_153676.4 (Appendix Fig ). Distinct porcine primary cell lines (Richter et al, ) were examined for SNPs in the target region and 3 distinct gRNAs, rk1, rk3, and rk4 that were not affected by cell line‐specific SNPs were examined for their power to introduce NHEJ‐based mutations in pig primary cells lines; for this, cells were nucleofected and after 48 h the target locus was amplified with the primers ushwt1f and ushwt1r, cloned into plasmids and sequenced. Targeting experiments were based on rk4 as it proved superior (12% mutation rate) to rk1 (6%) and rk3 (10%). BACs CH242‐515C3 and CH242‐199J14, were identified to completely carry the porcine USH1C locus via the Sscrofa 10.2 reference genome and the PigPre BAC map (www.ensemlb.org) and purchased from CHORI BACPAC Resources Center (BACPAC Genomics, Emeryville, CA, USA). A sequence comprising a 278 bp 5′‐arm, the 1,524 bp humanized fragment including the TGA stop codon in exon 2 and 3 intronic SNPs as well as a 278 bp 3′‐arm were commercially synthesized and provided in a pUC plasmid derivate by GeneArt (Invitrogen by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA). A cassette with a PGK/EM7 driven neo gene, providing neomycin resistance in mammalian cells and kanamycin resistance in bacteria (Klymiuk et al, ), was cloned into the plasmid via the NotI/XhoI sites located between the 5´‐arm and the humanized fragment. The entire fragment was excised from the backbone via AscI and introduced into the CH242‐515C3 BAC by bacterial recombineering, according Vochozkova et al ( ) using the SW106 E. coli strain (Warming et al, ). Correct modification of the BAC was proven by PCR for recombination at the 5′‐ and 3′‐ends with the primer pairs 5arm1f – 5arm1r and 3armwf – 3arm2r, and for the removal of the corresponding porcine segment with the primer pair ushwt1f – ushwt1r. Further, the overall integrity of the BAC and changes in the restriction enzyme (RE) recognition sites that arise from to the modification were confirmed by the RE pattern after digestion with XbaI (Fig  ) and SpeI (Appendix Fig D).

## Generating pigs
Plasmids carrying the modified BAC, the gRNA rk4 and Cas9 were prepared endotoxin‐freely and transfected into pig primary cells PKCf and PKCm by nucleofection (Amaxa by Lonza, Basel, Switzerland). Single cell clones were generated as described (Richter et al, ) and propagated toward a 2 × 96‐well scale. One aliquot was used for analysis by the loss‐of‐wild‐type‐allele approach (LOWA) (Vochozkova et al, ) and the other served as a backup for potential SCNT. qPCR was carried out on a LightCycler96 (Roche Life Science, Basel, Switzerland) using FastStart Essential DNA Green Master (Roche Life Science) and primer pair ush1c_qf1 – ush1c_qr1 for the target site as well as the primer pair o4_qf2 – o4_qr1 for a reference site in the POU5F1 gene and ng_qf6 – ng_qr4 for a second reference in the NANOG gene. Verified single cell clones were used as donors in SCNT and embryos were transferred to synchronized gilts, according standard procedures (Kurome et al, ). Birth was introduced in pregnant foster mothers by Estrumate at day 115. (MSD Animal Health, Merck, Kenilworth, NJ; USA).

## Tissue sampling
For isolation of pig primary kidney cells and sampling of tissue, animals were sedated with ketamine 100 mg/ml (Ursotamin®, Serumwerk Bernburg, Germany) and azaperone 40 mg/ml (Stresnil®, Elanco Animal Health, Bad Homburg, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Fully anesthetized animals were euthanized by intravenous injection of T61® (MSD Animal Health). Pig primary kidney cells were isolated according to standard procedures (Richter et al, ) (see below). Tissue samples for histology, electron microscopy, and molecular analyses were collected according to established sampling guidelines adapted to porcine biomedical models (Albl et al, ). Samples for molecular analysis were frozen on dry ice and stored at −80°C. Tissue was powdered using hammer and anvil first and pestle and mortar afterward. All instruments and samples were cooled in liquid nitrogen to avoid thawing of the samples during processing. Powdered tissue was transferred to a pre‐cooled tube and stored at −80°C.

## Breeding
After reaching fertility and stabilization of cycle, USH1C F0 sows were inseminated with WT sperm. When pregnant, sows were trained and reassured intensively for farrowing by regular physical contact with caretaker. F1 offspring were genotyped (see below) and raised for breeding purposes. After reaching fertility, F1 boars were mated to their mothers and sisters for producing USH1C‐null pigs and with wild‐type sows to broaden the genetic background of the future breeding herd. Some litters from hom x het matings were with their mother for suckling, but piglets were kept in a separate box otherwise. Upon calling by the mother, the barrier between the boxes was opened and the time until piglets passed the gate was determined. Non‐responding piglets were nudged by the caretaker after one minute to avoid impaired nurturing.

## Molecular analysis

## Genomic level
Genomic DNA was isolated from tail biopsies by using the Easy DNA kit (Invitrogen), DNAeasy kit (Qiagen, Hildesheim, Germany) or Nexttec kit (Nexttec GmbH, Leverkusen, Germany). For verifying the abundance of the modification element, amplicons generated with the primer pair hush_for3 – hush_rev3 were sequenced. The presence of the neo selection cassette was detected by endpoint PCR with usharm2f – ush5arm2r and sequencing of the amplicon while Cre‐mediated excision of neo was detected with neoFOR3 – neoREV3 and sequencing of the amplicon.

## Transcriptional analysis
RNA was isolated from powdered tissue samples using TRIzol (Invitrogen). Approximately 100 mg of powdered tissue was grinded up in 1 ml of TRIzol by Polytron PT2500E (Kinematica, Luzern, Switzerland) in a pulsatile manner to avoid overheating. Further steps were carried out as suggested by the TRIzol protocol and RNA was stored at −80°C. For cDNA synthesis, samples were treated first with DNase I (Invitrogen) to remove a possible contamination with genomic DNA. Then, RNA was reversely transcribed into cDNA with SuperScriptTM III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen). For determining USH1C transcripts, cDNA was used in RT–PCRs with the primer pair ushrt2f – ushrt2r or ushrt2f – urt4r, located in the consistently transcribed exons 1 and 8 or 6, for detecting all splice variants of the gene. Primer pairs ushrt11f – ushrt11r and ushrt13f – ushrt13r were used to amplify USH1C_a and USH1C_c variants (pig specific primers binding on exons according the splice pattern of human GenBank entries NM_005709.4 and NM_001297764.2, respectively). Primer pairs ushrt16f – ushrt16r and ushrt18f – ushrt18r were used to amplify USH_b splice variants (pig specific primers binding on exons according the splice pattern of human GenBank entry NM_153676.4). Afterward, Sanger sequencing was performed on PCR amplicons.

## Protein analysis
Tissue was powdered and then processed as previously described (Sedmak & Wolfrum, ). In brief, retinal tissues were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP‐40, 0.5% sodium‐deoxycholate, 1 mM sodiumvanadate, 30 mM sodium‐pyrophosphate, pH 7.4). Protein lysates were separated by SDS–PAGE gel electrophoresis, followed by semi‐dry Western blotting as previously described in (Overlack et al, ). Western blots were analyzed and quantified in an Odyssey infrared imaging system (LI‐COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA).

## Morphology & histology

## Immunohistochemistry
Porcine eyes were fixated in melting isopentane for cryosectioning as described (Overlack et al, ). Samples were sectioned with a MICROM HM 560 Cryo‐Star cryostat (Fisher Scientific by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and placed on poly‐L‐lysine‐precoated coverslips. After drying, samples were incubated with 0.01% Tween 20 PBS, then washed with PBS and covered with blocking solution (0.5% cold‐water fish gelatin, 0.1% ovalbumin in PBS) for a minimum of 30 min followed by overnight incubation at 4°C with primary antibodies (for details on antibodies and fluorescent dyes see below). For GFAP staining samples were post‐fixated with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. Cryosections were washed repeatedly and incubated with secondary antibodies in blocking solution containing DAPI (Sigma‐Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. After washing, sections were mounted in Mowiol (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany). Slides were analyzed on a Leica DM6000B microscope (Leica, Bensheim, Germany); images were processed with LAS‐AF Leica imaging software and ImageJ/Fiji software (Schindelin et al, ) or Adobe Photoshop CS (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA, USA).
Quantitative analyses of connecting ciliary length and cone synaptic width: For measurements of connecting cilia length and width of cone pedicle synapses we stained cryosections through pig retinae with either GT335, a marker for tubulin glutamylation in the connecting cilium or FITC‐PNA, a marker for the extracelluar matrix of cones, respectively. For the image analysis, we developed Fiji scripts by ImageJ/Fiji software for automatic analysis of the fluorescent images.
The script for measuring connecting cilium length is:
run("8‐bit");
run("Smooth");
run("Auto Threshold", "method=Yen ignore_black white");
run("Analyze Particles...", "size=10–75 pixel display add").
The script for measuring synapse width is:
run("8‐bit");
run("Mean...", "radius=2 stack");
run("Subtract Background...", "rolling=50 stack");
//setThreshold(0, 11);
run("Convert to Mask", "method=Otsu background=Light black");
run(“Measure”).

## Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
The temporal bones of the pigs were dissected to expose the middle and inner ears. Their cochleae were dissected immediately and the organ of Corti was exposed. The tectorial membrane was removed prior to fixation. Dissected cochleae were fixated in 2,5% glutaraldehyde, 4% PFA in 0.1 M Sörensen’s phosphate buffer. After several washing steps with 0.1 M Sörensen’s phosphate buffer, cochleae were dehydrated in ethanol, critical‐point dried, and gold sputtered in an argon atmosphere. Specimen were imaged with a Philips ESEM XL30 scanning electron microscope (Philips, Eindhoven, Netherlands).

## Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
For conventional TEM dissected eyeballs were pre‐fixated for 2 h in buffered 2.5% glutaraldehyde containing sucrose and post‐fixated in buffered 2% OsO4 as previously described (Karlstetter et al, ). After dehydration in ethanol and passaging through propylenoxid as an intermedium, samples were embedded in Renlam® M‐1 and polymerized at 60°C. For the pre‐embedding labeling, we followed a previously established protocol (Sedmak & Wolfrum, ). In brief, eyes were pre‐fixated in buffered 4% PFA, dissected, infiltrated with 30% buffered sucrose, and cracked by repeated freeze–thawing, followed by embedding in buffered 2% Agar (Sigma‐Aldrich). Agar blocks were sliced with a VT1000 S vibratome (Leica). Endogenous peroxidase activity in vibratome sections was suppressed by incubation with H2O2. Sections were incubated with primary antibodies for 4 days and overnight with biotinylated secondary antibody and were visualized with a Vectastain ABC‐Kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA).
Retina sections were first post‐fixated in 2.5% glutaraldehyde buffer and second in 0.5% OsO4 buffer. After dehydration, sections were flatmounted between ACLAR®‐films (Ted Pella Inc., Redding, CA, USA) in Renlam® M‐1 resin. Flatmount samples were heat‐polymerized and glued on the top of empty Araldit blocks. Ultrathin sections of the embedded specimens were prepared with an Ultracut S ultramicrotome (Leica) and collected on Formvar‐coated copper or nickel grids. Sections were counter‐stained with heavy metals before imaging and analyzing in a Tecnai 12 BioTwin TEM (FEI by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hillsboro, OR, USA), equipped with a SIS Mega‐View3 CCD camera (EMSIS, Münster, Germany) was used. The images were processed using Adobe Photoshop CS (Adobe Systems). Connecting cilia length or synapse width were analyzed directly in the TEM using the measuring tool of the Olympus SIS image analysis system (Soft Imaging Systems, Muenster, Germany). Quantification steps have been performed with Fiji/ImageJ.

## Primary cell culture
Pig primary kidney cells and primary dermal fibroblasts were isolated according to standard procedures (Richter et al, ). In brief, kidneys were taken from euthanized animals, washed in PBS containing Penicillin/Strepomycin and minced. Tissue was treated with collagenase and filtered cells were cultivated in DMEM. Pieces of porcine skin were disinfected in 98% Ethanol and after short washing in PBS placed in 10% Betaisodona solution. After repeated washing steps in PBS, skin was minced. Kidney or skin samples were transferred to cell culture dishes and completely covered with MEM containing 10% heat‐inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS) and 1% penicillin‐streptomycin (PS) and incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2. 5 days later 10% FCS were added. Outgrown cells were transferred to new complete medium for further culturing. For ciliogenesis experiments, 5 × 105 cells were seeded per well (in medium containing 10% FCS and 5% PS) and 24 h later cultured in OPTI‐MEM reduced‐serum medium (Invitrogen by Thermo Fisher Scientific). After 48 h of starvation, cells were washed in PBS and fixed with 2% PFA in PBS. After washing and permeabilization with 0.1% Triton‐X in PBS, cells were blocked with 0.5% cold‐water fish gelatin, 0.1% ovalbumin in PBS followed by incubation with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. After washing, coverslips were incubated with secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were washed and then mounted in with Mowiol (Roth). The primary ciliary length and number of ciliated fibroblasts were quantified by using Fiji. Lengths were measured directly in immunostained images taken with a 63‐x objective. For this purpose, the Arl13b‐positive axoneme was measured from the tip to the cilia base, which was labeled for pericentrin, a common marker for the ciliary base.

## Clinical examination

## Anesthesia
For examination with ERG, mfERG, OCT, AF, FA, and ABR on 3‐week old animals were anesthetized by intramuscular injection of 2 mg/kg azaperone (Stresnil®, Elanco, Germany), 0.02 mg/kg atropine sulfate (B. Braun, Germany) and 20 mg/kg ketamine (Ursotamin®, Serumwerke Bernburg, Germany). Anesthesia was continued by intravenous injection of propofol (Fresenius, Germany) according to effect. After endotracheal intubation, pigs were mechanically ventilated and cardiovascular function was monitored throughout the procedures. To exclude eyeball movement during examinations, a peripheral muscle relaxant (Rocuronium, Inresa, Germany) was applied. For ABR on older animals, animals were starved overnight before intramuscular application of TKX (tiletamine 4 mg/kg, zolazepam 4 mg/kg (Zoletil 100; Virbac), ketamine 5 mg/kg (Narketan 10; Chassot), and xylazine 1 mg/kg (Rometar 2%; Spofa).

## Auditory brain stem response (ABR)
In 3‐week‐old USH1C and WT piglets, ABR was recorded with standard electrodiagnostic equipment (Viking Quest®; Natus, Planegg, Germany) and Natus® TIP‐300 insert earphones (AF). Recording stainless steel needle electrodes were positioned subcutaneously ipsilateral to the stimulated ear over the mastoid at the base of the ear (−) and at the vertex in the midline of the skull corresponding to Cz (+). A ground electrode was positioned in the neck. Electrode impedance was < 2 kOhm. Click stimuli (100 µs, alternating polarity, 11.1 Hz) were delivered at supramaximal stimulation intensity (100 dBSPL) to one ear and masking noise was applied to the contralateral ear (−40 dBSPL). Filter settings were 100 Hz for high pass and 3 kHz for low pass filters. The ABR represented the averaged signal of 1,000–1,500 10 ms recordings. ABR was recorded twice for each ear to ensure reproducibility of the ABR peaks in WT animals (n = 3) or absence of recognizable peaks in USH1C‐null animals (n = 3), respectively. If there was no recordable ABR at 100 dBSPL in USH1C‐null animals, ABR was also conducted at 120 dBSPL (twice for each ear). Additional testing comprised ABR at decreasing steps of 10 dB in WT piglets. Hearing threshold was determined as the minimal click intensity that still evoked a noticeable potential negative peak after peak V. ABR for other time points were conducted with four subcutaneous needles placed in vertex, forehead, and mastoids with specialized audiometric equipment. 8 weeks and 2 years old animals were examined with eABRUSB (eABR–BioMed Jena GmbH, calibrated by standard norm IEC 318‐4) and headphones (Sennheiser Momentum M2 In‐Ear G Black‐Red, 18Ω) were used on the 8 weeks old piglets. Click stimuli (duration 100 µs, steps 10 to 5 dB) and tone pips (duration 100 µs, frequencies 2, 4, 8, 16 kHz, steps 10 to 5 dB) were applied. The evoked signal was filtered by band‐pass filter of range from 300 Hz to 3 kHz. All the responses were averaged 200–400 times for each intensity and analyzed with eAudio software. On 3 months, 6 months and 2 years old pigs, acoustic stimuli were generated with an evostar 2 system (ERA system: Evoselect/Evostar 2, Pilot Blankenfelde medizinisch elektronische Geräte GmbH) and presented to the animal via headphones (beyerdynamic, DT48, 5Ω, Germany). Click stimuli (duration of electric pulse 150 µs) and the tone pips (duration 2 ms, frequencies of 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 kHz, intensity steps from 10 to 5 dB) were applied. The signal from an electrode was filtered by band‐pass filter over the range of 100 Hz to 2.5 kHz. The response was averaged 200–500 times on each intensity. This signal was processed with and analyzed using Evostar software. The threshold response to each frequency and click was determined as the minimal tone/click intensity that still evoked a noticeable potential peak in the expected time window of the recorded signal. This evaluation process was the same for both systems.

## Electroretinography (ERG)
Full‐field ERG was recorded with a corneal Kooijman electrode (Roland Consult, Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany). Platinum needles were placed subcutaneously at the temple and top of the head between the ears as reference and ground electrodes respectively. Stimuli were brief white flashes (4 ms) delivered from a light source within the Kooijman electrode (Kooijman & Damhof, ). The RETImap system (Roland Consult) was used for stimulus generation and data acquisition. The recording protocol used was based on, and extended from, the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision standard for human clinical full‐field ERG. A band‐pass filter was used to remove frequencies outside 1–300 Hz. An interstimulus interval (ISI) of 1 s was used with 20 responses recorded and averaged for each single flash protocol. For scotopic ERG, the protocol consisted of 30 min dark‐adaptation, followed by recording of a dark‐adapted single flash series with increasing luminance from −3.0 log cd*s*m−2 to 2.0 log cd*s*m−2. After completion of the dark‐adapted intensity series, animals were light adapted for 10 min to a steady white background of 30 cd*s*m−2 with the same light source. Light‐adapted standard flash was recorded by using white flash stimuli at 0 log cd*s*m−2. The same luminance was used to record a 28 Hz flicker response for 300 ms. For multifocal ERG, the mfERG was recorded using the same RETImap system (Roland Consult) using a 61‐hexagon stimulus and according to the standard of the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (Hood et al, ). A 61‐hexagon stimulus was presented on a 51‐cm cathode ray tube monitor with a frame frequency of 60 Hz. It encompassed the central visual field of 44° horizontally and vertically. The scaled‐size hexagons (distortion factor 4) were light‐modulated according to a binary pseudorandom m‐sequence. The light state had a luminance of 120 cd/m−2 and the dark state of 1 cd/m−2. Refractive errors were not corrected. Pupil dilation was achieved with one drop of tropicamide–phenylephrine mixture into the conjunctival sac of each eye about 15 min before the exam. Contact lens electrodes (ERG‐jet®, CareFusion, San Diego, USA) were applied. Amplifier gain was set to 50,000 and the band‐pass from 5 to 100 Hz. There were eight recording cycles of 47 s each. The 61 traces are displayed separately in a false‐color‐coded amplitude map identifying P1 amplitude (measured from the N1 trough to the following maximum positive peak; N1 amplitude was measured from the electroneutral starting point to the first negative deflection). All traces were also grouped into one response value and the averaged first‐order kernel function displayed as single trace. Luminance levels in the pig eye were calculated from the light intensity measured at the floor. Given the complex physical correlation between light source, reflection, and sensing in an indoor 3D space, it is challenging to determine corresponding luminance levels in the pig eye, but considering the general reflexion parameter ρ as 0.2 seems a fair approximation.

## Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
Spectral‐domain OCT B‐scans of central retina in animals were obtained using a Spectralis HRA + OCT device (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) under general anesthesia and during full pupil dilation. During the acquisition, the corneal surface was protected with methylcellulose eye drops while lids were held open using lid specula. After 30deg and 55deg infrared and red‐free images were recorded using scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (SLO), animal received a flush of approximately 5 mg/kg fluorescein and the angiography was recorded using the 55 degree lens at multiple time points (0.5, 1, and 5 min).

## Behavior testing

## Barrier course
The design was adapted from a previous publication (Barone et al, ). Ten barriers (boards of 94 × 76 cm) were placed in a distance of one meter in a straight aisle (12 × 2.2 m) alternating in the middle, the left or right positions. There were four different arrangements of barriers, which were used alternatingly (Appendix Fig ). Pigs were trained in the course until they walked straight through the course without pausing or hesitating for at least two times in a row. After a training period of four weeks, the animals were tested in the course weekly. The pigs entered the course individually in random order, they had to pass the barriers, and at the end, they were rewarded with fruit juice in a food bowl. The test was performed before feeding to ensure a higher motivation in the pigs. After some runs in the light, the test was conducted alternately in the light (average of 135 lux) and in the dark (average of 2.9 lux). Illumination level was measured at three different sites in the course (start, middle and end) in animals’ head height. Each run was documented by video. The pigs were marked with numbers on their backs to facilitate recognition. The times pigs took for passing the course, from snout crossing the start line until the pig was touching the food bowl, were measured. All barrier contacts by the pigs were counted. Contacts were divided into two subgroups. Frontal contacts mean the pig was touching the barrier with its snout or head, while contacts were called lateral when the pig was touching the obstacle barrier with its shoulders or hips. Each turning around or walking back before reaching the end was counted. It was distinguished between turns in front of the course and turns within the course. Such runs were excluded. After turning around, animals were sent back to the course, and the new run was documented with time and contacts when they reached the end. Walking in circles was counted as a separate event as well. As long as they were just circling and not walking back, the run was not excluded, time measurement was continuing. When the pig was circling in front of the start line, those circles were also counted, but time measurement only started when the animal was crossing the start line. Pigs were excluded from parcour testing when they were lame or when they had already been outside of their pen on the experiment day for another reason. When a pig was turning around or circling so often that it needed longer than two minutes to walk to the endpoint, the run was also excluded. The numbers of turns/circles within those two minutes were nonetheless counted. Pigs were not included in the study when motivation was lacking, for example, in the case a pig did not head to the endpoint reliably after six weeks of training or when it seemed more interested in playing with the barriers than walking straight to the food bowl.

## Obstacle course
An obstacle course to test the visual capacity of USH1C pigs and WT pigs was conducted. The course was 6.15 m long, the width was 1.58 m in the beginning and 2.48 m in the end. Most obstacles were built from obstacles used for equestrian sport, other obstacles were a stepboard and barrels. Obstacles were rearranged for almost each test day (Appendix Fig ).
Pigs were trained until they walked straight through the obstacle course to the food trough without stopping or hesitating. After a training period of three weeks, the pigs were performing the course once a week. The pigs entered the course individually in random order, they had to pass the obstacles and at the end they were rewarded with a cookie in a food trough. The test was conducted under light and dim conditions. Each run was documented by video. The pigs were marked with numbers to facilitate recognition. The times the pigs needed to pass the course were measured. All contacts with the obstacles or the wall were counted. When a pig nudged one obstacle more than once in a playful way in the same area, this was counted as one touch. When a pig touched one obstacle at different sites, each contact was counted separately. When a pig swept along an obstacle with its snout, this was counted as two touches. When a pig turned around before reaching the end or when a pig was lame, the pig was excluded for the test day. For analyzing the trajectory, the dimensions of the course and the gaps of the slatted floor were measured and scaled at 1:100 (Macromedia FreeHand MX, STUDIOMX 2004). Using the slatted floor as a ruler, each footstep of each animal in each qualified run were plotted in the map. X and Y coordinates of footsteps as well as the corresponding times when the foot touched the ground were transferred to an excel file. Trajectories were analyzed from these data sets with the R package trajr. Briefly, we first imported and smoothed all trajectories to avoid any source of noise by applying a Savitzky‐Golay smoothing filter (Savitzky & Golay, ; Luo et al, ). Then, we called all the functions of the trajr packages (McLean & Skowron Volponi, ) to characterize the trajectories into measures of speed, length, distance, duration and measures of straightness or tortuosity. The trajectory significance was tested using Kruskal–Wallis test. For statistical evaluation, data were checked for consistency and normality. Fisher’s exact test or Pearson’s test were used to analyze cross tabulations. Generalized linear models with Poisson distribution, Median tests, bootstrap‐t tests based on 5000 Monte Carlo simulations, t‐tests with and without the assumption of homogeneity, Mann–Whitney U‐tests were used to test continuously distributed variables. All reported tests were two‐sided, and P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Analyses were performed by use of NCSS_10 (NCSS LLC, Kaysville, UT, USA), STATISTICA_13 (Statsoft, Tulsa, OK, USA), MATHEMATICA_12 (Wolfram Research, Hanborough, UK), Champaign, IL (2018) and PASW 24 (SPSS by IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA), and Prism_5 (GraphPad Software, San Diego CA, USA).

## Therapy approaches

## AAV transduction of retinal layers
Distinct AAVs (AAV8.CMV.eGFP, AAV9.CMV.eGFP, and Anc80.CMV.eGFP) were generated by the viral core facility at Boston Children’s Hospital Viral Core at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary. AAVs were injected subretinally into the eyes of WT pig at an age of 30 months using an ophthalmologic surgery microscope (Hi‐R NEO 900A, Haag‐Streit). Using inhalation anesthesia (Morpheus E, Siare), morphology of the retina was examined via OCT iVue (Optovue, Fremont, CA, USA) on both eyes before the injection. 200 µl of AAVs (2 × 1010 AAV particle (vg)) were applied in the subretinal space with Extendible 41G subretinal injection needle (23 gauge/0.6 mm) (DORC, Zuidland, Netherlands). After 5 weeks injection sites were evaluated by OCT (see above) and funduscopy, confirming the concise injection sites. Following enucleation, the eyecup was dissected and fixed with 4% PFA in PBS. Flattened whole mount preparations of the eyecup were analyzed by epifluorescence using a handhold device (Bluestar Flashlight, Nightsea, Lexington, MA, USA). Samples were processed for cryosectioning and analysis as described above.

## Gene repair in vitro

Different constellations of the gRNAs urg1 and urg2 with correcting ssODN urt1, urt2, urt1.1, urt1.2, urt1.3, urt1.4, and urt1.5 were tested in primary fibroblasts. For this, plasmids encoding Cas9 and the respective gRNA as well as correcting oligonucleotides were nucleofected under standard conditions (Richter et al, ). After 24–48 h of cultivation, DNA was isolated from mixed cell batches and the efficacy of NHEJ and HDR were determined by examination of Sanger electropherograms of amplicons generated by PCR with the primer pair huUSH2f – huUSH2r and sequenced with primer ush1s in the web‐based ICE v2 CRISPR Analysis Tool (https://www.synthego.com/products/bioinformatics/crispr‐analysis by Synthego, Menlo Park, CA, USA). For examination of specific allelic constellations, cells nucleofected with urg1 and urt1.3 were seeded onto 96‐well plates and single cell clones were produced. DNA was isolated from independent clones and PCR amplicons were generated by primer pair ushHS1f – huUSH1r, sequenced with primer ush1s, and analyzed by Sanger sequencing.

## Gene therapy in vitro

For restoring gene expression, 2.5 × 105 primary porcine fibroblasts were transfected with 0.4 µg of an endotoxin‐free pDest_Harm_a1_S/F plasmid (Invitrogen), expressing splice form a1 of the human USH1C gene under the control of the CMV promoter. Transfection was performed with the 4D‐NucleofectorTM X Unit (Lonza), using the P2 Primary Cell 4D‐NucleofectorTM X Kit S and program FS113, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After transfection, cells were seeded in 10% FCS and analyzed for ciliogenesis as described above.

## Gene therapy in vivo

1 × 1011 vg Anc80.CMV.harmonin_a1 in 200 µl PBS (manufactured by Boston Children's Hospital Viral Core) was injected subretinally into the right eye, while the left eye was sham‐treated with 200 µl PBS vehicle, according to the procedures described for the AAV transduction experiment (see above). Animal #10056 was injected at an age of 2.5 years and experiment was terminated after 12 months after gfERG examination. Eyes were collected from the vesicular and non‐vesicular areas of the retina for immunofluorescence and Western blot analyses. Animal #10054 was injected at an age of 3.5 years. After intermediate gfERG examination 3 months after injection, the experiment is ongoing.

## Author contributions

Sophia Grotz: Validation; Investigation; Visualization; Methodology; Writing—original draft; Writing—review and editing. Jessica Schäfer: Validation; Investigation; Visualization; Methodology; Writing—original draft; Writing—review and editing. Kirsten A Wunderlich: Investigation; Methodology. Zdenka Ellederova: Methodology; Project administration. Hannah Auch: Validation; Investigation; Methodology. Andrea Bähr: Supervision; Investigation; Methodology. Petra Runa‐Vochozkova: Supervision; Investigation; Methodology. Janet Fadl: Investigation. Vanessa Arnold: Investigation. Taras Ardan: Investigation; Methodology. Miroslav Veith: Investigation; Methodology. Gianluca Santamaria: Software; Formal analysis; Methodology. Georg Dhom: Investigation. Wolfgang Hitzl: Formal analysis; Methodology. Barbara Kessler: Methodology. Christian Eckardt: Investigation. Joshua Klein: Investigation. Anna Brymova: Investigation. Joshua Linnert: Investigation. Mayuko Kurome: Methodology. Valeri Zakharchenko: Methodology. Andrea Fischer: Supervision; Investigation; Methodology; Writing—review and editing. Andreas Blutke: Investigation; Methodology; Writing—review and editing. Anna Döring: Investigation. Stepanka Suchankova: Investigation; Methodology. Jiri Popelar: Supervision. Eduardo Rodríguez‐Bocanegra: Validation. Julia Dlugaiczyk: Supervision. Hans Straka: Formal analysis. Helen May‐Simera: Conceptualization; Investigation; Methodology; Writing—review and editing. Weiwei Wang: Resources. Karl‐Ludwig Laugwitz: Conceptualization; Methodology; Writing—review and editing. Luk H Vandenberghe: Resources. Eckhard Wolf: Conceptualization; Methodology; Writing—review and editing. Kerstin Nagel‐Wolfrum: Conceptualization; Validation; Investigation; Visualization; Methodology; Writing—original draft; Writing—review and editing. Tobias Peters: Formal analysis. Jan Motlik: Supervision; Methodology; Project administration; Writing—review and editing. M Dominik Fischer: Supervision; Validation; Visualization; Methodology; Writing—original draft; Writing—review and editing. Uwe Wolfrum: Conceptualization; Supervision; Funding acquisition; Validation; Investigation; Visualization; Methodology; Writing—original draft; Writing—review and editing. Nikolai Klymiuk: Conceptualization; Supervision; Funding acquisition; Validation; Investigation; Visualization; Methodology; Writing—original draft; Project administration; Writing—review and editing.
In addition to the CRediT author contributions listed above, the contributions in detail are:
SG contributed to molecular analysis and breeding of animals, designed and performed behavior tests and contributed to writing of the manuscript. JS contributed to molecular and morphological analysis, and ciliation analysis in primary fibroblasts. KAW contributed to tissue sampling and processing, imaging (IF and SEM), data analysis and interpretation. ZE contributed to breeding attempts sub‐retinal intervention and ABR measurements. HA evaluated Gene Repair. ABä managed intervention on pigs and anesthesia. PR‐V contributed to Gene Repair study. JF contributed to genetic modification. VA contributed to quantitative analysis of the synaptic phenotype in cones. TA managed intervention on pigs. MV performed subretinal injection. GS performed trajectory analysis. GD contributed to animal management and tissue sampling. WH performed data analysis. BK contributed to Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer and performed Embryo Transfer. CE performed RT–PCR on USH1C transcripts. JK participated in the molecular and morphologic analysis of eyes after USH1C gene therapy. ABr contributed to ERG measurements. JL performed ciliation analysis in primary fibroblasts. MK and VZ performed Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer. AF, SS, and JP performed ABR measurement. ER‐B participated in ophthalmologic analysis. ABl conducted pathological examinations and tissue preparation. AD contributed to ERG measurement. JD and HS contributed to the analysis of the vestibular phenotype. HM‐S assisted with tissue dissection and cochlear preparation. K‐LL and EW contributed to the design of the study and the writing of the manuscript. WW and LHV provided AAV vectors. KN‐W contributed to the design of the study, interpretation of data and writing of the manuscript. TP performed ERG and OCT measurements. JM contributed to the design of the study, orchestrated breeding attempts, sub‐retinal intervention and ABR measurements. MDF led the ophthalmological characterization of animals, performed the vitreoretinal surgery and contributed writing of the manuscript. UW designed and coordinated the study, performed molecular and morphological analysis, interpreted data and wrote the manuscript. NK designed and coordinated the study, performed bio‐informatic and molecular analysis, interpreted data and wrote the manuscript. ER‐B contributed to analysis of ERG and OCT measurements.

## Supporting information
Appendix
Click here for additional data file.
Expanded View Figures PDF
Click here for additional data file.
Movie EV1
Click here for additional data file.
Movie EV2
Click here for additional data file.
Movie EV3
Click here for additional data file.
Movie EV4
Click here for additional data file.
Movie EV5
Click here for additional data file.
Movie EV6
Click here for additional data file.
Movie EV7
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 1
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the FAUN Stiftung and USHER2020, by the Foundation Fighting Blindness (FFB) (to: E.W., N.K. & U.W. (TA‐GT‐0316‐0693‐JGU); K.N.W. & U.W. (TA‐GT‐0316‐0694‐JGU) and to U.W. (PPA‐0717‐0719‐RAD)), as well as by the German Research Council within SPP2127 “Gene and cell‐based therapies for neuroretinal degeneration” (to: M.D.F. (FI 2336/1‐1); H.M.‐S. (MA 6139/3‐1); K.N.W. (NA1398/1); U.W. (WO548/9); N.K. (KL 2405/2‐1)). We are grateful to Elisabeth Sehn, Ulrike Maas, Gabi Stern‐Schneider, and Yvonne Kerner for their excellent technical support, to Martin Pavlik and Alena Havrdova for excellent animal caretaking, to Marold Handl for necropsy assistance. Many thanks also to the Institute of Pathology, LMU Munich for providing facilities and infrastructure for necropsies. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

## Disclosure and competing interests statement
U.W., K.N.W., E.W. & N.K. are holders of patent US2020/0337279_A1.

## Data availability
This study includes no data deposited in external repositories.

 Reviewer Report