EMBO JEMBO J78emboj8208664EMBJThe EMBO Journal0261-41891460-2075Nature Publishing GroupPMC8280819PMC8280819.1828081982808193401822010.15252/embj.2020106111EMBJ20201061111ArticleArticlesRedox homeostasis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis is modulated by a novel actinomycete‐specific transcription factor
Mehak Zahoor Khan et alKhanMehak Zahoorhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2780-4119 SinghaBiplabhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3205-1323 AliMohammad Farhan TaunkKhushman RapoleSrikanth GourinathSamudrala NandicooriVinay Kumarhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5682-4178 vinaykn@nii.ac.in

1

National Institute of Immunology
New Delhi
India

2

School of Life Sciences
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi
India

3

National Centre for Cell Science
Pune
India

*
Corresponding author. Tel: +91 11 26703789; Fax: +91 11 26742125; E‐mail: vinaykn@nii.ac.in

21520211572021401438576610.1002/embj.v40.14e106111
1742021
0172020
2042021
210520212307202107042026© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 licensehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) has evolved diverse cellular processes in response to the multiple stresses it encounters within the infected host. We explored available TnSeq datasets to identify transcription factors (TFs) that are essential for Mtb survival inside the host. The analysis identified a single TF, Rv1332 (AosR), conserved across actinomycetes with a so‐far uncharacterized function. AosR mitigates phagocyte‐derived oxidative and nitrosative stress, thus promoting mycobacterial growth in the murine lungs and spleen. Oxidative stress induces formation of a single intrasubunit disulphide bond in AosR, which in turn facilitates AosR interaction with an extracytoplasmic‐function sigma factor, SigH. This leads to the specific upregulation of the CysM‐dependent non‐canonical cysteine biosynthesis pathway through an auxiliary intragenic stress‐responsive promoter, an axis critical in detoxifying host‐derived oxidative and nitrosative radicals. Failure to upregulate AosR‐dependent cysteine biosynthesis during the redox stress causes differential expression of 6% of Mtb genes. Our study shows that the AosR‐SigH pathway is critical for detoxifying host‐derived oxidative and nitrosative radicals to enhance Mtb survival in the hostile intracellular environment.

Oxidative stress‐activated transcription factor AosR regulates the non‐canonical cysteine biosynthesis pathway in M. tuberculosis to promote bacterial growth in the host cells.
 

cysteineMycobacterium tuberculosisoxidative stresssigma factorstranscription factors

## Subject Categories
Chromatin, Epigenetics, Genomics & Functional GenomicsMetabolismMicrobiology, Virology & Host Pathogen InteractionDepartment of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, India (DBT)BT/PR13522/COE/34/27/2015BT/PR10855/BRB/10/1330/2014DST | Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB)CRG/2018/001294JCB/2019/000015 The present study was undertaken to address the following questions: (i) “What is the cellular and physiological role of this transcription factor and why does it aid in the survival within the host though not in vitro?”, (ii) “what are the physiological triggers and the mode of activation of AosR?”, (iii) “what does the AosR regulon comprise of?”, (iv) “does it mediate its function(s) through any partner proteins, and if so, which?”, and (v) “what is the significance of AosR‐mediated regulation of the transcriptional network(s) it controls vis‐à‐vis Mtb survival and persistence within the host?”. Collectively, our results indicate that inhibition of this novel redox‐sensing regulatory network impacts global gene expression, dampening the pathogen's ability to combat host‐induced redox stress, thus attenuating its survival in the host.

## Results

## AosR is a novel transcription factor that promotes Mtb virulence in vivo

Analysis of previously published Mtb TnSeq data revealed that transposon‐induced mutants of 10 TFs display attenuated growth only when within the host (Appendix Table  and Fig  ). Interestingly, only one among these—Rv1332 (AosR), is highly enriched in actinomycetes (99.8%). AosR is a 24 kDa protein that harbors an N‐terminal CxxxC motif and a helix‐turn‐helix motif, followed by a domain of an unknown function, DUF2017 (Fig  ). Orthologs of AosR are highly conserved throughout the actinomycete order (Huerta‐Cepas et al,
 ), with 25.5% of the orthologs belonging to mycobacteriaceae, 36.4% belonging to corynebacteriaceae, and 10.9% to nocardiaceae (Fig  and Table  ). To investigate the effect of AosR on mycobacterial gene expression and adaptation, we constructed a genetic deletion mutant RvΔaosR in MtbH37Rv (Rv) (Fig ). Complementation with AosR placed under its native promoter in an integrative plasmid (RvΔaosR::
aosR) restored AosR expression to levels similar in Rv (Fig  ). While the RvΔaosR mutant showed no growth difference in vitro in nutrient‐rich or limiting media (Fig ), its survival was compromised by ~ 10‐fold within peritoneal macrophages (pΦ) at day 4 post‐infection (p.i) (Fig  ). Subsequently, we evaluated bacillary survival using the murine model of infection (Fig  ). Equal deposition of all three strains was confirmed by determining CFUs in the lung 24 h p.i (Fig  ). The bacillary survival and growth rates of all three strains were indistinguishable a week after infection, both in the lungs and in the spleen (Fig  ). As the infection progressed thereafter, the difference in the survival of RvΔaosR became distinctly apparent. The survival of RvΔaosR was ~ 10‐fold lower than Rv and RvΔaosR::aosR at the persistence phase of infection (day 14 onwards; Fig  ). These data suggest that Rv1332 is specifically required for mycobacterial survival within its host.
 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is exposed to multiple stresses within host macrophages. The deletion of aosR did not affect Mtb's ability to combat acidic, starvation, or surfactant stresses (Fig  ). We observed a marginal (~ 1.5‐fold) decrease in the survival of RvΔaosR upon exposure to nitrosative stress. However, RvΔaosR showed markedly compromised survival (~ 30‐fold) upon exposure to peroxide radicals (Fig ). This effect was dose‐dependent, with increasing concentrations of CHP leading to poorer survival of RvΔaosR when compared with Rv and RvΔaosR::aosR (Fig  ). Importantly, RvΔaosR displayed higher susceptibility to both peroxide stress (H2O2, CHP) and thiol oxidizer diamide (Fig  ). Collectively, these data led us to conclude that AosR is a major contributor to mycobacterial survival during oxidative stress. Thus, we named it as 
a
ctinomycetes 
o
xidative 
s
tress 
r
egulator (AosR).
 

## AosR protects the pathogen from phagocyte‐derived reactive oxygen and nitrogen species
IFNγ elicits the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) through Phox and iNOS, respectively (Fig  ). Phox is composed of two transmembrane glycoprotein subunits, gp22 and gp91, and three additional cytosolic subunits (Fig  ). Survival defects of Mtb mutants of katG, sodA, and sodC genes (whose products neutralize oxygen radicals) are restored in gp91 knockout mice (phox−/−), underlining the importance of ROS in host defense mechanisms (Edwards et al,
 ; Piddington et al,
 ; Ng et al,
 ). To evaluate the contribution of AosR in protecting Mtb from host‐derived stress, we infected peritoneal macrophages that were derived from wild‐type C57BL/6 (WT) or murine strains that are deficient either in their ability to induce oxidative stress (phox−/−) or both oxidative and nitrosative stresses (IFNγ−/−) (Fig  ). RvΔaosR mutants showed compromised survival within the peritoneal macrophages isolated from wild‐type mice, which was exacerbated upon the addition of IFNγ (Fig  ). The differences in survival were nullified when pΦ were isolated from IFNγ−/− mice (Fig  ). To delineate the role of AosR in mitigating ROS and RNS stress independently or together, the survival of mycobacterial strains was evaluated in pΦ isolated from WT and phox−/− in the presence or absence of iNOS inhibitor. RvΔaosR displayed survival advantages (~7‐ to 8‐fold) in pΦ isolated from phox−/− mice as well as upon the inhibition of iNOS when compared with the WT (Figs  and ). However, inhibition of ROS and RNS independently was insufficient to completely abate the survival differences observed between Rv and RvΔaosR or RvΔaosR and RvΔaosR::aosR strains (Figs  and ). Importantly, inhibition of both ROS and RNS by treating pΦ from phox−/− with iNOS inhibitor completely overcame the survival defects of the RvΔaosR (Figs  and ). These results suggest that AosR is critical for mycobacterial defense against both host‐derived ROS and RNS. However, this is in contrast with the in vitro data, wherein we observed marginal differences in the susceptibility of the RvΔaosR strain upon the addition of DETA‐NO (Fig  ). We speculate that the discrepancy between in vitro and ex vivo results is most likely due to the crosstalk between ROS and RNS pathways in the host (Fig  ). To validate these findings in vivo, we infected WT, phox−/−, and IFNγ−/− mice with Rv,
RvΔaosR, and RvΔaosR::aosR and monitored their survival at 4 weeks p.i. Bacillary survival in the lungs of infected animals at day 1 indicated equal deposition. As observed in Fig  , Rv∆aosR displayed attenuated survival compared with Rv and RvΔaosR::aosR in WT mice at 4 weeks p.i (Figs  and ). Importantly, the survival differences between the strains were abolished in phox−/− and IFNγ−/− mice (Figs  and ). These results indicate that AosR detoxifies host‐derived ROS and RNS facilitating the mycobacterial growth in the host.
 

## AosR rewires the transcriptome in response to oxidative stress
To gain insights into the mechanism by which AosR modulates the cell's response to oxidative stress, RNAseq analyses of Rv and RvΔaosR cells in the absence and presence of oxidative stress were carried out (Appendix Fig ; Dataset , , , , ). Compared with the untreated controls, the addition of CHP to Rv and RvΔaosR resulted in the differential expression of 301 and 358 genes, respectively. While we found only 23 genes to be differentially expressed (4 downregulated and 19 upregulated) between both strains under normal growth conditions (Fig  ), the addition of CHP resulted in 434 genes to be differentially modulated. Among these genes, 156 genes overlapped with those that were differentially regulated due to CHP stress in RvΔaosR (Fig  and Dataset ), signifying that their regulation is likely to be independent of AosR (Fig  ). Excluding these, the stress‐responsive AosR regulon thus appears to consist of 278 genes (233 upregulated and 45 downregulated in Rv compared with RvΔaosR), suggesting AosR to be a probable transcriptional activator (Fig  ; Dataset ). Intermediary metabolism and respiration were the most prominent functional category among the AosR‐regulated genes (Fig  ). We further analyzed these 278 genes to identify the ones that are clustered in the same operon (Appendix Fig ), as they are likely to be directly regulated by AosR (Dataset ). Of the 57 genes that shared an operon with one or more other members of the group, the differential regulation of seven highly upregulated genes and two downregulated genes was further validated by qRT–PCRs (Fig  ). To confirm that their regulation was indeed AosR‐dependent, we analyzed the expression of the same genes in Rv and RvΔaosR cells treated with CHP (Fig  ). Up‐ or downregulation observed in Rv upon CHP‐induced stress was nullified in CHP‐treated RvΔaosR, suggesting that the regulation is mediated through AosR. Taken together, global transcriptome profiling suggests that AosR influences the expression of ~6% of Mtb's genes in response to oxidative stress.
 

## AosR regulates non‐canonical cysteine biosynthesis pathway
In analyzing the differentially expressed genes, of particular intrigue was the observation that rv1334 was upregulated in Rv in response to CHP (Fig  ) and downregulated in RvΔaosR compared with Rv in response to CHP (Fig  ). This gene, also known as mec, has been predicted to be a part of an eleven‐gene operon (rv1331 to rv1341) that also includes aosR (rv1332) (Appendix Fig ). To confirm the genetic architecture of this predicted operon, we performed RT–PCRs using primer combinations from different genes of the operon and established that Rv1331‐Rv1341 is indeed part of a single operon (Appendix Fig ). While the functions of most of the genes of the operon are uncharacterized, genes encoding for mec, cysO, and cysM, participate in a non‐canonical actinomycete‐specific cysteine biosynthesis pathway (Fig  ) (Burns et al,
 ). The pathway commences by the transfer of sulfur from a yet unidentified source to the C‐terminus of the CysO protein by a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme MoeZ (Rv3206), to form thiocarboxylated CysO (CysO‐SH). The CysM protein then utilizes O‐phosphoserine and CysO‐SH as substrates to catalyze the formation of a CysO‐cysteine adduct, which is subsequently cleaved by the protease Mec, to produce cysteine and CysO(Burns et al,
 ) (Fig  ). This is proposed to be the primary route to l‐cysteine biosynthesis inside the host (Rengarajan et al,
 ; Hatzios & Bertozzi, ).
 Since genes rv1331 to rv1341 are part of the same operon, we hypothesized that during oxidative stress, AosR binds to the operon promoter upstream of Rv1331, thus inducing transcription of the entire operon (Fig  ). If this were true, one would expect enhanced l‐cysteine production, which would lead to the biosynthesis of antioxidants such as mycothiol and ergothioneine. Concordant with this, the addition of l‐cysteine to the growth medium rescued the survival defect of RvΔaosR both in vitro and within pΦ (Fig  ). To negate the possibility of the addition of l‐cysteine itself perturbing the redox homeostasis, we examined if overexpression of mec‐cysO‐cysM can complement the RvΔaosR phenotype. We found that indeed the overexpression of mec‐cysO‐cysM (mom) cluster in the RvΔaosR strain could rescue the growth and survival defects both in vitro (Appendix Fig ) and ex vivo (Fig  ), suggesting that the non‐canonical l‐cysteine biosynthesis pathway mitigates oxidative stress.
Contrary to the hypothesis that the entire operon might be upregulated under redox stress (Fig  ), we observed the protein levels of AosR to be unaltered upon CHP treatment (Fig  ). Moreover, gene expression analysis by qRT–PCR revealed that while mec, cysO, and cysM were significantly upregulated in response to redox stress, there was no difference in the expression of the first three genes of the operon rv1331‐Rv1333 (Fig  ). While the transcript levels of mec and cysM peaked at 3 h post‐treatment (Appendix Fig ), the corresponding protein levels peaked at 6 h post‐CHP addition (Appendix Fig ). In agreement with the data in Fig  , neither transcriptional (Fig  ) nor translational levels (Appendix Fig ) of AosR were altered upon CHP treatment. Most importantly, the expression levels of the other cysteine synthases, CysK1, and CysK2 (Fig  ), also remained unaltered (Fig  and Appendix Fig ). Consistent with these results, quantitative analysis of protein levels 6 h post‐CHP addition suggested a twofold to threefold increase in CysO and CysM (Appendix Fig ). Notably, CysO or CysM expression was not enhanced in CHP‐treated RvΔaosR, a deficiency that was overcome upon complementation with aosR (Fig  ). Taken together, these results supported the conclusion that the induction of CysM and CysO expression in response to oxidative stress is indeed AosR‐dependent.
To conclusively demonstrate that mec‐cysO‐cysM augments Mtb defense against peroxide stress, we deleted the non‐canonical cysteine synthase CysM (RvΔcysM) (Appendix Fig  ) and examined its phenotype. The RvΔcysM mutant exhibited compromised survival during in vitro peroxide stress and within pΦ (Fig  ). The survival defect in response to peroxide was more pronounced in RvΔcysM as compared with RvΔaosR, likely due to the absence of even basal levels of cysM expression. Importantly, similar to RvΔaosR, the attenuated survival of RvΔcysM was recuperated in pΦ isolated from IFNγ−/− mice (Fig  ). Collectively, these results indicate that AosR‐driven upregulation of mec‐cysO‐cysM combats host‐induced stress.

## AosR binds to a stress‐inducible auxiliary promoter in conjunction with SigH
The results presented above suggested the possibility of an auxiliary AosR‐dependent promoter upstream of mec, through which mec‐cysO‐cysM expression might be induced upon oxidative stress (Fig  ). To examine this hypothesis, we fused the 500 bp immediately upstream sequence of the mec gene with the luciferase gene and analyzed luciferase activity in the absence or presence of CHP in Rv and RvΔaosR. In contrast to the control sigA promoter‐luciferase construct, which supported luciferase expression regardless of the presence of CHP, the mec promoter drove luciferase expression only upon oxidative stress, suggesting the presence of an inducible auxiliary promoter (Fig  ; left panel), importantly, while the mec promoter‐driven luciferase activity could only be detected in Rv but not in RvΔaosR, indicating AosR to be a positive regulator of this promoter (Fig  ).
 While AosR is necessary for mec‐cysO‐cysM transcriptional activation, it alone might not be sufficient to do so. Thus, to identify an associated factor that contributes to AosR‐mediated transcriptional regulation, we examined the AosR interactome. FLAG‐AosR was immunoprecipitated (IP) from whole‐cell lysates isolated from formaldehyde‐treated RvΔaosR::pN or RvΔaosR::pN‐aosR cells, in the absence or presence of CHP. The co‐immunoprecipitating proteins were identified using mass spectrometry (Fig  ). As AosR regulates transcription in response to oxidative stress, interacting partners exclusively found in RvΔaosR::pN‐aosR+CHP were of interest (Fig  ). Only four proteins fell into this category, and one among these was SigH: an extracytoplasmic‐function sigma factor (Fig  ), known to respond to oxidative stress (Raman et al,
 ; Manganelli et al,
 ; Sharp et al,
 ).
To validate the interaction between SigH and AosR, we performed biolayer interferometry (BLI) with purified proteins. His‐SigH protein was immobilized on the sensor, and increasing concentrations of His‐AosR were allowed to interact. The binding of AosR to the SigH bound on the biosensor would increase the thickness of the layer on the sensor tip resulting in a wavelength shift that was measured. We found a significant shift in the association curve upon the addition of AosR in a concentration‐dependent manner both in reduced and oxidized conditions (Appendix Fig ). The binding curves thus generated were fitted to a 1:1 binding model, and the equilibrium dissociation constant (Kd) values were calculated under both conditions (Appendix Fig ). The binding affinity of AosR toward SigH is higher under oxidizing conditions with a Kd value of ~ 300 nM compared with the reducing conditions wherein the Kd value was ~ 3,000 nM. Moreover, the response of the interaction was threefold higher under oxidizing conditions compared with the reducing conditions (Fig  ). Oxidative‐dependent interactions between SigH and AosR were further confirmed by performing a reverse IP wherein FLAG‐SigH was found to interact with AosR specifically under oxidizing conditions (Fig  ). If SigH‐AosR interaction is indeed critical for AosR‐mediated transcriptional activation of mec‐cysO‐cysM, one would expect that the genetic deletion of sigH (RvΔsigH) phenocopies the effects observed in RvΔaosR. Consistent with this hypothesis, neither CysM nor CysO protein levels were upregulated in RvΔsigH mutant upon peroxide stress, suggesting that both AosR and SigH are important for mec‐cysO‐cysM upregulation (Fig  ).
SigH regulates genes involved in DNA repair, sulfate uptake, cysteine, and molybdopterin biosynthesis in response to heat or oxidative stress (Raman et al,
 ; Manganelli et al,
 ; Sharp et al,
 ). Its deletion compromises the ability of Mtb to combat oxidative stress (Manganelli et al,
 , ; Raman et al,
 ). The SigH regulon identified through ChipSeq (Sharp et al,
 ) showed direct binding to the intragenic region upstream of mec‐cysO‐cysM (Fig  ). Having established that SigH‐AosR regulates mec‐cysO‐cysM upon peroxide stress, we next sought to determine whether either or both proteins could directly interact with the promoter region of mec. Toward this, we fused 100 bp upstream of mec‐cysO‐cysM harboring the SigH binding sequence identified through ChipSeq (Fig  ), upstream of the luciferase gene. Luciferase activity evaluated in the absence and presence of CHP in Rv validated that the auxiliary promoter element necessary for stress‐inducible response lies within the 100 bp region (Fig  ). Next, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) with radiolabeled 100 bp fragment to examine the direct binding of AosR and SigH. EMSA indicated that both AosR and SigH bind 100 bp fragment both under reducing and oxidizing conditions. Importantly, the addition of both proteins together resulted in stronger binding under oxidizing conditions, compared with the reduced conditions indicating that the DNA binding is influenced by the redox environment (Fig  ). We established the specificity of the observed shift in the EMSA by performing competition with fold excess of unlabeled 100 bp fragment (Fig  ). Collectively, these results suggest that AosR and SigH are independently essential for the regulation of non‐canonical cysteine biosynthesis pathway and that the two factors come together in the cell's response to oxidative stress, acting concertedly to activate transcription of the mom cluster.

## Intracellular redox status governs activation of AosR
The alignment of the amino acid sequences of AosR from various mycobacterial species highlights the well‐conserved primary sequence of this protein. Interestingly, while the DUF2017 domain is conserved in all orthologs, only two mycobacterium sps., namely Mtb and M. bovis, encode for an extended N‐terminus of 22 amino acid length (Fig  ). The N‐terminal region is largely unstructured up to 33 amino acids except for a helix‐turn‐helix motif (Fig  ). To evaluate the importance of the N‐terminal region, we complemented RvΔaosR with either AosR lacking the N‐terminal 22 aa (RvΔaosR::aosRΔN) or with an AosR ortholog from M. smegmatis (RvΔaosR::aosRMsm
), which does not have the extended N‐terminus region (Fig  ). While the expression of full‐length AosRMtb rescued the survival defects of RvΔaosR under oxidative stress, neither AosR::ΔN nor AosRMsm rescued the defective phenotype, highlighting the importance of the N‐terminal region in mediating AosR function during oxidative stress (Fig  ).
 Examination of the primary amino acid sequence of the N‐terminus extension revealed the presence of a CxxxC motif (Fig  ). Further analysis revealed an intriguing fact that these are the only cysteine residues in the protein. CxxC/CxxxC motifs are ubiquitously found in redox‐sensitive TFs including WhiBMtb proteins that respond to O2/NO, RsrAMtb, and Spx of B. subtilis that sense diamide, CatR of S. coelicolor, and FurS of S. reticuli that sense H2O2/diamide(Hillion & Antelmann, ). The ability of cysteines to form a disulfide bond in response to an oxidizing cellular environment may lead to the release of a metal ion coordinated by the cysteines, triggering a conformational change, which may, in turn, modulate their interactions with other proteins. Hence, we first assessed the oligomeric state of His‐AosR through gel‐filtration chromatography and found it to be a dimer (Appendix Fig ). However, His‐AosRAxxxA (wherein cysteines were mutated to alanines) also eluted as a dimer in GFC (Appendix Fig ), suggesting that the CxxxC motif does not participate in dimer formation. Exposure to oxidants not only affects cysteine but also oxidizes several other amino acids including tyrosine, tryptophan, histidine, and methionine, which may influence oligomerization of the protein. Thus, we examined the dependence of AosR dimerization status on the redox environment. His‐AosR, His‐AosRAxxxA, and His‐AosRMsm eluted as dimers independent of the oxidizing nature of the environment (Appendix Fig ). In line with this, analysis using the ClusPro protein–protein docking webserver predicted that the two chains of AosR interact through the C‐terminal region. To investigate whether the two cysteine residues of the CxxxC motif form an intrasubunit disulfide bond, the recombinant AosR protein was incubated in monobromobimane (mBBr). mBBr reacts with the free thiol group and results in the formation of an adduct that displays fluorescence, with a direct correlation between the intensity and the number of thiol groups. As observed in Fig  , an increasing ratio of reduced to oxidized DTT was coupled to an increase in fluorescence, suggesting that these cysteines participate in the formation of an intrasubunit disulfide bond that is attenuable in response to the external redox environment (Fig  ).
Next, we examined the ability of the mutated protein AosRAxxxA to rescue the growth defects of the RvΔaosR. While the mutations did not affect AosR expression, it failed to rescue the survival defects of RvΔaosR both in vitro (Fig  ) and in pΦ (Fig  ). To understand the underlying mechanism, we tested whether CxxxC residues are important for the interaction of AosR to SigH. BLI experiments indicated while His‐AosR could bind to His‐SigH under oxidizing conditions, His‐AosRAxxxA failed to do so (Fig  ). To validate that these cysteine residues are indeed important for interaction in mycobacterial cells, FLAG‐SigH was immunoprecipitated from M. smegmatis electroporated with pN‐F‐SigH and pS‐AosR‐HAWT/mut. It is apparent from the data that the interaction of AosR with SigH could only be detected upon peroxide stress and mutation of CxxxC significantly reduced the affinity (Fig  ). These results validate the importance of the redox environment as well as the CxxxC motif of AosR in mediating AosR‐SigH interaction, which in turn is important for combating host‐induced peroxide stress.

## AosR is crucial for cellular‐redox homeostasis
Cysteine‐derived molecules such as mycothiol, ergothioneine, H2S, and other Fe‐S cluster‐containing proteins alleviate oxidative stress (Rawat et al,
 ; Shatalin et al,
 ; Saini et al,
 ; Mishra et al,
 ). To investigate whether AosR‐mediated regulation indeed influences cysteine‐derived molecules, we estimated the free thiol protein content in Rv, RvΔaosR, and RvΔaosR::aosR under normal and oxidized conditions. As shown in Fig  , we observed a ~ 3‐fold increase in the thiol content of Rv and RvΔaosR::aosR in oxidatively stressed cells compared with respective control groups. Importantly, the increase in thiol was found to be dependent on AosR (Fig  ). Next, we quantified cysteine‐derived highly abundant low molecular thiols, mycothiol, and ergothioneine using LC‐MRM MS/MS analysis. The MSH levels were found to be similar in Rv, RvΔaosR, and RvΔaosR::aosR under normal conditions. While the addition of CHP resulted in ~30 and 15% and an increase in the MSH levels in Rv and RvΔaosR::aosR, we observed a ~ 50% decrease in RvΔaosR, indicating Mtb is unable to replenish MSH in the absence of AosR (Fig  ). Similarly, levels of ergothioneine were found to be drastically lower in RvΔaosR (18%) as compared to Rv (~ 80%) and RvΔaosR::aosR (~ 70%) upon oxidative stress (Fig  ). Consequently, the levels of redox cofactors NAD and NADH were also found to be lower in RvΔaosR, probably a metabolic consequence of death (Fig  ). Next, we monitored the antioxidant response of Rv, RvΔaosR, and Rv∆aosR::aosR by measuring changes in mycothiol redox potential (EMSH) using a non‐invasive, highly sensitive redox biosensor specific to mycobacteria (Bhaskar et al,
 ). Redox status of Rv∆aosR undergoes a more drastic shift upon exposure to oxidative stress compared with Rv and Rv∆aosR::aosR. Moreover, while Rv and Rv∆aosR::aosR were able to return to its ambient redox state within 60 min, Rv∆aosR failed to do so (Fig  ). Together, the data suggest that AosR is crucial in maintaining intra‐mycobacterial redox homeostasis.
 We have shown that either overexpression of mec‐cysO‐cysM or the addition of l‐cysteine rescues the survival defects of RvΔaosR in response to oxidative stress (Fig  ). Moreover, these defects were mirrored in RvΔcysM (Fig  ), suggesting that the upregulation of the mec‐cysO‐cysM gene cluster might be the sole function of AosR prima facie. This hypothesis is divergent from the RNAseq data, which showed that under oxidative stress AosR regulates ~ 6% of the Mtb transcriptome (Fig  ). Thus, we propose that in addition to directly modulating the mec‐cysO‐cysM gene cluster, AosR indirectly influences the expression of a larger set of genes as a result of l‐cysteine deprivation and consequent redox imbalance (Fig  ). If this is indeed true, the addition of the metabolic product l‐cysteine should rescue the differential expression of indirectly regulated genes. Thus, we evaluated the expression profiles of previously validated genes (Fig  ) in Rv+CHP, RvΔaosR+CHP, and RvΔaosR+CHP+l‐cysteine. The differential expression pattern between Rv+CHP and RvΔaosR+CHP for all nine genes was in line with data in Fig  . The addition of l‐cysteine mitigated the expression differences of 8 genes: all except mec, suggesting that transcriptional modulation of mec‐cysO‐cysM is upstream of the metabolic consequences of redox perturbations (Fig  ). Thus, failure of RvΔaosR to upregulate cysteine biosynthesis during oxidative stress ensues a domino effect, causing differential expression of 6% of Mtb genes resulting in attenuated survival (Fig  ).
 

## Discussion
Bacterial transcription factors SoxR, OxyR, and FNR act as the primary sensors during NO and O2 linked metabolic adaptation. However, functional orthologs of OxyR, SoxR, and FNR have not been identified in Mtb, indicating that Mtb may respond to oxidative stress differently (Deretic et al,
 ). Identification of oxidative stress‐responsive transcriptional modulators in Mtb is largely based on sequence homology. The sigma factors SigH, SigB, and SigE, the two‐component signaling systems SenX‐RegX and DosS‐DosT/DosR, as well as proteins WhiB3, WhiB4, and WhiB7, are among the well‐characterized redox‐sensing TFs (Manganelli et al,
 , ; Kumar et al,
 ; Singh et al,
 ; Burian et al,
 ; Chawla et al,
 ; Singh & Kumar, ). In addition, antioxidant enzymes, cell wall‐associated lipids, and the membrane‐associated oxidoreductase complex act concertedly to neutralize the host‐derived ROS (Edwards et al,
 ; Piddington et al,
 ; Nambi et al,
 ). Despite the identification of various enzymes that help Mtb withstand the oxidative and nitrosative insult, the transcriptional regulatory events that coordinate Mtb's response during redox stress are poorly understood. Here, we have employed an integrated approach involving genetics, transcriptomics, biophysical analyses, metabolite quantitation, ex vivo, and in vivo infections to uncover a redox‐sensitive network regulated by a novel transcription factor, AosR, which facilitates bacterial adaptation to an inimical environment during oxidative stress.
The survival of Rv∆aosR in murine lungs and spleen was comparable to wild type up to 2 weeks after the initiation of infection. This could be either due to the sufficient presence of reduced sulfur metabolites, or the mutant's ability to scavenge sulfated moieties from the host. With the progression of murine infection, enhanced recruitment of pro‐inflammatory cells increases the levels of ROS and RNI (Nathan et al,
 ; Ehrt et al,
 ). At this stage, Rv∆aosR fails to surmount the higher concentration of ROS and RNI generated by the host and thus shows compromised growth (Fig  ). The phenotype observed was similar to what was found upon the deletion of the 5'APS reductase, CysH (Senaratne et al,
 ). In contrary to attenuated growth in vivo, the mutant exhibited decline in CFUs in the peritoneal macrophages. This apparent discrepancy in phenotype observed with ex vivo and in vivo infection experiments might probably due to the pre‐activated status of peritoneal macrophages. Data show that the attenuated growth of Rv∆aosR is mitigated in phox
−/− and Ifnγ−/− mice (Fig  ), confirming the specific requirement of this pathway in response to host‐induced oxidative stress. Restricted amounts of sulfated moieties in Rv∆aosR inside the host may limit its ability to withstand host‐generated oxidative and nitrosative radicals and hence result in attenuated survival. This is corroborated by the ability of l‐cysteine supplementation or overexpression of Mec‐CysO‐CysM to reverse RvΔaosR susceptibility to oxidative stress (Fig  ). Moreover, the phenotype of RvΔaosR is mirrored in RvΔcysM (Fig  –K), confirming that observed protection against oxidative stress by AosR is due to the regulation of the genes of CysM‐dependent pathway.

Mtb encodes for three cysteine synthases—CysK1, CysK2, and CysM (Fig  ), with 22–36% sequence identity among them (Appendix Fig ). In addition to this, Mtb can also synthesize cysteine from methionine through the reverse trans‐sulfuration pathway (Wheeler et al,
 ). However, the relative contributions of these biosynthetic pathways and their regulation are yet unknown. It is presumed that during regular growth conditions cysteine biosynthesis relies primarily on the classical CysK1 pathway, whereas CysM‐driven biosynthesis operates in the phagosomal environment of the host (Brunner et al,
 ). Transcriptome profiles reveal the upregulation of all CysM pathway genes—mec, cysO, and cysM under oxidative stress (Manganelli et al,
 ; Voskuil et al,
 ). This is consistent with our RNAseq analysis, wherein we observe the upregulation of mec and cysO in Rv upon CHP stress (Fig  ). In other bacteria, l‐cysteine biosynthesis is regulated by TFs such as CysB, CymR, and McbR at multiple nodes (Kredich, ; Rey et al,
 ; Even et al,
 ). Interestingly, similar transcriptional regulators have not been identified in mycobacteria. The RNAseq and qRT–PCR data presented in Fig  establish that the regulation of the CysM‐dependent l‐cysteine biosynthesis pathway is mediated by the transcription factor AosR, which is encoded by the same operon.
While CysK1 and CysK2 transcript and protein levels did not alter under CHP‐induced stress, we found CysM to be upregulated under these conditions (Fig  ). Our study suggests that in response to the aggravating conditions inside the host Mtb elects to upregulate l‐cysteine biosynthesis specifically through the CysM pathway. This could be due to the higher stability of its acceptor substrate O‐phospho‐l‐serine compared with the CysK1 substrate O‐acetyl‐l‐serine (Agren et al,
 ), and higher resistance of donor thiocarboxylates to oxidation compared with thiols, the sulfur donor of CysK1 (Burns et al,
 ). In accordance with this, transposon mutants with insertions in mec,
cysO, and cysM exhibit attenuated survival inside the host (Sassetti & Rubin, ; Rengarajan et al,
 ; Agren et al,
 ). Our findings are incongruent with a recently published study that showed the survival of Mtb during in vitro oxidative stress to be unaffected by the deletion of mec‐cysO‐cysM (Burns‐Huang & Mundhra, ). This could be due to the presence of catalase in the broth and agar that quenches oxidative radicals, or different experimental conditions such as the concentrations of the oxidant and the duration of exposure to the oxidizing conditions. However, the study also reported the mec‐cysO‐cysM cluster to be essential upon clofazimine (a peroxide‐producing drug) (Burns‐Huang & Mundhra, ). Taken together, we conclude that Mec‐CysO‐CysM mitigates exogenous and host‐derived oxidative stress, which would also explain the selective essential nature of AosR in vivo (Figs  and ).
Sharp et al ( ) performed ChipSeq of SigHMtb and showed that it regulates genes involved in thiol metabolism including enzymes involved in sulfur uptake and cysteine and molybdopterin biosynthesis. Interestingly, the authors noted a discrepancy between their ChipSeq and qRT–PCR expression data, which was suggested to be due to interactions with stress‐specific co‐regulators (Sharp et al,
 ). Our data fit well with this observation: the interaction of SigH and AosR specifically under oxidative stress. Even though we observed only ~ 10‐fold lower affinity of SigH‐AosR in reduced compared with oxidative conditions (Fig  ), it is important to note that mycobacterial cells inhibit SigH‐AosR interaction under normal conditions through spatial regulation. SigH is liberated free from its cognate anti‐sigma factor, RshA, only upon oxidative stress. This is reflected in our IP data wherein we found interaction specifically under oxidative stress (Fig  ). This additional layer of stringency could be important to protect the precarious redox state of Mtb, especially due to the high toxicity and reactivity of l‐cysteine. SigH and AosR together bound to 100 bp upstream of mec Fig  ), resulting in mec‐cysO‐cysM transcription that was abrogated upon deletion of either aosR or sigH (Figs  and ).
Redox‐responsive proteins such as PknG, WhiB, RsrA, and Trx possess CxxC/CxxxC motifs (Hillion & Antelmann, ). A reversible disulfide bond is formed between the cysteine residues of the motif in response to the external redox environment, triggering conformational changes that result in their activation. In consonance with this, we found that mutation of the CxxxC motif present in the unique N‐terminal extension of AosRMtb failed to rescue the RvΔaosR defective phenotypes (Fig  ). Importantly, cysteine residues of the CxxxC motif are capable of forming intrasubunit disulfide bonds in an oxidizing environment (Fig  ), suggesting that the formation of a bridge between these residues in AosR, which in turn is important for SigH‐AosR interaction (Fig  ). In accordance with this, RNAseq analysis revealed ~ 6% of Mtb genes are regulated by AosR in response to oxidative stress (Fig  ).
Cysteine is the source of sulfur for multiple cellular components including biotin, lipoic acid, coenzyme A, methionine, molybdopterin, thiamine, and Fe‐S clusters. Importantly, the redox‐active moiety of the major cytosolic redox buffers—mycothiol and ergothioneine—is also derived from cysteine. Interestingly, an excess concentration of l‐cysteine is cytotoxic, and hence, multiple bacteria utilize cysteine‐inducible cysteine‐specific efflux pumps for its export (Dassler et al,
 ; Franke et al,
 ; Takumi & Nonaka, ). However, such transporters have not been identified in Mtb, indicating that the regulation could be at the level of biosynthesis and through metabolic redistribution. This is also in line with the finding that the intracellular concentration of l‐cysteine in Mtb is limiting in comparison with other amino acids (Laxman et al,
 ). Thus, our efforts to measure cysteine through commercially available kits and mass spectrometry were unsuccessful. In response to the increased need for antioxidant molecules in hostile conditions such as oxidative stress, Mtb actively upregulates CysM‐dependent l‐cysteine biosynthesis through AosR and SigH, which in turn enhances the production of cysteine‐derived antioxidants including mycothiol and ergothioneine (Fig  ). Inhibition of this redox‐regulatory pathway leads to an extensive pleiotropic effect affecting multiple biological processes (Fig  ). Collectively, this study broadens our understanding of how Mtb employs unique transcriptional networks and metabolic pathways to self‐serve its nutritional needs while effectively combating the host immune system (Fig  ). The apparent essentiality of the numerous metabolic products and the absence of cysteine synthases in humans showcase the vulnerability of this pathogen pathway that can be exploited to develop anti‐mycobacterial drugs. We propose that this newly discovered regulatory pathway acts as a rheostat of cysteine enabling Mtb enabling adaptation to a sudden heightened requirement for antioxidant molecules during oxidative burst (Fig  ).

## Materials and Methods

## Bacterial strains and culturing
Bacterial strains used in the study are listed in Appendix Table  . Mycobacterial strains were cultured in Middlebrook 7H9 medium (BD Biosciences) supplemented with 10% albumin, dextrose, NaCl, catalase (ADC) along with 0.2% glycerol (Sigma) and 0.05% Tween‐80 (Sigma), or 7H11 agar (BD Biosciences) with 10% OADC (oleic‐acid added to ADC) and 0.2% glycerol. Susceptibility to different in vitro stresses was ascertained as previously described (Khan et al,
 ). For oxidative stress, the mycobacterium culture was grown in 7H9‐ADS (ADC without catalase) to A600 ~ 0.2–0.3 followed by exposure to cumene hydroperoxide (CHP; 50 µM) for 24 h, and then plated on 7H11‐OADS (OADC without catalase).

## Creation of mutants by gene replacement
All knockouts were generated using recombineering (van Kessel & Hatfull, ). Approximately 800 bp regions upstream (LHS) and downstream (RHS) of the gene of interest (including ~150 bp of the gene at both ends) were amplified from Rv genomic DNA using specific primers (Appendix Table  ). The amplicons were appropriately digested and ligated with two fragments of compatible ends: the fragment containing the oriE+cosλ sequences from plasmid pYUB1474 (Jain et al,
 ), and the hygromycin resistance (hygr
) cassette from pENTR‐Hyg to generate the allelic exchange substrate (AES). The AES was digested with SnaBI to excise out the donor LHS‐hygr
‐RHS fragment, which was electroporated into the recombineering proficient Rv‐ET strain expressing RecET from plasmid pNit‐ET (Wei et al,
 ). Ten to twenty hygr
 colonies were analyzed by PCRs across the deletion junctions to screen for legitimate recombination events at the native loci. Mutants were confirmed by Western blotting with the appropriate antibody and then cured of pNit‐ET (and thereby kanamycin resistance) through negative selection by plating them on 7H11 agar plates containing 2% sucrose and hygromycin.

## Generation of plasmid constructs and strains
Sequences of oligonucleotides used to generate various plasmid constructs and details of the plasmid constructs used in this study are listed in Appendix Tables  and , respectively. For complementation experiments, the full‐length aosR gene (Rv1332) and the 500 bp region immediately upstream of the Rv1331 coding region were amplified from Rv genomic DNA using specific primers and Phusion DNA polymerase (Thermo Scientific). The amplicons were digested with ScaI‐SapI and SapI‐HindIII, respectively, and cloned into the ScaI‐HindIII sites in pST‐Ki (Parikh et al,
 ), to generate pST‐AosR. The aosR mutant CxxxC→AxxxA was constructed with the help of overlap PCR using suitable primers. The amplicon was cloned in pST‐Ki under its native promoter (the 500 bp fragment upstream of Rv1331) to generate pST‐AosRAxxxA. The aosR–ΔN mutant was generated by amplification using a forward primer starting at nucleotide 67 of the aosR gene in combination with the gene‐specific reverse primer. The coding region of Msmeg_4909 was amplified from mc2155 using gene‐specific primers. The mec‐cysO‐cysM cluster was amplified from Rv genomic DNA using mec forward primer in combination with cysM reverse primer. The coding region of cysM was similarly amplified using gene‐specific primers. Amplicons of aosR‐ΔN, msmeg_4909
(aosRMsm), mec‐cysO‐cysM (mom), and cysM were digested with NdeI‐HindIII and cloned into the corresponding sites in pNit‐3F. pST‐aosR, pST‐aosRAxxxA, pNit‐AosR‐ΔN, pNit‐AosRMsm, pNit‐mom, and pNit‐CysM constructs were electroporated into RvΔaosR to generate RvΔaosR::aosR, RvΔaosR::aosR
AxxxA
, RvΔaosR::aosR‐ΔN, RvΔaosR::aosRMsm, RvΔaosR::mom, and RvΔaosR::cysM strains, respectively. pNit‐CysM was also electroporated into RvΔcysM to generate the RvΔcysM::cysM strain.

## Growth kinetics and in vitro stress susceptibility
To evaluate the impact of gene deletions on in vitro growth of Mtb, wild type (Rv), knockout (RvΔaosR), and complemented (RvΔaosR::aosR) strains were inoculated into 7H9‐ADC at A600 ~ 0.05 or into Sauton's medium at A600 ~ 0.1. Aliquots were withdrawn to measure A600 at the indicated time points, and the bacteria serially diluted before plating to enumerate colony‐forming units (CFUs).
To evaluate the susceptibility of Mtb strains to oxidative stress, mycobacterial strains were grown to mid‐log‐phase (A600 ~ 0.6–0.8) in 7H9‐ADS. The cells were collected by centrifugation, washed twice with PBS containing 0.05% Tween 80 (PBST), and inoculated into 7H9‐ADS medium at A600 ~ 0.05. CHP (Sigma; 50 µM) was added when A600 reached ~ 0.2–0.3, and CFUs were enumerated on 7H11‐OADS agar 24 h later.
For assessing the impact of acidic stress, early–mid‐log‐phase cultures were washed with PBST and single‐cell suspension was inoculated into acidified 7H9‐ADC, pH 4.5 (supplemented with 0.02% tyloxapol instead of Tween 80) at A600 of 0.05. Serial dilutions of cultures were plated on 7H11‐OADC agar after 7 days of incubation. Log‐phase cultures were inoculated at A600 of 0.3, and the viability of strains was enumerated in the presence of 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate for 3 h (SDS, Sigma), PBS for 7 days, or 1 mM DETA/NO for 2 days.

## Macrophage infection experiments
Balb/c, C57BL/6 (B6), and mice with targeted deletions of gp91phox (B6.129S6‐Cybbtm1Din/J; JAX# 002365) or IFN‐γ (B6.129S7‐Ifngtm1Ts/J; JAX#002287) were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. NADPH phagocyte oxidase (gp91) breeder pair‐homozygous null mice (gp91−/−; Jackson Lab) and heterozygous female (gp91+/−; Jackson Lab) were procured from Dr. Apurva Sarin's laboratory with due permission from The Jackson Laboratory. Only the homozygous null litters confirmed by PCRs (using primer sets mentioned in Appendix Table  ) were used for the experiment. 4‐ to 6‐week‐old mice of either sex were injected with 4% thioglycolate (Hi‐Media) into the peritoneum cavity of the mice. 4 days post‐injection, peritoneal macrophages were extracted and maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2 in RPMI 1640 medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% heat‐inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco). The cells were either left untreated or activated overnight with 10 ng/ml IFNγ (BD Biosciences), followed by incubation with 10 ng/ml lipopolysaccharide (LPS, Sigma) for 2 h. For the inhibition of iNOS, cells were treated overnight with 100 µM 1,400 W (Sigma). For experiments with cysteine supplement in the medium, host cells were pretreated with 0.2 mM cysteine prior to mycobacterial infection. Macrophage cells were infected with single‐cell suspensions of mycobacterial strains at 1:10 (cells:bacteria) multiplicity of infection (MOI). Cells were washed thrice with warm RPMI to remove non‐phagocytosed Mtb 4h post‐infection (p.i), and replenished with complete RPMI containing IFNγ, 1,400 W, or cysteine, as desired. For analysis at the specified time points after infection, the infected cells were thoroughly washed with sterile PBS, lysed with 0.05% SDS, and CFUs enumerated on 7H11‐OADC plates after serial dilutions.

## Screening of phox mutant mice
The final concentration of components in PCR was; Buffer 1×, Primers (oMIR0517, oMIR0518, oMIR0519) 1 µM each, 200 µM dNTP Mix, 0.5 U/reaction Taq polymerase (NEB), with 50–100 ng genomic DNA isolated from the mice tail. The PCR was set in a thermocycler (Bio‐Rad) with the following parameters: 98°C for 3 min, [12 cycles of 94°C for 20 s, 64°C for 30 s (−0.5 deg per s cycle) and 72°C for 35 s], followed by [25 cycles of 94°C for 20 s, 58°C for 30 s and 72°C for 35 s], then 72°C for 2 min, 4°C hold. For positive control, genomic DNA isolated from C57BL/6 served as the template. The expected size of amplicon from the null mutant and wild type was 195 and 240 bp, respectively. The presence of both the bands suggested that the mouse is heterozygous for the gp91 gene.

## Infection experiment in mice
Mice (four to six weeks old of either sex) were housed in individually ventilated cages at Tuberculosis Aerosol Challenge Facility, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (New Delhi, India). Mice (n = 6 at a minimum, per time point) were infected by aerosol route using the Madison Aerosol Chamber (University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI) which is pre‐calibrated to deliver ~ 100 bacilli/mice. Two mice for each Mtb strain were euthanized at 24 h post‐infection to assess the bacterial deposition. At selected time points, lung and spleen were removed aseptically and CFUs in the homogenates were enumerated on 7H11 agar‐PANTA plates.

## Purification of recombinant proteins, generation of antibodies, and gel‐filtration chromatography

aosR, cysK1, cysK2, cysM, clpS, cysO, and rv1333 genes were PCR amplified using specific primers (Appendix Table  ) and cloned into NdeI‐HindIII sites in pQE2 vector. The expression constructs were transformed into E. coli DH5α, and expression was induced at A600 ~ 0.6, with 0.1 mM IPTG (isopropyl‐D‐thiogalactopyranoside) at 22°C for 14 h for His‐AosR and 18°C for 16 h for other proteins. The cells were washed with PBS, and resuspended in lysis buffer [20 mM sodium phosphate, (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM imidazole, 10 mM β‐mercaptoethanol, 1 mM DTT], and lysed. Following clarification, the supernatant was nutated with equilibrated Ni2+‐NTA Beads (Sigma) 4°C for 12 h and washed with 10‐bed volumes of lysis buffer containing 200 mM NaCl and 10 mM imidazole. The proteins were eluted in elution buffer [20 mM sodium phosphate, (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM β‐mercaptoethanol] containing different concentrations of imidazole. Peak fractions were dialyzed against dialysis buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 20 mM NaCl, and 20% glycerol) and stored at −70°C. 400 µg of purified His‐tagged protein in PBS was mixed with Freund's incomplete adjuvant (Sigma) in 1:1 ratio to a final volume of 1.2 ml. 200 µl of the emulsion was injected subcutaneously at two sites into six mice. In the case of ClpS, Rv1333, CysK2, Coomassie‐stained bands were excised from the gel, and the emulsion was prepared. Three booster doses were given every two weeks. Final bleed was collected 7 days following final injection, and Western blotting was performed to assess antibody specificity and sensitivity of the antibody.
For Western blotting, 20–60 µg of Mtb whole‐cell lysate was resolved on SDS–PAGE, transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane, and probed with α‐AosR, α‐CysK1, α‐CysK2, α‐CysM, α‐ClpS, α‐CysO, and α‐Rv1333 antibodies raised in mice at 1:1,000 dilution or α‐SigA and α‐GroEL‐1 antibodies (used as controls) raised in the rabbit at 1:10,000 dilution. Monoclonal α‐FLAG M2 (Sigma‐F1804) antibody was used at 1:2,500 dilution. The target proteins were detected with the help of a chemiluminescent HRP substrate reagent (Millipore, USA), captured on ImageQuant LAS 500 (GE), and quantified using ImageJ.
Gel filtration chromatography (GFC) was performed in buffer; 30 mM Tris‐pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, and 25 mM arginine containing either 2 mM oxidized or reduced DTT. The protein was concentrated using a centricon filter with a 10 kDa cut‐off and loaded onto a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 75 column (GE healthcare).

## Monobromobimane assay
Monobromobimane reagent (mBBr; Sigma) forms a conjugate with free thiol groups, and this conjugate exhibits fluorescence with absorption/emission maxima of 394/490 nm. The AosR protein (1 µM) was incubated in buffers containing different molar ratios of oxidized and reduced DTT (4:0, 3:1, 2:2, 1:3, and 0:4), followed by the addition of 10 µM mBBr (dissolved in 100% acetonitrile). The mixes were incubated in the dark at 25°C for 1 h, followed by measurement of the fluorescence emission spectra at 25°C from 430 to 600 nm after excitation at 390 nm wavelength, using a Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). Protein‐free solution was taken as blank. Each reading represents an average of three independent readings.

## RNA isolation and qRT–PCRs
RNA was isolated from exponentially growing cultures equivalent to 10 O.D.600 units. The collected cells were resuspended in TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), lysed using a bead beater (MP FastPrep system, MP Biomedicals) as per manufacturer's instructions, and the TRIzol‐lysed cell mix was extracted with chloroform, followed by precipitation of RNA using isopropanol. The RNA pellet was dissolved in RNase‐free water (30 µl with 2 µl of RiboLock (Thermo Scientific). DNA contamination was removed by DNase I (Invitrogen) treatment, and the RNA was further purified using RNeasy mini columns (Qiagen). RNA (500 ng) was reverse transcribed using iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio‐Rad), and qRT–PCRs were performed using iTaq Universal SYBR GreenSupermix (Bio‐Rad) in a MasterCycler Real Plex real‐time PCR system (Eppendorf, Germany). Normalization of the data was performed with respect to 16s rRNA (rrs gene) expression levels (Appendix Table  ). The 2(−ΔΔCt) method was used to analyze the relative changes in gene expression.

## RNA sequencing and analysis
The RNA sequencing workflow is outlined in Appendix Fig . Total RNA isolated from three biological replicates of Rv and RvΔaosR cultures grown in the presence or absence of CHP (50 µM) was analyzed using Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer (Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Kit). Samples with RIN values higher than 7.5 were submitted for RNAseq analysis to Bencos Research Solutions Pvt Ltd (Bangalore, India). Transcriptome sequencing was performed using the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 Platform with read length 100 bp, generating 20 million paired‐end reads per sample. Raw reads were uploaded on www.galaxy.org
, and the quality of raw sequencing reads was assessed with the help of FastQC software, ensuring the quality score to be above 30. The reference genome sequence for Rv was downloaded from the Ensembl, and a custom annotation file was prepared. The paired ends were combined with the help of the BAM tool and were aligned with the reference genome using Bowtie2. HTSeq‐count was used to calculate the read counts per gene. Genes with less than 300 total reads were discarded, and the rest were analyzed using a custom python script to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) using DESeq2 (1 log2 fold change, P
adj < 0.1). Figures were generated using custom scripts in python3. For identification of the AosR regulon during oxidative stress, DEGs exclusively found in the Rv+CHP/RvΔaosR+CHP but not in RvΔaosR/RvΔaosR+CHP were plotted in the form of a heat map using heatmapper.ca.

## Identification of operon by intergenic PCR
To identify the aosR operon, cDNA was prepared from log‐phase culture of Rv. The PCR was set up with 2 µl cDNA, 2 µl 5X GC buffer, 0.25 µl dNTP Mix (final concentration 12.5 mM), 1 µl of 10 µM Primer Mix, 0.3 µl 100% DMSO, and 0.2 U Phusion DNA Polymerase (Thermo Scientific). The PCR was set in a thermocycler (ProFlex PCR System, Applied Biosystems) with the following parameters: denaturation at 98°C for 3 min, 35 cycles of “98°C for 10 s, 65°C for 30 s and 72°C for 20 s” and one extension cycle for 3 min at 72°C. Genomic DNA from Rv served as the template for positive control and reaction performed in the absence of reverse transcriptase served as the negative control.

## Luciferase reporter assay
The 500 bp or 100 bp sequence immediately upstream of the mec or sigA start codon was cloned in ScaI‐NdeI sites of a Tweety integrative shuttle vector. The coding region of the luciferase gene was cloned in the NdeI‐HindIII sites, with either no promoter upstream of it, or linked to the sigA or mec promoter. The constructs were electroporated into Rv and RvΔaosR. The resulting strains were grown in 7H9‐ADS to early‐log‐phase (OD600 ~ 0.3) and subjected to oxidative stress with 50 µM CHP for 6 h. Lysates prepared from cultures in the absence of oxidative stress (untreated) were used as controls. Equal concentrations of lysates were used for measuring the luciferase activity using RenillaGlo Luciferase Assay Kit (Promega).

## Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
100 nt long complementary oligonucleotides corresponding to the template and non‐template strands sequence upstream mec were commercially synthesized
(Sigma). The template strand was end‐labeled with 20 µCi [γ‐32P]ATP using T4 polynucleotide kinase (PNK) in a 20 µl reaction at 37°C for 30 min as per the manufacturer's instructions. PNK was heat‐inactivated, and reaction volume was made up to 50 µl and purified using sephadex G‐50 minicolumns (Bio‐Rad). 5'‐end‐labeled template oligo was mixed with twofold molar excess of complementary unlabeled non‐template oligo in 1 × binding buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH‐7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM MnCl), heated at 90°C for 5 min, centrifuged for 30 s, and left at RT for 2 h followed by overnight at 4°C to form double‐stranded EMSA substrate. An aliquot of the reaction was resolved on 12% PAGE gel in 0.5 × TBE buffer to confirm the formation of double‐stranded DNA. EMSA reactions were performed with 5–7.5 × 104 cpm oligonucleotide/sample in the presence of 10 mM DTT (reduced conditions) or diamide (oxidized conditions) in a 20 µl 1× binding buffer containing 4 µM BSA or 2 µM His‐AosR + 2 µM BSA, or 2 µM His‐SigH + 2 µM BSA or 2 µM His‐AosR + 2 µM His‐SigH for 15 min at RT followed by 30 min at 4°C. The protein–DNA complexes were resolved on 8% Native PAGE; gels were dried and imaged using a phosphorimager (GE).

## Biolayer interferometry (BLI)
The binding kinetics of AosR and AosRAxxxA with SigH were evaluated by BLI using Octet Red96® instrument using Amine Reactive 2nd Generation (AR2G) Biosensors (ForteBio, Inc.). Sensors were pre‐incubated with MQ water for 10–15 min, followed by activation with a mixture of EDC and NHS for 420 s. Sensors were incubated with 200 ml of 250 nM SigH for 600 s to the levels of 1.5–2.0 nm in 10 mM sodium acetate pH 6.0. Subsequently, the activated carboxylate groups on the surface were blocked with 1.0 M ethanolamine pH 8.5 and the uncoupled His‐SigH washed from the biosensor. The SigH captured sensors were equilibrated in running buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, and 3 mM EDTA pH 8.0) for 120 s, and sensors were then dipped in various concentrations (125–1,000 nM) AosR or AxxxA protein wells in the running buffer in the presence of 4 mM oxidized or reduced DTT for the binding assay experiment. The association kinetics was monitored for 600 s followed by moving sensors to buffers only to measure dissociation for the next 600 s. The surface was regenerated with a buffer consisting of 50 mM NaOH for 5 s. All the data were recorded at 25°C with an agitation speed of 1,000 rpm. The equilibrium dissociation constant (Kd) was obtained by fitting the binding data in a nonlinear regression analysis to a global 1:1 ligand interaction model. Data were processed using Octet Analysis software 10.0 provided by the manufacturer.

## 
In vitro measurement of mycothiol redox potential (EMSH)
pMV762‐Mrx1roGFP2 (Bhaskar et al,
 ) plasmid was modified to insert chloramphenicol resistance casette in HpaI site. The resulting plasmid was electroporated in Rv, RvΔaosR, and RvΔaosR::aosR, and the intracellular redox state was measured as described previously (Khan et al,
 ). Briefly, bacilli expressing Mrx1‐roGFP2 bioprobe were treated with 5 mM H2O2 for various time points. 10 mM nethylmaleimide (Sigma) was added for 5 min to block the redox state of roGFP2 (Bhaskar et al,
 ). Cells were fixed with 4% PFA and analyzed by flow cytometry using FITC (495 nm excitation, 519 nm emission) and V500 (415 nm excitation, 500 nm emission) channels. The 405/488 ratios were normalized by treating cells with 2 mM CHP (100% oxidation; 405/488 ratio set to 1) and 50 mM DTT (100% reduction; 405/488 ratio set to 0.1).

## Thiol estimation
Protein thiol was estimated using a commercially available kit (Invitrogen—Cat no. EIARSHF) as per the manufacturer's instructions. The kit contains a non‐fluorescent molecule that covalently binds free thiol in the sample to produce a fluorescent product. Rv, RvΔaosR, and RvΔaosR::aosR were either left untreated or subjected to CHP stress for 6 h. WCLs were prepared in the presence of DTT to reduce oxidized thiols. The concentration of thiols in µM/µg WCL was estimated with respect to the standard curve obtained using different concentrations of N‐acetylcysteine.

## Mass spectrometry‐based multiple reaction monitoring analysis to quantitate metabolites

Rv, RvΔaosR, and RvΔaosR::aosR strains at A600 ~ 0.2 were either treated or left untreated with 50 μM CHP for 24 h. Bacterial cultures corresponding to A600 ~ 10 / sample were washed thrice with Tris–HCl, pH 7.4 and were quenched in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were resuspended in pre‐chilled methanol and lysed with help of a bead beater, and the lysates were clarified. The remaining metabolites were extracted from the pellet with 100% methanol and subsequent to clarification; the pellet was subjected to a third‐round extraction with 50% methanol. Clarified lysates from all three extractions were pooled and dried using a speed vac (Savant, SPD 1010, Thermo Electron Corporation). Metabolite extracts from Mtb were reconstituted in 90 μl of sample reconstitution buffer (6:4‐acetonitrile:LC‐MS Grade water). The mass spectrometry‐based multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) analysis was performed in a positive ionization mode on a 4000 QTRAP triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) equipped with Shimadzu Prominence binary pump HPLC system (Shimadzu Corporation, Japan). Prior to sample injection into the liquid chromatography (LC) system, 10 μl of internal standard d2
l‐phenylalanine (25 ng/μl) was added to the metabolite extracts. The LC‐MRM MS/MS‐targeted metabolomic profiling was undertaken for mycothiol (MSH), ergothioneine (ERG), nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) and the reduced form of NAD+ (NADH). The pure analytical standards for each metabolite were procured from Sigma‐Aldrich except for MSH. Acquisition protocol for MSH was kindly provided by Dr. Sunil Laxman, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine (inStem), Bangalore, India. 10 μl of the metabolite extract was injected through the HPLC autosampler on a 4.6 mm × 150 mm XBridge 5 μm HILIC column (Waters, Milford, MA). The mobile phases used for HILIC chromatography were 10 mM ammonium formate in LC‐MS grade water with 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (mobile phase B). The sample was eluted at 0.7 ml/min flow rate with a 35 min total chromatography run time. The gradient started from 95% mobile phase B, reaching up to 20% mobile phase B over a period of 25 min. The column was kept at 20% mobile phase B for 2 min then returned to 5% mobile phase A for an 8‐min equilibration step. The four parameters were optimized for the MRM acquisition of the four metabolites using analytical standards. Declustering potential (DP), entrance potential (EP), collision energy (CE), and collision cell exit potential (CXP) were the parameters that were optimized. For MSH, DP of 65, EP of 12, CE of 21, and CXP of 12 were optimized to analyze the MRM transitions of m/z 487.5 (Q1)/134.1 (Q3). In the case of ERG, DP of 47, EP of 9, CE of 26, and CXP of 22 were optimized for the MRM transitions of m/z 230.0 (Q1)/127.2 (Q3). NAD+, the optimized value for DP was 45, EP was 10, CE was 60, and CXP was 8 for acquiring the MRM transitions of m/z 664.1 (Q1)/136.06 (Q3). For NADH, the DP value was optimized at 96, EP at 10, CE at 25, and CXP at 28 to acquire the MRM transitions of m/z 666.0 (Q1)/649.13 (Q3). The 4000 QTRAP system was operated at the following values: curtain gas at 30, ion spray voltage at 5500, the temperature at 550, ion source gas at 40. Data acquisition and analysis were performed on the Analyst 1.5 software platform (Sciex, Foster City, CA). The samples were acquired in a randomized order at the time of acquisition. To check the instrument performance over time, the internal standard peak areas were utilized. Four technical replicates of each sample were analyzed using the LC‐MRM MS/MS analysis. Further, the peak areas obtained after integration were exported to Microsoft excel file format in a matrix form.

## Interactome
Three biological replicates of RvΔaosR and RvΔaosR::pN‐aosR early‐log cultures grown in 7H9‐ADS medium containing inducer isovaleronitrile (IVN; 5 µM; Sigma) were subjected to CHP (50 µM) treatment for 24 h. Two biological replicates of untreated induced RvΔaosR::pN‐aosR were used as an additional control. The cultures were fixed using 1% formaldehyde for 15 min, followed by the addition of 250 mM glycine to neutralize the cross‐linking. Samples were lysed in a buffer containing protease inhibitors. Lysates were analyzed for the expression of AosR using anti‐FLAG antibody, and FLAG‐tagged AosR was immunoprecipitated from 2 mg of lysate using FLAG‐M2 agarose beads (Sigma). The samples were loaded on 12% SDS–PAGE and resolved till the dye front was ~ 2 cm into the resolving gel. The bands were excised, dehydrated, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin overnight. Proteomics analyses were performed using quantitative LC‐MS/MS, as described previously (Jain et al,
 ).

## Statistical analysis
Unless mentioned otherwise, experiments described in the manuscript were executed independently at least twice, being performed minimally in triplicates each time. The significance of the results was analyzed using one‐way ANOVA followed by a post hoc test (Tukey test) unless otherwise specified. GraphPad Prism 5 was used to plot the acquired data sets and calculate statistical significance and modified using Adobe Illustrator. P values < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. Source data of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.

## Author contributions
MZK and VKN conceptualized the study; MZK contributed to generation of constructs and strains; BS and MZK involved in interactome, mass spectrometry, and analyses; MZK and BS performed animal studies at ICGEB; MZK involved in transcriptomic profiling and analysis; MZK and BS contributed to macrophage assays; MZK involved in in vitro stress susceptibility and redox assays; MFA and SG involved in gel filtration chromatography, mBBr, and SPR experiment; KT and SR contributed to metabolite quantification, MZK curated the data; MZK and VKN wrote the manuscript; VKN involved in funding acquisition. All authors read and commented on the manuscript.

## Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Animal experimentation
The animal experimental protocol was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India (IAEC#409/16 & IAEC#462/18), as per the guidelines issued by the Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA), Government of India.

## Supporting information
Appendix
Click here for additional data file.
Expanded View Figures PDF
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV1
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV2
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV3
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV4
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV5
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV6
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV7
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV8
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Expanded View/Appendix
Click here for additional data file.
Review Process File
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 1
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 2
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 3
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 4
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 5
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 6
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 7
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Apruva Sarin for phox
−/− mice and thoughtful discussion; Dr. Aneeshkumar and Somdeb for their help with analysis of RNAseq data; Dr. Manganelli for kindly providing RvΔsigH strain; ICGEB for access to their TACF; Conan, Sai, and Kanika for their help in the antibody generation; Suneeta for her help with BLI experiments; Dr. Swati Saha for critical reading of the manuscript; and Dr. Rajesh Gokhale and Ms. Kritee Mehdiratta for their insightful suggestions. MZK is supported by Research Associateship from SERB (CRG/2018/001294). SR would like to acknowledge Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Govt. of India, grant no BT/PR10855/BRB/10/1330/2014. Research reported in this publication was supported by the core grant of the National Institute of Immunology; DBT grant BT/PR13522/COE/34/27/2015; SERB grant CRG/2018/001294, and JC Bose fellowship JCB/2019/000015 to VKN.

## Data availability
RNAseq data are available at the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus Database, accession number GSE161190 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE161190).