pmcCell RepCell Rep445elsevierwt101573691Cell Reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleElsevier Sponsored DocumentsPMC8411121PMC8411121.1841112184111213443301710.1016/j.celrep.2021.109618S2211-1247(21)01056-11096181ArticleFetal hematopoietic stem cell homing is controlled by VEGF regulating the integrity and oxidative status of the stromal-vascular bone marrow niches
MesnieresMarion BöhmAnna-Marei PeredoNicolas TrompetDana Valle-TenneyRoger BajajManmohan CorthoutNikky NefyodovaElena CardoenRuben BaatsenPieter MunckSebastian NagyAndras HaighJody J. KhuranaSatish VerfaillieCatherine M. MaesChristachrista.maes@kuleuven.be 1Laboratory of Skeletal Cell Biology and Physiology (SCEBP), Skeletal Biology and Engineering Research Center (SBE), Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium2Stem Cell and Developmental Biology Unit, Stem Cell Institute Leuven, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium3VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain & Disease Research, VIB BioImaging Center, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium4Research Group Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium5Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada6Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada7Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada8Research Institute in Oncology and Hematology, Cancer Care Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada9School of Biology, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Thiruvananthapuram, 695551 Kerala, India∗Corresponding author christa.maes@kuleuven.be10Lead contact
24820212482021368389247109618211120202852021582021240820210309202108042026© 2021 The Authors2021https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) engraftment after transplantation during anticancer treatment depends on support from the recipient bone marrow (BM) microenvironment. Here, by studying physiological homing of fetal HSPCs, we show the critical requirement of balanced local crosstalk within the skeletal niche for successful HSPC settlement in BM. Transgene-induced overproduction of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) by osteoprogenitor cells elicits stromal and endothelial hyperactivation, profoundly impacting the stromal-vessel interface and vascular architecture. Concomitantly, HSPC homing and survival are drastically impaired. Transcriptome profiling, flow cytometry, and high-resolution imaging indicate alterations in perivascular and endothelial cell characteristics, vascular function and cellular metabolism, associated with increased oxidative stress within the VEGF-enriched BM environment. Thus, developmental HSPC homing to bone is controlled by local stromal-vascular integrity and the oxidative-metabolic status of the recipient milieu. Interestingly, irradiation of adult mice also induces stromal VEGF expression and similar osteo-angiogenic niche changes, underscoring that our findings may contribute targets for improving stem cell therapies.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Establishment of BM hematopoiesis is coupled to development of the skeletal niches
•Primary HSPC seeding of bone depends on balanced molecular crosstalk in the niche
•Stromal VEGF triggers EC activation and controls stromal-vascular niche integrity
•Excessive skeletal VEGF deranges cell metabolism and induces oxidative stress in BM

Mesnieres et al. show that increased VEGF in fetal bone disrupts stromal-vascular integrity, alters cell metabolism, and induces oxidative stress in the developing bone marrow niche, blocking the homing of endogenous hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. Post-natal irradiation, a common stem cell transplantation pretreatment, induces similar niche alterations, thus opening therapeutic strategies.

## Keywords
hematopoietic stem cellnichebone marrowangiogenesisstromal cellhematopoiesisVEGFoxidative stressboneosteoprogenitorpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfnopmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: August 24, 2021

## Introduction
Hematopoiesis is a dynamic process involving self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), generation of lineage-committed cells, differentiation, and mobilization of mature cells into the blood. The principal site for hematopoiesis throughout post-natal life is the bone marrow (BM), where hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) are maintained and regulated through their interactions with various specialized microenvironments called niches ( ; ; ). A multitude of individual cell populations constitute HSC niche components, including arteriolar and sinusoidal endothelial cells (ECs) ( ; ; ; ; ), several skeletal stem and progenitor cell (SSPC) subsets such as perivascular and reticular BM stromal cells (BMSCs) marked by expression of CXC chemokine ligand (CXCL) 12 ( ; ; ), leptin receptor (LepR) ( ; ), and/or platelet-derived growth factor receptors (PDGFRs) ( ; ), as well as more differentiated osteolineage cells ( ; ; ; ; ). Although many aspects of how single niche constituents contribute to HSC stemness and functioning have been uncovered over the last decade ( ; ), much remains to be learned about the inter- and intra-niche communication and coordination cues, the mechanisms that control the balanced composition and spatial distribution of complex multi-component niches throughout the tissue, and how these govern HSC behavior. Increased understanding of this interplay in health, disease, and therapy can help design strategies to enhance BM engraftment of transplanted HSCs and improve the success of stem cell therapies for life-threatening diseases. Because endogenous HSPC homing to BM takes place during embryogenesis under physiological, optimal conditions, this process may provide vital insights in the ideal niche characteristics and requirements for successful HSPC settlement.
In fetal life, HSCs migrate through different anatomical locations before finding their final destination in the BM ( ; ). First, blood cells emerge in the yolk sac, around embryonic day (E) 7.0 in mice. Next, HSC generation and hematopoiesis take place in the placenta and aorta-gonad-mesonephros region (E9.0–E10.5). Around E11.0, HSCs migrate to the liver, where they vigorously expand. Finally, around E16.5, the liver HSCs home toward the skeleton, where they continue to reside throughout life ( ; ).
There is only very limited information on the identity, function, and molecular signature of the fetal BM niche constituents interacting with incoming HSPCs. Initial seeding of the BM cavity by HSCs requires CXCL12 acting on its receptor CXCR4 in HSCs; mice deficient for these molecules display normal fetal liver hematopoiesis but fail to establish BM hematopoiesis ( ; ; ). A few other chemo-attractive cytokines and adhesion molecules have been implicated, including stem cell factor (SCF) ( ) and β1 integrin on HSCs ( ). However, it is not known how the local, tightly orchestrated process of bone development is coupled with the generation of a supportive environment fostering incoming HSPCs. Endochondral ossification starts around E12.5 with mesenchymal condensations forming cartilaginous templates of the long bones, which initially remain completely avascular. Between E14.5 and E16.5, an osteo-angiogenic transformation takes place, excavating the cartilage and creating the primary ossification center, i.e., the central vascularized area within the bone shaft corresponding to the nascent BM cavity ( ). This process is driven by blood vessels co-invading the cartilage together with perivascular SSPCs and migratory osteoprogenitors expressing osterix (Osx) ( ). The establishment of BM hematopoiesis is dependent on this stromal-vascular invasion, accommodating local extravasation of HSPCs infiltrating the developing bones ( ; ; ). Yet, the regulatory control and impact of the interplay between perivascular/stromal SSPCs and skeletal blood vessels in mediating fetal HSPC homing has not been investigated.
Here, using mouse models to modulate stromal cell-derived vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling, combined with transcriptional profiling and high-resolution imaging, we found that developmental HSPC homing to bone critically depends on controlled local crosstalk among the stromal-vascular cell populations, determining the integrity and functionality of the niche. Excessive skeletal VEGF caused endothelial and perivascular cell hyper-activation, altered cellular metabolism, and increased oxidative stress within the fetal BM environment. Interestingly, irradiation of adult mice also induced VEGF in bone and phenocopied several of the stromal and vascular responses of the fetal genetic model. The mechanistic findings made in this study could thus help improve stem cell homing for treatment of hematologic diseases and malignancies.

## Results

## Osteolineage VEGF overexpression disrupts osteo-angiogenic bone development and impairs BM cavity formation
To alter the stromal-vascular communication in the fetal skeleton and assess the repercussions on hematopoietic development, we conditionally overexpressed the angiogenic factor VEGF in osteoprogenitors by crossing Osx-Cre:GFP mice ( ) to mice carrying a conditional transgene (cTg) encoding VEGF164 ( ). Herein, Cre-mediated recombination excises a stop cassette, enabling expression of transgenic VEGF164, the prime VEGF-A isoform, in surplus of the normal VEGF expression from the endogenous gene. VEGF cTg embryos (Osx-Cre:GFP+;VEGF(cTg/+)) exhibited 2-fold increased VEGF levels in their bones compared with control littermates (Osx-Cre:GFP+;VEGF(+/+)) ( A). Serum VEGF levels were unaltered ( B), supporting restricted local actions in the skeleton. 
Osteolineage VEGF overexpression led to drastic skeletal malformations and stunted bone growth. At E18.5, VEGF cTg limb bones showed bending and thickening of the central shaft (diaphysis) ( C) and excessive mineralization ( D and A). Ossification was also increased in the sternum and ribs ( B), as observed previously using a Col2-Cre driver too ( ). Despite the normal serum VEGF levels, the mutant mice did not survive past birth, presumably because the thorax deformities impaired breathing ( C and S1D). Histology of the limb bones showed a grossly normal growth plate morphology throughout development, whereas the distal and proximal epiphyses (both ends of the bone) became misaligned and separated by an underdeveloped and disrupted primary ossification center, representing the nascent BM cavity ( E; E and S1F). Accordingly, the volume of the BM cavity was vastly reduced ( F). Thus, VEGF cTg mice failed to develop a normally sized and structured bone shaft and BM cavity.
Excavation of developing bones is initiated by angiogenic invasion of the cartilage template ( ). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for the pan-EC marker CD31 revealed that VEGF overexpression led to early and sustained abnormalities in the skeletal vascular density and pattern at all stages from E14.5 on ( G). By E18.5, VEGF cTg bones showed excessive numbers of randomly oriented and undersized vessels throughout the widened perichondrium and diaphysis ( G). Vascularization of developing bones is coupled to their invasion by vessel-associated Osx+ osteoprogenitor cells (OPCs), a subset of SSPCs ( ). Control bones at E18.5 showed ample Osx-Cre:GFP+ cells in the vascularized metaphysis (region below the growth plate), as visualized by co-IHC for the EC marker endomucin (Emcn) ( H). In VEGF cTg mice, along with the altered vessel distribution, Osx-Cre:GFP+ cells were homogeneously abundant throughout the bone ( H), and their overall number was increased ( I; Osx/GFP+ gating in G).
Thus, constitutive overexpression of VEGF164 by Osx+ progenitor cells drastically altered the osteo-angiogenic development of the skeleton, resulting in a disrupted bone architecture and impaired BM cavity formation.

## Osteolineage VEGF overexpression impairs the establishment of BM hematopoiesis
To assess how impaired formation of a vascularized bone center would impact the dynamics and characteristics of hematopoietic development, we next quantitatively mapped HSPCs (Lineage [Lin]− stem cell antigen (Sca)-1+ c-Kit+ [LSK] cells) and HSCs (LSK-SLAM cells) (illustration of gating strategy in A), as well as the global CD45+ hematopoietic fraction and blood lineages, in control versus VEGF cTg embryos across the time frame of BM genesis. At E15.5, prior to active BM hematopoiesis ( ), we detected only very few LSK and no LSK-SLAM cells in the BM of either genotype ( A). CD45+ cells were detected ( B), likely representing circulating blood cells contained within the bone vasculature. Consistently, the number of CD45+ cells was slightly elevated in VEGF cTg embryos and remained relatively stable at E15.5–E16.5, prior to the initiation of bona fide BM hematopoiesis (observed from E18.5 in control mice) ( B). By E16.5, very few LSK and LSK-SLAM cells had migrated to the BM in control mice, whereas mutant bones showed transiently higher numbers of HSCs and HSPCs ( A), suggesting accelerated homing or, alternatively, increased entrapment in the excessive and smaller blood vessels of VEGF cTg bones (also see G). Strikingly, however, further expansion or colonization of the mutant BM appeared blocked. The number of LSK and CD45+ cells stagnated in VEGF cTg bones by E18.5, in sharp contrast with the steep rise in control bones between E16.5 and E18.5 ( A and 2B). Although LSK-SLAM cells were preserved, the LSK and CD45+ cell fractions were significantly reduced in VEGF cTg bones ( C and 2D). 
Despite the severely impaired HSPC settlement in the BM of E18.5 VEGF cTg embryos, their blood profile was rather normal ( B), suggesting compensatory extramedullary hematopoiesis. Therefore, we extended the HSC trafficking analysis to non-skeletal hematopoietic organs. There were no differences in circulating LSK cells ( E), and the VEGF cTg fetal spleen actually showed fewer LSK-SLAM cells ( F), yet without major impact on the LSK or CD45+ cells in the spleen ( F). In the mutant liver, though, the LSK, LSK-SLAM, and CD45+ populations were markedly increased at E18.5 ( G), paralleling the timing of impaired BM hematopoiesis (see A and 2B). In line with a compensational function, lineage-committed progenitors were also more abundant in the E18.5 mutant liver ( H), as was the expression of niche factors known to regulate HSPC maintenance in the fetal liver ( I). Of note, livers of VEGF cTg mice showed no off-target or secondary Vegf upregulation and no vascular alterations ( C).
Thus, increased skeletal VEGF affects bone vascularization and BM cavity formation, leading to impaired establishment of BM hematopoiesis and triggering compensational hematopoiesis in the fetal liver.

## Slightly delaying the onset of osteolineage VEGF overexpression rescues BM cavity formation while still inhibiting HSPC homing to the skeleton
The constitutive Osx-Cre:GFP-targeted VEGF overexpression model suggested functional links between developmental bone vascularization and hematopoietic settlement in the BM. Yet, we could not exclude the possibility that impaired excavation and growth of the bone shaft merely spatially precluded HSPC infiltration. To uncouple these aspects, we established a hypomorph model by slightly delaying the VEGF overexpression. This was achieved by silencing the Tet-off-engineered Osx-Cre:GFP driver with doxycycline (dox) from conception until E13.5. Perinatal (E18.5 and post-natal day [P] 2) VEGF cTgDOX mice showed skeletal VEGF upregulation ( A) locally, but again not systemically, as serum VEGF levels ( B) and non-skeletal tissue vascularity (liver, A) were normal. In sharp contrast with the constitutive model, temporarily holding back the VEGF overexpression did allow the development of a normally shaped and sized skeleton ( C), including a bone shaft of normal length ( D). Although E18.5 VEGF cTgDOX tibias showed evident abnormalities in the distribution of the bone matrix ( E), these did not impact the overall bone density ( F), and importantly, the BM cavity volume was normal ( G). 
Despite the relatively normal bone architecture, the osteo-angiogenic BM compartments were still substantially altered in VEGF cTgDOX fetuses. CD31 IHC revealed higher numbers of blood vessels of smaller average size, eventually leaving the total vascularized area of the BM unaltered ( H and 3I). The Osx-Cre:GFP+ OPC population was again vastly expanded throughout the mutant bone, including the diaphyseal BM cavity, contrasting the more confined metaphyseal and endosteal localization of Osx-Cre:GFP+ cells in controls ( J and 3K).
Intriguingly, as in the constitutive model, VEGF cTgDOX mice also showed drastic defects in HSPC homing and establishment of BM hematopoiesis. At E18.5 and even more pronounced at P2, the number of LSK cells in the BM was dramatically decreased, associated with a striking lack of local CD45+ hematopoietic cell production ( L; gating strategy in B). Again, despite the blocked HSPC settlement in VEGF cTgDOX BM, the circulating blood cell types ( C), including LSK cells ( D), were normal. LSK and CD45+ cell numbers in the liver were normal ( E), suggesting hematopoietic compensation by another organ. Accordingly, VEGF cTgDOX mice showed elevated LSK, LSK-SLAM, and CD45+ cell numbers in their spleens ( M).
These data show that slightly postponing the excess VEGF production created a hypomorph model, displaying more moderate bone architectural changes and a normal-size BM cavity, while still exhibiting evident stromal-vascular alterations. Despite the rescued BM cavity formation, VEGF cTgDOX mice still showed impaired endogenous HSPC homing to bone and compromised establishment of BM hematopoiesis.

## Local over-production of VEGF by the osteogenic stroma impairs HSPC settlement in fetal bones through extrinsic, micro-environmental control of HSPC homing
The data above indicated that increased osteolineage VEGF production altered the dynamics of developmental HSPC trafficking and settlement in bone, even when cellular infiltration into the BM cavity was not hampered by a lack of physical space. We next aimed to define whether the actual HSPC entry process (homing) was impaired or whether, alternatively, reduced local proliferation or increased apoptosis of HSPCs underlaid the reduced HSPC pool in the mutant BM environment. Analysis of cell proliferation ( A) revealed no deviations in the proportions of BM-resident LSK cells in the G0, G1, and G2/S/M phases of the cell cycle in the VEGF cTg and VEGF cTgDOX models ( B and 4C), nor in Ki67+ LSK cells ( A). These data thus exclude a deficit in local HSPC proliferation. Testing apoptosis, we found an increased fraction of annexinV+ LSK cells in VEGF cTgDOX limbs at P2 ( D). Although a 3% raise in apoptotic rate can be substantial, the drastic 80% reduction in BM HSPCs (see L) suggested another or additional cause. 
Primary HSPC homing encompasses the traveling of HSPCs from the fetal liver to the developing bone and their seeding for subsequent long-term settlement in the BM cavity. To experimentally test the capacity of the control versus mutant BM environments in supporting HSPC homing, we injected membrane-labeled, wild-type Lin− cells isolated from the liver of newborn donor mice into the circulation of P2 control and VEGF cTgDOX recipient pups ( E). Sixteen hours after the transplantation, dramatically reduced numbers of labeled LSK cells were retrieved in the bones of VEGF cTgDOX mice compared with control recipients ( F). Instead, homing to the spleen, not the liver, was increased in VEGF cTgDOX mice ( G and 4H), similar to the endogenous situation (see M and E). Of note, virtually all of the ±5,000-6,000 LSK cells present in the injected Lin− cell suspensions ( B) were effectively retrieved in these three hematopoietic organs in both genotypes ( I), with only very few remaining circulating cells ( C). Yet the relative distribution strongly differed; in control mice, the vast majority (almost 60%) of retrieved LSK cells had homed to the skeleton, foremost to the limbs and vertebrae (see F) with hardly any infiltration into the calvaria ( D), followed by the spleen (25%) and liver (17%). In contrast, in VEGF cTgDOX mice, only 21% of the cells seeded into the skeleton versus 68% in the spleen ( I). This short-term homing experiment confirmed the intrinsic inhospitality of the mutant bone microenvironment to incoming HSPCs.
Together, these data indicate that the defective developmental BM hematopoiesis in mice with stromal VEGF over-production resulted from a niche-determined incapacity to support fetal HSPC homing and survival in the challenging environment.

## Defective HSPC homing in VEGF transgenic mice is not explained by a deficit in classical niche signals
To identify the basic features leading to the unsupportive microenvironment for HSPC homing in VEGF cTg mice, we performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on the prime osteo-angiogenic niche constituents at an early stage following VEGF over-exposure, preceding the initial HSPC seeding, to favor primary changes. Therefore, we sorted Osx-Cre:GFP+ OPCs and skeletal ECs (CD31+) from E14.5 control and VEGF cTg limbs ( A, 5B, and A). The specificity of the cell populations was validated by the distinct expression of osteolineage markers in sorted OPCs and the restricted expression of endothelial markers in the EC samples ( B). Specific VEGF-A overexpression in Osx+ OPCs from VEGF cTg mice was also confirmed ( C). 
There were relatively few significantly differentially expressed (DE) genes between the genotypes ( C). These included several genes related to osteogenic differentiation, which were downregulated in VEGF cTg versus control OPCs ( D). In line therewith, E18.5 VEGF cTg mice showed increased early (Runx2, Alp) yet reduced late osteoblast markers (osteocalcin [Ocn], Dmp1) by qRT-PCR on full bones ( E), suggesting a shift to immature cells. In the VEGF cTgDOX model, the overall spectrum of osteolineage markers, early and late, was increased at P2 ( F), indicating an expanded osteoblast pool.
Osteolineage cells, stromal cells, and ECs all constitute sources of homing factors and secreted or cell-bound signals regulating HSPCs. Surprisingly, though, the RNA-seq databases did not uncover differences in known hematopoietic niche factors produced by Osx+ OPCs (osteocrine factors) and/or CD31+ ECs (angiocrine factors) ( D). Even at later stages, key secreted HSPC niche factors were expressed at normal levels in VEGF cTg and VEGF cTgDOX bones, with the exception of a mild rise in CXCL12 in VEGF cTg bones only (qRT-PCR, G).
Thus, no consistent or pronounced changes, or deficits, were recorded in the expression of classical hematopoietic niche factors and key homing signals, suggesting that other mechanisms had to be responsible for the impaired HSPC homing in VEGF transgenic mice.

## Increased VEGF triggers stromal-vascular hyperactivity and alters the metabolic and oxidative status of the fetal BM environment
We next conducted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) on the RNA-seq data. Intriguingly, these analyses revealed prominent parallels in the impact of the mutation on Osx+ OPCs and CD31+ ECs. First, in line with VEGF strongly stimulating angiogenesis, ECs from VEGF cTg limbs showed activated DNA replication, ribosome synthesis and transcription pathways, and upregulated genes related to cell proliferation ( E and H). Likewise, VEGF cTg OPCs showed enriched DNA replication and cell-cycle pathways/genes ( F and H), implying an overall hyper-activation in the osteo-angiogenic compartments. Pathways related to matrix remodeling and cell growth and migration were also stimulated in both cell types exposed to high VEGF in vivo ( I and S5J).
Consistently, various pathway/gene set databases (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes [KEGG], Gene Ontology [GO]), Reactome, Hallmark, IPA) implied significant changes between the genotypes in cellular metabolism and redox homeostasis in both OPCs and ECs ( G–5I). Transcriptomes of ECs from VEGF cTg mice pointed at increased oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial respiration ( G and 5H), while mutant OPCs displayed marked downregulation of pathways associated with glycolysis, glucose metabolism, and hypoxia ( H), along with reduced expression of hypoxia-regulated genes, including many glycolytic enzymes ( I). In both cell types, these changes were associated with disturbed redox regulatory pathways ( H) and unbalanced lipid metabolism ( J), characterized by altered transport, accumulation, and metabolism of fatty acids and impaired cholesterol homeostasis. Moreover, ECs and OPCs from VEGF cTg bones showed transcriptional marks of increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), along with activation of DNA repair mechanisms in ECs ( K and 5L).
Thus, based on transcriptome analyses, forced stromal overexpression of VEGF appeared to quickly lead to cellular hyper-activation in the osteo-angiogenic unit and a relative hyperoxic state, associated with altered cell metabolism and oxygen use, disturbed redox homeostasis, and increased ROS levels, overall creating excessive oxidative stress in the mutant BM milieu.

## Altered blood vessel architecture, stromal-vascular interplay, and EC phenotype in bones with elevated VEGF levels, associated with increased ROS production
We next sought in vivo validation for the RNA-seq outcome of stromal VEGF over-production inducing excessive oxidative stress in the BM environment. Increased ROS levels were indeed detected in both the skeletal endothelium (CD31+CD45−Ter119−) and the hematopoietic marrow (CD45+ and/or Ter119+) of E16.5 VEGF cTg fetuses ( A). VEGF cTgDOX mice displayed elevated EC ROS also at P2, corresponding to the time of blocked HSPC settlement, both in arteriolar- (CD45−Ter119−CD31+Sca-1+) and sinusoidal-like (CD45−Ter119−CD31+Sca-1−) subtypes ( B). 
Global alterations in oxygenation and cellular metabolism within an environment can stem from a dysfunctional local vascular system. We therefore assessed the consequences of the altered stromal VEGF production on the blood vessel architecture and EC phenotype and on the association with perivascular SSPCs in the developing BM niche. Deep-tissue 3D confocal microscopy of bone sections stained for CD31 and Emcn revealed pronounced alterations in the overall architecture and distribution of blood vessels within the mutant BM cavity ( C; 3D models in ). Longitudinal oriented CD31highEmcn−/low arterial/arteriolar vessels were largely lost, as was the overall diversification of the blood vessels’ structure, size, and distinct organization along the vascular tree ( C–6F; quantitative image analysis detailed in ). Metaphyseal vessels in VEGF cTg bones failed to show normal bulb structures at the interface with the growth plate ( C, upper magnified panels); diaphyseal vessels displayed a uniform appearance, random distribution, loss of directionality, narrow lumens, and complex connections ( C, lower magnified panels). Quantitative image analysis (see A–S6D) confirmed the loss of longitudinal arrangement of blood vessels along the bone axis ( D), increased vascular density ( E), excessive vessel branching ( E), and loss of wider vessels and increased prevalence of smaller-diameter vessels ( F, F, and S6G). Overall, the changes led to blunted structural diversity in the vascular pattern of E18.5 VEGF cTg bones, albeit maintaining the global vascularized versus nonvascular volume fractions of the BM cavity ( E). Newborn VEGF cTgDOX mice similarly showed a dense network of narrower and virtually exclusively CD31highEmcnhigh vessels of homogeneous morphology, with abundant protrusions supporting excessive EC activation ( G and D and see I).

## Video S1. Blood vessel morphology and Osx-GFP+ cell distribution in control and VEGF cTg mutant embryos, related to Figure 6
Confocal 3D rendering showing blood vessels marked with Emcn (red) and CD31 (green) in tibias from control (left) and VEGF cTg (right) embryos at E18.5. Osx-Cre:GFP+ cell (gray) distribution is analyzed with respect to their closeness to blood vessels, represented here as modeled spheres with color labeling according to individual cells’ distance to the vasculature.

In line with the early cellular hyperactivity implied by the RNA-seq analysis, the absolute number of ECs (CD31+) populating the BM was increased in the mutants ( H), with abundant EC proliferation even in the later delayed-onset model ( I). Although both arteriolar-type (CD31+Sca-1+) and more permeable sinusoidal-type (CD31+Sca-1−) ECs had expanded massively ( A and S7B), a shift was observed in the relative composition of the vessels. In normal developing bones, the predominant EC subtype classifies as CD31+Sca-1+ (±70%–80% of ECs), with the CD31+Sca-1− fraction constituting only ±20%–30% ( J and B, lower graphs). The mutant bones consistently contained increased proportions of sinusoidal-type ECs at the expense of the CD31+Sca-1+ fraction ( J and B). Despite the overall EC expansion being only manifest by P2 in the delayed-onset VEGF cTgDOX model (see H), this EC phenotypic switch was observed already by E18.5 ( J), suggesting it to be an early effect of increased VEGF exposure. The frequency of ECs with evident ROS and the mean ROS levels were significantly elevated in each EC subtype in both models ( C and S7D).
Along with the changes in the vasculature, Osx+ cells in fetal VEGF cTg bones were not only expanded (see I) and under-differentiated (see D and S5E) but also generally located closer to blood vessels than normal ( K and 6L; ). In line with the primitive nature of perivascular SSPCs, VEGF cTg bones contained increased fractions of Sca-1+CD51+ immature osteogenic progenitor cells, along with decreased fractions of the more mature osteogenic precursors that had lost Sca-1 expression (Sca-1−CD51+ cells) ( M). Earlier mesenchymal stromal populations known to associate with ECs, and to provide niches controlling HSC self-renewal and differentiation in adult murine BM, were expanded as well in the fetal VEGF-enriched BM environment. These included cells marked by expression of PDGFRα and Sca-1 (PαS cells) ( ) and, most prominently, cells expressing PDGFRβ ( ; ) ( N). The VEGF cTgDOX model recapitulated particularly the expansion of Osx+ (see K) and PDGFRβ+ SSPC populations ( N). Although co-IHC for PDGFRβ and Emcn showed relatively restricted metaphyseal localization of PDGFRβ+ cells in control tibias, extended areas of PDGFRβ+ stromal-vascular association were observed throughout the mutant bones ( O), further evidencing coupled disturbances in the stromal-vascular niches.
At the (sub-)cellular levels, independent in vivo endorsement of the RNA-seq findings was sought by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of the developing BM cavity. In control bones, blood vessels with pronounced lumens were lined by thin and elongated ECs, containing limited cytoplasm and showing a smooth cell surface ( P, left panels). In sharp contrast, VEGF cTg bones showed abundant but severely narrowed capillaries (in line with E and 6F), formed by numerous and strongly thickened ECs, whose unusually plumb cell bodies partially obstructed the capillary lumens ( P). These ECs contained more cytoplasm, an irregular and plumb nucleus, and excessive mitochondria, many appearing irregular and swollen ( P), consistent with the RNA-seq indications of mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress (see H and 5K). The ECs also displayed very irregular cell borders with numerous projections and pinocytotic vesicles ( P, middle), and altered intercellular contacts ( P, right). In contrast with the normal tight junctions (visible as dark spots of high electron density) in control limbs, ECs in mutants appeared only loosely adherent (small regions of cell-cell contact) with irregular junctions displaying multiple gaps or pores ( P, right), suggesting more fenestrated capillaries and altered permeability. VEGF cTgDOX bones also showed selective alterations in expression of genes implicated in endothelial junctions and phenotype ( E and S7F). Thus, TEM analysis provided ultrastructural evidence for distorted vascular integrity, mitochondrial dysfunction, and increased vessel permeability in the VEGF-enriched BM.
Altogether, these data indicate that excessive stromal cell-derived VEGF in the developmental BM environment induced profound changes in endothelial phenotype, organization, and interplay with perivascular stromal cells, presumably associated with vascular dysfunction. Changes were observed in the oxidative-metabolic status of the stromal-vascular niches, and increased oxidative stress occurred broadly and non-cell-autonomously within the BM environment, concomitant with blocked initial HSPC homing and settlement in the skeleton.

## Irradiation induces increased stromal VEGF production, coupled stromal-vascular hyper-responses, and oxidative stress in the adult murine BM niche
Ionizing radiation therapy, a conventional anticancer treatment and procedure preceding HSC transplantation, increases ROS levels in the tumor niche and employs the cytotoxicity of ROS for killing tumor cells through a sudden, localized, and intense oxidative burst. Irradiation also severely damages the BM environment ( ). We here analyzed the stromal-vascular compartments during post-irradiation BM recovery. Interestingly, even 2 weeks after sub-lethal irradiation (7 Gy), recovering bones contained increased ROS levels within the non-hematopoietic BM niche ( A). Elevated ROS production was seen in ECs ( B) and OPCs, with the Sca-1−CD51+ cells being the most sensitive subtype ( C). BM vascularization was massively increased and characterized by tortuous, relatively random orientated and dilated blood vessels throughout the metaphysis and diaphysis ( D and 7E). The EC frequency was increased ( F) and shifted toward the arteriolar subtype ( G) by vastly increased CD31+Sca-1+ cells ( H). This hyper-vascularization was associated with expansion of primitive stromal cells, particularly PDGFRβ+ ( I) and Sca-1+CD51+ ( J) cells. Given the parallels with the fetal VEGF transgenic models, we analyzed the production of VEGF by the niche following non-lethal radiotherapy. Interestingly, irradiation induced VEGF expression in the recovering bones, with Vegf mRNA levels increasing with dose and time ( K), as well as in cultured primary murine BMSCs ( L). 

## Discussion
In recent years our understanding of the BM niches has advanced immensely. Besides the specifics of individual HSC-niche interactions, an emerging complexity is to decipher the interplay between the constituents of the multi-component niches. Elucidating how integrated and coordinated inter-/intra-niche signaling is achieved, lending perfectly balanced support to promote HSC stemness and direct HSPC differentiation, will be coupled to uncovering how it is disturbed in disease and therapy settings. VEGF is upregulated in multiple hematologic diseases and malignancies, including myelofibrosis and acute myeloid leukemia ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ) and has been implicated in vascular remodeling following irradiation and chemotherapy ( ; ; ). Here, studying the natural homing process of fetal HSPCs toward their BM destination, we found that tightly controlled skeletal VEGF levels are critical for ensuring local vascular integrity and functionality, regulating the oxidative environment and redox homeostasis, and defining the success of endogenous HSPC homing. Exposure to irradiation, often used in cancer treatment preceding stem cell therapy, amplified VEGF signaling and affected the BM stroma and vasculature in ways resembling the developmental genetic models. Understanding the impact of VEGF signaling in the crosstalk within the stromal-vascular niches may thus possibly be applicable toward promoting engraftment of transplanted HSCs and/or improving anticancer treatment.

## Fetal hematopoietic development is coupled to skeletogenesis and is dependent on the establishment of a receptive stromal-vascular niche
Severe obstruction of BM cavity formation in VEGF cTg embryos as a result of an altered osteo-angiogenic interplay underscores the tight coupling of hematopoietic development and skeletogenesis. Timely vascular invasion of the cartilaginous bone template and establishment of a perfused BM cavity is a prerequisite for HSC infiltration via the circulation ( ) and is controlled by VEGF ( ). Blocking either VEGF or Osx inhibited the hematopoietic conversion of fetal endochondral constructs grafted under the kidney capsule of transplant recipient mice ( ; ). In vivo, fetal Osx+ cells contribute to bone tissue generation and to the primitive BM stroma ( ; ), and they are indispensable contributors to the fetal HSC niche ( ; ). In Osx−/− mice lacking differentiating osteolineage cells ( ), initial HSPC seeding took place, but the defective niche was unable to maintain HSC quiescence and long-term engraftment potential ( ). Embryos lacking the earlier osteogenic transcription factor Runx2 also completely lacked osteolineage cells, but additionally failed to upregulate VEGF ( ; ) and to undergo stromal-vascular invasion and BM cavity formation, consequently failing to develop BM hematopoiesis ( ; ). Thus, the vasculature, invading fetal bones along with its associated primitive stromal cells ( ), seems the most critical requirement for allowing HSPC homing, while the osteogenic stroma further supports HSPC maintenance subsequently. Adding to the essential role of VEGF in steering vascular invasion initiating bone development ( ; , ), the current data establish that local VEGF levels determine stromal-vascular niche creation and HSPC settlement in the fetal BM cavity.
Our findings also underscore the concept that HSPC colonization of newly developing hematopoietic sites relies on the receptiveness of the local microenvironment by having created the required niches. At the stages studied here (E14.5 to P2), several organs actively participate in the ontogeny of the hematopoietic system, including the liver ( ) and spleen ( ). HSPCs constitutively circulate at low levels in this time frame but colonize specific organs stage-restrictively, probably only when local niches capable of supporting HSPC maintenance and self-renewal have been established ( ). Seeding of HSPCs into the BM normally initiates around E16.5 ( ); if hindered, as in VEGF transgenic mice, yet unknown signals trigger compensational hematopoiesis, but surprisingly, this takes place in different organs depending on the stage. When the block occurred earlier during embryogenesis (as in the constitutive model), the liver provided compensation, whereas defective BM engraftment in perinatal animals (in the delayed-onset model) led HSPCs to enter the spleen. The shift between these extramedullary hematopoietic organs seems to position around E18.5, coinciding with spleen hematopoiesis normally starting. Runx2−/− mice, lacking BM hematopoiesis, develop excessive extramedullary hematopoiesis in both liver and spleen at E18.5 ( ), and livers from Osx−/− mice show higher engraftment potential at E17.5 ( ). Later in post-natal life, BM obstruction or niche dysfunction commonly leads to BM egress of HSPCs and migration to the spleen for extramedullary hematopoiesis, causing splenomegaly, which was also seen upon short-term induction of skeletal VEGF in adult mice ( ).

## Increased skeletal VEGF leads to redox and metabolic changes in the niche cells and oxidative stress in the BM milieu
Our results suggest that, besides the need for adequate initial vascular invasion, successful HSPC homing, survival, and functioning in the developing BM depend on optimal vascular integrity and redox homeostasis. Excess VEGF triggered osteo-angiogenic hyper-activation and profoundly changed the EC phenotype, vessel architecture, and stromal-vascular interface. Early-stage changes in osteogenic cells and ECs were dominated by altered cellular metabolism, redox homeostasis, and lipid handling, including cholesterol synthesis and fatty acid oxidation, and associated with increased ROS production. The molecular, metabolic, and morphological alterations in the endothelium may have been detrimental for the vascular barrier function and/or the rolling, attachment, and extravasation of HSPCs, precluding their infiltration of the BM. Alternatively, or additionally, increased vascular permeability and excess ROS in the stromal-vascular niche may have hampered HSPC retention and survival, leading to an overall defective settlement in the BM. The lack of HSPC infiltration could further have negatively impacted on the integrity of the vascular network too, given the mutual dependency of ECs and hematopoietic cells ( ).
Although knowledge on the metabolic pathways employed by ECs residing in BM is sparse, generally ECs mostly rely on glycolytic metabolism, for up to 85% of their ATP production ( ; ). By maintaining a low oxidative metabolism, ECs minimize the production of ROS, thereby providing protection against their high-oxygen milieu; mitochondria in ECs are correspondingly thought to function as signaling hubs rather than metabolic powerhouses ( ; ). The switch to increased endothelial oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial activity implied by our data would expectedly alter the metabolic communication in the niche, which might impact its functioning in supporting HSPCs. We consistently documented increased ROS levels in ECs in both VEGF transgenic models; high ROS can induce lipid peroxidation and impact the integrity of the membrane lipid bilayer and tissue permeability. showed that HSC maintenance and leukocyte trafficking are regulated by distinct vessel types with different permeability: less permeable arterial vessels maintain quiescent HSCs, which are in a low ROS state, whereas more active, high ROS-containing HSCs are found around permeable sinusoidal vessels promoting HSC differentiation and exchange of blood cells with the circulation. In our model, high stromal-derived VEGF induced a fenestrated sinusoidal EC phenotype and molecular and morphological changes consistent with increased ROS and impaired vascular barrier function, suggesting that similar concepts might apply to the control of HSC homing by the fetal BM microenvironment.
Whether these metabolic alterations may be direct VEGF effects is not clear. VEGF signaling in primary ECs can promote mitochondrial biogenesis ( ), fitting the abundant mitochondria seen in VEGF cTg ECs. Yet, in our hands, administration of recombinant VEGF to cultured endothelial MS1 cells did not notably affect the rate or balance of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation (extracellular flux analysis, data not shown). Others found that VEGF stimulation actually led ECs to elevate their glycolytic flux ( ). Environment-dominated causes thus seem more likely for explaining the metabolic shift, especially given the complementary changes in the osteolineage cells. Skeletal progenitor cells normally use glycolysis as their main source of energy ( ), but reduced glycolysis associated with reduced hypoxia-regulated gene expression prevailed in the transcriptome of VEGF cTg Osx+ cells. Hence combined, the altered metabolic functioning of both cell types in the VEGF-enriched milieu suggests a relative hyperoxic status of the mutant BM. Normally, BM is quite hypoxic ( ), and precisely regulated signaling by hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) is essential for bone development, homeostasis, and vascularization ( ; ; ; ; ), as well as for hematopoiesis and HSC homing and engraftment ( ; ). Whether and how the altered oxidative environment may impact metabolism in the HSCs proper remains to be investigated ( ; ). We conclude that fetal HSPC homing to bone is controlled by the local stromal-vascular integrity and the metabolic and oxidative status of the niche, with the establishment of BM hematopoiesis being highly sensitive to the developing tissue’s oxygenation.

## Parallels between fetal VEGF overexpression and adult post-irradiation niche recovery underscore therapeutic prospects
Our finding that increased stromal VEGF production elicited oxidative stress in the fetal BM milieu inspired us to assess the potential relevance to the post-irradiation BM, as induction of ROS is a hallmark of ionizing radiation therapy ( ; ). Myelosuppression also severely damages the BM vascular system ( ; ), and engraftment of donor HSPCs and hematopoietic reconstitution after radiotherapy depends on vascular regeneration, a process requiring VEGFR2 signaling in sinusoidal ECs ( ) and VEGF provided by HSPCs ( ). We found increasing VEGF expression following non-lethal irradiation recovery and hyper-responses in the stromal-vascular compartment resembling the fetal VEGF cTg models, including expansion of specific SSPC populations and bias toward CD31+Sca-1+ ECs. The latter largely typify the fetal bone vasculature and may correspond to the VEGF-responsive Apelin+ ECs shown to control hematopoiesis and post-irradiation vascular regeneration ( ). The fact that such niche changes associated with poor homing of endogenous fetal HSPCs raises the possibility that excess VEGF could similarly be disadvantageous to transplanted HSCs. Recently, though, administration of VEGF shortly after irradiation was shown to improve transplantation efficiency ( ). Since the response of the BM environment to irradiation is highly dynamic and complex, it is possible that the ideal levels of VEGF in support of stem cell therapy may be time dependent; although early on increased VEGF may be beneficial or even required for engraftment, at later stages during the recovery, sustained excess VEGF in the niche may become unwarranted.
Further insights into the dynamic control of HSPC homing in development and disease will be instrumental toward therapeutically exploiting the niche for steering stem cell behavior. Possibly, the links uncovered here may help establish strategies to render the irradiated BM environment more favorable for incoming donor HSCs. Antioxidant treatment decreasing ROS levels, for instance, improved hematopoietic engraftment in immunodeficient mice ( ). Further research can clarify the value of anti-VEGF or antioxidant therapy, or uncover better targets, e.g., mediating vascular normalization, metabolic shift correction, or redox balance restoration, to enhance homing of infused stem cells and disease treatment outcomes. Although compound delivery in fetal systems can in some cases be challenging, the models described here may represent useful tools to explore candidate strategies in an in vivo context.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Christa Maes (christa.maes@kuleuven.be).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Experimental model and subject details

## Mouse models
All animals were housed in a temperature- and humidity-controlled environment, with a 12h light/dark cycle, and access to food and water ad libitum. Animal experiments and care were performed in accordance with the guidelines of institutional authorities and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the KU Leuven.
Embryos were harvested by cesarean section at the indicated stage (embryonic day (E)14.5-E18.5), as mentioned in the respective figure legends. Embryos at all stages and newborn mice at postnatal day (P)2 were euthanized by decapitation; adult mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation. Young adult wild-type females with CD1 genetic background were used for experimental purposes at 8-12 weeks of age. Mice were irradiated with a single dose of 5Gy or 7Gy using a RS 2000 X-ray irradiator (Rad Source).
Constitutive and delayed-onset conditional VEGF164 transgenic (cTg) mice were used in this study, based on the use of a Rosa26-VEGF164 transgene located in the genomic Rosa26 locus and consisting of the full-length cDNA sequence of mouse VEGF164 with an upstream floxed cassette containing a transcriptional stop sequence ( ). To direct constitutive overexpression of the VEGF164 isoform of VEGF-A to Osx+ skeletal stem/progenitor cells (SSPCs) and their osteolineage descendants, female VEGF(cTg/+) mice carrying one copy of the conditional VEGF164 transgene in the Rosa26-locus ( ) were crossed with male mice carrying one copy of the Osx-Cre:GFP transgene ( ). Mutant mice (Osx-Cre:GFP+;VEGF(cTg/+)) were termed VEGF cTg mice, and the control littermates were Osx-Cre:GFP+;VEGF(+/+) mice. The primers used for genotyping are listed in .
The Osx-Cre:GFP construct contains a Tet-Off system, such that the expression and activity of the Cre recombinase is prevented when a tetracycline analog, such as doxycycline, is given to the mice ( ). To establish a delayed-onset VEGF overexpression transgenic mouse model, doxycycline (dox) (Sigma-Aldrich) was administered via the drinking water of the pregnant dams at 0.2mg/ml from conception (E0.5, the morning a vaginal plug was observed) until E13.5. The dox solution was protected from light and changed three times per week. The resulting mice with delayed activation of VEGF164 cTg expression were termed VEGF cTgDOX (Osx-Cre:GFP+;VEGF(cTg/+) given dox) and the control mice were Osx-Cre:GFP+;VEGF(+/+) littermates that similarly received dox via the mother during embryogenesis.

## Primary murine bone cells
Murine bone marrow-derived stromal cells (mBMSCs) were isolated from 8-week-old females of CD1 genetic background, housed in standard conditions as described above (‘Mice’). Primary cell isolation and culture conditions are described in detail below. Cells were cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2.

## Method details

## Mouse bone tissue processing and image analysis

## Micro-computed tomography (micro-CT)
Micro-CT analysis was performed using the NanoCT phoenix nanotom® system (GE Healthcare). Embryonic limbs were scanned at 50kV/260μA, 3μm voxel size. Images were analyzed using CTAn software (Bruker) and 3D reconstructed models were made using CTVox software (Bruker). Scans of tibias were used for 3D representation and the quantification of bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV, %) and BM cavity volume (μm3) was performed using a region of interest (ROI) containing the entire BM cavity.

## Skeletal staining
Full embryos were dissected and prepared for skeletal staining with Alizarin red and Alcian blue to visualize mineralized tissue and cartilage respectively. Briefly, dissected embryos were fixed in 95% ethanol for at least 3 days and stained with Alcian blue for 24h. Samples were further cleared using a 1% KOH solution and stained with Alizarin red for 3h. Finally, samples were placed in 2% KOH for the last removal of soft tissues and progressively in a gradient of 2% KOH to glycerol, until storage and imaging in a 20:80 ratio KOH:glycerol solution.

## Paraffin histology and histomorphometry
The histological methods using paraffin sections of fetal and adult mouse bones have been described in detail previously ( ; ; ). Here, the bones were fixed overnight using freshly prepared 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at 4°C, decalcified in 0.5M EDTA for 2 days (E18.5 and P2 samples) or 2 weeks (adult samples), embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 5 μm. Paraffin sections were stained with standard hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or with safranin O to visualize cartilage proteoglycans. To visualize the vasculature, sections were subjected to immunohistochemistry (IHC) for CD31 using TSA Indirect Biotin System (PerkinElmer) with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB)-based visualization and brightfield detection, as before. Stained sections were imaged using an Olympus IX83 inverted microscope equipped with a DP73 camera. For blood vessel (BLV) quantification (shown in I), the average BLV size (lumen surface area of individual vessels (μm2)), density (number of vessels per BM area unit (/mm2)), and vascularized area denoting the fraction of the BM occupied by vessels (BLV area/BM area, %), were determined using the entire BM cavity as a region of interest. Each parameter was quantified on 2 to 3 sections per bone, to generate a representative average value for the animal, and a total of 4 animals were analyzed per group.

## Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of frozen tissue sections and confocal microscopy.
For histological analysis of embryonic and newborn bones, dissected samples were fixed for 4-6 h in 4% PFA. Frozen samples were either embedded in Freeze Gel Q Path (VWR International) and cut into thin sections (5-10 μm), or embedded in 8% gelatin (Sigma-Aldrich) to generate thick (50 μm) sections using a cryostat. In the former procedure, bones were first taken through a gradient of 30% D-(+)-sucrose in increasing Freeze Gel Q Path medium and embedded by snap-freezing the samples in liquid nitrogen-cooled 2-methylbutane. For gelatin embedding, tissues were cryoprotected using 20% D-(+)-sucrose and 2% polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and further embedded in 8% gelatin diluted in cryoprotection medium as described in .
Staining for PDGFRβ and endomucin (Emcn) together was performed on 50 μm thick gelatin sections. Samples were blocked with 5% donkey serum for 45 min and stained with rat monoclonal anti-mouse Emcn (Santa Cruz) and goat polyclonal anti-mouse PDGFRβ (Santa Cruz) overnight, followed by secondary staining for 75 min using donkey-anti-rat IgG DyLight 550 (Invitrogen) and donkey-anti-goat IgG Alexa Fluor 647 (Abcam). The detection of endogenous GFP+ cells together with Emcn staining, and/or with additional phospho-histone H3 (PHH3) proliferation marker or junctional VE-cadherin (Cdh5) staining, was also prepared on the same type of samples (gelatin sections of 10 or 50 μm) and following this protocol.
Staining for CD31 alone was performed on 5-10 μm cryosections. Samples were blocked with 5% donkey serum for 45 min and stained overnight with a goat polyclonal anti-mouse CD31 (R&D systems), followed by secondary staining for 75 min using donkey-anti-goat IgG Alexa Fluor 647 (Abcam). Nuclei were visualized using Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen). The stained sections were imaged by laser scanning confocal microscopy on a Nikon C2 Eclipse Ni-E, inverted microscope (Nikon) equipped with 20x (Plan Apo VC NA 0.75), 40x (Oil Plan Fluor NA 1.30) and 60x (Oil Apo NA 1.40) objectives.
For the staining of blood vessels with CD31 and Emcn together, half trimmed cryo-embedded bones were first blocked and permeabilized using 10% serum, 0.1% tween and 0.2% v/v Triton-X in PBS overnight. Samples were further stained with goat polyclonal anti-mouse CD31 (R&D Systems) and rat monoclonal anti-mouse Emcn (Santa Cruz) for 48 h in blocking solution, followed by secondary staining for 48 h using donkey-anti-goat IgG Alexa Fluor 647 (Abcam) and donkey-anti-rat IgG DyLight 550 (Invitrogen). Nuclear staining was performed with Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen) overnight. Samples were then cleared using increasing series of thioldiethanol (TDE) dilution and kept in 95% TDE for imaging. The stained sections were imaged with a 20x (Multi-immersion Plan Fluor NA 0.75) objective using an Andor CSU-X spinning-disk module mounted on a Nikon upright Ni-E microscope, and acquired with a microscope and Andor Ixion3 camera (Ultra EMCCD 885). The setup was steered by NIS-Elements AR 5.21.01 software (Nikon).

## Image processing and segmentation

## 2D blood vessel analysis and PHH3 analysis
Blood vessels marked with CD31 or Emcn within single confocal optical sections were segmented by training a machine learning pixel classification software (Ilastik 1.3.2) to distinguish between blood vessels and background. Binary versions of these images were then imported into FIJI ( ) for further processing. As blood vessels are hollowed structures, they were closed and filled within their lumen to make quantifications possible. To exclude CD31+ hematopoietic cells and debris from the final analysis, we used a 50 μm2 size filter.
Vascularized area fraction and perimeter were obtained using the “analyze particles tool” from FIJI for area and perimeter. Final values were obtained by summing either the area or the perimeter of detected blood vessels and then normalizing them to the analyzed tissue area.
Blood vessel width was determined using the local thickness tool in FIJI. To allow for frequency width distribution comparison between multiple samples, we normalized the maximum blood vessel width to be 200 μm and stacked the data into 10 μm bins.
For directionality analysis, previously filled blood vessel binary images were iteratively eroded to obtain the center-line using the “skeletonization” tool in FIJI. Skeletonized blood vessel images were rotated such that the line traversing the proximal growth plate was parallel to the right y axis of the image (no interpolation was used in this step). We defined a range from −90° to 90° with respect to the growth plate, meaning that 0° represents blood vessels oriented orthogonal to the growth plate, hence running along the longitudinal axis of the bone shaft. The fraction of blood vessels oriented in each direction was calculated using the “directionality” plugin in FIJI. The blood vessel, junction, triple, and quadruple point numbers were obtained by running the “analyze skeleton tool” on the skeletonized blood vessel images.
To quantify proliferating ECs, Emcn+ cells also showing nuclear staining for the proliferation marker PHH3 were counted in tissue areas of 250 μm x 500 μm of the metaphyseal and diaphyseal areas of P2 bones. The density of double positive (Emcn+ PHH3+) cells per surface area was calculated.

## 3D Osx-GFP cells nearest distance to blood vessel surface analysis
Confocal image stacks were stitched together, denoised, and deconvolved using proprietary software (NIS-Elements AR 5.21.01). Images were then imported into Imaris v9.5.1 (Bitplane AG) and rendered as 3D volumes. CD31 and Emcn signals were modeled using the surface tool of Imaris using the absolute intensity algorithm. Osterix-GFP cells were modeled as 3D spots with an estimated XY diameter of 8 μm. To quantify the distance of Osx-GFP spots to the nearest blood vessel surface, we used a distance transformation algorithm (MATLAB R2017b) on the modeled surfaces generated from either CD31 or Emcn signals and calculated the intensity value of the distance transformed image at the center of each modeled Osx-GFP spot. Growth plate Osx-GFP spots were filtered out of the analysis. All Osx+ cells were analyzed in a representative bone of each genotype.

## Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
E16.5 tibia samples were harvested and cleaned. The epiphyses were cut to improve fixative infiltration, and the samples were immediately fixed with a 4% PFA and 2.5% glutaraldehyde solution (both from Electron Microscopy Sciences) in a 0.1 M phosphate buffer. Samples were then stained with 2% osmium (OsO4) (Electron Microscopy Sciences) and 1.5% potassium ferrocyanide (K4Fe(CN)6) (Sigma) for 4 h, followed by incubation with 0.5% uranyl acetate (Electron Microscopy Sciences) in 25% methanol overnight and en bloc staining with Walton’s lead aspartate ( ) for 30 min at 60°C. Samples were then dehydrated with a graded series of ethanol and incubated with propylene oxide (Agar Scientific) twice for 10 min. Finally, samples were gradually infiltrated with hard epoxy resin (Agar Scientific)/propylene oxide mixtures followed by embedding in pure epoxy resin and polymerization at 60°C for 48 h. Blocs were sectioned at 70 nm thickness, post stained with 4% uranyl acetate (SPI) for 8 min and Reynold’s lead citrate ( ) for 3 min and imaged at an acceleration voltage of 80 kV using a JEOL JEM1400-LaB6 Transmission Electron Microscope equipped with a EMSIS Quemesa 11 Mpxl camera.

## Primary Cell Culture and in vitro Irradiation
For primary murine (m) BMSC cultures, femurs and tibias were isolated from 8-week-old wild-type CD1 mice and thoroughly cleaned to remove muscles and connective tissues. Epiphyses were removed with a sterile scalpel, and each bone shaft was placed in a heparin-coated Microvette CB tube (Sarstedt) for a 2-min centrifugation step at 4500 rpm. The BM plug in the collection tube was resuspended and plated in DMEM containing 20% non-heat inactivated FBS and 1% AA. During the first 3 days, medium was changed every day to remove hematopoietic cells. Next, cells were grown until 50% confluency and irradiated with 7Gy; parallel control cultures were left non-irradiated. The medium was changed every 2 days subsequently, and the cells were harvested 7 days after irradiation by lysing them in RLT buffer containing 1% β-mercaptoethanol. RNA was extracted for qRT-PCR, as described below.

## Analysis of gene expression

## Real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
For RNA extraction, bones were crushed while frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in Trizol (Sigma-Aldrich), as described before ( ; ). For embryos, we used both tibias and femurs in a pooled hind limb sample of each individual mouse; for newborn mice at P2 we pooled the two femurs; adult bone RNA samples were extracted from a single femur per mouse. For RNA isolation of livers, the samples were homogenized in Trizol (Sigma-Aldrich). Total RNA from these samples was isolated using the RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN). Total RNA from mBMSCs was isolated using the NucleoSpin RNA XS Micro kit (Macherey-Nagel), all according to the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA was synthesized from 1 or 2 μg RNA by a standard protocol as described before ( ). Gene expression was quantified using the Fast SYBR Green Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a Step One Plus Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) according to standard protocols. Primers are listed in . Relative mRNA levels were calculated by the ΔΔCt method, using hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) as housekeeping/reference gene.

## Bulk RNA-sequencing
Mice were dissected at E14.5 to isolate osteoprogenitor cell (OPC) and endothelial cell (EC) populations from the perichondrium of fetal long bones (forelimbs and hind limbs), according to the procedure described in detail previously ( ). Briefly, bones were subjected to a digest using 2 mg/mL collagenase type II and 3 mg/mL dispase in αMEM for 30 min, in a shaking water bath at 37°C. Medium containing 10% FBS was added and the isolated cells were filtered (70 μm), centrifuged and resuspended at 1x 106 cells/mL in PBS containing 2% FBS. Cells were stained for 30 min with anti-CD31-AlexaFluor 647 (BD Biosciences) and anti-CD45-PE (eBioscience). Populations of interest were isolated using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) on a BD FACSAria Cell Sorter (BD Biosciences). Gates for Osx-Cre:GFP+ and CD31+ cell selection were set as shown in A, based on the FACS profile of negative control samples. ECs were selected as CD45- Osx-Cre:GFP- CD31+ and OPCs were selected as CD45- CD31- Osx-Cre:GFP+. Three independent samples for each group (two cell types, from control and VEGF cTg fetuses) were collected, except for OPCs from control mice where 4 samples were collected. Each individual sample contained the pooled cell yield from 12 to 31 embryos as detailed in A.
The extraction of total RNA (RNeasy Micro kit, QIAGEN), library preparation using 100 ng RNA (TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Preparation Kit, Illumina), indexing, quantification, validation of library quality and size range (DNA 1000 kit, Agilent Technologies), sequencing Illumina HiSeq2500, generating 50 bp single-end reads with a depth of 30-40 Mb per sample), and processing of results and bioinformatics was all done according to the procedures described before ( ). Count-based differential expression analysis was done with R-based Bioconductor package DESeq and Cufflinks 2.2.1. Reported p values were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, which controls the false discovery rate (FDR). For differential expression analysis of a single gene, DESeq datasets were used. To directly compare the differential expression of multiple genes (in C), cufflinks software datasets were used because these include a correction for gene length; all other analyses were based on DESeq datasets. Differentially expressed (DE) genes were identified based on the FDR, with FDR < 0.1 considered statistically significant. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed with GSEA software (MSigDBv6, Broad Institute) ( ; ) using the full gene lists with normalized reads and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (QIAGEN) was performed using the gene list of DE genes.

## Protein extraction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Hind limbs and forelimbs (from constitutive and delayed-onset (DOX) mice, respectively) were crushed on liquid nitrogen and extracted in cell extraction buffer (CEB buffer, Invitrogen #FNN0011) including 350 μM of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 5 mM of sodium fluoride (NaF), 2.3 mM of sodium orthovanadate (Na3VO4) and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma #P2714). Samples were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 g at 4°C and the protein concentration was quantified by the Protein Assay Dye Reagent (BioRad). For ELISA, 18 μg protein lysate was assayed using the Mouse VEGF Immunoassay Quantikine ELISA Kit (R&D Systems MMVOO). Serum VEGF protein levels were determined using the same. Briefly, blood was collected and centrifuged for 10 min at 4000 rpm to obtain the serum and samples were stored at −80°C until use. The ELISA was performed using 10 μL of serum, according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and analyzed on a Synergy HT (BioTek) plate reader.

## Peripheral blood analysis
Blood samples were collected via the jugular vein and kept in EDTA-coated tubes (Sarstedt) until analysis. Total nucleated blood cell counts were performed using an automated scil Vet abc Plus+ hemocytometer (SCIL Animal Care Company).

## Flow cytometry

## Single-cell samples preparation
For flow cytometry, all skeletal tissue digestions were performed at 37°C with an enzymatic digest solution consisting of α-MEM medium containing 3 mg/mL collagenase II and 4 mg/mL dispase (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full embryonic femurs and tibias were digested for 2 × 30 min. Newborn mouse-derived femurs and tibias were longitudinally cut and digested for 40 min. Spleens and livers were mechanically dissociated. Blood was taken via the jugular vein and kept in EDTA-coated tubes. Samples from bones, livers and spleens were filtered through 70 μm nylon cell strainers to obtain single-cell suspensions. Cell suspensions derived from livers were additionally incubated for 10 min with red blood cell (RBC) lysis solution. For bones from adult mice, the BM was flushed and incubated in the enzymatic digest solution for 15 min; the remaining bone shaft was further cut into pieces and incubated with the same digestion medium formula for 30 min, all at 37°C. Bone pieces and BM flush were then combined and filtered through 70 μm nylon cell strainers to obtain single cell suspensions.

## Staining procedure
For staining of cell surface markers, cells were kept in FACS buffer (0.5% BSA, 2 mM EDTA in PBS) and incubated for 30 min at 4°C unless indicated otherwise. All antibodies used for flow cytometry analyses are listed in the and the populations analyzed are described in the following section (‘Sample recording and analysis’).
Cell cycle analysis was performed either with Hoechst and Pyronin Y ( ) or with Ki67 ( ). For cell cycle analysis by Hoechst and Pyronin Y, cells were kept in FACS buffer with 50 μg/mL verapamil (Sigma-Aldrich) through the entire procedure and stained with 20 μg/ml Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen) for 30 min and with 2 μg/mL Pyronin Y (Sigma) for an additional 30 min, all at 37°C. After centrifugation, cells were subsequently incubated with antibodies detecting specific cell surface markers. For cell cycle analysis using Ki67, the cells were first incubated with antibodies against specific cell surface markers, and after centrifugation, fixed with 4% PFA for 20 min and permeabilized with 1% (w/v) saponin solution in 10 nM HEPES buffer for another 20 min. After this step, cells were maintained in a 0.5% saponin buffer and incubated with Ki67-Pacific Blue antibody (BioLegend) for 30 min. Detection of apoptotic cells was performed by incubating the cells with Annexin V-PE (BioLegend), along with antibodies for selected cell surface markers, for 30 min at 4°C in binding buffer (10 mM HEPES pH7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2 in PBS).
Detection of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in cells was done using 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate, acetyl ester (CM-H2DCFDA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). CM-H2DCFDA passively diffuses into cells, where it reacts with intracellular components and is finally oxidized, leading to fluorescent 2′,7’-di-chlorofluorescein (DCF). After staining for cell surface markers, cells were additionally incubated with 3 μg/mL CM-H2DCFDA for 30 min at 37°C in FACS buffer. The results are displayed as the ratio between control and VEGF cTg samples of the mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) for 2′,7’-di-chlorofluorescein (DCF) (relative DCF MFI (%)).
All flow cytometry experiments included corresponding unstained, single color and fluorescence minus one (FMO) controls for determining compensation and gating.

## Sample recording and analysis
All samples were run on a BD FACSCanto II High Throughput Sampler (BD Biosciences) flow cytometer followed by analysis with FlowJo® software. Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) and HSCs were identified in all organs as CD45+ Lineage- (Lin-; with the lineage cocktail including antibodies against CD3, CD45R (B220), Ter119, and Gr1 (Ly-6G), but not CD11b for fetal/newborn analyses of endogenous HSC/HSPC numbers, because CD11b is expressed by a subfraction of developmental HSCs and we did not want to risk excluding a specific subset of the cells of interest from the analyses) Sca-1+ c-kit+ (LSK) and LSK CD48- CD150+ (LSK-SLAM) ( ; ), respectively. Committed progenitors were identified in liver samples as pre-colony forming unit – erythroid (pre-CFU-E: Lin- Sca-1- c-kit+ CD41- CD105+ CD150+), megakaryocyte progenitors (MkP: Lin- Sca-1- c-kit+ CD41+ CD150+), pre-granulocytes and monocytes (preGM: Lin- Sca-1- c-kit+ CD41- CD105- CD150-) ( ). Osx-Cre:GFP+ cells were recorded as CD45- Ter119- CD31- Osx-Cre:GFP+. BM ECs were identified as CD45- Ter119- CD31+ and further divided into arterial (CD45- Ter119- CD31+ Sca-1+) and sinusoidal (CD45- Ter119- CD31+ Sca-1-) fractions ( ). SSPC populations including stromal cells in the BM were identified as either PDGFRβ+ cells (CD45- Ter119- CD31- PDGFRβ+) ( ; ), PαS cells (CD45- Ter119- CD31- PDGFRα+ Sca-1+) ( ), immature osteolineage progenitors cells (CD45- Ter119- CD31- CD51+ Sca-1+) or more mature osteolineage progenitors (CD45- Ter119- CD31- CD51+ Sca-1-) ( ).

## Short-term (ST) homing assay.
To experimentally test the homing capacity of transplanted wild-type HSPCs toward the control versus mutant BM environment, we opted for using the VEGF cTgDOX mouse model at P2 as recipient to facilitate transplantation and survival for 16 hours subsequently until tissue harvesting. To model the natural migration process, we used HSPCs derived from the liver as donor cells; furthermore, no irradiation was included to not introduce new changes to the BM environment. Liver cells were isolated from wild-type donor mice at P2 by mechanical dissociation as described above, and Lin- cells were subsequently selected by magnetic separation using the Lineage Cell Depletion Kit (cocktail containing antibodies against CD5, CD45R (B220), CD11b, Gr-1 (Ly-6G/C), 7/4-antigen, and Ter-119), with MS columns and MiniMACS Separator (all from Milteny Biotec). Lineage-depleted cells were then labeled with the membrane dye Vybrant DiI Cell-Labeling Solution (Invitrogen) and injected into the jugular vein of P2 control and VEGF cTgDOX newborn pups. Sixteen hours after the transplantation, the bones, liver, spleen and blood were harvested and prepared for flow cytometry as described above. For the analysis, total LSK cells were first identified and then further gated for the detection of LSK cells labeled with the Vibrant™ DiI dye (Excitation 549nm / Emission 565nm). The number of labeled LSK cells retrieved from the limbs (fore- and hind limb bones), vertebra, calvaria, skeleton (sum of cells homed to the limbs, vertebra and calvaria), spleen, liver, and circulation were documented.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Analysis of the RNA-seq data is detailed in the respective section above. Briefly, padj < 0.1 by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used as threshold for statistical significance. All other results are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). With the exception of a few selective cases, indicated in the figure legends, statistical testing entailed the comparison of samples of two conditions or genotypes, using a two-sided two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test (GraphPad prism), whenever applicable applied to distinct time points separately. P values (p) < 0.05 were considered as significant, and indicated as ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Absence of a symbol implies that the difference between the groups was not statistically significant (p > 0.05). n numbers are biological repeats, representing the number of individual mice or distinct sets of pooled mice for each genotype group or condition.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Table S1

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data and code availability

•The RNA-seq datasets generated in this study have been deposited at the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) repository and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the .
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We thank A. McMahon, J. Cools, P. Agostinis, A, Zwijsen, and M.-H. Lafage-Proust for sharing mice, equipment, and protocols; W. Bossuyt, V. Brys, A. Cortés Calabuig, and the UZ Leuven Genomics Core for RNA-seq and bioinformatics expertise; P.A. Penttila and the KU Leuven/VIB FACS Core; and the personnel of KU Leuven Animal Facilities. The members of the SCEBP lab, SCIL and SBE, and L. Purton and L. Silberstein are acknowledged for sharing expertise and critical insights. This work and personnel directly involved were supported by the 10.13039/501100000781European Research Council under EU’s 7th Framework Programme (FP/2007–2013; ERC Grant #282131 to C.M.), the KU Leuven Research Fund (OT/14/121 and C14/18/105 to C.M.), SCIL Program Financing to C.M.V. (PF/10/019; providing Emerging Science Program funding to C.M.), and the 10.13039/501100003130Research Foundation Flanders (FWO; #G0B5219N, #G0C8519N, and ‘Kom Op Tegen Kanker’ #G0E7116N grants to C.M.; fellowship #12J8516N to A.-M.B.; fellowship #1S26717N to D.T.). NanoCT equipment was financed by the Hercules Foundation for Research Infrastructure funding, Belgium (AKUL/13/47). The EU Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under Marie Sklodowska-Curie (MSCA-ITN #721432) supported N.P.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, M.M., A.-M.B., and C.M.; methodology, M.M., A.-M.B., N.P., M.B., N.C., P.B., S.M., S.K., and C.M.; investigation, M.M., A.-M.B., N.P., D.T., R.V.-T., M.B., N.C., E.N., R.C., and P.B.; resources, A.N., J.J.H., P.B., S.M., C.M.V., and C.M.; writing – original draft, M.M. and C.M.; writing – review & editing, M.M., N.P., D.T., S.M., J.J.H., S.K., C.M.V., and C.V.; funding acquisition, C.M.V. and C.M.; supervision, C.M.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109618.