822acssdACS Biomaterials Science & EngineeringACS Biomater Sci EngPMC8130531813053182904023397914310.1021/acsbiomaterials.1c00318Nanobased Platforms for Diagnosis and Treatment of
COVID-19: From Benchtop to Bedside
BidramElham EsmaeiliYasaman AminiAbbas SartoriusRossella TayFranklin R ShariatiLaleh MakvandiPooyan ‡Biosensor
Research Center, School of Advanced Technologies in Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Hezarjerib Avenue, Isfahan 8174673461, Iran§Centre
for Infrastructure Engineering, Western
Sydney University, Locked
Bag 1797, Penrith 2751, New South Wales, Australia⊥Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Australian College
of Kuwait, Al Aqsa Mosque
Street, Mishref, Safat 13015, Kuwait||Institute
of Biochemistry and Cell Biology (IBBC), National Research Council (CNR), Via Pietro Castellino 111, Naples 80131, Italy#The
Graduate
School, Augusta University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia 30912, United States□Applied
Physiology Research Center, Isfahan Cardiovascular Research Institute, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Hezarjerib Avenue, Isfahan 8174673461, Iran○Department
of Biomaterials, Nanotechnology and Tissue Engineering, School of
Advanced Technologies in Medicine, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Hezarjerib Avenue, Isfahan 8174673461, Iran△Centre
for Materials Interfaces, Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia, viale
Rinaldo Piaggio 34, Pontedera 56025, Pisa, Italy*Email: L.Shariati@amt.mui.ac.ir.
*Email: pooyan.makvandi@iit.it.
12520217621502150–21761852021© 2021 The
Authors. Published by American
Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Human respiratory
viral infections are the leading cause of morbidity
and mortality around the world. Among the various respiratory viruses,
coronaviruses (e.g., SARS-CoV-2) have created the greatest challenge
and most frightening health threat worldwide. Human coronaviruses
typically infect the upper respiratory tract, causing illnesses that
range from common cold-like symptoms to severe acute respiratory infections.
Several promising vaccine formulations have become available since
the beginning of 2021. Nevertheless, achievement of herd immunity
is still far from being realized. Social distancing remains the only
effective measure against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nanobiotechnology
enables the design of nanobiosensors. These nanomedical diagnostic
devices have opened new vistas for early detection of viral infections.
The present review outlines recent research on the effectiveness of
nanoplatforms as diagnostic and antiviral tools against coronaviruses.
The biological properties of coronavirus and infected host organs
are discussed. The challenges and limitations encountered in combating
SARS-CoV-2 are highlighted. Potential nanodevices such as nanosensors,
nanobased vaccines, and smart nanomedicines are subsequently presented
for combating current and future mutated versions of coronaviruses.
Keywords: COVID-19, coronavirus, nanobiosensor, nanobased vaccine, SARS-CoV-2

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Mar 8; Accepted 2021 Apr 29; Issue date 2021 Jun 14.

1.

## Introduction
Coronavirus pandemics
have emerged rapidly in the 21st century,
with catastrophic consequences. , The first severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) pandemic, SARS-CoV-1,
occurred in southern China in late 2002 and infected more than 8000
people with ∼10% mortality globally. This was followed by the emergence of the Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in 2012 that infected about 2494 people
with a mortality rate of 34.4%. , In late 2019, the new
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, often referred to as coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19), emerged in Wuhan, China, and spread quickly to all countries
around the world. As of February 26, 2021,
the World Health Organization (WHO) reported a total of 112 million
confirmed cases with 2.5 million deaths. Over the last 12 months or so, considerable efforts have been made
to rapidly develop COVID-19 vaccines to protect and mitigate the effects
of this deadly disease on the human population. However, with more
than 2.5 million deaths to date, there is an urgent need for fast
and reliable diagnostic and therapeutic approaches against SARS-CoV-2
infections. Many aspects of the currently available vaccine formulations
remain to be clarified, including the safety of administration on
the pediatric population and their effectiveness against emerging
viral strains.
Nanotechnology has opened up new horizons in
many different aspects
of medical science, such as targeted gene delivery, targeted drug
delivery, biosensor platforms, imaging, and diagnosis. , Nanomaterials have been developed to combat viral, bacterial, and
fungal infections because of their unique
physicochemical characteristics, such as high surface area, nanoscale
dimensions, and readily achievable surface modifications. These properties
enable scientists to improve drug pharmacokinetics, control drug release,
enhance drug solubility, facilitate cellular membrane passage, and
enhance the bioavailability of pharmaceutics against a series of viruses
such as human immunodeficiency virus, herpes simplex virus, and hepatitis
B virus. , Nanomaterials are promising tools for the
diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19.
The present review systematically
outlines the recent advances
reported in the literature on the use of nanoparticles as effective
diagnostic and antiviral treatment tools against recently mutated
coronaviruses. In addition, an overview of the biological properties
of all human coronaviruses is provided, with evaluation of their differences
and site-specific infection of the human body. The challenges and
limitations encountered by this technology are discussed. Nanotechnology
offers multiple roles in combating coronavirus infections, such as
nanosensors, nanobased vaccines, and smart medicine.

2.

## Human Coronaviruses: An Overview on Biological
Properties
To date, seven known coronaviruses (HCoVs) have
been identified
that infect humans. They belong to the family Coronaviridae and include
SARS-CoV-1, , HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC4), HCoV-HKU1, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2. The HCoV-229E and HCoV-NL63 are identified as Alphacoronaviruses, whereas HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-OC43, SARS-CoV1, SARS-CoV2, and MERS-CoV
are classified as Betacoronaviruses.( ) As a coronavirus that infects humans, SARS-CoV-2 is genetically
similar to SARS-CoV-1 (∼79%) and MERS-CoV (∼50%). 
Coronaviruses are enveloped, positively
sensed, single-stranded
RNA with spherical capsids (120–160 nm) that collectively resemble
a crown with a solar shape. , The CoV genome is about
26.4–31.7 kb, which is the largest among RNA viruses with guanine
and cytosine contents varying from 32 to 43%. Genomic RNA acts as a mRNA (mRNA) which plays a key role in the
replication of the viral genome and production of new infectious virus
particles. The 5′ untranslated
region (5′ UTR) and 3′ untranslated region (3′
UTR) are the regions of mRNA involved in many regulatory aspects of
gene expression with a major role in RNA–RNA interactions for
binding with viral and cellular proteins. A typical CoV comprises at least six-open reading frames (ORFs).
Two-thirds of the genome consists of ORF1a and ORF1b, which produce
two polypeptides, pp1a and pp1ab. These polypeptides are processed
by viral proteases (e.g., 3-C-like protease (3CLpro), main protease
(Mpro) and papain-like protease (PLpro)) for cleaving the 16 nonstructural
proteins (NSPs) that are involved in genome transcription and replication. The sizes of the NSPs vary in different CoV
strains. 
Coronaviruses have four
canonical structural proteins including
spike protein (S), envelope protein (E), membrane protein (M), and
nucleocapsid protein (N). Besides, there are several nonstructural
proteins that are encoded by ORFs 10 and 11 on one-third of the genome
near the 3′ end. The S protein
is a large glycosylated transmembrane protein (1160–1400 aa)
that plays an essential role in the recognition of cellular receptors
for infection of a susceptible cell. The size of this protein differs
among the coronaviruses: 21493 aa, 1270 aa, and 1273 aa for SARS-CoV-1,
MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2, respectively. The E protein is a small envelope protein (74–109 aa) responsible
for the assembly of virions and curving of the viral envelope. The M protein is an integral glycoprotein (250
aa), which has three transmembrane regions and interacts with other
structural proteins to maintain the virion structure. The N protein is a heavily phosphorylated nucleocapsid
protein (500 aa), which has a key role in encapsulating the viral
genome into helical nucleocapsid within the viral particles. The arrangement of N, E, and M proteins among
coronaviruses is different, as shown in . , The Betacoronavirus genus has an additional structural protein, hemagglutinin-esterase
(HE, 430 aa) and a transmembrane protein that forms homodimers. The HE protein has acetyl-esterase function
that is not necessary for in vitro viral replication. However, the
HE protein may affect early viral infection in vivo by binding reversibly
to O-acetylated sialic acids. The 3a/b and 4a/b proteins are other
mature proteins responsible for various important functions in virus
replication and genome maintenance. 
 The receptors utilized by human
CoVs typically include 9-O-acetylated
sialic acid by HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1, human aminopeptidase N (CD13) by HCoV-229E, , dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) by MERS-CoV, and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) by HCoV-NL63, SARS-CoV1,
and SARS-CoV2. , In addition, protease can help
CoVs enter cells. For example, transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2)
and airway trypsin-like protease TMPRSS11D activate the S protein
in HCoV-229E, SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 infections, while cathepsin L is activated in SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. After the virus enters a susceptible cell, the
genome is transcribed and translated. Replication and transcription
of the coronavirus genome occur with continuation/discontinuation
of RNA synthesis that is mediated by a huge replicase complex. The replicase complex is about 20 kb and contains
up to 16 viral subunits along with a number of host cellular proteins. After the cellular and molecular processes,
the protein is assembled on the cell membrane. Genomic RNA that buds
off the internal cell membranes is converted to the mature particle
forms. 

3.

## Mechanism
of Entry of Coronaviruses into Cells
Blocking of entry of
coronaviruses into the host cell is one of
the basic approaches in preventing viral infections. Because the pathogenesis
of coronaviruses has not been fully understood, the precise molecular
mechanism by which the virus enters a cell is unknown. Two routes are used by CoVs for entering human
cells. These routes are categorized as direct delivery of the viral
genome into the cytosol through fusion with the host cell membrane
and through endocytosis ( ). 
 Coronaviruses enter the host cell through the interaction
of their
structural spike protein with cell surface receptors. The S1 subunit
of the viral spike protein binds with its receptor through the receptor
binding domain (RBD), after which fusion with the viral cell membrane
commences through the spike S2 subunit. The ACE-2 receptor is the major receptor for entry of the SARS-CoV-1
and SARS-CoV-2 into a human host. Moreover,
neuropilin-1 (NRP1) and CD147 were recently identified as host cofactors
that enhancing the entry of SARS-CoV-2 via endocytosis. , Proteolytic cleavage at the S1/S2 and S2′ sites by host cell
proteases is required for the conformational changes of the S protein
and for the viral fusion with the cell membranes. The cell surface
serine protease transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) and endosomal
cysteine proteases cathepsin B and L (CatB/L) are responsible for
the activation of the spike proteins. After binding to the ACE2 receptor, host proteases on the cell surface
mediate virus fusion at the level of the plasma membrane or with the
endosomal membrane, with subsequent release of the viral genome into
the host’s cytosol. Release of
endocytosed virions into the cytosol is usually dependent on the pH
of the endosomes, whereas direct entrance of the virions into the
cytosol is pH-independent.
Recently, it has been proposed that
Sars-CoV-2 employs clathrin-mediated
endocytosis as the mechanism for cell entry. However, similar to the SARS-CoV and other CoVs, SARS-CoV-2 may
utilize multiple pathways to gain access into the host cell cytosol. − To date, 11 clinically approved generic drugs have been identified
as potential candidates for blocking the routes of entry of SARS-CoV-2,
including direct fusion with the cell membrane.

4.

## Infection
of Host Organs by Coronavirus
Although human COVs generally
cause upper respiratory tract infections
with relatively mild symptoms, SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV and the recent
SARS-CoV-2 have caused severe epidemics of acute respiratory syndromes.
Because viruses are cleared by the immune system, viral infections
typically remain in the respiratory tract with minimal local clinical
consequences. However, in some cases,
viruses can evade the immune system and spread to other tissues, including
the respiratory system, central nervous system, cardiovascular system,
gastrointestinal system, liver, and kidney, where they induce other
types of pathologies ( ). , 
 4.1.

## Respiratory System Infection
The
most common complication of coronaviruses is respiratory system infection.
The clinical manifestations include fever, dry cough, dyspnea, and
fatigue. Pulmonary manifestations of the recent COVID-19 pandemic
have varied from asymptomatic infection to respiratory failure and
death. The main receptor for the entry
of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, the ACE2 receptor, is heterogeneously
distributed in the upper and lower respiratory tract. It is expressed
at high levels in the sinonasal cavity and pulmonary alveoli, as well
as on the apical side of type II alveolar epithelial cells in the
lung parenchyma. This partially explains the preference of lung cells
as a target for replication of these viruses. SARS-CoV-2 infection causes strong alveolar injury and acute interstitial
pneumonia. The latter is characterized by macrophage infiltration,
hyaline membrane formation, and alveolar wall edema and thickening. There are also pulmonary vascular abnormalities
with pulmonary vessel hyaline thrombosis, hemorrhage, neutrophils,
and lymphocyte infiltration. These symptoms are collectively described
as diffuse pulmonary intravascular coagulopathy. 
Among the factors that determine a poor prognosis
of the COVID-19 disease, there is the huge inflammatory over-reaction
due to the excessive increase in circulating proinflammatory cytokines.
The latter include interleukin (IL-1), IL-6, IL-12, interferons, and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. This “cytokine storm”
ultimately leads to an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
which is characterized by endothelial cell dysfunction, damage of
the vascular barrier, capillary leakage, and diffuse alveolar damage. 
Other factors involved are enormous oxidative/nitrosative
stress
following the entrance of the virus, with the occurrence of apoptotic
cell death and necrosis. A severe form
of ARDS with low oxygen saturation levels and respiratory failure
is the leading cause of mortality for SARS-CoV-2.
The molecular
mechanism involved in the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2
is characterized by cytokine dysregulation. Accordingly, cytokine
blockers such as tocilizumab, sarilumab, and siltuximab monoclonal
antibodies or corticosteroids such as
dexamethasone are considered promising
therapeutic candidates for counteracting lung hyper-inflammation.
These medications generally improve clinical outcomes.

4.2.

## Central Nervous System Infection
Detection of CoVs
RNA in human brain samples indicates that these
viruses are neuroinvasive and neurotropic, with the capability of
causing CNS diseases. It has been demonstrated
that HCoV-OC43 RNA has the potential to cause persistent infection
in human CNS cells for at least one year in a murine model of acute
viral encephalitis. In murine CNS, neurons
were the main target of viral infection; the neurons were degenerated
via programmed cell death. The S glycoprotein
of the virus plays a major role in the neurodegenerative mechanism. Infections involving HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43, SARS-COV-1,
and SARS-COV-2 have been identified in various human neurological
diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis,
and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. − To date, there
have been no reports on the presence of HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-NL63, or MERS-CoV
in the central nervous system of humans. However, several studies
have shown that neurological symptoms are associated with HCoV-HKU1,
HCoV-NL63, and MERS-CoV. , SARS-CoV-2 was detected
in capillary endothelial cells in the frontal lobe tissues obtained
from the post-mortem examination. According
to that report, viral infections that cause neurodegenerative diseases
can impair the function of the blood brain barrier and illicit a systemic
inflammatory response. The systemic inflammation
triggered by coronavirus infection may cause neuroinflammatory reactions
that increase susceptibility of the infected individual to neurological
disorders. Infection of the central nervous
system may expedite the progression of neurodegenerative diseases
in at-risk individuals.

4.3.

## Gastrointestinal Infection
The relation
between respiratory infection and the gastrointestinal tract has not
been completely understood. Patients with respiratory infections typically
have intestinal dysfunction. This is indicative of the crosstalk between
the gastrointestinal tract and the lung. , A recent case study identified SARS-CoV-2 RNA in a stool specimen,
where the virus utilized ACE2 receptor for the entry into the cells. Indeed, ACE2 expression correlates with neutral
amino acid transporter B0AT1 (SLC6A19) expression in the gastrointestinal
tract, which increases the susceptibility of an individual to CoV
infection. 

4.4.

## Cardiovascular
Infection
Myocardial
damage caused by CoV infection increases the complexity of patient
treatment. Recent studies reported that MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 can
cause severe myocarditis and heart dysfunction. , The mechanism of severe myocardial damage caused by CoV infection
may be related to the ACE2 cell surface receptor. Indeed, ACE2 is
extensively expressed both in the lung and in the cardiovascular tract.
Hence, ACE2-related signaling pathways may have a key role in heart
dysfunction. Other suggested mechanisms
of myocardial injury include a cytokine storm that is triggered by
an imbalance between type 1 and type 2 T-helper cells, and respiratory
dysfunction and hypoxemia caused by SARS-CoV-2 that result in damage
of the myocardial cells. 

4.5.

## Liver Infection
Post-mortem examination
of patients infected by SARS-CoV identified the presence of a large
number of virus particles in the lungs, liver vascular endothelium,
and parenchymal cells. In addition, SARS-CoV-1
RNA was demonstrated in hepatocytes by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). Because the
ACE2 receptor is abundantly expressed in the endothelial cells of
liver, it has been proposed that SARS-CoV-1 utilizes this receptor
for cell entry. Both liver cells and
bile duct epithelial cells express ACE2 receptors. However, bile duct cells express more ACE2 receptors than
liver cells. Because bile duct epithelial cells play an important
role in liver regeneration and immune response, it has been suggested that liver damage that occurs in
CoV patients is attributed to the damage of bile duct cells and not
the virus infection.
Liver enzymes and bilirubin levels increased
in patients with MERS-CoV infection, whereas albumin levels decreased. − A more recent study reported that liver dysfunction in patients
with severe SARS-CoV-2 infection was significantly more extensive
than that patients with mild SARS-CoV-2 infection only. In those patients with severe SARS-CoV-2 infection,
the levels of liver enzymes such as alanine aminotransferase, aspartate
transaminase, and gamma-glutamyl transferase are considerably high. 
Patients infected with coronavirus who
have other liver comorbidities
such as hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections
are more susceptible to liver damage and the manifestation of acute
hepatitis. This may be attributed to the promoted replication of the
hepatitis virus during CoV infection. The antibiotics, antiviral medication, and other drugs used for
the treatment of CoV infection probably cause liver dysfunction. , 

4.6.

## Kidney Infection
Studies have shown
that CoVs (SARS and MERS-CoV) can attack the kidney and cause acute
kidney injury. , It is well shown that ACE2 receptors
are not only expressed in the lung, heart, liver, and brain but are
also present in the kidney. , Thus, the virus can
utilize this receptor for entry into the kidney. Patients suffering
from SARS-CoV-2 infection have been reported to have a higher frequency
of renal and kidney abnormalities. 

5.

## Diagnosis
The innate immune system provides
excellent defense against viruses,
otherwise primary prevention is the only alternative option. For this
reason, diagnosis remains the most effective approach to control virus
infection. There is growing interest
in virus detection through the use of molecular-based techniques.
These approaches have been classified into the amplification or nonamplification
molecular-based techniques. 
Molecular-based
techniques are more rapid and sensitive than serological
techniques, either as a simple method for the manual detection of
viruses or as a part of highly developed techniques. Fully automated detection systems are generally preferred
in medicine. Biosafety issues and time concerns associated with the
clinical usage and study of viruses are eliminated with the use of
such systems. Despite all the purported benefits associated with the
newly developed molecular techniques, there are still potential restrictions
regarding their accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and even reproducibility.
These restrictions are mainly caused by the genetic inconsistency
of viruses. , In addition, these assays are
expensive and time-consuming, requiring specific laboratory instruments
as well as expert human resources. Nanomaterials
with unique properties, including optical, electronic, mechanical,
and magnetic characteristics, are considered attractive substrates
for biomedical imaging and clinical diagnosis. , compares
the rants and raves of common virus detection methods. A wide range
of nanomaterials has been proposed for virus detection. These nanomaterials
include metal, silica and polymeric nanoparticles, quantum dots (QDs),
and carbon nanotubes ( ). 
 According to the WHO, the current
trend of CoV diagnostics is focused
on the development of nucleic acid- or protein-based detection methodology
for point-of-care testing (POCT). , Nanobiohybrid
platforms, containing at least one component derived from virus (e.g.,
nucleic acid, antibody, antigen, or structural peptide) are conjugated
to various NPs. These systems rely on
functioning of NPs as well as the activity of the conjugated biomolecules
and/or compact multivalent probes for signal transduction. These specific NP-based probes are used in
a variety of optical, electrical, and electrochemical assays for single
and multiple virus detections. 
A quantum dot-conjugated RNA oligonucleotide system has been designed
for highly sensitive imaging. The system was installed on a biochip
for the recognition of SARS-CoV-1 nucleocapsid (N) protein. More recently, RT-PCR was combined with lateral
flow immunoassay for rapid detection of MERS-CoV. Nucleic acid testing can also be combined with the lateral
flow assay. For example, a multiplex colorimetric paper-based analytical
device was developed using AgNPs as a colorimetric substrate to detect
the DNA associated with MERS-CoV infection. Another system was developed using self-assembled nanostructure
that consisted of AuNPs and quantum dots. This platform was used as an immunosensor for the detection of Avian
coronavirus (IBV) infected birds. Nanonested PCR was employed with
AgNPs to distinguish between the variant and the classical strains
of porcine epidemic diarrhea corona virus. In another study, a method was developed for detection of IBV using
magnetoplasmonic NPs and zirconium-quantum dots conjugated with IBV
antibodies. Notably, there was no reaction
between the magnetoplasmonic NPs and Zr-quantum dots until the targeted
virus was added. Compared with conventional
analysis, this immunosensor possesses remarkable advantages, including
higher sensitivity, faster analysis and accuracy comparable to enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. In 2019, a range of signal amplifying techniques
were introduced, including thermal imaging and assembly of multiple
AuNPs, for improving the lateral flow readout signals for the detection
of MERS-CoV ( ). 
 An immunochromatographic
strip (ICS) was introduced for the detection
of IBV in infected chickens based on the use of IBV-specific monoclonal
antibodies against S glycoprotein and N proteins. Monoclonal antibody–colloidal gold conjugates were
utilized as tracers during the preparation of ICS. The assembled ICS
was identified as a specific test for IBV antigens, compared to RT-PCR. Considering that RT-PCR is an expensive technique,
the AuNP-ICS method appears to have the potential for rapid detection
of different IBV strains in chickens.
Lateral flow detection
of SARS-CoV-2 antigen has been used to improve
COVID-19 diagnosis as a point-of-care approach. In the lateral flow assays, a paper strip is coated with
AuNP–antibody conjugates in the first line and with capture
antibodies in the second. A urine or blood sample is placed on the
strip, while the proteins of interest are placed on the membrane. The viral antigens bind to the coated AuNPs
in the first line as the sample runs through the membrane by capillary
action. When the antigen/AuNP–antibody complex flows through
the strip, it is immobilized by the capture antibodies in the second
line and a colored line appears. The color of the complex (blue) is
different from the color of the NPs (red) because of plasmon effect.
Although this kind of assay shows 100% specificity for IgM and IgG,
the clinical sensitivity and accuracy are different (57 and 69% for
IgM, and 81 and 86% for IgG, respectively). Detecting both IgM and
IgG yields a clinical sensitivity of 82%. 
An energy transfer system has recently been developed using
recombinant
spike protein receptor binding domain (RBD) conjugated to fluorescent
quantum dots, AuNPs, and cells with green fluorescent protein tagged
ACE2 receptors (ACE2-GFP) for facile monitoring of viral spike protein–ACE2
interaction ( ). In that study, fluorescence of the
quantum dots was quenched upon their binding with AuNPs in the vicinity.
Fluorescence was recovered by neutralizing SARS-CoV2 antibodies that
compete with ACE2–AuNPs or blocking the binding of quantum
dot–spike protein RBD to the ACE2–AuNPs. The in vitro
bioimaging results demonstrated the potential ability of quantum dot–RBD
internalization via dyamin/clathrin-dependent receptor-mediated endocytosis,
with high affinity to the ACE2 extracellular domain. This platform
is a promising biosensor for facile, rapid, and high-throughput cell-based
screening of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
 Another research group
created an advanced field-effect transistor
(FET) biosensor platform based on graphene sheets with a specific
antibody against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein ( ). This biosensing
platform could recognize surrounding alteration on their surface and
provide ultrasensitive sensing and low-noise detection. In addition,
it could distinguish the SARS-CoV-2 antigen from the MERS-CoV antigen.
It is a potential device for rapid and highly sensitive detection
of CoVs from clinical samples.
 Metal NPs (e.g., Au, Zr and Ag NPs, as well as MoS2 nanosheets)
and quantum dots were employed for the detection of a range of coronaviruses. Conjugating nanomaterials with colorimetric,
electrochemiluminescence, immunosensing, photoluminescence, and chiroimmunosensing
have also been considered as potential substrates for the detection
of coronaviruses. Electrochemical devices appear to be a good alternative
for the detection of new strains of coronaviruses because of their
superior ability to combine with nanomaterials. Using nanomaterials in this aspect decreases the time of
analysis and increases sensitivity. This strategy opens new vistas
in designing better systems with higher performance in the future.
Microfluidic devices incorporated as organ-on-a-chip are considered
another point-of-care system. These
devices consist of a palm-sized chip fixed with the reaction chambers
and micrometer-sized channels. The chip is made of various materials,
including polymers, glass, or papers. The device mixes and separates
liquid samples by capillary, vacuum, or electrokinetic forces. Microfluidic devices have benefits such as
portability, miniaturization and the use of small sample volume for
rapid detection. For example, a smartphone-based point-of-care microfluidic
platform has been developed. The system was fabricated with ZnO nanorods
and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to detect antibodies against specific
infections such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection through
colorimetric detection. This platform
showed 100% clinical sensitivity and 87% specificity for HIV detection
in 96 patients in Rwanda. Microfluidics may be modified further for
the detection of coronavirus RNA or protein.

6.

## Therapy
6.1.

## Nanomaterials to Combat Coronaviruses
Nanomaterials
have been introduced as antiviral agents or drug delivery
platforms for combating CoV infections. In 2014, a research group patented a mixture of silver colloid,
titanium dioxide (TiO2) NPs and a dispersion stabilizer
with antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral behavior. The platform offers antiviral activity against
CoVs such as porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) and swine transmissible
gastroenteritis virus (TGEV). When the platform concentration is diluted
by 1000-fold, virus growth is inhibited at a rate of 99.9 and 93.0%
for PEDV and TGEV, respectively. This activity was reliant on the
platform concentration, which means that the usage dose has to be
in tune with the virus in which the platform is designed to inhibit. 
In the same year, the induced immune
responses of four silver nanoconjugates on TGEV-infected swine testicle
cells were investigated. These nanomaterials
included AgNPs, two Ag nanowires with mean lengths of 60 and 400 nm,
and silver colloids. Silver NPs and the two types of Ag nanowires
protected the testicle cells against TGEV infection and reduced the
number of apoptotic cells. In contrast, the silver colloids were not
capable of inhibiting cellular entry by TGEV. Graphene oxide–silver (GO–Ag) nanoconjugates
that possess antiviral activities against nonenveloped and enveloped
viruses were developed by other researchers. Different dilutions of GO–Ag solution were incubated with
diluted solutions of feline coronavirus. The supernatant was analyzed
using a virus inhibition assay after removing the GO-Ag pellets. The
GO-AgNPs were able to detect nonenveloped and enveloped viruses by
binding of the AgNPs to the negatively charged sulfur groups of the
viral proteins, whereas pristine GO inhibited only enveloped viruses
at noncytotoxic concentrations. 
A diphyllin-based therapeutic device was developed for the treatment
of feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) caused by feline coronavirus. Diphyllin is a vacuolar ATPase required for
endosomal acidification inhibition in Felis catus whole fetus-4 cells.
The inhibitory behavior of diphyllin against FIP was enhanced by generating
a diphyllin nanocarrier with poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(lactide-coglycolide). Diphyllin NPs demonstrated antiviral
activity; even a high dosage of the NPs was tolerated by mice. Although this system was not a candidate for
preparing vaccines, the study verified the efficacy of nanoformulations
against coronaviruses.
Another nanoplatform was developed using N-(2-hydroxypropyl)-3-trimethyl
chitosan (H-HTCC) to produce nano/microspheres (NS/MS) for adsorbing
coronaviruses. The copy number of viral
RNA decreased when H-HTCC-NS/MS was added to the viral suspensions.
The result is indicative of a good correlation between virus concentration
and the amount of added biomaterial. In another novel therapeutic approach, Ag2S nanoclusters
were fabricated for restraining the proliferation of PEDV in treated
Vero cells ( ). The Ag2S nanoclusters
were capable of inhibiting the synthesis of negative-strand RNA and
preventing viral budding. The Ag2S nanoclusters regulated
the expression of interferon-stimulating genes as well as the production
of pro-inflammation cytokines. This resulted in the protection against
PEDV infection. 
 Although a lot of studies illustrated the antiviral activities
of nanomaterials against coronaviruses, further investigation is needed
to develop antiviral nanomedications against SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and
SARS-CoV-2.

6.2.

## Nanobased Gene Therapy
of Coronaviruses
Ribonucleic acid interference (RNAi) mediated
by small interfering
RNA (siRNA) is an effective strategy to inhibit the replication of
RNA viruses. Antiviral siRNA therapy offers several advantages compared
to conventional antiviral drugs and vaccines. These advantages include
rapid action with high specificity and efficacy at different viral
stages, the use of a less amount of siRNA to reduce viral RNA, and
high homology of siRNA with cognate viral RNA. Therapy based on RNAi is a potentially promising approach
to overcome SARS-CoV-2 infection. In this regard, accurate characterization
of the coronavirus genome enables rapid development of effective therapeutic
anti SARS-CoV-2 RNAi activators. Because
the genomic sequences of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 have high homology
(∼79% at the nucleic acid level), the results derived from
SARS-CoV may be extrapolated to SARS-CoV-2 ( A). 
 Several recent studies have found that RNAi is
effective against
SARS-CoV. A research group reported
that the use of expression cassettes (plasmid-mediated siRNAs) that
produced six antiviral RNAi activators could target specific sites
of the viral genome. Pretransfection of Vero cells with the siRNA-expressing
plasmids pSR02 and pSR03 prior to the infection of those cells with
SARS-CoV resulted in blocking the replication of the ORF1b sequence
of the virus genome. Targeting the S
sequence effectively inhibit viral infection and replication because
the S gene is a good target in SARS-CoV. RNAi activators that target both S and ORF1b regions of the viral
genome have been investigated as the potential drug candidates. , Based on these valuable results derived from the use of RNAi against
SARS-CoV, gene therapy via RNAi may revolutionize the treatment of
COVID-19. The therapeutic potential
of RNAi in combating MERS-CoV has been investigated by using two siRNAs,
Smad7-1 and Smad7-2, to knockdown MERS-CoV in both human lung and
kidney cell lines. It was found that Smad7 effectively inhibited viral
replication and infection in host cells. 
Although specific targeting of the viral genome sequence is
the
strength of antiviral siRNA therapy, targeted delivery of siRNA into
a cell with inadequate endosomal escape is another potential approach. Application of siRNA is typically hampered
by rapid enzymatic degradation of the siRNA, fast clearance and inability
of SiRNA in entering cells. These challenges
are mostly due to unstable negatively charged siRNA bases that stimulate
unwarranted immune response, and random insertion of the siRNA into
chromosomes that results in gene dysfunctions. These restrictions may be overcome by using nontoxic, biocompatible
nanocarriers prepared from polymers, lipids, hybrid (polymer/lipid)
NPs, nanohydrogels, silica, dendrimers, iron oxide NPs and AuNPs. − Among these, lipids and polymers are considered promising platforms
for siRNA delivery because of their highly biocompatible and biodegradable
nature. For example, poly(lactic acid), polycaprolactone, poly(glycolic
acid) and their copolymers have been approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration for targeted siRNA delivery in vivo. , , 
Lipid-based NPs, including
solid-lipid NPs, nanostructured lipids,
and liposomes, are also suitable for the preparation of siRNA delivery
systems. Nanocarriers preserve the encapsulated
siRNA from degradation by serum nucleases, prolong their circulation
and promote their access to destined sites. Polycationic lipids or polymers maintain their low endosomal pH
by increasing influx of protons and water. This causes the endosomes
to rupture and release the loaded therapeutics into the cytosol. Delivery of antiviral siRNA through commercially
available cationic lipid structures such as oligofectamine, lipofectamine
(Invitrogen), lipofectin, TransIT TKO (Mirus), and RNAifect (Qiagen)
have demonstrated promising results. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), lipid, and
polymer–lipid nanocarriers are suitable for loading of inhalable
antiviral siRNA as well as for aerosol-based pulmonary delivery of
antiviral siRNA. Cholesterol-conjugated
lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) have also been developed for the delivery
of an mRNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2. Histidine-lysine copolymer and spermine-liposome conjugate-based
nanocarriers have also been approved for siRNA delivery to target
specific sequences in the SARS-CoV genome. Coronavirus-infected mice that were treated with intranasally delivered
nanoformulated antiviral siRNA showed very positive effects. Considering
these successful achievements, the use of cationic-liposomal encapsulated
antiviral-siRNA and their aerosol formulation appears to be a reasonable
treatment for SARS-CoV-2 infection. A
lipid/polymer-based nanocarrier modified with functional molecules
(i.e., antibodies or aptamers) was effective in delivering siRNA to
target sites through intranasal or intratracheal administration via
an inhaler ( B). The use of antibodies against alveoli-specific
surface markers type-I and II (AT-I and AT-II) is a good alternative
for functionalization of nanocarriers and the subsequent delivery
of therapeutic siRNA to lung cells and other organs that express these
markers. The surface of nanocarriers may also be functionalized with
polyethylene glycol and pH-sensitive histidine-lysine peptide for
prolonged circulation and endosomal release of siRNA to the cytosol
for inducing the RNA interference pathway. Activation of the RNA interference pathway results in cleavage of
the viral RNA at the targeted site, which is critical for combating
viral infection.

6.3.

## Nanobased Immunotherapy
against Coronaviruses
Immunotherapy-based NPs have gained
attention as a highly effective
treatment modality for combating infectious diseases. However, there
are still challenges associated with increasing therapeutic efficiency
and reducing side effects. Understanding the function of the immune
system against infection and the possible approaches to modulate immunity
are essential steps toward the design of effective immunotherapy.
6.3.1.

## Immune Responses against Coronaviruses
The immune responses
to CoVs include innate and adaptive immunity.
When CoVs encounter the first line of immune defense (i.e., mucus
and ciliated cells), the pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
on the virus surface alert the innate immune cells to the presence
of the invading molecule. This results in the release of type I interferons
(IFN-α/β). In the event
of an acute infection, other immune cells, including natural killer
(NK) cells, alveolar macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils, are
activated. This produces a large amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(IFN, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β,
and IL-6), resulting in a condition known as the cytokine storm that
severely impairs the respiratory epithelial cells. The innate immune cells use pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs) such as retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptors, Toll-like
receptors, and nucleotide-binding and oligomerization domain-like
receptors to detect PAMPs and generate an appropriate immune response. Subsequent interactions between PAMPs and PRRs
stimulate phagocytosis by macrophages and dendritic cells and induce
intracellular molecular pathways to express pro-inflammatory cytokines
(i.e., type I interferons (IFN-I), IFNα/β; and type II
interferon (IFN-II), IFN-γ) and chemokines (i.e., CCL-2 and
CXCL-10). The IFN-I blocks the replication of viruses through multiple
pathways. The infected cells that express
major histocompatibility complex I induce NK cells to produce IFN-γ
and stimulate apoptosis via antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. 
In SARS-CoV-2 infection, extensive production
of antibodies was observed along with reduction in CD4+/CD8+ T cells. , In this infection,
macrophages and dendritic cells have an essential role in mounting
specific immune responses. These cells remove virus particles through
phagocytosis and IFN-I secretion, with subsequent priming of the adaptive
immune responses. In additions, IFN-I
inhibits the replication of viruses through upregulation of interferon
stimulated genes, including protein kinase R (PKR) and 2′-5′-oligoadenylate
synthase (OAS)/RNase L. These important
components of the protein synthesis machinery block the synthesis
of proteins via phosphorylation of OAS/RNase L and eukaryotic initiation
factor 2 subunit-α (eIF2α), resulting in degradation of
the viral ssRNA and impairment of viral replication. The IFN-I promotes CD8+ T cell priming, induces
B cell activation and antibody production, and eventually stimulates
NK cells and macrophages to halt viruses. Several studies have reported
that MERS-CoV expresses NS4a protein to block the activation of PKR
and OAS/RNase L in the innate immune responses. − The response of the immune system to SARS-CoV-2 infection is shown
in A. Researchers
suggested that using IFN-α as a pretreatment approach prior
to infection with SARS-CoV could induce the expression of IFN-related
genes and signaling pathways. An in
vitro study reported that IFN-α could restrain SARS-CoV infection. A more recent study also indicated that pretreatment
of cells with IFN-I resulted in a significant decrease in SARS-CoV-2
replication. These initial findings suggest that IFN-1 possesses antiviral
activity against SARS-CoV-2. However,
more clinical trials are required to validate these findings.
 
6.3.2.

## Immunotherapy Strategies
against Coronaviruses
Humoral immunity is crucial for inhibiting
viral infection through
the activation of B cells for antibody generation. Antibodies recognize and mediate the killing of the virus-infected
cells via several pathways, including phagocytosis, opsonization,
neutralization, and activation of the classical complement pathway,
as well as mediating antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. As such, the virulence of virus and the host
immune response should be balanced to successfully overcome the viral
infection. Although the host’s inflammatory responses in the
early stages of infection is essential, the severe inflammatory responses
at the late stages of the viral infection aggravate the clinical manifestations. For this reason, immunotherapy strategies that
enhance viral clearance and minimize the hyper-inflammatory responses
should be used to overcome coronaviruses infection. Immunotherapy against SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infections
is classified into three approaches: passive antibody therapy, interferon
α/β and IL-6 receptor inhibition ( B). 
Passive
antibody therapy includes the administration of antibodies from recovered
patients to new patients involved with the same infection. Neutralizing antibodies may be isolated from
individual convalescent plasma or developed as monoclonal antibodies
through immortalizing B-cell repertoires of the convalescent plasma. Several issues should be regulated to improve
the efficacy of passive antibody therapy. These issues include administered
antibody titer, plasma administration time, and accurate convalescent
plasma screening for blood-borne pathogens. The use of monoclonal antibodies is preferred in comparison with
the other approaches in blocking the attachment of viruses. This because
of the unique properties of monoclonal antibodies, including purity,
specificity, low risk of blood-borne pathogen contamination, and safety. Monoclonal antibodies comprising different
polyclonal antibodies are capable of recognizing different epitopes
on the viral surface and holds promise in overcoming virus infection.
Targeting the S protein as the key neutralizing antibodies inducer
has also been considered for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2. 
The use of IFNs may overcome viral infection
by promoting the expression
of interferon stimulated genes that encode antiviral proteins and
cytokines. Such antiviral proteins exert
antiviral effects by either the hindering viral replication or inducing
the adaptive immune system. According to reported experimental investigations,
IFNα and IFNβ possess potent antiviral activities that
restrict SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV replication. , 
Cytokines are other potential targets for efficient immunotherapy
of coronaviruses. Among the cytokines, IL-6 is considered more important
in the treatment of SARS-CoV-2. This is because overexpression of
IL-6 is associated with the severity of inflammatory cytokine storm. It has been proposed that targeting of IL-6
and its receptor (IL6R) through the use of immunosuppressive drugs
such as tocilizumab and chimeric monoclonal antibody such as siltuximab
can overcome cytokine storms and reduce the clinical manifestations
in SARS-CoV-2 patients. 
The use
of the described immunotherapy approaches, alone or in
combination with other drugs, has been proposed for treating patients
with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Notably,
all immunotherapy efforts against SARS-CoV-2 mostly involve the use
of polyclonal antibody via plasma therapy, polypeptide hormone for
T cell maturation, neutralizing antibodies, ACE2 immunoadhesin, immunoglobulins,
and monoclonal antibody against IL-6. In spite of the extensive attempts in the development of monoclonal
antibody-based passive immunotherapy for combating CoV infections,
no monoclonal antibody is available to date. The major limitation
is that large-scale production of monoclonal antibodies is difficult,
expensive, and time-consuming. Designing
and developing advanced platforms and materials are essential in providing
immunotherapy at a reasonable cost in a short time period.
Nanoparticle
formulations are promising platforms for overcoming
the hurdles associated with immunotherapy. For example, nanoparticulate forms of antigens and other immunomodulatory
agents can modulate the function of immune components through enhancing
multivalent receptor cross-linking, regulating intracellular processing,
inducing cytosolic delivery, targeting the innate immune system, and
reducing the toxicity associated with immunomodulators. In additions, nanomaterials have the potential
to incorporate several antigens on their surface for more effective
activation of the immune system. Thus, nanomaterials are not only
therapeutic carriers but may possess immunomodulatory properties themselves,
acting as potential immune adjuvants. To date, an extensive range
of nanomaterials such as dendrimers, liposomes, carbon nanotubes,
polymer-based materials, and inorganic NPs have been investigated
as potential platforms for immunological applications. Nanomaterials such as PLGA and liposomes can
activate CD8+/CD4+ T cells and promote antigen
cross-presentation for effective antigen delivery. , Moreover, inorganic NPs such as AuNPs can interact with dendritic
cells, promoting the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e.,
IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, IFN-α, and TNF-α), and the down-regulation
of anti-inflammatory factors (i.e., transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1
and IL-10). , Gold nanoparticles also activate
T cells-related immune responses and increased the phagocytic activity
of dendritic cells. Despite the progress of experimental application
of nanomaterials in immunotherapy, there are relatively few fundamental
investigations on the use of NP-based immunotherapy against CoVs.

6.4.

## Nanobased Vaccines against Coronaviruses
Because of their specificity and capacity to induce immune memory,
vaccines are the preferred defense tools against infectious diseases,
compared to chemotherapeutical drugs. Some of the current vaccines utilize either delivered or expressed
viral proteins to induce neutralizing antibodies against CoVs. These
antibodies inhibit viral entry by binding to the M, E or S proteins
of CoVs. The use of nanobased therapeutic
agents against different types of CoVs has been perceived as a potential
solution based on the immunostimulatory effects of NPs. 
Gold nanoparticles conjugated with TGEV
were used for stimulating the protective immune response against CoV
in immunized mice and rabbits. The use
of this antigen-colloidal gold complex resulted in the activation
of macrophages and immunity against TGEV, with induction of IFN-γ
production and higher titers of neutralizing antibody in vaccinated
animals. Proliferation of T cells was amplified ten-fold following
immunization with the antigen-colloidal gold complex, compared with
the free antigen response. On the basis of this result, virus-conjugated
AuNPs were suggested as a potential antiviral vaccine. 
Ribonucleic acid conjugated to ferritin-based
NPs have been proposed
as a potent molecular chaperone. The
use of this NP-based vaccine against MERS-CoV induced CD4+ T cells and promoted the production of TNF-α and IFN-γ
( ). In another
study, an immunogenic vaccine against MERS-CoV was introduced using
a heterologous prime-boost method. Using
a recombinant adenovirus serotype 5 that encodes the MERS-CoV spike
gene (Ad5/MERS) and spike protein NPs, female BALB/c mice was immunized
three times with the prime-boost vaccination. The homologous immunization
with spike protein NPs successfully induced higher antibody titers.
However, Th1 immune response was not generated by spike protein NPs.
Only the Th2 immune response was elicited with the induction of neutralizing
antibodies. A heterologous one-stage Ad5/MERS prime and two-stage
spike protein NP boost appear to be more effective than the homologous
prime-boost regimen in providing more durable immunogenicity and balance
of Th1/Th2 responses. 
 

7.

## Translating
Research into Clinical Practice
Translating archived knowledge
acquired from the laboratory into
clinical trials is a crucial and challenging stage for safe and tangible
combat against COVID-19. To date, developing
anti-COVID-19 drugs have encountered challenges because of their side
effects to the lung and heart. A smart technology is therefore required
for the design and fabrication of rational drugs that only target
SARS-CoV-2 with minimal side effects. Drug repurposing is an effective drug discovery strategy based on
the use of existing drugs. Such a strategy shortens the time and reduces
the cost compared to de novo drug discovery. In silico pharmacology performed on a computer or via computer simulation
is a smart, revolutionary technology for evaluating approved medicine,
reducing the regulatory costs of innovation and decreasing the time
for marketing of biomedical products. Such a “virtual”
process is indispensable in contemporary drug discovery research for
translating drugs into clinical trials. , The combination of in silico strategy and large drug-related databases
facilities the selection of appropriate repurposed drugs by screening
their side effects on different organs. Drug-repurposing strategies
have recently been performed by computational modeling on the interaction
and mechanism of potential drugs with the host cells and SARS-CoV-2 Computer modeling offers a platform for visual
assessment and analysis of the molecular mechanisms involved in the
entrance, replication, and transcription of virus molecules as well
as their interactions with host cells, immune response, and the potential
mechanisms of cell recovery.
Another research group investigated
a deep-learning Dense Fully
Convolutional Neural Network (DFCNN) model for screening established
drugs against SARS-CoV-2 infection. In
this approach, RNA sequences were collected from the Global Initiative
on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) database to investigate the
3D protein sequences and protein–ligand interactions via homology
modeling. Drug screening was performed without using docking or molecular
dynamics. This modeling successfully recognized chemical ligands (meglumine,
vidarabine, adenosine, d-sorbitol, d-mannitol, sodium
gluconate, ganciclovir, and chlorobutanol) and peptide drugs (combination
of isoleucine, lysine, and proline) from the databases to aid scientists
in identifying molecules that can combat SARS-CoV-2 in a shorter time
period.
In another interesting work, an advanced pharmacology
network-based
approach was developed to evaluate a rational drug for effective treatment
of COVID-19 infection ( ). In this work, phylogenetic
analysis of 15 human CoV whole genomes with coronavirus infection
was performed. Using network proximity analyses of drug targets and
human CoV–host interactions in the human interactome, potential anti-CoV repurposable drug candidates
such as melatonin, mercaptopurine, and sirolimus were identified and
further validated by enrichment analyses of drug–gene signatures
in human cell lines. In addition, three potential drug combinations
were identified through a “Complementary Exposure” pattern,
including (i) sirolimus plus dactinomycin, (ii) mercaptopurine plus
melatonin, and (iii) toremifene plus emodin. The study provides an
excellent role model for the rapid identification of therapeutic drugs
for combating SARS-CoV-2 infections.
 Combining data generated on the
mechanisms of COVID-19 infections
with in silico models enables virologists, immunologists, clinicians,
and computational biologists to collaborate in understanding the accurate
molecular mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 infection. This approach provides
a useful guide for the development of advanced and efficient nanomedicine
against the COVID-19 pandemic.

8.

## Challenges and Future Perspectives
Nanotechnology is rapidly becoming a vivid player in antiviral
therapy for combating coronaviruses. Nanomaterials have been developed
specifically to improve the delivery of biotherapeutics across physiological
barriers, thereby resolving the classical challenge of low bioavailability. Nanomaterials possess various physicochemical
and biological benefits. These benefits include reduced particle sizes
that facilitate delivery through natural barriers, larger surface
areas for higher drug loading, adjustable surface charge to facilitate
drug entry across charged cell membranes, capability to anchor to
targeting ligands to increase the specificity of the destined target,
superior solubility and pharmacokinetic properties that result in
longer circulation times, better accumulation, controlled/sustained
release, and improved efficacy caused by either entrapping drug agents
and protecting them from the physiological environment or surface
modifications for targeting purposes. − 
The application
of nanomaterials as drug carriers, however, is
not free from challenges. One of the most eminent challenge is their
degradation prior to reaching the target. Nanoparticles, for example,
are degraded in the gastrointestinal tract when they are administrated
orally. Nanoparticles are not always successful in crossing the mucus
barrier, which results in reduced or nonabsorption. Other challenges associated with the use of nanomaterials
include interactions with biological molecules that result in opsonization,
phagocytosis by macrophages that reduces their plasma half-life, nonspecific absorption which induces apoptosis
of the cells that absorb them, and disruption of their cell membranes. 
An ideal nanocarrier for proficient antiviral
treatment needs to
possess several attributes. These attributes include: (1) excellent
clinical outcome, as therapeutic devices are required to be effective,
available, targeted, safe, and affordable; (2) the nanocarrier needs
to improve the efficacy of drug delivery, reduce intake rate and time,
decrease side effects, and reduce the cost of therapy; (3) the nanocarrier
should possess an appropriate fabrication design that permits targeted
drug delivery in a sustained released manner. Hybrid nanosystems have
the potential to meet the requirements for nanomanufacturing and shape/size
configurations. In addition, the nanomaterials used for fabricating
the designated compositions should be biodegradable, biocompatible,
and nontoxic. In this regard, polymers offer tremendous potential
for chemical surface modifications. More complex challenges are associated
with nanocarrier shape because this property is associated with NP
size and surface charge. Polymer-based nanomaterials such as polyethylene
glycol and poly(lactide-co-glycolide) are close-to-ideal
candidates because of their flexibility to uptake various charges,
capacity to be fabricated in different shapes and sizes for enhancing
the permissibility of the composition, and reduced clearance to prolong
circulation time. Polymeric nanomaterials
are likely to emerge as the materials of choice for the development
of vaccine and drug carriers for single-dose and needle-free delivery. 
Metal NPs such as AgNPs, AuNPs, MNPs,
and their related compositions
may be used as alternative candidates for the delivery of therapeutic
agents against CoVs. Because the size
of the devices influences their biodistribution and rate of uptake,
a nanocarrier has to be used in the nanometer size range (e.g., <200
nm). For cyclodextrin drug delivery
systems such as hydroxypropyl beta-cyclodextrins (HPβCD), the
use of carbon-based nanosheets may overcome formulation challenges
of antiviral drugs by improving solubility and bioavailability. , Likewise, they may be used as safe and efficient adjuvants in vaccines
for coronaviruses. summarizes the trend of nanobiotechnology against CoVs.
 In the grand scheme of things, the applications of nanoplatforms
for the detection of human coronaviruses have yet remained unresolved
for nanotechnology researchers. Colorimetric sensing, electrochemiluminescence,
immunosensing, photoluminescence, and chiroimmunosensing, as well
as electrochemical sensors, are potential techniques to detect coronaviruses.
Various nanobased vaccines have demonstrated the potential to induce
a more potent immune response. However, further investigations on
the interaction of virus particles with host cells are required to
tackle the application of smart NPs against the mutated versions of
highly contagious SARS-CoV2 ( ).
 As of February 2021, eight COVID-19 vaccines based on different
technologies have been approved or authorized for emergency use. They
are the mRNA vaccines BNT162 from Pfizer/BioNtech and mRNA-1273 from
Moderna, the chimpanzee adenovirus-based AZD1222 (Covidshield) vaccine
from Oxford-Astra Zeneca, the Ad26-based viral vector vaccine from
Johnson &Johnson, the virus-inactivated Covaxin vaccine from Indian
Barhat Biotech, the CoronaVac vaccine from Sinovac Biotech, China,
and the human adenovirus-based Sputnik V vaccine from the Gamaleya
National Center of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Russia. , Although more than 250 other vaccines are in various stages of development,
the emergence of new SARS-CoV2 variants with possible highly transmissibility demonstrate the urgency of
developing new vaccine formulations with high effectiveness.

## Acknowledgments
We thank
Scigraph team (scigraph.ir) for illustrating some
of the schemes. Dr. Bidram was supported by the grant (Grant No. 199264)
from Isfahan University of Medical Sciences deputy of research.

## Author Contributions
† E.B. and
Y.E. contributed equally to this work

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References