1899taeTherapeutic Advances in Endocrinology and MetabolismTher Adv Endocrinol MetabSAGE PublicationsPMC8474306847430684743063458920110.1177/20420188211042145Therapeutics for type-2 diabetes mellitus: a glance at the recent
inclusions and novel agents under development for use in clinical
practice
ShahNajeebConceptualization, Writing original draft, Writing review editing AbdallaMohammed AltiganiWriting review editing DeshmukhHarshalWriting review editing SathyapalanThozhukatSupervision, Writing review editing 1Hull University Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Hull, UK2Department of Academic Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Brocklehurst Building, 220-236 Anlaby Road, Hull, HU3 2RW, UK3Department of Academic Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Hull, UK4University Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust and Department of Academic Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Hull, UK5University Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust and Department of Academic Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Hull, UK✉Email: nzshah17@gmail.com
23920211220420188211042145204201882110421452892021© The Author(s), 2021This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a chronic, progressive, and multifaceted illness
resulting in significant physical and psychological detriment to patients. As of
2019, 463 million people are estimated to be living with DM worldwide, out of
which 90% have type-2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Over the years, significant
progress has been made in identifying the risk factors for developing T2DM,
understanding its pathophysiology and uncovering various metabolic pathways
implicated in the disease process. This has culminated in the implementation of
robust prevention programmes and the development of effective pharmacological
agents, which have had a favourable impact on the management of T2DM in recent
times. Despite these advances, the incidence and prevalence of T2DM continue to
rise. Continuing research in improving efficacy, potency, delivery and reducing
the adverse effect profile of currently available formulations is required to
keep pace with this growing health challenge. Moreover, new metabolic pathways
need to be targeted to produce novel pharmacotherapy to restore glucose
homeostasis and address metabolic sequelae in patients with T2DM. We searched
PubMed, MEDLINE, and Google Scholar databases for recently included agents and
novel medication under development for treatment of T2DM. We discuss the
pathophysiology of T2DM and review how the emerging anti-diabetic agents target
the metabolic pathways involved. We also look at some of the limiting factors to
developing new medication and the introduction of unique methods, including
facilitating drug delivery to bypass some of these obstacles. However, despite
the advances in the therapeutic options for the treatment of T2DM in recent
years, the industry still lacks a curative agent.
Keywords: Type 2 diabetes mellitus, novel agents, treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Mar 25; Accepted 2021 Aug 6; Collection date 2021.

## Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a global epidemic posing a significant health threat to
people around the world. According to the International Diabetes Federation (IDF)
estimates in 2019, 463 million people aged 20–79 years suffered from DM worldwide,
which is projected to rise to a staggering 700 million in the next 25 years ( ). DM is
the fastest growing health challenge of the 21st century, and its scale is such that
1 in 11 adults (20–79 years) have DM, bleeding $760 billion in funds, which is 10%
of the worldwide health expenditure. DM confers a risk of early mortality, and in 2019 the IDF projected that 4.2
million adults would die as a result of DM and related complications, which, when
put into perspective, is equivalent to one death every 8 s. T2DM accounts for approximately 90% of all DM cases, and the global
exponential growth of this epidemic is mainly attributable to a sedentary lifestyle,
obesity, an ageing populace, urbanization, and economic development. , 
 Management of T2DM requires a patient-centred approach in bringing about lifestyle
changes and optimizing glycaemic control using the available pharmacological options
to preserve the quality of life and minimize complications. , The Kumamoto and UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) , confirmed that intensive
glycaemic control in patients with newly diagnosed T2DM significantly decreased
rates of microvascular complications and, therefore, early and adequate treatment is
of paramount importance. T2DM is a progressive condition, and to prevent long-term
complications, improving and sustaining glycaemic control is vital. Timely treatment
escalation can help achieve this; however, this is often delayed, and people remain
with suboptimal glycaemic control for several years. Comorbid state, insulin resistance (IR), and beta-cell dysfunction render
many available treatments, either inadequate or contra-indicated. An intricate
scenario is further complicated when treatment choices have to be informed to avoid
hypoglycaemia and weight gain. 
Due to the introduction of new oral and injectable pharmacological agents, which are
potent and well tolerated, clinicians nowadays have more options for treating T2DM.
However, based on the commonly encountered constraints mentioned above, there is a
requirement for developing new agents which are effective individually and can be
safely co-prescribed with the currently available array of treatment options. In
addition to this, the medical community is longing for preparations that positively
impact complications arising from T2DM and have little or no limitations to their
use in patients with significant multiorgan comorbid states.
In this article, we discuss the pathophysiology of hyperglycaemia in T2DM, followed
by recently included therapeutic agents and novel medication under development for
the treatment of T2DM.

## Methodology
We systematically searched PubMed, MEDLINE, and Google Scholar for original articles,
review articles, systematic reviews, randomized control trials (RCTs), and
meta-analysis published in English from 01 January 2011 to 05 March 2021. Relevant
and important articles published before 2011 were also included. We developed a
search string of medical subject headings (MeSH) including the terms ‘diabetes’ OR
‘non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus’ OR ‘hyperglycaemia’ OR ‘T2DM’, ‘insulin
resistance’, ‘novel agents’ OR ‘future medications’ AND ‘updates’, ‘medical
treatment’ OR ‘pharmacological treatment’ OR ‘therapy’, ‘novel delivery methods’ OR
‘administration’, ‘genome-wide association and type 2 diabetes’, ‘insulin pump
systems’ AND ‘closed-loop pump systems’.

## Pathophysiology of hyperglycaemia in T2DM
In contrast to type-1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), where the driving force behind
hyperglycaemia is autoimmune destruction of β-cells, T2DM results from β-cell
dysfunction and IR. There is high insulin demand from the peripheral tissues due to
IR resulting in β-cell expansion and hyperinsulinemia. As a result of this compensatory response from the β-cells, in the presence
of a hyperglycaemic milieu, there is a steady loss of β-cell mass thought to occur
from accentuated apoptosis. – The
development of T2DM is a continuum from a state of impaired glucose tolerance (IGT),
where patients exhibit a very high level of IR and have lost an estimated 80% of
their β-cell function to T2DM. To explain the pathophysiologic defects in T2DM,
eight key collaborators have been described which include pancreatic β-cells
(decreased insulin secretion), pancreatic α-cells (increased glucagon secretion),
liver (increased hepatic glucose output), muscle (decreased glucose uptake), adipose
tissue (increased lipolysis), kidney (increased glucose re-absorption), gut
(decreased incretin effect), and the brain (impaired appetite regulation) which were
collectively called the ominous octet. In DM, the complex system required to maintain euglycemia independent of
glucose load and clearance fails ( ) and the
fascinating interplay between IR, impaired insulin secretion and loss of β-cell
mass, have long been targeted with therapeutic agents to treat this condition.
 

## Combined peptide injectables
By increasing β-cell insulin secretion, delaying gastric emptying, and reducing
glucagon secretion, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analogues successfully target
and suppress post-prandial hyperglycaemia in T2DM. , On the contrary, basal
insulin therapy targets fasting hyperglycaemia and theoretically, when combined,
their complimentary action should result in significant improvement in glycaemic
control. This materialized with the introduction of IDegLira (50 U insulin degludec
and 1.8 mg liraglutide) and iGlarLixi (100 U insulin glargine and 50 μg
lixisenatide) in a titratable fixed-ratio combination. The FDA approved both
combination injections for clinical use in 2016. Results from the DUAL (Dual Action
of liraglutide and Insulin Degludec in T2DM) clinical development programme
demonstrated the efficacy and safety of iDegLira in 1393 adults with T2DM, who had
inadequate glycaemic control on liraglutide or basal insulin alone. Switching to
iDegLira resulted in a mean reduction in HbA1c up to 1.94%. Lixilan-O
(ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02058147) compared iGlarLixi with insulin glargine or
lixisenatide alone for treatment of insulin-naive patients on metformin , while
lixiLan-L (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02058160) compared iGlarLixi with insulin glargine
alone in patients already using basal insulin with or without oral hypoglycaemic
agents. , As evidenced by several studies, , – both IDegLira and iGlarLixi
achieved more significant HbA1c reductions without increasing the risk of
hypoglycaemia in patients with T2DM, compared to individual insulin or GLP-1
analogues. In addition to the described benefits, there is a lower risk of
hypoglycaemia, weight gain, and gastrointestinal side effects. , All these
attributes make these injections suited for the management of T2DM and can be
utilized at the treatment intensification stage of the management algorithm.

## GLP-1 and GIP dual-receptor agonists
GIP is an incretin hormone like the much talked about GLP-1. Together, they are
responsible for enhancing glucose-dependant insulin secretion from the pancreatic
β-cells termed the incretin effect. , Under normal physiological
circumstances, the incretin effect is mainly driven by GIP. , Developed by
Eli Lilly, Tirzepatide (TZP), LY3298176, is a GLP-1 receptor and GIP receptor
(GLP-1R/GIPR) dual agonist, which has achieved superior HbA1c and weight
reductions compared to injectable semaglutide as an add-on to metformin in adults
with T2DM in the phase-3 SURPASS-2 clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03987919).
In this 40-week, multi-centre, randomized, parallel, open-label trial, participants
taking weekly TZP 15 mg (highest dose) achieved an HbA1c reduction of
2.46% and weight loss of 13.1% compared to weekly semaglutide 1 mg. An estimated 51%
of patients who received the higher TZP dose achieved an HbA1c of <5.7%
(non-diabetic range) compared to 20% in the semaglutide arm. Previously in patients with T2DM, once weekly TZP at doses of 1, 5, 10, or 15
mg has been compared to once weekly dulaglutide 1.5 mg; in a double-blind phase-2
study. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1:1:1:1:1) to receive either once weekly
subcutaneous (SC) TZP (1, 5, 10, or 15 mg), dulaglutide (1.5 mg), or a placebo for
26 weeks. The change in HbA1c with TZP at 26 weeks was −1.06% (1 mg), −1.73% (5 mg),
−1.89% (10 mg), and −1.94% (15 mg) compared with −0.06% for placebo and −1.21%.
Reassuringly, the change in HbA1c with TZP did not plateau. At 26 weeks, 33%–90% of
patients treated with TZP achieved the HbA1c target <7% versus
(vs) 52% with dulaglutide and 12% with placebo. At 26 weeks, changes in mean body
weight ranged from −0.9 to −11.3 kg for TZP versus −0.4 kg for
placebo versus −2.7 kg for dulaglutide. Gastrointestinal events
including nausea, diarrhea, and vomiting were the most reported side effects, were
dose dependent, mostly mild-moderate and self-limiting. There were no reports of
severe hypoglycaemia. Although the mechanism of its action is not fully understood, studies suggest
that TZP binds to the GIPR with the same affinity as native GIP while its affinity
with the GLP-1R is five times lower than the endogenous molecule. As a result, TZP engages GIPR more than the GLP-1R, and the unique signalling
properties at the GLP-1R may form the basis of its profound efficacy. , GLP-1R/GIPR
dual agonists ( )
have shown significantly better efficacy in terms of glycaemic control and weight
loss compared to GLP-1R agonists with satisfactory tolerability and so will be a
welcome addition to the therapeutic options in T2DM.
 

## Sodium-glucose co-transporter and dual SGLT1 and SGLT2 inhibitors
Sodium-glucose co-transporters (SGLTs) regulate sodium and glucose transport across
cell membranes. Six SGLT isoforms have been identified in human beings; however, only SGLT1 and SGLT2 inhibition has translated into pharmacotherapy
in T2DM so far. SGLT1 is a high-affinity but low-capacity transporter, which mediates the absorption of glucose in the small intestine and accounts
for the re-absorption of approximately 3% of the filtered glucose from the S3
segment of the proximal convulated tubule (PCT) in the nephrons. , In contrast,
SGLT2 is a low-affinity but high-capacity transporter, which is responsible for the bulk (>90%) , of glucose re-absorption from
the S1 and S2 segments of the PCT. , Targeting the inhibition of
SGLT2 could lead to glucosuria and improved glycemia.
In 2012, dapagliflozin was approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for
clinical use, marking the first approval of a drug from this class anywhere around
the world. The following year, canagliflozin was approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for clinical use in the United States, and thereafter several agents have been approved and marketed around the
world. These approvals came on the back of large-scale clinical trials, where, in
addition to improving glycaemic control, SGLT2 inhibitors led to weight loss and
demonstrated cardio-renal benefits. For instance, not only did empagliflozin reduce
the 3-point major adverse cardiac events (cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial
infarction, and stroke), it was shown to reduce cardiovascular death (by 38%),
hospitalization with heart failure (by 35%), and all-cause mortality (by 32%)
aswell. – These remarkable results have
led to a rapid uptake of this class in the management of T2DM.
Recent pharmacological research suggested that combined SGLT1 and SGLT2 inhibition
resulted in significant post-prandial glucose reduction, the elevation of endogenous
GLP-1, and urinary glucose excretion. First-in-class of dual SGLT1 and SGLT2
inhibitors, sotagliflozin has been developed. It has 20-fold higher selectivity for SGLT2 than SGLT1, is as effective as
dapagliflozin and canagliflozin in inhibiting SGLT2 but is greater than 10-fold more
potent than them in inhibiting SGLT1. – From phase-2 and -3 clinical
trials, sotagliflozin has demonstrated improved glycaemic control, reduced
post-prandial glucose, reduced insulin requirements, appetite suppression, and
weight loss in patients with type-1 and type-2 diabetes. , 
Encouraging results from phase 3, inTandem 1–3 trials among others, have led to its approval in the EU as an adjunct to insulin in patients with
T1DM with a body mass index (BMI) ⩾ 27 kg/m2 who have failed to achieve
adequate glycaemic control despite optimal insulin therapy. A higher incidence of ketoacidosis with sotagliflozin (3%) compared to
placebo (0.6%) was seen in the inTandem study which is of some concern, , an effect
also seen with dapagliflozin in the past. Goldenberg and colleagues have developed the ‘STOP DKA Protocol’, a practical
tool that may potentially help in reducing this risk in clinical pratice in addition to appropriate patient selection and down titration of basal
insulin. In the SOLOIST-WHF clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03521934),
sotagliflozin therapy resulted in a significantly lower total number of deaths from
cardiovascular causes, hospitalizations, and urgent visits for heart failure
compared to placebo in patients with T2DM. Moreover, in the SCORED clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03315143),
treatment with sotagliflozin resulted in a similar effect in patients with T2DM and
chronic kidney disease with or without albuminuria. Another dual SGLT1 and SGLT2 inhibitor, licogliflozin has been shown to exert
a favourable metabolic effect leading to weight loss, reduced PPG excursion, and
elevation of total GLP-1 levels in patients with obesity and T2DM. , Based on the
overwhelmingly encouraging results from sotagliflozin, it seems that approval for
use in T2DM is not far away. At the same time, other agents from this novel class
can emerge as clinically beneficial entities for the treatment of T2DM in the years
to come.

## Peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor α (alpha)/γ (gamma)/δ (delta)
pan-agonists
Peroxisome proliferator–activated receptors (PPARs) are ligand-activated
transcription factors of nuclear hormone receptors. Their subtypes include PPAR-α
(liver, muscle, and heart); PPAR-γ (adipose tissue and vascular endothelial cells),
and PPAR-δ (widespread whole-body distribution) which play an integral part in
energy metabolism, where PPAR- δ regulates energy expenditure while PPAR-γ mediates
its storage. – Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are
anti-diabetic agents in clinical use since 1997. They are PPAR-γ agonists, which enhance insulin sensitivity by increasing
adiponectin, GLUT4 expression and oppose the effect of tumour necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha in adipocytes. These actions result in reduced hepatic gluconeogenesis
and increase insulin-dependent glucose uptake in muscle and fat. Chiglitazar, a novel PPARα/γ/δ pan-agonist, has been investigated in phase-3
multi-center, randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled trials
(ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02121717), as well as sitagliptin, controlled (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02173457) trials in patients with T2DM with insufficient glycaemic control despite diet
and exercise. Compared to placebo, at 24 weeks, both doses of chiglitazar were
superior to placebo in HbA1c reduction and the effects were sustained for 52 weeks.
The mean change in HbA1c from baseline was −0.45% ± 1.22% with placebo,
−1.30% ± 1.07% with chiglitazar 32 mg, and −1.52% ± 1.19% with chiglitazar 48 mg.
Although hypoglycaemia, weight gain, and oedema were relatively more common with
chiglitazar, the overall adverse events were comparable across all groups with no
major safety concerns. MHY2013 and IVA337 are other examples of PPAR pan-agonists that have been
shown to suppress inflammation and hepatic lipid accumulation and may emerge as
useful candidates for treating non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in the
future. , 

## GLIMINS
A novel oral anti-diabetic drug, imeglimin is a tetrahydrotriazine compound that is
the first member of the ‘glimins’ class of agents and has been investigated in many
landmark clinical trials. In patients with T2DM, imeglimin has shown sustained improvement in
hyperglycaemia without disabling hypoglycaemia and was not associated with a
concerning side-effect profile. , Its unique mechanism of
action (MOA) ( ) not
only increases glucose-dependant insulin secretion but also reduces IR. , It acts by
inhibiting the process of oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria of aerobic
cells which in turn leads to favourable metabolic effects. Imeglimin counteracts a variety of metabolic disruptions at play in T2DM. It
accelerates the phosphorylation of Akt (protein kinase B) leading to enhanced
insulin signalling and has also been linked to the induction of insulin sensitivity in the β-cells. In addition to this, imeglimin reduces hepatic gluconeogenesis, , is protective
against β-cell death, increases the β-cell mass and improves glucose-induced insulin
secretion (GSIS) from islets of Langerhan cells in the pancreas. , , 
Interestingly, Lachaux et al. reported a reduction in left ventricle (LV) end-diastolic pressure and
increased LV tissue perfusion with imeglimin treatment in Zucker fa/fa rats. These
findings suggest that imeglimin is potentially cardioprotective in addition to its
anti-diabetic properties and thus once approved for commercial use, will be a useful
inclusion to the arsenal against T2DM.
 A systematic review and meta-analysis of the available evidence from Crabtree
et al. showed that imeglimin therapy, at a dose of 1500 mg twice a day, lead to a
reduction in HbA1c (0.63%) and fasting plasma glucose (FPG) (0.52 mmol/L)
in patients with T2DM when used alone or in combination with metformin or
sitagliptin. These results are similar to those reported for other classes of
glucose-lowering therapies inducted in clinical practice in recent times. Based on
the available evidence, imeglimin use is not related to any significant adverse
effects and is overall well tolerated. Based on its potent anti-diabetic effect as monotherapy and as an adjunctive treatment, the lack of major adverse effects and potential cardioprotection, imeglimin
is poised to occupy a crucial role in the future of T2DM pharmacotherapy.

## Therapies targeting the glucagon receptor

## GLP-1R and glucagon receptor dual agonists
Around 90% of patients with T2DM are overweight, making it an important risk
factor for its development. GLP-1R agonists improve glycaemic control and reduce weight in patients
with T2DM, making them an effective pharmacological agent. Glucagon is a peptide hormone, produced by the α-cells of the islets of
Langerhans. Acting via the glucagon receptor (GCGR), it
increases glucose concentration in the bloodstream via
gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, increases lipolysis, improves energy
expenditure and can activate the GLP-1R leading to a glucose-lowering
effect. , In diet-induced obese (DIO) mice, Pocai et
al. demonstrated that GLP-1 and GCGR dual agonism lead to superior
weight loss compared to GLP-1R agonists alone while the lipid-lowering and
antihyperglycemic activity of both classes were comparable. Chronic
administration of GLP-1/GCGR dual agonist leads to a more pronounced improvement
in plasma metabolic parameters (insulin, leptin, and adiponectin) compared to
GLP-1R agonist alone. Oxyntomodulin, JNJ-64565111, and MEDI-0382 , are examples of some
agents being developed in this emerging class with some encouraging results
being reported with MEDI-0382 recently. 

## GCGR antagonist
Glucagon and insulin exhibit opposite metabolic effects. Glucagon regulates
glucose homeostasis through hepatic glucose production via
gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. Glucagon receptor antagonists (GRAs) are a
novel class of anti-hyperglycaemic agents designed to target hyperglycaemia in
diabetes by blocking glucagon action through its receptor. , GRAs
differ chemically, and on this basis, can be classified into small molecule,
monocloncal antibody, and anti-sense oligonucleotide agents. A variety of GRAs
studied in clinical trials have shown to improve glycaemic control in terms of
HbA1c, but clinically significant adverse effects have precluded
their use as therapeutic options in clinical practice. Weight gain, elevated
hepatic enzymes, increase in low-density-lipoprotein-C (LDL-C) levels and liver
fat content, rise in systolic blood pressure, and α-cell hyperplasia are some of
the concerns reported with GRA use. , Efforts are underway to
minimize side effects of GRAs, and many agents are currently being developed from this class ( ).
 

## GLP-1R/GCGR/GIPR triple agonists
Following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGBP) surgery, it was noted that the
endogenous GLP-1, GIP, and glucagon (Incretins) secretion was increased. It was
theorized that these incretins’ synergistic metabolic action could lead to
weight reduction. , HM15211, currently in phase-1 clinical trials, is a
weekly SC GLP-1R/GCGR/GIPR tri-agonist peptide being developed by Hanmi Pharma
to treat obesity, NAFLD, and T2DM. It is a modified human glucagon molecule
formed by conjugating to human immunoglobulin G Fc fragment through PEG
linkage.
To assess the efficacy in treatment of obesity, HM15211 was compared with
liraglutide in DIO mice, where early results have shown a ~three-fold reduction
in weight and increased energy expenditure with HM15211 compared to liraglutide.
Moreover, in methionine choline–deficient (MCD) mice, HM15211 administration
resulted in reduction in hepatic TGs (−82.6% vs vehicle) and
thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) (−60.7% vs
vehicle). A concurrent fall in serum alanine-aminotransferase (ALT) and
bilirubin was also observed. HM15211 resulted in increased intracellular cAMP
through GLP-1R, GCGR and GIPR. Its robust glucagon activity caused weight loss
and improved lipid profiles by accelerated lipid oxidation. GLP-1R and GIP
served to neutralize the glucagon-induced hyperglycaemia. , , By
affecting weight loss and improving lipid profiles, this class could provide an
attractive therapeutic option for treating obesity and related diseases, for
example, T2DM and NAFLD. NN9423 (NNC9204-1706) by Novo Nordisk and GGG
tri-agonist by Eli Lilly are examples of some other GLP-1R/GCGR/GIPR triple
agonists which are currently under development. 

## G-protein-coupled receptor ligands
A variety of mediators acting through G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) can enhance
and inhibit GSIS. Gs, Gi, Gq, and G12 are involved in signalling pathways modulating insulin
secretion. Gs and Gq stimulate insulin release while Gi inhibits it. 

## GPR119 agonists
GPR119 is a Class-A orphan GPCR found in the pancreas and the gastrointestinal
tract and can regulate insulin and incretin release. Its activation leads to the
intracellular accumulation of cAMP, resulting in GSIS from the pancreatic
β-cells and incretin release from the gut. , Due to the dual effect
of GSIS and incretin release coupled with a low risk of hypoglycaemia, these
agents have drawn considerable interest as a therapeutic entity in the
management of T2DM. Unfortunately, no synthetic GPR119 ligand has been approved
for treatment, nor has any passed beyond phase-2 clinical studies. , DS-8500
is a GPR119 agonist being developed by Daiichi Sankyo Company and is currently
in phase-2 clinical trials. 

## Free fatty acid receptor
Several agents have been identified to have anti-hyperglycaemic action by
stimulating or blocking the free fatty acid receptor (FFAR). Among the FFARs,
FFAR1 (GPR40), FFAR2 (GPR43), FFAR3 (GPR41), and FFAR4 (GPR120) have emerged as
anti-diabetic targets. Long-chain free fatty acids (FFAs) activate FFAR1 and FFAR4, and agonists
of these two receptors have been proven to enhance insulin and incretin release. Short-chain FFA activates FFAR2 and FFAR3 and as opposed to FFAR1 and 4,
antagonism of these receptors has shown anti-diabetic potential. Mice studies have demonstrated that FFAR2 and FFAR3 antagonists can
enhance insulin secretion and glucose tolerance. Agents targeting the FFAR are still in the early stages of development,
and it remains to be seen whether an effective and safe drug can be delivered
and inducted into clinical practice from this class in the future. P1736 and
P11187 by Piramal Enterprises and LY2922470 by Eli Lilly are examples of
recently studied FFAR1 agonists. , 

## Takeda G-protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR5 agonists)
Discovered in 2002, TGR5 (also known as GPBAR1 and GPR131) is a bile
acid–specific receptor found in the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, liver,
gallbladder, and adipose tissue. A lot of research has gone into establishing a link between bile acids
and glucose metabolism, with numerous studies showing bile acid–mediated TGR5
activation resulting in impactful gluco-metabolic sequelae including GLP-1,
insulin, and glucagon release. – The ability to
stimulate GLP-1 secretion has attracted considerable interest; however, this effect may be limited
as TGR5 receptors are predominantly present in L-cells’ basolateral membrane,
leading to insufficient luminal activation required to produce the desired
metabolic impact. , Studies in rodents suggest an important role for TGR5
in GLP-1 secretion, and therefore, it is an important target for the development of
pharmacotherapy directed against metabolic disease, including T2DM. However, data from animal studies showed significant safety concerns with
TGR5 agonists treatment, foremost of which were gall bladder dilation,
pancreatitis, and hepatic necrosis. Human studies have reported no beneficial
effects on GLP-1 secretion or plasma glucose levels, and as such, currently, a
viable pharmacological option using this concept is not on the
horizon. , SB 756050, originated by GlasgowSmithKline, was TGR5
agonist studied for the treatment of T2DM. Fifty-one participants were
randomized to receive either placebo or one of four doses of SB-756050 for 6
days. A single 100 mg dose of sitagliptin was co-administered on Day 6 to all
participants. It was well tolerated, however, exhibited variable pharmacodynamic
effects with rise in glucose at the two lowest doses and no fall in glucose at
the two highest doses. The glucose effects of SB-756050 and sitagliptin were
comparable to those of sitagliptin alone (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00733577). Studies on SB-756050 were eventually discontinued in Phase-2 clinical trials. 

## Melatonin receptor
Peripheral and central IR, glucose intolerance and reduced expression of the
GLUT4 gene have been observed in pinealectomized animals, which improved with
melatonin administration. , Furthermore, a
reduction in melatonin formation has been reported in animal models with
T2DM. , MT1 and MT2 are isoforms of melatonin receptors
expressed on hepatocytes and pancreatic cells, forming part of the glucose
regulation pathway. Various studies demonstrate that melatonin-mediated
activation of these receptors improves insulin sensitivity and suppress
gluconeogenesis. , In the past, MT1 and
MT2 knockout mice have been shown to have systemic IR and reduced insulin
sensitivity, with the latter exhibiting increased insulin release. – Ramelteon is a
selective melatonin receptor (MT1 and MT2) agonist,
approved by the FDA for the treatment of insomnia; however, as noted by Tsunoda et al., its use did not improve glycaemic control in patients with T2DM suffering
from insomnia.
In contrast, piromelatine, a novel melatonin receptor agonist, has been shown to
exert a protective effect on insulin sensitivity and lipid metabolism in
sleep-deprived rats. Melatonin receptor is a potential target for developing therapies to
address hyperglycaemia. However, substantial research is required in this class
to produce a clinically relevant agent in the future. Shiraz University of
Medical Sciences is conducting a clinical study on Melatonin’s Effects on the
Treatment of Diabetes Mellitus (METOD), which is currently in the early phase-1 stage. 

## Enzymes, hormones, and receptors as therapeutic targets

## Protein tyrosine phosphatase-1B inhibitor
Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) lead to the inactivation of the insulin
receptor via dephosphorylation. PTP-1B down-regulates insulin
and leptin pathway and therefore has been seen as a therapeutic target for the
treatment of diabetes and obesity. , PTP-1B-deficient mice
were observed to be sensitive to insulin and had a degree of resistance to
weight gain. , Selective, reversible, and high-affinity PTP-1B
inhibitors have been tested in animal models, but being highly charged
molecules, they could not be developed into medicinal products. – KQ-791, developed by
Kaneq Bioscience, has been studied in a phase-1 interventional randomized
placebo control trial for treatment of T2DM (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02445911).
The study consisted of 81 participants which were divided into four groups based
on the regimen of KQ-791 they receive over a period of 4 weeks. Group 1
(n = 20) received a loading dose of 100 mg on day 1,
followed by single 50 mg doses on days 8, 15, 22, and 29. Group 2
(n = 20) received a loading dose of 250 mg on day 1,
followed by a daily dose of 25 mg for 28 days and group 3
(n = 21) received a loading dose of 1500 mg on day 1, followed
by a daily dose of 150 mg for 28 days. Group 4 (n = 20)
received multiple ascending doses matching KQ-791 dose (placebo). The primary
outcome measure was the difference in change in fasting blood glucose between
KQ-791 and placebo from baseline to day 29. The results suggested superior
improvement in fasting blood glucose in group 1 −3.28 ± 22.99 mg/dL and group 2
−3.93 ± 30.63 mg/dL compared to group 3 0.67 ± 30.82 and placebo 3.17 ± 23.17.
No serious adverse event (SAE) was recorded with any intervention group. 

## Human pro-islet peptide
DM is a chronic illness and is characterized by a lack of functioning pancreatic
β-cells at advanced stages. Increasing β-cell numbers to alleviate DM is the
logical answer; however, this is cumbersome to deliver in clinical practice.
Transplantation of donor islets has been explored but has been limited by
insufficient donors. Where successful islet transplantation has been achieved,
patients have been plagued with post-transplantation sequelae, including
rejection and adverse effects of immunosuppressive therapies. – The human pro-islet
peptide (HIP) is a 14-amino acid, biologically active fragment encoded by the
human REG3a gene with the ability to increase β-cell mass
whereby improving glycaemic control. In streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice, Jiang et al. have demonstrated that HIP promotes differentiation of human
foetus–derived pancreatic progenitor cells (HFPPCs) into insulin-secreting cells
leading to a significant reduction in hyperglycaemia. Evidence from this
landmark effort from Jiang et al. suggests that ex vivo HIP-treated HFPPCs can
differentiate into functional β-cells and can potentially cure diabetes in their
recipients. Phase-1 clinical trials with BTI-410 (first agent in the class of
HIPs) established good safety and tolerability in patients with T2DM with
promising results. Boston therapeutics have now planned two 90-day phase-2
clinical trials for the study of BTI-410; one 36 patient study in
immunocompromised T1DM patients post–renal transplant and another 120 patient
study in otherwise healthy T2DM patients, marking the beginning of an exciting prospect. 

## Fibroblast growth factor 21 analogues
Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are signalling molecules responsible for
wide-ranging functions from development and regeneration to maintaining
metabolic homeostasis. FGF-21 is an atypical member of this family, produced from the liver; it
is involved in regulating glucose and lipid metabolism. Elevated FGF-21 levels in obese animals have been observed to reduce
hyperglycaemia, body weight, and lipid concentration. Recombinant FGF-21 also demonstrates a similar effect in various diabetic
animal models. – 
Pegbelfermin (BMS-986036) is a recombinant PEGylated FGF-21 that is well
tolerated and significantly reduces fat fraction in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was carried out in
which patients with T2DM and obesity (BMI 30–50 kg/m2) received
either SC pegbelfermin (n = 96) at doses of 1, 5, or 20 mg
daily or 20 mg weekly or placebo (n = 24) for a duration of 12
weeks (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02097277). At 12 weeks, pegbelfermin therapy did
not impact HbA1c concentrations compared to placebo; however, significant
differences (p < 0.05) versus placebo were
noted for a reduction in FPG (20 mg weekly) and an increase in whole-body
insulin sensitivity (Matsuda index; 20 mg daily). In addition, significant
improvements were observed in high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) and TG for the 20
mg daily regime versus placebo. Injection site bruising (5%)
and reaction (4%) together with diarrhoea were among the commonly reported
adverse events. Based on these results, pegbelfermin warrants further investigation in
evaluation of its efficacy in obesity-induced metabolic conditions.

## Adenosine monophosphate analogues
Adenosine monophosphate (AMP) predominantly activates adenosine
monophosphate–activated protein kinase (AMPK). Once activated, AMPK exhibits an
insulin-sensitizing effect, reducing hepatic gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis
via negative regulation of specific genes while promoting peripheral glucose uptake and lipid oxidation in skeletal
muscles. Low levels of AMPK have been noted in patients with diabetes, and its activation is one of the cellular mechanisms through which
metformin exerts its anti-diabetic effect. , Novel agents which can
activate AMPK or serve as AMP analogues have been explored as potential
therapeutic modalities in T2DM. First in class, AMPK activator, O304, is a
PAN-AMPK activator studied in a proof-of-concept phase-2(a), single-centre,
randomized, parallel-group, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial in patients
with T2DM on metformin (TELLUS). Sixty-five patients with T2DM were studied for
28 days and O304 administration resulted in a mean absolute reduction in FPG at
day 28 compared with day 1 of −0.60 mM (p = 0.010) compared to
−0.10 mM in the placebo group. At day 28, O304 use resulted in a mean absolute
reduction in systolic blood pressure (BP) by 5.8 mmHg
(p = 0.030) and diastolic BP by −3.8 mmHg
(p = 0.009). In addition to these findings, O304 use resulted
in an increase in microvascular perfusion as well. These beneficial effects may
allow it to play an important role in treating patient with T2DM complicated
with cardiovascular disease. , 

## Glucokinase activators
Glucokinase (GK), also known as hexokinase type-IV, is part of the hexokinase
enzyme family. Mainly expressed in the pancreas, liver, brain, and
gastrointestinal tract, it facilitates phosphorylation of glucose to
glucose-6-phosphate. , It regulates GSIS,
hepatic glucose uptake and glycogenesis, thus regulating whole-body glucose
homeostasis. , Based on the characteristics mentioned above, agents
activating GK have a therapeutic potential in T2DM. Numerous GK activators developed thus far have shown significant
glucose-lowering capabilities. However, a concomitant increase in plasma (TGs)
and loss of efficacy with continued administration meant that they could not be
used as therapeutic entities. – TMG-123, a novel GK
activator, has been shown to overcome these limitations and, in animal studies,
has demonstrated glucose-lowering effects without affecting hepatic and plasma
TG. As the plasma insulin levels were not increased, it is likely that TMG-123
mainly acts in the liver. Although it is a viable candidate for development as a new treatment for
T2DM, its safety needs to be evaluated further as Kobayashi and colleagues have
shown that TMG-123 causes long-lasting hypoglycaemia and irreversibly impairs
spermatogenesis in rats. TTP-399 is another GK activator being investigated as a potential therapy
in both T1DM and T2DM. 

## Sirtuins
Sirtuins (SIRT1-SIRT7) are a family of NAD+-dependent deacetylases
which modulate a range of metabolic processes together with age-related
conditions, including obesity and T2DM. , SIRT1 and SIRT6 have
been extensively studied and have been identified to have a role in maintaining
insulin sensitivity. , In the pancreatic β-cells, overexpression of SIRT1 was
noted to augment insulin secretion, leading to improved glucose tolerability. And by inhibiting PTP-1B (which blocks the insulin receptor), SIRT1
enhanced insulin sensitivity. , Metformin is
recommended as the first-line treatment for T2DM and has been shown to directly activate SIRT1, among various other recognized metabolic effects. This lends credence to
the potential usefulness of SIRT1 activating agents in the treatment of T2DM.
SIRT2, SIRT3, and SIRT6 also sustain insulin sensitivity, whereas SIRT4 and
SIRT7 downregulate insulin secretion. Resveratrol, a polyphenol found in grapes, has been shown to activate SIRT1. It has been shown to have a positive impact on glucose homeostasis in
rodents, – and
several studies have reported improvements in insulin sensitivity, glycaemic
control, and other metabolic parameters in patients with T2DM. – Jeyaraman et
al. reviewed RCTs comparing the effects of oral resveratrol with placebo, no
treatment, other anti-diabetic medications, or diet or exercise, in adults with
a diagnosis of T2DM and found that the available research was insufficient for
evaluation of safety and potency of resveratrol therapy for treating T2DM.
Recently, De Ligt et al. studied the effects of resveratrol 150
mg daily (n = 20) compared to placebo
(n = 21), in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial over 6 months in overweight participants with pre-diabetes (BMI 27–35
kg/m2) (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02565979). At 6 months, although
treatment with resveratrol did not affect insulin sensitivity, there was a
significant (p = 0.007) difference in the post-intervention
HbA1c between the two groups with the adjusted means showing a lower
post-intervention HbA1c in the resveratrol group ((35.8 ± 0.43 mmol/mol)
compared to placebo (37.6 ± 0.44 mmol/mol). These results point towards a positive impact of resveratrol on glycaemic
control; however, despite rigorous research, a clinically safe and effective
SIRT activator for treating T2DM is yet to be found. – 

## 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1 (11β-HSD1) inhibitors
11β-HSD1 is a reductive nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH)-dependent enzyme, predominantly expressed in the liver, adipose tissue,
gonads, and brain and is responsible for the formation of cortisol from its
inactive metabolite, cortisone. , Cortisol regulates
energy homeostasis (liver and adipose tissue) and has been well characterized to
impair peripheral glucose uptake and increase hepatic IR. Stimson and colleagues have shown that the whole body 11β-HSD1 activity
is increased in obese men with T2DM, making the inhibition of 11β-HSD1 a target for treating T2DM, especially
in those with high fasting blood glucose as shown by Shukla and colleagues. Several compounds have entered clinical trials and have demonstrated
modest improvement in glycaemic control, together with favourable changes in
some metabolic syndrome parameters. , 11β-HSD1 inhibition
will reduce the levels of circulating cortisol and, due to a lack of negative
feedback, will increase levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). This can
result in adrenal hypertrophy, accumulation of adrenal androgen precursors and
depression. , These unfavourable sequelae must be addressed while
ensuring significant clinical benefit before a medicinal product from this class
can be introduced into clinical practice. BI 135585, a selective 11β-HSD1
inhibitor, was evaluated in an open-label administration of BI 135585 200 mg as
a single dose in nine healthy volunteers (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01652742) and in
a multiple-dose study with randomized, double-blind administration of BI 135585
5, 12.5, 25, 50, 100, and 200 mg or placebo once daily in 72 participants with
T2DM over a period of 2 weeks (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01282970). It was found to
be safe and was well tolerated; however, adrenocorticotropic hormone was noted
to be slightly raised but within the normal range. Serum cortisol levels
remained unchanged and increased total urinary corticoid excretion was noted. While these are positive results, its safety profile and therapeutic
potency need to be investigated in further trials over a longer period of
time.

## Insulin
For the management of T2DM, insulin therapy is initiated generally as a last resort
when patients fail to achieve their glycaemic targets with two or more oral
hypoglycaemic agents (OHAs) or with non-insulin injectable medication. Various
insulin preparations are now available in clinical practice, ranging from rapid to
long-acting preparations. As with other areas in the management of T2DM, insulin therapy has also been
a focus of research, and work has been done to devise insulin preparations with
alternate delivery methods. Compounds have been developed with a longer duration of
action to reduce the frequency of injections.

## Oral insulin
Following its endogenous release from the β-cells in the pancreas, insulin is
transferred to the liver, where it undergoes degradation from the hepatic
first-pass metabolism resulting in a concentration gradient between the hepatic
portal and peripheral systemic circulation. As parenteral insulin preparations are directly delivered to the
peripheral circulation, they fail to achieve the described concentration
gradient resulting in the reversal of normal physiology. Therefore, when
injected, insulin reaches the liver at a lower concentration, and
insulin-treated diabetic patients tend to develop weight gain and hypoglycaemia
as a manifestation of peripheral hyperinsulinaemia. Oral insulin, on the contrary, mimics normal physiology leading to better
glycaemic regulation. Once absorbed from the gut, insulin is delivered to the
liver via the portal circulation building a high portosystemic
gradient. Reduced levels of systemic insulin alleviate hypoglycaemia and issues
with weight gain. – As a peptide hormone,
insulin is susceptible to degradation from acid hydrolysis in the stomach and
proteolytic cleavage in the intestine. These factors have made the production of
a viable oral insulin preparation challenging. , There is an emphasis on
protecting and enhancing peptide drug absorption. To achieve this, researchers
have employed innovative measures such as mucoadhesive polymers, micronization,
absorption enhancers, protease inhibitors, and particulate carrier
systems. , , A recent randomized, placebo-controlled, phase-2b
trial with the novel oral human insulin, ORMD-0801, has shown promising results
in subjects with poorly controlled T2DM. ORMD-0801 achieved a significant
reduction in HbA1c without an increase in the frequency of
hypoglycaemia or weight. It can be the first commercial oral insulin preparation and has currently
entered the FDA phase-3 clinical trials.
Oral devices comprising mucoadhesive patches and enterically coated capsules are
another insulin delivery technique on the horizon. Gupta et al. developed a mucoadhesive patch of
Carbopol934, pectin, sodium carboxymethyl cellulose in 1:1:2 ratio. When loaded
with bovine insulin, human insulin, and exenatide to compare the efficacies when
administered through the oral route, the results indicated that mucoadhesive
patches increased oral insulin absorption. They concluded that the release of
the insulin from the patches was time-dependent, and the insulin loaded into the
delivery system was wholly released from the patch within 5 h of administration.
The results are an encouraging step towards the development of another
non-invasive anti-diabetic therapeutic option in the form of sustained-release
mucoadhesive patches promoting oral peptide delivery to improve patient
compliance and drug adherence. , 

## Transdermal insulin
The use of the transdermal route for drug delivery has been around for a long
time. In terms of insulin delivery, the transdermal route alleviates the
discomfort and inconvenience of regular SC injections. This is especially true
for patients on multiple daily injections (MDIs) of insulin. It bolsters
compliance among patients while ensuring controlled insulin release over a while. Lack of adequate permeability of the stratum corneum is the main limiting
factor with this route. , Over the years,
researchers have been working on methods to bypass this obstacle, leading to
discovering various novel techniques to achieve this. – Abdul Ahad et
al. have summarized various transdermal insulin delivery techniques,
including microneedle (MN), a chemical permeation enhancer, patches,
sonophoresis, iontophoresis, nanoparticles, and microemulsions, among others. In
this article, we will focus on insulin patches as a novel insulin delivery
method.

## Subcutaneous insulin patch-pump system
Using novel technologies, the insulin patch-pump devices provide accurate and
flexible insulin delivery. Omnipod, a full-featured device available
worldwide and V-GoTM, a simple specific patch pump available in
the US/Europe, can be seen as a sophisticated modification of the already widely
used continuous SC Insulin infusion (CSII) systems ( shows examples of fully
featured and simple mechanical patch pumps). Patch pumps are smaller,
flexible, discreet, without tubing and cheaper, making them more attractive
than CSII systems. These devices do not use tubing, thus improving the user experience.
The Omnipod system comprises an insulin reservoir and a handheld Personal
Diabetes Manager (PDM). Using wireless technology, PDM directs the delivery
of continuous basal insulin from the reservoir via a
discreet needle. The V-GoTM device, on the other hand, can
deliver basal and bolus insulin over 24 h and is suitable for patients on
MDI insulin regimes. It replaces the insulin pens, low in price without an
upfront cost and is disposable. Using an adapter, the device is loaded with rapid-acting insulin
analogues and then attached to the skin with a hypoallergenic adhesive
strip. The basal rates are pre-set and are available as 20, 30, or 40 units
of insulin per 24 h and each one also allows for 36 units of bolus insulin
daily. Mader et al. evaluated PAQ®, which is a
simple specific patch pump providing set basal and on demand insulin
delivery. The study included 28 adults with T2DM with HbA1c ⩾53 and ⩽97
mmol/mol while treated with ⩾2 insulin injections/day. Participants were
investigated in three phases: baseline (on usual insulin injections),
transition, and a PAQ treatment phase. After 12 weeks of PAQ wear, HbA1c
improved significantly (HbA1c –16 ± 9 mmol/mol
(p < 0.0001)) while the body weight remained stable with
no episodes of severe hypoglycaemia (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02158078 & NCT02419859). The patch-pump targets a large cohort within the DM population
however, for patients with T2DM who are on simple insulin regimes, the
simple specific patch pump is an exciting prospect as in clinical studies
they have demonstrated improved glycaemic control, user satisfaction, and
were cost-effective compared to MDI insulin regimes. , 
 

## Closed-loop pump systems
Over the last few years, particularly in the domain of blood glucose
monitoring and insulin delivery, advances in technology have revolutionized
diabetes care. Introduction of closed-loop (CL) pump systems are one such
technological marvel, where continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) and an
insulin pump function in a unified manner, achieving automation in
glucose-responsive insulin delivery by the help of a computerized algorithm
which adjusts basal insulin in response to data obtained from the CGM
helping to maintain glucose levels in the target range. For mealtime insulin
delivery, users input their carbohydrate counts into the algorithm which
calculates the required insulin dose and signals the pump to deliver the
dose (single hormone system). Dual hormone CL pump systems can also deliver
glucagon in a glucose-responsive manner, and therefore, the CL pump systems
reduce the user burden by automatically adjusting insulin delivery based on
sensed glucose levels (CGM).
With the hybrid closed-loop (HCL) systems, algorithm-mediated and
user-initiated insulin delivery co-exists as basal insulin delivery is
adjusted automatically; however, meal time boluses are required to be
programmed manually. The HCL system can make regular self-directed adjustments to the
basal insulin delivery rate which prevents large fluctuations in blood
glucose, and overall, these novel insulin delivery systems have resulted in
improved glycaemic control and reduction in hypoglycaemic events in people
with T1DM. , In the last 2 years numerous commercial HCL pump
systems have been marketed ( describes examples of
commercially available HCL pump systems and their properties while depicts the
Medtronic 670G with the guardian 3 sensor).
 Interestingly, people with T1DM around the world have developed
‘Do-It-Yourself’ (DIY) artificial pancreas systems by creating their own
algorithm which runs on a smartphone app and automates insulin delivery
while integrating with existing CGM and insulin pumps. Several studies have shown that DIY artificial pancreas systems
increase the time in range (TIR) leading to a fall in HbA1c without
increasing the incidence of hypoglycaemia. Examples of these DIY artificial pancreas systems include OpenAPS
(runs on a Linux computer); AndroidAPS (runs on an Android phone); and Loop
(runs on an iPhone and communicates to the pump with the RileyLink). However, these are unlicenced devices and users are responsible for
any untoward events related to their use.
The HCL pump system technology is undergoing rapid development and with
active trials being conducted on Insulin Only Bionic Pancreas (iLET)
(ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04200313) and Omnipod Horizon™ Automated Glucose
Control System (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04196140), and the future of closed-loop pump system technology appears to be
bright. Although these systems are relevant to the management of T1DM which
is beyond the scope of this article, we have described these systems due
their novel insulin delivery method and in future we may see them being
employed for treatment of people with T2DM on MDI insulin regimes.

## MN patch
The MN technology provides an innovative method for transdermal delivery of
proteins. , The MN patch forms temporary cutaneous channels,
which provide access to the epidermis and dermis for biotherapeutics
delivery. Once the MN patch is removed, the micro-channels close up quickly,
preventing long-term skin damage. , As opposed to the
26-G hypodermic needles, MN use is tolerated much better as it causes
significantly less pain, anxiety, and local tissue irritation/damage. Based on the material and mechanism of drug delivery, MN’s can be
classified into solid, degradable, hollow, dissolvable, and recently
developed bioresponsive MNs that can respond to physiological glucose levels
on-demand delivery of insulin. The MN developed by Zhang et al. using cross-linked
alginate coupled with maltose, were functionally robust with high
cytocompatibility. These MN’s demonstrated a sustained hypoglycaemic effect
in diabetic SD rats with the relative pharmacological availability (RPA) and
relative bioavailability (RBA) at 94.1 ± 5.6% and 93.7 ± 4.7%, respectively,
compared with that of SC injection route at similar insulin doses
demonstrating their efficacy in the treatment of DM. Being convenient and painless, MN is ideal for domiciliary use.
However, before induction into clinical practice, a thorough investigation
is required to look at their safety with regards to the potential for skin
infection and irritation.

## Inhaled insulin
Dance 501, from Dance Biopharm, is a front runner in the domain of pulmonary
insulin delivery. It is a mist formulation of human insulin administered with a
pocket-sized smart inhaler using vibrating mesh micropump technology developed
by Aerogen. It is small, discreet, portable, and battery-operated hence overcoming
some of the major drawbacks encountered with Exubera which lead to its
withdrawal from the market in 2007. Data from phase-2 randomized, controlled study comparing Dance 501 to SC
insulin lispro in T2DM are encouraging. Dance 501 inhaled human insulin
demonstrated faster onset and greater action in the first hour of administration
than SC insulin lispro, with good tolerability and without any pulmonary safety concerns. The insulin release with Dance 501 is breath actuated and so requires
training before use. In addition to this, before use, the inhaler reservoir
needs to be loaded with insulin and may present some difficulty to patients with
compromised manual dexterity, for example, in cases of tremors or severe
deforming arthritis. Nevertheless, if it continues to provide positive results in clinical
trials, Dance 501 will be a potent option in managing T2DM.

## Once weekly insulin
T2DM is a chronic illness, and to reduce the long-term morbidity burden, patients
must achieve adequate glycaemic control. Due to the lack of compliance and
acceptance in some patients, multiple daily basal insulin injections prove to
hinder this venture. Novo Nordisk has developed a long-acting insulin analogue,
insulin Icodec, which has now entered phase-3 clinical trials in the United
States, United Kingdom, and Europe. By three amino acid substitutions (A14E,
B16H, and B25 H) and an addition of a C20 fatty diacid containing side chain at
B29 K, insulin icodec undergoes reduced enzymatic degradation and robust
reversible albumin binding resulting in reduced clearance which stretches its
terminal elimination half-life to 196 h. These properties allow it to be used as a single weekly injection
covering the basal insulin requirements for an entire week. In a randomized,
double-blind, double-dummy, phase-2 clinical trial, Rosenstock et
al. compared the safety and efficacy of insulin icodec with
once-daily insulin glargine U100 in insulin-naïve patients with T2DM. At 26
weeks, the estimated mean change from baseline in the HbA1c was
−1.33% in the insulin icodec group and −1.15% in the insulin glargine group;
thus insulin icodec demonstrated similar glucose-lowering efficacy to once-daily
insulin glargine U100. There were no significant safety concerns with insulin
icodec either, with observed hypoglycaemia rates similar to those in the insulin
glargine group. From the available evidence so far, without compromising glycaemic
control, insulin icodec can reduce the frequency of basal insulin injections and
improve compliance, making it an exciting prospect for the future.

## Genome-Wide Association Study and T2DM
Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS) is a method used in genetics research, which can
identify specific genetic variations in the form of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) linked to a variety of disease processes. A recent meta-analysis of GWAS with ~16 million genetic variants in 62,892
T2DM cases and 596,424 controls of European ancestry has led to the identification
of 143 variants associated with T2DM, over three dozen of which were previously unknown. Impairment of pancreatic β-cell glucose sensitivity in the non-diabetic
population is an independent and robust predictor of abnormal glucose tolerance and
progression to T2DM. , Following a genome-wide association meta-analysis, Deshmukh
and Madsen et al. identified CDKAL1 and GIPR-QPCTL loci as
important determinants of beta-cell glucose sensitivity. Similar studies have uncovered genes that are targets for current
therapeutics. KCNJ11, GLP1R, and PPARG are gene variants identified by this method
for T2DM targeted by sulfonylureas (SU), GLP-1 analogues, and TZD’s,
respectively. – Using the
knowledge obtained from GWAS, new modalities in the form of ivacaftor and lumacaftor
have been developed to treat cystic fibrosis (CF). , Identification of genetic
variants implicated in complex pathologies, the presence of successful drug
therapies against these targets and the development of new treatments using
knowledge from GWAS has lent substantial credence to this approach. In the future,
advances in this strategy can inform the development of effective and may be
curative pharmacotherapy for T2DM.

## New agents and delivery methods in pre-existing classes of medication for the
treatment of T2DM
SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1 analogues, and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors are
among the new classes of medication for the treatment of T2DM, developed over the
last 15 years. Their novel MOA, ease of administration, effective glycaemic control,
weight reduction capability, cardiovascular, and renal protection have had an
overwhelmingly positive impact on the management of T2DM. A description of these agents is beyond the scope of this review; however, we
detail some of the new developments to these classes in .
 

## Conclusion
Since the ground-breaking work from the French physician Jean Sterne, who studied
metformin for the first time in humans in the 1950s to treat DM, the industry has come a long way in investigating, developing, and delivering
beneficial treatment modalities in T2DM. Most novel compounds produced for treatment
have shown a potent anti-hyperglycaemic effect; however, they need to be examined
further to ensure that their use is safe and well-tolerated in clinical practice.
Various new therapeutic targets have been explored; however, an extension of
previously known mechanisms has yielded greater success as in the case of
sotagliflozin, for example. Innovations in delivery methods and reduction in dosing
frequency will undoubtedly improve compliance with these formulations in the real
world. Oral and once-weekly insulin, insulin patch pumps and once monthly GLP-1
analogues are an exciting prospect with the potential of conferring significant
clinical benefits to patients.
The future appears to be bright; there are 129 active interventional studies in T2DM
registered over the last 10 years, currently in phase 1 to phase 4 globally, based
on data from ClinicalTrials.gov from March 2021. Can the academic and pharmaceutical
industry come together and uncover an agent which reverses the underlying mechanisms
fuelling dysglycaemia and normalizes glucose homoeostasis resulting in the cure of
T2DM? Perhaps the advances in monoclonal antibody and gene therapy will provide this
answer in the future.

## Footnotes
Author contributions: NS: conceptualization; writing—original draft; writing—review and editing. MAA:
writing—review and editing. HD: writing—review and editing. TS: supervision and
writing—review and editing.
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
ORCID iD: Thozhukat Sathyapalan 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3544-2231

## Contributor Information
Najeeb Shah, Hull University Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Hull, UK; Department of Academic Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Brocklehurst Building, 220-236 Anlaby Road, Hull, HU3 2RW, UK.
Mohammed Altigani Abdalla, Department of Academic Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Hull, UK.
Harshal Deshmukh, University Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust and Department of Academic Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Hull, UK.
Thozhukat Sathyapalan, University Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust and Department of Academic Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, Hull, UK.

## References