pmcACS Appl Mater InterfacesACS Appl Mater Interfaces822acssd101504991amACS Applied Materials & Interfaces1944-82441944-8252pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC8855343PMC8855343.1885534388553433510798710.1021/acsami.1c149751Research ArticleHybrid
Lipid/Polymer Nanoparticles to Tackle the Cystic
Fibrosis Mucus Barrier in siRNA Delivery to the Lungs: Does PEGylation
Make the Difference?
ConteGemma CostabileGabriella BaldassiDomizia https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8409-9025RondelliValeria BassiRosaria ColomboDiego LinardosGiulia FiscarelliErsilia V. SorrentinoRaffaella MiroAgnese https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6223-0782QuagliaFabiana https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9852-6056BroccaPaola d’AngeloIvana https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4151-3916MerkelOlivia M. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0850-9533UngaroFrancesca †Di.S.T.A.Bi.F., University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Caserta 81100, Italy‡Department
of Pharmacy, University of Napoli Federico
II, Napoli 80131, Italy§Department
of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, Munich 81377, Germany∥Department
of Medical Biotechnologies and Translational Medicine, University of Milano, Segrate (MI) 20090, Italy⊥Children’s
Hospital Bambino Gesù IRCCS, Rome 00165, Italy#Department
of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli 80131, Italy*Email: ivana.dangelo@unicampania.it.*Email: ungaro@unina.it.0202202216022022146401348756575780608202119012022180220221802202210042023© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2022The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Inhaled siRNA therapy
has a unique potential for treatment of severe
lung diseases, such as cystic fibrosis (CF). Nevertheless, a drug
delivery system tackling lung barriers is mandatory to enhance gene
silencing efficacy in the airway epithelium. We recently demonstrated
that lipid-polymer hybrid nanoparticles (hNPs), comprising a poly(lactic-co-glycolic)
acid (PLGA) core and a lipid shell of dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine
(DPPC), may assist the transport of the nucleic acid cargo through
mucus-covered human airway epithelium. To study in depth the potential
of hNPs for siRNA delivery to the lungs and to investigate the hypothesized
benefit of PEGylation, here, an siRNA pool against the nuclear factor-κB
(siNFκB) was encapsulated inside hNPs, endowed with a non-PEGylated
(DPPC) or a PEGylated (1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-poly(ethylene
glycol) or DSPE-PEG) lipid shell. Resulting hNPs were tested for their
stability profiles and transport properties in artificial CF mucus,
mucus collected from CF cells, and sputum samples from a heterogeneous
and representative set of CF patients. Initial information on hNP
properties governing their interaction with airway mucus was acquired
by small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) studies in artificial and cellular
CF mucus. The diffusion profiles of hNPs through CF sputa suggested
a crucial role of lung colonization of the corresponding donor patient,
affecting the mucin type and content of the sample. Noteworthy, PEGylation
did not boost mucus penetration in complex and sticky samples, such
as CF sputa from patients with polymicrobial colonization. In parallel,
in vitro cell uptake studies performed on mucus-lined Calu-3 cells
grown at the air–liquid interface (ALI) confirmed the improved
ability of non-PEGylated hNPs to overcome mucus and cellular lung
barriers. Furthermore, effective in vitro NFκB
gene silencing was achieved in LPS-stimulated 16HBE14o- cells. Overall,
the results highlight the potential of non-PEGylated hNPs as carriers
for pulmonary delivery of siRNA for local treatment of CF lung disease.
Furthermore, this study provides a detailed understanding of how distinct
models may provide different information on nanoparticle interaction
with the mucus barrier.

lung mucushybrid nanoparticlessiRNA deliverycystic fibrosisSAXSMinistero dellÃ¢??Istruzione, dellÃ¢??UniversitÃ Â  e della Ricerca10.13039/50110000340720173ZECCMDepartment of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of MilanoNAPSR2019Fondazione per la Ricerca sulla Fibrosi Cistica10.13039/50110000838525/2018Fondazione per la Ricerca sulla Fibrosi Cistica10.13039/50110000838523/2017Fondazione per la Ricerca sulla Fibrosi Cistica10.13039/5011000083851/2020pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9am1c14975document-id-new-14am1c14975ccc-price

## Introduction
Lung delivery of small
interfering RNA (siRNA) holds great promise
for the treatment of severe lung diseases, such as cystic fibrosis
(CF). , As a matter of fact, synthetic therapeutic
siRNA can be designed to virtually target any gene of interest with
high selectivity, including those targets considered “undruggable”. Furthermore, the pulmonary route of administration
offers the unprecedented opportunity to directly deliver siRNA to
the diseased lung tissue in a loco-regional and minimally invasive
manner. , Nevertheless, despite the huge therapeutic
potential, only two clinical trials providing for aerosolized siRNA
have been undertaken till now (ALN-RSV-01, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals,
Phase IIb completed; Excellair, ZaBeCor Pharmaceutical Co, Phase II
discontinued), highlighting the intrinsic difficulties involved in
the translation of inhaled siRNA from the bench to the clinics.
A key challenge to exploit the full potential of siRNA-based therapeutics
for inhalation is the development of safe and effective delivery systems,
assisting siRNA transport to their cell target at the lungs. An early investigated technological approach
relies on lipid-polymer hybrid nanoparticles (hNPs) that is based
on core–shell nanoparticles comprising a poly(lactic-co-glycolic)
acid (PLGA) core and a lipid shell, exhibiting complementary characteristics
of both polymeric nanoparticles and liposomes. − Of note, we recently demonstrated that the lipid
layer surrounding the PLGA core likely confers muco-inertia to hNPs,
thus assisting the transport of the nucleic acid cargo through the
mucus-covered human airway epithelial barrier. , 
The mucus layer is composed of highly cross-linked mucin chains,
water, and other gel-like constituents creating a complex barrier,
which strongly affects the fate of any inhaled particle in the lungs. − This is a crucial concern in severe lung diseases, such as CF, which
is associated with the production of viscous and adherent mucus in
the airway. , Two major mechanisms may stop
particles from readily diffusing through this mucus gel, namely, “size
filtering” through the mucus meshes and “interaction
filtering”. , Insoluble particles may be trapped
in the mucus gel layer or establish hydrophobic, electrostatic, and/or
hydrogen bonding interactions with the negatively charged mucin chains. , This issue needs to be properly considered when designing novel
inhaled siRNA nanomedicines.
To understand in depth the potential
of hNPs for siRNA delivery
to the lungs, here, we investigated the behavior and the interactions
of hNPs with mucus. In a translational perspective, we encapsulated
inside hNPs an siRNA pool against the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB),
coordinating the in vivo expression of several genes
involved in acute and chronic inflammation, , also in CF. Since PEGylated nanoparticles
are at the cutting edge to overcome the mucus barrier, we examined the potential of PEGylated hNPs,
which have been investigated so far for reasons other than siRNA lung
delivery. − Thus, siRNA loaded hNPs were prepared with a PLGA core and coated
by either non-PEGylated or PEGylated lipid shells, employing dipalmitoyl
phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) or N-(carbonyl-methoxypolyethyleneglycol-2000)-1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DSPE-PEG). Polyethylenimine
(PEI) was introduced as an additional component in hNPs due to its
proven ability to interact with siRNA forming a complex able to improve
its loading inside hNPs. hNPs loaded
with a fluorescent siRNA were tested for release and transport properties
in artificial mucus and sputum from CF patients. Crucial information
on hNP properties governing their interaction with CF mucus were acquired
by small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) studies. Finally, the in vitro proof of concept of the ability of siRNA-loaded
hNPs to penetrate inside mucus-lined lung epithelia is demonstrated
by using a cell culture model based on mucus-covered confluent Calu-3
monolayers.

## Experimental Section

## Materials
The
Resomer RG 502H (uncapped PLGA 50:50,
inherent viscosity 0.16 0.24 dL/g) was purchased from Evonik Industries
AG (Germany). Rhodamine-labeled PLGA was purchased from PolySciTech
(USA). 1,2-Dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DPPC) and 1, 2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-Poly(ethylene
glycol) (DSPE-PEG) were a kind gift of Lipoid GmbH (Switzerland).
Dharmacon ON-TARGETplus siRNA pools against p50 (SMARTpool Nfkb1 siRNA)
and p65 (SMARTpool RelA siRNA) NF-kB subunits and ON-TARGETplus non-targeting
pool (non-coding siRNA or siNC) were purchased from Carlo Erba Reagents
s.r.l. (Italy). Alexa Fluor 647–labeled siRNA (siFluo) was
obtained by labeling amine-modified siRNA (Integrated DNA Technologies,
Leuven, Belgium) with Alexa Fluor 647 (Life Technologies, Darmstadt,
Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and purified
by ethanol precipitation and spin column binding as described previously. Egg yolk emulsion, deoxyribonucleic acid sodium
salt from calf thymus (DNA), diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA),
phosphate buffer salts, branched polyethylenimine (PEI; 25 kDa), potassium
chloride, RPMI 1640 amino acid solution, sodium chloride, Eagle’s
Minimum Essential Medium (EMEM), fetal bovine serum and sterile 1×
PBS, lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia coli O111:B4 (LPS), 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT), and RIPA buffer were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Missouri,
USA). Methylene chloride and ethanol 96% (v/v) were supplied by Carlo
Erba (Italy). Penicillin/streptomycin and trypsin 0.25% were purchased
from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, Massachusetts USA). Cell culture
flasks (75 cm2) and multiwell plates were purchased from
Greiner Bio-One (Kremsmünster, Austria). Transwell permeable
supports were from Corning (NY, USA). PneumaCult ALI medium, hydrocortisone,
and heparin were purchased from STEMcell technologies (Vancouver,
Canada).

## Production of siRNA-Loaded hNPs
PLGA-based hNPs loaded
with an siRNA pool against NF-kB were prepared by an emulsion/solvent
diffusion technique, as described previously. Briefly, a water solution containing siRNA (100 μL; 0.1 nmol/mL)
was emulsified by vortex mixing (2400 min–1, Heidolph,
Germany) in methylene chloride containing PLGA (1 mL; 1% w/v) and
the selected lipid (DPPC/PLGA or DSPE-PEG/PLGA 1:20 w/w). Where indicated,
PEI was added to the internal water phase (0.016 mg per 100 mg of
PLGA). Just after mixing, the w/o emulsion was added to ethanol 96%
(12.5 mL) under moderate magnetic stirring, leading to the immediate
precipitation of hNPs. The formulation was diluted with 12.5 mL of
Milli-Q water and maintained under stirring for 10 min. Afterward,
residue organic solvent was removed by rotary evaporation under vacuum
at 30 °C (Heidolph VV 2000, Germany) down to a final volume of
5 mL. hNPs were isolated by centrifugation at 7000 rcf for 20 min
at 4 °C (Hettich Zentrifugen, Germany) and dispersed in Milli-Q
water. D2O was used for H1-NMR.
Fluorescently labeled
hNPs were prepared using rhodamine-labeled PLGA (PLGA-Rhod) (resulting
formulations: NFkB_DPPCRhod, PEI/siNFkB_DPPCRhod, PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod, PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod,) in the organic phase at 10% w/w with respect to the total PLGA
amount. Alternatively, fluorescent hNPs were obtained encapsulating
a fluorescent siRNA labeled with AlexaFluor647 (siFluo) (resulting
formulations: siFluo_DPPC, PEI/siFluo_DPPC, siFluo_DSPE-PEG, PEI/siFluo_DSPE-PEG).

## Characterization of siRNA-Loaded hNPs
The hydrodynamic
diameter (DH), polydispersity index (PDI),
and zeta potential (ζ potential) of hNPs in water were determined
by dynamic light scattering (DLS) and electrophoretic light scattering
(ELS) (Zetasizer Nano ZS, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). Results are
expressed as the mean value ± standard deviation (SD) of triplicate
measurements on different batches.
The morphology of the hNPs
was evaluated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with an FEI
Tecnai G2 200 kV s-Twin microscope equipped with a 4K camera (ThermoFisher
Scientific). Sample analysis was performed upon air drying of 10 μL
hNPs dispersions in water (3 mg/mL) mounted on 200 mesh copper grids
coated with carbon film (Ted Pella Inc., Nanovision, Italy).
The fixed aqueous layer thickness (FALT) was evaluated by monitoring
the influence of ionic strength on particle surface charge. To this purpose, different amounts of a stock
NaCl solution were added to a 0.5 mg/mL hNP aqueous dispersion, and
the ζ-potential of the samples was recorded.
1H NMR analysis was performed at 500 MHz with a Bruker
FT-NMR DRX500 spectrometer using a 5 mm z-PFG (pulsed field gradient)
broadband reverse probe in D2O at 298 K. Chemical shifts
were reported as δ(ppm) relative to residual HDO fixed at 4.70.
Diffusion experiments were carried out with the Bruker sequence LEDBPGP2s
(DOSY in the following) using stimulated echo and LED with bipolar
gradient pulses for diffusion and two spoil gradients. The acquisition
was done ranging from 0.674 to 32.030 G/cm with 32 increments using
a gradient pulse duration (δ) from 3.2 to 4.4 ms and a diffusion
time (Δ) from 100 to 250 ms. The eddy current delay and the
gradient recovery delay were 5.0 and 0.2 ms, respectively. hNP dispersions
in D2O (10 mg/mL) were analyzed. For comparison, dispersions
in D2O of DSPE-PEG (0.5 mg/mL) and nanoparticles based
on PLGA-PEG2000 (10 mg/mL) were analyzed. After diffusion experiments,
a solution (10 μL) of 0.538 M dimethylsulfoxide in D2O was added to the samples (0.53 mL) as a quantitative reference.

## siRNA Loading inside hNPs
siRNA actual loading was
evaluated indirectly by quantitation of non-encapsulated siRNA. Briefly,
just after production, hNPs were collected by centrifugation (7000
rcf for 20 min at 4 °C) and the supernatant was analyzed for
siRNA content using Quant-IT RiboGreen reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Massachusetts, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Quantitative analysis was performed by spectrofluorimetry at λex/λem 480 nm/520 nm (ProMega GloMax Plate
reader, USA). Results are reported as actual loading (nmol of encapsulated
siRNA per mg of hNPs) and encapsulation efficiency (actual loading/theoretical
loading × 100) ± SD of values collected from three different
batches.

## Interactions of hNPs with Mucin and Artificial Mucus
hNPs/mucin interactions were determined in mucin from porcine stomach,
Type II (Sigma-Aldrich, Merk KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany), and artificial
CF mucus (AM). AM was prepared as previously reported. Briefly, 25 μL of sterile egg yolk emulsion,
25 mg of mucin from porcine stomach, Type II, 20 mg of DNA, 30 μL
of aqueous DTPA (1 mg/mL), 25 mg NaCl, 11 mg KCl, and 100 μL
of RPMI 1640 were added to 5 mL of water, and the dispersion was stirred
until a homogenous mixture was obtained.
The light scattering
of hNP aqueous dispersions with or without mucin was assessed by spectrophotometry
as previously described. Briefly, a saturated
solution of Type II mucin was prepared dispersing an excess of mucin
in water (0.08% w/v), under stirring overnight, followed by centrifugation
at 6000 rcf, 4 °C for 20 min and collection of the mucin-containing
supernatant. Then, 10 μL of hNPs dispersion in water were diluted
to 1 mg/mL in the mucin solution. The light scattering of the mucin/hNPs
mixtures was measured by spectrophotometric analysis at 650 nm at
time 0 and after incubation for 30 and 60 min at room temperature.
Reference absorbance of mucin and 1 mg/mL hNP dispersions in water
were also evaluated. Experiments were run in triplicate, and results
are expressed as absorbance at 650 nm ± SD over time.
hNP/mucin
interactions were further probed by DLS, comparing the
size of hNP dispersion in water, mucin, and AM. A 10-fold dilution of AM in water was employed for DLS
analysis. Data were reported as mean diameter ± SD calculated
on three different batches.

## Cellular Mucus (CM) Sampling and Treatment
CM samples
were obtained by collection of the secretion produced by human primary
bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) derived from CF patients homozygous
for F508del mutation and from non-CF subjects (hereinafter referred
to as wild type, WT) obtained from “Servizio
Colture Primarie” of the Italian Cystic Fibrosis Research Foundation
(U.O.C. Genetica Medica, IRCSS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy).
Cells were cultured on Transwell permeable supports (6 well inserts,
0.4 μm pore size) and allowed to differentiate on an air–liquid
interface (ALI) to achieve a fully differentiated muco-ciliary airway
epithelium as previously reported. After
4 weeks of ALI-cultures, mucus secretion was harvested once a week
by washing the apical surface with D-PBS (300 μL per 24 mm diameter
well insert) followed by 30 min incubation at 37 °C before removal.
After low-speed centrifugation of cells and larger debris (300 × g for 5 min), mucus from 6-well inserts was pooled and stored
at −80 °C until SAXS analysis.

## Small-Angle X-ray Scattering
(SAXS) Studies
Synchrotron
SAXS measurements were performed at the ID02 high-brilliance beamline at the ESRF (Grenoble, France), with a beam
cross section of 200–400 μm and wavelength λ =
0.1 nm, using two different sample detection distances: 1 and 6 m.
The range of investigated momentum transfer, q =
(4π/λ)sin(θ), was 0.0007 nm–1 < q < 6 nm–1, where 2θ is the scattering
angle. All measurements were performed at T = 25
°C. Samples were put in plastic capillaries (KI-BEAM, ENKI srl)
with 2 mm internal diameter and 0.05 mm wall thickness and closed
with polyethylene caps. Capillaries were then mounted horizontally
onto the sample holder. Sample concentration was 10 mg/mL. The exposure
time of each measurement was 0.1 s, and spectra were checked for radiation
damage. The measured SAXS profiles report the scattered radiation
intensity as a function of the momentum transfer, q, where 1 and 6 m sample-to-detector distance spectra were merged.
Solvent subtraction was obtained by measuring water-filled capillaries
and empty capillaries and subtracting their intensities from the sample’s
ones. Data were analyzed in the Guinier–Porod approximation
and were fitted by modeling the hNPs as spherical multishells by using
the routines developed in the SaSView program (SasView - Small Angle
Scattering Analysis, 2019. Available at https://www.sasview.org/). hNP
structure and stability was assessed in water and upon contact with
either AM or CM.

## CF Sputum Sampling and Characterization
The sputum
was recovered from CF patients of the Children’s Hospital Bambino
Gesù of Rome (Italy), upon approval of the Ethics Committee
(1700/2018). Subjects or their parents gave and signed a written informed
consent. A heterogeneous and representative set of CF patients was
selected for the study. Data regarding age, sex, CFTR mutation (genotype),
ongoing inhaled and/or antimicrobial therapy, pulmonary function (i.e.,
forced expiratory volume in the first second and forced vital capacity),
and lung bacterial colonization were collected from medical records.
Samples from sputum induction in non-expectorating children and spontaneously
expectorated sputum mixed by a magnetic stirrer were exposed to an
ultraviolet light-emitting diode (UV-LED). The sputum irradiation
at 265 nm for 6 h at 22 °C in a safety cabinet effectively inactivated
pathogenic microorganisms (data not shown). After treatment, all samples
underwent freezing, which was previously demonstrated to affect neither
the viscoelastic properties of native mucus nor drug coefficient of
diffusion across mucus models. 
DNA quantitation in CF sputa was performed by a Quant-IT PicoGreen
dsDNA assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). The analysis was performed
by spectrofluorimetry at λex/λem 480 nm/520 nm (ProMega GloMax Plate reader, USA). A calibration
curve was obtained with standard solutions of DNA from calf thymus
(Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The linearity of the response was verified over
the concentration range 0.001–10 μg/mL (r2 ≥ 0.99). The results are reported as μg/mL
of DNA ± SD of three different measurements.
Quantitation
of human Mucin 5 subtype B (MUC5B), Mucin 5 subtype
AC (MUC5AC), and Mucin 2 (MUC2) was performed by specific enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits according to the manufacturer’s
procedure (Elabscience Biotechnology Inc., USA). The optical density
(OD) was measured spectrophotometrically at a wavelength of 450 nm
(ProMega GloMax Plate reader, USA). The individual mucin concentration
in each sputum sample was calculated by comparing the OD of the sample
with the corresponding calibration curve (reference standards 0.156–10
ng/mL; r2 > 0.99). The results are
reported
as ng/mL of mucin ± SD of three different measurements.

## In Vitro Transport of hNPs through Artificial
Mucus and CF Sputum
A previously developed model based on
Transwell multiwell plates was used for
diffusion experiments. Briefly, 75 μL of artificial mucus or
CF sputum were transferred into each Transwell insert (6.5 mm; pore
size: 8 μm). Afterward, 25 μL of a hNP dispersion in water
(20 mg/150 μL) were placed on top of the medium and the insert
was transferred in a 24-well plate containing 300 μL of simulated
interstitial lung fluid (SILF) per well. SILF (NaCl 0.1 M, KCl 4 mM,
NaHPO4 1 mM, Na2SO4 0.5 mM, CaCl2 2.5 mM, MgCl2·6H2O 1.5 mM, NaHCO3 31 mM, sodium acetate 7 mM, sodium citrate monohydrate 0.36
mM) was prepared as previously reported. 
At scheduled time intervals, the acceptor medium was sampled
and centrifuged at 9000 rcf for 20 min at 4 °C to isolate hNPs.
The pellet was suspended in 50 μL of water, diluted with 450
μL of 0.5 M NaOH, and stirred for 1 h to degrade the PLGA matrix.
The amount of hNPs in the resulting solution was quantified by spectrofluorimetric
analysis of PLGA-Rhod at λex 520 nm/λem 580–640 nm (GloMax Explorer, Promega, Italy). Calibration
curves were derived by analyzing serial dilutions of standard solutions
prepared from an hNP stock degraded in 0.5 M NaOH. The linearity of
the response was verified over the concentration range 2–200
μg/mL (r2 ≥ 0.999). Experiments
were run in triplicate, and the results were expressed as percentage
(%) of total hNPs permeated over time ± SD.

## hNP Uptake
in Mucus-Covered Calu-3 Cell Monolayers
Calu-3 cells were
seeded in a clear polyester cell culture insert
(growth area 1.12 cm2, pore size 0.4 μm) on Transwell
permeable supports. Per sample, 500,000 cells were seeded in 500 μL
of medium in the apical chamber, while 1.5 mL of the medium was added
to the basolateral chamber. After 72 h, the medium in the upper and
basolateral chamber was removed and replaced by fresh Pneumacult ALI
medium (Stemcell Technologies GmbH, Germany) to air-lift the culture.
Once TEER values ≥300 Ω·cm2 were reached
and a stable polarized epithelial layer was formed, cell layers were
used for cell uptake experiments and mucus transport studies.
For cell uptake experiments, Calu-3 monolayers were incubated with
500 μL of PEI/siFluo_DPPC or PEI/siFluo_DSPE-PEG resuspended
in medium corresponding to a 20 nM siRNA final concentration (10 pmol
siFluo per well). After 24 h, monolayers were washed, cells were detached
from the inserts and the dispersion was analyzed by flow cytometry
on an Attune NxT flow cytometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 638
nm excitation and a 670/14 nm emission filter. All cells were gated
according to morphology based on forward/sideward scattering, and
10,000 events were evaluated per sample to determine the median fluorescence
intensity (MFI) and siFLuo uptake per cell. Controls consisted of
cells transfected with free siFluo and lipofectamine/siFluo complexes
as negative and positive controls, respectively.
For transport
experiments across the mucus layer, differentiated
mucus-covered Calu-3 cells were exposed for 24 h to PEI/siFluo_DPPC
or PEI/siFluo_DSPE-PEG amounts corresponding to 10 pmol siFluo per
well. Monolayers were then washed with PBS, and the mucus layer was
stained by incubation with AlexaFluor488-labeled wheat germ agglutinin
(10 μg/mL) (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for 10
min at 37 °C. After washing with PBS, the membranes of the Transwell
inserts were cut, mounted on microscope slides, covered with coverslips,
and immediately analyzed by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM)
(SP8 inverted scanning confocal microscope, Leica Camera, Wetzlar,
Germany). Z-stack pictures were taken, and optical sections were processed
to create a 3D view, which allows observing the diffusion of the hNPs
through the mucus and their cellular internalization.

## In
Vitro NFκB Gene Silencing in LPS-Stimulated
16HBE14o- Cells
Epithelial 16HBE14o- cells were grown in
EMEM supplemented with 1% l-glutamine, 1% penicillin/streptomycin,
and 10% fetal calf serum at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 humidified
atmosphere. Cells were passaged every 3–4 days once reached
confluency. Afterward, 2.5 × 104 cells were seeded
in 6-well plates with 2.5 mL of medium and incubated overnight. Before
transfection, cells were stimulated with LPS (25 μg/mL) to induce
NFκB gene expression. After 4 h, the medium was removed, and
the cells were transfected with hNPs containing 20 nM siNFκB
or non-coding siNC for 72 h at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 humidified
atmosphere. siRNA/lipofectamine complexes were used as positive controls.
After transfection, cells were lysed using RIPA Buffer with 1×
cocktail of protease/phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland).
The samples were analyzed for the expression of NFκB p65 subunit
(NFκB p65 mouse monoclonal antibody, 1:500, sc-1008, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) by Western blot analysis, following a published protocol. Actin (actin goat polyclonal IgG, 1:500, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology) was used as housekeeping protein. Mouse IgG binding
protein conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (mIgG BP-HRP) and donkey
anti-goat IgG-HRP were used as secondary antibodies (1:5000, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology). Membranes were treated with SuperSignal West
Pico PLUS chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) immediately
before analysis at the ChemiDoc MP imaging system (Bio Rad). Cell
studies were performed in triplicate, and results are expressed as
mean value ± SD, n = 3. One-way ANOVA, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005.

## Results
and Discussion

## Overall Properties of siRNA-Loaded hNPs
hNPs containing
an siRNA pool against NFkB (siNFkB) were successfully produced by
an emulsion/solvent diffusion technique employing two different lipids
as surface modifiers, that is DPPC and DSPE-PEG, in the presence (i.e.,
PEI/siNFkB_DPPC and PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG hNPs, respectively) or absence
of PEI (i.e., siNFkB_DPPC and siNFkB_DSPE-PEG hNPs, respectively)
as the fourth component of the PLGA nanoparticulate system. To quantify
the amount of hNPs transported through mucus, corresponding fluorescently
labeled hNPs were prepared using PLGA-Rhod (i.e., siNFkB_DPPCRhod, siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod, PEI/siNFkB_DPPCRhod, PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod). For transport experiments,
hNPs containing a fluorescent Alexa Fluor-647 siRNA (siFluo) were
employed. A sketched representation of the adopted concepts is shown
in A.
 As can be seen in , the formulation conditions do not significantly
affect hNPs
properties. Independently of the lipid shell type and the presence
of PEI inside the formulation, siNFkB-loaded hNPs show negative ζ
potential, DH lower than 180 nm and low PDI values (ranging
from 0.06 to 0.2). TEM images indicate the formation of regularly
shaped hNPs displaying a halo, likely compatible with a core shell
structure in which the PLGA core, containing siNFkB or PEI/siNFkB,
is covered by the lipid shell (DPPC or DSPE-PEG) ( B).
 SAXS investigation of hNPs
confirms that finite size particles,
in the size range of 100–150 nm, are suspended in the dispersant.
The measured Porod limit showing a q–4 power law identifies a sharp interface and a smooth surface, suggesting
that the inner PLGA core, structured as a network with a fractal geometry, is coated at the surface by the smooth phospholipid
layer. Guinier and Fournet’s analysis of the lowest q-vector points gives a measure of
the gyration radii (RG), which are in
line with DLS measurements ( ). As previously observed with DPPC-engineered hNPs, the best fits of SAXS spectra of siRNA-loaded
hNPs were obtained by applying the form factor of polydispersed spheres
with a spherical radius RS (Figure S1A). We found Rs values of 70 ±
21 and 61 ± 18 nm (mean ± SD) for siNFkB_DSPE-PEG and PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG,
respectively (polydispersity ratio of 0.3). The scattering profiles
were reproduced as well by a spherical core-multishell form factor
with polydispersed thicknesses, satisfying the electron density profiles
expected for the formulation of PLGA, and a phospholipid shell of
thickness 2.4 ± 0.2 nm (Figure S1B). Nonetheless, the PEG external shell showed a very feeble electron
density difference with respect to the solvent and is hardly visible.
Of course, as the number of parameters increases a lot with respect
to those of a simple spherical form factor, we can only state the
agreement of the more complex fitting to avoid overfitting hazard.
As expected from previous studies, PEI
is able to complex siNFκB (Figure S2), thus increasing the amount of siRNA entrapped inside the hNPs
( ). A 30% increase
of the EE was observed for PEI/siNFkB_DPPC hNPs as compared to siNFkB_DPPC,
while a slighter change in EE was achieved when adding PEI in hNPs
prepared from DSPE-PEG/PLGA mixtures (from 80% of siNFkB_DSPE-PEG
to 89% of PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG).
The presence of a PEG shell
on the surface of DSPE-PEG modified
hNPs was suggested by FALT measurements performed by monitoring the
influence of ionic strength of the dispersing medium on particle surface
charge (Figure S3). According to the Gouy–Chapmann
theory, the ζ-potential decreases with the increase of the ionic
strength of the medium. In agreement with SAXS, data fitting by linear
regression indicates that a shell around 2 nm (1.74–1.87 nm)
is formed on the surface of the hNPs when DSPE-PEG was used as a lipid
component, independently on the presence of PEI (Figure S3A). Contrariwise, the ζ-potential of control
non-pegylated DPPC-based hNPs does not increase when increasing the
ionic strength of the medium (Figure S3B).
To gain information on the PEG aggregation state, parallel 1H NMR experiments were performed on D2O dispersions
of (a) PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG, (b) PEI/siNFkB_DPPC, (c) PEI/siNFkB-loaded
nanoparticles based on PLGA-PEG2000 (PEI/siNFkB_PLGA-PEG), and (d)
DSPE-PEG lipid, for the sake of comparison. The low mobility of large
aggregates prevents the detection of high-resolution NMR signals,
while small aggregates and molecules produce a spectrum. A high-resolution
PEG peak at 3.62 ppm is visible in all samples, except for PEI/siNFkB_DPPC,
and internal reference allowed to estimate their molarity (Figure S4). PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG hNPs show a sharp
peak, while PEI/siNFkB_PLGA-PEG nanoparticles, with a DH of 110 ± 10 nm, display the overlapping of
a sharp and a broad component. The same sharp component is visible
in DSPE-PEG dispersion with 7.7 times higher intensity (Figure S4). DOSY diffusion experiments indicate
that the sharp PEG signal does not belong to the same aggregate size
in the three samples (Figure S5). The diffusion
coefficients were derived, giving D values of (2.78
± 0.09)·10–11 m2/s, (1.12 ±
0.04)·10–10 m2/s, and (2.625 ±
0.005)·10–11 m2/s for PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG
hNPs, PEI/siNFkB_PLGA-PEG, and DSPE-PEG dispersions, respectively.
Control diffusion experiments were performed on mePEG750 and PEG2000
in D2O and on residual HDO signal in D2O for
gradient calibrations (data not shown). Appling the Stokes–Einstein
relation, we estimate that the residual PEG signal in PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG
hNPs and DSPE-PEG control dispersions belongs to aggregates with a
9 nm radius corresponding to the size of DSPE-PEG lipid micelles in
water. The molar ratio between the PEG
signals in the dispersions show that PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG hNPs contain
a 13% of DSPE-PEG solved in micellar form with a radius of about 9
nm, in equilibrium with a much larger proportion (87%) on the hNPs.

## Behavior of siRNA-Loaded hNPs in Mucin Dispersions and Artificial
CF Mucus
A critical point in defining particle ability to
diffuse across the mucus layer is the evaluation of the interactions
between particles and mucus components. The absence of such interactions
is commonly assumed as the conditio sine qua non for
an efficient mucus-penetrating nanoparticulate system. To this aim, the interactions between hNPs and mucin, one
of the main components of airway mucus, were first roughly determined
by measuring the scattering at 650 nm of hNP aqueous dispersions with
and without mucin. As shown in A,B, all formulations displayed the same absorbance
at 650 nm in water and in mucin, suggesting no mucin absorption on
the hNP surface, independently of the type of lipid employed (i.e.,
DPPC or DSPE-PEG) or the presence of PEI.
 The absence of hNPs/mucin interactions was confirmed when monitoring
hNP size in the presence of mucin using DLS ( C,D). A very slight increase in particle
size and a slight broadening in the size distribution was observed
only for DPPC-coated hNPs in mucin as compared to the corresponding
aqueous dispersions ( C). This effect was even more evident in AM (DH = 221.3 ± 1.4 nm and PDI = 0.211 for PEI/siNFkB_DPPC
in AM), where a contribution of salts, likely affecting the mucin
structure, and DNA fibers , cannot be excluded. Nevertheless, no change was apparent for particles
coated with DSPE-PEG, displaying an even lower mean DH (162.4 ± 3.1 nm) as compared to water ( D). No significant
differences were observed between hNPs with or without PEI in AM (data
not shown).
To understand the detailed role of AM components
on the behavior
of hNPs in mucus, the transport of fluorescent siRNA-loaded hNPs through
AM was assessed by a Transwell multi-plate assay as previously reported
( A). In line with previous literature data, our results suggest that PEGylated hNPs allow
for faster transport through AM as compared to non-PEGylated ones,
with about 80% of the total amount of PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod hNPs permeated after 6 h versus 60% of PEI/siNFkB_DPPCRhod found in SILF at the same time intervals. As expected from hNPs/AM
interaction studies, no significant difference was apparent between
hNPs with or without PEI ( B).
 

## Behavior of siRNA-Loaded hNPs in Artificial CF Mucus and Mucus
Secreted from CF Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells
In order
to implement knowledge of hNPs features relevant for pulmonary delivery,
the hNP structure and stability in contact with mucus was studied
by SAXS analysis in AM, cellular mucus (CM) secreted from CF, and
wild type (WT) HBEC grown at ALI.
The SAXS spectra of CM (both
WT and CF) are reported in in comparison with those of AM. The scattering profiles
for the three investigated networks are typical of semidiluted gels
but reveal important differences. The AM matrix has a significantly
steeper slope in the low q-vector range, proportional
to q–3, while the cellular models
show a q–2.2 slope, denoting a
change from the surface fractal behavior, typical of large scale clustering
mesh (AM), to a mass fractal dimensionality, characteristic of semidiluted
meshes.
 In fact, a −3 power law
is at the border between mass- fractals
and surface-fractals that, in the case of the AM model, denotes the
presence of large aggregates, also highlighted by an increased scattering
intensity in the low q-vector, corresponding to the
large distance scale. The overall difference in the scattering intensity
among the different systems is possibly originated by their composition.
For a similar mucin content, AM is enriched in DNA and lipids, with
respect to WT and CF cellular mucus that are not expected to be contaminated
by bacteria.
As previously observed upon incubation of siRNA-loaded
DPPC/PLGA
hNPs in AM12, SAXS spectra of the mixed systems siNFkB_DPPC
plus CM are in general reproducible by a linear combination of the
spectra of the bare hNPs and the mucus. In , we show that when subtracting the corresponding
mucus spectrum from the hNPs plus mucus spectra, a generally good
agreement is found with the profile of the original hNPs. This is
consistent with a long-time stability of the hNPs in CM. However,
when PEI/siNFkB_DPPC hNPs were put in contact with CM from CF cells,
we found low-q scattering that largely exceeds the
scattering of the linear subtraction of the two components (arrow
in B). This
indicates that some particle clustering is induced in the mucus mesh.
Importantly, all samples show a higher scattered intensity at high q-vectors, where the small features are visible. The profile
of the spectra agrees with the presence of extra features sized tenths
of nanometers, which, along with the increased intensity at the low q-vectors, may account for an extra layer coating the hNPs.
This can originate from a partial sequestering of material from the
mucus mesh enlarging the size of the particles, as also observed by
DLS (see C).
The effect is more important when interaction occurs with CM from
CF cells.
 The structural outcome
regarding the incubation of hNPs modified
with DSPE-PEG in AM and CM mucus models are reported in . We show the scattering profiles
of the bare hNPs and the profiles obtained after subtraction of the
correspondent mucus profile from each hNP plus mucus spectrum. No
major effect seems to affect the original particles profile, except
for an increased intensity at the lowest q-vectors
of the PEI containing hNPs when in contact with CM. These findings
highlight that PEGylated hNPs are not totally inert in CM, when PEI
is present in their composition. When PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG hNPs are
put in contact with CM from CF cells, the high q-vector
intensity also increases, likely due to the release of small objects,
tenths of nanometers sized, in the dispersion. However, the interaction
does not consist any hNP degradation but rather implies that some
aggregation process occurs. The preferred interpretation of our finding
is given by considering some rearrangement of the mucus network to
accommodate the hNPs. In fact, an induced clustering of the mucin
matrix could explain the low q-vector evidence, suggesting
a role of the positively charged PEI polymer as a bridging agent with
the negatively charged mucin components. It is not clear why interactions
with CM from CF cells are different from the interactions with the
healthy control in this respect. Nevertheless, a difference in the
CM composition in terms of DNA and mucin contents cannot be excluded, though previous studies on HBEC derived from
non-CF and CF patients revealed no significant differences in the
levels of mucins 5-subtype B (MUC5B) and 5-subtype AC (MUC5AC), the
major secreted gel-forming mucins. 
 

## Behavior of siRNA-Loaded
hNPs in CF Sputum Samples
Results achieved on AM and CM models
prompted toward a full understanding
of hNP behavior in physiologically relevant settings, that is, human
CF sputa. Nowadays, there is a broad consensus that the major consequences
of CFTR dysfunction in the airway are dehydration of mucus and reduction
in the height of the periciliary layer. Once infected, CF mucus is infiltrated with neutrophils, contributing
to high concentrations of neutrophil-derived DNA and filamentous actin,
and microorganisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and Aspergillus species, among others, often in biofilms. All
these highly entangled polymeric macromolecules contribute to a firm
gel matrix with a pore size reduced from the normal size of approximately
500 to approximately 150 nm. , 
Data regarding
age, sex, CFTR mutations, lung colonization/function, and inhaled
therapy of enrolled patients are reported in .
 Regardless
of other patient clinical parameters, the samples here
can be roughly grouped according to the different numbers of microbial
colonies isolated from the corresponding sample in (i) “high
colonization” sputa, corresponding to CF1, CF3, CF7, CF8, CF9,
and CF11 (isolated microorganisms ≫ 2); (ii) “low colonization”
sputa, corresponding to CF2, CF4, CF5, CF10, CF12, and CF13 (isolated
microorganisms ≤ 2). Nevertheless, CF sputa were further characterized
for the concentrations of dsDNA and total and individual mucins ( ), which are the
major contributors to CF mucus barrier properties. 
 As stated above, elevated extracellular DNA levels, mainly derived
from neutrophils, are commonly found in sputa from CF patients, with
an obvious effect on mucus viscosity and elasticity and consequent
airway obstruction. − Though all the CF individuals contributing to the
study samples received inhaled rhDNase, significant DNA concentrations
were found in most of the samples, except for CF4, CF5, and CF6 (0.009
± 0.003, 0.038 ± 0.008, and 0.145 ± 0.005 μg/mL
of dsDNA, respectively) ( A). Even though the highest DNA levels were found in
the CF3 sputum (i.e., 10.8 ± 0.070 μg/mL), similar amounts
were found also in other samples (9.22 ± 0.485, 9.68 ± 0.357,
and 9.67 ± 0.152 for CF1, CF9, and CF10, respectively), suggesting
a different contributor to the complexity of the pathological sputa,
such as gel-forming mucins.
Literature data suggest that the
gel-forming mucins MUC5B and MUC5AC,
normally secreted from goblet/mucous cells in healthy airways, are
the main determinant of the non-Newtonian properties of airway mucus. , , Nevertheless, the intestinal
mucin MUC2 is also reported in small amounts in the CF airways.42 44,47 Thus, MUC5AC, MUC5B, and MUC2 amounts in the
CF sputum samples were also quantitatively determined by sandwich
ELISA relying on biotinylated antibodies specific for human MUC5AC,
MUC5B, and MUC2 (blue, red, and gray bars in C, respectively). As expected from colonization
data, total mucin concentration was significantly higher for “high
colonization” samples as compared to “low colonization”
ones.
While MUC5AC concentrations within the range 14.7–21.3
ng/mL
were recorded for “low colonization” CF samples, MUC5AC
levels of ≥24 ng/mL were found in more complex “high
colonization” sputa (23.7 ± 0.0915, 24.8 ± 0.915,
28.0 ± 0.519, 33.2 ± 0.519, 34.0 ± 1.01, and 24.2 ±
0.0305 ng/mL of MUC5AC for CF1, CF3, CF7, CF8, CF9, and CF11, respectively).
In line with literature data, suggesting an expansion of the MUC5B
expression in inflamed CF airways, the contribution of MUC5B to the
total mucin concentration was even more evident in “high colonization”
sputum samples. Except for sample CF7 (3.36 ± 0.280 ng/mL of
MUC5B), samples CF1, CF3, CF8, CF9, and CF11 displayed MUC5B levels
within the range 6.70–17.6 ng/mL, with a maximum value for
CF3 sputum. Contrariwise, low MUC5B concentrations ranging from 0.388
(±0.038) to 3.95 (±0.061) ng/mL were measured for “low
colonization” sputum samples. In line with literature data,
very small amounts of MUC2 were found in all the CF sputum samples
(0.271–2.56 ng/mL) with the only exception of CF2 (3.98 ±
0.148 ng/mL).
The transport of fluorescent hNPs through each
CF sputum layer
was assessed by the Transwell multi-plate assay. Trying to elucidate the role of the surface lipid, the
behavior of PEI-containing hNPs engineered with either DPPC (PEI/siNFkB_DPPCRhod) or DSPE-PEG (PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod,) were
compared. In fact, PEI did not play a crucial role on hNPs/mucus interactions,
while it tuned siRNA entrapment, release, and subsequent transfection
efficiency of the siRNA cargo. Results are reported in as the percentage of fluorescent
hNPs permeated across the CF sputum layer and found in the SILF-containing
donor compartment over time.
In each case, the diffusion profile
varied with the tested sample
( ). This trend
can be likely attributed to the variable composition and viscosity
of CF sputum samples ( ), which are strongly affected by the health conditions of
the corresponding CF donor. Noteworthy,
the presence of PEG on the hNP surface significantly increased the
permeation rate of the hNPs through poorly colonized (isolated microorganisms
< 2) CF sputa (blue dots in B). Nonetheless, a more complex sputum colonization
is associated with a decreased positive effect of PEG on hNP permeation.
In fact, the permeation rate of PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod in less complex CF sputa (blue dots in B) was significantly higher than that of
PEI/siNFkB_DPPCRhod (blue dots in A) (p < 0.05 at time
points 1, 2, 4, and 6 h). Contrariwise, no significant difference
was observed in the permeation rate of PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod (blue dots in B) as compared to PEI/siNFkB_DPPCRhod (blue dots in A) (p ≫ 0.1 at each time point) in highly colonized CF sputum samples
(i.e., high colonization group).
 To confirm the ability of hNPs to assist the diffusion
of the entrapped
siRNA through CF sputum, studies were performed also with hNPs containing
Alexa Fluor 647–labeled siRNA (siFluo) (Figure S6). The total amount of siFluo (free and encapsulated)
found in the donor compartment at each time point confirmed similar
transport kinetics. Nevertheless, except for the first time points
(i.e., 30 min and 1 h time intervals), the presence of PEG on the
hNP surface does not seem to enhance the permeation rate of siFluo
through “low colonization” CF sputum samples (blue dots
in Figure S6B).
As confirmed by in vitro release studies (Figure S7), the contribution of the amount of
siRNA released in comparison to the total encapsulated siFluo over
time should be considered.
The promoting effect of PEGylated
hNPs on siRNA transport through
CF mucus was even less apparent on the CF3 sample, which was not included
in the overall data analysis, due to the peculiar behavior of siRNA-loaded
hNPs in this sample (Figure S8). The sputum
was obtained from a male 42 years-old patient infected with meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Aspergillus
terreus, Achromobacter denitrificans, Comamonas acidovorans, Shingobacterium spiritivorum ( ), some of the emerging pathogens in CF,
and a very poor pulmonary function (FEV1 30%; FVC 57%). Increased
sputum production is commonly associated with active fungal infections,
as those of Aspergillus spp. Moreover, potential binding of conidial surface lectin of Aspergillus spp. to mucin glycans has been hypothesized,
thus altering the mucus barrier properties. Meanwhile, aggregates consistent with biofilm were visualized in
sputum samples from CF patients colonized with Achromobacter. Rheology measurements could not be performed
due to the low volume of the CF sputum samples. Nevertheless, sample
CF3 is macroscopically the most viscous one ( A). Furthermore, dsDNA and mucin analysis
confirm the dominant role of MUC5B and MUC5AC in the barrier properties
of this mucus toward the developed hNPs, partially contributed to
by extracellular DNA ( B,C).
Overall, results point out a quite different and
variable behavior
of hNPs in CF sputa as compared to AM. Recent data suggest that commercial
mucin from porcine stomach, type II, may present several structural
alterations as compared to lab-purified MUC5AC, likely affecting mucin
functionality in terms of gelation and adsorption. This could partly explain the different behavior of hNPs
in AM, which is closer to that observed in “low colonization”
sputa, characterized by low concentration of gel-forming mucins.
Nonetheless, different hNP interactions with the complex CF sputum
matrices ( , ) as compared to
AM are feasible. This hypothesis was confirmed by assessing hNPs/CF
sputum interactions by DLS (Figures S9 and S10). Though a slight increase of PEI/siNFkB_DPPC size, along with PDI,
was observed in “low colonization” sputa (Figure S9A), the size distribution profile in
“high colonization” samples was considerably more variable,
with CF3 causing a manifest hNP aggregation (DH ≫ 1 μm; PDI ≈ 0.5) (Figure S9B). Of note, PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG hNPs (Figure S10) displayed a very similar behavior
to that of PEI/siNFkB_DPPC, suggesting some aggregation propensity
of hNPs in “high colonization” CF samples, independently
upon PEGylation.

## Nanoparticle Permeation in Mucus Covered
Calu-3 Cell Monolayers
Upon diffusion in mucus, a successful
siRNA delivery system must
release the drug payload to the underlying cell layer, where the target
is located. Thus, the ability of non-PEGylated and PEGylated hNPs
to assist the siRNA transport through mucus-lined Calu-3 monolayers
grown at ALI was further investigated. Calu-3 cells are widely used
as a model for CF due to their high transepithelial resistance, mucus
secretion, and expression of CFTR protein on the apical side when
cultured on Transwell filters. , When cultured at ALI,
Calu-3 cells form a pseudostratified columnar epithelium secreting
mucus, with a morphology very close to the airway epithelium in terms
of the ultrastructure and secretory components, including the gel-forming
mucin MUC5AC and electrical resistance. − 
Polarized epithelial
Calu-3 cell layers (TEER value of at least 300 Ω*cm2) were first incubated with PEI/siFluo_DPPC and PEI/siFluo_DSPE-PEG
for cell uptake studies. Based on the preliminary in vitro dose–response gene silencing studies (Figure S11), the experiments were performed at 20 nM siFluo.
Both PEI-containing formulations show significant uptake in comparison
to both free siRNA and siRNA/lipofectamine complexes. In particular,
the best results are obtained with DPPC-engineered hNPs. ( ).
 An initial ALI culture-based experiment was then completed to assess
hNPs’ ability to deliver siRNA through the mucus covering the
confluent Calu-3 monolayers (TEER values ≥ 300 Ω*cm2). The 3D view of the cell culture model is reported in .
 All the tested hNPs
efficiently diffuse across the mucus layer
covering the Calu-3 monolayer and were taken up intracellularly. Nevertheless,
the Calu-3 uptake of siRNA-loaded PEI-DPPC hNPs appeared more efficient
than that observed for the other hNP formulations.
These results
are not surprising, since the mucus layer and the
cell membrane are very complex and have different barriers, and thus
particle engineering suitable to improve the permeation across the
first may not be adequate for the second. This is the case for siRNA-loaded PEGylated hNPs, being able to
enhance the diffusion of the particles through the CF sputum while
limiting subsequent cell uptake.

## In Vitro Gene Silencing Activity
Once
confirmed that hNPs are able to assist siRNA transport through mucus-covered
lung epithelial cells, their capability to release the siRNA cargo
in the cytosol and to knockdown NFκB gene expression was investigated
in LPS-stimulated 16HBE14o- cells. Stimulation of cells with LPS from E. coli caused an increase of NFκB expression,
which was efficiently inhibited by 20 nM siNFκB (Figure S11). In vitro knockdown
experiments were performed at the corresponding concentration of siNFκB-loaded
hNPs. The preliminary MTT assay confirmed that hNPs do not considerably
affect 16HBE14o- cell viability at the tested concentrations (Figure S12). Despite the relatively low amount
of siNFκB released from hNPs in buffer over 72 h (Figure S7), both PEGylated and non-PEGylated
hNPs displayed a silencing effect comparable to that observed with
lipofectamine, the reference transfection reagent ( ). This observation is more
evident for PEI/siNFκB_DPPC hNPs than for PEI/siNFκB_DSPE-PEG
hNPs, likely due to the faster siNFkB release. Thus, results confirm
the ability of the developed hNPs to release siNFkB intracellularly
and to induce in vitro inhibition of NFκB gene
overexpression, likely preventing progressive and fatal degradation
inside intracellular organelles (i.e., endosomes).
 

## Conclusions
One of the main challenges in the field of siRNA
delivery to the
lungs remains the development of strategies able to efficiently assist
the transport of the macromolecular cargo across the mucus-covered
airway epithelium. Here, non-PEGylated and PEGylated siRNA-loaded
lipid/PLGA polymer hybrid nanoparticles, that is, hNPs, were successfully
developed and proposed to tackle this barrier. Valuable information
on factors governing hNP interactions with mucus, its main components,
and lung epithelial cells were achieved combining different techniques
and model systems. We found that PEGylation does not make the difference
when the mucus barrier properties are dominated by pathology-associated
proteins, such as the gel-forming mucins MUC5AC and MUC5B (i.e., sputum
from cystic fibrosis patients). Nevertheless, subsequent uptake of
hNPs in mucus-covered human airway epithelial cells grown at the air–liquid
interface can be prevented by PEGylation. Thus, the presence of a
biomimetic lipid shell is enough to assist hNP permeation across mucus,
but it becomes essential to achieve both mucus penetration and cellular
internalization as demonstrated also through in vitro gene silencing data. Overall, results highlight how a thorough understanding
of nanoparticle behaviors in the physiological lung environment is
the key for designing a delivery system allowing an efficient translocation
of siRNA to its cell target in the lung. Data confirm the potential
of hNPs as carriers for pulmonary delivery of siNFκB for local
treatment of CF lung disease and prompt toward in depth investigation
of their therapeutic effectiveness in vitro and in vivo.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsami.1c14975.(Figure S1) SAXS spectra
of 1% w/v water dispersions
of siNFkB_DSPE-PEG and PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG hNPs; (Figure S2) evaluation
of siRNA-PEI complexation through electrophoresis; (Figure S3) FALT
measurements of the polymer shell thickness of siNFkB-loaded hNPs;
(Figure S4) 1H NMR spectra displaying the residual PEG
signal at 3.62 ppm; (Figure S5) decay of the PEG peak intensity at
increasing applied gradient in DOSY - LEDBPGP2s experiments; (Figure
S6) percent amount of siFluo transported over time through different
CF sputum samples; (Figure S7) in vitro release kinetics
of siNFkB from PEI/siNFkB_DPPC and PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEG hNPs; (Figure
S8) percent amount of PEI/siNFkB_DPPCRhod and PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod permeated through the CF3 sputum sample over time; (Figures
S9 and S10) in vitro assessment of PEI/siNFkB_DPPCRhod and PEI/siNFkB_DSPE-PEGRhod interactions with
CF sputa; (Figure S11) in vitro gene-silencing effect
of different concentrations of siNFkB on LPS-stimulated 16HBE14o-
cell; and (Figure S12) cytotoxicity of hNPs on 16HBE14o- cells via
the MTT assay (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
am1c14975_si_001.pdf

## Author Contributions
∇ Ge.C. and Ga.C. contributed equally. Ge.C.
and D.B. did the investigation,
formal analysis, and writing of the original draft. Ga.C. did the
data curation, formal analysis, and writing of the original draft.
V.R. and R.B. did the investigation and formal analysis. D.C. did
the data curation and methodology. G.L. and E.F did the investigation
and resource gathering. R.S., A.M., and F.Q. did the methodology,
writing of the review, and editing. P.B. did the data curation, methodology,
writing of the review, and editing. I.d.A. did the conceptualization,
data curation, methodology, writing of the review, and editing. O.M.
did the conceptualization, funding acquisition, resource gathering,
writing of the review, and editing. F.U. did the conceptualization,
funding acquisition, project management, resource gathering, writing
of the review, and editing. All authors have given approval to the
final version of the manuscript.
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This
work was supported by the Italian Cystic Fibrosis
Research Foundation (projects FFC #23/2017 and FFC#25/2018 adopted
by Delegazioni FFC di Pesaro e di Manciano Grosseto with Famiglia
Catalano, Gruppo di Sostegno FFC di Melilli Siracusa, Elena e Federico
Frattini, Emanuela Cricri e amici della ricerca, and Delegazione FFC
di Montebelluna) (F.U., O.M.M.). F.U. also acknowledges the Italian
Ministry of Education, University and Research for funding (PRIN 20173ZECCM).
G.C. is an Italian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation fellowship holder (projects
FFC#23/2017 and FFC#1/2020). This research was partly funded by the
‘Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine Department’
of the ‘Università degli Studi di Milano’, grant
number ‘PSR2019’ to R.B. and P.B. The authors thank
the ID02 beamline at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF,
Grenoble, France) for beamtime and support. Dr. Markus Döblinger,
Department of Physical Chemistry at LMU, is gratefully acknowledged
for aiding in TEM analysis.