pmcJ Toxicol PatholJ Toxicol Pathol1592jtoxp9306408TOXJournal of Toxicologic Pathology0914-91981881-915XThe Japanese Society of Toxicologic PathologyPMC8544165PMC8544165.1854416585441653471200810.1293/tox.34.1S2021-I0021ReviewInternational Harmonization of Nomenclature and Diagnostic Criteria (INHAND):
Non-proliferative and Proliferative Lesions of the Non-human Primate (M.
fascicularis)
ColmanKaryn AndrewsRachel N. AtkinsHannah BoulineauTheresa BradleyAlys Braendli-BaioccoAnnamaria CapobiancoRaffaella CaudellDavid ClineMark DoiTakuya ErnstRainer van EschEric EverittJeffrey FantPierluigi GruebbelMargarita M. MecklenburgLars MillerAndew D. NikulaKristen J. SatakeShigeru SchwartzJulie SharmaAlok ShimoiAkihito SobryCécile TaylorIan VemireddiVimala VidalJustin WoodCharles VahleJohn L. 1 Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA,
USA2 Wake Forest School of Medicine, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Winston-Salem, NC, USA3 Penn State College of Medicine, Department of Comparative
Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA4 Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Ridgefield, CT,
USA5 Charles River Laboratories Edinburgh Ltd., Tranent,
Scotland, UK6 Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Roche Innovation Center Basel, Switzerland7 Janssen Research & Development, a Division of Janssen
Pharmaceutica NV, Beerse, Belgium8 Department of Pathology, Section on Comparative Medicine,
Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA9 LSIM Safety Institute Corporation, Ibaraki, Japan10 Hennigsdorf, Germany11 InSight Pathology BV, Oss, the Netherlands12 Department of Pathology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC, USA13 Charles River Laboratories, Lyon, France14 Experimental Pathology Laboratories, Inc., Research
Triangle Park, NC, USA15 Covance Preclinical Services GmbH, Münster, Germany16 Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca,
NY, USA17 Inotiv, Maryland Heights, MO, USA18 Shin Nippon Biomedical Laboratories, Ltd., Kagoshima and
Tokyo, Japan19 Charles River Laboratories, Reno, NV, USA20 Covance Laboratories, Inc., Madison, WI, USA21 Ina Research Inc, Nagano, Japan22 Charles River Laboratories, Evreux, France23 Covance Laboratories, Ltd., Eye, UK24 Covance Laboratories, Inc., Chantilly, VA, USA25 Charles River, Mattawan, MI, USA26 Lilly Research Laboratories, Indianapolis IN, USA*Address correspondence to: Karyn Colman, Novartis Institutes for
BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA. e-mail: Karyn.colman@novartis.com28920212021343 Suppl3924711S182S010120212710202107082025©2021 The Japanese Society of Toxicologic
Pathology2021https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivatives (by-nc-nd) License. The INHAND (International Harmonization of Nomenclature and Diagnostic Criteria for
Lesions Project (www.toxpath.org/inhand.asp) is a joint initiative of the Societies of
Toxicologic Pathology from Europe (ESTP), Great Britain (BSTP), Japan (JSTP) and North
America (STP) to develop an internationally accepted nomenclature for proliferative and
nonproliferative lesions in laboratory animals. The purpose of this publication is to
provide a standardized nomenclature for classifying microscopic lesions observed in most
tissues and organs from the nonhuman primate used in nonclinical safety studies. Some of
the lesions are illustrated by color photomicrographs. The standardized nomenclature
presented in this document is also available electronically on the internet
(http://www.goreni.org/). Sources of material included histopathology databases from
government, academia, and industrial laboratories throughout the world. Content includes
spontaneous lesions as well as lesions induced by exposure to test materials. Relevant
infectious and parasitic lesions are included as well. A widely accepted and utilized
international harmonization of nomenclature for lesions in laboratory animals will provide
a common language among regulatory and scientific research organizations in different
countries and increase and enrich international exchanges of information among
toxicologists and pathologists.

nonhuman primatepathologytoxicopathologynomenclaturebackground findingsINHANDcynomolgus macaquepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## 1. Introduction
The INHAND Project (International
Harmonization of Nomenclature and
Diagnostic Criteria) is a joint initiative of the societies of
toxicologic pathology from Europe (European Society of Toxicologic Pathology - ESTP), United
Kingdom (British Society of Toxicological Pathologists - BSTP), Japan (Japanese Society of
Toxicologic Pathology - JSTP), and North America (Society of Toxicologic Pathology - STP) to
update the existing World Health Organization/International Agency for Research on Cancer
(WHO/IARC) and Society of Toxicologic Pathology/ Standardized System of Nomenclature and
Diagnostic Criteria (STP/SSNDC) nomenclature systems. The INHAND nomenclature and the
related diagnostic criteria represent a consensus of experienced toxicologic pathologists
and were reviewed by the INHAND-Global Editorial and Steering Committee (INHAND-GESC) for
compliance with INHAND principles. Members of the Societies of Toxicologic Pathology had the
opportunity to comment on the draft version during a 60-day period. The initial series of
nomenclature publications were focused on findings in rats and mice. With the interest of
the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the use of published terminology and
the decision of the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC) initiative on
Standard for the Exchange of Non-clinical Data (SEND) to model the controlled terminology
(CT) based on the INHAND nomenclature, the INHAND project was extended to other laboratory
animal species including the nonhuman primate, rabbit, mini-pig, dog, and fish.
Although the INHAND nomenclature and diagnostic criteria represent a preferred
international standard nomenclature for lesions identified in nonclinical studies,
recommendations for diagnostic criteria and preferred terminology may not be applicable in
all situations. The purpose of specific experiments or the specific context of a given study
may require modifications to this standardized nomenclature and diagnostic criteria. The
appropriate diagnoses are ultimately based upon on the scientific judgement of the study
pathologist.
The present publication provides standardized terms and diagnostic criteria for
histopathology observations to be used in nonclinical toxicology studies conducted in
cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis). Throughout this publication,
findings applicable for use in general toxicology studies in monkeys are tabulated by organ
system. The terms and tables build on the existing INHAND rodent nomenclature. In most
instances, the description and definition of the rodent finding applies to the monkey and is
not further described. This publication focuses on findings that are unique to the monkey
and are not observed in rodents, and findings in monkeys that share the same terminology
with a rodent finding but display different morphologic features. The tabulated findings are
categorized according to the following characteristics: “Common”, “Uncommon”, “Not Observed
but Potentially Relevant”, and “Not Applicable”.
The distinction between common and uncommon findings is based on the occurrence in
untreated, relatively young cynomolgus monkeys in the authors’ experience, and is not based
on published references. The uncommon category is reserved for changes that are observed
only sporadically as spontaneous findings in nonhuman primate toxicology studies, or those
that are induced almost exclusively by xenobiotics. “Not Observed but Potentially Relevant”
are changes that have not been described or observed in cynomolgus monkeys; however, the use
of these terms has been considered permissible, should a finding meet the diagnostic
criteria. The category “Not Applicable” refers to rodent specific findings or terminology,
such as chronic progressive nephropathy, and the use of these terms in monkeys is considered
not appropriate. It should be kept in mind that the monkeys used in toxicology studies are
usually of young age and are only on study for a relatively short time, a fraction of their
normal life span. The health status of individual monkeys is usually checked carefully and
the individuals selected for a study are in excellent condition. For these reasons, the
spectrum and frequency of changes can be different from those observed in long-term
research-based primate colonies, and common age-related findings including neoplasms are
rarely seen in these animals. Accordingly, most documented age-related findings are
categorized as “Uncommon”. Neoplasms represent a very rare event in nonclinical toxicology
studies and thus have been excluded for the most part. Only those neoplastic findings that
have occurred in toxicology studies in the authors’ institutes &/or been reported in
literature to occur in toxicology studies 
are included. For more complete descriptions and diagnostic criteria of tumors occurring in
cynomolgus monkeys, the reader is referred to Chapter 6: Neoplasia and Proliferative
Disorders of Nonhuman Primates in Nonhuman Primates in Biomedical Research:
Diseases and/or current literature.
Whenever possible the equivalent rodent term/SEND terminology should be used for any tumors
not specifically addressed in this manuscript, as appropriate.
In addition to the journal publication, the nomenclature and diagnostic criteria for the
cynomolgus monkey are also available online (www.goreni.org). The
online version contains additional images and useful links to differential diagnoses
characterizing it as a practical tool for diagnostic work. In addition, all INHAND
publications are available at www.toxpath.org. Several manuscripts
and texts have been published on background lesions in non-human primates and the reader is
directed to the general bibliography at the end for further reading.
The recommended nomenclature is generally descriptive rather than diagnostic, based on
standard hematoxylin and eosin stained paraffin embedded sections only. Histochemical or
immunohistochemical staining characteristics may be addressed in the comments section of the
respective finding. Such special techniques may be required in some situations, but a
comprehensive discussion of these methods is outside the scope of this publication. Systemic
non-proliferative findings that occur across organs systems and are not specific to an organ
are reviewed in the section on systemic pathology. Instead of “synonyms” for each term, the
non-rodent publications have used the notation “other terms”. While these synonyms or other
terms have been used historically, the primary listed term is the preferred term and will
link to the controlled terminology in SEND.
Findings included in this nomenclature system may be further specified by modifiers.
Criteria are given for modifiers that are of particular relevance. These modifiers should be
consistently applied. Additional modifiers not provided in this nomenclature system may
describe the location, tissue type, or duration, among others. General principles of the
INHAND nomenclature have been published separately . As new information becomes available, new terms will be needed from
time to time and a request for this new term will be applied by “change control” (see goRENI
and STP websites).

## 2. Systemic Pathology
Microscopic findings that may be observed in multiple organs and/or tissues are listed in
the following table with associated diseases and conditions as well as tissues in which they
are usually observed. An associated comment or description is available in this chapter for
terminology marked with an asterisk. For description of other terminology, the reader is
referred to the chapter of the corresponding organs. Metabolic/systemic syndromes, along
with the terminology to be used for associated findings within affected organs, are
discussed in the section following this table ( ).
Syndromes included:

Fatal Fasting Macaque Syndrome

Hemophagocytic Syndrome

Phospholipidosis

## Ectopic tissue: Multiple tissues
( )

## Diagnostic features
Histologically normal tissue in an aberrant location.
Comments: Ectopic thymic tissue is commonly identified in or adjacent to the
thyroid or parathyroid glands in cynomolgus monkeys. Adrenal cortical tissue can also be
identified in or adjacent to the liver .
Accessory spleens, also referred to as ectopic spleens, spleniculi, or splenic nodules,
are occasionally observed in cynomolgus monkeys. These are often embedded in or attached
to the pancreas . Several other ectopic
locations for tissue are described under individual organs.

## Amyloid: Multiple tissues
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Amyloid is a pathologic proteinaceous substance deposited between cells in various
tissues and organs of the body in a wide variety of clinical settings.
In AA-amyloidosis, there is an increased level of serum amyloid-A (SAA), which is common
in inflammatory states. It is formed mainly in the liver upon stimulation by
proinflammatory cytokines and normally plays a role in cholesterol transport and as a
chemoattractant in the inflammatory processes . When the concentration of this molecule is increased, typically as a
result of chronic inflammation, certain isoforms of SAA are partially cleaved into
fragments that have an increased propensity to form fibrillar aggregates of amyloid
deposited systemically. Deposition of insoluble amyloid fibrils occurs either due to a
defect in SAA-degrading enzyme in the system, or consequent to the synthesis of abnormal
SAA protein resistant to the enzymatic degradation.
In AL-amyloidosis, unstable monoclonal immunoglobulin light chains, produced by a plasma
cell dyscrasia, lead to the formation and deposition of fibrils.

## Diagnostic features

Grossly, affected organs appear enlarged, moderately firm, and abnormally
discolored (pale gray or yellowish orange).

Microscopically, amyloid is deposited extracellularly in various affected
tissues.

Amyloid is a homogeneous, extracellular, hyaline to finely fibrillar waxy
material.

Can interfere with normal tissue function and eventually may produce pressure
atrophy of adjacent cells.

## Differential Diagnoses
Other similar-appearing extracellular deposits such as collagen and fibrin:

Necrosis:

- Congo red, Thioflavin T and immunohistochemical staining negative.
- Disruption of cellular architecture
- Nuclear pyknosis, karyolysis, or karyorrhexis.

Fibrosis:

- Fibrillary appearance with small numbers of fibroblasts
- Congo red, Thioflavin T and immunohistochemical staining negative.
- Positive collagen staining (van Gieson and Masson-trichrome).

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Congo red staining orange to red with green birefringence under polarized light.
Other special stains: crystal violet (amyloid stains purple-violet) and thioflavin T
(brilliant orange fluorescence).
Immunohistochemistry to identify amyloid deposits and the specific constituents
composing the deposits such as the antiβ-light chain antibodies.
TEM: non-branching fibrils of indefinite length and 0.7-1 mm diameter that form
single to laterally aggregated bundles or interlocking mesh-like ribbons lacking
periodicity.
Comments: Different types and clinical forms of amyloidosis are known based
on the deposition in tissues and organs of various domestic and wild animals, as well as
humans.
Systemic amyloid deposition can be due to AL-amyloidosis, AA-amyloidosis, or familial
amyloidosis. Amyloid substance may be confined at a given area in the body in the form of
localized amyloidosis. Amyloidosis involving several tissues and organs throughout the
body is referred to as systemic amyloidosis .
AA-amyloidosis is the most common form of amyloidosis in NHP. Affected animals present
weight loss, diarrhea and malabsorption. Common sites of amyloid deposition in NHP include
spleen, lymph nodes, kidney, liver, pancreatic islets and lamina propria or submucosa of
the small intestine; especially in aged macaques, often due to chronic enterocolitis or
other inflammatory conditions , , .
Similar to humans, aging NHP can develop cerebrovascular amyloid angiopathy, within
vessels of the cortex and leptomeninges or cerebral plaques composed of amyloid-β, which
correlate with neurocognitive decline .

## Bacteria: Multiple tissues (No image provided)

## Diagnostic features
Intracellular or extracellular cocci, bacilli ,coccobacilli, rods or other less
common forms visualized by light microscopy.
Often associated with inflammation, tissue degeneration, and/or necrosis and can be
obscured by cellular debris.
Histochemical methods suchs as Gram, Acid Fast or Silver (Warthin-Starry) stains aid
in visualization.
Culture results and molecular diagnostics.aid in diagnosis.

## Differential Diagnoses
Necrosis, of other known or unknown causes.
inflammation, of other known or unknown causes.
Comments: Primary bacterial infections are rare in laboratory macaques.
However, like many other mammalian species, NHP are susceptible to opportunistic
infection. A complete review of bacterial lesions in macaques is beyond the scope of this
manuscript. The reader is referred to the literature. Relevant emerging and reemerging
bacterial pathogens of laboratory NHP are reviewed in Bailey and Mansfield 2010 .

## Extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH): Multiple Tissues
( )

## Modifiers
Increased

## Diagnostic features
Varying proportions of marture and immature myeloid, erythroid and megakaryocyte
lineages, depending on the etiology.
Common extramedullary hematopoiesis sites.
- Medullary cords in lymph nodes
- Sinusoids in the liver
- Adrenal cortex
- Renal interstitium

## Differential Diagnoses:
Infiltrate [insert appropriate cell type].
- Infiltration of mature leukocytes into the tissue.
- Presence of leukocytes but no other histologic criteria of inflammation.
Hematopoietic neoplasms
- Clonal disorders involving hematopoietic blast cells of myeloid lineage and their
progenitors.
- >20% blasts in bone marrow, neoplastic cells in circulation or infiltrating
parenchyma tissue (refer to Hematolymphoid General Terms).
Lymphoma
- Distinguished by cell morphology, tissue distribution and clonality.
Comments: Extrameduallary hematopoiesis (EMH) is rarely noted in the spleen
in healthy control cynomolgus macaques ,
yet is commonly seen in the mandibular lymph nodes, medullary cords as well as
sporadically in other lymph nodes. When bone marrow is the target of toxicity, EMH can be
seen in tissues such as the adrenal gland, liver (sinusoids) and kidneys
(interstitium) . Extramedullary
hematopoiesis may be recorded when it is increased above background levels and the
modifier “increased” may be used in such cases.

## Fungus: Multiple tissues
( )

## Diagnostic features
Host response to fungal infection can vary from neutrophilic to granulomatous
inflammation in miliary to mass-like lesions. Multinucleate giant cells may also be
present.
Distinct fungal morphologic features are often visualized by light microscopy.
Special histochemical stains (Grocott or Gomori methenamine silver [GMS] and periodic
acid Schiff [PAS] being most commonly used), culture results, antigen detection and
molecular diagnostics aid in diagnosis.
Comments: Primary fungal infections are extremely rare in laboratory
macaques. However, like many other mammalian species, NHP are susceptible to opportunistic
infection. NHP are often temporarily housed or originate in geographic locations that are
endemic for specific fungal pathogens, and thus can be exposed to a variety of fungal
agents, most of which remain latent in immunocompetent animals. Reported fungal infections
observed in immunosuppressed macaques include Pneumocystis carinii in the
lung, Histoplasma capsulatum, Cryptococcus neoformans
and non-neoformans spp., Aspergillus spp., and Coccidioides
spp. , , Disseminated Talaromyces (Penicillium)
marneffei infection was also recently reported in a laboratory cynomolgus
macaque and directly linked to the immunosuppressive pharmacology of therapeutic agent
given . Candida
albicans, while considered a normal saprophytic inhabitant of mucous membranes
of the alimentary and genital tract in NHP, can also cause localized infection (thrush) or
disseminated disease in neonates and immunocompromised animals .

## Inclusions: Multiple tissues
( )

## Other term(s)
Viral infection

## Modifiers
Cytoplasm; intranuclear

## Diagnostic features
Intranuclear inclusions are typically round, may partially or almost completely fill
the nucleus leading to margination of host nuclear chromatin.
Contents of intranuclear inclusion bodies vary from eosinophilic, amphophilic to
basophilic and may be granular or flocculent.
Intracytoplasmic inclusions are typically eosinophilic, round to oval, homogenous,
vary in size and occur as single or multiple structures in the cytoplasm.
Comments: Laboratory cynomolgus monkeys are the natural hosts for several
well-described retroviruses, herpesviruses (e.g. cytomegalovirus, lymphocryptovirus and
simian varicella virus), small DNA viruses (parvovirus and SV40) and adenovirus. The
majority of viral infections in laboratory cynomolgus monkey colonies are clinically
silent, since host-virus coevolution has allowed for lifelong viral persistence, often
with a limited detrimental effect on the immunocompetent natural host. While complete
elimination of infection is not possible, present strategies for pathogen control in
laboratory non-human primate colonies including pre-study viral screening for known NHP
retroviruses, Herpes B and measles virus have effectively decreased the likelihood that
viral infection will confound toxicology study results. However, these viruses do pose a
risk of opportunistic infection under conditions of immunosuppression or
immunomodulation ,
 , . Cytomegalovirus, lymphocryptovirus and
adenovirus are among the most common latent viral infections in macaques . Viral inclusions should be recorded as
“inclusion, intranuclear and/or cytoplasmic” when observed, further specifications can be
provided in observation comments or the pathology narrative. Inclusions may be recorded as
“present” or graded, depending on pathologist discretion. Non-viral causes of inclusion
bodies such as those due to lead exposure are less common, but have been reported in
macaques and should be
considered.

## Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type]: Multiple tissues (No image
provided)

## Modifiers
Neutrophil, eosinophil, lymphocyte, plasma cell, mast cell, macrophage, mononuclear cell,
lympho-histiocytic, lymphoplasmacytic, mixed cell

## Other term(s)
Inflammatory cell infiltrate; aggregates, inflammatory cell

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The pathogenesis of inflammatory cell infiltrate is undetermined; however it is
hypothesized that infiltrates may occur as a self-limiting immune response or as part of a
tissue repair process.

## Diagnostic features
Usually manifests as variably sized focal to multifocal aggregates of inflammatory or
immune cells in diverse tissues and body organs
In general, lack of concomitant edema, congestion, hemorrhage, necrosis, and/or
fibrosis, helps to differentiate from active or resolving inflammation
Differential Diagnoses
Inflammation:
- In addition to inflammatory cell infiltrates, additional features include edema,
tissue damage, hemorrhage, and/or fibrosis
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
- MALT structures are normal anatomical features of the mucosal immune system that
are histologically identified as nonencapsulated subepithelial lymphoid follicles with
parafollicular areas and overlying specialized follicle-associated epithelium (FAE).
The reader is referred to the hematopoietic and lymphoid system section for a detailed
discussion of MALT and MALT-like structures such as duct-associated lymphoid tissue
(DALT).

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Infiltrates are easily identifiable in H&E stained tissue sections
Immunohistochemistry may be performed to identify the lineage of leukocytes
involved
Comments: Mononuclear cell infiltrates in various tissues are among the most
common spontaneous pathology findings in control cynomolgus monkeys , but need to be differentiated from naturally
occurring mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) and duct-associated lymphoid tissue
(DALT). Within the conjunctiva, mononuclear or lymphoid cell infiltrates may not be
indicative of an inflammatory process but may instead represent conjunctiva-associated
lymphoid tissue (CALT), a normal structure of the conjunctival mucosa. With chronic
antigenic stimulation, lymphoid hyperplasia may occur in CALT structures.

## Inflammation: Multiple tissues (No image provided)

## Modifiers
Granulomatous, mixed cell, neutrophil, eosinophil, lymphocyte, mast cell, macrophage,
mononuclear cell

## Other term(s)
“-itis”, specific to the organ affected, e.g. encephalitis, gastritis, etc.

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Inflammation in a tissue may be evoked as a response of resident or systemic inflammatory
cells in response to nocuous stimuli.

## Diagnostic features
Presence of a single cell lineage or multiple types of leukocytic infiltrates in
tissues along with other features of tissue damage and/or repair such as edema,
congestion, hemorrhage, necrosis, and fibrosis.
Based on the cell type, inflammation can be classified as suppurative (mainly
neutrophilic), mononuclear or mixed cell (consisting of neutrophils, eosinophils,
lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages), granulomatous (mainly consisting of
macrophages with or without multinucleated giant cells), or pyogranulomatous
(consisting of both macrophages and neutrophils).

## Differential Diagnoses
Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type]
Abscess
Leukocytic neoplasms

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Inflammation is easily identifiable in H&E stained tissue sections
Immunohistochemistry may be performed to identify the lineage of leukocytes
involved
Comments: Inflammation can occur as a normal host defense or a repair
process in response to tissue injury. It should be differentiated from an “inflammatory
cell” infiltrate as the latter does not have other features of tissue damage and/or repair
such as edema, congestion, hemorrhage, necrosis, and fibrosis. Inflammation is one of the
most common spontaneous pathology findings reported in control cynomolgus
monkeys . Differentiation of systemic
tumors e.g. by accumulation of “inflammatory cells” without a discernible stimulus,
morphology of cells such as mitosis or pleomorphism.
For organ specific, detailed characteristics refer to the description in the respective
organ section.
Various approaches to further characterize inflammation are used by pathologists,
including chronicity (peracute, acute, subacute, etc.), location (perivascular,
peribiliary, etc.), and others. To implement a descriptive terminology, the use of the
term “inflammation” is preferred over the “-itis” terminology, and the indication of the
predominant cell type(s) in the diagnosis is recommended over the conventional use of
chronicity, e.g.:
Inflammation, neutrophil
Inflammation, lymphocyte
Inflammation, plasma cell
Inflammation, monocyte/macrophage
When applicable the terms are combined, e.g.:
Inflammation, lympho-plasmocytic
Inflammation, lympho-histiocytic
Further description by location and distribution is recommended.

## Parasite/Parasitic granuloma: Multiple tissues 
( )

## Diagnostic features
Distinct helminth or protozoal morphologic features are often visualized by light
microscopy.
Host response to tissue invasion can vary from neutrophilic, eosinophilic to
granulomatous inflammation in miliary to mass-like nodular lesions.
Heminth tissue invasion commonly presents as organized, focal, well demarcated,
nodular lesions. Parasite profiles are often encapsulated by fibroblasts, lymphocytes,
and plasma cells, with limited to no active inflammation.
Epithelioid macrophages and multinucleated giant cells (Langhans or foreign body
types) are often present.
Granulomas may distort normal tissue architecture.
Comments: Many parasitic pathogens are endemic in NHP colonies and remain
clinically inapparent in immunocompetent animals. Treatment with anti-helmintics prior to
importation and during quarantine has significantly reduced or eliminated many parasitic
infestations; however, a low incidence is still noted on post mortem examination. In
healthy immunocompetent animals, most parasitic infections present as non-invasive disease
with low numbers of organisms present. For example, Balantidium coli is
commonly identified within the gastrointestinal tract lumen, specifically in the cecum and
colon without mucosal invasion or alteration. Similarly, Sarcocystis spp.
cysts are occasionally observed in skeletal muscle, and less frequently in the cardiac and
smooth muscle in the absence of active
disease.
Common helminths identified in cynomologus macaques include species of
Strongyloides, Oesophagostomum,
Anatrichosoma, Trichostrongylus,
Trichuris,Gongylonema, larval stages of nematodes
(ascarids, spirurids), cestodes (Echinococcosis spp.) and trematodes (the
lung fluke – Paragonimus westermanii) . Cerebral Baylisascaris larva migrans has also recently been reported
in cynomolgus macaques . In most
instances of infection, only a few organisms are observed and tissue damage is limited
with parasitic granulomas being a common presentation.
Protozoal infections encountered in macaques include Cryptosporidium parvum,
Enterocytozoon bieneusi, Plasmodium spp., Trichomonas spp., Acanthamoeba spp.,
Toxoplasma gondii and
Trypanosoma cruzi .
Toxoplasma gondii systemic infection can be seen spontaneously in
macaques and is characterized by
necrosis and inflammation in the brain, lungs, mesenteric lymph node, liver and/or heart.
Trypanosoma cruzi infection can be the cause of inflammation in the
heart and/or brain of cynomolgus monkeys.
Lastly, pulmonary acariasis (Pneumonyssus simicola) was once prevalent,
yet due to current pathogen control measures is now rarely identified in laboratory
colonies.
A complete review of parasitic lesions in macaques is beyond the scope of this
manuscript. The reader is referred to the literature.

## Pigment: Multiple tissues
( )

## Modifiers
May include the pigment type, if known

## Other term(s)
Endogenous pigments
Lipofuscin
Melanin
Hemosiderin
Mite pigment
Hematoidin
Hemozoin (malaria pigment)
Bilirubin
Exogenous pigments
Carbon (coal dust), anthracosis
Tattoo ink

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The pathogenesis varies based on the type of pigment observed in tissue sections.
Pigments are generally colored based substances that arise from either exogenous sources
or endogenous processes. Endogenous pigments can be further classified as either
hematogenous or nonhematogenous. In most cases, these products develop as a pathological
consequence; however some may occur as normal physiological products.

## Diagnostic features
Lipofuscin or lipochrome is an insoluble pigmented byproduct of lipid
peroxidation . It appears as
yellow-brown, finely granular cytoplasmic material in histological sections of tissue.
Accumulates in macrophages in the heart, liver, spleen, gastrointestinal tract and
brain. Ceroid is a golden acid-fast, sudanophilic pigment, probably a type of
lipofuscin, although differing from true lipofuscins by failing to stain with Schmorl
ferric-ferricyanide reduction stain .
Melanin is a naturally occurring substance formed the oxidation of
tyrosine to dihydroxyphenylalanine in melanocytes . The result is a brown-black pigment that is deposited mainly in
the skin, meninges, uvea, iris, and reproductive tissues where it is sometimes known
as melanosis .
Hemosiderin appears as golden brown granules within macrophages.
Hemosiderin results when the intracellular protein ferritin binds with free
iron . Ferritin is highly
abundant in the liver, spleen and bone marrow; therefore these tissues may contain
numerous hemosiderin-laden macrophages. Hemosiderin may be observed in a variety of
tissues subsequent to hemorrhage. Accumulation of perivascular hemosiderin-laden
macrophages is a common finding in the lung . Application of the Perls’ Prussian blue histochemical stain will
detect this pigment in tissues.
Mite pigment. This pigment results from Pneumonyssus
simicola infections .
Although it is seen primarily in the lungs in proximity to the mite or bronchial
lesions, it may also extend to the tracheobronchial lymph nodes. Histologically
macrophages contain a golden brown to black pigment that is refractile.
Acid hematin. This pigment develops in tissues fixed in unbuffered
formalin . It is most abundant
in regions rich in erythrocytes or hemoglobin including regions of hemorrhage and
congested blood vessels. Acid hematin presents as a granular to sometimes crystaline
black to dark brown substance. The pigment can be bleached with the
Kadasewitsch-method to avoid interference with endogenous pigments.
Hematoidin is a golden-brown crystalline pigment. Morphologically the
crystals may appear in a variety of forms including: 1) thread-like filaments that
form star-shaped clusters (Medusa’s head); 2) small, irregular crystals; 3) spheroid
crystals; and 4) rhomboid crystals . Closed tissue compartments have low oxygen tension, which are
suitable for the formation of hematoidin following degradation of hemoglobin from
extravasated erythrocytes.
Hemozoin also known as malaria pigment is the result of the Plasmodium
parasite converting free heme to the insoluble b-hematin . The pigment can be detected in blood films by light
microscopy as intracytoplasmic yellow to green-brown pigment within granulocytes
and/or monocytes. Hemozoin is recognized as granular birefringent material with
polarization.
Bilirubin is a breakdown product of erythrocytes and is also excreted by
the hepatocytes as a bile pigment. Grossly it imparts a yellow discoloration to
tissues also known as icterus. Bilirubin is a pigment found within bile and is
therefore associated with cholestasis and observed histologically as yellow brown
plugs or casts within the bile canaliculi.
Carbon (coal dust). Anthracosis is the accumulation of inhaled carbon
particles by alveolar and interstitial macrophages in the lungs. The carbon pigment
may also extend to the tracheobronchial lymph nodes.
Tattoo ink. This form of exogenous pigment is localized to the skin and
draining lymph node. Dermal macrophages, as well as those located in nearby lymph
nodes phagocytize this pigment where it remains indefinitely.

## Differential Diagnoses
Fine granular material:
- May resemble bacteria, which can be differentiated by Gram stain.
Calcium salts:
- Impart a basophilic granular appearance, can be differentiated from pigmented
substances using von Kossa histochemical staining.
Copper:
- May not be readily detected in hematoxylin and eosin stained tissues but can be
differentiated from other granular material using rhodanine or rubeanic acid.
Hematoidin:
- Should be distinguished from other pigments based on its negative Perls’ Prussian
blue staining.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Light microscopy, special stains (Perls Prussian blue), electron microscopy,
polarization

## Infectious Diseases
Nonhuman primates used within routine toxicology studies may be subclinically infected with
a variety of infectious organisms acquired from their breeding colony or holding facilites
en-route to the testing facility. Evidence of these organisms or infections may be an
incidental finding at necropsy, or they may become clinically activated or be transmitted
while the animal is on a nonclinical study, particularly when one or more animals become
immunologically compromised. Infectious agents seen within macaques include fungal,
parasitic, bacterial and viral diseases, which should be recorded within the data capture
system at a high level under the visible etiologic agent (fungus, parasite, bacteria) or
inclusions (virus), and not under individual organisms or disease diagnosis (e.g.
Plasmodium spp.). Any pathologic response(s) or finding(s) associated
with the infectious agent should be recorded separately using appropriate INHAND terms where
possible. Additional diagnostic tools such as in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry can aid in identifying and investigating the impact of known or novel
NHP pathogens on nonclinical studies .
A complete review of infectious agents in macaques is beyond the scope of this manuscript.
The reader is referred to the extensive literature and to the individual INHAND terms
(fungus, bacteria, parasite, inclusions).

## Syndromes
Syndromes that may occur in the nonhuman primates include fatal fasting macaque syndrome,
hemophagocytic syndrome and phospholipidosis, which are described below. The syndrome should
not be recorded as a finding but should be mentioned as an observation comment in the data
capture system and/or in the pathology narrative. The individual findings that together make
the syndrome should be recorded seperately using INHAND terms where possible.

## Fatal fasting macaque syndrome: Systemic Conditions
( )

## Other term(s)
Obese macaque syndrome; fatal fatty liver-kidney syndrome in obese monkeys; fatal fatty
liver syndrome

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Although still poorly understood, the pathogenesis of this syndrome is considered
multifactorial , , , , , , , .
Stress-inducing conditions such as transportation, recaging, changes in husbandry and
others, may cause decreased food consumption up to anorexia and subsequent rapid and/or
repeated weight variation/losses in previously overfed/obese adult monkeys. This finally
causes a negative energy/nutritional imbalance. The subsequent mobilization of lipid and
fatty acids from adipose tissue throughout the body disrupts lipid metabolism and
finally causes lipid accumulation in several organs, especially the liver and kidneys.
Raised level of circulating triglycerides may be associated with morphological changes,
but blood chemistry profile generally does not suggest liver failure.

## Diagnostic features
Macroscopically, the liver and kidneys may appear enlarged and pale, and multiple
pale-tan foci can be observed in the fat tissue of the abdominal cavity at
necropsy.
Various degrees of cellular swelling due to cytoplasmic vacuolation are noted in
several organs especially the liver (hepatocytes) and kidneys (epithelial lining of
the proximal convoluted tubules). The vacuoles are of variable size but generally
large and round-oval and contain lipids. They appear empty in HE-stained section and
are positive to Oil Red-O stain and other lipidic special stains.
Acute degenerative and inflammatory changes can be observed in the pancreas, such
as decreased zymogen content in acinar cells, acinar cell necrosis, acute cell-type
infiltration and steatonecrosis in the surrounding fat tissue.
In some cases, adrenocortical hyperplasia and vacuolation, and thyroid follicular
enlargement associated with flattening of the follicular epithelium have been
reported in affected monkeys .

## Differential Diagnoses
Xenobiotic-induced cellular degeneration in the liver and kidneys (with fatty
change), pancreas and fat tissue.
Traumatic events causing degenerative/inflammatory changes in fat tissue.
Pancreatic cell degeneration associated with inflammation:
- Adenoviral-related pancreatitis has been reported in M.
mulatta .
Hypothyroidism and diabetes mellitus may be associated with fatty change in the
liver.
Serous atrophy of fat:
- Generally not associated with steatonecrosis and lipidic accumulations in other
organs.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Special stains for lipid content such as Oil Red-O and Sudan Black.
Comments: This syndrome has been reported in several species of non-human
primates such as M. fascicularis, M. mulatta, M. arctoides, M. nemestrina and M.
radiata ,
 , , . It has been generally described in adult monkeys, and
females seem to be predisposed.

## Hemophagocytic syndrome: Systemic Conditions (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
HPS

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
HPS is a nonneoplastic condition characterized by proliferation of activated
macrophages . HPS is mediated by
hyperinflammatory state comprising uncontrolled CD8+ T-cell activation leading to marked
production by interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) . This is followed by histiocytic proliferation and production of
cytokines including tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), IL-1, IL-6, IL-10, IL-18, and
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) . Together this leads to multiorgan dysfunction.

## Diagnostic features
Bone marrow cytopenia
Increased numbers of hemophagocytic macrophages in peripheral tissues.

## Differential Diagnoses
Epstein-Barr infections:
- Often present with monocytosis, and Epstein-Barr Nuclear Antigen (EBNA) can be
detected in sections of tissue by immunohistochemistry.
Simian Parvovirus infections:
- May present with a normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia, or bone
marrow dysmaturation with the presence of large intranuclear inclusion bodies within
bone marrow hematopoietic cells .
Infection with Simian Retrovirus:
- A betaretrovirus, presents with cytopenic abnormalities that includes anemia,
leukopenia and thrombocytopenia .
Earlier phases of infection may consist with bone marrow hyperplasia involving
granulocytic and erythroid lineages ; however late stage infection typically present as severe
pancytopenia associated with bone marrow depletion.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Light microscopy, complete blood counts, clinical history, viral titers
Comments: The veterinary literature is lacking information regarding HPS
in monkeys. A recent report described HPS in rhesus associated with SRV infection. Much of what is known about
hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS) comes from the human medical literature and scant reports
in the veterinary medical literature including cats and dogs , . HPS is an often-fatal nonneoplastic proliferative disorder
characterized by activated macrophages, multi lineage cytopenias in the bone marrow and
profound phagocytosis occurring in the bone marrow and liver. Both genetic and acquired forms with Epstein-Barr infections have been reported.

## Phospholipidosis: Systemic Conditions (No image provided)
Comments: Similar to the other laboratory species, the macaque is
susceptible to phospholipidosis .
Drug-induced phospholipidosis is characterized by cytoplasmic vacuolation seen in multiple
tissues on light microscopic examination. The descriptive term vacuolation is the
preferred terminology. A diagnosis of phospholipidosis is confirmed by demonstrating the
accumulation of lamellar bodies in lysosomes on TEM.

## 3. Cardiovascular System
For detailed general considerations on the cardiovascular system, refer to the INHAND
rodent publication .
In nonclinical studies, morphological and functional end-points are essential in the
identification of any potential interaction between xenobiotics and cardio-vascular
structures. As a minimum, post-mortem standard morphological evaluation of the
cardio-vascular system includes heart weight measurement and light conventional
histopathology of the myocardium and valvular leaflets in the heart , aorta and blood vessels within tissues.
Electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry may help to identify the pathological process
caused by xenobiotics. In addition, the evaluation of serum levels of heart-specific
biomarkers and functional assessments, such as blood pressure and echocardiography, can
provide valuable in-life information correlating with morphological alterations observed at
the post-mortem examination.

## A. Heart
At necropsy, similar to other lab animal species, the heart is sampled with the root of
the large vessels and fixed in buffered-formalin solution. Although not considered
necessary, the heart may be opened prior to immersion in the fixative in order to ensure
adequate fixation and eliminate large blood clots occupying the cardiac chambers.
Similar to all other laboratory animal species, light conventional histopathology of the
heart is based on a thorough and consistent microscopic evaluation of hematoxylin and
eosin-stained sections of all relevant compartments and structures of the heart, including
the ventricular, atrial and interventricular septal wall, the valves and the coronary
vessels following published guidelines , . This
allows an accurate identification of changes in the cardiomyocytes, extracellular matrix,
conduction system and the vascular structures within the myocardium and the adjacent
epicardial tissue. Occasionally, a more detailed evaluation of the conduction system may
be required, and specific dissection techniques are necessary , although this is not a standard procedure in routine
toxicology studies. Special dissection procedures may be required to systematically
evaluate the coronary arteries ( ).

## Cyst/plaque, squamous/epithelial cell: Heart
( )

## Other term(s)
Squamous cyst; squamous epithelial cyst; keratinized/non-keratinized cyst; epithelial
cyst; squamous plaque; squamous cyst/plaque; squamous metaplasia; ectopic epithelial
structure; ectopic epithelium

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The origin is unknown. Morphologic features are consistent with an embryonic
remnant.

## Diagnostic features
Usually observed on the epicardial surface or sub-epicardially, rarely
sub-endocardially, throughout the heart surface. Non-keratinized cysts are found
primarily at the base of the heart, coronary groove and atria.
Squamous cysts are lined by a keratinized or non-keratinized squamous epithelium
and may contain concentric layers of keratin, inflammatory cells, cellular debris
and/or eosinophilic colloid-like material. They may be surrounded by a
foreign-body inflammatory reaction if the epithelial wall has been broken.
The epithelial lining is usually surrounded by a layer of fibrous connective
tissue of varying thickness.
Squamous plaques can be found alone or near squamous cysts , , , , .

## Differential Diagnoses
Ectopic thyroid tissue or thyroid follicle-like structures:
- Consist of variably sized single or clusters of colloid-filled follicles at the
epicardial or mid-myocardial areas, generally at the base of the heart near the
atrial appendages and large vessels.
Comments: Squamous atrial plaques can be associated with focal
mesothelial proliferation suggesting that they could also represent a reactive change
to physical irritation of the epicardium.
Squamous cysts and plaques are considered to represent ectopic foregut epithelium
that was sequestered in the dorsal mesocardium prior to closure of the
pleuro-pericardial fold during early embryonic development.

## Accumulation adipocytes, myocardium: Heart
( )

## Other term(s)
Fat infiltration; increased adipose tissue; fatty replacement of cardiomyocytes;
heart lipomatosis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
It is uncertain whether the presence of adipose tissue in the heart is caused by an
infiltrative process or a metaplastic phenomenon.

## Diagnostic features
Segmental or diffuse transmural loss of myocardium replaced by normally appearing
white adipose tissue.
Adipose tissue may extend from the epicardium towards the endocardium.
Most commonly seen in the right ventricular wall, although may also be observed
in left ventricle and interventricular septum.
Infiltrating adipocytes displace/replace cardiomyocytes. Remaining cardiomyocytes
in the adjacent myocardium may be decreased in size, suggesting a concurrent
atrophic change.
This change may be associated with an inflammatory response, primarily
lymphocytic infiltration ,
 .

## Differential Diagnoses
Lipoma:
- This diagnosis should be taken into consideration, despite the lack of report
on cardiac lipoma in monkey, to date. Lipoma may present as a lobulated mass
composed of mature adipocytes supported by a fine fibro-vascular stroma.
Comments: Adipose tissue replacement of the myocardium may be an
incidental finding in healthy cynomolgus monkeys used in nonclinical studies, and
generally without degenerative changes of the surrounding myocardium. This change has
been associated with obesity and its incidence appears to increase with age. It is
generally not accompanied by any evidence of cardiac dysfunction. If not an induced
change, typically this background observation is not recorded.

## Hemorrhage, subendocardium: Heart (No image provided)
Comments: Subendocardial hemorrhage is a common finding in the heart of
cynomolgus monkeys derived from Mauritius and various sources in Asia .
The range of severity varies from small foci of erythrocytes to distinct hemorrhages,
dissecting the cardiac myofibers. Hemosiderosis and erythrophagocytosis are often
associated with subendocardial hemorrhage .
The reason for subendocardial hemorrhage in nonhuman primates is not known, whereas a
variety of mechanisms has been identified in humans . It was believed that the early stages represent an agonal
phenomenon. In man, it has been demonstrated that even minor subendocardial hemorrhages
might have an influence on cardiac function .

## Hypertrophy, cardiomyocyte: Heart
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Focal or diffuse, ventricular cardiomyocyte hypertrophy can develop in response to
various conditions such as exercise, blood pressure/volume overload or injury, and is
a compensatory change. However, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy can also be induced by
certain xenobiotics.

## Diagnostic features
Focal, or diffuse increase of diameter in individual cardiomyocytes in the
ventricle wall.
Nuclei of hypertrophied cardiomyocytes are often enlarged, irregularly shaped and
hyperchromatic.
Cardiomyocyte alignment may be distorted in more severe cases (e.g. myocardial
remodeling).
Diffuse cardiomyocyte hypertrophy can result in cardiac hypertrophy and increased
heart weight.
Modifiers: focal/diffuse, ventricular (left/right), apical.

## Differential Diagnoses
Foci of hypertrophic cardiomyocytes can be associated with degenerative
myocardial changes in idiopathic myocardial cardiomyopathy.
Comments: Rhesus macaques appear to be prone to develop spontaneous left
ventricular cardiac hypertrophy, as suggested by the description of several cases in a
colony of rhesus monkeys, where concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle
associated with reduction of the ventricular lumen was observed in young adults of
both sexes presented for sudden death. There appeared to be a strong genetic
predisposition at pedigree analyses . Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy has also been described in a Rhesus
monkey bearing a functional pheochromocytoma . The epinephrine produced by this tumor induced cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy near areas of fiber atrophy and degeneration and bands of fibrous
connective tissue disrupting the normal orientation.
Examples of compounds inducing ventricular cardiomyocyte hypertrophy resulting in
cardiac hypertrophy include Muraglitazar and certain synthetic androgens.
Muraglitazar, a peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor (PPAR) agonist given orally
to cynomolgus monkeys over a period of 1 year induced cardiac hypertrophy in the left
ventricular wall due to increased cardiac workload secondary to plasma volume
expansion . Supra-physiological
androgen exposure also can cause cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in animals . Hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes by
testosterone and dihydrotestosterone ( ) was determined to be directly androgen receptor-dependent . Focal cardiomyocyte hypertrophy has
also been reported in cynomolgus monkeys treated with
2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinolone . The cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was observed near foci of fiber
necrosis and atrophy, chronic inflammation, fibrosis and vasculitis.
Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy has been reported in aging male cynomolgus monkeys, and
this was associated with increased cardiomyocyte apoptosis .

## Inclusion, intracytoplasmic, cardiomyocyte: Heart (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Ceroid and lipofuscin are known to accumulate in several tissues as a function of
age.

## Diagnostic features
Presence of eosinophilic granules in cytoplasm of cardiomyocytes, generally
located near the poles of the nuclei.
Ceroid-lipofuscinosis has been reported in a cynomolgus monkey and was
characterized by cytoplasmic accumulation of bright, eosinophilic cytoplasmic
granules in multiple tissues and organs, including the cardiac muscle
cells .
Ceroid and lipofuscin granules are approximately 1.0 µm in diameter and show
irregular contours. Special stains are needed in order to distinguish ceroid and
lipofuscin pigments.
Other types of inclusions have been described, such as hyaline granules,
generally round and varying in size, up to 3.5 pm in diameter.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Special stains including PAS, Ziehl-Neelsen, Luxol Fast Blue, Oil-Red-O,
Schmorl’s, Mallory’s and others, may be of great help to distinguish ceroid,
lipofuscin, and hyaline-type intracytoplasmic granules.
Comments: Ceroid, lipofuscin and hyaline-type intracytoplasmic granules
have been described in cardiomyocytes of cynomolgus monkeys , , .
Ceroid granules are considered to contain an insoluble lipid and are stainable with
Luxol fast blue and Mallory’s phloxine stain for hyaline. Lipofuscin granules
represent age-related pigments. Hyaline granules appear to be devoid of lipid
component.

## Inclusion, intranuclear, eosinophilic, cardiomyocyte: Heart (No image
provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Considered to be invagination of cytoplasm and cytoplasmic organelles into the
nucleus of the cardiomyocyte.

## Diagnostic features
Eosinophilic inclusions in the nucleus of cardiomyocytes
Comments: Reported as a rare event, sometimes associated with severe
cases of cardiomyopathy .

## Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type], myocardium: Heart (No image
provided)
Comments: Focal inflammatory cell infiltrations and focal myocarditis are
other terms that have been used to describe different degrees of severity of the same
pathological phenomenon , which are
commonly observed in cynomolgus monkeys as a spontaneous finding , , . The term “myocarditis” should not be used, however, and more
descriptive terminology would be preferred, according to INHAND guidance and norms.
Lower grades are not associated with necrosis or degeneration of cardiomyocytes or
subsequent increase in troponin , and
the term infiltrate with relevant cell type(s) is appropriate. Higher grades are
associated with myocardial degeneration and necrosis or other evidence of inflammation
such as edema, karyomegaly or fibrin deposition . In cases where more extensive inflammatory changes are observed,
the term inflammation is appropriate.
The myocardium at sub-endocardial and sub-epicardial locations is most affected. The
lesions are much more common in the ventricular than the atrial myocardium without
preference for the left or right ventricle, heart base or apex , .

## Inflammation, pericardial: Heart (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Pericarditis; epicarditis; epicardial inflammation

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Infiltration of the pericardium/epicardium by inflammatory cells occasionally
associated with myocardial inflammation.

## Diagnostic features
Infiltration of the pericardial tissues with inflammatory cells, predominantly
lymphocytic, although mixed inflammatory infiltrates can be seen in more severe
cases associated with focal myocardial inflammation.
May be associated with degenerative/inflammatory lesions of the myocardium, and
necrotic debris in the pericardium.
Comments: Pericardial inflammatory changes have been reported as
secondary changes to diseases in wild caught monkeys. Toft and Eberhard reported pericarditis associated with
ruptured lung mite lesions in rhesus monkeys, and April and Keith reported acute purulent pericarditis
associated with severe myocarditis. Osborn et al. , reported pericarditis as a significant
finding in small number of animals in a colony of rhesus monkeys epizootic of apparent
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

## Inflammation, granulomatous, pericardial fat: Heart
( )

## Other term(s)
Fat tissue granuloma.

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The cause is unknown.

## Diagnostic features
Granuloma(s) composed of macrophages with large cytoplasm (epithelioid cells),
which may be surrounded by scattered inflammatory cells including lymphocytes,
plasma cells and eosinophils, seldom accompanied by fibrosis .
Multinucleated giant cells may also be present.
This change is more likely to occur in adipose tissue around the right coronary
artery.
Differential Diagnoses
Chronic inflammation of fat tissue (steatitis)
Metastatic hematopoietic neoplasms
Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Ziehl-Neelsen stain and Gram stains to exclude the presence of mycobacteria or
other bacterial colonies
PAS to exclude the presence of mycotic colonies
Comments: This is a relatively common finding in cynomolgus monkeys,
although the incidence is generally low. Sometimes, similar granulomatous foci can be
observed in the fat tissue associated with other organs, such as in mesenteric fat.
This change may be associated with decrease in food intake and/or fat atrophy.

## Karyomegaly/karyocytomegaly, cardiomyocyte: Heart
( )

## Other term(s)
Anisokaryosis and karyomegaly; idiopathic myocardial degeneration; cardiomyopathy

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Degenerative change of cardiomyocytes.

## Diagnostic features
Cardiomyocyte karyomegaly is generally observed at the apex of the heart, the
interventricular septum, the papillary muscle and the subendocardial areas in both
ventricles.
Individual to small groups of myofibers, rarely up to extensive area of
myocardium, may appear enlarged (i.e. hypertrophic).
Histological changes may be limited to enlargement (karyomegaly) and irregular
shape (anisokaryosis) of the nucleus. The nuclei may show intranuclear cytoplasmic
invaginations. These changes are commonly seen in purposed-bred non-human
primates.
Less frequently, the severity is higher and changes in affected fibers may
include cytoplasmic vacuolation and higher degrees of karyomegaly and
anisokaryosis. The nuclei show weakly stained chromatin and prominent
nucleolus.
In addition, anisokaryosis and karyomegaly have been described in association
with interstitial thickening due to edema and/or collagen bundles, with
mineralization in chronic lesions, accompanying cardiomyocyte disarray.
The inflammatory component is generally sparse and consists of scattered
lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages.

## Differential Diagnoses
Necrosis of cardiomyocyte:
- Generally not associated with karyomegaly, although scattered foci of
degenerating fibers can be observed.
Cellular infitrates:
- May be observed without karyomegaly and anisokaryosis. An inflammatory cell
infiltration is generally not a primary feature associated with karyomegaly and
anisokaryosis ,
 ,
 ,
 .

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Masson’s trichrome may help to identify collagen deposits.
Comments: Anisokaryosis and karyomegaly are considered to reflect
polyploidy.
The term “spontaneous cardiomyopathy” has been recently used to describe the
condition in cynomolgus monkeys , , ;
however, a descriptive terminology of the histological changes is currently
recommended in order to avoid any potential confusion with human-specific cardiac
syndromes.
The pathogenesis of this myocardial change is poorly understood. However, it is
considered as reminiscent of chronic catecholamine-induced experimental cardiomyopathy
and stress cardiomyopathy in cynomolgus monkeys and humans , .

## Parasite, protozoa: Heart
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Parasitic infestation of the heart.

## Diagnostic features
Presence of intracellular protozoan parasites (e.g. Trypanozoma
cruzi amastigotes). The parasite-related inflammation is generally
characterized by random, focal to diffuse, primarily lymphocytic myocardial
infiltrates associated with amastigotes. In addition, cardiomyocyte degeneration,
hyper-eosinophilia and loss of cross striations, and mixed cell and
eosinophil-rich inflammatory cell infiltration may occur.

## Differential Diagnoses
Non-infectious cardiomyocyte degeneration and/or inflammation
Comments:Trypanosoma cruzi has been reported
sporadically in cynomolgus monkey colonies in the USA and can be the cause of
mononuclear cell infiltration in the heart of cynomolgus monkeys , . Intracellular clusters of amastigotes, however, can be
very difficult to find microscopically. Other protozoal parasites such as
Sarcocystis or Toxoplasma spp. have been reported
in rhesus and cynomolgus macaques; however, these organisms are very rarely associated
with myocardial inflammation in immunocompetent animals.

## Hyperplasia, mesothelium: Heart
( )

## Other term(s)
Benign mesothelial proliferation; reactive mesothelium

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
An excessive non-neoplastic growth of mesothelium perceived to be a response to local
irritation, which may be a result of inflammation, infection or toxicity. No or few
inflammatory cells may be observed.

## Diagnostic features
Papillary (villous) thickening of the mesothelium lining the pericardium,
epicardium and tunica adventitia of vessels.
Macroscopically, small white nodules or flat plaques may be visualized at
necropsy on the epicardial, pericardial or adventitial vascular surface.
Histologically, inflammatory changes may accompany the hyperplastic
mesothelium.
Unlike the normally flat simple squamous mesothelial cells, hyperplastic
mesothelial cells may be cuboidal or columnar with abundant cytoplasm. Cells may
occasionally be binucleate but cellular atypia is usually low and mitoses are
infrequent.
Outgrowing hyperplastic mesothelium (papillary or villous) are usually lined by
single layer of cells supported by loose fibro-vascular and/or edematous stroma,
more frequently observed in atrial wall.
Occasionally, cells may be shed and subsequently surrounded by inflammatory
exudate or tissue.

## Differential Diagnoses
Mesothelioma:
- Increased anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, increased numbers of multinucleate
cells, mitotic figures and stromal or parenchymal invasion
Carcinomas and sarcomas:
- Lack of immunoreactivity to both cytokeratin and vimentin
Fibrosis:
- Bundling of cells and presence of collagen deposits

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Special stains such as Alcian blue able to detect cytoplasmic mucins
Immunohistochemistry. Mesothelial cells are immuno-reactive to both cytokeratin
and vimentin, but negative for CEA, S-100.
Electron microscopy. Lining mesothelial cells may show numerous desmosomes and
tight junctions, long slender microvilli on cell surface, and circumferential
bundles of perinuclear intermediate microfilaments (tonofilaments).
Comments: In non-human primates, cardiovascular mesothelial hyperplasia
may be seen as a background change associated with epicardial and/or pericardial
inflammation, presence of fluid/exudate in the pericardial sac, therapeutic implants,
aberrant helminth migration, protozoal infections (e.g. Chagas), and bacterial
diseases involving pericardium or epicardium (e.g. tuberculosis). The change can also
be associated with fibromatosis accompanying retrovirus infection. Vascular
adventitial reactions in non-human primates may be seen accompanying atherosclerosis
and arteritis ,
 , .

## B. Heart Valves
Recent observation of drug-induced valvulopathy in post-marketing surveillance in man has
led to withdrawal of some commercialized compounds, such as appetite suppressant drugs.
This has increased the interest in the evaluation of heart valves during nonclinical
studies.
Histopathological examination of the cardiac valves in all laboratory animal species,
including non-human primates, may suffer from inconsistencies and artifacts related to
both the technical approach and the inherent small size of the valves. The
trimming/sectioning of the heart may greatly influence the type, number and correct
orientation of valves within the histological sections, which finally affects the accuracy
of the microscopic examination. Therefore, in those studies where drug-related effects are
suspected to occur in the cardiac valves, the pathologist may need to adapt the
preparation of the heart and trimming of valves to ensure the best representation of most
or all four cardiac valves.
Valvular thrombosis, inflammation and atherosclerosis can be seen in aging,
hypercholesterolemic macaques. For more specific comments and diagnostic criteria on
atherosclerotic lesions, please refer to the section on blood vessels ( ).

## Degeneration, myxomatous: Heart Valves (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Endocardial myxomatous change; spontaneous valvulopathy; valvular endocardiosis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The pathogenesis of degenerative valvular disease of cynomolgus monkeys is unknown.
It likely involves activation of valvular interstitial cells leading to either
increased production or decreased remodeling of interstitial matrix.

## Diagnostic features
Diffuse or nodular thickening of valve leaflets
Expansion of the spongiosa of the valve leaflet with hypocellular extracellular
matrix composed predominately of glycosaminoglycans
Incidence increases with age

## Differential Diagnoses
Drug-induced valvulopathy:
- Has not definitively been recognized in cynomolgus monkeys used in nonclinical
studies
Valvular endocarditis:
- Would be distinguished by greater cellularity with infiltrates of inflammatory
cells as well as frequently including hemorrhage and cellular necrosis
Comments: Spontaneous valvular disease is uncommon in cynomolgus monkeys
in survey pathology studies ,
although this is likely due to the young age of animals used in toxicity testing.
Myxomatous valvular changes are known to be an age-associated lesion . Mitral valve prolapse in human patients
is the result of an age-related myxomatous degeneration of atrioventricular
valves . The valvular lesions
that can result may allow systolic regurgitant blood flow (valvular insufficiency) and
myocardial disease/remodeling from increased hemodynamic preload. Morphologically
similar changes have been described as a spontaneous condition in atrioventricular
valves of rhesus monkeys in a breeding colony , although this is not a common finding and the etiology of the
high incidence in this colony remained unknown.

## C. Blood Vessels
The microscopic evaluation of the vasculature in organs is generally performed as part of
the evaluation of each specific organ. This may reveal the presence of either
organ-specific vascular changes (possibly as part of an organ-specific toxicity) or
widespread vascular changes visible in several organs pointing toward a systemic vascular
injury. Specific collection of larger vessels may be required in particular when
intravascular administration of xenobiotics is performed (e.g. through bolus injection or
slow infusion), with potential for local and/or systemic vascular injury. Large arteries
that can be easily collected in non-human primates include the thoracic and abdominal
aorta, carotid arteries and iliac arteries. Some lesions occur in vessel-specific
progression (e.g. atherosclerosis). Strategies for the systemic evaluation of the arterial
tree have been published . Vascular
injury in non-human primates, as well as in other laboratory animal species, can occur as
a spontaneous pathological change or be drug-induced. In nonclinical drug development,
vascular injury can be caused by a wide array of compounds encompassing small and large
molecules (such as monoclonal antibodies) and antisense oligonucleotides. Several papers
have been published to better characterized drug-induced vascular injury and associated
biomarkers in nonclinical studies , , .
However, the distinction between the spontaneous and drug-induced vascular injury may
still be challenging and a correct identification of the histological pattern of vascular
changes may be crucial.
The observation of a vascular injury may reflect an organ-specific toxicity or represent
a widespread change visible in several organs and, therefore, suggesting the occurrence of
a systemic vascular disorder.
The histopathological evaluation of the heart and the other organs according to standard
guidelines for organ trimming is generally considered sufficient to ensure the thorough
evaluation of the vascular tree ( ).

## Amyloid, media or wall: Blood Vessels (No image provided)
Comments: Cynomolgus monkey are considered prone to develop systemic
amyloidosis following chronic inflammatory processes. Several organs may be affected,
most frequently the spleen and liver. An age-related endocrine amyloidosis has been
described in the pancreas often associated with diabetes .
It is seldom observed as a primary vascular lesion but typically occurs if there is
amyloid deposition in the adjacent tissues. In such cases, it should not be recorded as
a separate vascular-specific diagnosis.

## Atherosclerosis: Blood Vessels
( )

## Other term(s)
Arteriosclerosis; fatty streak; intimal plaque

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Atherosclerosis is a degenerative change that occurs along the tunica intima of large
and small arteries and has been described in several non-human primate species
including cynomolgus monkey, as well as in other animal species . The pathogenesis is complex, is related
to lipoprotein metabolism and includes progressive accumulation of lipids,
lipoproteins and free cholesterol in the intima and media, with accumulation of
macrophages and lymphocytes within and around the arterial wall. Normal vascular wall
architecture can be disrupted and the intima, internal elastic lamina, media, and
adventitia may be effaced by inflammatory cells and fibrosis. Necrosis may occur with
accumulation of free cholesterol crystals and mineralization. Chronic lesions are
progressively remodeled due to ongoing/progressive collagen accumulation, which may
finally result in either stenosis or enlargement of the lumen , .

## Diagnostic features
Regions of intimal thickening that are composed of smooth muscle cells,
mucopolysaccharies, and hypocellular collagen deposits. The mucopolysaccharides
can predominate in some lesions conferring a loose appearance.
Lesions are typically segmental. Early lesions may consist only of slight
elevation of the intima by lipid-laden macrophages. Can partially or completely
occlude the vessel lumen.
No inflammatory component is generally noted.

## Differential Diagnosis
Intramural plaque:
- Fibrous response to indwelling catheter or at infusion sites within a blood
vessel

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Plaques can be highlighted with a variety of immunohistochemical and
histochemical stains.
Verhoff-Van Gieson staining may be used to distinguish muscular, fibrous, and
elastic elements of the lesion, and to identify disruption or splitting of the
internal elastic lamina.
The plaques can be highlighted with a Masson’s trichrome as well as
immunohistochemistry for smooth muscle actin.
Comments: Arteriosclerosis encompasses a spectrum of lesions in man, but
most often refers to atherosclerosis. Arteriosclerosis in man is an age-related change
in blood vessels which are characterized by thick and stiff wall and luminal
dilatation in large arteries. Atherosclerosis is a different pathological condition;
however, these two terms are sometimes used interchangeably . Atherosclerosis is primarily an arterial disorder and
refers to the accumulation of fats, cholesterol and lipid-laden macrophages in the
artery wall with formation of plaques, potentially restricting blood flow. In man, it
is considered that the earliest change of atherosclerosis occurs in the endothelium
resulting in endothelial dysfunction. This can result in increased permeability to
lipids, macrophage migration with formation of foam cells, and infiltration by
T-lymphocytes and platelets in the vessel wall. These early inflammatory changes are
accompanied by accumulation of extra cellular matrix and stimulate smooth muscle cells
in the vascular media which then migrate and proliferate , , .
Fibrous intramural plaques are infrequent and while they have been referred to as
“Other Terms” with arteriosclerotic lesions, this term should not be used as a synonym
for atherosclerotic lesions in the non-human primate. Intramural plaques can be
induced at sites of chronic catheter implantation as well as infusion sites, and the
term should be restricted to these observations.
It has been demonstrated that atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries can cause
myocardial infarction in rhesus and cynomolgus monkeys fed an atherogenic diet
(low-fiber, high-carbohydrate and high-fat diet) for more than one year . Additionally, it appears that
cynomolgus monkeys are more prone to develop atherosclerosis than rhesus macaques, and
that the social status may play a role in females, with competitive female cynomolgus
monkeys having less atherosclerosis than submissive females .

## Cytomegaly, endothelial cell: Blood Vessels
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Infection by Cytomegaloviruses spp. of the family of the Betaherpesvirinae.

## Diagnostic features
Hypertrophy of endothelial cells, bulging in the vascular lumen.
generally associated with vascular/perivascular inflammation.
Large intranuclear Cowdry-type A inclusion bodies may be observed whereas smaller
amphiphilic, intra-cytoplasmic inclusions are less frequent.
In addition to endothelial cells, many other cell types (such as epithelial
cells, cardiomyocytes etc) can be affected, particularly in the lungs, heart and
kidneys. Intra-vascular cytomegalic cells can occasionally be seen.

## Differential Diagnoses
Other cytomegalic viruses (e.g. Adenovirus).

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization may be useful diagnostic tools,
especially when inclusions are rare and cytomegaly is mild.
Comments: Cytomegaloviruses are highly host-specific viruses of human,
non-human primates and other species. The sero-prevalence of simian cytomegaloviruses
in adult monkeys is about 100% in most colonies. Infection is most commonly
asymptomatic. Latent infections tend to persist in glandular tissue, lympho-reticular
cells and kidneys, with periodic shedding in body secretions. Clinically apparent
disease occurs in immunodeficient animals, after viral infection (simian
immunodeficiency virus, retroviruses) or treatment with immunosuppressive
agents .

## Degeneration/necrosis, media or wall: Blood Vessels
( )

## Other term(s)
Fibrinoid vascular necrosis; vasculitis; polyarteritis nodosa

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown.

## Diagnostic features
Segmental necrosis of the entire vascular media, accompanied by inflammatory cell
infiltrates and collagen deposits which may disrupt the vascular wall
architecture.
Segmental or diffuse loss of cellular architecture and replacement of the vessel
wall by bright eosinophilic fibrinoid material.

## Differential Diagnoses
Infectious vasculitides such as the hemorrhagic fevers (filoviruses and
flaviviruses).

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
PTAH staining may be used to demonstrate the presence of fibrin in the lesion
Comments: This lesion has been associated with simian immunodeficiency
virus infection (SIV), but also occurs in monkeys with no history of SIV exposure. The
cause remains unknown, and the relative significance of the lesion in the context of a
study should be considered; low numbers of sporadic lesions can be considered a
“background” lesion, whereas highly prevalent lesions would be unusual and would
suggest a study-related cause.
Vascular inflammation characterized by prominent mural degeneration/necrosis can be
induced by treatment with a large spectrum of molecules such as monoclonal antibodies
and proteins causing formation of immune complex which deposit onto the endothelial
surface triggering endothelial activation followed by chemotaxis of inflammatory
cells. A similar morphological pattern can also be rarely observed with certain
antisense oligonucleotides, as a consequence of drug-related complement activation
(which is a monkey-specific phenomenon), which triggers the inflammatory cascade.
Polyarteritis nodosa has been described in cynomolgus monkeys and can affect small-
to medium-sized arteries in several organs (including kidney, gut, heart, spleen,
mesentery, and others), showing varying severity and stage of development. The lesion
is considered to progress from a segmental infiltration of the tunica adventitia and
media by lymphocytes, macrophages, and few neutrophils and eosinophils. Intimal
thickening due to accumulation of mucinous stroma can also occur. Some vessels may
show marked intimal proliferation and only few inflammatory cells. In severe lesions,
fibrinoid necrosis of the tunica media can be prominent and accompanied by loss of the
internal elastic lamina and luminal occlusion due to thrombus formation. The mural
inflammatory changes are generally associated with inflammatory cell infiltration in
the tunica adventitia and surrounding tissues , , , , , .

## Embolus: Blood Vessels (No image provided)
Comments: Foreign material and fragments of keratin or hair shaft can be
observed in cynomolgus monkeys in continuous infusion studies within the inflammatory
reaction surrounding the cannulated vessels and/or in distant vessels such as in the
lungs, generally associated with granulomatous inflammation , .

## Mineralization, media or wall: Blood Vessels (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown.

## Diagnostic features
Mineralization in the wall of the aorta or in the media layer of small- or
medium-sized arteries and arterioles

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Intensely basophilic material in the H&E stain which gives a positive
reaction with von Kossa stain.
Comments: Mineralization of various degrees has been reported in the
brain of cynomolgus monkeys with no evident age-relationship in incidence or severity
and no macroscopic correlate. The lesions were observed in the medial medullary lamina
dividing the globus pallidus into the medial and lateral segments, always bilaterally.
No mineralization was reported in other regions of the brain. The lesions were
characterized by the presence of globoid bodies with prominent concentric lamellar
structures in the arteriolar and vein wall (type A) or fine granules in the media of
small or medium-sized arteries (type B), appearing as dense deposits in the media of
small- or medium-sized arteries and arterioles, at electron microscopy. X-ray analysis
demonstrated the presence of calcium and other minerals. The pathogenesis was unclear,
although there appeared that degenerative change in the vessel wall preceded the
formation of mineralized deposits. These changes were not accompanied by any
abnormalities in growth, weight gain, or neurologic signs .

## Mucinous change, aorta: Blood Vessels
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown.

## Diagnostic features
Thickening of the wall of the aorta and/or small- or medium-sized arteries due to
intimal accumulation of loose material with sparse fibroblast-like cells
surrounded by eosinophilic extracellular substance.
May accompany intimal fibrosis and atherosclerotic lesions.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
PAS and/or other stains specific for mucopolysaccharides may help in identifying
the extracellular substance.
Comments: This can be a striking although infrequent change in
cynomolgus monkeys used in nonclinical studies and can lead to local swelling of the
affected blood vessel, especially in the aorta near the coronary sinus and/or the
carotid arteries. Similar lesions can occur in the subendocardial regions of the atria
( ) and ventricles as well as heart valves where it is often referred to as
myxomatous degeneration .

## SIV-related arteriopathy: Blood Vessels (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Infection by Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV).

## Diagnostic features
Intimal and medial thickening due to fibrosis characterized by collagen deposits,
extracellular matrix, smooth muscle cells and macrophage infiltration.
May be associated with luminal occlusion and/or thrombosis
Fragmentation of the internal elastic laminae
At early (absence of intimal thickening) and late stages, the endothelial cells
may appear plump, vacuolated, and/or detached from the subendothelial space.
Pulmonary arteries seem to be preferentially affected; vessels in other organs
appear less frequently affected.

## Differential Diagnoses
Atherosclerosis
Mucinous change
Comments: This disease has been reported in rhesus and cynomolgus
macaques ,
 . Cases of systemic
arteriopathy additionally affecting the intestine, pancreas, liver, heart, lymph
nodes, spleen and testis have been described in SIV-infected rhesus macaques with
concurrent Cytomegalovirus infection .

## Hemangioma: Blood Vessels (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown.

## Diagnostic features
Presence of multiple vascular lacunae filled by blood and lined by
well-differentiated endothelial cells.

## Differential Diagnoses
hemangiosarcoma
Comments: A case of hemangioma was reported in the adrenal glands in an
adult female cynomolgus monkey and appeared to dissect the parenchyma in the adrenal
cortical region .
Another case of vascular tumor has been reported in an adult rhesus macaque and was
identified as an epithelioid hemangioendothelioma .

## 4. Digestive System
For detailed general considerations on the digestive system, please refer to the rodent
publication . The terminology
regarding “vascular lesions” and “infectious diseases” are covered elsewhere (cardiovascular
and systemic chapters).

## A. Upper Alimentary Tract (Oral Cavity, Tongue, Pharynx, and Esophagus)
Most commonly, microscopic lesions in the upper alimentary tract are observed in tissues
that are required to be examined microscopically, based on regulatory guidelines and the
laboratories preferences, e.g., esophagus, and tongue. In most instances, other lesions in
the oral cavity and pharynx are examined only when gross lesion are recorded at necropsy
( ).

## Cyst, esophagus: Upper Alimentary Tract (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Inclusion cyst; developmental cyst

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Congenital lesion from abnormal primitive foregut tissue, whose remnants are
transferred during the normal developmental process into other sites (tracheobronchial
tree, oesophagus, stomach, intestine, mediastinum) .

## Diagnostic features
Grossly, soft, whitish area with a smooth, glossy surface
Cyst located within the submucosa of the esophagus with no communication with the
esophageal lumen
Cyst filled with serous fluid
Cyst lined by a pseudostratified ciliated epithelium

## Metaplasia, sebaceous gland cell: Upper Alimentary Tract
( )

## Other term(s)
Fordyce’s spots; Fordyce’s granules

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Sebaceous gland cell metaplasia most likely originates from pluripotential basal
cells within the squamous esophageal (or buccal) epithelium .

## Diagnostic features
Presence of nests of cells, exhibiting characteristic sebaceous cell
differentiation, within the intra-epithelial cell-nests mucosal epithelium,
primarily located at the stratum basale, showing characteristic sebaceous cell
differentiation.Within the cell-nest, differentiation from basally oriented
seboblasts to centrally orientated, mature sebocytes with finely cytoplasmic
vacuolation and a centrally placed nucleus is evident.
Individual or small clusters of mature, highly vacuolated sebocytes can be found
ascending within the overlying normal stratified squamous, non-keratinized
epithelium.
An excretory duct is lacking.
Comments: Sebaceous gland cell metaplasia within the esophageal mucosa,
which is of endodermal origin is an extremely rare finding in man and monkey. In
contrast, in man, sebaceous gland metaplasia is very commonly found in organs of
ectodermal origin, such as the inner surface of the lips and buccal mucosa. This
however seems not the case in monkeys . The term ectopic sebaceous glands described in the rodents as a
congenital finding is not considered appropriate in these specific sites (buccal and
esophageal mucosa), since this observation appears to be acquired in primates, and is
not observed in younger animals.

## Necrosis/ulcer: Upper Alimentary Tract (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Necrotizing and ulcerative gingivitis and stomatitis (Noma)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Localized disruption of the squamous epithelium in the oral cavity with full
penetration of the squamous epithelium (ulcer) associated with coagulative necrosis
and mixed bacteria.
Ulceration is usually is the result of epithelial necrosis.

## Diagnostic features
Focal or locally extensive loss of surface epithelium in the oral cavity
Homogenous amorphous eosinophilic and karyorrhectic debris (necrosis)
Acute/chronic inflammatory response (neutrophilic or lymphocytic-plasmacytic
inflammatory cell infiltrate)
Hemorrhage may be seen with larger ulcers

## Differential diagnoses
Squamous cell carcinoma:
- May present with erosion/ulcer on the mucosal surface. The presence of this
neoplasm would preclude diagnosis of an associated erosion/ulcer.
Atrophy, epithelial:
- Reduced thickness of all layers of the squamous epithelium or, in severe cases,
absence of basal germinal layers; usually no inflammatory cell infiltrate.
Erosion/ulcer:
- Focal or focally extensive absence of superficial or, in severe cases, of all
epithelial layers with extension of the alteration into the muscularis.
Comments: Noma is a rapidly developing, necrotizing gingivitis and
stomatitis which frequently progresses to include both underlying bone and overlying
skin. Noma is microscopically characterized by mucosal ulcer covered by necrotic
debris and mixed bacteria. Intense neutrophilic infiltration, mixed bacteria,
spirochetes and vascular thrombi are present in areas of necrosis. In more severe
cases, there is osteonecrosis .
The precise etiology of this lesion remains unclear, but a variety of microorganisms
are isolated from lesions (Fusobacterium necrophorum,
Sighella flexneri, Spirochetal organisms,
Streptococcus spp., Staphylococcus
aureus) ,
 .
The presence of noma in a macaque colony is strongly suggestive of endemic type D
retrovirus infection, though severe malnutrition should be considered a possible
cause.

## Hyperplasia, gingiva: Upper Alimentary Tract (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Gingival fibromatosis; fibrous gingival hyperplasia; gingival overgrowth

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Gingival hyperplasia is a benign proliferation of gingival tissue. The etiology is
unknown, but gingival hyperplasia may be a sequela to chronic gingivitis. There is a
possibility that it is familial in macaques .
In both humans and non-human primates, this condition has also been associated with
the use of some anticonvulsants such as diphenylhydantoin.

## Diagnostic features
Grossly, bright red/pink tissue, with granular surface
Fusiform-shaped fibroblasts admixed with collagen
Squamous epithelium is extended into rete pegs
Inflammatory cells may be present in the submucosa but are rarely associated with
the fibrous tissue

## Differential Diagnoses
Hyperplasia, squamous cell:
- Proliferation and thickening of the stratum spinosum
Fibrosis
- Poorly cellular fibrous tissue containing few fibroblasts; very little if any
leukocyte infiltration.
Fibroplasia
- Cellular, containing numerous active fibroblasts which although may be plump,
show no atypical features.
Comments: There are usually no clinical signs. There is mild to marked
firm enlargement of the marginal and alveolar gingiva, including the interdental
papillae. The hyperplastic tissue may completely cover the teeth.

## B. Stomach
Unlike the rodent, the stomach of the cynomolgus monkey consists of glandular mucosa only
and is devoid of a nonglandular mucosa; therefore, the terminology for the nonglandular
stomach of rodents is not applicable for the NHP and was omitted.
The cynomolgus monkey has a simple stomach comprising cardiac, fundic and pyloric
glandular regions. To assure a thorough examination of the stomach, examination of
representative sections of all regions is mandatory. Vidal et
al. developed a
reliable method for routine sampling of the stomach for microscopic evaluation in
nonclinical safety studies, allowing for correlation of the gross subdivisions (fundus,
cardia, body, and antrum) with the histologic distribution of parietal, chief, and mucus
cells.
The cynomolgus monkey has a prominent fundus that extends to the level of the
gastroesophageal junction. Macroscopically, the fundus can be distinguished from the body,
as the fundus is a lighter shade of tan. The fundus of the cynomolgus monkey has prominent
gastric pits, lacks parietal cells, and has extensive mucous-secreting cells. The body of
the cynomolgus monkey is histologically similar to that reported in the human, and
although similar to the described “fundic mucosa”, care must be taken in using this term,
as the mucosa of the true fundus in cynomolgus monkeys is distinct. The proximal portions
of body contained more chief cells than the distal portions, as has been reported in the
human, dog, and cat. The cardia was similar to that of humans in size and histology. The
antrum was similar in size and consistent in histologic appearance with that reported in
other species ( ).

## Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type]: Stomach (No image provided)

## Diagnostic features
High incidence in Cynomolgus monkeys
Commonly observed as lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates in the lamina propria
In fundus and antrum
Occasionally accompanied by atrophy of epithelial cells and dilation of gastric
glands, but without the presence of ulceration and hemorrhage.
Comments: The cause of lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations in cynomolgus
monkey stomachs is not known and it is possible that environmental antigens such as
food antigens may cause an immunological reaction within the lamina propria of the
stomach. One of the proposed causes is thought to be Helicobacter
spp. Infection ,
 , , . Lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates, even without
additional features characteristic of inflammation (e.g. necrosis, ulceration), has
sometimes been referred to as inflammation or “gastritis”. This approach is not
recommended and the term infiltrate, lymphoplasmacytic is preferred. The presence of
inflammatory cell infiltrates in the absence of other features of inflammation should
be diagnosed as an ‘infiltrate’ with predominate/appropriate cell type(s) identified.
Only if other prominent morphologic features (congestion, hyperemia, hemorrhage,
edema, necrosis, fibrosis, foreign material, bacterial organisms, etc.) are present,
it is preferable to characterize the change as an inflammatory process (inflammation)
with specific descriptors.

## Hyperplasia, polypoid: Stomach (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Polyp; adenomatous polyp; gastric polyposis

## Diagnostic features
Circumscribed areas of gastric hyperplasia with prominent stroma
Well-differentiated tall, columnar, mucus-secreting cells perpendicular to
papillary projections of stroma
Stroma can be branching and radiate from the underlying submucosa
Deep, mucus-filled crypts present between adjacent papillary projections
Most often seen associated with presence of nematode infection (P.
tumefaciens)

## Differential Diagnoses
Adenoma
- Nodular lesions growing exophytic (polypoid, papillary); distortion of
glandular architecture and in case of non-papillary adenomas also compression of
surrounding tissue.
Comments: This finding is extremely rarely observed as a spontaneous
observation in the absence of nematode infestation. A spontaneous case can be
differentiated by the absence of any parasites or ova .

## C. Small and Large Intestine (Duodenum, Jejunum, Ileum, Cecum, Colon, Rectum)
( )

## Herniation, gland: Small and Large Intestine (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Glandular herniation; glandular micro-herniation; crypt herniation

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Herniation is thought to result from a defect in the overlying muscularis mucosa,
causing the glands to protrude through the gap into the underlying GALT in the sub
mucosa. The increased intraluminal pressure, as part of normal peristalsis is thought
to be a contributing factor to the herniation of the mucosal glands .

## Diagnostic features
Extension of crypts through muscularis mucosa, into the submucosa
Basement membrane integrity always maintained
Occurs mainly in the colon, but can be seen also in small intestine and the
stomach
Glands are frequently observed within in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue
(GALT)
Often accompanied by inflammation and regenerative/reparative processes.

## Differential Diagnosis
Diverticulum, diverticulosis:
- Diverticula are blind, mucosal lined pouches of the alimentary tract that
communicate with the lumen. Usually they occur in the colon. They may be
congenital or acquired. Congenital diverticula contain all layers of the
intestinal wall, while acquired diverticula either lack or have an attenuated
muscularis propria. Colonic diverticula generally occur alongside the taenia coli.
Hypertrophy of the colonic musculature is commonly observed.
- The mechanism of diverticulum development is unknown but two factors appear to
be involved: an increase in intraluminal pressure and areas of relative weakness
in the colonic wall. Contributing factors are low fiber diet and old age.
Comments: Micro-hernias of colonic mucosal glands through the muscularis
mucosae are common in both humans and nonhuman primates . A retrospective study of Chamanza et
al. indicated that the
incidence of glandular herniation was of 1-1.5%.
Micro-herniations play an important role in the spread of pathogens from the lamina
propria to the submucosa by allowing the infective agents (e.g. Balantidium
coli or bacteria) to pass through the muscularis mucosae. Parasites and
fecal matter trapped within these herniation or diverticula can incite a chronic
inflammatory cell reaction with foreign-body giant cells.
Complications include hemorrhage, ulceration, inflammation, abscess formation,
perforation, fistulas, stricture formation, and phlebitis.

## D. Salivary Glands
The major salivary glands are examples of exocrine glands and include the parotid,
submandibular and sublingual glands. The parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands are
all branched, tubulo-alveolar (acinar) glands with a merocrine type of secretion. The
secretory product is either serous (parotid) or mucous (sublingual gland) or both
(submandibular gland).
All major salivary glands should be sampled for routine toxicological examination ( ).

## E. Exocrine Pancreas
( )

## Hyperplasia, acinar cell: Exocrine Pancreas (No image provided)
Comments: Fujisawa et al. describe this observation in cynolgous macaques.

## Hyperplasia, ductal cell: Exocrine Pancreas
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Non-neoplastic proliferative lesion associated with microsporidian parasites
(Enterocytozoan bieneusi-like) in immunosuppressed rhesus macaques.
The lesion is noted in association with hepatobiliary infection or inflammation
(“cholangiohepatitis”, “cholecystitis”, or “choledochitis”) .

## Diagnostic features
Grossly, thickened, firm, dilated pancreatic ducts
Proliferation of pancreatic duct epithelial cells forming papilliferous lumenal
projections
Circumscribed by mild to moderate periductular fibrosis
Can be associated with mild non-suppurative inflammation

## 5. Endocrine System
For detailed general considerations on the endocrine system, refer to the INHAND rodent
publication .

## A. Pituitary Gland
The pituitary gland is structurally and functionally the most complex of the endocrine
glands and exhibits a typical mammalian morphology in the non-human primate ( ).

## Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type]: Pituitary Gland (No image
provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Mononuclear cell infiltrates can be seen in many tissues in non-human primates
including pituitary.
Comments: Mononuclear cell infiltrates (lymphocytes, plasma cells,
macrophages) are not uncommon in the pituitary in cynomolgus monkeys in toxicity
studies. They are generally seen focally or multifocally in the pars
intermedia or pars nervosa . As for other locations in the body, their incidence and
severity can be increased compared to controls after administration of
immunostimulating compounds such as proinflammatory oligonucleotides .

## Adenoma, pars distalis: Pituitary Gland (No image provided)
Comments: Remick et al. have described the spontaneous occurrence of pituitary
adenoma observed in cynomlogus macaques.

## B. Pineal Gland
The pineal gland in the primate is located on the posterior wall of the third ventricle,
between the hemispheres, rostral to the cranial colliculi ( ).

## C. Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands
The thyroid consists of two lobes connected by a narrow isthmus, below and anterior to
the larynx. The C-cells of the cynomolgus monkey are less apparent than in other species,
and focal accumulations of C cells are rare .
The primate usually has two pairs of parathyroids, embedded in the posterior connective
tissue of the thyroid. The parathyroid in non-human primates is composed of small chief
cells and larger oxyphil cells. The chief cell is the predominant cell type. Oxyphil cells
are larger cells with granular eosinophilic cytoplasm, containing abundant mitochondria,
but no secretory granules. Small numbers may be seen throughout the parathyroid gland, and
their incidence increases with age. The function of the oxyphil cell is yet to be
determined ( ).

## Ectopic tissue, salivary gland: Thyroid / Parathyroid Gland
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Congenital foci of ectopic salivary gland

## Diagnostic features
Foci of salivary gland acini and ducts in the thyroid or parathyroid gland.
Comments: Ectopic salivary gland in the thyroid or parathyroid gland is
rare in monkeys . In humans ectopic
salivary gland is reported in the oropharyngeal region including thyroid and
parathyroid gland.

## Accumulation, adipocytes: Thyroid / Parathyroid Gland
( )

## Other term(s)
Fatty infiltration; lipomatosis of the thyroid gland

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown/Mature adipocytes

## Diagnostic features
Focal or diffuse adipocyte infiltration of the interstitium of thyroid or
parathyroid gland.
Comments: Infiltration of adipocytes in the thyroid or parathyroid gland
is rare and is also described in
human.

## Colloid alteration: Thyroid / Parathyroid Gland (No image provided)
Comments: Colloid alteration characterized by granular or clumped colloid
with mineralized material is also rarely observed in cynomolgus monkey. Variations in
the staining characteristics of the colloid can be seen in the absence of other
morphological changes and are considered a background change and not a finding to be
reported.

## Degeneration, vacuolar: Thyroid / Parathyroid Gland
( )

## Other term(s)
Hydropic degeneration of follicular cells; vacuolar change

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Degenerative change

## Diagnostic features
Thyroid gland without macroscopic changes
Enlarged follicular cells.
Apically displaced nuclei.
Large intracellular vacuole with homogeneous eosinophilic content located at the
base of follicular epithelial cells.

## Differential Diagnosis
Hypertrophy, follicular cells
- The nucleus is not apically displaced.
- No vacuoles at the base of the follicular epithelial cells.
Comments: A lesion with similar morphologic features is observed in in
dwarf and normal-sized Hannover Wistar GALAS rats and diagnosed as thyroid
dysplasia .
By electron microscopy, the rough endoplasmic reticulum was dilated , which displaced the normally basally
located nucleus to an apical position.

## Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type]: Thyroid Gland (No image
provided)

## Other term(s)
Inflammatory cell infiltrate; thyroiditis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Accumulation of inflammatory cells; uncertain pathogenesis or local immune
response.

## Diagnostic features
Focal to multifocal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate in the interstitium
Lymphoid follicle formation may be present
Macrophage infiltrate within the follicles
Comments: Focal to multifocal inflammatory cell infiltrate and focal to
multifocal thyroiditis are terms used previously . The latter terminology should be avoided in favor of more
descriptive terminology and prevent any confusion with the conditions observed in
clinical setting in humans.

## D. Adrenal Gland
Special care is required when removing the right adrenal gland of the cynomolgus macaque,
due to its anatomic location and close association with the right lateral lobe of the
liver. It also has a very distinctive pyramidal shape ( ).

## Adhesion, adrenohepatic: Adrenal Gland
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Spontaneous congenital lesion

## Diagnostic features
Adhesion of liver tissue and the right adrenal gland tissue with a connective
septum in between and without intermingling of the respective parenchyma
(adrenocortical adhesion).
Union of liver tissue and the right adrenal gland with close intermingling of the
respective parenchyma without a connective capsule in between (adrenocortical
fusion) ,
 ,
 .

## Differential Diagnoses
Ectopic tissue, adrenocortical
- Ectopic adrenal tissue is attached to the liver or lying within the liver
capsule.
Adhesion (inflammation in the abdominal cavity)
- Presence of inflammatory cell infiltrate or fibrosis.
Comments: This finding is observed in young cynomolgus monkey at
necropsy. The distinction between adhesion and fusion is not considered
essential . This finding is
also sporadically described in human and the pathogenesis is controversial, some
authors suggest a developmental anomaly and other consider it as an acquired
anomaly.

## Ectopic tissue, adrenocortical: Adrenal Gland (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Accessory cortical tissue; cortical herniation; extracapsular adrenal tissue.
Comments: This finding is morphologically similar to this described in
rodents, but reported under multiple other terms as indicated above , .

## Involution, fetal cortex: Adrenal Gland
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Remnants of fetal cortex

## Diagnostic features
Additional layer of solid sheets and columns of cells supported by vascular
capillary bed that surrounds the entire circumference of the medulla
Large polyhedral cells with abundant eosinophilic, slightly finely vacuolated
cytoplasm
All three zones of the cortex (glomerulosa, fascicularis, and reticularis) can be
clearly identified
Comments: This finding is very rare in cynomolgus monkey and there is
only one case described in literature . In NHP the fetal cortex is gradually replaced with the three
zones and the involution is accompanied by hemorrhage and necrosis with consequent
dystrophic mineralization.

## Degeneration, cortical: Adrenal Gland (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Sequela of altered steroidogenesis or metabolism in adrenal cortical epithelium.

## Diagnostic features
Cortical cell loss (decreased number of cortical epithelium in comparison to
surrounding parenchyma).
Zona fasciculata is more commonly affected
Both increased cytoplasmic vacuolation and decreased vacuolization with increased
cytoplasmic eosinophilia have been described.

## Differential Diagnoses
Atrophy, cortical:
- Decreased cortical thickness and individual epithelial cell size with no
evidence of cell degeneration or loss.
Vacuolation, Increased, Cortical
- Increased cytoplasmic vacuolization of cortical epithelium with little or no
evidence of cell loss or degeneration.
Comments: Adrenal cortical degeneration is an uncommon
xenobiotic-induced finding in cynomolgus monkeys although is reported that the adrenal
is the endocrine gland most sensitive to compound-induced lesions , .

## Mineralization: Adrenal Gland (No image provided)
Comments: Mineralization occurring at the corticomedullary junction of the
adrenal gland in cynomolgus monkeys is a relatively common incidental observation (6%
incidence in male cynomolgus macaques) , . This
finding is believed to be caused by dystrophic calcification of remnants of the fetal
adrenal cortex and is considered to be of no pathological significance. It is much more
frequently observed in rhesus macaques (up to 45% incidence in both males and
females) ,
 . The focal change can
be quite extensive and may show up during in-vivo imaging
techniques.

## Hyperplasia, cortical, focal: Adrenal Gland (No image provided)
Comments: Cortical focal hyperplasia has also been reported as
hyperplasia, nodular . The term
hyperplasia, cortical, focal is preferred.

## E. Endocrine Pancreas (Islets of Langerhans)
The endocrine pancreas consists of discrete aggregates of cells throughout the exocrine
pancreas (islets of Langerhans) whose main function is the regulation of blood glucose.
The islets are composed of pale staining polygonal cells of variable size, and in the
primate show a mainly intra-lobular distribution. Large- to small-sized islets are present
in all lobes of the pancreas. Two main distribution patterns of α- and β-cells are
present, there are α-cell-rich or β-cell-rich islets in all lobes of the pancreas. In the
α-cell-rich islet, α-cells are distributed in all parts of the islet, and β-cells are
scattered or accumulated in the periphery of the islet, forming an irregular ring. In the
β-cell rich islet, β-cells are distributed in all parts of the islet. Relatively numerous
δ-cells are scattered in the center or periphery equally in both α-cell-rich and
β-cell-rich islets . Characterization
of the different cell types within the islets is not possible on H&E staining.
Application of immunohistochemical staining for the different hormones, or the use of
electron microscopy is necessary to differentiate the structure of the secretory granules
in each cell type ( ).

## 6. Hematopoietic and Lymphoid System
For detailed general considerations on the hematopoietic and lymphoid system, refer to the
INHAND rodent publication . A tiered
diagnostic approach has been used in the rodent nomenclature, however due to the smaller
number of animals in general toxicology studies using cynomolgus macaques, the authors of
this document recommend use of the descriptive terminology and not the more conventional
terms. Accordingly, only the descriptive terms are included in the tables for this
section.
Owing to their immunological, genetic, physiological, and anatomic similarities to humans,
nonhuman primates (NHP) have shed significant insight into nonclinical pharmaceutical
studies, as well as several translational models of human diseases including cancer,
infectious diseases, immunology, and radiation toxicity. Of the NHPs used in research,
cynomolgus and rhesus macaques are the species most widely used.
NHP are commonly the large animal species of choice to evaluate immunomodulatory compounds,
and thus, a comprehensive evaluation of hematolymphoid tissues is critical. Specific
recommendations for evaluating immune parameters including histopathology are addressed in
regulatory documents (FDA Guidance for Industry: S8 Immunotoxicity Studies for Human
Pharmaceuticals [ICH S8], 2006 ).
Standard post-mortem morphological evaluation of the hematolymphoid system in NHP is similar
to that of rodents which include evaluation of primary lymphoid organs including bone marrow
and thymus where lymphocyte proliferation and maturation occur independent of exogenous
antigen stimulation and secondary lymphoid organs including spleen, lymph nodes, and mucosal
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) where exogenous antigen-dependent lymphocyte development
and maturation takes place. As a standard, spleen and thymus weight measurements, and
microscopic evaluation of the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, Peyer’s patches (typically
included in section of ileum), mesenteric and mandibular lymph nodes are evaluated. Axillary
and/or inguinal lymph nodes are often included among the lymphoid tissues collected.
Depending on the study objectives, additional lymphoid tissues including lymph nodes
draining sites of test article or antigen administration may be collected and examined. In
general, MALT is examined in routine sections of lung (BALT) and gastrointestinal tract
including stomach, small and large intestines (GALT). Mucosal associated lymphoid tissue
surrounding the lacrimal and salivary gland ducts referred to as DALT are also observed in NHP. For drugs
administered by inhalation or nasal route of exposure, specific mucosal associated lymphoid
tissue from the nasal cavity (nasal-associated lymphoid tissues [NALT]) may be evaluated and
requires special collection . Tonsils
are an important component of the oropharyngeal mucosal associated lymphoid tissues which
were not discussed in the rodent manuscript as they are not present in rodent species but
are often evaluated in NHP toxicology studies (anatomic details described in MALT
section).
Each lymphoid organ has separate identifiable compartments that support specific immune
functions and should be evaluated individually for changes on microscopic evaluation.
Microscopic findings should be recorded accordingly, using locators/modifiers to describe
the compartment (cortex, medulla, medullary sinus, etc.) that is affected , . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) may be incorporated into a
toxicology study design as an adjunct diagnostic tool to further characterize a morphologic
finding observed in hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained tissue sections. IHC can be used to
determine tissue distribution of an antigen, lymphocyte subset and/or drug target and be
useful in identifying target versus off-target effects. A weight of evidence approach is
particularly important in interpreting morphologic changes in hematolymphoid organs.
Correlating in-life data such as immunophenotyping results, immune function assays,
anti-drug antibody and exposure data with post-mortem morphological alterations can aid in
interpreting a xenobiotic effect ( ).

## Decreased number and size, germinal centers: Lymphoid Tissues
( )

## Additional locator
lymphoid follicle
Comments: This morphologic term falls under the general category of
“lymphocytes, decreased”; however, because many immunomodulatory drugs have highly
specific molecular targets using enhanced terminology with compartment specific
modifiers can aid in elucidating target specific effects. To further characterize
drug-related findings in the splenic white pulp, lymph node cortex, tonsil and mucosal
associated lymphoid tissues the use of the descriptive term increased or decreased,
number and size, lymphoid follicles or germinal centers has been recommended . If follicular changes specifically
involve the germinal center, the locator “germinal center” is used.

## Erythrophagocytosis: Lymphoid tissues
( )

## Other term(s)
Erythrophagia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
This condition refers to the engulfment of RBCs by macrophages or neutrophils. It may
be seen in local lymph nodes following trauma or surgical biopsy associated with
draining lymphatic vessels. It can be seen in a variety of conditions including viral,
bacterial, and parasitic infections. Specifically, it has been observed lymph nodes from
SIV-infected monkeys. Klump et al. reported the finding in a monkey infected with
Salmonella spp. and it is also a feature of monkeys infected with
Plasmodium spp. It can be seen in the late stages of Simian
Retrovirus Type D infections whereby markedly depleted lymph nodes exhibit
hemosiderosis, medullary histiocytosis, and erythrophagocytosis. Finally, erythrophagia
has been observed in cynomolgus monkeys infected with Ebola virus. In contrast to
infectious diseases, it has been observed as an off-target effect in spleens of
cynomolgus monkeys dosed with a therapeutic monoclonal antibody. In humans, it has been
reported in immune-mediated diseases, as well as, incompatible blood transfusions.

## Diagnostic features
Gross and histological findings may include an enlarged lymph node, abundant sinus
macrophages, sinus erythrocytosis, or hemosiderosis. The cytological features are
RBCs located within the cytoplasm of macrophages or neutrophils.
Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Histology (Hematoxylin and Eosin) or blood smear (Wrights or Wright-Giemsa
stain)
Comments: The presence of erythrophagocytosis suggests an underlying
disorder but can be seen at a minimal level spontaneously within lymph nodes.

## Immunoblasts, increased: Lymphoid Tissues
( )

## Modifiers
lymphoid

## Other term(s)
Increased lymphoblasts, increased centroblasts, lymphoid hyperplasia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Physiologic response to antigen exposure

## Diagnostic features
The term immunoblasts is most commonly used to refer to proliferating lymphocytes;
however, immunohistochemical characterization is necessary for definitive
identification. Immunoblasts are large, pale-staining polygonal cells with increase
nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, vesicular chromatin, often prominent nucleoli and
moderate, pale to basophilic cytoplasm. They often have visible mitotic figures and
are commonly present in the germinal center of secondary lymphoid follicles.
Increased immunoblasts may represent a normal physiologic response to antigen
presentation.
Increased immunoblasts may be associated with clusters of plasma cells and
occasional Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells. RS cells are large 30–50 microns EBV/LCV
transformed immortalized B cells which often have either a multinucleated or bilobed
nucleus with prominent eosinophilic inclusion-like nucleoli (an “owl’s eye”
appearance). Mitotic figures and atypical cells can be frequent in these clusters.
These clusters are commonly found in periarteriolar lymphoid sheath (PALs) in the
spleen as well as in the paracortex and medullary cords in lymph nodes. Adjacent to
these clusters, normal T and B cell area architecture is preserved.
Increased immunoblasts with plasmacytoid features (plasmablasts) can be admixed
with mature plasma cells, identified in spleen in the marginal zone and red pulp as
well as in lymph nodes in the paracortex and medullary cords.

## Differential Diagnoses
Lymphoma
- Diffuse infiltration, loss of distinction between normal tissue compartments and
may extend beyond tissue capsule or border.
- Cell population is more homogeneous.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Ki67, an immunohistochemistry (IHC) marker of proliferation, can be used to label
immunoblasts
IHC is useful to aid in identifying in RS cells. RS cells are typically CD30 and
CD15 positive and usually negative for CD20 and CD45.
In situ hybridization for EBV-encoded nuclear RNAs (EBERs),
present in most infected B cells in relatively high copy numbers, can be used to
verify LCV infection.
Comments: Lymphoproliferation, whether caused by exposure to an infectious
agent or exogenous substance such as a therapeutic protein, is a normal physiologic
response. Increased responses such as reactive plasmacytosis have been described with
antigen stimulation through vaccination or with severe infection. One of the most common
infectious causes of lymphoproliferation in cynomolgus monkeys is simian
lymphocryptovirus (LCV), a gammaherpes virus similar to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Most,
if not all, Old World non-human primates, including cynomolgus macaques, are infected
with LCV. Naturally acquired, primary LCV infection usually occurs within the first year
of life in cynomolgus monkeys with nearly all individuals infected by 2 years of
age , . LCV establishes a latent and
asymptomatic infection in B cells which is mediated by T cell viral suppression.
Immunomodulatory agents that cause immunosuppression can lead to LCV reactivaton,
associated lymphoproliferative disorders and oncogeneis. Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders
(PTLDs) are reported in NHP following solid organ, stem cell or other xenotransplants in
NHP , . Differentiation from malignant lymphoma
is often difficult with the florid lymphoproliferation observed with PTLD and relies on
molecular studies (restriction fragment length polymorphism [RFLP]) to determine
clonality. Proliferative cells often have plasmacytoid features. Plasma or serum
electrophoresis can aid in differentiation of a monoclonal spike seen with neoplasia vs.
the lack of a spike with PTLD. Since kappa and lamda light chains in plasma cells are of
similar frequency in NHPs, immunohistochemical or flow cytometric demonstration of
enhanced distribution toward either light chain would be suggestive of malignancy.

## Increased number and size, germinal centers: Lymphoid Tissues (No image
provided)

## Additional locator
lymphoid follicle
Comments: This morphologic term falls under the general category of
“lymphocytes, increased”. To further characterize drug-related findings the descriptive
terminology with compartment specific modifiers can aid in elucidating target specific
effects.

## Lymphoid follicle formation: Lymphoid Tissues
( )

## Other term(s)
Organized lymphoid aggregates; tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
May be related to persistent antigen exposure

## Diagnostic features
One or more organized primary or secondary lymphoid follicles noted in an ectopic
or uncommon location.
Occasionally present in the thymic medulla, bone marrow of the femur or sternum,
and salivary glands ,
 ,
 

## Differential Diagnoses
Infitrate, mononuclear cell (or lymphocyte)
- lack distinct germinal center formation and organized follicle architecture
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
- Nonencapsulated subepithelial lymphoid structures with parafollicular areas and
overlying follicle-associated epithelium (FAE)
Comments: Increases in the number of lymphoid follicles above the normal
variance may suggest immune stimulation. Tertiary lymphoid structures frequently occur
in association with inflammation, tumors or chronic infections in non-lymphoid
organs.Variably-organized lymphoid aggregates, with or without follicular development,
observed in the bone marrow have been postulated to be related to type D retrovirus
infection . However, most
non-human primates used in nonclinical studies are currently prescreened for simian
retroviruses and thus other agents or non-specific immunosurveillance could be the
cause. Increased secondary lymphoid follicles in the bone marrow have also been observed
in cynomolgus monkeys in association with test article exposure.

## Hematopoietic Neoplasms: Lymphoid Tissues (No images provided)

## Other term(s)
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML); Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia (ALL); Chronic Myeloid
Leukemia (CML); Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia; Myeloma; Myelodysplastic Syndrome

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Hematopoietic neoplasms are clonal disorders involving hematopoietic blast cells of
myeloid lineage and their progenitors. In general, complete neoplastic transformation
occurs due to DNA damage that often results in gross chromosomal damage (e.g.,
chromosomal translocations (CTs)). Complementary secondary mutations (e.g., point
mutations) accumulate in DNA and together with CTs lead to neoplastic transformation. A
variety of risk factors may predispose individuals to the development of hematological
malignancies including accidental or therapy-related ionizing radiation,
chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., alkylating agents and topoisomerase II inhibitors), and
exposures to environmental carcinogens.
Reports of spontaneous hematopoietic malignancies in nonhuman primates are sparse
compared to humans and rodents. A case report involving a rhesus macaque with
granulocytic leukemia has been reported following exposure to whole body, fractionated
low dose, neutron irradiation . A
second case of AML was reported in a monkey which developed delayed onset of disease
following radiation exposure . A
larger study involving monkeys that received whole body proton irradiation found that
one monkey out of 123 rhesus macaques developed AML two and a half years post
exposure .
The majority of reports relating to leukemia in NHPs are associated with radiation
exposure. Gaps in our knowledge are due to a low prevalence of disease and a lack of
suitable assays including cytogenetics and genomics.

## Diagnostic features
>20% blasts in bone marrow, neoplastic cells in circulation or infiltrating
parenchyma tissue.
Presence of blasts with immature nuclear chromatin.
Myeloblasts may have round or indented nuclei.
Cyotplasmic granules may be present.

## Differential Diagnoses
Myelodysplastic Syndrome typically present with peripheral cytopenias despite
hypercellular marrow. Both the hematopoietic cells in the marrow as well as those on
the smear present with dysplastic features (e.g., large or giant platelets,
basophilic stippling in erythrocytes and immature but abundant precursors in the
marrow).
Leukemoid reactions, are differentiated on the basis of orderly maturation of
hematopoietic cells undergoing proliferation and have normal morphology. The marrow
is hypercellular characterized by myeloid hyperplasia.
Myelitis (Inflammation) may present as either acute or chronic. The duration will
determine the morphology wich may present with abundant (degenerate) neutrophils
with fibrin and necrosis or the presence of macrophages and well-formed abscesses.
Infectious agents (bacteria, viral inclusions, or fungi) may or may not be
present.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Histology, Cytology, Flow Cytometry, Immunohistochemistry, PCR, Southern Blotting,
In Situ Hybridization, Cytogenetics
Comments: Leukemia in contrast to lymphoma is a rare disease in nonhuman
primates.

## Histiocytic sarcoma: Lymphoid Tissues (No image provided)
Comments: A single case has been reported in an 11-year-old male cynomolgus
monkey fed a high-fat diet .

## Lymphoma: Lymphoid Tissues
( )

## Other term(s)
Leukemic lymphoma; lymphosarcoma; lymphoid leukemia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Lymphoma is a solid mass of neoplastic lymphocytes that arises from extramedullary
sites such as spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, or mucosa immune structures. Many lymphomas
in nonhuman primates are associated with viral infections including SIV, STLV, LCV, and
Rhadinaviruses ,
 .

## Diagnostic features
A diagnosis is made when a large percentage (>50%) of the cell population
consists of homogenous atypical, large lymphocytes in contrast to a heterogenous
population typically seen within lymphoid tissue.
Lymphoma can be classified based on anatomic site involvement (e.g., lymph node vs
thymus), histological location within the lymph node (e.g., follicular vs diffuse)
and morphology of the cell (large cell vs lymphoblastic).
Some authors have differentiated B-cell and T-cell lymphomas based on
immunohistochemical staining.
Demonstration of clonality is important to differentiate non-neoplastic
lymphoproliferative disease from lymphoma.

## Differential Diagnoses
Leukemia can be differentiated on the basis of increased numbers of myeloblasts in
bone marrow, invasion into parenchymal tissues and in circulation .
Lymphoid (Reactive) Hyperplasia is a benign condition wherein lymph node follicles
are numerous with sharp demarcations outlining the germinal centers and mantle
zones. Cells comprising these reactive regions comprise centroblasts, centrocytes,
and tingible body macrophages .

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Histology, Cytology, Flow Cytometry, Immunohistochemistry, PCR, Southern Blotting,
In Situ Hybridization, Cytogenetics
Comments: Gammaherpesvirus-related lymphoma has been reported in non-human
primates exposed to immunomodulatory biotherapeutics in non-clinical studies as well as
in experimental xenotransplant models. An association with chronic pharmacologic
T-lymphocyte depletion has been made.

## A. Bone Marrow
Bone marrow is routinely examined in situ in a section of sternum. The
quality of histologic sections of bone marrow is greatly influenced by the decalcification
procedure, which involves a balance between preservation of marrow cell features versus
adequate removal of mineral to allow histologic sectioning . In nonclinical toxicity studies, hematology data in
conjunction with microscopic examination of the bone marrow provide an assessment of
overall hematopoietic cellularity. If the combined data is inadequate, then
cytologic evaluation of the bone marrow smears (from rib or sternum) may be considered for
assessing the effect of test articles on the hematopoietic system , . Other techniques, such as flow cytometric evaluation,
clonigenic assays and electron microscopy may also be helpful in certain
situations ( ).

## Aggregate, lymphocyte: Bone Marrow
( )

## Other term(s)
Infiltrate, lymphocyte

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown

## Diagnostic features
A focal accumulation of lymphocytes in tissues which lacks organized follicular
structure

## Differential Diagnoses
Lymphoid follicle formation
- organized primary or secondary lymphoid follicles in an ectopic location (e.g.
tertiary lymphoid structures in non-lymphoid organs)
Comments: Commonly identified in the bone marrow in the femur or
sternum.

## Emperipolesis, increased, megakaryocyte: Bone Marrow
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The migration of blood cells, including lymphocytes, neutrophils, and erythrocytes,
through the cytoplasm of megakaryocytes is referred to as emperipolesis. This is in
contrast to phagocytosis, which involves the engulfment of cells that are targeted for
killing and elimination. Emperipolesis has been observed in a variety of species
including dogs, cats, rats, monkeys and humans. Emperipolesis is observed in healthy
marrow and increases under conditions of hematopoietic stress or bone marrow
disease . In humans,
increased emperipolesis has been observed with several types of bone marrow
neoplasms and when
stimulated by agents that cause thrombopoiesis including recombinant human
IL-6 . The underlying
mechanism and significance remains poorly understood.

## Diagnostic features
The presences of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and erythrocytes in the cytoplasm or
proplatelet extensions of megakaryocytes.

## Differential Diagnoses
Phagocytosis of dead or dying cells and/or cellular debris. Depending on the
orientation of the cells, emperipolesis should be distinguished from granules
(which are considerably smaller) or inclusions.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Histology, Cytology
Comments: The significance of emperiopolesis in normal megakaryocytes of
monkey bone marrow is not clear.

## B. Thymus
Non-human primates, have a bilobed thymus located in the anterior thoracic cavity just
cranial to the heart and cardiac vessels. The thymus has a thin connective tissue capsule
that surrounds the organ and penetrates into the lobes dividing it into multiple lobules.
Lobules are easily identified ( ).

## Cellularity, decreased, lymphocyte: Thymus
( )

## Other term(s)
Thymic atrophy; thymic involution; lymphocytes decreased

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Thymic involution can be divided into physiological or age-related or stress-induced.
Examples of stress related causes include metabolic derangements, pregnancy, or
malnutrition .

## Diagnostic features
Decreased cellularity of cortical region
Interlobular fat infiltration
Reduced or loss of delineation of the corticomedullary junction, with reduction
in cortical and medullary T and B cells
Reduced cortical-to-medullary ratio
Decreased thymic weights

## Differential Diagnoses
Atrophy
- Age-associated and stress-induced thymic both result in loss of cortical and
medullary thymocytes .
- Determining the underlying cause is important to classification.
- Apoptotic lymphocytes can be differentiated from other mechanisms of cell death
(e.g., necrosis) by cleaved caspase 3 and TUNEL.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Histology, Flow cytometry, sjTREC, thymic weight
Comments: Stress, age, and sex differences should be considered when
evaluating the thymus. Studies have shown that females do not exhibit the same degree
of thymic change as seen in males; this may be attributed to the influence of pre/post
menopause and the role of sex steroids.

## Myoid cells, increased: Thymus (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Ectopic tissue, myoid cells

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The normally occurring presence of myoid cells in the thymus has been well known
since 1888 . Myoid cells are
considered a source of acetylcholine receptors and play a key component in the
pathogenesis of myasthenia gravis . Recent studies suggest that myoid cells may protect the resident
thymocytes from apoptosis and regulate their differentiation .

## Diagnostic features
Myoid cells are located in the medulla and share morphological and functional
features with skeletal muscle; they express myoid proteins and contain
acetylcholine receptors.

## Differential Diagnoses
Hamartoma is a benign growth consisting of an abnormal collection of heterogenous
cells or tissue types normally located in that particular region of the body.
Choristoma is a benign growth consisting of normal tissue that is derived from
germ cells that are not normally found in that region of the body.
Rhabdomyoma is a benign tumor composed of striated muscle fibers that may appear
as a discrete mass.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Light microscopy, immunohistochemistry
Comments: It should be noted that myoid cells are part of the normal
thymic tissue architecture. These cells are not readily observed on routine light
microscopy and are best visualized using IHC.

## Thymoma, benign: Thymus
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Considered to be of thymic epithelial cell origin

## Diagnostic features
Present as solitary, well encapsulated, thymic nodules, distinct from the
surrounding normal thymic tissues.
May have pale and dark zones noted on HE. Pale areas are typically composed of
proliferations of large spindle or elongated cells, often densely packed and may
form a storiform pattern. Dark areas typically represent areas composed primarily
of lymphocytes like those in the thymic cortex.
Relative proportions of epithelial cells and lymphocytes vary between tumors and
within a given tumor.
Additional features may include interspersed Hassall’s corpuscles, individual,
small clusters of small lymphocytes (mixed T and B cells), scattered eosinophils,
necrosis, cavitation, mineralization, multinucleate giant cells (nearby keratin
whorls) and cholesterol clefts.
Neoplastic spindle cells have a relatively low mitotic index.
No evidence of vascular invasion or metastasis.

## Differential Diagnoses
Thymoma, malignant
- Marked invasion of adjacent tissues
Lymphoma
- No neoplastic epithelial component
- Other lymphoid organs often involved

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Useful IHC markers in published reports include pan-cytokeratin, vimentin, CD3,
CD20, PCNA, and S100
- Pan-cytokeratin helps visualize the epithelial component.
- Neoplastic spindle cells can have variable cytokeratin and/or vimentin
staining.
Comments: Neoplastic lesions including thymomas are rare in cynomolgus
monkeys used in toxicologic studies. Two published cases of benign thymomas have been
reported ,
 . Both were diagnosed
in relatively young monkeys and were subclinical in nature. Both tumors had benign
features (well-encapsulated, low mitotic rate, and no evidence of metastasis), and
prominent medullary differentiation including the presence of Hassall’s corpuscles, an
unusual occurrence in human tumors. The main differences were in their morphological
characteristics. One was histologically categorized as a mixed thymoma (type AB)
composed of proliferating spindle cells and a lymphoproliferative component and the
other was compatible with the WHO Type A morphology in which the neoplastic component
was limited to a neoplastic spindle cell population.

## C. Spleen
Anatomical differences in the structure of the spleen in macaques as compared to rodents
are worth mentioning. In macaques, the spleen is strongly sinusal with well-defined
medullary cords (syn. cords of Billroth) and sinuses like humans. In humans and Old World
monkeys, splenic sinuses are lined by modified sinus-lining cells called littoral cells
(LC). LC have multilineage expressions patterns with endothelial and
monocyte/macrophage/dendritic cell antigen expression patterns suggesting increased
plasticity of function. LC play a major role in regulating the cellular composition of the
systemic circulation by regulating which red blood cells (RBC) or leukocytes will pass
back into venous circulation or be destroyed. When sinusoidal lining cells become
reactive, for example during endotoxemia or sepsis, the cords appear almost
epithelial ( ).

## Accumulation acidophilic material, germinal center: Spleen
( )

## Additional modifiers
Eosinophilic, acidophilic, hyalinized

## Other term(s)
Hyalinized germinal centers; acidophilic material ; centrofollicular hyalinosis ; amorphous eosinophilic material .

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown, presumed to represent products of the immune reactions such as
antigen-antibody complexes. Increased eosinophilic PAS-positive extracellular germinal
center deposits, confirmed by electron microscopy to be non-amyloid, have been
associated with follicle involution post-SIV-induced follicular hyperplasia .

## Diagnostic features
Amorphous extracellular deposits within lymphoid follicle germinal centers stain
eosinophilic in H&E stained sections.
PAS positive staining
These deposits can have a granular or hyalinized appearance.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Differentiated from amyloid with histochemical stains such as Congo red or
Thioflavin T or with electron microscopy.
Differentiated from collagen with Masson’s trichrome stain.
Immunohistochemical stains for kappa and lambda immunoglobulin light chains can
be performed. This material often stains positive for IgM.
Comments: Deposition of eosinophilic material is frequently seen in
lymphoid follicle germinal centers in clinically normal juvenile cynomolgus monkeys
used in general safety assessment studies , , .
The material is generally considered to represent products of the immune reactions
such as immunoglobulin.

## Compound follicle: Spleen
( )

## Modifiers
Lymphoid

## Other term(s)
Giant lymphoid follicles ;
atypical lymphoid follicles ;
nodular hyperplasia; lymphoid follicle ; coalescing of lymphoid follicles

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown

## Diagnostic features
Large, variably-shaped, irregular lymphoid follicles and bizarre shaped germinal
centers. Often appear to be the result of two coalescing lymphoid
follicles .
In some giant follicles, the centers may contain amorphous eosinophilic or
acidophilic extracellular material and/or small central pale areas of lymphocytic
necrosis, fibrosis, and/or macrophage accumulation. Other follicles in the
surrounding spleen are normal in size and structure.
On gross evaluation, these giant irregular follicles can be recognized as single
or multiple raised pale foci on cut surface. They can cause slight compression of
surrounding tissue normal splenic tissue or bulging of the splenic capsule.

## Differential Diagnoses
Increased number and size, lymphoid follicle, germinal centers
- Diffuse, increase in the number and size of lymphoid follicle, most of which
have normal architectural features, including well-defined germinal centers with a
surrounding mantle/marginal zone.
Comments: These giant follicles occur in both wild-caught and
purpose-bred cynomolgus monkeys .
While the pathogenesis is considered unknown, it has been suggested that these
exuberant lymphoid follicles may be the result of chronic parasitic infestation
(including malaria), bacterial or viral infection.
They occur in low frequency and are typically surrounded by normal lymphoid follicles
and other normal splenic components. There is no evidence to support that these
lesions progress to lymphoma .

## Hyperplasia, stromal cell: Spleen (No image provided)

## Modifiers
Nodular

## Other term(s)
Reticular networks; fibroplasia; hamartoma; nodular hyperplasia (red pulp)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Much of what is known about nonhematopoietic splenic stromal cells is derived from
developmental studies in rodents and humans, and to some degree macaques. A complete
discussion on stromal cell biology is beyond the scope of this article. Stromal cells
play an important role in regulating hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) niches, directing
lymphoid traffic, modulating immune responses, and shaping the development and
compartmentalization of the spleen , , .
Studies in humans have revealed phenotypically and morphologically distinct subsets of
stromal cells that are uniquely different from those described in mice . This suggests that species
differences must be taken into account when assessing the spleen.

## Diagnostic features
Dense aggregates of well differentiated plump to spindle cells with abundant
cytoplasm and round to oval nuclei; mitoses may be frequent.
Surrounded by normal red pulp

## Differential Diagnoses
Sarcomas are typically composed of unencapsulated to infiltrating bundles of
poorly differentiated pleomorphic neoplastic cells often with a high mitotic
index.
Hamartoma is a benign growth consisting of an abnormal collection of heterogenous
cells or tissue types normally located in that particular region of the body.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Histology, Immunohistochemistry
Comments: Lymphoid-associated stromal cell hyperplasia is considered
here as being distinct from reticuloendothelial hyperplasia, which is regarded as a
separate entity that involves cells of the immune (monocyte) system in the splenic red
pulp.

## D. Lymph Node
Typically examined lymph nodes in toxicologic pathology studies include a section of
mandibular and mesenteric lymph node but other nodes may be sampled as indicated by the
study design or target biology. Ideally, a standardized midsagittal section of lymph node
should be obtained to include all the lymph node compartments, which constitute the
follicles and interfollicular cortex, the paracortex (or deep cortex) and the medulla,
including medullary cords and medullary sinuses ( ).

## Cellularity, increased, dendritic cells: Lymph Node (No image provided)

## Other term(s) [cell type]
Antigen presenting cells; conventional type 1 DCs; conventional type 2 DCs;
plasmacytoid DCs; interdigitating dendritic cell

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Increased numbers of dendritic cells have been observed in a variety of conditions in
nonhuman primates.

## Diagnostic features
Dendritic cells (DCs) are potent antigen-presenting cells found throughout the
body in mucosal sites and skin. They are also abundant within lymph nodes,
especially mesenteric lymph nodes where they play a pivotal role in linking innate
and adaptive immunity.
Dendritic cells are characterized by fine cytoplasmic extensions.

## Differential Diagnoses
Macrophages
- Have phagocytic capabilities and often have cytoplasmic vacuoles.
- Macrophages can be detected using anti-CD163, anti-CD68, and HAM56
antibodies.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Using immunofluorescence, DCs were identified based on their morphology including
dendritic morphology.
Flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry (CD103, CD11c, CD163, CD68, HAM56)
- The debate over how best to adequately identify DCs in blood and
tissue has evolved with improvements in monoclonal antibodies and flow cytometry
strategies. One study evaluated DCs in rhesus lymph nodes using antihuman Fascin
(p55), a marker for actin protein located within dendrites, in combination with the
markers CD123, p55, and CD11c.
Comments: This diagnosis should only be used when dendritic cell origin
is confirmed with immunohistochemical stains. Increased numbers of dendritic cells
have been observed in a variety of conditions in nonhuman primates. For example,
monkeys administered Flt3 ligand had increased numbers of pre-DC subsets in lymphoid
tissue . A similar study
showed a marked increase in nodal DCs following administration of supraphysiologic
doses of Flt3-Ligand to SIV- and SHIV-infected macaques . Other studies involving SIV-infected macaques have
shown that acute SIV infection is followed by depletion of circulating myeloid DCs and
a paradoxical accumulation of immature DC within lymph nodes .
A complete review of DCs is beyond the scope of this manuscript. Recent studies using
unsupervised high-end dimensional analysis have provided a new framework for identifying dendritic cells
across tissues in several species including macaques. The reader is referred to these
studies . In routine studies
without special stains, the diagnosis of increased cellularity, macrophage should be
used for this finding.

## E. Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissues (MALT)
The form and function of the mucosal immune system begins during prenatal development and
changes dramatically with time in response to a number of environmental and physiological
pressures , . Specific anatomic features that
distinguish MALT structures histologically from other secondary lymphoid tissues include
the lack of a defined capsule and afferent lymphatics, the presence of specialized
follicle-associated epithelium (FAE) and high endothelial venules. FAE may appear
flattened, lack cilia and contain few to no goblet cells. The characteristic histology of
normal MALT , , should be differentiated from cellular infiltrates and
inflammation. Mucosal immunity has been extensively studied in macaques and thus the
anatomical features and cellular composition of major mucosal associated lymphoid tissue
sites have been described . Tonsils
are also an important component of the oropharyngeal mucosal associated lymphoid tissues.
Similar to humans, NHP have at least 3 sets of tonsils, the lingual, palatine, and
pharyngeal (nasopharyngeal), and may also have tubal tonsils, but descriptions of tubal
tonsils in NHP are lacking. The palatine and lingual tonsils are the most commonly
evaluated, the pharyngeal tonsil is equivalent to the adenoid in humans. These are all
classified as follicular tonsils which refers to tonsils with crypts as opposed to those
without. Tonsilar crypts are invaginations of the surface epithelium into the submucosal
lymphoid tissue . Studies describing
the microscopic and ultrastructural anatomy of the lingual tonsil in cynomolgus monkeys
have been published . Just briefly,
tonsillar units are arranged in a rosary fashion below a slit-like mucosal fold forming a
blind-ended pouch. Crypt epithelium is generally non-keratinized and has moderate numbers
of infiltrating intraepithelial lymphocytes and dendritic cells. The lumen contained a
mixture of exfoliated epithelial cells, leukocytes and bacteria.
Unlike rodents, lymphoid tissue in mucosal and non-mucosal tissues is frequently
identified in NHP, dogs and swine used in nonclinical studies. In nonclinical studies,
MALT is generally recognized in the bronchus or bronchioles, small and large intestine,
nasal cavity and tonsils, and is less frequently recognized as part of the normal MALT of
the trachea, oral cavity, stomach, gallbladder, eye (uvea, sclera and conjunctiva also
referred to as conjunctiva associated lymphoid tissue, CALT), eustachian tube, urinary
bladder, urethra and vagina ,
 , , , . Duct-associated (non-mucosal) lymphoid tissue (DALT) is routinely
recognized in the monkey parotid salivary gland but may also be found in all glandular tissues ( ).

## Multinucleate syncytial cell/lymphocytic syncytia: Mucosal-Associated Lymphoid
Tissue
( )

## Other term(s)
Warthin-Finkeldey cells

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The origin of the multinucleate syncytial cells is not definitively known, but
immunophenotyping suggests a lymphocytic or dendritic cell origin. It has been
postulated that they form by cell fusion or abnormal nuclear division.

## Diagnostic features
Multinucleate giant cells of Warthin-Finkeldey type are frequently observed in
the MALT of the larynx, BALT of the lung and the GALT of the large intestines. The
syncytial cells are typically present in the lymphoid follicle germinal
centers.
Nuclei are typically round or oval and closely packed in the center of the cell.
Individual nuclei are generally similar in size and appearance to those of
surrounding lymphoid cells. The cells have relatively little cytoplasm. The nuclei
occupy most of the space and mold together to take on various shapes.
No lymphocyte necrosis or associated inflammation, or viral inclusions are
present.

## Differential Diagnoses
Infectious lymphadenopathy due to various viral etiological agents (LCV,
cytomegalovirus, Herpes B virus, measles morbillivirus) which exhibit increased
lymphoid cellularity, and increased immunoblasts, Reed Sternberg cells and/or
lymphocyte necrosis.
Granulomatous inflammation with multinucleate giant cells of Langerhan’s giant
cell type of macrophage origin. Nuclei are arranged either around the periphery of
the cell in the form of a horseshoe or ring or cluster are the two poles of the
cell. Can be a response to a foreign body material, non-living (particulate) or
living cells (fungi or bacteria), or endogenous material (cholesterol, keratin, or
crystals).
Other multinucleated or giant cells in tissues: circulating megakaryocytes,
osteoclasts, cells with cytoplasmic inclusions.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunohistochemistry can be used to further characterize the syncytial giant
cells.
Comments: The immunophenotype of these lymphoid multinucleate giant
cells has not been well studied in cynomolgus monkeys. In humans, immunohistochemistry
studies have provided discordant results, with some reports of a T-helper cell
phenotype and other of follicular dendritic cell origin. Lymphoid multinucleate giant
cells of Warthin-Finkeldey type have been experimentally produced with inoculation of
wild type measles virus in monkeys and are observed in natural measles infections in
humans. However, these syncytia are also found in apparently healthy cynomolgus
monkeys in nonclinical studies. The cause of these syncytia in NHP are unknown
although these animals are free of measles and other active viral diseases .

## F. Other Lymphoid Tissues (Tertiary Lymphoid Structures [TLS] and Serosa-associated
Lymphoid Clusters [SALCs])
( )

## 7. Hepatobiliary System
For detailed general considerations on the hepatobiliary system, refer to the INHAND rodent
publication .
Liver and gall bladder pathology diagnostic terms for non-human primates have been covered
in detail in other publications ,
 , . Non-proliferative abnormalities of the
liver and gall bladder can be observed spontaneously in young cynomolgus macaques used in
nonclinical toxicity studies, particularly mononuclear cell infiltrate, vacuolation,
necrosis, and pigment as well as cellular infiltrates in the gall bladder.

## A. Liver
The liver of the cynomolgus monkey has four lobes: the median (the largest), the right
and left lateral, and the caudate lobes. The gall bladder is long and fusiform and lies
within a fossa of the inferior surface of the right median lobe . The microscopic and functional anatomy of the liver is
similar across species used in nonclinical safety studies (rodents, dogs, and primates) as
well as in humans . Recommended
routine sections include one sample from the right medial lobe to include gallbladder and
adjacent liver parenchyma, and one additional section from the left lateral lobe ( ).

## Bile plug: Liver
( )

## Other term(s)
Cholestasis; icterus; pigment; pigment deposition

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Obstruction of bile flow, Hepatocellular injury

## Diagnostic features
Green-brown bile pigment, primarily bilirubin, in hepatic bile caniculi
Pigment may appear in Kupffer cells (after rupture of bile caniculi)

## Differential Diagnoses
Other pigments, including hemosiderin, lipofuscin, porphyrin, hematoxylin, and
formaldehyde:
- A comprehensive discussion of differentiation is included in the rodent
manuscript under pigmentation .
- Proof of bile pigment can be achieved by special stains (e.g. iodine test or
Hall’s test).

## Cytoplasmic alteration: Liver (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Granular change; ground glass cytoplasm

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Typically xenobiotic-induced, and may be associated with hepatocellular
hypertrophy

## Diagnostic features
Hepatocytes characterized by presence of abundant eosinophilic, amorphous
cytoplasm, with uniformly granular appearance
Affected hepatocytes may be enlarged, and exhibit a zonal distribution.
Comments: The modifier “ground glass” should be used to describe the
characteristic light microscopic appearance of the cytoplasm in hypertrophic
hepatocytes as a result of enzyme induction following administration of
xenobiotics ,
 . Hypertrophic
hepatocytes are characterized by enlargement with amorphous, eosinophilic cytoplasm.
This characteristic appearance is caused by proliferation of the smooth endoplasmic
reticulum (SER) which can be confirmed by electron microscopy or immunohistochemistry.
Similar changes are more commonly observed in rodents, and xenobiotics which induce
hepatocellular hypertrophy in rats rarely induce similar changes in non-human
primates .

## Dissociation, hepatocyte: Liver
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Acute degenerative change

## Diagnostic features
Characterized by hepatocytes with rounded cell margins that have lost
intercellular attachments 
Centrilobular areas with acute circulatory failure

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Cytoskeletal integrity can be assessed by staining liver sections with Gomori’s
method for reticulin fibers.
Comments: Hepatocellular dissociation can result from tissue hypoxia or
direct damage to cytoskeletal filaments and has been observed in cases of acute circulatory failure.
Euthanasia with barbiturates can also induce a similar change in monkeys which is
reported as barbiturate lysis .
The term hepatocellular dissociation should be preferred, and the cause should be
discussed in the narrative or as a comment.

## Erythrophagocytosis, Kupffer cell: Liver
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Spontaneous background finding (only if present at very low incidence) or due to
malaria infection.

## Diagnostic features
Multifocal Kupffer cells with intracytoplasmic erythrocytes or intravascular
hemolysis-associated erythrocyte “ghosts” or presence of hemozoin (malaria
pigment) in the Kupffer cells.
Comments: Kupffer cell erythrophagocytosis often results when
erythrocytic membranes become coated with antibodies and are thus targeted for removal
by reticuloendothelial cells .
This finding is of potential relevance in toxicologic studies since phagocytosis of
erythrocytes by monocyte derived Kupffer cells is associated with depression of
macrophage function including the ability to phagocytize and kill bacteria , . The functional impairment likely occurs due to
interactions between erythrocyte components (including hemoglobin and reactive
products of oxygen metabolism) and reactive products of phagocytes resulting in
inhibition of oxidative bactericidal mechanisms . The consequence of such impairment is increased susceptibility
to bacterial infection and endotoxic shock.
Erythrophagocytosis by Kupffer cells has been well documented and investigated in
animal models and humans.
In cynomolgus monkey, erythrophagocytosis or presence of hematoidin was described in
monkey infected with Plasmodium spp .

## Inflammation, granuloma/microgranuloma: Liver
( )

## Other term(s)
Microgranuloma; granulomatous inflammation

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Various etiologies: single cell necrosis of hepatocytes, tuberculosis,
Hepatocystis kochi 

## Diagnostic features
Granulomas are characterized by central area of eosinophilic cellular and
karyorrhectic debris (necrosis) admixed with degenerated neutrophils, and surrounded
by macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells.
Fibroblasts and fibrous connective tissue may circumscribe the granuloma.
Epithelioid macrophages, Langhans and foreign body type multinucleated giant cells
can be present.
Microgranuloma are small and consist of presence of inflammatory cells, mainly
macrophages, lymphocytes, and small numbers of plasma cells.
Microgranuloma can be associated with single cell necrosis of hepatocytes.
Comments: Microgranulomas are of much lower incidence in cynomolgus
monkeys than in other laboratory animals . In some cases, microgranuloma is used as Other Term of inflammatory
cell infiltrate. The term microgranuloma should be used in case of small aggregate with
predominant macrophage and lymphocytic component.

## Parasite (Cryptosporidia spp.): Liver/Gall bladder
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
A protozoal infestation of the digestive system which may extend to the gall bladder,
common bile duct and/or intrahepatic bile ducts.

## Diagnostic features
Cryptosporidial organisms attached to the luminal surface of the mucosal
epithelium.
Organisms are approximately 2-4 µm in diameter, weakly eosinophilic with HE stain
and deep blue with Giemsa stain.
Infested bile ducts may be prominent with increased mucosal folds, increased
periductal connective tissue, thickened lamina propria due to inflammatory cell
infiltrates (primarily lymphocyte, plasma cells and monocytes).
Epithelial hyperplasia may be present.
Intraductal neutrophilic exudates and/or luminal cellular debris may be
present.

## Differential Diagnosis
Enterocytozoon bieneusi infection
Comments: Cryptosporidium infestation is reported to occur at a relatively
low incidence in laboratory macaques. Infection is often of limited or no clinical
significance in the immunocompetent host; however, infection can disseminate and cause
disease in immunosuppressed or juvenile animals , , , .
Cryptosporidia are most commonly reported in the stomach; however, there are report of
hepatobiliary infection in juveniles and macaques experimentally infected with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) , .

## Parasite (Echinococcus cyst) : Liver
( )

## Other term(s)
Hydatid disease; hydatidosis; echinococcal disease

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Zoonotic infestation caused by the larval stage of the tapeworms Echinococcus
(E.) multilocularis (alveolar echinococcosis) or E.
granulosus (cystic echinococcosis).

## Modifiers
Cystic echinococcosis or alveolar echinococcosis

## Diagnostic features
Unilocular (E. granulosus) or multilocular (E.
multlocularis) cysts in the liver , .
Cystic wall has three different layers: outer layer consisting of fibrous tissue
and inflammatory cells, intermediate layer is an avascular laminated membrane, and
the inner germinal layer gives rise to brood capsules with protoscolices attached by
short stalk in infectious (fertile) cysts.
Cysts may occur in liver, lung or vertebra.
Comments: Serodiagnosis (ELISA) is used to distinguish E.
multilocularis from E. granulosus infections . E. granulosus and
multilocularis are endemic in Europe, E granulosus endemic
in China. Both are important zoonoses.

## Pigment ([proto]porphyrin): Liver
( )

## Modifier
Intercanalicular

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
(Proto) porphyrias are rare pathologic conditions caused by inherited or induced enzyme
defects at different stages of the heme biosynthesis causing porphyrin precursors to
accumulate. Morphologically, this accumulation of protoporphyrins can become visible as
a typical intra- and extracellular pigment.

## Diagnostic features
Multifocal globular pigment deposits within the bile canaliculi and within the
hepatocellular cytoplasm.
The pigment often is dark brown-red in color.
This typical pigment sometimes can also be found within the cytoplasm of Kupffer
cells and macrophages.
Pigment deposits are birefringent and often show the characteristic “Maltese
Cross”-like appearance under polarized light.
True bile plugs can sometimes be found additionally.
Mononuclear infiltrates may accompany the condition.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Fluorescence microscopy of fresh liver tissue at wavelengths between 395-408 nm can
produce red fluorescence (emitting between 620-630 nm).
Electron microscopy reveals a typical pattern with radiating double-lined
crystalline structures, called “star-burst”.
Biochemical detection of changes in enzymes that play a role in the heme synthesis
(e.g. ferrochelatase, hepatic δ-aminolevulinic acid synthase (ALA-S),
porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD)).
Comments: Porphyria was induced in macaques by the administration of
allylisopropylacetamide . In
treated animals, hepatic δ-aminolevulinic acid synthase (ALA-S) was increased, while
Cytochrome P-450 and associated monooxygenase activities and microsomal heme oxygenase
activity were decreased. Clinically, the monkeys showed elevation of porphyrin levels in
blood and urine.
In human, accumulation of high levels of porphyrins in the liver is known to cause
liver damage, including cirrhosis, siderosis, focal necrosis and hyperplasia. In rat,
mices and dogs can be observed following administration of a number of different
xenobiotics .

## Vacuolation, hepatocyte: Liver
( )

## Other term(s)
Fatty change; lipidosis; lipid; macrovescicular and/or microvescicular steatosis;
phospholipidosis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Perturbation in lipid metabolism and disposition resulting in excessive accumulation of
vacuoles in the cytoplasm.

## Modifiers
Macrovescicular and microvescicular:
Macrovesicular: Hepatocytes contain a large well-defined single rounded vacuole
within each cell. Nucleus and cytoplasm displaced to the periphery. A few
hepatocytes may contain one or more smaller vacuoles.
Microvesicular: Hepatocytes partially or completely filled with numerous small
lipid vacuoles. Affected hepatocytes may have a ‘‘foamy’’ appearance. Small vacuoles
do not normally displace the nucleus to the periphery.

## Differential Diagnoses
Cytoplasmic rarefaction

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Frozen sections of unfixed or fixed tissue can be stained for fat (oil red O, Sudan IV)
and are helpful in recognizing microvesicular lipidosis and in differentiating fat from
other substances that may accumulate in vacuoles.
Comments: The descriptive term vacuolation is preferred to the term fatty
change and other etiologic terms used in the rodent terminology , since the diagnosis is normally based
on evaluation of the H&E stained sections. The main diagnostic features as well as
the differential diagnosis are the same as these described in the rodent manuscript.
Diffuse and severe vacuolation of the hepatocytes is observed in the fatal fatty liver
syndrome also known as fatal fasting syndrome or fat macaque syndrome. This syndrome is
described in detail in the systemic/general pathology section since the condition is
considered an acute metabolic syndrome with involvement of multiple organs.

## B. Gall Bladder
( )

## Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type]: Gall Bladder (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Spontaneous background (may represent MALT)

## Diagnostic features
Focal to diffuse, frequently lymphoplasmacytic, infiltrate in the gall bladder
lamina propria .
May have germinal centers.
Comments: Inflammatory cell infiltrates of the gall bladder have been
reported in New World NHPs in association with Helicobacter sp.
Infections, which have also been reported in macaques.

## Parasite (Enterocytozoon bieneusi): Gall Bladder
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Enterocytozoon bieneusi is a microsporidian parasite of primarily
macaque species that causes proliferative cholecystits, choledochitis, and serositis

## Diagnostic features
Non-suppurative inflammation of the biliary tract.
Single, sloughed epithelial cells that contain the organism are diagnostic for this
infection. It is very difficult to see the organism without special stains.
Marked proliferation of bile ducts in the portal tracts with concurrent
fibrosis.
Proliferative serositis associated with mesothelial hyperplasia and non-suppurative
inflammation of the small intestine.

## Differential Diagnoses
Cryptosporidium parvum
- Ascending biliary infections are associated with biliary hyperplasia and
eosinophilic to neutrophilic inflammation admixed with mononuclear cells.
- Organisms are seen attached to the apical surface of the biliary epithelial cells
or free in the lumen.
- Organisms can be very numerous.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunohistochemistry for measles matrix protein will highlight the organism. A
modified Weber’s trichrome is also diagnostic.
Additional diagnostic testing can be performed using electron microscopy or
PCR.
Comments: This is an uncommon opportunistic infection in immunocompromised
macaques . Recently data
suggest that M. fascicularis can also harbor the parasite although
pathogenesis studies have not been performed to date . The proliferative serositis lesion is an uncommon
manifestation . In severe cases
of E. bieneusi, grossly the liver can have an accentuated lobular
pattern due to the degree of biliary hyperplasia and accompanying fibrosis.

## 8. Integument
For detailed general considerations on the integument system, refer to the INHAND rodent
publication . Descriptions of
“vascular lesions” and “infectious diseases” are covered elsewhere (cardiovascular and
systemic chapters).
In nonclinical studies, correlations between clinical observations and microscopic
observations are essential in the identification of any potential interaction between
xenobiotics and integument structures. The entire skin should be carefully examined at the
post-mortem evaluation and all abnormalities should be recorded. As a minimum, a sample from
the chest skin overlying the mammary gland should be collected and examined by conventional
histopathology. Electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry may help to identify
pathological processes caused by xenobiotics.

## A. Skin
Cynomolgus monkeys are born with a dense black hair coat. By the age of 2 to 3 months,
this hair coat starts to change into an adult type of pelage, which covers backs, legs,
and arms with brown to grayish fur. The hair coat shows lesser density on the ventral
aspect of the trunk , , . The
face is pinkish-brown and the fur on the head sweeps back over the forehead, often
creating a crest of hair on the top of the head. Males and females have facial hair and
both have cheek whiskers and may white coloration on the eyelids near the nose . The epidermis in cynomolgus monkeys is
slightly thicker than in rodents, but thinner when compared to minipigs and man.
Melanocytes are found in the epidermis and the dermis. Hair coat density varies between
regions, but the basic structure of hair follicle complexes is similar across the body.
Hair follicles are arranged in complexes with accessory glands, namely sebaceous glands
and apocrine tubular glands. Eccrine sweat glands are found in the digital pads.
Skin structures characteristic of Old World monkeys, including cynomolgus macaques, are
the ischial callosities. Callosities are greatly thickened areas of compact keratin on
which the animal may sit for extended periods of time without damage to underlying soft
tissue.
Skin swelling at the perineum and the base of the tail occurs in female cynomolgus
macaques in association with the estrogenic (follicular) phase of their reproductive cycle
and this region, when swollen, is frequently referred to as “sex skin” , . These swellings consist grossly of erythema and
thickening of the skin by dermal and subcutaneous edema, fibroplasia, and hyaluronate
deposition. They are most pronounced around the time of ovulation . There is substantial individual variation
in the amount of sex skin swelling in cynomolgus macaques; the presence or absence of sex
skin is not a reliable indicator of reproductive status. There is potential for sex skin
swelling to occur as a treatment effect in the case of hormonally active test agents.
Alopecia is very common in cynomolgus monkeys, especially if socially housed. It is often
linked to behavioral abnormalities, but alternative causes of alopecia include: endocrine
disease, nutritional deficiencies, aging, immunologic disorders, allergic disease, and
stress . In order to determine
the cause of alopecia, a diagnostic approach should be taken as in clinical veterinary
dermatology .
The skin immune system in non-human primates, specifically the cynomolgus monkey, shows
distinct differences from that of rodents and humans. The epidermis of cynomolgus macaques
contains a population of dendritic-shaped T cells expressing the γ/δ T cell receptor. This
population of skin immune cells plays a critical role in mice, but is of little importance
in humans. The γ/δ T cells in cynomolgus macaque epidermis differ from rodents in that
they appar to be inactivated .
Overall, the immune cell population in macaque skin is very similar to that in humans,
with the epidermis containing Langerhans cells, T cells and putative NK cells. The dermis
contains dermal dendritic cells, resident macrophages, T cells and putative NK cells. The
skin may also contain polymorphonuclear cells .
Cynomolgus monkey skin contains Merkel cells, i.e. tactile epithelial cells that make
synaptic contacts with somatosensory afferent nerve fibers, particularly in highly
sensitive skin like that of the fingertips , and it contains Meissner and Pacinian corpuscles, i.e.
mechanoreceptors in glabrous skin which are responsible for sensitivity to vibration and
pressure ( ).

## Erosion/ulcer: Skin, Epidermis (No image provided)
Comments: Wounds are commonly encountered in social housed NHP. They are
typically recorded in the in-life phase and/or during necropsy and should be sampled for
microscopic examination. Erosion/ulcer can be a consequence of bacterial infections and
may progress to dermal/subcutaneous abscesses. Cultures typically reveal Staphylococcus
aureus, Klebsiella oxytoca, Actinomyces spp., Streptococcus spp., Enterobacter spp., or
Pseudomonas spp. . Increased
incidence of skin infections has been described in association with immunomodulatory
drugs , and with dual blockade
of interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-17A .

## Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type] (epidermis, dermis): Skin, Epidermis,
Dermis and Subcutis (No image provided)
Comments: Inflammatory cell infiltrates into the epidermis occur in
association with pustules. In addition, they are a component of interface dermatitis,
i.e. a superficial perivascular dermatitis, in which lymphocytes approximate the
dermo-epidermal junction, associated with epidermal necrosis . A typical case of interface dermatitis in NHP was
described by Palanisamy et al. .

## Necrosis, epidermis: Skin, Epidermis
( )
Comments: Necrosis of keratinocytes is a well-known feature of cutaneous
toxicities . Necrosis may be of
the single-cell type like in the clinical disease ‟Erythema multiforme”, where
individual necrotic keratinocytes are found at all epidermal levels, or they may become
confluent to form full-thickness necrosis, which is the typical feature of the clinical
disease ‟Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis”. Other frequently used terms of clinical disease
with similar histological features are ‟Stevens-Johnson syndrome” and ‟Fixed drug
eruption”; a distinction based on histomorphology alone is not feasible. Epidermal
necrosis is typically a feature of interface dermatitis, i.e. a superficial perivascular
dermatitis, in which lymphocytes approximate the dermo-epidermal junction, associated
with vacuolar degeneration in the basal zone.
Drug-induced epidermal necrosis in NHP is rare. A typical example was described by
Palanisamy et al ,
who described keratinocyte degeneration/necrosis in association with lymphocytic
interface dermatitis in relation to oral treatment with metabotropic glutamate receptor
5 modulators. Skin lesions were grossly characterized by swelling and erythema and
developed 8 to 9 days after initiation of treatment. Lymphocytes were predominantely CD4
positive, and the authors hypothesized that the underlying pathomechanism was a delayed
type-IV hypersensitivity reaction.
Epidermal necrosis in NHP was described in association with drug-induced peripheral
vasoconstriction, likely resulting in ischemia . Skin lesions were grossly characterized by blisters (syn.
vesicle), ulceration and scabs (syn. crust), associated with medial
hypertrophy/hyperplasia of arterioles in the superficial dermis.
Infection with the measles virus is a differential diagnosis for epidermal necrosis.
The underlying clinical symptom is a skin rash . Epidermal necrosis may lead to the formation of subepidermal
vesicles, i.e. detachment of the epidermis from the underlying dermis, and subsequently
to ulceration. Necrosis of the basal cell layer may lead to ‟pigmentary incontinence”,
which is characterized by the presence of melanin within macrophages in the upper
dermis .

## Pigment, decreased: Skin, Epidermis (No image provided)

## Diagnostic features
Decreased melanin content in the epidermis
Might be associated with an increased number of melanin-containing macrophages in the
superficial dermis
Comments: Grossly visible loss of skin pigmentation in humans is known
as albinism, leukoderma or vitiligo. The former two are genetic and have not been
described in cynomolgus macaques. Vitiligo is an acquired patchy loss of epidermal
melanocytes. Cases of vitiligo in cynomolgus monkeys have not been published but there
are annecdotal reports that hypopigmentation has been observed in this species.

## Pigment, increased: Skin, Epidermis
( )

## Diagnostic features
Increased melanin content in the epidermis, characterized by an increased amount
of cytoplasmic melanin granules in basal and suprabasal keratinocytes
The number of epidermal melanocytes might be increased; differentiation of
melanocytes from pigment-containing keratinocytes requires investigation of cell
ultrastucture (transmission electron microscopy) or immunohistochemical staining
(e.g., melan A)
Might be associated with an increased number of melanocytes or melanin-containing
macrophages in the superficial dermis
Comments: Every species of primate has epidermal and dermal
melanocytes .
Hyperpigmentation is clinically defined as the darkening of skin. Melanin granules are
produced within epidermal melanocytes. They are transported along cytoplasmic
dendrites and are then transferred to adjacent keratinocytes. Melanocye activity is
stimulated by UV light.
In NHP, epidermal hyperpigmentation has been described as a consequence of treatment
with antibody drug conjugates .

## Pustule: Skin, Epidermis
( )
Comments: Pustules are not uncommon in social housed NHP, but they can be
drug-induced.
Drug-induced pustules in NHP have been described with dual blockade of interleukin (IL)
1β and IL 17A, which resulted in time-dependent spontaneous skin infections, consistent
with a reduced host resistance .
Skin infections were also described in NHP studies investigating the pharmacokinetics
and toxicity of a synergistic antibody mixture directed against epidermal growth factor
receptor , clinically
presenting as rash (syn. erythema); however, microscopic details of the skin infection
were not described.

## Vesicle: Skin, Epidermis
( )
Comments: The formation of subepidermal vesicles, i.e. detachment of the
epidermis from the underlying dermis, is a typical consequence of keratinocyte necrosis
in the basal layer .
Vesicles in NHP are rare. A typical case of vesicles as a consequence of epidermal
necrosis was described by Palanisamy et al. . Another case was described by Kikkawa . Macroscopic skin lesions occurred after
7 consecutive days of oral dosing and were characterized by scabs (syn. crust). Vesicles
were accompanied by pustules and epidermal necrosis. The inflammatory infiltrate in the
superficial dermis was sparse and was dominated by neutrophils and macrophages rather
than lymphocytes (which does not exclude the presence of an interface dermatits at
earlier time points).
Vesicles can also develop as a consequence of contact dermatitis. Morris and
Etheridge described a case in
cynomolgus monkeys, that developed vesicular dermatitis, associated with an eosinophilic
infiltrate in the superficial dermis, epidermal spongiosis (syn. intercellular edema),
and blood eosinophilia. The antigen causing this reaction was not identified.
Although mostly affecting the mucosal surface, vesicles in the skin can also be caused
by Macacine Herpesvirus-1 (Herpes B Virus) and simian varicella virus .

## Atrophy, adnexa: Skin, Cutaneous Adnexa
( )
Comments: Atrophy of adnexal structures is a rare finding in NHP.
Sebaceous gland atrophy has been described after oral treatment with an
acyl-Coa:cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) inhibitor . The authors describe a decreased size and number of
differentiated sebocytes, associated with hypertrophy/hyperplasia of peripheral reserve
cells. The depletion of tissue lipids was an expected physiologic sequela to ACAT
inhibition, and similar changes were described in the adrenal glands and ovaries.

## Inflammation: Skin, Dermis and Subcutis (No image provided)
Comments: For NHP, the same principles apply as for rodents. Inflammation
in the dermis, subcutis and the underlying soft tissue is predominantly a consequence of
local trauma and is frequently observed at subcutaneous injection sites. Eosinophilic
inflammation is a feature of contact dermatitis .

## Mineralization: Skin, Dermis and Subcutis (No image provided)
Comments: Mineralization in the dermis and/or subcutis can occur as a
syndrome previously described as dystrophic calcinosis circumscripta that occurs
following tissue damage, without abnormalities in calcium and phosphorus homeostasis,
and it is characterized by deposition of calcium salts in soft tissues. This syndrome
has been reported in both humans and animals, including NHP. In nonhuman primates,
calcinosis circumscripta has been reported in two female rhesus macaques . Idiopathic calcinosis circumscripta has
been described in two cynomolgus monkeys and in one female cynomolgus macaque from a 39-week oral toxicity
study . The descriptive term
“mineralization” should be used rather than the syndrome term.

## Hyperplasia, melanocyte: Skin, Dermis and Subcutis (No image provided)

## Diagnostic features
Foci of nests and cords of pigmented cells in the dermis
Comments: Melanocyte hyperplasia in the dermis might be associated with
epidermal hyperpigmentation. It can be difficult to differentiate from an accumulation
of melanophages, i.e. macrophages that have phagocytosed melanin granules, for example
in association with ‟melanin incontinence” occurring with interface dermatitis.
Melanocyte hyperplasia in the dermis can be a feature of neurocutaneous melanosis,
which is a rare phakomatosis characterized by proliferation of melanin-producing cells
in skin and brain .

## Papilloma, squamous cell: Skin, Epidermis (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Wart

## Diagnostic features
Well circumscribed papilliform exophytic or endophytic nonpigmented mass.
Composed of diffusely thickened epidermis separated by islands of dermal
connective tissue.
Basal cell layer markedly increased in thickness (4 to 8 cell layers) composed of
monomorphic cells with distinct cell borders and little basophilic cytoplasm.
Suprabasal cells show gradual squamous differentiation and keratinization with a
thickened granular cell layer and irregularly enlarged (clumped) keratohyalin
granules.
Markedly thickened compacted stratum corneum (up to 1 mm in thickness).
Mitotic figures are common.
Suprabasal cells show varying degrees of cytomegaly with cytoplasmic pallor,
nuclear clearing with peripheralized chromatin, and eccentric basophilic to
magenta nucleoli (koilocytes).
Suprabasal cells may show pale eosinophilic round to ovoid intranuclear
inclusions (approximately 7 μm in diameter) typically surrounded by a halo of
cleared chromatin.
Mild to moderate dermal mononuclear inflammation.
Comments: Spontaneous squamous cell papilloma in NHP are associated with
papilloma virus infection. Papillomaviruses (PVs) are a group of small, non-enveloped
DNA viruses that cause mucosal or cutaneous neoplasia in a variety of animals. Whilst
most papillomas will regress spontaneously, some may persist or undergo malignant
transformation.
There was a case report of persistent and extensive warts observed on the hands and
feet of a cynomolgus macaque (Macaca fascicularis). The genomic DNA
of this PV was cloned and sequenced, and the PV was designated M.
fascicularis papillomavirus type 1 (MfPV-1). Its genome was 7588 bp in
length and the organization of its putative open reading frames (E1, E2, E6, E7, L1,
L2 and E4) was similar to that of other PVs. Molecular analysis of MfPV-1 genomic DNA
classified it into the genus Betapapillomavirus, to which all epidermodysplasia
verruciformis (EV)-type PVs belong .
Diseases caused by PVs of the genus Betapapillomavirus are usually associated with
natural or iatrogenic immunosuppression.

## Lipoma: Skin, Dermis and Subcutis (No image provided)
Comments: Lipoma in the subcutis of a female cynomolgus monkey from
Chinese origin was reported by Kaspareit et al. 

## Melanoma, malignant: Skin, dermis and subcutis (No image provided)
Comments: Malignant melanoma in NHP is very rare. A case has been
described in a 3.3-year-old cynomolgus monkey, exhibiting a dermal mass on the dorsal
surface of the hind limb . In this
case, the dermal melanoma was associated with lymphatic invasion. Neoplastic cells stain
positive for S-100, Melan-A, HMB-45 and HMB-50. Transmission electron microscopy can
confirm the presence of stage IV melanosomes (mature melanin granules) in the
cytoplasm.

## 9. Mammary Gland
For detailed general considerations and appropriate terminology, refer to the INHAND rodent
publication .
The mammary gland is a dynamic hormonally responsive organ that can be affected by
pharmacologic, chemical, and dietary agents. Evaluation of the mammary gland is particularly
important in toxicology studies of substances that may mimic endogenous sex steroids or
otherwise disrupt endocrine pathways. Mammary gland tissue should always be examined in the
context of reproductive age and hormonal status, including the cyclic phase of the primary
reproductive organs. Evaluation of potential physiologic influences will provide a better
understanding of possible mechanisms underlying any observed changes. In this section, we
describe specific anatomic and physiologic details as well as pathologic changes of the
non-human primate mammary gland, with an emphasis on the female cynomolgus macaque.

## Anatomy
Macaques have two pectoral mammary glands with similar basic anatomical features as
humans. In adult non-lactating macaques, flattened mammary glands consist of branching
lactiferous ducts radiating from the nipple and ending in terminal ductal lobular units.
The terminal lobular units are intralobular ducts surrounded by alveoli . Alveoli and ducts have a single layer of
luminal cuboidal to columnar glandular epithelium surrounded by a single layer of
myoepithelium. Each nipple contains five to seven lactiferous ducts lined by columnar
glandular epithelium transitioning to stratified squamous epithelium at their openings.
The primary ductal/lobuloalveolar network is contained within the mammary pad, which is
more fibrous than the adjacent subcutaneous fat. Glandular tissue is most prevalent
cranial and lateral to the nipple, extending to the axilla . The areola in macaques is indistinct. Normal
non-lactating and quiescent macaque mammary glands commonly contain intraepithelial fat
droplets. During lactation, the macaque breast becomes larger and often pendulous, hanging
away from the pectoral muscle. The mammary gland of male macaques is similar to that of
females but with a small nipple and a less developed ductal and lobular network. Mammary
gland tissue collection in both sexes should include a full-thickness sample of skin and
subcutaneous fat running from the nipple laterally towards the axilla. This orientation
provides a cross-section of skin and the underlying mammary tissue.

## Development
The macaque mammary gland undergoes dramatic changes in morphology across different life
stages, from puberty to pregnancy and senescence. Mammary gland development begins
in utero, due in part to maternal sex hormone exposure . By birth, a nipple and branching ductal
system, a few hundred micrometers in diameter are present . The only congenital mammary defects reported in macaques
are supernumerary nipples . The most
substantial changes occur during the peripubertal period when rapid expansion of the
mammary gland epithelium occurs .
Such postnatal changes highlight the need to understand reproductive status and endogenous
hormone context when evaluating potential xenobiotic effects.
The peripubertal period is characterized by nipple enlargement followed by rapid
elongation and branching of the rudimentary ductal system . Nipple enlargement is often the first macroscopic sign of
progression into the peripubertal period in macaques and may precede menstruation by
several months. The rapid, extensive, and variable proliferation of the peripubertal
mammary gland is often a challenge to assess in studies involving young macaques , . Female macaques at the beginning of menstruation often
possess a mixture of well-differentiated and highly branched lobuloalveolar units with
variable numbers of acini within each lobule . Proliferating glandular epithelium terminal end-buds take the form
of multilayered ducts and may resemble focal ductal hyperplasia or carcinoma in
situ . Immature or
transitional ducts can be differentiated from true aberrant proliferative lesions by lack
of well-differentiated lobular structures and the presence of other developmental features
such as a loose peri-ductal stroma , .
Young male macaques may also develop transient gynecomastia similar to that observed in
peripubertal human males .
The adult non-lactating macaque mammary gland consists primarily of mature lobules with
variable levels of cell proliferation . Mammary epithelium expresses estrogen and progesterone receptors
(similar to the human mammary gland) and shows modestly higher rates of cell proliferation
in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle . These biomarker profiles are described in detail elsewhere . Significant mammary gland development
occurs in pregnancy to prepare for lactation. During this time, a high concentration of
endogenous estrogens, progesterone, prolactin, chorionic gonadotropin, and placental
lactogen stimulate epithelial proliferation, secretory dilation of the ductal and alveolar
lumens, and upregulation of pathways related to prolactin signaling and milk protein
production ,
 . The average length of
lactation in macaques is twelve months . Lactation suppresses ovulation in macaques, shifting energy from
reproduction to milk production. The overall composition of breast milk is similar in
women and macaques, although milk protein is almost two times higher in macaques . Macaque milk also contains lower
concentrations of secretory IgA, lactoferrin, polymeric immunoglobulin receptor, alpha-1
antichymotrypsin, vitamin D-binding protein, and haptocorrin compared to human
milk . After weaning, mammary
gland tissue undergoes post-lactational involution, and glandular morphology returns to a
state resembling a non-pregnant premenopausal animal.
The mammary gland in aged macaques is characterized by marked lobular atrophy with
limited ductal and lobular proliferation. Expression of estrogen and progesterone
receptors persists in ovariectomized macaques for at least six to seven years, and the
breast remains responsive to hormonal stimulation during this time , ( ).

## Dilatation, duct or lobule: Mammary Gland (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Cystic change

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Incidental finding of mammary gland ducts or acini

## Diagnostic features
Dilated ducts or acini with attenuated epithelium
May or may not contain lightly eosinophilic intraluminal material with secretory
droplets (protein)

## Differential Diagnoses
Increased secretory content (galactorrhea)
- additional changes of epithelial hypertrophy and hyperplasia are present
Comments: Cystic dilation of ducts or lobules is considered an
incidental finding, particularly in older parous macaques , . Dilated ducts may also be observed secondary to hyperplastic or
neoplastic mammary gland lesions . There is no reported association with hormonal treatment .

## Epithelial secretory change, acinar or lobular cell: Mammary Gland
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Lobular or acinar epithelial cells

## Diagnostic features
Cytoplasmic vacuoles/lipid droplets, often with intraluminal lipid/protein
secretion and luminal dilation
Apical blebs (luminal “snouts”)
Bright red granules within the cytoplasm of mammary gland epithelial cells

## Differential Diagnoses
Apocrine metaplasia
- cuboidal glandular epithelium, apical blebs and bright red granules not common
features
Increased secretory content (galactorrhea)
- additional changes of epithelial hypertrophy and hyperplasia are present
Physiologic secretory activity (lactation):
- dilated acini containing milk protein
Comments: Epithelial secretory change is a common background lesion in
macaques associated with production and release of milk proteins, immunoglobulins, and
fats into the ductal lumens . It
is important to distinguish this lesion from physiologic secretory activity, including
lactation, in which lobuloalveolar units are diffusely increased in size and
number.

## Increased secretory content: Mammary Gland (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Galactorrhea

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Acinar epithelial cells are stimulated directly by prolactin to take on a secretory
phenotype with increased intracytoplasmic lipid droplets.

## Diagnostic features
Lobular and acinar hyperplasia with epithelial cell hypertrophy
Dilated acini contain variably-sized droplets of homogeneous, eosinophilic
material (milk protein)

## Differential Diagnoses
Epithelial secretory change:
- no lobular or acinar hyperplasia
Comments: Increased secretory content is associated with
prolactin-producing pituitary neoplasms in male and female macaques , . Chronic daily morphine administration also results in
transient hyperprolactinemia and may induce mammary gland hyperplasia/hypertrophy in
male macaques .

## Infiltrate, [insert appropriate cell type], lobule: Mammary Gland (No image
provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Lymphocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, or a mixture of
these cell types

## Diagnostic features
Presence of lymphocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, or
a mixture of these cell types in the stroma surrounding lobules (most common site)
or ducts

## Differential Diagnoses
Inflammation
- immune cells associated with other findings such as edema, hemorrhage,
congestion, degenerative epithelial changes, and/or fibrosis
Lymphoma
- infiltrative population of lymphocytes with neoplastic features such as
pleomorphism and high mitotic index
Comments: The base term “infiltrate” should be followed by the
predominant cell type, or ‘‘mixed’’ if there is not a dominant cell type. Infiltrates
consisting only of lymphocytes or plasma cells may indicate an immunologic effect of a
xenobiotic but can also be observed as a spontaneous change .

## Inflammation, lobule: Mammary Gland (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Mastitis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Lymphocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, multinucleated
giant cells, or a mixture of inflammatory cell types

## Diagnostic features
Infiltration of inflammatory cells within the mammary gland stroma, epithelium,
and/or lumens, with associated degenerative changes, edema, hemorrhage,
congestion, and/or fibrosis

## Differential Diagnoses
Infiltrate
- Infiltration without associated tissue changes
Comments: Mastitis in macaques has been rarely reported in the
literature as a spontaneous finding , .

## Metaplasia, apocrine cell, duct or lobule: Mammary Gland
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Ductal or lobular epithelial cells

## Diagnostic features
Glandular epithelial cells are cuboidal with pale eosinophilic cytoplasm and
round nuclei arranged in a discrete row (similar to an apocrine sweat gland).
Variable features include apical blebbing and luminal dilatation.
Lobular lesions may be present within one or more acini.

## Differential Diagnoses
Ductal or lobuloalveolar hyperplasia
- an increased number of ductal or lobular acinar cells
Secretory change
- eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules in the luminal epithelium (without
apocrine-type morphology)
Comments: Apocrine metaplasia is an incidental finding in older
macaques ,
 . There is no clear
association with specific hormone treatment or higher-grade lesions in cynomolgus
macaques . In women, simple
apocrine metaplasia is not associated with increased risk for breast cancer . A common type of apocrine metaplasia
in the human breast has strongly eosinophilic coarse granules in the apical cytoplasm
of luminal cells. It is unclear whether this type of granular change is related to the
red cytoplasmic granules noted above under secretory change. Here we have limited the
diagnosis of apocrine metaplasia to glands with distinctive cuboidal apocrine-type
morphology. Additional markers for apocrine cells in the human breast include periodic
acid-Schiff after diastase digestion, epithelial membrane antigen, cytokeratins 8 and
18, androgen receptors, and gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP) proteins 15, 24
and 44.4 .

## Metaplasia, squamous cell, duct: Mammary Gland
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Ductal epithelial cells

## Diagnostic features
Presence of foci or areas of stratified squamous non-keratinizing epithelium

## Differential Diagnoses
None
Comments: Squamous metaplasia can be observed in response to the direct
cytotoxicity induced by certain antibody-drug conjugates (e.g., directed against
HER2). Immunohistochemical markers of basal/squamous cells include cytokeratin 14 and
p63.

## Hyperplasia, lobuloalveolar, lactiferous duct, or intralobular (terminal) duct
epithelium: Mammary Gland
( )

## Other term(s)
Basophilia; hyperchromasia; columnar cell hyperplasia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Lobuloalveolar, lactiferous duct, or intralobular (terminal) duct epithelium may be
affected. Hyperplastic lesions can occur as spontaneous findings, particularly in
older macaques, but show increased incidence with different types of hormone
treatment . In one survey of
rhesus and cynomolgus macaques, 47% of animals (9/19) with hyperplastic breast lesions
had received some form of hormone treatment . A separate experiment in older ovariectomized macaques found a
higher incidence of mammary epithelial hyperplasia in animals treated with oral
17β-estradiol (E2) compared to controls . Benign proliferative lesions showed greater expression of
estrogen receptor-α and greater expression of progesterone receptor in response to E2
than controls, suggesting enhanced sensitivity to estrogen exposure .

## Diagnostic features
Hyperplastic lesions have increased numbers of densely packed glandular
epithelial cells, often with large hyperchromatic nuclei, lining ducts or
acini.
Epithelial cells may form mounds, tufts, or micropapillae.
Distribution can be focal, multifocal, or diffuse.
Variable features include tall pseudostratified columnar cells, apocrine-type
morphology, cystic dilated lumens, and secretory changes.
Mitoses or proliferation markers such as Ki67 may be increased relative to
adjacent tissue.
Heterogeneous morphologies have been reported, but lesions are generally
classified as conventional (non-atypical) or atypical:
- Non-atypical: Increased numbers of monomorphic cells without atypical cytologic
or architectural features
- Atypical: Acini or ducts have at least two layers of luminal epithelial cells.
Atypia can be cytologic (e.g., anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, irregular mitotic
figures) or architectural (abnormal arrangement of cells or luminal shape).
Micropapillary change is the most common atypical growth pattern. Atypical lesions
may represent a precursor to ductal/lobular carcinoma in
situ.

## Differential Diagnoses
Hormone-dependent lobular enlargement
Carcinoma in situ:
- Carcinoma in situ is characterized by both architectural and
cytologic atypia
Normal development in peripubertal macaques
- multilayered ducts
Comments: Ductal hyperplasia has been reported in 3% of middle-aged
adult macaques and increases with age . The severity of mammary gland hyperplasia can range from small
focal micropapillae (most common type) to more diffuse bilateral lesions with
atypia ,
 . Focal lobular
hyperplasia against a background of atrophic lobules is documented as a background
finding in older macaques. The focal hyperplastic nodules in these cases may be large
enough to compress adjacent tissues . Certain types of atypical benign lesions have been associated
with increased breast cancer risk in women . In macaques, the relationship between hyperplasia and carcinoma
is not established .

## Hyperplasia/hypertrophy, lobuloalveolar, lactiferous ductal, or intralobular duct
epithelium: Mammary Gland
( )

## Other term(s)
Gynecomastia (males)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Ductal and lobular epithelial cells.

## Diagnostic features
Well-differentiated ducts and lobuloalveolar units with variable numbers of acini
in each lobule

## Differential Diagnoses
None
Comments: Hyperplasia and hypertrophy of mammary gland elements can be
observed in male macaques secondary to long-term estrogen treatment. The development
of breast tissue in peripubertal males occurs analogously to that in females so that
some degree of hyperplasia and hypertrophy may be present in the peripubertal
period . The morphology of
exuberant mammary gland development in males generally resembles that of normal
premenopausal females . This term
should not be confused with the term in rodents.

## Carcinoma in situ: Mammary Gland
( )

## Other term(s)
Dysplasia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Ductal or lobular epithelial cells

## Diagnostic features
Growth patterns include comedo, micropapillary, solid, and cribriform
architecture. Most common type (comedo) is characterized by marked expansion of
ducts by epithelial cells with central necrosis.
Other features include high mitotic rates, nuclear pleomorphism, prominent
nucleoli, and lack of polarity and cohesion.
Variable stromal fibrosis may be observed but no evidence of local invasion or
metastasis.

## Differential Diagnoses
Invasive carcinoma or adenocarcinoma
- local/stromal invasion (with penetration of epithelial basement membrane),
vascular invasion, and/or evidence of metastasis
Comments: The lifetime incidence of in situ and
invasive mammary carcinoma in macaques ranges from 3.5-6.1%. E-cadherin is a marker of
ductal origin in carcinoma in situ lesions . While most cancers occur in older animals, DCIS and
invasive cancers have been reported in animals as young as 4 years of age.

## Carcinoma/adenocarcinoma, duct or lobule: Mammary Gland
( )

## Other term(s)
Invasive carcinoma

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Ductal or acinar epithelial cells

## Diagnostic features
Neoplastic cells are arranged in sheets, with variable comedo, cribriform, and
micropapillary growth patterns.
Cellular features include large round to oval euchromatic nuclei, prominent
nucleoli, abundant amphophilic to basophilic cytoplasm, and increased mitotic
figures compared to non-neoplastic epithelium.
Tubules have irregular morphology with decreased luminal size or loss of
lumens.
Central necrosis is common within neoplastic cells.
Areas of squamous differentiation can be observed in some carcinomas.
Higher grade carcinomas have high nuclear pleomorphism and mitotic rate, loss of
tubular lumens, extensive stromal invasion, and vascular invasion.

## Differential Diagnoses
Carcinoma in situ: neoplastic epithelial cells do not invade the
basement membrane
Comments: Carcinomas may be observed macroscopically as raised
subcutaneous masses adjacent to the nipple, with or without an ulcerated
surface . There is no clear
association between the extent of necrosis and grade in macaque carcinomas . Mammary cancers in macaques variably
express estrogen and progesterone receptors. A subset of ductal carcinomas may
overexpress HER2/neu. Metastasis of invasive carcinomas may occur to the axillary
lymph nodes and lungs .

## 10. Nervous System
For detailed general considerations, refer to the INHAND rodent publication .
The neuroanatomy of the non-human primate is covered in detail elsewhere , . The large brain size of the monkey compared to rodents
necessitates a different approach to trimming and embedding the brain; a recommended
trimming scheme is presented in an STP position paper by Bolon et
al. and a technical
guide . Non-proliferative
spontaneous findings in the nervous system are not common in young cynomolgus monkeys used
in routine nonclinical toxicity studies , . Due
to the young age of the animals and the short duration of the studies, neoplastic lesions
are rarely observed in routine nonclinical toxicity studies involving non-human
primates . The few published reports of
neoplasms in young monkeys include primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), astrocytoma and
ependymoma ( ).

## Cyst, ependyma: General (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Aberrant migration of ependymal cells during embryogenesis

## Diagnostic features
Intracranial cavitation lined by ciliated cuboidal to low columnar epithelium
Immunohistochemically positive for cytokeratin, S-100, and GFAP
Comments: Ependymal cyst is rare in non-human primates with reports in
cynomolgus and African green monkeys , .

## Infiltrate, mononuclear cell: General (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Mononuclear cell infiltrate

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown.

## Diagnostic features
Multifocal perivascular aggregates of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages in
the parenchyma of CNS (usually surrounding blood vessels), choroid plexus, meninges,
cranial or peripheral nerves and/or ganglia
The infiltrate in the CNS parenchyma may be admixed with glial cells such as
microglia and oligodendrocytes
Comments: Perivascular infiltrates of mononuclear cells are the most
common spontaneous finding in the nervous system of cynomolgus monkeys , . Other cell types such as microglial cells and or
oligodendrocytes may be admixed with mononuclear cell infiltrates in the CNS parenchyma
and may represent a glial response to the mononuclear cells transiting from the
Virchow-Robin space into the parenchyma due to a breach in the blood-brain
barrier .
The presence of admixed neutrophils and/or eosinophils may represent tissue or vascular
injury. Drug-induced vascular injury associated with biotherapeutics, particularly
immune complex deposition, is frequently identified in the choroid plexus in NHP in
safety toxicology studies .
Mononuclear cell infiltrates in the choroid plexus should be differentiated from mixed
perivascular and/or vascular cell infiltrates or inflammation. Associated vascular
changes such as endothelial activation, plump endothelial appearance with protrusion
into the lumen, should be described.

## Neural tissue loss, cerebrum: General
( )

## Other term(s)
Porencephaly, brain tissue cavitation

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown

## Diagnostic features
Chronic unilateral or bilateral (generally asymmetrical) lesions characterized by
loss of nervous tissue, neurons and neuropil, resulting in altered tissue
architecture with cavitation and partial or full thickness defects in the cerebral
hemisphere wall.
Nervous tissue is replaced by a thin fibrovascular meshwork with multifocal
clusters of pigmented macrophages (hemosiderin and/or lipofuscin laden). The
surrounding cerebral parenchyma is often atrophic with variable gliosis. Prominent
astrocytes and astrocytic fibrils can be observed around excavation areas.
Often noted grossly as depressed areas with brown discoloration. These areas may be
associated with cranial adhesions.

## Differential Diagnosis
Ependymal cyst
- Cystic dilatation within the white matter reported in the caudal cerebral
hemisphere, partially or completely lined by flattened cuboidal to low columnar
epithelium with a high percentage of ciliated cells. May be associated with acute or
chronic hemorrhage, atrophy and/or gliosis in the surrounding neuropil.
Comments: The parenchymal loss/cavitary lesions are most commonly observed
in the parietal and/or occipital lobes. While the pathogenesis is uncertain, the
constellation of histologic findings is suggestive of a chronic ischemic lesion,
resulting from an ischemic event (thrombus of unknown origin) or traumatic injury
causing impaired cerebral circulation. Due to the young age of affected animals, it has
been suggested that the damage in some cases could occur in utero
during development ,
 . The change can rarely
be associated with hydrocephalus and sometimes due to bacterial infection following
direct CNS injections. Lesions may be subclinical or present with associated neurologic
signs.

## Autophagy, neuron, dorsal root ganglia (DRG): Neuron-Cell Body
( )

## Other term(s)
Lysis, neuron; degeneration, neuron; necrosis, neuron

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Auto-programmed cell death, presumably following lethal cell injury to the sensory
neurons (though the nature of the fatal damage is not known).

## Diagnostic features
Scattered neurons with typically stippled or granular pale eosinophilic
neuroplasm
Absent or lytic nucleus, with distribution of residual chromatin as irregular
amphophilic to deeply eosinophilic central, often winding islands of coalescing
globules and spicules.
The affected neurons are interspersed amongst morphologically normal appearing
neurons
No inflammatory cell reaction is generally observed

## Special Diagnostic Techniques
The appearance is distinctive on H&E-stained sections. If special procedures are
performed, the following features are evident:
Bielschowsky’s silver stain: The clumped chromatin residue appears as black
debris.
Fluoro Jade: Disintegrating cells are not stained.
Immunohistochemistry: In monkeys, affected DRG neurons label positively for
peripherin and ATB16L1, indicating autophagy as an underlying process in the DRG
neurons. Peripherin is a type III intermediate filament protein expressed mainly in
ganglion neurons and ATB16L1 is an autophagy-related protein .
Ultrastructure: By transmission electron microscopy, autophagic neurons are filled
with phagolysomes, which gives the cells their granular cytoplasmic appearance by
light microscopy; have disrupted nuclei comprised of angular to granular chromatin
spicules often arranged in a vaguely circular array; and possess intact cell
membranes .

## Differential Diagnoses
Degeneration, neuron is a potentially reversible indication of substantial cell
injury, which typically presents as cell and/or nuclear swelling.
Necrosis, neuron is an end-stage change indicating cell death, which is apparent as
slightly shrunken, hypereosinophilic cells with small, condensed [“pyknotic”] or
fragmented [“karyorrhectic”] nuclei.
Apoptosis is an end-stage finding indicating cell death, which presents as slightly
shrunken cells possessing either nuclei with marginated crescents of chromatin or
irregularly sized, globular pieces of the disintegrating nucleus.
Comments: Neuronal autophagy is a relatively common background finding in
the dorsal root ganglia and to a lesser extent trigeminal and the autonomic ganglia of
cynomolgus monkeys . The change is
less commonly seen in rats and dogs. As DRG’s are uncommonly examined, existing
historical control data for the incidence of this finding may be of limited
value , , . The change is noted frequently in untreated and
vehicle-treated control animals (1 or occasionally 2 cells per affected ganglion). When
present, the change is likely to be observed in multiple DRG’s in the same animal. The
ultrastructural features of this change suggest that it represents autophagy, but the
initiating cause is unknown. To date, this finding has not been associated with in-life
neurological signs or exposure to potentially neurotoxic test articles, though it is
possible that a test article could increase the incidence of this background change. The
change has been diagnosed historically as “necrosis, neuronal”.

## Ceroid-lipofuscinosis, neuron: Neuron-Cell Body
( )

## Other term(s)
Batten-disease; Kuf’s disease; Parry’s disorder; Jansky-Bielschowsky disease;
Santavuori-Haltia disease

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin/Biological behavior
Defects in cellular metabolism result in accumulation of intracellular lipopigment
(lipofuscin), with or without neurologic impairment.

## Diagnostic features
Neuronal loss
Neuronal swelling (ballooning), with intracytoplasmic, golden brown to pale
amphophilic, autofluorescent finely granular material
Astrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy

## Special Diagnostic Techniques:
Special stains :
- Stain positively for
▪ Periodic-acid Schiff
▪ Acid-fast (weak)
▪ Sudan black
▪ Schmorl’s stain
▪ Aldehyde fuchsin
▪ Luxol-fast blue
Ultrastructural analysis:
- Irregular, granular, electron-dense, membrane-bound intracytoplasmic inclusions
within neurons (as seen in a Cynomolgus macaque) .
- Inclusions in humans vary according to disease sub-type :
▪ Electron-dense curvilinear profiles
▪ Electron-dense profiles resembling ‟finger-prints”
▪ Electron-dense haphazardly arranged rectilinear complexes
Comments: The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses are a group of lysosomal
storage disorders characterized by the intracellular accumulation of lipopigments
resulting in progressive neurodegeneration and neurologic decline. Cases of ceroid
lipofuscinsosis are exceptionally rare in Cynomolgus macaques . Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses should not be confused
with age-associated intraneuronal lipofuscin accumulation, which occurs commonly in aged
macaques without neurologic impairment.

## Degeneration, nerve fiber: Neuron-Axon
( )

## Other term(s)
Axonal spheroids; axonopathy

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin/Biological behavior
Degeneration resultant from primary axonal injury with secondary myelin degredation, or
primary myelin damage leading to secondary axonal disintegration.

## Diagnostic features
Early axonal lesion is characterized by swollen, eosinophilic axons (also known as
spheroids) without any effect on myelin sheaths.
As a primary lesion, myelin degeneration is usually observed as a clear space with
ovoid-shaped myelin debris surrounding an intact centrally located axon.
Late-stage changes are characterized by formation of ‟digestion chambers”
containing macrophages (gitter cells), axon fragments and degenerated myelin
ovoids.
Comments: “Spheroids” are often observed within the white matter tracts in
the brain of aging cynomolgus macaques but rarely in young animals. The globus pallidus
of the basal ganglia is the frequently affected site and the finding is generally
thought to be a function of ageing , .
Nerve fiber degeneration can occur in the absence of detectable functional neurologic
impairment.

## Gliosis, not otherwise specified: Glia
( )

## Other term(s)
Astrocytosis; gemistocytosis; glia hypertrophy; microgliosis; oligodendroglial
satellitosis; glial ‟scar”

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
This finding is occasionally observed in cynomolgus macaques and presumed to result
from cerebral trauma and subsequent (attempted) repair by any of multiple cell
lineages.

## Diagnostic features
Focal or multifocal aggregation of glial cells.
Comments: Scattered aggregates of glial cells are observed as spontaneous
findings in the brains of group housed macaques in toxicity studies, and are presumed
consequent to minor cerebral trauma incurred during play, aggression or housing
transfer. The cell aggregates are mainly composed of microglial cells, oligodendrocytes,
and/or astrocytes occasionally admixed with lymphocytes . Numbers of microglial cells have been shown to increase
with age in cynomolgus monkey brains . When possible, the type of gliosis should be specified (e.g.;
astrocytosis, oligodendroglial satellitosis) with cell types identified according to
cytoarchitectural features. Identification criteria are similar to those for “gliosis
NOS” in rodents . This reactive,
non-neoplastic change should be distinguished from pre-neoplastic changes (now termed
“hyperplasia, glial cell NOS” in rodents ).

## Globoid cell leukodystrophy: Glia (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Krabbe disease; Krabbe’s disease; galactosylceramide lipidosis;
galactocerebrosideosis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Inherited bi-allelic loss of function mutations in GALC gene result in deficient
activity of galactosylceramidase leading to defective lipid metabolism. Subsequent
accumulation of sphingolipids and psychosine results in widespread myelin degeneration
and oligodendrocyte death.

## Diagnostic features
Distinctive ‟globoid” cells: swollen, often multinucleate macrophages containing
flocculent eosinophilic cytoplasm. Globoid cells commonly form perivascular
aggregates.
Severe myelin degeneration
Absence or necrosis of oligodendrocytes
Neuronal loss in thalamus, cerebellum and brainstem

## Special Diagnostic Techniques:
Special stains 
- Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS): Globoid cells contain strongly PAS positive
material
Ultrastructural analysis 
- Moderately electron-dense, variably sized, tubular, intracytoplasmic
inclusions
Comments: Globoid cell leukodystrophy is an autosomal recessive, lysosomal
storage disorder which occurs in Rhesus macaques , , and is a model for the human disease. Affected monkeys typically
appear normal at birth, but become lethargic, dehydrated, fail to thrive and develop
intention tremors in the weeks to months following birth .

## Primitive neuroectodermal tumor: Neuronal
( )

## Other term(s)
Supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumor; medulloblastoma; PNET; embryonal
tumor

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Malignant transformation of neuroectodermal embryonal progenitors

## Diagnostic features
Gross appearance:
- Invasive
- Soft to granular, gray parenchyma
- Variably cystic or hemorrhagic
Histologic appearance: 
- Densely packed, small, oval cells with hyperchromatic nuclei
- High nucleus:cytoplasm ratio
- Mitotic figures are abundant
Comments: Central nervous system primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs)
are rare, malignant embryonal neoplasms, which occur most frequently in
children . In humans,
intracranial PNET were historically classified as supratentorial PNETs or
medulloblastomas. Although histologically similar, these subtypes are considered
distinct due to anatomic ,
immunohistochemical, genetic , , ,
epigenetic and prognostic
differences ,
 . Medulloblastomas most
frequently arise within the cerebellum and leptomeningeal and fourth ventricular extension is common.
Recent changes in the 2016 World Health Organization nomenclature have discarded PNET
terminology in favor of the broader classification as “Embryonal tumors” with further
subtyping, including particular distinction of medulloblastomas from other embryonal
tumor subtypes (Louis et al., 2016). Medulloblastomas are further
sub-classified into genetic and histologically defined variants. The remaining embryonal
tumor variants are classified by a combination of genetic and histopathologic
characteristics.

## Astrocytoma, malignant: Astrocyte/Glial Precursor Cell (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Diffuse astrocytic glioma; grade II astrocytoma; fibrillary astrocytoma

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Malignant transformation of astrocytes or associated glial precursor cells

## Diagnostic features
Gross appearance:
Ill-defined with indistinct margins
Light to dark tan
May be spongy, gelatinous with cysts or calcified
Histologic appearance:
- Stellate cells with fibrillar eosinophilic cytoplasm resembling
astrocytes 
- Low to moderate cellularity, low mitotic rate, infrequent atypia 

## Special Diagnostic Techniques
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP): Astrocytes express GFAP, however, this does
not distinguish neoplastic cells from reactive gliosis.
Comments: Astrocytomas are primary central nervous system tumors, which
account for less than 5.6% of all primary central nervous system tumors in
humans . These tumors are rare
in non-human primates, with one report in a cynomolgus macaque . In humans, astrocytomas are classified by criteria set
forth by the World Health Organization (WHO), and identified on the basis of associated
genetic mutations and histologic features . Astrocytomas are generally classified as diffuse (grade II, low
grade) or anaplastic (grade III, high grade); and differentiated by degrees of atypia,
infiltration and mitotic rate. By definition, necrosis and microvascular proliferation
are not features of astrocytomas; both of these features are reserved for the diagnosis
of glioblastoma . Spontaneous
glioblastomas have been described in a Rhesus macaque , and female baboon .

## Oligodendroglioma, malignant: Oligodendrocyte/Glial Precursor Cell (No image
provided)

## Other term(s)
Anaplastic oligodendroglioma, grade III oligodendroglioma, malignant oligodendroglioma,
diffuse oligodendrocytic glioma

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Malignant transformation of oligodendrocytes, or associated glial precursor cells

## Diagnostic features
Gross appearance , , 
- Generally well-defined, pink to grey
- Texture ranges from gelatinous to firm
- May contain scattered foci of hemorrhage, mucoid change, cystic degeneration and
calcification
- Predilection for white matter
- Leptomeningeal invasion is common , , 
Histologic appearance ,
 
- Moderate cellularity
- Round cells with swollen, clear cytoplasm creating a “honeycomb” or “fried egg”
appearance
- Round to oval nuclei containing finely granular chromatin
Comments: Oligodendrogliomas account for 1.5% of primary brain and other
CNS tumors in humans . Cases in
non-human primates are also rare. Oligodendrogioma has not been reported in Cynomolgus
macaques published, however the authors have observed a single case in an aged
cynomolgus monkey in an academic research setting.
Diagnosis of oligodendrogliomas in humans relies on genetic phenotyping and
identification of both an IDH mutation and 1p/19q chromosomal co-deletion
status . Differentiation
between low (WHO grade II) and high grade oligodendroglioma (WHO grade III) is reliant
upon histologic evidence of malignancy, including a high mitotic rate, nuclear atypia,
necrosis and microvascular proliferation , .

## 11. Reproductive System – Female
This section describes common background and treatment-induced changes in the reproductive
tract of female cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis). The scope is
generally limited to findings reported in young animals in toxicology studies and aligned
with those described for rodents when possible . In addition to the material provided here, we refer the reader to the
2008 monograph on the reproductive system of the female macaque published as a special
supplement by the Society of Toxicologic Pathology , , , , , , which
includes tissue trimming guidelines ,
and to additional works on the reproductive pathology of non-human primates (NHPs)
(e.g. , , ).
Macaques are Asian-origin NHPs with many biological similarities to humans, including a
high degree of gene sequence identity (approximately 98% for coding sequences of the
cynomolgus macaque , compared with 40%
for the laboratory mouse (Mus musculus) ). Genetic variability among and within sub-populations of
cynomolgus macaques is relatively high, with the lowest inter-individual variation seen in
animals from the island of Mauritius .
Cynomolgus macaques interbreed with rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) in the
wild, and rhesus lineage is present in commercially available cynomolgus macaques . Notably, animals from different
geographical regions may show distinct patterns of reproductive physiology and pathology.
Seasonal effects on reproduction are insignificant in cynomolgus macaques. In contrast, the
closely related rhesus macaque has strong seasonal suppression of reproductive function
during the summer .

## Menstrual Cycle
From menarche to menopause, the menstrual cycle is the central physiological feature of
the reproductive system in female cynomolgus monkeys. Accordingly, the toxicologic
pathologist may encounter a variety of morphologic patterns within the reproductive tract
depending on the phase of the cycle. This variability requires a sound understanding of
the menstrual cycle phases, along with an awareness of how circulating ovarian hormones
influence the appearance of the reproductive tract. While these normal cyclic changes are
not routinely diagnosed in standard toxicology studies, documentation of the different
phases of the menstrual cycle in females may be included if there is cause for concern
based on the pharmacological mode of action, on suspicion of treatment-related effects
interfering with the normal cycle-related events, on relevant findings in previous
studies, or in cases where cycle monitoring is required.
The menstrual cycle of the cynomolgus monkey is generally divided into three major
phases: the follicular phase, the luteal phase, and the menstrual phase. The follicular
phase is characterized by the presence of an enlarging dominant follicle within the ovary.
The rising levels of estradiol produced by this dominant follicle (in combination with low
serum progesterone) increase glandular mitotic activity in the endometrium and, as such,
the follicular phase is often referred to as the proliferative phase. Ovulation and the
development of the corpus luteum is the hallmark of the luteal phase; however, in
cynomolgus monkeys, there is considerable variability in the microscopic appearance of the
ovary and endometrium. During the luteal or “secretory” phase, elevated levels of
progesterone induce differentiation of a secretory phenotype within the endometrial
glands. In the absence of maternal recognition of pregnancy, the corpus luteum begins to
regress and the menstrual phase begins. Following menstruation, there is a short period of
transition before the follicular phase begins in which there is repair and regeneration of
the endometrium, often referred to as the regenerative phase. While these phases can be
subdivided and may have multiple other terms, it is recommended here to use follicular,
luteal, and menstrual phases. These terms are most closely aligned with the cycling
changes in the ovary, which provides the primary hormonal stimulation for all other
aspects of the cycle.
In the NHP, cyclic changes are most evident in the ovary and endometrium, which are the
most useful organs for assessing cycle stage microscopically. The normally cycling
endometrium can be staged to within a few days ( ). A full description of macaque menstrual cycle features is beyond the scope of
this review but can be referenced elsewhere , , , , , , , , .

## Follicular Phase
The follicular phase is characterized by the presence of a developing dominant follicle.
Rising serum concentrations of estradiol along with lower progesterone concentrations
drive characteristic features within the endometrium, including increasing numbers of
mitoses, epithelial pseudostratification, an increasing proportion of straight or slightly
spiraled parallel endometrial glands, and stromal edema in the superficial endometrium
(zona functionalis). The thickness of the superficial endometrium increases, whereas the
morphology of the basal endometrium (zona basalis) does not appreciably change.

## Luteal Phase
The luteal phase is characterized by the presence of a developing corpus luteum. Elevated
levels of progesterone induce glandular secretion, coiling, and dilation of endometrial
glands, as well as proliferation and differentiation of the spiral arteries, as the
endometrium becomes receptive to implantation of the blastocyst and supportive of early
pregnancy. The endometrium reaches its maximal height at the beginning of the luteal phase
and decreases towards the end. The increasing secretion causes glandular dilation and
accumulation of secretory material in the glandular lumina. Towards the end of the luteal
phase, signs of regression and glandular exhaustion become evident, including apoptotic
cells among the glandular epithelium in the basal endometrium, accumulation of inspissated
secretion and stromal edema with small hemorrhages and fibrin leakage.

## Menstrual Phase
Menstruation is the most clinically visible phase of the menstrual cycle, and the first
day of bleeding is often designated as the first day of the cycle. The menstrual phase is
characterized by a regressing corpus luteum on one of the ovaries. During menstruation,
vasoconstriction and vascular thrombosis of the spiral arteries and disturbed circulation
lead to tissue necrosis and disintegration and shedding of the superficial layer of the
endometrium into the uterine lumen. Multifocal hemorrhage into the superficial stroma is
the first hallmark of the menstrual phase. There is focal dense clumping of superficial
endometrial stromal cell nuclei. Portions of the sloughed endometrial tissue, hemorrhage
from stromal blood vessels, leukocytes, and cellular debris can be found in the uterine
lumen, the endocervical canal, and the vagina. During menstruation, the entire superficial
endometrium is shed and the endometrial stroma is partially denuded. The remaining
epithelial cells are low to medium columnar. The basal endometrium is spared. The glands
of the basal endometrium may still contain secretory material but remain quiescent.

## Recommendations for Documentation of Sexual Maturity in Female NHPs
In addition to normal ovarian cyclicity, there is also considerable variability in the
histologic features across the different stages of reproductive development. The
toxicologic pathologist is often required to interpret these patterns and document
whether the animal is considered sexually mature based on microscopic features.
Histologic confirmation of sexual maturity is especially important when working with
NHPs, as age alone is not an effective way to determine if animals are sexually mature.
It is recommended to document for each animal in a study if it is considered immature,
peripubertal, mature, or senescent. Immaturity may be documented in some cases, leading
to the presumption of maturity if not stated otherwise . This is not a recommended practice, as a study with all
mature animals will have nothing documented, and unless the assumption of maturity is
specifically included in the materials and methods, downstream readers will have no way
to know if the animals were mature or not. Therefore, it is recommended here to document
sexual maturity or immaturity for all animals under study.
When documentation of sexual maturity is needed, it is best to create or use a “summary
tissue” in the data entry system such as “Reproductive Status” and to use this parameter
to record the maturity status of all animals in the study. Depending on the data entry
system limits, documentation of sexual maturity can also be made under “General
Observations”. This approach allows for a full assessment of all individual organs in
the reproductive system, for individual histopathologic diagnoses under the reproductive
organs to be used independent of maturity status, and for data (including reproductive
status) to be easily pulled into tabular summaries and historical control data sets.
In-life data, if available, may also be correlated to support morphological
findings.
The terms for describing the maturity status recorded under the pseudo-tissue or
general observations are immature, peripubertal,
mature ( ), and senescent. Awareness of the normal features of these
developmental stages is important in the identification and interpretation of treatment
effects on the reproductive system.

## Immature
Due to absence or low levels of hormone stimulation from the hypothalamus and pituitary,
there is no (cyclic) development of hormone responsive structures within the primary and
secondary reproductive organs. This state is reflected in the following morphologic
characteristics: the ovaries show varying degrees of early follicular development, but
lack corpora lutea or luteal remnants; the uterus is small with inactive glands and
condensed stroma and myometrium; the vagina is small and shows a low, cuboidal
non-keratinized epithelial lining; and the mammary gland consists only of rudimentary
ducts and lacks signs of development .

## Peripubertal
Initiated by the increased production and secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) in the hypothalamus, the pituitary starts to produce follicle stimulating hormone
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). These gonadotropins are responsible for early
development of hormone-responsive structures within the reproductive organs through
stimulation of the ovary and early steroidogenesis. The ovaries may show varying degrees
of follicular development (up to the stage of tertiary or preovulatory follicles) or the
presence of an occasional corpus luteum, but, in general, show absence of multiple
remnants of previous corpora lutea as observed in mature regularly cycling females.
Although young females may have microscopic evidence of prior ovulation (presence of one
or two remnants of corpora lutea), it should be recognized that many of the NHPs used in
routine general toxicology studies are only recently post-menarche and are not likely
fully mature or regularly cycling. Because of the production of estrogens originating from
developing follicles within the ovaries, the secondary reproductive organs can show
varying degrees of development including proliferative changes within the endometrium
(mitoses, pseudostratification), epithelial maturation with keratinization in the vagina,
and ductal expansion, branching, and differentiation into lobuloalveolar units in the
mammary gland .

## Mature
A mature animal has a cycle length generally between 28 and 32 days , , although there is considerable intra- and inter-animal
variability, in large part due to social and hierarchal influences . The microscopic appearance of the ovary
varies with the phase of menstrual cycle and may display varying degrees of follicular
development (up to the stage of a large preovulatory, tertiary follicle) or a developing
or mature corpus luteum and has multiple remnants of corpora lutea from prior cycles.
Since mature NHPs have a relatively high incidence of anovulatory cycles, evidence of
current cyclicity is not always possible and the presence of multiple remnants of corpora
lutea is often the only histologic indicator of maturity in these animals . Due to the cyclic changes in estradiol
and progesterone, the endometrium exhibits alternating features of follicular, luteal, or
menstrual phase characteristics (as described by van Esch et
al. ). The vagina has a
well-keratinized epithelium throughout the cycle and the mammary glands show signs of
development and/or secretory activity.

## Senescent
While most toxicologic pathologists work with juvenile or early adult animals, an
understanding of age-related changes may be important in certain disease models or aging
studies, requiring documentation of the reproductive status for proper study
interpretation. Macaques of 20 or more years of age typically show signs of reproductive
inefficiency and senescence. Menses may become irregular and eventually cease (menopause).
Decreased serum estradiol, normal or reduced progesterone, and increased FSH
concentrations are often observed with histologic evidence of reproductive
senescence ,
 . Anti-Müllerian hormone
levels decrease with increasing age and may be useful as a marker of diminished ovarian
reserve . As a part of
reproductive senescence, the ovaries exhibit a decrease in primordial, primary, and antral
follicles with an increase in atretic follicles. The uterine endometrial stroma and glands
are often inactive and appear similar to an early follicular phase endometrium without
mitotic activity. Endometrial glands are narrow and straight with cuboidal to low columnar
epithelium. The endometrial height is generally low and as the animal becomes older, the
endometrium becomes more compact with endometrial glands often oriented parallel to the
endometrial surface. Endometrial glands may become dilated. Estrogen receptor expression
is high in the initial stages of senescence but eventually decreases and may ultimately
vanish . The cervical and vaginal
epithelium will show evidence of atrophy . The mammary glands of older macaques regress with age, showing
lobular atrophy and low proliferative activity . It is important to note that the term “senescent” is a general term
and there are considerable species differences in the patterns and morphologic features
observed as a part of reproductive aging and the features described for NHP here are
distinct from those observed in rodents .

## A. Ovary
The ovary of an immature animal typically contains multiple secondary or tertiary
follicles, without signs of ovulation or formation of corpora lutea. In mature macaques,
one ovary ovulates in a given cycle. Thus, the single dominant ovarian structure (mature
follicle, corpus hemorrhagicum, or corpus luteum) will only be evident on one side, and it
is necessary to examine complete sections of both ovaries in order to determine the likely
hormonal context for interpretation of the endometrium and the rest of the reproductive
tract. Gross photographs of both sides of the ovaries are a useful adjunct to histology,
when assessment of reproductive function is critical. In a normally cycling adult animal,
follicles are present at all stages (primordial to antral). As the dominant follicle
enlarges, other antral follicles become atretic, with apoptosis of granulosa cells.
Follicles develop over 3-5 cycles, so small to mid-sized antral follicles can be seen at
any cycle stage. Corpora lutea largely regress at the end of the menstrual cycle, but
remnants are usually visible for several subsequent cycles. Fibrous corpora albicantia may
arise from either ovulatory or non-ovulatory follicles. After regression of non-dominant
follicles, acellular, semicircular, pale eosinophilic zona pellucida remnants persist
within the ovarian stroma for months to years. The macaque ovary has a prominent rete
ovarii at the hilus but no ovarian bursa. The fimbria is prominent macroscopically and may
be larger than the ovary. Uncommon disorders of the ovary include polycystic ovarian
syndrome , a condition that can
be mimicked by treatment with high-dose FSH agonist treatment ( ). Male pseudohermaphroditism has also been reported ( ).

## Deciduosis: Ovary, Oviduct, Vagina
( (Ovary); (Vagina))

## Other term(s)
Extrauterine decidual change; ectopic decidual reaction

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Subcoelomic mesenchyme-derived stromal cells within the ovarian cortex; stromal cells
of the oviduct, cervix, or vagina

## Diagnostic features
Presence of a plaque or nodule(s) of decidualized cells, sometimes forming
polypoid projection from the ovarian surface
Decidualized cells are large polyhedral, cytoplasm-rich (epithelioid) pale
basophilic stromal cells.
Granulated lymphocytes with eosinophilic cytoplasmic globules are often
interspersed within areas of decidualized stromal cells in the endometrium.
The cytology of the cells is comparable to the decidualized cells observed within
the endometrium during pregnancy or during high-dose progesterone treatment.

## Differential Diagnoses
Ectopic decidual reaction should not be mistaken for carcinoma or other
neoplastic growths.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
With PAS, decidualized stromal cells are found to store detectable amounts of
cytoplasmic glycogen.
Comments: “Deciduosis” is the presence of decidual tissue or tissue
resembling the endometrium of pregnancy in an ectopic site , , .
Deciduosis is a rare finding in nulliparous NHPs.

## Follicle, polyovular: Ovary
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Polyovular follicles appear to occur due to a failure of normal germ cell nest
breakdown during the formation of primordial follicles in the late fetal and early
neonatal period.

## Diagnostic features
Multiple (two or more) oocytes present within a single developing follicle.

## Differential Diagnoses
None
Comments: Polyovular follicles are commonly observed in young
macaques ,
 . The presence and
number can vary between animals, with occasional animals having numerous polyovular
follicles. Increased polyovular follicles have been reported in mice following
xenobiotic exposure during the fetal or perinatal period that induces hormonal
dysregulation, in particular disruption of estrogen signaling pathways , , . In rhesus macaques, the number of polyovular follicles increase
following exposure to exogenous FSH . While test article-related increases can occur, this can be
difficult to evaluate in macaques due to the variability and presence of large numbers
of polyovular follicles in normal control animals.

## Mineralization, follicle: Ovary
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The change appears to arise from degenerate primordial oocytes within atretic
primordial follicles undergoing dystrophic calcification.

## Diagnostic features
Calcified round bodies are present within the ovarian cortex.
The mineralized bodies are often associated with primordial oocytes.

## Differential Diagnoses
None
Comments: Follicular mineralization is a common finding in the macaque
ovary. The change appears to arise from degenerate primordial oocytes within atretic
follicles that undergo dystrophic calcification. This change is most commonly observed
in young adult animals ,
 and can vary between
individuals with occasional animals having extensive mineralization.

## Hyperplasia, surface epithelium: Ovary
( )

## Other term(s)
Hyperplasia, ovarian serosal epithelium; hyperplasia, ovarian mesothelium

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Cell of origin is the ovarian serosal epithelial cell.

## Diagnostic features
Focal or multifocal papillary, indented, or saw-toothed, non-mass-forming lesions
consisting of a single layer of closely packed columnar ovarian surface epithelial
cells with normal ovarian stroma beneath.
Few/no mitoses
No atypia or pleomorphism

## Differential Diagnoses
Ovarian surface epithelial tumor
- Mass-forming exophytic neoplasm arising from the ovarian surface epithelium
Endometriosis
- Typically, cystic and accompanied by endometrial stroma, macrophages (often
hemosiderin-laden), and hemorrhage
Comments: Ovarian surface epithelial hyperplasia is a common background
finding, usually of no significance .

## Choriocarcinoma: Ovary, Uterus
( (Uterus))

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The cell of origin is unknown but is considered to be a primitive cell of ovarian
germ cell origin, with differentiation into cytotrophoblast, intermediate trophoblast,
and syncytiotrophoblast lineages.

## Diagnostic features
Pleomorphic, anaplastic polygonal to round, large cells with an
infiltrative/destructively invasive growth pattern and a high mitotic rate.
Two distinct neoplastic cellular populations, uninucleate
(cytotrophoblast/intermediate trophoblast-like) and multinucleated
(syncytiotrophoblast)
Scant fibrovascular stroma

## Differential Diagnoses
Ovarian granulosa cell tumor
- Arise from within the ovary, and have a more uniform cellular population and a
distinct nodular/nest/cord growth pattern

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunostaining for human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), mucin 4 (MUC4) and CD146
(Mel-CAM) 
Comments: Choriocarcinomas are uncommon in macaques , , but have been reported in toxicology
studies . A mixed germ cell
tumor with elements of choriocarcinoma has also been reported in a 7-year-old
cynomolgus macaque in a toxicology study .

## Tumor, granulosa cell, benign or malignant: Ovary
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The cell of origin is the ovarian granulosa cell.

## Diagnostic features
Solid or cystic nodules, nests, and thick cords of uniform polygonal epithelial
cells within the ovary, with scant fibrovascular stroma. Usually well
circumscribed and bounded by a distinct basement membrane zone (benign); rarely
invasive (malignant).
Uniform cellular features resembling granulosa cells; moderate amount of pale
basophilic cytoplasm, oval vesicular nuclei with finely stippled chromatin.

## Differential Diagnoses
Hyperplastic follicular remnants
- Follicular remnants are typically solitary, small (<1 mm), occur in older
animals, and may contain zona pellucida remnants.
Hyperplastic rete ovarii
- The rete ovarii has a distinct tubular to retiform contour with concave
borders.
Sex cord-stromal tumor
- This tumor is composed of more fusiform cells, with palisading arrays along
basement membrane zones.
Cystadenoma/Cystadenocarcinoma
- This surface-oriented tumor has an exophytic, papillary morphology.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Clinical, gross, or histopathologic evidence of hyperestrogenism
Comments: Granulosa cell tumors are one of the two most common malignant
neoplasms of the ovary in rhesus macaques, the other being
cystadenocarcinoma ,
 . Granulosa cell
tumors are often hormonally active, producing elevated serum concentrations of
estradiol and resulting in uterine enlargement, endometrial hyperplasia, endometrial
polyps, and/or endocervical squamous metaplasia.

## Teratoma, benign: Ovary
( )

## Other term(s)
Dermoid cyst

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Germ cell origin, presumably congenital.

## Diagnostic features
Gross: Solitary round mass, often pigmented and cystic
Histologic presence of at least 3 different cell types derived from different
embryonic tissue lineages (mesodermal, ectodermal, endodermal, or neural
tube/neural crest)
Tissues disorganized but differentiated into recognizable tissue types (e.g.
skin, bone, neural, intestinal)

## Differential Diagnoses
Other common ovarian tumor types (granulosa cell tumor, ovarian surface
epithelial tumor)
- These tumors arise from a single cell type; morphology is described elsewhere
in this monograph.
Endometriosis
- Endometriosis consists of endometrial glands and stroma, with hemorrhage and
macrophage-rich inflammation with hemosiderosis, but not multiple mature
lineages.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
None are required; histologic features are distinctive and diagnostic.
Comments: Teratomas are the most common benign neoplasm of the macaque
ovary , , , , . In human pathology benign teratomas are the most common neoplasm
in juveniles, and are also termed “dermoid cysts” .

## B. Oviduct
( )

## C. Uterus

## Introduction to Non-Cyclic Hormone-mediated Endometrial Changes
Ovarian estrogens and progesterone mediate a range of glandular and stromal changes
during the menstrual cycle. Administration of various activators or inhibitors of
trophic factors (e.g. GnRH, FSH, and LH) or steroid receptor agonists/antagonists can
alter this normal pattern and result in morphologic abnormalities, including abnormal
development/maturation of glands, stroma, and/or spiral arteries. There may be overt
alterations of these structures, or the changes may be within the range of what is
observed during the normal cycle, just without the normal timing of events within the
endometrium or without the expected development or structures (i.e., dominant follicle
or corpus luteum in the ovary). Such changes can be challenging to identify and require
thorough knowledge of the normal endometrial morphologic events for proper diagnosis and
interpretation. For steroid receptor agonists/antagonists, the endometrium can be
inactive or dyssynchronous and show non-physiologic secretory and proliferative patterns
(preferred terms are described below) depending on pharmacologic profile of the test
article, dose, treatment period, and/or hormonal context.

## Inactive endometrium
An inactive endometrium arises from decreased activation of estrogen and/or
progesterone receptors, either because of reduced hormonal stimulation or because of a
blockade/inhibition at the receptor or pathway level. Morphologically, the
characteristics of an inactive endometrium consist of stromal compaction, inactive
glands lined by low columnar to cuboidal epithelium with small, dark nuclei and minimal
cytoplasm and a very low number or even absence of mitotic figures or absence of
cytoplasmic vacuoles ( ). Examples of compounds capable of inducing an inactive endometrium are
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonists, selective estrogen receptor
modulators (SERMs) such as bazedoxifene acetate, and selective progesterone receptor
modulators (SPRMs) (with predominantly antagonistic activity) such as mifepristone (RU
486). Long-standing suppression can finally result in an atrophic endometrium in which
the number of estrogen and progesterone receptors are markedly reduced (e.g. Ethun
et al. ).

## Dyssynchronous endometrium
A dyssynchronous endometrium arises from a perturbation of the normal physiologic
sequence of events that occurs within the endometrium during the menstrual cycle. It
consists of a varying combination of overlapping morphologic changes consisting of
inactive glands, glands showing low mitotic activity and/or nuclear
pseudostratification, cystic dilated glands, gland tortuosity, varying grades of
glandular secretory changes, apoptotic changes, hemorrhage, compact stroma, stromal
decidual changes, and thick-walled spiral arteries ( ). SPRMs with mixed agonistic/antagonistic progesterone receptor
activity such as asoprisnil and ulipristal acetate are examples of compounds that can
induce a dyssynchronous endometrium.

## Asynchronous endometrium (normophysiologic secretory pattern)
An asynchronous endometrium mimics a normal cyclic luteal phase (and can have the
characteristics of an early, mid, and late luteal phase), but it is induced by exogenous
administered hormones. The endometrium is called asynchronous because it does not
correspond to the ovarian phase/morphology. Examples are estrogen/progestogen therapies
including oral contraceptives.

## Non-physiologic patterns of endometrial histopathology
A variety of non-physiologic patterns may be seen in the endometrium that reflect
endogenous or exogenous influences on the reproductive system. The most common pattern
occurring as a background effect is reduced endometrial proliferation and/or
differentiation as a result of social, environmental, or treatment-related stressors.
The impact of social status and stress on reproductive function is
well-documented ,
 . Follicular and luteal
phase deficiencies may result from suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal
(HPG) axis. Suppression of the HPG axis in socially subordinate animals is a normal
facet of macaque reproductive physiology, resulting in non-ovulatory cycles and a
corresponding lack of full luteal-phase endometrium.
Other non-physiologic patterns can provide insight into class-specific effects.
Examples include (1) the effects of selective estrogen receptor agonists such as
tamoxifen, which produce glandular atrophy, cystic change, and endometrial stromal
fibrosis ; and (2) the pattern
produced by selective progesterone receptor agonists, consisting of overt luteal
phase-type of changes of the glands, with saw-tooth appearance and varying grades of
epithelial cytoplasmic vacuolation, prominent spiral arteries and
(pseudo)decidualization of the stroma. These endometrial changes can mimic
pregnancy-related endometrial changes.
Although it is tempting and sometimes useful to discuss class-specific changes in terms
of “typical patterns” of estrogen and progestogen effects, the most useful approach for
study interpretation is to simply indicate the presence of a non-physiologic pattern,
and to include a careful description of the morphologic features of that pattern, using
concurrent control animals as comparators ( ).

## Adenomyosis: Uterus
( )

## Other term(s)
Myometrial endometriosis; endometriosis interna; endometrial diverticulosis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Adenomyosis pathogenesis is still largely unknown but multiple hypotheses exist
including direct myometrial invasion by the endometrium, uterine traumatization (e.g.
surgery), (focal) myometrial weakening or rupture (e.g. related to pregnancy),
developmental anomalies (misplaced endometrial precursors), or bone marrow-derived
stem cells differentiating to glandular and stromal components .

## Diagnostic features
Focal aggregate(s) of normal, well-differentiated glandular epithelium and
stroma, reminiscent of endometrium, but present in the myometrium.
Myometrium may be grossly thickened.
Foci of adenomyosis may show cyclic changes in concordance to the
endometrium.
Foci of adenomyosis may show a connection to the luminal surface, suggesting
endometrial diverticulosis.
Adenomyosis may be focal and well-circumscribed (adenomyoma) or diffuse.

## Differential Diagnoses
Fallopian tube or tangential sections of endometrium within the myometrium
Endometrial stromal sarcoma
- Nodule of neoplastic stromal tissue resembling proliferative phase endometrial
stroma within the myometrium. Tumors may extend into the endometrium as a
polyp.
Lack of endometrial glands as observed in adenomyosis.
May contain necrosis or hemorrhage depending on grade.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunohistochemistry
- CD10/CALLA (membranous and cytoplasmic) – Adenomyosis stromal cells are
positive, endometrial glands are negative
Comments: Adenomyosis is most commonly diagnosed in captive NHPs after
hysterectomy or at necropsy with a prevalence of up to 24% in macaques . The change can also can be induced by
exposure to high levels of unopposed estrogenic compounds . In rhesus monkeys, some cases of adenomyosis were
found in conjunction with endometriosis . Macaques with adenomyosis may show clinical signs of abnormal
uterine bleeding and abdominal pain. Histologic diagnosis should only be made from
well-positioned, full thickness histology sections and not biopsy.

## Decidualization: Uterus
( )

## Other term(s)
Decidual reaction; pseudodecidualization

## Modifiers
Focal, diffuse, perivascular

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Endometrial stromal cell, that under progestogenic stimulation transform into large,
polyhedral, cytoplasm-rich (epithelioid) cells storing large amounts of glycogen (the
process of decidualization).

## Diagnostic features
Presence of endometrial periarterial areas of decidualized stromal cells to, in
more progressed cases, presence of decidualized stromal cells occupying the whole
of the stroma in the superficial endometrium and even part of the basalis.
The decidualized cells are large polyhedral to spindle-shaped, pale basophilic
cytoplasm-rich (epithelioid) stromal cells.
Intermingled within areas of decidualized stromal cells, often endometrial
lymphocytes with their eosinophilic cytoplasmic globules (NK cells) can be
observed additionally.
In progressed cases, stromal decidualization can cause compression and
obstruction and consequently dilation of the upper part of the glands.
In cases of chronic stimulation, the decidualized stromal cells can become
spindle-shaped and resemble smooth-muscle cells.

## Differential Diagnoses
Normal luteal-phase decidual change.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
With the PAS methods, decidualized stromal cells are found to store detectable
amounts of cytoplasmic glycogen.
Decidual cells stain positive for CD10, while the NK cells within the
decidualized area stain positive for CD56
Comments: Decidualization is a progesterone-driven process in which the
stromal cells transform to large, polyhedral, cytoplasm-rich cells storing large
amounts of glycogen during pregnancy. In case of pregnancy, the process is temporary
and will disappear after labor. Similar morphologic changes may be induced by (high
doses/unopposed) progestogenic stimulation in non-pregnant non-human primates. In
addition to the stromal marker CD10, decidualized cells can stain positive for
vimentin, smooth muscle actin, progesterone receptor, and VCAM-1 .

## Decreased endometrial differentiation, luteal phase: Uterus (No image
provided)

## Other term(s)
Luteal phase defect

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Luteal phase defect may be associated with stress or illness . In humans, it is characterized by
decreased progesterone release from the corpus luteum.

## Diagnostic features
Clinical tests:
- Low serum progesterone
Histologic characteristics (present in the majority of the endometrium):
- Decreased sacculation or decreased numbers of sacculated endometrial glands
with low-medium columnar epithelial cells
- Low endometrium
- Compact stroma in the zona basalis
- Persistent mitoses in the zona functionalis glands
- A combination of the characteristics listed above plus the presence of a mature
corpus luteum on ovary

## Differential Diagnoses
Normal endometrium
Dyssynchronous endometrium (if changes are present focally/multifocally rather
than diffusely)
Comments: In women, luteal phase defects are characterized by menstrual
cycle lengths that are normal for the individual, with a long follicular phase and
shortened luteal phase ,
 . In cynomolgus
macaques, animals with social stress-associated suppression of ovulation have
decreased luteal phase progesterone .

## Decreased glandular development, follicular phase: Uterus (No image
provided)

## Other term(s)
Inactive endometrium; endometrial atrophy; proliferative phase defect

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Uterine proliferative phase defects are often identified as decreased endometrial
development without changes in associated hormone concentrations (e.g. anti-Mullerian
hormone, inhibin B, FSH, LH, and progesterone) . In women, ultrasound measurements show decreased endometrial
thickness, often with no difference in luteal phase length .

## Diagnostic features (relative to expectations based on ovarian
morphology)
Decreased endometrial thickness
Decreased number/proportion of endometrial glands
Decreased glandular mitoses in superficial endometrium
Decreased glandular pseudostratification in superficial endometrium
Compact endometrial stroma?

## Differential Diagnoses
Endometrial atrophy (senile)
Normal endometrium
Decreased endometrial differentiation, luteal phase – low progesterone, clinical
evidence of a long follicular phase and with short luteal phase
Comments: This condition may correspond to a clinical follicular phase
defect. Diagnosis of a follicular phase defect is often difficult and should be made
in conjunction with histologic evaluation of the ovaries and when possible, in-life
menstrual cycle monitoring and/or serum hormone levels.

## Degeneration, spiral arteries: Uterus
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Spiral arteries are unique to the primate endometrium and are the key vessels that
control menstruation. They are very sensitive to progesterone. Treatment with
anti-progestins or progesterone receptor modulators can lead to degradation and
degeneration of those vessels.

## Diagnostic features
Spiral arteries can show varying grades of degradation and/or atrophy of the
mural smooth muscle cells.
The tunica media can become replaced by hyaline deposits.
The endometrial stroma often is very compact.

## Differential Diagnoses
None
Comments: Degeneration and degradation of spiral arteries can be induced
by progesterone (receptor) antagonists , . Anti-progestin treatment such as with RU486 and ZK 137 316 can lead
to stromal cell atrophy, stromal compaction and hyalinizing degeneration of the spiral
arteries, all in the presence of high serum concentrations of estradiol and increased
ER . Anti-progestin treatment
causing degeneration and atrophy of spiral arteries may contribute to endometrial
atrophy because of reduction in endometrial blood flow .

## Dyssynchronous endometrium: Uterus
( )

## Other term(s)
Non-physiologic endometrial pattern

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
A dyssynchronous endometrium arises from perturbation of the normal physiologic
sequence of events that occurs within the endometrium during the menstrual cycle.
Estrogen- and progesterone-mediated glandular and stromal changes occur in a
predictable cyclic fashion during the menstrual cycle and administration of various
steroid receptor agonists/antagonists alone or in combination can alter the typical
morphologic pattern. Changes in hormonal stimulation can result in the appearance of
abnormal development/maturation of glands, stroma, and/or spiral arteries. There may
be overt alteration of these components, or the changes may appear to be within the
range of what can be observed during the normal cycle, just without the normal timing
of events within the endometrium or occurring without the expected
development/structures (i.e., dominant follicle or corpus luteum) in the ovary. This
altered timing of development within the endometrium and/or lack of concordance with
ovarian cyclicity represents a dyssynchronous endometrium.

## Diagnostic features
Depending on the compound’s profile, the treatment period and dose, the
endometrium exhibits a varying combination of simultaneously appearing morphologic
changes that may include inactive glands, glands showing low mitotic activity,
and/or nuclear pseudostratification; cystic dilated glands; excessive gland
tortuosity; varying degrees of glandular secretory changes; apoptosis; compact
stroma; stromal pseudodecidual changes; and/or thick-walled spiral arteries.
Individual glands can display features of mixed estrogen
(follicular/proliferative phase) and progesterone (luteal/secretory phase)
stimulation simultaneously.
Squamous metaplasia of endometrial glands can be present (typically with estrogen
receptor agonism).
Despite some of the similarities to a typical secretory phase endometrium, the
whole of selective progesterone-receptor modulator (SPRM) induced morphologic
endometrial changes does not match any of the normal cyclic related morphologic
events.
Because of tissue selectivity, the ovaries can appear normal (morphologically as
well as functionally) or display a lack of cyclicity.
Depending on the ratio of agonistic and antagonistic influence(s), the
endometrium can have an increased, decreased or normal thickness.
Comments: Selective progesterone receptor modulators mainly developed
for the treatment of endometriosis and uterine leiomyomata represent a class of
synthetic ligands that can exert partial agonistic, partial antagonistic or mixed
agonistic and antagonistic effects on various progesterone target tissues. A few
examples of compounds in this class that have a mixed agonistic/antagonistic profile
and can induce endometrial dyssynchrony in cynomolgus monkeys (more or less comparable
to human) are asoprisnil and
ulipristal acetate . In toxicity
studies using sexually mature animals, the cyclic phase of the ovary (follicular or
luteal phase) at the start or during of the study possibly plays a role in the
development and progression of the changes, since endogenous estrogen or progesterone
can interfere with the agonistic or antagonistic properties of the compounds on test:
asoprisnil and other 11β-benzaldoxime-substituted SPRMs, for instance, exert
tissue-selective effects on the uterus in the presence of follicular phase estrogen
concentrations . Possibly,
the physiologic progesterone-mediated downregulation of the expression of the estrogen
receptor is perturbed resulting in simultaneous expression of both the typical
estrogen- and progesterone-mediated endometrial changes . SPRM dose may be important, as some effects may be
dose-dependent ,
 . Although not all
histological features are present simultaneously, it is usually possible to identify
several of the characteristic changes induced by SPRMs, as described for the human
endometrium . These complex
changes can be challenging to identify in some cases, and knowledge of normal
endometrial morphology is a prerequisite for the correct diagnosis.

## Ectopic tissue, ovary: Uterus
( )

## Diagnostic features
Small focus of ovarian stroma with varying amounts of primordial, primary, and
atretic follicles.
Typically present on the serosal surface of the uterus, within the myometrium, or
within the broad ligament.
Not usually visible grossly and found incidentally during microscopic evaluation
of the uterus
Comments: Ectopic ovarian tissue can occasionally be reported in
macaques and has been observed in approximately 8% of animals . Given that this change is only
observed microscopically, incidence may vary with different trimming patterns of the
uterus. When using ovariectomized macaques, completeness of ovariectomy should be
confirmed using postsurgical serum estradiol, progesterone, or gonadotropin
concentrations, or a combination of these hormones .

## Endometriosis: Uterus
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The pathogenesis of endometriosis is largely unknown. In women, the most cited theory
is retrograde menstruation: endometrial fluid leakage from the fallopian tubes into
the abdominal or pelvic cavity during menstruation . This theory does not account for differences in the
percentage of women with endometriosis (10%) and women that experience retrograde
menstruation (90%). The theory of retrograde menstruation also fails to explain cases
of endometriosis in newborns, pre-menarchal girls, and men undergoing prostate cancer
treatment ,
 . Additional factors
likely predispose some women to endometriosis. A second theory involves embryonic
development of endometriosis tissue. The peritoneum and pleural lining, ovarian
germinal epithelium, and Müllerian ducts develop from the mesoderm. Estrogen
stimulates the metaplastic transformation of these tissues following puberty . Finally, endometrial and bone
marrow-derived stem cells are implicated in endometriosis development . The basal layer of endometrium
contains stem cells necessary for regeneration following menses. Studies show
endometrial stem cells may become distributed throughout the body by retrograde
menstruation, blood vessels, or lymphatics .

## Diagnostic features
Gross Features:
- Dark red to brown cysts in the abdomen or pelvis that contain brown, viscous
fluid
- Other morphologies include white scar-like lesions.
Histopathology features:
- Glandular epithelium and stroma reminiscent of the endometrium
- Glands filled with hemorrhage with degenerate and viable macrophages
- Stromal hemorrhage and aggregates of hemosiderin-laden macrophages
- Endometrial granular leukocytes
Endometriosis stromal cells may decidualize under the influence of exogenous or
endogenous progesterone 
Often contains features of menstrual cyclicity similar to the eutopic
endometrium.

## Differential Diagnoses
Fibroplasia
- Fibroplasia has dense bands of fibrous connective tissue surrounded by
elongated cells with scant cytoplasm and oval, basophilic nuclei (reactive
fibroblasts).
Granulation tissue
- Granulation tissue consists of small caliber capillaries perpendicular to organ
surface, spindle shaped (reactive) fibroblasts parallel to organ surface.
Metastatic neoplasia
- Metastatic adenocarcinomas – Typically lack characteristic blood-filled cysts,
endometrial stroma, and hemosiderin-laden macrophages.
- Squamous cell carcinoma – Polygonal neoplastic cells have intercellular
junctions and eosinophilic, granular cytoplasm. Individual cells often become
keratinized with brightly eosinophilic intracytoplasmic material.
- Malignant deciduoid mesothelioma – Neoplastic cells arranged in sheets,
papilla, tubules, or cords. Mesothelial cell nuclei are larger and more vesicular
than decidualized endometriosis stroma.
Retroperitoneal fibromatosis
- Nodules consist of stellate cells in bundles and swirls with distinct borders,
and oval nuclei supported by a fibrovascular stroma (but no endometrial
glands).
Atypical extra-placental trophoblastic invasion
- Observed in peritoneal cavity of pregnant animals. Sheets and cords of round to
polygonal cells with round to oval nuclei infiltrate serosal surfaces (but no
endometrial glands).

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Cyst fluid cytopathology
- Cellular debris
- Degenerate red and white blood cells (peripheral blood)
- Macrophages often contain hemosiderin, erythrocytes, and cellular debris
Immunohistochemical markers
- CD10/CALLA (membranous and cytoplasmic) – Endometrial stromal cells are
positive, endometrial glands are negative;
- Estrogen receptor (nuclear) – immunoreactivity extent and intensity varies
depending on the phase of cycle and history of hormone-based treatments
- Progesterone receptor positive (nuclear) – immunoreactivity extent and
intensity varies depending on the phase of cycle and history of hormone-based
treatments
Comments: Spontaneous endometriosis prevalence may be as high as 30% in
captive macaque populations .
Cases are common in colonies with a high rate of Cesarean section births.
Endometriosis lesions can be induced in NHPs through injection or implantation of the
endometrium into the peritoneal cavity . Lesions are frequently found on uterine, ovarian, and colonic
serosal surfaces but thoracic cavity and abdominal wall endometriosis are
possible ,
 .

## Hemorrhage, abnormal, endometrium: Uterus
( )

## Other term(s)
Abnormal uterine bleeding; atypical endometrial bleeding

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Abnormal endometrial bleeding can be attributed to disruption of the HPG axis and is
often observed during anovulatory cycles. This may be due to administration of
exogenous substances or normal cycle variation.

## Diagnostic features
Histologic characteristics:
- Endometrium or uterine lumen hemorrhage, usually in conjunction with follicular
or periovulatory phase endometrium
- Ovaries may contain one or more, small or medium, variably atretic follicles
and lack a regressing corpus luteum.
- Often associated with a sudden drop in serum hormone levels (e.g. due to
stress).

## Differential Diagnoses
Menses – hemorrhage observed in tandem with menstrual phase endometrium, entire
endometrial superficial endometrium zone usually sloughs, apoptosis present in
glands, regressing corpus luteum often present on ovaries.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Clinical assessment of serum progesterone and estradiol concentrations or vaginal
swab data across several cycles is often helpful in distinguishing abnormal
uterine bleeding (spotting) between true menses.
Comments: In humans, abnormal endometrial bleeding is very common in
reproductive-aged women .
Abnormal bleeding is also common in macaques with increased incidence in pubertal and
adolescent animals .

## Hyaline deposits, perivascular: Uterus
( )

## Other term(s)
Pregnancy-associated Vascular Remodeling

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Hyaline perivascular deposits are nonpathologic changes associated with pregnancy.
Extracellular matrix (ECM) and collagen is deposited around vessels in response to
rapid uterine expansion and increased uterine blood flow during pregnancy. Placental
trophoblasts invade and remodel endometrial and myometrial blood vessel walls and
perivascular connective tissue in late pregnancy. The result is loose connective
tissue surrounding myometrial blood vessels, especially veins. The change is primarily
adventitial but may involve the tunica media.

## Diagnostic features
Eosinophilic, hypocellular, hyaline material surrounding myometrial veins and,
less often, arteries

## Differential Diagnoses
Arteriosclerosis: In contrast to hyaline perivascular deposits, arteriosclerosis is
of intimal, not adventitial, origin.
Comments: Aged, nulliparous animals may also have focal ECM and collagen
deposition .
Pregnancy-related change may persist for more than six years after the last pregnancy
and is a persistent reliable indicator of prior pregnancy status in cynomolgus
macaques . These changes may
be considered background findings of no significance in non-reproductive studies, but
are informative in the context of hormonally-active agents.

## Hypersecretion, glandular: Uterus (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Perturbation of the normal physiologic progesterone-mediated glandular and stromal
changes resulting in premature development and maturation of glands or overexpression
of the characteristic morphologic changes.

## Diagnostic features
Depending on the compound’s profile, the treatment period, and dose, the
endometrium can exhibit a secretory type of morphology that is not in-line with
the expected secretory physiologic phase of the endometrium based on ovarian
morphology. The synchrony between the different endometrial elements, however, is
normal.
Decidualization, normally not present within the cynomolgus endometrium but can
be pronounced.
Spiral arteries are well developed.

## Differential Diagnoses
Dyssynchronous endometrium. Within a dyssynchronous endometrium perturbation of
the normal, physiologic separation between estrogen- and progesterone-mediated
glandular and stromal changes results in dyssynchronous development or maturation
of glands mutually or in stromal–epithelial dyssynchrony.
Comments: Localized hypertrophy of secretory endometrial glands is also
known as the Arias-Stella reaction. The hypertrophic cells have enlarged nuclei that
are hyperchromatic and irregular. The Arias-Stella reaction is a non-specific finding
that can be seen in patients with ectopic pregnancy, intrauterine pregnancy and after
ovarian stimulation with ovulation inducing agents.

## Inactive endometrium: Uterus
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Endometrial structures become inactive due to lack of estrogen and/or progesterone
receptor stimulation. Decreased stimulation may be either because of sub-physiologic
or absent hormone production or inhibition of receptors or signaling pathways.

## Diagnostic features
The thickness of the endometrium is decreased with compact stroma.
The epithelium of the glands, as well as the surface epithelium, is low columnar
to cuboidal with small, dark nuclei and minimal cytoplasm.
There is marked decrease or even absence of glandular and stromal proliferative
or secretory activity (indicated by a very low number or even absence of mitotic
figures or absence of cytoplasmic vacuoles).
Cystic dilated glands can be present.

## Differential Diagnoses
Atrophy, endometrium (senile)
Comments: In contrast to the state of real atrophy, characterized by a
very low and compact endometrium with scattered gland profiles often oriented parallel
to the endometrium surface , the
number of estrogen or progesterone receptors in an inactive endometrium is high.
Examples of an inactive endometrium are immaturity, menopause and after ovariectomy,
in which the sudden drop in reproductive hormones causes inactivation of the
endometrial structures. Nevertheless, after administration of exogenous hormones the
endometrial structures can become active again. GnRH antagonists suppress FSH or LH
release from the pituitary gland and can induce endometrial inactivity. SPRMs such as
mifepristone (RU 486), which have predominant anti-progestogenic activity, can also
induce endometrial inactivity .

## Infarct, uterus: Uterus
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Usually associated with systemic illness, such as sepsis or injury leading to
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy.

## Diagnostic features
“Watershed” pattern of necrosis of the endometrium or myometrium or both, on
midline at the extremes of vascular supply.
Comments: This lesion was reported in a necropsy case series of
cynomolgus macaques, occurring at a rate of 2.8% .

## Epithelial plaque: Uterus
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The epithelial plaque response is a lesion composed of a florid proliferation of
epithelial cells located in the neck of the endometrial glands and the adjacent
superficial endometrial lining. Although it is a normal temporary structure that
develops as a reaction to embryo implantation during pregnancy, it also can be induced
experimentally (i.e., by combined estrogen and progestogen treatment accompanied by
trauma to the endometrium).

## Diagnostic features
The change appears focally within the endometrium, often on the opposing walls
(in the marmoset it is a more diffuse superficial change).
The lesions start to appear at the basal side of the epithelium lining the neck
of the endometrial glands and form nodular cell nests that merge into a
plaque-like lesion.
The change has an abrupt border with absence of deeper endometrial invasion.
The epithelial cells composing the plaque are large, pleomorphic, and polygonal,
with sometimes anaplastic nuclear features. Giant and binucleated nuclei are often
present.
The cells within the plaque can be highly vacuolated because of storage of
glycogen.
Within the plaque, mitosis can be numerous.

## Differential Diagnoses
Endometrial carcinoma in situ
Trophoblastic neoplasm
Comments: In primates, the true epithelial plaque is a common early
endometrial response to implantation of the blastocyst . During pregnancy, the epithelial plaque response is a
temporary change that lasts for only a few weeks: it is highly proliferative during
the first phase, but finally regresses via apoptosis. Immunohistochemical
proliferation markers such as Ki67 are positive during the developmental phase of the
change, while those for cleaved caspase 3, indicating apoptosis becomes positive
during regression. An epithelial plaque also can be induced in non-pregnant rhesus
monkeys by various stimuli, such as combined estrogen and progestogen
treatment ,
 , sometimes
accompanied by trauma to the endometrium. The induced lesions show many similarities
to the true, pregnancy-related epithelial plaque. Kaspareit et
al. described the
appearance of spontaneous epithelial plaques in non-pregnant cynomolgus monkeys.
Because of the cellular and nuclear atypia and high mitotic index this lesion was
believed to represent carcinoma in situ in the past . Although the primate endometrium
shares many similarities to the human endometrium, the epithelial plaque is unique to
primates and is not present in women.

## Hyperplasia, basal gland: Uterus
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Proliferation of the epithelial (progenitor) cells lining the blind ends of the
endometrial glands, the most basal parts of the glands within the basal endometrium
(zone IV). This is a distinctive treatment-related lesion of macaques.

## Diagnostic features
Intraepithelial hyperplasia starting at the basal site of the gland epithelium
forming a multilayered epithelium that lifts-up or replaces the original
cuboidal/columnar epithelial cell-lining
In general, the change appears zonal (zone IV), not focal
In more progressed cases hyperplastic areas can show a cribriform pattern, with
many secondary lumina
Mitotic figures as signs of ongoing proliferation can be observed, but also signs
of apoptosis of the cells involved can be a feature
Slight atypia sometimes can be observed
Signs of hypersecretory activity of the cells can be a feature of the lesion

## Differential Diagnoses
Endometrial (adeno) carcinoma
Comments: Some synthetic hormones (including a compound that exhibited
both SPRM and SERM activity) or combinations of hormones administrated at high dosage
can cause unique hyperplasia of the epithelium lining the most basal part of the
glands in the basal endometrium (zone IV). This change may be caused by the local
expression patterns of estrogen and/or progesterone receptors. Even during the (early
and mid) luteal phase of a normal cycle under relative progesterone dominance, mitotic
activity increases in the glands in the deep basalis, while proliferation is inhibited
in the rest of the gland portions , , . This enhancement of proliferative activity in the deep basalis
glands is thought to reflect the process of replenishing the pool of stem and
progenitor cells . Under
continued hormonal stimulation, the balance between precursor cell proliferation and
apoptosis can be lost and shifted in the direction of hyperplasia.

## Hyperplasia, glandular: Uterus
( )

## Modifiers
Simple; complex; with atypia; focal; diffuse; cystic

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Endometrial hyperplasia is induced in macaques by endogenous or exogenous
estrogens ,
 .

## Diagnostic features
Gross morphology: Thickened, soft, tan endometrium
Histologic morphology:
- Glandular proliferation with an increased gland-to-stroma ratio either without
glandular crowding (hyperplasia, simple) or with endometrial gland crowding ‟back
to back glands” (hyperplasia, complex)
- Disordered glandular architecture relative to normal follicular phase
- Usually edema of the superficial endometrium
- Pseudostratification of glandular epithelium
- Increased glandular epithelial mitoses
- May or may not exhibit epithelial atypia (loss of polarity, increased
nuclear-cytoplasm ratio, nuclear clearing with clumped, marginated chromatin, and
round or irregular nuclei)

## Differential Diagnoses
Normal, proliferative endometrium in the follicular phase – parallel straight or
spiral glands with superficial endometrium edema
Dyssynchrony - Variable glandular patterns of mixed morphology, without increased
mitoses or increased glandular area
Cystic glandular (endometrial) hyperplasia – cystic dilation of glands in the
endometrium without glandular proliferation
Endometrial polyp – focal, pedunculated mass of endometrial stroma with variable
scattered glands supported by a vascularized or fibrotic center; may contain
hyperplasia, metaplasia, or malignant changes
Comments: Endometrial hyperplasia is associated with a slightly
increased risk of endometrial cancer in women. Women with complex endometrial
hyperplasia with atypia have an increased risk of developing endometrial cancer. In
fact, up to 25% of women diagnosed with atypical complex endometrial hyperplasia will
be diagnosed with a well-differentiated carcinoma within one month of endometrial
biopsy . In macaques it may
be observed in conjunction with other endometrial changes such as polyps or
adenomyosis . This lesion is
also associated with granulosa cell tumors, and polycystic ovarian syndrome . Epithelial atypia should be noted, if
present.

## Metaplasia, ciliated cell: Uterus/Cervix
( )

## Other term(s)
Tubal metaplasia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The normal endometrial or cervical columnar secretory epithelium is replaced by
ciliated, tubal epithelium (both epithelia are of Müllerian origin).

## Diagnostic features
The endometrial or cervical secretory epithelium is replaced by ciliated
cells.
Ciliated epithelial cells clearly bear recognizable cilia on the surface
The nuclei of the ciliated cell often are situated above the nuclei of the
secretory cells.
Atypia is absent.
Comments: Ciliated cell metaplasia is a common finding in the NHP
endometrium. During estrogen dominance the number of ciliated cells within the glands
increase . The so-called
clear cell is believed to represent a progenitor of the ciliated cell.

## Metaplasia, endocervical cell: Uterus (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Endometrial mucinous metaplasia (EMM); endocervical cell metaplasia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The normal endometrial columnar secretory epithelium is replaced by mucus-producing
epithelial cells that show a high similarity to the mucous cells lining the
endocervix.

## Diagnostic features
The endometrial gland epithelium is focally replaced by columnar mucinous
epithelial cells resembling the mucus cells of the endocervix.
The cells in the lesion are tall and columnar and secrete mucins, which
differentiate them histochemically from the normal glandular secretory cells.
Atypia is absent.
Comments: Mucous cell metaplasia is an uncommon finding in the non-human
primate endometrium. Sections including the endocervix will normally include
mucus-producing cells. Mucous cells stain positive for Alcian-Blue (AB) and/or
Periodic-Acid Shiff (PAS, AB-PAS).

## Metaplasia, squamous cell: Uterus/Cervix
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The normal endometrial or cervical columnar secretory epithelium is replaced by
squamous epithelial cells.

## Diagnostic features
The endometrial or cervical secretory epithelium is replaced by squamous
cells
Squamous cells often lie beneath the endocervical
Atypia is absent.
Comments: Squamous cell metaplasia is a common finding in the NHP
endocervix during estrogen dominance, either physiologic (e.g. during puberty before
first ovulation) or pharmacologic (due to administration of estrogen agonists).

## D. Cervix
( )

## Adenosis: Cervix, Vagina
( )

## Other term(s)
Glandular metaplasia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Basal epithelial cells of the ectocervical and vaginal mucosa; abnormal glandular
rather than squamous differentiation.

## Diagnostic features
Adenosis is defined by the presence of simple columnar glandular epithelium in
areas of the ectocervix and vagina normally lined by stratified squamous
mucosa.
Glandular epithelium may be present as discrete islands within squamous mucosa or
more generally as a “posteriorization effect” in which columnar cells extend
diffusely past the os and along the ectocervix, fornix, and anterior vaginal
wall.
Abnormally located glandular structures may also be present in the submucosa of
the ectocervix and vagina.
Glandular epithelial cell morphology is often normal.
Squamous epithelium may replace heterotopic glandular epithelium with age.
Progression to neoplasia has not been reported.

## Differential Diagnoses
- Normal transformation zone (see comment below)

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunohistochemical markers
- Cytokeratin 18 (cytoplasmic and membranous) – This marker is highly expressed
in glandular but not squamous epithelial cells.
- Cytokeratin 14 (cytoplasmic and membranous) – This marker is highly expressed
in squamous but not glandular epithelial cells.
Comments: Adenosis of the vaginal and ectocervical epithelium has been
described in macaques as a developmental abnormality associated with perinatal
exposure to certain estrogenic compounds, notably diethylstilbestrol (DES) , , . Aberrant early-life estrogen treatment blocks proper
transformation of the Müllerian epithelium into normal vaginal or ectocervical
epithelium. Macaques exhibit a wide range of natural variation in the degree of
eversion of the glandular cervix, which can extend close to the fornix in some
cases ; this normal
morphology should not be confused with adenosis.

## Dysplasia, epithelial: Cervix, Vagina
( )

## Other term(s)
Cervical/vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia; carcinoma in situ

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Basal/squamous epithelial cells of the cervical and vaginal mucosa

## Diagnostic features
Hallmark is nuclear atypia of squamous epithelial cells.
The growth pattern is often endophytic (invaginating).
The extent of basal cell expansion determines lesion grade (low, moderate, and
high):
- Low-grade dysplasia - acanthosis with large atypical nuclei and perinuclear
clearing (koilocytosis) but limited expansion of the basal epithelium (less than
one-third of the total epithelial thickness);
- Moderate-grade dysplasia - increased thickness of basal cell layers (one-third
to two-thirds of the total epithelial thickness); and
- High-grade dysplasia (carcinoma in situ) - composed almost
entirely of basal-type cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and scant cytoplasm; can
be laterally invasive within the epithelium but do not penetrate the basement
membrane.

## Differential Diagnoses
Papilloma, vagina (wart, condyloma acuminata)
- Papillomas show exophytic growth, often with a stromal core, and no or limited
basal cell expansion.
Squamous cell carcinoma, cervix/vagina
- Carcinomas show clear evidence of submucosal and/or vascular invasion.
Squamous metaplasia, endocervix
- Metaplastic lesions do not show nuclear atypia, koilocytic change, or basal
cell expansion.
Hyperkeratosis, vagina
- Hyperkeratotic lesions have a normal maturation lineage of squamous epithelium
and no atypia or basal expansion.
Ectopic decidual reaction, cervix/vagina
- Decidual reactions are composed of plump stromal cells located subjacent to
mucosal epithelium.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunohistochemical markers
- Ki67 (nuclear) – Proliferation in normal mucosal epithelium is limited to
basal/suprabasal layers. Dysplastic lesions show cell proliferation in more
superficial layers.
- P16INK4A (nuclear and cytoplasmic) – This tumor suppressor protein is absent in
normal mucosal epithelium but increased in dysplastic lesions.
Cytologic markers
- Cells with large atypical nuclei and koilocytic change can be seen on
Pap-stained cell preps obtained using cervicovaginal swabs.
Genetic testing
- DNA testing (PCR) can be used to identify papillomavirus sequences.
- In situ hybridization is preferable to immunohistochemistry
for viral antigen
Comments: Cervical and vaginal dysplasia is a common background lesion
in female macaques, with a reported prevalence ranging from 5% to 19% . Cervical dysplasia has also been
reported in baboons . This lesion
is highly associated with genital papillomavirus infection, which is sexually
transmitted ,
 . Lower-grade
dysplasias occur throughout the squamous epithelium of the cervix and vagina, while
higher-grade dysplasias typically involve the squamocolumnar junction or transition
zone of the cervix and may progress to squamous cell carcinoma .

## Carcinoma, squamous cell: Cervix
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Basal/squamous epithelial cells of the cervical mucosa

## Diagnostic features
Neoplastic cells have the following features:
- Arranged in sheets and nests with a predominantly endophytic growth
pattern;
- Highly atypical with large, often bizarre nuclei and high mitotic index;
and
- Basal/squamous phenotype with variable degrees of squamous cell maturation and
keratinization and no glandular elements.
Basement membrane is breached by neoplastic cells.
Keratinizing forms include whorls with central foci of sloughed keratin.
Carcinomas may be found on a background of cervical dysplasia.
Carcinomas may include focal areas of necrosis.

## Differential Diagnoses
Adenocarcinoma, endometrial
- Adenocarcinomas have extensive glandular elements.
Papilloma, vagina
- Squamous papillomas show exophytic growth with no evidence of invasion.
Dysplasia, cervix/vagina
- Cervical/vaginal dysplasias have atypia with or without basal cell expansion
but no clear evidence of local or vascular invasion.
Squamous metaplasia, endocervix
- Metaplastic lesions of the endocervical epithelium do not show atypia or
evidence of local or vascular invasion.
Hyperkeratosis, vagina
- Hyperkeratotic lesions have a normal maturation lineage of squamous epithelium
and no atypia or invasion.
Ectopic decidual reaction, cervix/vagina
- Decidual reactions are composed of plump stromal cells located subjacent to
mucosal epithelium.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunohistochemical markers
- Ki67 (nuclear) – Expression of this cell proliferation marker in normal mucosal
epithelium is limited to basal/suprabasal layers. Neoplastic lesions show high
rates of labeling throughout all layers.
- P16INK4A (nuclear and cytoplasmic) – This tumor suppressor protein is absent in
normal mucosal epithelium but expressed in papillomavirus-associated neoplastic
lesions.
Cytologic markers
- Cells with large atypical nuclei can be seen on Pap-stained cell preps obtained
using cervicovaginal swabs.
Genetic testing
- DNA testing can be used to identify papillomavirus sequences.
Comments: Cervical carcinoma is a rare lesion in macaques associated
with dysplasia and genital papillomavirus infection , . Carcinomas typically involve the squamocolumnar junction or
transition zone of the cervix .
Cervical adenocarcinoma has not been reported in macaques.

## E. Vagina
( )

## Condyloma, inflammatory: Vagina
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Pathogenesis is unknown, but it is distinct from ‟Dysplasia/Vaginal Intraepithelial
Neoplasia” which is associated with papillomavirus infection. Papillomaviruses have
not been found in this lesion.

## Diagnostic features
Exophytic polypoid lesion of the vagina or vulva
Composed of hyperplastic squamous epithelium supported by fibrous stroma
Submucosal and intraepithelial infiltrates of eosinophils.
No basal hyperplasia, atypia, or dysplasia
No invasion

## Differential Diagnoses
Vaginal dysplasia (intraepithelial neoplasia)
- Dysplastic lesions usually lack exophytic papillary growth pattern.
- Higher grade dysplasias have basal cell expansion.
- Dysplasia does not have eosinophilic infiltrates.
Squamous metaplasia
- Metaplastic lesions are associated with glandular endocervical epithelium and
lack exophytic growth and eosinophilic infiltrates.
Vaginal hyperkeratosis
- Hyperkeratotic lesions have a normal maturation lineage of squamous epithelium
and no atypia, basal cell expansion, or papillary morphology.
- Hyperkeratosis alone does not have eosinophilic infiltrates.
Papilloma
- Composed of hyperplastic squamous epithelium supported by a fibrovascular
core
- No evidence of invasion into adjacent structures
- Epithelial features may include acanthosis, perinuclear clearing
(koilocytosis), and hyperkeratosis
- Papillomavirus-associated lesions also show nuclear atypia of squamous
epithelial cells
- Limited expansion of the basal epithelium
Comments: This lesion has only been reported in Mauritian-origin
macaques . These lesions were
characterized by hyperplastic squamous epithelium with acanthosis (but no atypia),
prominent collagenous stroma, and marked eosinophilic and lymphoplasmacytic
inflammation; no association with papillomavirus was identified. Normal vaginal
keratin in macaques can form distinct ridges that should not be confused with
papillomas .

## Papilloma: Vagina
( )

## Other term(s)
Vaginal wart; condyloma acuminata

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Squamous epithelial cells of the vaginal mucosa; may be caused by papillomavirus
infection.

## Diagnostic features
Exophytic polypoid growth protruding into the vaginal lumen
Composed of hyperplastic squamous epithelium supported by a fibrovascular
core
No evidence of invasion into adjacent structures
Epithelial features may include acanthosis, perinuclear clearing (koilocytosis),
and hyperkeratosis
Papillomavirus-associated lesions also show nuclear atypia of squamous epithelial
cells
Limited expansion of the basal epithelium
Not known to progress to squamous cell carcinoma

## Differential Diagnoses
Vaginal dysplasia (intraepithelial neoplasia)
- Dysplastic lesions usually lack exophytic papillary growth pattern.
- Higher grade dysplasias have basal cell expansion.
Squamous metaplasia
- Metaplastic lesions are associated with glandular endocervical epithelium and
lack atypia, koilocytic change, and exophytic growth.
Vaginal hyperkeratosis
- Hyperkeratotic lesions have a normal maturation lineage of squamous epithelium
and no atypia, basal cell expansion, or papillary morphology.
Condyloma, inflammatory
- Hyperplastic squamous epithelium with acanthosis (but no atypia), prominent
collagenous stroma, and marked eosinophilic and lymphoplasmacytic inflammation; no
association with papillomavirus identified.

## Special Techniques for Diagnostics
Immunohistochemical markers:
- P16/INK4A and papillomavirus antigens (nuclear and cytoplasmic) –
papillomavirus-associated lesions may show increased expression of these
markers.
Genetic testing:
- DNA testing can be used to identify papillomavirus sequences.
Comments: Vaginal papillomas can be observed as a rare background lesion
in female macaques ,
 . In Indonesian-origin
macaques, this lesion has been associated with genital papillomavirus
infection . Normal vaginal
keratin in macaques can form distinct ridges that should not be confused with
papillomas .

## 12. Reproductive System – Male
For detailed general considerations on the male reproductive system and tabulated
terminologies not described in this chapter, please refer to the INHAND rodent
publication .
Anatomical features of the macaque male reproductive tract that are specific to these
species and microscopic findings unique or applicable to cynomolgus monkey (M.
fasicularis) and/or rhesus monkey (M. mulatta) are discussed.
The cynomolgus monkey is a ‟non-seasonal breeding” macaque and is one of the most commonly
used non-human primate in biomedical research. The Rhesus macaque, another commonly used
non-human primate is a seasonal breeder with testes undergoing seasonal regression and
recrudescence of spermatogenesis ,
which may complicate the findings or interpretation in a toxicity study. Most non-clinical
toxicity studies conducted in Cynomolgus monkeys are in groups that are immature or a
mixture of immature and peripubertal to mature animals. Thus a challenge in many studies for
evaluation of potential effects in the male reproductive tract is often related to notable
differences in histoanatomical features in the reproductive tract as a result of normal
variability of maturation in the groups of animals on study. These differences related to
maturity must be separated from histopathologic findings that may represent either
background pathology or test article-related effects.

## Sexual Maturation in the Male Macaque
Male Cynomolgus monkeys are typically sexually mature at approximately 4.5-5 years of age
and with a body weight of >5 kg ;
however, most toxicity studies are ≤ 6 months in duration and use monkeys that are under 4
years of age, hence these animals are often sexually immature or a mix of immature,
peripubertal, and occasionally mature at the study start and/or the terminal necropsy. To
avoid possible misinterpretation of normal age/maturity-related morphology from test
article-related effects, it is recommended that sexual maturity be routinely documented
for each animal, using the category of immature, peripubertal, or mature.
Briefly, the three categories for sexual maturation are:

## Immature
The seminiferous tubules are undeveloped, lacking a lumen and any evidence of
spermatogenesis. Seminiferous tubules are lined by only Sertoli cells and quiescent
spermatogonia with rare luminal germ cell debris and multinucleated cells. No mature
spermatids and rare to absent germ cell debris are present in epididymis. Secondary sex
organs are undeveloped.

## Peripubertal
Seminiferous tubules are in varying stages of development. Mature spermatids may be
present in some seminiferous tubules, with some seminiferous tubules containing mature
spermatids and/or occasionally germ cell debris and multinucleated cells. A few mature
sperm and/or germ cell debris may be seen in the ductular lumen of the epididymis that may
also contain multinucleated giant cells and spermatids. Secondary sex organs development
may be variable.

## Mature
Mature spermatozoa predominate in all/most seminiferous tubules and ducts of the
epididymis. Fully developed seminiferous tubules contain mature spermatids and a full
complement of germ cells (spermatogonia, spermatocytes, round spermatids, and elongating
spermatids). Epididymis contains abundant spermatozoa in the ductular lumen with rare to
absent rounded germ cells. Secondary sex organs development may be variable.

## Morphologic Evaluation of Male Reproductive System
Ability to assess effects of test compounds in the reproductive tract of mature NHPs is
important and morphologic evaluation of the testis is one of the most sensitive methods
for identifying many male reproductive toxicants . An understanding of spermatogenesis whereby stem cell spermatogonia
develop into highly specialized spermatozoa is essential for an accurate evaluation of the
testis. Specifically, morphologic changes in germ cell morphology or appropriate cell
numbers, types and cell associations need to be recognized in particular stages of the
spermatogenic cycle. Several published guidelines for comprehensive qualitative evaluation
of spermatogenesis in the NHP testis are available which can be used by pathologists for
“stage-aware” evaluation of the testes to help identify subtle changes , , .
A standard set of tissues sampled and evaluated in routine monkey toxicity studies
include testes, epididymis, seminal vesicles, and prostate. Additional tissues related to
the reproductive tract and sexual maturity that may be added for specific studies include
efferent ducts, pampiniform plexus, bulbourethral glands, penis, prepuce, and mammary
glands.
This manuscript provides a standardized nomenclature for classifying microscopic findings
observed in the reproductive system of male cynomolgus monkeys including the testes,
epididymides, seminal vesicles (or vesicular glands), prostate, prepuce, and penis.
Spontaneously occurring background findings, as well microscopic findings resulting from
administration of compounds are included. The diagnostic criteria used for these terms can
generally be seen with standard hematoxylin and eosin-stained paraffin sections. Other
terms in common use for the INHAND term (“Other Term(s)”) are usually given as an aid to
understanding the INHAND term, but are not to be used in preference to the INHAND
term.
Incidental background microscopic findings are occasionally observed in the reproductive
tract of male macaques used in general toxicity studies. When findings are present they
may be test article-induced, or due to procedure-related injury or are a result of
degenerative changes frequently associated with aging or systemic conditions. Modern
laboratory animal management practices in nonhuman primate facilities have resulted in
infrequent occurrence of spontaneous infectious disease thus lesions related to infectious
reproductive tract diseases are not described in detail in this document.
Due to young age and the short duration of routine pre-clinical toxicity studies
involving macaques, proliferative neoplastic lesions in the male reproductive tract are
rarely observed . Most of the available
literature about male reproductive tract tumors is limited to individual case reports and
include prostate basal cell adenoma, prostate carcinoma in cynomolgus and rhesus
monkey , , , ; bilateral interstitial cell tumor and seminal vesicle adenoma in a cynomolgus
monkey . Rhesus papillomavirus type 1
and lymphocryptovirus have been identified in a few squamous cell papillomas and
carcinomas of the penis and/or prepuce noted in cynomolgus and rhesus macaques , , .

## A. Testis, Epididymides, Efferent Ducts
The testes are ovoid in shape and comprised of lobules of seminiferous tubules that empty
into the more centrally located rete testis within the mediastinum testis . The rete testis is located along the
lateral aspect of the testis, adjacent to the epididymis and comprises a series of
interconnected channels, lined by simple cuboidal or columnar epithelium. The rete testis
leads into a series of efferent ducts . Efferent ducts have variably sized lumens lined by columnar ciliated
epithelium; and connect via multiple entry points into the initial segment of the
epididymis. The epididymis is crescent shaped, attached to the posterolateral border of
the testis and is comprised of the initial segment, caput, corpus and cauda. The
epididymis carries sperm from the testis to the vas deferens (ductus deferens), which is a
thick walled convoluted tube that transfers sperm from the epididymis, to the prostatic
urethra. The vas deferens is lined by pseudostratified epithelium with
stereocilia ( ).

## Embryonic remnants: Testis, Epididymidis
( )

## Other term(s)
Appendix testis; appendix epididymides; developmental abnormality; embryologic
remnants; vestigial embryonic duct remnants; appendages; hydatids of Morgagni;
rudimental tissue; cyst, embryonic; aberrant ductules; vasa aberrantia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Testicular and epididymal appendages are vestigial remnants of the embryonic genital
primordia, the paramesonephric (Muellerian) duct and the mesonephric (Wolffian) duct,
respectively. Aberrant ductules are blind ending persistent mesonephric tubules.

## Diagnostic features
Appendages:
Sessile or pedunculated structures (macroscopic)
Simple to pseudostratified ciliated columnar surface epithelium with occasional
gland or tubule-like invaginations
A central fibromuscular stromal core
Occasional congested or hemorrhagic fibrovascular stroma
Appendix testes located at the upper pole of the testis beneath or attached to
the epididymal body or, more rarely, epididymal head
Appendix epididymidis is typically attached to epididymal head
Unilateral or bilateral
Aberrant ductules:
Small duct-like or cystic structures lined with a simple cuboidal to columnar,
partly ciliated epithelium
Thin smooth muscle wall with peripheral fibrous connective tissue layer
Lumen may contain eosinophilic, floccular proteinaceous material
Typically attached to tunica albugenia or vaginalis with a fibrous stalk
Unilateral or bilateral

## Differential Diagnosis
Efferent ducts: Columnar ciliated and non-ciliated epithelium, lined by single
layer of smooth muscle cells, lumen contain sperm in sexually mature monkeys,
bilateral
Comments: The incidence of testicular and epididymal appendages, and
aberrant ductules in macaques may be higher than the number of documented cases as
these appendages are mostly asymptomatic, often only detected microscopically, may be
unintentionally removed during the trimming/embedding, and/or may not be in the plane
of section of routinely processed tissues . In general, appendages are regarded as incidental developmental
findings, but may have clinical relevance when they become macroscopically visible
cystic structures filled with blood or undergo torsion with subsequent hemorrhagic
infarction similar to that in humans . In addition, appendages may be of toxicological significance with
administration of estrogen or estrogen analogues; Zuckerman and Krohn showed that estrogen administration
resulted in increased size as well as an increased stromal and epithelial mitotic
activity in testicular and epididymal appendages in rhesus macaques. The actual
incidence of cyst or vasa aberrantia in macaques is not well established as there is
only one available documented report of aberrant ductules in Cynomolgus
monkeys .

## Hypoplasia, tubular: Testis, Epididymis
( )

## Other term(s)
Atrophy/hypoplasia; focal hypoplasia; focal subcapsular tubular atrophy or
hypoplasia; segmental hypoplasia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The lobular distribution suggests that the group of tubular profiles belong to a
single, coiled, seminiferous tubule never having been populated by germ cells, hence
hypoplasia.

## Diagnostic features
Lobular distribution that can be wedge-shaped and situated in a subcapsular
location.
Generally affects triangular clusters (segments) of varying numbers of
seminiferous tubular profiles.
Affected tubules are completely devoid of germ cells and are only lined by
Sertoli cells.
Tubule diameter smaller than normal tubules.
Tubular lumina are empty.
Affected tubules reside immediately adjacent to normal tubules.
Unilateral, but may be bilateral.

## Differential Diagnoses
Atrophy, tubular:
- Alternatively, seminiferous tubules that have sustained permanent loss of germ
cells (atrophy) may result in Sertoli cell-only tubules. Basement membrane
thickening may be a feature.
Transitional areas (Tubuli recti):
- Germ cells are reduced or absent at transitional areas between seminiferous
tubules and the rete testis. These areas are normal anatomy and not a finding to
be diagnosed.
Hypospermatogenesis
- A complete or partial loss of one or more germ cell layers that tends to have a
patchy distribution throughout the testes.
Comments: Hypoplasia in monkey is similar to that in dogs but tend to be
smaller areas and may not always be wedge shaped and can be confused with focal
tubular atrophy. Tubules lined by only Sertoli cells are attributed to hypoplasia of
entire tubules or tubular segments presumably never populated by germ cells during
testicular development. The etiology is presumably due to a reduced migration of germ
cells to the affected segment.

## Increased, stromal collagen: Testis, Rete Testis
( )

## Other term(s)
Fibrous hypoplasia; stromal hyperplasia

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Congenital or developmental anomaly

## Diagnostic features
Excess collagen originating from mediastinum around rete testis expanding the
rete and interlobular septa
Dense collagen bundles with high cytoplasmic to nuclear ratio
May have thickened capsule
Replacement of testis parenchyma in moderate to severe lesions
May be associated with tubular or rete tubule dilatation in mature monkeys
Unilateral or bilateral

## Differential Diagnosis
Fibrosis:
- Sparse collagen fibers. May have inflammation, necrosis or be associated with
distortion of normal anatomic structure
Amyloid:
- Fibrillar eosinophilic, Congo red positive material
- Material deposited in perivascular and peritubular locations
Comments: Increased stromal collagen, also reported previously as
fibrous hypoplasia, has been noted in the testes of sexually immature, maturing and
mature Cynomolgus monkeys with higher prevalence and severity of the lesion in
immature Asian Cynomolgus monkeys , , . In addition, high incidence/severity of this lesion was noted in
Cynomolgus monkeys of Chinese origin compared to the ones from Mauritius. The location
(testis or rete testis) may be added as a locator or modifier, if deemed
appropriate.

## Degeneration/atrophy, tubule: Testis
( )
Comments: This observation as a stand-alone diagnosis without tubular
dilatation or hypospermatogenesis is not a common observation in control macaques. It is
a frequent sequel to tubular dilatation and should not be recorded as a separate
observation (see Dilatation, tubular). In macaque testis, individual seminiferous
tubules are arranged within one lobule thus when an individual tubule is affected it
results in a lobular pattern of degeneration. A few tubules or lobules with
degeneration/atrophy can occur as a spontaneous finding in the macaque testis and in
most cases of spontaneous tubular degeneration/atrophy, there will be some tubules that
are undergoing active germ cell degeneration (tubular degeneration) or have no germinal
epithelium (tubular atrophy) .
Typically, test article-related tubular degeneration/atrophy in Cynomolgus monkeys is
multifocal or diffuse and may lack the stage specificity of degeneration commonly seen
in the rat; and end-stage spermatogenic suppression is typically more pronounced in
primates compared to rodents .
Other reported causes of tubular degeneration/atrophy in macaques include but are not
limited to testicular hyperthermia secondary to inguinal hernia, senescence, prolonged
restraint and generalized disease similar to SIV infection , , . Rhesus monkey testes during non-breeding season show varying degrees
of regression (degeneration/atrophy) with oligo/aspermia in the epididymidis . In addition, moderate calorie
restriction for 5 years in aging rhesus macaques (24-30 year-old) resulted in testicular
atrophy characterized by modest decrease in seminiferous tubule diameter and epithelium
height, with a concomitant increase in the number of depleted germ cell lines ; however, moderate calorie restriction
for 7 years did not cause any changes in adult rhesus macaque (~12 year old) testis.

## Depletion, germ cell: Testis
( )
Comments: Stage specific-depletion is not a common feature of test
article-induced or spontaneous toxicity in macaque testis; however, one exception is
diffuse type B spermatogonia depletion noted in early stages of gonadotropin or androgen
reduction. Late stages of gonadotropin or androgen reduction results in more generalized
depletion of multiple germ cells with variably present spermatid retention and is
histologically similar to the maturation depletion that can occur with a direct
spermatogonial toxicity ,
 , .

## Dilatation, tubule or rete testis: Testis, Rete testis
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Increased stromal collagen of testis or rete testis causing impaired outflow of the
fluid; impaired fluid reabsorption in the efferent ducts/caput epididymis; distal
obstruction in excurrent duct system (rete testis, efferent ducts, or initial
segment)

## Diagnostic features
Increased luminal diameter of seminiferous tubules or rete testis ducts
Sperm stasis may be present
Accompanied by thinning or pressure atrophy of the seminiferous epithelium or
duct epithelium
Increased pressure could cause cystic dilatation and germ cell degeneration of
seminiferous tubules
May be associated with increased stromal collagen
Focal to multifocal or segmental
Unilateral or bilateral

## Differential Diagnosis
Tubular degeneration/atrophy:
- Degeneration and/or depletion of germ cells without increase in tubular luminal
diameter
- No attenuation or thinning of the seminiferous epithelium
Comments: Outflow obstruction most frequently occurs at the level of the
rete testis in macaques. Focal, unilateral or bilateral tubular dilation can be seen
as a background incidental finding , , 
and can be particularly obvious during puberty , . Moderate to severe increased stromal collagen (previously
described as fibrous hypoplasia) may cause increased incidence and severity of tubular
or rete testis dilatation in maturing or sexually mature animals , . This change frequently results in secondary tubular
degeneration/atrophy and should be used as the appropriate diagnostic term where
dilatation as a result of outflow obstruction is the primary change.

## Hypospermatogenesis: Testis
( )

## Other term(s)
Segmental hypospermatogenesis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Hypospermatogenesis is attributed to transient failure of spermatogenesis affecting a
segment of the seminiferous tubule resulting in an absence of one or more generations
of germ cells.

## Diagnostic features
Affects scattered tubular profiles (segments) throughout the testes
Focal spermatogenic interruption at various germ cell levels mixed with
normal spermatogenesis
Complete or partial absence of one or more generations of germ cells
(spermatocytes, round spermatids or elongate spermatids)
When affecting only some of the germ cells these tubular segments may be missing
round spermatids and/or pachytene spermatocytes from the layers below the
overlying elongate spermatids.
May have a few sertoli-only cells tubules (atrophy)
Generally occurs in the absence of any significant germ cell degeneration or
apoptosis
Not stage or cell specificity
No accompanying increase in cell debris in the epididymidis
Usually bilateral

## Differential Diagnosis
Immaturity:
- The absence of elongate spermatids
Transitional areas (Tubuli recti)
- Transitional areas between seminiferous tubules and the rete testis
- Central location, adjacent to rete testis
- Partial sertoli-cell only lining without apparent degeneration
- Bilateral
Tubular hypoplasia:
- Total lack of germinal cells with sertoli cell-only tubules
- Decreased tubular lumen or contracted tubules
- No luminal debris or content
Depletion, Germ Cell:
- Generally germ cell specific
- Generally diffuse distribution throughout the testis
Degeneration, Germ Cell:
- Active degeneration of germ cells including multinucleate giant cells
- Generally associated with increased cell debris in the epididymis
Comments: In macaques, spermatogenesis progresses at a different rate in
all tubules, hence it is common for some groups of tubules to be significantly more or
less advanced than others , thus
less developed tubules should not be diagnosed as having hypospermatogenesis. In
addition to differential diagnoses discussed earlier, hypospermatogenesis can also
histologically overlap with the appearance of seasonal involution and/or atrophy in
rhesus macaques, but in general hypospermatogenesis is less uniform and does not
follow a cell or stage specificity ( ).

## Dilatation, duct: Epididymis, Efferent Ducts
( )

## Other term(s)
Dilatation, cystic
Comments: Efferent duct dilatation can occur secondary to test
article-induced inflammation .

## Hyperplasia, diffuse: Epididymis (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Physiologic hyperplasia; hyperplasia, functional

## Diagnostic features
Hypertrophy of ciliated cells and basal cells in the epididymal epithelium
Piling or stratification of epithelial cells
Irregular luminal epithelial border
Increased diameter of epididymal ducts
Increased mitosis
Bilateral
Diffuse change
Comments: This is a very uncommon change. Diffuse hypertrophy and
hyperplasia of epididymal epithelium was noted in cynomolgus monkeys administered ≥100
µg/kg recombinant human epidermal growth factor (hEGF) for 2
weeks . No changes were noted
in the testes of monkeys administered hEGF. Focal hyperplasia or tumors of
epididymides haven’t been reported in macaques.

## Sperm granuloma: Epididymis, Efferent Ducts (No image provided)
Comments: In nonhuman primates, sperm granulomas in the epididymis,
efferent ducts or vas deferens are primarily associated with vasectomy
procedures ,
 .

## B. Prostate, Seminal vesicles, Bulbourethral Glands, Penis, and Prepuce (Accessory
Sex Glands and External Genitalia)
Male reproductive anatomy of the macaque differs from the rodent, most notably by the
absence of coagulating and preputial glands, and the presence of external fibrovascular
penis with a glans, and an os penis or baculum .
The accessory sex glands in nearly all NHPs consist of single or two-lobed prostate gland
and paired seminal vesicles and bulbourethral glands. In cynomolgus monkeys, the prostate
has a prominent stromal component, indistinctly divided into a lobular cranial lobe and
compact caudal lobe that incompletely envelops the urethra. These two lobes have been
considered analogous to the central and peripheral zones of the human prostate,
respectively. However, the cranial lobe is quite different functionally and histologically
from the central zone of the human prostate . The central portions of both lobes have large, irregularly arranged
acini, which are more prominent in the cranial lobe. Acini in the peripheral portion of
both lobes are smaller and more regularly arranged. The epithelium consists of columnar
epithelial and basal cells on a basal lamina. Columnar epithelial cells are taller in the
cranial lobe than in the caudal lobe. Cytoplasm and nucleus of epithelial cells are
basally located and the apical region of the cell contains a large number of vacuoles and
secretory material. The lumen of the acini contains eosinophilic-staining secretory
material. Basal cells with clear cytoplasm are more numerous in the peripheral
portion .
Paired seminal vesicles are the largest of the accessory sex glands and produce a
yellowish-white viscous fluid that makes up most of the ejaculate. These are highly
convoluted glands consisting of rounded acini with a simple columnar epithelium, situated
distal to the ampulla of the vas deferens, and empty via the ejaculatory duct into the
urethra ( ).
Bulbourethral glands are paired compound tubuloalveolar glands that secrete a mucoid
material into the penile urethra. The epithelial cells are pyramidal to columnar with a
microvillous surface .

## Corpora amylacea: Prostate, Seminal vesicles, Penis
( )

## Other term(s)
Mineral; mineral calculi; concretions, semen; semen calculi; sperm cystoliths; semen
matrix calculi; concretions

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Spontaneous (common); much less frequently can be seen as a result of retrograde
ejaculation (back flow) of sperm due to repeated transrectal electro-ejaculation

## Diagnostic features
Composed of numerous sperm embedded in a brightly eosinophilic matrix
with/without mineralization.
Could be intermixed with mineral, necrotic debris, epithelial cells and
inflammatory cells
Accompanying obstruction and inflammation/ulceration of the urethra and urinary
bladder
Comments: Concretions, calcified concretions or mineral in the testis,
seminal vesicles, prostate and distal urinary tract are typically composed of calcium
carbonate ,
 ,
 , , , , . Semen calculi have been reported in prostatic and penile urethra
of macaques , , .
Retrograde sperm ejaculation due to repeated electro-ejaculation causes trapping of
semen in the posterior urethra and back flow into urinary bladder causing obstruction
and can result in corpora amylacea , , however the observation is commonly observed in monkeys as a
spontaneous change, particularly within the seminal vesicles.

## Metaplasia: Prostate, Seminal Vesicles, Penis (No image provided)
Comments: Squamous metaplasia of the prostate and atrophy with stromal
fibrosis secondary to administration of estrogenic compounds has been observed in
prostate and other accessory sex glands , ,
including seminal vesicles (personal observation, Eric Van Esch).

## Sperm reflux: Prostate, Seminal Vesicles, Penis
( )

## Other term(s)
Retrograde sperm ejaculation; sperm backflow

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Spontaneous; Repeated electroejaculation-induced asynchronous flow or spontaneous
sperm back flow

## Diagnostic features
Back reflux of sperm into seminal vesicles, prostatic or penile urethra
Leads to semen concretions or calculi and obstruction of prostatic or penile
urethra
Comments: In macaques, sperm reflux can occur spontaneously or
associated with routine trans-rectal electroejaculation which induces a lack of
synchronous flow potentially due to asynchronous stimulation of nerve tracts , . Sperm reflex when occurring as a spontaneous finding
in macaques without any associated inflammatory or degenerative changes, does not need
to be diagnosed routinely.

## Hyperplasia, basal cell: Prostate
( )

## Other term(s)
Hyperplasia; focal hyperplasia;

## Diagnostic features
Irregular, solid nests of basal cells displacing or replacing secretory columnar
epithelium in one or more acini
The cells have scant basophilic cytoplasm
Nuclei are ovoid with fine chromatin and occasional indistinct nucleolus
Scant but cellular fibromuscular stroma
Rare mitosis
No cellular atypia

## Differential Diagnosis
Hyperplasia, functional:
- All acini and ducts affected
- Frequent mitoses
- Prominent fibromuscular stroma
- Associated hyperplasia of prostatic urethra
Adenoma:
- Larger, compressive, encapsulated masses that replace normal acini
- Typically has both basal and larger epithelial cells
- Areas of basal lamina deposition and squamous, neuroendocrine, transitional and
goblet cell differentiation
- Loss of acinar architecture
- No metastasis
- Minimal cellular atypia
Adenocarcinoma:
- Lacks basal cells
- Loss of acinar architecture
- Metastasis

## Special Techniques
Immunohistochemical markers:
Cytokeratin - Basal cells express cytokeratins recognized by the monoclonal
antibody EAB 903 (34PE12), which can be used to distinguish basal cell lesions
from acinar cell lesions.
Comments: Unlike in rodents, focal hyperplasia of the prostate is not
often seen as a response to inflammation in the monkey and can occur as a spontaneous
change in toxicity studies. Most reported prostate lesions were noted in the cranial
lobe, represent a continuum of basal cell hyperplasia to adenoma and considered
morphologically similar to benign basal cell lesions arising in the human prostate and
thus macaque is considered a good animal model for studying prostatic
diseases ,
 ,
 ,
 . Functional or
diffuse hyperplasia of prostate noted in rodents secondary to administration of
exogenous androgens resulting in enlargement, weight increase, diffuse hyperplasia,
and an increase in secretions 
was also reported in rhesus macaques . In addition, diffuse hyperplasia of prostate and seminal vesicles
secondary to administration of recombinant human epidermal growth factor was noted in
cynomolgus monkeys ( ).

## Papilloma: Penis, Prepuce (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Condyloma acuminatum; wart or verrucae

## Pathogensis
Potential virus-induced proliferation of genital skin and mucous membranes

## Diagnostic features
Exophytic plaque, or cauliflower-like lesions (macroscopic) on shaft, glans penis
and prepuce
Irregular epidermal hyperplasia with anastomosing rete ridges, dyskeratosis,
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, hypergranulosis
Prominent basal layer
Fibrovascular stromal core
Mixed cell inflammatory infiltrates in the superficial dermis
Intranuclear viral particles in supra-basal keratinocytes

## Differential Diagnosis
Hyperplasia, squamous epithelium:
- Expansion of squamous cell layer
- No basal cell layer expansion
- No fibrovascular stromal core
Squamous cell carcinoma:
- Clear evidence of submucosal and/or vascular invasion
- Cellular atypia
Hyperkeratosis:
- Normal maturation lineage of squamous epithelium
- No basal cell layer expansion
- No cellular atypia

## Special Techniques
Immunohistochemical markers
- Ki67 (nuclear) – Proliferation in normal mucosal epithelium is limited to
basal/suprabasal layers. Hyperplastic lesions show cell proliferation in more
superficial layers.
- P16INK4A (nuclear and cytoplasmic) – This tumor suppressor protein is absent in
normal mucosal epithelium but increased in hyperplastic or dysplastic lesions.
Genetic testing
- DNA testing (PCR) can be used to identify virus sequences.
- In situ hybridization is preferable to immunohistochemistry
for viral antigen.
Comments: Typically, monkeys with macroscopically visible lesions on
external genitalia before the study start are culled. Papillomaviruses (PVs) are a
group of small, non-enveloped DNA viruses that cause mucosal or cutaneous neoplasia in
a variety of animals and humans. Human papilloma virus 11 and Lymphocryptovirus have
been identified in a few reported genital skin papilloma lesions in macaques , . Whilst most papillomas will regress spontaneously,
some may persist or undergo malignant transformation. A rhesus papillomavirus type 1
(RhPV-1)-related penile carcinoma was reported in a rhesus monkey .

## 13. Respiratory System
Standardized INHAND nomenclature of proliferative and nonproliferative respiratory tract
lesions in rats and mice was previously published and that publication should be consulted for general respiratory tract
nomenclature. This document follows a similar anatomical approach to that used previously
although larynx, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles have been combined to reduce redundancy,
and respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli are combined as they represent the
lung parenchyma.
Like humans, NHPs are microsmotic, and the NHP nasal cavity is anatomically more similar to
that of humans than the more complex nasal cavities of rodents and dogs , , and NHPs, like humans, are oronasal breathers and may be more useful
than rodents as a research model for toxic changes in the nasal cavity in inhalation
studies. The nasopharyngeal tonsil, analogous to the adenoid in humans, is the primary and
constitutive (present at birth) secondary lymphoid tissue of the posterior nasal cavity.
Other small submucosal lymphoid tissues, sometimes called nasal associated lymphoid tissue
(NALT) , are part of the MALT
system and are acquired postnatally after antigen exposure. Acquired MALT of the nasal
cavity in NHP should not be confused with the NALT of the rodent nasal cavity which is
constitutive (present at birth) but will mature further after postnatal antigen
exposure.
Macaques have a single laryngeal sac, which is a thin-walled air-filled pouch anterior to
the larynx, communicating with the main airway via a small opening at the base of the
epiglottis , . This structure is lined by ciliated
respiratory epithelium, and occasionally becomes infected . The pharynx, larynx and carina in NHPs are anatomically and
histologically more similar to humans and respond to xenobiotics in more similar (to humans)
fashion than rats ,
 , . Macaques have 7 lung lobes, including left
and right cranial, middle, and caudal lobes, and an accessory lobe arising from the right
side. NHP lungs are anatomically more similar to humans than lungs of rats and mice based on
the presence (in NHPs but not rats or mice) of cartilage and submucosal glands in
intrapulmonary bronchi, of mucus cells as the primary cell type in conducting airways, and
the presence of respiratory bronchioles . Club cells are present mainly in terminal and respiratory bronchioles
of humans, monkeys, and dogs. However, in contrast to the dichotomous branching pattern of
human tracheobronchial airways, airways of monkeys, rodents, and dogs are monopodial. NHPs,
like humans, have thin pulmonary veins with mostly fibrous walls .
The respiratory system is susceptible to injury caused by blood borne or inhaled
xenobiotics and thus should be routinely examined in all toxicity studies. For inhalation
studies, it is recommended that tissues sampled include 4 to 6 transverse sections of the
nasal cavity and nasopharynx to represent 4 levels from anterior to posterior, at least 2
transverse sections of the larynx, 1 or 2 transverse sections of the trachea, 1 section of
the carina, samples of all lung lobes to include proximal and peripheral sections, and the
tracheobronchial lymph nodes. One transverse section of the epiglottis and 1 transverse
section of the oropharynx bordered by the tonsils may be sampled as needed for specific
studies. This sampling is illustrated in the Respiratory Collection Protocol of the
Laboratory Monkey, published by GlaxoSmithKline, Charles River Laboratories, and
EPL and more recently for the
nasal cavities in Chamanza et al. . Tissue sampling for non-inhalation studies may be less extensive but
should include at least 2 sections of the lung (a proximal area near the mainstem bronchi
and an area at the periphery) and one section of trachea.
Localized and generalized changes that can be observed within the respiratory tract, such
as parasites/parasitic granulomas; intranuclear and cytoplasmic inclusions; cellular
infiltrates and inflammatory changes; and thromboemboli are tabulated under the appropriate
sections with comments added, but are discussed in more detail in the Systemic/General
Pathology section.

## A. Nasal Cavity, Nasopharynx, Paranasal Sinuses
( )

## Hyperplasia, polypoid: Nasal Cavity/Nasopharynx/Paranasal Sinuses (No image
provided)

## Other term(s)
Polyposis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Nasal polyps in nonhuman primates are inflammatory lesions of the nasal or paranasal
sinus mucosa.

## Diagnostic features
Exophytic mucosal growth(s) on a fibrous or fibrovascular stalk.
Typically associated with chronic inflammation.
Frequently edematous and infiltrated with inflammatory cells. May have areas of
erosion, ulceration, or hemorrhage.
Epithelial cells do not exhibit nuclear atypia and mitotic figures are rare or
absent.
Basement membrane is intact.
May block or partially block nasal passage or sinus.
May be associated with nasal mites.

## Differential Diagnoses
Hyperplasia, epithelial
- No exophytic growth; does not form papillary projections. Lack of a
fibrovascular stalk.
Papilloma, squamous cell
- Papillary or filiform structures typically consisting of thick fronds of
squamous cells or a mixture of squamous and mucus-producing cells without cilia.
Relatively more epithelial proliferation and less inflammation than an
inflammatory polyp.
Comments: Nasal mites (genus Rhinophaga) in the nasal
cavity and upper respiratory tract of Old World monkeys and apes and can cause
inflammation and nasal polyp formation . The term polyp should not be used since that is considered a
neoplasm within the FDA’s Standardization for Exchange of Nonclinical Data (SEND)
criteria.

## B. Larynx (including Air Sacs), Trachea, Bronchi, and Bronchioles
( )

## Hypertrophy/hyperplasia, Bronchial Smooth Muscle: Lung –
Bronchi/Bronchioles
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Smooth muscle cells in the submucosa of bronchi and bronchioles.

## Diagnostic features
Increased prominence of smooth muscle mass characterized by enlarged smooth
muscle cells with or without increased nuclear density
Smooth muscle cells are well differentiated and aligned appropriately
Usually the thickened muscle layer is evenly distributed around the airways
(depends on section)
May be associated with an adjacent inflammatory cell infiltrate
No disruption, compression or disturbance of adjacent tissues

## Differential Diagnoses
Tangential section through vessel:
- Other structures in section are cut tangentially, missing, or otherwise
abnormal in shape
Leiomyoma:
- Well circumscribed, nodular mass composed of interlacing bundles and whorls of
uniform spindle cells arranged in criss-cross patterns of bundles
- NOTE: There are no reports of leiomyoma occurring in the respiratory tract of
cynomolgus monkeys in routine toxicology studies
Comments: Smooth muscle cell hypertrophy/hyperplasia is uncommon as a
spontaneous finding but can be seen in cases of lung inflammation, allergic disease
and/or immune stimulation ,
 , especially following
inhalation administration of certain xenobiotics. Often it is observed as a
focal/multifocal change rather than diffusely present throughout all areas of the
parenchyma.

## C. Respiratory Bronchioles, Alveolar Ducts, and Alveoli
( )

## Accumulation, pigmented macrophage, perivascular: Lung
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of origin
Accumulation of bown pigment in macrophages in the perivascular interstitium. This is
a specifc finding associated with vascular lesions and the pigment has been shown to
be hemosiderin. Fragmentation or partial loss of the external or internal elastic
laminae or arteries/arterioles can be detected using an elastin stain. Small- to
medium-sized arteries and veins with prominent accumulation of brown pigment-laden
macrophages may show degeneration and necrosis of smooth muscle of the tunica
media.

## Diagnostic features
Accumulation of macrophages containing brown cytoplasmic pigment in the
perivascular interstitium of small- to medium-sized vessels.
Affected vessels are interlobular or, in moderate to severe cases, also in the
subpleural parenchyma.
Hemorrhage may be present around vessels in severe cases.
Pigment laden macrophages are not present in alveoli, or only negligible numbers
can be found in alveoli.
Comments: Yamakawa et al. reported a 9% incidence among cynomolgus macaques bred
in Cambodia. The affected animals were relatively young and the authors concluded that
the findings were congenital lesions.

## Macrophages increased, alveolar: Lung: Alveoli
( )

## Other term(s)
Alveolar macrophage aggregation; alveolar macrophage accumulation; alveolar
histiocytosis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of origin
Bone marrow-derived monocyte precursors; resident interstitial and alveolar
macrophages proliferate locally in adults.

## Diagnostic features
Increased numbers of alveolar macrophages over and above the expected number of
randomly scattered individual macrophages within the alveolar spaces.
Often aggregated in multiple foci.
Comments: The term increased alveolar macrophages is intended to replace
alveolar macrophage aggregation in the rat INHAND document, particularly for
inhalation studies . It is
preferable to use increased alveolar macrophages as a stand-alone diagnosis and not as
an umbrella term that includes other inflammatory, degenerative, or proliferative
responses. The term also pertains to lesser numbers of interstitial macrophages that
might accompany increased alveolar macrophages. The affected compartment should be
addressed in the report narrative. Increased interstitial macrophages should only be
diagnosed separately if the pulmonary interstitium represents the predominant
location. If the macrophages from treated animals have cytoplasmic changes (pigment,
vacuolation, foreign material, etc.) that are distinct from features in controls
(historical or current), these changes should be part of the diagnostic term. The term
alveolar phospholipidosis is not an “Other Term” for increased alveolar macrophages
and should be reserved for accumulations of phospholipid-containing macrophages
observed after treatment with cationic amphiphilic drugs , .

## D. Pleura
( )

## Fibrous Tag: Lung – Pleura
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of origin
Mesenchymal/connective tissue originating from the pleural surface of the lung and/or
thoracic cage.

## Diagnostic features
Increased amount of mature collagen extending as a ribbon from the pleural
surface
Low numbers of spindle cells (fibroblasts or fibrocytes) admixed
Lined by a single layer of normal, flattened mesothelial cells
May create adhesions between lung lobes or thoracic pleural surface

## Differential Diagnoses
Pleural fibrosis:
- Increased collagen and/or spindle cells along the pleural margin of the lung
parenchyma
Mesothelial hyperplasia:
- Focal or diffuse increase in layers of pleural mesothelium from normal one- to
two-cell thickness, accompanied by inflammatory cells and an increase in
underlying connective tissue
- Mesothelial cells are cuboidal with prominent nucleoli, abundant cytoplasm
compared to flattened normal mesothelial lining cells.
Mesothelioma:
- As for mesothelial hyperplasia PLUS
- Evidence of cellular atypia and/or invasion of adjacent lung parenchyma or
thoracic wall
Comments: Fibrous tag formation is a relatively common incidental
observation in wild-caught and free-range purpose bred cynomolgus macaques, likely
related to previous parasitic or inflammatory conditions. It is suggested that
pathologists do not record these incidental observations unless a gross observation is
made at necropsy and/or when particularly prominent.

## 14. Skeletal System and Tooth
For detailed general considerations, refer to the INHAND rodent publication . Non-proliferative abnormalities of bones
and growth plates can be observed spontaneously in young cynomolgus macaques used in
nonclinical toxicity studies, particularly fractures and developmental cartilage
abnormalities . Spontaneous lesions
of the joints and teeth are rare in young cynomolgus monkeys used in routine toxicity
studies. Models of naturally occurring or induced diseases, such as osteoporosis,
osteoarthritis and periodontal disease, are briefly addressed herein, although the
widespread use of this species as a nonclinical model is precluded by disadvantages such as
ethical issues, cost and availability .

## A. Bone
The skeletal maturation and bone turnover found in monkeys is generally considered to be
most similar to humans, therefore studies in the non-human primate often play a prominent
role in skeletal assessment . In
monkeys used in routine toxicity studies, which are usually 2-5 years of age, the growth
plates are generally open. The average time of physeal closure in cynomolgus monkeys in
the proximal femur is 6 years in males, and 4 years and 9 months in females , . As in humans, bone remodeling in non-human primate occurs
with a formation of osteons (Haversian systems) in the cortical bones, whereas cortical
bone osteons do not usually form in rodents .
The standard bone samples examined in non-human primates during a toxicity study are
distal femur and proximal tibia, including the femoro-tibial joint. The proximal tibia may
provide a more uniform physis for evaluation than the distal femur. Furthermore, the
sternum is examined with the main purpose of evaluating bone marrow. Sometimes vertebrae
are evaluated, particularly for compounds targeting the skeletal system. Rib samples may
provide access to a more active site of endochondral growth . The preparation of bones for optimal H&E sections is
a time-consuming procedure in a non-rodent species. Although several attempts have been
made to optimize the decalcification procedure, the traditional method using a formic
acid-based solution often gives the best results. As in rodents, special techniques can be
performed in addition to routine histology and H&E staining, such as bone
densitometry, biomechanical testing, bone formation and resorption biomarkers, and
histomorphometry (see review in: Vahle et al. ).
The terms below indicating the growth plate as it relates to skeletal maturity (growth
plate open, closed and partially closed) may be recorded as a finding under the femur (or
any other bone evaluated) or may be recorded under a “summary tissue” such as “Skeletal
Maturity”.
The only published report of spontaneous bone tumor in cynomolgus monkeys described a
chondrosarcoma of the femur in a 4-year old individual , .
One case of induced osteosarcoma was described in cynomolgus monkeys following chronic
administration of aflatoxin B1 ( ).

## Bone decreased, trabeculae and/or cortex: Bone (No image provided)
Comments: In standard toxicity studies in monkeys, a reduction in
trabecular or cortical bone is not a common observation, either as a spontaneous or
test-article-related effect. It should be noted that the non-human primate is a commonly
used model to evaluate the efficacy and safety of bone therapeutics , . A common model involves surgical ovariectomy in
skeletally mature cynomolgus monkeys to induce a high bone turnover state and subsequent
bone loss. In these models, quantitative measures such as densitometry and
histomorphometry are used to assess the changes in bone mass. In those instances where
routine histologic examination detects a decrease in trabecular and/or cortical bone,
the descriptive term of decreased bone should be used.

## Bone increased, trabeculae and/or cortex: Bone (No image provided)
Comments: Diffuse increases in the relative amount of trabecular or
cortical bone in toxicity studies are most often a result of a test-article-induced
effect. For example, bone anabolic agents such as monoclonal antibodies that neutralize
sclerostin and recombinant human parathyroid hormone cause increased bone
formation ,
 . Although quantitative
analyses such as histomorphometry and bone densitometry are often used to characterize
these changes, the increases in bone may be observed in routine histology sections in
toxicity studies.
Increased cortical bone can sometimes be observed with hypertrophic osteopathy (HO),
also called hypertrophic osteoarthropathy or hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy.
This is an obscure pathogenesis syndrome reported in humans and various animal species,
including non-human primates, which develops following a variety of severe, mostly
intra-thoracic, neoplastic or non-neoplastic conditions. It is likely that the release
of growth factors such as VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) and PDGF (platelet
derived growth factor) is involved in the pathogenesis , . Bilateral symmetrical thickening of the long bones of distal
extremities can be observed macroscopically along with irregular surface on the affected
bones. Histologically, there is periosteal new bone formation involving the diaphysis of
the long bones. HO should be differentiated from periosteal new bone formation
associated with secondary hyperparathyroidism. There are only few reports of spontaneous
HO in monkeys, and two cases of HO in cynomolgus monkeys were observed following severe
opportunistic infections during a nonclinical study with an immunomodulator .

## Dysplasia, fibrous: Bone (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Developmental disorder of bone in which all the components of normal bone are present
but they do not differentiate into their mature structures (i.e. no rimming of
trabeculae by osteoblasts and no evidence of lamellar replacement of woven bone).

## Diagnostic features
Well circumscribed intramedullary lesions that can expand and distort the
bone.
Fibrous dysplasia can involve a single bone (monostotic) or several bones
(polyostotic).
Characterized by disorganized trabeculae of woven bone that lack conspicuous
osteoblastic rimming, surrounded by moderately cellular fibroblastic
proliferation.
Nodules of hyaline cartilage may be present.
Cystic degeneration, hemorrhage and foamy macrophages can occur.

## Differential Diagnoses
Fibrous osteodystrophy:
- generalized condition; osteoblastic rimming present.
Ossifying fibroma:
- located in the jaws; presence of osteoblastic rimming around trabeculae.
Comments: Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia has been reported in one 2.3
year old cynomolgus macaque with pathologic fractures .

## Dysplasia, physeal: Bone (No image provided)
Comments: Some cases of spontaneous metaphyseal dysplasia resembling
rickets, often associated with growth plate (micro) fractures, have been described by
Chamanza in a review of spontaneous findings in the cynomolgus monkey . In this publication, the author also
describes cases of cartilage abnormalities such as physeal osteochondrosis or
dyschondroplasia.

## Fracture/Callus: Bone
( )
Comments: Spontaneous fractures are not uncommon in cynomolgus monkeys
kept under laboratory conditions, especially when they are group-housed (i.e. traumatic
fractures). In a review of spontaneous pathology findings in cynomolgus monkeys,
Chamanza reported digital fractures with an incidence of 7% in males, and 1.2% in
females . In the same publication,
growth plate microfractures could be associated with metaphyseal dysplasia (see
increased thickness, physis).
Increased susceptibility to fracture is observed as a consequence of decreased bone
mass during aging and other models of osteoporosis .

## Growth plate open: Bone
( )
Comments: The long bone epiphyseal growth plate is considered as “open”
when the epiphyseal cartilage, regardless of thickness, spans the full width of the
bone. The growth plate is thickest when bone growth is most rapid and narrows as the
growth plate cartilage is replaced by bone (closed). Layers of cartilage are
successively replaced by new layers of bone in an organized fashion, starting in the
transitional metaphyseal region and extending away from the diaphysis to the
epiphysis.

## Growth plate partially closed: Bone
( )
Comments: As the epiphyseal growth plate cartilage is gradually replaced
by bone, the growth plate narrows and partial segmental growth plate closure may be
present. As in humans, the epiphyses of non-human primates close toward the end of
adolescence ,
 , . Skeletal maturity will vary depending
on the site, gender and species. In cynomolgus monkeys, subtle differences in the timing
of appearance and fusion of secondary ossification centers have been reported. Zoetis
et al. 
published an interspecies comparison of postnatal bone growth and development . In their review, they reported the age
of complete fusion of the femoral epiphyses in both species. In male cynomolgus monkeys
complete fusion is reported at 6 and 5.25 years of age for the proximal and distal
epiphyses, respectively, and in females both epiphyses are fused at 4.75 years of
age.

## Physis, increased thickness: Bone (No image provided)
Comments: Induced physeal thickening and dysplasia have been associated
with several different drug classes . Increased thickness and dysplasia of the physis have been observed
in cynomolgus monkeys following treatment with angiogenesis inhibitors, such as an
anti-angiogenic humanized monoclonal antibody, rhuMAbVEGF , or a multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase (including
VEGFR) inhibitor, Sunitinib .
Rickets can be observed spontaneously in young monkeys. It is a disorder that affects
growing bone and cartilage undergoing endochondral ossification, and is characterized by
failure of bone mineralization with subsequent bone deformities and fractures. Dietary
deficiencies and/or metabolic defects in vitamin D, calcium or phosphate metabolism are
predisposing conditions for rickets . It has almost disappeared in modern facilities because of vitamin D
supplementation in commercial diets . Enlargement and deformity of the epiphyseal growth plate cartilage
can be observed macroscopically. The bone is soft. At microscopic examination, the
growth plate is elongated with a persistence of distorted, irregular masses of cartilage
i.e. physeal dysplasia, which may project into the marrow. There is excess accumulation
of non-mineralized matrix (i.e. increased osteoid). Transverse ‟pseudofractures” in the
soft cartilage can be observed.

## B. Joint
Although there are some differences in the gross morphology of joints in non-human
primates, their microscopic, ultrastructural and biochemical features are very close to
those in humans (for thorough literature review, see Pritzker and Kessler . Differences in the joint biomechanics
related to human adaptations for bipedal locomotion are smaller in monkeys compared to
strict quadrupeds .
General morphology of the joint can be assessed on routine decalcified H&E sections.
Additional sections of the joint may be stained with toluidine blue or safranin O to
permit the grading of cartilage matrix integrity .
Spontaneous lesions of the joints are rare in cynomolgus monkeys used in toxicity
studies. To our knowledge, there are no published reports on tumors of the joint in
cynomolgus macaques ( ).

## Degeneration, articular cartilage: Joint
( )

## Other term(s)
Arthropathy

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Degeneration of the articular cartilage associated with various xenobiotics.

## Diagnostic features
Chondrocyte degeneration
Focal loss of matrix
Cavitations, fissures and/or erosion of the articular cartilage
Generally, the inflammatory component (inflammation of synovial membranes) is not
significant

## Differential Diagnoses
Spontaneous degenerative joint disease (older animals)
Comments: Drug-induced arthropathies have been observed with quinolones
in juvenile animals of many laboratory species, including non-human primates . The specific mechanism for the
initiation of this arthropathy is not fully determined. The most likely primary
mechanism is the chelation of magnesium ions by quinolones, resulting in impaired
function of chondrocyte surface β1 integrins and disturbed interaction between the
matrix and cells .

## Degenerative joint disease: Joint (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Osteoarthritis
Comments: Degenerative joint disease (more commonly called
osteoarthritis in the literature on non-human primates) is a naturally occurring
entity in adult cynomolgus macaques that increases in prevalence and severity with
increasing age. The knee joint is typically involved, and the lesion is characterized
by articular cartilage microfissures, clefting and loss, with thickening of the
subchondral bone . Spontaneous
cases are uncommon in cynomolgus macaques in routine toxicity studies due to the young
age of the individuals.
Unilateral advanced degenerative joint disease, with full thickness loss of the
articular cartilage on the femoral head and acetabulum, and replacement by a fibrous
connective tissue that extended into the superficial subchondral bone marrow (pannus),
was described in two presumptive cases of idiopathic chondrolysis in 3 year old,
wild-caught, cynomolgus females of Vietnamese origin, reared in captivity . Idiopathic chondrolysis is a human
clinical entity typically reported in adolescents.

## Inflammation: Joint (No image provided)
Comments: The monkey collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model is used in the
development of new drugs for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) because
non-human primates have the closest immunological and skeletal similarities to humans.
Cynomolgus macaques may be used for this model . This experimentally-induced auto-immune disease consists of
immunizing monkeys with bovine type II collagen co-administered with complete Freund
adjuvant. At histology, there is marked infiltration of T cells and macrophages in the
synovium. Neutrophils are also present during the progression of the disease.
Hyperplasia of the synovium and pannus formation overlying the cartilage precedes
progressive destruction of the joints during the late phase of CIA, with loss of
cartilage and subchondral bone, and bone remodeling , , .
Takei described a case of spontaneous polyarthritis in a 5 year old female cynomolgus
macaque from China . This animal
presented fever, swelling of the fingers, knees and tail, deformation of the pelvis, and
loss of mobility. Although microscopy of the joints was not available, the presence of
inflammatory cells in the synovial fluid obtained by arthrocentesis, and high counts of
neutrophils, monocytes and large unstained cells along with increased serum CRP levels
were consistent with polyarthritis of unknown pathogenesis.

## C. Tooth
Non-human primates have teeth similar to those of humans. In
Macacafascicularis, the age of eruption of the
decidual teeth occurs between two weeks and 6 months old, and between 1.38 and 5.75 years
old for permanent teeth .
Non-human primates have naturally occurring dental plaques, calculus, and periodontal
disease , and they are often used
as experimental models for plaque formation, periodontal disease and caries , . However, reports and descriptions of teeth lesions are
scarce in cynomolgus monkeys used in toxicity studies, because this tissue is not examined
routinely (except during evaluation of oral implants), and probably also because of the
generally young age of the animals.
Among neoplastic lesions, ameloblastic odontoma is the only odontogenic tumor described
in the literature in cynomolgus monkey, in a single adult individual , and an ossifying fibroma of the maxilla
has been described in one 7 year old cynomolgus macaque ( ).

## Inflammation, periodontium: Tooth
( )

## Other term(s)
Periodontal disease; periodontitis

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Periodontitis is a chronic, multifactorial immuno-inflammatory process that affects
the supporting structures of the teeth (periodontal ligaments) and alveolar bone. It
is considered to be primarily due to infection by oral opportunistic bacteria, but
individual variability in the host responses to bacterial infection contributes
significantly to expression of the disease.

## Diagnostic features
Inflammatory cells, including neutrophils, within the gingival, periodontal
spaces and/or adjacent connective tissue (i.e. periodontal pockets)
Resorption of the periodontal ligament and bone
Loosening and eventual loss of the teeth following destruction of the periodontal
ligament
Comments: Non-human primates, including cynomolgus monkeys, are
susceptible to naturally occurring periodontal disease and can be used as models of
the disease in humans. To induce experimental periodontitis, plaque-accumulating
devices such as orthodontic elastic ligatures or sutures are commonly placed . Inoculation of monkeys with human
pathogens such as Porphyromonasgingivalis also leads
to plaque formation and bone loss , .

## Inflammation, pulp: Tooth (No image provided)
Comments: Periodontal disease, dental fractures, implantation of
biomedical devices, or endodontic procedures such as the cutting of canine
teeth , can lead to exposure of
the pulp cavity or tooth root. The subsequent colonization by bacteria can result in
chronic inflammation of the pulp and surrounding tissues, and development of abscesses
(often characterized by facial swelling) and/or a draining tract .

## Resorption: Tooth (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Caries
Comments: Dental caries have been described in many species of non-human
primate including the cynomolgus monkey . Caries is a macroscopic term corresponding to a chronic
infectious disease resulting from the resorption of dental hard tissues by oral
bacteria . Microorganisms
subsequently trigger inflammatory and degenerative responses in the dental pulp. The
development of caries is a multifactorial process , , 
involving sugar-rich diets fed in captive environment, and microbial shifts towards
highly acidogenic bacteria (e.g. some serotypes of
Streptococcusmutans) among others.

## 15. Soft Tissues
For detailed general considerations on soft tissues, skeletal muscle, and mesothelium refer
to the INHAND rodent publication . This
chapter includes lesions of soft tissues, skeletal and smooth muscle, adipose tissue, and
mesothelium. Lesions of the synovium are described in the chapter on the skeletal
system.

## A. Soft Tissue
Soft tissue lesions observed in the non-human primate are generally identical to those
observed in rodents and other domestic animals as well as in humans . One additional non-human primate specific
condition, retroperitoneal fibromatosis, is discussed ( ).

## Retroperitoneal fibromatosis: Soft Tissue
( )

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Retroperitoneal fibromatosis (RF) in macaques is caused by retroperitoneal
fibromatosis herpesvirus (RPHV) and/or rhesus rhadinovirus (RRV) in the presence of
retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency. RF has been reported in macaques that have
concurrent natural infection with simian D-type retrovirus-2 (SRV-2) or experimental
infection with SIV or SIV/HIV hybrid viruses , .

## Diagnostic features
Multifocal fibroproliferative syndrome that occurs subjacent to the peritoneum
covering the ileocecal junction and associated mesenteric lymph nodes. There may
also initially just be a diffuse opaque thickening of the mesentery.
Macroscopically, two patterns occur with RF:
- Localized, in which fibroproliferative lesions occur only in solitary
nodules.
- Progressive, in which fibromatosis occurs throughout the abdominal cavity as
either discrete nodules of fibromatous tissue or as one large continuous mass that
can circumscribe loops of intestines, interfering with peristalsis and
gastrointestinal function (but which does not invade into or obstruct the
intestinal lumen). The fibromatous tissue may even extend into the inguinal canal
or invade through the diaphragm into the pleural cavity.
- Secondary subcutaneous fibromatous lesions also sometimes occur (referred to as
subcutaneous fibromatosis).
Histologically, two basic patterns occur with RF:
Proliferative: This pattern has aggressive proliferation of highly vascular
fibrous tissue with large, plump, spindle-shaped fibroblasts in a disorganized
stromal network of collagen and reticulum fibers. Mononuclear cell infiltrates and
edema are also normally present in varying degrees.
Sclerotic: This pattern has fewer fibroblasts and edema/mononuclear cell
infiltrates and can appear as a mass of mostly acellular collagen.

## Differential Diagnoses
Fibrosarcoma (differential for the proliferative histologic pattern of RF). The
fibroblasts in RF tend to lack the densely cellular, anaplastic appearance of most
fibrosarcomas. Also, with RF there is no metastasis by lymphatic or vascular
routes or invasion of parenchymatous organs.
Fibroma (differential for the sclerotic histologic pattern).
Comments: This multifocal fibroproliferative syndrome in macaques was
first recognized at the University of Washington National Primate Research Center in
1976 at which time it was linked to animals with concurrent SRV-2 associated
immunosuppression . Epidemic
outbreaks occurred at that and other primate centers in the 1980s . Animals often presented clinically
with chronic weight loss and diarrhea and had evidence of generalized lymphoid
depletion. It has since been observed in animals with immunosuppression caused by
experimental infection with SIV retroviruses .
Localized RF syndrome can develop into the progressive RF syndrome, but even if it
does not, animals with localized RF typically die of other infections associated with
immunosuppression. The progressive syndrome of RF is considered uniformly
fatal .
RF is often discussed in the context of Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), another mesenchymal
proliferative disorder that occurs in virally induced immunodeficient humans and
caused by Kaposi’s sarcoma herpesvirus, which is closely related to the RF
herpesviruses . Histologic
findings of proliferative RF (highly vascularized, disorganized, proliferating fibrous
tissue that is edematous with mononuclear cell infiltrates) resemble histologic
features observed in KS .
Differences between the two diseases include that KS is characteristically a
multicentric dermal disease compared to the typically ileocecal regionality of RF
(although secondary subcutaneous fibromatosis does sometimes occur with RF), and
hemorrhage is a more prominent histologic feature with KS compared to RF .

## B. Adipose Tissue and Smooth Muscle
As noted in the rodent manuscript, careful recording of the nature, intensity, and
duration of inflammatory responses to implants or injected substances in soft tissues is
important for the assessment of their local tolerability ( ).

## C. Skeletal Muscle
The special cellular structure of skeletal muscle, the different fiber types and their
varying sensitivity in response to xenobiotics require a separate consideration of the
pathological changes and the extent of sampling and careful selection of sampling sites is
important . The ideal skeletal muscle
choice has either entirely one type or a consistent mixture of fast and slow myofibers.
Consistent orientation of myofibers is also important in order to produce true cross- and
longitudinal sections. For routine toxicity studies, thigh muscles (biceps femoris and
quadriceps) and hindlimb muscles (gastrocnemius, long digital extensor, and anterior
tibialis) are most often used in NHP. Most of these routinely collected muscles have more
fast than slow twitch fibers, especially superficially. In studies where evaluation of a
particular muscle fiber type is desired, the soleus is recommended for type I fibers and
the anterior tibialis muscle is recommended for type II fibers ( ).

## D. Mesothelium
( )

## 16. Special Senses (Eye And Ocular Adnexa)
For detailed general considerations on the eyes and ocular adnexa, please refer to the
rodent INHAND publication on Special Senses . The suggested standardized nomenclature for the ocular system is
subdivided into the eye and the glands of the eye. The ear is not examined routinely in
toxicologic pathology studies and is not included in this manuscript. Recommended
nomenclature for microscopic lesions in the nose is addressed in the respiratory
chapter.

## A. Eye
The macaque cornea is relatively small compared to the relatively larger corneas of many
non-primate mammals . A corneal
Bowman’s layer is present but rather poorly defined , , . In
macaques, the posterior corneal endothelium is poorly regenerative , . The corneal limbal epithelium (at the corneoscleral
junction) is normally lightly pigmented (melanin) and has more cell layers than the
central corneal epithelium .
The macaque lens is small and flattened compared to the relatively larger, more spherical
lens of rats and mice . The lens
provides about one-third of the total ocular refractive power while the cornea provides
most of the remaining two-thirds (Ott, 2006). In primates such as macaques and humans,
lens suture configuration in the adult has a multibranched “star” suture pattern .
Many features of the macaque uvea (iris, ciliary body, and choroid) and aqueous
filtration system are related to high accommodative ability . The ciliary body consists of the anterior pars plicata
(ciliary processes and ciliary muscle) and the posterior pars plana. In macaques, the
ciliary body muscle (smooth muscle) is large and robust with melanin-laden cells normally
scattered among the muscle fibers , .
The pars plana is flat and smooth and extends posteriorly to the junction with the
retina . Macaque and human eyes
have a comparatively wide pars plana; the temporal pars plana is wider than the nasal and
thus is a common site for intravitreal injection. The ora serrata (so called because of
its wavy, indented outline) is the junction of the pars plana and the peripheral retina.
Compared to many nonprimate mammals, the iridocorneal angle of macaques is relatively
small and shallow and lacks well-developed pectinate ligaments , . The anterior chamber is also relatively small . The aqueous filtration system of macaques
and humans has a canal of Schlemm, a single circumferentially oriented venous-like channel
in the base of the ciliary body .
The principal retinal phototransductive neurons are the two ciliary photoreceptors (rods
and cones) . The retina of macaques
also contains intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGC), a recently
discovered third type of retinal photoreceptor . As in humans and most mammalian species, rods greatly outnumber
cones in the macaque retina (“rod-dominant”) , , . In
most regions of the retina, the less numerous cones are spaced in orderly patterns
(“mosaics”) among the more abundant rods , .
The retinal fovea centralis (region of highest visual acuity, ) is a round depression created by centrifugal displacement of all blood vessels,
rod and cone axons, and all cell bodies except those of the specialized foveal cones, and
a few foveal Müller cells , , , , . In
the fovea, cones become centripetally more abundant than rods, such that the central fovea
(foveola) is cone-dominant ,
 . In foveate retinas, the
widened perifoveal outer plexiform layer (OPL) is known as the Henle region and is
composed of the obliquely oriented foveolar cone axonal processes (Henle fibers) which are
greatly elongated to reach their synapses with bipolar and horiztonal cells displaced by
the formation of the foveal pit , , , .
The fovea centralis is surrounded by the macula lutea, a round to oval zone with a
yellowish in vivo appearance due to high concentrations of yellow
carotenoid pigments , , .
Histologically, the macula is distinguished by having more than one cell layer in the
retinal ganglion cell layer (GCL) as well as increased bipolar cell density in the inner
nuclear layer (IPL). Retinal ganglion cell axons comprise the retinal nerve fiber layer
(NFL) and are normally unmyelinated in the macaque retina . The numerous axons from the macular ganglion cells form a
papillomacular bundle which extends into the temporal side of the optic nerve
head . Most retinal astrocytes
are located in the retinal NFL .
The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is a monolayer of cuboidal, melanin-laden cells
lining the subretinal space opposite the neurosensory retina. Bruch’s membrane is a
multilayered extracellular structure between the RPE and choroidal capillary bed
(choriocapillaris). It is composed of the RPE and choriocapillaris capillary basement
membranes and associated collagen and elastin layers , , .
Except for the avascular foveal region, retinal blood vessels are distributed over the
entire fundus , . The central retinal artery and vein are
located within the optic nerve and enter the eye through the scleral lamina cribrosa at
the optic nerve head ,
 . The central retinal
artery usually subdivides into four main branches, each of which supplies the one of the
four retinal quadrants ,
 , . These vessels further branch to
eventually create two interconnecting capillary beds in the inner retina . In the normal macaque retina, capillaries
extend only to the level of the inner nuclear layer (INL) and inner plexiform layer
(IPL) . Thus, the inner
two-thirds of the retina is supplied by the central retinal artery and its branches while
the outer, avascular one-third of the retina (rods and cones) is supplied by choroidal
vessels , .
The optic nerve is composed of the axons of retinal ganglion cells which converge and
exit the globe at the optic nerve head (ONH) . The optic nerve also contains glial cells (astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes), and is surrounded by meninges (dura, arachnoid, and pia) continuous
with those of the brain ,
 . Supportive fibrous septa
are intercalated between optic nerve fibers . The scleral lamina cribrosa is very well-developed in macaques and
humans , . Alterations in the lamina cribrosa and
adjacent regions of the optic nerve/optic nerve head are important in the pathophysiology
of various glaucomas ,
 . In contrast to the white
sclera of humans, the sclera of macaques and almost all other nonhuman primates is
normally pale to dark brown in most adult individuals , , .
The macaque vitreous cavity is relatively large, with vitreous-to-globe area ratio of 0.7
in cynomolgus macaques, compared to 0.4 for the rabbit . The vitreous is a transparent extracellular matrix gel
composed of about 98 - 99% water with remainder being primarily collagen and
hyaluronan . In the normal
vitreous, the only constituent cells are a few hyalocytes (bone marrow-derived mononuclear
phagocytes) and fibroblasts , , . The
collagen fibrils of the central vitreous are condensed into funnel-like lamellae , . The vitreoretinal interface consists of the vitreous
cortex, retinal inner limiting membrane (ILM), and the basal surfaces of retinal Müller
glial cells . Age-related vitreous
liquefaction (“synchysis”) has been documented in rhesus macaques .
Tenon’s capsule is an outer layer of loose fibrous connective tissue which invests the
eye and extraocular muscles from the limbus to the optic nerve . The sub-Tenon space is a potential cavity between Tenon’s
capsule and the adjacent episcleral connective tissue.
Within the conjunctiva, conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue (CALT) is normally
present, especially in the palpebral and fornical conjunctivae , , , . The
superior eyelid tends to have more lymphoid aggregates than the inferior eyelid ( ).

## Developmental Anomalies
Various spontaneously occurring eye and ocular adnexal developmental anomalies have
been noted in macaques, including remnants of persistent fetal hyaloid vessels
(including Bergmeister’s papilla); iridal and optic nerve colobomas; arteriovenous
anastomoses; retinal dysplasia; and eyelid heterotopic cartilage , , , , , , , , , .
Usually the cause is undetermined, though multiple ocular malformations in a rhesus
fetus were attributed to experimental Zika virus infection of the pregnant dam .
Small, discrete nodules of glial-like cell and fibers can extend from the retinal nerve
fiber layer (NFL) or optic nerve head (ONH) without associated inflammatory or
degenerative changes, suggesting at least a partial astrocytic component. In otherwise
unremarkable retinas, such glial nodules most likely represent minor developmental
anomalies. These macaque glial nodules share some clinical and/or microscopic features
with several proliferative but nonneoplastic entities in human retina such as astrocytic
hamartomas .
However, in response to disease or injury, retinal macroglia (astrocytes and Müller
cells) can undergo reactive activation which if persistent or exacerbated, can result in
excessive hypertrophy, proliferation, and nodular aggregation , . Thus, similar nodular glial aggregates can also occur macaque
retinas in conjunction with degeneration, necrosis, inflammation, or other pathologic
changes.
Foci of myelinated nerve fibers and myelin-forming cells (oligodendrocytes and/or
Schwann cells) have been reported in the macaque retina and are generally regarded as
minor developmental anomalies , , , .

## Retinal rosette; Retinal fold: Eye (Retina) (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Pseudorosettes; photoreceptor rosettes; fleurettes; retinal dysplasia; outer retinal
tubulations (ORT); Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes; Homer-Wright rosettes;
disarrangement of retinal structures

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
The term “retinal rosette” implies changes related to abnormal development and
differentiation of the retina. Minor retinal rosettes or folds in otherwise normal
macaque retinas are usually considered to arise during the fetal period due to random
genetic anomalies. However, acquired insults to the developing fetal or immature
perinatal retina could also result in such changes . Rosettes and rosette-like structures can be morphologic features
of retinoblastoma and other primitive neuropepithelial neoplasms in humans , .
In mature retinas in adult animals, fold-like bucklings or laminar disarray can be
morphologic features of remodeling in extensive retinal degeneration (due to various
acquired causes). For example, retinal fixed folds are common features of retinas
detached by traction of contracted adhered epiretinal membranes , .

## Differential Diagnosis
Lange’s fold
Comments: Various focal buckling, and/or disarray of retinal cell layers
have been described by many different terms, depending on the constituent retinal
cells, presence of a lumen or pseudolumen, and other morphologic features , , , . For such non-artifactual structures located in any fundus region
posterior to the ora serrata and attributable to abnormal retinal development or
differentiaton, the recommended diagnostic term is retinal “rosette”.
The term “retinal fold” is recommended to denote acquired bucklings, projections or
disruptions of the retina due to various causes, such as the fixed folds commonly seen
in retinas detached by traction of contracted adhered epiretinal membranes , .
“Lange’s fold” ( ) is a fixation artifact characterized as a raised, buckle-like or wave-like
elevation of the peripheral retina at the ora serratain eyes of human and macaque
fetuses, and is also common in the peripheral retina of young and adult
macaques ,
 . Lange’s folds, are
considered fixation artifacts and should not be confused with non-artifactual retinal
rosettes or folds. The peripheral location and distinct “undulated” form help
differentiate Lange’s fold from nonartifactual retinal rosettes or folds.

## Infiltrate, lymphoplasmacytic: Eye (General term) (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Infiltrate, mononuclear cell; infiltrate, lymphoid cell; infiltrate, lymphocyte

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Minor accumulations of lymphoplasmacytic cells are common incidental findings in many
eye and ocular adnexal subsites in macaques, but their presence in other subsites is a
pathologic change (inflammation and/or excess immunostimulation).

## Diagnostic features
Incidental accumulations are generally small foci of lymphocytes, often with
plasma cells and/or small monocytes.
Increases in size and numbers of cell accumulations (and distribution in atypical
ocular subsites) can also occur.

## Differential Diagnosis
Lymphoma (neoplastic cell infiltrates).
Comments: Small foci of lymphoplasmacytic cells are common incidental
“background” findings in several eye subsites, lacrimal gland, and conjunctiva of
cynomolgus and other macaques ,
 , , . Frequently affected subsites in the eye include the
ciliary body, choroid, iris, and corneal limbus. Lymphoplasmacytic cell aggregates are
also normally present in the eyelid and fornical conjunctivae (conjunctiva-associated
lymphoid tissue (CALT) ,
 .
Increased numbers of lymphoplasmacytic cells in “typical background” sites can
represent a reactive pathologic change (inflammation and/or excessive
immunostimulation) due to various disease processes. Thus, in safety-testing studies,
intergroup differences in severity of these accumulations can be highly relevant in
distinguishing incidental levels from treatment-related effects.
The presence of even low numbers of other cell types (e.g., neutrophils, eosinophils,
macrophages, epithelioid cells) within even the smaller lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates
is abnormal. Thus, depending on the circumstances of a particular study, such cell
admixtures (of any severity level) may warrant a diagnosis of “inflammation” (with
appropriate modifiers) rather than “infiltrate” (see also Infiltrate and Inflammation
sections in Chapter 2).
In addition, extremely pronounced increases in lymphoplasmacytic cell numbers in
“typical background” subsites (with or without other cell types) seldom occur as
isolated changes in otherwise apparently unremarkable eyes. Instead, very prominent
accumulations of such cells are often just one morphologic component of complex
regional or even pan-ocular inflammatory processes with concurrent interrelated
pathologic changes in multiple ocular subsites (such as degeneration, necrosis,
hemorrhage, fibrosis and architectural disruptions [e.g., retinal detachment, lens
rupture, corneal perforation]) , . The overall circumstances in such complex situations can be
variable and even unique, so the question of whether or not to record the
lymphoplasmacytic cell accumulations as separate diagnoses or to regard them only as
part of a more general diagnosis of inflammation is most appropriately based the study
pathologist’s professional judgment after assessment of all relevant factors.
Lymphoplasmacytic cells are not typical “background” findings in certain other ocular
subsites such as the anterior chamber, central cornea, lens, retina, subretinal space,
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), vitreous, optic nerve head, and optic nerve. In
these sites, even low numbers of such cells are abnormal. As such, low-level
accumulations (in otherwise unremarkable or minimally altered subsites) may warrant
diagnosis.
In addition, lymphoplasmacytic cells in these “nontypical” subsites can also occur in
much larger numbers when they too are components of complex regional or pan-ocular
pathologic processes. In these complex situations, whether or not to record the
lymphoplasmacytic cell accumulations as separate diagnoses or to regard them only as
part of a more general diagnosis of inflammation is likewise most appropriately based
the study pathologist’s professional judgment after assessment of all relevant
factors.

## Keratoconus: Eye (Cornea) (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown

## Diagnostic features
Conical protrusion of central cornea (clinical).
Corneal epithelial thinning.
Corneal stromal thinning and lamellar disorganization.
Corneal endothelial cell degeneration.
Breaks or folds of Bowman’s layer and Descemet’s membrane.

## Differential Diagnosis
Artifactual distortion of the corneal surface during histologic processing.
Comments: Keratoconus has been reported in cynomolgus and rhesus
macaques ,
 .

## Pigment, increased (melanin): Eye: Iris (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Hyperpigmentation

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Chemically- induced increased production of melanin by existing iridal stromal
melanocytes.

## Diagnostic features
Clinically observed darker coloration of iris in treated eye compared to
contralateral untreated eye, or to irides of control animals.
Sometimes microscopically detectable by careful comparison of contralateral eyes
in animals in which inciting test article was unilaterally administered.
Comments: Increased iridal coloration (hyperpigmentation) in humans and
macaques has been reported as a side-effect of treatment with certain prostaglandins,
especially PGF2α analogue latanoprost , , , .
Prostaglandin-stimulated melanin overproduction by iridal stromal melanocytes is
considered the underlying mechanism.

## Degeneration, fiber: Eye (Lens) (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Cataract

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Congenital lens fiber degeneration (cataracts) in macaques has been attributed to
genetic defects, in utero infectious agents, concurrent ocular
developmental anomalies, or is of unknown origin , , , , .
Age-related spontaneous lens fiber degeneration (cataracts) has also been reported in
older macaques ,
 ,
 ,
 , , .
Naturally occurring or experimentally induced acquired lens fiber degeneration
(cataracts) in macaques can also develop due to many other causes including chemical
toxins, irradiation, and diabetes mellitus , , , , , .
Lens fiber degeneration (cataracts) in younger macaques in toxicity studies can also
result from physical trauma to the lens or as sequelae of many spontaneous or induced
ocular pathologies that secondarily affect the lens.

## Diagnostic features
Lens fiber swelling, ballooning, fragmentation, condensation, hypo- or
hypereosinophilia.
Anterior lens epithelium hyperplasia, posterior migration, fibrous metaplasia
(epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition).
Lens capsule thickening, thinning, and distortion.
Mineralization.

## Differential Diagnosis
Fixation artifact, especially with acetic acid-containing fixatives (such as
Davidson’s solution).
Comments: Macaque lens fibers are quite susceptible to fixation
artifact, especially after fixation with Davidson’s or modified Davidson’s
solutions , , .
Distinguishing ante-mortem cataracts from this artifact can be challenging.

## Degeneration, microcystoid: Eye (Retina)
( )

## Other term(s)
Retinal peripheral cystoid degeneration; retinal cystic degeneration; Blessig-Iwanoff
cysts; ora serrata cysts

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Peripheral microcystoid degeneration is considered an aging-related change though it
can also be present in young animals.

## Diagnostic features
Small to large, cyst-like, generally clear cavitations at the peripheral retina
or pars plana (near the ora serrata)
Can be single or multiple, often confluent.

## Differential Diagnosis
Lange’s fold (artifact)
- distinct, often well-elevated buckling or crimped appearance rather than cystic
cavitations.
Retinal edema
- often located in more central retina (especially in and around the macula);
often associated with other pathologic changes in retina and/or eye subsites.
Retinoschisis
- true intraretinal expansion or “splitting” vs. artifactual splitting
Comments: Minor microcystoid formations in the peripheral retina and/or
pars plana are common in macaque eyes and are considered innocuous incidental
changes ,
 ,
 .

## Displacement, photoreceptor nuclei: Eye (Retina Choroid)
( )

## Other term(s)
Photoreceptor displaced nuclei; subretinal photoreceptor cell

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Spontaneous or pathologic change of rod and cone photoreceptors.

## Diagnostic features
Normal-appearing or pyknotic rod/cone nuclei in the subretinal space; displaced
from their normal residence (outer nuclear layer [ONL]).
Partly displaced nuclei can sometimes be seen spanning the outer limiting
membrane (OLM).
Low numbers of displaced nuclei may be present in the subretinal space as
spontaneous incidental findings in otherwise normal retina.

## Differential Diagnosis
Infiltrates [insert appropriate cell type] in the subretinal space
Comments: Rod and cone photoreceptor nuclei (and associated perikaryal)
are normally located in the outer nuclear layer (ONL) but can be “displaced” into the
subretinal space in various species including macaques , , .
In otherwise unremarkable macaques, a few such subretinally displaced rod/cone nuclei
are considered incidental spontaneous changes of no toxicological relevance. However,
increased or excessive numbers of displaced rod/cone nuclei can be a feature of
retinal degeneration and other pathologies.

## Edema, retina: Eye (Retina Choroid)
( )

## Other term(s)
Cystoid macular edema; cystic edema; macular cyst; retinoschisis; retinal cystoid
degeneration

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Abnormal intraretinal fluid accumulation (edema) occurs in many degenerative,
inflammatory, and vascular retinal pathologies. The pathophysiology is not completely
understood , , .

## Diagnostic features
Variably sized, generally clear, often multiple cyst-like spaces or cavitations
which can occur in any retinal region. In foveate retinas, edema cavitations are
often localized or most prominent in the inner retina, and especially in the
macular Henle fiber region (macular outer plexiform layer [OPL] and adjacent inner
nuclear layer [INL]) ,
 .
The cystic spaces are often crossed perpendicularly by the intact but attenuated
trunks of Müller cells.
Confluent cavitations can create the effect of internal retinal “splitting”
(retinoschisis).

## Differential Diagnoses
Artifactual post-mortem “splitting” of the retinal outer plexiform layer
(especially in the Henle fiber region)
Peripheral retinal microcystoid degeneration
- spontaneous and generally innocuous
Comments: Retinal edema is not a specific disease, but rather a feature
of many degenerative, vascular, and inflammatory conditions, especially those that
which have primary or most extensive effects in the inner retina.

## Atrophy, idiopathic, bilateral: Eye: Optic nerve (No image provided)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Unknown

## Diagnostic features
Temporal optic nerve has circumscribed minor to extensive loss of axons, often
with associated gliosis (astrocyte proliferation) and apparent
condensation/thickening of pial septa. The demarcation between the affected
temporal side and the unaffected nasal side can be quite distinct.
Frequently, overall shrinkage of the temporal-side optic nerve (most evident in
cross-sections).
Thinning (decreased axons) of temporal retina nerve fiber layer (NFL) (i.e., the
papillomacular bundle).
Decreased ganglion cells in the macula.
Not always bilateral.

## Differential Diagnoses
Vitamin B12 deficiency
- Similar temporal optic nerve atrophy and temporal macular ganglion cell loss
have also been noted, along with brain and spinal cord pathology following
experimentally induced Vitamin B12 deficiency in “monkeys” (presumed to be rhesus
macaques) .
Other causes of optic nerve and/or retinal degeneration/atrophy
- usually do not exhibit such well-demarcated temporal localization
- often concurrent with other retinal and/or optic nerve pathologic changes such
as inflammation.
Comments: Idiopathic bilateral optic atrophy is a specific optic
nerve/retinal ganglion cell degenerative condition of unknown etiology that has been
described in cynomolgus and rhesus macaques , , , , , .

## Deposit, retinal pigment epithelium: Eye (Retina RPE) (No image available)

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Deposits of amorphous material (“drusen”) can be a feature of various age-related
macular degeneration (AMD)-like syndromes in macaques. Genetic predisposition has been
implicated in some cases of such accumulations and AMD-like disease in macaques, with
some gene polymorphisms associated with human AMD also present in macaques , .
Later-onset deposits have a familial association in in some closed-colony rhesus
populations ,
 ,
 ,
 . Early-onset AMD-like
disease in a cynomolgus colony was also demonstrated to be heritable , , .

## Diagnostic features
Deposits are single to multiple, focal, amorphous extracellular eosinophilic
aggregates typically located between Bruch’s membrane and the retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE).
Aggregates often elevate the RPE in a “dome”-like manner.

## Differential Diagnoses
Lipofuscin accumulation in RPE cells
- has been noted as an aging-related change in rhesus macaques , , with or without concurrent
“drusen”-like formations.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
- Recently described as a naturally occurrence in a colony of Japanese macaques
[Macaca fuscata] results in accumulations of abnormal
glycoprotein storage materials in many central nervous system sites including the
retina .
“Pseudodrusen”-type material
- In human patients with AMD and certain other diseases, aggregates of
drusen-like material (“reticular pseudorusen”, “subretinal drusenoid deposits”)
can occur in the subretinal space (internal to the RPE) .
- This material is similar though not identical to “classic” drusen in
composition.
- Although apparently not described in macaques, such “pseudodrusen” -type
material could potentially occur in these species.
Comments: In humans, drusen deposits are heterogenous mixtures of
lipids, complement, immunoglobulins, proteins and other molecules and are considered a hallmark of human
AMD .
Ophthalmoscopically visible “drusen” in macaques can correlate not just with the
typical sub-RPE deposits but with vacuolated and/or lipid-filled RPE cells , , , , .
Naturally occurring drusen-type deposits as well as retinal and RPE alterations
suggestive of early-to intermediate-stage human AMD have been noted in cynomolgus and
rhesus macaques; in some but not all studies, these findings were characterized only
clinically and not confirmed microscopically , , , , .
Spontaneous drusen-type deposits are not common in the typically younger macaques
used in most toxicity safety-testing studies. However, the incidence in macaques tend
to increase with age ,
 ,
 ,
 , , .
The descriptive terms “deposit” should be used when “drusen-type deposits” are
observed in routine toxicology studies because such deposits are not usually
biochemically analyzed. Diagnostic/intepretative terms used in the literature such as
drusen, macular drusen, drusenoid leions, Aquired Macular Degeneration (AMD)-like
lesions, drusenoid maculopathy, macular degeneration, and microcystic change should
not be used.

## Melanoma: (Eye Uvea/Iris/Choroid) (No image provided)
Comments: Proliferative lesions reported in macaques include choroidal
melanomas with evidence of malignancy and local invasion of retina, in two cynomolgus
macaques ,
 . Circumscribed
aggregates or nodules of pigmented (presumably melanocytic) spindle to round cells
without evidence of malignancy can occur in the choroid and ciliary body of macaques,
but it is unknown whether these are neoplasms versus hamartomatous and/or other
nonneoplastic uveal proliferations , .

## B. Adnexa (Eyelids, Extraocular Muscles and Lacrimal Glands)
The caruncle (carcuncula lacrimalis) is an elevated, nodular fold of modified skin at the
medial canthus. The plica semilunaris (vestigial nictitating membrane) is a small
conjunctiva-lined fold closely applied to the contour of the lower medial globe, near the
medial canthus ,
 .
Macaque eyelids have a well-developed tarsal plate with embedded Meibomian sebaceous
(tarsal) glands as well as smaller sebaceous glands (glands of Zeis), apocrine (sweat)
glands (glands of Moll), and accessory lacrimal tissue , , A
single lacrimal punctum is located at the medial canthus of each eyelid .
Extraocular muscles include the superior and inferior rectus; superior and inferior
oblique; and medial and lateral rectus. Cynomolgus and other macaque species also have an
accessory lateral rectus muscle which is not routinely present in humans , , . Macaque extraocular muscles are very well vascularized . Eyelid superior levator palpebrae and
orbicularis oculi muscles are also present in macaques , , .
The macaque lacrimal gland is composed of serous acini and is located in the superior
lateral orbit , . Multiple lacrimal gland ducts open into
the superior lateral fornix . In
addition to the major lacrimal gland, microscopic clusters of lacrimal gland acini
(accessory lacrimal tissue) are often scattered in the fornical conjunctival stroma
(glands of Krause) and in the eyelid (glands of Wolfring) ( ).

## Neoplastic lesions
Comments: Other primary ocular neoplasms have been rarely noted, and
include lacrimal gland myoepithelioma , eyelid squamous cell papilloma , and eyelid “dermoid carcinoma” in rhesus macaques. Retrovirus-induced lymphoma can
spread into the eye and ocular adnexa.

## 17. Urinary Tract
For detailed general considerations on the Urinary system, refer to the INHAND rodent
publication . This chapter is
limited to an overview of recommended terminology, diagnostic criteria, and histologic
images for the urinary tract of Cynomolgus monkeys used in preclinical toxicity studies.
The range of spontaneous proliferative and non-proliferative urinary tract findings/lesions
encountered in macaques is narrow when compared to rodents. Among the most common findings
in macaques are renal and urinary bladder inflammatory cell infiltrates, urothelial
cytoplasmic inclusions, and multinucleated cells in the medullary collecting ducts. These
can sometimes vary by the geographical source of macaque .

## A. Kidney (including Renal Pelvis)
As in rodents, the kidney is a common target organ for therapeutic and diagnostic (e.g.
imaging contrast media) agents. Injury may occur either as a result of direct effects on
tubules or glomeruli, or indirectly via altered hemodynamics. Organs of the lower urinary
tract (ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra) are less frequent targets of
chemical-induced toxicity.
Exposure of the kidneys to drugs and chemicals is primarily through the bloodstream via
paired renal arteries arising from the abdominal aorta. The kidneys are a major site of
xenobiotic biotransformation, which can result in the formation of toxic metabolites from
chemicals or drugs that may be present in the cytoplasm of tubular epithelial cells and/or
excreted in the urine. Chemicals and/or metabolites are often concentrated in the urine
and thus excretion may result in increased exposure of the lower urinary system.
Deposition of biologic compounds (e.g., therapeutic antibodies, immune complexes, and/or
proteins) commonly occurs in glomeruli.
Although the kidney is not a common site for spontaneous background lesions in macaques,
the pathologist must be aware that changes associated with a variety of nonhuman primate
microbial diseases that manifest lesions in multiple organ systems may also occur in the
kidney. Unlike rodents, which are typically maintained in toxicology facilities with
relatively less prevalent pathogens, nonhuman primates often carry potential pathogens
that can result in spontaneous findings depending on species, age, gender, colony, and/or
geographical source. Importantly, immunosuppression caused by either stress or test items
can result in the clinical manifestation of spontaneous, newly acquired infections or the
recrudescence of previously quiescent microbial associated lesions (viral and bacterial),
some of which may result in renal findings ( ).

## Crystals: Kidney
( )

## Other term(s)
Lithiasis; concretions; nephrocalcinosis
Comments: Crystalline deposits (nephrocalcinosis) have been observed
sporadically in cynomolgus macaques, sometimes in clusters (i.e. seen in an apparent
random distribution in multiple animals in a given study or within a batch of
animals). The deposits are usually primarily interstitial in nature with classic
foreign-body giant cells and other mononuclear cell infiltrates. The inciting cause is
not understood but may be related to diet and/or water quality, and/or other
environmental factors (such as excess phosphorus intake or an imbalance of calcium and
phosphorus in the diet) resulting in secondary hyperparathyroidism at some point in
the animals’ lives .
Additionally, nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism has been reported in Japanese
macaques (Macaca fuscata) with no accompanying renal functional
impact ,
 .
Cline et al 
discusses this observation and cites literature stating this change to be relatively
common in male baboons at 11.2% incidence and occurring as a spontaneous and induced lesion in squirrel
monkeys ,
 .

## Eosinophilic droplets, Glomerulus: Kidney
( )

## Other term(s)
Glomeruli, hyaline droplets

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Visceral podocyte
Comments: Eosinophilic droplets are noted occasionally within the
glomeruli of monkey kidneys. The droplets are generally bright pink with H&E
stains but are more easily visualized with PAS stains. These droplets are generally
composed of albumin and/or other proteins that can pass through the podocyte slit
diaphragms, and surprisingly the location is most often within visceral podocytes
rather than in mesangial cells. Usually, only a small number of glomeruli within a
kidney section are affected. Glomerular eosinophilic droplets may be a component of
glomerular injury related to glomerulonephritis or glomerulosclerosis, but in some
cases appear spontaneously without other evidence of glomerular dysfunction or damage.
Ultrastructurally, the droplets are osmiophilic and surrounded by a limiting membrane
which suggests they reside within endolysosomal compartments. The droplets are
generally not associated with hyaline droplet nephropathy, which is limited to tubules
and associated with drug:protein complexes within tubule lysosomes, therefore the term
eosinophilic droplets is preferred to avoid confusion with tubule lesions. The finding
should be differentiated from thrombi, which are typically solitary and larger and
localized to capillary lumina, whereas eosinophilic droplets are almost always
multiple and found within podocyte cytoplasm.

## Multinucleated cells: Kidney
( )
Comments: Multinucleated cells are sometimes found in the renal tubular
epithelium, usually in the collecting ducts in the renal papilla, in macaques. These are
considered to be incidental, of unknown etiology, and have no known pathologic
significance ,
 , .

## Nephroblastoma: Kidney (No image provided)

## Other term(s)
Nephroblastomatosis; Wilms’ tumor (human nomenclature); embryonal nephroma

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
Renal embryonic tissue
Comments: Nephroblastomas are uncommon in non-human primates but have
been reported in young baboons, cotton-tailed tamarins, and cynomolgus
macaques ,
 . The nephroblastomas
described in baboons and cotton-tailed tamarins were typically grossly and
histologically very similar to those observed in rodents as described in the rodent
INHAND Urinary System publication . One macaque had a unilateral, markedly enlarged kidney in which
normal kidney architecture was completely effaced by primitive tubules, occasional
glomeruli, and edematous stromal tissue. The diffuse nature of this tumor and lack of
any normal renal architecture is similar to the human pathology classification of
“nephroblastomatosis” so this can be considered an alternative term. None of the
nephroblastomas in non-human primates had chromosomal abnormalities equivalent to
those seen in human Wilms’ tumor.

## B. Ureter, Urethra and Urinary Bladder
( )

## Inclusions, eosinophilic cytoplasmic: Renal pelvis/Ureter/Urinary Bladder 
( )

## Other term(s)
Tonofilament pseudoinclusions

## Pathogenesis/Cell of Origin
These pseudoinclusions consist of cytokeratin aggregates.

## Diagnostic features
Eosinophilic, intracytoplasmic bodies that resemble inclusion bodies present in
the transitional cell epithelium of the urinary bladder and occasionally renal
pelvis and/or ureter.
Comments: These pseudoinclusions occur in macaques and are of no
pathologic significance. It is important to recognize these as incidental findings and
they should not be confused with viral inclusions , , .

## Ethical Practices
All procedures used to prepare macroscopic and microscopic images of animal specimens for
this article were performed in accordance with regulations and established guidelines for
humane treatment of research animals and were reviewed and approved in advance by an
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

The authors wish to express their sincere appreciation to multiple STP memberships (in
particular STP, JSTP, ESTP, BSTP) for their comprehensive reviews and excellent comments.
Photographs used in this document were provided by coauthors and by Drs. Cindy Farman
(StageBio, Nevada), Jennifer Chilton (Charles River Laboraroties, Nevada), Ingrid Pardo
(Pfizer, Connecticut), Sanjeev Gumber (Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Georgia), Molly Boyle (Covance, California), Norimitsu Shirai (Pfizer,
Connecticut) and Kendall Frazier (Florida). In addition, we acknowledge David Sabio (EPL
Inc., North Carolina) and Ms. Beth Mahler (EPL, NIH/NIEHS, NC), for image collation,
proofing and editing. Finally, we would like to acknowledge the work of Dr Rupert Kellner
and his colleagues at the Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, for
his thorough review of the manuscript contents and images, and the insertion of nomenclature
and images into goRENI.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivatives (by-nc-nd) License
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/>.