PLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8297783PMC8297783.1829778382977833429295310.1371/journal.pone.0241766PONE-D-20-335961Research ArticleBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationSmall interfering RNABiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNASmall interfering RNAMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsMalignant TumorsMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCarcinogenesisBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologySignal TransductionCell SignalingAutocrine SignalingMedicine and Health SciencesEndocrinologyEndocrine PhysiologyAutocrine SignalingBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyEndocrine PhysiologyAutocrine SignalingBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene AmplificationBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionAutocrine signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder
Autocrine signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases in bladder cancerLeeYoung H.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing LeeMolly M.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing De SilvaDinuka M.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing RoyArpitaData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing WrightCara E.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing WongTiffany K.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodology CostelloReneData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing OlakuOluwoleData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidation GrubbRobert L.IIIConceptualizationWriting – review & editing AgarwalPiyush K.ConceptualizationInvestigationResourcesWriting – review & editing ApoloAndrea B.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5057-5334BottaroDonald P.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America2
Genitourinary Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America3
Department of Urology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, United States of AmericaGarcia de FrutosPabloEditor .

## Data Availability
Expression array data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database of the National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health (URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), Series GSE156348. Original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying blot or gel results reported in this submission have been deposited in the Zenodo public data repository: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4749396 All other relevant data are within the manuscript and its .

## Introduction
In 2018, 549,000 new cases of bladder cancer (BCa; urothelial (transitional) cell carcinoma of the bladder) and 200,000 bladder cancer-related deaths were estimated worldwide [ , ]. Although 70% of newly diagnosed disease is confined to the mucosa, recurrence and progression are frequent, and long-term surveillance is required. The remaining 30% of new cases are more advanced, involving muscle invasion, lymph node involvement or distant metastases (mUC). Standard of care combination platinum-based chemotherapy for mUC patients provides a median overall survival (OS) of 9–15 months [ , ]. Several immune checkpoint inhibitors have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the past 3 years for platinum-refractory patients [ – ], 2 of which are also approved as first-line therapy for cisplatin-ineligible mUC patients with high levels of programmed death-ligand 1 protein [ , ]. Despite some durable responses, the overall response rate to these therapies is 14–23% [ – ]. More recent FDA approvals of erdafitinib for platinum refractory mUC patients with gene alterations of FGFR3 or FGFR2, enfortumab vedotin, and sacituzumab govitecan for platinum- and immune checkpoint inhibitor-refractory mUC patients [ – ] represent continued progress, but more effective identification and targeting of pathways that drive oncogenesis in this disease is urgently needed.
Several comprehensive molecular interrogations of BCa patient tumor samples have improved our understanding of disease pathogenesis, revealed functionally relevant molecular phenotypes with parallels to those of other cancers, and provided a foundation for more detailed analyses of specific signaling pathways as likely oncogenic drivers among these phenotypes and in individuals [ – ]. With the goal of identifying targets for molecular diagnosis and treatment where diagnostic reagents and targeted drugs already exist, we found that positive results from a phase II NCI clinical trial of the multikinase inhibitor cabozantinib for patients with advanced BCa (NCT01688999) implicated several members of the tyrosine kinase (TK) superfamily in disease progression [ ]. We surveyed 12 BCa-derived cell lines for evidence of oncogenic signaling by a perceived primary cabozantinib target, MET, the receptor TK (RTK) for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) [ ]. No MET gene alterations or copy number variations among these cell lines are recorded in COSMIC [ ], none of the cell lines produced HGF [ ], and significant co-overexpression of MET and HGF transcripts occurred only twice in the recent TCGA data (408 cases) analyzed by Robertson et al. [ ]. Together these findings suggested that ligand-independent or autocrine MET signaling occurs infrequently in BCa, and that cabozantinib targets other than MET might be driving oncogenesis. This theory was reinforced by the lack of any significant association between tumor tissue MET content or kinase activation and outcome in trial NCT01688999 [ ], where patients with heavily pretreated, platinum-refractory metastatic urothelial carcinoma with measurable disease and bone metastases displayed clear clinical responses to single-agent cabozantinib treatment [ ]. Cabozantinib also exerted innate and adaptive immunomodulatory activity in patients and in supporting cell-based studies [ ], providing a strong rationale for combining cabozantinib with immunotherapeutic agents, and for identifying active cabozantinib targets in BCa. A phase 1 study led by our group reported significant efficacy for this combination in multiple genitourinary tumors including bladder and kidney cancer [ ], leading to a phase 3 of this combination that resulted in FDA approval of cabozantinib and nivolumab for the first-line treatment of clear cell renal cell carcinoma [ ].
The reported cabozantinib targets include 15 RTKs encoded by AXL, CSF1R, FLT1, FLT3, FLT4, KDR, KIT, MET, MERTK, MST1R, NTRK1, NTRK2, RET, ROS1 and TEK [ – ]. We report here results of kinase profiling of cabozantinib in vitro that implicate the 4 RTKs encoded by DDR1, DDR2, NTRK3 and TYRO3 as additional high affinity targets. We found that potentially oncogenic gene alterations (amplification, overexpression and/or mutation) of these 19 cabozantinib-targeted RTKs (ctRTKs) occur in 66% of 408 cases in the TCGA BCa database analyzed by Robertson et al. [ ], as determined using tools available on the cBioPortal [ ]. RNASeq and gene amplification data in this set for AXL, CSF1R, DDR2, KDR, MST1R, PDGFRA and TEK show significant co-occurrence of >2-fold expression and/or gene amplification for 8 cognate ligands of these receptors in a combined 16% of cases, suggestive of oncogenic autocrine RTK activation. Results obtained using BCa-derived cell lines indicate that autocrine signaling via the GAS6/AXL, MST1/MST1R, or CSF1/CSF1R pathways drives cell migration and proliferation, effects that were suppressed by ligand- or RTK-specific RNAi and blocked by cabozantinib. These findings reveal the frequency and patterns of autocrine RTK signaling in BCa and suggest that detection of these events in BCa patients could better inform TK inhibitor (TKI) use and thereby improve clinical outcomes.

## Materials and methods

## Reagents and cell lines
Tissue culture media and supplements were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, California USA). Human bladder cancer-derived cell lines were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Manassas, VA USA): 5637 (ATCC HTB-9), J82 (ATCC HTB-1), HT1376 (ATCC CRL-1472), UMUC3 (ATCC CRL-1749), T24 (ATCC HTB-4), TCCSUP (ATCC HTB-5), RT4 (ATCC HTB-2) and SW780 (ATCC CRL-2169), or from the European Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (available through Millipore Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO USA): RT112 (85061106), UMUC5 (UM-UC-5, 08090502) and HT1197 (87032403). The T24-derived cell lines T24T, T24M2, SLT3 and FL3 were provided by Dan Theodorescu and originally described by Nicholson et al. [ ]. The cell line MDXC1 was derived from an explant of a J82 xenograft tumor grown in a SCID/BEIGE mouse for 50 days. The cell lines MDXC2, MDXC31R, MDXC31L, MDXC33R, MDXC33L, MDXC34R, and MDXC34L are explant derivatives of J82 tumors serially passaged twice (MDXC2) or three times (all others) grown in SCID/BEIGE mice for 50 days/passage. Lines were confirmed to be 100% human in origin by RT-PCR analysis with multiple probes for human and mouse genes. Lines were confirmed to be mycoplasma-free using the MycoSEQ Mycoplasma Detection System (cat. #s 4452222 and 4460626) from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, Massachusetts USA) using the manufacturer’s protocol. Antibodies against phospho-Met (1234/1235; cat. #3126), pErk (cat. #4370), tErk (cat. #4695), pAkt (cat. #4060), tAkt (cat. #4685), AXL (cat. #8661), MST1R (cat. #2654), DDR1 (cat. #3917), DDR2 (cat. #12133), PTK7 (cat. #25618), MERTK (cat. #4319) and GAPDH (cat. #5174) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, Massachusetts USA). Antibodies against Met (cat. # BAF358, AF276), RYK (cat. #AF4907), CSF1 (cat. #AF216), CSF1R (cat. #MAB3291) and GAS6 (cat. # AF885) were obtained from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, Minnesota USA). Cabozantinib and TP0903 were obtained from the NCI Repository of Chemical Agents—Small Molecules and Isolated Natural Products of the Developmental Therapeutics Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland USA (https://dtp.cancer.gov/repositories/).

## TCGA database analyses
Several prior studies describe potentially oncogenic gene mutations in BCa [ – ]. TK overexpression, in contrast, has received far less scrutiny and was our primary focus here, particularly in the context of co-occurring alterations in other pathway components that support the possibility of oncogenic pathway activation. mRNA expression (RNA-Seq V2 RSEM) data of tumor samples from muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) patients described in the dataset analyzed by Robertson et al. [ ], was downloaded from cBioPortal website [ ] (https://www.cbioportal.org/study/summary?id=blca_tcga_pub_2017; April, 2019) using links therein with the following option settings: “Bladder Cancer (TCGA, Cell 2017)” was chosen from https://www.cbioportal.org/; “Query by Gene” was selected; “Select Genomic Profile” was set to “mRNA Expression, z-score +/- 2”; “Select Patient/Case Set” was set to “All Samples”; in the “Genes of Interest” box, the 89 TKs listed in S1A Table in were entered using HUGO gene identifiers. The complete downloaded RNA-Seq data set is presented in S1B Table in . The same dataset was also analyzed using tools available on the cBioPortal website for gene mutations, copy number alteration (GISTIC 2.0) and mRNA expression level (absolute z-score > 2-fold; RNA Seq V2 RSEM) for selected TKs, cognate ligands, and transcription factors. Co-occurrence of gene amplification and/or overexpression was evaluated by Fisher’s exact test with significance at p < 0.05 and q < 0.05. Overall and progression-free survival for cases with and without alterations was assessed by the Kaplan-Meier method and compared by log-rank test; in all cases, case sets defined by altered and unaltered gene sets were compared across the entire patient dataset (n = 408). RNA Seq data was imported into Qlucore Omics Explorer software (versions 3.0–3.5, Qlucore AB, Lund, Sweden) to identify differential gene expression patterns with selected p and q values, perform 2-group and multi-group statistical tests, and produce heat maps with clustering by specific annotations (e.g., molecular phenotype classifications defined previously [ ]) as noted in the text.

## Gene silencing and RT-PCR
All siRNA used for in vitro studies were synthesized by GE Dharmacon (Lafayette, Colorado USA). siRNA transfections used Lipofectamine RNAiMax according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts USA). For quantitative RT-PCR measurements, total RNA was obtained using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Valencia, California USA) and concentrations were determined spectroscopically at 260 nm using a NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Real-time quantitative PCR was performed using a QuantStudio 6 Flex real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California USA) following manufacturer’s protocols. All PCR primer and siRNA sequences are listed in S6 Table in . Relative gene expression levels were evaluated using the delta-delta CT method. Absolute mRNA copy number was determined for selected targets in BCa cell lines by using purified mRNA for RT-qPCR reactions and including parallel samples for PCR amplification of the neomycin gene in serial dilutions of pcDNA 3.1 plasmid. Neomycin gene PCR results were used to generate a reference standard curve relating PCR product concentration to cycle number and comparing the last cycle number at exponential product generation (Cq) for all other reactions to that of the reference standard. Selected PCR reactions were analyzed on 1.5% agarose gels in Tris-EDTA buffer and bands were visualized using ethidium bromide.

## SDS-PAGE, immunoblot analysis and 2-site immunoassays
For SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis, cultured cells were washed with cold PBS, extracted in Laemmli sample buffer, sonicated in ice-cold water with 3 cycles of 15 sec sonication followed by 1 min of cooling time. Samples were then heated for 5 min at 95°C prior to SDS-PAGE and electrophoretic transfer to nitrocellulose or PVDF membrane. Membranes were processed as described previously [ ]: membranes were blocked with 5% milk in Tris buffered saline, 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST) for 1 h at 25°C before incubating with primary antibody (1:1000 dilution) in TBST-5% milk for 16 h at 4°C. Membranes were then washed 3 times with TBST, incubated with horse radish peroxidase-labeled secondary antibody (1:10,000 dilution) for 1 h at 25°C, and washed for 3 h with TBS prior to ECL detection (Pierce/Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s supplied protocol. Imaging and quantitation of ECL light emission was performed using an Azure Biosystems c600 imaging system (Dublin, California USA).
Electrochemiluminescent 2-site immunoassays for Met and Axl total protein and phosphoprotein content in cell extracts were performed as described previously [ ]. Briefly, streptavidin-coated 96-well plates manufactured for use in a Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) S600 Sector Imager (Meso Scale Discovery, Gaithersburg, Maryland USA) were first coated with 300 microliters/well I-Block solution (Applied BioSystems Thermo Fisher Scientific cat. # A1300), washed 3 times with PBS (150 microliters/well), then incubated with biotin-tagged, affinity purified capture antibody (diluted in 0.5% BSA in PBS; 5 micrograms/ml, 25 microliters/well) for 1 h with shaking. Wells were washed 3 times with PBS before adding samples or standards. Samples were prepared from intact cells at 80% confluence that were washed twice with cold PBS before lysis in cold 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4) containing 1% Triton X-100 and protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Cell extracts were clarified by high-speed centrifugation at 4°C and 25 microliter aliquots were added to wells of 96-well plates at a total protein concentration of 500 micrograms/ml for 1 h at 25°C with shaking. Recombinant protein reference standards (100 microliters/well) for Met (R&D Systems cat. # 358MT) or Axl (R&D Systems cat. # 154AL) were added in parallel to generate curves from 0.01 ng/ml to 100 ng/ml in semi-log increments. Wells were washed 3 times with PBS before adding detection antibody labeled with MSD Sulfotag (diluted in 0.5% BSA in PBS) at 1 microgram/ml, 25 microliters/well for 1 h with shaking. Wells were then washed 4 times with PBS before adding MSD Read Buffer T with surfactant (150 microliters/well) and then read immediately in an MSD S600 Sector Imager. All samples were measured in quadruplicate. Mean values from control wells lacking specific capture antibody were subtracted from all other raw values and standard curves were constructed by plotting sample signal intensity against recombinant protein standard concentration. A non-linear regression curve-fitting algorithm (GraphPad Prism software versions 6–8) was used to generate an equation from which sample values for Met or Axl concentration were derived from background-corrected mean signal intensity values. Mean values among groups were compared for statistically significant differences using unpaired t-test (paired human cell lines) or analysis of variance; R2 and/or P values are provided in the text and/or figure legends. Electrochemiluminescent immunoassays for Akt, Erk and phosphorylated forms of these proteins were performed similarly in 96-well format using kits available from Meso Scale Discovery (Gaithersburg, Maryland USA).

## Cell migration, cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth assays
Migration assays were performed using 8 micron pore size Corning Transwell inserts (Corning, New York USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Images were captured by light microscopy and image analysis and quantitation were performed using Image J software V1.47 (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland USA). For proliferation assays, cells were transfected with siRNA negative control, siAXL, siGas6, siMST1R or siMST1 and plated in triplicate at a density of 2.5 × 104 cells/35 mm dish in defined medium. Gas6, MST1, and/or cabozantinib were added on days 1, 2, and 4. Cells were detached and counted using a hemocytometer on day 3 or 6. Anchorage independent growth was measured as described previously [ ] with the following modifications: A base layer of 0.5% Noble agarose (Difco, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey USA) in phenol red-free DMEM was added to 96 well plates. Cells in 0.3% agarose in phenol red-free DMEM were added on top of the base layer. Cells were fed with DMEM with or without growth factors (as noted in the text) and cabozantinib every other day. After 1 week, MTT was added to quantify the viable colonies by absorbance using a PerkinElmer Victor plate reader (PerkinElmer, Hopkinton, Massachusetts USA). Significant differences between 2 groups were determined by Student’s t test using GraphPad Prism software versions 6–8, where p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Tumorigenicity studies in mice
All experiments involving animals were performed in accordance with NIH Guidelines for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and conforming to ARRIVE guidelines using institutionally reviewed and approved protocol UOB-009 (D. Bottaro, Principal Investigator) at the Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. Animal health was monitored daily for pain, distress or generalized discomfort and classified categorically as (1) minimal, transient or no pain or distress, or (2) pain or distress relieved by appropriate measures (analgesics e.g., buprenorphine); or (3) having unrelieved pain or generalized discomfort. Humane endpoints: any animals in category (3), including animals appearing moribund, cachectic, exhibiting ulcerous skin lesions or unable to obtain food or water, were euthanized immediately using an in-house line of carbon dioxide gas supplied to a closed chamber. For the animal studies described here, J82 and J82-derived cell lines were injected subcutaneously (106 cells in 100 microliters) into SCID/BEIGE mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, Massachusetts USA; n = 10 per group) and tumor volumes were measured at regular intervals using calipers (3 dimensions) as described previously [ ]. Study endpoint: animals were euthanized when tumors reached 2 cm in any single dimension or a calculated volume of 500 mm3, or at 50 days post-implantation. Tumors were removed for cell culture and implantation into new mice using sterile surgical procedures performed in a laminar flow hood. Animals implanted with tumor fragments received perioperative anesthesia (isoflurane, 0.5–4%, via inhalation), perioperative care, aseptic surgical subcutaneous implantation, and post-operative care accordingly to the ACUC approved protocol. A licensed veterinarian was present in the animal facility or on-call continuously throughout the study; no mortality occurred outside of the planned euthanasia or humane endpoints of this study. Tumor growth curves were fitted by regression analysis using GraphPad Prism software versions 6–8.

## mRNA expression, bioinformatic and intracellular pathway analyses
The Nanostring PanCancer Progression 770 gene expression panel (Nanostring Technologies Inc, Seattle, Washington USA) was used to analyze J82 cells and the J82 tumor xenograft-derived cell line MDXC1. Cells were grown to near confluence, serum-deprived for 16 h, total RNA was extracted, and samples were processed and analyzed per the manufacturer’s protocol. Hybridized panels (770 genes and 30 control genes) were read at maximum field count (555 FOV). Data was normalized using Nanostring NSolver software versions 2.0 or 3.0 with a background threshold set to 20 counts, normalization reference set to housekeeping (control) genes, and normalization factor set to geometric mean. NSolver normalized expression data from J82 and MDXC1 cell lines was imported into Qlucore Omics Explorer software V3.0–3.6 for 2-group comparisons with J82 samples set to control and filtering for q < 0.05 and p < 0.0021, generating a list of 321 significantly differentially expressed genes and heatmap with hierarchical clustering. Expression array data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database of the National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health (URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), Series GSE156348.
For Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com /products/ingenuitypathway-analysis, Qiagen NV, Venlo, Netherlands), the Nanostring 770 gene data file was uploaded, and pre-processing statistical cutoffs were set to q < 0.05 and p < 0.0021, enabling IPA to identify the same 321 gene list produced by Qlucore as “analysis ready”. The list was then processed using IPA Core Analysis (version 49932394, Nov 2019) with the following settings: Reference set = user data file (770 genes); Relationship to include: Direct and Indirect; Does not Include Endogenous Chemicals; Data Sources = All; Species = All; Tissues and Cell Lines = All; Mutation = All; Filter Summary: Consider only relationships where confidence = Experimentally Observed; no cutoffs were set for fold change or ratio. P values for overlap between gene expression changes and IPA Molecule Groups, Functions, Activities or Pathways were derived using the right-tailed Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini and Hochberg multiple test correction where appropriate. A positive IPA z-score indicates direct concordance between the direction (expression increase or decrease) and of genes altered in the sample and genes included in the IPA subcategory, a negative score indicates an inverse concordance. The IPA z-score is unrelated to the magnitude of expression change, provided it exceeds a threshold based on p-value and q-value (false discovery rate) [ ].

## Results

## TK gene expression in BCa TCGA samples and BCa cell lines
Data from muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) tumor samples in the bladder urothelial carcinoma TCGA dataset analyzed by Robertson et al. [ ] were analyzed using cBioPortal tools [ ] and downloaded for further analyses. Samples with RNA Seq V2 data (n = 408) were queried for potentially oncogenic alterations (excluding mutations) in 89 TKs (>98% of the human protein tyrosine kinome, S1 Table in ), which occurred at combined frequencies of 53% for gene amplification, 97% for mRNA overexpression with z-score >2, and 55% for overexpression with z-score >4 (S2A Table in ). Collectively these alterations were not associated with significant survival differences at log-rank p<0.05, but trends of lower OS and disease-free survival (DFS) for the altered groups were noted (S2A Table in ).
The mRNA expression profiles of 52 TKs varied significantly among the 5 molecular phenotypes of BCa developed previously [ ]: neuronal (N), basal squamous (BS), luminal (L), luminal infiltrating (LI), and luminal papillary (LP), forming 2 distinct patterns ( ). Thirty-one TKs (ABL1/2, AXL, BTK, CSF1R, DDR2, EPHA3, EPHB2/3/4, FER, FGFR1, FLT3, FYN, HCK, IGF1R, ITK, JAK1/2/3, LCK, LYN, MET, PDGFRA/B, PTK7, ROR1/2, TEK, TIE1 and ZAP70, hereafter referred to as group 1) were highly expressed in the worse OS phenotypes N and BS, with lower expression in LP, the best OS phenotype, whereas 21 TKs (DDR1, EPHA1, EPHB6, ERBB2/3/4, FGFR2/3, INSR, LMTK2, MERTK, MST1R, PTK2/6, SRC, SRMS, STYK1, TNK1/2, TXK, and TYK2, hereafter group 2) showed a reciprocal expression pattern among those phenotypes (p = 1.00x10-4, q = 1.01x10-4, F2,405≥9.42, R2≥0.044 for the 3-group comparison F test: LP vs. (LI+L) vs. (BS+N); ). The expression profiles of the remaining 37 TKs varied independently of molecular phenotype (hereafter group 3; S1 Table in ).
 The frequency of potentially oncogenic alterations (excluding mutations) in these 3 TK groups was similar: significant mRNA overexpression (z-score >2) and/or gene amplification of group 1 TKs occurred in 67% of samples, among group 2 TKs in 69% of samples and among group 3 TKs in 74% of samples (S3A–S3C Table in ). However, significant (q<0.05) co-occurrence of these alterations was disproportionately higher among group 1 TKs: there were 422 mRNA overexpression and/or gene amplification co-occurrences in 63 of 465 (14%) of group 1 TK pairings (S3A Table in ), vs. 114 co-occurrences in 12 of 210 (6%) of group 2 TK pairings (S3B Table in ), and 115 co-occurrences in 16 of 666 (2.4%) of group 3 TK pairings (S3C Table in ). Median OS and DFS for patients harboring these alterations relative to those without alteration also differed among the TK groups, and were consistent with reported OS differences [ ] between molecular phenotypes. Patients with overexpression (z-score >2) and/or gene amplification of group 1 TKs (most frequent in N and BS phenotypes) had significantly worse median OS (28.22 vs. 61.40 mos., log-rank p = 0.0308) and DFS (27.99 vs. 82.42 mos., log-rank p = 0.0145; S2B Table in , ) than those without alteration, whereas patients with these alterations in group 2 TKs (most frequent in L, LI and LP phenotypes) had significantly better median OS (46.65 vs. 22.14 mos., log-rank p = 3.197e-4) and DFS (51.41 vs. 19.05 mos., log-rank p = 6.673e-4) than those without alteration (S2C Table in , ). Patients with overexpression (z-score >2) and/or amplification of group 3 TKs, which varied independent of molecular phenotype, showed a trend of worse median OS (30.91 vs. 59.26 mos., log-rank p = 0.134) and significantly worse median DFS (27.99 vs. 72.34 mos., log-rank p = 0.0391) than those without alteration (S2D Table in , ).
 The TK expression profiles of 15 BCa-derived cell lines were compared to those of TCGA tumor samples using mRNA copy number for 31 TKs from groups 1 and 2 ( ). These 31 TKs (19 from group 1 and 12 from group 2, preserving the 3:2 ration of the larger 52 gene set) were selected for practicality as the minimum number that retained the same significant correlation with molecular phenotype as the parent 52 TK set (p = 1.00 x10-4, q = 8.97 x 10−5, F2,405 ≥ 9.42, R2 ≥ 0.044 for the 3-group comparison F test: LP vs. (LI + L) vs. (BS +N); ). Each cell line profile was correlated with each TCGA sample profile, correlation coefficients were averaged within each molecular phenotype, and cell lines were assigned to N, BS, LI, L or LP phenotype by best average coefficient that was distinguished from coefficients for other phenotypes by t-test ( ). By these criteria, 10 of the 15 cell lines were assigned to a single phenotype or 2 related phenotypes, whereas the remaining 5 failed the t-test threshold but most closely resembled a single phenotype ( ). The same classification was generated using the related method of hierarchically clustering cell TK mRNA profiles by heat map ( , right).
 Positive interim results from our phase II clinical trial of the multikinase inhibitor cabozantinib for patients with advanced BCa (NCT01688999) [ ], prompted us to analyze TKs targeted by cabozantinib in the TCGA MIBC dataset [ ]. The 16 reported cabozantinib targets (encoded by AXL, CSF1R, FLT1, FLT3, FLT4, KDR, KIT, MET, MERTK, MST1R, NTRK1, NTRK2, RET, ROS1, TEK and TYRO3) had been identified in a variety of ways [ – ]. We compared targets on a single assay platform using cell-free cabozantinib dose-dependence studies to obtain IC50 values for 30 RTKs encompassing known targets (except TEK) and members of structurally related RTK subfamilies ( ). In this context, cabozantinib inhibited most of the 16 known target RTKs with IC50 values below 150 nM, and 3 others (DDR1, DDR2, and NTRK3) that were not previously reported ( ), bringing the total to 19 targets. IC50 values could not be determined for RYK, ROR1/2 and PTK7, so whether they are inhibited by cabozantinib remains to be determined.
All 19 ctRTKs displayed potentially oncogenic alterations (overexpression, amplification and mutations unclassified as to pathogenic consequence) harbored by 282/408 (69%) of cases in the MIBC TCGA dataset [ ] and ranging in frequency from 4% (NTRK2/3, TYRO3) to 20% (DDR2); homozygous deletions were rare by comparison, affecting 13 of these genes in 51/408 (12.5%) of cases ( ). The mRNA expression distributions for 9 of 19 ctRTKs were significantly different among BCa molecular phenotypes; of these, 6 were group 1 TKs (AXL, CSF1R, DDR2, FLT3, MET and TEK) and 3 were group 2 TKs (DDR1, MERTK and MST1R; ); the remaining 10 ctRTKs (FLT1/4, KDR, KIT, NTRK1/2/3, RET, ROS1 and TYRO3) were in TK group 3. Significantly co-occurring potentially oncogenic alterations (overexpression, amplification and mutations unclassified as to pathogenic consequence, 150 events) involved 15/171 (9%) of ctRTK pairings; these events involved only TK groups 1 (67% of events) and 3 (33% of events; S3D Table in , top). All 15 BCa-derived cell lines examined above expressed 1 or more ctRTK ( , right). Patients harboring overexpression and/or amplification among 14 ctRTKs (46% of cases) had significantly worse OS (25.56 vs. 54.86 mos., log-rank p = 0.0289) and DFS (25.23 vs. 55.16 mos., log-rank p = 0.0109) than those without alteration (S2E Table in , ). This subset of 14 ctRTKs excludes the group 2 members DDR1, MERTK and MST1R, as group 2 TK overexpression was associated with improved survival relative to groups 1 and 3. Significantly co-occurring alterations in the 14 ctRTKs (60 events in 6.6% of pairings) involved AXL, CSF1R, DDR2, MET, TEK, KDR and NTRK1 (S3D Table in , bottom). Several ctRTKs showed general concordance between mRNA content ( , right) and protein abundance detected by immunoblotting or 2-site immunoassay ( ).

## Potential autocrine RTK signaling pathways in BCa tumors and cell lines
cBioPortal tools were used to identify significant co-occurrence of mRNA overexpression (>2-fold RNASeqV2 z-scores) and/or gene amplification for specific RTK/cognate ligand pairs in 65/408 cases (16%) in the TCGA dataset [ ] involving 7 RTKs (AXL, CSF1R, DDR2, KDR, MST1R, PDGFRA and TEK), suggestive of oncogenic autocrine RTK signaling ( ). For these RTKs and NTRK2, heat map analysis also revealed broad concordance between receptor and cognate ligand expression levels among BCa TCGA cases, including 5 ligands of DDR2 (COL1A1, COL3A1, COL4A1, COL5A1 and COL10A1) ( , left). Quantitative mRNA analyses for these ligand transcripts revealed a similar pattern of co-expression of AXL/GAS6, CSF1R/CSF1, DDR2/COL-1A1, -3A1, -4A1, 5A1, -10A1, MST1R/MST1, and NTRK2/NTF4 in a combined 20% of 15 BCa-derived cell lines ( , right). Receptor/ligand co-expression events were confirmed by immunoblot analysis for CSF1R/CSF1, AXL/GAS6, and MST1R/MST1 in 9 BCa cell lines ( ); 7 of these cell lines most closely resembled the molecular phenotypes associated with lowest OS (BS and N, ) [ ], and the CSF1R/CSF1, AXL/GAS6, and MST1R/MST1 pathways showed the highest Odds Ratio (Log 2) values for co-occurrence ( ). Consistent with TCGA patient data, DDR1, DDR2 and PTK7 were also detected frequently among the 9 BCa cell lines ( ). The group 1 TK DDR2 has been implicated recently in immune evasion by BCa tumors [ ], whereas targeting PTK7 (also a group 1 TK) has been reported to induce regression of several tumor model systems [ ]. Five of 7 RTKs involved in significant ligand co-occurrence are in group 1, MST1R is in group 2 and KDR in group 3, and 6 of 7 RTKs (excepting PDGFRA) are targeted by cabozantinib. Most RTK/ligand pairs were associated with lower median OS and DFS values relative to unaltered cases, but did not meet a 5% significance threshold by log-rank test (S2F Table in , center column). The notable exception was the group 2 MST1R/MST1 pair, for which Kaplan-Meier analysis displayed a trend of improved survival relative to unaltered cases (S2F Table in , center column). Combined, cases harboring groups 1 and 3 RTK/ligand co-alterations had worse OS and DFS relative to unaltered cases with log-rank p values approaching 5% but exceeded this threshold only for DFS (18.00 vs. 43.96 mos., p = 0.0101) for expression z >2.0 and/or gene amplification and/or RTK gene mutation of unclassified pathogenic consequence ( ).
 Many TK pathways induce epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is thought to be a critical process in promoting tumor invasiveness and metastasis. Additional indirect evidence of TK pathway activation and oncogenic signaling in BCa was obtained by interrogating the TCGA dataset [ ] for coincident overexpression of TKs and EMT transcriptional activators (TAs) and by measuring TA mRNA copy number in the 15 BCa cell lines identified above. Heat map analysis of TCGA and cell line data revealed a pattern of higher expression for 9 EMT TAs (MYC, RUNX2, SNAI1, SNAI2, SOX2, SOX9, TWIST1, ZEB1 and ZEB2) among molecular phenotypes with lower survival, consistent with oncogenic impact ( ). Potentially oncogenic alterations (>2-fold mRNA overexpression and/or gene amplification) in these EMT TAs occurred at a combined rate of 174/408 TCGA samples (43%) and significant co-occurrence rate of 14% ( ). Median OS for those 14% harboring EMT TA co-occurrence was significantly lower than for unaltered cases (27.43 vs. 44.91 mos., p = 0.0175). Potentially oncogenic alterations co-occurred significantly for 22 (71%) group 1 TKs and 7 EMT TAs; 9 of these 38 concurrent alterations (24%) were associated with significantly lower OS and/or progression-free survival (PFS) relative to unaltered cases ( ). In contrast, potentially oncogenic alterations co-occurred among only 5 (24%) group 2 TKs and 5 EMT TAs, none of which were associated with diminished survival ( ).
 

## Autocrine AXL, CSF1R and MST1R signaling in BCa cell lines
Potential autocrine signaling by AXL, CSF1R and MST1R pathways in BCa cell lines was further investigated using exogenous ligand to induce activation, using cabozantinib to block RTK activation, and using short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to suppress expression of GAS6 in J82 cells, and MST1 and CSF1 in FL3 cells ( ). Axl kinase activation (observed as autophosphorylation) normalized to total Axl protein (pAxl/tAxl), was stimulated >2-fold by exogenous Gas6 added to intact serum-deprived J82 cells, and this was suppressed significantly below control levels by added cabozantinib ( , left). Consistent with autocrine signaling by endogenous Gas6 production ( , middle), J82 cells transfected with siGAS6 also showed significant pAxl/tAxl suppression relative to control siRNA transfected cells ( , right). The same pattern of significant exogenous Gas6-induced activation, suppression below baseline by cabozantinib, and siGAS6-associated baseline suppression, was observed for the downstream effectors Akt ( ) and Erk ( ). These results indicate receptor proximal pathway functionality and support the presence of autocrine signaling. This approach was also used to interrogate the receptor proximal pathways for MST1R and CSF1R in FL3 cells ( ). These pathways were activated by exogenously added ligand and suppressed significantly below baseline by siRNAs directed against their cognate ligands or by cabozantinib, supporting the presence of autocrine proximal pathway activation in these cells.
 Gas6-, MST1-, and CSF1-induced migration of J82 and FL3 cells, respectively, was also repressed by cabozantinib treatment ( ). siRNA suppression of AXL ( , inset) significantly reduced J82 cell migration below the level of untreated serum-deprived cells ( ), indicating that autocrine Gas6/Axl signaling contributed to the migration of otherwise untreated J82 cells. In FL3 cells, comparable manipulation of the MST1 and CSF1 pathways using exogenous ligand, cabozantinib and RTK-directed siRNA also indicated autocrine driven migration in otherwise untreated cells ( ). Exogenously added Gas6 significantly increased 5637 and J82 cell proliferation rates, and cabozantinib treatment significantly inhibited proliferation by these lines below the rate of untreated cells, in the presence or absence of added Gas6 ( ). In FL3 cells, added MST1 alone significantly increased proliferation rate, and cabozantinib treatment alone significantly reduced proliferation rate, relative to untreated cells ( ). But unlike Gas6-driven proliferation in 5637 and J82 cells, treatment with both cabozantinib and MST1 reduced FL3 proliferation to the control cell growth rate, but not below ( ). Autocrine-driven proliferation by the AXL, MST1R and CSF1R pathways in J82 and FL3 cells was further supported by studies in which siRNA suppression of ligands or RTKs ( ) was exerted in the presence or absence of exogenous ligand and/or cabozantinib ( ). Consistent with the results of biochemical and cell migration studies, J82 cells transfected with siRNA directed against GAS6 or AXL showed significantly reduced proliferation relative to control siRNA transfected cells ( ), as did FL3 cells transfected with siRNA directed against MST1, MST1R, CSF1, or CSF1R ( ). Anchorage independent growth by J82 ( ) and FL3 ( ) was similarly enhanced significantly by added ligand, inhibited by cabozantinib treatment, and suppressed by RTK-directed siRNA.
 

## Phenotypic changes in J82 cells upon serial xenograft passage in mice
Mouse xenograft studies were conducted to further characterize the oncogenic impact of Gas6/Axl autocrine signaling in J82 cells. Tumorigenesis was slow and tumor volumes varied widely relative to many well-studied tumor cell lines from other cancers, to an extent that drug efficacy studies were impractical. Hypothesizing that Gas6/Axl autocrine signaling in tumor xenografts might over time lead to a more aggressive tumor phenotype, 15 mice were implanted with 106 cells each; when tumors reached 300 mm3 they were excised, and tumor fragments were serially passaged in mice for 3 x 50-day tumor re-growth cycles. Although some later-cycle individual J82-derived tumors grew faster than others as measured by volume, these were frequently hemorrhagic and necrotic. Tumor tissue samples were taken at each cycle and 14 new cell lines were derived from tumor explants. None of these cell lines formed tumors faster than J82: the growth profiles of 10 J82 tumors ( , left) and 10 tumors from a representative J82 tumor derived cell line (MDXC1, , center) showed wide variability yet similar mean growth rates ( , right). Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of 8 tumor xenograft-derived cell lines showed that none had lost expression of either GAS6 or AXL; in fact, 6 of 8 had acquired significantly increased expression of MERTK (also activated by Gas6) and KDR ( ). Consistent with high MERTK transcript levels, MERTK protein abundance in MDXC1 cells was several-fold higher than that of J82 ( ). Exogenous Gas6 stimulated robust MERTK autophosphorylation, and the MERTK inhibitor TP0903 reduced phospho-MERTK content below that of untreated serum-deprived cells, suggestive of autocrine Gas6/MERTK activation ( ). J82 and MDXC1 cells grew at similar rates in 2D culture, but MDXC1 was notably less motile than J82, at rest or with Gas6 stimulation ( ).
 Although persistent AXL/GAS6 co-overexpression and acquired MERTK and KDR overexpression did not accelerate tumor xenograft growth rate, other concurrent phenotypic changes might nonetheless bear on disease progression. Seeking an overview of such changes, we used the Nanostring PanCancer Progression panel to analyze mRNA expression in J82 and MDXC1. Of the 770 genes in this panel (identified in S4A Table in ), 321 were expressed at significantly different levels in MDXC1 relative to J82 (Qlucore 2-group comparison p = 0.021, q = 0.05; ; S4B Table in ). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis [ ] of the 321 genes revealed that the top significantly matched Diseases and Bio-functions included several categories of cell migration, cell death and cell proliferation. Consistent with experimental observations, the z-scores indicated inactivated migration and proliferation in MDXC1 relative to J82 and activated cell death in MDXC1 relative to J82 (S5A Table in ). Other notable findings in the IPA analysis were consistent with a transition from inflammatory AXL signaling to tolerogenic MERTK signaling, as described previously by Zagorska et al. [ ]. MDXC1 expression of several proinflammatory mediators (e.g., CXCL8, IL1A, IL1B, IL11, IL6, IL18, and PLAU, S4B Table in ) was significantly diminished while negative regulators of inflammation were significantly increased (e.g., SPARC, TGF-β1) relative to J82, and top IPA predicted Upstream Regulators that MDXC1 acquired were transforming growth factor beta-1, estradiol and dexamethasone (S5B Table in ), the latter a known inducer of MERTK expression [ ]. Top IPA predicted Canonical Pathways were also consistent with this phenotypic transition (S5C Table in ).

## Discussion
Among several important discoveries, the comprehensive molecular analyses of BCa patient tumor samples published to date divided profound tumor heterogeneity into distinct phenotypes [ – ]. Although these broad classes display only a few dominant oncogenic pathways recognized in other cancers, they facilitate a process of systematic refinement of molecular pathogenesis that, for BCa in particular, is challenged with proving the criticality of less frequent, more complex and potentially transient processes driving disease progression. Accordingly, our focus was averted from well-studied oncogenic protein TK alterations, such as those affecting fibroblast growth factor receptors [ , , , , ], and directed toward alterations that are as yet only circumstantially implicated in malignancy, with the goals of using TK inhibitors to their best therapeutic advantage and identifying new TK pathways for further study. We surveyed data obtained from 408 MIBC tumor samples previously classified into broad molecular phenotypes with distinct median overall survival periods (N, BS, L, LI and LP; [ ]) for potentially oncogenic TK alterations, such as amplification and overexpression that might underlie catalytic overactivity, and for coincident overexpression of receptor TKs and their cognate ligands. Prompted by the positive results of a clinical trial of cabozantinib in patients with advanced or metastatic BCa [ ], we further focused on RTKs targeted by this multikinase inhibitor for aberrant features and phenotypic distribution.
The expression profiles of 89 TKs analyzed across N, BS, L, LI and LP phenotypes fell into 3 broad groups: 2 with reciprocal patterns of overexpression among poorer surviving N and BS phenotypes and the best surviving LP phenotype (TK groups 1 and 2, respectively), and a group of 37 TKs with expression patterns that were independent of molecular phenotype (TK group 3). The significant differential distribution of group 1 and 2 TKs across phenotypes indicates that among the >3000 genes used to develop the phenotypes [ ], these 52 TKs were defining elements, which in turn implies possible functional contributions to clinical distinctions, including survival. Although the combined incidence of potentially oncogenic mRNA overexpression and/or gene amplification events in all 3 groups were similar, significant co-occurrence of these alterations was disproportionately higher in group 1, in both number of samples affected and fraction of TK pairings. OS and PFS for patients harboring these alterations in group 1 TKs were significantly worse than for those without alterations, consistent with the reported relatively poor survival of N and BS phenotypes [ ]. In contrast, patients with the same alterations in group 2 TKs had significantly better OS and DFS than the unaltered group, again consistent with more frequent occurrence in the better surviving L and LP phenotypes [ ]. Patients harboring overexpression and/or amplification of group 3 TKs also showed significantly diminished DFS relative to those without alteration. These findings reinforce the likelihood that among all TKs, overexpression and/or amplification of groups 1 and 3 TKs contribute disproportionately to BCa progression.
The most recent CabometyxTM (cabozantinib) prescribing information available from the US Food and Drug Administration [ ] identifies AXL, FLT1, FLT3, FLT4, KDR, KIT, MET, MERTK, NTRK2, RET, ROS1, TYRO3 and TEK as its targets. We found that cabozantinib inhibited these RTKs in vitro with IC50 values <50 nM, with the exception of KIT (IC50 143 nM), FLT1 (IC50 333 nM) and TEK (not included in our assays). Yakes et al. [ ] reported potent TEK inhibition in vitro (IC50 14 nM), but less potent MST1R inhibition than we observed (IC50 124 nM vs. 42 nM). Niehus et al. [ ] reported complete inhibition of CSF1R activation in intact cells, consistent with potent inhibition we observed in vitro (IC50 14 nM). In addition to these 16 targets, we observed potent inhibition of 3 other RTKs in vitro: DDR1, DDR2 and NTRK3, with IC50 values of 11, 0.5, 20 and 3 nM, respectively.
Combined, these 19 ctRTKs were overexpressed and/or amplified in most (69%) MIBC cases in the TCGA dataset analyzed by Robertson et al. [ ], with individual alteration frequencies from 4% to 20%. Co-occurring alterations were also frequent (150 events). Sixteen ctRTKs were in TK groups 1 and 3, whose combined alterations occurred disproportionately in patients with diminished survival relative to those without alteration; indeed, the patient cohort harboring alterations in 14 ctRTKs (all except DDR1, FLT1/4, KIT and MST1R; 46% of cases) had significantly worse OS and DFS than those without alterations. The combination of wide target spectrum and high frequency of target alteration implicated in worse outcome is consistent with the relatively high overall response rate (33%) observed in our clinical trial of cabozantinib in advanced BCa patents [ ]. However, wide target spectrum also poses serious challenges to developing diagnostic biomarker panels and learning the molecular pathogenesis underlying individual patient responses. Anticipating that BCa-derived cell lines would be invaluable in that process, a preliminary characterization of how their TK expression profiles resembled those of TCGA samples was performed to help optimize their use in assessing the criticality of specific TK profiles in oncogenically relevant bioactivities.
We determined mRNA copy number for 31 TKs in 15 BCa-derived cell lines; this TK set represented groups 1 and 2 as defined using TCGA samples and retained the same significant differential distribution across LP vs. (LI + L) vs. (BS + N) phenotypes. A simple method was used to classify these cell lines among these molecular phenotypes on the basis of TK expression profile alone. We noted that several features discussed below, such as concurrent overexpression of RTK/cognate ligand pairs, and/or EMT transcriptional activators, occurred more frequently in cell lines classified as N or BS, corresponding to patient groups with worse survival relative those of other phenotypes. The classifications helped in selecting cell lines for studies of autocrine signaling, but may have more general utility, e.g., in determining the effects of multikinase inhibitors when specific combinations of active target pathways are present. Classification may also help to integrate kinomic with other -omic analyses to better inform cell line selection for studies aimed at specific BCa patient cohorts. We note that our classification is in reasonable agreement with those of Earl et al. [ ], despite substantial differences between our methods.
Prevalent mechanisms of oncogenic TK activation (i.e., gene amplification, chromosomal rearrangements, gain of function mutations, and autocrine activation or aberrant ligand production in the tumor microenvironment) suppress immune surveillance and enhance tumor cell survival, proliferation, motility and invasion in a wide spectrum of cancers and thereby drive tumor progression, metastasis and drug resistance [ – ]. Among these mechanisms, autocrine activation and aberrant ligand production in the tumor microenvironment may appear as co-expression in RNA Seq analysis of tumor samples and occur with relatively low incidence. Both are, nonetheless, capable disease drivers and drug resistance pathways.
We found significant co-occurrence of mRNA overexpression (>2-fold RNASeq V2 z-scores) and/or gene amplification of AXL, CSF1R, DDR2, KDR, MST1R, PDGFRA and TEK and their cognate ligands among 65/408 cases (16%) in the BCa TCGA dataset [ ]. These findings indicate that oncogenic autocrine RTK signaling could have occurred and provide impetus to fully determine its extent and criticality in BCa. RTK/ligand co-expression was confirmed by immunoblot analysis of CSF1R/CSF1, AXL/GAS6, and MST1R/MST1 in 9 BCa cell lines, reinforcing the hypothesis that autocrine signaling occurs in BCa patients. Six co-altered RTK/ligand pathways found are targeted by cabozantinib, and cabozantinib suppressed proliferation, motility and anchorage independent growth below basal levels in BCa cell lines harboring these alterations. All but 2 RTK/ligand pairs (KDR/VEGFA and MST1R/MST1) affected group 1 TK pathways that were frequently altered in the lower survival of N and BS phenotypes. Each co-alteration was manifested in <3% of cases, so although median OS and DFS values of patients harboring these events were below those of unaltered cases, they were not so extreme as to meet a 5% significance threshold. The fact that log-rank p values approached that threshold when group 1 cases were combined supports the possibility that these events were clinically relevant. Median OS and DFS values of patients harboring the group 2 MST1R/MST1 co-alteration, in contrast, segregated with the more favorable survival of the L and LP phenotypes. Whether this co-alteration has lower oncogenic potential than group 1 RTK/ligand pairs, or other features in the L and LP phenotypes offset its impact, remains to be determined.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) often precedes, and in model systems has been shown to promote, tumor invasiveness and metastasis [ ]. Concurrent overexpression of TKs and a set of EMT TAs that they regulate was used as a proxy of oncogenic TK pathway activation in samples from the BCa TCGA dataset [ ]. We also measured TA mRNA copy number in the 15 BCa-derived cell lines used for RTK analysis. Heat map analysis of TCGA and cell line data revealed a clear pattern of higher expression for MYC, RUNX2, SNAI1, SNAI2, SOX2, SOX9, TWIST1, ZEB1 and ZEB2 which strongly resembled the pattern of group 1 TKs, consistent with oncogenic impact. Indeed, co-occurring alterations among group 1 TKs and EMT TAs were 3-fold more frequent than for group 2 TKs, and 24% of those were associated with significantly lower OS and/or PFS relative to unaltered cases. mRNA overexpression and/or gene amplification among these EMT TAs occurred in a combined 174 (43%) TCGA samples, 59 (34%) of which had significantly co-occurring EMT TA alterations. OS for patients with co-occurring EMT TA alterations was 27.43 mos. vs. 44.91 mos. for those without alterations (p = 0.0175). The possibility that co-occurring alterations of RTK/ligand pairs or TKs and EMT TAs detected in tumor/liquid biopsies, plasma DNA or exosomes from BCa patients might predict clinical outcome warrants further study.
Direct evidence of autocrine signaling by AXL, CSF1R and MST1R pathways was found in BCa-derived cell lines. Selective siRNAs directed against ligand or RTK suppressed receptor and canonical downstream mediator activation, as well as cell proliferation, migration and anchorage-independent growth, below basal levels. The results obtained using selective siRNAs support the concept that significantly reduced basal levels of the same biochemical proxies and biological activities by cabozantinib in these cell lines also occurred by blocking autocrine RTK signaling, and suggest that this mechanism of action underlies a portion of the efficacy we observed in BCa patients on a phase II cabozantinib clinical trial [ ], and may be an important disease driver in BCa. While this manuscript was in preparation, an independent report [ ] found evidence of GAS6 expression in BCa tissue samples associated with lower survival, and functional impact of GAS6 signaling in 5 BCa-derived cell lines; those findings reinforce the likelihood that autocrine AXL signaling contributes to BCa disease progression in a subset of patients.
Serial passage of the human BCa-derived cell line J82 as tumor xenografts in mice generated several J82-derived cell lines. One such line, MDXC1 grew comparably to J82 in 2D culture, but was less motile and displayed significant expression changes in cancer related genes. Notably, none of the J82 xenograft-derived cell lines analyzed had lost expression of either GAS6 or AXL, suggesting that retention of this activated pathway contributed to tumorigenicity. Six of 8 derived cell lines acquired significantly higher expression of MERTK and KDR, and MDXC1 cells showed evidence of robust MERTK activation. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis [ ] of 321 differentially expressed genes in the Nanostring PanCancer Progression 770 gene panel revealed that in MDXC1, genes comprising cell migration and cell proliferation bio-functions were predominantly inactivated, while those comprising cell death were activated. Accompanying this were significant changes in regulators of inflammation that were consistent with a shift from AXL to MERTK signaling, which have been distinguished in carefully controlled studies [ ] that refine our understanding of TAM receptor signaling in tumor immune surveillance [ , ]. Indeed, recent studies show that MERTK signaling contributes to an immunosuppressive environment by inducing an anti-inflammatory cytokine profile and regulating checkpoint inhibitor signaling in hematopoietic and solid tumors [ – ]. Our xenograft studies in immunocompromised SCID/Beige mice would be unlikely to display these changes as a pro-tumorigenic transition from J82 to MDXC1. In humans, however, such a transition might lead to more effective tumor evasion of immune recognition and disease progression, despite increased tumor cell death and neo-antigen abundance. We recently reported that in patients with advanced BCa, cabozantinib treatment modulated immune checkpoint regulators PD-1 and TIM-3, increased anti-tumor monocytes, and decreased pro-tumorigenic monocytes and myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC) populations; a greater-than-median decrease in the granulocytic MDSC population was significantly associated with a favorable outcome [ ]. While our focus here was on coincident overexpression or amplification of GAS6, AXL and MERTK as proxies of putative driver roles and relevant cabozantinib targets, our findings also suggest that a more comprehensive characterization of these pathways as drivers in tumor and immune compartments should inform efforts to optimally combine TKIs and checkpoint inhibitors for BCa treatment.

## Supporting information
S1 File(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

## Abbreviations
TKtyrosine kinase
RTKreceptor TK
ctRTKcabozantinib-targeted RTK
TKITK inhibitor
BCabladder cancer
MIBCmuscle-invasive bladder cancer
OSoverall survival
PFSprogression-free survival
TCGAThe Cancer Genome Atlas
EMTepithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
TAtranscriptional activator
 10.1371/journal.pone.0241766.r001Decision Letter 0
Garcia de FrutosPabloAcademic Editor© 2021 Pablo Garcia de Frutos2021Pablo Garcia de Frutoshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
1 Mar 2021

PONE-D-20-33596
Autocrine Signaling by Receptor Tyrosine Kinases in Urothelial Carcinoma of the Bladder
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bottaro,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Three experts in the field reviewed the present study. They consider positively its novelty and scientific interest. However, the authors should answer several criticisms pointed by the reviewers. Especially, authors should respond carefully about the technical aspects of the proposal. These include the lack of phosphorylation measurements and the possibility of gene amplifications as a causative mechanism. Other points refer to the clarity of the presentation, in particular regarding the way the figures are presented.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 05 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Pablo Garcia de Frutos
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Thank you for agreeing previously to compile the sequence table of primers and siRNAs during the period of finding reviewers and peer review. As your manuscript has now been reviewed, could you please provide this table as a supplementary file?
3.PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
4. Please amend your list of authors on the manuscript to ensure that each author is linked to an affiliation. Authors’ affiliations should reflect the institution where the work was done (if authors moved subsequently, you can also list the new affiliation stating “current affiliation:….” as necessary).
5.We note that you have a patent relating to material pertinent to this article. Please provide an amended statement of Competing Interests to declare this patent (with details including name and number), along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development or modified products etc. Please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
This information should be included in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
Please know it is PLOS ONE policy for corresponding authors to declare, on behalf of all authors, all potential competing interests for the purposes of transparency. PLOS defines a competing interest as anything that interferes with, or could reasonably be perceived as interfering with, the full and objective presentation, peer review, editorial decision-making, or publication of research or non-research articles submitted to one of the journals. Competing interests can be financial or non-financial, professional, or personal. Competing interests can arise in relationship to an organization or another person. Please follow this link to our website for more details on competing interests: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: I Don't Know
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In this work, Lee et al., explored the potential use of autocrine TK signaling as a suitable tool for managing advanced muscle invasive Bladder cancer. In particular, based on a previous trial using cabozantinib, they focused in potential Cabozantinib targets. Their analyses of TCGA database allow them to identify two groups of TK overexpressed (n= 31 and n=21) in opposite manner among the Basal/neuronal and luminal papillary tumors, whereas the remaining 37 TKs studied varied independently of molecular phenotype. They next explored mRNA expression of 31 TK gene in BCa cell lines and found that they can subclassify these cells into different molecular subtypes.All potential Cabozantinib targets displayed potentially oncogenic alterations in a large proportion of TCGA cases, and they also co-express high levels of their cognate ligands. These findings were corroborated in cell lines, in some cases also by immunoblot, suggesting possible autocrine signaling. Autocrine and ligand-dependent signaling, as well as its inhibition by cabozantinib, were confirmed in J82 and FL3 cells. Since they observed coincident overexpression of TKs and EMT transcriptional activators in TCGA, they studied whether autocrine signaling may mediate cell migration and this could be blocked by cabozantinib. In line with this autocrine signaling, xenografts of J82 cells serially passaged in mice showed persistent AXL/GAS6 co-overexpression and acquired MERTK and KDR overexpression.
The study is interesting as it may open new possible ways of treating advanced BC. However, a number of potential clarifications should be added prior acceptance.
1) The data regarding the phase II of cabozantinib in mUC should be discussed in terms of effectivity (also the authors should correct the reference of this study).
2) Why the authors excluded mutations in their first analysis of the TK genes?
3) How the TK genes to be analyzed were selected in cell lines?
4) How their assignment of cell lines to different BCa subtypes and their RNA data are correlated with those previously reported by Earl et al., 2015 (PMID: 25997541), including gene amplifications?
5) It is not clear whether the differences in clinical outcome between altered and non-altered groups are obtained for each molecular subtype or globally. They should clarify this point, given the intrinsic differences in clinical outcome among groups
6) In addition to EMT drivers, they should analyze whether the altered groups also showed enrichment of EMT signatures using GSEA. In the same line, patients harboring overexpression also displayed increased tendency to develop distant metastasis, either at diagnose or in follow up?
7) Number of cell lines were they confirm autocrine signaling is too short to generalize autocrine signaling in BC cell lines.
8) The metastatic capacity of J82 cells is increased upon serially passages in mice? Can it be blocked by cabozantinib?
Reviewer #2: The work is well done but the data is not presented in a manner by which the reader can follow. For example, in Figure 2, authors need to mark on the figure what is the difference between A, B, C, D. Western blots need to be redone - for example, that in Figure 4B upper three panels. In addition, the figure needs a loading control that is the same throughout the blot. Immunoblots in Figure 5D are cut too close to the band, and need to show empty space both before and after. Figure 5 - effect of adding ligands to the receptor or receptor phosphorylation not shown. Effect of genes overexpressing the receptor not shown.
Reviewer #3: Summary of submission: This work utilizes bladder cancer (BCa) data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database to postulate the role of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) in BCa. Hypotheses are then tested using multiple human BCa cell lines. The results suggest that autocrine signaling by RTKs contributes to the malignant phenotypes of some of the BCa cell lines and that autocrine RTK signaling may be a good target for therapeutic intervention in BCa.
The scope of this work is wide ranging and includes both in silico and wet lab approaches. Overall, the work is well-designed and -performed. Two major and a few minor issues are noted that do not markedly reduce the enthusiasm for this work but that should be addressed prior to publication.
Major issues
1. The failure to directly measure RTK phosphorylation is noteworthy, particularly in those cases in which autocrine RTK signaling is inferred.
2. Similarly, the experiments do not appear to explicitly address the possibility that elevated RTK signaling could in some cases arise through RTK overexpression. This is of particular note given the attempt to identify the target(s) for carbozantinib.
Minor issues
1. It is unclear how the cell lines, RTKs, and ligands analyzed in Figure 4b were chosen, particularly given the apparent occasional incongruence between transcription data shown in Figure 4a and the protein expression data shown in Figure 4b.
2. Is there strong congruence between the cell line gene expression data reported in this work (Fig 3A and Fig 4A) and data available from the Broad CCLE? Similarly, if other biomarkers (from ref 21 cited in this work) characteristic of the N, BS, L, LI, and LP subtypes are applied to Broad CCLE data for the 15 BCa cell lines, are the subtype assignments the same as those reported in Table 1?
3. The authors’ attempts at brevity are greatly appreciated, particularly given the scope of this work. However, the paper appears to be a bit underwritten. Additional subheadings in the results section would improve readability. Likewise, additional transitioning between subsections and between and within paragraphs would improve clarity. For example, on page 14 (paragraph 1), the paper reads “cabozantinib inhibited 17 RTKs”. Yet, on page 14 (paragraph 2), the paper reads “All 19 ctRTKs displayed potentially oncogenic alterations”. It is not clear why 19 RTKs are being studied given that only 17 RTKs are inhibited by cabozantinib. Later, in paragraph 2 of page 14, the manuscript indicates that “patients harboring overexpression and/or amplification among 14 ctRTKs had significantly worse OS and DFS”. It is not apparent how these 14 RTKs were chosen.
4. Finally, the manuscript appears to occasionally use TK instead of RTK.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Jesus M Paramio
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0241766.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
20 May 2021

PONE-D-20-33596: "Autocrine Signaling by Receptor Tyrosine Kinases in Urothelial Carcinoma of the Bladder" by Young H. Lee et al. 
Response to Reviewers
Review Comments to the Author
Please note that all Reviewer comments are as received verbatim.
Reviewer #1:
In this work, Lee et al., explored the potential use of autocrine TK signaling as a suitable tool for managing advanced muscle invasive Bladder cancer. In particular, based on a previous trial using cabozantinib, they focused in potential Cabozantinib targets. Their analyses of TCGA database allow them to identify two groups of TK overexpressed (n= 31 and n=21) in opposite manner among the Basal/neuronal and luminal papillary tumors, whereas the remaining 37 TKs studied varied independently of molecular phenotype. They next explored mRNA expression of 31 TK gene in BCa cell lines and found that they can subclassify these cells into different molecular subtypes.All potential Cabozantinib targets displayed potentially oncogenic alterations in a large proportion of TCGA cases, and they also co-express high levels of their cognate ligands. These findings were corroborated in cell lines, in some cases also by immunoblot, suggesting possible autocrine signaling. Autocrine and ligand-dependent signaling, as well as its inhibition by cabozantinib, were confirmed in J82 and FL3 cells. Since they observed coincident overexpression of TKs and EMT transcriptional activators in TCGA, they studied whether autocrine signaling may mediate cell migration and this could be blocked by cabozantinib. In line with this autocrine signaling, xenografts of J82 cells serially passaged in mice showed persistent AXL/GAS6 co-overexpression and acquired MERTK and KDR overexpression.
The study is interesting as it may open new possible ways of treating advanced BC. However, a number of potential clarifications should be added prior acceptance.
Author Reply:
We thank Professor Paramio for his positive comments and careful review of our work.
1) The data regarding the phase II of cabozantinib in mUC should be discussed in terms of effectivity (also the authors should correct the reference of this study).
Author Reply:
We have revised the Introduction (pp. 4-5, lines 82-94) to more fully summarize the clinical trial results published in Lancet Oncology (our cited reference 23), their relationship to our prior study of BCa cell lines (our cited reference 24), and the rationale that these and other findings provided to identify the most likely oncogenic drivers among cabozantinib's TK targets. Our cited reference 23 also has been updated.
2) Why the authors excluded mutations in their first analysis of the TK genes?
Author Reply:
Although we are very interested in the impact of TK mutations in bladder cancer, several prior studies have described the most prevalent mutations and their predicted and/or observed oncogenic impact (our cited references 14-22). A comprehensive assessment of mutations across the entire TK family is also a big task for an individual lab (as opposed to a TCGA or similar large team collaboration), and because a substantial fraction of mutations would have unknown pathogenic impact and thus not bear comment, that portion of the work (often by a trainee) would be unpublishable. On the other hand, TK overexpression as a proxy for oncogenic impact in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder has not yet garnered as much attention from the research community. Because evidence of TK overexpression alone is not as strong as activating genomic alterations in guiding therapeutic strategy, we included additional proxies of pathway activation: coincident ligand overexpression (which might represent autocrine or local paracrine production, in view of how the TCGA samples were processed) and overexpression of EMT transcriptional activators that are known TK pathway effectors.
3) How the TK genes to be analyzed were selected in cell lines?
Author Reply:
We considered determining absolute mRNA copy number for all 52 group 1 and 2 TKs in the 15 BCa cell lines. There were challenges to this task, since we started with reliable primers for much smaller number of TKs. While expanding this primer set, we encountered TKs for which there were no published primers and/or readily available cell lines to serve as positive controls for primer testing. So, we assembled primer sets for group 1 and group 2 TKs in a 3:2 ratio (like the group of 52) to reach a subset that achieved the same correlation with TCGA patient molecular phenotype as the parent 52 TK set (p = 1.00 x10-4, q = 8.97 x 10-5, F2,405 > 9.42, R2 > 0.044 for the 3-group comparison F test: LP vs. (LI + L) vs. (BS +N)). This goal was met with 19 group 1 TKs and 12 group 2 TKs, or ~60% of the parent set. We have added text to the Results for clarification (p. 14, lines 369-374). While this strategy limited the cell line data modestly, it was a reasonable and practical way to provide relevant TK coverage and enable TK-based molecular phenotyping of most of the cell lines into the classes described by Robertson et al. (cited reference 22).
4) How their assignment of cell lines to different BCa subtypes and their RNA data are correlated with those previously reported by Earl et al., 2015 (PMID: 25997541), including gene amplifications?
Author Reply:
This is an interesting question and we thank the reviewer for calling the work of Earl et al. to our attention. The short answer is that there is reasonable agreement between our findings, despite the very different methods that were used.
To recap our method: each cell line TK PCR expression profile (n = 15, 31 TKs) was correlated with each TCGA sample TK RNASeq profile (n = 408, 31 TKs), the correlation coefficients were determined and averaged within each molecular phenotype defined by Robertson et al. (22), and cell lines were assigned to a phenotype by best average coefficient that was distinguished from coefficients for other phenotypes by t-test.
Earl et al. (2015) used two classification schemes, although both schemes matched cell line profiles to a molecular classifier signature set. From Earl et al. (verbatim): 
(1) “We applied the UBC molecular classifier based on gene expression defined by Sjodahl et al. [12] to identify lines most representative of the taxonomical groups proposed. Figure 6A shows that cell lines could be adscribed to the “Urobasal A”, “Urobasal B”, and “SCC-like” classifiers (Additional file 1: Table S12). The “Genomically Unstable” group was most commonly represented among the lines.”
(2) “Rebouissou et al. have recently reported on a 40-gene basal-like signature [25]. We have applied their 40-gene classifier to the cell line dataset and identify 4 major groups: lines with a predominant enrichment in the “Basal-like” signature; lines with a predominant enrichment in the “Non basal-like” signature; lines with enrichment of both signatures; and lines in which none of the signatures is enriched (Figure 6B and Additional file 1: Table S13).” 
The most important difference between our respective methods was that we used only TK expression data for developing correlation coefficients, whereas the signature sets used by Earl et al. were developed without restricting genes to any particular functional class.
Eleven of the 15 cell lines that we used were also studied by Earl et al. We adapt below Table S13 from Earl et al. (left side) to compare the classifications of these 11 cell lines (right side):
[PLEASE SEE THE ATTACHED FILE "Response to Reviewers.pdf" to view the table below in proper format]
Table S13. Pearson's correlations according to the 40-gene signature from Rebouissou et al. (Earl et al.) Comparison with Lee et al. (submitted)
Cell line Non basal-like MIBC Basal-like MIBC Lee et al. classification Passed t-test? Agreement w/ Earl?
5637 0.245 0.639 Basal squamous Yes Yes
HT1197 0.436 0.530 Basal squamous Yes Yes
HT1376 0.319 0.458 Luminal papillary Yes* No
J82 0.288 0.224 Basal squamous Yes No
RT112 0.502 0.614 Neuronal No Maybe*
RT4 0.695 0.373 Luminal papillary Yes Yes
SW-780 0.627 0.491 Luminal papillary Yes* Yes
T24 0.105 0.241 Basal squamous Yes Yes
TCCSUP 0.163 0.098 Basal squamous No No
UM-UC-3 0.173 0.152 Basal squamous Yes No
UM-UC-5 0.561 0.627 Luminal papillary Yes* No
Yes* = passed all t-tests except Luminal, the most closely related class.
Maybe* = Earl et al. had no neuronal classification, but RT112 had mixed but more basal phenotype by the Rebouissou et al. criteria.
Comparisons like this are interesting, but they have many caveats. For this reason we have chosen to only briefly mention the partial agreement of our findings and those of Earl et al. (Discussion, p. 30, lines 808-809) and we have added the Earl et al. citation to our cited references (#45, p. 38, lines 1028-1031).
5) It is not clear whether the differences in clinical outcome between altered and non-altered groups are obtained for each molecular subtype or globally. They should clarify this point, given the intrinsic differences in clinical outcome among groups
Author Reply:
Thank you for raising this point. We did not limit the Kaplan-Meier analyses to specific molecular phenotypes; in each case a global comparison was made among altered and unaltered gene groups. We have revised the Material and Methods text for clarification (p. 7, lines 157-160).
6) In addition to EMT drivers, they should analyze whether the altered groups also showed enrichment of EMT signatures using GSEA. In the same line, patients harboring overexpression also displayed increased tendency to develop distant metastasis, either at diagnose or in follow up?
Author Reply:
While we agree it would be interesting to determine whether any of the groups with lower survival also display enrichment of EMT signatures by GSEA compared to the unaltered groups, we feel that the amount of work involved is beyond the scope of this manuscript. We hope that an inspired reader of our work might consider the question and use the PLOS ONE online forum to post any findings of interest. 
We believe that correlating overexpression with metastasis will be of limited value, since the greatest single factor determining overall survival is metastatic disease. This implies that any cohort that shows reduced overall survival, regardless of the feature(s) used to define that group, is very likely to also show a shorter average time to metastasis.
7) Number of cell lines were they confirm autocrine signaling is too short to generalize autocrine signaling in BC cell lines.
Author Reply:
We did not intend to imply that autocrine signaling is a dominant feature among BCa cell lines in general. We show immunoblot evidence of co-expression of cognate ligand and receptor protein pairs in 9 BCa cell lines (some of which show ligand/receptor pairs for more than one RTK pathway) and functional evidence of autocrine signaling in J82 and FL3. In our summary of these findings at the end of the Introduction (p. 5, lines 107-110) we originally stated: “These findings reveal the prevalence and patterns of autocrine RTK signaling in BCa…” where we used the word “prevalence” to mean “frequency”; to avoid confusion we have substituted the word “frequency” in the revised text. In the Discussion (p. 32, lines 853-854) we originally stated: “Direct evidence of autocrine signaling by AXL, CSF1R and MST1R pathways was found in several BCa-derived cell lines.”; we have deleted the word “several” from this sentence in the revised manuscript to avoid any overstatement.
8) The metastatic capacity of J82 cells is increased upon serially passages in mice? Can it be blocked by cabozantinib?
Author Reply:
We did not observe that the metastatic capacity of J82 increased upon serial passages in mice and we do not know whether cabozantinib can block J82 metastasis in mice.
Reviewer #2:
The work is well done but the data is not presented in a manner by which the reader can follow. For example, in Figure 2, authors need to mark on the figure what is the difference between A, B, C, D. Western blots need to be redone - for example, that in Figure 4B upper three panels. In addition, the figure needs a loading control that is the same throughout the blot. Immunoblots in Figure 5D are cut too close to the band, and need to show empty space both before and after. Figure 5 - effect of adding ligands to the receptor or receptor phosphorylation not shown. Effect of genes overexpressing the receptor not shown.
Author Reply:
We thank the reviewer for their positive comments and careful review of our work.
We have revised Figure 2 to identify the groups being compared in each panel's symbol key. The comparisons in each panel are also defined in the figure's legend. 
We have replaced the CSF1R immunoblot image for RT4, RT112, J82, UMUC5 and UMUC3 cell lines Figure 4B. We have also added to this panel immunoblot detection results for DDR1, DDR2 and PTK7 proteins across the 9 BCa cell lines, as these are understudied and potentially oncogenic RTKs in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. The Results text (p. 17, lines 465-473) and Figure 4 legend (p. 18, lines 487-489) have been revised accordingly. The loading control for Figure 4B was omitted in error and this has been corrected in the revised figure (panel B, bottom) and legend.
We wish to emphasize that we did not use immunoblotting here to quantitate protein content, but to simply detect the presence or absence of a protein product under the conditions specified. As shown in Figure 5, we use 2-site electrochemiluminescent immunoassays to quantitatively compare protein-to-phosphoprotein ratios under varying conditions. For example, we show that adding Gas6 to serum-deprived J82 cells significantly increased AXL phosphotyrosyl content (Fig 5A, compare bars for Gas6 "-" and "+" at left). This increase in receptor phosphorylation is reversed by cabozantinib treatment (Fig 5A, 3rd and 4th bars from the left). The remaining panels in Figure 5 show that addition of Gas6, MST1 or CSF1 stimulated significant increases in the phosphorylation of critical downstream effectors Akt and Erk.
Regarding the cropping of bands in Figure 5D, we believe that no information has been obscured by our figure production, and we provide public access to all full-size, uncropped images that are used for figures as required per PLOS ONE policy.
Reviewer #3:
Summary of submission: This work utilizes bladder cancer (BCa) data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database to postulate the role of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) in BCa. Hypotheses are then tested using multiple human BCa cell lines. The results suggest that autocrine signaling by RTKs contributes to the malignant phenotypes of some of the BCa cell lines and that autocrine RTK signaling may be a good target for therapeutic intervention in BCa.
The scope of this work is wide ranging and includes both in silico and wet lab approaches. Overall, the work is well-designed and -performed. Two major and a few minor issues are noted that do not markedly reduce the enthusiasm for this work but that should be addressed prior to publication.
Author Reply:
We thank the reviewer for their positive comments and thorough review of our work.
Major issues
1. The failure to directly measure RTK phosphorylation is noteworthy, particularly in those cases in which autocrine RTK signaling is inferred.
Author Reply:
Please note that direct quantitative measurement of Axl tyrosyl phosphorylation is shown in Fig. 5A and MERTK tyrosyl phosphorylation is shown more qualitatively by immunoblot in Fig. 8C. Any perceived lack of evidence of RTK activation is not due to lack of expertise or diligence (the Bottaro lab has published extensively on TK phosphorylation), but rather by choice. We believe that today, RTK activation through tyrosyl phosphorylation is well-enough established to be assumed from evidence of ligand-stimulated biological effects (by ligand addition or specific pathway inhibition as shown in Figs. 5 – 8). Had we failed to find ligand-driven effects in experimental settings where they were expected, we certainly would have measured RTK activation as part of normal troubleshooting. Otherwise, we believe our effort is better used measuring pathway effects that are not yet established. 
2. Similarly, the experiments do not appear to explicitly address the possibility that elevated RTK signaling could in some cases arise through RTK overexpression. This is of particular note given the attempt to identify the target(s) for carbozantinib.
Author Reply:
We do appreciate the importance of ligand-independent activation of overexpressed but otherwise unaltered RTKs. We characterize overexpression as a “potentially oncogenic alteration” throughout the manuscript. However, experimental proof of that event is not easy to obtain in cultured cells and much more difficult to prove in tissue samples or animal models. Consistent with our long-term goals, we focused effort on experiments that would convey reasonable evidence of pathway activation and were most likely to enable the development of reliable assays (direct or proxy) for tissue samples.
Minor issues
1. It is unclear how the cell lines, RTKs, and ligands analyzed in Figure 4b were chosen, particularly given the apparent occasional incongruence between transcription data shown in Figure 4a and the protein expression data shown in Figure 4b.
Author Reply:
The nine BCa cell lines analyzed in Figure 4B are a subset of the 15 cell lines analyzed in Figure 4A; the number was reduced from 15 to 9 for practicality, but the subset includes each of the molecular phenotype classifications shown in Table 1. The subset is weighted toward the more aggressive phenotypes (basal squamous and neuronal) out of an interest in the potential coincidence of multiple ligand/RTK pair co-occurrences that were suggested by our analysis of the TCGA dataset [22] (Table 2A and Table S2A). Table S3A shows significant co-occurrence of group 1 TKs (i.e. TKs whose overexpression was associated with lower survival among the TCGA patients [22]), so the potential for multiple group 1 ligand/RTK pair co-occurrences in BCa cell lines was plausible.
Regarding the pathways chosen, as shown in Table 2A, the Gas6/AXL, CSF1/CSF1R and MST1/MST1R pathways have the highest Odds Ratio (Log2) values for co-occurrence, so these were prioritized in the immunoblot analysis in Figure 4B.
We regret that journal word limits that we encounter frequently (though not for PLOS ONE) have had a lasting negative impact on our tendency to provide detail. We have revised the Results text (p. 17, lines 465-469) to include our rationale for these choices.
2. Is there strong congruence between the cell line gene expression data reported in this work (Fig 3A and Fig 4A) and data available from the Broad CCLE? Similarly, if other biomarkers (from ref 21 cited in this work) characteristic of the N, BS, L, LI, and LP subtypes are applied to Broad CCLE data for the 15 BCa cell lines, are the subtype assignments the same as those reported in Table 1?
Author Reply:
We thank the reviewer for raising this interesting question. To address it, we downloaded the file “CCLE_expression.csv” from the DepMap portal (Source: Broad Institute; https://depmap.org/portal/download/). Per the DepMap web page, the file contains “RNAseq TPM gene expression data for just protein coding genes using RSEM. Data is Log2 transformed, using a pseudo-count of 1. Rows correspond to cell lines (Broad IDs) and columns correspond to genes (HGNC symbol and Entrez ID)”. Of the 15 BCa-derived cell lines used in our study, SLT3, FL3, T24T and T24M2 were absent from the CCLE dataset. Of the TKs analyzed in Fig. 3A, the CCLE dataset omits DDR1 and LYN. Using all other TKs in Fig. 3A, we composed the scatter plot shown below, with mRNA expression as determined by RT-PCR (Y.H. Lee et al., x-axis) vs. mRNA expression as determined by RNAseq (CCLE, y-axis). Displaying both axes using log2 scaling allows resolution of all data points. The data are reasonably concordant, considering the differences in method, date of analysis and established variability among the same cell lines cultured in different laboratories at different times:
[PLEASE SEE THE ATTACHED FILE "Response to Reviewers.pdf" to view the figure placed here]
Regarding whether the biomarkers used by Robertson et al. (our cited reference 22) characteristic of the N, BS, L, LI, and LP subtypes, if applied to Broad CCLE data for the 15 BCa cell lines, would result in the same subtype assignments as those reported in Table 1: while this is also an interesting question, it would take considerable time to address. Robertson used >3000 genes to generate their phenotypic groupings. Considering the work involved, we would be compelled to include all BCa cell lines for which data was available, an effort that we feel is beyond the scope of the current manuscript. Even if we were to consider it for an addendum, we would caution readers that real biological differences between cultured cell lines and tumor tissue samples affect the reliability and potential utility of this type of characterization, regardless of how definitive the approach might be.
We asked whether a limited set of differentially expressed TKs could be used to classify BCa cell lines into established molecular phenotypes and the results show that this can be done. The utility of this classification may be limited to TK-related studies, but in view of the importance of TKs as oncology targets and TK inhibitors as a drug class, it is still appreciable.
3. The authors’ attempts at brevity are greatly appreciated, particularly given the scope of this work. However, the paper appears to be a bit underwritten. Additional subheadings in the results section would improve readability. Likewise, additional transitioning between subsections and between and within paragraphs would improve clarity. For example, on page 14 (paragraph 1), the paper reads “cabozantinib inhibited 17 RTKs”. Yet, on page 14 (paragraph 2), the paper reads “All 19 ctRTKs displayed potentially oncogenic alterations”. It is not clear why 19 RTKs are being studied given that only 17 RTKs are inhibited by cabozantinib. Later, in paragraph 2 of page 14, the manuscript indicates that “patients harboring overexpression and/or amplification among 14 ctRTKs had significantly worse OS and DFS”. It is not apparent how these 14 RTKs were chosen.
Author Reply:
We appreciate the possible confusion here and we apologize for being overly brief. We have added text to the manuscript to provide greater detail regarding our goals and rationale and/or better clarify our findings (Introduction, pp. 4-5, lines 82-94; Materials and Methods, p. 6, lines 141-144; Results, p. 14, lines 370-374 and p. 17, lines 465-469).
Regarding the number of cabozantinib targets: 16 targets were known prior to our work and we identified DDR1, DDR2 and NTRK3 that had not been reported previously, bringing the total to 19. We have revised the Results text to clarify this point (pp. 15-16, lines 422-429).
The 14 RTK cabozantinib targets (ctRTKs) associated with significantly worse OS and DFS are group 1 and group 3 TKs only. Group 2 TKs are associated with improved survival relative to the other groups (Fig. 2B and Table S2C) and three group 2 TKs are also cabozantinib targets (DDR1, MERTK and MST1R), so the combined groups 1-3 ctRTK set is not associated with significantly worse outcome. We have revised the Results text to clarify this point (p. 16, lines 444-448 ).
4. Finally, the manuscript appears to occasionally use TK instead of RTK.
Author Reply:
This is intentional: RTKs are a subset of TKs, so only in TK sets that are exclusively RTK do we use that abbreviation. Since abbreviations used in the paper are listed separately in a footnote, we did not elaborate further on this in the text.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0241766.r003Decision Letter 1
Garcia de FrutosPabloAcademic Editor© 2021 Pablo Garcia de Frutos2021Pablo Garcia de Frutoshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
10 Jun 2021

Autocrine Signaling by Receptor Tyrosine Kinases in Urothelial Carcinoma of the Bladder
PONE-D-20-33596R1
Dear Dr. Bottaro,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Pablo Garcia de Frutos
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: The attached file reiterates the answers to the questions above. The attached file also contains detailed comments for the authors.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Jesus M Paramio
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0241766.r004Acceptance letter
Garcia de FrutosPabloAcademic Editor© 2021 Pablo Garcia de Frutos2021Pablo Garcia de Frutoshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
12 Jul 2021

PONE-D-20-33596R1 
Autocrine signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases
 in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder 
Dear Dr. Bottaro:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Pablo Garcia de Frutos 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE