pmceLifeElife1894elife101579614eLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC8639150PMC8639150.1863915086391503471380510.7554/eLife.69832698321Research ArticleCell BiologyGenetic, cellular, and structural characterization of the membrane potential-dependent cell-penetrating peptide translocation pore
TrofimenkoEvgeniyahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-4910-5324 ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Even though they differ in their origin ( ; ; ; ) and physico-chemical properties, the majority of CPPs carry positive charges in their sequence ( ; ; ; ). Polyarginine (e.g. R9), HIV-1 TAT47-57, and Penetratin (Antennapedia43-58) are among the most used and studied CPPs.
The mode of CPP cellular entry is still debated and no proteins have been identified that regulate this process. CPP entry starts after the initial electrostatic interactions between the positively charged CPP and the negatively charged components of the cell membrane ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Interaction with acid sphingomyelinase ( ) and glycosaminoglycans ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), local membrane deformation ( ), as well as calcium fluxes ( ) have been suggested to play a role in CPP internalization. CPPs enter cells through a combination of two non-mutually exclusive mechanisms ( ; ): endocytosis and direct translocation ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). The nature of these entry mechanisms is debated and not fully understood at the molecular level. The vesicular internalization of CPPs has been suggested to occur through clathrin-dependent endocytosis, macropinocytosis, and caveolin-1-mediated endocytosis ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). However, recent data indicate that CPP endocytosis proceeds via a newly discovered pathway that is Rab14-dependent but Rab5- and Rab7-independent ( ). When CPPs are endocytosed, access to the cytosol requires that the CPPs break out of endosomes through a poorly understood process called endosomal escape.
Direct translocation allows the CPPs to access the cytosol through their ability to cross the plasma membrane. There is currently no unifying model to explain mechanistically how direct translocation proceeds and no genes have yet been identified to modulate the manner by which CPPs cross cellular membranes. Direct translocation across the plasma membrane often seemed to originate from specific areas of the cells, suggesting discrete structures on the plasma membrane involved in CPP entry ( ; ; ; ; ). There is a general consensus though that an adequate plasma membrane potential (Vm) is required for direct translocation to occur based on live cell experiments ( ; ; ), as well as in silico studies ( ; ; ; ). Electrophysiological and pharmacological Vm modulations have revealed that depolarization blocks CPP internalization ( ; ) and hyperpolarization improves the internalization of cationic CPPs ( ; ; ; ; ). By itself, a sufficiently low Vm (i.e. hyperpolarization) appears to trigger CPP direct translocation in live cells ( ; ; ). In silico modeling has provided evidence that membrane hyperpolarization leads to the formation of transient water pores, allowing CPP translocation into cells ( ; ; ; ; ), but the free energy landscape governing CPP translocation has not been determined. Moreover, the nature and the structural characteristics of the pores used by CPPs to cross the plasma membrane have not been investigated in live cells.
Here, we provide the first genetic evidence that validates the importance of Vm for CPP direct translocation and we characterize the diameter of the water pores used by CPPs to enter live cells. We also determined the role of the Vm in modulating the free energy barrier associated with membrane translocation and the impact of the Vm on CPP translocation kinetics.

## Results

## Modes of TAT-RasGAP317-326 cellular entry
In the present work, we have used TAT-RasGAP317-326 as a model compound to investigate the molecular basis of CPP cellular internalization. This peptide is made up of the TAT48-57 CPP and a 10 amino acid sequence derived from the SH3 domain of p120 RasGAP ( ). TAT-RasGAP317-326 sensitizes cancer cells to chemo-, radio-, and photodynamic therapies ( ; ; ; ) and prevents cell migration and invasion ( ). This peptide also exhibits antimicrobial activity ( ; ; ). Some cancer cell lines, such as Raji (Burkitt’s lymphoma), SKW6.4 (transformed B-lymphocytes), and HeLa (cervix carcinoma), are directly killed by this peptide ( ). The manner by which TAT-RasGAP317-326 kills cells has recently been uncovered ( ). The peptide first accesses the cell’s cytosol by direct translocation through the plasma membrane. It then binds to specific phospholipids, such as phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylinositol-bisphosphate that are enriched in the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane. This binding allows the peptide to disrupt the cell’s membrane causing its death by necrosis.
Most CPPs can enter cells by direct translocation and by endocytosis ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). This is also the case for TAT-RasGAP317-326 ( and – ). Two types of staining were observed in cells incubated with this peptide: (i) vesicular only and (ii) vesicular and cytosolic ( and ). When the peptide cytosolic signal was strong, it masked the vesicular staining ( ). In our experimental settings, the cytosolic acquisition of TAT-RasGAP317-326 occurred only through direct translocation and not through endosomal escape ( , ) and was not due to phototoxicity ( ) as can occur in some settings ( ; ; ; ).
 
 
 
 
 

## Identification of potassium channels as mediators of TAT cargo direct translocation into cells
As TAT-RasGAP317-326 needs to translocate through the plasma membrane to reach the cytosol, a prerequisite for the peptide to kill cells ( ), we used the killing ability of the peptide in a CRISPR/Cas9 screen to identify genes involved in CPP direct translocation in two different cell lines (Raji and SKW6.4 cells) ( ). The top candidate genes identified through this approach were specific potassium channels or genes coding for proteins known to regulate such channels indirectly (e.g. PIP5K1A; ; and ). KCNQ5, identified in Raji cells, is a voltage-dependent potassium channel. KCNN4 and KCNK5, identified in SKW6.4 cells, are calcium-activated channels and belong to the two-pore (voltage-independent) potassium channel family ( ), respectively.
 
 
 
 
These potassium channels were pharmacologically or genetically inactivated ( and ) to validate their involvement in the direct translocation of TAT-RasGAP317-326 through the plasma membrane and the resulting death induction. The KCNQ family inhibitor, XE-991 ( ), as well as KCNQ5 genetic invalidation ( ), fully blocked peptide internalization in Raji cells and protected them from the killing activity of the peptide ( and ). SKW6.4 cells individually lacking KCNN4 or KCNK5 ( ), or SKW6.4 cells treated with TRAM-34, a KCNN4 inhibitor ( ; ), were impaired in their ability to take up the peptide and were partially protected against its cytotoxic activity ( and ). Inhibition of KCNN4 activity with TRAM-34 in KCNK5 knock-out cells did not further protect the cells against TAT-RasGAP317-326-induced death. In HeLa cells, TRAM-34, but not XE-991, inhibited TAT-RasGAP317-326 internalization and subsequent death ( ). Thus, in HeLa cells, KCNN4 channels regulate the membrane translocation of the peptide. This was confirmed by knocking out KCNN4 in these cells ( and ). Resistance to TAT-RasGAP317-326-induced death in KCNQ5 knock-out Raji cells and KCNN4 knock-out SKW6.4 or HeLa cells was restored through ectopic expression of the corresponding FLAG- or V5-tagged channels ( ), ruling out off-target effects.
We next determined whether vesicular internalization or direct translocation were affected in cells with impaired potassium channel activities. Compared to their respective wild-type controls, the percentage of cells with diffuse cytosolic location of FITC-TAT-RasGAP317-326 was drastically diminished in cells lacking one of the CRISPR/Cas9 screen-identified potassium channels in the respective cell lines ( and ). This was mirrored by an increase in the percentage of knock-out cells with vesicular staining. The invalidation of potassium channels did not affect transferrin or dextran internalization into cells ( ) or the infectivity of vesicular stomatitis virus ( ), substantiating the non-involvement of these channels in endocytic pathways.
One possibility to explain the above-mentioned results is that the absence of potassium channels reduces peptide binding to cells, thereby hampering subsequent peptide cellular uptake. At a 20 μM concentration, TAT-RasGAP317-326 is readily taken up by wild-type Raji cells but not by KCNQ5 knock-out cells. At this concentration, peptide binding was slightly lower in knock-out than in wild-type cells ( , upper graph). However, augmenting the peptide concentrations in the extracellular medium of KCNQ5 knock-out cells to reach surface binding signals equivalent or higher than what was obtained in wild-type cells still did not result in peptide cellular internalization unless ≥80 μM of the peptides were used and even in this case, the uptake remained inefficient ( ). Difference in peptide binding is therefore not the cause of the inability of potassium channel knock-out cells to take up TAT-RasGAP317-326.
We then assessed whether the role of potassium channels in cellular internalization also applied to TAT cargos other than RasGAP317-326. TAT-PNA is an oligonucleotide covalently bound to TAT, which can correct a splicing mutation within the luciferase-coding sequence ( ; ). This can only occur if TAT-PNA reaches the cytosol. The luciferase activity triggered by TAT-PNA was diminished in the presence of potassium channel inhibitors and in potassium channel knock-out cell lines ( ). Cytosolic access of TAT-Cre, which can recombine a loxP-RFP-STOP-loxP-GFP ( ; ) gene construct, was then assessed. Switch from red to green fluorescence occurs only when TAT-Cre reaches the nucleus. This took place in wild-type Raji cells but not in the KCNQ5 knock-out cells ( ). We finally tested a clinical phase III therapeutic D-JNKI1 compound ( ; ) used in the context of hearing loss and intraocular inflammation. The internalization of this peptide was completely blocked in Raji cells lacking KCNQ5 ( , left). D-JNKI1 internalization was also diminished in SKW6.4 cells lacking KCNN4 and KCNK5 channels, as well as in HeLa cells lacking the KCNN4 potassium channel ( , middle and right panels). These data demonstrate that the absence of specific potassium channels diminishes or even blocks the entry of various TAT-bound cargos.

## Potassium channels maintain plasma membrane polarization that is required for cationic CPP entry into cells
Potassium is the main ion involved in setting the plasma membrane potential (Vm). The potassium channels identified in the CRISPR/Cas9 screen may therefore participate in the establishment of an adequate Vm permissive for CPP direct translocation ( ; ; ; ; ; ). (left graph) shows that genetic disruption or pharmacological inhibition of KCNQ5 in Raji cells led to an increase in their Vm (from –26 to –15 mV, validated with electrophysiological recordings; see ). Surprisingly, such minimal increase in Vm in the KCNQ5 knock-out Raji cells practically abolished CPP internalization ( , left graph), indicating that above a certain threshold, the Vm is no longer permissive for CPP direct translocation. In SKW6.4 and HeLa cells, Vm measurement was much more variable than in Raji cells. Nevertheless, a trend of increased Vm was observed when KCNN4 or KCNK5 were invalidated genetically or pharmacologically ( , middle and right graphs) and this was accompanied by reduced peptide uptake ( , middle and right graphs). As the CRISPR/Cas9 screens performed in various cell lines identified a variety of potassium channels required for efficient CPP internalization, we conclude that it is the Vm maintenance activity of these channels that is important for CPP direct translocation and not some specific features of the channels.
 
 
 
 
 
If the reason why invalidation of the KCNQ5, KCNN4, and KCNK5 potassium channels inhibits TAT-RasGAP317-326 cellular entry is cell depolarization, a similar response should be obtained by artificially depolarizing cells. Indeed, depolarizing cells with gramicidin ( ) (making non-specific 0.4 nm pores [ ] in cell membranes) or by increasing the extracellular concentration of potassium (dissipating the potassium gradient) totally blocked cytosolic peptide acquisition into the three studied cell lines ( ) but not peptide endocytosis ( ). Hence, cellular depolarization in itself inhibits TAT-RasGAP317-326 direct translocation into the cytosol.
Next, we determined whether hyperpolarization could reverse the inability of potassium channel knock-out cells to take up TAT-RasGAP317-326. Cells were either incubated in the presence of valinomycin ( ), which leads to formation of potassium-like channels, or transfected with KCNJ2 channel that also provokes potassium efflux and membrane hyperpolarization ( ). shows that hyperpolarization of cells lacking CRISPR/Cas9-identified potassium channels fully restored peptide translocation. Moreover, hyperpolarization increased peptide cytosolic acquisition in wild-type cells ( ). Similar effect, albeit to a lesser extent, was observed by ectopically expressing KCNQ5 in wild-type and KCNN4 knock-out SKW6.4 and HeLa cells as well as by ectopically expressing KCNN4 in wild-type and KCNQ5 knock-out Raji cells ( ). Additionally, cells such as primary rat cortical neurons that naturally have a low Vm (–48 mV) take up the CPP in their cytosol more efficiently than cells with higher Vm such as HeLa cells (–25 mV) ( ). Altogether, these results demonstrate that the Vm modulates internalization of TAT-RasGAP317-326 in various cell lines. This internalization can be manipulated through cellular depolarization to block it and through hyperpolarization to increase it, confirming earlier results obtained for the R8 CPP in Jurkat cells ( ).
We then assessed whether the entry of TAT, nanomeric arginine (R9), and Penetratin ( ), three commonly used cationic CPPs in biology and medicine, was regulated by the plasma membrane potential as shown above for TAT-RasGAP317-326. Similarly to TAT-RasGAP317-326, these CPPs are taken up by HeLa cells by both direct translocation and endocytosis ( ). Depolarization, induced by either gramicidin or high extracellular potassium concentrations ( ), led to decreased cytosolic fluorescence of these CPPs, while valinomycin-mediated hyperpolarization favored their translocation in the cytosol ( , upper graphs, , and ). Although the cellular membrane composition of neurons may differ from the other cell lines used in this study, the Vm also controlled peptide translocation in non-transformed rat primary cortical neurons ( ). In contrast, depolarization had no impact on the ability of the cells to endocytose these CPPs ( , bottom graphs), further confirming that CPP endocytosis is not affected by Vm. Finally, we note that CPP membrane binding was only minimally affected by depolarization ( ). Hence, the reason why depolarized cells do no take up CPPs is not a consequence of reduced CPP binding to cells, confirming our earlier observation obtained with TAT-RasGAP317-326 ( ). Altogether the data presented in show that direct translocation of cationic CPPs is modulated by the Vm of cells and that specific potassium channels are involved in this modulation.

## CPP direct translocation modeling
To further study the mechanism of CPP cellular entry through direct translocation, we took advantage of coarse-grained molecular dynamics (MD) technique and MARTINI force field 2.2p ( ; ). In our simulations we have used TAT-RasGAP317-326, TAT, R9 and Penetratin in presence of a natural cell membrane-like composition (for both inner and outer leaflets) while earlier studies have employed simpler membrane composition ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Membrane hyperpolarization was achieved by setting an ion imbalance ( ; ; ; ) through a net charge difference of 30 positive ions (corresponding to a Vm of ~2 V) between the intracellular and extracellular spaces. The use of very high Vm values, typically used in computational studies, is required to capture nanosecond occurring events. This protocol ( ) allowed us to observe CPP translocation across membranes within a few tens of nanoseconds ( and ). In presence of ~2 V Vm, the CPPs approached the membrane on the extracellular side and this led to the formation of a water column within the membrane that the CPP then used to move to the intracellular space ( ). The movement of the positive charges carried by the CPPs, as well as extracellular cations, to the intracellular compartment via the water pore induced membrane depolarization. This depolarization provoked the collapse of the water pore and membrane resealing. Even though CPPs play an active role in their internalization, the mere presence of the CPP in the absence of a sufficiently low Vm was not enough to trigger water pore formation ( , right graph and ). These data confirm earlier work describing the role of the Vm in CPP penetration into or through bilipidic membranes ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). TAT, R9, and Penetratin all translocated into the intracellular compartment but with different propensities ( , left graph) and with different kinetics ( ) that appeared to be related to the positive charges they carry ( ): the more positively charged a CPP, the higher probability to translocate across cell membranes and the faster kinetics of water pore formation at a given Vm.
 
 We also applied a metadynamics protocol to estimate the impact of the Vm on the free energy landscape of R9 translocation. The free energy barriers recorded in depolarized membranes (Vm = 0) and polarized membranes (Vm = –80 mV) were similar ( ). The obtained value of about 200 kJ/mol is in line with recent estimation of the free energy barrier associated with CPP translocation at a Vm = 0 ( ). Only at much lower Vm values (–150 mV) was a marked decrease in free energy barrier recorded. This indicates that hyperpolarization values found in resting cells (down to about –80 mV in neurons and higher in many other cells types; ) are not more favorable than fully depolarized membranes to establish conditions for the formation of water pores. It appears therefore that cells need to decrease their Vm to much lower values (e.g. –150 mV or lower) to reach conditions compatible with water pore formation. This in silico observation may appear contradictory with our results obtained in live cells showing direct translocation at –25 mV ( ), as well as with the experiment demonstrating that CPP cytosolic internalization was more efficient in cortical neurons in comparison to less negatively charged HeLa cells ( ). We therefore postulate that the presence of CPPs on the cell surface induces locally a substantial voltage drop from the resting Vm. To test this assumption, we analyzed the electrostatic potential map in a molecular system composed of the R9 peptide in contact with the plasma membrane in the absence of an external electrostatic field ( ). This simulation indicated that the presence of CPPs at the cell surface is sufficient to decrease locally the transmembrane potential to about –150 mV ( ). This was not observed in the absence of the CPP. In conclusion, our data support a model where CPPs further decrease the Vm of resting cells to very low values (equal to or less than –150 mV) that are compatible with spontaneous water pore formation and that we coin megapolarization.
Our model also predicts that the electric force exerted on CPPs when cells are megapolarized permit CPPs to accumulate in the cytosol and reach concentrations that are higher than in the extracellular milieu. shows indeed that cells can concentrate TAT-RasGAP317-326 in the cytosol of Raji and HeLa cells, up to 100 times in extreme cases.

## Structural characterization of the pore allowing CPP entry in live cells
Propidium iodide (PI), with a diameter of 0.8–1.5 nm ( ) or fluorophore-labeled 3, 10, and 40 kDa dextrans, with diameters (provided by Thermo Fisher) of 2.3 ± 0.38 ( ), 4.5, and 8.6 nm, respectively ( ), were used to estimate the size of the water pores formed in the presence of CPPs in live cells. These molecules by themselves did not translocate in the cytosol of cells ( and ). They were then co-incubated with different FITC-labeled CPPs and their uptake monitored by confocal microscopy. While PI and CPPs efficiently co-entered cells ( and ), there was only marginal co-entry of the dextrans with the CPPs ( ). The marginal dextran co-entry was inversely correlated with the dextran diameters (inset in ): ~2.3-nm-wide dextrans entered cells better than ~4.5-nm-wide dextrans and ~8.6-nm-wide dextrans mostly remained outside cells. The entry of PI and CPPs in cells occurred with identical kinetics ( ), further supporting the notion that they enter cells together. The PI/CPP co-entry was prevented by cell depolarization ( ), which is expected if PI accesses the cytosol via the megapolarization-induced pores used by CPP to enter cells. CPPs do not need to be labeled with a fluorophore to allow PI co-entry into cells ( , ‘unlabeled TAT+ PI’ condition), ruling out phototoxicity as a confounding effect. Similar results were obtained in primary rat cortical neurons, where PI cytosolic signal was observed in cells that took up the selected CPPs through direct translocation ( ). These data are compatible with the notion that water pores triggered by CPPs allow molecules up to ~2 nm in diameter to efficiently enter cells. They are also in line with the in silico prediction of the water pore diameter of 1.6±0.26 nm obtained by analyzing the structure of the pore at the transition state (i.e. when the CPP is crossing the cell membrane; see ). Molecules in the 2–5 nm diameter range, such as 3 and 10 kDa dextrans, can still use this entry route to a limited extent. In this context, the Cre recombinase, with a diameter of 5 nm (estimated from its crystal structure; NDB:PD0003), can be transported by TAT into cells ( ), another indication that the pores used by cationic CPPs to enter cells can allow the passage of molecules up to 5 nm.
 
 
Despite identical net positive charges ( ), and as reported earlier ( ), the K9 peptide made of nine lysine residues was less capable of translocating into cells compared to R9 ( and , right graph). This may be due to the deprotonation of K9 once in the plasma membrane (see Discussion). However, in the few cases when cells have taken up K9, PI co-internalized as well (middle graph of ). This indicates that K9 has a reduced capacity compared to R9 to trigger water pore formation but when they do, PI can efficiently translocate through the pores created by K9.
Modeling experiments indicate that water pores are created in membranes subjected to sufficiently high (absolute values) Vm. We therefore tested whether the mere hyperpolarization of cells (i.e. in the absence of CPPs) could trigger the translocation of PI into cells, indicative of water pore formation. (left) shows that the hyperpolarizing drug valinomycin significantly increased PI cell permeability. In contrast, depolarization, mediated by gramicidin, reduced PI internalization ( , left). Cells incubated with CPPs took up PI in their cytosol to a much greater extent than when cells were treated with valinomycin ( , left), as expected if CPPs participate in setting plasma membrane megapolarization.
 shows the correlation between cytosolic PI accumulation over time and Vm. Based on this correlation, we estimated the Vm of cells incubated with a CPP to be in the order of –150 mV ( ). In accordance with the modeling experiments, these data further support the notion (i) that water pore formation in cells is favored by cell hyperpolarization and inhibited by depolarization and (ii) that CPPs themselves ( ; ) further contribute to the establishment of local megapolarization in the plasma membrane.

## Megapolarization improves CPP internalization in vivo
We investigated whether it was possible to experimentally manipulate the Vm to favor CPP internalization in in vivo situations. Systemic exposure of zebrafish embryos to valinomycin in Egg water led to cell hyperpolarization ( ) and improved internalization of a TAT-based CPP ( ). This systemic treatment, while not acutely toxic, halted development ( ). However, local valinomycin injection did not affect long-term viability ( ) and efficiently increased CPP cellular internalization ( ). Subcutaneous injections of valinomycin in mice induced tissue hyperpolarization ( ) and boosted the CPP delivery in skin cells ( ). These results demonstrate that hyperpolarizing drugs can be used to ameliorate CPP internalization in animal tissues.
 

## Discussion
Multiple models, mostly inferred from artificial experimental paradigms, have been proposed to explain CPP direct translocation. These include the formation of pores made of the CPPs themselves that they use for their own entry, the formation of inverted micelles in the plasma membrane that translocate the CPPs, or diffusion of the CPPs across the plasma membrane ( ; ; ; ; ). Our simulation and cellular data, while providing no evidence for such models, demonstrate that CPP cellular internalization is potassium channel- and Vm-dependent in vitro and in vivo. Potassium channels are required to establish a basal low Vm, subsequently permissive for CPP direct translocation. Hyperpolarizing drugs, such as valinomycin, enhance permissiveness. When CPPs come into contact with the plasma membrane, they decrease even more the Vm, resulting in a locally megapolarized membrane. This increases the likelihood of water pore formation that the CPPs then use to penetrate into cells according to their electrochemical gradient ( ). Water pores are created by a combination of lipid head group reorientation coupled to intrusion of a column of water in the membrane bilayer. Water movement plays therefore an active role in the formation of the pore and is not merely occurring once the pores are formed. The movement of the positive charges carried by the CPPs into the cell, as well as the transport of extracellular cations (e.g. Na+), dissipates the Vm, resulting in the collapse of the water pores and sealing of the plasma membrane. CPP-mediated formation of water pores is therefore transient and does not affect cell viability. Multiple rounds of CPP-driven water pore formation and CPP translocation into cells can lead to intracellular accumulation of the CPP to concentrations higher than found outside cells ( ).
 It has not been possible to measure directly the precise values of the Vm that allow the formation of water pores used by CPPs to enter cells. Using an indirect calculation mode based on the uptake of PI alongside CPPs, we have estimated that a Vm in the order of –150 mV is required for water pores to be formed ( ). This might be an underestimation however as modeling data indicate that, at –150 mV, the free energy barrier, while being markedly diminished compared to those calculated at –80 or 0 mV, is not fully abrogated ( ). Possibly therefore, the local Vm where CPPs interact with the plasma membranes is much lower than –150 mV and/or changes in CPP structures occur (e.g. refolding, aggregation) leading to further reduction in free energy barrier.
It is worth mentioning that the applied coarse-grained MARTINI force field, as any other model, has a number of known limitations ( ; ) such as the chemical and spatial resolution, which are both limited compared to atomistic models. There is also a shifted balance between entropy and enthalpy due to the reduced number of degrees of freedom. Moreover, the secondary structure is an input parameter of the model, which implies that secondary structure elements remain fixed during the simulation ( ). However, the coarse-grained approach has provided reliable results in the context of protein-membrane interactions and peptide translocation ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Moreover, the ability of MARTINI coarse-grained force field to model realistic and heterogeneous membranes has been repeatedly reported in literature, as summarized in a recent review paper ( ).
Our model posits that the number of positively charged amino acids influence the ability of CPPs to hyperpolarize cells and hence to form water pores that they take to translocate into cells. CPP hydropathy strongly correlates with penetration of water molecules in the lipid bilayer, thus supporting the hypothesis that the amount of water each CPP can route inside the membrane is modulated by the hydrophobic and hydrophilic character of the peptide ( ). The nature of cationic amino acids in peptides determines their translocation abilities. It is known for example that peptides made of nine lysines (K9) poorly reaches the cytosol ( and ) and that replacing arginine by lysine in Penetratin significantly diminishes its internalization ( ; ). According to our model, K9 should induce megapolarization and formation of water pores that should then allow their translocation into cells. However, it has been determined that, once embedded into membranes, lysine residues tend to lose protons ( ; ; ). This will thus dissipate the strong membrane potential required for the formation of water pores and prevent lysine-containing CPPs to cross the membrane. In contrast, arginine residues are not deprotonated in membranes and water pores can therefore be maintained allowing the arginine-rich CPPs to be taken up by cells. This phenomenon was not modeled in our coarse-grained in silico simulations because the protonation state was fixed at the beginning of the simulation runs and was not allowed to evolve. An additional potential explanation for the internalization differences observed between arginine- and lysine-rich peptides is that even though both arginine and lysine are basic amino acids, they differ in their ability to form hydrogen bonds, the guanidinium group of arginine being able to form two hydrogen bonds ( ) while the lysyl group of lysine can only form one. Compared to lysine, arginine would therefore form more stable electrostatic interactions with the plasma membrane. According to previously published studies ( ; ), the optimal length of consecutive arginine residues appears to be between 9 and 16 amino acids, resulting in optimal CPP cytosolic acquisition. Shorter and longer peptides have decreased internalization efficiencies. The role of the Vm presented in our model is consistent with the reduced uptake of short polyarginine peptides but the Vm parameter of our model cannot explain why longer polyarginine peptides are less efficiently taken up by cells. Our work however also indicates that the water pores created by megapolarization have a diameter of about 2 (–5) nm. Molecules larger than 2 nm are therefore less efficiently transported through these water pores and if polyarginine peptides reach that size their internalization will be hindered. The efficiency of direct translocation of peptides is therefore likely modulated by their sizes, the secondary structures they adopt, and the number of positive charges they carry.
Cationic residues are not the only determinant in CPP direct translocation. The presence of tryptophan residues also plays important roles in the ability of CPPs to cross cellular membranes. This can be inferred from the observation that Penetratin, despite only bearing three arginine residues, can penetrate cells with similar propensities compared to R9 or TAT that contain 9 and 8 arginine residues, respectively. The aromatic characteristics of tryptophan is not sufficient to explain how it favors direct translocation as replacing tryptophan with the aromatic amino acid phenylalanine decreases the translocation potency of the RW9 (RRWWRRWRR) CPP ( ). Rather, differences in the direct translocation promoting activities of tryptophan and phenylalanine residues may come from the higher lipid bilayer insertion capability of tryptophan compared to phenylalanine ( ; ; ). There is a certain degree of interchangeability between arginine and tryptophan residues as demonstrated by the fact that replacing up to four arginine residues with tryptophan amino acids in the R9 CPP preserves its ability to enter cells ( ). Therefore, despite the importance of the membrane potential for CPP direct translocation into cells, other factors also appear to play a role in this process.
While the nature of the CPPs likely dictate their uptake efficiency as discussed in the previous paragraph, the composition of the plasma membrane could also modulate how CPPs translocate into cells. In the present work, we have recorded CPP direct translocation in transformed or cancerous cell lines as well as in primary cells. These cells display various abilities to take up CPPs by direct translocation and the present work indicates that this is modulated by their Vm. But as cancer cells display abnormal plasma membrane composition ( ), it will be of interest in the future to determine how important this is for their capacity to take up CPPs.
We propose, based on the work described here, that hyperpolarization induced by drugs such as valinomycin represents a simple alternative or parallel approach to optimize CPP internalization. However, hyperpolarizing drugs may be toxic when systemically applied. For example, valinomycin at the concentrations used to induce hyperpolarization (10 μM) would be lethal if systemically injected in mice (LD50 in the low micromolar range; ). On the other hand, local administration of valinomycin is far less toxic ( ; ) as confirmed here in zebrafish and mice. Hyperpolarizing agents may therefore be preferentially used for local or topical applications, which is incidentally the case for the clinically approved CPPs ( ; ).
Strategies to improve CPP delivery are becoming increasingly elaborate through the use of nanoparticles ( ), double-coated nanoparticles ( ), liposome-polycation-DNA complexes ( ), branched peptides ( ), etc. Our molecular characterization of the process of CPP direct translocation can be taken advantage of to (i) improve or optimize ‘old’ CPPs, (ii) design new CPPs, (iii) help explain the behavior of newly discovered CPPs ( ; ; ), (iv) discriminate between target cells and cells that should be left unaffected based on Vm, and (v) distinguish between direct translocation and endosomal escape. The present work indicates that the impact on megapolarization should be evaluated when chemical modifications are performed on cationic CPPs to augment their delivery capacities.

## Materials and methods
 

## Chemicals
Puromycin 10 mg/ml (Thermo Fisher, ref no. A11138-02) was aliquoted and stored at –20°C. Blasticidin (Applichem, ref no. A3784) was dissolved at 1 mg/ml in water and stored at –20°C. XE-991 and TRAM-34 (Alomone Labs, ref no. X-100 and T-105, respectively) was dissolved in DMSO at 100 mM and stored at –20°C. Cells were pre-incubated with 10 μM of these inhibitors for 30 min and then kept throughout the experiments. Live Hoechst 33342 (Sigma, ref no. CDS023389) was aliquoted and stored at –20°C. Trypan Blue 0.4% (Life Technologies, ref no. 15250061) was stored at room temperature. AlexaFluor488-labeled human transferrin was dissolved in PBS at 5 mg/ml and stored at 4°C (Thermo Fisher, ref no. 13342). TexasRed-labeled neutral 3000 and 40,000 Da dextran was dissolved in PBS at 10 mg/ml and stored at –20°C (Thermo Fisher, ref no. D3329 and D1829, respectively). TMR-labeled 10,000 neutral dextran was dissolved in PBS at 10 mg/ml and stored at –20°C (Thermo Fisher, ref no. D1816).

## Antibodies
The rabbit polyclonal anti-V5 (Bethyl, ref no. A190-A120), mouse monoclonal anti-FLAG antibody was from Sigma-Aldrich (ref no. F1804), rabbit monoclonal anti-actin (Cell Signaling, ref no. 4970), and rat monoclonal anti-γ-tubulin (Santa Cruz, ref no. sc-51715) antibodies were used for Western blotting.

## Cell lines
All cell lines were culture in 5% CO2 at 37°C. Raji (kind gift from the laboratory of Aimable Nahimana, ATCC: CCL-86), SKW6.4 (kind gift from the laboratory of Pascal Schneider, ATCC: TIB-215), and HeLa (ATCC: CCL-2) cells were cultured in RPMI (Invitrogen, ref no. 61870) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Invitrogen, ref no. 10270–106). HEK293T cells (ATCC: CRL-3216) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and were used here only for lentiviral production. All cell lines were mycoplasma-negative and authenticated via Microsynth cell authentication service. Unless, otherwise indicated, experiments were performed in RPMI with 10% FBS.

## Zebrafish
Zebrafish (Danio rerio) from AB line were bred and maintained in our animal facility under standard conditions ( ), more specifically at 28.5°C and on a 14:10 hr light:dark cycle at the Zebrafish facility of the Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne (cantonal veterinary approval VD-H21). Zebrafish of 20 hr post fertilization were collected and treated with 0.2 mM phenylthiourea (Sigma, St Louis, MO) to suppress pigmentation. Embryos were raised at 28.5°C in Egg water (0.3 g sea salt/l reverse osmosis water) up to 4 days post fertilization.

## Mice
C57BL/6NCrl were acquired from Charles River laboratories, which were then housed and bred in our animal facility. All experiments were performed according to the principles of laboratory animal care and Swiss legislation under ethical approval (Swiss Animal Protection Ordinance; permit number VD3374.a).

## Primary cortical neuronal culture
Sprague-Dawley rat pups (from Janvier, France) were euthanized in accordance with the Swiss Laws for the protection of animals, and the procedures were approved by the Vaud Cantonal Veterinary Office (permit number VD1407.9). Primary neuronal cultures from cortices of 2-day-old rats were prepared and maintained at 37°C with a 5% CO2-containing atmosphere in neurobasal medium (Life Technologies, 21103–049) supplemented with 2% B27 (Invitrogen, 17504044), 0.5 mM glutamine (Sigma, G7513), and 100 μg/ml penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen, 15140122) as described previously ( ). Neurons were plated at a density of ~3 × 105 cells on 12 mm glass coverslips coated with 0.01% poly-L-lysine (Sigma, P4832). Half of the medium was changed every 3–4 days and experiments were performed at 12–13 days in vitro.

## Confocal microscopy
Confocal microscopy experiments were done on live 300,000 cells. Cells were seeded for 16 hr onto glass bottom culture dishes (MatTek, corporation ref no. P35G-1.5–14C) in 2 ml RPMI, 10% FBS and treated as described in the figures in 1 ml media, 10% FBS. For nuclear staining, 10 μg/ml live Hoechst 33342 (Molecular Probes, ref no. H21492) was added in the culture medium 5 min before washing cells twice with PBS. After washing, cells were examined with a plan Apochromat 63× oil immersion objective mounted on a Zeiss LSM 780 laser scanning fluorescence confocal microscope equipped with gallium arsenide phosphide detectors and three lasers (a 405 nm diode laser, a 458-476-488-514 nm argon laser, and a 561 nm diode-pumped solid-state laser). Time-lapse experiments were done using an incubation chamber set at 37°C, 5% CO2 and visualized with a Zeiss LSM710 Quasar laser scanning fluorescence confocal microscope equipped with either Neofluar 63×, 1.2 numerical aperture (NA) or plan Neofluar 100×, 1.3 NA plan oil immersion objective (and the same lasers as above). Visual segregation of cells based on types of CPP entry, associated with either vesicular or diffuse cytosolic staining, was performed as shown in . Cell images were acquired at a focal plane near the middle of the cell making sure that nuclei were visible. Image acquisition was performed using identical settings for the data presented in a given panel and the related supplementary information.

## Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry experiments were performed using a Beckman Coulter FC500 instrument. Cells were centrifuged and resuspended in PBS prior to flow cytometry. Data analysis was done with Kaluza Version 1.3 software (Beckman Coulter).

## Cell death and CPP internalization measurements
With the exception of neurons, cell death was quantitated with 8 μg/ml PI (Sigma, ref no. 81845). Unless otherwise indicated, cell death was assessed after 16 hr of continuous incubation in Raji and SKW6.4 cells and 24 hr in HeLa cells. Prior to treatment, 300,000 cells were seeded in six-well plates for 16 hr in 2 ml media, 10% FBS. Treatment was done in 1 ml media with 10% FBS. Cell death and peptide internalization were analyzed by flow cytometry. Internalization measurements were done after 1 hr of incubation. Peptide internalization in primary cortical neurons was assessed by confocal microscopy. Cell-associated fluorescence was quantitated with ImageJ. When cytosolic fluorescent was recorded with ImageJ, the regions of interest that were analyzed were chosen so as not to contain labeled endosomes ( , circle).

## Lentivirus production
Recombinant lentiviruses were produced as described ( ; ) with the following modification: the envelope plasmid pMD.G and the packaging vector pCMVΔR8.91 were replaced by pMD2.G and psPAX2, respectively.

## In vitro membrane potential measurements
Two methods were used to assess cellular membrane potential in vitro. With the first method, the membrane potential was determined by incubating 300,000 cells for 40 min with 100 nM of the fluorescent probe DiBAC4(3) (Thermo Fisher, ref no. B438) in six-well plates in 1 ml media, 10% FBS, and the median fluorescence intensity was then assessed by flow cytometry. Calculation of the actual membrane potential in mV based on the DiBAC4(3) signals was performed as described earlier ( ; ). The second method relied on electrophysiology recordings. To perform these, the bath solution composition was (in mM): 103.9 NaCl, 23.9 NaHCO3, 2 CaCl2, 1.2 MgCl2, 5.2 KCl, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 2 glucose, and 1.7 ascorbic acid. The pipet solution was composed of (in mM): 140 KMeSO4, 10 HEPES, 10 KCl, 0.1 EGTA, 10 phosphocreatine, and 4 MgATP. The patch pipets had a resistance of 2.4–3.6 MΩ. Perforated patch recordings were performed as previously described ( ). Briefly, freshly prepared gramicidin D (Sigma, ref no. G5002), at 2.8 μM final concentration, was added to prefiltered patch pipet solution and then sonicated for three consecutive times during 10 s. Cell-attached configuration was achieved by applying negative pressure on patch pipet until seal resistance of over 1 GΩ was reached. After gaining cell access through gramicidin created pores, membrane potential measurements were done in current clamp at 0 pA for at least 3 min. Since primary rat neurons are killed following full depolarization induced by gramicidin, the standard curve from membrane potential calculations ( ; ) was performed using gramicidin-treated Raji cells incubated with increasing concentrations of DiBac4(3) for 40 min. Images of the cells were then taken using an LSM780 confocal microscope and the cell-associated fluorescence quantitated with ImageJ.

## Relative membrane potential assessment in vivo
Zebrafish embryos in Egg water (see ‘Zebrafish’ section) were incubated for 40 min in the presence or in the absence of various concentrations of valinomycin together with 950 nM DiBac4(3). The embryos were then fixed and visualized under a confocal LSM710 microscope ( ). DiBac4(3)-associated fluorescence of a region of interest (ROI) of about 0.0125 mm2 in the tail region was quantitated with ImageJ. The values were normalized to the control condition (i.e. in the absence of valinomycin). Mice were intradermally injected with 10 μl of a 950 nM DiBac4(3) PBS solution containing or not 10 μM valinomycin and sacrificed 1 hr later. The skin was excised, fixed in 4% formalin, paraffin-embedded, and used to prepare serial histological slices. Pictures of the slices were taken with a CYTATION3 apparatus. The DiBac4(3)-associated fluorescence in the whole slice was quantitated with ImageJ. The slice in the series of slices prepared from a given skin sample displaying the highest fluorescence signal was considered as the one nearest to the injection site. The signals from such slices are those reported in the figures.

## Experimental modulation of the plasma membrane potential

## Flow cytometry assessment of CPP internalization
Raji, SKW6.4, or HeLa cells: 300,000 cells were plated on non-coated plates to avoid cell adherence in 500 μl RPMI, 10% FBS. Cellular depolarization was induced by pre-incubating the cells at 37°C with 2 μg/ml gramicidin for 5 min and/or by placing them in potassium-rich buffer ( ) for 30 min (40 mM KCl, 100 mM potassium glutamate, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 5 mM glucose, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4). Cells were then treated with the selected CPPs at the indicated concentrations for 1 hr when peptide internalization was recorded or with 100 nM DiBac4(3) for 40 min when membrane potential needed to be measured. Hyperpolarization in Raji cells in the presence of TAT-RasGAP317-326 was performed by treating the cells with 10 μM valinomycin for 20 min in RPMI without serum. Cells were then treated with 5 µM TAT-RasGAP317-326 for 1 hr or 100 nM DiBac4(3) for 40 min. In the case of SKW6.4 and HeLa cells, hyperpolarization was induced by infection with a viral construct expressing KCNJ2 (see ‘Lentivirus production’ section). Cells were then treated with 40 µM of indicated CPP for 1 hr or 100 nM DiBac4(3) for 40 min.

## CPP cytosolic internalization quantitation based on confocal microscopy
Three-hundred thousand wild-type HeLa cells were plated overnight on glass-bottom dishes in 2 ml RPMI with 10% FBS. The next day, serum was removed and cells were pre-incubated at 37°C with 2 μg/ml gramicidin for 5 min, 10 μM valinomycin for 20 min, or were left untreated in 1 ml media with 10% FBS. The indicated CPPs were then added and cells were incubated for 1 hr at 37°C. Cells were then washed and visualized in RPMI without serum under a confocal microscope. CPP cytosolic internalization was quantitated within a cytosolic region devoid of endosomes using ImageJ. The number of CPP-positive vesicles per cell was visually determined in a given focal plane.
Neurons (12 days post isolation) were pre-incubated 30 min with 5 mM TEA (tetraethylammonium, Sigma Aldrich, ref no. T2265; gramicidin is toxic in these neurons; see section ‘In vitro membrane potential measurements’) to induce depolarization or 10 μM valinomycin to induce hyperpolarization in bicarbonate-buffered saline solution (116 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 0.8 mM MgSO4, 1 mM NaH2PO4, 26.2 mM NaHCO3, 0.01 mM glycine, 1.8 mM CaCl2, 4.5 mg/ml glucose) in a 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator. The cells were then incubated 1 hr with 2 μM of FITC-labeled TAT-RasGAP317-326. The cells were finally washed thrice with PBS and images were acquired using a LSM780 confocal microscope. Cell-associated peptide fluorescence was quantitated using ImageJ.

## Setting membrane potential by changing potassium concentrations in the media
RPMI-like media made without potassium chloride and without sodium chloride was from Biowest ( ). Varying concentrations of potassium chloride were added to this medium containing 10% FBS. Sodium chloride was also added so that the sum of potassium and sodium chloride equaled 119 mM (also taking into account the concentrations of sodium and potassium in FBS). Three-hundred thousand cells were pre-incubated in 1 ml media, 10% FBS containing different concentrations of potassium for 20 min, then different CPPs at a 40 μM concentration were added and cells were incubated for 1 hr at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells were washed once in PBS and CPP internalization was measured by flow cytometry. The corresponding membrane potential was measured with DiBac4(3).

## In silico CPP translocation free energy assessment through MARTINI coarse-grained simulations
An asymmetric multi-component membrane was constructed and solvated using CHARMM-GUI ( ; ). Each layer contained 100 lipids ( ), in a previously described composition ( ). The membrane was solvated with 2700 water molecules, obtaining a molecular system of 10,200 particles. The MARTINI force field 2.2p ( ; ) was used to define phospholipids’ topology through a coarse-grained approach. The polarizable water model has been used to assess the water topology ( ). Each peptide (R9, TAT, and TAT-RasGAP317-326) structural model has been obtained by PEPFOLD-3 server ( ), as done in previous studies in the field ( ; ; ). For each molecular system, one CPP was positioned 3 nm away from the membrane outer leaflet, in the water environment corresponding to the extracellular space. Then, the system was equilibrated through four MD simulations of 100 ps, 200 ps, 500 ps, and 100 ns under the NPT ensemble. Position restraints were applied during the first three MD simulations and gradually removed, from 200 to 10 kJ/mol*nm2. Velocity rescaling ( ), temperature coupling algorithm, and time constant of 1.0 ps were applied to keep the temperature at 310.00 K. Berendsen ( ) semi-isotropic pressure coupling algorithm with reference pressure equal to 1 bar and time constant 5.0 ps was employed. Then, all systems were simulated for the production run in the NPT ensemble with a time step of 20 fs. Electrostatic interactions were calculated by applying the particle-mesh Ewald ( ) method and van der Waals interactions were defined within a cut-off of 1.2 nm. Periodic boundary conditions were applied in all directions. Trajectories were collected every 10 ps and the Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) ( ) package was employed to visually inspect the simulated systems. Three different transmembrane potential values were considered: 0, 80, and 150 mV. In the MD simulations, an external electric field Eext was applied parallel to the membrane normal z, that is, perpendicular to the bilayer surface. This was achieved by including additional forces Fi = q*Eext acting on all charged particles i. In order to determine the effective electric field in simulations, we applied a computational procedure reported in literature ( ). A well-tempered metadynamics protocol ( ) was applied to estimate the free energy landscape of CPP translocation. Two collective variables were considered: the lipid/water density index and the CPP-membrane distance. Gaussian deposition rate of 2.4 kJ/mol every 5 ps was initially applied and gradually decreased on the basis of an adaptive scheme. Gaussian widths of 0.5 and 0.2 nm were applied following a well-established scheme ( ; ; ; ). In particular, the Gaussian width value was of the same order of magnitude as the standard deviation of the distance CV, calculated during unbiased simulations. The well-tempered metadynamics simulations were computed using GROMACS 2019.4 package ( ) and the PLUMED 2.5 open-source plug-in ( ). The reconstruction of the free-energy surface was performed by the reweighting algorithm procedure ( ) allowing the estimation of the free energy landscape. The comparison between the water pore formation free energy estimated by our MARTINI coarse-grained simulations and previous estimations available in literature is reported in . Each system was simulated (with a 20 fs time step) until convergence was reached. The electrostatic potential maps were computed by the APBS package ( ) on the molecular system composed of R9 peptide in contact with the cell membrane, without any applied external electrostatic field. In detail, the non-linear Poisson-Boltzmann equation was applied using single Debye-Huckel sphere boundary conditions on a 97 × 97 × 127 grid with a spacing of 1 Å centered at the COM of the molecular system. The relative dielectric constants of the solute and the solvent were set to 2.5 and 78.4, respectively. The ionic strength was set to 150 mM and the temperature was fixed at 310 K ( ; ). The average and standard deviation values of the local transmembrane potential were computed considering 10 different trajectory snapshots taken from the molecular trajectory.

## In silico pore formation kinetics through MARTINI coarse-grained simulations
The same molecular system previously constructed and equilibrated was investigated to estimate the water pore formation kinetics by applying a constant electrostatic potential ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Each peptide (R9, TAT, and TAT-RasGAP317-326) was positioned 3 nm away from the membrane at the beginning of each simulation. The relatively small size of the molecular system and the application of coarse-grained MARTINI force field allowed us to study the pore formation kinetics, requiring many simulations at varying field strengths. In detail, 25 simulations were performed for each molecular system at different external electric field strengths from 0.0055 to 0.090 V/nm. In the MD simulations, an external electric field Eext was applied parallel to the membrane normal z, that is, perpendicular to the bilayer surface. This was achieved by including additional forces Fi
= q*Eext acting on all charged particles i. In order to determine the effective electric field in simulations, we applied a computational procedure reported in literature ( ). The results are reported in .

## In silico cell membrane hyperpolarization modeling through ion imbalance in MARTINI coarse-grained simulations
The translocation mechanism of each CPP was studied by ion imbalance in a double-bilayer system ( ; ; ; ). The same asymmetric membrane considered to perform the single-bilayer simulations ( ) was used to build up the double-bilayer system. The double-membrane system was solvated with 4300 water molecules, obtaining a molecular system of 20,000 particles. The MARTINI force field 2.2p ( ; ) was used to define phospholipids’ topology through a coarse-grained approach. The polarizable water model was used to model the water topology ( ). The elastic network ELNEDYN ( ) was applied to reproduce the structural and dynamic properties of the CPPs.
For each molecular system, one CPP was positioned in the middle of the double-bilayer system, 2 nm away from the membrane outer leaflets, in the water environment corresponding to the extracellular space. Then, the system was equilibrated through four MD simulations of 100 ps, 200 ps, 500 ps, and 100 ns under the NPT ensemble. Position restraints were applied during the first three MD simulations and gradually removed, from 200 to 10 kJ/mol*nm2. Velocity rescaling ( ), temperature coupling algorithm, and time constant of 1 ps were applied to keep the temperature at 310 K. Berendsen ( ) semi-isotropic pressure coupling algorithm with reference pressure equal to 1 bar and time constant 5 ps was employed. Then, all systems were simulated for the production run in the NPT ensemble with the time step of 20 fs with Parrinello-Rahman pressure coupling ( ).
Membrane hyperpolarization was achieved through a net charge difference of 30 positive ions between intracellular and extracellular space, considering all charged ions of the system and fulfilling the full system electroneutrality. Ten different replicas of each molecular simulation were performed until the water pore formation and closure events were observed. The visual inspection of the simulated molecular systems is reported in . To analyze whether the CPPs were able to cross the membrane and reach the intracellular compartment, their trajectories were studied in the last 5 ns of each simulation replica. Considering the CPP position with respect to the membrane bilayers and the CPP’s solvent accessible surface area, three different compartments were defined: intracellular space, lipid bilayer (cell membrane), and extracellular space. The radius of the water pores within the membrane was calculated as previously done ( ; ). We assumed that the central part of the cylindrical water pore contains N water molecules at the same density as outside of the water flux.

## In vitro assessment of water pores
Three-hundred thousand wild-type HeLa cells or primary rat cortical neurons were incubated with 32 µg/ml PI (0.8–1.5 nm diameter 75) or 200 µg/ml dextran of different molecular weight in the presence or in the absence of the indicated CPPs in normal, depolarizing (2 µg/ml gramicidin), or hyperpolarizing (10 µM valinomycin) conditions in 1 ml media, 10% FBS. Time-lapse images were acquired by confocal microscopy every 10 s. The percentage of cells where direct CPP translocation occurred, as well as the percentage of cells positively stained for PI, were manually quantitated using ImageJ based on snap shot images taken after 30 min of incubation, as shown in . Cytosolic PI fluorescence was assessed with ImageJ, by selecting a region within the cell's cytosol devoid of endosomes. Cells were permeabilized with 0.1% saponin (Sigma, ref no. 4706, diluted in PBS weight:volume; 30 min incubation at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator) to determine the maximal PI uptake cell capacity. Three fitting models were obtained:
Exponential decline: 
Exponential: 
Modified power: 
These equations fitted equally well the PI uptake/Vm curve in . For the calculations used in , the exponential decline equation was used.

## Zebrafish viability
FITC-TAT-RasGAP317-326(W317A) internalization in zebrafish was assessed either by adding the peptide directly in Egg water or by injection. Experiments in which the peptide was added in the water were performed on fish between 4 and 24 hr post fertilization. Viability assays were done on embryos of 4, 6, and 24 hr post fertilization to determine a maximal nonlethal dose of the peptide that can be used. Different concentrations of the peptide were added to 500 µl water per well in 24-well plate, with between eight and eleven embryos per well. Fish viability was visually assessed at 20 hr post incubation with the peptide. Hyperpolarization-associated viability was visually assessed at different time points in the presence or in the absence of the peptide with or without various valinomycin concentrations. Zebrafish were visualized with binocular microscope and CYTATION3 apparatus. Survival was visually assessed under a binocular microscope by taking into consideration the embryo transparency (as dead embryos appear opaque), general development characteristics, and motility.

## CPP internalization in vivo
To assess peptide internalization in zebrafish, two methods were used: (i) addition of the peptide directly in 500 µl of Egg water in 24-well plates containing between eight and twelve embryos per well and (ii) intramuscular injections. In the case of the first method, after the indicated treatments, zebrafish were washed, fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 1 hr at room temperature. Whole embryos were mounted on slides with Fluoromount-G (cBioscience, ref no. 00-4958-02). Zebrafish were then visualized under an LSM710 confocal microscope. Experiments where the peptide was added directly to the water were performed on zebrafish at 18 hr post fertilization to limit cuticle development that would hinder peptide access to the cells. In the case of the second method, 8 nl injections (containing the various combinations of peptide and valinomycin and 0.05% (vol:vol) phenol red as an injection site labeling agent) were done on 48 hr post fertilization embryos into the tail muscle around the extremity of yolk extension, after chorion removal and anesthesia with 0.02% (w:vol) tricaine ( ) buffered with sodium bicarbonate to pH 7.3. At this age, zebrafish already have well developed tissues that can be easily visually distinguished. Injections were done with an Eppendorf Microinjections FemtoJet 4i apparatus. After the indicated treatments, embryos were fixed in 4% PFA/PBS and visualized under a confocal microscope. Some embryos were kept alive for viability evaluation post injection until the age of 4 days.
Experiments with mice were performed in 10- to 14-week-old C57BL/6NCrl mice anesthetized with ketasol/xylasol (9.09 mg/ml ketasol and 1.82 mg/ml xylasol in water; injection: 10 μl per g of body weight). The back of the mice was shaved and intradermic injections were performed (a total of 10 μl was injected). Mice were kept under anesthesia for 1 hr and Artificial tears (Lacryvisc) were used to avoid eye dryness. Mice were then sacrificed by CO2 inhalation, skin was cut at injection sites, fixed in 4% formalin, and paraffin embedded for histology analysis. For each sample, 10–15 slides were prepared and peptide internalization was visualized with a CYTATION3 apparatus. Fluorescence intensity was quantitated with ImageJ. The slices displaying the highest fluorescence signal were considered as those nearest to the injection site and the fluorescent values from these slides were used in .

## Assessment of endosomal escape and direct translocation
Three hundred thousand cells were seeded onto glass-bottom dishes in 2 ml RPMI, 10% FBS for 16 hr. Quantitation of cytosolic fluorescence was performed within live HeLa cells pre-incubated with 80 µM TAT-RasGAP317-326 for 30 min at 37°C in 1 ml media, with 10% FBS and then incubated for the indicated periods of time in the presence (i.e. no wash after the pre-incubation) or in the absence (i.e. following three consecutive washes with RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS) of extracellular labeled peptide. Endosomal escape from lysosomes was induced by 1 mM LLOME (L-leucyl-L-leucine methyl ester) ( ), added in the 1 ml media, 10% FBS 30 min after the CPPs were washed out (cells were exposed to LLOME for 100 min). Confocal images were taken every 5 min after the 30 min pre-incubation with the CPPs. For each cell, the fluorescence intensity of one ROI devoid of labeled endosomes throughout the experiment was quantitated over time using ImageJ Time Series Analyzer V3. The surface of the ROI was identical for all cells. Only cells displaying labeled endosomes after the 30 min pre-incubation (that is cells that had taken up the CPPs by endocytosis) were analyzed. Note that the washing steps, for reasons unclear at this time, induced a slightly higher initial ROI intensity signal.

## Transferrin internalization quantitation
Wild-type HeLa cells were plated in 12-well plates (200,000 cells per well) for 16 hr in 1 ml RPMI (Invitrogen, ref no. 61870), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Invitrogen, ref no. 10270–106). Cells were then incubated with 20 µg/ml AlexaFluor488-conjugated transferrin for 20 min at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells were washed with PBS and pelleted after trypsinization. To quench membrane-bound transferrin fluorescence, cells were resuspended in 0.2% trypan blue diluted in PBS. Transferrin internalization was quantitated by flow cytometry using Beckman Coulter FC500 instrument. Data analysis was done with Kaluza Version 1.3 software (Beckman Coulter).

## TAT-PNA-induced luciferase activity
The LeGOiG2-LUC705 lentiviral construct (plasmid #975) encodes a luciferase gene interrupted by a mutated human beta globin intron 2. This mutation creates a new aberrant splicing site at position 705 that, when used, produced an mRNA that encodes a truncated non-functional luciferase ( ). In the presence of the TAT-peptide nucleic acid (TAT-PNA) CPP described below, the aberrant splice site is masked allowing the production of a functional luciferase enzyme. Lentiviruses produced using this construct were employed to infect cells. The doses used resulted in >90% cells infected (based on GFP expression from the lentiviral vector). The infected cells (200,000 cells in 12-well plates containing 1 ml of RPMI, 10% FBS) were treated or not with 5 μM TAT-PNA (GRKKRRQRRR-CCTCCTACCTCAGTTACA). TAT-PNA is made of TAT48-57 and an oligonucleotide complimentary to a sequence containing the aberrant splice site. After 16 hr incubation, cells were washed twice in HKR buffer (119 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1 mM NaH2PO4, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 1.3 mM MgCl2, 20 mM HEPES, 11 mM dextrose, pH 7.4) and lysed in 40 μl HKR containing 0.1% Triton X-100 for 15 min at room temperature. Luciferase activity was measured with a GLOMAXTM 96 Microplate Luminometer (Promega) using a Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay (Promega) and normalized to the protein content. Results are displayed as the ratio between the protein-normalized luciferase signal obtained in TAT-PNA-treated cells and the signal obtained in control untreated cells.

## TAT-Cre recombinase production, purification, and recombination assay
Raji cells were infected with a lentivirus encoding a Cre-reporter gene construct ( ). TAT-Cre recombinase was produced as described ( ). Briefly, Escherichia coli BL21 transformed with the pTAT-Cre plasmid (#917, Addgene plasmid #35619) were grown for 16 hr in LB containing 100 µg/ml kanamycin. Protein production was induced at OD600 of 0.6 with 500 µM IPTG (isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside) for 3 hr. Bacteria were collected by centrifugation at 5000× g and kept at –20°C. Purification was performed on Äkta prime (GE, Healthcare, Chicago, IL) equipped with a 1 ml HisTrap FF column equilibrated with binding buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM imidazole pH 7.4). The day of the purification, bacterial pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (binding buffer with protease inhibitors; Roche, ref no. 4693132001; one tablet per 50 ml), 0.025 mg/ml DNase I (Roche, ref no. 04716728001), and 2 mg/ml lysozyme (Roche, ref no. 10 837 059 001) and sonicated six times for 30 s. After 20 min centrifugation at 5000× g, the supernatant was filtered through Steriflip 0.45 µm and loaded on the column. Elution buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole pH 7.4) was used to detach His-tagged proteins from the column. Imidazole was removed from collected fractions by overnight dialysis using 10 K MWCO cassette (Thermo Scientific, ref no. 66807) in PBS. Raji cells encoding the Cre-reporter were treated for 48 hr with 20 µM TAT-Cre-recombinase. Fluorescence was imaged using a Nikon Eclipse TS100 microscope.

## Assessment of CPP binding to plasma membranes
Three-hundred thousand cells were incubated for 60 s in 1 ml RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 10 mM HEPES in Eppendorf tubes at 37°C in the presence of increasing concentrations of FITC-TAT-RasGAP317-326. Half of the cells were then immediately placed on ice, pelleted at 4°C, and resuspended in 1 ml of ice-cold PBS and then split into two tubes, one of which receiving a final concentration of 0.2% (w:w) trypan blue to quench surface-associated FITC signals. The cells (still kept at 4°C) were then analyzed by flow cytometry. The surface associated peptide signal was calculated by subtracting total fluorescence measured in PBS and fluorescence measured after trypan blue quenching. The other half of the cells after the 60 s peptide incubation was incubated at 37°C for 1 hr at which time the cellular internalization of the labeled peptide was assessed by flow cytometry.

## Transient calcium phosphate transfection in HeLa cells
Calcium phosphate-based transfection of HeLa cells was performed as previously described ( ). Briefly, cells were plated overnight in DMEM (Invitrogen, ref no. 61965) medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Invitrogen, ref no. 10270–106), 2.5 µg of total plasmid DNA of interest was diluted in water, CaCl2 was added and the mixture was incubated in presence of HEPES 2× for 60 s before adding the total mixture drop by drop to the cells. Media was changed 10 hr after.

## Isothermal titration calorimetry
Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) was performed using MicroCal ITC200 (Malvern Panalytical) at 37°C with 600 µM FITC-R9 in the cell (total volume 300 µl) and consecutive injections (2.5 µl/injection, except for the first injection of 0.4 µl) of 6 mM PI from the syringe (total volume 40 µl) with 2 min delay between injections and 800 rotations/min rotation speed. Differential power was set to 7, as we had no prior knowledge of the expected reaction thermodynamics. The results in are represented as a: thermogram (measurement of thermal power need to ensure that there is no temperature difference between reference and sample cells in the calorimeter as a function of time) and a binding isotherm (normalized heat per peak as a function of molar ratio).

## Colony formation assay
Three-hundred thousand wild-type HeLa cells were plated overnight in RPMI with 10% FBS in six-well plates. Cells were then treated for 1 hr with the indicated concentrations of CPP, PI, and membrane potential modulating agents (gramicidin or valinomycin) in 1 ml RPMI. As control, cells were either left untreated or incubated with DMSO, the vehicle used to dilute gramicidin and valinomycin. Cells were then washed, trypsinized, and plated on 10 cm dishes at a density of 300 cells per condition. Colonies were counted at day 14 after 100% ethanol fixation for 10 min and Giemsa staining. Washes were done with PBS.

## Genome-scale CRISPR/Cas9 knock-out screening
The human GeCKO v2 library (two plasmid system) (Addgene plasmid #1000000049) was amplified by electroporation using a Bio-Rad Gene Pulser II electroporation apparatus (Bio-Rad #165–2105) and the Lucigen Endura bacteria (Lucigen ref no. 60242). Cells were plated on LB agar plates containing 100 µg/ml ampicillin. After 14 hr at 32°C, colonies were scrapped and plasmids recovered with the Plasmid Maxi kit (Qiagen, ref no. 12162). To produce lentivirus library, 12 T-225 flasks were seeded with 12 × 106 HEK293T cells per flask in 40 ml DMEM, 10% FBS. The following day, 10 µg pMD2.G, 30 µg psPAX2, and 25 µg GeCKO plasmid library in 1.8 ml H2O were mixed with 0.2 ml 2.5 M CaCl2 (final calcium concentration: 250 mM). This solution was mixed (v/v) with 2× HEPES buffer (280 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM Na2HPO4, 12 mM D-glucose, 50 mM HEPES), incubated for 1 min at room temperature, added to the culture medium, and the cells placed back in a 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator for 7 hr. The culture medium was then removed and replaced by DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS containing 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. Forty-eight hours later, the medium was collected and centrifuged 5 min at 2000× g to pellet the cells. The remaining cell-free medium (12 × 40 ml) was then filtered through a 0.45 µm HV/PVDF (Millipore, ref no. SE1M003M00) and concentrated ~100 times by resuspending the viral pellet obtained by ultracentrifugation at 70000× g for 2 hr at 4°C in ~5 ml ice-cold PBS. The concentrated viruses were aliquoted in 500 µl samples and stored at –80°C.
To express the Cas9 endonuclease, cells (e.g. Raji or SKW6.4) were infected with Cas9-expressing viruses that were produced in HEK293T cells transfected with the lentiCas9-Blast (#849, Addgene plasmid #52962), pMD2.G, and psPAX2 plasmids as described under ‘Lentivirus production’. The infected cells were selected with 10 µg/ml blasticidin for a week. The multiplicity of infection (MOI) of the GeCKO virus library was determined as follows. Different volumes of the virus library were added to 3 × 106 Cas9-expressing cells plated in 12-well plates. Twenty-four hours later, the cells were split into two wells of 12-well plates. One well per pair was treated with 10 µg/ml puromycin for 3 days (the other cultured in normal medium). Cell viability was determined by trypan blue exclusion and MOI was calculated as the number of cells in the well treated with puromycin divided by the number of cells in the control well. The virus volume yielding to a MOI ~ 0.4 was chosen to perform large-scale infection of 12 × 107 cells that was carried out in 12-well plates with 3 × 106 cells per well. After 24 hr, the infected cells were collected and pooled in a T-225 flask and selected with 10 µg/ml puromycin for a week. Thirty millions of these were frozen (control untreated cells) and 60 million others were treated with 40 µM TAT-RasGAP317-326 for 8 days (Raji) or for 17 days (SKW6.4) with a medium and peptide renewal every 2–3 days. Thirty million of the peptide-treated cells were then also frozen. Genomic DNA was extracted from the control and the peptide-treated frozen cells using the Blood & Cell Culture DNA Midi Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen, ref no. 13343). A first PCR was performed to amplify the lentiCRISPR sgRNA region using the following primers:
F1: 5’-AATGGACTATCATATGCTTACCGTAACTTGAAAGTATTTCG-3’
R1: 5’-CTTTAGTTTGTATGTCTGTTGCTATTATGTCTACTATTCTTTCC-3
A second PCR (see for the primers used) was performed on 5 µl of the first PCR reaction to attach Illumina adaptors with barcodes (nucleotides highlighted in green) and to increase library complexity (using the sequences highlighted in red) to prevent signal saturation when the sequencing is performed. The blue sequences are complementary to the extremities of the first PCR fragments.
Both PCRs were performed in 100 µl with the 2 µl of the Herculase II Fusion DNA Polymerase from Agilent (ref no. 600675) according the manufacturer’s instructions. Amplicons were gel extracted, quantitated, mixed, and sequenced with an MiSeq (Illumina). Raw FASTQ files were demultiplexed and processed to contain only unique sgRNA sequences. The number of reads of each sgRNA was normalized as described ( ). The MAGeCK algorithm ( ) was used to rank screening hits by the consistent enrichment among multiple sgRNAs targeting the same gene.

## CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing
Single guide RNAs targeting an early exon of the gene of interest were chosen in the sgRNA library ( ) and are listed in . LentiCRISPR plasmids specific for a gene were created according to the provided instructions ( ). Briefly, oligos were designed as follows: Forward 5’-CACCGnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn-3’; Reverse-3’-CnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnCAA-5’, where nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn in the forward oligo corresponds to the 20 bp sgRNA. Oligos were synthetized, then phosphorylated, and annealed to form oligo complexes. LentiCRISPR vector was BsmBI digested and dephosphorylated. Linearized vector was purified and gel extracted and ligated to oligo complexes. The lentiCRISPR vector containing the sgRNA was then used for virus production. Recombinant lentiviruses were produced as described ( ) with the following modification: pMD.G and pCMVDR8.91 were replaced by pMD2.G and psPAX2, respectively. Cells were infected and selected with the appropriate dose of puromycin (2 µg/ml for HeLa cells). Clone isolation was performed by limiting dilution in 96-well plate.

## TA cloning
TA cloning is a subcloning technique that allows integration of a PCR-amplified product of choice into a PCR2.1 vector based on complementarity of deoxyadenosine added onto the PCR fragment by Taq polymerase. This approach is useful to distinguish between several alleles and to determine whether the cells are heterozygous or homozygous at a given locus. TA cloning kit (Life Technologies, ref no. K202020) was used according to manufacturer’s instructions to sequence DNA fragment containing the region targeted by a given sgRNA. Briefly, DNA was isolated and the fragment of interest was PCR-amplified using primers listed in , then ligated into PCR2.1 vector. E. coli competent cells were then transformed and at least 15 colonies were selected per condition for DNA isolation and sequencing.

## Plasmid constructs
The hKCNN4-V5.lti (#953) lentiviral plasmid encoding a V5-labeled version of the KCNN4 potassium channel was from DNASU (ref no. HsCD00441560). The hKCNK5-FLAG.dn3 (#979) plasmid encoding the human KCNK5 potassium channel (NCBI reference sequence NM_003740.3), Flag-tagged at the C-terminus, was purchased from GenScript (ref no. OHu13506). The Myc-mKCNJ2-T2A-IRES-tdTomato.lti (#978) lentiviral vector encoding the mouse Kir2.1 (KCNJ2) potassium channel and tdTomato (separated by an IRES) was generated by subcloning myc-mKCNJ2-T2A-Tomato.pCAG plasmid (#974, Addgene plasmid #60598) into the LeGo-iT2 lentiviral backbone (#809), a gift from Boris Fehse (Addgene plasmid #27343), through ligation of both plasmids after digestion with BamHI (NEB, reg. no. R313614). The pMD2.G plasmid (#554, Addgene plasmid #12259) encodes the envelope of lentivirus. The psPAX2 plasmid (#842, Addgene plasmid #12260) encodes the packaging system. Both pMD2.G and psPAX2 plasmids were used for lentiviral production. The Flag-hKCNQ5(G278S)-IRES-NeoR plasmid (#938) codes for the N-terminal Flag-tagged G278S human KCNQ5 inactive mutant and a neomycin resistant gene separated by an IRES sequence. It was generated by subcloning a BamHI/XmaI digested PCR fragment obtained by amplification of pShuttle-Flag-hKCNQ5(G278S)-IRES-hrGFP2 (#937, kind gift from Dr Kenneth L Byron) using forward primer #1397 (CAT CGG GAT CCG CTA TAC CGG CCA CCA TGG ATT ACA AGG A) and reverse primer #1398 (CAT CGC CCG GGG CTA TAC CGT ACC GTC GAC TGC AGA ATT C) into the lentiviral vector TRIP-PGK-IRES-Neo (#350) opened with the same enzyme. The Flag-hKCNQ5(SM,G278S)-IRES-Neo (#939) plasmid is identical to Flag-hKCNQ5(G278S)-IRES-NeoR except that the sequence targeted by the sgKCNQ5.1 sgRNA ( ) was mutated with the aim to decrease Cas9-mediated degradation. Silent mutations (SM), at the protein level, were introduced using the QuikChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (ref no. 200522) according to manufacturer’s instructions using forward primer #1460 (AAA TAA GAA CCA AAA ATC CTA TGT ACC ATG CCG TTA TCA GCT CCT TGC TGT GAG CAT AAA CCA CTG AAC CCA G) and reverse primer #1461 (CTG GGT TCA GTG GTT TAT GCT CAC AGC AAG GAG CTG ATA ACG GCA TGG TAC ATA GGA TTT TTG GTT CTT ATT T).
The Flag-hKCNQ5(SM)-IRES-NeoR (#940) lentiviral construct codes for a Flag-tagged wild-type version of human KCNQ5. It was made by reverting the G278S mutation in Flag-hKCNQ5(SM,G278S)-IRES-Neo (#939) using the QuikChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit with the #1462 forward primer (TTT TGT CTC CAT AGC CAA TAG TTG TCA ATG TAA TTG TGC CCC) and the #1463 reverse primer (GGG GCA CAA TTA CAT TGA CAA CTA TTG GCT ATG GAG ACA AAA). The pLUC705 ( ) (#876, gift from Dr Bing Yang) plasmid encodes a luciferase gene interrupted by a mutated human beta globin intron 2. This mutation creates a new aberrant splicing site at position 705 that when used produced an mRNA that encodes a truncated non-functional luciferase ( ). To introduce this construct into a lentiviral vector, the pLUC705 plasmid was digested with HindIII/XhoI, blunted with T4 DNA polymerase, and ligated into StuI-digested and dephosphorylated LeGO-iG2 (#807, Addgene plasmid #27341), resulting in plasmid pLUC705.LeGO-iG2 (#875). The pTAT-Cre (#917, Addgene plasmid #35619) bacterial plasmid encodes a histidine-tagged TAT-Cre recombinase. The Cre reporter lentiviral vector (#918, Addgene plasmid #62732) encodes a LOXP-RFP-STOP-LOXP-GFP gene construct. Cells expressing this plasmid appear red but once recombination has occurred when TAT-Cre is translocated into cells, the RFP-STOP fragment will be excised, GFP but not RFP will now be produced, and cells will appear green.

## Peptides
TAT-RasGAP317-326 is a retro-inverso peptide (i.e. synthesized with D-amino-acids in the opposite direction compared to the natural sequence) labeled or not with FITC or TMR. The TAT moiety corresponds to amino acids 48–57 of the HIV TAT protein (RRRQRRKKRG) and the RasGAP317–326 moiety corresponds to amino acids from 317 to 326 of the human RasGAP protein (DTRLNTVWMW). These two moieties are separated by two glycine linker residues in the TAT-Ras-GAP317-326 peptide. FITC-bound peptides without cargo: TAT, Penetratin (RQIKWFQNRRMKWKK), R9 (RRRRRRRRR), and K9 (KKKKKKKKK) were synthesized in D-amino acid conformation. All peptides were synthesized in retro-inverso conformation (over the years different suppliers were used with routine checks for activity of TAT-RasGAP317-326 derived peptides, Biochemistry Department of University of Lausanne, SBS Genetech, China and Creative Peptides, USA) and resuspended to 1 mM in water.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed on non-normalized data, using GraphPad Prism 7. ANOVA multiple comparison analysis to wild-type condition was done using Dunnett’s correction ( and and , top panel, and PI internalization in , as well as TAT-PNA internalization in ). ANOVA multiple comparison analysis between several conditions was done using Tuckey’s correction ( ). Comparison between two conditions was done using two-tailed paired t-test for the CPP internalization experiments described in (bottom panel), , , and . All measurements were from biological replicates. Unless otherwise stated, the horizontal bars in the graph represent the median, the height of columns correspond to averages, and the dots in the figures correspond to values derived from independent experiments.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001711Swiss National Science Foundation

CRSII3_154420 IZCSZ0-174639 to Christian Widmann.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001711Swiss National Science Foundation

158116 to Nadja Chevalier.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001711Swiss National Science Foundation

320030_170062 to Francesca Amati.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001711Swiss National Science Foundation

310030-184759 to Anita Lüthi.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation awarded to CW (no. CRSII3_154420, IZCSZ0-174639), to NC (no. 158116), to FA (no. 320030_170062) and to AL (no. 310030-184759). We are thankful to Prof. Denise Nardelli Haefliger and her group at the Lausanne University Hospital, especially to Sonia Domingos Pereira and Laurent Derre for helpful discussions. We are thankful to the Cellular Imaging Facility, Mouse Pathology Facility and Genomic Technologies Facility at the University of Lausanne for the resources provided and their technical help. We would like to thank Giacomo Nanni for his technical help in running the molecular simulations. We are also thankful to the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS). We are grateful to Jacques Morisod for helping us perforing the ITC experiments at the Laboratoires des Polymères (EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland).

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing.
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization.
Conceptualization, Investigation, Validation.
Conceptualization, Investigation, Validation.
Software.
Investigation, Validation.
Investigation.
Formal analysis, Investigation.
Investigation.
Formal analysis, Supervision.
Investigation.
Investigation, Validation.
Resources, Supervision.
Resources, Supervision.
Resources, Supervision.
Resources, Supervision.
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing.

## Ethics
All experiments were performed according to the principles of laboratory animal care and Swiss legislation under ethical approval (Swiss Animal Protection Ordinance; permit number VD3374.a).

## Additional files
Supplementary file 1.

## Components of the culture medium lacking potassium chloride and sodium chloride.
This table lists the components found in the Biowest RPMI-like media that lacks potassium chloride and sodium chloride.
Supplementary file 2.

## Membrane lipid composition considered in the present study.
This table lists the proportions of various lipids found in the inner and outer layers of the plasma membrane that we have used for our simulations.
Supplementary file 3.

## Nascent water pore free energy estimations in various studies.
This table reports the free energy that needs to be overcome for the formation of water pores that was calculated in the indicated studies.
Supplementary file 4.

## Primer sequences used in the second PCR performed to bar code the single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) of the selected populations.
The green nucleotides correspond to the bar codes. The red nucleotides are added to increase library complexity to prevent signal saturation when the sequencing is performed. The blue sequences are complementary to the extremities of the first PCR fragments.
Supplementary file 5.

## Single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) used to disrupt the indicated genes.
This table provides the sequences of the sgRNAs used to target the first exon of the indicated genes.
Supplementary file 6.

## Forward and reverse primers used in the TA cloning procedure.
Transparent reporting form

## Data availability
DNA sequencing data from the CRISPR/Cas9-based screens are available through the following link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/SRP161445.
The following dataset was generated:

TrofimenkoE
GrassoG
HeulotM
ChevalierN
DeriuMA
DubuisG
ArribatY
SerullaM
MichelS
VantommeG
OryF
DamLC
PuyalJ
AmatiF
LüthiA
DananiA
WidmannC
2018CRISPR/Cas9 screen to identify genes involved in uptake of cell-penetrating peptidesNCBI Sequence Read ArchiveSRP161445

 10.7554/eLife.69832.sa0Editor's evaluation
BassereauPatriciaReviewing Editor
Institut Curie
France
Although the role of membrane potential in cell-penetrating peptide (CPP) translocation has been consistently described in artificial systems, this multi scale study combining cell biology, genetics and in silico approaches further extends this topic to a live cell context where it shows that internalization stops when the membrane polarization is decreased by the removal of potassium channels. It proposes an original mechanism of CPP translocation based on transient water pore formation, which should be of interest for biophysicists, cell biologists and for applications such as drug deliver.
10.7554/eLife.69832.sa1Decision letter
BassereauPatriciaReviewing Editor
Institut Curie
France
JoliotAlainReviewer
Collège de France
France
Our editorial process produces two outputs: (i) public reviews designed to be posted alongside the preprint for the benefit of readers; (ii) feedback on the manuscript for the authors, including requests for revisions, shown below. We also include an acceptance summary that explains what the editors found interesting or important about the work.

Decision letter after peer review:

Thank you for submitting your article "Genetic, cellular and structural characterization of the membrane 1 potential-dependent cell-penetrating peptide translocation pore" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by 2 peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and Olga Boudker as the Senior Editor. The following individual involved in review of your submission has agreed to reveal their identity: Alain Joliot (Reviewer #2).
The reviewers have discussed their reviews with one another, and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this to help you prepare a revised submission.
Essential revisions:
We believe that your study is original and brings new data to the field. The additional data that we ask should strengthen your paper and should be feasible in about 2 months.
1) Data analysis:
Quantification of CPP uptake that takes into account the intracellular localization of the CPP (cytosolic versus vesicular) is a critical issue in cellular models. In this study, quantification relies either on the toxicity induced by the cytosolic accumulation of the Tat-RasGAP peptide or on the direct visualization of fluorescently-labelled CPPs. In the latter case, the choice made by the authors to define 3 categories for quantification has to be justified. More precisely, merging the low and strong cytosolic signal categories into a single one is questionable as these two categories might correspond to distinct functional fates due to the highly variable cytosolic staining (much more than between vesicular and low cytosolic). Indeed, the water pore mechanism invoked by the authors might correspond to an "all or none" mechanism for the cytosolic delivery that thus, to low and high cytosolic contents, respectively. It would be then relevant to determine how each category (low and high) is affected by the membrane potential.
In order to link functional (toxicity) and live imaging analysis assays, one possibility would be to analyze the remaining living cells following long incubation (16-24h) with FITC-TAT RasGAP to estimate which staining category is actually killed (ideally with or without hyperpolarization). The non-toxic mutant TatRASGAP (W317A) could be used as control.
Optional: To check whether the very large heterogeneity in the translocation efficiency within a same cell culture could be related to heterogeneities in membrane potential among cells, the membrane potential of each cell could be measured (using DiBAC4(3) labelling or any genetically encoded membrane potential sensor) together with CPP translocation (labelled TMR if using DiBAC).
2) Ectopic expression of the potassium channel in "heterologous" context.
Although distinct types of potassium channels have been characterized in the screen, the authors only consider their action on the membrane potential, supported by the effects of specific drugs. However, translocation efficiency does not strictly correlate with membrane potential (e. g. KCNJ2 expression in WT and KCNN4 KO Hela figure 3B). It would be interesting to evaluate if KCNQ5 expression would rescue or even increase internalization (additive effect) in SW6.4 and HeLa cells (WT and KCNN4 KO) and vice versa (KCNN4 expression in Raji). This would also avoid any potential interference of the CRISPR system on ectopic expression. Indeed, the kinetic of CPP uptake significantly differs between cell lines (Figure 1B, almost 100% negative cells for Raji at 20 minutes and only 20% for the 2 others), suggesting partially distinct mechanisms.
On the simulations:
3)The limitations of the simulations should be discussed. The main limitation is the structure of peptides because the Martini forcefield (the version should be mentioned) is not able to properly capture peptide folding, which can be important in membrane adsorption/translocation. Thus, the in silico results should be viewed only as an indication (not proof), the folding issue should be mentioned in the manuscript and the authors should more clearly specify what the peptide structures are.
4) Current simulations seem to mainly capture the effect of simple electrostatics; i.e. more charges, more penetration. To test this, the authors could do simulations with K9 and compare it to R9, which is known experimentally to translocate better than K9. Such comparison would show what simulations actually detect.
Optional:
– Further check experimentally the physical mechanism related to the membrane potential: compare the uptake effectiveness for different lengths of poly-arginines. If the mechanism is correct, the effectiveness will increase with increasing length.
[Editors' note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.]
Thank you for submitting your article "Genetic, cellular and structural characterization of the membrane potential-dependent cell-penetrating peptide translocation pore" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by 2 peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and Olga Boudker as the Senior Editor. The following individuals involved in review of your submission have agreed to reveal their identity: Alain Joliot (Reviewer #2).
The reviewers have discussed their reviews with one another, and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this to help you prepare a revised submission.
Essential revisions:

Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):

The authors responded to all the raised issues and modified the manuscript accordingly. The manuscript represents an important contribution to the field of CPP translocation into cells. Based on the experiments and simulations CPP, they propose a mechanism that CPPs enter the cell thanks to the electrostatic membrane potential. The data are well presented, however, it seems to me that the authors overinterpret the data because the presented mechanism and its discussion have few flaws:
On page 21: The authors state: "However, it has been determined that, once embedded into membranes, lysine residues tend to lose protons (Armstrong et al., 2016; Li et al., 2013). This will thus dissipate the strong membrane potential required for the formation of water pores and leave the lysine-containing CPPs stuck within the phospholipids of the membrane."
Lysine can indeed get neutral in the membrane, and the deprotonated state is the most favorable state in the middle of the membrane hydrophobic core (see MacCallum et al., 2008 for free energy profiles of lysine insertion). However, it is energetically unfavorable for lysine to be inside the membrane even when deprotonated. The most favorable state for lysin is to be protonated in solution (around neutral pH), i.e., lysine residue is hydrophilic, not hydrophobic. Therefore, lysine residues preferentially leave the membrane and not get stuck inside the membrane, as the authors state. Moreover, the proton will dissociate during the lysine insertion into the membrane, and thus it most likely stays outside of the cell. Note that when peptides are in the pore, they are not in the hydrophobic core of the membrane.
Page 22: "…water pores created by megapolarization have a diameter of about 2(-5) nm. Molecules larger than 2 nm are therefore less efficiently transported through these water pores. Polyarginine peptides of 20 amino acids or more have a predicted spherical diameter greater than 2 nm and would travel less efficiency through the water pores than shorter peptides. The efficiency of direct translocation is therefore likely modulated by the number of positive charges of the peptide and the size of the peptides (not mentioning the role of the secondary structures adopted by the CPPs)."
I agree with the general statement that the uptake of large molecules could be hindered or even prevented by the limited size of the pore size. However, the PEPFOLD-3 server, which the authors used for the prediction of peptide structures fixed in all simulations, predicts helical structure for polyarginine peptides with lengths 9 and even 20. Such helix has a diameter smaller than 2 nm along the helical axes and thus can easily get through the pore. Therefore, the presented data/discussion is not consistent with simulations.
Finally, the authors correctly state that arginine residues could be replaced by tryptophan residues in CPPs leading to similar translocation in cells. This possibility clearly demonstrates that there is more into the CPP translocation mechanism than the electrostatic membrane potential. The used explanation "It appears that loss of positive charges that contribute to water pore formation can be compensated by acquisition of strengthened lipid interactions when arginine residues are replaced with tryptophan residues." is strange because the use of more residues with less hydrophobic character would then have the same effect (e.g., two phenylalanine residues instead of arginine or tryptophan). In addition, the membrane potential does not explain the experiments on GUVs. Therefore, despite a nice demonstration of the importance of the membrane potential for the CPP translocation into cells, the mechanism seems to be more complex.

Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):

I really appreciate the efforts of the authors to provide new experimental data in response to the comments, which reinforce the quality of the manuscript. I fully agree that the time component should be critical at the level the whole cell population, which is not incompatible with an all or none mechanism at the single cell level, i.e.once reaching the favorable membrane potential. Surprisingly, fluorescent median intensity rather than the percentage of cells with high intensity signal seems to increase over time (Figure 1 sup4, error in axis title panel D) at least in HeLa cells. Inherent to most original studies, this work raises some interesting questions which remain unanswered or unclear but this would be part of another study. In particular, the use of genetic sensor instead of diBac to measure membrane potential might greatly help to dissect the translocation process on a single-cell basis.
In conclusion I would recommend the publication of this manuscript in its revised version
10.7554/eLife.69832.sa2Author response
Essential revisions:
We believe that your study is original and brings new data to the field. The additional data that we ask should strengthen your paper and should be feasible in about 2 months.
1) Data analysis:
Quantification of CPP uptake that takes into account the intracellular localization of the CPP (cytosolic versus vesicular) is a critical issue in cellular models. In this study, quantification relies either on the toxicity induced by the cytosolic accumulation of the Tat-RasGAP peptide or on the direct visualization of fluorescently-labelled CPPs. In the latter case, the choice made by the authors to define 3 categories for quantification has to be justified. More precisely, merging the low and strong cytosolic signal categories into a single one is questionable as these two categories might correspond to distinct functional fates due to the highly variable cytosolic staining (much more than between vesicular and low cytosolic). Indeed, the water pore mechanism invoked by the authors might correspond to an "all or none" mechanism for the cytosolic delivery that thus, to low and high cytosolic contents, respectively. It would be then relevant to determine how each category (low and high) is affected by the membrane potential.
We thank the reviewer for this interesting comment. The reviewer suggests that water pore formation mechanism is an “all or none” process, which could be the case. However, based on our results in Figure 1, another plausible interpretation to account for CPP uptake heterogeneity within the cell population is the difference in kinetics of water pore formation, indicating a need for a certain membrane potential threshold favorable to water pore formation. We have seen that over time there are more and more cells that acquire the CPP within the cytosol, which supports the time component of the process.
As the reviewer suggested, we have now quantitated the percentage of cells with different CPP fluorescence intensity within the cytosol in non-treated, depolarized (gramicidin treatment) or hyperpolarized (valinomycin treatment) conditions (see Figure 3 – figure supplement 2D ). As seen previously (Figure 3C-D), Penetratin uptake is slightly less affected by membrane potential modulation than the uptake of TAT and R9, though the trend remains the same. For all three tested CPPs, in the control condition, there is a mixed population of cells where the CPP cytosolic signal is either absent, low or high. The fact that there is a mix of the CPP cytosolic uptake efficiency in the non-treated population could be due to differences in the basal membrane potential within the cell population. Upon depolarization, cells with high cytosolic signal were no longer observed. Most cells were actually unable to acquire the CPPs in their cytosol. However, when cells were hyperpolarized by valinomycin, the percentage of cells without cytosolic signal became negligible and the number of cells with high cytosolic CPP signal increased in comparison to the non-treated condition. These results confirm our previous results that cytosolic CPP access is membrane-potential dependent, which is reflected in the increased intensity of CPP cytosolic signal in hyperpolarized conditions. These results are now part of Figure 3 – figure supplement 2D.
In order to link functional (toxicity) and live imaging analysis assays, one possibility would be to analyze the remaining living cells following long incubation (16-24h) with FITC-TAT RasGAP to estimate which staining category is actually killed (ideally with or without hyperpolarization). The non-toxic mutant TatRASGAP (W317A) could be used as control.
We now provide an additional experiment to address this question in [Figure 1 —figure supplement 4] by combining flow cytometry and confocal microscopy data. Despite intensity differences, the appearance of the populations with high and low CPP fluorescence occurred with similar kinetics (panels A-B). There was an almost perfect correlation between:
i) the percentage of cells with low intensity peptide fluorescence detected by flow cytometry and the percentage of cells with vesicular staining and low CPP cytosolic signal visualized with confocal microscopy (panel C),
ii) the percentage of cells with high intensity peptide fluorescence detected by flow cytometry and the percentage of cells with high CPP cytosolic staining visualized with confocal microscope (panel D).
Cell death induced by TAT-RasGAP317-326 was mostly recorded in cells from the high-intensity fluorescent population (panel E), which, based on our results, corresponds to cells that had acquired the CPP through direct translocation across the cell membrane. Hence, cytosolic accumulation of the peptide in relatively high amounts is what allows TAT-RasGAP317-326 to kill HeLa cells. For the mechanism underlying the killing activity of TAT-RasGAP317-326, and why the TAT-RasGAP317-326 mutant lacks this activity, please refer to the following reference: Serulla et al. PNAS 2020 117:31871.
Optional: To check whether the very large heterogeneity in the translocation efficiency within a same cell culture could be related to heterogeneities in membrane potential among cells, the membrane potential of each cell could be measured (using DiBAC4(3) labelling or any genetically encoded membrane potential sensor) together with CPP translocation (labelled TMR if using DiBAC).
This is indeed an interesting point. We, as well as others1-7, have regularly observed different abilities of cells within a culture to take up CPPs. Some take up the CPP by endocytosis, others by direct translocation, many using both eventually. There can also be cells in a population that do not take up CPPs at all. The observed variability is currently not understood and could be modulated by the metabolic state of the cell, by the extent of cell polarization, as well as in which stage of the cell cycle cells are (for the latter point, it is known indeed that cells close to mitosis become refractory to endocytosis). In our DiBac3(4) experiments performed with control cells, we have seen that the probe fluorescence follows a relatively broad Gaussian distribution (i.e. spanning about 1 ½ logs of fluorescence intensity) indicating that cells within a population can have very different Vm (see ). Similar results were recently obtained using single cell membrane potential detection that showed that within a cell population the Vm vary between -100 mV to 0 mV 8. We have attempted to co-incubate the cells with TMR-CPP and DiBac3(4). However, these two molecules seem to interact with each other, preventing adequate interpretation of the results. Nevertheless, we agree with the reviewer that the heterogeneity in the CPP uptake could reflect the membrane potential differences within the cell population.
 2) Ectopic expression of the potassium channel in "heterologous" context.
Although distinct types of potassium channels have been characterized in the screen, the authors only consider their action on the membrane potential, supported by the effects of specific drugs. However, translocation efficiency does not strictly correlate with membrane potential (e. g. KCNJ2 expression in WT and KCNN4 KO Hela figure 3B). It would be interesting to evaluate if KCNQ5 expression would rescue or even increase internalization (additive effect) in SKW6.4 and HeLa cells (WT and KCNN4 KO) and vice versa (KCNN4 expression in Raji). This would also avoid any potential interference of the CRISPR system on ectopic expression. Indeed, the kinetic of CPP uptake significantly differs between cell lines (Figure 1B, almost 100% negative cells for Raji at 20 minutes and only 20% for the 2 others), suggesting partially distinct mechanisms.
We thank the reviewer for this interesting suggestion of potassium channel expression in “heterologous” context. Through these experiments (see Figure 3 —figure supplement 1) we have indeed been able to show that the KCNQ5 and KCNN4 CRISPR/Cas9-identified potassium channels modulate the cell membrane potential not only when present endogenously, but also when ectopically expressed. Ectopic expression of the identified potassium channels led to cell hyperpolarization (albeit to a lesser extent than what was observed in Figure 3B), which as expected resulted in increased CPP internalization. These results are now part of Figure 3 —figure supplement 1C.
The reviewer is correct that CPP internalization in Raji cells is somewhat delayed in comparison to HeLa and SKW6.4 cells. It is possible that distinct mechanisms are used by different cell lines to acquire CPPs in their cytosol. However, since direct translocation, in all the tested cell lines, is inhibited by depolarization and increased by hyperpolarization, we rather suggest that direct translocation follows the mechanism described in our manuscript but with different kinetics and efficiencies between cell lines possibly due to differences in cell membrane composition affecting initial peptide surface binding and consequently modulating further water pore formation and CPP entry.
On the simulations:
3) The limitations of the simulations should be discussed. The main limitation is the structure of peptides because the Martini forcefield (the version should be mentioned) is not able to properly capture peptide folding, which can be important in membrane adsorption/translocation. Thus, the in silico results should be viewed only as an indication (not proof), the folding issue should be mentioned in the manuscript and the authors should more clearly specify what the peptide structures are.
Martini forcefield, as any other model, has indeed a number of known limitations9,10 such as the chemical and spatial resolution, which are both limited compared to atomistic models. There is also a shifted balance between entropy and enthalpy due to the reduced number of degrees of freedom. Moreover, as correctly mentioned by the Reviewer, the secondary structure is an input parameter of the model, which implies that secondary structure elements remain fixed during the simulation11, starting from the molecular model obtained through the PEPFOLD-3 server12-14. Tertiary structural changes, however, are allowed and in principle realistically described with Martini forcefield. The coarse-grained approach has demonstrated to provide reliable results in the context of protein translocation mechanism15, estimation of tilt angle of membrane spanning helices11, or helix-helix packing motifs16,17, H-NMR quadrupolar splitting of WALP peptides (reproduced to a better extent than atomistic simulations)18, structure prediction of the glycophorin A dimer compared to NMR data16, water transmembrane (TM) permeation rate11,19, propensity for interfacial versus TM peptide orientation11, lateral diffusion of peptides20 and proteins21, and dimerization free energies of transmembrane helices22. Moreover, the ability of Martini Coarse-grained forcefield to model realistic, heterogeneous, membranes was widely demonstrated in literature. Extensive comparison of the performance of the Martini model with respect to a variety of experimental properties has revealed that the model performs generally very well in term of membrane thickness, area per lipid (typically reproduced to within 0.1–0.2 nm2)19,23, ternary phase behavior of lipid mixtures24, liquid densities19, accessible lipid conformations25, membrane bending modulus19, rupture tension23, diffusion rates of lipids19,23, time scales for lipid aggregation19, bilayer phase transition temperatures26,27, lipid desorption free energy23, membrane domain formation24,28 data. The scientific literature in the field of coarse-grained molecular simulations of cell membranes is summarized in a recent review10. In the context of electroporation, the implementation of a polarizable water model for the coarse-grained MARTINI force field19,29 allowed to induce pores in a membrane in a similar manner as it was done in atomistic simulations19,30. However, treatment of long-range electrostatic interactions with the PME method is a prerequisite to observe pores and therefore an increased computational effort is needed. For this reason, we applied the PME method to treat the electrostatic interactions (Please see the Material and Method section of the manuscript).
We’ve carefully discussed the limitations of the coarse-grained approach applied in the manuscript, as required by the Reviewer in the Discussion section of the manuscript. Moreover, we’ve also specified the version of the forcefield used. We would also specify that, as reported in Material and Methods section of the manuscript, the CPP molecular structure has been generated through the PEPFOLD-3 server12, as done in recent manuscripts in the field13,31.
4) Current simulations seem to mainly capture the effect of simple electrostatics; i.e. more charges, more penetration. To test this, the authors could do simulations with K9 and compare it to R9, which is known experimentally to translocate better than K9. Such comparison would show what simulations actually detect.
The reviewer is correct and we mention in the discussion that, according to our model, K9 should induce megapolarization and formation of water pores. This should then allow efficient K9 translocation into cells, contradicting the cellular observations made by us and others that K9 internalization if less efficient than that of R9 (Figure 3 —figure supplement 2C). It has been determined that besides the differences in the formation of hydrogen bonds between the two CPPs, lysine and arginine differ in their protonation state. Once embedded into membranes, lysine residues tend to lose protons32,33. This will thus dissipate the strong membrane potential required for the formation of water pores and leave the lysine-containing CPPs stuck within the phospholipids of the membrane. In contrast, arginine residues are not deprotonated in membranes and water pores can therefore be maintained allowing the arginine-rich CPPs to be taken up by cells. This phenomenon however cannot be modeled by coarse-grained in silico simulations because the protonation state is fixed at the beginning of the simulation runs and is not allowed to evolve. Therefore, the uptake kinetics of lysine-rich peptides, such as MAP and K9, would appear artefactually similar as the uptake kinetics of arginine-rich peptides such as R9. This was discussed in the previous version of the manuscript.
Optional:
– Further check experimentally the physical mechanism related to the membrane potential: compare the uptake effectiveness for different lengths of poly-arginines. If the mechanism is correct, the effectiveness will increase with increasing length.
Several previously published studies such as34,35 have addressed this question by comparing the internalization efficiency of polyarginine peptides of various lengths. According to these studies the optimal length of consecutive arginine residues appears to be between 9-16 amino acids, resulting in optimal CPP cytosolic acquisition. Shorter and longer peptides have decreased internalization efficiencies. The role of the Vm presented in our model is consistent with the reduced uptake of short polyarginine peptides but the Vm parameter of our model cannot explain why longer polyarginine peptides are less efficiently taken up by cells. Our work however also indicates that the water pores created by megapolarization have a diameter of about 2(-5) nm. Molecules larger than 2 nm are therefore less efficiently transported through these water pores. Polyarginine peptides of 20 amino acids or more have a predicted spherical diameter greater than 2 nm and would travel less efficiency through the water pores than shorter peptides. The efficiency of direct translocation is therefore likely modulated by the number of positive charges of the peptide and the size of the peptides (not mentioning the role of the secondary structures adopted by the CPPs). This is now addressed in the discussion of the updated version of the manuscript.
[Editors' note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.]
Essential revisions:
Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):
The authors responded to all the raised issues and modified the manuscript accordingly. The manuscript represents an important contribution to the field of CPP translocation into cells. Based on the experiments and simulations CPP, they propose a mechanism that CPPs enter the cell thanks to the electrostatic membrane potential. The data are well presented, however, it seems to me that the authors overinterpret the data because the presented mechanism and its discussion have few flaws:
On page 21: The authors state: "However, it has been determined that, once embedded into membranes, lysine residues tend to lose protons (Armstrong et al., 2016; Li et al., 2013). This will thus dissipate the strong membrane potential required for the formation of water pores and leave the lysine-containing CPPs stuck within the phospholipids of the membrane."
Lysine can indeed get neutral in the membrane, and the deprotonated state is the most favorable state in the middle of the membrane hydrophobic core (see MacCallum et al., 2008 for free energy profiles of lysine insertion). However, it is energetically unfavorable for lysine to be inside the membrane even when deprotonated. The most favorable state for lysin is to be protonated in solution (around neutral pH), i.e., lysine residue is hydrophilic, not hydrophobic. Therefore, lysine residues preferentially leave the membrane and not get stuck inside the membrane, as the authors state. Moreover, the proton will dissociate during the lysine insertion into the membrane, and thus it most likely stays outside of the cell. Note that when peptides are in the pore, they are not in the hydrophobic core of the membrane.
We thank the reviewer for raising the point that lysine-containing peptides are unlikely to get “stuck” in the plasma membrane. We have now rephrased our statement to indicate that the dissipated membrane potential as a result of lysine deprotonation would prevent the peptide from crossing the membrane. We have removed the notion that lysine-containing peptides get stuck in membranes as this would unlikely happen based on this reviewer’s explanations. We have also added the MacCallum study to the references indicating that lysines get deprotonated in membranes.
Page 22: "…water pores created by megapolarization have a diameter of about 2(-5) nm. Molecules larger than 2 nm are therefore less efficiently transported through these water pores. Polyarginine peptides of 20 amino acids or more have a predicted spherical diameter greater than 2 nm and would travel less efficiency through the water pores than shorter peptides. The efficiency of direct translocation is therefore likely modulated by the number of positive charges of the peptide and the size of the peptides (not mentioning the role of the secondary structures adopted by the CPPs)."
I agree with the general statement that the uptake of large molecules could be hindered or even prevented by the limited size of the pore size. However, the PEPFOLD-3 server, which the authors used for the prediction of peptide structures fixed in all simulations, predicts helical structure for polyarginine peptides with lengths 9 and even 20. Such helix has a diameter smaller than 2 nm along the helical axes and thus can easily get through the pore. Therefore, the presented data/discussion is not consistent with simulations.
We agree with the reviewer that larger molecules could use the water pores if they adopt thread-like structures but the general concept remains that since the pore has a given diameter, molecules with increasing sizes will be less and less likely on average to translocate via the water pore. To speculate less on the size that polyarginine peptides adopt when they translocate into cells we have now removed the mention of specific diameters. We have just kept the notion mentioned above, namely that size will influence the translocation of molecules across the water pores and that this might also apply to polyarginine peptides at some point.
Finally, the authors correctly state that arginine residues could be replaced by tryptophan residues in CPPs leading to similar translocation in cells. This possibility clearly demonstrates that there is more into the CPP translocation mechanism than the electrostatic membrane potential. The used explanation "It appears that loss of positive charges that contribute to water pore formation can be compensated by acquisition of strengthened lipid interactions when arginine residues are replaced with tryptophan residues." is strange because the use of more residues with less hydrophobic character would then have the same effect (e.g., two phenylalanine residues instead of arginine or tryptophan). In addition, the membrane potential does not explain the experiments on GUVs. Therefore, despite a nice demonstration of the importance of the membrane potential for the CPP translocation into cells, the mechanism seems to be more complex.
We understand this reviewer concern. To be less speculative we have removed the quoted sentence and also added a last sentence in this paragraph indicating indeed that the direct translocation mechanisms is unlikely explained solely by the electric characteristics of the CPPs.
References
1. Wallbrecher, R., Ackels, T., Olea, R. A., Klein, M. J., Caillon, L., Schiller, J., Bovee-Geurts, P. H., van Kuppevelt, T. H., Ulrich, A. S., Spehr, M., Adjobo-Hermans, M. J. W. & Brock, R. Membrane permeation of arginine-rich cell-penetrating peptides independent of transmembrane potential as a function of lipid composition and membrane fluidity. J Control Release 256, 68-78, doi:10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.04.013 (2017).
2. Zhang, X., Jin, Y., Plummer, M. R., Pooyan, S., Gunaseelan, S. & Sinko, P. J. Endocytosis and membrane potential are required for HeLa cell uptake of R.I.-CKTat9, a retro-inverso Tat cell penetrating peptide. Mol Pharm 6, 836-848, doi:10.1021/mp800121f (2009).
3. Herce, H. D., Garcia, A. E. & Cardoso, M. C. Fundamental molecular mechanism for the cellular uptake of guanidinium-rich molecules. J Am Chem Soc 136, 17459-17467, doi:10.1021/ja507790z (2014).
4. Ziegler, A., Nervi, P., Dürrenberger, M. & Seelig, J. The Cationic Cell-Penetrating Peptide CPPTAT Derived from the HIV-1 Protein TAT Is Rapidly Transported into Living Fibroblasts:  Optical, Biophysical, and Metabolic Evidence. Biochemistry 44, 138-148, doi:10.1021/bi0491604 (2005).
5. Duchardt, F., Fotin-Mleczek, M., Schwarz, H., Fischer, R. & Brock, R. A comprehensive model for the cellular uptake of cationic cell-penetrating peptides. Traffic 8, 848-866, doi:10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00572.x (2007).
6. Potocky, T. B., Menon, A. K. & Gellman, S. H. Cytoplasmic and nuclear delivery of a TAT-derived peptide and a beta-peptide after endocytic uptake into HeLa cells. J Biol Chem 278, 50188-50194, doi:10.1074/jbc.M308719200 (2003).
7. Ter-Avetisyan, G., Tunnemann, G., Nowak, D., Nitschke, M., Herrmann, A., Drab, M. & Cardoso, M. C. Cell entry of arginine-rich peptides is independent of endocytosis. J Biol Chem 284, 3370-3378, doi:10.1074/jbc.M805550200 (2009).
8. Lazzari-Dean, J. R., Gest, A. M. & Miller, E. W. Optical estimation of absolute membrane potential using fluorescence lifetime imaging. Elife 8, doi:10.7554/eLife.44522 (2019).
9. Marrink, S. J. & Tieleman, D. P. Perspective on the Martini model. Chem Soc Rev 42, 6801-6822, doi:10.1039/c3cs60093a (2013).
10. Marrink, S. J., Corradi, V., Souza, P. C. T., Ingolfsson, H. I., Tieleman, D. P. & Sansom, M. S. P. Computational Modeling of Realistic Cell Membranes. Chem Rev 119, 6184-6226, doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00460 (2019).
11. Monticelli, L., Kandasamy, S. K., Periole, X., Larson, R. G., Tieleman, D. P. & Marrink, S. J. The MARTINI Coarse-Grained Force Field: Extension to Proteins. J Chem Theory Comput 4, 819-834, doi:10.1021/ct700324x (2008).
12. Lamiable, A., Thevenet, P., Rey, J., Vavrusa, M., Derreumaux, P. & Tuffery, P. PEP-FOLD3: faster de novo structure prediction for linear peptides in solution and in complex. Nucleic Acids Res 44, W449-454, doi:10.1093/nar/gkw329 (2016).
13. Grasso, G., Muscat, S., Rebella, M., Morbiducci, U., Audenino, A., Danani, A. & Deriu, M. A. Cell penetrating peptide modulation of membrane biomechanics by Molecular dynamics. J Biomech 73, 137-144, doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2018.03.036 (2018).
14. Grasso, G., Deriu, M. A., Prat, M., Rimondini, L., Verne, E., Follenzi, A. & Danani, A. Cell Penetrating Peptide Adsorption on Magnetite and Silica Surfaces: A Computational Investigation. J Phys Chem B 119, 8239-8246, doi:10.1021/jp512782e (2015).
15. Koch, S., Exterkate, M., Lopez, C. A., Patro, M., Marrink, S. J. & Driessen, A. J. M. Two distinct anionic phospholipid-dependent events involved in SecA-mediated protein translocation. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr 1861, 183035, doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2019.183035 (2019).
16. Sengupta, D. & Marrink, S. J. Lipid-mediated interactions tune the association of glycophorin A helix and its disruptive mutants in membranes. Phys Chem Chem Phys 12, 12987-12996, doi:10.1039/c0cp00101e (2010).
17. Periole, X., Cavalli, M., Marrink, S. J. & Ceruso, M. A. Combining an Elastic Network With a Coarse-Grained Molecular Force Field: Structure, Dynamics, and Intermolecular Recognition. J Chem Theory Comput 5, 2531-2543, doi:10.1021/ct9002114 (2009).
18. Castillo, N., Monticelli, L., Barnoud, J. & Tieleman, D. P. Free energy of WALP23 dimer association in DMPC, DPPC, and DOPC bilayers. Chem Phys Lipids 169, 95-105, doi:10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2013.02.001 (2013).
19. Marrink, S. J., de Vries, A. H. & Mark, A. E. Coarse Grained Model for Semiquantitative Lipid Simulations. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 108, 750-760, doi:10.1021/jp036508g (2004).
20. Ramadurai, S., Holt, A., Schafer, L. V., Krasnikov, V. V., Rijkers, D. T., Marrink, S. J., Killian, J. A. & Poolman, B. Influence of hydrophobic mismatch and amino acid composition on the lateral diffusion of transmembrane peptides. Biophys J 99, 1447-1454, doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2010.05.042 (2010).
21. Periole, X., Huber, T., Marrink, S. J. & Sakmar, T. P. G protein-coupled receptors self-assemble in dynamics simulations of model bilayers. J Am Chem Soc 129, 10126-10132, doi:10.1021/ja0706246 (2007).
22. Monticelli, L., Tieleman, D. P. & Fuchs, P. F. Interpretation of 2H-NMR experiments on the orientation of the transmembrane helix WALP23 by computer simulations. Biophys J 99, 1455-1464, doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2010.05.039 (2010).
23. Marrink, S. J., Risselada, H. J., Yefimov, S., Tieleman, D. P. & de Vries, A. H. The MARTINI force field: coarse grained model for biomolecular simulations. J Phys Chem B 111, 7812-7824, doi:10.1021/jp071097f (2007).
24. Risselada, H. J. & Marrink, S. J. The molecular face of lipid rafts in model membranes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105, 17367-17372, doi:10.1073/pnas.0807527105 (2008).
25. Baron, R., Trzesniak, D., de Vries, A. H., Elsener, A., Marrink, S. J. & van Gunsteren, W. F. Comparison of thermodynamic properties of coarse-grained and atomic-level simulation models. Chemphyschem 8, 452-461, doi:10.1002/cphc.200600658 (2007).
26. Marrink, S. J. & Mark, A. E. Molecular view of hexagonal phase formation in phospholipid membranes. Biophys J 87, 3894-3900, doi:10.1529/biophysj.104.048710 (2004).
27. Marrink, S. J., Risselada, J. & Mark, A. E. Simulation of gel phase formation and melting in lipid bilayers using a coarse grained model. Chem Phys Lipids 135, 223-244, doi:10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2005.03.001 (2005).
28. Faller, R. & Marrink, S. J. Simulation of domain formation in DLPC-DSPC mixed bilayers. Langmuir 20, 7686-7693, doi:10.1021/la0492759 (2004).
29. Yesylevskyy, S. O., Schafer, L. V., Sengupta, D. & Marrink, S. J. Polarizable water model for the coarse-grained MARTINI force field. PLoS Comput Biol 6, e1000810, doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000810 (2010).
30. Kirsch, S. A. & Bockmann, R. A. Membrane pore formation in atomistic and coarse-grained simulations. Biochim Biophys Acta 1858, 2266-2277, doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2015.12.031 (2016).
31. Serulla, M., Ichim, G., Stojceski, F., Grasso, G., Afonin, S., Heulot, M., Schober, T., Roth, R., Godefroy, C., Milhiet, P. E., Das, K., Garcia-Saez, A. J., Danani, A. & Widmann, C. TAT-RasGAP317-326 kills cells by targeting inner-leaflet-enriched phospholipids. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, doi:10.1073/pnas.2014108117 (2020).
32. Armstrong, C. T., Mason, P. E., Anderson, J. L. & Dempsey, C. E. Arginine side chain interactions and the role of arginine as a gating charge carrier in voltage sensitive ion channels. Sci Rep 6, 21759, doi:10.1038/srep21759 (2016).
33. Li, L., Vorobyov, I. & Allen, T. W. The different interactions of lysine and arginine side chains with lipid membranes. J Phys Chem B 117, 11906-11920, doi:10.1021/jp405418y (2013).
34. Mitchell, D. J., Kim, D. T., Steinman, L., Fathman, C. G. & Rothbard, J. B. Polyarginine enters cells more efficiently than other polycationic homopolymers. J Pept Res 56, 318-325, doi:10.1034/j.1399-3011.2000.00723.x (2000).
35. Kosuge, M., Takeuchi, T., Nakase, I., Jones, A. T. & Futaki, S. Cellular Internalization and Distribution of Arginine-Rich Peptides as a Function of Extracellular Peptide Concentration, Serum, and Plasma Membrane Associated Proteoglycans. Bioconjugate Chemistry 19, 656-664, doi:10.1021/bc700289w (2008).