pmcJ Med ChemJ Med Chem822acssd9716531jmJournal of Medicinal Chemistry0022-26231520-4804pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC8883472PMC8883472.1888347288834723514810110.1021/acs.jmedchem.1c020671PerspectiveChasing a Breath
of Fresh Air in Cystic Fibrosis (CF):
Therapeutic Potential of Selective HDAC6 Inhibitors to Tackle Multiple
Pathways in CF Pathophysiology
BaroneSimona CasseseEmilia AlfanoAntonella Ileniahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9119-3773BrindisiMargherita https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6288-2681SummaVincenzo Department of Pharmacy, Department
of Excellence 2018-2022, School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples “Federico II”, Via D. Montesano 49, I-80131 Naples, Italy*Email: margherita.brindisi@unina.it.*Email: vincenzo.summa@unina.it.11022022240220226544019293080309703122021280220220103202202032022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2022The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Compelling new support
has been provided for histone deacetylase
isoform 6 (HDAC6) as a common thread in the generation of the dysregulated
proinflammatory and fibrotic phenotype in cystic fibrosis (CF). HDAC6
also plays a crucial role in bacterial clearance or killing as a direct
consequence of its effects on CF immune responses. Inhibiting HDAC6
functions thus eventually represents an innovative and effective strategy
to tackle multiple aspects of CF-associated lung disease. In this
Perspective, we not only showcase the latest evidence linking HDAC(6)
activity and expression with CF phenotype but also track the new dawn
of HDAC(6) modulators in CF and explore potentialities and future
perspectives in the field.

Fondazione Fibrosi CisticaNAFFC#20/2020pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9jm1c02067document-id-new-14jm1c02067ccc-price

## Special Issue
Published as part of
the Journal of Medicinal Chemistry special issue
“Epigenetics 2022”.

## Introduction
Cystic fibrosis (CF)
patients present mutations of the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, which codes for a
cyclic AMP-regulated chloride ion channel. Loss of function of this channel leads to defective transport of
chloride ion across the surface of epithelial cells, which in turn
interferes with the clearance of inhaled microorganisms. This lack
of defense against microorganisms is responsible for severe airway
infections in CF patients. Intensive antibiotic
therapy is mandatory for maintaining lung function and quality of
life and has contributed to a significant extension of the mean expected
lifetime of CF patients. The CF-associated
complex microbial flora of the respiratory tract are characterized
by the coexistence of multiple bacterial species, which complicates
the identification of a very efficacious antibacterial treatment.
Infections triggered by Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) are particularly challenging and have the
tendency to persist and become chronic. Morbimortality of CF patients is largely ascribable to chronic lung
infection, inflammation, and uncontrolled fibrotic tissue rearrangement.
The underlying pathways still remain underexplored; additionally,
the efficacy of currently employed anti-inflammatory treatments is
limited to symptomatic management of CF airway inflammation. 
The initial stage of CF-related lung disease
mainly consists of
prolonged airway inflammation accompanied by protracted infections,
chronic inflammation, mucus hypersecretion, and oxidative stress. − Evolution to chronic CF disease entails recurrent or steady infection
with PA, which finally results in chronic airway
inflammation, permanent pulmonary impairment, and collapse of respiratory
function. CFTR malfunctioning is also
related to a defective autophagy process that promotes chronic inflammation
and oxidative stress in CF airways. , Chronic inflammation
is mainly associated with NFκB-mediated proinflammatory signaling
(as demonstrated by increased levels of the NFκB-dependent genes
KC and Mip-2) and IL-8-dependent neutrophil chemotaxis. , Beyond neutrophils, other innate and adaptive immune cells are linked
to increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines,
thus promoting CF-related lung disease; therefore, a deeper knowledge of the mechanisms underlying inflammatory
response is of pivotal importance in CF research. Since CFTR-targeted
therapies display swinging efficacy in reducing inflammation in CF
airways, a complementary anti-inflammatory therapy to be employed
in association with CFTR correctors and potentiators would be an added
value in this context. More importantly, patients harboring CFTR mutations
that are not responsive to currently available modulators would at
least take advantage of innovative therapeutic options to re-establish
inflammatory regulation.
It has also been demonstrated that
CF fibroblasts exhibit an aberrant
phenotype characterized by uncontrolled proliferation and myofibroblast
differentiation, increased sensitivity to growth factors, and altered
levels of proinflammatory and fibrotic mediators. In particular, CF
lungs show increased release of transforming growth factor-β1
(TGF-β1), a multifunctional protein implicated in wound repair,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), myofibroblast differentiation,
and production of various elements of connective tissue matrix. , 
The latest studies identified the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
class
of enzymes as strategic components of the complex molecular machinery
underlying both inflammation and fibrogenesis in CF. Accordingly,
compelling new support has been provided for isoform HDAC6 as a common
thread in the generation of the dysregulated proinflammatory and fibrotic
phenotype in CF. − HDAC6 also plays a crucial role in bacterial clearance or killing
as a direct consequence of its effects on CF immune responses. Inhibiting HDAC6 functions thus eventually represents
a novel and effective strategy to tackle multiple aspects of CF-associated
lung disease. Selective HDAC6 inhibition should also avoid the common
toxicities related to the currently available unselective HDAC inhibitors.

1

## Current Therapeutic Strategies in Cystic Fibrosis:
State of the Art and Unmet Needs
CF is characterized by a
complex clinical picture. To date there
is no cure for CF, and the current treatment regimen requires ad personam
approaches. In general, a multidrug combination is required to control
the symptomatology associated with this pathology and to ensure improved
quality of life and life expectancy in CF patients. 
Currently, CF treatment includes CFTR modulators,
antibiotics,
bronchodilators, mucolytics, and anti-inflammatory and food supplements
(because of the lack of pancreatic enzymes and vitamins in CF patients). 
CF patients also deal with chronic bacterial
infections. Pulmonary
infections are especially caused by PA and Staphylococcus aureus (SA). Even
if primary infection is characterized by a low bacterial load, these
types of infections easily become chronic because of reduced mucociliary
clearance (caused by CFTR alteration), superficial airway fluid hypertonicity,
and resistance toward β-lactam antibiotics, mainly due to PA strains that produce serine and metal β-lactamases. , It is also important to underline how chronic infection in turn
prompts pulmonary tissue destruction, thus further worsening the clinical
picture for CF patients. Therefore, the role of antibiotic therapy
is crucial to control PA and other CF-associated
bacterial strains. , 
PA infections
in CF are generally treated with
β-lactam antibiotics. Piperacillin (1, ) is among the more
widely used, and it is often associated with tazobactam (2, ), aminoglycosides
such as tobramycin (3, ), macrolides such as azithromycin (4, ), and carbapenems such as meropenem (5, ). Tazobactam shows efficacy
in the inhibition of serine β-lactamases produced by PA.
 Fifth-generation cephalosporins such as ceftolozane
(6, ), associated
with tazobactam, show good activity against PA and
variable activity against other Gram-negative bacteria; ceftaroline (7, ) is effective against methicillin-resistant SA (MRSA). 
A more difficult
therapeutic approach involves bacterial strains
expressing metallo β-lactamases, since no drugs are currently
approved for their specific inhibition.
In addition to its effect
on bacterial protein synthesis, azithromycin
has important immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties, which
in part could explain the effectiveness of this class of antibiotics.
In fact, in patients with persistent PA infection,
azithromycin strongly reduces neutrophil chemiotaxis in the lung and
the release of elastases by neutrophils themselves. 
Another important aspect related to the management
of microbial
infections in CF patients is related to nontuberculous mycobacteria
(NTM) present in roughly 10% of CF patients, although only a small
set of them will show NTM disease. However, patients potentially prone
to develop NTM lung disease will just need careful monitoring on a
precautionary basis if symptoms and radiographic outcomes are negligible. 
With regard to anti-inflammatory therapy,
ibuprofen (8, ) is certainly
the most widely used drug, and it is able to reduce the migration
of neutrophils to the lung. However,
its use is limited because of side effects (e.g., renal failure, gastric
ulcers), which are common to all nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) and are associated with the chronic intake required for CF-related
inflammation treatment. Moreover, the need to monitor the blood concentration
to ensure the therapeutic effect for long times is an additional deterrent
to the use of ibuprofen. Another important factor to be considered
when dealing with both steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and NSAIDs
is the interindividual variability, which significantly affects treatment
efficacy and tolerability.
CF patients also experience the presence
of thick, sticky mucus.
For this reason, mucolytic therapy is considered to be beneficial
to reach the lower respiratory tract, where thicker mucus is produced.
Bronchitol (9, ) is the most representative and used drug of this
category.
The development of CFTR modulators marked the most
important breakthrough
in CF therapy. Depending on the mechanism of action, they are classified
as enhancers, correctors, or amplifiers. Correctors and enhancers
act on mutations that involve a defect in CFTR maturation and migration
on the cell membrane. Amplifiers act to increase CFTR protein production,
regardless of the type of mutation; a greater amount of defective
protein available would make the action of correctors and enhancers
more profitable ( ). 
 Symkevi is a combination of ivacaftor (10, ) and tezacaftor
(11, ) and is approved for patients (>12 years old) who are
homozygous
for phenylalanine 508 deletion (ΔF508). This mutation is associated
with a defect of CFTR transport from the nucleus to the cell membrane
and with reduced stability of the channel in the cell membrane itself.
CFTR correctors are basically able to increase the cell-surface expression
of mutated CFTR. Ivacaftor is an effective enhancer for class III
CFTR mutations (channel opening defect); it acts by improving CFTR
channel opening, thus increasing chlorine transport and leading to
cell osmolarity within physiological parameters.
 Tezacaftor is a CFTR corrector and improves CFTR protein
folding
and transport to the cell membrane. Thus, it is useful for patients
bearing mutations that result defective in protein folding. Kaftrio,
the last treatment approved, is a combination of ivacaftor, tezacaftor,
and elexacaftor (12, ) and acts as corrector of CFTR defects,
while Orkambi combines lumacaftor (13, VX809; ) and ivacaftor and
is used in pediatric patients that are at least 2 years of age. CFTR
modulators are essential drugs in CF therapy, but because of the large
number of CFTR mutations, they unfortunately are not always effective
in the entire patient population. Furthermore, their use is restricted
to patients harboring the specific mutations for which their use has
been approved.
Pirfenidone (14, ) and nintedanib (15, ) are used
in the
therapy for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and represent another
relevant therapeutic option to be considered in CF, with respect to
CF-associated pulmonary fibrosis. In
IPF these drugs showed efficacy in reducing fibrotic progress and
pulmonary failure, delaying disease progression without reversing
lung damage. However, their mechanism of action is still unclear,
and therefore, more detailed studies are required for their safe and
effective use in CF treatment. 
Ideally, an effective drug for CF should act independently of interindividual
gene variability and should be suitable for chronic therapy and therefore
characterized by a wide therapeutic window and high tolerability by
the patient. Currently, none of the available drugs used in CF therapy
possess all of these characteristics. Therefore, further research
efforts are still necessary to identify more effective and safe therapeutic
options in CF.

2

## Epigenetic Regulation in
Cystic Fibrosis
Epigenetic regulation is a complex mechanism
involved in gene expression
changes due to alterations of chromatin packaging. The main epigenetic
mechanisms include histone modification and DNA methylation, among
others. , Specifically, acetylation, methylation,
phosphorylation, and ubiquitination are the most representative histone
modifications, and they are implicated in several physiopathological
processes. Pairs of enzymes with opposing activity are responsible
for fine-tuning these modifications, such as histone methyltransferases
(HMTs) and demethylases or histone acetyltransferases (HAT) and HDACs.
These dynamic and reversible modifications regulate cell-specific
gene expression, acting as promoters or repressors. In particular,
histone acetylation causes gene activation, while histone methylation
can silence or activate genes. , 
To date, the
role of epigenetics in CF has not yet been entirely
unveiled, although several studies have pointed out the relevance
of DNA methylation and histone modifications in CFTR gene regulation
and protein activity. , These mechanisms could be crucial
for the discovery of innovative therapeutic strategies in CF treatment.
A study highlighted the relationship between CFTR mutations and
microRNA (miRNA)-controlled pathways. miRNAs are single-stranded noncoding RNAs that regulate cell differentiation,
growth, and proliferation as well as apoptosis and gene expression. CFTR plays a pivotal role in cellular homeostasis
by regulating Cl– and HCO3– ingress and egress, and the concentrations of these ions influence
miRNA expression, causing abnormal lung epithelial remodeling and
altered immune response in CF patients. Altered miRNA pathways could
explain major disorders associated with CFTR mutations. Thus, miRNAs could be a novel therapeutic target
for the management of CF and CF-related pathologies such as diabetes,
liver fibrosis, and pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
DNA methylation
and histone deacetylation promote CFTR transcriptional
inhibition. DNA methylation at promoters represses gene expression,
and this mechanism is altered in CF nasal epithelial cells, blood
cells, and lung macrophages. However,
it is still unclear whether this modification is a trigger or a result
of the disease. CFTR expression is regulated
by a housekeeping promoter and distal cisregulatory elements. Comparison of fetal and adult tissues of lung,
colon, and intestine revealed that CFTR expression was reduced during
development as a result of DNA methylation. In fetal tissues, CFTR
expression is not related to promoter methylation, while in adult
individuals the CFTR gene is silenced, suggesting how epigenetic regulation
could be correlated to the CF phenotype. In addition, mutant CFTR
expression causes the activation of ROS-mediated autophagy. In this
kind of cells, the CpG sequence of the CFTR gene results in hypermethylation,
causing an alteration of CFTR expression. 
Similarly, histone acetylation promotes CFTR expression, but
the
exact mechanisms of chromatin packaging in the CFTR locus still have
to be completely clarified. Histone acetylation neutralizes the positive
charge on lysine residues of the amino-terminal tails of the histones,
modifying the chromatin packaging and increasing the transcriptional
activity. The basal expression of CFTR
gene is connected to an inverted CCAAT element (sequence: 5′-AATTGGAAGCAAAT-3′)
located between nucleotides 132 and 119 upstream of the translational
start site. CFTR gene hyperacetylation of the CFTR promoter increases
gene transcription as a result of major accessibility to the CCAAT
sequence. In human lung and colon, introns
1 and 11 and the promoter result hyperacetylation, suggesting cell-type-specific
gene expression of CFTR. 
Dysregulation
of inflammatory mediators in the CF airway also has
an epigenetic basis. A CFTR defect itself causes inflammation, but
nevertheless, altered levels of histone acetylation and methylation
displayed significant correlations to the increase in inflammatory
markers, thus suggesting key epigenetic mechanisms underlying the
CF-associated inflammatory phenotype. − 
In conclusion,
key epigenetic changes appear to be involved in
CF, and they represent promising starting points for further research
efforts in this field. In particular, the role of specific epigenetic
enzymes, such as the HDAC class of enzymes, deserves particular attention,
since multiple pathways associated with CF are closely related to
HDAC expression and activity. In this review, special focus will be
devoted to HDAC6 isoform because of its unique features and its multifaceted
role in CF, which will be discussed in the following paragraphs.

3

## Structure and Substrates of HDAC6
HDAC enzymes are
responsible for acetyl group removal from histones
and other protein substrates. Eighteen isoforms of HDAC enzymes have
been identified to date, and they are clustered into four classes
on the basis of homology to yeast HDACs. Classes I, II, and IV are
zinc-dependent HDACs, while class III HDACs are NAD+-dependent.
HDAC isoforms 1, 2, 3, and 8 (class I) are expressed in the nucleus
of the cells of all tissues and share homology with yeast HDAC RDP3. , While HDAC isoforms 1 and 2 display nuclear localization, isoforms
3 and 8 can shuttle between the cell nucleus and the cytoplasm. Class
II HDACs are subdivided into Class IIA isoforms (4, 5, 7, and 9) and
Class IIB isoforms (6 and 10). Class IV contains isoform 11 and shows
homology with Class I and II HDACs. Class III HDACs are sirtuins (SIRT
isoforms 1–7) and display homology with yeast sirtuin protein
Sir2. , , 
HDAC6
is a cytoplasmic HDAC isoform containing 1215 amino acids
that is encoded by the hdac6 gene, and the general
structure and domain organization are depicted in . The amino-terminal domain is characterized by a nuclear localization
signal containing a high percentage of arginine and lysine residues,
followed by a nuclear export signal (NES) that is rich in leucine
and smooths the export of the enzyme toward its cytoplasmic localization.
The center of catalytic activity is represented by two deacetylation
domains, called DD1 and DD2, and HDAC6 is the only HDAC enzyme featuring
two catalytic domains. The catalytic domains are followed by a serine–glutamic
acid (SE14) tetradecapeptide signal that is responsible for cytoplasmic
retention ( ). The carboxy-terminal domain is characterized by a ubiquitin binding
domain containing Zn2+ ion (ZnF-UBP) that is rich in cysteine
and histidine residues and can interact with ubiquitinated proteins
that undergo the degradation process. In particular, the HDAC6 carboxy-terminal
domain controls the transfer of ubiquitinated proteins on the aggresomes
present on the microtubules; therefore, HDAC6 binds to ubiquitin,
thus preventing protein degradation via the ubiquitin proteasome.
 The main HDAC6 substrates are non-histone proteins, namely, heat
shock protein 90 (HSP90), α-tubulin, cortactin, and peroxiredoxins
( ).
The
first identified HDAC6 substrate was α-tubulin. Reversible
acetylation of α-tubulin on residue lysine 40 plays a fundamental
role in the regulation of stability and function of microtubules. Non-acetylated α-tubulin monomers interact
with each other through electrostatic interactions, which are lost
when the lysine nitrogen is acetylated, thus reducing inter-protofilament
interactions and enhancing the flexibility of microtubules under mechanical
stress.
Chemotactic cell movement, cell invasion, and migration
are triggered
by overexpression of HDAC6. Acetylated α-tubulin levels are
also responsible for the fine-tuning of motor-based trafficking, which
is essential for the transport of cargos along with the microtubule
network ( ). The ratio between acetylated and non-acetylated
tubulin is often altered in several pathological conditions and coincides
with an overexpression of HDAC6. − 
Another crucial
deacetylation substrate is HSP90, an ATP-dependent
chaperone involved in the maturation of several proteins, including
steroid receptors and mutant p53 proteins. HDAC6 inhibition increases
acetylated HSP90 (Ac-HSP90) levels, causing its dissociation from
cochaperone p23, which leads to failure of glucocorticoid receptor
protein maturation, with important consequences for the transcription
mechanism. Another consequence of the
increased Ac-HSP90 levels is the dissociation of the complex between
HDAC6 and heat shock transcription factor 1-(HSF1)–HSP90 which
in turn triggers the activation of HSF1 and the expression of crucial
cellular chaperones. 
HDAC6 also
performs its deacetylating activity on other two protein
substrates, namely, peroxiredoxins I (Prx I) and II (Prx II), both
of which are deeply implicated in redox regulation processes. At low H2O2 concentrations,
peroxiredoxins behave as antioxidants; , on the contrary,
increased levels of H2O2 cause the oxidation
of their cysteine residue to the corresponding sulfonic acid, prompting
the generation of high-molecular-mass protein complexes. Since acetylated
Prx is more effective in reducing H2O2 levels
than its non-acetylated counterpart, it is likely that inhibiting
HDAC6 function may increase the antioxidant activity of these proteins.
Beyond its interaction with non-histone substrates, HDAC6 interacts
with diverse proteins (e.g., ubiquitin, tau, IIp45, and EGFR) through
protein–protein interactions, which modulate its deacetylase
activity. , 
Owing to its unique functional and
structural characteristics,
HDAC6 deserves a special role in the armamentarium of epigenetic targets.
Accordingly, several research efforts have been devoted to the development
of novel, potent, and selective HDAC6 inhibitors for several disease
states. − An increasing number of reports highlight the potential of selective
HDAC6 inhibitors in noncancerous conditions and rare diseases. In particular, the role of this HDAC isoform,
acting as a key player in diverse inflammatory states and a crucial
regulator of immune response, is particularly attractive. , In this context, recently reported X-ray cocrystal structures of
HDAC6 in complex with selective inhibitors will further help refining
the design of novel chemical entities with improved potency and selectivity
features. , − This Perspective will examine
the multifaceted role of HDAC6 in CF and highlight the potential of
selective HDAC6 inhibitors as innovative therapeutic options for the
treatment of several aspects of this disabling and lethal rare disease.

4

## The Multifaceted Role of HDAC6 in Cystic Fibrosis
4.1

## Impaired Microtubule Acetylation in Cystic
Fibrosis
As mentioned in the previous paragraphs, defective
CFTR is responsible for reduced transepithelial chloride transport,
hyperabsorption of sodium, dehydration of epithelial surfaces, and
altered inflammatory responses. − Interestingly, mutated CFTR has
also been related to perinuclear free cholesterol accumulation as
a result of defective endosomal transport. The effectiveness of endosomal transport is a direct consequence
of the microtubule network stability and the bidirectional endocytic
trafficking ( ). , In particular, the microtubule network undergoes
extensive post-translational modifications (PTMs), including acetylation,
polyglutamylation, polyglycylation, and carboxy terminal cleavage.
PTMs are largely responsible for fine-tuning of the microtubule network
stability as well as regulation of motor proteins and recruitment
of microtubule-associating proteins. − Acetylation is a reversible process
controlled by histone acetyltransferases, which exert their activity
on residue Lys40 of α-tubulin. − In contrast, the histone
deacetylase enzymes are their counterparts appointed for the hydrolysis
of N-acetyl groups from pertinent Lys residues. In
particular, α-tubulin was the first acknowledged HDAC6 protein
substrate. Accordingly, increased expression of HDAC6 promotes tubulin
hypoacetylation and chemotactic cell movement ( ). − Acetylated α-tubulin also
finely controls motor-based trafficking mediated by motor proteins,
including kinesin-1 and dynein ( ). Very recent studies
also identified and characterized the disordered N-terminal region
of HDAC6 as a microtubule-binding domain, with a microtubule-binding
motif spanning two positively charged areas including residues Lys32
to Lys58. The deacetylase and microtubule-binding domains display
crucial crosstalk that is critical for the recognition and effective
in vitro and in vivo deacetylation of free tubulin dimers, thus revealing
the complexity of the recognition process between tubulin and HDAC6
and demonstrating once again that domains external to the tandem catalytic
core are crucial for effective substrate deacetylation. Therefore, perturbation of the HDAC6 function
is strongly implicated in the alteration of tubulin function.
 This evidence supported the hypothesis that the microtubule
acetylation
status is responsible for the defective endocytic trafficking and
perinuclear cholesterol accumulation detected in CF. The pivotal function of microtubule regulation in CF was
demonstrated in cell and tissue models, and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress was recognized as one of the causes of the microtubule
alteration in the CF epithelium. , 
In particular,
to investigate the mechanisms causing reduced trafficking
in the epithelial cells in the case of defective CFTR function, the
levels of Ac-tubulin were assessed in IB3 cells (human epithelial
cells bearing the ΔF508 mutation) and CFTR-corrected S9 cells
by densitometry analysis. As expected, reduced levels were unveiled
in IB3 cells, as was perinuclear cholesterol accumulation with respect
to WT S9 cells. Reduced Ac-tubulin levels were also confirmed in a
primary tissue CF model, namely, the mouse nasal epithelium (MNE),
where a 40% decrease in Ac-tubulin level was registered in Cftr–/– mice relative
to WT mice. 
Since comparable HDAC6
expression levels were found in IB3 and
S9 cells, the decreased Ac-tubulin content in CF cells and tissue
was possibly ascribable to defective HDAC6 regulation in the absence
of CFTR function. To assess whether HDAC6 inhibition would revert
the CF phenotype, both IB3 and S9 cells were subjected to treatment
with the selective HDAC6 inhibitor tubastatin A (TubA, 16; and ) at 10 μM for
24 h. TubA-treated IB3 cells displayed increased levels of Ac-tubulin
comparable to those for S9 cells as well as relocation of accumulated
perinuclear cholesterol, as detected by monitoring the trafficking
of fluorescent 25-[N-[(7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-yl)methyl]amino]-27-norcholesterol
(NBD-cholesterol). A further confirmation that the effects of TubA
were only related to selective HDAC6 inhibition was provided by knockdown
of HDAC6 expression in both IB3 and S9 cells using shRNA against HDAC6.
In support of the clear role of HDAC6, the silenced IB3 cells displayed
increased Ac-tubulin levels, although the effects of acute HDAC6 inhibition
through pharmacological treatment were more marked than the effects
of gene silencing (3-fold vs 1.5-fold increase in Ac-tubulin content,
respectively). 
As mentioned before,
chronic ER stress has been related to decreased
Ac-tubulin content in CF. ER stress in CF cells has been associated
with misfolding of ΔF508 CFTR and also represents a trigger
for aggresome formation. , − Accordingly, it has been shown that thapsigargin, a molecule leading
to ER stress and activation of the unfolded protein response, is able to reduce Ac-tubulin levels and recapitulate
the cholesterol accumulation phenotype in S9 cells. The same study also showed that IB3 cells and MNE from Cftr–/– mice display
reduced Ac-tubulin levels and higher levels of GRP78, an inherent
marker of ER stress. To further validate
the role of ER stress associated with the CF phenotype, it was demonstrated
that ΔF508 CFTR corrector C18 (10
μM for 72 h) was able to increase the Ac-tubulin content to
a comparable extent with respect to TubA; however, the effect on cholesterol
mobilization was inferior to that exerted by TubA treatment. As a further effort to investigate more specific
molecular mechanisms linking ER stress and tubulin acetylation status,
the role of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase p110α (PIK3CA) was
examined because of its direct ability to associate with HDAC6 and
respond to diverse cellular stresses. , Accordingly,
the use of the PIK3CA inhibitor PIK-75 (0.5 μM for 24 h) evoked
a relevant increase of Ac-tubulin levels in IB3 cells and led the
cholesterol distribution to a more WT phenotype. 
Interestingly, the use of 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PB, 17; and ) as an
ER stress
reliever at 1 mM for 48 h , resulted in a significant
increase in Ac-tubulin levels and reduced perinuclear accumulation
of cholesterol in IB3 cells. Since 4-PB also acts as a pan-HDAC inhibitor, , the role of an HDAC6-mediated mechanism for the observed effects
cannot be ruled out.
A few years later, more direct evidence
was provided that HDAC6
activity influences the levels of membrane cholesterol in CF epithelium
and that the electrochemical measurement of these levels is closely
linked to genetic and pharmacological CFTR correction. In particular, the evidence demonstrating that
high cholesterol levels in CF cells are correlated with the CFTR phenotype
and depend on de novo cholesterol synthesis − prompted the hypothesis of an adaptative response to the loss of
CTFR function. On the basis of this assumption, it is reasonable to
presume that electrochemical determination of membrane cholesterol
levels can serve as a biomarker to observe the adjustment of intracellular
events upon administration of novel therapeutics in CF.
First,
the expression of HDAC6 was knocked out from a ΔF508
mouse, and then the membrane cholesterol amount was electrochemically
evaluated by the use of an electrode with cholesterol oxidase. The
study demonstrated that HDAC6 depletion causes an almost 2-fold increase
in membrane cholesterol levels, thus restoring correct cholesterol
processing. The effects of pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 using
TubA (10 μM for 24 h) on membrane cholesterol levels were also
assessed in CF bronchial epithelial cells (CFBE) through a double-pulse
technique. These experiments conclusively
demonstrated that tubulin acetylation is a crucial pathway in pathophysiology
of several CF phenotypes and that HDAC6 inhibition holds promising
potential as innovative therapeutic option for restoring those pathways
to a more WT-like pattern.
As a further support to this evidence,
it was very recently demonstrated
that resveratrol (RSV, 18; and ) is able to restore intracellular transport in CF
epithelial cells. RSV is well-characterized
as an activator of SIRT1, although it
also acts as a pan-HDAC inhibitor and antagonist of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors PPARγ and PPARα. , RSV treatment
(50 μM, 24 h) in IB3 cells and control S9 cells effectively
reversed the perinuclear cholesterol accumulation, suggesting that
intracellular transport is restored. 
To assess whether a correctly functioning CFTR was essential
for
the intracellular transport correction in CF cells, RSV was tested
in cells isolated from Cftr–/– mice to check the improvement of cholesterol mobilization in MNE.
RSV (50 μM for 24 h) significantly lowered cholesterol accumulation
in Cftr–/– MNE cells, demonstrating
that CFTR function is not critical for RSV efficacy. The study also
showed that RSV at the same concentration is able to trigger microtubule
formation in both IB3 cells and human nasal epithelial (HNE) cells
from ΔF508 patients and that these effects are not mediated
by sirtuin signaling, as demonstrated by cotreatment with the SIRT1
inhibitor EX-527 (IB3 cells, 1 μM for 24 h), which did not have
a significant impact on the efficacy of RSV. It was then hypothesized
that the influence of RSV on microtubules could be ascribable to PPARγ
activation and HDAC6 inhibition. Accordingly, cotreatment with the
PPARγ inhibitor GW-9662 (IB3 cells, 20 μM, 24 h) demonstrated
that the effects of RSV in promoting intracellular transport are partially
mediated by PPARγ receptors. Conclusive support for the role
of HDAC6 inhibition on the effects of RSV came from the evidence that
treatment with RSV (50 μM, 24 h) markedly enhances tubulin acetylation
in IB3 cells. 
Although additional
studies are needed, the observation that RSV
reverses CF cellular phenotypes more effectively than ibuprofen suggests that RSV could represent a valuable
anti-inflammatory treatment with a multifaceted profile that is in
part ascribable to its ability to inhibit HDAC6. However, other reports
demonstrate that RSV is able to prevent the accumulation of acetylated
tubulin resulting from mitochondrial damage, precluding inflammasome
activation. It should also be mentioned
that the main limitation of RSV is its low water solubility and the
impossibility of reaching plasma levels even remotely close to the
concentration of 50 μM utilized in this and other cellular studies. 
Taken together, these data validate the
role of HDAC6 as a key
player in microtubule acetylation status and trafficking in CF. TubA,
behaving as a selective HDAC6 inhibitor, and RSV, through pan-HDAC
inhibition and PPARγ activation, served as chemical probes for
a deeper understanding of CF cell signaling related to tubulin acetylation
status, thus providing a glimpse of a new therapeutic avenue for effective
reversal of CF phenotype.

4.2

## HDAC6 and Bacterial Clearance
in Cystic Fibrosis
Among protein PTMs, reversible acetylation
deserves a primary role
among the processes involved in the responses to environmental stimuli
as well as cellular homeostasis. In particular, the evidence supporting
dynamic regulation of epigenetic marks by environmental cues has prompted
research efforts toward the elucidation of epigenetic pathways in
microbial infections. Accordingly, huge
progress has been made lately on the bacterial regulation of the host
acetylation system, with a special focus on the mechanisms engaged
to evade immune response. , In general, pathogenic
microorganisms utilize a limited number of mechanisms involving acetylation
of histone and non-histone proteins, including modulation of the activity
and expression of HAT and HDAC enzymes thorough diverse bacterial
effectors as well as the production of metabolites regulating the
so-called “acetylome”. In this context, isoform HDAC1 may be considered the crucial acetylation
system targeted by pathogens for evading the host immune system, as
demonstrated by the efficacy of silencing of HDAC1 expression or enzymatic
inhibition in restoring defense gene expression. More recently, it was demonstrated that the quorum-sensing
signal generated by PA, namely, 2-aminoacetophenone,
prompted the expression of HDAC1 in human THP-1 monocytes, thus causing
hypoacetylation of histone H3K18; this in turn led to reduced induction
of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as TNF, IL-β,
and MCP-1. The process was also demonstrated to be completely reverted
by HDAC1 inhibition, thus unambiguously highlighting the role of this
isoform in promoting tolerance to PA ( ). 
 As mentioned above, metabolites produced by pathogenic bacteria
can also modulate the host acetylation system. In particular, it has
been demonstrated that short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as propionic
acid (19, and ) and butyric acid (20, and ) produced by anaerobic bacteria behave as inhibitors
of class I/II HDACs, thus regulating several facets of immune response
( ). Accordingly, treatment with butyrate prompted
histone H3 acetylation at the promoter region of the transcription
factor FoxP3, which is crucial in the differentiation of regulatory
T cells. In this context, isoforms HDAC6 and HDAC9 demonstrated a
suppressive role in FoxP3 induction ( ). 
Around
a decade ago, pioneering studies started unveiling the effect
of HDAC inhibitors on microbial infection. In particular, it was demonstrated
that the use of valproic acid (VPA, 21; and ) increased mortality in mice upon nonsevere
infection by Klebsiella pneumoniae or Candida albicans( ) and
that HDAC inhibition was able to reduce phagocytosis and killing of E. coli and SA by bone-marrow-derived
macrophages. 
These initial observations
supporting an unfavorable outcome when
HDAC inhibitors are used during bacterial infection were controverted
by subsequent studies. Indeed, it was clarified that the effects of
HDAC inhibitors on antibacterial response strongly relied upon the
isoform selectivity and timing of the treatment. Interestingly, in
2015 Ariffin et al. highlighted that only the HDAC6-selective inhibitor
TubA and not MS-275 (entinostat, 22; and ), which specifically targets class I HDACs,
enhanced bacterial killing by macrophages ( ). The same
study also highlighted that acute treatment with HDAC inhibitors at
the insurgence of bacterial infection boosts mitochondrial ROS production
by human macrophages, which is in line with an increased antibacterial
response. Almost parallel studies also showed that HDAC6-selective
inhibition through the use of TubA promoted bacterial clearance, reduced
pro-inflammatory cytokine production, restored innate immune cell
populations in the bone marrow, and improved survival in a mouse model
of sepsis ( ). , These data, together with the evidence linking
HDAC6 to control of mitochondrial function and stimulation of mitochondrial
ROS production, suggest a crucial role for HDAC6 in regulating bacterial
clearance, − while class I HDACs seem unlikely to exert
such an effect.
While the previously described reports mainly
focus on the effects
of HDAC inhibitors on immune cell function, several experiments analyzing
the responses of epithelial cells to bacterial challenges support
the role of HDAC inhibitors as effective regulators of the production
of cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs) ( ). In particular,
the expression of defensins and cathelicidins, the two main classes
of mammalian CAMPs, is robustly triggered by HDAC inhibitors in colonic
and airway epithelial cells. − Although induction of CAMPs by several HDAC inhibitors has been
widely documented across several types of epithelial cells, the mechanisms
underlying this effect are mostly unclear or at the stage of preliminary
investigation.
Collectively, these findings underline the dual-faceted
potential
of HDAC6 inhibitors as anti-infective agents through either promotion
of innate immune-mediated bacterial clearance or reduction of the
damage induced by excessive inflammation. These data also highlight
the potential to use HDAC6-selective inhibitors for treatment of chronic
inflammatory diseases of the airways.
To further validate these
premises, a recent study examined the
outcome of Hdac6 depletion on both the CF inflammatory
response and the bacterial load in a model of infection using clinical PA isolates embedded in agarose beads, which effectively
recapitulates CF phenotype. In that study,
genetic ablation was preferred over pharmacological inhibition in
order to avoid contributions ascribable to off-target effects. The
loss of Hdac6 was demonstrated to increase the rate
of bacterial clearance in CF mice, thus restoring CF responses to
bacterial challenge. These data, coupled with the limited weight loss
and the regulation of neutrophil recruitment upon Hdac6 depletion demonstrated in the same study, further depict HDAC6 as
a key regulator in several secondary phenotypes associated with impaired
CFTR function and support the potential benefits of using HDAC6-selective
inhibitors in CF patients independently of CFTR phenotype.

4.3

## HDAC6 in the Regulation of Inflammatory and
Fibrotic Phenotypes in Cystic Fibrosis
The complex CF phenotype
is associated with several clinical manifestations, although lung
disease, chronic airway inflammation, and infection are by far the
main causes of morbimortality. A common thread of the end stage of
CF-associated lung disease is represented by extensive pulmonary fibrosis,
characterized by increased collagen deposition and tissue remodeling.
Fibrosis is generated by overgrowth of various tissues and an increased
amount of myofibroblasts and it is flanked by anomalous deposition
of extracellular matrix components, a process known as epithelial–mesenchymal
transition. EMT is a crucial process in CF involving loss of cell–cell
junctions and polarization of cell-surface molecules of epithelial
cells, which thus acquire the characteristics of mesenchymal cells. , Beyond their role as a key scaffold for parenchymal tissue, fibroblasts
can secrete key inflammatory chemoattractants, such as chemokine C–C
ligand-2 (CCL-2) and CCL-8, interleukin-16 (IL-16) and IL-8, regulated
on activation normal T-cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), and monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 and -2. , The dysregulated fibroblast
phenotype in CF was investigated in a bleomycin-induced fibrosis model
in ΔF508 homozygous mice. An increased
release of TGF-β1, a potent EMT inducer, was demonstrated in
CF lungs. Members of the TGF-β family are potent inducers of
EMT, and overexpression of TGF-β1 was also previously linked
with a more severe CF lung phenotype. Moreover, CF lungs challenged with bleomycin were also shown to
overexpress TIMP-1, a predictive marker of tissue remodeling reflecting
a protease imbalance in damaged lungs. , The study
also demonstrated that upon inflammatory stimulation, mRNA and protein
expression levels of proinflammatory mediators (CCL-2, TNF-α,
IL-16 and IL-18) were higher in CF than in wild-type fibroblasts,
thus demonstrating that dysregulated proinflammatory and fibrotic
status in CF fibroblasts is an extensive and multifaceted process
involving several signaling pathways and transcription factors. 
The demonstration of the close crosstalk
between inflammation and
fibrosis in CF opened up possibilities for novel disease-modifying
treatments specifically targeting these mechanisms.
4.3.1

## HDAC6 and Inflammatory Responses in Cystic
Fibrosis
In the context of inflammation, increasing evidence
is available highlighting the key role of HDACs and HDAC inhibitors
in the regulation of chemokines and cytokines ( ). HDAC inhibitors,
in particular, have been shown to downregulate several pathways involving
cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors, thus controlling key inflammatory
pathways in inflammatory diseases with different origins. , With respect to cytokines, the pan-HDAC inhibitors trichostatin
A (TSA, 23; and ) and romidepsin (24, and ) were found to suppress IFN-α-induced transcriptional
responses, thus regulating both innate and adaptative immunity, , while the pan-HDAC inhibitors SAHA (vorinostat, 25; and ) and TSA were demonstrated
to decrease the expression of IFN-γ in various disease models. Interestingly, a predominant role of isoform
HDAC6 in regulation of cytokines has been unveiled by several studies.
Accordingly, the HDAC3/6/8 inhibitor MC2625 (26, and ) and the HDAC6-selective inhibitor
MC2780 (27, and ) were shown to downregulate IL-1β expression in epithelial,
fibroblast, and myogenic cell lines, and HDAC6 was identified as a key player in the regulation of NF-κB
activity, which is related to IL-1β signaling. Selective HDAC6 inhibition by TubA was also linked to inhibition
of IL-6 in an arthritis mouse model. However, the effects of HDAC6 inhibition on the production of the
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 are still controversial. , 
 The involvement in HDACs in chemokine
signaling was also supported
by several experiments. In particular, it was demonstrated that pan-HDAC
inhibition induced the expression of CCL-2 and that both HDAC6-selective inhibition with CKD506 (28, and ) and pan-HDAC inhibition
were able to decrease CCL-4 expression. , 
HDAC6 has also been shown to play a critical role in the regulation
of inflammatory cells. For example, inhibition of HDAC6 functions
causes stimulation of inflammatory antigen-presenting cells with a
key role in the induction of T-cell activation and T-cell tolerance. , , Moreover, depletion of HDAC6
has been demonstrated to endorse the suppressive activity of FoxP3+ regulatory T-cells in inflammation models and to increase
the population of γδT cells, which are involved in the
release of IL-17. 
According to
these data, targeted HDAC6 inhibition has been increasingly
proposed over the last year as a promising therapeutic strategy toward
inflammatory disorders, including airway inflammation. For example, TubA has been demonstrated to efficiently
relieve airway inflammatory state and hyper-responsiveness in a chronic
mouse model of allergy, thus opening up the possibility for a novel
therapeutic option in asthma treatment. Also, TubA significantly inhibited cigarette-smoke-induced airway
dysfunction, thus paving the way to an innovative therapeutic strategy
against chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
With respect to CF, the potential usefulness
of HDAC inhibitors
in correcting the ΔF508 CFTR variants was recently evaluated
in several studies. , , In particular, the pan-HDAC inhibitors panobinostat (29, and ) and romidepsin provided
functional correction of Class II and III CFTR variants, as they were
able to cause dose-dependent enhancement of the expression of ΔF508
CFTR and restore the activity of the cell-surface chloride channel
in primary human bronchial epithelial cells. Most importantly, the effects of the combination of panobinostat
and romidepsin with lumacaftor were evaluated. Panobinostat (2.5 nM)
and romidepsin (0.6 nM) were combined with a higher dose of VX809
(3 μM). While the combination with romidepsin produced an additive
effect on the trafficking efficiency of ΔF508 CFTR, the combination
with panobinostat unveiled a synergism in improving the trafficking
efficiency after immunoblotting and quantification analysis of CFTR
expression in human CFBE-ΔF508 cells. A more inflammation-oriented study evaluated the effect of pan-HDAC
inhibition in PA lipopolysaccharide (PA-LPS)-induced airway inflammation and CF lung disease. HDAC inhibition through SAHA was shown to control
TNF-α-induced IL-8 and NF-κB reporter activity, suggesting
that HDAC inhibitors regulate TNF-α-induced inflammation and
CF lung disease. CFTR–/– mice treated with PA-LPS (20 μg/mouse) were used as a model for CF-induced
lung infection. Intratracheal administration of SAHA (100 μg/mouse
daily for 3 days) demonstrated that SAHA was able to efficiently control PA-LPS-induced IL-6 levels in mice treated for 1 day, while
treatment for 2 or 3 days was shown to be detrimental. The outcome
of a lower dose (50 μg/mouse) was then assessed, demonstrating
that PA-LPS-induced IL-6 and myeloperoxidase levels
were efficiently reduced by SAHA and highlighting its role in controlling
chronic airway inflammation and neutrophil activity. Moreover, the
same study demonstrated that NF-κB activation (as a marker of
inflammation) and Nrf2 regulation (as a marker of antioxidant response)
are effectively corrected by SAHA treatment. In agreement with previous studies, SAHA demonstrated the ability
to restore trafficking in misfolded ΔF508 CFTR and to promote
FoxP3+ T-reg activity, thus providing conclusive evidence
of the role of HDAC inhibition in modulation of innate and adaptive
immune response linked to pathogenesis and progression in CF-related
inflammatory lung disease. 
More
recent evidence pointed out the prevalent role of HDAC6 in
the beneficial effect of HDAC inhibition especially with respect to
the inflammatory phenotype in CF, thus supporting the evaluation of
HDAC6-selective inhibitors in this context. Accordingly, it was recently
demonstrated that HDAC6 depletion was able to improve CF mouse airway
inflammatory responses to bacterial challenge. A clinical PA isolated by means of the
agar bead model of infection was employed. This model nicely recapitulates
the CF phenotype related to an excessive inflammatory response, with
particular reference to the increased neutrophil recruitment.
The loss of Hdac6 on a CF background increased
the rate of bacterial clearance, and this effect was ascribed to a
crucial regulatory step in CF immune responses. Accordingly, it was
shown that HDAC6 controls neutrophil recruitment in CF mice. Reduced cytokine production in Hdac6-depleted CF mice was also demonstrated in the same study.

4.3.2

## HDAC6 and Fibrotic Remodeling in Cystic
Fibrosis
Aberrant HDAC activity and/or expression is detected
in fibrotic diseases, and increasing amounts of data support the role
of HDACs in the initiation and evolution of fibrotic phenotype in
several organs, including lungs, heart, liver, and kidneys. 
More specifically, the regulation of
TGF-β1 by HDAC6 is crucial in the initiation and progression
of fibrotic diseases through EMT ( ). , , Recent data provided evidence
that HDAC6 blockade by siRNA or tubacin (30, and ) is able to reduce TGFβ1-induced EMT
markers and SMAD3 activation in response to TGF-β1. Since SMAD3
is a key player in TGFβ1 signaling, its deactivation impairs
HDAC6-dependent deacetylation of α-tubulin, highlighting the
crucial importance of HDAC6 in EMT through the TGF-β1–SMAD3
signaling pathway. Several lines of evidence
demonstrated the effectiveness of pan-HDAC inhibitors (including romidepsin,
SAHA, and panobinostat) against idiopathic lung fibrosis (IPF) and
fibrotic diseases, mainly based on the decrease of myofibroblast differentiation
and fibroblast proliferation prompted by TGF-β1. − More recent reports pointed out the efficacy of a targeted HDAC6
approach in IPF. Accordingly, TubA was shown to protect mice from
lung fibrosis by repressing TGF-β1-induced collagen expression
and diminished Akt phosphorylation, and
novel indoline-based inhibitors demonstrated efficacy in a human lung
model of TGF-β1-dependent fibrogenesis and the ability to inhibit
fibrotic sphere formation. 
 These data foster further investigation of HDAC6-selective inhibitors
as potential therapeutic tools to tackle the fibrotic process in CF
and other diseases. , , , 

5

## Perspectives
Increasing evidence points to unveiling a new
guise for epigenetic
targets as key players in many nononcological diseases, particularly
rare diseases. In the context of CF, the past decade has represented
a phase of hope for patients, with increased scientific awareness
toward novel CF therapeutics. Accordingly, researchers in academia
and pharmaceutical companies are devoting intense research efforts
to leverage new technologies and scientific knowledge to successfully
develop new effective therapies that are changing the patient quality
and expectation of life, although there is still the need for great
improvement and simplification of the therapy.
The void of knowledge
on how the loss of CTFR function is linked
to many of the secondary manifestations of CF remains a crucial gap
to be filled. Also, there is still a lack of understanding of the
molecular underpinnings and crosstalk mechanisms related to inflammatory
response, immune system engagement, and microbial infections in CF.
The objective of developing a new inflammatory therapy for CF is
closely linked to the necessity of identifying a novel therapeutic
option that could allow the resolution of the prolonged and aggressive
inflammatory phenotype associated with CF but also guarantee sustained
immune response for the eradication of infections.
During the
past decade, clear evidence has been provided that the
protein acetylation status of the host is dynamically regulated during
infection and helps establish an efficient response against pathogens.
Recent evidence has also pointed out the role of microtubule acetylation
as a crucial regulator of intracellular transport in CF cells and
CF-related inflammatory responses.
In this frame, HDAC enzymes
appear as key players because of their
role in modulating the acetylation balance in several pathophysiological
conditions. HDAC6, in particular, displays unique features owing to
its distinctive structure, localization and nature of substrates.
The concept that several CF phenotypes can be corrected by HDAC6 inhibition
is of pivotal importance for those patient populations bearing CFTR
mutations not approachable with currently available potentiators and/or
correctors. Moreover, HDAC6 inhibitors could also flank CFTR-targeted
therapies in order to improve the management of inflammation, fibrosis
and infection in CF.
The effects of HDAC6 partially selective
modulators and pan-HDAC
inhibitors have been recently examined in several cell and animal
models of rare diseases, often providing substantial proof-of-concept
for their utility as innovative therapeutic option. However, none
of the clinically approved HDAC displays selectivity for HDAC6. This
means that they cannot work as effective chemical probes to dissect
the role of HDAC6 in rare diseases. Moreover, they cannot be considered
ready-to-use therapeutics for treating these patients especially due
to their therapeutic index, which would not be compatible with a chronic
drug administration.
In this context, the increasingly appearing
X-ray cocrystal structures
of HDAC6 enzyme in complex with several HDAC6 inhibitors are allowing
more effective structure-based design strategies, which will certainly
help medicinal chemists to drive the drug discovery trajectory toward
potent, selective and safer HDAC6 inhibitors, to be employed as novel
therapeutic option in several disease states.

## Author Contributions
† S.B. and E.C. contributed equally to this work.

## Author Contributions
‡ M.B. and V.S. are co-senior authors.
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
Simona Barone graduated in Pharmaceutical
Chemistry
and Technology from the University of Naples “Federico II”
in 2021. Currently she is spending a five-month fellowship granted
by the Italian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation at the Department of Pharmacy,
University of Naples “Federico II”, where she is working
on the synthesis of HDAC6-selective inhibitors as a novel therapeutic
option for the treatment of cystic fibrosis.
Emilia Cassese graduated in Pharmaceutical Chemistry
and Technology from the University of Naples “Federico II”
in 2021. During her thesis internship, she was involved in the design
and synthesis of antiviral drugs. She is currently working in the
same department as a research fellow under the support of the Italian
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation on the development of HDAC6 inhibitors
for the treatment of cystic fibrosis.
Antonella Ilenia Alfano is currently pursuing her
Ph.D. in the SPOTS Lab at the Department of Pharmacy at the University
of Naples “Federico II”. She graduated in 2018 in Pharmaceutical
Chemistry and Technology. Soon after she spent a six-month fellowship
working on the multicomponent synthesis of biologically active compounds
via visible-light photocatalysis. Her Ph.D. project is focused on
the development of greener and more sustainable synthesis and derivatization
of privileged scaffolds in pharmaceutical chemistry through continuous
flow approaches. She is currently working on the development of compounds
as novel antibacterial and anti-biofilm agents.
Margherita Brindisi received her Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical
Sciences from the University of Siena. As a junior researcher in Siena,
she worked on developing compounds for the treatment of cancer, viral
diseases, and brain disorders. She was a postdoctoral fellow in Professor
Arun Ghosh’s research group at Purdue University in 2010–2011
and a Visiting Scientist in the same group in 2016–2017. In
April 2019 she was appointed as Assistant Professor at the Department
of Pharmacy at University of Naples “Federico II”, where
she is working on the development of novel therapeutics as modulators
of epigenetic targets in rare disorders, including cystic fibrosis.
In the last 5 years, she has been involved in the development of several
structural templates for selective HDAC6 inhibition.
Vincenzo Summa obtained his Ph.D. in Organic
Chemistry
from the University of Wuppertal. In 1996 he joined Merck Research
Laboratory-Italy (IRBM). He served as Director in the Medicinal Chemistry
Department, leading the team that discovered Isentress, the first-in-class
HIV integrase inhibitor (Galien Prize USA and Italy for the best pharmaceutical
agent-2008), and Grazoprevir, a pan-genotype HCV protease inhibitor.
For these discoveries, he was recognized as a Hero of Chemistry by
the American Chemical Society in 2013 and 2017, respectively. In 2009,
he became cofounder of IRBM Science Park and Vice President of Drug
Discovery. Since 2019 he has been Professor of Medicinal Chemistry
at the Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples “Federico
II”. His research focuses on the identification of anti-infective
agents and novel therapeutics for cancer and rare diseases.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Fondazione Fibrosi
Cistica (FFC)
for financial support through Grant FFC#20/2020: Harnessing selective
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibition to tackle inflammation and
fibrotic remodeling in cystic fibrosis. We also acknowledge MIUR Grant
Dipartimento di Eccellenza 2018–2022 (l. 232/2016) to the Department
of Pharmacy, University of Naples Federico II.

## Abbreviation
Used
4-PB4-phenylbutyrate
Ac-HSP90acetylated
HSP90
ALIacute
lung injury
BALFbroncho-alveolar lavage
fluid
BDNFbrain-derived
neurotrophic factor
BDNG-YFPBDNF tagged with a yellow fluorescent protein
CAMPscationic antimicrobial
peptides
CCLchemokine
C–C ligand
CFcystic fibrosis
CFBECF bronchial epithelial cells
CFTRcystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
AMPadenosine monophosphate
CMTCharcot–Marie–Tooth
disease
CNScentral
nervous system
COPDchronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COXcyclooxygenase
DDdeacetylation domain
dHMN2Bdistal hereditary motor neuropathy
2B
DNMTDNA methyltransferase
DRGdorsal root ganglion
E. coliEscherichia coli
EGFRepidermal growth
factor receptor
EMTepithelial–mesenchymal transition
ERendoplasmic reticulum
FDAU.S. Food and Drug Administration
GlyRSGlycyl tRNA synthetase
GRglucocorticoid receptor
GRP7878 kDa glucose-regulated
protein
HAThistone
acetyltransferase
HDHuntington’s disease
HDAChistone deacetylase
HMNhereditary motor neuropathies
HMThistone methyltransferase
HNEhuman nasal epithelial
HSF1heat shock transcription
factor 1
HSP90heat
shock protein 90
HSPB1heat-shock protein B1
IB3human epithelial cells bearing the ΔF508 mutation
IFNinterferon
ILinterleukin
ILDinterstitial lung disease
IPFidiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis
iPSCspluripotent
stem cells
IRDinherited
retinal disorder
JIP1JNK-interacting protein 1
KATlysine acetyltransferase
KCkeratinocyte-derived chemokine
LOXlysyl oxidase
LPSlipopolysaccharide
LTB4leukotriene B4
Lyslysine
MCP-1monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
MeCP2X-linked methyl-CpG-binding
protein 2
Mip-2microphage inflammatory protein-2
miRNAmicroRNA
MNEmouse nasal epithelium
MRSAmethicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus
NBD-cholesterol25-[N-[(7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-yl)methyl]amino]-27-norcholesterol
ncRNAnoncoding RNA
NESnuclear export
signal
NFκBnuclear factor kappa light-chain enhancer of activated B cells
Nrf2nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2
NSAIDnonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
NTGnontransgenic mice
NTMnontuberculous mycobacteria
p97/VCPp97/valosin-containing
protein
PAPseudomonas aeruginosa
PIK-75PIK3CA inhibitor
PIK3CAphosphatidylinositol
3-kinase p110α
PLAPphospholipase A2 inactivating protein
PPARperoxisome proliferator-activated
receptor
Prxperoxiredoxin
I
PTMpost-translational
modification
RANTESregulated on activation normal T-cell expressed and secreted
ROSreactive oxygen species
RPretinitis pigmentosa
RTTRett syndrome
RSVresveratrol
SAStaphylococcus aureus
SAHAsuberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
SCFAshort chain fatty acid
SEserine–glutamic
acid
shRNAshot
hairpin RNA
SIRTsirtuin
SMAD3small
mothers against decapentaplegic family member 3
TGF-βtransforming growth factor-β
TIMP-1tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteinase-1
TSAtrichostatin A
Tub Atubastatin A
UBPubiquitin-specific protease
VEGFvascular endothelial growth factor
VIPNvincristine-induced
peripheral neuropathies
VPAvalproic acid
WTwild type
ZnF-UBPubiquitin C-terminus hydrolase-like zinc finger