822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC8461619846161984616193393872410.1021/acs.chemrev.0c01177Translational Applications of Hydrogels
CorreaSantiago GrosskopfAbigail K Lopez HernandezHector ChanDoreen YuAnthony C StapletonLyndsay M AppelEric A †Materials
Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States‡Chemical
Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States§Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States∥Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States⊥Pediatric
Endocrinology, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, United States#ChEM-H Institute, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, United States∇Woods
Institute for the Environment, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, United States*Email: eappel@stanford.edu.
352021121181138511385–114572492021© 2021 The Authors. Published by American
Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Advances in hydrogel
technology have unlocked unique and valuable
capabilities that are being applied to a diverse set of translational
applications. Hydrogels perform functions relevant to a range of biomedical
purposes—they can deliver drugs or cells, regenerate hard and
soft tissues, adhere to wet tissues, prevent bleeding, provide contrast
during imaging, protect tissues or organs during radiotherapy, and
improve the biocompatibility of medical implants. These capabilities
make hydrogels useful for many distinct and pressing diseases and
medical conditions and even for less conventional areas such as environmental
engineering. In this review, we cover the major capabilities of hydrogels,
with a focus on the novel benefits of injectable hydrogels, and how
they relate to translational applications in medicine and the environment.
We pay close attention to how the development of contemporary hydrogels
requires extensive interdisciplinary collaboration to accomplish highly
specific and complex biological tasks that range from cancer immunotherapy
to tissue engineering to vaccination. We complement our discussion
of preclinical and clinical development of hydrogels with mechanical
design considerations needed for scaling injectable hydrogel technologies
for clinical application. We anticipate that readers will gain a more
complete picture of the expansive possibilities for hydrogels to make
practical and impactful differences across numerous fields and biomedical
applications.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 Nov 3; Issue date 2021 Sep 22.

1.

## Introduction
Since
their discovery in the 1960s, synthetic
hydrogels have become increasingly useful for engineering
biological systems. The enthusiasm over this technology is evident
in the explosion of research publications over the past 60 years ( ): from just 1,000
total publications by 1982 to more than 100,000 total publications
by 2020! The past three years alone have seen >10,000 publications
per year, and with only a few months into 2021 there were already
more than 600 new articles indexed in the Web of Science by the time
of this publication. Here, we seek to provide a resource for researchers
both new and familiar with this technology, delving into many of the
fundamentals and open questions of the field and shining a spotlight
on both developed and developing applications for these exciting materials.
 The explosion of hydrogel technologies has made
significant contributions
in biomedical applications that impact the day-to-day lives of millions
of people. For example, hydrogels made one of the most visible (or
perhaps we should say invisible?) contributions to modern life in
the form of soft contact lenses, creating a new class of optically
tunable soft materials and establishing what is today a multibillion
dollar industry. Early studies also revealed
the usefulness of engineered hydrogels for delivering diverse drugs, − establishing a field for local controlled release of bioactive compounds. − In the 1970s, surgeons recognized the utility of hydrogels for reconstructive
surgeries, , and by the 1990s, hydrogels were
becoming a foundational technology for tissue regeneration. − The history of hydrogel materials is well reviewed, − and the consistent theme has been that hydrogels continue to find
new and exciting applications as the underlying technology improves
( ). Emerging
applications for hydrogels today include device coatings, environmental engineering, soft robotics, and adoptive
cell therapy. 
 Hydrogels come in many flavors, with diverse capabilities
and limitations,
but in general these systems can all be described as cross-linked
macromolecular networks that retain a significant amount of water.
As much as 99% of the weight of a hydrogel can be water, which makes
these materials quite friendly to water-enriched biological environments
such as the human body. In earlier technologies, harsh mechanisms
for macromolecular cross-linking (e.g., toxic agents, radiation, etc.) − meant that gelation needed to occur prior to introducing gels to
biological systems. Unsurprisingly, this limited the bioengineering
applications of hydrogels to superficial environments such as the
surface of the eye, an open wound, or an exposed surgical bed.
Subsequent work developed safer cross-linking mechanisms, which
began a trend toward triggering gelation in situ after
injection, providing a minimally invasive way of administering hydrogels
to practically any organ or tissue. , The most biocompatible
iterations of these injectable in situ gelling platforms
use specific cues from the body to trigger gelation: physiological
temperature, pH, or ionic strength. Unlike earlier hydrogels
that relied on covalent cross-links, some of these hydrogels have
self-healing properties and possess mechanical properties akin to
native tissue, capable of countering natural forces and stresses of
a body in motion.
More recently, shear-thinning hydrogels were
developed that are
formed through dynamic and reversible cross-linking. For example, physical hydrogels use noncovalent interactions
(e.g., supramolecular chemistries) between soluble building blocks
in order to self-assemble into a dynamic, reversibly cross-linked
network. , Likewise, reversible covalent cross-linking
strategies can yield dynamic networks with similar properties. , These “dynamic hydrogels” assembled through reversible
cross-links afford the unique property of being injectable even after
having formed a gel, due to their shear-thinning and self-healing
behaviors. Current research on dynamic hydrogels has revealed novel
and useful capabilities that have opened new frontiers for this technology.
For example, they can stabilize delicate protein and cellular cargoes
to combat pharmaceutical cold-chain limitations, they can adhere strongly to tissues to form protective
barriers and bandages, and they can be
delivered through spray applications to coat complex biological geometries. 
While dynamic hydrogels are opening up
new translational possibilities,
significant progress is also being made to introduce unprecedented
levels of functionality into biomaterials. This includes features
such as nanoscale patterning of bioactive molecules, , programmable drug release, , and stimuli-responsive
behaviors. , As a consequence, much of the
research in this space is trending toward increasingly interdisciplinary
projects that recruit the expertise of nanotechnologists, chemists,
protein engineers, and synthetic biologists to develop sophisticated
multifunctional hydrogels. These novel systems include the rise of
programmable behavior in hydrogels reminiscent to the behaviors we
now associate with digital technology. For example, significant advancements have been made to transform
simple PEG-based hydrogels into responsive systems based on Boolean-logic
gating decisions (e.g., YES, AND, OR operations) by incorporating
functional peptides and proteins into the hydrogel network. , , Programmable biotechnologies
are already leading to smart injectable materials with the potential
to degrade or release drugs based on either endogenous or exogenous
triggers. , As these capabilities continue to mature,
multifunctional and programmable hydrogels may provide the technological
foundation for platforms that can engage more effectively with the
complex, multistage biological events that govern processes such as
tissue regeneration and immunity.
As the capabilities of hydrogels
have dramatically increased over
time, they have unsurprisingly become useful tools for a wide range
of fields and disciplines. Here, we primarily focus on the contributions
of injectable hydrogel systems to a range of biomedical applications,
with an emphasis on dynamic hydrogels. We begin with a discussion
of mechanical considerations for injectable hydrogels and specifically
how rheological characterization of these systems is critical for
developing technologies with translational potential. From there,
we provide a general discussion on strategies for delivering diverse
therapeutic cargo, such as small molecule drugs, nucleic acids, and
proteins. We focus subsequent discussion of drug delivery toward an
emerging area of intense research—that of cancer immunotherapy—which
presents highly complex and novel challenges for controlled multidrug
delivery and engagement of immune cells. In the following section,
we summarize key considerations for designing hydrogels meant to engage
with and manipulate cells. We then review the extensive work on hydrogels
for cellular therapies, spanning their use as both tissue scaffolds
and cellular carriers for applications ranging from tissue regeneration
to adoptive cell therapy. We then turn our attention toward emergent
and promising biomedical frontiers outside of drug delivery and cellular
therapies. We review how the capabilities of dynamic, shear-thinning
hydrogels are now giving rise to a class of tools that prevent or
mitigate complications that can arise from surgery. We also discuss
new developments for hydrogels as coatings for implantable devices
to improve biocompatibility and introduce novel functionalities. We
round out our discussion of biomedical applications with a review
of the current clinical landscape for injectable hydrogels, with a
particular focus on hydrogels in active clinical trials and current
limitations relating to manufacturing and scalability. We also highlight
how the lessons learned from biomedical hydrogels are informing advances
in new application areas in agriculture, water preservation, and cosmetics.
Overall, we anticipate that readers will gain a greater perspective
on the range of possibilities available for hydrogel technologies
to make substantive contributions to society, as well as the need
for vibrant interdisciplinary collaboration to fully translate this
potential into real world change.

2.

## Mechanical
Consideration for Designing Injectable
Hydrogels
Hydrogels are a broad class of materials that exhibit
mechanical
and chemical properties that are especially useful for a variety of
medical interventions. Noninjectable hydrogels represent the bulk
of the literature as they were the first to be discovered and developed,
and their usefulness for both drug and cell delivery led to broad
enthusiasm for developing hydrogels for biomedical applications. − However, static covalent cross-links ultimately introduced translational
challenges for clinical implementation, since traditional covalent
gels require invasive surgical implantation to access nonsuperficial
tissues. Additionally, new manufacturing processes, such as 3D printing,
require dynamic rheological properties during processing, disqualifying
the use of traditional covalent hydrogels. Interest in further developing the translational potential of hydrogels
led to innovative methods to implant them through minimally invasive
means, of which the most clinically relevant is injection through
a needle or catheter ( ).
 Initial success for injectable
systems came about with systems
that could gel in situ, which allowed liquid polymer
solutions to be injected into tissues where they subsequently solidify.
For example, dual-syringe devices can coinject two solutions that
react to form a hydrogel when mixed. − Similarly, microencapsulation
of gel-inducing molecules could slow down gelation to provide an injection
“window” after combining the components of the gel. Alternatively, stimuli-responsive polymers have
been developed that undergo sol–gel transitions based on environmental
factors such as temperature, pH, and ionic strength. These systems
are engineered to remain liquid under nonphysiological conditions
(e.g., room-temperature, acidic pH, salt-free) but solidify when introduced
into the body (e.g., 37 °C, neutral pH, millimolar salt concentration). − While these systems are injectable, many experience problems with
gelation kinetics. For example, they may gel too quickly and solidify
within the syringe or gel too slowly and prematurely release cargo in vivo, and poor mixing may further cause heterogeneous
gelation. , − 
To overcome these
limitations, significant attention has been devoted
to dynamic hydrogels, which can seamlessly transition back and forth
from solid-like to liquid-like during injection thanks to their shear-thinning
and self-healing capabilities. These materials, which are gelled within
the syringe before injection, additionally have the ability to stabilize
drugs over broad temperature ranges and maintain homogeneously mixed
cell solutions. − Here, we define dynamic hydrogels as any hydrated
polymer network cross-linked via reversible chemistries, which can
include both covalent and noncovalent chemistries. Early reports of
the unique rheology of dynamic networks emerged in the late 1980s
with polysaccharide-based networks covalently cross-linked through
boric esters, which identified intriguing self-healing capabilities. − However, it was only in the early 2000s that noncovalent chemistries
began to be leveraged to make shear-thinning supramolecular hydrogels
based on cyclodextrins, engineered peptides, and the physical interactions resulting from
biopolymer blends. Although they can
be prepared through diverse chemistries, dynamic hydrogels share unique
rheological properties that are directly related to their translational
potential as injectable systems. In this section, we will review the
principle rheological considerations that ought to be taken into account
when designing an injectable dynamic hydrogel, as well as a range
of techniques to properly characterize these complex systems.
2.1.

## Rheological Considerations for Injectable
Dynamic Hydrogels
Injectable hydrogels have enabled minimally
invasive strategies to deliver therapeutic drug and cellular cargo
without surgical implantation. The applicability of hydrogels in clinical
settings is seemingly limitless, from applications that require localization
in different regions of the body to the delivery of a wide range of
cargo. Importantly, the rheological properties of these hydrogels
are constrained by the need for administration by direct injection
or catheter delivery. Here, we focus on and discuss the rheological
properties of existing injectable hydrogels and emphasize the need
for determining property–function relationships to facilitate
their design for clinical translation.
Injectable therapeutic
hydrogels must be compatible with a three-stage administration process
( ). First,
their formulation must be compatible with the incorporation of drug,
cellular, or other therapeutic cargo (e.g., the hydrogel must not
react with or otherwise compromise the bioactivity of cargo). Second,
they must be injectable. Third, they should provide the desired terminal
function within the body, which ranges broadly from cell expansion
to controlled release of molecular cargo of diverse types. Typically,
the terminal function within the body is the key target in the design
process, yet the performance of the hydrogel during formulation and
administration must not be neglected. From a translational perspective,
the injectability of a particular formulation may change as the relevant
dimensions and geometries of the injection process changes when moving
from the lab to the clinic. Going forward, it is helpful to provide
an explicit definition of “injectability”. Here, we
define injectability as the capability of a formulation to flow at
a clinically relevant flow rate through an administration needle,
catheter, or autoinjector using clinically relevant applied pressures.
According to this definition, injectability is necessarily dependent
on the intended application and will vary depending on the needle
gauge and length (i.e., subcutaneous vs catheter injections) and other
processing constraints (e.g., administration volumes, syringe geometries,
and desired flow rates).
 The application-specific requirements
imposed by each stage of
the administration process can impose paradoxical constraints on the
rheological properties of injectable materials, simultaneously requiring
flowability for injection and solid-like retention at the injection
site (e.g., sustained localized delivery). There have been several
hydrogel compositions with varying chemistries and cross-linking modalities
developed that address this paradoxical constraint and are capable
of both injectability and solid-like retention after injection.
For a material to flow, it must demonstrate liquid-like behavior,
whereby the constituent molecules are able to move past each other,
under relevant processing conditions. Most covalent materials cannot
flow because their covalent bonds prevent relative movement of their
constituent molecules. Consequently, “static” covalent
hydrogels require the injection of prepolymer systems that gel upon
injection or stimuli-responsive polymers that cross-link in response
to temperature, UV, pH, or other external stimuli. More recently,
there has been an increased interest in the use of dynamically cross-linked
hydrogels as injectable materials. − The specific cross-linking strategies
vary and include both dynamic covalent and noncovalent supramolecular
cross-linking, but generally these approaches imbue hydrogels with
dynamic, yielding, and self-healing rheological responses. The various
cross-linking strategies and description of the hydrogels for the
delivery of therapeutics have been outlined in several reviews. , − We highlight that although dynamic hydrogel compositions
vary, they demonstrate similar rheological functions. In general,
the physical cross-links create a hydrogel network with solid-like
material properties under static conditions. Yet, when deformed, the
dynamic cross-links can be disrupted, dissipating stress and resulting
in liquid-like behavior. Since the cross-links are reversible, they
can reassociate after deformation to restore the network structure
and its solid-like behavior.
The rapid development of dynamic
hydrogels for injectable material
platforms has enabled new therapeutic strategies without the need
for in situ chemical reaction strategies. However,
our understanding of structure–property-function relationships
(which relate a hydrogel’s rheological properties to their
functional performance) for dynamically cross-linked hydrogels is
still rather poorly developed. − Dynamically cross-linked hydrogels
are complex fluids, where their reversible cross-links result in bulk
material behaviors that include yielding, shear-thinning, thixotropy,
and viscoelasticity. To date, designing injectable hydrogels from
dynamically cross-linked networks with the desired combination of
properties for new applications remains challenging. Indeed, researchers
in the rheological community have focused on creating engineering
design strategies for dynamically cross-linked hydrogels. − For injectable therapeutic applications, there is a desire to design
hydrogel materials with tunable viscoelasticity to deliver stem cells
and control their differentiation, − a need for strategies to control the release of small molecular
cargo, , , , , − and a push toward materials that provide stabilization of pharmaceuticals. 
With structure–property–function
relationships in
place, it becomes easier to answer important design questions before
heading to the bench. Questions such as how does one design a hydrogel’s
terminal function (i.e., local depot formation for sustained release
of molecular cargo) without compromising performance in formulation
or during administration by injection? How can one identify if an
existing hydrogel formulation would meet the demands of a new application,
eliminating the need for starting anew with laborious and costly trial-and-error
efforts? Unveiling property–function relationships facilitates
the design process of injectable hydrogels. Knowledge of these relationships
allows for rapidly identifying and satisfying the functional constraints
across a broad variety of administration conditions while optimizing
the performance of the injectable hydrogel in vivo. The following sections provide a concise review of key property-function
relationships of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels for injectable
therapeutic applications. We briefly discuss structure–property
relationships in the context of the rheological properties that are
introduced but leave a detailed discussion to other excellent reviews. , , , Since cross-linking strategies and network structure result in similar
rheological behaviors (i.e., shear thinning, yield stress), the property–function
relationships shown here are useful across many hydrogel compositions.
Next, we discuss rheological characterization strategies for complex
fluids, such as physically cross-linked hydrogels, and provide information
about best practices during the characterization process. We intend
these sections to help scientists and engineers design future biomaterials
and also highlight key areas where more investigations are needed.

2.2.

## Pre- and Postinjection Constraints of Injectable
Hydrogels
The applications of injectable hydrogels dictate
the requisite properties for the hydrogel during formulation and after
injection. The details of the requirements for these applications
are left to the other sections of this review. From a rheological
perspective, the rheological modifications required by each application
must be considered alongside the constraints of injectability. A common
requirement is the localization of a hydrogel after injection, which
depends strongly on the rate at which the hydrogel self-heals after
injection. During injection, the high shear destroys the structure
of the dynamic hydrogel. After injection, most dynamic hydrogels do
not return to their initial viscosity immediately but rather demonstrate
a recovery of viscosity over time. , , − The transient recovery of viscosity after the cessation of flow
(i.e., once in the implantation site after injection) is called thixotropy.
Thixotropic behavior in dynamic hydrogels depends heavily on the cross-linking
motif, whereby some motifs result in hydrogels that require a significant
amount of time to recover (strongly thixotropic), while some show
only mild thixotropy and recover their properties rapidly (weakly
thixotropic). For injectable drug delivery applications, the thixotropy
of a hydrogel provides valuable insight for the time scales over which
a hydrogel will be susceptible to burst release or flowing away from
the site of injection before establishing a depot.

2.3.

## Relevant Rheological Properties for Injectability
The
viscosity of a hydrogel is related to its injectability, elucidating
the constraints that injectability places on the viscosity of injectable
biomaterials. For clinical applications, injectable hydrogels must
be delivered through a needle or catheter to the site of injection.
The injectability of a fluid depends on how much pressure is required
to drive this process of injection over relevant time frames. This
pressure is a function of the fluid viscosity, injection geometry,
and desired flow rate. Here, we review how injectability constrains
the allowable rheological properties of injectable hydrogels. To elucidate
these constraints on rheological properties, it is important to understand
the physical process of injection. Injection, in its simplest form,
is the flow of a fluid through a circular tube of constant diameter
and length. Often, there is a maximum pressure that can be applied
and a minimum flow rate that is desired. A syringe injection, for
example, would be limited to the amount of force the average healthcare
personnel could comfortably apply to a syringe plunger. An autoinjector on the other hand would be
limited by the maximum pressure the mechanism could generate. Intuitively,
there is a limit to the viscosity (i.e., resistance to flow) of the
materials which can be injected under a prescribed set of injection
conditions and geometries. Therefore, it is critical to understand
how viscosity—and its dependence on shear rate—affects
injectability, enabling researchers to use simple rheological measurements
to design their materials for injectability.
Steady state flow
models are used to model the relationship between a hydrogel’s
viscosity and the pressure required to inject it ( a). − In the case of polymer solutions and physically associated hydrogel
materials, the viscosity often obeys a power law ( ) that is described by the consistency
index, K, and shear-thinning parameter, n. , A shear-thinning parameter of n = 1 describes a Newtonian fluid with constant viscosity as the shear
rate is increased. A value of n < 1 represents
a shear-thinning fluid with a viscosity that decreases as the shear
rate is increased. Assuming power law shear-thinning behavior, the
constitutive relationship shown in can be used to describe the relationship between the
shear stress and shear rate on the fluid. The governing equation for
steady state flow through a pipe ( ) is derived using this constitutive relationship to
model the injection pressure (P) as a function of
flow rate (Q), radius (R), length
(l), and viscosity. − This model has been
used by Paxton et al. to predict the bioprinting window for a variety
of 3D printing materials. Almendinger
et al. validated the model for shear-thinning antibody solutions and
used it to predict the extrusion pressure in a variety of injection
scenarios. , − Our group validated the model for physically cross-linked hydrogels,
demonstrating its applicability for two physical hydrogels with distinct
cross-linking mechanisms (polymer–nanoparticle interactions
and ionic cross-linking). 
1 2 3 In addition to validating the model, our work also demonstrated
the utility of using the model inversely for materials design to elucidate
the consistency indexes and shear-thinning parameters that correspond
to hydrogel injectability across applications with varying geometries
or flow rate constraints. Ashby style plots of the consistency index
vs shear-thinning parameter were used in combination with the model
developed in to
reveal a parameter space for readily injectable hydrogels under typical
process constraints for syringe injection ( b). , − 
It is therefore critical that in the development of injectable
biomaterials, researchers employ flow models accompanied by rheological
characterization to avoid developing material platforms with properties
that could never scale to the clinic. This is perhaps most notable
for deep-tissue delivery of dynamic hydrogels, which can impose significantly
different constraints in a preclinical model versus clinical practice.
For example, the primary model for oncological research is mice, where
delivery to any organ is possible through a short 0.5–1.0 in.
syringe. In contrast, the equivalent in a human patient could require
injection through a long catheter and necessitate injection forces
that are impractical. To avoid these types of pitfalls on the road
to translation, it is imperative that the flow properties of dynamic
hydrogels be measured within application relevant shear rate/shear
stress regimes to determine the appropriate constitutive relationship
for each hydrogel. It is important to note that injections through
small diameter needles can result in shear rates which are dramatically
higher than the typical shear rates range used for characterization
on a rheometer ( ). For example, oncological treatments have improved patient comfort
and are delivered at flow rates between 1 and 2.3 mL/min. , 
4 Using —which
describes the maximum shear rate for a Newtonian fluid in a pipe—a
flow rate of 2.3 mL/min in a 27-gauge needle (standard for subcutaneous
injections) results in shear rates up to 42 × 103 s–1. Researchers should be cautious of extrapolating
constitutive relationships beyond the range of characterization, as
this can lead to significant errors and often poor approximations
for fluids as complex as dynamically cross-linked hydrogels. 
There are limitations to the model presented
in , which simplifies
the flow of these
hydrogels by assuming a simple power law shear-thinning response ( ), steady state conditions,
no slip, a negligible yield stress under the flow conditions, and
negligible effects of fluid extensibility. While these assumptions help make the problem simpler to analyze,
there may indeed be cases where these simplifications fail to capture
the relevant phenomena necessary to describe the flow of more complex
fluids. Good practice is to validate the flow model within the target
flow regimes and with the appropriate rheological data measured within
the correct shear-rates. In the rare cases where the simple model
in fails to adequately
describe the flow behavior, there is extensive literature on the flow
of non-Newtonian fluids that should be explored. , − , − Alternative models have been developed to account for slip, significant
yield stresses, and nonconstant geometries, though these models should
be validated with the target materials and desired flow regimes prior
to broad utilization by the community.

2.4.

## Rheological
Characterization of Injectable
Hydrogels
As we have shown, the rheological properties of
injectable hydrogels dictate the function and ultimately a significant
fraction of the performance as injectable therapeutic strategies.
Here, we provide a brief review of characterization methods for measuring
the rheological behavior of injectable hydrogels. For an in-depth
discussion of these methods, we point the reader to reports by Ewoldt, Larson, and Macosko. Dynamic hydrogels demonstrate rheological behavior
that may comprise a combination of yielding, shear-thinning, thixotropic,
viscoelastic, and extensible behaviors. − Consequently, their characterization is nontrivial and requires
a combination of rheological tests to characterize comprehensively.
Here, we present the state-of-the-art rheological methods for measuring
the viscoelastic and flow behaviors of injectable hydrogels.
2.4.1.

## Viscoelasticity
The viscoelasticity
of a hydrogel is most often measured using dynamic mechanical analysis
to measure the bulk elastic and viscous responses of a hydrogel to
an imposed oscillatory shear strain or stress. Methods also exist to measure the viscoelasticity of hydrogels
at various length scales, which may be important in cell-based applications
where they interact with the hydrogel at different length scales than
the bulk. , In bulk oscillatory measurements,
the amplitude and frequency of the imposed oscillations are varied,
and the oscillatory response of the hydrogel is measured. Small amplitude
oscillatory shear (SAOS) is the most common experimental method for
measuring a hydrogel’s viscoelastic response. The oscillatory
response measured in response to the oscillatory input is analyzed
and typically represented through dynamic storage and loss moduli
( a), which
describe the elastic and viscous responses of the hydrogel, respectively.
When the storage modulus is greater than the loss modulus, the material
is said to be solid-like. When the loss modulus is greater than the
storage modulus, the material is said to be liquid-like. The storage
and loss moduli are only well-defined when experiments are performed
within the linear viscoelastic regime ( ), where the hydrogel network responds linearly
to the imposed strain or stress amplitude.
 Frequency sweeps are
performed at a constant strain or stress amplitude,
and the frequency of the oscillation is varied to probe the material’s
time-dependent viscoelasticity. For irreversible covalent hydrogels,
solid-like behavior is observed for all frequencies without any significant
frequency dependence due to the permanent cross-links in the network.
For dynamic hydrogels, the response to oscillatory shear can be more
complex, showing both solid and liquid like responses that depend
on the frequency of oscillation. The point at which the storage modulus
is equal to the loss modulus is the crossover frequency and denotes
the transition between solid and liquid like states. In general, the
viscoelastic response is a function of the thermodynamics and kinetics
of the physical cross-link and network topology. , , − Craig et al. have demonstrated for nonentangled physically cross-linked
networks that the relaxation time (τ) of the hydrogel is equal
to the dissociation rate of the physical cross-link. In a simple system, where the only cross-links originate
from physical cross-links, the equilibrium constant (Keq) of the interaction describes the equilibrium concentration
of cross-links and therefore the magnitude of the rubbery plateau.
Though not discussed in detail here, stress relaxation experiments—where
a constant deformation is applied and the temporal decrease in stress
is monitored—are also a valuable experimental tool for measuring
the relaxation time (τ) of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels. Stress relaxation experiments are especially
useful when the relaxation time is longer than the measurable relaxation
times in SAOS experiments.
Time sweep SAOS measurements—where
the amplitude and frequency
of oscillation are kept constant—are useful when measuring
the transition of a hydrogel or its components from liquid to solid
or vice versa, such as in the gelation of covalent and physically
cross-linked materials. The oscillatory response is measured at a
constant frequency and amplitude over an extended period of time.
For irreversible covalent materials, mixing of two components can
be performed immediately before measuring the materials viscoelastic
response. The temporal evolution of the dynamic moduli reveals the
kinetics of gelation, where the gelation point is assigned to the
time at which the storage modulus surpasses the loss modulus at a
crossover time. For dynamically cross-linked hydrogels, time sweep
SAOS measurements are used to probe their self-healing behavior. The
amplitude of the applied shear strain or stress is transitioned from
low-to-high or high-to-low to probe the response of the dynamic cross-links.
The temporal viscoelastic response of a dynamic hydrogel is measured
to quantify the kinetics of recovery and degree of self-healing. This
process is often alternated and repeated several times to demonstrate
reversible self-healing of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels.
For injectable applications, dynamic hydrogels typically undergo
transitions from a static equilibrium state to a nonlinear flow state
and then return to a static equilibrium state. The properties of the
hydrogels during and after these transitions influence their performance
as injectable therapeutics. Measuring these properties, however, is
challenging due to the transition from the linear to nonlinear regime.
Nonlinear oscillatory shear measurements that go beyond the linear
viscoelastic regime, such as large amplitude oscillatory shear (LAOS),
have been a recent area of research focus. , − The storage and loss moduli become ill-defined in the nonlinear
regime, and methods for quantifying a hydrogels’ response are
more challenging. There have been recent advances in the analysis
of nonlinear rheological data using Fourier transform analysis methods
and a sequence of physical process methods, which provide more insight
into the nonlinear properties of injectable biomaterials.

2.4.2.

## Flow Rheology
The flow properties
of a hydrogel are measured using a rheometer or capillary viscometer.
In these instruments, a simple shear flow is applied to measure the
relationship between the shear rate and shear stress of a fluid. This
relationship is shown in a flow curve (and is extracted through an
analysis of the imposed viscometric flows). A typical flow curve for a yielding, physically cross-linked hydrogel
is shown in ( a). The viscosity is the ratio of the stress and shear rate and can
be constant across shear rates (Newtonian) or be shear rate dependent
(non-Newtonian). This section will discuss the acquisition of a steady
state flow curve, introduce the important features of a flow curve
for injectable hydrogels, and discuss the measurement transient thixotropic
behaviors (time-dependent change in properties). Typical flow curves
for physically cross-linked hydrogels show three distinct regimes:
(1) preyield, (2) yielding, and (3) flow. We highlight that although
discussion about a true yield stress has been a long contentious area
of discourse in the scientific literature, the engineering reality
of its effects is readily evident for injectable hydrogels. , − 
 In a rheometer, an angular velocity is applied
to a rotating geometry,
and the resulting torque on the geometry is measured—or vice
versa. With a known geometry, such as parallel plates or a cone-and-plate,
the angular velocity is converted to shear rate and the torque is
converted to stress. In a capillary viscometer, a constant flow rate
is applied, and the pressure required to drive the flow is measured.
The shear stress is determined from the geometry and pressure, and
the shear rate is calculated from the geometry, flow rate, and pressure
using the Weissenberg–Rabinowitsch–Mooney analysis. , For Newtonian fluids, the shear rate is a function of the flow rate
and channel geometry. For non-Newtonian fluids, the shear rate is
also a function of the fluid’s viscosity in addition to the
flow rate and channel geometry. Deciding between a rheometer and viscometer
depends on the viscosity of the fluids being measured and on the shear
rates that are of interest—outlined by Pipe et al. Generally, it is simpler to measure high-shear-rate
flow curves using a capillary viscometer. In rheometers, there are
significant challenges at high shear rates. The shear rate in rheometers
is proportional to (gap size)−1 and is increased
by decreasing the gap size between the two shearing surfaces. As the
gap size is decreased to increase the shear rate, significant errors
arise due to geometrical imperfections. Rheometers also suffer from
radial migration of the sample and subsequent ejection of a sample
at high shear rates. Capillary viscometers provide an alternative
strategy for measuring the viscosity of fluids at high shear rates
and use a closed capillary that is not prone to technical issues such
as sample ejection. Regardless of the measurement technique used,
the outcome is a measurement of the stress–shear rate relationship
of a fluid.
The yield stress demarcates the minimum required
stress necessary
to induce flow for the fluid, and several strategies for measuring
it have been developed. , , Here, we review the use of flow data to measure the yield stress.
Using a stress vs shear rate curve ( a), the yield stress manifests as a nonzero
intercept with the stress axis. The yield stress is then calculated
using a Herschel–Bulkley model ( ) that is fit to the stress-shear rate data.
Here, σy is the
yield stress with units in Pascals, n is the shear-thinning
parameter (unitless), and K is the consistency index
with units in Pascal-secondsn. The modified
Herschel–Bulkley model is often preferred because it yields
fitting parameters with constant units and more intuitive meaning.
The consistency index is replaced with γ̇critical, which is the critical shear rate with units in s–1 at which the flow stress is double that of the yield stress. Alternatively,
some authors suggest plotting viscosity vs stress ( b), where a dramatic decrease
of several orders of magnitude in the viscosity is observed for a
small increase in the stress. , , , − Here, the stress at which the viscosity decreases is assigned as
the yield stress. In plots of viscosity vs shear rate ( c), the preyield regime appears
as shear-thinning. Before the yielding event, the stress is constant
at increasing shear rates, resulting in a viscosity which appears
to decrease. On a log–log plot
of viscosity vs shear rate, this phenomenon is observed as a slope
of −1. In practice, the visualization of rheological data showing
flow data with plots of viscosity vs shear rate alone makes it challenging
to understand important details about the rheological response of
a dynamic hydrogel. For this reason, it is recommended that—at
a minimum—both stress vs shear rate and viscosity vs shear
rate data be shown when characterizing yield stress fluids. The flow
curve (stress vs shear rate) shows yielding, while the viscosity versus
shear rate plot of the flow regime more clearly shows the degree of
shear-thinning for the hydrogel.
5 Postyield, physical hydrogels flow with shear-thinning
behavior,
where viscosity decreases as the shear rate is increased. Seen as
a series of progressively decreasing slopes on a stress vs shear rate
plot and as a negative, linear decline (slope = n – 1, where n is between 0 and 1) in a log-base
plot of viscosity vs shear rate ( c). In a yielding
hydrogel, the Hershel–Bulkley model provides information about
the non-Newtonian viscosity of a hydrogel, where the consistency index
and shear-thinning parameter describe the power law shear thinning
of the hydrogel in flow. Alternatively, the flow portion of the viscosity
versus shear rate curve can be fit to a power law ( ) to find the consistency index
and shear-thinning parameter fits. It is critical that only the flow
portion of the viscosity versus shear rate plot is used when fitting
a power law to the rheological data of a dynamic hydrogel. In general,
because it is difficult to distinguish between the preyield and flow
regime, it is important to be cautious when demarcating the flow regime
in viscosity vs shear rate plots before measuring the degree of shear
thinning with a model fit ( c).
When measuring a flow curve, it is critical
to consider the effects
of thixotropy and take appropriate precautions with test protocols.
Intuitively, materials that are strongly thixotropic have a significant
delay in restructuring, resulting in a transient response until equilibrium
is reached during a deformation ( a). For dynamically cross-linked systems—which
possess both solid-like and liquid-like behaviors—the dynamics
of the cross-links and network often result in transient material
response when changing the shear rate, especially before or near the
yield point. It is common to observe an overshoot in the viscosity
( b) on the
startup of shear as the network structure yields and breaks down to
the new equilibrium state. , At faster shear rates,
the viscosity overshoot is more pronounced and depends on the yielding
and relaxation behavior of the material. c, shows the viscosity of a thixotropic material
when the applied stress is instantly decreased (flow cessation). Instead
of the viscosity increasing instantly, the viscosity slowly increases
as the structure within the material rebuilds. The recovery of the
viscosity can be fit to an exponential to determine the characteristic
thixotropic time scales. The phenomena
observed upon the sudden application or removal of shear shown in b and c probe similar
phenomena as described in self-healing SAOS experiments discussed
above. Authors will often choose between either self-healing SAOS
experiments or flow cessation experiments to demonstrate reversible
self-healing.
 Experimentally, thixotropy can significantly affect the acquisition
of a flow curve, making it challenging to determine the equilibrium
viscosities, shear-thinning, and yielding behavior of materials. , Flow experiments that do not account for thixotropy are often irreproducible
and can demonstrate significant hysteresis ( d). A simple strategy for measuring the equilibrium
flow curve is to perform flow experiments using stepwise changes in
the stress or shear rate and not ramped protocols. Stepwise experiments can be designed to apply a deformation
until equilibrium is reached before taking a measurement. 

2.5.

## Outlook for Rheological
Characterization of
Injectable Hydrogels
In this section, we’ve highlighted
the importance of functional constraints on the rheological behavior
of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels. The constraints are often paradoxical,
requiring higher yield stresses or viscosities for localization upon
injection, yet also demand low viscosities to allow for facile injection.
Here, we’ve reviewed the property–function relationship
between the rheological properties of power-law shear-thinning fluids
and the pressure required for injection. These relationships elucidate
materials design targets for future injectable material platforms,
specifically target viscosities which allow for facile injection at
the shear rates relevant to the clinic. Designing these materials
requires careful and rigorous characterization of viscoelastic and
flow properties, which include viscoelasticity, shear-thinning, yielding,
and thixotropy. We’ve briefly provided a survey of the more
standard characterization techniques and point the reader to some
reliable resources that provide a more rigorous description of the
techniques. Most notably, stress relaxation and creep experiments
are critical for understanding the long-time relaxation behaviors
of materials and are not suitably characterized using SAOS. Together,
this section provides the reader with a foundation to understand how
the rheological behavior of existing hydrogels may translate to a
desired function within their application. As more hydrogels are developed
in the field of therapeutic delivery and new challenges arise, the
property–function relationships shown here will enable more
effective materials selection strategies to down-select materials
and create rheological targets for new applications.

3.

## Hydrogels for Drug Delivery
Shortly after Wichterle
and Lim described the first synthetic hydrogel, researchers began engineering hydrogels to deliver
drugs locally and for extended periods of time. − Hydrogel platforms for drug delivery have steadily evolved in their
sophistication, expanding beyond synthetic, covalently cross-linked
systems toward a hugely diverse set of biomaterials platforms. Alongside
these exciting materials developments, the rise of mathematical models
that describe the release of drugs from hydrogels and other biomaterials
has become an important aspect for designing these systems and has
been reviewed in depth. − In particular, these models
can guide the design of drug carriers so that they can meet the requirements
of a particular application or they can help researchers elucidate
the transport mechanisms that govern release kinetics from novel formulations.
Many empirical, semiempirical, and numerical methods have been developed
to describe transport from biomaterials. In particular, power law
approaches, such as the Ritger–Peppas and Korsmeyer–Peppas
models, , have proven to be very useful for modeling
controlled release of drug cargo from hydrogels.
By locally
drugging target tissues, hydrogel drug carriers provide
compelling safety benefits by reducing drug exposure in off-target
tissue. Cancer therapies in particular stand to benefit considerably
from this type of highly focused drug exposure. While hydrogels can locally focus drug exposure, they can
also sustain a steady release rate of drugs over a prolonged period
of time (e.g., hours, days, weeks, or months depending on the formulation).
This sustained release of drugs is especially beneficial for reducing
the number of doses required to treat a patient over time, which is
promising for treating chronic diseases requiring lifelong medication,
such as diabetes. Sustained release kinetics also appear to provide
specific opportunities to enhance the efficacy of certain therapies,
such as vaccines for infectious disease. Finally, the mechanical properties and overall biocompatibility
of hydrogels allows them to integrate well into soft tissues and serve
as the eventual scaffolding for endogenous cells as they degrade—traits
that enhance their utility for a range of regenerative applications.
Overall, the value of carefully designed hydrogel drug carriers
in biomedical applications is expansive and likely to be quite impactful.
In particular, we focus on injectable hydrogel systems in this section,
which for our purposes includes hydrogels that gel in situ as well as shear-thinning hydrogels. There are several recent reviews
that cover this area in depth from either the materials or clinical
perspective, , , − and here we provide a hybrid view with an
emphasis on the interdisciplinary nature of this type of research,
in particular, the need for thoughtful materials design to be coupled
with robust biological rationales and preclinical evaluation.
3.1.

## Foundations of Hydrogel Drug Delivery
The process of
mass transport through hydrogels is essential for
understanding how drug (and even cellular) cargo will move through
these materials. Various properties influence mass transport, with
some of the most salient being whether the hydrogel exhibits macroscopic
architecture, such as porosity, and how tightly cross-linked the polymer
network is, which gives rise to the hydrogel mesh size ( ). Critically,
the movement of cargo inside of a hydrogel depends strongly on the
relationship between the cargo’s hydrodynamic diameter and
the hydrogel mesh size ( ). Depending on the ratio between these two features,
cargo release from hydrogels may be diffusion-dependent, erosion-dependent,
or dependent on both mechanisms. In general, diffusion-dependent release
occurs over shorter timeframes, ranging from hours to days, while
erosion-based approaches can extend release out to weeks or months. Prior to delving into cargo-specific considerations,
we will briefly review the behavior of cargo in hydrogels as a function
of hydrogel mesh size and erosion kinetics.
 In many hydrogel systems, the mesh size can be tuned to regulate
the release of cargo, with reported sizes ranging from single-digit
to hundreds of nanometers. Intuitively,
if the mesh size is much larger than a drug’s hydrodynamic
diameter, then the drug can freely diffuse through the network with
minimal steric hindrance. Under these conditions, diffusion is the
dominant mechanism for release, and the diffusivity of the cargo inside
the gel may be similar to its diffusivity in bulk solution. When this
is the case, drug release can be quite rapid, with the cargo releasing
completely from the hydrogel in hours or days. However, the diffusion
of molecules can be strongly affected by nearby surfaces and substrates,
which has led to active research on modeling and understanding the
concept of hindered diffusion. , As a result, even
if a drug is smaller than the effective mesh size of a hydrogel, it
may very well diffuse more slowly than it would if it were simply
in free solution. If the hydrogel mesh size is comparable to the hydrodynamic
diameter of the drug, then diffusion can be slowed down considerably,
but it still remains an important contributor to release, alongside
erosion kinetics ( b).
In contrast, if the mesh size is smaller than the
hydrodynamic
diameter of the cargo, then the cargo is sterically hindered and cannot
move through the hydrogel—leaving it essentially trapped ( c). In these cases,
drug release is dominated by mechanical disruption, gel erosion, or
swelling behaviors. , Only when the surrounding gel
has sufficiently broken down, effectively increasing the mesh size
in the vicinity of the cargo, can the drug diffuse away from the carrier.
In these cases, erosion kinetics become a critical determinant of
drug release kinetics, and there are several ways that erosion mechanisms
can be engineered to control drug release. 
Biomedical hydrogels are generally designed to erode or degrade
under physiological conditions, through mechanisms such as hydrolysis
or enzymatic digestion, to break down the polymer network into resorbable,
metabolizable, or excretable base components. If a hydrophilic hydrogel
is susceptible to hydrolytic degradation (e.g., polyesters), then
it generally undergoes bulk erosion—that is that the network
throughout the gel is simultaneously degrading at a similar rate. , Bulk erosion could also occur through other mechanisms, such as
with an enzymatically degraded gel, provided the mesh size of the
hydrogel permits rapid penetration of the enzyme from the exterior.
Alternatively, hydrogels can also undergo surface erosion when the
exterior of the gel breaks down more quickly than the interior bulk. , This can occur when the molecular agents that degrade the gel (e.g.,
water, enzymes) diffuse into the bulk slowly relative to the rate
of surface erosion. This can occur with hydrogels bearing hydrophobic
components that slow down the rate of water penetration into the bulk
or when the mesh size is much smaller than the size of the enzymes
that are responsible for breaking down the network. Regardless of
the mechanism of erosion, these behaviors can be readily modeled to
predict erosion-dependent release kinetics. Overall, the mechanisms of hydrogel erosion are important considerations
when designing a drug carrier, in particular when delivering large
cargoes such as nano- or microparticles.
In many instances,
the cargoes that are delivered for biomedical
applications are drugs smaller than 15 nm—small molecules or
compact proteins. We will delve into
the specific considerations for the different types of cargoes in
the following sections, but in many cases hydrogel delivery of biomedical
drugs through passive means (e.g., physical encapsulation and subsequent
release) will be strongly diffusion-dependent. Therefore, there is
considerable benefit to being able to predict or model the diffusion
of cargoes within different types of hydrogels. There are numerous
models that capture important aspects of this behavior, such as hydrodynamic
theory, free volume theory, and obstruction theory. The literature on these models is extensive, − , and here we provide basic summaries
of their underlying assumptions. In general, these theories assume
the drug (or solute) is a perfect hard sphere in the aqueous bulk
phase of the hydrogel. Most general models assume negligible hydrophobic,
electrostatic, or van der Waals forces. However, it should be noted
that in certain drug/hydrogel combinations these interactions can
strongly impact mass diffusion ( ). Hydrodynamic
theory is focused on the effects of friction between cargoes and the
hydrogel, which is considered to be a fluid (instead of a solid) in
this particular model. The free volume theory looks to model diffusion
by assuming cargo is transported through the dynamic open spaces between
the molecules that form the hydrogel. Obstruction theory models the polymer mesh as a physical barrier
that hinders the diffusion of the drug through the bulk phase. More recently, our group developed a model
that combines these three approaches, which we call the Multiscale
Diffusion Model (MSDM). The MSDM notably
reconciles both theoretical and experimental inconsistencies between
the prior three models, providing a
more accurate prediction of cargo transport in a variety of PEG and
alginate hydrogels. Overall, theoretical
models provide researchers with a critical tool for designing hydrogels
before coming to the bench, helping to minimize costly trial-and-error
optimization. Nevertheless, there is an outstanding need for models
that fully capture the complexities of drug delivery, including drug–hydrogel
interactions and drugs of complex shape (e.g., elongated biopolymers
such as DNA). For readers interested in further details, we refer
them to several excellent and comprehensive reviews on the physics
and modeling of drug diffusion through hydrogels. − , 
 So far, we have seen
that the relationship between drug size and
mesh size can help predict a great deal about drug release kinetics.
If taken into account during the design stage, hydrogels can be formulated
to feature a mesh size that is more likely to yield desirable release
kinetics. To this end, hydrogel mesh size can usually be made smaller
by increasing the polymer content and/or cross-linking density and
vice versa. However, while tuning the mesh size can be relatively
straightforward in more traditional, covalently cross-linked systems,
certain precautions must be taken when looking to leverage these concepts
in dynamic hydrogels. This is due to the reversible nature of the
cross-links in dynamic hydrogels, which can essentially lead to the
reversible opening and closing of paths for entrapped macromolecules
diffusing through the hydrogel. In these instances, the time scales
for the formation and dissociation of these cross-links may play an
important role in governing diffusion. In addition, noninjectable
systems can increase or decrease polymer concentration and/or cross-link
density to tune the mesh size, generally without jeopardizing the
downstream applications of the hydrogel (unless those applications
depend on mechanical properties, which can be altered by these changes).
In contrast, changes to cross-link density may have a detrimental
impact on the injectability of dynamic hydrogels, particularly when
scaled to clinically relevant geometries, as discussed previously.
As a result, novel strategies for regulating drug release, and in
particular small molecule drugs, have been important for designing
injectable hydrogels for sustained release applications.

3.2.

## Considerations for Small Molecule Delivery
Drug carriers
aim to improve the efficacy of their cargo by delivering
more of the active drug to its site of action within target tissues.
Simultaneously, these carriers should reduce the exposure to the drug
in off-target tissues, where it can cause toxic side effects. Nanoparticle
carriers, another exciting materials approach to solving biomedical
challenges, are designed to accomplish this by encapsulating small
molecules through various passive and chemical strategies. Nanoparticles then must protect their cargo
while navigating the body to reach a target tissue. This is a considerably
complex task, and for now nanoparticle drug delivery still leads to
extensive accumulation of drug in filtration organs such as the liver
and spleen and has had limited success in specific tissue targeting. In contrast, hydrogels sidestep the challenge
of navigating through the body by being administered directly at the
target site. This is now easily achievable with injectable hydrogels,
which can be administered to diseased tissues using a minimally invasive
approach. While this local drug delivery has limited utility for the
treatment of a disseminated disease, such as metastatic cancer, it
has a great deal of potential in treating localized disease or injured
tissues. As we will detail in later sections, hydrogels offer some
unique advantages for locally interfacing with the immune system to
orchestrate systemic immune responses.
All this is to say that
the design of contemporary hydrogel drug carriers is heavily focused
on two properties: (i) injectability, either through shear-thinning
or shape-memory properties or triggered in situ sol–gel
transitions, and (ii) tuning parameters that govern the release of
cargo. Obtaining a high degree of control over drug release is particularly
challenging with small molecule drugs, the focus of this section.
Due to their small size, small molecule drugs present a challenge
for sustained release strategies, many of which are based on passive
diffusion approaches that involve tuning hydrogel mesh sizes. As a
result, a rapid burst-release of drug is a common problem when delivering
this class of drug. Large bursts introduce
safety concerns by potentially increasing drug exposure to dangerous
levels in the target tissue. Burst release can also saturate local
tissues with drug, allowing excess drug to escape into systemic circulation
where it can affect off-target organs. The subsequent steady state
release of the remaining drug after a burst may also be too little
to maintain the target tissue within the drug’s therapeutic
window.
Overall, the field has worked diligently to exert greater
control
over the release of small molecule drugs. Because mesh sizes cannot
generally restrict the diffusion of small molecules through hydrogels,
the effect of polymer–drug interactions with the matrix can
make a significant impact on release kinetics. These interactions
can consist of electrostatic, hydrophobic, hydrogen-bond, van der
Waals, or other specific and nonspecific interactions. Nonspecific
interactions, for example, may explain why increasing the polymer
content of certain hydrogels can attenuate the burst release of hydrophilic
small molecules, despite the fact that
the mesh sizes remain much larger than the size of the cargo. Incorporating
polyelectrolytes into hydrogels can similarly slow down the release
of oppositely charged small molecules, greatly reducing burst release
of the cargo. Although hydrophobic small
molecules exhibit very slow steady state release kinetics from hydrogels,
they still exhibit a burst release (albeit smaller than their hydrophobic
counterparts). Hydrogels that feature
hydrophobic pockets enabling host–guest interactions within
the polymer network can reduce the extent of this burst release, as
has been demonstrated by cyclodextrin-functionalized polymer networks. , In a similar vein, hydrophobic nanoparticles can be used to encapsulate
these drugs and entrap them within a hydrophilic hydrogel network. 
These technologies have important implications
for the clinic,
as hydrogels that locally deliver small molecule drugs and avoid systemic
exposure have been shown to maintain efficacy while reducing toxicity.
Along these lines, Yang and co-workers demonstrated that a pH/temperature-sensitive
hydrogel could reduce the toxicity of a common chemotherapy regimen
that combines hydrophilic doxorubicin and hydrophobic paclitaxel ( ). This study highlights how the solubility of
small molecule cargo directly influences its release profile, with
the water-soluble doxorubicin following a typical burst-release followed
by a slower sustained release. In contrast, the hydrophobic paclitaxel
was released quite slowly, possibly on the time scale of gel degradation.
An important consideration from this study is that the cargo influenced
the gelation time and the mechanical properties of the resulting gels,
and the effect was also cargo specific. Doxorubicin drove quicker
gelation and resulted in higher modulus gels while paclitaxel slowed
gelation and decreased the modulus of the resulting gels. In the end,
the effects tended to cancel each other out when the drugs were combined,
but the impact of cargo on the mechanical properties of the hydrogel
can nonetheless affect critical factors such as in vivo erosion and release kinetics.
 While the release of drugs from
this hydrogel was primarily driven
by simple passive diffusion, the effect was sufficient to provide
a considerable improvement in off-target side effects. Mice treated
with doxorubicin-gels had ca. 40-fold lower peak drug concentrations
in the blood when compared to mice receiving bolus treatments. Potentially
due to the lower systemic exposure, gel-treated mice were protected
from treatment associated acute weight loss and cardiotoxicity. In
addition to the improved safety profile, gel-delivery made this treatment
regimen even more effective in a murine model of melanoma, compared
to bolus treatments. This outcome may be partially due to schedule-dependent
synergy between doxorubicin and paclitaxel, where optimal efficacy
requires doxorubicin release to precede paclitaxel. , Due to the intrinsic differences in solubility between these cargo,
doxorubicin naturally released much more quickly from the hydrogel
than hydrophobic paclitaxel, creating a rudimentary but effective
staged-release effect. The capacity for hydrogels to confer this kind
of improvement in safety and efficacy is likely to continue growing
as materials scientists develop platforms with increasingly sophisticated
controlled release mechanisms.
Not all small molecule drugs
will possess useful physicochemical
properties that can be taken advantage of by strategies seeking to
increase drug–polymer interactions. In these cases, there are
limited options for designing a hydrogel carrier, but one powerful
technique has been to use molecular imprinting to fabricate hydrogels
that are tailor-made to bind to a specific molecule. , With this approach, hydrogels are synthesized in the presence of
a “template molecule” that can later be removed. The
cavity left behind from the template exhibits a high degree of affinity
for the actual cargo molecule, in a sense creating an artificial binding
pocket. Unfortunately, the need to retain this specific shape has
precluded this technique from being implemented in injectable hydrogels
so far. However, the ability to molecularly
imprint nanoparticles might provide an avenue for incorporating this
technology into injectable hydrogels in the future. 
Leveraging intrinsic drug–-polymer interactions
can be a
powerful tool in developing hydrogel carriers for a variety of small
molecules, reducing burst release and at times extending the period
release to achieve particular biomedical goals. Nevertheless, the
release kinetics of these systems is often diffusion-dominated and
can lead to faster release than what is desired, which has led to
alternative strategies that go beyond passive release mechanisms.
One technique is to tether drugs directly to the hydrogel network,
either through irreversible covalent attachment or a labile linkage. − This type of approach can significantly extend drug release and
minimize burst effects, with release kinetics governed primarily by
the degradation kinetics of the hydrogel. In some instances, it can
also introduce stimuli-responsive release of drugs, if, for example,
the linkages are cleavable by specific environmental factors such
as pH or expression of a specific enzyme. Alternatively, light and heat-cleavable linkages open the door to
exogenously triggered drug release. , Overall,
these strategies provide significantly more control over the release
rate of small molecules, but they do introduce their own complexities.
For example, chemical modification of small molecule drugs may affect
their biological properties in ways that are challenging to predict.
The kinetics of stimuli-responsive labile linkages may also be difficult
to predict, especially if it is based on the endogenous expression
of a particular enzyme or protein. For exogenously triggered cleavage
of linkers, stimuli such as light and heat may be difficult to apply
in a translational setting (e.g., penetration depth limitations of
light). These are issues that highlight the interdisciplinary nature
of this endeavor, which would benefit from collaboration between clinicians,
biologists, medicinal chemists, and materials scientists.
An
alternative approach to governing small molecule drug release
has been to engineer the molecules into a form that interacts with
the hydrogel either physically, chemically, or supramolecularly ( ). For example,
Ding and co-workers took advantage of methods for conjugating poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG) to camptothecin, a chemotherapy drug, which considerably
increased the size of the cargo. This
process, commonly referred to as PEGylation, is a well-documented
approach for improving the solubility of small molecule drugs and
proteins and increasing their size. , It provides
significant benefits for a variety of drugs, particularly in extending
the circulatory half-life of systemically administered drugs and altering
their biodistribution. In this study,
mixing a PEGylated form of camptothecin with a triblock copolymer
comprising poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid) and
PEG (PLGA-PEG-PLGA) generated an injectable solution that gelled at
physiological temperatures. The resulting hydrogel provided a depot
for release of PEGylated camptothecin, which could be tuned by changing
the relative size of the polymer blocks and their relative concentrations.
When injected subcutaneously in S-180 sarcoma-bearing mice, the hydrogels
slowed tumor growth despite being distant from the actual tumor, likely
by maintaining the therapeutic levels of PEGylated camptothecin in
the blood. Assuming that maintaining these levels of camptothecin
is tolerable, this and similar hydrogels could replace the long infusions
characteristic of chemotherapy and have efficacy against widely disseminated
cancers. Future studies should evaluate the efficacy of peri or intratumoral
hydrogel injection, which may achieve therapeutic effects at lower
doses and mitigate toxic side effects. 
 In this system, the long bulky PEG arm of the camptothecin
was
entangled with the polymer mesh of the hydrogel, slowing its diffusion
out of the gel. Interestingly, the inclusion of PEGylated camptothecin
had a considerable impact on the mechanical properties of the PEG-PLGA-PEG
hydrogels. Namely, the drug lowered the sol–gel transition
temperature and increased the viscosity of the sol. This finding introduces
an important consideration for how the cargo itself may interfere
(potentially beneficially or detrimentally) with the dynamic self-assembly
behaviors that drive gelation. For example, Shim et al. reported how
the chemotherapy drug paclitaxel decreased the sol–gel transition
temperature of another temperature-sensitive hydrogel formulation
in a dose-dependent manner, possibly
due to a salting-out effect. , 
The impact of
cargo on the mechanical properties of a gel is especially
critical in supramolecular hydrogel systems that incorporate their
cargo into their building blocks, a strategy which Ding and co-workers
used to develop a sustained release system for a derivative of cisplatin,
another common chemotherapy drug ( ). The Pt(IV)
derivative of cisplatin was conjugated to two PEG-b-poly(d,l-lactide) (PEG-PLA) block copolymers to
form a triblock macromolecule. This amphiphilic polymer self-assembled
into micelles with the platinum prodrug contained within the hydrophobic
core. At physiological temperatures, the micelle solution undergoes
a sol–gel transition, yielding a long-lasting depot of platinum–drug
loaded micelles. As the gel degrades, intact micelles are released
which can be broken down into the active Pt(II) drug by intracellular
reducing agents. By incorporating the platinum prodrug into the building
blocks of this hydrogel, this hydrogel significantly slowed the release
of a very small molecule drug (∼75% released in vitro in 40 days), which would otherwise rapidly diffuse out of a passive-release
system (75% released in vitro in <5 h). However,
inclusion of the drug into the building blocks of this supramolecular
system had significant effects on hydrogel formation. In this case,
the effect was quite beneficial—the inclusion of the Pt(IV)
into the hydrophobic region of the triblock decreased the sol–gel
transition sufficiently to form gels under physiological conditions.
In contrast, drug-free triblock PEG-PLA-PEG systems gelled at ∼50
°C, which would hardly be useful for biomedical applications.
While this approach is promising for extending the release of a fundamental
chemotherapy drug, in vivo studies on release rates
and efficacy still need to be carried out. In particular, it will
be important to determine if such a drug delivery system might mitigate
the traumatic side effects that accompany platinum-based chemotherapies. 
 While the prior approaches focus on delivery of encapsulated small
molecules, one innovative approach by Kibbe and co-workers uses a
hydrogel system to generate therapeutic small molecules in
situ. By incorporating nitric
oxide (NO) donors into a peptide nanofiber hydrogel platform, this
group produced an injectable depot of NO to locally inhibit neointimal
hyperplasia, a condition which complicates treatment of cardiovascular
disease. Notably, in developing this hydrogel, four unique NO-donor
candidates were tested, two of which prevented gelation. Again, we
see that the properties of cargo can exert potent and difficult-to-predict
effects on the forces driving gelation, which led to the discontinuation
of two donors. And while the remaining two NO donors yielded hydrogels,
only one of the donors (PROLI/NO) could inhibit neointimal hyperplasia
in a rat model. Importantly, the PROLI/NO formulation was successful in vivo despite underperforming in earlier in vitro assays, highlighting the need to carry forward these studies into
relevant preclinical models.

3.3.

## Considerations for Nucleic
Acid Delivery
Nucleic acid-based therapies include DNA and
RNA that encode beneficial
proteins, as well as microRNA and siRNA,
which can silence expression of specific genes. Synthetic biologists have further advanced the capabilities
of nucleic acid cargoes with stimuli-responsive and self-replicating
constructs known as replicons. More
recently, gene therapies have grown to include CRISPR-based systems
which can precisely edit the host genome. , Short DNA and RNA oligomers known as aptamers have also been developed,
with the capability to bind to and regulate specific targets with
specificity and affinity comparable to antibodies. Additionally, several immunogenic nucleic acids that are
agoinsts for toll-like receptors (TLR), including CpG (TLR9 agonist),
poly(I:C) (TLR3 and RIG1 agonist), and ssRNA (TLR7/8 agonists), have
become important adjuvants for a variety of immunotherapies. In general, all of these biopolymers share
similar physicochemical traits due to the conserved phosphatidyl backbone
of nucleic acids, so in general these cargo are relatively stiff (particularly
in the double-stranded form) and negatively charged species, − which complicates their delivery through cell membranes. They are
also susceptible to numerous endogenous enzymes that quickly degrade
extracellular or otherwise “out of place” nucleic acids.
Because the information stored in nucleic acids is variable and length-dependent,
the overall size of therapeutic cargo can vary from the tens of kilodaltons
(e.g., siRNAs) to the megadalton range (plasmid DNA or poly(I:C)).
As a result, nucleic acid therapeutics are sensitive and difficult
to deliver to their site of action, major obstacles for their clinical
translation.
Fortunately, electrostatic interactions with polycations
have proven to be a useful and effective way to condense nucleic acid
cargo into nano- and microsized particles that protect cargo from
premature degradation ( ). , Electrostatic complexation with
supramolecular building blocks (e.g, peptide amphiphiles and phospholipids)
can also yield self-assembled particle carriers. , In addition to protecting nucleic acids from premature degradation,
particle carriers also have cell-penetrating capabilities that can
help to deliver cargo to the cytoplasm or nucleus, where they can
carry out their therapeutic function. While electrostatically assembled
polyplexes can be effective, without further modification they have
overall poor pharmacokinetic properties and poor tissue-targeting,
as well as issues with toxicity and safety. , But by formulating hydrogel carriers of nucleic acid polyplexes,
these therapeutic particles can be delivered locally to target tissues
to resolve both of these issues.
 Chen and co-workers used this approach with a PLGA-PEG-PLGA
thermosensitive
hydrogel that safely delivered shRNA against the tumor oncogene PLK1. PLK1 shRNA was complexed with a polylysine-modified
polyethylenimine, producing a roughly 100 nm particle, which is sufficiently large to tune the release
rate based on the porosity of the hydrogel carrier. The local release
of shRNA led to a decrease in tumoral PLK1 expression. The authors
also explored simultaneous delivery of the chemotherapy drug doxorubicin
and found that the combination therapy led to synergistic antitumor
effects via activation of a G2/M cell cycle checkpoint. Importantly,
hydrogel combination therapy avoided off-target cardiotoxicity typically
associated with doxorubicin and saw no toxic effects from the shRNA
polyplexes. As these results suggest, hydrogels can be developed to
deliver combination therapies composed of diverse cargoes without
provoking systemic toxicity. And these types of multidrug systems
have become an intense area of research in the biomaterials community.
These studies considerably amplify the complexity of preclinical studies,
but it is essential that future studies directly compare hydrogel
delivery against bolus administrations to determine to what extent
benefits in safety and efficacy can be attributed to the inclusion
of the hydrogel carrier.
Hydrogel delivery of electrostatically
assembled nucleic acid particles
locally alters gene expression, , presenting
opportunities for healing highly localized injuries or tissue damage.
Khademhosseini and co-workers used this approach with an injectable
methacrylated hydrogel to deliver DNA encoding the pro-angiogenic
growth factor VEGF. The DNA cargo was
first electrostatically adsorbed onto PEI-functionalized graphene
oxide, which was released slowly from the gel depot to promote cardiac
tissue repair after myocardial infarction. This group directly compared
the effect of using precomplexed DNA particles versus naked DNA in
their hydrogel system and determined that hydrogels delivering particles
achieved superior tissue regeneration, namely smaller myocardial scar
area and improved heart function, as measured by changes in ejection
fraction. The hydrogels used in this study did not provoke an immune
response or changes in systemic inflammatory markers, which bodes
well for future studies aimed at hydrogel-mediated gene therapy for
tissue regeneration. In particular, it will be important to see how
future iterations of this technology fare with the delivery of mRNA,
which has become the preferred approach for expressing exogenous genes. 
A promising alternative to delivering
nucleic acid-loaded particles
is to use chemically modified nucleic acids ( ). , Several phosphatidyl
backbone modifications have been identified to improve the stability
of delicate RNA and DNA therapeutics, for example. , There are also interesting opportunities presented by nucleic acids
conjugated to polymers or other biomacromolecules. , Burdick and co-workers recently leveraged the capabilities of a
cholesterol-conjugated miRNA in an injectable supramolecular hydrogel
to locally alter gene expression in heart tissues over the course
of several weeks. By combining two hyaluronic
acid derivatives, one modified with pendant cyclodextrins and the
other with pendant adamantanes, the authors form a gel from the resulting
host–guest network. In addition, the ability for cyclodextrins
to form host–guest complexes with cholesterol allows the gel
to form high affinity interactions with cholesterol-modified miRNA,
which considerably slowed its release rate from the gel. In
vitro, the release was sustained out to 20 days, and in vivo, elevated miR302 could be detected out to 14 days.
Remarkably, this approach led to a robust clonal expansion of terminally
differentiated cardiomyocytes in a mouse model of myocardial infarction,
which corresponded to improved heart function (decreased end-diastolic
and end-systolic volumes as well as increased ejection fraction and
fractional shortening). One especially exciting aspect of this study
is that the use of a confetti mouse model allowed the researchers
to provide answers to an open question in cardiac tissue regeneration—whether
new cardiomyocytes arise from a progenitor cell type or from pre-existing
cardiomyocytes—highlighting how carefully planned biomaterials
studies can be used to simultaneously probe unanswered biological
questions while advancing clinically relevant technologies.
 Incorporating nucleic
acids as cargo is not the only strategy to
deliver or use nucleic acids in hydrogels. Extensive work has established
a field of DNA-based hydrogels, where the macromolecular network is
either partially or entirely formed from nucleic acids ( ). , Initial reports of these systems used enzymatic processes to ligate
complementary strands of DNA, creating systems similar to the covalently
cross-linked synthetic polymer hydrogels. More recently, supramolecular approaches have taken center stage
with these materials, leading to thixotropic hydrogels suitable for
creating injectable drug depots in vivo. , Many DNA hydrogels have been used to deliver immunogenic nucleic
acids for applications in immunotherapy, which will be discussed in
greater detail in later sections. Hybrid synthetic polymer–DNA
hydrogels are recruiting the considerable functionality of engineering
nucleic acids into a versatile biomaterials platform. For example,
Collins and co-workers demonstrated the coupling of CRISPR-responsive
elements into hydrogels provided novel functionalities that included
triggered drug release, cell release, and biosensing. It is particularly interesting that these hydrogels
could be used to develop highly sensitive detectors of viral ssRNA,
in this case for the Ebola virus. Thanks to the catalytic nature of
the Cas12a system used in this study, the virus-sensing hydrogels
were able to detect RNA concentrations as low as 11 aM. Considering
the capabilities of nucleic acid-based nanotechnologies, we expect
that DNA- or RNA-based hydrogels will continue to provide exciting
new functionalities to this space. Future work will need to evaluate
how stable functional nucleic acid elements are under physiological
conditions, as the delicate nature and short half-lives of many of
these constructs may be at odds with the prolonged time frames targeted
with biomedical hydrogels. Additionally, the extent to which hydrogels
can target transfection to a particular cell type is an open question.
 
3.4.

## Considerations for Protein
Delivery
Therapeutic proteins and peptides comprise a major
portion of the
biopharmaceuticals industry and have
demonstrated extensive value for treating a number of conditions ranging
from diabetes, cancer, infectious disease, and arthritis. In general,
the stability of protein drugs has been an obstacle, particularly
for storing and transporting these drugs, leading to the highly expensive
cold-chain transport system that makes these drugs difficult to supply
to the rest of the world. , , Often, protein drugs need to be administered repeatedly to maintain
their benefit, with treatment frequencies ranging from monthly dosing
for certain antibodies to daily dosing for peptide hormones such as
insulin.
Hydrogel carriers may provide useful innovations for
stabilizing protein drugs during shipment and storage, as well as minimizing treatment frequency by
providing long-lasting sustained release of proteins after they are
administered. Typically, proteins larger than 100 kDa are large enough
to design hydrogels to regulate their release primarily though gel
degradation and diffusion and are reasonably successful in providing
a sustained release of the cargo. , This approach
is promising for important classes of therapeutic proteins, such as
antibodies, bulky enzymes, and engineered proteins. For example, Yang
and co-workers observed that a physically cross-linked injectable
hydrogel was able to deliver a high dose of Avastin, a clinically
approved antibody that antagonizes the aberrant angiogenesis in tumors. Compared to a control treatment regimen, which
followed a weekly bolus administration out to 4 weeks, the single
hydrogel injection achieved similar efficacy in the HCT116 murine
model of metastatic colon cancer. Notably, the hydrogels had a strong
impact on the pharmacokinetics of Avastin, reducing the Cmax in circulation ca. 4-fold.
Passive release strategies
to focus drug exposure in target tissues
could have benefits for a variety of protein therapies with problematic
off-target effects. However, for smaller protein drugs (e.g., hormones,
peptides, growth factors, or cytokines), passive release runs into
many of the same issues facing small molecules, such as burst release
and short release windows. So, for smaller cargo and for applications
looking at very prolonged release windows, alternative approaches
are required to adequately control protein release. Increasing the
effective size of the protein cargo can be complicated due to their
highly diverse structures and compositions, and proteins are generally
not as easy to complex or load into larger particulate systems as,
say, nucleic acids. Nevertheless, clever strategies have emerged to
generate slow-release systems from injectable hydrogels.
As
in prior sections, one approach to slow the release of proteins
is to increase their effective size through direct modification (e.g.,
PEGylation) or through encapsulation into a particle system. Liposomal
encapsulation of proteins and subsequent loading into a hydrogel can
significantly slow down cargo release. This also creates an opportunity
to tune release kinetics and program multidrug release from hydrogels.
For example, Hartgerink and co-workers developed a peptide nanofiber
hydrogel that encapsulated liposomes within the matrix. Growth factors could be loaded in the bulk
aqueous phase as well as in the liposomal compartment, and in general
the protein in the bulk phase was released before the proteins entrapped
within the liposomes. Similar particle encapsulation approaches include
loading proteins into PLGA, mesoporous
silica, and calcium carbonate (CaCO3) particle systems. Leveraging
nanoencapsulation techniques for protein delivery in this way has
clear advantages, but the translational potential of these technologies
remains limited by the difficulty of developing scalable and generalizable
encapsulation techniques. This is further complicated by the relatively
low encapsulation efficiency of proteins compared to other classes
of drug. 
An alternative approach
to increasing the effective size of protein
cargo is to introduce interactions between cargo and the hydrogel
matrix. This could be done chemically through covalent attachment
of proteins to the hydrogel matrix as described in prior sections, − but this runs the risk of impacting the bioactivity of the cargo.
In contrast, engineering in noncovalent interactions (e.g., hydrophobic,
hydrogen-bond, and electrostatic) between proteins and the hydrogel
matrix has the potential to greatly slow protein release kinetics
without modifying the cargo. Electrostatic interactions have been
especially useful to tune the release rates of proteins that carry
sufficient net charge under physiological conditions. For example, this approach appears to be helpful
for regulating the release of smaller cationic enzymes, such as lysozyme
(Mw ∼ 15 kDa), from injectable hyaluronic acid hydrogels. , 
Electrostatics-mediated affinity seems to be useful for delivering
smaller peptide hormones as well, as Lee and co-workers demonstrated
with a cationic hydrogel to prolong the release of insulin (Mw ∼
5.8 kDa), which is net anionic ( ). As with
other hydrogel platforms that directly engage their cargo, these systems
also observed that inclusion of the protein drug could alter certain
mechanical properties, including gelation behavior. Electrostatic
affinity was sufficient to extend the release of insulin out to ca.
35 days in vitro, compared to a 5-day delivery window
for an analogous, but charge-neutral, hydrogel. In vivo, the cationic hydrogel eliminated burst release and maintained steady
insulin levels in the blood of rats for ca. 20 days. In contrast,
the neutral hydrogel showed a considerable burst release characterized
by a spike in blood insulin, which disappeared by 24 h. Yet, even
the neutral hydrogel was beneficial compared to bolus administration
of insulin, which led to a short-lived (<5 h) spike of insulin
in the blood.
 While leveraging electrostatic
interactions is promising, it does
require accessible, charged residues on the protein cargo, and it
is unclear just how many charged residues are needed to sufficiently
slow down cargo diffusion. For proteins that are insufficiently charged,
there are options to attach charged motifs through protein chemistry
or protein engineering, but this poses a risk of altering the bioactivity
of the protein. At the very least, it introduces additional manufacturing
steps that will eventually introduce logistical challenges during
scale up of production. Nevertheless, cleverly taking advantage of
electrostatic interactions between proteins and the hydrogel offers
a straightforward approach to extending release for a select class
of cargoes that are small and intrinsically charged under physiological
conditions.
The extracellular matrix intrinsically regulates
the diffusion
of a host of signaling proteins through noncovalent interactions between
those proteins and the ECM. Taking this
cue from nature, extensive research into ECM-mimetic hydrogels has
led advances in controlled protein delivery. , Hydrogels made with biopolymers derived from the ECM have the innate
capability to bind to a variety of proteins including soluble growth
factors and cell surface receptors. This intrinsic affinity can be
leveraged to extend the release of a number of naturally occurring
proteins (e.g., fibroblast growth factors, neurotrophins, and bone
morphogenic proteins) that are useful for tissue regeneration applications.
Some of the best studied biopolymers for ECM-mimicry have been
heparin and heparan sulfate, which are anionic linear polysaccharides
that are natural constituents of the ECM. Heparin exists in diverse states in the body and carries out similarly
diverse roles that include growth-factor signaling, chemokine signaling,
cellular adhesion, and coagulation. While
ionic interactions are a major contributor to heparin–protein
interactions, there are also important contributions from hydrogen
bonding and hydrophobic interactions, leading to Kd values as low as 10–9 M. , Heparin’s interaction with growth factors, such as bone morphogenic
protein-2 (BMP-2), fibroblast growth
factor, and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), among others, has been the basis for several sustained release
platforms for tissue regeneration.
There have been several strategies
to incorporate heparin into
synthetic hydrogel platforms, with the development of modified heparin
derivatives providing a good deal of design flexibility. Heparin can
be readily modified through its carboxylic acid groups without compromising
the prominent anionic characteristics from its abundant sulfate groups.
Heparin derivatives include cross-linkable heparin and cross-linkable
hybrid polymers with useful properties that include in situ gelation and injectability. , One especially innovative
approach for an injectable and stimuli-responsive heparin hydrogel
was developed by Kiick and co-workers, which functionalized a star
PEG polymer with low-molecular weight heparin molecules ( ). The resulting multiarmed building block could
be cross-linked into a hydrogel by the addition of free VEGF, thereby
directly incorporating the therapeutic cargo as a structural component
of the hydrogel itself. Erosion of the gel could then be triggered
by a ligand-exchange mechanism; that is, when cells expressing the
receptor for VEGF (VEGFR) came in contact with the gel, they could
harvest the VEGF cross-links to slowly degrade the hydrogel. In addition to heparin/heparan sulfate, other
constituents of the ECM have demonstrated specific interactions with
growth factors and other soluble signaling proteins, including collagen, fibronectin, and
vitronectin, among others. These biopolymers
provide a broad armamentarium for developing ECM-mimetic hydrogels
capable of delivering specific growth factors. Nevertheless, it is worth pointing out that these materials
are highly multifunctional, with many promiscuous binding sites capable
of engaging diverse binding partners. As a result, it may be difficult
to fully anticipate how the release behaviors of these systems will
respond to the presence of endogenous factors after implementation
or if these biopolymers will mediate unanticipated functions beyond
regulating cargo release.
 More sophisticated methods to
govern the release of proteins from
hydrogels are being developed that introduce affinity interactions
between the hydrogel and cargo. These approaches rely on highly specific
supramolecular interactions between the cargo and the hydrogel matrix
that can include host–guest and ligand–receptor interactions. This often takes the form of engineering cargo
(via protein engineering or chemical modification) to exhibit a binding
domain that can be specifically recognized by another molecular motif
attached to the hydrogel matrix. For example, Shoichet and co-workers
developed an injectable, peptide-modified, polysaccharide-based hydrogel
to control the release kinetics of fibroblast growth factor (FGF). In this work, FGF was fused to a Src homology
3 (SH3) domain which introduced a “handle” for a supramolecular
interaction with SH3-binding peptides conjugated along the hydrogel
network ( ). By using low-affinity or high-affinity SH3-binding peptides, the
authors were able to tune FGF release kinetics, and in subsequent
work they have developed a mathematical model to elucidate key parameters
in programming a specific drug release profile in these systems. 
 In a similar approach, Huynh and Wylie used poorly soluble biotin
derivatives to tune the release rate of desthiobiotin-modified antibodies
from a neutravidin-modified injectable hydrogel ( ). Without the slow-dissolving biotin derivative, these hydrogels release
antibodies extremely slowly (∼5 ng per day) due to the high-affinity
interaction between desthiobiotinylated antibodies and neutravidin.
To disrupt that interaction, a poorly soluble derivative of biotin
could be coencapsulated into the hydrogels. As this biotin derivative
slowly dissolves over time, it introduces free biotin to compete for
the neutravidin binding sites within the gel. This strategy leads
to a ligand-exchange-based release mechanism that can be tuned by
the amount of biotin derivative coencapsulated within the gel.
 These types of approaches provide impressive control over
protein
release, but they also require modification of the protein cargo with
molecular “handles” that can interact with binding motifs
tethered to the hydrogel. This can be challenging for certain proteins
or have unintended consequences on bioactivity, and from a translational
point of view, it introduces additional processing steps that complicate
fabrication. An alternative to this is to use binding motifs that
recognize the native protein cargo. Apart from antibodies, this type
of specific interaction has been hard to incorporate into biomaterials
until somewhat recently. And while high-quality antibodies exist for
numerous therapeutic proteins, their high target affinity (which is
not easily tuned) can lead to extremely slow release. In these systems,
release is generally strongly erosion-dependent and can limit certain
applications. That being said, Zhao et al. reported that anti-BMP-2
antibody-modified collagen gels could improve bone regeneration in vivo, potentially due to extended release of coencapsulated
BMP-2. Nevertheless, alternative mechanisms,
such as antibody-gel mediating a locally elevated concentration of
endogenous BMP-2, cannot be discounted based on this study, especially
in light of reports that other growth-factor binding hydrogels can
mediate tissue regeneration in the absence of exogenous growth factor. Delivery applications aside, antibody-based
hydrogels are also interesting from a stimuli-responsive perspective,
such as antigen-induced swelling materials. 
More recently, directed evolution techniques have unlocked
the
ability to generate novel binding motifs such as aptamers and peptides
toward diverse targets. These new ligands
are especially promising for hydrogel carriers thanks to their rapid
development (relative to antibodies), small size, ease of synthesis,
and options for site-specific bioconjugation. As a brief summary,
directed evolution uses the principle of natural selection to develop
novel proteins, peptides, or nucleic acids able to carry out user-defined
catalytic or binding functions. This process generally involves the
introduction of random mutations in a precursor biomolecule to generate
a library that can be screened for improved functionality. In terms
of screening techniques, numerous options are available for assessing
binding capabilities, including displaying candidates on phage, bacteria,
and yeast. The highest performing mutants are then selected for amplification
to use as the template for subsequent rounds of mutations and selection.
Overall, this approach has been instrumental in the development of
new proteins (particularly antibodies) and peptides with high affinity
toward specific targets. Going beyond protein engineering, the directed
evolution technique known as systematic evolution of ligands by exponential
enrichment (SELEX) has led to the development of new nucleic acid-based
targeting moieties, known as aptamers, that can provide target affinities
comparable to antibodies. Importantly, these approaches allow researchers
to develop ligands for a specific target and also provides them with
a library of candidates ranging from low to high affinity for that
target. By incorporating novel, cargo-specific ligands into hydrogels
or other biomaterials, excellent and specific control of cargo release
is possible, without the need to modify cargo in any way.
Recent
work leveraging aptamers in hydrogels indicates the promise
for engineered ligands for protein delivery. Wang and co-workers developed
aptamer-functionalized polyacrylamide gels to sustain the release
of antiplatelet derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB). In this system, anti-PDGF aptamer was modified at its 5′
terminus with an acrylamide functional group, which allowed the aptamer
to be directly incorporated into the hydrogel during the free radical
polymerization of acrylamide. Notably, release rates of the growth
factor could be tuned by using low- or high-affinity versions of the
aptamer. In a follow-up study, this group demonstrated that the aptamer
affinity approach allowed for two release modalities—an extended
slow release (governed by the aptamer binding kinetics) and a rapid
triggered release (governed by introduction of complementary oligonucleotides).
Introduction of complementary oligos outcompetes the aptamer–target
interaction, which can drive a ligand-exchange mechanism. Notably, this approach can be used to independently
control the delivery of multiple protein drugs from the same hydrogel. , 
Overall, affinity hydrogel approaches may form the basis for
highly
programmable protein drug release, which will be essential for directing
multidrug delivery aimed at shaping complex biological outcomes such
as tissue regeneration. These exciting improvements in delivering
protein directly should also be considered alongside alternative routes
for protein therapy, such as the delivery of DNA or mRNA that encodes
therapeutic proteins, which we discussed in the prior section. In
particular, the possible time scales from “direct protein delivery”
should be compared to gene delivery platforms. For example, with direct
delivery of protein, the therapeutic molecules are immediately available
until the hydrogel reservoir is exhausted. In contrast, gene therapies
will see a lag before protein is manufactured from the genetic templates,
and then the duration of protein expression will depend on a complex
mix of factors including the immunogenicity, the half-life of the
nucleic acid cargo, and the permanence of any genome modification.
As synthetic biology continues to introduce novel constructs such
as RNA replicons, the time scales for protein delivery may begin to
favor gene delivery approaches for long-term, sustained delivery.
That being said, many CRISPR-based approaches rely on the codelivery
of protein and guide RNA, which indicates a need for sophisticated
carriers of both types of cargo.

3.5.

## Injectable
Hydrogels for Cancer Immunotherapy
The prior sections summarized
important considerations for the
delivery of a variety of therapeutic cargoes. In this section, we
use the application of hydrogels for immunotherapy as a case study
to continue discussing the delivery of small molecule, protein, and
nucleic acid cargoes. The recent successes of cancer immunotherapy
have led to an explosion of research in this area, which has led to
exciting innovations in drug delivery technology to overcome the challenges
associated with delivering multiple, diverse therapeutic cargoes that
include small molecule adjuvants, antibodies, and antigen-encoding
mRNA, to name a few. Given the unique spatial compartmentalization
and variable time scales involved in mounting and manipulating the
immune response, immunomodulatory hydrogels are pushing the boundaries
on skillful delivery of all three categories of drugs. We expect that
these advances will prove impactful on the emerging field of immunoengineering
and that the drug delivery concepts developed by these materials will
also prove useful for drug delivery applications outside of immunotherapy.
Hydrogels are especially well suited to simultaneously address
the weaknesses and bolster the strengths of current immunotherapy
strategies ( ). Importantly, in the context of immunotherapy, hydrogel drug delivery
becomes a viable approach for addressing metastatic cancer. Previously,
the localized therapy that hydrogels provide had limited utility for
treating metastasized disease, because even with injectable systems
it becomes impractical to locally inject hydrogels near tumors that
are widely disseminated across variable organ systems.
 So, in the context of
metastasis, hydrogel drug delivery strategies
were limited to treatments following surgical resection or to depots
that could provide sustained elevated drug levels system-wide. The
first of these strategies benefited little from the advances in injectable
hydrogels, and the second strategy missed out on the potential for
hydrogels to minimize side effects and toxicity. The advent of immuno-oncology,
however, shifted the paradigm for treating metastatic disease. If
a hydrogel could be administered to one tumor, and successfully mount
an immune response, the systemic nature of immunity could lead to
the clearance and elimination of distant tumors. This capacity to
affect distant, untreated malignancies is referred to as the abscopal
effect, a term coined for the observation that radiotherapy of one
tumor could surprisingly inhibit the growth of untreated tumors—which
we now know is attributable to the immunogenic cell death caused by
radiation therapy. − 
Using hydrogels for local immunotherapy
has tremendous potential,
as one of the major barriers for advancing new cancer immunotherapies
has been dose-limiting toxicity. − By limiting the stimulation
of the immune system to the tumor microenvironment, hydrogels are
likely to make immunotherapies more tolerable, , as has been observed in prior research using chemotherapy drugs.
This potential is supported by early studies that aimed to curb the
toxicity of immunostimulants, which used simple viscous fluid carriers
to locally administer immunotherapeutics and markedly reduce immune-related
toxicities. − Compared to these viscous fluids, hydrogels
are much better regulators of drug release, and we expect that they
will offer even greater benefits. Additionally, the ability for hydrogels
to serve as a tissue scaffold allows them to be more than just a drug
depot; when designed carefully they can actively recruit and host
endogenous immune cells to cultivate an immunogenic niche. , For cancer, this is a major benefit, as it serves as a direct foil
to the immunosuppressive environment within the tumor microenvironment. 
The utility for hydrogels in immunotherapy
extends beyond cancer,
and we expect hydrogel vaccines to become of significant interest
in the coming years. This is in part because hydrogels can orchestrate
release kinetics that better mimic the dynamics of a natural infection.
Several studies indicate that extended release kinetics are especially
beneficial for mounting potent and highly desirable humoral responses
for diseases such as HIV. And just as
hydrogels can be designed to foster immunogenic niches, they can be
engineered to establish immunosuppressive, or tolerogenic niches,
to combat autoimmune disease. This capacity
to specifically “train” an immune response is particularly
interesting for developing novel immunotherapies, but it may also
prove to be useful for studying the immune response through highly
tunable immuno-interfaces.
3.5.1.

## Stimulating Innate Immunity
The
innate immune system constantly surveils the body for signs of infection
or dysfunction, using numerous toll-like receptors to detect highly
conserved macromolecules associated with pathogens or pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs). These include
the detection of certain lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins that
are conserved in microbiol pathogens but not in vertebrates. Triggering
these signaling pathways is critical for a sustained immune response,
and integration of these signals by antigen presenting cells (APCs)
governs critical decisions that ultimately determine the type of immune
response generated. Because cancer cells bear significant resemblance
to healthy cells, these innate immune signals are often not present
during oncogenesis, but by providing
exogenous signals it is possible to reinvigorate pre-existing, but
suppressed, immune responses or even generate entirely denovo immune
responses to cancerous tissue. 
Several PAMPs include nucleic acids and their derivatives, and as
discussed previously, there are several strategies to deliver anionic
nucleic acids from cationic hydrogels leveraging electrostatic interactions.
Hartgerink and co-workers used this approach to deliver a cyclic dinucleotide
agonist of the cGAS-STING pathway, a
potent immunostimulatory sensor of cytosolic DNA. In nonimmune cells,
activating this pathway can trigger senescence and cell death. In
innate immune cells, such as DCs, this pathway leads to maturation,
the production of cytokines, and improved T cell priming. STING agonists have shown significant promise
for cancer immunotherapy, but they pose serious toxicity concerns
due to their potency. Controlled delivery
of these small dinucleotides is challenging even with local injections,
and their ability to rapidly diffuse through tissues and into systemic
circulation leads to poor pharmacokinetics and therefore frequent
dosing. To address some of these challenges, these researchers used
an injectable supramolecular hydrogel composed of multidomain peptides,
which self-assemble in the presence of multivalent ions. By engineering the peptides to bear additional
cationic lysine residues, the hydrogels could electrostatically associate
with cyclic dinucleotides. In vitro, this approach
extended release ca. 3-fold (5 to 14 h) compared to neutral collagen
hydrogel controls.
While this release window is still relatively
short, these gels
led to significant improvements in a murine model of head and neck
cancer compared to either local injections or collagen control gels.
This improvement may derive from the longer release of STING agonist,
but the authors also observed robust immune cell infiltration into
the multidomain peptide gels that implies that the formation of an
immunogenic niche is critical for efficacy. Future studies that disentangle
the relative contributions of controlled release from the niche effect
will hopefully direct efforts into developing whichever mechanism
is more important. Granted, the design of such studies will be challenging
since the formation of these niches appears to depend just as much
on the identity of the cargo as it does on the identity of the hydrogel.
Immunomodulatory cytokines provide another powerful means to engineer
the strength and type of immune response. This class of secreted proteins govern much of the paracrine and
autocrine cellular signaling involved in initiating, maturing, maintaining,
and finally resolving immune responses. Because the receptors for
cytokines are fairly ubiquitous, most cytokines are captured and “used
up” relatively quickly within the body. This presents a challenge for typical administration routes
such as systemic infusion, where the majority of administered exogenous
cytokine may be captured by healthy tissues prior to reaching the
target tissue. This behavior also contributes to elevated risk for
toxicity, particularly notable with the failed clinical translation
of highly potent cytokines such as IL-12. Unsurprisingly, the pharmacokinetics of exogenous cytokines is generally
poor and has required clever engineering solutions to extend their
half-lives in vivo (e.g., the fusing of IL-2 to Fc
domains). − Hydrogel carriers are able to address these
issues by sustaining the release of cytokines within or next to the
target tissue. The close proximity of the depot allows high therapeutic
concentrations of cytokine over an extended time window to achieve
robust changes in the local immune microenvironment. Toward this end,
there have been promising studies using injectable hydrogels to deliver
IL-2, , IFNa, and
IL-12, which are all critical mediators
of a type I immune response. Overall, these studies indicate that
hydrogels can extend release of their cargo out to around 1 week using
passive approaches, with the ability to tune release somewhat by tuning
the stiffness or solids content of the hydrogel carrier. Leveraging
electrostatic interactions appeared to further extend that release
of protein cargo, generating hydrogels that could sustain release
of “model” cargo over 2 weeks in vitro, although this was not directly confirmed with the target cytokine. From these early studies, a major challenge
for cytokine delivery with hydrogels may be maintaining the bioactivity
of unreleased cargo, as some studies report a precipitous drop in
function of encapsulated IL-2 after about 1 week. Future studies ought to explore next-generation techniques,
such as affinity mechanisms and mRNA delivery, to evaluate the benefits
of longer term release kinetics. At the same time, it will be important
for future work to leverage the multiplexed cytokine profiling technologies,
such as Luminex, to better elucidate cytokine dynamics and cross-talk
in specific microenvironments (e.g., draining lymph nodes, tumor tissue,
and the hydrogel).
An alternative to delivering PAMPs or cytokines
is to use tumor-specific
antibodies to stimulate antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). This approach takes advantage of the ability
for certain Fc domains of antibodies to engage with Fc receptors on
certain innate immune cells, such as macrophages. With the right Fc
domain, this triggers phagocytosis and destruction of antibody-decorated
tumor cells. It is worth noting that
there are numerous Fc domains, and engineering this region of antibodies
can lead to variants that can promote or prevent ADCC, among other
things. It is also worth noting that
while certain Fc regions may function one way (e.g., promote ADCC)
in mice or nonhuman primates, the analogously named Fc domain in humans
can have an entirely different function due to interspecies differences
in Fc receptors. − Certain antibodies can also initiate the
complement cascade, a part of the innate immune system which rapidly
perforates cell membranes and causes immunogenic cell death. Overall, ADCC allows innate immunity to attack
tumor cells, which can potentially lead to the generation of a de novo endogenous adaptive immune response, especially
if paired with other immunostimulants. 
Several studies have shown the utility of hydrogel depots
of tumor-targeting
antibodies. For example, Ding and co-workers used a temperature-sensitive
injectable hydrogel to deliver anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies (Herceptin)
to the surgical cavity following primary tumor resection in a murine
model of HER2+ breast cancer ( ). For this type of cancer,
Herceptin forms the backbone of nearly all frontline therapies and
is therefore essential for treating these patients. Unfortunately, the wide expression of HER2 on healthy cells
leads to toxic side effects, in particular, cardiotoxicity which can
range from subclinical to fatal cardiac failure, especially when treatment
is combined with chemotherapy. , By injecting Herceptin-loaded
hydrogel into the surgical cavity after resection, high local concentrations
of Herceptin were achieved which appeared to prevent tumor recurrence.
Critically, the hydrogels kept the antibody from significantly spilling
into systemic circulation, which eliminated the cardiotoxicity observed
with the control treatment—4 weekly intravenous antibody administrations.
Notably, a single hydrogel injection could deliver the total amount
of antibody that was spread across the 4 weekly infusions yet still
prevented cardiotoxicity.
 In addition to improved
safety, the hydrogel formulation had better
overall efficacy, likely due to maintaining high Herceptin levels
within the resection cavity. These results are consistent with a prior
study by Yang and co-workers that used an injectable hydrogel carrier
of Herceptin to treat a primary breast tumor in the murine BT474 model. Namely, these authors also observed improved
efficacy with hydrogels compared to dose-matched bolus injections,
despite using a system with a significantly faster release rate (5-days
to 50% in vitro release versus ca. 25 days for the
temperature-sensitive system). From this, it appears that any depot
effect is beneficial, but more work will be needed to determine the
extent to which release rate ultimately impacts efficacy and safety—preferably
though direct comparisons within a single study. In both of these
studies, use of a human cancer xenograft necessitated using immunocompromised
murine hosts, which provides an incomplete picture of the broader
immune response for this type of therapy. Future studies that evaluate
tumor-targeting antibodies within immuno-competent hosts will be useful
for determining how local tumor-targeted antibody therapies might
synergize with immunotherapeutics such as checkpoint inhibitors.

3.5.2.

## Localized Combination Immunotherapy
An
important frontier for immunotherapy is the development of safe
combination therapies. This is particularly critical in immuno-oncology,
where a subset of patients responds remarkably well (some patients,
such as former President Jimmy Carter, have seen complete remission
of even metastatic disease), but the majority of patients do not benefit
from current approaches. One theory is that multiple redundant immunosuppressive
pathways must be targeted in the tumor and that combination approaches
could sufficiently disable these layered defenses to illicit a potent
antitumor immune response. , Combinatorial immunotherapy
is challenging in several ways, with the most notable perhaps being
significant increases in toxicity seen in clinical trials. Combining immunomodulating agents is also complicated
by schedule-dependent effects that are only beginning to be understood
but that have a clear and significant effect on both safety and efficacy. − Initial studies into combination immunotherapy are also revealing
that dosing strategies might not need to resemble the conventional
approaches established by chemotherapy, such as multiple cycles of
drug. For example, clinical trials that combined PD-1 and CTLA-4 checkpoint
antibodies reported that patients who ultimately discontinued the
trial due to toxicity saw similar benefits to patients who completed
the trial. , These data provide a provocative
basis to explore different dosing frequencies and strategies.
Hydrogel delivery of combination immunotherapy is local and may avoid
stimulating distant lymphatic organs, which could reduce the frequency
or strength of side effects such as cytokine release syndrome or spare sensitive organ systems, such as the
gut, that must maintain an exquisite balance of stimulatory and inhibitory
signals to maintain peaceful coexistence with the microbiome. The use of injectable systems is also able
to facilitate minimally invasive treatments, which ideally would leave
a resorbable depot to treat the area for days or weeks after a single
injection. As these depots degrade, they can serve as scaffolds for
immune cells to create an immunogenic niche to further support the
immune response. Next-generation hydrogels
are being developed that can release different drugs at specific times
or after specific cues, which offers
controlled scheduling of drugs in a local context. Overall, this is
a research area with great promise and initial studies have revealed
compelling data.
Early studies combined immunotherapy with chemotherapy,
a strategy
based on the ability of certain chemotherapy drugs to induce immunogenic
cell death—that is cell death that leads to an immune response. It is not entirely clear which chemotherapy
drugs can induce immunogenic cell death based on their pharmacological
mechanisms alone, but this can be determined empirically as was demonstrated
by Son and co-workers, who used an injectable chitosan hydrogel to
test the combination of different chemo drugs (doxorubicin, cisplatin,
or cyclophosphamide) with the inflammatory GMCSF cytokine. They found that cyclophosphamide synergized
best with GMCSF and that inclusion of GMCSF was important for durable
anticancer responses in the TC1 murine model of cervical cancer. This
study used an intratumoral injection, which appeared to foster an
increase in CD8+ killer T cells within the tumor. None of the combination
regimens induced weight loss in the mice, suggesting the treatments
were relatively safe—although it is difficult to be certain
without additional data on toxicity biomarkers or histology. Similar
results have been reported for hydrogels delivering doxorubicin, camptothecin,
and cisplatin with diverse cytokines. − 
Therapies combining different,
specific immunomodulators are the
next frontier for local therapy, which can entail delivery of compounds
with considerable physicochemical differences. While this can complicate
traditional infusion, recent studies are highlighting the ability
of hydrogel carriers to simultaneously deliver versatile classes of
immunotherapy drugs. Irvine and co-workers demonstrated this capability
with an injectable alginate system loaded with calcium-containing
microspheres. The mechanical properties
of the gel were tunable by the calcium content of the microspheres,
and the cytokine IL-2 could be loaded within the aqueous phase of
the hydrogel where it was slowly released by passive diffusion. Meanwhile,
short nucleic acid fragments of CpG, a well-characterized and potent
stimulator of APCs, , could be loaded through electrostatic
adsorption onto the calcium-containing microspheres. This combination
led to cellular infiltration of the hydrogels in vivo and sustained the release of both drugs in vitro for about a week.
More recently, Gu and co-workers have been
developing ROS-reactive
hydrogels for combination immunotherapy ( ). , , Central to this platform is the use of the hydrogel scaffold itself
as a therapeutic element. By reacting with, and therefore scavenging,
ROS, this hydrogel has the ability to repolarize the inflammatory
state of the tumor microenvironment—where high levels of ROS
are thought to promote protumor myeloid cell phenotypes. In theory, this approach may be helpful for
treating “cold” tumors, or tumors that are overall poorly
immunogenic. In an initial study, Gu
and co-workers evaluate this platform using the chemotherapy drug
gemcitabine, which has well documented immunogenic properties. In the B16F10 and 4T1 models of cancer, local
delivery of gemcitabine using the ROS-scavenging hydrogel suppressed
local immunosuppressive cells (MDSCs and TAMs) while increasing intratumoral
CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. These shifts in immune cell numbers corresponded
to an increase in type 1-associated systemic cytokine levels, consistent
with the activation of an immune response. Importantly, flow cytometry
analysis also revealed that tumor cells and T cells had increased
expression of PD-L1 and PD-1, respectively, strongly indicating that
inclusion of a checkpoint inhibitor would further improve the immune
response. Physical encapsulation of PD-L1 antibody (aPD-L1) within
the hydrogel led to a significant improvement in overall survival,
which correlated with more abundant tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
than were seen with the gemcitabine gels. One interesting outcome
for this therapy is that due to the size difference between gemcitabine
and aPD-L1, the chemotherapy drug is released substantially quicker
than the antibody. This order of release would in theory better support
the natural progression of immunity, namely where immunogenic cell
death is later followed by a T cell response, but future studies will
need to evaluate to what extent the difference in kinetics matters
in this therapy.
 In a companion study, Gu and co-workers used their ROS-reactive
hydrogel to codeliver a PD-L1 and D1MT, a small molecule inhibitor
of indoleamine-pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). IDO is a secreted enzyme that exerts strong immunosuppressive
effects on T cells and is overexpressed in many tumors. By incorporating
D1MT directly into the ROS-sensitive polymer backbone of the hydrogel,
this platform achieved very slow release of the inhibitor as gels
eroded in ROS-rich environments. This combination therapy led to improved
outcomes in the B16F10 model, which corresponded to more TILs and
less ROS within the TME. Importantly, the hydrogel version of the
therapy appeared to be safer than the free drug version, which was
associated with histopathologic irregulates. In addition to this apparent
safety benefit, the efficacy of the treatment was significantly improved
when using the hydrogel carrier. Whether this improved efficacy is
due to the unique ROS-scavenging capabilities of the gel or to the
sustained release kinetics remains an open question.
Gu and
co-workers later applied their ROS-reactive hydrogel platform
to target a significant barrier in immuno-oncology, namely mounting
an immune response against cancers with low levels of neoantigens.
The availability of neoantigens is related to the overall number of
mutations in the cancer genome (it is also described as tumor mutational
burden or TMB). It is strongly correlated to the immunogenicity of
different types of cancer, though recent studies are painting a more
complex picture. , Nevertheless, high levels of
neoantigens are thought to explain why immunotherapy has had success
with malignancies that arise from highly mutagenic processes such
as melanoma (UV radiation) and lung cancer (smoking). Quite simply,
fewer neoantigens implies that the immune system will have a harder
time identifying and ultimately clearing cancer cells.
To combat
this issue, Gu and co-workers deliver a hypomethylating
agent (Zeb HMA) alongside PD-1 checkpoint antibody. Zeb HMA induces epigenetic changes to broadly activate
expression of otherwise silenced genes, increasing the chance that
cancer cells will begin manufacturing potential neoantigens. Local
delivery of Zeb HMA to B16F10 tumors in vivo increased
the amount of matured/activated DCs and decreased the number of immunosuppressive
MDSCs within the TME. Flow cytometry also revealed that tumor cells
began to up-regulate PDL-1 expression after Zeb HMA delivery with
the ROS-scavenging hydrogel. This observation led to the inclusion
of PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor antibodies (aPD-1) to further support
the nascent immune response. However, rather than passively encapsulate
aPD-1 within the gels, the antibodies were loaded first into pH-responsive
CaCO3 nanoparticles that could then be physically entrapped
within the hydrogel. The pH-sensitive nature of these particles would
in theory both reduce acidosis within the TME and mediate selective
intratumoral antibody release after the NPs released from the degrading
hydrogel. Once combined, this triple-therapy gel was able to significantly
increase the number of intratumoral CD8+ T cells, which correlated
with superior overall survival. Notably, local combination therapy
again resulted in improved outcomes compared to controls where Zeb
HMA was delivered as a local bolus injection. This is perhaps in contrast
to studies of local monotherapy, where the local sustained therapy
is generally safer but provides comparable efficacy to local bolus
administration. It will be important to see if future controlled local
combination therapies see similar improvements in efficacy or whether
this effect is due to the TME-modulating ability of this particular
hydrogel platform.
Two of these studies provided critical data
on the ability for
local hydrogel therapy to illicit an abscopal effect on distant, untreated
tumors. , In both the B16F10 and 4T1 models, tumor
growth is inhibited for both the treated and distant tumor. Increases
in infiltrating T cells and APC activation occur in the distant tumor
in both studies, supporting the mechanism of a systemic immune response
to local immunotherapy. In addition to the abscopal effect, Gu and
co-workers report that their therapy elicits immune memory and can
protect previously cured mice from relapse after rechallenging them
with fresh tumor cells. These data corroborate
an earlier report by Wang and co-workers, which explored alginate
hydrogel mediated codelivery of aPD-1 and the anti-inflammatory drug
celecoxib in the B16F10 and 4T1 models. The combination of these two drugs proved to be synergistic, driving
increased CD4+ and CD8+ effector T cell infiltration into tumors while
depleting MDSCs and regulatory T cells. In the case of the 4T1 model,
where spontaneous metastasis is common, hydrogel treatment mitigated
the occurrence of distant metastases. Although alginate hydrogels
do not confer any therapeutic benefits in themselves, in contrast
to the ROS-reactive platform discussed previously, this study reported
that hydrogel delivery improved the efficacy of aPD-1/celecoxib combination
therapy compared to injection of the free drugs. This may support
the notion that local therapy may provide greater benefit in the context
of combination therapy, as opposed to local monotherapy, where the
benefits are most often increased safety. Overall, these studies provide
provocative data that supports the utility of highly local combination
therapy for treating metastatic cancer.

3.5.3.

## Hydrogels
as Cancer Vaccines
Delivery
of more ambitious combination therapy using injectable hydrogels has
led to increasingly sophisticated and complex treatment regimens.
Among the more comprehensive strategies has been to use hydrogels
to deliver cancer vaccines, generally multicomponent therapies designed
to kick-start de novo and durable immune responses
by providing the key elements of antigen (sometimes preloaded into
adoptive APCs) and one or more adjuvants. In this context, adjuvants are drugs that provide essential danger
signals to the innate cells of the immune system (we have already
discussed several adjuvants, including CpG and STING agonists). Cancer
vaccines generally fall into two categories, those that mount a response
to exogenous antigen and those that mount responses to endogenous
antigen. The first case is perhaps the
simpler approach in the context of preclinical research, where researchers
can use a known neoantigen or a lysate of the tumor. However, the
drawback here is in clinical translation, as this approach requires
prior knowledge of a patient’s neoantigen repertoire or at
least a biopsy of the tumor to generate the lysate or target antigen.
The alternative strategy is to induce immunogenic tumor cell death in situ in order to release endogenous neoantigens to immune
cells. While this approach is less biased and more easily applied
in a clinical context, it introduces another layer of complexity (inducing
productive immunogenic cell death) and it has proven to be quite difficult
to successfully mount an effective, wholly endogenous immune response.
Studies on schedule-dependency indicate that one major barrier here
is that immunogenic cell death and antigen release may need to occur
before innate cells encounter adjuvants. 
Mooney and co-workers have led pioneering studies into the
use of injectable gels for cancer vaccines and have specifically leveraged
the ability for these gels to recruit critical immune cells to maximize
efficacy. By loading their hydrogels with chemokines that attract
DCs, Mooney and co-workers recruit this critical APC and establish
an immunogenic niche where DCs can preferentially engage with codelivered
tumor lysate and CpG. The initial studies establishing the efficacy
of this approach relied on noninjectable PLG scaffolds, which required
surgical implantation. , While not injectable,
these systems facilitated extensive optimization of the components
needed to generate a functional immunogenic niche. For example, the
amount of the chemokine GMCSF determined whether enough DCs would
migrate into the hydrogel, but too much and the DCs would not be able
to return to regional lymph nodes to present antigen to resident lymphocytes. , − Likewise, optimization to evaluate different
types of adjuvants provided helpful insights for mounting specific
immune responses, identifying CpG and poly(I:C) as especially useful
for mounting anticancer cellular immunity. This optimization facilitated the development of a new generation
of injectable gels/scaffolds composed of alginate, mesoporous silica
microrods, or gelatin to deliver the same therapeutic components (GMCSF,
tumor lysate, and adjuvants) in a minimally invasive way. − These extensive studies have revealed that the ability to recruit
DCs into the gel is critical for hydrogel vaccine efficacy and can
depend strongly on the microporous architecture of the hydrogel system
being used. Further supplementing these
cancer vaccines with systemic checkpoint inhibitors appears to be
a facile and tolerable way to further boost efficacy and response
rates, and future studies ought to compare
whether including CPIs in the gel alongside the vaccine components
is beneficial.
As hydrogel vaccines continue to become more
sophisticated, greater
control over the release of some or all of the vaccine components
may unlock further benefits which would be inaccessible to traditional
bolus administration routes. To mediate independent release of different
drug cargo will likely involve the development of affinity hydrogels,
which rely on supramolecular interactions with specific cargo to regulate
differential release rates. In particular, DNA-based hydrogels provide
a promising avenue toward this type of design, as DNA components can
be individually engineered to introduce specific interactions via
hybridization or other engineered affinities (e.g., aptamers). , , 
In the context of immunotherapy,
DNA-based hydrogels can incorporate
a number of nucleic acid adjuvants directly into the building blocks
of the hydrogel itself. Nishikawa et al. demonstrated this capability
with an injectable DNA hydrogel, which is self-assembled from DNA
strands that contain immunogenic CpG repeats. The assembly of these gels arises from a two-stage self-assembly
process. First, DNA strands hybridize into a DNA nanoparticle, termed
a polypodna. Depending on the DNA sequence, polypodna of variable
number of “arms” can be formed, and the arms can be
engineered to feature overhanging single-stranded DNA, termed sticky
ends. Under certain conditions (e.g., DNA polypodna concentration,
ionic strength, and presence of a DNA cross-linker) the polypodna
self-assemble into a network, thereby forming a hydrogel. This system
offers a distinct advantage—that the effect of CpG delivery
can be studied as delivered by a nanoparticle (nongelling polypodna)
or as a hydrogel (gelling polypodna).
The initial study on this
platform indicates that hydrogel formation
was critical for the highest level of activity (e.g., type 1 cytokine
induction and antigen specific antibody titers) in vivo. Moreover, this system can directly compare nonimmunogenic versions
of the gel by replacing CpG with nonimmunogenic GpC motifs. As a result,
this approach allows for a very thorough study of the role of adjuvant
and its intersection with delivery vehicle. The inclusion of P32 radiolabeled
nucleotides allowed for a highly quantitative assessment of CpG pharmacokinetics
in the injection site and the blood compartment. Notably, the DNA
hydrogels release ca. 90% of CpG locally over 36 h, while free CpG
and polypodna released 90% of their payload in under 6 h. Consistent
with the injection site data, the hydrogel formulations drive sustained
accumulation of CpG into the blood over 48 h, while free CpG and polypodna
exhibit early elevation in the blood compartment, which rapidly decays
and flatlines by 12 h. This study highlights a very attractive mechanism
for regulating the release rate of nucleic acid-based adjuvants—a
broad class that includes drugs such as CpG (TLR 9 agonist), poly(I:C)
(TLR3 and RIG1 agonist), and ssRNA (TLR7/8 agonists). It could be
fruitful to also explore systems that can transfect cells locally,
which could induce the in situ production of many
more immunomodulatory proteins.
DNA gels offer a straightforward
way to incorporate and regulate
the release of functional nucleic acids but also offer opportunities
based on their intrinsic negative charge. Nishikawa and co-workers
reported that cationized ovalbumin could be loaded into these gels
and retained over a longer time frame than unmodified ovalbumin (ca.
24 h vs 3 h in vivo). Mice treated with hydrogels made of CpG-containing DNA and loaded
with cationized antigen were more effective at slowing the growth
of established tumors expressing the target antigen, compared to free
formulations or CpG gels loaded with unmodified antigen.
These
data were later corroborated by Li and co-workers in a similar
study, which also described DNA hydrogels capable of mediating controlled
release of CpG and cationic antigen. In this system, DNA strands self-assemble into Y-shaped building
blocks that are cross-linked by a linear DNA linker composed of CpG.
In this case, a short 20-aa peptide for the MUC1 tumor-associated
antigen was fused to another short 21-aa P30 peptide, which has been
reported to be a T-helper cell epitope. Importantly, the linkage between
the two peptides is a string of lysine residues, providing an overall
cationic charge which provides the electrostatic affinity to the DNA
gel and thus a slow and sustained release profile. This hydrogel vaccine
is effective at slowing growth in the challenging B16F10 melanoma
model and outperforms the same drug cocktail provided as a bolus injection.
While the cellular response was not fully explored, interesting data
regarding antibody generation was gathered. In particular, antibody
class-switching and dominant immunoglobulins were characterized for
the CpG gel loaded with antigen versus the free antigen. While this
comparison only provides limited insight, it did reveal a skew toward
IgG1 and IgG2 isotypes in the gel vaccine, as opposed to an IgG3/IgM
dominated response with antigen alone. This difference is likely due
to the lack of an adjuvant in the control, but future studies ought
to compare how free and gel-based vaccines may reshape class-switching
during the humoral response.
Toward cancer vaccines that mount in situ or endogenous
immune responses, researchers have taken a second look at the combination
of specific chemotherapeutics and complementary immunotherapeutics. The initial studies described above typically
focused on chemotherapy in conjunction with cytokines or CPIs, leaving
a critical part of the immune cycle unsupported—the activation
of APCs through adjuvants. Liu and co-workers recently reported that
local therapy with immunogenic chemotherapy and TLR7 adjuvant produces
a robust immune response, which can then be augmented with an additional
immune checkpoint blockade. In this
study, injectable alginate hydrogels were loaded with R837 (aka imiquimod),
a small molecule agonist of the TLR7 pathway. In addition, either
doxorubicin or oxaliplatin, both of which induce immunogenic cell
death, were coloaded into these hydrogels. Flow cytometry analysis
of CT26 tumors treated with this chemoimmunotherapy hydrogel showed
significant increases in DCs, TAMs, and T cells (both CD4+ and CD8+).
As expected, the inclusion of the R837 adjuvant into the hydrogel
led to a considerable increase in activated APCs (ca. 50% increase
in frequency). Interestingly, inclusion of the adjuvant also led to
an increase in PDL-1 expression on cancer cells, DCs and TAMs, as
well as an increase in PD-1 in T cells, which justified the subsequent
inclusion of a PD-L1 antibody. The addition of anti-PDL-1 led to a
robust immune response, including the formation of memory T cells,
regardless of whether the antibody was included in the hydrogel or
administered systemically. Impressively, this triple-combination therapy
was broadly effective in the CT26 colon, 4T1 breast, and the P5 C57
glioma cancer models, leading to long-term survival. Critically, the
local therapy was also able to mediate abscopal effects on distant
tumors in all three models. This study provides a very promising approach
for driving in situ or endogenous immune responses
to tumors, without the need to deliver a known neo-antigen or tumor-specific
cell lysate. In general, these types of approaches are exciting from
a clinical perspective, as they might be suitable to treat a variety
of tumors using a combination of drugs that clinicians are already
quite familiar with.

3.5.4.

## Hydrogels as Adjuvant
Therapies
Local immunotherapy is potentially very useful
as an adjuvant therapy,
a medical term used to describe a treatment which is given in addition
to a primary treatment. Somewhat confusingly, it has no relation to
the concept of the adjuvant class of drugs used in formulating vaccines.
In the clinic, adjuvant therapy is often a medical treatment that
supplements surgical resection or complements radiotherapy. Traditionally,
adjuvant therapies have been regimens of chemotherapy provided before
(in which case it is called neoadjuvant therapy) or after the “primary”
treatment. But since surgery and radiotherapy
can cause a great amount of immunogenic cell death (thereby making
neoantigen available) and can mitigate or eliminate immunosuppression,
complementing these treatments with immunotherapy has become an area
of intense interest. − 
In the case of surgery, the wound
bed is an attractive area for local immunotherapy. Even traditional,
noninjectable hydrogels can be very useful in these scenarios. Nevertheless,
thixotropic hydrogels continue to provide unique advantages in this
area, particularly since certain formulations can be applied through
spraying techniques to optimally cover all exposed surfaces. Gu and
co-workers demonstrated the potential of sprayed immuno-stimulatory
hydrogels for adjuvant therapy by using a fibrin gel loaded with CD47
antibody-carrying CaCO3 nanoparticles. As nanoparticles are released from the hydrogel, they break
down in the acidic tumor microenvironment where they simultaneously
release antibody and shift pH toward neutral. The pH normalization
appears to rewire the local immune cells, as delivery of the nanoparticle
alone is sufficient to deplete MDSCs and T regulatory cells in the
tumor. Combined with CD47 antibody, which stimulates the phagocytosis
of tumor cells, this treatment mounted a strong immune response that
protected mice from postresection recurrence in the B16F10 model of
melanoma. Furthermore, these gels were able to slow the growth of
distant tumors in a model of incomplete resection, indicating the
ability to mediate abscopal effects.
In the case of radiation
therapy, injectable hydrogels are the
preferable approach for mediating a local adjuvant therapy through
minimally invasive means. Liu and co-workers explored this combination
in a unique way by using a sodium alginate hydrogel to intratumorally
deliver multicomponent therapy that simultaneously relieves tumor
hypoxia, mediates local radiotherapy, and stimulates innate immune
cells. This approach delivers catalase,
an enzyme that generates oxygen from intratumoral ROS species, to
reverse hypoxic conditions. However, this group took the innovative
step of labeling catalase with the 131I radioisotope to
provide local radiotherapy from their hydrogel. By combining the delivery
of radioactive catalase with CpG, the treatment was able to mount
a strong immune response in four tumor models: the murine 4T1 breast
cancer, murine CT26 colon cancer, prostate patient-derived murine
xenograft, and rabbit VX2 liver cancer models. The response was sufficient
to eradicate tumors in all models with radioisotype therapy, but metastatic
models required CpG and additional systemic anti-CTLA4 treatment to
increase survival. This transformative approach leveraged hydrogel
technology to deliver both the primary treatment (radioisotope therapy)
and several additional local adjuvant therapies (antihypoxia enzyme
and CpG). Notably, the radiation therapy was effective using a low
dose of radioisotope, which may indicate that this approach could
be used to more safely administer radiotherapy.
Along these
lines, several innovative hydrogel therapies have been
developed that bundle light-triggered phototherapy. − In these cases, reactive elements in the hydrogel generate heat
or cytotoxic byproducts when stimulated with light at a specific wavelength
and can mediate immunogenic cell death similar to radiotherapy. Again,
in these treatment regimens, the “primary” photothermal
treatment leverages the hydrogel carrier to focus its effect within
or near the tumor. The production of heat or chemical byproducts can
also be leveraged to trigger the release of the secondary cargo, in
this case immunostimulatory drugs. Nishikawa and co-workers took this
approach using their injectable DNA polypod hydrogels to deliver light-reactive
gold nanoparticles. After injection,
the DNA gel could be irradiated with near-infrared wavelengths to
generate heat and induce cell death. The heat also triggered release
of DNA from the gels, which could be encoded to contain CpG motifs
to simulate innate immune cells. Together, this therapy suppressed
the growth of EG7-OVA tumors in mice.
Jia et al. recently explored
using this style of multifunctional
hydrogel as a supplement to surgical resection, essentially bringing
together surgical, photothermal, and immunotherapeutic capabilities
into one treatment regimen. This group
used an injectable temperature-sensitive hydrogel to deliver nanoparticles
loaded with a photosensitizer drug (ICG) and two immunostimulant drugs
(CpG and R848). After resection, the hydrogel was injected into the
surgical bed, where it conformed to the geometry of the incision as
it gelled. Irradiation with near-infrared light initiated photothermal
therapy to kill residual tumor cells and release tumor antigen. Phototherapy
here also triggers release of CpG and R848, providing the components
necessary for an endogenous cancer vaccine. Mice treated with hydrogels
containing the immunotherapeutic drugs had more mature DCs and CD8+
T cells in tumor draining lymph nodes, which correlated with lower
incidence of distant metastases following surgical resection in the
4T1 model of breast cancer. Overall, these approaches provide an innovative
means to trigger effective immunogenic cell death, making the development
of endogenous cancer vaccines more feasible. Critically, the ability
for these treatments to mount abscopal effects to treat distant metastasis
could make surgical debulking plus local immunotherapy a viable treatment
for patients initially diagnosed with metastatic disease, who would
normally not be candidates for surgical treatments.

3.6.

## Hydrogels for Immunomodulation Beyond Cancer
Immunotherapy
There is no question that mobilizing the immune
system toward treating disease is quickly becoming a pillar of biomedical
research. The current massive expansion of research efforts toward
immuno-oncology was in response to the remarkable, curative results
from recent clinical trials. , And with the global
fallout from the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, we expect to see another wave
of explosive growth to develop next-generation immunotherapies for
infectious disease applications. However, future research should also
consider other important but often overlooked biomedical applications
such as the treatment of autoimmune disorders. Here, we summarize
some key findings for hydrogels in this broader immunotherapy space.
3.6.1.

## Injectable Hydrogels as Vaccines for Infectious
Disease
While the main focus of a previous section was cancer
vaccines, it is critical to note that hydrogel carriers may be equally
beneficial for vaccines against infectious disease. Given the devastating
impact of the SARS-CoV-2 global pandemic, this area is likely to garner
significantly more attention in the future. Nevertheless, there are
sufficient data now to support the theory that systems capable of
sustaining the release of antigen over prolonged periods of time are
able to induce antibodies with improved specificity and neutralizing
capabilities. The fundamental basis
for this theory comes from studies using osmotic pumps to sustain
the release of antigen over time in rhesus monkeys. In general, it appears that approaches that can mimic the
antigen release kinetics typical to natural infection are able to
prolong the process of somatic hypermutation in regional lymph nodes,
yielding superior antibodies. While these results are promising, implantation
of osmotic pumps is impractical in a clinical setting, particularly
in areas of the world where infectious diseases are most prevalent.
A potential solution to this problem will be injectable hydrogels,
which can sustain release of cargo in an optimal way. Early studies
showed that thermosensitive polymeric hydrogels can be used in place
of typical carriers such as Freund’s adjuvant to deliver antigen. While the antibody response to these antigen-loaded
gels is inferior to Freund’s adjuvant, it is important to note
that Freund’s is innately immunogenic whereas the hydrogels
used in this study were unlikely to provoke an immune response. This
highlights the need to deliver immunomodulatory drugs alongside antigen
in hydrogels to maximize their potential. For example, when delivering
CpG alongside antigen, DNA hydrogels drove effective antibody responses,
while producing less toxicity than Freund’s adjuvant or alum
carriers. 
More recently, our group
reported injectable polymer–nanoparticle hydrogels for vaccinations,
which could significantly slow the release of incorporated antigens
and adjuvants ( ). Tuning the polymer and nanoparticle
content of these gels influenced the relative release rates of ovalbumin
and poly(I:C) adjuvant, with the optimized formulation releasing both
components at similar rates, and sustained in vivo release over the course of 4 weeks. Slow-release hydrogel vaccines
were able to drive prolonged germinal center responses in draining
lymph nodes out to 30 days postprime, compared to bolus (low activity
by 15 days postprime) and fast-release gel vaccines (low activity
by 30 days postprime). Most notably, slow-release hydrogels induced
antibodies with a 1000-fold increase in antigen-specificity, compared
to bolus vaccination. Interestingly, cellular infiltration into the
gels was strongly influenced by the presence of cargo, with empty
gels containing 5-fold fewer immune cells than vaccine-loaded gels.
Moreover, vaccine gels recruited more monocytes, macrophages, and
dendritic cells—all cell types with professional antigen presenting
capabilities—than empty gels. Among dendritic cells, the majority
were migratory cDC2 cells that have been reported to be important
activators of follicular helper T cells, which play a central role
in antibody affinity maturation. Overall,
these results largely support the predictions based on sustained release
from prior osmotic pump studies and indicate hydrogels may be a promising
path toward translating the benefits of sustained release vaccination
into the clinic. Future work in this area may illuminate means to
develop improved vaccines and also reveal critical biology related
to the release kinetics of individual vaccine components.
 
3.6.2.

## Hydrogels for Initiating
Immune Tolerance
Aberrant activation of the immune system
leads to an array of devastating
diseases that include type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis, arthritis,
and lupus. So far, there have not been many attempts to leverage hydrogel
technologies to address these diseases. However, one of the few reports
on this subject described promising results using a tolerogenic hydrogel
vaccine for type 1 diabetes. Keselowsky and co-workers used a puramatrix
peptide hydrogel to locally deliver PLGA microparticles loaded with
insulin self-antigen. The hydrogel was
also loaded with GM-CSF and CpG, which could attract immune cells
and activate them. It is worth noting that in the context of this
study, CpG was explored for its reported ability to induce tolerance,
which is surprising given its usefulness in anticancer studies. This
is perhaps an important reminder of the complexity of the immune system
and the ability for molecules to have pleiotropic effects; − that is when the same molecule can induce different (and at times
opposing) effects depending on the biological context. After three
subcutaneous injections, this insulin-tolerizing hydrogel vaccine
protected 40% of NOD mice from developing type 1 diabetes. Although
this study documented increased anti-inflammatory IL-10 due to the
treatment, deeper details of the underlying mechanism remain unknown.
Engineering tolerance through materials-based interventions is a fertile
research area, and we anticipate future studies will provide important
insights into the immune system and potentially transformative therapies
for autoimmune disorders.

4.

## Hydrogels
for Cellular Therapy
Aside from drug delivery, hydrogels
can also be engineered into
scaffolds for native and exogenous cells, providing three-dimensional
templating and structure useful for tissue regeneration and adoptive
cell therapy. For example, careful design of hydrogel materials to
encourage beneficial cellular infiltration and expansion can drastically
change biological outcomes in regenerative treatment ( ). Current approaches tune
the mechanical and chemical properties of hydrogels to more closely
mimic native extracellular matrix, developing substrates with improved
control over cellular growth and differentiation. Many hydrogel-based
cellular scaffolds are composed of natural materials, such as collagen
or alginate, but more recent work has focused on developing highly
defined and mutable synthetic materials, such as polyethylene glycol.
These hydrogels can be further augmented to deliver helpful biologics,
such as chemokines or growth factors that drive cellular differentiation
toward desirable end points. While many hydrogels recruit and support
endogenous cells to accomplish their goals, there are also hydrogels
that are proving quite useful for delivering exogenous therapeutic
cells (e.g., stem cells or adoptive T cells). In this section, we review the properties that make hydrogels
effective ECM mimics and excellent carriers for therapeutic cells.
We also explore the ways that hydrogels can improve cell delivery
before, during, and after injection compared to traditional liquid
injections. , And finally, we summarize the
advances for specific and diverse cellular therapy applications.
 4.1.

## Cell Adhesion to Hydrogels
To live,
proliferate, and migrate, many cells require integrin engagement with
a matrix material. Without this critical cue, most cells undergo a
specialized form of programmed cell death known as “anoikis”,
a term which means “a state of being without a home”.
Cells are “at home” in the native ECM, where they can
attach to cell-adhesive motifs distributed throughout the ECM network.
To mimic this kind of cellular “home”, hydrogels can
be engineered with ligands (e.g., peptides and certain polysaccharides)
to promote cell attachment and enhance viability, and otherwise cue
specific cellular programming. In general, inclusion of adhesion motifs
promotes cell engagement with the scaffold and helps to increase cell
viability and proliferation within the scaffold. − These motifs are also useful for changing cell motility within the
hydrogel, which can be useful for promoting
cell egress or retention from hydrogels. In a sense, adhesion motifs
open a channel of communication with cellular cargo or infiltrates.
And depending on the type of motif, its density, or its spatial patterning,
hydrogels are able to coax different behaviors out of cells in order
to meet the particular goals of a given cellular therapy.
To
unlock the potential for adhesion motifs in hydrogels, researchers
generally search out the means to stably incorporate them into the
polymer network. Naturally derived hydrogels (including collagen,
gelatin, hyaluronic acid, and fibronectin) are intrinsically recognized
by several cellular receptors and thus enable cell attachment without
any further modification. In contrast,
synthetic hydrogels must be modified to include cell adhesion motifs
to promote attachment. Although this adds additional materials processing
steps, it is also an opportunity to design matrices with novel motifs,
or combinations of motifs, that may not be available from natural
substrates. As a separate but equally interesting line of inquiry,
engineered systems also allow us to more directly ask questions about
the role of ligand/motif density in hydrogels and, as proxy, the native
ECM.
Although there are many potential cell adhesion ligands,
the majority
of work has focused on a few amino acid motifs (e.g., the fibronectin-derived
RGD sequence or the laminin-derived IKVAV sequence) that have been
shown to be quite effective in promoting cell attachment. For example, 500 μM to 1 mM concentrations
of RGD are effective in promoting stem cell attachment. Along these lines, bioactive nanofiber peptide
amphiphiles modified with RGD promote increased viability of bone
marrow derived stem and progenitor cells. In an in vivo model with bioluminescent cells, this RGD-modified material produced
a 3.2-fold increase in bioluminescence compared to cell delivery using
a saline bolus. In another example of
the utility of RGD-modified gels for in vivo tissue
regeneration, Heilshorn and co-workers developed the “Mixing
Induced Two Component Hydrogel” (MITCH), which is composed
of two protein engineered block copolymers that interact in a 1:1
stoichiometry. These peptides were engineered
to contain an RGD motif to promote cell adhesion and viability, and
they showed enhanced adipose stem cell retention in the subcutaneous
space compared to unmodified alginate and collagen. Overall, the inclusion of cell adhesion motifs is a significant
and quite effective approach for engineering the material–host
interface. From a design perspective, these motifs provide a very
broad parameter space for designing cellular scaffolds, even when
considering that research has mostly focused on a subset of possible
ligands. As materials synthesis techniques continue to improve and
become more compatible with high-throughput discovery approaches,
we anticipate interesting outcomes to studying materials libraries
that probe novel ligands, combinations, and spatial patterns.

4.2.

## Hydrogel Degradability to Facilitate Cellular
Remodeling and Motility
In addition to attaching to the hydrogel
matrix, cells also reorganize the matrix by degrading the hydrogel
mesh and depositing their own ECM, reshaping their microenvironment
as they mature, proliferate, and migrate. For hydrogels to accommodate
proliferation and migration, they must be engineered to degrade in
a controlled manner. For example, a hydrogel can facilitate cellular
migration by including protease-sensitive elements in the hydrogel
network, which the cells can degrade “on command” by
secreting the relevant proteases. Protease-sensitivity
is a fairly universal approach to controlled degradation, but it is
especially useful in chemically cross-linked systems.
On the
other hand, cellular migration through dynamic hydrogels (particularly
those lacking macroscopic porosity) is still not completely understood,
but recent reviews have put forth several potential mechanisms by
which these systems may permit cellular migration. , In general, it is thought that the dynamic formation and dissociation
of cross-links leads to transient openings or migratory pathways for
encapsulated cells. Leading theories to develop design criteria for
these systems therefore focus on the thermodynamics and kinetics of
dynamic cross-link formation, which need to strike a balance that
provides physical stability without preventing cell migration. If cross-link rearrangement occurs too quickly,
for example, then cells may not have time to spread or migrate before
cross-links are re-established. If it is too slow, the hydrogel cannot
provide the adequate support needed to provide homogeneous cell encapsulation
or retain cells at the injection site. With this in mind, understanding
the thermodynamics of cross-link formation is a critical factor for
designing dynamic hydrogels friendly to cellular migration or infiltration.
However, assessing cross-link thermodynamics in the absence of cells
may paint an incomplete picture; there is a good deal of evidence
that the thermodynamics and kinetics of dynamic cross-link formation
can be temporarily disturbed or altered by the mechanical forces exerted
by migratory cells. Future studies observing
single-cell migration through these systems may begin to shed more
light on how specific cell types may be able to move through dynamic
networks and to what extent these networks need to be degraded to
facilitate migration.
Regardless of the network chemistry, eventual
degradation is still
a desirable trait since resorbable materials tend to be most biocompatible
in the long run. Fortunately, many natural hydrogel materials such
as collagen and gelatin degrade into safely metabolizable and excretable
base components. Some natural polymers, however, are not innately
degradable. For example, alginate is nondegradable in mammals, which
lack the necessary enzyme alginase. And
while ionically cross-linked alginate gels still dissolve in vivo due to the release of the divalent cross-linker
ions, the dissolved alginate polymers are often larger than what can
be cleared through the kidneys. This
particular problem has been solved by partial oxidation of the alginate
backbone, which yields a highly degradable polymer. Interestingly, this improved degradation also led to increased
cell infiltration in vivo, highlighting the important
relationship between degradability and cell motility. 
To make synthetic materials susceptible
to degradation, hydrogels
can be engineered to include specific stimuli-sensitive chemistries
(e.g., degradation driven by changes in pH, ROS, proteases, or exogenous
triggers) or hydrolytically degradable chemistries. One of the major benefits to the stimuli-responsive forms
of engineered decomposition is that it can be tailored to the specific
cell delivery applications being explored. For example, using an amine
reactive cross-linker, Madl et al. were able to independently control
degradability from stiffness in hydrogel materials. Using this system, the authors found that protease-mediated
degradability directly aided in the maintenance of stemness of neural
progenitor cells in different hydrogel materials, while stiffness
played little role. Overall, hydrogels that facilitate cellular remodeling,
either through direct degradation by cells or through other more passive
mechanisms, may provide unique advantages for regenerative cellular
therapies.

4.3.

## Tuning Diffusion and Porosity
Diffusion
and porosity are key design considerations when engineering hydrogels
as cellular scaffolds. Cells require sufficient oxygen and glucose
in order to survive, and hydrogels present a literal barrier to these
necessities. Studies have found that both the hydrogel mesh size and
cell density are major contributors to diffusion of nutrients within
a hydrogel. As a general rule of thumb, studies have shown that a
mesh size of less than 15 nm and cellular densities greater than 4
million per mL begin to impede nutrient diffusion, but these studies
are dependent on cell type size and characteristics. , However, not all hydrogels have an easily defined mesh size, such
as hydrogels based on transient dynamic cross-links, and in these
cases it may require empirical viability and transport experiments
to determine the limits on nutrient diffusion. From the point of view of translation, it is also important
to consider how geometries may scale from preclinical to clinical
studies. In these cases, a small volume of hydrogel may work well
to deliver cells without the threat of nutrient-deprivation in preclinical
murine studies, but human studies may require much larger volumes
that will increase the distance that nutrients will need to travel
within the gel.
In addition to limiting diffusion of nutrients,
hydrogels can also limit diffusion of coencapsulated factors or drugs.
In this scenario, hydrogels are a diffusion barrier, keeping exogenous
growth factors local to the delivered cells to drive cellular growth
or differentiation. Under these conditions, retention of cargo and
intake of endogenous nutrients become opposing design criteria. Fortunately,
there are ample strategies from the field of hydrogel drug delivery
to decouple the diffusion of a delivered factor and ambient nutrients.
For example, if a hydrogel carrier cannot slow diffusion of cargo
enough through passive release alone, those factors may be conjugated
directly to the hydrogel material to keep them local to the scaffold. , This technique is very similar to the natural capability of endogenous
ECM to bind to, and retain, specific growth factors. It is worth noting
that cargo tethering, and other techniques discussed in the earlier
drug delivery sections, could be leveraged to decouple the movement
of endogenous and exogenous factors through the gel.
In addition
to engineering around diffusion requirements, designing
distinct microstructures (e.g., porosity) into hydrogels can influence
cell function and hydrogel mechanical strength. Electrospinning has
been used to make nanofiber-based hydrogels from hyaluronic acid.
The unique fibrous morphology of these hydrogels influences chondrogenic
differentiation and cell alignment for cartilage engineering applications. Microribbon-like elastomer-based hydrogels
have been developed from wet-spinning gelatin to form hydrogels and
using methacrylates to cross-link a swollen microribbon-based network. This method produces hydrogels with a highly
distinct macroporosity and remarkable shock-absorbing mechanical properties. In vivo, these microribbon-like hydrogels demonstrated impressive
results in cartilage tissue regeneration. Injectable granular hydrogels based off hydrogel microparticles
are another emerging technique to introducing macroporosity to promote
cell growth. Microparticles are fabricated using microfluidics, emulsions,
or mechanical fragmentation and then concentrated to form a hydrogel.
Cells can be encapsulated within microparticles or encapsulated between
packed microparticles. Segura and coworkers
showed that the injection of a granular hyaluronic acid hydrogel into
a stroke-formed cavity reduces the inflammatory response while increasing
peri-infarct vascularization compared to nonporous traditional hydrogel
controls. These studies broadly highlight
how certain physical traits (e.g., porosity) have wide-ranging effects
on multiple properties of the gel, in this case nutrient transport,
cell motility, and mechanical resilience.

4.4.

## Cell
Delivery Using In Situ Gelation
Many hydrogel-based
cellular scaffolds are designed
to gel in situ after injection, which introduces
some specific materials design constraints. Depending on the chemical
gelation strategy, gelation can potentially lead to cytotoxicity if
the chemistries used are not biorthogonal. For that reason, in vitro cell viability studies
are normally performed prior to in vivo studies to
evaluate if the material chemistries enable cell growth. The type of trigger for gelation can also determine
the kinetics of gelation, particularly if it involves a period of
equilibration with an environmental stimulus. Often, triggered gelation
strategies involve changes in temperature, light, pH, or ion concentration after
injection. For the popular thermogels, these formulations often include
temperature-sensitive polymers with lower critical solution temperatures
that gel at body temperature after injection. Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) is a common polymer used in these
hydrogel formulations due to its LCST phase transition at approximately
32 °C. So while liquid at room temperature, these systems quickly
gel as they warm to 37 °C. , Hydrogels composed
of decellularized matrix often demonstrate temperature induced gelation
at 37 °C while also presenting many natural bioactive molecular
motifs that can promote cell attachment and growth. , These materials can be directly harvested from donor tissue and
decellularized, but there are issues with batch-to-batch variability
between donors that complicate the clinical translation of decellularized
scaffolds.
Many triggered hydrogel systems incorporate methacrylate-based
chemistries to photopolymerize upon light or UV exposure. For example,
many biopolymers such as alginate, hyaluronic acid, gelatin, and chitosan
have been modified with methacrylate groups to enable triggered gelation
with photopolymerization after injection. However, it is necessary to pay close attention to the cytotoxicity
associated with radical initiators and prolonged UV exposure. And from a translational perspective, it is
challenging to use light-triggered gels in deep tissues that are inaccessible
to the short wavelengths typically used. As a result, light-triggered
gelation may need to focus on developing infrared or near-infrared
triggers, which can penetrate deeply into the body, in order to be
translated for deep-tissue biomedical applications.
To successfully
deliver cellular therapies, triggered gelation
must occur quickly enough to prevent cell settling and retain cells
at the transplantation site after injection. When delivering exogeneous cells, hydrogels that gel in
situ after injection (as compared to dynamic hydrogels that
are shear-thinning) do not possess the favorable mechanical qualities
that stabilize and protect cells before or during injection, but they
do provide mechanical protection of the cells immediately after injection
and long-term. For example, once gelled, the hydrogels protect cells
from being swept away from the high-pressure environments within the
injection site. Longer term after injection,
hydrogels help cells to persist at the delivery location by acting
as scaffolds that support proliferation and growth in 3D, as discussed
above.

4.5.

## Cell Delivery Using Dynamic Hydrogels
As discussed in prior sections, dynamic hydrogels have been designed
that involve reversibly cross-linked networks, giving rise to shear-thinning
and self-healing materials that can be injected even after gelation
( ). Shear-thinning
hydrogels for cell transplantation have been designed using chemistries
including alginate, engineered protein assemblies, polymer–nanoparticle
interactions, dynamic covalent bonds, and host–guest interactions. − Like in situ gelation approaches, dynamic hydrogels
improve cell viability and retention at the transplantation site.
However, dynamic hydrogels can also maintain cell viability before
and during injection due to their unique rheology. Before injection,
dynamic hydrogels exhibit solid-like properties within the syringe
or delivery device, which maintains cells homogeneously suspended
throughout the medium, leading to more reproducible and consistent
cell delivery. During injection, shear-thinning
hydrogels protect cells from destructive shear and extensional forces
exerted within syringe needles to prevent damage to cell membranes.
This ability to safely shepherd cells through the injection process
leads to improved viability after injection with dynamic hydrogels,
compared to liquid carriers. , Aguado et al. demonstrated
this phenomenon by comparing hydrogel and liquid carrier injection
methods, and they found that up to 40% of cells were destroyed during
syringe needle injection with a liquid carrier, in contrast to the
ca. 5% loss seen with hydrogels. The
authors hypothesized that the plug flow profile of shear-thinning
hydrogels within the syringe helped to protect cells from damaging
mechanical forces. That being said, the mechanisms behind this phenomenon
are still being understood and are an active area of ongoing research. , 
 Other types of shear-thinning materials include dynamic covalent
hydrogels, which use covalent bonds capable of reversibly exchanging,
dissociating, or switching. These materials
are generally stronger than many physically cross-linked systems,
which provides both opportunities and challenges for cellular therapies.
Stiffer and stronger scaffolds can provide mechanical cues more suitable
for certain cells (e.g., bone cells) or better retain cells in specific
shapes and conformations. For example, Wang et al. designed a dynamic
covalent hydrogel in which hyaluronic acid was modified with either
hydrazide or aldehyde groups and mixed to form hydrogels containing
a dynamic hydrazone bond. This material
was able to be injected and quickly self-heal. These traits made this
material compatible with 3D bioprinting techniques, where it was demonstrated
that cells could be encapsulated in the hydrogel and printed to form
various shapes. However, due to the slower bond-exchange kinetics
of most dynamic covalent chemistries, these networks can require much
more force to induce shear-thinning. This mechanical requirement can
complicate the clinical translation of these materials, since these
materials can be much more challenging to inject than many of the
physical hydrogels we have discussed. Recent efforts to make these
systems easier to inject may ultimately resolve this issue. One promising
approach used a biocompatible and fast-diffusing small molecule catalyst
to accelerate bond exchange during injection to improve injectability.
After injection, the catalyst quickly diffuses out from the hydrogel,
leading to slower bond rearrangement and a more robust hydrogel in situ. 
Overall, the
ability for dynamic hydrogels to protect cells throughout
encapsulation and delivery, plus their ability to spontaneously resolidify
after injection, makes these systems especially compelling for translational
development of cellular delivery and tissue regeneration. Further
insights into how a dynamically cross-linked matrix influences cellular
behavior within the gel, or infiltration of endogenous cells, may
reveal other unique capabilities that could be leveraged for these
applications.

4.6.

## Applications of Hydrogel
Cellular Therapies
In the following sections we summarize
the specific areas where
hydrogels are accelerating cellular therapies. As discussed above,
hydrogels can provide significant benefits for protecting therapeutic
cells during storage, delivery, and postdelivery to achieve impressive
outcomes. In many instances, hydrogels themselves provide a significant
benefit for engaging with the endogenous tissues and cells, and we
will discuss several acellular hydrogels scaffolds that promote remarkable
outcomes without the aid of therapeutic cells. Nevertheless, we will
also focus on hydrogel delivery of therapeutic cells to regenerate
the tissue damage caused by conditions such as myocardial infarction,
neurodegeneration, and osteochondral defects. , We also cover emerging efforts to use hydrogel carriers to improve
adoptive cell therapies such as CAR T cells and autologous DCs. In
many of these instances, we will see hydrogels cleverly deployed to
localize therapeutic effects of helpful cells, often by promoting
their proliferation and sustaining their therapeutic functionality
(e.g., differentiation into lost cell types, secretion of bioactive
factors, or ability to remodel their environment). Put together, thoughtfully
designed scaffolds matched to potent cellular therapies are likely
to have a significant clinical impact.
4.6.1.

## Engineering
and Characterizing an Immunomodulatory
Niche
As discussed in the drug delivery section, hydrogel
vaccines are highly promising, and there is growing evidence that
they can generate safer and more effective results than bolus administration
of the same drugs. The mechanisms behind this are still being unraveled,
but one significant factor appears to be the infiltration of important
immune cells into the hydrogel. , Once inside
the gel, it appears that a mixture of cues from the encapsulated drug
and the hydrogel itself can stimulate these cells, while also minimizing
signals from outside of the gel—such as immunosuppression from
a nearby tumor ( ). The result is the formation of a new immune microenvironment,
often referred to as an immunomodulatory niche. Although most studies
so far have focused on ways to increase the immunogenicity of the
hydrogel’s immune microenvironment, there is also significant
clinical value in determining ways to create immunosuppressive or
tolerogenic niches, for example, for tissue regeneration applications
where the host immune system may attack nascent stem cells or organoids. , While the molecular levers and inputs are not yet fully understood,
engineering an optimal immunomodulatory niche appears to provide better
treatment outcomes for wide ranging biomedical applications.
 Mooney and co-workers
provided some of the most detailed insight
into the ability of a cytokine (granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor or GMCSF) to recruit a critical class of dendritic cell (DC)
into their hydrogel vaccines. Notably, they found that the dose of
GMCSF could be too high, preventing those DCs from migrating back
to regional lymph nodes to present their newly acquired antigen. More
recent work is providing new insight into how additional immunostimulatory
compounds help to shape the immunomodulatory niche. For example, Song
et al. recently reported that poly(I:C), an agonist of the TLR3 pathway,
both recruits and activates DCs into an injectable polypeptide hydrogel
vaccine. Our recent work on hydrogel
vaccines also found that antigen and poly(I:C) drove influx of endogenous
APCs and in particular cDC2 migratory dendritic cells. Injectable polymer–nanoparticle hydrogels
were also used to successfully recruit DCs in mouse models through
the direct encapsulation and sustained release of CCL21. 
In addition to releasing chemoattractants
to promote cell infiltration
into a hydrogel niche, hydrogel scaffolds can also be engineered to
promote cell infiltration. Both inclusion of adhesion motifs, such
as RGD, but also degradability of the matrix can promote more endogenous
cell infiltration. , For example, Lueckgen et al.
observed that inclusion of peptide cross-linkers susceptible to cleavage
by matrix metalloproteinases enabled drastic increases of cell infiltration
into the hydrogel depot. In general,
learning how to recruit specific subtypes of immune cells is very
valuable and helps to map out strategies applicable toward distinct
immunomodulatory applications.
Infiltrating cells can also be
reprogrammed based on the contents
of the hydrogel, which can help to drive the immune response toward
a particular biomedical goal. For example, an in situ gelling mesoporous silica rod formulation was developed that promotes
sustained release of inflammatory cytokines that recruit DCs. Once
in the hydrogel, DCs encounter encapsulated factors that reprogram
them to be more immunogenic, eliciting a strong vaccine response. This same scaffold containing microparticles
with encapsulated antigen and adjuvant has also recently been used
to elicit cancer vaccine responses. Along
these lines, an in situ gelling formulation based
on dextran and 4-arm PEG cross-linking was also developed that released
MIP3α and recruited DCs. To reprogram those DCs, this formulation
included dual-mode DNA–siRNA microparticles that strongly activated
DCs with immunomodulatory siRNA and plasmid DNA antigens. 
In addition to DCs, immune modulation
of recruited T cells has
been a valuable tool for fighting autoimmune diseases or transplant
rejection. A pore-forming alginate hydrogel encapsulating GM-CSF and
PLG particles containing peptide antigens was designed to induce a
regulatory T cell response by delivering the peptides to DCs in a
noninflammatory context to improve outcomes in a nonobese diabetic
mouse model of type 1 diabetes. Remarkable
antigen-specific CD4+ T cell accumulation was observed in the hydrogel
with a large proportion being regulatory T cells. The pancreatic islets
also contained large amounts of regulatory T cells, and disease progression
appeared to be slightly delayed. While these results are preliminary,
they indicate a promising path forward for tolerogenic immunomodulation
using materials approaches.
Another important class of cell
that can be reprogrammed by hydrogels
is macrophages, which can exist along a spectrum of phenotypic states.
Depending on a given biomedical problem, certain phenotypes are preferrable
to mediate healing or to treat a disease. For example, macrophages
can exist in a protumorigenic or antitumorigenic state. Jin et al.
recently reported that inclusion of calmodulin in an injectable peptide
gel could help repolarize macrophages toward an antitumor state in
the local environment. Similarly, Gu
and co-workers leveraged the ability to repolarize macrophages and
other myeloid cells with their ROS-scavenging and pH-neutralizing
hydrogel vaccines. , , 
From a design perspective, this “capture then reprogram”
approach is very promising, but it requires thoughtful preparation
of the hydrogel so that it fits into the biological processes that
are being manipulated. Researchers must consider which cells need
to be recruited, the desired residence time of cells within the hydrogel,
and how to provide the necessary factors needed to successfully reprogram
those cells. As seen with vaccines, recruiting and reprograming antigen
presenting cells is not useful if those cells later fail to migrate
to nearby lymph nodes. In most cases, the functions that manipulated
immune cells need to carry out are outside of the hydrogel, so eventual
cellular egress is a critical mechanism to consider. Likewise, recruited
cells cannot be reprogrammed if the necessary cues are missing or
made available at the wrong time.
It is likely that local immune
microenvironment repolarization
or reprogramming will emerge as a critical factor in the development
of effective immunoengineering approaches. However, characterizing
this niche and determining how individual components of these therapies
(e.g., the hydrogel scaffold versus the cargo) influence outcomes
is not trivial. At a minimum, these studies require careful immunohistochemical
analyses to probe the presence and location of distinct immune populations.
But to best understand what those populations are doing, more complex
techniques such as flow cytometry and CODEX are needed. But even with
these techniques, it is difficult to answer the highly specific questions
the field is now asking. For example, how can researchers track the
location, state, and activity of an antigen presenting cell that was
recruited into a hydrogel and later migrated back into lymphatic tissue?
Recently, Mooney and co-workers offered an approach that may be able
to provide just such a capability, using techniques which are reasonably
within reach to most groups performing materials and immunological
research. The approach uses hydrogels
loaded with particles carrying azido-modified sugars, which are readily
internalized by DCs that infiltrate the gels. DCs metabolize the sugars
and ultimately present azido groups on their surface, which can react
with DBCO-modified labeling agents via bio-orthogonal click chemistry.
As a result, the cells which engaged with hydrogels can be specifically
labeled and analyzed alongside other cells using flow cytometric techniques.
By combining metabolic labeling, bio-orthogonal chemistry, and flow
cytometry, this technique allows researchers to begin specifically
interrogating the altered functionality of cells which engaged with
immunomodulatory biomaterials. Future techniques that allow in situ observation and imaging of these materials-influenced
immune cells may provide the field with even deeper insight into the
mechanisms at play in these systems.

4.6.2.

## Hydrogels
for Adoptive Cell Therapy
In addition to tissue regeneration,
injectable cell scaffolds can
be used for applications in immunology and immunotherapy. Many of
the principles developed for effective cellular scaffolds in regenerative
medicine can be similarly applied for immune cells, but few studies
with injectable materials have been pursued. As discussed above, hydrogels
provide the ability to form a type of immunological niche that begins
to mimic what occurs in lymphatic tissue. In addition to cells, activating
drugs and signaling molecules can be added or conjugated to hydrogel
materials to promote specific cellular processes. This realization
has led to efforts to further engineer these depots to behave as artificial
lymph nodes or APCs. To date, researchers developing hydrogels for
adoptive cell therapies have focused on the delivery of dendritic
cells (DCs) and T cells.
Biomaterial-assisted immune cell delivery
has focused a great deal on DCs, which are integrally involved in
orchestrating the humoral immune response. Antigens and adjuvants
can be colocalized in hydrogels providing a rich environment for the
maturation of either endogenous or exogenous DCs. For example, alginate
hydrogels have been used to codeliver DCs and stimulatory chemokines
to establish an inflammatory milieu in situ of concentrated
DCs and their secreted factors in vivo. In this study, increased T cell infiltration
was observed with increasing numbers of exogeneous DCs in the hydrogel.
In another study, this approach was used to codeliver DCs and stimulatory
cytokines and improved survival in a difficult-to-treat syngeneic
model of melanoma. 
Researchers
have also investigated the expansion and delivery of
T cells for adoptive cell therapies, including the delivery of CAR-T
cells. Due to the lengthy cell expansion
timelines before treatment, focus has been on developing 3D hydrogel
culture systems that speed up T cell expansion prior to treatment.
This has led to interest in hydrogels or self-assembled scaffolds
that can mimic what occurs in lymphatic tissue. This kind of biomimicry
requires carefully engineered surface chemistries to mediate complex
biological signaling. For example, the surface chemistry of a silica
microrod scaffold has a profound effect on cellular behavior, with
the scaffold promoting or dampening inflammatory responses depending
on if it was coated with PEG or integrins. In a follow up study, Cheung et al. leveraged this observation to
engineer the surface of the MSRs toward a biomimetic APC-like surface. By coating MSRs in a lipid bilayer functionalized
with cytokines and antibody agonists (IL-2, anti-CD3 and anti-CD28),
this platform was able to much more efficiently engage and prime effector
T cells ex vivo—indicating potential for use
in bioreactors for adoptive cell therapies. Similarly, hyaluronic
acid hydrogels cross-linked with polyethylene-glycol diacrylate were
engineered with conjugated anti-CD28 and anti-CD3 antibodies to rapidly
expand T cells in 3D. Overall, these
studies indicate that 3D culture platforms could drastically reduce
the time and space needed for the ex vivo expansion
needed for adoptive cell therapies.
Hydrogel carriers are also
providing new insights into the mechanobiology
of T cells, which may shed light on critical cues relevant to in vivo function as well as ex vivo cell
expansion. For example, a recent study by Majedi et al. reported that
the stiffness of an alginate hydrogel had a dramatic effect on T cell
motility and degree of activation, even when the porosity of the materials
is held constant. This study found that
stiff gels (∼44 kPa) could significantly improve T cell activation
compared to soft gels (∼4 kPa). T cells show enhanced proliferation
and activation, measured by the release of cytokines, and expression
of surface activation markers (CD25). Similar effects have been observed
in 2D, but these 3D studies imply stiffer
hydrogels may lead to improved ex vivo expansion,
which currently creates a significant lag time between patient cell
acquisition and subsequent treatment. These studies may also provide
insight on the design of T cell delivery gels that are effective at
maintaining T cell activity in vivo, which could
improve outcomes for patients receiving adoptive cell therapy.
The Stephan group has notably developed alginate implants for the
local delivery of T cells ( ). These IKVAV-functionalized alginate hydrogels were
embedded with microspheres functionalized with anti-CD3, anti-CD28,
and anti-CD137 antibodies and loaded with IL-15 cytokine. When the
T-cell-seeded alginate implant was placed at the tumor site, remarkable
efficacy and T cell expansion was observed in treating tumor resection
and inoperable tumor mouse models. In
a follow-up, STING agonists were delivered in the alginate implants
along with adoptive T cells. This codelivery
method enabled eradication of tumor cells that did not express the
T-cell-targeted antigen, eliciting global tumor immunity and treatment
of heterogeneous tumors. In a study by Figdor and co-workers, injectable
RGD-functionalized polyisocyanopeptide (PIC) hydrogels were used to
both expand and deliver T cells. Interestingly, this hydrogel material
was found to elute T cells to the organs and blood similarly to bolus
controls. It is important to note that
the goals of these materials are different from the delivery of regenerative
stem cells, where it is often beneficial for the exogenous cell to
remain in the scaffold. For T cell delivery, these hydrogels need
to be able to facilitate quick egress from the gels before the cells
become nutrient deficient (which is exacerbated by the high cell densities
administered in these therapies). From the research thus far, inclusion
of adhesion motifs may be a critical design component to facilitate
this type of rapid motility.
 Injectable materials could be
developed to be easily administered
at tumor sites without surgery, where they can release cells for local
treatments. An outstanding question is whether local adoptive cell
therapy may potentially reduce immune related toxicities, which have
led to fatal complications in the clinic. These approaches may also
improve biodistribution of therapeutic T cells to target tissues,
as a high proportion of T cells localize to the lungs and spleen with
current intravenous methods of delivery. This could be especially
impactful for the treatment of solid tumors, which currently fail
to respond to CAR T therapies in part due to poor penetration into
tumors. , Regional delivery of CAR T cells as a bolus
is already indicating this kind of benefit, and further benefits may be possible with hydrogels engineered to
tune the CAR T cell responses with specific codelivered stimulatory
and signaling molecules. For example, hydrogels could be engineered
to decrease CAR T exhaustion for prolonged and stronger treatment
responses, potentially with fewer cells than is currently possible.
As hydrogels for adoptive cell therapy continue to be explored, we
may soon see efforts to deliver other cell types, such as NK cells.

4.6.3.

## Stem Cell Mediated Tissue Regeneration
Stem cells are a major cell type used in regenerative medicine
applications due to their ability to differentiate into many distinct
tissue lineages. Hydrogels can be powerful tools for controlling stem
cell differentiation by providing specific mechanical and chemical
signaling cues. In vitro 3D cell culture studies have provided compelling evidence that hydrogels’
mechanical and chemical cues have a powerful effect on the fate of
encapsulated stem cells. , For example, 3D culture
in hydrogels reveals the strong effect that rheological properties
(e.g., stiffness and stress relaxation) have on stem cell differentiation. More specifically, compliant materials generally
promote soft tissue lineage differentiation (neural and fat cells),
while stiffer materials lead to hard tissue lineage differentiation
(bone cells). 
The most commonly
used stem cells in the clinic are pluripotent stem cells, such as
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) or mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). These cells can differentiate into many cell
types including osteogenic, adipogenic, chondrogenic, and neural cell
types, making them highly attractive for widespread applications.
Many fundamental materials-focused cell delivery studies have used
pluripotent stem cells as their model cell type due to their widespread
applicability. Because stem cells require
engagement of adhesion peptides to survive, many engineered hydrogels
include natural materials, such as gelatin, that promote cell adhesion
and attachment. Clever chemistries have been used to induce controlled
gelation of gelatin-based materials such as the design of a gelatin-hydroxyphenylpropionic
acid-based gel, which is cross-linked by hydrogen peroxide and horseradish
peroxidase. This hydrogel induced stiffness-dependent
differentiation of hMSCs toward neuronal cell fates. While we have
a detailed understanding of in vitro culture conditions
for differentiation, efforts to leverage these observations for in vivo studies face the added complexity of interfacing
with the body’s own mechanical and chemical environments, as
well as an often unfriendly response from the immune system. Nevertheless, in vivo validation of these fundamental studies is needed
in order to further advance translation of stem cell therapies.

4.6.4.

## Paracrine Signaling from Cellularized Hydrogels
In addition to local regrowth, encapsulated cells can send paracrine
signals that trigger biological processes and recruit other cells
to their location or activate further regenerative processes. From
this perspective, transplanted cells can act like local living “drug
machines”. Hydrogels can be used to control the diffusivity
and release rate of these signals and thus spatially shape the strength
of these signaling processes. For example, this approach has been
particularly effective in engineering the bone marrow niche. Collagen
hydrogels were used to investigate the effects of autocrine vs paracrine
cues on hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) fate transitions. These studies selectively investigated the
effects of matrix diffusivity and niche cell coculture with inhibitory
cocktails of autocrine or paracrine signals, demonstrating the importance
of hydrogel design. Another study used
methacrylated gelatin hydrogels to understand the effects of diffusion-regulated
paracrine signals from MSCs to HSCs for engineering the bone marrow
niche. MSCs in particular are known
and used for their abundant paracrine signaling, and biomaterials must be designed carefully in order to
preserve this critical function. For example, in vitro studies have found that MSCs encapsulated in hydrogels with an average
pore size of 125 μm are more susceptible to triggered paracrine
signaling than MSCs encapsulated in gels with pores averaging 10 nm. Future studies ought to evaluate the effect
of paracrine signals from hydrogels in vivo, in particular
the duration of in vivo paracrine signaling and its
capacity to orchestrate the desired responses from endogenous tissues.
For example, it would be valuable to determine if paracrine signaling
from MSCs could reprogram or alter the foreign body response to implanted
biomaterials and provide a novel way to engineer material–host
interfaces.

4.6.5.

## Traumatic Wound Healing
One of
the most attractive applications of regenerative medicine is wound
healing, which involves complex cascading responses from many cell
types. If healing does not proceed optimally, this can result in damaged
or scarred tissues. Therefore, technologies that can stimulate the
right responses at the right time and in the right place are quite
valuable. − Along these lines, hydrogels not only act
as release mechanisms of regenerative factors but also act as scaffolds
for infiltrating restorative cells, providing both chemical and mechanical
cues with spatiotemporal control.
Given the complexity of the
wound healing process, there have been numerous strategies to evoke
improved healing outcomes with hydrogels. In one study, Ma and co-workers
developed a series of injectable, adhesive, and conductive hydrogels
based on quaternized chitosan-g-polyaniline (QCSP)
and benzaldehyde group-functionalized poly(ethylene glycol)-co-poly(glycerol sebacate) (PEGS-FA), and they found that
these hydrogels were effective antibacterial and electroactive dressings
for cutaneous wound healing in vivo.( ) By optimizing the cross-linker concentration,
the authors found remarkably improved blood clotting and wound healing
in a full thickness skin defect model, which corresponded with upregulation
of local growth factors.
Injectable peptide amphiphile nanofiber
materials have also demonstrated
the ability to control hemorrhages. This
material was designed to bind to tissue factors as a way to treat
noncompressible torso hemorrhage. Notably, this study presented an
interesting strategy; it used gels as a means to interface with and
manipulate endogenous tissue factors in situ, circumventing
the need to load exogenous factors. In another study, using recombinant
sequence design, a set of partially ordered polypeptides (POPs) was
developed that demonstrated unique thermal hysteresis and the ability
to form viscoelastic networks above threshold temperatures. In a fascinating time series experiment, cellular
infiltration was investigated in vivo. The analysis
of the recruited cells indicated that the POP depots undergo a wound
healing response with an initial, mild inflammatory phase that resolves
over time, followed by angiogenesis and proliferation of nonimmune
cells.

4.6.6.

## Bone and Cartilage Repair
Bone
and cartilage engineering aims to improve the quality of life of patients
suffering a wide range of issues that include congenital defects,
traumatic injury, and age-related degeneration. Since bone is a highly
stiff material, the hydrogels used in this application area tend to
be quite stiff as well. For injectable systems, hydrogels that are
a liquid during injection but demonstrate triggered in situ covalent gelation and a final high elastic moduli have been most
successful. Stiffer hydrogels have been
found to yield higher cell retention of exogenously delivered cells
and to induce differentiation of MSCs toward osteogenic pathways. Bone also presents a highly unique growth factor
and mineral composition, and hydrogels containing compatible chemical
signals such as calcium phosphate or bone morphogenic proteins have
shown enhanced osteogenic differentiation and biointegration. Similarly,
when phosphate groups were conjugated to a PNIPAM-based hydrogel,
delivery of MSCs was improved in a rat cranial defect model, showing
enhanced osteogenic differentiation, biomineralization, and host integration. Hydroxyapetite has also been incorporated in
hydrogel materials with cells to mimic the bone’s structure
and demonstrated improved osteogenic differentiation. From these studies, it would seem that for
bone regeneration it is beneficial to engineer hydrogels to closely
match the mechanical and mineral composition of bone.
Cartilage
is the connective tissue that covers bones and joints, and it often
encounters high-friction environments within the body, like the knee.
From a clinical perspective, cartilage loss remains the primary reason
for disability among adults and is an enduring biomedical challenge. Stem cells have potential for regenerating
lost cartilage given their potent ability to expand and undergo chondrogenesis,
but since cartilage defects are often irregular shapes with slippery
interfaces, cells alone quickly disperse from the injection site. Many studies have focused on in situ and chemically cross-linked hydrogels that can withstand frequent
agitation , and involve delivery of MSCs,
ASCs, and chondrocytes to replace lost cells. In particular, thermoresponsive
hydrogels involving PNIPAM and Pluronic have been effective in enhancing
cell delivery to these tissues. , , In another exogenously triggered approach, Evseenko
and co-workers used light-triggered gelation of methacrylated chitosan-based
materials to codeliver growth factors and chondroitin sulfate, which
improved chondrogenic differentiation and enhanced cartilage integration
in a rat chondral defect model. Although
there has been extensive work in this area, most studies have focused
on in vitro demonstrations of improved chondrocyte
differentiation with few examples of improved outcomes in
vivo. Future work that specifically
evaluates the function of these materials in vivo will provide valuable insight into the clinical impact of these
interventions.
Cell delivery appears to provide consistent benefits
in cartilage
regeneration, but inclusion of additional growth factors may be the
way to further enhance outcomes. In one study by Stupp and coworkers,
a material based on peptide amphiphiles was modified with RGD to promote
cell adhesion of encapsulated MSCs. The amphiphiles were also modified
with affinity sites for TGFB-1, a helpful growth factor that promotes
the differentiation of MSCs into chrondrocytes. This material supported
the 3D chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs in vitro. When injected in vivo, the material promoted regeneration
in a full thickness chondral defect treated with microfracture in
a rabbit model. Surprisingly, the strength
of the effect was the same with or without exogenous TGFB1. The ability
for hydrogels functionalized with the TGFB1 affinity site, but not
loaded with the exogenous growth factor, to mediate the same efficacy
as gels loaded with exogenous TGFB1 is a very intriguing result. It
implies either that the growth factor is unnecessary or that simply
adding affinity sites allowed the hydrogel to adequately concentrate
this factor from the endogenous pool of TGFB1. Further studies into
this effect would provide valuable information with major translational
implications for these scaffolds.

4.6.7.

## Cardiovascular
Regeneration
Heart
disease remains the leading cause of death in the United States, with
coronary heart disease currently causing 1 in every 7 deaths. With
such a pressing need, vascular tissue regeneration has been an area
of intense research and where hydrogels have contributed to significant
clinical advances. We will briefly review key examples here, but for
a thorough and in-depth discussion we recommend the following reviews. , , Myocardial infarction (MI),
more colloquially known as a heart attack, has been the principle
focus for cardiovascular regenerative materials. MI occurs when insufficient
blood supply leads to damaged tissues in the heart that pose significant
long-term risk of death. Hydrogels acting as supportive scaffold materials
have proven highly effective in decreasing the size of the infarcted
area, reducing scarring, and promoting angiogenesis. In a pioneering
study, the Christman group developed a myocardial ECM-based biomaterial
that would gel upon injection to prevent scar formation after MI. In particular, this material prevented post-MI
negative left ventricular remodeling by enhancing systolic function
and contractility. The ECM-based material appeared to promote muscle
growth and blood vessel formation in the infarcted areas, compared
to the thin and fibrotic controls in large animal models. Subsequent
work has revealed that the mechanical properties of these scaffolds
play an important role in cardiovascular regeneration. For example,
a hyaluronic acid methacrylate-based hydrogel was used to investigate
the effect of biological and mechanical support from hydrogels as
treatment in ovine MI models. Hydrogels
with higher moduli showed significant improvement and decreasing infarct
size compared to controls.
Growth factors such as VEGF are also
powerful promoters of angiogenesis in damaged heart tissue, which
can improve outcomes. Along these lines, Li and co-workers reported
that conjugating VEGF directly to an aliphatic polyester gel material
was more effective than including free VEGF for promoting angiogenesis. Heparin-presenting peptide amphiphiles that
gel upon injection have also been used to load paracrine factors from
incubation with stem cells and then release these paracrine signals
upon injection in a chronic rat ischemic hind limb model causing extensive
limb revascularization. 
Delivery
of cells can help to further regenerate damaged myocardium
in MI and vascular endothelium in peripheral artery disease (PAD).
Many studies have shown that the delivery of hMSCs, epithelial cells,
or adipose derived stem cells after MI and PAD can improve cardiovascular
regeneration. Along these lines, several studies have confirmed that
alginate- and calcium-based hydrogels are effective in promoting cell
retention and improved impulse conduction in murine MI models and
ischemic tissue models. , Similarly, another
study delivered MSCs using a thermosensitive hydrogel formulation
and found that this delivery method reduced fibrous scarring and enhanced
angiogenesis after MI. Consistent with
results from other cellular hydrogel therapies, studies have found
that incorporation of RGD into alginate scaffolds can drastically
improve acute retention of cells in cardiovascular tissue. Likewise, engineered codelivery of growth factors,
such as VEGF or FGF, has been found to further promote cellular engraftment
and growth and yield increased vasculogenesis in damaged tissues. 
Going forward, the administration methods
that are the most viable
in the clinic ought to be considered in the design of novel regenerative
hydrogel formulations. For example, catheters allow for a much less
invasive delivery of cells to the heart, so moving forward, dynamically
cross-linked shear-thinning gels may be more suitable for this application
compared to triggered gelation methods (e.g., temperature-triggered
gelation) to reduce the risk of premature gelation and clogging. However, it is worth noting that the properties
required for injection through a catheter are quite different from
injection from a syringe, as discussed in . Future studies may benefit from extensive
rheological characterization of candidate materials to identify those
capable of this translationally relevant administration method.

4.6.8.

## Regenerating the Nervous System
Injury
or disease of the spinal cord (SCI) and brain leads to devasting
consequences to a patient’s quality of life and cognitive functioning,
and interventions that can restore partial or complete function are
badly needed. Several studies utilizing hydrogels as cellular scaffolds
for applications in the nervous system have revealed their potential
for regenerating these unique tissues. In particular, the Stupp group
has done pioneering work on peptide amphiphile (PA) nanofibrous materials
for neuroregeneration and shown that when these materials are modified
with the cell adhesion epitope IKVAV, they can prevent scar formulation
after spinal cord injury. In an in vivo model PA
materials decreased astrogliosis, decreased cell death, and enhanced
the number of oligodendroglia at the site of injury, leading to behavioral
improvements. This PA IKVAV-modified
hydrogel was also shown to promote plasticity of serotonergic fibers
after spinal cord injury in mouse and rat models. 
Delivery of neural stem cells or neural progenitor
cells in hydrogel materials has also been highly effective for SCI
and stroke. Due to the highly sensitive nature of neural tissue and
the low cell retention typically achieved during cell delivery, very
small volumes of hydrogel material (<25 μL) have been used
to precisely deliver several million cells at a target location intracranially
or in the spine. Hyaluronic acid and
methylcellulose-based materials (HAMC) have been successfully used
as delivery vehicles for neural stem and progenitor cells and iPSCs
in spinal cord injury models in rats with reduced scarring, inflammation,
and even animal recovery. When mixed,
these biopolymers form a physically cross-linked, injectable dynamic
hydrogel. , Like with other cellular therapies,
it appears that inclusion of growth factors and adhesion motifs further
improves the therapeutic efficacy of cell delivery. For example, growth
factors including PDGF have been codelivered and conjugated to hydrogels,
which has led to increased cell retention, neuronal differentiation,
and decreased off-target teratoma formation. Other hydrogels containing
hyaluronic acid (which can bind to surface receptors on cells) have
successfully shown improved cell retention for ischemic stroke therapy. , Recently the shear-thinning hydrogel for encapsulation and long-term
delivery, or “SHIELD”, hydrogel was shown to improve
Schwann cell transplantation in a cervical contusion model by 700%. This hydrogel contains a copolymer of PNIPAM
and a multiarm PEG that interacts with a C7 protein containing the
RGD integrin binding motif. Overall, significant strides are being
made with hydrogels for neuroregeneration, and in particular the benefits
of highly organized and functionalized scaffolds appear to be considerable.

4.6.9.

## Other Applications in Regenerative Medicine
Advances in understanding cellular biology have led to novel therapies
for less common diseases and applications ranging from vision loss
to cosmetic defects. For example, retinal degradation has been treated
through the improved delivery of retinal stem cells in the hyaluronic
acid and methylcellulose (HAMC) hydrogels from the Shoichet group. Lipoaspirate was used as a natural gel material
for delivering adipose derived stem cells to repair adipose tissue
deficits. Additionally, muscle stem
cell transplantation is improved through use liquid crystal peptide-based
materials. Notably, this approach enhanced
cell engraftment and improved proliferation in murine models, in theory
by aligning muscle stem cells with the liquid crystals. As we will
see in the clinical translation section, there are even injectable
hydrogels currently being evaluated for their ability to regenerate
hearing function. In many ways, it appears that the regenerative potential
for hydrogels is limitless. The current breadth of applications provides
strong support that these systems can be tailored to benefit virtually
any tissue type in the human body. However, each tissue in the body
has its own unique properties that need to be taken into account during
development of a regenerative hydrogel, highlighting the critical
role of collaboration with biologists and clinicians in the early
design stages—particularly for materials designed to regenerate
tissues where there is a lack of pre-existing literature.

5.

## Other Biomedical Applications of Hydrogels
Although drug and cell delivery are perhaps the most extensively
studied applications of hydrogels in medicine, there are numerous
additional and important research areas. In particular, there are
important implications for hydrogels in surgical situations, both
during and after procedures. In particular, hydrogels with hemostatic
capabilities are proving to be quite impressive for controlling bleeding
during surgery, which also has implications for treating acute trauma.
Sprayable hydrogels are also capable of preventing the formation of
surgical adhesions, a painful and very common complication from surgery.
Hydrogels are also being explored for their ability to coat and improve
the biocompatibility of a host of different medical implants and devices.
These coatings are becoming increasingly multifunctional and hold
significant promise for next-generation biosensors. This section is
dedicated to these exciting and emerging application areas.
5.1.

## Hydrogels for Surgical Applications
Hydrogels have
been investigated for the treatment and prevention
of adhesions following surgical operations. Surgical adhesions, or
postoperative adhesions, are fibrous bands of scar tissue that form
between internal organs and their surrounding tissues as a result
of natural healing processes following surgery. , Adhesions occur in upward of 95% of patients and, each year, put
more than 19 million patients at risk for adhesion-related complications
in the United States alone. − These complications place significant burden
on the US healthcare system, leading to billions in treatment-related
costs each year. The two most common
commercial products for adhesion prevention are solely indicated for
use in the abdomen and are solid, resorbable membranes composed of
hyaluronic acid (HA) and carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) in the form
of a film (Seprafilm, Sanofi/Genzyme) or a woven fabric (Interceed,
Ethicon). In practice, these barriers
are often difficult to administer over the target tissues to adequately
provide surface coverage, which is necessary to prevent adhesion formation
between the tissues and organs of interest. Furthermore, these sheet-like
barriers have been reported to become easily dislodged on account
of natural tissue movement and cannot fully cover the surface of target
tissues with irregular surfaces or those that are heavily folded,
such as the small intestine, leaving these surfaces vulnerable to
potential adhesion formation. 
Numerous groups have investigated sprayable polymer solutions comprised
of chitosan, HA, and/or CMC to circumvent the difficulties associated
with the application of solid barriers. , These sprayable polymer solutions undergo in situ polymerization to form covalent hydrogels with tunable mechanical
properties, and they have been shown to increase the local residence
time in the body to aid in effective adhesion prevention. − Li et al. demonstrated reduced peritoneal adhesions following the
administration of an in situ cross-linking hydrogel
treatment comprised of N,O-carboxymethyl chitosan (NOCC) and aldehyde
hyaluronic acid (A-HA). Chitosan specifically has shown excellent
hemostatic properties, meaning that the material prevents and stops
bleeding by promoting clot formation. The hemostatic properties of the NOCC/A-HA hydrogel, due to the
inclusion of chitosan in the hydrogel composition, could be a particular
advantage of this hydrogel system for preventing postsurgical bleeding,
which is a potent stimulus for adhesion formation. Future studies conducted with this system ought to investigate
this hypothesis regarding hemostatic properties and subsequent adhesion
prevention.
In situ polymerization of hydrogels
for adhesion
prevention has been widely investigated with polyethylene glycol (PEG)-based
materials and translated into human trials. Napoleone et al. evaluated
the efficacy and safety of CoSeal for the prevention of pediatric
cardiac adhesions. CoSeal was applied via a “product-specific
gas-driven spray device” that covered the visible surface area
of the heart and great vessels in 76 pediatric cardiac surgery cases,
prior to sternal closure. The results
of this study reported consistently low adhesion classifications with
85% of adhesions categorized as “filmy and avascular”. However, the study design was observational
and lacked an appropriate control arm. Additionally, 6 adverse events
were reported as potentially associated with the application of CoSeal
(cardiac tamponade and cardiac fibrillation). These safety concerns were addressed through protocol amendments
and improvements in the CoSeal application technique. While further
controlled studies with CoSeal are warranted given the overall positive
safety profile and observed adhesion reduction, the authors comment
on FDA concerns regarding study design and measurable end points that
could introduce translational challenges in future development. Later,
Banasiewicz et al. investigated a SprayShield adhesion barrier system
composed of a PEG ester amine solution and a buffer solution that
undergo rapid in situ polymerization upon mixing.
A total of 30 subjects underwent restorative proctocolectomy with
ileal J-pouch-anal anastomosis and were randomized to receive SprayShield
via an air-assisted sprayer or no treatment at the end of the operation
prior to closing. While adhesions occurred
in 37.5% of subjects treated with SprayShield with an average adhesion
severity score of 0.9 compared to 66.7% of subjects with an average
adhesion severity score of 1.3 in the control group, SprayShield did
not demonstrate a significant reduction in adhesion formation due
to the small number of subjects enrolled in the trial. While participating investigators reported
that SprayShield was easy to use and the observed safety outcomes
suggested no association between adverse events and the investigational
adhesion barrier, a larger clinical study, statistically powered to
detect differences of clinical relevance is needed to better assess
the safety profile and potential efficacy of SprayShield.
Tissue
adherence capabilities are another adhesion barrier design
parameter that appears to be an important consideration for these
types of surgical interventions. Yang et al. demonstrated the benefits
of a tissue-adhesive hydrogel composed of o-nitrobenzyl alcohol (NB),
modified carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC-NB), and glycol chitosan (GC)
that underwent a photoinduced imine-cross-linking reaction to form
a hydrogel adhesion barrier (CNG hydrogel). The aldehyde groups generated
from the CMC-NB react with the amino groups distributed on GC or tissue
surfaces to form a hydrogel adhesion barrier that covalently attaches
to the tissue. In this work, the CNG
hydrogel was compared to a previously studied hydrogel composed of
hydroxybutyl chitosan (HBC) that weakly adheres to tissue via a noncovalent,
physical attachment. The administration
of the CNG hydrogel was completed within 5 min utilizing a syringe
for the initial material deposition and light irradiation to cross-link
the hydrogel. The published results indicate the CNG tissue-adhesive
hydrogels were better at preventing inter- and intratissue postsurgical
adhesions. In contrast, the poorly tissue-adhesive HBC group saw inconsistent
levels of postsurgical adhesions, suggesting that consistency of the
outcome could depend on hydrogel-tissue adhesion strength. This variability
may be due to the potential slippage and dislodgement of the HBC hydrogel
from the site of application as a result of weak tissue adherence,
which would lead to more exposed tissues than seen with CNG hydrogels.
While tissue adhesive properties that allow for covalent attachment
of hydrogel to tissue can prevent hydrogels from becoming dislodged
from the site of application, these materials can still fracture similarly
to commercially available sheetlike barriers resulting in poor adhesion
prevention. Additionally, other potential
side-effects of in situ polymerization include cross-linking
of the native tissues, resulting in greater adhesion formation due
to the nonbioorthogonal nature of the chemistries used for hydrogel
cross-linking. In these cases, the material
can tightly adhere two tissues together and create similar problems
associated with postoperative adhesions. Finally, covalent hydrogel
materials are able to swell significantly, reaching upward of 400%
volumetric expansion. This type of expansion can be severely problematic
when using materials for thoracic or cardiac surgeries where expansion
can cause cardiac tamponade or mechanical compression of the heart. , 
More recently, our group improved upon the limitations associated
with covalent hydrogel systems and investigated the use of a noncovalent,
transiently cross-linked dynamic hydrogel platform to prevent surgical
adhesions ( ). In this study, a polymer nanoparticle (PNP) hydrogel resulted
in a 85% and 38% reduction in adhesion formation in both rodent and
ovine models of surgical adhesions, respectively. The PNP hydrogel system did not swell, was easily administered
via spraying, persisted at the site of interest for at least 2 weeks,
and exhibited dynamic mechanical properties allowing for natural tissue
movement. Additionally, the reported
system addresses other translational hurdles, such as scalability
due to facile manufacturing requirements and clinical adoption due
to the simple route of administration. Further studies exploring additional
surgical indications, such as abdominal or pelvic surgery, would broaden
the translational potential of this technology.
 Hydrogels also provide a unique opportunity for a combinatorial
approach to postoperative adhesion prevention. Similar to the adhesion
barrier composed of chitosan that provides hemostatic properties while
simultaneously providing a physical adhesion barrier to the tissues
of interest, these materials can be engineered to provide a multifunctional
approach to adhesion prevention. Recently, small molecular inhibitors
of hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1a) resulted in significant
prevention of adhesion formation in mice undergoing peritoneal adhesion
induction. While these small molecule
inhibitors demonstrated promising results, these treatments were administered
via repeated dosing to achieve efficacy. Loading these small molecule
inhibitors into hydrogel adhesion barriers as therapeutic cargo could
be a transformative approach to adhesion prevention by simultaneously
addressing the physiologic formation of adhesions while maintaining
a physical barrier between the tissues of interest.
Hydrogels
have also demonstrated promising results as hemostatic
agents and surgical sealants. Uncontrollable or excessive bleeding
following trauma or during surgery is a major cause of global morbidity. For example, repair of aortic rupture and cardiac
bleeding following cardiac injury or penetration wounds are critical
clinical challenges. Surgical operations
may also require the ability to seal and/or connect tissues together
or stably incorporate implantable devices into native tissues. Currently, sutures and staples are the most
widely used clinical method for both restoring hemostasis and/or reconnecting
tissues during operations. Not only
are these methods not feasible in emergency situations outside of
surgical units, these techniques are challenging and time-consuming.
In general, these methods can increase the risk of infection, do not
provide an immediate, leak-free seal, and are difficult to deploy
during minimally invasive procedures where certain regions of the
body are not readily accessible. , Additionally,
piercing tissues with sutures and/or staples can cause further tissue
damage, especially fragile, previously damaged tissue. , While the use of current hemostatic agents can reduce blood loss
and increase survival rates, these agents are still associated with
poor adhesion strength to wet tissue, toxicity, inadequate gelation
times, and inflexible bonding mechanics. Likewise, surgical sealants have been demonstrated to more effectively
seal wounds than suture alone, reducing patient blood loss and risk
of infection. However, these sealants
also suffer from overall weak tissue adhesion and the inability to
adequately reconnect tissues in dynamic environments, such as areas
that experience variable contraction and blood flow. , 
Recent advances with in situ polymerizable
hydrogels
for hemostatic agents or surgical sealants have generated exciting
results that address many of these limitations, including enhanced
tissue adhesion properties, biocompatibility, favorable mechanical
properties, and faster, controlled gelation times. − For example, in situ polymerizable hydrogel systems
can conform to the complex geometries of traumatic wounds or folded
tissues, thereby improving surface coverage. Specifically, Annabi
et al. developed a methacryloyl-substituted tropoelastin (MeTro) elastic
hydrogel surgical sealant with biocompatible and tunable adhesive
properties. This study demonstrated that the MeTro elastic hydrogel
can not only effectively seal blood vessels and lung tissue in small
animal models of tissue injury but also effectively seal and prevent
leakage in a preclinical, large animal porcine model of lung leakage. The MeTro system relies on UV light for cross-linking
to control polymerization and application of the material, preventing
uncontrolled, rapid polymerization. While these results are promising,
future studies exploring the degradation profile of this material
and the long-term effects on wound healing would further enhance the
translational potential of this platform. For hemostatics, Hong et
al. reported a biomimetic hemostatic agent that polymerizes and strongly
adheres to wet tissue within seconds after UV photoactivation. Remarkably,
this hydrogel stopped high-pressure bleeding from pig carotid arteries
with 4∼5-mm-long incision wounds and from pig hearts with 6-mm-diameter
cardiac penetration holes within 20 s, without the need of suture
( ). 
 These studies yielded exciting results for hemostatic materials,
and future studies should work on resolving key translational challenges
for these materials. In particular, reliance on in situ polymerization poses some difficulties for translation that will
eventually need to be addressed. For example, with light-triggered
systems, reliance on UV light places limitations as to where these
technologies can be deployed. Beyond being mutagenic, UV light does
not penetrate deeply into tissues and requires that the wound be physically
accessible to the light source, which may not be feasible for internal
or deep wounds. Overall, the development of materials with alternative
light triggers (e.g., near-infrared) would further enhance the translational
potential hemostatic hydrogels for minimally invasive surgeries or
emergency trauma where access to UV light is not possible. In addition,
engineering in situ polymerizable materials to adequately
cross-link in clinically relevant timespans will be important so that
materials stick where they are placed and do not prematurely gel in
the applicator device. Polymerization techniques also need to be evaluated
for potential off-target effects. Uniformity of cross-linking in the
deposited film may also be important to optimize, particularly in
spray-mix systems where two reactive components are aerosolized simultaneously.
Alongside the continued development of in situ polymerizable
systems, it may be useful to also explore the rheological advantages
of dynamic hydrogels in the development of these types of hemostatic
materials.

5.2.

## Hydrogel Coatings for Medical
Devices
Hydrogels can be engineered to be antimicrobial and/or
antifouling
and can be used as coatings for medical devices to act as “skin”-like
scaffolds on electronic devices and sensors. Hydrogel coatings provide
an interface with the human body that can improve device function
and biocompatibility. The capabilities of hydrogels can be tailored
to the specific application by modulating key properties, such as
their morphological (e.g., porosity), chemical (e.g., reactivity and
stability), and mechanical properties (e.g., flexibility, compressibility,
stiffness). , These coatings are especially
useful for long-term implants because they can improve their biocompatibility,
enshrouding the underlying material with a surface that is antifouling,
antimicrobial, and nonimmunogenic. Overall,
these capabilities make hydrogels an ideal medium for engineering
what we will call the “host–device interface”,
optimizing device function and improving device lifetime in the body.
Here, we summarize current techniques for incorporating hydrogels
into devices, summarize several key advances for using hydrogels as
antimicrobial and antifouling coatings, and highlight recent advances
using these hydrogels in implantable electronic devices.
5.2.1.

## Integrating Hydrogels into Devices
Hydrogels can be
readily applied onto a variety of surfaces through
chemical (e.g., polymerization directly onto the surface) or physical
attachment (e.g., spray coating). Importantly, many of these methods
are capable of functionalizing diverse geometries and shapes. Many
relevant techniques are often industrially scalabe, such as dip coating,
spin coating, spraying, or doctor blading, which can be used on a
number of devices and surfaces. , For example,
Xie et al. demonstrated that acrylate-based films can be applied directly
on surfaces through directly brushing or spraying a film that self-generates
to form a hydrogel “paint”. Along the same lines, Pan et al. applied hierarchical nanostructured
hydrogels through inkjet printing and spray coating onto paper and
glass. 
Toward longer term adhesions
of coating to a device, hydrogels can be covalently attached to surfaces,
which can be activated or modified to present reactive functional
handles. Silicones and metals are commonly oxidized or modified with
small molecules (e.g., [3-aminopropyl]triethoxysilane) to create a
reactive surface through which prepolymer mixtures can then be introduced
and cross-linked onto the activated surface. 
Development of “hydrogel skins” has enabled
coatings
onto complex geometries and architectures ( ), with applications
for polymeric devices of arbitrary shapes ranging from pacemaker leads
to soft robots. , This style of direct-functionalization
is possible for other substrate materials, including metals. For example,
Zambonin and co-workers successfully functionalized metal substrates
by directly polymerizing a film on their surface using electrosynthetic
techniques. This versatility indicates
that hydrogel coatings are a viable option for functionalizing everything
from specialty medical devices such as orthopedic implants to everyday
materials such as contact lenses.
 Although significant progress has been made to develop methods
to incorporate hydrogel coatings on diverse materials, the lifetime
and degradation of these coatings requires quite a bit of optimization.
For example, the individual requirements of the implant will dictate
the time scales that hydrogels need to persist in the body. Consider
the needs of a glucose sensor, which are rather distinct from those
of a hip joint replacement. Methods that fully and robustly characterize
coating lifetime and degradation behaviors are needed to allow for
clinical translation and to enhance device function. On top of these
methods, strategies need to be developed to adapt or tune material
properties to meet the challenges faced in vitro.
For example, the constant mechanical forces that implants face could
damage or physically degrade a coating and prevent use of the device
beyond its electronic and internal capabilities. While synthetic polymers
(e.g., brushes, films, or self-assembled monolayers) are widely used
for bulk material casings or coatings for implantable devices, and
appear robust to these forces, the mechanical integrity of synthetic
and naturally derived polymeric hydrogels on surfaces is not as well
understood. Adhesion to surfaces under shear forces (particularly
relevant for stents and blood sensors) brings about limitations in
their lifetime as well as concerns over swelling, driving a need for
novel strategies to toughen hydrogels and assays to properly study
degradation mechanisms and lifetime under physiologically relevant
conditions. While many advancements have been made on the materials
side, future work to translate these technologies relies on preclinical
and clinical collaborations to precisely define standards for function,
durability, and biocompatibility. These standards can then guide further
engineering and characterization of these materials so that they perform
clinically valuable functions and exhibit clinically relevant in vivo lifetimes. Toward this, durability and self-healing
are properties to look out for, which can restore materials that are
damaged through physical sliding or deformation due to wear and tear
brought on by the patient’s everyday life. 

5.2.2.

## Hydrogels as Antimicrobial
Coatings
Hydrogel coatings provide novel strategies to combat
one of the biggest
challenges for implantable devices—infections. In 2011 alone,
the United States saw nearly 185,000 cases of hospital-acquired infections
associated with medical devices. Fortunately,
there has been considerable work toward use of hydrogels to mitigate
these device-associated infections, which arise with a wide range
of devices such as catheters and ventilators. Mistakes in aseptic
technique during hospital procedures and host responses from endogenous
bacteria that come in contact with implanted devices lead to bacterial
accumulation and biofilm formation, causing infections that are difficult
to treat. In many cases, infected implants must be entirely removed
and replaced, which can lead to long periods of disability and pain
for patients. Even with removal, the infections often require the
administration of powerful antibiotics to patients and as a result
contribute to the ongoing crisis of bacterial drug resistance. Even
under impeccable sterile conditions, some bacterial adhesions are
unavoidable, which means that devices intrinsically pose an infection
risk.
For prophylactic prevention of adherent matter or organisms,
antimicrobial hydrogels may serve as “passive” coatings
with inherent antimicrobial properties or moieties. − These include hydrophilic and zwitterionic moieties that lead to
strong surface hydration that can resist protein adsorption, which
have benefited a number of medical devices. Cationic materials are intrinsically antimicrobial, and catheters
functionalized with hydrogel coatings made from cationic polycarbonate
and antifouling polymer poly(ethylene glycol) have shown resistance
against Gram-positive (S. aureus, enterococcus) and
Gram-negative (E. coli, A. bacumanii) bacteria and
fungi (C. albicans, C. neoformans). 
As discussed previously, hydrogels can be formulated
to deliver
drugs using passive and active mechanisms, and hydrogel coatings can
use these strategies to provide local and sustained release of antibacterial
compounds to prevent implant infections. For example, the porosity
of hydrogel coatings can be tuned to create “active”
coatings that release small molecules or particles embedded in the
scaffold. One strategy being explored clinically is the encapsulation
of intrinsically antimicrobial silver nanoparticles into polyacrylamide-based
hydrogels to prevent infections from E. coli and S. aureus. Another “active”
antibacterial coating was developed by Schneider et al. using a bactericidal
hydrogel that carried peptide MAX1, which assembled into beta-hairpins
with activity against Gram-positive (S. epidermidis, S. aureus,
S. pyogenes) and G negative (K. pneumoniae, E. coli) bacteria. While the mechanism of
these peptide-functionalized coatings is not fully understood, these
materials are thought to disrupt the bacterial membrane via electrostatic
interactions with the negatively charged bacterial membrane and bacterial DNA. Strategies that combine both innately antimicrobial components,
such as these peptides, and antibiotic drugs may be particularly powerful
and have recently been reviewed for coating titanium implants. 
If hydrogel coatings can reduce the prevalence
of device-associated
infections, the clinical impact for patients would be considerable.
Continued development of these materials against virulent bacterial
strains is critical and will need to exploit all the properties hydrogels
have to offer: meshes that can encapsulate drugs over long terms (at
least days); mechanics that affect adhesion
of the gel to the device; and the ability to respond dynamically to
stimuli (e.g., temperature and inflammation). Novel properties that
may further enhance these coatings include the ability to undergo
wettability changes for self-cleaning and the use of mechanical vibration to displace the attachment of
proteins, cells, and bacteria. , 

5.2.3.

## Hydrogels as Anti-Fouling Coatings
Although device-associated
infections are a serious source for morbidity
due to medical device implantation, rejection of the implant by the
body is a major factor limiting both the lifetime and functionality
of implants. The most common way the body rejects an implant is through
the foreign body response, a complex set of molecular events that
begins with fouling of the surface and ends with the formation of
a fibrotic capsule as the body works to eliminate macroscopic foreign
materials. − The success of antimicrobial hydrogel coatings,
which in part depends on prevention of biofilm formation, has led
to research into hydrogels as antifouling coatings. Antifouling materials
seek to prevent the nonspecific adhesion of molecules onto device
surfaces, which occurs instantaneously when materials come in contact
with complex fluids. All implanted materials are prone to fouling
that can lead to thrombosis, inflammation, and occlusion. Fouling
initiates with nonspecific adhesion of proteins, which undergo conformational
changes upon adsorption onto the surface that reveals parts of the
protein normally hidden in the native conformation. These revealed
sites can then mediate interaction with parts of the immune system.
For example, some proteins, such as fibrinogen, serum albumin, complement,
and lysozyme, opsonize a surface, which is to say they undergo dynamic
interactions and rearrangements that cause platelets and cells to
agglomerate and aggregate onto the fouled surface. Immune cells such as macrophages are also sensitive to
these misfolded proteins and are quickly recruited to the site and
secrete inflammatory cytokines. In the context of a pathogen or parasite,
this entire process is quite beneficial. But in the context of a long-term
implantable device, the foreign body response leads to the eventual
deposition of collagen matrices that create an isolating capsule around
implants, the formation of remarkably corrosive foreign-body giant
cells, and the recruitment of myo-fibroblasts that exert significant
deformational compressive forces on implants. − To prevent this formidable defense mechanism from destroying or
disabling medical implants, materials approaches look to head it off
at the very first step—fouling.
Perhaps our best strategy
for developing antifouling materials has been the development of materials
with specific interactions with water molecules, namely very strong
interactions to create a protective layer of water to sterically hinder
access to the underlying material. As
our fundamental understanding has evolved, the field has pinpointed
parameters including surface packing, hydrophilicity, electrical neutrality,
and flexibility of polymer chains as contributors to these antifouling
properties. , On a mechanistic level, materials
with a tight hydration layer establish a physical and energetic barrier
to prevent nonspecific adhesion and increase the free energy barrier
required for proteins to adhere. Because
of their hydrophilicity, hydrogels in particular are great candidates
for creating this barrier both with water and potentially other solvents.
Although quite different for the human body, biomedical antifouling
technology may learn a great deal from efforts in the maritime industry
to develop antifouling surface coatings on underwater structures,
which are prone to adhesions from plants, algae, barnacles, and other
seafaring organisms. These accumulations increase the drag of moving
vessels and require considerable upkeep. In particular, hydrogel surfaces
for antifouling marine surfaces have shown resilience against bacteria
and barnacles, and these fully cross-linked
networks are suspected to be environmentally benign. These studies
suggest that hydrogels are promising as antifouling surfaces even
in highly complex and relatively harsh environments and could provide
clues for developing similar coatings for medical implants.
In the medical and biological space, hydrogels have reduced protein
and microbial adhesion to devices in serum and whole blood. Toward materials development, screening of
combinatorial alginate-based hydrogels containing triazole analogs
identified formulations that reduce fibrosis and lead to reduced
immune cell recruitment, indicating potential applications for coating
devices. Notably, poly(ethylene) glycol , and zwitterionic hydrogels, incorporating sulfobetaine, carboxybetaine,
and phosphorylcholine moieties, are
gold standard polymeric materials that have been successful in both
biomedical and marine spaces. As a biomaterial, they have reduced
platelet adhesion on devices that are in contact with blood, , and they have reduced the foreign body response, promoted angiogenesis, and improved pharmacokinetics when coupled
to proteins. As research into antifouling
hydrogels continues, it will be important to determine the time scales
over which they can protect devices, as well as how that time scale
may change based on the area of the body they are exposed to (e.g.,
blood versus subcutaneous versus brain).
It is worth noting
that hydrogel coatings could further improve
the biocompatibility of relatively rigid devices, say in the context
of a neural electrode, by providing a much more compliant interface
with soft brain tissues. However, it is unclear whether a balance
must be struck between the durability of the coating and efforts to
match the mechanical properties of its surrounding tissues. Along
these lines, efforts to decouple the antifouling capabilities of hydrogels
from their mechanical properties may be valuable for developing protective
and biocompatible coatings for diverse types of tissues.

5.2.4.

## Hydrogel Integration with Implantable Electronics
Hydrogels
were initially developed as passive coatings that protect
a device, with little or no contribution toward the function of that
device. More recently, hydrogel coatings with function-enhancing capabilities
have been explored for electronic sensors, serving as a conduit between
electronic sensing components and the body without disrupting device
performance. As the desire for real-time monitoring of analytes in vivo for personalized medicine has increased, so has
the desire for materials that allow for integration of implantable
sensors with the human body.
These coatings stand to improve
two of the most highly used medical devices, continous glucose sensors
and insulin pumps, which both suffer from short lifespans that limit
their clinical utility. To maintain healthy insulin levels, insulin
pumps require frequent replacements of the implanted components and
regular calibration via finger prick glucose sensors. Onerous maintenance,
replacement, and calibration of the devices leads to high patient
burden and tissue scarring, driving the desire for implanted devices
that could reliably and wirelessly transmit patient data to the patient
or healthcare provider directly. Current FDA-approved devices such
as Eversense’s 90-day Continuous Glucose Monitoring System
have used polymeric materials to encase their implantable devices,
but twice a day finger-pricks are still needed to calibrate the system.
Hydrogels offer a promising alternative to protect these devices and
reduce the foreign body response that leads to device failure. Notably,
acrylate-based hydrogels have been applied for continuous glucose
sensing. , Zwitterionic hydrogels have
also demonstrated the ability to extend the lifetime of glucose biosensors
over 12 days in blood due to their antifouling properties that reduce
accumulation and aggregation of proteins that obstruct the sensor. PEG hydrogel is often used to interface between
sensors and tissue to mitigate foreign body response, with poly(acrylamide) (PAAm)/PEG hydrogels
acting as monitors of glucose themselves. , Recently, our group described the use of copolymer hydrogels comprising N,N-diethylacrylamide and N-hydroxyethyl acrylamide, which were selected from a combinatorial
copolymer hydrogel library of over 170 acrylamide-derived formulations
that was evaluated in a highly parallelized platelet fouling assay.
When used to coat electrochemical sensors, the leading polyacrylamide-derived
hydrogel improved device performance and lifetime when compared to
PEG-coated devices, showing significant resistance to blood fouling. 
The challenges in developing continuous
implanted glucose sensors
are fairly common issues for implanted sensors in general, particularly
where constant and prolonged sensing is needed. For example, neural
electrodes used to develop brain–computer interfaces for the
physically disabled also struggle with the brain foreign body response,
which leads to glial scarring and loss of signal. Along these lines,
Rao et al. demonstrated that PEG-containing PU coatings could improve
the biocompatibility of neural electrodes. An emerging trend has led to the rise of hydrogel coatings that
can play an active role as a component of the device
themselves, especially as electrically conductive hydrogels. , , Properties of conductivity,
self-healing, and stimuli-responsiveness are exploited in poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD) hydrogels that are promising for applications
such as artificial organs and as pressure-dependent sensors. PAm-LiCl hydrogels have been integrated with
cephalopod-(bio)inspired materials that serve as electrodes for dynamic
optical and tactile sensing as ionic
conductors capable of operation at high frequencies and as actuators. Overall,
the use of hydrogel coatings may represent an important step closer
toward maintaining long-term and reliable connections between sensors
and the tissues they are probing.

5.2.5.

## Future
Directions for Hydrogel Coatings
Implants face multifaceted
and complex interactions with the body
and are often expected to simultaneously manage numerous processes
including infections, the foreign body response, and whatever the
device’s specific function happens to be. Hydrogel coatings
can be useful for implants seeking to achieve this level of multifunctionality,
but it is likely that coatings will need to take on multiple roles
as well. Incorporating small molecules and antithrombogenic drugs
into an antifouling hydrogel, for example, may provide added benefits
for implanted stents. Achieving fully integrated multifunctional hydrogel
coatings will require novel strategies and materials, as well as deeper
understanding of what occurs at the host–device interface.
For example, physical modifications of hydrogel topography (e.g.,
bioinspired patterning such as biomimicking the micropatterning of
a lotus leaf or snail shell) of materials may provide new ways to
prevent fouling. Substrate roughness
also appears to affect adhesion of matter onto the surface of materials
and can be tuned during synthesis. Although
we now have many ways to incorporate hydrogels onto devices, there
remains uncertainty on the mechanical properties that hydrogel coatings
require in order to simultaneously withstand the forces from everyday
movement, prevent degradation, and integrate well with surrounding
tissues. The design of materials and devices will require optimization
on all fronts, as a number of these factors may influence the antifouling
properties of these systems.
Finally, advances in materials
and exploiting properties depends ultimately on a deep understanding
of the mechanisms underlying their use and failure. For example, most
antifouling/microbial efforts are aimed at preventing the initial
attachment of proteins and matter on the surface, yet we only have
a limited understanding of the mechanism of adhesion, which may include
factors beyond energetic and kinetic considerations. Computational
studies to elucidate more mechanisms at play at the host–device
interface could provide valuable new insights. In biological fouling,
albumin, lysozyme, and fibrinogen are often pinpointed as major contributors
to fouling, though not all proteins or species that contribute to
fouling may be identified in such complex fluids. Surface-sensitive
techniques such as AFM, XPS, FTIR, SPR, and QCM are often used to
study material surfaces and protein adhesion, but materials need to
be assessed in environments that more closely mimic that of their
application. In analysis of surfaces, time-of-flight secondary ion
mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) allows high-resolution images and analyses
of surfaces. Cryo-TOF-SIMS/SEM systems have been used in analysis
of wood tissue in planta; implementing this for biological
samples could provide important compositional information about changes
in surface chemistry after implantation. A push toward more complex testing assays in in vivo or physiological conditions is critical for optimizing and defining
design criteria for hydrogel coatings for biomedical devices. Coupling
a greater understanding of these mechanisms with the growing capabilities
of modern materials science may well unlock even greater benefits
for hydrogel coatings in the years to come.

6.

## Clinical Translation of Biomedical Hydrogels
Consistent
with their numerous biomedical capabilities, hydrogels
have been used clinically for some time. This is not to say, however,
that the clinical translation of hydrogels is trivial or straightforward.
While significant infrastructure has been developed to reliably fabricate
more traditional hydrogels (e.g., covalent gels) for applications
ranging from contact lenses to bandages, the emergent generation of
hydrogels can be considerably more complex from both a physical and
chemical point of view. These complexities can introduce challenges
when trying to meet federally required current Good Manufacturing
Practices (cGMP) and Quality System Regulations (QSRs). These challenges
can be further exacerbated for emergent hydrogel formulations that
rely on nanoparticles or other forms of nanotechnology, since manufacturing
standards for biomedical nanotechnologies are still not especially
well established. Nevertheless, exciting progress in the clinical
translation of novel formulations, and particularly injectable formulations,
is evident from currently ongoing clinical trials and will be the
focus of this section. Here, we will evaluate the major application
areas where clinical work is ongoing and compare these clinical technologies
to the emergent technologies being implemented in the preclinical
studies discussed in our prior sections. We round out the discussion
of clinical translation with manufacturing considerations that may
often be overlooked during the early stages of preclinical hydrogel
development, which we hope will be useful for researchers with an
eye toward eventual translation.
6.1.

## Injectable Hydrogels Currently
in the Clinic
Hydrogels have been part of the clinical landscape
for some time,
and their current usage in the clinic was recently reviewed and analyzed
by Mitragotri and co-workers. Their meta-analysis
showed that the plurality of hydrogels in clinical trials is for ocular
applications, such as soft contact lenses. However, outside of ocular
therapies, the remaining hydrogels spanned a diverse set of applications
including pain management, tissue regeneration, wound healing, cosmetic
procedures, cancer therapy, and urinary disorder treatments. By and
large, ocular hydrogels and wound healing dressings are composed of
noninjectable hydrogels. Here, we discuss how the clinical applications
and therapeutic strategies of injectable hydrogels differ and relate
to the preclinical research discussed in prior sections.
Injectable
hydrogels are a quickly progressing area of biomedical research, having
already led to numerous approvals in the US and in Europe. Overall, a significant portion of current clinical
trials seek to determine what additional benefits and disease indications
are possible for already-approved formulations. Nevertheless, several
trials of novel formulations are paving the way to the clinic for
more experimental and multifunctional injectable hydrogels. contains the active,
recruiting, and not yet recruiting clinical trials using injectable
hydrogels, as of early 2020.
 Of the 20 trials identified, 25% were for bone, joint,
or cartilage
repair applications. These treatments implement hydrogels as tissue
scaffolds, using either polyacrylamide
or hydroxyethyl cellulose hydrogels to treat conditions that include
arthrosis and osteoarthritis. Notably, these interventions generally
do not aim to deliver drugs or therapeutic cells with hydrogels, with
the exception of Argiform, a poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) gel formulated
with antibacterial silver ions. But in general, the injectable hydrogels
being tested in the clinic for bone/cartilage regeneration are resorbable
and provide structural support or scaffolding for endogenous cells
as they degrade. PAA gels in particular appear to foster invasion
by endogenous cells, which ultimately leads to integration with and
resorption by the body.
Within the bone/join/cartilage repair
application area, three naturally
derived hydrogel formulations have already been approved in the US
and Europe. In contrast to the materials currently undergoing trials,
these hydrogels engage through specific receptor–ligand interactions
and are used to deliver drugs in some cases. One of these is the hyaluronic
acid-based EUFLEXXA, which acts as a mechanical scaffold but also
has natural ligand–receptor interactions through CD44 and other
proteins to more actively engage endogenous cells. The other two formulations
are collagen-based and are used to deliver growth factors (BMP-2 in
the INFUSE system and OP-1 in the OP-1 Putty system). Whether passive
scaffolding or more active/drug eluting strategies prove to be more
effective has yet to be determined.
The plurality of injectable
hydrogel clinical trials identified
(40%) pertained to cancer, evaluating indications that included pancreatic,
bladder, rectal, prostate, and head and neck cancers. While this is
a large percentage, the majority of these trials are seeking to find
additional utility for the already approved SpaceOAR and TraceIt systems,
both PEG-based hydrogels developed by Boston Scientific for imaging
and radiotherapy applications. Nevertheless, the therapeutic approaches
across these clinical trials varied widely, and included improving
tumor imaging, reducing side effects from radio or chemotherapy, and
a local adjuvant immunotherapy.
The iodinated TraceIt hydrogel
system has been successful for improving
tumor imaging following resection. The hydrogel persists in tissues
for up to three months, where it provides a high contrast in image-guided
radiation therapy, which can allow physicians to more selectively
treat tissues where residual tumors are most likely to reside. This
product has received clearance for clinical use as a radiographical
marker for soft tissues, and current clinical trials seek to determine
additional indications and applications in cancer imaging and radiotherapy.
The SpaceOAR system was developed and approved as a tool for shielding
vulnerable tissue from damage during radiotherapy of prostate cancer.
In addition to these gels being radio-opaque, they serve as physical
spacers between cancer tissues and other delicate organs. Both systems
continue to be explored in clinical trials as a means to physically
obstruct radiation in order to shield sensitive healthy tissues during
cancer radiotherapy. This particular approach may be useful for prostate,
rectal, and pancreatic cancers, where the tumors are adjacent or near
to delicate organs. Notably, these products appear to be providing
significant clinical value simply by persisting in the locations where
they are administered. Modification of their formulations to make
them radio-opaque or to include a tracer for imaging also allows for
much safer and effective radiotherapy. Notably, these trials are also
demonstrating that precise hydrogel injection to areas near deep-tissue
tumors is possible using ultrasound or other image-guided techniques.
These observations ease concerns that injectable hydrogel therapies
would be difficult to adapt to treating nonsuperficial tumors.
Despite the significant amount of preclinical research into drug
delivery systems, there are few trials evaluating such systems in
the clinic. This is perhaps due to the fact that prior to immunotherapy,
local drug delivery was of limited usefulness to the types of cancer
patients who enroll in clinical trials in the first place—those
with unresectable and metastatic cancer. The recent groundswell in
local cancer immunotherapy work may presage a wave of immunomodulatory
hydrogels entering into clinical trials in the near future. However,
this may be complicated by scalable manufacturing and GMP requirements,
which are always a challenge for new therapeutic approaches.
The success or failure of early clinical trials with immunomodulatory
hydrogels will be of intense interest to the field, such as the upcoming
LICoRN-01 trial that will evaluate the combination of chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, and local immunomodulatory hydrogels in patients with
unresectable colorectal cancer. Following a round of chemotherapy
and radiofrequency ablation therapy, two metastatic lesions will be
intratumorally injected with a muco-adhesive hydrogel containing GMCSF
and a TLR agonist. The preclinical data supporting this approach indicated
a tolerable and effective therapy in a murine model of colorectal
cancer. The results of this trial will
provide valuable insight into the translatability of local immunomodulatory
hydrogels and the technical challenges of intratumoral injection and
of producing pharmaceutical grade immuno-modulatory hydrogels at scale.
Of special interest will be the extent of the abscopal effect or the
antitumor effect on distant, untreated lesions. Immunomodulatory hydrogels
will need to mount abscopal effects for continued cancer clinical
trials to be feasible. However, it cannot be discounted that there
may be significant interest in hydrogel-based vaccines in the wake
of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, which may ultimately provide some of the
earliest and most comprehensive data on immunomodulatory biomaterials
in humans.
The remaining trials span a fairly diverse clinical
landscape and
echo many of the topics discussed in the preclinical sections. Two
studies are evaluating hydrogels for surgical applications. One study
is evaluating the sprayable Actamax system as a way to prevent adhesions
following certain laproscopic surgeries, and the other study uses
an injectable hydrogel plug (BioSentry) to close the wound left in
lungs after a biopsy. Tissue regeneration trials are especially interesting,
such as the Algisyl trial that seeks to determine the safety and efficacy
of an injectable alginate hydrogel as a scaffold for left ventrical
regeneration following heart failure. Algisyl is already approved
in Europe, and this trial may provide entry into the US market. Delivery
of therapeutic cells is being evaluated in the REACT trial which aims
to deliver renal cells to patients in a gelatin hydrogel to treat
chronic kidney disease. And regenerative drug delivery is being evaluated
in the FX-322 trial, which uses a poloxomer-based hydrogel to deliver
a proprietary blend of small molecules to stimulate regrowth of hearing
cells. Overall, current clinical trials are exploring diverse and
wide-ranging capabilities of injectable hydrogels.

6.2.

## Manufacturing and Scale Up Considerations
for Translation
Scaling and manufacturing hydrogels for commercial
products remains a challenging process. Despite the critical nature
of scalable manufacturing in bringing these technologies into the
clinic, there is surprisingly little attention provided to this topic
in the literature. This may be due to a general lack of interest in
these topics, difficulty for academic groups to explore scaled-up
manufacturing, insufficient communication between academic and industry
partners, or the lack of research funding. More likely than not, all
of these contribute to the dearth of studies to improve the process
engineering of these biomaterials. Here, we briefly summarize several
regulatory and manufacturing considerations that should be taken into
account when developing hydrogels with translation in mind.
Typically, hydrogels are classified by the United States FDA as a
device, biologic, or drug depending on the application. The quickest
and most inexpensive regulatory pathway would be as a device with
a 510(k) designation. Devices have quicker
approval processes (around 5 years), but if the hydrogel is delivering
a drug or cells, it is most often classified as a combination product
requiring 7–10 years for approval and $50–300 million
for development and testing. Most hydrogels
are currently fabricated in small batches for preclinical studies,
but large-scale reactions and processes must be designed and optimized
through officially recognized Good Manufacturing Processes (GMP) before
approval and commericalization. For widespread
utilization, hydrogels should be able to be safely fabricated on the
kiloton scale. The considerable challenge
of this scale up should not be underestimated, even from moving from
small to large animal preclinical work. From our own experience, the
volume of sprayable hydrogel used in preclinical studies of adhesion
barriers ranged from 0.25 mL per subject for rat studies to 50–75
mL for ovine studies.
The chemical components making up the
hydrogel may also affect
scaling and manufacturing processes. If hydrogels contain chemical
moieties that degrade due to hydrolysis or other processes over time,
proper storage and formulation processes must be anticipated and accounted
for. For example, can a new hydrogel formulation be cryopreserved
and lyophilized without damaging the product or encapsulated drugs?
Does the formulation remain stable at room temperature under mild
agitation, or does it require refrigeration? If refrigeration is required,
is 4 °C sufficient or are freezing temperatures (and if so does
it require −20 or −80 °C) needed? These are all
essential questions for commercial feasibility, yet they are rarely
explored in either in vitro or preclinical studies.
Individual components of hydrogels might present unique regulatory
challenges, especially as nanotechnology and biologicals are incorporated
into next-generation formulations. So while the advantages of nanoparticles
in hydrogel formulations are readily apparent in the preclinical literature,
there is the issue that nanomedicines have generally been difficult
to translate to the clinic. Similarly,
many hydrogels used for preclinical studies rely upon natural biopolymers,
such as alginate, cellulose, or collagen, but often these biopolymers
exhibit batch-to-batch variation that may complicate the ability to
satisfy robust quality control metrics. 
Beyond the difficulty in producing their individual components,
hydrogels that require defined macroscale architecture (e.g., macroporosity)
can be difficult to produce at larger scales. Recent work on this
issue has led to some progress, with Mikhalovsky and co-workers reporting
cryogelation methods that increase the scale from a few milliliters
up to 400 mL. 
One key challenge
of scaling hydrogel products is maintaining sterility,
which is required to receive approval for commercial products. Due
to the high-water content in hydrogels, it is challenging or impossible
to sterilize hydrogel products by traditional methods, such as autoclaving,
without damaging the product. Often
the only viable method is to sterilize components and processes themselves
before hydration. This of course requires all subsequent steps be
performed under aseptic conditions, which presents a considerable
process challenge. Some techniques for sterilization include filtration,
radiation (gamma-rays and e-beams), and heating procedures. Of course, care should be taken to make sure
that at least one of these techniques is compatible/nondestructive
for the various components of a novel hydrogel therapy.
There
are a variety of additional pitfalls and challenges for translation
that could be evaluated from early design stages. For example, depending
on the nature of gelation for hydrogel synthesis, large quantities
of heat or other byproducts may result and must be safely handled.
Along these lines, hydrogels that form through self-assembly and simple
mixing procedures may have an advantage during scaled up manufacturing. And as discussed in the prior section on injectable
hydrogel rheology, careful assessment of hydrogel rheology can identify
what applications a formulation can feasible accomplish when translated
to clinically relevant geometries (e.g., forces required to inject
through a syringe or catheter of different gauge/lengths).
Most
biomedical materials literature is goal-oriented toward clinical
translation, and the field has amassed reports that painstakingly
characterize the therapeutic efficacy and mechanisms of novel biomaterials,
such as hydrogels. Of course, biomedical translation depends upon
this efficacy, but translation also depends on the material’s
ability to be manufactured at scale and to meet regulatory standards.
Nevertheless, this type of assessment is rare in the literature. This
is not to say that all biomaterials research should be limited to
materials that would be readily scaled and manufactured based on today’s
infrastructure. After all, studies with highly tunable but difficult-to-translate
materials can be very helpful and may elucidate generalizable, materials-agnostic
design criteria for specific biomedical applications. Rather, it is
to say that increased transparency in current fabrication capabilities
of biomaterials could identify current bottlenecks, thereby elevating
their importance and unlocking research and funding to resolve them.

7.

## Opportunities for Hydrogels beyond Biomedical
Applications
While previous discussions primarily focused
on hydrogels for biomedical
applications, many of the principles discussed throughout this review
are analogous and transferrable to diverse nonbiomedical applications
including agriculture, , water remediation, oil recovery, , water storage, biofuel production, , and cosmetics. , In this section, we briefly
summarize several exciting areas for hydrogel technology outside of
medicine and point out areas where desired functionality overlaps
with the capabilities being developed for biomedical hydrogels. It
is our hope that this discussion may inspire materials researchers
to consider opportunities across a variety of societally impactful
but underexplored application areas.
The unique materials properties
of hydrogels are often acquired
through relatively low (<10%) amounts of solids, enabling simple
processing and low costs that are required for commercial applications,
which often can necessitate hundreds of millions of gallons of product
a year. , Additional functional complexities such
as active ingredient encapsulation, triggered and controlled cargo
release, and degradation rate can all be engineered through appropriate
chemical and mechanical design of the hydrogels. − Altogether, these attributes combine to make hydrogel technology
not only broadly useful but also translationally feasible for diverse
commercial and industrial applications.
Biofuel production and
biofabrication are a particularly interesting
area where there is considerable overlap with hydrogels used to manipulate
cells. However, instead of mammalian cells, the ability to manipulate
microbes opens the door to completely novel capabilities. For example,
Johnston et al. engineered methacrylate-based hydrogels to immobilize
microbes that would not otherwise be compatible in liquid suspension. Careful design of the hydrogel chemistry and
cross-linking enabled these materials to be processed through extruders,
to immobilize and stabilize microbes, and to also allow for repeated
lyophilization–rehydration cycles without cryoprotectants.
These properties allowed for on-demand microbial production of small
molecules and active peptides, and the hydrogels demonstrated up to
a year of continuous fermentation of yeast to produce ethanol.
In the field of cosmetics, hydrogel mechanical properties are essential
for providing long-lasting benefits. Along these lines, Yu et al.
engineered an elastic cross-linked polymer layer that mimicked the
mechanics of youthful skin. In this
example, the hydrogel structure allowed the topically applied material
to be breathable without irritation, while having the elastic properties
of youthful skin. Furthermore, the authors conclude that in addition
to the isotropic stresses applied by the hydrogel, the hydration properties
of the hydrogel also contributed to improvements in skin mechanics
and appearance.
One particularly promising area for hydrogels
is environmental
engineering, where the biocompatible and hydrophilic properties of
this technology allow for some remarkable capabilities. Importantly,
this is an area that may have considerable implications for the world
as it adapts to the consequences of a warming climate. In particular,
hydrogel technology provides new options for water remediation. A
critical design criteria for water remediation is the adequate mass
transport of water through the hydrogel, which is similar to the considerations
for nutrient transport in a variety of hydrogels for cellular therapies.
In one recent study, Kumarasamy et al. created a polymer resin using
fluorophilic and charged functional groups to rapidly and selectively
remove polyfluorinated alkyl substances from water. In this example, upon exposure to water, the resins form
hydrogels where the network structure allows for rapid mass exchange
throughout the material, while exposing the water to the fluorophilic
and charged functional groups for rapid sorption.
Agriculture
accounts for 69% of annual water usage worldwide with
40% of the global population projected to be living in areas of severe
water stress by 2050. , Hydrogels have played an important
role in facing these challenges by increasing soil water holding capacity
and minimizing water runoff. Specifically, these hydrogels are formed
through swelling of superabsorbent polymers (SAPs), which can result
in fluid absorption up to 1000 times their dry weight. , These SAPs are often delivered as powders or granules and can be
formed through physical or chemical cross-linking of synthetic or
natural polymers. Appropriate choice of materials, structure, and
chemistry depends on judicious balancing of the target functionalities:
water absorption capacity, rate of absorption, swelling size, durability
(operation and storage), toxicity, biodegradability, and cost.
Synthetic SAPs use monomers such as acrylic acid, methacrylic acid,
siloxanes, and various acrylamides to form chemically cross-linked,
swellable materials. These materials benefit from having a vast chemical
space for tunability, typically large swelling capabilities, and mechanical
robustness (stiffness and elasticity to retain structure under soil
compression) at low concentrations. For
example, Woodhouse and Johnson demonstrated that dry polyacrylamide,
poly(vinyl alcohol), and starch copolymer mixed into sand all enhanced
water efficiency (g of dry plant matter produced per kg of water)
and increased the number of days until plants wilted to 16, up from
3 days. These water enhancing properties
have also found utility in wildfire retardant strategies as “short-term”
retardants. − In these strategies the increased retention of water allows for
treatment of buildings and fuel in the path of encroaching fires,
but the overall efficacy is limited since the water rapidly evaporates
(<1 h) in wildfire conditions. , , 
Beyond water enhancement, synthetic SAPs have
also demonstrated
utility in erosion prevention and ecological soil restoration. These polymers are designed to functionally
mimic humus and engineered to be hydrophilic and capable of binding
specific soil cations. For example, researchers use a polyacrylate
polymer to remediate soils contaminated by copper from fungicides,
reducing the amount of copper to 0.11 times the control with 0.1%
of polymer blended in the soil. The
ability to tune the density of hydrophilic and ion-binding moieties
provides a flexible strategy toward tailoring synthetic SAPs for specific
soil conditions and remediation approaches. However, despite these
many advances, many SAP-based hydrogels (e.g., polyacrylates) are
often limited in biodegradability and renewable production, raising
concerns about environmental and human toxicity. − Like in many biomedical applications, a vast proportion of agricultural
uses of SAP-based hydrogels require biodegradability (e.g., microbial
degradation and hydrolysis), biocompatibility (e.g., nontoxic, no
accumulation, minimal changes in soil chemistry), and renewability
(e.g., sustainable synthesis), leading researchers to explore natural
polymers as alternatives.
Similar to hydrogels in biomedical
applications, researchers can
cross-link the hydrogel network through many of the traditional chemical
and physical cross-linking methods. One example is carboxymethylcellulose
(CMC), which has been popular for engineering naturally derived SAPs
due to its high-water-absorbency ability and swelling rate thanks
to its abundant hydroxyl and carboxylic acid groups. , In this example, CMC was mixed with clay particles to form hydrogels
that increased the time to release 50% of the encapsulated herbicide
from <1 h for the commercial standard to ∼2 to 500 h, illustrating
the analogous engineering strategies and criteria to biomedical applications. These similarities have inspired researchers
to expand the use of hydrogels beyond soil remediation and water enhancement
to more ambitious and complex cargo (e.g., pesticides, herbicides,
fungicides, fertilizers, retardants) delivery.
Analogous to
delivery of biotherapeutics, controlled delivery of
cargo for agriculture and sustainability provides several benefits
over site retention, release kinetics, and triggered release strategies.
As in drug delivery, cargo release can be categorized as passive release
or active release. In passive release, researchers often leverage
chemical potential gradients or natural degradation to drive both
water and cargo delivery to the surrounding soil. For example, Cheng
et al. use an acrylic acid-based hydrogel chemically cross-linked
by urea and N,N’-methylenebis(acrylamide)
that passively released nitrogen (in the form of urea) to the surrounding
soil over ∼40 days. In this system,
the poly(acrylic acid) backbone facilitated enhanced water-swelling,
while the hydrolysis rate of urea dictated the extended release time
frame of N delivery to the soil.
Our group recently reported
another passive delivery strategy for
wildfire prevention, where the hydrogel’s mechanics enhanced
adherence of fire retardants on target wildland fuels ( a). In this example, hydroxyethyl cellulose and methylcellulose were
cross-linked with colloidal silica particles to form viscoelastic
fluids that could be sprayed and adhered onto vegetation. In these studies, the enhanced mechanical (e.g.,
relative elasticity, extensional viscosity, and dynamic yield stress)
and physicochemical properties (e.g., surface tension and spreading
coefficient) provided by the cellulose–silica particle network
enhanced adherence of fire retardants on wildland fuels from 44% to
70% after spraying and was able to completely prevent ignition of
dry grass even after half an inch of rain. Notably, the ability for a dynamic hydrogel to be sprayed and coat
complex shapes was an essential capability for this approach and suggests
that sprayable hydrogels may be especially important environmental
interventions.
 Active release strategies open the doors to a vast multitude of
available stimuli and chemical methods to trigger release. This broad
landscape of design strategies has led researchers to develop many
creative ways to create hydrogels for triggered release of nutrients,
pesticides, and other agrochemicals. − The primary draw of
these triggered release strategies is to enhance delivery efficiency
(e.g., timing, location, and dosing) and reduce pollution from leakage,
surface migration, or off-target delivery. Along these lines, Xu et
al. combine the near-infrared (NIR)-responsive polydopamine (PDA)
with the temperature-responsive PNIPAm to form microspheres for a
temperature-responsive release of pesticides to improve site accuracy
and efficiency of delivery ( b). While the PDA core
converted photons to thermal energy, the PNIPAm shell encapsulated
the pesticide and shrunk when exposed to elevated temperatures, which
released the pesticide. Using pH as their stimulus, Xiang et al. demonstrated
controlled pesticide release using an attapulgite, PDA, and calcium
alginate hydrogel. In this system, the
attapulgite was modified with PDA, which coordinated with the pesticide.
This mixture was then mixed into an alginate solution, which was subsequently
cross-linked with calcium to form hydrogel spheres. The pH-responsiveness
originated from dissolution of the calcium alginate network due to
ion exchange of the cross-linking calcium with sodium when increasing
pH from 5.5 to 8. Similarly, many poly(acrylic acid) -based hydrogel
systems are capable of incorporating pH triggers for cargo release
due to the pH sensitivity of the hydrogen bonds that hold the network
together. Beyond temperature and pH,
researchers have also explored electrical stimuli for triggered release,
citing high energies for temperature triggers and harmful soil chemistry
effects of pH triggers. , , In one example, Zhang et al. demonstrated in water tank and pot
(rice plants and weeds) experiments that they could use attapulgite
and calcium alginate to form an electrically triggered hydrogel sphere
for releasing glyphosate, a commonly used pesticide ( c). The electric field induced Coulombic forces on the anionic calcium
alginate network, enlarging pores and allowing the negatively charged
glyphosate to release from the hydrogel.
Overall, this section
provides a brief introduction into the nonbiomedical
applications of hydrogels, which includes opportunities in a wide
range of sustainability related applications and cosmetics. Many of
the materials design strategies for these applications are analogous
to hydrogels used in the biomedical field and suggest that concepts
developed for biomedical applications may be transferrable to diverse
challenges and vice versa. This being said, the constraints in cost,
environmental compatibility, and delivery strategies ultimately offer
a very different challenge for fields such as environmental engineering.
In particular, the multitude of available materials design strategies
frequently leads to tenuous rationalization of starting materials,
chemistry, and complexity in exchange for demonstration of feasibility.
For this reason, commercial hydrogel products in agriculture and sustainability
are still limited in scope, with hydrogels capable of multifaceted
functionality out of reach due to the high costs of synthesis and
unscalable production. This reality not only offers ample opportunity
for creative innovation in hydrogel fabrication but also demands for
interdisciplinary collaborative teams between materials engineers,
environmental scientists, and industry partners for hydrogel technologies
to be realistically applied across a spectrum of commercial applications.

8.

## Conclusions
Although the applications discussed throughout
this review are
very diverse, there are recurrent themes that tie together these efforts.
The concept of controlled trafficking of molecules though hydrogels,
for example, is highly relevant for drug, cell, and pesticide delivery.
Within this theme of controlled release, there are some inconsistencies
in drug delivery strategies with hydrogels that are worth assessing.
One of the main strengths of these approaches is to localize treatment
to the vicinity of the hydrogel, yet many studies have evaluated the
efficacy of gels distant from the target tissue. In these systems,
the hydrogel is acting like a long-term infusion of drugs, which could
be beneficial if the drug is largely nontoxic (e.g., passive immunization
applications). But for toxic drugs such as chemotherapy, the question
of tolerability is considerable, and these studies ought to evaluate
toxic side effects. While peritumoral or intratumoral injection of
chemotherapeutic hydrogels is not feasible for metastatic disease,
it is an appropriate approach for adjuvant therapy or in the context
of cancer immunotherapy, which can drive systemic responses from local
immuno-modulation.
Perhaps the most ubiquitous theme across
the studies discussed
here is the interdisciplinary skillset required to unlock the potential
of hydrogels in each focus area. Whether being developed for vaccines,
surgeries, or wildfire prevention, each application places highly
specific demands on hydrogels. Identifying these demands is often
not trivial and requires effective communication between materials
scientists and their collaborators in these subject areas. Usually,
adapting to the requirements of a given application necessitates innovation
on the materials end, bringing together diverse specialties such as
chemistry, bioengineering, and mechanical engineering. Testing and
proving the value of these materials then requires materials groups
to become literate in the conventions and techniques of one or more
unfamiliar disciplines, such as cancer biology, immunology, surgery,
or microbiology. Especially as modern medicine continues to become
increasingly reliant on highly advanced proteomic, transcriptomic,
and genomic techniques, engineering hydrogel therapies to mediate
complex biological interventions will require high levels of expertise
in systems biology, genetics, and biochemistry. Thus, as biomaterials
become more sophisticated, we anticipate that highly effective and
interdisciplinary research teams will be essential to both develop
and translate these technologies to solve society’s most urgent
biomedical problems.

## Acknowledgments
This
research was financially supported by the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID, R01AI154989),
the Center for Human Systems Immunology with Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation (OPP1113682), and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
(OPP1211043). S.C. is supported by the National Cancer Institute of
the National Institutes of Health under Award Number F32CA247352.
A.K.G. is thankful for a National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship and the Gabilan Fellowship of the Stanford Graduate Fellowship
in Science and Engineering. A.C.Y. is grateful for a Kodak Graduate
Research Fellowship. L.M.S. is grateful for an American Heart Association
predoctoral fellowship and a Stanford Interdisciplinary Graduate Fellowship.
The authors would like to thank Emily Gale, Caitlin Maikawa, Catie
Meis, Netra Rajesh, and Shawn Musgrave for helpful discussions on
these topics.

## Biographies
Santiago Correa is currently a Ruth L. Kirschstein
Postdoctoral
Fellow in the Materials Science & Engineering Department at Stanford
University, where he works on immunomodulatory biomaterials in the
Appel Lab. He received his Ph.D. in Biological Engineering from MIT,
where he investigated how nanoparticle surface chemistry could be
engineered to target specific subcellular compartments of ovarian
cancer cells and to fabricate multifunctional nanomaterials in the
Hammond Lab. Before his graduate training, he obtained his B.S. in
Biomedical Engineering from Yale University, where he conducted research
on the foreign body response to brain implants in the Kyriakides Lab.
Santi is enthusiastic about the potential for leveraging nanotechnology
for both macro- and nanoscale drug delivery vehicles and is particularly
interested in their unique ability to engage and communicate with
the body’s immune system.

Abigail
Grosskopf is a Ph.D. student in the Chemical Engineering
department at Stanford University and is currently funded by a Stanford
Graduate Fellowship and National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship.
She is from Chadds Ford, PA, and attended Princeton University for
her undergraduate studies. She is interested in tuning the dynamic
rheological responses of hydrogel materials with novel chemistries
to uncover unprecedented structure property relationships. She also
works on designing injectable hydrogels for therapeutic cell delivery
for applications in regenerative medicine, cancer, and preclinical
models. She is also excited about designing materials for 3D printing.

Hector Lopez Hernandez received his Ph.D.
from the University of
Illinois at Urbana–Champaign in the research group of Professor
Scott R. White. His research interests lie in the areas of multifunctional
and stimuli-responsive polymeric materials. He was a postdoctoral
researcher in the lab of Professor Eric Appel at Stanford University
where he investigated the relationship between the rheology of physically
cross-linked hydrogels and their use as injectable materials. His
postdoctoral work provides insight into the structure–property–function
relationships of these hydrogels and discusses the implications of
those relationships on drug delivery. Hector’s studies on the
rheology of physically cross-linked networks established and validated
the use of flow models to create engineering design strategies for
the development of translatable and injectable drug delivery materials.

Doreen Chan received her B.S. in Chemistry
from the California
Institute of Technology in 2015. She graduated from Stanford University
with her Ph.D. in Chemistry under the supervision of Professor Eric
Appel in the Department of Materials Science & Engineering (2020).
Her research interests lie in the design of soft materials for desired
properties and integration of these materials with biosensors to improve
biocompatibility and device performance.

Anthony Yu is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at the Brigham
and Women’s Hospital working with Professor Jeffrey Karp. Anthony
completed his Ph.D. in Materials Science & Engineering in the
Appel Lab in 2020. During his Ph.D. studies he developed a fundamental
understanding of physically cross-linked polymeric materials in order
to engineer carrier materials for active ingredients in fields spanning
medicine to agriculture. In particular, he worked on hydrogels for
long-term antibody delivery and viscoelastic yield stress fluids for
wildfire prophylaxis.

Lyndsay Stapleton
graduated from Stanford University in 2020 with
a Ph.D. in Bioengineering and is currently the Manager of Strategy
and Operations at Calcilytix Therapeutics, a BridgeBio Company. She
completed her Ph.D. work in the Appel Lab investigating hydrogels
for postoperative adhesions and cardiovascular interventions. Her
work was funded by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program, Stanford
Bio-X Fellowship, and the AHA Predoctoral Fellowship. Prior to her
Ph.D., she graduated from the University of New Mexico in 2015 with
a B.S. in Chemical Engineering.

Eric A.
Appel is an Assistant Professor of Materials Science &
Engineering at Stanford University. He received his B.S. in Chemistry
and M.S. in Polymer Science from California Polytechnic in San Luis
Obispo, CA. Eric performed his M.S. thesis research with Dr. Jim Hedrick
and Dr. Robert Miller on the synthesis of polymers for drug delivery
applications at the IBM Almaden Research Center in San Jose, CA. He
then obtained his Ph.D. in Chemistry with Prof. Oren A. Scherman in
the Melville Laboratory for Polymer Synthesis at the University of
Cambridge. His Ph.D. research focused on the preparation of dynamic
and stimuli-responsive supramolecular polymeric materials. For his
Ph.D. work, Eric was the recipient of the Jon Weaver PhD prize from
the Royal Society of Chemistry and a Graduate Student Award from the
Materials Research Society. Upon graduating from Cambridge in 2012,
he was awarded a National Research Service Award from the NIH (NIBIB)
and a Wellcome Trust Postdoctoral Fellowship to work with Prof. Robert
Langer at MIT on the development of supramolecular biomaterials for
drug delivery and tissue engineering applications. During his postdoctoral
work, he received a Margaret A. Cunningham Immune Mechanisms in Cancer
Research Award. His work at Stanford focuses on the development of
biomimetic polymeric materials that can be used as tools to better
understand fundamental biological processes and to engineer advanced
healthcare solutions.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): S.C., A.K.G.,
D.C., A.C.Y., L.M.S., and E.A.A. are listed on various granted or
pending patents reporting technology described in this review (62/959,599;
18/052,570; 62/739,587; 62/739,550; 15/943,358; 15/716,500; 15/052,036).

## References