2967acscentsciACS Central ScienceACS Cent SciAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC8265720826572083232493434177110.1021/acscentsci.1c00361An mRNA SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine Employing Charge-Altering
Releasable Transporters with a TLR-9 Agonist Induces Neutralizing
Antibodies and T Cell Memory
HaabethOle A
W LohmeyerJulian J K SalletsAdrienne BlakeTimothy R Sagiv-BarfiIdit CzerwinskiDebra K McCarthyBlaine PowellAbigail E WenderPaul A WaymouthRobert M LevyRonald †Stanford
Cancer Institute, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States‡Department
of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States§Department
of Biochemistry & Stanford ChEM-H, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, United States∥Department
of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, United States*E-mail levy@stanford.edu
18620217711911191–1204872021© 2021 The Authors. Published
by American
Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on May 25, 2021: "
An mRNA SARS-CoV-2 vaccine employing Charge-Altering Releasable Transporters with a TLR-9 agonist induces neutralizing antibodies and T cell memory
".

## Abstract
 The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
has necessitated the rapid development
of prophylactic vaccines. Two mRNA vaccines have been approved for
emergency use by the FDA and have demonstrated extraordinary effectiveness.
The success of these mRNA vaccines establishes the speed of development
and therapeutic potential of mRNA. These authorized vaccines encode
full-length versions of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. They are formulated
with lipid nanoparticle (LNP) delivery vehicles that have inherent
immunostimulatory properties. Different vaccination strategies and
alternative mRNA delivery vehicles would be desirable to ensure flexibility
of future generations of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and the development of
mRNA vaccines in general. Here, we report on the development of an
alternative mRNA vaccine approach using a delivery vehicle called
charge-altering releasable transporters (CARTs). Using these inherently
nonimmunogenic vehicles, we can tailor the vaccine immunogenicity
by inclusion of coformulated adjuvants such as oligodeoxynucleotides
with CpG motifs (CpG-ODN). Mice vaccinated with the mRNA-CART vaccine
developed therapeutically relevant levels of receptor binding domain
(RBD)-specific neutralizing antibodies in both the circulation and
in the lung bronchial fluids. In addition, vaccination elicited strong
and long-lasting RBD-specific TH1 T cell responses including
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell memory.

## Short abstract
Charge-altering releasable transporters effectively deliver
coformulated SARS-CoV-2 RBD mRNA and adjuvant. Prime-boost immunization
leads to robust antigen-specific B and T cell responses in mice.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Mar 23; Issue date 2021 Jul 28.

## Introduction
Coronavirus
pandemics have been a growing concern for more than
a decade, and several attempts have been made to develop vaccines
against SARS-CoV-1 and the Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome (MERS). The global spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus stimulated
worldwide efforts to leverage previous insights from coronavirus vaccines
to develop safe, effective, and scalable vaccines to alleviate the
COVID-19 pandemic. While a variety of vaccine candidates and approaches
are being investigated worldwide, the
extraordinary pace of development and implementation of mRNA vaccines − illustrates the potential of this emerging technology. The mRNA
vaccines granted emergency use authorization by the FDA against SARS-Cov-2
represent a triumph of basic and applied science as these advances
enabled the most rapid clinical translation from concept to clinical
trial ever for a vaccine. , mRNA is transiently
expressed, does not integrate into the genome, and is eliminated through
natural degradation mechanisms in the body. mRNA vaccines offer a
flexible and fast design that will allow for subsequent generations
of products to address the emergence of new virus variants. The currently
approved mRNA vaccines , generated by in vitro transcription
use chemically modified nucleotides incorporated in mRNAs encoding
the full viral spike protein, usually containing 2 structural epitope
mutations, formulated in lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) and are administered
intramuscularly. Despite their extraordinary success, the underlying
science that contributes to the most effective, safe, and scalable
vaccine against COVID-19 continues to evolve. Modifications and sequence
optimization of the mRNA and the particular components of the delivery
vehicle can influence the immunological response. Previous studies of SARS-CoV and MERS have shown that the
proper choice of encoded antigen is critical to avoid potential complications from the antibody-dependent enhancement
(ADE) of disease. The chemistry of the
delivery vehicle is also important as the ionizable lipids that are
a component of LNPs act as adjuvants but can induce adverse events, and the use of polyethylene glycol (PEG) in
the LNP formulations can contribute to allergic reactions. , 
These continuing challenges and the degree to which the global
scale of the COVID-19 pandemic has strained supply chains for the
existing LNP technologies highlight the need to develop alternative
approaches, (i) to enhance the resilience of the global response in
the face of this and future pandemics, (ii) to test alternative approaches
that might lead to the most effective and durable immunological responses,
as well as (iii) to be able to respond rapidly to emerging new virus
variants. 
In this study, we present
an alternative 3-component mRNA vaccine
utilizing mRNA encoding the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-2
spike protein formulated with a highly efficient, nontoxic, PEG-free
mRNA delivery platform called charge-altering releasable transporters
(CARTs) − and a TLR9 agonist (CpG) as a coformulated adjuvant , ( A). Prior
studies had indicated that the RBD is a promising antigen target − as antibodies elicited against RBD are often strongly neutralizing.
CARTs offer a promising new gene delivery platform and have proven
to be effective deliverers of mRNA vaccines in preclinical mouse studies. , CARTs are single-component amphiphilic diblock oligomers containing
a sequence of lipid monomers and a sequence of cationic monomers ( B, Figure S1A). They are readily produced on scale in a two-step
organocatalytic oligomerization. CARTs electrostatically encapsulate
mRNA (or other coformulated nucleotides like CpG) and deliver the
genetic cargo into cells (Figure S1B).
A unique feature of CARTs is their ability to undergo a charge-altering
rearrangement to produce neutral diketopiperazine small molecules
(DKPs). This transformation facilitates the release of mRNA ( C) and eliminates
any toxicity associated with persistent cations. Previous observations had shown that, upon intravenous
(IV) injection, CARTs containing hydroxyethyl glycine repeating cation
units selectively deliver mRNA to the spleen, − whereas intramuscular
(IM) injections of these same products result in mRNA translation
locally in the injected muscle ( D). Bioluminescence studies with Firefly luciferase
(fLuc) mRNA indicate that in vivo protein expression is greater in
the spleen after IV injection than in the muscle after IM injection.
In either site, expression peaks after 4–6 h ( E) and decreases over a period
of 3–4 days. Moreover, CARTs containing unsaturated lipid blocks
exhibit the enhanced transfection of antigen presenting cells motivating our choice of such a CART for the
COVID-19 vaccine. The CART delivery vehicle does not induce nonspecific
immune stimulation by itself. , This property allows
the coformulation of oligodeoxynucleotide adjuvants such as the TLR9
agonist CpG-ODN to tune the induced immune response.
 Here, we show that the coformulation of a CART with mRNA encoding
SARS-CoV-2 RBD with the TLR9 agonist CpG (RBD mRNA + CpG-CART) induces
robust neutralizing antibodies and RBD-specific T cell responses in
mice. Moreover, we detect significant levels of these antibodies and
memory T cells in the spleen and lung of vaccinated animals.

## Results

## RBD mRNA
+ CpG-CART Vaccination Elicits Anti-RBD-Specific Antibodies
at Day 4 after Immunization
An mRNA encoding the receptor
binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 was
made by in vitro transcription and based on the published sequence
of the virus. A His tag was included to allow for protein detection
of the translated mRNA product as a quality control step. The resulting
mRNA contained the optimal CAP-1 structure; uridines were replaced
with modified N1-methyl-pseudouridine, and cytidines
were replaced with 5-methylcytidine to maximize mRNA stability and
translation. Protein expression was verified by Western Blot in transfected
293F and HeLa cells (Figure S2A). To demonstrate
that the administration of mRNA-CART complexes does not lead to nonspecific
immune stimulatory effects when formulated with optimally modified
mRNA, mice were injected intravenously
(IV) with mRNA-CART and monitored for the activation of innate immune
cells, a test that we have found to be most sensitive. mRNA-CART complexes
were free of such nonspecific stimulatory effects when formulated
with modified mRNA. However, when formulated with unmodified mRNA,
nonspecific activation of innate immune cell subsets could be observed,
demonstrating that the property of nonspecific immune stimulation
is dependent on the cargo and not the CARTs (Figure S2B). We were then able to direct the immune response of our
candidate vaccine by coformulating the mRNA-CART complexes with CpG
oligonucleotides that trigger endosomal TLR9 receptors in antigen
presenting cells. These CpG entities are known to be safe and effective
vaccine adjuvants. 
We assessed
the effects of the RBD mRNA-CART vaccination with or without the addition
of CpG as the adjuvant. IV injection of CARTs effectively delivers
the cargo to antigen presenting cells (APCs) such as B cells, macrophages,
and dendritic cells in the spleen , ( D). This route of
administration of the mRNA-CART vaccination had proven effective in
previous studies of therapeutic cancer vaccination. Based on this knowledge, we evaluated our vaccine first
by IV administration. Mice were primed on day 0 and received two boosts
on day 4 and on day 8 with 3 μg of RBD mRNA-CART formulated
with or without 3 μg of CpG ( A). As a control, a group that received 3
μg of CpG-CART alone with no mRNA and a control group treated
with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) were included. Mice vaccinated
with RBD mRNA-CART plus CpG developed detectable levels of anti-RBD
IgG and IgM as early as 4 days after vaccination (Figure S3A). Over time, we observed an increase in the levels
of anti-RBD antibodies in the serum of both mRNA-treated groups compared
to controls ( B). Importantly, the antibodies induced by our vaccine were specific
for RBD and did not cross react to an irrelevant His tagged protein
(GFP-His) (Figure S3B). Notably, RBD-specific
antibody responses in mice vaccinated with the formulation including
CpG consistently exceeded those observed in groups treated without
CpG ( B,D).
 

## Addition of CpG Results in Early Isotype
Switching of RBD-Specific
Antibody Responses
By day 14, we observed that the CpG coformulated
vaccine induced an RBD-specific Ig response that had undergone isotype
switching from IgG1 to IgG2a, IgG2b, and IgG3. By contrast, mice receiving
the vaccine formulation without coformulated CpG produced predominantly
unswitched IgG1 ( C and Figure S4A,B). By day 60, these
differences were less apparent; however, we detected higher levels
of all classes of RBD-specific antibodies in the serum of mice vaccinated
with the CpG-containing vaccine ( C and Figure S4B).

## Antibodies Induced by RBD mRNA + CpG-CART Vaccination Inhibit
RBD-ACE2 Binding and Neutralize Pseudotyped Viral Entry
The
induced antisera were next tested for their ability to inhibit the
RBD-ACE2 interaction ( A) and to block pseudotyped viral entry into ACE2-expressing
target cells ( B). Functional RBD-ACE2 receptor blocking was assayed both against
the binding of RBD protein to the ACE2-expressing target cell by flow
cytometry (data not shown) and by binding to the solid phase coated
with ACE2 protein. On day 28, we observed a striking difference in
the level of neutralizing antibodies between the group that had received
the vaccine containing the CpG as compared to the group vaccinated
without the adjuvant. While antisera from RBD mRNA + CpG-CART vaccinated
mice displayed a high degree of receptor blocking and pseudotyped
viral neutralization with IC50 of 1:500 and 1:18 000, respectively,
the antisera from mice vaccinated with RBD mRNA-CART were only barely
positive above the background ( A,B). However, by day 60 antisera from mice vaccinated
with RBD mRNA-CART were able to block RBD-ACE2 receptor binding and
neutralize pseudotyped viral entry, although to a lesser extent than
antisera from mice vaccinated with RBD mRNA + CpG-CART ( A,B). The results from the
receptor interaction blocking assay and the pseudovirus neutralization
assay were well correlated.
 

## RBD-Specific Antibodies in Bronchoalveolar Lavage of Vaccinated
Mice
To evaluate the presence of RBD-specific immunoglobulin
in the lungs of vaccinated mice, we collected bronchoalveolar lavage
(BAL) on D60 after treatment. RBD-specific Ig was detected in BAL
from both RBD mRNA + CpG-CART and RBD mRNA-CART vaccinated mice by
ELISA ( C).
Notably, as BAL is collected by flushing lungs with 2 mL of sterile
PBS, the Ig titers represent highly diluted samples. Importantly,
although diluted, these immunoglobulins from BAL of both vaccinated
groups blocked RBD-ACE2 binding on D60 ( D).

## RBD-Specific CD4+ T Cells in the
Lung of Vaccinated
Mice
In mice, Ig class switching is linked to TH1 T cell responses. , To evaluate the vaccine induced
T cell responses, we prepared single-cell suspensions from the lungs
of IV vaccinated mice on D28 and cultured the cells for 48 h in media
alone or in the presence of soluble RBD-His protein or a control protein
(hCD81-His). Cells were then collected and assayed by flow cytometry
for T cell activation using fluorochrome conjugated monoclonal antibodies
for memory and activation-specific surface proteins and intracellular
cytokines. Remarkably, upon RBD protein restimulation, a defined RBD-specific
CD4+/CD44high/CD134+ and CD4+/CD44high/TNFα+ activated T cell
subset could be identified in lung cell suspensions from mice vaccinated
with RBD mRNA + CpG-CART that could not be detected when cells were
cultured with media alone or in the presence of the control protein
( E). TNFα
secretion by CD4+ T cells is associated with a TH1 polarization.

## RBD mRNA + CpG-CART Vaccine Elicits Robust
Anti-RBD Ig Responses
by an Intravenous, Intramuscular, and Subcutaneous Route of Administration
To test the efficacy of our vaccine in relation to the route of
administration (ROA), we compared RBD-specific Ig responses induced
by immunizations given IV, IM, or SC. Mice were primed with 3 μg
of RBD mRNA and 3 μg of CpG formulated in CARTs on day 0 and
received a boost on day 8 (Figure S5A).
All routes of administration led to detectable neutralizing antibody
titers at the analyzed time points D14 and D28, with no significant
differences between IM and SC administration (Figure S5B). There was a tendency toward higher titers in
IV vaccinated mice. Isotype switching occurred independent of the
route of administration (Figure S5C).

## RBD mRNA + CpG-CART Vaccine Induces Robust RBD-Specific Ig Responses
in a Clinically Relevant Prime-Boost Regimen and Is Independent of
CpG Source
Guided by the immunization regimen chosen by the
currently approved SARS-CoV-2 vaccines, mice were primed with the vaccine on D0 and boosted on D21. Mice
were immunized either IV or IM with 3 μg of RBD mRNA + CpG-CART
( A). Confirming
previous observations, robust responses were observed for both groups.
IV immunized mice showed higher—statistically not significant—titers
of anti-RBD antibodies in serum and in the BAL on both D21 and D28
( B–D).
Antisera from both groups effectively inhibited RBD-ACE2 binding on
D21 (Figure S6B), although substantially
more effective on D28 reflecting the difference observed in total
RBD-specific IgGs between the two groups ( C). Moreover, robust antibody responses against
the complete spike protein were observed in both groups, although
higher in the intravenous group (Figure S6C). Thus, the vaccine induced anti-RBD response is primarily directed
toward exposed RBD epitopes in the complete spike protein. Importantly,
although CpG is required for robust isotype switched anti-RBD immunoglobulin,
the response is independent of the source of CpG. We tested 4 different
sources of CpG, three of the C-subclass of CpGs (CpG-C) and one of
the B-subclass (CpG-B). No significant difference was observed between
the different CpG-Cs (Figures S6 and S7), while the B-subclass CpG underperformed compared to the CpG-Cs
(data not shown).
 

## RBD mRNA + CpG-CART Vaccine Induced Long-Lasting
TH1 CD4+ and CD8+ T Cell Memory
Splenocytes
from mice that had received 3 μg of RBD-mRNA + 3 μg of
CpG-CART or 3 μg of Ctrl mRNA + 3 μg of CpG-CART either
IV or IM on D1 and D21 were harvested on day 105 after vaccination
and characterized for T cell responses by an IFNγ enzyme-linked
immunosorbent spot assay (ELISpot). In this assay, pooled splenocytes
were enriched for either CD4+ or CD8+ T cells
and cultured overnight with a SARS-CoV-2 RBD peptide pool or media
alone. Significant IFNγ responses in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were detected by both IV and IM vaccination. Since
the route of administration of IV vaccinated mice targets the spleen,
it is expected that spleen T cells would give a stronger response.
On the other hand, it is remarkable to detect responding T cells 105
days after vaccination ( A,B).
 To further assess the functionality and polarization of the vaccine
induced T cells, we incubated splenocytes of individual mice from
the same experiment in the presence of an RBD peptide pool or media
alone. After 18 h of incubation, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were assayed separately by flow cytometry for their expression
of memory markers CD44 and for the intracellular cytokines IFNγ,
TNFα, and IL-4. Even at this late time point after vaccination,
a significant population of RBD-specific IFNγ producing CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and TNFα producing CD8+ T cells could be identified in the RBD-mRNA + CpG-CART IV
vaccinated group. There was no increase in IL-4 producing CD4+ T cells, indicating that T cell memory was predominately
TH1 ( C,D, Figure S8). In contrast to the IFNγ
ELISpot results, we were not able to identify these low-frequency
populations (mean 28 and 55 IFNγ spots per 5 × 105 cells for CD4+ and CD8+ enriched conditions,
respectively) in IM vaccinated mice by flow cytometry.

## Neutralizing
Antibody Levels of Immunized Mice Are Comparable
to Those Achieved in Vaccinated Humans
Results from clinical
trials indicate that the Pfizer/BioNTech mRNA vaccine and the Moderna
vaccine can both confer protection from symptomatic infection prior
to administration of their second booster vaccine doses. , This implies that the antibody levels in humans at that early preboost
time point are sufficient to confer disease protection. Accordingly,
we compared the levels of neutralizing antibodies achieved in our
vaccinated mice to those in immunized humans both prior to and after
their boosters. BALB/c mice were vaccinated with 3 μg of RBD
mRNA + 3 μg of CpG-CART either IM or IV on D1 and D21, and serum
was collected on D28. These mice sera were then compared to sera from
13 individual Pfizer/BioNTech mRNA-LNP vaccinated humans collected
15–21 days after their priming vaccination and then again 15
± 4 days after their booster vaccinations. The level of RBD-ACE2
inhibition achieved with postboost sera from our IM and IV vaccinated
mice was similar to or higher than that of the human preboost sera.
The inhibitory antibody levels in the mice receiving the IV vaccination
equaled those in humans after boosting ( A,B).
 

## RBD mRNA + CpG-CART Vaccination Shows a Favorable
Safety Profile
To evaluate the safety profile of the vaccine,
mice were treated
on D0 and D21 with either PBS, 3 μg of GFP mRNA-CART, 3 μg
of GFP mRNA + 3 μg of CpG-CART or 3 μg of RBD mRNA + 3
μg of CpG-CART (Figure S9A). No differences
in body weight were observed after treatment (Figure S9B,C). IV administration of CpG-containing formulations
induced a transient decrease in white blood cell (WBC) count 24 h
after treatment that recovered by D2. This was driven by CpG; injection
of mRNA-CART without CpG did not alter the WBC count (Figure S9D–F). Serum levels of TNFα
and IL-6 measured 1 day and 1 week after treatment were not affected
by vaccination. IM and IV vaccination led to a transient increase
of serum IP10 and IFNα levels 1 day after prime. Serum cytokine
levels were within a normal range at the second analyzed time point
7 days after prime. Again, transient effects were mediated by CpG;
mice treated with mRNA-CART without CpG showed an unaltered cytokine
profile after treatment compared to untreated mice (Figure S9G–J). Similar dynamics for both WBC count
and cytokine profile were observed after the boost treatment (data
not shown). Treatment did not induce liver toxicity as assessed by
serum liver enzyme levels of alanine transferase (ALT), aspartate
transferase (AST) (Figure S9K–N),
and alkaline phosphatase (AP) (data not shown). In addition, gross
histopathology performed on day 1 and 5 after booster treatment revealed
no pathologic findings in the gross assessment of the main organs.

## Discussion
For the first time, mRNA-based therapeutics have
been approved
by the FDA, and the success of both mRNA-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccines
is both remarkable and mutually validating. However, challenges in
production, deployment, and availability of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines remain.
One important aspect for the continuous success and refinement of
mRNA-based therapeutics in general will be to create access to diverse
choices of safe delivery vehicles with varying chemical and biological
properties. Here, we demonstrate an effective mRNA vaccination strategy
against the clinically relevant RBD antigen of SARS-CoV-2 using an
alternative mRNA delivery platform to the clinically used lipid nanoparticles.
We observed an effective SARS-CoV-2 specific immune response that
was enhanced by the inclusion of the TLR9 agonist CpG as an adjuvant.
We further showed that the resulting anti-RBD sera were able to neutralize
pseudoviral entry into ACE2-expressing cells. Focusing on the ACE2
receptor binding domain of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, we were able to generate
high amounts of isotype switched RBD-specific neutralizing antibodies
in both the serum and lungs of immunized animals. In addition, we
compared serum levels of neutralizing antibodies from sera of humans
vaccinated with approved Pfizer/BioNTech mRNA-LNP vaccines with those
of mRNA-CART vaccinated mice. The levels of neutralizing antibodies
in fully immunized mice were similar (IM) or higher (IV) than the
levels of neutralizing antibodies measured in preboost blood samples
from humans vaccinated with the Pfizer/BioNTech mRNA vaccine. Since
it has been shown that this approved mRNA vaccine confers protection
as early as day 12 post prime, this is an indication that our vaccine
induced neutralizing antibody levels can be sufficient to confer protection. Of course, for further validation of these results,
vaccination studies in larger animals such as nonhuman primates are
needed. Finally, the RBD mRNA + CpG-CART vaccine induced RBD-specific
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses with the induction
of long-lasting T cell memory of TH1 polarization. In addition,
the IgG isotype profile dominated by IgG2a and IgG2b confirms a TH1 polarized T cell response.
When compared to LNPs,
CARTs have a unique biodistribution, selectively
delivering mRNA to the spleen or other organs without the need for
targeting ligands, simply through changes in the CART structure. CARTs
can be readily prepared and formulated with multiple mRNAs in any
desired nucleotide combination, only
require a single structural component that is mixed with mRNA, and
do not require specialized microfluidics instruments for their manufacture.
This allows for alternative drug application strategies. Preliminary
experiments show that CARTs formulated with mRNA are stable for 11
days at −20 °C (Figure S11).
However, since formulation does not require specific equipment, a
mix-and-shoot administration of the vaccine could be used. Our initial
experiments indicate that unformulated CARTs in DMSO are stable for
more than 12 months at −20 °C. CARTs and mRNA could therefore
be divided into two separate chambers of a two-chamber syringe, allowing
for mixing and mRNA-CART formation at the point of administration
and avoiding thermostability issues of preformulated complexes. In
contrast to LNPs, CARTs have no unspecific immunostimulatory effects,
which allows more flexibility for vaccine design and the option to
vary oligodeoxynucleotide adjuvant quantity when codelivered with
mRNA, rather than relying on the inherent immunogenicity of LNPs.
When CARTs are injected IM, gene expression localizes exclusively
at the site of injection and does not spread to other organs. In a
SARS-CoV-2 vaccine study using IM injection of LNPs, the liver showed
the highest level of reporter gene and antigen expression. In addition, IV injection of CARTs confers mRNA
expression exclusively to the spleen which could explain the higher
potency of IV vaccination compared to IM. While IV administration
of the vaccine induced a stronger antibody and T cell response, significant
responses could be induced via both routes of administration. Interestingly,
it has been shown recently that IV vaccination with a BCG vaccine
against tuberculosis profoundly altered the protective outcome in
nonhuman primates with an increase of antigen responsive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in blood, spleen, BAL, and lung lymph
nodes when compared to the established intradermal or aerosol administration. Additionally, IV administered mRNA lipid nanoparticles
have demonstrated potency in preclinical mouse models and a clinical
phase I study of therapeutic cancer vaccination. , 
We chose to direct our vaccine specifically against the RBD
rather
than the whole spike protein sequence. Potent humoral and cellular
immune responses have been observed in clinical trials with both the
SARS-CoV-2 full-length spike protein and RBD. Moreover, an RBD mRNA directed vaccine was proven safe in a phase
1/2 clinical trial tested in the US and in Germany. , In addition, RBD provides essential targetability for humoral and
cellular immune responses. Piccoli et al. showed that 90% of the neutralizing
activity of serum from an exposed patient targets the RBD. RBD is also an epitope for T cell responses
against SARS-CoV-2 S protein. A fast-spreading
mutant with a mutation in the RBD (N501Y) has been identified in the
UK (B.1.1.7) raising concerns about coverage of the current mRNA-based
vaccines. This N501Y mutation does not
seem to affect the efficacy of an RBD vaccination since mice vaccinated
against the original RBD sequence were able to clear a SARS-CoV-2
variant containing the specific mutation. However, recent data indicates that other clinically relevant RBD
and non-RBD mutations can mediate escape from vaccine induced humoral
immunity, , highlighting the urgent need of flexible
and rapidly adaptable vaccine platforms.
The safety data of
mRNA + CpG-CART vaccination seems to be favorable.
The detected changes in the white blood cell count and cytokine profile
were mediated by CpG. However, CpG has a well-known safety record
in clinical studies of other vaccines. We believe that the ability
to formulate TLR activating molecules like CpG into our vaccine will
aid in inducing a protective immune response in populations with less
competent immune systems and that are more at risk for severe COVID19
symptoms. CpG directly activates pDCs and B cells, contributing to
the induction of both innate and adaptive immune responses. The cascade
of events initiated by CpG indirectly supports maturation, differentiation,
and proliferation of natural killer cells, T cells, and monocytes/macrophages. − B cells activated by CpG upregulate expression of their Fc receptor
(FcR) and costimulatory molecules including MHC class II, CD40, CD80,
and CD86. − Subsequently, the CpG-stimulated B cells proliferate
and differentiate into plasma cells and memory B cells. The adjuvant effects of CpG are supported by
our study where the addition of CpG resulted in a more rapid immune
response, higher anti-RBD titers in the serum and bronchoalveolar
lavage, more effective ACE2-RBD inhibition and pseudotyped virus neutralization,
an increased T cell response, and more pronounced isotype switching.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates the potency and flexibility
of this mRNA-CART vaccine platform against the clinically relevant
SARS-CoV-2 RBD antigen. The robust induction of both B and T cell
responses via different routes of administration warrants further
exploration and its use as an alternative to the clinically approved
lipid nanoparticles in the general development of mRNA-based therapeutics
against infectious diseases.

## Material and Methods

## Recombinant Proteins
The pCAGGS plasmids coding for
soluble RBD-His, residues 319–541, and spike-His, residues
1–1213 from the Wuhan-Hu-1 genome sequence (GenBank MN9089473),
were a gift from Prof. Florian Krammer (Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai). The pcDNA3 plasmid coding
for a soluble ACE2-hIgA FC fusion protein was purchased from addgene
(ID 145154). Plasmids were expanded using One Shot TOP10 Chemically
Competent Escherichia coli (ThermoFisher Scientific)
and the ZymoPURE II Plasmid Maxiprep kit (Zymo Research). Recombinant
proteins were produced using the Expi293F cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
by transfecting 200 × 106 of these cells with purified
DNA using the ExpiFectamine 293 transfection kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Supernatants from transfected cells were harvested 3 days post-transfection
by centrifugation at 300g for 10 min and filtration
through a 22 μm filter. RBD-His and Spike-His containing supernatants
were batch purified using the HisPur Ni-NTA resin (ThermoFisher Scientific).
Supernatants were incubated with 6 mL of resin for 1 h at room temperature
(RT). Then, the resin was recovered by centrifugation (2 min at 700g), washed, and finally eluted per manufacturer recommendation.
Elution fractions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blot to confirm
RBD-His or Spike-His purification, and the positive fractions were
pooled.

## In Vitro Transcription
The RBD-6his was cloned from
the pCAGGS expression plasmid into the LF-pLMCT plasmid that contains
a T7 promoter and a polyA sequence required for mRNA synthesis. The
LF-pLMCT plasmid was a gift from Dr. Kris Thielemans (Free University
of Belgium). The RBD-6his coding sequence was amplified by PCR using
PHUSION polymerase (NEB) and TAAACTTAAGACAACCATGGTCGTGTTTCTGGTGC
as a forward primer and GGGGATCCcGTCTTCCTCGAGTTATCAATGGTGATGGTGA
as a reverse primer. The PCR product was then inserted into pLMCT
by NcoI and XhoI. mRNA coding for RBD was synthesized per manufacturer
recommendation using Hiscribe T7 (NEB) with cotranscriptional CleanCap
AG (Trilink), N1-methyl-pseudouridine (Trilink),
and 5-methylcytidine (Trilink). The template for in vitro transcription
was a PCR amplicon from the pLMCT-RBD-6His produced using the PHUSION
high-fidelity DNA polymerase (NEB) and TGTGGAATTGTGAGCGGATA
as a forward primer and CTTCACTATTGTCGACAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
as a reverse primer.

## CART Preparation and Characterization
CART O6-stat-N6: A9, consisting of
a first block of a 1:1 statistical mixture of oleyl and nonenyl-substituted
carbonate monomers, followed by a block of α-amino ester monomer
was prepared as previously reported. , Briefly, to
a mixture of nonenyl (29 mg, 1 mmol) and oleyl carbonate (40.5 mg,
1 mmol) in toluene (150 μL) were added TU, DBU, and BnOH (5
mol % TU/DBU, 0.2 mmol BnOH) in 50 μL of toluene. The reaction
was stirred for 1.5 h; then, the morpholinone monomer (33.4 mg, 0.16
mmol) was added as a solid and then stirred for an additional 2.5
h. The reaction was quenched with AcOH then dialyzed overnight in
DCM/MeOH (3.5 kDa Mw, cutoff). Concentration
after dialysis afforded 85 mg of clear residue which was deprotected
with TFA (0.85 mL) in dry DCM (8.5 mL) overnight. End group analysis
of the deprotected polymer showed block lengths of 6 nonenyl and 6
oleyl carbonate units and 9 cationic aminoester units.

## CART Oligonucleotide
Formulation
To prepare the CART-vaccine,
CARTs were formulated with a mixture of CpG and RBD mRNA at a 10:1
cation:anion ratio assuming full protonation of the CART and full
deprotonation of the oligonucleotides (1:1 mass ratio of CpG and mRNA
nucleotides). Formulations were prepared by mixing the reagents for
20 s in acidic PBS (pH adjusted to 5.5 by addition of 0.1 M HCl) in
a total volume of 50–100 μL, followed by a brief spin
in a tabletop centrifuge. The formulation was used within 5 min for
in vitro or in vivo experiments.

## Mouse Vaccination
Female BALB/c mice (8- to 12-week-old)
were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory and housed in the Laboratory
Animal Facility of the Stanford University Medical Center. All experiments
were approved by the Stanford Administrative Panel on Laboratory Animal
Care and were conducted in accordance with Stanford University Animal
Facility and NIH guidelines. RBD-mRNA and CpG were formulated with
CART polymer in PBS at pH 5.5 as described above. Mice were injected
with 3 μg of RBD-mRNA formulated with 2.6 μL of CART (5
mM) or 3 μg of CpG formulated with 2.6 μL of CART (5 mM)
or 3 μg of RBD-mRNA plus 3 μg of CpG formulated with 5.2
μL of CART (5 mM). Mice were vaccinated by IV, IM, or SC injection
and were boosted as described in the experiment. CARTs are formulated
at indicated concentrations of mRNA in 50–100 μL total
volume. For IV administration, 100 μL of formulated CART was
administered per tail vein injection. For IM injections, 50 μL
of formulated CART was injected in the thigh muscle. SC injections
were administered on the back of the mouse near the tail. At indicated
time points, mice were bled, and serum was collected.

## HeLa and 293F
Transfection
HeLa cells and 293F cells
were plated at 106 cells per well in a 12-well plate in
Opti-MEM media (ThermoFisher Scientific). 2 μg of the RBD-his
mRNA or GFP mRNA (Trilink) was formulated in 6.6 μL of PBS pH
5.5 with 1.37 μL of 5 mM CART and added to the cells. After
4 h of transfection, Opti-MEM media was replaced by RPMI media containing
10% FCS and penicillin–streptomycin 1000 U/mL. 12 hours post-transfection,
RBD and GFP expression were monitored by Western blot and fluorescence
microscopy, respectively.

## Western Blot
15 μL of media
from HeLa or 293F
transfected cells was mixed with 4× sample loading buffer (Invitrogen)
and was loaded on a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). Electrophoresis
was performed in an MES buffer at 200 V for 35 min. Proteins were
transferred to a cellulose membrane using the iBLOT system (Invitrogen).
The membrane was stained with Ponceau red to verify protein transfer,
and then, the membrane was blocked for 1 h in TBS buffer containing
0.1% Tween 20 (TBST) containing 5% nonfat dry milk. The membrane was
washed 3 times in TBST and incubated in TBST containing 5% nonfat
dry milk and 1:1000 mouse anti-His (Biolegend) overnight. After 3
washes in TBST, the membrane was incubated with 1:10 000 antimouse
Ig (Southern Biotech) in TBST containing 5% nonfat dry milk for 1
h. After 3 washes in TBST, the blot was revealed using the EC Prime
Western blotting system (Sigma). The membrane was imaged using a Chemidoc
MP imaging system from BioRad.

## Serum Preparation
For human samples, informed consent
was obtained from the subjects prior to blood draw. Blood was collected
in Eppendorf tubes and allowed to coagulate for 60 min at room temperature.
After 10 min of centrifugation at 1000g, the supernatant
was collected. Serum was heat-inactivated at 56 °C for 30 min.

## ELISA
Nunc-Immuno MicroWell 96-well ELISA plates (MilliporeSigm)
were coated overnight with 50 μL per well of 2 μg/mL RBD-His
or Spike-His protein in carbonate buffer pH 9. After 3 washes in ELISA
wash buffer (PBS with 0.1% Tween 20), plates were blocked using 100
μL of 5% nonfat dry milk diluted in TBS buffer containing 0.1%
Tween 20 (TBST) for 1 h at room temperature. Serum, BAL, and antibody
dilutions were prepared in TBST containing 1% nonfat dry milk. The
blocking solution was removed, and 50 μL of each serial dilution
was added to the plate for 1 h at room temperature. Plates were washed
three times and incubated with HRP conjugated antihuman Ig (1:5000,
BioSource), antimouse Ig (1:5000, Cell Signaling), antimouse IgG2a
(1:5000, Southern Biotech), antimouse IgG2b (1:5000, Southern Biotech),
antimouse IgG1 (1:5000, Southern Biotech), antimouse IgG3 (1:5000,
Southern Biotech), antimouse IgA (1:5000, Invitrogene), or antimouse
IgM (1:5000, Southern Biotech). Plates were washed three times, and
100 μL of TMB ELISA substrate (Abcam) was added to each well.
ELISA was developed for 10 min, and then, the reaction was stopped
by adding 50 μL of Stop Solution for TMB Substrates (ThermoFisher
Scientific) to each well. In some assays, a human anti-RBD (Invivogene)
of known antibody concentration was used as a standard. Optical density
at 450 nm (OD450) was measured using a SpectraMax Paradigm microplate
reader (Molecular devices).

## RBD-ACE2 Interaction Blocking Assay ELISA
The RBD-ACE2
interaction blocking assay was evaluated using three methods: a commercial
kit from Genescript, an in house developed ELISA, and flow cytometry.
For the commercial kit, we used the SARS-CoV-2 surrogate virus
neutralization test (sVNT) kit (Genescript) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. In short, samples and controls were diluted at indicated
ratios with dilution buffer and preincubated with HRP-RBD in a 1:1
ratio for 30 min at 37 °C. Samples were then added to the capture
plate in wells precoated with hACE2. After 15 h of incubation at 37
°C, wells were washed four times with wash buffer. TMB solution
was added and incubated for 15 h at room temperature in the dark.
After 15 h, stop solution was added to the wells and promptly analyzed.
Optical density at 450 nm (OD450) was measured using a SpectraMax
Paradigm microplate reader (Molecular devices).
For the in-house
developed ELISA, Nunc-Immuno MicroWell 96-well
ELISA plates (Millipore) were coated overnight with 50 μL per
well of 2 μg/mL RBD-His or Spike-His protein in carbonate buffer
pH 9. After 3 washes in ELISA wash buffer (PBS with 0.1% Tween 20),
plates were blocked using 100 μL of 5% nonfat dry milk diluted
in TBS buffer containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST) for 1 h at room temperature.
Serum, BAL, and antibody dilutions were prepared in TBST containing
1% nonfat dry milk. The blocking solution was removed, and 50 μL
of each serial dilution was added to the plate for 1 h at room temperature.
Plates were washed three times, and 50 μL of 2 times diluted
ACE2-hIgA supernatant was added to each well for 1 h. After 3 washes,
the plate was incubated with HRP conjugated antihuman IgA (1:1000,
Thermo Scientific) for 1 h in TBST with 1% nonfat dry milk. Plates
were washed three times, and 100 μL of TMB ELISA Substrate (Abcam)
was added to each well. ELISA was allowed to develop for 10 min, and
then, the reaction was stopped by adding 50 μL of Stop Solution
for TMB Substrates (ThermoFisher Scientific) to each well. In some
assays, human anti-RBD (Invivogen) of known antibody concentration
was used as a standard. Optical density at 450 nm (OD450) was measured
using a SpectraMax Paradigm microplate reader (Molecular devices).
For the flow cytometry assay, RBD-His 2μg/mL was incubated
with sera for 1 h. Then, the 4 × 105 ACE2-expressing
HEK293T cells were added to the RBD-His/sera mix and incubated at
RT for 30 min. Cells were then washed 2 times in PBS containing 1%
BSA. RBD was then detected using an Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated anti-His
antibody (clone J099B1, Biolegend). Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry
(BD).

## Pseudovirus Assay
Pseudotyped lentivirus expressing
the Sars-Cov-2 spike protein and the luciferase was produced in HEK293T
cells as previously described. , One day before transfection,
6 × 106 HEK293T cells were seeded in a 10 cm culture
plate in RPMI containing 10% FCS, 2 mM l-glutamine, streptomycin,
and penicillin. Using TransIT (Mirus), cells were then transfected
with 10 μg of the lentiviral packaging vector (pHAGE_Luc2_IRES_ZsGreen),
the 3.4 μg of SARS-CoV-2 spike, and lentiviral helper plasmids
(2.2 μg of HDM-Hgpm2, 2.2 μg of HDM-Tat1b, and 2.2 μg
of pRC-CMV_Rev1b). The spike vector contained the full-length wild-type
spike sequence from the Wuhan-Hu-1 strain of SARS-CoV-2 (GenBank NC_045512).
These 5 plasmids were kindly provided by Dr. Jesse Bloom (Fred Hutch
Seattle, University of Washington). 72 h after transfection, virus-containing
supernatant was harvested, centrifuged at 300g for
5 min, filtered on a 0.45 μm filter, aliquoted, and frozen at
−80 °C.
For viral neutralization assays, ACE2-expressing
HEK293T cells were plated in poly-l-lysine-coated, white-walled, clear-bottom 96-well plates at
12 500 cells/well 1 day prior to infection. Mouse serum was
centrifuged at 2000g for 15 min, heat-inactivated
for 30 min at 56 °C, and diluted in D10 media (DMEM medium supplemented
with 10% FCS). Virus was diluted in D10 medium, supplemented with
polybrene (5 μg/mL), and then added to serum dilutions. The
virus/serum mix was preincubated for 1 h at 37 °C before it was
added to the cells and incubated at 37 °C for ∼48 h. Cells
were lysed by adding BriteLite assay readout solution (PerkinElmer),
and luminescence values were measured with a SpectraMax Paradigm microplate
reader (Molecular devices). As a positive control, a neutralizing
human anti-SARS-Cov-2 IgG1 antibody was used (Acro).

## Bronchoalveolar
Lavage
Mice were sacrificed, and lungs
were inflated 2 times with 1 mL of PBS following a previously described
procedure. Lavage fractions were pooled
and centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 5 min. Supernatant was collected and
assayed for anti-RBD antibodies by ELISA.

## T Cell Response Assay on
Lungs
Mouse lungs were harvested
at indicated days after vaccination. To prepare lung single-cell suspensions,
lungs were cut into small pieces and incubated at 37 °C in RPMI
containing Collagenase D (2 mg/mL, Sigma) and DNase (50 μg/mL,
Sigma) for 30 min. Then, digestion mix was diluted 5 times, and the
lung preparations were processed through a 70 μm cell strainer.
Red blood cells present in the spleen or lung single-cell suspensions
were lysed using ACK buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Single-cell
suspensions were kept on ice until further processing for the T cell
response assay. Cells were cultured in 96-well plates (Corning, V-bottom)
at 1 × 106 cells/well and stimulated for 48 h with
5 μg/mL RBD-His or hCD81-His or media alone (RPMI + 5% FCS)
in the presence of antimouse CD28 antibody [0.5 μg/mL] (Southern
Biotech). As a positive control, cells were stimulated with antimouse
CD3 [0.05 μg/mL] (Southern Biotech). For intracellular staining,
cells were treated with GolgiStop (BD Biosciences) for 5 h prior to
staining. Following stimulation, cells were washed, stained with Aqua
live/dead viability dye (Thermo Fisher) in PBS, washed two additional
times, and stained with a cocktail of monoclonal antibodies and Fc
block: CD16/32, CD4 BV605 RM4-5, CD8 FITC 53-6.7, CD44 APC IM7, CD69
PE-Cy7 H1.2F3, CD134 BV786 OX-86, CD137 PE 1AH2, and CD45R/B220 Per-CP
5.5 RA3-6B2 (all BD Bioscience). Cells were fixed and permeabilized
according to the manufacturer’s protocol (BD Biosciences) and
stained with aTNFα BV650 MP6-XT22 (BD Bioscience). Cells were
washed, fixed with 2% formaldehyde, acquired on a BD LSR II, and analyzed
using Cytobank V7.3.0.

## T Cell Response Assay on the Spleen
Mouse spleens were
harvested on D105 after vaccination, and single-cell suspensions were
prepared by processing them through a 70 μm cell strainer (BD
Biosciences). Cells were then incubated in FACS tubes at 6 ×
105 cells per tube and stimulated for 18 h with 2 μg/mL
RBD peptide mix [PepMix SARS-CoV-2 (S-RBD) Protein ID: P0DTC2 PM-WCPV-S-RBD-1,
JPT] or media alone. As a positive control, cells were stimulated
with antimouse CD3 [0.05 μg/mL] (Southern Biotech) and antimouse
CD28 antibody [0.5 μg/mL] (Southern Biotech). GolgiStop (BD
Biosciences) was added for the last 10 h of the assay. Following stimulation,
cells were washed, stained with Aqua live/dead viability dye (Thermo
Fisher) in PBS, washed two additional times, and stained with a cocktail
of monoclonal antibodies and Fc block: CD16/32, CD4 Ax700 RM4-5, CD8
APC-H7 53-6.7, and CD44 APC IM7 (all BD Bioscience). Cells were fixed
and permeabilized according to the manufacturer’s protocol
(BD Biosciences) and stained for intracellular cytokines with IFNγ
PE-Cy7 XMG1.2, TNFα BV650 MP6-XT22, and IL-4 BV786 11B11 (BD
Bioscience). Cells were washed, fixed with 2% formaldehyde, acquired
on a Cytek Aurora (Northern Lights), and analyzed using Cytobank V7.3.0.

## IFNγ ELISpot
The assay was performed
following the manufacturer’s instructions (R&D systems,
mouse IFNγ kit cat. EL485). In short, IFNγ ELISpot analysis
was performed ex vivo (without further in vitro culturing for expansion)
using PBMCs depleted of CD4+ and enriched for CD8+ T cells or depleted of CD8+ and enriched for CD4+ T cells by MACS sort (Miltenyi CD4+ or CD8+ microbeads following the manufacturer instructions). Tests
were performed in triplicates and with a positive control [anti-CD3
monoclonal antibody (0.05 μg/mL; Southern Biotech)]. PVDF backed
microplates precoated with IFNγ-specific antibodies (R&D
systems, mouse IFNγ kit cat. EL485) were washed with PBS and
blocked with RPMI medium (Corning) containing 5% FCS for 20 min at
room temperature. Per well, 5 × 105 effector cells
were stimulated for 16 h with 2 μg/mL RBD peptide mix [PepMix
SARS-CoV-2 (S-RBD) Protein ID: P0DTC2 PM-WCPV-S-RBD-1, JPT]. After
stimulation, wells were washed and incubated with a biotinylated anti-IFNγ
antibody (R&D systems, mouse IFNγ kit cat. EL485) overnight
at 4 °C. The next day, wells were washed and incubated with streptavidin-AP
(R&D systems, mouse IFNγ kit cat. EL485) for 2 h at RT.
After washing, wells were incubated with a 5-bromo-4-chloro-3′-indolyl
phosphate (BCIP)/nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) substrate (R&D systems,
mouse IFNγ kit cat. EL485). Plates were scanned and analyzed
using an ImmunoSpot microanalyzer.

## In Vivo Bioluminescence
Imaging
For the bioluminescence
assessment, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane gas (2% isoflurane
in oxygen, 1 L/min) during injection and imaging procedures. Intraperitoneal
injections of D-luciferin (Biosynth AG) were done at a dose
of 150 mg/kg, providing a saturating substrate concentration for Fluc
enzyme (luciferin crosses the blood–brain barrier). Mice were
imaged in a light-tight chamber using an in vivo optical imaging system
(AMI HT; Spectral Instruments imaging) equipped with a cooled charge-coupled
device camera. During image recording, mice inhaled isoflurane delivered
via a nose cone, and their body temperature was maintained at 37 °C
in the dark box of the camera system. Bioluminescence images were
acquired between 10 and 20 min after luciferin administration. Mice
usually recovered from anesthesia within 2 min of imaging.

## White
Blood Cell Count
5 μL of blood was harvested
and mixed with 45 μL of 3% acetic acid with methylene blue (Stemcell),
and nuclei were counted using a hematocytometer.

## Cytokine Analysis
IP10, IFNa, TNFa, and IL6 were measured
in serum samples using the LEGENDplex bead-based immunoassays from
Biolegend per manufacturer protocol. The assay was analyzed on a BD
FACSCalibur instrument.

## Complete Blood Count
A complete
blood count (CBC) analysis
was performed by the animal diagnostic lab at Stanford. Automated
hematology was performed on an Sysmex XN-1000 V analyzer system. Blood
smears were made for all CBC samples and reviewed by a clinical laboratory
scientist. Manual differentials were performed as indicated by species
and automated analysis.

## Liver Enzyme Analysis
Liver enzymes
were analyzed by
the animal diagnostic lab at Stanford. The chemistry analysis was
performed on the Siemens Dimension EXL200/LOCI analyzer. A clinical
laboratory scientist performed all testing, including dilutions and
repeat tests as indicated, and reviewed all data.

## Safety Statement
For all mouse experiments, no unexpected
or unusually high safety hazards were encountered.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the Dynavax Corporation
for the gift of the CpG formulation
SD101. This work was supported by Fast Grants (to R.L), Stanford University
Innovative Medicines Accelerator (IMA) (R.L., R.M.W., and P.A.W.);
The National Science Foundation Grant NSF CHE-2002933 (to R.M.W.);
NIH R01 CA031845 (P.A.W.); The Child Health Research Institute at
Stanford University, and the SPARK Translational Research Program
in the Stanford University School of Medicine (R.M.W., P.A.W., R.L.).
The support of German cancer aid (Deutsche Krebshilfe-Mildred Scheel
postdoctoral fellowship to J.J.K.L.) and the Stanford Cancer Translational
Nanotechnology Training T32 Training Grant T32 CA196585 funded by
the National Cancer Institute (T.R.B.) is gratefully acknowledged.
B.M. is grateful for financial support from a Cancer-TNT Fellowship.
Research reported in this publication was supported by the National
Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health under Award
F32CA254128. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is available
free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acscentsci.1c00361.
CART characterization,
NMR spectrum, ζ potential,
IVT mRNA quality control and immunogenicity, mRNA expression by Western
Blot, upregulation of activation markers upon in vivo administration
by flow cytometry, early RBD-specific immunoglobulin responses on
D4 and 14, ELISA results, route of administration—intravenous,
subcutaneous, and intramuscular effects, induction of neutralizing
antibodies independent of CpG source, ELISA D21 and D28 results, intracellular
cytokine staining (IFNγ, TNFα, IL-4) in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells on D105, mouse in vivo safety studies,
white blood cell count, liver enzymes, serum cytokines after prime
and boost, and mRNA-CART stability D11 at room temperature, 4 °C,
and −20 °C (PDF)

## Author Contributions
⊥ O.A.W.H., J.J.K.L., and A.S. contributed
equally to this work.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
oc1c00361_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
oc1c00361_si_001.pdf