2899mtoMolecular Therapy OncolyticsMol Ther OncolyticsAmerican Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC9800256980025698002563661929310.1016/j.omto.2022.11.006Polycytidine tract deletion from microRNA-detargeted oncolytic Mengovirus optimizes the therapeutic index in a murine multiple myeloma model
PenzaVelia MarounJustin W NaceRebecca A SchulzeAutumn J RussellStephen J 1Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55902, USA2Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55902, USA3Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55902, USA4Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA∗Corresponding author Stephen J. Russell, Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55902, USA. sjr@mayo.edu
2122022281515–30512023© 2022 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Mengovirus is an oncolytic picornavirus whose broad host range allows for testing in immunocompetent cancer models. Two pathogenicity-ablating approaches, polycytidine (polyC) tract truncation and microRNA (miRNA) targets insertion, eliminated the risk of encephalomyocarditis. To investigate whether a polyC truncated, miRNA-detargeted oncolytic Mengovirus might be boosted, we partially or fully rebuilt the polyC tract into the 5′ noncoding region (NCR) of polyC-deleted (MC0) oncolytic constructs (NC) carrying miRNA target (miRT) insertions to eliminate cardiac/muscular (miR-133b and miR-208a) and neuronal (miR-124) tropisms. PolyC-reconstituted viruses (MC24-NC and MC37-NC) replicated in vitro and showed the expected tropism restrictions, but reduced cytotoxicity and miRT deletions were frequently observed. In the MPC-11 immune competent mouse plasmacytoma model, both intratumoral and systemic administration of MC0-NC led to faster tumor responses than MC24-NC or MC37-NC, with combined durable complete response rates of 75%, 0.5%, and 30%, respectively. Secondary viremia was higher following MC0-NC versus MC24-NC or MC37-NC therapy. Sequence analysis of virus progeny from treated mice revealed a high prevalence of miRT sequences loss among MC24- and MC37- viral genomes, but not in MC0-NC. Overall, MC0-NC was capable of stably retaining miRT sites and provided a more effective treatment and is therefore our lead Mengovirus candidate for clinical translation.
Keywords: oncolytic virotherapy, oncolytic virus, picornavirus, Mengovirus, polyC tract, microRNA detargeting, microRNA, multiple myeloma

## Graphical abstract
 
The use of viruses for cancer treatment demands a balance between potency and safety. MicroRNA detargeting efficiently eliminates neurological and cardiac toxicities from an oncolytic picornavirus, Mengovirus. Genome stability is improved by deleting a polycytidine (polyC) tract from the 5′-noncoding region, consequently increasing therapeutic efficacy in an immunocompetent multiple myeloma model.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Sep 14; Accepted 2022 Nov 29; Collection date 2023 Mar 16.

## Introduction
The generally accepted paradigm for oncolytic viruses (OVs) as cancer therapeutics is that they directly and preferentially lyse infected tumor cells, releasing tumor antigens and creating an immunogenic microenvironment that serves as in situ vaccination against the tumor. , The intrinsic permissiveness of tumor cells for OV infection can be enhanced through modifications to the virus genome that modulate tropism, immunogenicity, and tumor-specific cytotoxicity to achieve an optimal balance of therapeutic safety and potency. , , Mengovirus MC24-NC, an attenuated and microRNA (miRNA)-detargeted picornavirus, was previously shown to be a safe and efficacious OV in a murine multiple myeloma model. However, a consistently curative therapy with complete and durable response across multiple tumor models was not achieved, , which suggested that the virus may have been over-attenuated and that the therapeutic outcome might be improved if certain attenuating mutations were reversed.
Picornaviruses are single-stranded positive-sense RNA viruses that couple high immunogenicity with rapid replication and high yield of virus progeny. They therefore have the potential to quickly debulk tumors with minimal risk of genotoxicity associated with viral genome integration, and their small particle size allows for efficient extravasation from leaky tumor neovessels. To date, four picornavirus species have been evaluated in phase II clinical trials: a tumor-adapted Enteric cytopathogenic Human Orphan virus 7 (ECHO7 or Rigvir), a porcine pathogen named Seneca Valley virus (SVV), a nonengineered Coxsackievirus (CVA21, or V937), and an engineered poliovirus-human rhinovirus 2 chimera (PVSRIPO). , , , , , , , As for many other clinically translated OVs, promising preclinical studies showed transient and stable tumor mass reduction, increased survival, responses in non-injected tumors, and acceptable safety profiles. While these findings have been partially replicated in the clinic, complete disease remissions and meaningful therapeutic successes have been inconsistent and sporadic. , 
Mengovirus is a member of the Cardiovirus genus and a close relative of encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV). , , The virus readily infects rodents, which are thought to be the natural reservoir, a variety of other mammalian species including non-human primates such as rhesus monkey and African gray monkey, and is known to infect cell lines derived from a spectrum of human cancers. , , , , , In contrast to the strict human cell tropism of other picornaviruses considered for oncolytic virotherapy, such as CVA21 and PVSRIPO, whose preclinical evaluation is restricted to the use of human tumor xenograft or transgenic mouse models, Mengovirus can be conveniently studied in immunocompetent mouse tumor models. Because of its species promiscuity, Mengovirus has been studied in immune competent mice, rats, and several other mammals where it has proven to be highly immunogenic and capable of eliciting powerful humoral and cellular cytotoxic responses. , , , , , , 
Mengovirus seroprevalence in the human population is low (2%–30%), and infections have been asymptomatic and subclinical. , , , Severe symptoms or fatal outcomes have never been reported in humans and a clear correlation between infection and human disease has never been established. In mice and non-human primates, the most common pathologies reported after Mengovirus infection have been pan encephalomyelitis and myocarditis, presenting with flaccid paralysis or sudden death, although the spectrum of symptoms varies greatly depending on route of administration, host adaptation, age, and immunocompetence. , , , , , , , , , , To eliminate the toxicities associated with replication in neuronal and cardiac tissues, our lab created an miRNA-detargeted Mengovirus in which miRNA targeting (miRT) sequences corresponding to miRNAs overexpressed in neuronal (miR-124) and cardiac (miR-133b, miR-208a) tissues were inserted into the 5′ and 3′ noncoding regions (NCR), respectively. miRNA-detargeting successfully controlled virus tropism, restricting its replication to cells and tissues not expressing the cognate miRNAs, thus removing virus-induced toxicity in mice without significantly diminishing oncolytic potency. 
Certain viral species in the Cardiovirus and Aphthovirus genera of the Picornaviridae family contain a polycytidine (polyC) tract 50 to 250 nucleotides long in the 5′ NCR. In Mengovirus, the polyC tract, which occupies a putatively unstructured spacer region between a pseudoknot (pk) and a hairpin structure named stem-loop D, is 55 nucleotides long and contains a single uridine discontinuity, with sequence C44UC10. Although the exact function and molecular mechanism by which the polyC tract impacts the virus replication cycle are still to be elucidated for each viral species, several studies have established that the polyC length is a major Mengovirus pathogenicity determinant and that reducing its length proportionally decreases the virulence of the virus in vivo without destroying its replication competence. , , , , Complete elimination (MC0) or substantial truncation (MC24, sequence C13UC10) of the polyC tract produces live attenuated Mengoviruses capable of establishing infection with absent or very mild symptoms, but nonetheless capable of inducing a powerful immune response that results in long-lasting immunity and protection against re-infection in a variety of mammalian species. , , , , Preliminary studies conducted in cultured murine cell lines indicated that the polyC tract might specifically enhance viral replicative fitness in cells of immunological origin. 
Here we investigated how increasing the polyC tract length might impact the oncolytic potency of a previously reported polyC truncated, miRNA-detargeted oncolytic Mengovirus (MC24-NC). Our data show that while miRNA-detargeting reliably eliminated virus-related neural and cardiac toxicities irrespective of polyC tract length, the longer polyC tracts were associated with genome instability and these viruses gave rise to a higher frequency of viral progeny with miRNA target sequence deletions. In contrast, the microRNA-detargeted virus with a completely deleted polyC tract (MC0-NC) proved highly efficacious in an immunocompetent plasmacytoma model, leading to rapid tumor reduction and durable complete response in 75% of mice treated with local or systemic administration combined, without loss of miRT integrity.

## Results

## PolyC tract length variably affects Mengovirus propagation in different cell types
A direct correlation between polyC tract length and pathogenicity has been established in vivo. , , , , To further explore the impact of polyC tract length on the ability of Mengovirus to infect and propagate in different cell lineages, we generated non-miRNA-detargeted Mengovirus polyC variants MC0 (no polyC), MC24 (C13UC10), and Mwt (C44UC10), and tested their replication and cytotoxicity in mouse primary cells ( A). Primary macrophages (BM-Mφ), dendritic cells (BM-DCs), splenocytes, and adult fibroblasts were isolated from the bone marrow, spleen, and skin of BALB/c mice, respectively. Comparing the cytolytic activity of wild-type Mengovirus (Mwt) across the different primary cell populations showed that fibroblasts are extremely sensitive to the virus showing ∼90% loss of viability by 48 h post-infection, whereas immune cells are relatively resistant, showing only ∼60%–70% loss of viability in macrophages and dendritic cells and an even smaller ∼16% viability loss in infected splenocyte cultures. Viral replication kinetics mirrored these differences in cytotoxicity, resulting in a viral yield five orders of magnitude (in log10) lower in splenocytes than in fibroblasts at an equivalent time point ( B). Deletion of the polyC tract (MC0) did not diminish Mengovirus cytotoxicity and/or propagation in fibroblasts but did have a significant impact on the ability of the virus to kill and replicate in macrophages (∼40%), dendritic cells (∼35%), and splenocytes (∼4%) ( B). These results in primary cells suggest that the long polyC tract in the 5′ NCR of the genome allows Mengovirus to partially overcome a cell-type-specific propagation block present in immune cells, corroborating the observations reported in Martin et al. In order to evaluate whether the cell-type-specific effect of the polyC tract extended to tumor cell lines, a panel of six murine tumor cell lines was selected to cover both non-immunological (4T1, B16-F1, CT26, TC-1) and immunological malignancies (A20 and MPC-11). Susceptibility to Mwt infection varied across cell types ( C), and the attenuating effect of polyC deletion (MC0) or truncation (MC24) was most apparent in A20 and MPC-11, the tumor cell lines of immunological origin. Replication kinetics of Mengovirus was also affected by polyC deletion (MC0), even though the difference with Mwt was not significant ( C). A similar trend was observed in human tumor cells, where polyC tract length reduction affected cytotoxicity more strongly in the B cell-derived cell lines ARH77, RPMI 8226, and U266 ( D).
 

## Expanding the polyC tract length in miRNA-detargeted Mengoviruses has a negative impact on replicative fitness and is associated with genome instability, but maintains target specificity
To evaluate the impact of combining polyC tract extension with miRNA-detargeting on Mengovirus oncolytic potency, we generated three detargeted viruses with varying polyC tract lengths of 0 (MC0-NC), 24 (MC24-NC), and 37 (MC37-NC) nucleotides ( A). Each of these viruses carries two tandem repeats each of three miRT sequences recognized by miRNAs enriched in neuronal (miR-124) and cardiac (miR-133b and miR-208a) tissues. The miR-133b and miR-208a target sequences were inserted into the 3′ NCR upstream of stem loops I–III, and the miR-124 target sequences were inserted into the 5′ NCR, directly upstream of the polyC tract and after the pseudoknot, as previously described. MC24-NC was previously reported to be a safe and relatively potent oncolytic virus, with varying efficacy depending on the tumor model. , , For the purpose of the current study we generated two additional vectors carrying either a full deletion of the polyC tract (MC0-NC) or a long polyC tract (MC37-NC) with the sequence C26UC10 ( A). The use of Mengovirus with a wild-type polyC length (C44UC10) raises several safety concerns because of its zoonotic potential. Moreover, in attempting to rebuild a full-length 55-residue polyC tract into the miRNA-detargeted Mengovirus genome, technical difficulties with the sequencing of long polyC stretches limited the length of the polyC tract that could be reliably verified post miRT subcloning. However, previous studies on the association between polyC tract length and pathogenicity in Mengovirus have shown that a C26UC10 polyC tract has higher virulence than C13UC10 (MC24) and approximates the full-length C44UC10 polyC in terms of in vivo lethality. MC37-NC was therefore used as representative of the long polyC tract.
 Combined insertion of the miRT sequences and modulation of the polyC tract length resulted in vector genomes whose length exceeded that of the Mwt genome by 118–155 nucleotides ( A, table), which was not expected to influence the outcome of our studies since a previous study had shown that Mengovirus genomes with longer insertions could be successfully encapsidated and stably tolerated in Mengovirus vectors. To better maintain insert sequence integrity in the new Mengovirus vectors, virus rescue and amplification were performed at 32°C. Rescue at a higher temperature (37°C) was associated with an increased frequency of insert sequence loss, most notable in the constructs with longer polyC tracts ( B and  ). This difference suggested that the MC0-NC genome may be inherently more stable than the MC24-NC and MC37-NC genomes.
We next tested the function of the miRNA-detargeting modifications in all three recombinant viruses using cells transfected with miRNA mimics. As predicted, when synthetic complementary miRNA mimics for miR-124, miR-133b, and miR-208a were transfected in H1-Hela cells 24 h before infection, the replication and cytotoxicity of all three miRNA detargeted variants was significantly reduced, but not in mock transfected cells, nor in cells transfected with an irrelevant miRNA mimic (miR-125 or a Caenorhabditis elegans miRNA used as negative control) ( C).
All three viruses replicated efficiently in the MPC-11 cell line ( D) and, MC0-NC cytotoxicity was no different from that of MC0 in any of the cell lines tested, whereas both MC24-NC and MC37-NC exhibited reduction in cytotoxicity compared with their non-targeted counterparts, and compared with MC0-NC ( D and C). The loss of cytotoxicity observed for miRNA-detargeted viruses with longer polyC tracts was not directly proportional to the length of their polyC tracts: thus MC24-NC showed diminished cytotoxicity when compared with both MC0-NC and MC37-NC in the cell lines tested.

## miRNA-detargeted polyC-deleted MC0-NC is associated with more rapid intratumoral replication and superior in vivo oncolytic efficacy
Oncolytic activity of the recombinant Mengoviruses was analyzed in BALB/c mice bearing subcutaneous MPC-11 tumors that were previously shown to be responsive to oncolytic Mengovirus therapy. Tumors were established via subcutaneous tumor cell implantation on the right hind flank of BALB/c mice and treated with a single intratumoral (i.t.) dose of 1 × 107 median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) of MC0-NC, MC24-NC or MC37-NC. Tumor volume, mouse weight, and overall survival were monitored ( A, Exp1) and a separate cohort of mice was followed to assess viral replication in the tumors at day 2 and day 6 post-injection ( A, Exp2).
 None of the treated mice developed virus-related toxicities of hindlimb paralysis or myocarditis, confirming that their miRT sequences were functional and prevented toxic replication of the virus in neuronal and cardiac tissues. All mouse deaths in this study were a consequence of tumor progression. Transient weight loss was observed following virus administration but was fully reversible ( A).
Control mice experienced rapid tumor growth and were euthanized within 10 days of virus administration, excepting one mouse in the i.t.-treated group whose tumor spontaneously regressed post-injection and eventually regrew over the course of 3 weeks ( B).
All virus-treated mice responded to the therapy, although the magnitude, kinetics, and durability of the responses varied ( B and 3C, table). Ninety percent of the MC0-NC-treated mice completely cleared their MPC-11 tumors, with corresponding complete response rates of 10% and 40% for the MC24-NC-treated and MC37-NC-treated groups, respectively. All other treated mice exhibited partial responses, defined as delayed tumor growth or temporary reduction in tumor volume.
To evaluate intratumoral virus replication and viremic spread to secondary target organs, mice were treated as described ( A) and were euthanized on days 2 and 6 post-therapy for harvest and analysis of blood, tumor, and selected organs ( D–3F and C). The day 2 intratumoral virus titers show that all three viruses replicated equally efficiently in the tumor milieu, although by day 6 MC0-NC titers were comparatively lower, perhaps because the tumors treated with this vector were already very small at this time point ( E).
All three viruses induced high-level viremia, with MC0-NC reaching significantly higher titers than MC37-NC and MC24-NC ( F). Recovery of virus from the heart and brain and in trace amounts in the spinal cord at day 2, was likely a reflection of the high viremia in the blood present in said tissues. Virus recovery from nontumor tissues was greatly diminished or absent by day 6 post-injection, which suggests viral clearance was achieved ( C).

## Systemically administered MC0-NC is also associated with more rapid intratumoral replication and superior in vivo oncolytic efficacy
To determine whether polyC tract length could safely impact the antitumor potency of miRNA-detargeted Mengoviruses after systemic administration, which may pose a greater risk of damage to normal cardiac and neural tissue, BALB/c mice bearing syngeneic multiple myeloma MPC-11 tumors were treated with a single intravenous (i.v.) dose of 1 × 107 TCID50 of MC0-NC, MC24-NC, or MC37-NC ( A).
 The only virus-related toxicity observed in these virus-treated animals was temporary weight loss, which resolved spontaneously ( B). There was no evidence of cardiac or neural toxicity and antitumor activity was comparable to that observed after i.t. administration. While all PBS-treated mice were euthanized within 2 weeks due to rapidly increasing tumor burden, complete tumor responses were observed in 60% of the mice treated with MC0-NC and 20% of those treated with MC37-NC. Remaining virus-treated mice, including those treated with MC24-NC showed temporary reduction in tumor volume or delayed tumor growth relative to the PBS group ( B and 4C). As observed following i.t. delivery, day 2 viremia was highest in MC0-NC treated mice, correlating with the superior antitumor efficacy of this construct.

## The MC0-NC genome shows greater miRT insert stability compared with MC24-NC and MC37-NC genomes
To examine genome stability of the recombinant Mengoviruses, plasma was collected on day 2 post virus administration (i.t. and i.v. routes) from five mice per group and was processed to isolate viral RNA, which was then subjected to 3′ NCR sequencing.
miRT sequences were preserved in all 10 MC0-NC-treated mice, but point mutations, deletions or recombinations of the entire NCR were detected in approximately half of the mice for each of the MC24-NC and MC37-NC groups ( A). A 500-nt-long portion of the coding sequence for the viral RNA polymerase (3D gene), which is found proximally to the 3′ NCR, was not affected in any of the three groups, which suggests the genomic instability is limited to the exogenous sequences ( B). These miRT site alterations appeared in the 3′ NCR, which is not genomically adjacent to the polyC tract itself, suggesting there may be a long-range interaction between the polyC tract in the 5′ NCR and the 3′ NCR that causes loss or destabilization of miRT sequences. Importantly, the appearance of these mutants in the serum of treated animals did not lead to the occurrence of cardiac or neuronal toxicity.
 

## Discussion
In this study, we sought to enhance the potency of an miRNA-detargeted oncolytic Mengovirus by increasing the polyC tract length. We therefore generated three recombinant viral constructs; MC0-NC (polyC-deleted), MC24-NC (polyC truncated), and MC37-NC (long-tract polyC).
Combining miRT sequence insertion with polyC extension negatively impacted virus efficacy. By rescuing at 32°C, the integrity and functionality of inserted miRT sequences could be preserved and maintained in all three miRNA-detargeted viruses, irrespective of polyC length, but the MC0-NC design emerged as the most cytotoxic in vitro, the most effective in vivo, and stably retained its miRT inserts after various viral rescue and amplification protocols as well as during in vivo oncolysis.
In a subcutaneous MPC-11 plasmacytoma model in immunocompetent BALB/c mice, a single dose of any one of the three viruses administered i.t. or i.v. significantly impacted tumor volume and survival without causing encephalomyocarditis. However, the depth and duration of tumor responses differed for each of the three viruses and their potency ranking did not correlate directly with polyC length. In both i.t. and i.v. therapy studies, MC0-NC, with a complete polyC tract deletion, was the most potent of the three; MC24-NC with a 24-residue polyC tract was the least potent, and MC37-NC with an almost fully reconstituted polyC tract, was superior to MC24-NC but less effective than MC0-NC. Although these findings were counter to original hypotheses, analysis of the genome stabilities of the three viruses showed that the insertion of a polyC tract into an miRNA-detargeted virus genome is associated, during virus replication, with the rapid emergence of variants that have deleted parts of the inserted miRT sequence. This accumulation of deleted genomes was observed both in vitro during virus amplification on cultured cells, and in vivo during intratumoral virus spread.
Because of structural constraints that limit the amount of RNA that can be encapsidated in a picornavirus, the viral genome is under selective pressure to eliminate exogenous sequences that increase its overall size. , By inserting two copies each of three different miRT sequences into the viruses used in the current study, we added a total of 172 nt to the Mengovirus genome. However, accounting for the polyC tract alterations in each of the three detargeted viruses, their genome lengths diverged from wild type by 118 nt for MC0-NC, 142 nt for MC24-NC, and 155 nt for MC37-NC. These genome length extensions are small (less than 2% of wild-type genome size) and were therefore potentially tolerable. However, in one previous study that evaluated the tolerability of genome insertions in an attenuated Mengovirus vaccine construct, there was a strong correlation between insert size and loss of infectivity, replication, and genome stability, with a steep reduction in all of these parameters in the 100- to 200-nt range of genome length extension. In keeping with the findings of this published study, loss of miRT insert sequences in the current study was observed more frequently in long polyC tract viruses with total genome lengths that were 142 or 155 nt longer than the wild-type genome, but not for MC0-NC, which exceeded wt genome length by only 118 nt. Combining miRT insertion with complete polyC deletion may therefore put the MC0-NC virus below the critical length at which the genome becomes unstable.
A second aspect to consider is the location of the miRT insertions in the genome. The polyC tract and the short region immediately upstream of it in the 5′ NCR, as well as the region upstream of stem loops I–III in the 3′ NCR, do not preferentially form stable secondary or tertiary structures, and insertion in these locations was not expected to alter the surrounding RNA secondary structures. , , However, it remains possible that alteration of the spacer sequences between the reported secondary structures might disrupt the highly optimized RNA tridimensional arrangement, thereby interfering with replication, translation, packaging, and/or the long-range RNA interactions established between NCRs. , , The total length of the miRT-124 (2X) sequence we inserted upstream of the polyC motif in the 5′ NCR is 56 nt. In the MC0-NC virus, where the polyC tract (55 nt in Mwt) has been completely removed, the total length of the spacer region between the pseudoknot and stem-loop D is therefore maintained (56 nt), while the MC24-NC and MC37-NC viruses carry longer spacers of 80 nt and 93 nt, respectively. Longer polyC tracts, up to 200 nt in length, have been reported for the closely related cardiovirus, EMCV, suggesting that longer spacer regions may potentially be tolerated in this virus family. However, all Mengovirus isolates analyzed to date have been reported to have polyC spacers in the 50–60-nt range, which indicates that some limitations unique to Mengovirus may need to be taken into consideration. These observations suggest that the highly compact and efficient organization of the picornavirus genome may impose severe constraints that disallow even small variations in the RNA structural landscape. In consequence, the positioning and precise sequence of even small insertions in the Mengovirus genome can have a significant impact on viral fitness, as observed in the current study.
Inherent differences in stability of the viruses reported in this manuscript, caused indirectly by the length of the polyC tract and its relationship to the inserted miRT sequences, may have been further exacerbated by the virus rescue protocol used in the present study. In an effort to preserve the integrity of the inserted miRT sequences during virus rescue, we lowered the temperature of incubation to 32°C, reduced the number of virus passages, and used high multiplicities of infection (MOI) to generate the viral stocks that were studied. All of these parameters are known to influence the diversity of the viral population, more specifically increasing the frequency of stochastic events that can lead to the generation of defective viral genomes (DVGs), both for Mengovirus and for other RNA viruses. , , Progeny viral particles incorporating DVGs can interfere with the replication of the non-defective genomes either by depleting cellular factors needed for the viral life cycle or by triggering interferon type I-mediated antiviral responses. One additional consideration that we previously reported is that alterations of the RNA secondary structures following miRT site insertions into picornavirus genomes can cause a delay in polyA elongation and consequent reduction in infectivity, and that the polyA length is affected by the temperature used during virus rescue. , Initial differences in the stability of our recombinant Mengovirus genomes relating to the polyC tract length might therefore have been amplified and/or compounded during virus rescue to result in viral populations more radically impacted in terms of diversity and efficiency of propagation and infection. Notably, MC0-NC could be easily rescued using conventional and modified protocols without loss of its inserted miRT sequences, which attests to its higher ability to stably retain these foreign sequence elements. Differences in virus populations deriving from the details of the rescue protocols used to generate stocks for in vivo evaluation may account for differences between the current study and a previous publication comparing the antitumor activity of different oncolytic Mengoviruses. The impact of OV manufacturing methodology on the efficacy of the final product is an important area for further study.
While the above considerations may account for the superiority of MC0-NC versus miRNA-detargeted viruses with longer polyC tracts, the reason for the notable lag of MC24-NC replication both in vitro and in vivo might reside in the fact that the polyC tract C13UC10 with a total length of 24 nt is below the threshold length (25–30 nt) previously reported as the necessary minimum to positively impact virus pathogenicity. As discussed above, an underlying instability caused by the longer viral genome might have been further aggravated by the new low temperature rescue protocol used for both MC24-NC and MC37-NC, but it still remains possible that a longer polyC tract combined with a less comprehensive miRT insertion strategy might allow the rescue of a stable oncolytic Mengovirus with superior in vivo efficacy and safety profiles.
Harnessing the regulatory power of the miRNA network to control the tropism of viral vectors is a well-established strategy that has been proven feasible in most OV platforms and is particularly effective when applied to viruses with plus sense RNA genomes. , , , , , , , , , , Picornaviruses are especially suitable for miRNA-detargeting because their mode of entry and cytoplasmic replication exposes the RNA genome to miRT site recognition immediately after uncoating, blocking both viral translation and replication, and has been successfully used to attenuate coxsackieviruses CVA21 and CVB3, poliovirus, and foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV). , , , , , However, high mutational and recombination rates of picornaviral quasispecies remains an obstacle to insertion of exogenous sequences. Under selective pressure, picornaviruses have been previously reported to lose miRT sequences due to mutations or deletions. Since perfect complementarity is needed for recruitment of the endonuclease into the RNA-induced silencing complex to degrade the target RNA, alterations occasionally generate escape mutants able to evade tissue restriction, causing toxicity, especially in immunocompromised mice. , , , For OV applications specifically, miRNA-detargeting is further challenged by the high titers of virus that must be administered to generate antitumor efficacy and by the fact that the infected tumor becomes a source for sustained generation of progeny genomes, which can potentially saturate the RNAi machinery. 
In the current study, symptoms of neurological or cardiac toxicities were not observed following administration of any of the miRNA-detargeted viruses, although mild or sub-lethal damage to normal tissues cannot be excluded. Genomes with deletions and mutations of the miRT sequences were found in the plasma of both MC24-NC and MC37-NC-treated mice as early as 2 days post virus administration; however, full revertants with wild-type virus pathogenicity were not observed. Interestingly, these alterations were limited to the exogenous inserts in the NCR and did not extend to the proximal protein-coding sequence, suggesting a selective pressure against the miRTs. Considering the kinetics with which escape mutants emerge and the kinetics of the antiviral immune response, it can be argued that the escape mutants arrive so late that they are very rapidly controlled by the immune system.
Analysis of virus progeny from MC0-NC-treated mice identified no mutations or deletions in viral genomes obtained from plasma at day 2 post-injection, the time of peak viremia. However, it remains possible that escape mutants may have been present at low frequency, below the threshold of detection of the methods used. A deeper population-level analysis to quantify and accurately describe population diversity, presence of DVGs, and the types of alterations and their prevalence in body fluids harvested at different timepoints post virus administration could provide more information on this question but was beyond the scope of the current study.
Given the relevance of the polyC tract for Mengovirus replication in immune cells and in tumor cells of immunological origin, it will be fundamental in future studies to address which cells within the tumor microenvironment (TME)—tumor cells, stromal cells, immune cells—are primarily supporting the replication of each of the recombinant Mengoviruses, and whether the viruses are differentially altering the TME composition, particularly with respect to immune cell infiltration and antitumor versus antiviral specific response levels.
Based on the findings reported in the current study, MC0-NC provides an optimal oncolytic Mengovirus vector design on account of its higher sequence stability, cytotoxicity in tumor cells, and oncolytic activity in an immunocompetent multiple myeloma model. The combination of attenuation through polyC deletion and tissue restriction via miRNA target insertions also offers remarkable advantages in terms of safety. Deletion of the polyC tract was previously shown to eliminate pathogenicity even at high titers without compromising immunogenicity. , , And while miRT insertion may provide only a temporary tropism restriction during the initial stages of in vivo replication, polyC deletion constitutes a long-term safety mechanism. The alternative attenuation strategy of polyC truncation to 24 residues in MC24 is stably preserved over passaging, but the possibility remains that the polyC tract might eventually be reconstituted through recombination or polymerase slippage, which could potentially lead to the emergence of a fully pathogenic virus under in vivo selective pressure. Elongation of a truncated polyC tract has been reported for other viruses, including FMDV, and this mechanism of pathogenicity restoration in MC24 Mengoviruses, therefore, remains a concern. , , , In contrast, polyC tract restoration is a less likely outcome after complete deletion of this sequence motif.
Accurately measuring the length of the polyC tract has proven to be a significant technical challenge due to the repetitive nature of the sequence. PolyC deletion may therefore simplify the characterization of a manufactured product for clinical application because it eliminates the need to confirm that the tract length is below the threshold associated with pathogenicity. Also, as reported here, the polyC-deleted virus can be conveniently produced at 37°C.
Overall, our data indicate that restoration of long polyC tracts in oncolytic Mengovirus constructs destabilizes the sequences inserted for genomic miRNA-detargeting and is associated with defective viral propagation and oncolytic activity, even though safety is preserved. Coupling two attenuation strategies—miRNA-detargeting and polyC deletion—produces a highly efficacious oncolytic Mengovirus vector showing an excellent safety profile in the multiple myeloma model that was examined in this study. Future studies will explore the potential of the MC0-NC virus in a wider spectrum of immunocompetent mouse tumor models and will attempt to unravel the contributions of antitumor immunity and immune cell infection to overall antitumor efficacy.

## Materials and methods

## Primary cell isolation
Six-week-old female BALB/c mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories. Mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation and death confirmed by cervical dislocation. The skin, spleen, and bone marrow of three donor mice were processed to isolate fibroblasts, splenocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells.
Primary adult fibroblasts were isolated according to Seluanov et al. Briefly, skin samples were collected from the underarm area, shredded manually with scalpels, and digested for 30 min at 37°C shaking slowly in DMEM/F12 (11320033, ThermoFisher Scientific) media with 0.14 Wunsch U/mL Liberase (5401020001, Roche) and 100 U/mL penicillin–100 μg of streptomycin (15140122, ThermoFisher Scientific). Resulting tissue fragments were washed in complete media DMEM/F12 supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin–100 μg of streptomycin, twice, and finally resuspended for plating. Tissue fragments were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 until fibroblasts exited the fragments over the course of the next 14 days. Culture media was switched to EMEM supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin–100 μg of streptomycin, non-essential amino acids in 1:100 dilution (11140050, ThermoFisher Scientific), and 1 mM of sodium pyruvate (11360070, Thermo Scientific) on day 14, after which only adult primary fibroblasts could be used for experiments.
Bone marrow was isolated and differentiated in either macrophages or dendritic cells using a modified protocol from Zhang et al. Briefly, bone marrow was flushed out of long bones (tibias and femurs) of hind legs with ice-cold PBS. Red blood cells were lysed and eliminated with eBioscience RBC Lysis Buffer (00433357, ThermoFisher Scientific) following incubation for 5 min at room temperature. The cells were washed in PBS and resuspended either in macrophage complete media, formulated as DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin–100 μg streptomycin, 100 U/mL M-CSF (315-02 10UG, Peprotech), or dendritic cells complete media, formulated as RPMI 1640 (ThermoFisher Scientific), 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin–100 μg of streptomycin, non-essential amino acids in 1:100 dilution and 1 mM of sodium pyruvate, 20 ng/mL GM-CSF (315-03-20UG, Peprotech), and 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol (31350010, ThermoFisher Scientific). On day 3 post isolation, half of the media was removed and replaced with fresh complete media. On day 7 post isolation, bone marrow-derived macrophages and dendritic cells were considered completely differentiated.
Whole spleens were mashed through 70-μm mesh nylon strainers using ice-cold PBS washes and the plunger of a 3-mL syringe. Red blood cells were lysed and eliminated with eBioscience RBC Lysis Buffer following incubation for 5 min at room temperature and the cells washed in PBS. Splenocytes were resuspended in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin–100 μg of streptomycin, non-essential amino acids, sodium pyruvate, 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM HEPES (15630080, ThermoFisher Scientific) and 50 U/mL interleukin-2 (212-12, Peprotech). For the first 2 days post isolation, complete splenocytes media was supplemented with 2.5 μg/mL concanavalin A. Two days post isolation, splenocytes were considered ready for experiments.

## Cell culture
MPC-11 (ATCC, CCL-167) was maintained in DMEM (ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% horse serum. A20 (ATCC, TIB-208) was maintained in RPMI 1640 (ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol (31350010, ThermoFisher Scientific). HepG2 (ATCC, HB-8065) and Mel264 (ATCC, HTB-71) were maintained in EMEM (ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum; 4T1 (ATCC, CRL-2539), CT26.wt (ATCC, CRL-2638), U266 (ATCC, TIB-196), RPMI 8226 (ATCC, CRM-CCL-155), and ARH77 (ATCC, CRL-1621) were maintained in RPMI 1640 with 10% fetal bovine serum; B16-F1 (ATCC, CRL-6323), TC-1 (provided by T.C. Wu of Johns Hopkins University), and H1-Hela (ATCC, CRL-1958) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. Cell lines were purchased from and verified by the ATCC (Manassas, VA). All media were supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg of streptomycin (15140122, Thermo Scientific) and cells incubated in a humidified 37°C incubator with 5% CO2. ATCC routinely tests morphology, karyotype, and species on cell lines. We performed no further authentication of the cell lines, except on 4T1 cells. Mouse STR profiling and interspecies contamination testing (IDEXX) confirmed mouse origin, genetic profile, and no mammalian interspecies contamination for the 4T1 cells. All cell lines routinely tested negative for mycoplasma contamination.

## miRNA-detargeted viruses cloning and rescue
Mengovirus plasmid Rz-pMwt was a kind gift from Ann C. Palmenberg (University of Wisconsin, Department of Biochemistry and the Institute for Molecular Virology), its construction and the construction of pCMV-Rz-Mwt have been described. , , Double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) fragments encoding a portion of the 5′ NCR containing a polyC tract of either 0 nt (MC0), C13UC10 (MC24), or C26UC10 (MC37) preceded by an additional NheI restriction site (position 148 nt on the wild-type reference sequence for Mengovirus) were synthesized and cloned into pUC57 (GenScript, Piscataway, NJ). The fragments were subcloned into pCMV-Rz-Mwt using EcoRV and AvrII restriction sites. Resulting pMC0, pMC24, and pMC37 were subsequently used as backbones for the cloning of miRNA-detargeted Mengovirus plasmids (pMC0-NC, pMC24-NC, pMC37-NC), according to the protocol described in Ruiz et al. for pMC24-NC, modified as follows. Briefly, oligonucleotides carrying two tandem copies of miR-124-specific miRT sequences, interspaced by the sequence CGAT and flanked by NheI restriction sites were cloned into the 5′ NCR of the plasmids to obtain the final insert sequence GCTAGCGGCATTCACCGCGTGCCTTACGATGGCATTCACCGCGTGCCTTAGCTAG. The miRT sequences for miR-133b and miRT-208a inserts were already generated for pMC24-NC in Ruiz et al., and were cloned into pMC0-NC and pMC37-NC using restriction sites AvrII and EcoRV.
All viruses were rescued as previously described in Ruiz et al., with the following modifications: RNA transcripts were in vitro-transcribed using a MEGAscript T7 Transcription kit (AM1334, ThermoFisher Scientific) and subsequently purified using a MEGAclear Transcription Clean-Up kit (AM1908, ThermoFisher Scientific), both according to the manufacturer’s instructions. H1-HeLa cells were seeded into a six-well tissue culture plate at 1 × 106 cells per well; 2.5 μg of purified RNA transcripts were transfected per each well using TransIT-mRNA (MIR2225, Mirus) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Once >70% cytopathic effects (CPE) were observed, cells and supernatants were collected, subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles, debris removed by centrifugation and by 0.22-μm filtration. The entire volume of the viral rescue was used to seed 12 confluent T175 flasks of H1-Hela cells that were harvested following the same protocol to produce passage 1 virus stocks. Cells were incubated at 5% CO2 either at 32°C or 37°C.
Viral preparations for animal use were concentrated through ultracentrifugation at 28,000× g on a 30% sucrose cushion and the pellet resuspended in PBS. Purified virus stocks were tested for endotoxin contamination prior to use in animals.
Integrity of viral sequences was verified by Sanger sequencing as described below, after extracting viral RNA from the preparations using a QIAamp Viral RNA kit (52904, QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Viral titration
H1-Hela cells were seeded at a concentration of 1 × 104 cells per well in 96-well plates. Ten-fold serial dilutions of virus preparations or clarified tissue lysates were made in Opti-MEM (31985070, ThermoFisher Scientific) and 100 μL of each dilution used to infect each well in eight replicates for each dilution. Virus was allowed to infect for 2 h at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator, then unincorporated virus was removed and fresh complete media added. The plates were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2 for 72 h and each well scored positive or negative for CPE. TCID50 per mL was calculated using the Spearman and Kärber equation.

## Viability assay
The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) (11465007001, Millipore Sigma) cell proliferation assay was used to measure cytotoxicity in all cell lines; 1 × 104 cells per well were seeded into 96-well plates, viral preparations diluted in Opti-MEM, and infection at indicated MOI was carried out at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator for 2 h. Unincorporated virus was removed and fresh complete media added. Cell viability was determined at 48 h post-infection according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and cell viability normalized to mock-infected cells.

## Growth curves
Cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a concentration of 2.5 × 105 cells per well. Viruses were diluted in Opti-MEM and cells infected at an MOI of 0.01 for 2 h at 37°C in 5% CO2. Unincorporated virus was removed and fresh complete media added. At the indicated time points, cells were scraped and collected with the supernatant to be stored at −80°C. Samples were processed simultaneously by three freeze-thawing cycles and centrifugation to eliminate cellular debris. Supernatants were titrated on H1-Hela cells by TCID50 as described above.

## miRNA assays
miRIDIAN miRNA mimics for miR-124, miR-133b, miR-208a, a miRNA irrelevant for the targeting (miR-125), and a negative control miRNA present in C. elegans were purchased from Dharmacon. miRNA mimics were pre-complexed with the TransIR-X2 (MIR6004, MIrus) reagent at a concentration of 200 nM and added to plates prior to H1-Hela seeding, according to the reverse transfection protocol. Twenty-four hours post transfection, cells were infected with miRNA-detargeted viruses or MC24 at an MOI of 0.2. Cell viability assay was performed on 96-well plates with 1 × 104 cells per well and measured through MTT assay as described above, while viral titer was performed on 24-well plates with 2 × 105 cells per well and measured by TCID50 on H1-Hela cells, as described above.

## Animal experiments
The Mayo Clinic Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all animal studies. Six-week-old female BALB/c mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories; 5 × 106 washed MPC-11 cells were implanted subcutaneously (s.c.) on the right hind flank. When tumors reached an average diameter of 0.5 cm, mice were treated with 1 × 107 TCID50 of MC0-NC, MC24-NC, or MC37-NC virus diluted in 100 μL PBS, or 100 μL PBS as control, through injection of the tail vein (i.v.) or directly in the tumor (i.t.). Tumor-bearing mice were observed and weighed routinely, and tumor size was measured daily using a caliper. Response to therapy was classified as follows: complete response (tumor elimination lasting over 120 days post treatment), delayed growth (tumor size stabilized, then continues growing), regression (tumor size reduced, then continued growing), or relapse (temporary tumor elimination, then reoccurred). On day 2 post administration, blood was collected from the submandibular vein in MiniCollect Lithium Heparin tubes (450477, Greiner BIO-ONE). Plasma was separated by centrifugation and used to extract viral RNA with the QIAamp Viral RNA kit (52904, QIAGEN) for sequencing.
For the biodistribution study, the same i.t. administration protocol described above was followed. Five animals per group were euthanized on day 2 and day 6 post administration and organs and blood harvested. Tumor, heart, brain, spinal cord, and liver were weighed and homogenized using stainless steel beads (69989, QIAGEN) in a tissue lyser, freeze-thawed three times, and centrifuged; 100 μL of clarified lysates were titrated on H1-Hela as described, and the TCID50/mg calculated. Blood was obtained through cardiac puncture at the time of euthanasia, and processed as described above to obtain plasma, 100 μL of which was titrated on H1-Hela and TCID50/mL calculated.

## Sequencing
Viral RNA extracted from mice sera harvested at day 2 post viral administration in the survival study was sequenced to assess the integrity of miRT sites. cDNA was synthesized using Superscript III first-strand synthesis (18080051, Life Technologies) using oligo-dT as primers, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Noncoding regions containing the miRT sites were amplified using cDNA as template accounting for 1.5% of the total volume of the PCR reaction, using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (M0530S, NEB) according to the protocol. The 3′ NCR and partial 3D coding region were amplified using primers GCAGAGGAATTCTTTTCTGAA and CTATTTATTTTACTACTCTAG, while 5′ NCR was amplified using nested PCR with primers GATTGCCGGTCCGCTCGATATCG and GGTCTGATAAATTCTCCATCT, followed by primers GGTCCGTGACTACCCACTCC and CCTTCACGACATTCAACAGACC, due to the difficulty of the template. The amplicons were sequenced by Sanger method.

## Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism software, version 8.0.2., was used for data analysis and to assess statistical significance. Viral titer and cell viability were tested using two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction or one-way ANOVA with Tuckey multiple comparison as indicated. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were assessed by Mantel-Cox log rank test.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Sara L. Anderson for the expert secretarial assistance. The authors also thank Ann C. Palmenberg of the University of Wisconsin for the kind gifts of the pF/R-wt and Rz-pMwt plasmids and communications regarding their use, and T.C. Wu of Johns Hopkins University, Department of Gynecologic Pathology for the kind gift of the TC-1 cell line. The authors respect and acknowledge the contribution of Henrietta Lacks and HeLa cells to biomedical research and of all other human tissue donors. V.P. was supported by the Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biological Science. J.W.M. was supported by the Medical Scientist Training Program at the Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine. The present work was funded by the Mayo Clinic Foundation and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (grants R01CA207386). The graphical abstract for this manuscript was created with Biorender.com.

## Author contributions
Conception and design: V.P., A.J.S., and S.J.R. Development of methodology: V.P., J.W.M., A.J.S. Acquisition of data from in vitro and in vivo experiments: V.P., R.A.N. Analysis and interpretation: V.P., J.W.M., and A.J.S. Writing, review, and revision of the manuscript: V.P., A.J.S., and S.J.R. Study supervision: A.J.S. and S.J.R.

## Declaration of interests
S.J.R. is chief executive officer at Vyriad, an oncolytic virus company. S.J.R. and Mayo Clinic hold equity in Vyriad.

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omto.2022.11.006.

## Supplemental information

Document S1. Figures S1 and S2

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data availability
Data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Document S1. Figures S1 and S2

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement
Data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.