822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC9798869979886997988693652054610.1021/acsnano.2c07312Integration
of In Vitro and In Vivo Models to Predict
Cellular and Tissue Dosimetry of Nanomaterials Using Physiologically
Based Pharmacokinetic Modeling
LinZhoumeng AryalSantosh ChengYi-Hsien GesquiereAndre J 1Department
of Environmental and Global Health, College of Public Health and Health
Professions, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, United States2Center
for
Environmental and Human Toxicology, University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32608, United
States3Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Health Outcomes, The Ben and Maytee
Fisch College of Pharmacy, The University
of Texas at Tyler, Tyler, Texas 75799, United States4Department
of Anatomy and Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, United States5Institute
of Computational Comparative Medicine, Kansas
State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, United States6Department
of Chemistry, College of Sciences, University
of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, United States7NanoScience
Technology Center, University of Central
Florida, Orlando, Florida 32826, United States8Department
of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering,, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, United States*Email: linzhoumeng@ufl.edu.
*Email: santosharyal@uttyler.edu.
*Email: andre@ucf.edu.
1512202216121972219722–1975430122022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Nanomaterials (NMs)
have been increasingly used in a number of
areas, including consumer products and nanomedicine. Target tissue
dosimetry is important in the evaluation of safety, efficacy, and
potential toxicity of NMs. Current evaluation of NM efficacy and safety
involves the time-consuming collection of pharmacokinetic and toxicity
data in animals and is usually completed one material at a time. This
traditional approach no longer meets the demand of the explosive growth
of NM-based products. There is an emerging need to develop methods
that can help design safe and effective NMs in an efficient manner.
In this review article, we critically evaluate existing studies on
in vivo pharmacokinetic properties, in vitro cellular uptake and release
and kinetic modeling, and whole-body physiologically based pharmacokinetic
(PBPK) modeling studies of different NMs. Methods on how to simulate
in vitro cellular uptake and release kinetics and how to extrapolate
cellular and tissue dosimetry of NMs from in vitro to in vivo via
PBPK modeling are discussed. We also share our perspectives on the
current challenges and future directions of in vivo pharmacokinetic
studies, in vitro cellular uptake and kinetic modeling, and whole-body
PBPK modeling studies for NMs. Finally, we propose a nanomaterial
in vitro to in vivo extrapolation via physiologically based pharmacokinetic
modeling (Nano−IVIVE−PBPK) framework for high-throughput
screening of target cellular and tissue dosimetry as well as potential
toxicity of different NMs in order to meet the demand of efficient
evaluation of the safety, efficacy, and potential toxicity of a rapidly
increasing number of NM-based products.
Keywords: cellular uptake, in vitro kinetic modeling, in vitro to in vivo extrapolation, nanomaterials, nanoparticles, nanotoxicology, physiologically
based pharmacokinetic modeling, risk assessment, toxicokinetics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jul 22; Accepted 2022 Dec 2; Issue date 2022 Dec 27.

Recent rapid advancements in
nanotechnology have enabled efficient synthesis of nanomaterials (NMs)
or nanoparticles (NPs) with a variety of physicochemical properties
for several different applications, such as consumer products, industrial,
and medical applications. − As the usage of NMs increases,
human exposure to these materials inevitably intensifies. The effect
of NM exposure on human health could be diagnostic, therapeutic, or
detrimental depending on the NM itself (usually related to its physicochemical
properties), the drug that the NM carries, the external exposure dose,
frequency and duration, the internal dose at the target organ and
cells, as well as the sensitivity of the species, organs, and cells. − Many animal studies have shown that overexposure to NMs can cause
adverse effects on different organ systems, such as the lungs, liver,
and blood. − A few human studies have also associated accidental
or occupational exposure to NMs with adverse effects. − The increasingly widespread use of NMs and the reported toxicity
data have caused concern on the potential risk of NMs and raised a
need to develop strategies to properly assess the risk of NMs.
Multiple studies have attempted to develop methods for risk assessment
of different NMs, including titanium dioxide, gold, and silver NPs. , − However, existing methods/models are limited to a
certain type of NMs, and some of the models have not been adequately
validated due to a lack of in vitro or in vivo data. High variations
in the type and physicochemical properties of NMs, the type of target
cells, and the number of cells in the body, as well as the route of
exposure, create an impossible task to perform risk assessment of
different NMs using conventional animal toxicity data-based approaches.
To address this challenge and to keep up with the rapid expansion
of NMs, mechanistic computational models that can efficiently predict
NM in vitro and in vivo dosimetry based on its physicochemical properties
as well as extrapolate in vitro results to in vivo are needed.
One approach that can help address the challenge of NM risk assessment
is to build in vitro kinetic models to accurately quantify or predict
target cellular dose based on physicochemistry, and then extrapolate
in vitro kinetics and toxicity to in vivo via a whole-body physiologically
based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model. − Multiple in vitro kinetic or
whole-body PBPK modeling studies have been performed for different
NMs based on either in vitro or in vivo dosimetry, with very few models
that can integrate in vitro with in vivo. , , In this review article, we discuss: (1)
the current progress in in vivo pharmacokinetics (PK) or toxicokinetics
(TK), in vitro kinetic modeling, and whole-body PBPK modeling as well
as in vitro to in vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) approaches; (2) a NM
in vitro to in vivo extrapolation via physiologically based pharmacokinetic
(Nano-IVIVE-PBPK) framework for high-throughput screening of the target
cellular and tissue dosimetry as well as potential toxicity of different
NMs solely based on their physicochemical properties; and (3) the
challenges and our future perspectives in this field.
In line
with the objectives of this review article, the manuscript
is categorized according to different sections: (1) in vivo PK/TK,
(2) in vitro kinetic modeling, (3) in vivo PBPK modeling, (4) IVIVE,
and (5) challenges and future perspectives. Within each section, we
will review the state of the art in each area. In the in vivo PK/TK
section, we will introduce the PK of NMs that have been widely researched
in vivo, including metal-based nanoparticulate systems, polymer-based
NPs, and lipid-based NPs. More specifically, we will focus on gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs), poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid
(PLGA) NPs, and liposomes as representative NPs for different nanocarrier
systems owing to their demand in clinical use as approved biomaterials
or biomaterials at various stages of clinical development, − thus human health risk assessment of these NPs is relevant. In the
sections of in vitro kinetic modeling, in vivo PBPK modeling, and
IVIVE, we will comprehensively review existing studies on almost all
types of NPs as these sections are the focus of this review. In the
last section, besides summarizing the challenges and sharing our future
perspectives in the field, we will also highlight how this review
article furthers the knowledge and understanding of the field.

## Pharmacokinetics/Toxicokinetics
of Nanoparticles In Vivo
PK or TK characteristics are important
in the evaluation of the
safety, efficacy, and potential toxicity of nanoparticulate systems,
whether through intended (e.g., drug nanocarrier) or accidental exposure.
PK or TK models are also important tools in human health risk assessment
as these models can be used to predict the target organ dosimetry
of the modeled substance, which is directly related to its toxicity
risk. PK or TK parameters that describe absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion (ADME) properties of a xenobiotic include
absorption rate constant (Ka), half-life
(t1/2), clearance (Cl), volume of distribution
(Vd), mean residence time (MRT), and area
under the concentration curve (AUC).

## Gold Nanoparticles
In metal-based NP systems, plasmonic
AuNPs have been widely studied because of their variety of diagnostic
and therapeutic functionalities for biomedical applications. , Moreover, gold is highly biocompatible, which promises successful
biomedical applications of AuNPs profiting from plasmonic or other
effects. − Dubaj et al. studied the PK, biodistribution, and
potential toxic effects of polyethylene glycol (PEG)-coated AuNPs
after a single intravenous injection. Rats were injected with a single
dose of 0.7 mg/kg body weight, and the concentrations of PEG-AuNPs
were examined at 1 h, 4 h, 24 h, 7 days, and 28 days postexposure. They analyzed the kinetics of gold clearance
using a two-compartment PK model, which revealed a rapid drop in the
initial amount with a biodistribution half-life of 1.56 h. In contrast,
the elimination phase showed a considerably longer half-life of 57.0
h. More than 80% of the PEG-AuNPs injected dose was eliminated from
circulation within 24 h. Accumulation of AuNPs in blood, lungs, and
kidneys were found to be decreased, whereas accumulation in the liver
(1.546 μg/g in 1 h to 2.153 μg/g in 28 days) and spleen
(2.693 μg/g in 1 h to 4.410 μg/g in 28 days) were found
to be increased. In another study by Cho et al., AuNPs with similar
chemistry but smaller in size (13 nm) were studied using 6-week-old
male BALB/c mice. They found a significant
increase in liver inflammation with apoptosis of liver hepatocytes,
which is an indication of NP-induced toxicity. The percentages of
retained NPs in the liver and spleen at 7 days post-treatment ranged
from 39% to 45% and from 12% to 20% for doses of 0.85 and 4.26 mg/kg,
respectively. These AuNPs were found trapped in liver Kupffer cells
and spleen macrophages. A clear indication of necrosis was observed
in hepatocytes. Mean maximum plasma NP
levels were concentration dependent, but the volumes of distribution
were not affected by dosages. 
A
systemic study was done by Bailly et al. to evaluate the PK, biodistribution,
and safety of laser-ablated dextran-coated AuNPs. These dextran-coated AuNPs were found to be rapidly eliminated
from the blood circulation and accumulated preferentially in the liver
and spleen, without inducing liver or kidney toxicity ( A,B). Nearly 50% of the injected
dose was accumulated in the liver after 14 days postinjection ( B). The authors applied a bicompartmental model to determine
mean PK parameters, which shows an elimination half-life (T1/2β) of 5.12 h ( C).
 A detailed kinetic study was performed by De Jong
et al. where
the authors focused on the influence of PEGylated AuNPs sizes in in
vivo tissue distribution. In this study,
a rat model was intravenously injected via tail vein with AuNPs of
10, 50, 100, and 250 nm sizes, respectively. Organ analysis was done
after 24 h postinjection. A difference was observed between the distribution
of the 10 nm particles and the larger particles, with most of the
particles in the liver and spleen. This
study clearly indicated a size-dependent response in the distribution
with larger particles accumulated more in the liver and spleen. An interesting observation that can be drawn
from this study is the absence of larger particles in the brain, whereas
detectable amounts of smaller 10 nm particles were found in the brain.
The brain is one of the challenging organs to deliver NPs for various
reasons, with the blood-brain barrier being significantly difficult
to cross. This study indicated that smaller particles are more suspectable
to cross such barriers (0.3% injected dose in the brain), therefore,
could hold promise in drug delivery to the brain.
A similar
size-dependent study was done by Sonavane et al. with
PEGylated AuNPs of average sizes of 15, 50, 100, and 200 nm. Considerable accumulation of particles of all
sizes was identified in the liver. The major difference in the studies
between De Jong et al. and Sonavane et
al. is the blood level of AuNPs between rats and mice. For rats, the
blood content of AuNPs at 24 h was nearly comparable with the content
in the main accumulating organs; whereas,
for mice, the blood level was an order
of magnitude lower than the contents in the accumulating organs. The
reason behind these differences was not discussed in the literature;
however, we assume the differences in blood concentration between
rats and mice are presumably due to the differences in their blood
circulation times, excretion, as well as anatomical and immunological
differences. , Most importantly, both studies
show the blood-brain barrier penetration potential of AuNPs of a size
smaller than 20 nm.

## Polymer-Based Nanoparticles
The
second NM that has
been widely used is polymer-based. Among various polymer-based nanoparticulate
systems, the PLGA , polymeric NP system has been
extensively used both in laboratory research and preclinical setting
owing to its great degree of biocompatibility as its degradation produces
lactic and glycolic acids, which are biogenic and are byproducts of
various metabolic pathways in the body under normal physiological
conditions. Acute toxicological analysis
of PLGA NPs was studied by Chen et al. using healthy mice. These PLGA NPs were surface coated with chitosan
and are biotinylated to maximize cellular delivery, 218.4 ± 21.0
nm in size with a ζ potential of 24.15 ± 1.41 mV. Biochemical
analysis and hematological indexes for both male and female mice between
all tested groups did not show a significant difference (intravenous
injected 300 mg/kg PLGA NPs). The histopathological exam also confirmed
that the tissues were healthy, and the particles were not toxic. After one single intravenous injection of PLGA
NPs, the elimination half-life was 16.624 h and the mean residence
time was 19.067 h. 
Pioneer work
in cell membrane coating of PLGA was carried out in Prof. Liangfang
Zhang’s laboratory at the University of California, San Diego. A study on red blood cell membrane-coated PLGA
NPs highlighted the elimination half-life of 39.6 h in contrast to
15.8 h for PEG-coated PLGA NPs. Considering
studies by Chen et al. and Hu et al., RBC membrane coating is superior in retarding
in vivo clearance compared to the conventional PEG or chitosan stealth
coating. Nguyen et al. prepared magnetically active PLGA NPs made
up of phospholipid conjugated gadolinium and coated with RBC membrane. In this case, Nguyen et al. took advantage of
gadolinium to assay the NP kinetics and found an elimination half-life
of 11.6 h. This value is significantly shorter than that reported
by Hu et al., which could be possibly
due to the presence of surface gadolinium and the analytical technique
used in the measurement process. These studies highlight the role
of surface chemistry in PK or TK of NPs.
Wang et al. studied
the PK of anticancer drug gemcitabine-loaded
PLGA NPs with poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) coatings of size 241 ±
36.2 nm using a male Sprague–Dawley rat (180–200 g)
model and calculated various PK parameters, such as t1/2, AUC, and MRT, which were 5.01 h, 10,986.17 h·μg/L,
and 4.96 h, respectively. Similar PLGA
NPs stabilized with PVA with an average size of ∼200 nm show
an elimination half-life of 8.25 ± 3.19 h in male albino rabbits. In another report, a PLGA end-functionalized
with glycine was micellized with methotrexate (MTX), forming 110 ±
5 nm particles. This MTX-loaded particle enhances the biological residence
of MTX by 2-fold with a drug elimination half-life of 4.30 h (elimination
half-life of free MTX was 2.47 h). Pitchaimani
et al., reported the circulation half-life and PK of biomimetic NPs
made up of PLGA. This NP was coated with
the membrane of natural killer cells, and PK studies were conducted
in the MCF-7 tumor-bearing immunodeficient mouse model. The t1/2, AUC, Vd, Cl, and MRT from a two-compartmental model
were found to be 9.51 ± 6 h, 1069 ± 507 %ID·h·mL–1, 3.85 ± 1.16 mL, 0.28 ± 0.14 mL·h–1, and 13.61 ± 1.38 h, respectively. Rafiei and
Haddadi conducted a comparative PK study of bare PLGA and PEG-PLGA
NPs with an aim to enhance the blood residence time of docetaxel. Docetaxel-loaded PEG-PLGA NPs with a hydrodynamic
size of 186.7 ± 2.9 nm showed an elimination half-life of 15.87
± 1.66 h, whereas bare PLGA NPs exhibited 6.05 ± 0.78 h,
indicating the surface passivation with PEG is the key to enhance
its residence time, confirming the role of PEG in helping NPs evade
from clearance mechanisms present in the systemic circulation and
the body. 
Owing to their ease of
modification in various functionalities
and engineering to subcellular size, PLGA NP-based delivery systems
have a distinct advantage in drug delivery and implantable medical
devices, such as but not limited to reducing drug dosage while achieving
pharmaceutical effects, minimizing side effects, protecting the drug
from degradation, and enhancing drug stability. These NPs can penetrate
deep into the tissue through fine capillaries or can take advantage
of leaky vasculature to improve deep tissue drug delivery and are
generally taken up efficiently by the cells. Studies highlight the
importance of NP chemistry and size to alter its in vivo kinetics,
which in turn modifies the kinetics of its cargo. Similarities presented
in these cited studies are the use of a murine model. In contrast,
the differences in the size and the surface chemistry of PLGA make
it challenging to predict a conclusive direction. Therefore, more
studies with a focus on unified parameters of sizes and surface properties
are warranted to picture a realistic scenario to better understand
the PK of PLGA NPs. summarizes the elimination half-life of gold and PLGA polymeric
nanoparticulate systems.
 

## Liposomal Nanoparticles
The third nanoparticulate system
that we discuss here is a liposomal NP. Unlike metal and core–shell
polymeric NPs, liposomes have an aqueous core shield with a phospholipid
bilayer. Liposomes were discovered by Alec D. Bangham in 1965 and were approved as therapeutic NPs for cancer
treatment. They represent a large proportion of clinical-stage nanotherapeutics
due to their biodegradable, biocompatible, nontoxic, and nonimmunogenic
composition. , − Deng et al.
discussed the importance of the liposomal formulation of 16-dehydropregnenolone
(16-DHP), a potent antitumor compound. In this report, the authors evaluated PK by measuring 16-DHP concentrations
in plasma after a single dose intravenous injection. A liposomal formulation
of 16-DHP was compared with free 16-DHP administration and found an
order of magnitude enhancement in the plasma residence time of liposomal
16-DHP. The calculated t1/2 for liposomal
16-DHP was 20.49 ± 2.71 h, whereas free administrated 16-DHP
was 5.99 ± 2.01 h. The first clinically approved liposomal anticancer
drug is DOXIL, which is a doxorubicin
(DOX) encapsulated liposome with a PEG surface. The hydrodynamic size
of DOXIL is ∼100 nm. A comparative study was carried out to
understand the PK parameters of free DOX and liposomal DOX (DOXIL)
in rats and dogs. Free DOX displays biphasic nature with a rapid decline
in concentrations in plasma, and the half-life of the first phase
is 5–10 min. In contrast, DOXIL has an elimination half-life
within the range of 20–35 h. The
DOXIL exhibits plasma concentrations of DOX several hundred-fold greater
several hours after injection in liposome-treated animals than in
animals treated with free drug. − It has been identified that the
drug found in plasma remains encapsulated in the liposome, which is
not yet bioavailable. Therefore, to enhance its bioavailability, development
of fast drug releasing liposomes or revisiting DOXIL formulation is
warranted, which can be achieved by developing NPs sensitive toward
external or internal stimuli and by enhancing vascular penetration
of NPs.
Recently, Han et al. studied the PK of paclitaxel-loaded
liposomes made up of soy lecithin phospholipid, cholesterol, and PEG2000. These liposomes were functionalized
with estrone to target positive estrogen receptors (ER) in breast
cancer. These ER-targeted liposomes showed an elimination half-life
of 20.98 ± 8.31 h and enhanced drug accumulation in tumor sites.
Highly studied liposomal hydrophobic drugs include paclitaxel, − 9-nitrocamp-tothecin, − SN-38 (an active metabolite of irinotecan), , docetaxel, cis-Bis-neodecanoato-trans-R,R-1,2-diaminocyclohexane
platinum(II), − and 7-t-butyldi-methylsilyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin. These liposomal formulations are based on the
principle of stealth coating with PEG, which is a commercially available
hydrophilic polymer. This prevents NPs from the reticuloendothelial
system (RES), hence enhancing the plasma residence time as shown in , which highlights
the importance of the surface properties of NPs for improving tissue
distribution and drug PK.
The aforementioned liposome formulations
mostly use naturally occurring
phospholipids. With naturally occurring phospholipids being a major
component in these formulations, toxicities of liposomes were found
to arise mainly due to the use of other additives to alter its stability
or kinetics. The main targets for potential toxic effects of liposomes
are the RES system and formed elements of the blood upon parenteral
administration. Platelet aggregation,
erythrocyte hemolysis, immunological hypersensitivity reaction due
to repeated administration, etc. are the major safety concern with
liposomes, which are primarily caused due to the use of nonlipid constituents.
In addition, the impact on RES cells such as macrophage saturation
by liposomes leads to immunosuppression and increases the risk of
infections. For example, administration of DOXIL in mice showed a
dose-dependent clearance saturation effect due to partial blockade
of the RES cells in the liver, which was not observed in the case
of free DOX. Although the liposomal drug
delivery systems have greatly impacted many medical fields, the use
of nonlipid additives needs to be carefully analyzed while considering
risk versus benefit.

## Uptake and Release Kinetics of Nanoparticles
In Vitro
Effects of particle size, surface charge, and cell
type have received
abundant attention with respect to their effects on NP uptake and
removal kinetics by cells in vitro. Herein, we review studies on the
kinetics of in vitro cellular uptake, organized by particle type.
A brief overview of in silico research that contributed to the understanding
of NP-cell interaction kinetics is included as well. provides an overview of the
work discussed.
 

## Gold Nanoparticles
One of the leading
NPs researched
is AuNPs due to their potential biomedical and biosensing applications.
Size and shape effects on AuNP-cell interaction were illustrated by
differences in kinetics and saturation of cellular dose. For spherical
particles with citric acid coating, uptake was maximum for 50 nm AuNPs,
while 14 and 100 nm showed the least uptake in HeLa (cervix carcinoma)
cells. Uptake for spherical AuNPs saturated
around 6 h, and uptake half-life was 2.10, 1.90, and 2.24 h for 14,
50, and 74 nm AuNPs, respectively. This corresponds to rates of 1.72
× 10–5, 1.63 × 10–3,
and 1.71 × 10–3 ng/h based on the unit conversion
from the number of NPs per hour to nanograms per hour reported by
Chithrani et al. When citric acid was
replaced with transferrin on the AuNP surface, uptake kinetics showed
comparable profiles, but the number of transferrin-coated AuNPs internalized
was three times less compared to the citrate-coated AuNPs. Comparing
these results with AuNP rods of similar dimensions (74 × 14 nm,
1:5 aspect ratio), cells internalized spherical 74 and 14 nm AuNPs
were 500% and 375% more than the rod-shaped particle. Although surface
chemistry or protein corona formation could play a role, it was noted
that 1:3 aspect ratio rods internalize more easily. This investigation
was extended by the investigators to quantify exocytosis for transferrin-coated
AuNPs while considering a broader group of cell lines in vitro. Smaller AuNPs were exocytosed at a faster rate
(14 nm two times faster than 74 nm AuNPs) and at a larger fraction
than larger NPs (fraction of 14 nm AuNPs five times higher than for
100 nm NPs). Exocytosis kinetics were found to plateau by 1 h for
the smallest AuNPs, while for larger ones, it took about 5 h. The
differences were proposed to relate to the thermodynamics of wrapping
of the NPs and receptor diffusion kinetics, a mechanism that was later
modeled by Li et al. for spherical particles, see below. Overall, endocytosis and exocytosis were found
to depend on NP size, but kinetics were different between the two
processes. In another study, gold nanocages coated with antibodies
and PEG were evaluated with respect to U87MGwtEGFR glioblastoma cells. About 75% NPs were internalized with the rest
of the NPs interacting with cells remaining surface-bound. Uptake
approached saturation quickly by 1 h incubation time, after which
the uptake rate slowed considerably. An increase in the number of
antibodies on the Au nanocage surface increased uptake. The uptake
of Au nanocages was also size-dependent, with the smaller 35 nm NP
internalizing abundantly and 90 nm NPs internalizing about 60% less.
The exocytosis of AuNPs coated with two different peptides (KATWLPPR
and KPRQPSLP) was investigated in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs). Both types of particles
show that over half of the particles remain in the cells after 6 h.
Furthermore, the KATWLPPR AuNPs showed a progressive increase in the
exocytosis rate until it appears to approach saturation at 6 h, while
the KPRQPSLP AuNPs show a complex kinetic profile that suggests reuptake
of NPs after 4 h.
Recently, AuNPs have also been studied with
in vitro 3D cell culture. An A549 human
lung carcinoma 3D model provided the biologically relevant modular
structure and presence of extracellular matrix for NP localization,
specifically with respect to these altering the kinetics of NP uptake.
Slow distribution of AuNPs from the extracellular matrix to intracellular
space was observed, in contrast to 2D in vitro culture where rapid
uptake kinetics are observed (see above). The kinetics in 3D culture
showed two phases, an earlier phase with a relatively higher uptake
rate and a second phase with a slower uptake rate. Up to 28 days,
no saturable uptake was observed. An example of correlating in vitro
kinetics of spherical PEG-coated AuNPs to in vivo observations was
reported recently as well. Lung epithelial,
lung bronchial, and liver cells exhibit comparable kinetics of interaction
with the AuNPs, while the renal proximal tubular epithelial cells
showed an order of magnitude faster kinetics. The authors modeled
an equilibrium between culture media and cell space (membrane + internalized)
and extracted rates of entry and exit from the cell space. The ratio
of the rates, basically the equilibrium constant for first-order mass
transfer between media and cell space, was used as the PBPK partition
coefficient. Notable deviations between prediction and in vivo observations
were attributed to the nonmechanistic approach used in modeling.

## Polymeric Nanoparticles
Polymeric NPs have been considered
extensively as well due to their biocompatibility and potential biodegradability.
The kinetics of polystyrene NPs were investigated in quantitative
detail for membrane adsorption, detachment, and cell internalization. Particle size was found to considerably affect
NP-cell interactions and was attributed to a reduced number of binding
sites for NPs per cell with increasing particle size. The kinetic
model applied to determine the corresponding rate constants is based
on the Wilhelm et al. mass transfer scheme that is based on Langmuir
adsorption. In this model the number
of particles adsorbed on the cell membrane is proportional to the
concentration of NPs in the culture media near the cell membrane,
noting that NP sedimentation can affect this concentration (discussed
in the next section). The change in the number of particles bound
to the cell membrane over time can then be described as
1 while the number of NPs internalized follows
from
2 In these equations Nmem is the number
of NPs adsorbed on the cell membrane, Nsites is the number of available binding sites
(varies with time depending on number of NPs bound), Ni is the number of particles internalized, C is the concentration of NPs in the culture media near the cell membrane,
and ka, kd, and ki are the rate constants for NP
adsorption, desorption, and internalization, respectively. The rate
constant ka has units of inverse concentration
times inverse time, and kd and ki have units of inverse time, where the authors
expressed time in seconds and the rate constant is in reference to
a change in the number of particles. The solution to this model yields
the time evolution of the number of particles bound to the cell membrane
and the number of NPs internalized:
3 with B the
binding capacity
of the cell and
4 Sample results of applying this model
are shown in . Uptake of carboxylated polystyrene NPs by hepatocytes was found
to depend on time, size, and in vitro environment. For 200 nm NPs, uptake was sparse, with most NPs located
on the cell surface. The 20 nm NPs were internalized, both earlier
and more abundantly. Findings were consistent for the different hepatocytes
studied, although the C3A cell line showed earlier compartmentalization
of NPs. In addition, after 30 min, 20 nm NPs started to accumulate
within bile canaliculi leading the authors to conclude that NP excretion
within bile is the mechanism of elimination. It is noteworthy that
when cells were incubated with 20 nm NPs in presence of serum that
uptake increased over time, but in absence of serum, the NPs agglomerated
which led to reduced NP uptake. For the 200 nm NPs, no effect was
found on agglomeration and uptake remained low. Interaction of polystyrene
NPs with murine macrophages was evaluated while taking into account
the differences between the administered dose and the delivered dose
via the in vitro sedimentation, diffusion, and dosimetry (ISDD) model. The authors found that only a small fraction
of the administered dose interacts with cells in vitro regardless
of particle size. It was speculated that low-density NPs and short
incubation times exacerbate this effect. Internalized dose correlated
well with the delivered dose in all cases. 50 and 1000 nm particles
showed more internalization by macrophages. Macrophages are known
to prefer the uptake of microparticles, while sub-100 nm particles allow for more cellular interaction through
a potentially wider scope of internalization pathways. 
 Uptake of uncoated chitosan particles by mouse
macrophages and
fibroblasts was reported to be very rapid, within a few minutes of
incubation. In contrast, hyaluronic acid
(HA)-coated chitosan particles required tens of minutes of incubation
time to observe any appreciable uptake. Uptake kinetics was saturable
with clear dose dependence and a Michaelis–Menten-like profile
presaturation. In addition, macrophages exhibited a greater uptake
capacity for uncoated NPs than fibroblasts, while the uptake capacity
for HA-coated NPs was 2 orders of magnitude lower. The authors of
this study reported that HA-coated chitosan particles were stable
in size and ζ potential. Conversely, the uncoated chitosan NPs
showed an increase in size with reversal of ζ potential in culture
media. This was attributed to protein adsorption, which was hypothesized
to be largely absent for the HA-coated NPs. These results illustrate
how protein adsorption can drastically change NP properties and experimental
outcomes in vitro. The size and surface charge dependence of chitosan
NP uptake by colorectal adenocarcinoma (Caco-2) cells were studied. It was found that increasing particle size led
to increased positive ζ potential. Uptake of the chitosan NPs
by Caco-2 cells increased in the 200–600 nm size range, while
larger particles with slightly higher ζ potential showed less
uptake. These results suggest complex interactions that affect NP
uptake other than chitosan NP size.
Jurney et al. compared the
in vitro kinetics of nonspherical PEG
hydrogel NPs between static culture and dynamic cell culture in microfluidic
devices. Notable outcomes are that in
the presence of shear flow NP-cell interaction is reversed, likely
due to increased motion of larger nonspherical NPs that pushes them
to the cell wall allowing for increased cell interaction. PEGylated
poly(lactide)-poly(carbonate)-DOX NPs showed first-order kinetics
with a faster uptake rate in the first hour followed by slower uptake
rates in the following five hours. Comparing
three glioblastoma cell lines, uptake was higher for GIN8 than GIN28,
with U87 showing the lesser uptake.
Conjugated polymer NPs fabricated
from the polymer poly(fluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole)
(PFBT) were tested for their in vitro
kinetics with J774A.1 macrophages. A
linear correlation between the applied dose and the internalized dose
was observed. Similarly, a linear relationship was found between amounts
of NPs internalized and incubation time. For cationic maltodextrin
NPs interacting with human bronchial epithelial cells, the endocytosis
rate was found to exceed NP binding. Further
research suggests the NP binding to anionic sites on the cell membrane
is required before their endocytosis. In addition, uptake was saturable
but trended downward after media replacement, which was attributed
to the exocytosis of the NPs. The rate of exocytosis increased substantially
after 1 h. The uptake of a series of poly(alkyl cyanoacrylate) NPs
was found to depend on polymer composition. Different cell types also
interacted differently with the NPs, resulting in different internalization
pathways. The results of another study showed that rat brain endothelial cell line RBE4 internalized significantly
more poly(butyl cyanoacrylate) (PBCA) and poly(octyl cyanoacrylate)
(POCA) NPs than prostate cancer cell line PC3. Uptake saturated at
3 h for RBE4 and the uptake rate for PC3 slowed down around the same
time without showing saturation. N-Vinyl-2-pyrrolidone
oligomer amphiphilic NPs showed linear kinetics for uptake by fibroblasts
and glioblastoma cells, although the uptake was tracked for only 1
h. The authors of the study speculated
that due to the particle size and inert surface, macropinocytosis
and receptor-mediated endocytosis were suppressed. Another amphiphilic
polymeric NP made from three polymers including N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone
polymer was cultured in vitro with HC-a and RAW 264.7 cells. Uptake kinetics were different between the two
cell types. A linear zero-order kinetic profile was observed for the
RAW 264.7 macrophages for the duration of the study (24 h). For HC-a,
a first-order kinetic profile with saturation at 8 h was noticeable.
The difference was attributed to the phagocytic properties of macrophages.

## Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) Nanoparticles
A study on 97 nm PLGA NPs with vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC)
revealed that the NP uptake was dose- and time-dependent, with a fairly
linear correlation between applied dose and internalization while
uptake saturated at 4 h. With the removal
of the NPs from the cell surroundings in vitro exocytosis of NPs took
place rapidly. Roughly 65% of the internalized fraction was exocytosed
in 30 min and proceeded more slowly afterward. The work reported by
the authors suggests that the exocytosis of NPs proceeds through an
energy-dependent process. The effect of protein corona formation was
illustrated when exocytosis was not observed in serum-free media,
indicating that NPs carry media proteins that potentially interact
with the exocytotic pathway. PLGA NPs of varying sizes (110–950
nm) with negative ζ potential showed more transepithelial transport
for the smaller sizes, with a limited effect of the applied dose,
while the kinetics profile appeared nonsaturable. A similar observation was made for 95 nm PLGA NPs and human
bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells, although a comparison of the same
PLGA NPs with opossum kidney (OK) and Caco-2 cells shows that uptake
was saturable and nearly indistinguishable from control until 24 h,
respectively. NP uptake by HBE cells
was found to be slower compared to OK cells, while both cell types
exhibit exocytosis of PLGA NPs. These observations illustrate the
role of cell type in cell-NP interactions. In another report, 180
nm PLGA NPs were found to internalize with a linear kinetic profile
that did not saturate after 6 h. Exocytosis took place after replacing
NPs containing media with NP-free media. 80% of NPs were removed from
cells within 2 h to the basolateral medium. Coating PLGA NPs with
chitosan increased the rate of uptake and transcellular transport
for Caco-2 cells, with higher doses showing saturable uptake at 2
h. 

## Liposomes
The
interaction of liposomes loaded with
8 nm iron oxide NPs with macrophages was studied, and the effect of
a PEG coating on the liposomes was evaluated. The liposomes bound with J774 macrophages were taken up by endocytosis.
The PEG coating limited the association of liposomes with the cells,
which limited internalization. This effect of the PEG coating was
also reported for AuNPs. However, the
kinetics of the liposome-macrophage interactions were not affected
by the polymer coating. Both liposome types showed first-order kinetics
for endocytosis with identical rate constants. Interestingly, the
maximum number of liposomes that could be endocytosed per cell as
determined from the first order kinetic model was lower for the PEG-coated
liposomes by a factor of 1.5. A recent report by Zhang et al. using
RAW 264.7 macrophages on the other hand indicates zero-order uptake
kinetics of liposomes by these macrophages, suggesting effects of
liposome composition, coating, and cell line. Magentoliposome (ML) in vitro kinetics were studied and
framed within a mathematical model by Slabu et al. Pancreatic tumor cell uptake kinetics were compared with
healthy fibroblast cells. MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic tumor cells internalized
three times more ML than BxPC-3 (another pancreatic tumor cell line)
and L929 murine fibroblast cells. Notably, these observations were
made while ML adsorption rate constants were nearly the same. These
results were modeled as a three-step process including adsorption,
internalization (endocytosis), and exocytosis. The authors started
with the model described above and extended this further with the
inclusion of exocytosis. They introduced the assumptions that (i)
only a finite fraction (F0) of the cell
membrane is available for NP internalization, (ii) the same fraction
of the cell membrane is available for NP exocytosis, and (iii) exocytosis
follows after endocytosis. The latter is simulated by an activation
function Θ(t) that varies the delay and magnitude
of exocytosis. The membrane subfraction participating in endocytosis
is Fendo and for exocytosis is Fexo. With these conditions is then reworked as follows to represent
endocytosis and exocytosis, respectively:
5 6 with Ne the number
of NPs removed from the cell interior and ke the rate constant for exocytosis. The rate constant ke has units of inverse time with time reported in minutes
in reference to a change in the number of particles, and the fraction F and activation function Θ are unitless.

## Superparamagnetic
Iron Oxide Nanoparticles and Other Oxide Nanoparticles
Wilhelm
et al. conducted a kinetic analysis of membrane adsorption
and internalization for 9 nm SPION to compare tumor cell and macrophage
properties. Neither HeLa cells nor RAW
macrophages showed a saturable kinetic profile after 12 h incubation
with SPION, although uptake rates had significantly slowed down. The
authors also reported a kinetic model to further analyze the results.
Their reported kinetic model consists of a two-step process involving
Langmuir adsorption followed by internalization and has formed the
basis for recent advancements in the modeling of NP-cell interactions
as discussed above. Binding parameters were consistent between cell
types, but internalization capacity was 1 order of magnitude greater
for RAW macrophages. Carboxydextran-coated SPION were incubated with
blood-derived macrophages to test the effect of particle size. The results of the study show that 60 nm NPs
are internalized 10 times more effectively than 20 nm NPs of the same
composition, demonstrating NP size dependence of cell-NP interaction.
In addition, the internalization was observed to saturate in less
than 3 h in both cases. In a mathematical model developed by the investigators,
the uptake mechanism is described as contributions from NP capture
and NP wrapping by the macrophage cell membrane involving multiple
receptors, based on the Gao et al. model. The size effect of SPION uptake kinetics by MCF-7 human mammary
adenocarcinoma epithelial cells was reported recently. Different NP sizes all followed first-order
kinetics but with saturation at a higher internalized dose for 15
nm versus 7 and 30 nm.
Larger (310 nm) silica NPs were found
to be internalized twice as much by HeLa cells than HUVEC cells after
24 h. Interestingly, within the first 4 h of NP-cell interaction,
uptake was much higher for HUVEC cells, after which uptake by HeLa
cells accelerated 20-fold. , These results illustrate
differing uptake rates for the same NPs by different cell types, with
nonlinear kinetic profiles at different incubation times. For another
type of oxide NPs, ceria, the kinetic profile was vastly different. A strong increase in the number of internalized
NPs was observed between 3 and 24 h, with no obvious size dependence.
Even though the particles were smaller, they aggregated into approximately
300 nm clusters before internalization. When smaller 50 and 100 nm
silica NPs were incubated with NCI-H292 lymphocytes, a saturable time-
and dose-dependent internalization kinetics was found, although the
100 nm particles showed high adsorption on the cell membrane. 

## Quantum Dots and Carbon Nanotubes
A series of CdSe/ZnS
QD coated with carboxylate, PEG, and PEG-amine were studied for the
kinetics of their interaction with malignant and nontumorigenic human
mammary epithelial cells. Carboxylated
QD were internalized with a linear kinetic profile up to 40 h incubation
time, while the PEG coating blocked internalization for both those
QD types over 12 h of study. Zwitterionic CdSe/ZnS QDs were primarily
endocytosed via the clathrin-mediated mechanism by HeLa cells with
accumulation observed on the cell membrane in conjunction with uptake
saturation. The investigators suggest
that clusters of particles rather than individual particles need to
be wrapped for successful completion of internalization, as corroborated
by computational modeling discussed herein. Exocytosis proceeded partially
by active transport of QD to the periphery of the cell, and the fraction
of QD exocytosis saturated at 2 h. The effects of NP size and surface
charge were studied for a series of QD, liposomes, and polystyrene
NPs by Yaehne et al. Deposition rate
constants were found to depend on surface charge when the researchers
removed effects from particle size. In addition, NP kinetics were
found to be controllable by size rather than chemistry. We recently
reported kinetics studies on the interaction of negatively charged
CdSe/ZnS core–shell QD with a number of cell types using a
ratiometric assay. , Adsorption and internalization
were found to dominate the kinetics, with adsorption being about 2
orders of magnitude slower. In addition, we observed significant NP
degradation that needed to be taken into account for correct modeling
of the data. To extract rate constants from the data, we built a chemical
kinetics model that includes degradation of the NPs for correct modeling.
The model consists of three compartments representing the culture
media, cell membrane, and internal cell space. The NP dose evolution
for the media compartment is represented by
7 with [Med] and [Mem], the concentration of
NPs in the culture media and NPs adhered to the cell membrane, respectively,
reported in nanomolar (nM). The cell membrane compartment separates
the culture medium from the internal space of the cell. Once adsorbed
to the cell membrane, NPs can go back to media or enter the cell as
expressed by
8 Once NPs
enter the cell space compartment,
there is a chance they become degraded. This is expressed with a term
that contains a first-order rate constant for the degradation process
(kdeg). If in vitro empirical work shows
that the NP does not degrade, this kdeg can simply be set to zero so that the degradation term is not included
in the modeling of the data. The NP dose evolution for the cell space
compartment is then described as
9 with [Cell] the concentration
of NPs (nM)
in the cell interior at time t. All rate constants
were reported as per hour in reference to a change in the molar concentration
of particles. Sample results of applying this model are shown in . The results of
this in vitro work were applied to in vivo predictions of QD predisposition. The mechanistic approach in the modeling resulted
in a satisfactory agreement between predicted and observed in vivo
data for multiple species.
Interaction of silicon quantum dots
(Si-QDs) with HUVEC cells resulted
in near saturation of uptake by 6 h of exposure. The dose-dependent response changed the number of particles
per cell under those conditions but the kinetic profiles remained
similar. Removing Si-QDs from the in vitro media was followed by exocytosis
of the NP from cells with a plateau reached by 2.5 h. A kinetic model
based on the mass balance of the Si-QDs allowed the authors to extract
the dissociation constant between receptors in endosomes and Si-QD
aggregates and was found to be the determinant in NPs remaining in
cells instead of being removed.

## DNA-Coated Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes
DNA-coated
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) with sizes ranging from 130
to 660 nm showed maximum uptake by fibroblasts for intermediate sizes. The investigators reported a model based on
the Gao et al. model, where the SWCNT
were reversibly bound to the cell membrane into clusters of receptor-bound
complexes, which when of sufficient size lowers the elastic energy
for wrapping enough to be overcome by the free energy reduction resulting
from the receptor-particle association. From the model, the endocytosis
rate constant and exocytosis rate constant were obtained for the SWCNT
and compared to modeling based on literature data for AuNPs , and PLGA NPs. The endocytosis rate
constant of SWCNT was estimated to be about 1000 times that of AuNPs,
while the exocytosis rate constants were similar for SWCNT, PLGA,
and AuNPs, noting that each NP was studied with different cell lines.

## In Silico Evaluation of Nanoparticle-Cell Interactions
Computational
modeling has also made significant contributions to
the understanding and quantification of in vitro NP-cell interactions.
More commonly used approaches include coarse-grained molecular dynamics
(CGMD) and dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) as more manageable
versions of all-atom molecular dynamics (AAMD). In addition, other
approaches such as thermodynamic models have been reported to study
NP-cell interactions.
Recently, Lunnoo et al. studied the interactions
of AuNPs and AuNP aggregates with cell membranes using CGMD simulations
while considering size, shape, and surface charge. The investigators calculated rate constants for internalization
and translocation half-life and found that aggregated AuNPs had less
ability to transport through the lipid bilayer than the corresponding
individual NP. Nanohexapods exhibited the highest cellular uptake,
while spherical AuNPs showed distinct surface charge and size dependence
of their transport through the plasma membrane. In an earlier study
by Gupta et al. using CGMD simulations to consider AuNP-membrane interactions
of uncharged smaller particles, these were found to permeate the membrane
more easily although all sizes considered entered the lipid bilayer
with relative ease. Entry was facilitated
by disruptions of the membrane caused by the NP. However, the charge
effect on this observation was found to be significant, with small
cationic and anionic particles showing mainly adhesion and minimal
permeation. The interplay between NP shape and charge was evaluated
previously while attempting to maintain NP size consistent. Internalization rates increased over 30 orders
of magnitude with increasing cationic charge density for prolate NPs
while the effect increased to 60 orders of magnitude for spherical
NPs. Negatively charged NPs were repelled from the cell membrane.
Nonspherical NPs reoriented near the cell membrane to enhance NP-membrane
contact, with the potential to disrupt the membrane structure. Shape
and size dependence on the cooperative wrapping of NPs by lipid membranes
was further studied with CGMD by Xiong et al. The authors reported complex dependencies that resulted
in various wrapping structures. Interestingly, Shen et al. recently
reported that deformable spherical NPs require interaction with more
receptors to induce membrane wrapping, more so with increasing NP
size. Oblate and prolate NPs on the
other hand showed more complex behaviors that depend on the orientation
of the NP on the membrane.
The effect of particle size and interaction
strength with membrane
on endocytosis has also been evaluated with DPD simulations. The investigators found two wrapping modes
depending on the extent of attraction between the NP and cell membrane.
Weak interaction resulted in slow and limited wrapping, with larger
particles accelerating the dynamics of membrane wrapping. For strong
NP-cell membrane interactions wrapping dynamics accelerated with decreasing
particle size, however. In another DPD investigation, a cooperative
effect in NP endocytosis was considered. The researchers reported that smaller particles (2.5 nm) cluster
to induce membrane deformation and wrapping, while intermediate-size
particles (4.0 nm) aggregate into pearl-chain arrangements, both internalizing
in cooperative fashion. Larger particles (6.0 nm) were found to internalize
individually. The investigators followed this study up with further
DPD simulations to understand these size effects on the NP internalization
pathways. The way the NPs aggregate
on the membrane surface was found to affect the mechanism of internalization.
Li et al. compared in vitro experimental results with DPD simulations
to investigate the endocytosis of charged AuNPs in the context of
cooperativity. Both experiment and theory
demonstrate that positively charged AuNPs enter the cell together
through cooperative endocytosis. Even though the like-charged NPs
repel each other, the investigators conclude that membrane deformation
counteracts this effect.
A thermodynamic model to determine
the optimal size for receptor-mediated
endocytosis of spherical NPs was reported by Li et al. The model describes the cell membrane during
receptor-mediated endocytosis with two regions: bound and free membrane
regions. Receptors on the cell surface behave accordingly, with a
change of receptor state leading to cell membrane deformation. Thermodynamic
contributions are then described by receptor binding free energy changes,
loss of entropy of the receptors, and free energy changes due to cell
membrane deformation. From this model, it is deduced that receptor
density and release of energy upon ligand-receptor binding are the
main factors that control the optimal NP size for receptor-mediated
endocytosis. Size and interaction-dependent thermodynamics of NP adhesion
effects on cell membrane were discussed by Ginzberg et al. The researchers found that uncharged or hydrophobic
NPs cause membrane swelling by incorporating into the membrane. Conversely,
charged or hydrophilic particles can remove phospholipids from the
membrane to form micelles, potentially rupturing the membrane and
leaving nanosized holes. These effects were found to correlate with
the charge density of the particle surface.

## Physiologically
Based Pharmacokinetic Modeling of Nanoparticles
Currently,
there are approximately 50 PBPK modeling studies for
different types of NPs in the literature. These PBPK models were developed
for different applications, such as nanomedicine development and NM
toxicity and risk assessment. The major features and applications
for each of these existing PBPK modeling studies are summarized in for inorganic NPs
and for organic
NPs and hybrid NPs. Some of these studies only simulate the PK of
a particular NP, but other studies simulate the PK of both the NP
itself and the active pharmaceutical ingredient that is carried by
and released from the NPs. Schematics of representative PBPK model
structures for different types of NPs are provided in . In the overview below, we
will discuss the progress of PBPK modeling for different NP types,
including inorganic NPs, such as QD, AuNPs, titanium dioxide, silver,
and other metal NPs as well as organic NPs, such as polymeric NPs,
liposomes, and other organic NPs.
 

## Inorganic Nanoparticles

## Quantum Dots
A PBPK model is described
in Lin et al. for QD 705 in mice following
intravenous injection.
At that time, the PBPK modeling methodology for NMs just started to
be explored. In this study, based on the most commonly used model
structure for small molecules, the authors used a perfusion-limited
model structure for all compartments to simulate the tissue distribution
of QD in mice. However, unlike small molecules whose extent of tissue
distribution is described using a constant parameter tissue:plasma
partition coefficient (or tissue:blood partition coefficient), the
authors used a nonconstant parameter termed “tissue distribution
coefficient” to describe the ratio of the affinity of QD to
a given tissue over that to blood and considered this parameter varied
with time depending on the respective instantaneous concentrations
in the individual tissues and blood as well as the microenvironment
at the tissue site. The authors calculated the tissue distribution
coefficient value using the AUCtissue/AUCblood method for a specific
time period, resulting in a time-dependent tissue distribution coefficient
for each tissue. The authors found that the time-dependent tissue
distribution coefficient for each tissue was sigmoidal in shape when
plotting against time, and this sigmoidal curve could be described
using a modified Hill :
10 where DCm is time-dependent
distribution coefficient of QD for each
tissue, DCmax is the maximum DC, DCT50 is the time reaching half of the maximum
DC (h), T is the experimental time (h), In is the
initial value for DC, and n is the Hill coefficient,
which dictates the overall shape of the curve. The use of a time-dependent
distribution coefficient for NPs, rather than a partition coefficient
as a constant represents one of the major differences in PBPK modeling
between small molecules and NPs. The method of time-dependent distribution
coefficients was later adapted and further developed by Lin et al. for AuNPs (described below).
Based on
the PBPK model for QD 705 in mice by Lin et al., Lee et al. developed a flow-limited
PBPK model using the same QD 705 data set from Lin et al. and applied this model to test its predictive
ability across different types of QD (e.g., QD 705, 525, 800, and
521), species (mice and rats), and routes (intravenous and intradermal).
The authors reported that the PBPK model that was calibrated based
on the data for QD 705 was not able to adequately describe the distribution
for other types of QD in the same or other species following the same
intravenous administration or other routes of exposure. Therefore,
the authors concluded that more complex PBPK models are needed to
better describe the biodistribution of QD in vivo following different
types, species, and administration routes. Later on, a more complex
permeability-limited PBPK model developed by Liang et al., based on a more mechanistic PBPK model from
Lin et al., was able to adequately simulate
the biodistribution of different types of QD following different routes
of administration (intravenous and subcutaneous) in mice and rats.

## Gold Nanoparticles
In the field of PBPK modeling for
NPs, AuNPs are the most extensively modeled type of NPs. This is in
part because gold is inert and very stable and does not metabolize
or degrade in the body (so it is not needed to consider complex metabolism
and dissolution processes) and analytical methods are available to
accurately quantify the biodistribution of gold in the body. This
also makes AuNPs an ideal example NM to explore PBPK modeling methodology
for NMs.
Among the published PBPK models for AuNPs, Lin et al. reported a PBPK model for PEG-coated AuNPs
in mice. In this study, the authors systematically evaluated the performances
of 14 different model structures for two sizes of AuNPs (a relatively
small size of 13 nm and a relatively larger size of 100 nm). These
structures included the traditional perfusion-limited model, traditional
membrane-limited model, perfusion-limited model with time-dependent
distribution coefficients, membrane-limited model with time-dependent
distribution coefficients, perfusion-limited model with endocytosis
of NPs in liver and spleen described using a linear equation, membrane-limited
model with endocytosis of NPs in liver and spleen described using
a linear equation, membrane-limited model with endocytosis of NPs
in liver, spleen, kidneys, and lungs described using the Hill function,
etc. The authors concluded that the model structure with the best
predictive ability was the membrane-limited model with endocytosis
of NPs in liver, spleen, kidneys, and lungs described using the Hill
function.
Compared to the earlier study by Lin et al., the study by Lin et al. also
used the parameter “distribution coefficient” and further
suggested that the other parameter “partition coefficient”
is not applicable to NPs because this parameter represents the ratio
of concentrations of a dissolved compound between two phases at thermodynamic
equilibrium, but NPs do not form solutions, but colloidal dispersions,
which are thermodynamically unstable. However, unlike Lin et al., which used a time-dependent tissue distribution,
Lin et al. used a constant value for
the distribution coefficient for each tissue. Instead, Lin et al. proposed that endocytosis of NPs from the blood
circulation into tissue cells is the major mechanism that determines
the tissue distribution profiles of NPs, and this process can be described
with the Hill equation:
11 where Kup_t (per h) is the uptake rate parameter
of NPs by phagocytic
cells in an organ t at a particular time T, T (h) is the simulation time, Kmax_t (per h) is the maximum
uptake rate parameter in the organ t, K50_t (h) is the time reaching half of Kmax_t, and nt (unitless) is the Hill coefficient.
This approach was created based on in vitro cellular uptake studies
(as described above), earlier PBPK models for other types of NPs, , , and after comparing the model
simulation results of 14 different model structures. This modeling strategy is now commonly used for the PBPK
modeling of NPs. − 
The PBPK model for AuNPs in mice was
later extrapolated to rats,
pigs, and humans. In this study, the
authors performed interspecies extrapolation from each of the animal
species (i.e., mice, rats, and pigs) to humans and found that rats
and pigs might be more appropriate animal models than mice in animal-to-human
extrapolation of the PK of AuNPs and the dose and age should be considered
in this extrapolation. The final optimal human model was derived from
the rat model. This group of researchers also collected literature
data on in vitro toxicity of AuNPs in primary human liver and blood
cells and in vivo toxicity in rats − and then calculated
human equivalent doses associated with these in vitro and in vivo
toxicity end points. Human equivalent doses are a crucial component
in the derivation of a reference dose for chronic exposure to a xenobiotic
in humans.
The PBPK model for AuNPs in rats and humans provides a basis for further development of
toxicity and
risk assessment approaches for NPs. The same group of researchers
conducted extensive in vitro toxicity assays of AuNPs using different
types of primary human cells (i.e., hepatocytes, umbilical vein endothelial
cells, renal proximal tubule epithelial cells, and keratinocytes). − Based on their PBPK model, in vitro toxicity studies, and additional
in vivo toxicity data from the literature, they developed a probabilistic
risk assessment approach for AuNPs. A
schematic of this approach is provided in . This method can be used to calculate human
equivalent doses associated with reported points of departure from
in vitro and in vivo toxicity, to predict the potential risk of exposure
to AuNPs under different scenarios, and to perform IVIVE and animal-to-human
exposure.
 Besides the PBPK models by Lin and colleagues mentioned
above,
multiple other groups have also published PBPK models for AuNPs. Bachler
et al. integrated in vitro and in silico
methods to evaluate the pulmonary translocation and biodistribution
of AuNPs using a PBPK model. The authors determined the translocation
kinetics across the lung epithelial tissue barrier using human and
mouse alveolar epithelial cell’s exposure to AuNPs of various
doses (25–200 ng/cm2) and sizes (2–80 nm)
for different time periods (0–72 h). They found that the translocation
kinetics of AuNPs across human and mouse lung epithelial cells was
similar. The translocation fraction was inversely proportional to
the size of the particle and was independent of the applied dose (up
to 100 ng/cm2). The authors incorporated the measured in
vitro translocation kinetics into a PBPK model, and the derived PBPK
model accurately predicted the in vivo biodistribution of AuNPs following
inhalational or intratracheal instillation in rats. The authors concluded
that this combined in vitro and in silico PBPK modeling approach has
the potential to replace short-term animal studies that aim to assess
the pulmonary absorption and biodistribution of NPs and to serve as
a screening tool to identify NPs of toxicity concern.
Similar
to the earlier models by Lin et al. and
Bachler et al., recent
PBPK models for AuNPs by other groups − had similar model structures,
in which there was an “endocytosis” subcompartment in
each major RES tissue compartment that accounted for the mechanism
of active cellular uptake of NPs by phagocytic cells. The common conclusion
from these studies was that cell-mediated endocytosis played an important
role in the biodistribution of NPs in the body. Note that the model
by Chou et al. was translated to a user-friendly web-based interface
so that readers can apply this web interface to run PBPK simulations
to predict the concentrations of AuNPs in plasma and tissues following
different routes of administration. 

## Silver Nanoparticles
PBPK modeling for AgNPs is different
from AuNPs as dissolution and metabolism need to be considered. Bachler
et al. developed a PBPK model for both
ionic silver and AgNPs in rats and humans following oral, dermal,
and inhalational exposures. In this model, two possible pathways were
considered for the metabolism of AgNPs: (1) AgNPs dissolve and release
soluble silver species, which are then connected to the ionic silver
PBPK model; and (2) AgNPs are directly transformed to silver sulfide
particles as a storage depot in the tissues. The model was calibrated
with data from intravenous exposure studies and validated with independent
data following other routes of exposure (dermal, oral, and inhalation).
The final model was able to successfully simulate the biodistribution
of both ionic silver and 15–150 nm AgNPs (those that were not
coated with substances designed to prolong the circulatory time, such
as PEG) following different routes of administration in all cases
examined in their study. This model was applied to assess the exposure
and risk of ionic silver and AgNPs based on five exposure scenarios,
including dietary intake, oral uptake of AgNPs released from food
boxes, dermal uptake of AgNPs released from T-shirts, oral uptake
of emitted AgNPs from a throat spray, and occupational exposure. The
results showed that in all consumer product scenarios, the silver
levels of all organs were around or below the dietary background (except
the lung silver level after the usage of the colloidal silver throat
spray), indicating that the risk of adverse health effects from exposure
to AgNPs in consumer products was very small. However, in the occupational
exposure scenario, the predicted soluble silver levels in different
organs exceeded the background levels by a large margin with the levels
in the bone marrow and lung above levels where adverse effects have
been reported, indicating a significant risk for the occupational
exposure population.

## Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles
Bachler
et al. also developed a PBPK model for
titanium dioxide
NPs (15–150 nm) in rodents following different routes of exposure
(intravenous, oral, and dermal) with a similar model structure as
their earlier model for AgNPs. The major
difference was that dissolution was not considered as titanium dioxide
NPs are very stable in the body. Route-to-route
extrapolation from intravenous to oral or dermal was done by including
an intestinal absorption fraction or percutaneous absorption fraction
to account for the orally absorbed and dermally absorbed doses, respectively.
These fractions were estimated by fitting to oral and dermal data
sets from the literature using the PBPK model. The oral PBPK model
was then used to assess the internal exposure and potential risk following
dietary exposure to titanium dioxide NPs for the German population
divided into six age classes (toddlers [1–2 years], other children
[3–9 years], adolescents [10–17 years], adults [18–64
years], elderly [65–74 years], and very elderly [75 years and
older]) on the basis of three main consumer product groups: (1) foods
and beverages, (2) drugs and dietary supplements, and (3) toothpastes.
The results showed that the estimated daily median intake was between
0.5 and 1.0 mg/kg for all age groups except the age group “other
children” (∼2.0 mg/kg). The estimated 95th percentile
titanium organ levels after oral ingestion were <170 ng/g for all
age groups and in all organs. This value is much lower than levels
where toxic effects have been reported in most in vitro studies. , , The authors concluded that the
risk from oral exposure to titanium dioxide NPs via the studied main
consumer products was small for the German population.

## Other Metal
Nanoparticles
Besides the above-mentioned
models, PBPK models have been developed for other inorganic NPs, such
as zinc oxide, iron oxide, , ceria, , iridium, , 99mTc-labeled carbon, and
silica NPs. Readers are referred to and the original
manuscripts of these models for further details.

## Organic nanoparticles

## Polymeric
Nanoparticles
PBPK models have been published
for different types of polymeric NPs, including PEG-coated polyacrylamide
(PAA-PEG) NPs, , poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) with varied content of monomethoxypoly(ethyleneglycol)
(mPEG) (PLGA, PLGA-mPEG256, PLGA-mPEG153, PLGA-mPEG51, PLGA-mPEG34), poly(l-lactide)-poly(ethylene glycol)
block-copolymer (PLA-PEG) NPs, and polymeric
methoxy poly (ethylene glycol)-poly(ε-caprolactone) (mPEG-PCL)
NPs. , Among these studies, the model by Li et
al. is one of the most comprehensively
described. In this study, the model consisted of 9 compartments: blood,
lungs, spleen, liver, kidneys, heart, brain, bone marrow, and the
rest of body. Within the blood and each tissue compartment, there
were three subcompartments representing capillary blood, tissue, and
phagocytizing cells. The model was built based on the assumption that
upon entering into the blood circulation, NPs are distributed throughout
tissues, and a fraction of the NPs entering each tissue is sequestrated
by phagocytic cells. As the amount of captured NPs increases, phagocytic
cells can eventually be saturated. The maximum uptake capacity was
assumed to be organ-specific to reflect the variation in the density
of phagocytic cells as well as differences in uptake capacity for
different types of phagocytic cells in different organs. It was also
assumed that NPs could re-enter the tissue after desorption from phagocytic
cells by processes of exocytosis. This PBPK modeling strategy was
adapted by Lin et al. to develop a PBPK
model for AuNPs described above, and this revised method is now commonly
used in developing PBPK models for NPs.
Another representative
PBPK modeling study for polymeric NPs is the one by Li et al. for PLGA NPs. In this study, experimental data
sets were available for 5 different types of PLGA NPs with different
sizes (57.5–133.5 nm), ζ potentials (−4.3 to −54.2
mV), and number of PEG molecules per unit surface area (0–0.77).
A PBPK model was developed and used to estimate biodistribution parameters
for each type of these NPs. Multivariate regression analyses were
performed to build the relationship between NP properties and biodistribution
parameters (i.e., organ-specific diffusion coefficients, partition
coefficients, and excretion coefficients). The resulting multivariate
regression equations were used to estimate biodistribution parameters
for a sixth type of PLGA NPs (PLGA-mPEG495) with different physicochemical
properties, and the PBPK simulated concentrations were compared with
observed data at 3 h after intravenous injection. The results showed
that the PBPK-predicted values were close to experimental data for
all tissues. This study demonstrates that it is possible to develop
NP property-biodistribution relationship models to estimate biodistribution
parameters and generate PBPK models for the same type of NPs with
variations in physicochemical properties.

## Liposomes
Liposomes
are a common nanoparticulate formulation
among the approved nanomedicines. Kagan
et al. developed a dual PBPK model to describe the disposition of
both liposomal and nonliposomal formulations of amphotericin B in
mice and rats following intravenous injection, and then extrapolated
the model to simulate amphotericin B concentrations in human tissues. The authors started with a PBPK model for a
nonliposomal formulation of amphotericin B as this is an important
prerequisite and provides a basis for understanding the PK of the
liposomal particulate formulations. The
authors established a compartmental release model to simulate the
release of amphotericin B from liposomes by fitting to plasma concentration–time
profiles for total and nonliposomal drug following intravenous administration
of the liposomal and nonliposomal drug in rats and humans. Next, a
dual PBPK model was created for liposomal and nonliposomal amphotericin
B. In this model, liposomal amphotericin B circulates throughout the
body via blood capillaries and can undergo release to its nonliposomal
form by a first-order rate constant. This release was assumed to take
place in both plasma and tissues. The derived human PBPK model-predicted
concentrations of liposomal and nonliposomal concentrations of amphotericin
B well corresponded the observed plasma data in humans following intravenous
injection of a liposomal formulation (AmBisome) and also correlated
with limited concentration data in various tissues from autopsy reports.
Since therapeutic success of amphotericin B depends on its concentration
in target tissues, the authors concluded that this model can be potentially
utilized to optimize therapeutic plans for AmBisome in humans and
to investigate pathophysiological factors controlling amphotericin
B PK and pharmacodynamics.

## Nanocrystals
Nanocrystals (or nanosuspensions)
refer
to a submicron colloidal dispersion system of pure drug particles
in water. Nanocrystals have many strengths in drug delivery, especially
for drugs with poor solubility (those in Biopharmaceutics Classification
System Classes II or IV). These strengths include: (1) a high drug
load because the drug is suspended in a solid state; (2) no significant
toxicity concern because only a small quantity of excipient (stabilizer)
is used; (3) suitability for various administration routes, including
oral, parenteral, pulmonary, and ocular pathways; and (4) great potential
in passive targeting and provide a depot effect. Dong et al. developed
a PBPK model for SNX-2112 (a potential anticancer drug with poor solubility
in water) and its nanoparticulate formulation as nanocrystals. The
PBPK model for the nonparticulate drug cosolvent is a standard perfusion-limited
model; whereas in the PBPK model for the nanocrystals, a species of
the nanoparticulate drug was included in the plasma, liver, and spleen.
The in vitro release kinetics of the nonparticulate form of SNX-2112
from the nanoparticulate form was determined using the bulk-equilibrium
reverse dialysis method and then described using a first-order rate
constant. This model was built based on the assumption that uptake
of nanocrystals only takes place in the liver and spleen (two major
RES organs), thus the nanoparticulate form of the drug is only present
in plasma, liver, and spleen. This assumption worked well in their
model as their model was able to adequately simulate the available
experimental data. However, this assumption is considered overly simplified
as phagocytic cells also exist in other organs of the RES systems
(i.e., lungs, kidneys, and bone marrow), and many PBPK modeling studies
suggest the endocytosis of NPs should also consider other RES organs,
such as kidneys and lungs.
PBPK models have also been developed
for other nanocrystals. − Similar to the study by Dong et al., these models were developed mainly to support
the development and evaluation of nanoparticulate formulations of
poorly soluble drugs. These studies consistently support that PBPK
models can be a useful tool in correlating in vitro release kinetic
profile of a poorly soluble drug with in vivo PK profile of the drug
in either nanoparticulate or nonparticulate forms, thereby helping
develop nanoparticulate forms of poorly soluble drugs.

## Other Organic
or Hybrid Nanoparticles
As described
above, there are numerous different types of NPs, and the same type
of NPs could have many variations in physicochemical properties (i.e.,
differences in sizes, ζ potential, surface coating). As such,
it is impractical to develop an individual PBPK model for each type
of NPs (this would be a daunting task) for safety and risk assessment
purposes. Several research groups have been trying to develop generic
PBPK models for multiple different types of NPs, including both inorganic
and organic NPs. Carlander et al. reported
a generic PBPK model for four types of nondegradable NPs, including
PEG-coated PAA, uncoated PAA, gold, and titanium dioxide NPs in rats
following intravenous injection. The same model structure and physiological
parameter values were applied, whereas NP-specific parameters were
estimated by fitting to respective experimental time–concentration
data in various tissues for each type of NPs. The final model adequately
simulated the observed PK behavior of all four types of NPs despite
substantial differences in the PK behavior and physicochemical properties.
Similarly, Price and Gesquiere developed
a generic PBPK model for many different types of NPs (i.e., QD, gold,
silica, iron oxide, and polymeric NPs) in healthy animals of several
species (i.e., mice, rats, and monkeys).
In addition, Cheng
et al. developed a generic PBPK model
that is applicable for a variety of NPs in tumor-bearing mice. This
model was based on their earlier model for AuNPs in healthy mice. , The authors extended their model to tumor-bearing mice by adding
a tumor compartment. All physiological parameters and NP-specific
parameters in nontumor tissues were kept the same as in the healthy
mice. Only parameters related to the tumor compartment were estimated
for each type of NPs by fitting to their respective data set from
the literature (summarized and published as an Excel file termed Nano-Tumor
Database). The model was used to simulate
distribution kinetics in the tumor tissue for different types of NPs
and the performance was evaluated against 376 data sets. The model
was able to adequate simulate >83% of the data sets (with a determination
coefficient of R2 > 0.75 in the regression
analysis between predicted and observed data). The authors conducted
multivariate regression analyses to determine the relationship of
tumor delivery efficiency with physicochemical properties and targeting
strategies and cancer types. It was found that low tumor delivery
efficiency of ∼0.7% injected dose was associated with low distribution
and permeability coefficients at the tumor site. This study demonstrates
that PBPK modeling can be an effective tool to identify determinants
associated with target tissue dosimetry in tumors or normal tissues.

## In Vitro to In Vivo Extrapolation of Cellular and Tissue Dosimetry
of Nanoparticles
IVIVE is a well-established approach for
PBPK modeling of small
molecules. The latest PBPK modeling guideline from Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) provides strategies to
develop and evaluate or validate a PBPK model for a chemical only
based on in vitro and in silico data, without relying on in vivo PK
data for the model validation. One approach
to address the above-mentioned limitation to account for cell-mediated
endocytosis of NPs in a PBPK model is to measure the cellular uptake
and release kinetic parameters using in vitro cell models and then
translate the in vitro results to in vivo based on cell type and cell
density of individual organs. Some studies have successfully implemented
this approach. For example, Bachler et al. determined the translocation
kinetics of AuNPs across human and mouse lung epithelial cells and
then incorporated this parameter into a PBPK model; the model-predicted
pulmonary translocation and biodistribution correlated with the observed
data well. 
Price and Gesquiere measured the in
vitro uptake, degradation, and release kinetics of different NPs in
different cells. A step-by-step process of the IVIVE in this study
is illustrated in . The overall simulation was based on a three-compartment
model that included the medium compartment, cell membrane compartment,
and cell space compartment as described in detail above. The in vitro
cell kinetics was translated to whole-body simulations based on the
in vitro assay results using a computational fluid dynamic model to
predict NP distribution into individual tissue cells. In the body,
the transport of a NP from the blood supply to cells of a particular
tissue was simulated through the computational fluid dynamic theory
primarily obtained from a hydrodynamic simulation of solutes through
cell membrane pores captured by modeling a reflection coefficient,
σ. When the reflection coefficient approaches 0, NPs can enter
the pathways to interstitial space or cell space through the cell
membrane. When it approaches 1, the membrane pore excludes the NP
and it remains outside the pores. Variable reflection coefficients
were calculated using a fluid dynamic model to account for differences
in NP size, animal species, and capillary membrane pore diameters.
The final model was validated against 15 preclinical data sets, which
included different dosing scenarios (0.029 to 64.3 mg/kg body weight),
NP types (polymer, QD, metal, and antibody), and sizes (4 to 197 nm
diameter) in mice, rats, and nonhuman primates. The authors concluded
that this in vitro- and in silico-based PBPK modeling strategy provides
a viable platform to refine, reduce, and replace animal testing in
nanomedicine development and safety evaluation.
 However, not all studies successfully
implemented this IVIVE of
the cellular uptake and release kinetics. For example, Dubaj et al. determined the internalization and exclusion
of PEG-coated AuNPs in several human cell lines (TH1, A549, Hep G2,
and 16HBE), modeled these processes with first-order rate equations,
and then translated the in vitro uptake and release parameters to
in vivo using a perfusion rate-limited PBPK model. However, there
were notable differences between the observed internalized amount
of gold in individual cell lines and the corresponding tissues in
vivo. The authors concluded that researchers should be cautious when
extrapolating in vitro kinetic data to predict tissue biodistribution
of NPs in vivo.

## Challenges and Future Perspectives

## Challenges
and Future Perspectives on In Vivo Pharmacokinetic
Study of Nanoparticles
NPs have been identified as promising
candidates for many biological and biomedical applications. Because
of their small particle sizes, versatile physicochemical properties,
and ease of their fabrication involving bottom-up and top-down approaches,
NPs have been widely used, more specifically, as a drug delivery system.
Special properties arise due to nanosize, including a high surface-to-volume
ratio has given us tremendous room to envision it as a multimodality
system. Despite its vast potential benefit in the biomedical field,
there are technical challenges to map their tissue bioavailability
and toxicology. Commonly synthesized NPs are often characterized in
the ranges of sizes, although unifying their size distribution and
segregating uniform size is possible but results in low product yield
for clinical application. While efforts have been made to study the
size effect on tissue distribution and toxicity, less attention has
been given to the systematic challenges arising due to the protein
corona formation that significantly alters the NP’s PK and
TK. The formation of protein corona over the surface of NPs in circulation
affects NP uptake and diffusion throughout the surrounding tissue;
hence, it is crucial to design experimental and mathematical approaches
to account for these variations. Fluorescence probes have been used
to account for the distribution of NPs in tissues, cells, and residence
in plasma; whereas less attention is given to using multimodality
techniques to map its distribution accurately. Therefore, future studies
should be based on the question raised, such as distribution differences
for NPs with different sizes, chemistry, and functionalities, which
are central questions that apply to any enveloped NP systems and have
parallels to the structural changes and interactions seen for many
NPs, and so the results will clarify some of the underlying rules
about how NPs interact with their host ligands to target intended
sites, thereby helping assess the potential risk of different NPs
with target site dosimetry.

## Challenges and Future Perspectives on In
Vitro Nanoparticle-Cell
Interaction Kinetics Research
The in vitro NP kinetics work
reviewed above demonstrates that in vitro studies allow for the discovery
of pharmacological end points including NP uptake and removal with
associated kinetics. Care should be taken however to ensure reproducible
data are interpreted correctly.
First, studies by Kim et al.
have shown that cellular uptake of NPs is affected by the cell cycle. While uptake rates stayed consistent in different
cell cycle phases, it was found that the dose of NPs internalized
in each cell in a population was dependent on the phase of the cell
cycle. It was also found that the absence of uptake saturation was
related to cell division rather than the expulsion of NPs.
Second,
corona formation can strongly alter the kinetics of NP-cell
interactions. The effect of corona formation on NP-cell interaction
kinetics was investigated for carboxylated polystyrene and silica
NPs. The authors reported that protein
adsorption on the NP surface significantly reduced NP adhesion on
the cell surface compared to the bare NPs for the case of nonspecific
interactions. This was attributed to the lower surface energy of the
NPs when they have a protein corona, illustrating the importance of
the biological environment on NP-cell interaction kinetics. With the
rational design of NPs, the formation and composition of protein corona
can be controlled as demonstrated by Yang et al. Changing the fraction of zwitterionic and charged lipids
in liposomes was demonstrated to affect the amount and type of serum
proteins adsorbed on the NPs in vitro. Moreover, the different liposome
formulations also resulted in varying uptake kinetics. These findings
suggest the potential to tune NP design to achieve desired cell uptake
properties through the engineering of the protein corona.
Third,
the effect of diffusion and sedimentation phenomena on cellular
uptake of NPs was studied in depth by Cho et al. for AuNPs of varying
shapes cultured in vitro under upright and inverted configurations. The researchers concluded that for particles
that sediment faster there was a greater difference in cellular uptake
between the upright and inverted in vitro configurations, in particular
where the ratio between the sedimentation and diffusion velocities
is >1. Some AuNPs (54 nm nanospheres and 62 nm nanocages) did show
back diffusion due to concentration gradient so this has to be considered
carefully as well. In a later study, Bancos et al. further validated
that assay preparation and conditions affect quantitative outcomes
and thus need to be carefully considered. Such reports indicate that some issues with unexpected or inexplicable
results from in vitro assays can be traced to sedimentation of larger
or dense NPs. For instance, Bancos et al. found that increasing the
applied dose of AuNPs leads to increased uptake rates, and that certain
media conditions could lead to particle aggregation. Since sedimentation of dense particles typically results
in a higher exposure dose of cells to NPs, not considering this effect
could lead to unexpected or misunderstood results. A similar conclusion
was made by Rischitor et al., noting that NP deposition occurs in
two phases, where phase 1 is cellular uptake driven by NP-cell affinity
and phase 2 is the deposition of NPs on the cell membrane. The authors also suggest that particle size
and exposure duration play their part in these phenomena together
with the liquid height in the wells for in vitro assays. Conversely,
a recent study by Bitounis et al. for larger cellulose NPs demonstrates
that only 26% of the applied dose could reach within 100 μm
from the bottom of a well after 24 h, where cells would be located. 
This was addressed in particular by Teeguarden
et al. and Hinderliter et al. in their ISDD model built on the work by Limbach
et al. Gravitational sedimentation and
particle aggregation
were considered in the calculation of the true delivered NP dose,
which can differ from the applied dose in an in vitro assay. The In
vitro Sedimentation, Diffusion, Dissolution, and Dosimetry (ISD3)
model extends this work to include particle dissolution. Along similar lines, Cohen et al. propose a
further study on particle-media interactions that NP dispersion protocols
should be standardized to ensure that in vitro research shows less
variation between studies. This was
more recently corroborated by Moore et al. when the authors reported
that the method of applying AuNPs in vitro affected the fraction of
NPs deposited on cells. Note that the
ISDD and ISD3 models , are mainly used to predict the
delivered dose on the membrane of cells at the bottom of the cell
culture well based on the physicochemical properties of NPs and the
in vitro cell culture and exposure conditions. This is different from
the in vitro cellular kinetic models reviewed in this article, which
are mainly used to simulate uptake and release of NPs into and out
of cells and can be used to predict intracellular dose of NPs. However,
the connection of these two types of models is that the delivered
dose predicted from the ISDD or ISD3 model can serve as a more accurately
input dose parameter to the in vitro cellular kinetic model to predict
intracellular dose.
Fourth, Serpooshan et al. have made a case
for the importance of
considering the effect of cell sex on in vitro NP kinetics. The researchers discovered that differences
exist in NP uptake for human amniotic stem cells, with greater uptake
of NPs by female cells. When this study was replicated with fibroblast
the opposite effect of cell sex was found.

## Challenges and Future Perspectives
on PBPK Modeling and IVIVE
of Nanoparticles
Unlike PBPK modeling for small molecules
and macromolecules such as monoclonal antibodies for which the methodology
is well-established, , PBPK modeling for NPs is an
emerging field, and the methodology is still under development. While
there are around 50 published PBPK models for different NPs, many
of these studies use different methods. Based on existing studies,
there are many differences in PBPK modeling methods between small
molecules and NPs, as summarized in . All of these have caused a challenge for
the field to progress and also raised a need to comprehensively evaluate
different strategies to determine the best PBPK modeling methods for
NPs. In this review article, several key points are discussed below
along with our perspectives.
 

## Endocytosis
One major difference in PBPK modeling between
small molecules and NPs is the consideration of endocytosis in organs
of the RES system. The very early NP PBPK models did not consider
this mechanism in part because of a lack of mechanistic information
at that time. , Later on, most NP PBPK models
included this mechanism, but with variations in how to account for
this mechanism, with some studies considering endocytosis in all compartments, , some only considered it in major RES organs, , and some only considered it in liver and spleen. , Also, the mathematical equations of the endocytosis among these
studies are somewhat different (e.g., first-order linear process vs
saturable process). While the inclusion of cell-mediated endocytosis
in organs of the RES system results in a more physiologically realistic
model, it also requires multiple cellular uptake and release kinetics
parameters for each organ, and these parameter values are dependent
on the type of NPs. Experimentally determined values of these parameters
are usually not available, thus these parameters have to be estimated,
resulting in increased uncertainty of the model. To minimize this
uncertainty, one research group did not include endocytosis mechanisms
in their PBPK model for AuNPs. While
a consensus approach remains to be established, most of the existing
studies suggest that (1) cell-mediated endocytosis in organs of the
RES system plays an important role in the biodistribution of NPs,
and should be included in a whole-body PBPK model; (2) the uptake
process appears to be better described as a saturable process; whereas
the release process can be simplified as a first-order linear process;
and (3) ideally the uptake and release rate parameters should be determined
using in vitro or in vivo approaches to minimize the uncertainty of
the PBPK model.

## In Vitro to In Vivo Extrapolation
Unlike small molecules
of which the IVIVE methodology is well-established, the IVIVE strategies
for NPs remain to be developed. Currently, there are only a few studies
that have attempted to perform IVIVE for NPs, with some studies showing
IVIVE is feasible for NPs, , whereas another study
suggests that direct IVIVE may produce suboptimal results for NPs
and thus may require further optimization of the methodology. Additional studies are needed to develop and
validate IVIVE methodology for NPs. We term the process of “nanomaterial
in vitro to in vivo extrapolation via physiologically based pharmacokinetic
modeling” as Nano-IVIVE-PBPK ( ). We think this framework is important for
high-throughput screening of the target cellular and dosimetry as
well as potential toxicity of different NMs based on their physicochemical
properties. Specifically, in vitro cellular uptake and release studies
should be performed in several major cell types in rodents and humans,
and the in vitro kinetics should be modeled using approaches that
are compatible with PBPK modeling, similar to our recent study. Next, IVIVE can be performed via a PBPK model,
and the PBPK-simulated in vivo kinetic profiles in plasma and tissues
should be evaluated and validated with in vivo PK data in rodents.
Depending on the evaluation results, the IVIVE approach may be optimized
as needed. Once the IVIVE approach is established in rodents, it can
be extrapolated to humans. This methodology development will require
in vitro, in silico modeling, and in vivo PK studies using the same
type of NPs to avoid compounding by other variables and uncertainty.
Once the methodology is developed for one NP, subsequent evaluation
with other NPs should be done to develop a general methodology for
NPs.

## Route-to-Route Extrapolation
Route-to-route extrapolation
is a standard application for PBPK modeling of small molecules. For
NPs, several studies have performed route-to-route extrapolation,
typically from intravenous to an extravascular route, by assuming
all parameters remained the same and only estimating the route-specific
parameter (e.g., oral absorption fraction or rate constant). This
is a default approach for small molecules, but whether this approach
is suitable to NPs remains to be tested. Upon entering into the body
following different routes of administration, NPs will be in contact
with different biological fluids, resulting in different protein coronas
that lead to different PK properties. Therefore, the default route-to-route
extrapolation approach for small molecules may not be applicable for
NPs. To test this, one recent study developed a PBPK model for different
sizes of AuNPs following different routes of administration, including
intravenous, oral, inhalational, and intratracheal exposures in rats. The in vivo data sets following different routes
of exposure were collected from the same laboratory using the same
measurement method and same NPs, making them an ideal data source
to assess the route-to-route extrapolation of NPs. The authors compared
the model predictive performance between two approaches: a traditional
approach that is commonly used for small molecules by directly extrapolating
the model from intravenous to other routes of exposure and a proposed
route-specific approach for NPs to calibrate the model using route-specific
data. The authors found that the multiroute model derived from the
proposed route-specific approach had a much more accurate prediction
than that from the traditional approach. This study demonstrated that
the traditional route-to-route extrapolation approach for PBPK modeling
of small molecules is not applicable to NPs. For NPs, multiroute PBPK
models should be established using route-specific data. This study
suggests that PBPK modeling methods for NPs could be quite different
from small molecules, and a more systematic evaluation of PBPK modeling
methods for NPs is needed.
Another question is whether the lymphatic
system and protein corona formation kinetics are needed and how to
incorporate them into a PBPK model for NPs. It is a standard practice
to include the lymphatic system into a PBPK model for macromolecules,
such as monoclonal antibodies. It is
known that the lymphatic system plays an important role in the biodistribution
of NPs. However, among existing NP PBPK models, only a few included
the lymphatic system. , Many PBPK models have acceptable
model predictive performance without including the lymphatic system
( and ). The performance of a PBPK model with and without
the lymphatic system has not been systematically evaluated, and this
should be done in order to figure out whether it is necessary to describe
the lymphatic system in a PBPK model for NPs. Regarding protein coronas,
it is well-recognized that protein corona formation plays an important
role in the PK of NPs, but protein corona formation kinetics has not
been incorporated into existing NP PBPK models. This is in part because
of the complexity of describing protein corona formation in vivo and
the differences in the formation kinetics between in vitro and in
vivo systems. This remains a critical barrier to be explored in future
studies.

## Generic PBPK Models
For PBPK modeling
of small molecules,
it is a general trend to develop generic models that work for multiple
chemicals as it is impractical to develop an individual PBPK model
for each chemical given a large number of chemicals in commerce whose
safety and risk need to be evaluated. This trend also applies to NPs.
A few studies have tried to develop generic PBPK models for several
types of NPs. , , , However, these models were calibrated
using particle-specific data sets, thus it still requires an in vivo
data set for each type of NPs to be included in the model framework.
For small molecules, it is common to build quantitative structure–property/activity
relationship (QSPR or QSAR) models to estimate parameters for chemicals
based on chemical structures. For NPs, Li et al. have demonstrated that it is feasible to build multivariate
linear regression equations to predict model parameters for a different
PLGA NP based on physicochemical properties. Similarly, in our recent
study, we constructed several multivariate linear regression equations
that can be used to predict PBPK model parameters (e.g., maximum uptake
rate and capacity parameters) for AuNPs. To build more robust models, machine learning and artificial intelligence
approaches may be applied, , but this will require
a larger amount of training data to avoid overfitting of the model.

## Interspecies Extrapolation
Finally, one of the reasons
PBPK modeling is very useful in small molecular chemical risk assessment
is its ability to extrapolate PK and toxicity data from animals to
humans. Several NP PBPK models have attempted to conduct extrapolation
from one species to another using the traditional approach for small
molecules. , , , , The study
by Lin et al. suggested that rats and
pigs may be more suitable animal models for extrapolating the PK of
AuNPs to humans. In addition, the PBPK model in mice by Aborig et
al. was extrapolated to rats by adapting
physiological parameters to represent rats, and the resulting rat
model adequately simulated PK and tissue distribution data of citrated-capped
AuNPs in rats. These studies support the potential of interspecies
extrapolation of NM PK using PBPK modeling. Nevertheless, interspecies
extrapolation of PBPK modeling remains to be evaluated for other types
of NPs, and the exact methodology remains to be developed.

## Summary of How This Article Furthers the Knowledge and Understanding
of the Field
This review article summarizes the state of
the art and the research challenges in the field of in vivo PK, in
vitro cellular kinetic modeling, and in vivo PBPK modeling as well
as IVIVE of NPs. We share our perspectives on how to address these
challenges. We also propose an emerging research paradigm for NPs,
i.e., Nano-IVIVE-PBPK ( ). All of this information will help us better understand
the progress, challenges, and potential solutions in this field, which
will further help design future studies to ensure in vitro and in
vivo studies are useful within the Nano-IVIVE-PBPK framework to move
this field forward. In the long term, the research strategies described
in this article will be instrumental to refine, reduce, and replace
animal experimentation in the field of nanoscience.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge
funding support
from the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering
(NIBIB), US National Institutes of Health (NIH) (grant nos.: R01EB031022,
R15EB030815, and R03EB026045), and the Faculty Start-up funds from
the University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, and the University
of Texas at Tyler, Texas. The authors also acknowledge assistance
from Dr. Qiran Chen at Department of Environmental and Global Health
and Center for Environmental and Human Toxicology at the University
of Florida for helping prepare the figures.

## Glossary

## Vocabulary
Target cellular and tissue dosimetrythe amount or the concentration of a substance, such as a chemical
and a nanoparticle that reaches the cell or the target organ in the
body and directly interacts with target cellular components to induce
responses at the molecular, cellular, organ and/or whole-body level
in vitro to in vivo extrapolation
(IVIVE)a process of extrapolating data, such as pharmacokinetic
and toxicity data that are generated using in vitro cell culture systems
to in vivo conditions
nanomaterial
in vitro to in vivo extrapolation via physiologically based pharmacokinetic
modeling (Nano-IVIVE-PBPK)an emerging research paradigm
in which cellular uptake kinetic parameters of a nanoparticle are
collected using in vitro model systems, and then these parameters
are extrapolated to in vivo and incorporated into a whole-body physiologically
based pharmacokinetic model to simulate the biodistribution of the
nanoparticle in the body
pharmacokineticsthe science of studying the rate and extent of absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and excretion processes of a drug and its
metabolites in the body as well as the factors that control the time
course of these processes using experimental or mathematical modeling
approaches
physiologically based
pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modelinga computational simulation
process that describes the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion of a substance, such as an environmental chemical, drug,
and nanoparticle and/or its metabolites in an organism based on interrelationships
among key physiological, biochemical, and physicochemical determinants
using mathematical equations
risk
assessmenta process to characterize the nature and
magnitude of potential risks of exposure to a chemical, a nanoparticle
or other stressors on human health
toxicokineticssimilar to pharmacokinetics, but it
is focused on toxicants, instead of drugs

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References