822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC9364977936497794134093592152210.1021/acsnano.2c03119Genetically Engineered
MRI-Trackable Extracellular
Vesicles as SARS-CoV-2 Mimetics for Mapping ACE2 Binding In Vivo
GalisovaAndrea ZahradnikJiri Allouche-ArnonHyla MorandiMattia I Abou KaramPaula FislerMichal AvinoamOri Regev-RudzkiNeta SchreiberGideon Bar-ShirAmnon †Department
of Molecular Chemistry and Materials Science and ‡Department of
Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute
of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel*Email: amnon.barshir@weizmann.ac.il.
3820221681227612276–122891082022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The elucidation of viral-receptor interactions and an
understanding
of virus-spreading mechanisms are of great importance, particularly
in the era of a pandemic. Indeed, advances in computational chemistry,
synthetic biology, and protein engineering have allowed precise prediction
and characterization of such interactions. Nevertheless, the hazards
of the infectiousness of viruses, their rapid mutagenesis, and the
need to study viral-receptor interactions in a complex in
vivo setup call for further developments. Here, we show the
development of biocompatible genetically engineered extracellular
vesicles (EVs) that display the receptor binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2
on their surface as coronavirus mimetics (EVsRBD). Loading
EVsRBD with iron oxide nanoparticles makes them MRI-visible
and, thus, allows mapping of the binding of RBD to ACE2 receptors
noninvasively in live subjects. Moreover, we show that EVsRBD can be modified to display mutants of the RBD of SARS-CoV-2, allowing
rapid screening of currently raised or predicted variants of the virus.
The proposed platform thus shows relevance and cruciality in the examination
of quickly evolving pathogenic viruses in an adjustable, fast, and
safe manner. Relying on MRI for visualization, the presented approach
could be considered in the future to map ligand-receptor binding events
in deep tissues, which are not accessible to luminescence-based imaging.
Keywords: ligand−receptor binding, virus mimetics, extracellular vesicle, genetic engineering, SARS-CoV-2, MRI, superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs)

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Mar 30; Accepted 2022 Jul 29; Issue date 2022 Aug 23.

## Introduction
Virus-receptor recognition is the initial
step in the infectious
cycle and is considered to be a key stage in the induction of viral
pathogenesis. Therefore, the elucidation
of the interactions of viruses with host cells’ receptors is
of paramount importance for a better understanding of pathology pathways
and for the development of antiviral interventions. For example, it
has been shown that the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2), which has caused the current and prolonged coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, specifically attacks cells expressing
high levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor. The understanding of the interactions between
the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the spike-S protein of the virus
with ACE2 has resulted in the development
of a wide range of efficient therapeutics and vaccines. − Unfortunately, SARS-CoV-2 has shown an unprecedented ability to
rapidly introduce mutations to the spike protein and the RBD for improved
affinity and immune evasion, − which have led to rapid spreading of more transmissible
variants and compromised effectiveness of available vaccines. Thus, it is clear that there is a need for the
ability to characterize viruses and their evolving mutants quickly
and safely and potentially even predict dangerous variants before
they emerge. Indeed, in silico( ) and in vitro( ) examination of viruses provides crucial insights into virus-receptor
interactions. Nevertheless, these approaches are limited in the study
of off-target binding events and are not applicable for spatial and
real-time mapping of viral-receptor binding in deep tissues. This
calls for a method with the ability to longitudinally and noninvasively
monitor and map in vivo viral distribution and receptor
binding in a safe and rapid way to enhance our ability to study emerging
viruses and assess biological feedback to therapeutics.
Several
types of nonviral nanosized formulations have been proposed
to elucidate viral-receptor interactions so far, including those for
studying SARS-CoV-2. , − Among these,
extracellular vesicles (EVs) offer several advantages over synthetic
nanoparticles. First, as cellular content nanocarriers, − they are biological substances, suggesting that they can be introduced
into the body without leading to the side effects often encountered
with synthetic formulations. Second, they can be genetically engineered
to present biomolecules on their surface, providing a rapid and general
method for the display of peptides. − As such, EV targetability
to a tissue of interest has been enhanced by displaying peptides that
are not present on the surface of native EVs. − Third, EVs share important similarities
with enveloped viruses, including comparable sizes and host membrane
compositions. , − EVs are thus
attractive noninfectious vehicles for examination of viral uptake
pathways of cellular cargo delivery, , − or for the development of EV-based vaccines , and related adjuvants. For example,
EVs presenting the coronavirus S protein or its RBD were proposed
as potential vaccines already in the mid-2000s for SARS-CoV as well as for the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. , , Moreover, they showed efficiency
as decoys for neutralizing antibodies and as systems for targeted delivery of antiviral agents. In addition, the ease at which EVs can be genetically
engineered makes these formulations ideal for rapid studies of emerging
viral mutations as they appear.
Given that EVs can mimic viruses
and can be labeled with imageable
material, , , EVs can potentially
be used for noninvasive in vivo imaging of viral-receptor
interactions. In fact, it has been shown that EVs can be fluorescently
labeled and imaged in vivo; however, these fluorescent
methods are unable to track EVs in deep tissues and offer limited
spatial resolution. In contrast, tracking
of EVs with three-dimensional imaging modalities (such as CT and MRI ) allows
an assessment of their spatial distribution even in deep tissues.
In this regard, MRI stands out because of its ability to provide spatial
information from the introduced EVs that can be overlaid on high-resolution
anatomical images of the same subject, thus avoiding the need to use
hybrid multimodal imaging approaches. Here, we show the design, development,
and implementation of genetically engineered EVs that display the
RBD of SARS-CoV-2 (EVsRBD) as coronavirus mimetics for
studying RBD-ACE2 interactions. Magnetically labeled EVsRBD allow mapping RBD-ACE2 binding in vivo and in real-time
using a clinically translatable MRI setup. Moreover, we demonstrate
the modifiability of the EV-based formulation by presenting a highly
potent mutant of RBD (RBD-62) and of
known SARS-CoV-2 variants, Delta and Omicron. The ability to monitor
both in vivo biodistribution and the effect of different
binding affinities of RBD to ACE2 in a fast and safe way highlights
the potential of our approach in prolonged pandemic eras and for the
study of other emerging viruses.

## Results and Discussion

## Genetic Design of SARS-CoV-2 Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) Constructs
Several methods have already been implemented to genetically engineer
EVs to display peptides on their surface as, e.g., in fusion with
the Lamp2b EVs membrane protein, , the vesicular
stomatitis virus G protein (VSVG), or
the transmembrane domain of platelet-derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR) when using the pDisplay vector. Although widely used, Lamp2b showed an inability to express the
RBD of the SARS-CoV-2 on the membrane efficiently. Starting from the pDisplay vector, which has been extensively
used for heterologous expression and surface display of cell receptors
in mammalian cells, we first engineered it for efficient expression
of viral peptides on the surface of EVs. To this end, and with a purpose
to create SARS-CoV-2 mimetics, EVRBD ( ), we constructed a pAGDisplay
plasmid through a three-component assembly of fragments from the widely
used pDisplay, pLVX-Puro, and pET26b plasmids. There are four main
benefits of using our designed pAGDisplay plasmid over other alternatives.
First, it uses the puromycin resistance marker, which is a more potent
selective antibiotic compared to Geneticin. Second, an IRES sequence,
which was introduced downstream from the transmembrane domain, allowed
coexpression of the antibiotic resistance gene and the transmembrane
domain gene under a single promoter. Third, the fluorescent protein
eUnaG2 was fused with the C-terminus of PuroR, allowing for easy detection
of transfected cells. Fourth, we introduced an RFnano protein, an
MIRFPnano670 derivative (see the section),
at the C-terminus of the PDGFβ transmembrane domain to allow
efficient selection of RBD-expressing cells using fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS). Having designed the pAGDisplay plasmid for efficient
and versatile surface display of cell receptors, the Wuhan RBD of
SARS-CoV-2 was first cloned at the N-terminus preceding the transmembrane
PDGFR domain. Specific tags were added to the obtained constructs
for further validation of expression with an ALFA tag as a marker
to the RBD construct and a Myc-tag to the control construct (referred
to later in the text as noRBD).
 

## Parental Cells Display Functional RBD with Wild Type Affinity
to ACE2
Human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells were transfected
with pAGDisplay-RBD or pAGDisplay-noRBD followed by FACS to select
cells associated with the highest expression levels of eUnaG2 (green
fluorescence) and RFnano (red fluorescence). Stable cell lines expressing
RBD or controls were established under puromycin antibiotics selection
for 3 weeks. HEK293 cells stably expressing RBD on the membrane surface
(RBD cells) or control cells (noRBD cells) were obtained and characterized
using immunostaining, immunoblotting, flow cytometry ( a–c), and confocal microscopy
(Figure S1). The presence of RBD fused
to the ALFA tag on the cell surface was confirmed using a designed
anti-ALFA tag nanobody (DnbALFA, see the section) fused with mNeon Green protein (excitation 506 nm, emission
517 nm). RBD-expressing cells incubated with the nanobody showed a
bright signal on the cell surface corresponding to the presence of
RBD, in contrast to noRBD cells, which showed only a background signal
of the eUnaG2 protein present in the cytoplasm ( a). The binding of the anti-ALFA tag nanobody
only to the RBD cells was also confirmed at a single-cell level by
flow cytometry ( b, p < 0.0001 and Figure S2 for FACS data). Moreover, Western blot analysis of lysed
cells showed the expression of the RBD-ALFA tag protein only in RBD
cells ( c).
 Having demonstrated the presence of RBD on the
cell surface, we
then tested its functionality. For this purpose, the recombinant extracellular
fragment of ACE2 protein (a 723 amino acids length, 83.6 kDa, 7 N-linked
glycosylation, theoretical pI of 5.26; Figure S3c) was expressed, purified, and conjugated
to a fluorophore CF640R (excitation 642 nm, emission 662 nm) followed
by its incubation with either noRBD or RBD cells ( d–f). Fluorescence microscopy
images showed a clear binding of the ACE2 protein only to RBD cells
depicted as a higher fluorescent signal compared to controls, confirming
the presence of a functional RBD on the cell surface ( d). Similarly, flow cytometry
analysis showed a significantly higher fluorescent signal in RBD cells
compared to noRBD cells (p < 0.001), corresponding
to the bound ACE2 protein ( e and Figure S2 for FACS
data). By incubating the cells with a range of different concentrations
of fluorescently labeled ACE2 protein and performing a series of FACS
experiments to determine its affinity to RBD at the cell surface,
an apparent equilibrium dissociation constant (KD) of 6.7 ± 1.3 nM was determined for RBD cells ( f, Figure S3a,b). This affinity of RBD expressed at the surface
of HEK293 cells to the ACE2 protein is in accordance with the values
reported for purified proteins or through a yeast-display assay. , 

## EVsRBD as Functional SARS-CoV-2 Mimetics That Target
ACE2 Receptors
Following the validation of the expression
of functional RBD at the surface of HEK293 cells through ACE2 binding
assessments ( and Figure S3), secreted EVs of these
cells were obtained using a standard method of differential centrifugation
of the cells’ media (with an average yield of 5 × 109 EVs/one million cells) according to MISEV guidelines. The isolated and purified EVs from RBD cells
or control cells were referred to as EVsRBD or EVsnoRBD, respectively, and were further examined. Western blot
analysis confirmed the expression of RBD ( a) via detection of the ALFA-tag only in
EVsRBD, while CD81 and Alix, typical markers of EVs, were detected in both EVsRBD and
EVsnoRBD ( b). Cryo-transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images revealed
the spherical morphology and typical size of vesicles for both EVsnoRBD and EVsRBD ( c). Nanoparticle tracking analysis showed
a homogeneous distribution of size, with an average size of 80.9 ±
1.8 nm and 90.4 ± 1.6 nm for EVsRBD and EVsnoRBD, respectively ( d), comparable to the size reported for SARS-CoV-2. Before using them for incubation studies, the stability
of the formulations was studied under the conditions used for their
long- and short-term storage (4 and −80 °C), fluorescent
labeling (25 °C), and incubation with live cells (37 °C),
which showed no change in the representation of the targeting peptide
(Figure S5).
 Next, with the aim to examine the binding capabilities
of EVsRBD to ACE2-expressing (HEKACE2) as compared
to
control (HEK) cells, both cell types were incubated with fluorescently
labeled EVs for 3 h followed by their examination with fluorescence
microscopy ( e) and flow cytometry ( f,g). The expression of the ACE2 receptors in HEKACE2 cells was confirmed by immunoblotting, FACS analysis, and enzymatically
(Figure S7). Fluorescent images of the
examined control cells (HEK) showed no pronounced red fluorescence
following their incubation with either EVsRBD or EVsnoRBD ( e, top row). In contrast, a pronounced red fluorescence was obtained
for HEKACE2 after their incubation with fluorescently labeled
EVsRBD, confirming their extensive binding to ACE2-expressing
cells ( e, bottom
row). Note here that the very low red fluorescence found in control
cells after their incubation with the EVsRBD may be in
accordance to the expected low expression levels of native ACE2 in
HEK293 cells. Flow cytometry analysis showed that EVsRBD had significantly greater binding efficiency to ACE2-expressing
cells (HEKACE2) when compared to EVnoRBD (p < 0.05), while the uptake into control cells (HEK)
was similar for both EVsRBD and EVnoRBD ( f,g and Figure S4 for FACS data). It is important to
note that EVsnoRBD showed a basal level of accumulation
in both HEK and HEKACE2 cells regardless of the presence
of RBD, showing their natural, but still negligible, ability to be
internalized or fused to HEK cells (Figure S4). The results summarized in thus confirm the presence and functionality of the
engineered RBD peptide on the EVsRBD surface and its targeting
and binding capability to ACE2 receptors expressed on cells. These
findings show that the engineered EVsRBD can be used as
SARS-CoV-2 mimetics with ACE2 binding capabilities with a similar
size and shape to the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Importantly, this EV-based
formulation, in contrast to a highly infectious SARS-CoV-2 virus, can be used to study RBD-ACE2 interactions at
a single-cell level under standard laboratory conditions without the
need for strict safety regulations. This platform may, therefore,
expand the research of viral-receptor interactions to research institutes
and industrial setups that do not yet have access to dedicated facilities,
which must be designated with the highest biosafety level required
to work with SARS-CoV-2.

## Biodistribution and Targeting of SARS-CoV-2 Mimetics in Mice
Prior to performing in vivo studies, the toxicity
effect of the engineered EVs and their biodistribution profiles under
the used experimental conditions were examined. No detrimental effect
on the viability of recipient cells was found when incubated with
EVsRBD (measured by two independent assays, Cell Titer
Blue and CKK-8, Figure S6). It is important
to mention here that, in order to examine whether there was any effect
of the intravesicular content of the EVsRBD, their effect
on the viability of the incubating cells was compared to their vesicle-ghost
analogues as well as to liposomes, confirming no effect when assessed
at the conditions used in this study. These results, which agree with
previous studies suggest that there is
no pronounced effect on recipient cells when using EVs. The biodistribution
of both types of EVs (EVsnoRBD and EVsRBD) was
examined in immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice after their intravenous administration,
and both showed very similar profiles, with the vast majority of EVs
cleared by the spleen and liver as expected ( ). It should
be stressed, however, that further safety and long-term biodistribution
examinations of the engineered EVs are required under different experimental
conditions and in live animals to examine their maximum tolerated
dose (MTD) for a specific application. Using ghosts of the EVsRBD, which should not contain any biomolecular content (proteins
or genetic material), may provide an alternative if any safety concern
is raised in the future, as these ghosts should preserve the outer
membrane feature of the EVs and, thus, their targeting capabilities.
Also note that a very recent report showed that lung-derived EVs, which were chemically conjugated to RBD, had
no safety concerns of such types of viruslike EVs and strengthen the potentiality of the proposed EVsRBD to be used in vivo in other studies.
 The in vivo targetability of the
EVsRBD mimetics toward ACE2 receptors was then studied
in an animal model.
Several studies have already shown the ability of genetically engineered
EVs to interact and bind to receptors of interest in vivo, including acetylcholine receptors in the brain, tumor cells, immune cell surfaces, and viral receptors, including ACE2. Since human ACE2 receptors are not naturally
present in mice, a few transgenic mice models had been proposed, , but they are not readily accessible and therefore are not yet extensively
used. Therefore, we established a xenograft model to study the in vivo targetability of EVsRBD to ACE2 following
their systemic administration. For this purpose, control HEK293 cells
(HEK) and ACE2-expressing HEK293 cells (HEKACE2) were first
inoculated bilaterally and subcutaneously in two flanks of immunodeficient
mice to result in tumor-like tissue appearances at the implantation
sites 2 weeks after cell inoculation. In contrast to the transgenic
mouse model, the model we used here allows
for real-time comparison of the accumulation of EVs following their
administration in both the control and ACE2-expressing cells simultaneously
in the same animal. Two weeks after cell transplantation, mice were
injected, intravenously, with fluorescently labeled EVs, either nontargeted
EVs (EVnoRBD, group 1, n = 5) or ACE2-targeted
EVs (EVRBD, group 2, n = 5) as schematically
depicted in a. Six hours after intravenous administration of fluorescently labeled
(DiR) EVs (3 × 1011 EVs per mouse), the two types
of tumors were excised for further quantitative analysis of their
fluorescent signal. Importantly, although introduced systemically
(through intravenous injection), a clear and statistically significant
difference in the fluorescence of HEK and HEKACE2 tumors
was obtained only after the administration of EVsRBD with
a higher accumulation in the ACE2-expressing cells ( b, c; p <
0.01; n = 5/group). Importantly, no observable difference
in the fluorescence of the tumors could be detected after the injection
of EVsnoRBD, indicating the high targeting ability and
enhanced specificity of EVsRBD to the ACE2 receptors in vivo ( b,c and Figure S9). Moreover, no
difference was observed between the accumulation of the two types
of EVs (EVsRBD and EVsnoRBD) in other organs
(Figure S9) indicating, once again, the
specific targetability of EVsRBD to ACE2-expressing cells
even in vivo after systemic administration ( b,c).
 

## MRI Mapping of Magnetically Labeled SARS-CoV-2 Mimetics
After showing the specific targetability of EVsRBD to
ACE-expressing cells both in vitro ( ) and in vivo ( ), we aimed
to examine the ability to map the accumulation in their target cells
using a noninvasive and three-dimensional imaging modality, such as
MRI, which was demonstrated to be applicable for monitoring of magnetically
labeled EVs in vivo. , − To this end, and to load EVs with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
(SPIONs), parental HEK-293 cells stably expressing the RBD ( ) were incubated
for 24 h with SPIONs added to their culture medium (40 μg of
iron per mL). Then, the incubating medium was replaced with EVs-free
medium and the released EVsRBD were collected and purified
by differential centrifugation ( a) and further characterized. Incorporation of SPIONs
into the secreted EVsRBD was clearly visualized by cryo-TEM
as multiple hypointense clusters inside the lumen of the EVs ( b). Solutions containing
different concentrations of SPIONs-labeled EVsRBD were
then examined by MRI and showed concentration-dependent T2*-weighted MRI contrast ( c). Importantly, labeling of EVs with SPIONs did not
compromise their size (84.8 ± 4.3 nm vs 94.8 ± 3.4 nm, d), charge (−18.8
± 3.9 mV vs −16 ± 1.0 mV, e), or the expression of the RBD ( f).
 Then, after confirming a successful labeling of
the EVs with SPIONs,
we aimed to examine the MRI-detectability of their ACE2 targetability in vivo. To this end, a solution containing 3 × 1011 SPIONs-labeled EVsRBD was injected systematically
through the mouse tail vein. The preferential accumulation of the
SARS-CoV-2 mimetics in ACE2-expressing tissue was observed as a reduced
MRI signal intensity in T2*-weighted images ( g). To quantify the change
in the MRI signal of the two tumorous-like tissues (HEK vs HEKACE2), mice were scanned before and 4 h after EVs administration
and the difference in the tissue contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) obtained
before and after injection was calculated. As shown in h, a significant (p-value <0.01, n = 5) increase in the CNR difference
(before vs after SPIONs-labeled EVsRBD injection) was obtained
in the region of interest (ROI) of the ACE2-expressing cells compared
to control tissue. Moreover, Prussian blue staining of slices of the
excised tissues clearly showed iron deposits only at the samples obtained
from ACE2-expressing cells ( i), confirming the delivery of the SPIONs-labeled EVsRBD to HEKACE2 but not to the controls. Injection
of SPIONs solution (without EVs) into an additional group of mice
showed no difference between HEK and HEKACE2 tumors (Figure S10), confirming, once again, the increased
accumulation of SPIONs when targeted by EVsRBD (at the
same time point of 4 h after tail vein injection).
Note here
that other strategies for labeling EVs should be considered
in the future to improve their iron content load and, thus, the sensitivity
of the approach. Labeling secreted EVs through labeling of their parental
cells might have suffered from low labeling capacity, , and more advanced labeling methods should be developed and employed
to allow the detection of lower numbers of targeted EVs in future
studies. In addition to MRI mapping of the targetability of magnetically
labeled SARS-CoV-2 mimetics to ACE2-expressing cells, our results
confirm the successful delivery of an intravesical cargo (nanoparticles
cargo) to a target tissue. It should be noted, however, that SARS-CoV-2
is a respiratory virus, and the demonstrated platform would better
mimic the virus biodistribution if administered intranasally or intratracheally.
Nevertheless, the demonstration that engineered RBD-tagged EVs with
encapsulated siRNA can be used to suppress SARS-CoV-2 infection in
a transgenic mouse model of ACE2 expression suggests that our platform can be used to deliver several types
of cargos in the future, including antiviral or immunosuppressive
agents to ACE2-expressing tissue. As such, the proposed SARS-CoV-2
mimetics could be of high importance during the current SARS-CoV-2
pandemic, where efficient and safe treatment strategies against COVID-19
are still needed.

## SARS-CoV-2 Mimetics: A Versatile Tool to Study Viral Variants
As for other RNA viruses as for SARS-CoV-2, the rapid evolution
and the introduction of diverse mutations at the RBD manipulates not
only the binding affinity to the host cell receptors and the infectivity
of the virus but also reduces the efficiency of proposed vaccines
and other therapeutics. In that regard, one key feature of the SARS-CoV-2
mimetics presented here is that suspicious mutations or those found
in rapidly spread variants of a virus of interest can be easily displayed
at the surface of the EVs through a one-step cloning procedure into
the pAGDisplay plasmid. This means that the method can provide rapid
data on the virus mutations as they appear or, perhaps more importantly,
on predicted mutations that might appear in the future. To examine
this, and based on our previous experience with predicting SARS-CoV-2
mutants with extremely high affinity to ACE2, we have engineered EVs
to express the predicted “62” variant of SARS-CoV-2
RBD ( , Figure S11 and Supplementary sequences). To this end, the gene encoding for the RBD sequence
of the predicted “62” variant of SARS-CoV was designed
and cloned into a pAGDisplay, and HEK-293 cells were transfected to
obtain a stable cell line (HEKRBD-62). After EVs
isolation, the difference in the binding capabilities of EVsRBD to EVsRBD-62 to ACE2 receptors expressed at the
surface of live cells was examined using flow cytometry. As shown
in , and as
expected from the extremely high affinity of RBD-62 to ACE2, HEKACE2 cells incubated with engineered
EVsRBD-62 showed a 4 times higher fluorescence compared
to that obtained when the same cells were incubated with EVsRBD (the so-called Wuhan variant). In contrast, EVs with RBD of Delta
(EVsRBD-Delta) or Omicron (EVsRBD-Omicron) mutations, although they showed a higher accumulation in HEKACE2 cells compared to EVsnoRBD, did not show significantly
higher fluorescence when compared to cells incubated with the Wuhan
RBD (EVsRBD, Figure S11). These
results may imply only a small increase in the binding capabilities
of RBD-Delta and RBD-Omicron to the ACE2 receptor compared to that
of Wuhan RBD. , Importantly, all these experiments
( and Figure S11) were performed using a single concentration
of EVs and may not reflect the difference in the ACE2 binding affinity
of each of the examined type of EVs. Such a determination would require
a series of concentrations of the incubating EVs in the same manner
as that performed for the data shown in f. Nevertheless, the results shown in demonstrate that
the proposed genetically engineered EVs, which are here used as coronavirus
mimetics, can be used as a reliable platform for fast and safe examination
of evolved and predicted mutations of SARS-CoV-2, with the potential
to be extended to other viruses.
 

## Conclusion
In summary, we showed the design and implementation
of genetically
engineered EVs as SARS-CoV-2 mimetics (EVsRBD), which efficiently
bind the ACE2 receptor both in vitro and in vivo, even after intravenous systemic delivery. The ability
to load EVsRBD with MRI-trackable material (SPIONs) allowed
mapping of their targetability in live subjects and, thus, could be
applied to study viral-receptor interactions in deep tissues, such
as the lungs, which might have played a significant role in viral
infectivity and are not accessible to luminescent-based imaging approaches.
Having demonstrated the modifiability of the approach and proposing
EVs that mimic additional variants of SARS-CoV-2 show its potential
to be applied for currently evolving or predicted mutants in a safe
and reproducible manner without the risk of using infectious material.
We envision that the demonstrated strategy could be employed to study
other virus-receptor interactions, beyond SARS-CoV-2-ACE2 demonstrated
here, by simply engineering a tailored peptide on the EVs surfaces
and using them in a wide spectrum of viral-induced pathologies. Finally,
with the increasing interest in EVs research, beyond viral mimetics,
including their use as cellular-derived nanocarriers, the reported
visualization strategy could be of high cruciality to enrich our understanding
of EV targetability to the organ of interest in the context of a live
organism.

## Methods

## DNA Manipulations
All DNA fragments were PCR amplified
using KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (Roche, Switzerland) and purified
by NucleoSpin Gel and a PCR Clean-up Kit (Nachery-Nagel, Germany).
Restriction-free cloning PCR reactions (50 μL, KAPA HiFi HotStart
ReadyMix) were composed of 100–200 ng of cloned DNA fragment
and 20 ng of destination plasmid. The assembly PCR reactions consisted
of 30 cycles of 1 min annealing, at 60 °C, and 6 mins of polymerization
and 20 s at 98 °C for denaturation. The template DNA was removed
by using DpnI type IIM restriction enzyme (NEB, USA)
at 37 °C (1–2 h), and 0.9 μL from the reaction mix
were electroporated to E. coli Cloni 10G cells (Lucigen,
USA). Colony PCR and sequencing were used for analysis and verification.

## pAGDisplay Vector Construction
pDisplay Mammalian Expression
vector was purchased from Invitrogen (V66020). The pAGDisplay vector
backbone was assembled by combining a pET28b fragment bearing KanR
and origin of replication, a pLVX vector fragment bearing WPRE, PuroR,
and IRES sequences, and a pDisplay CMV promoter with a PDGFRβ
expression cassette by a restriction-free three-component assembly. In the subsequent restriction-free cloning step,
the PuroR was fused with eUnaG2 fluorescent protein at the C-terminus. , The full-length pAGDisplay was sequenced to verify its correct assembly.

## pAGDisplay Modification with RFnano Near-Infrared Fluorescence
Protein
To increase our spatial resolution, we introduced,
by restriction-free cloning, a modified near-infrared MIRFP670nano, an RFnano protein, as a cytoplasmic domain at
the C-terminus of PDGFRβ. The preparation and design of RFnano
is the subject of a publication currently in preparation. Briefly,
the PROSS and Rosetta-based stabilization design was combined with S. cerevisiae EBY100 expression and sorting to obtain a
brighter signal and the same spectral parameters. In total, 23 mutations
were introduced into the protein.

## Protein Production, Purifications, and Labeling Procedures
The designed ALFA-tag binding nanobody (DnbALFA) and its mNeonGreen
fusion protein were expressed by using expression plasmid pET28bdSUMO and E. coli BL21(DE3) cells
as described previously. Briefly, 200
mL of 2YT medium (16 g of tryptone, 10 g of yeast extract, and 5 g
of NaCl, pH 7) was inoculated (1%), grown to the OD600 = 0.6 (37 °C),
and the expression was initiated by the addition of IPTG to a final
concentration of 0.5 mM. The expression continued for the next 16
h at 20 °C. Expressed cells were washed (50 mM Tris-HCl, 200
mM NaCl buffer, pH 8), disintegrated by sonication, immobilized on
Ni-NTA agarose (PureCube Ni-NTA agarose, Cube Biotech, Germany), and
cleaved on a column by using bdSUMO protease. The eluted fraction was further purified by size exclusion chromatography
on HiLoad 26/600 Superdex 75 using a GE AKTA Purifier FPLC system.
The soluble his-tagged peptidase domain of ACE2 protein (Q18–S740),
inserted in pHLsec plasmid, was expressed in an Expi293F cell system
with an ExpiFectamine 293 Transfection Kit (ThermoFisher, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol and purified as described previously. The ACE2 or DnbALFA proteins were labeled by
CF640R succinimidyl ester dye (Biotium, USA, catalog no. 92108) in
0.1 M bicarbonate buffer using a 1:4 protein to dye ratio. The reaction
was continued for 1 h at room temperature, and subsequently, the free
dye was removed by dialysis (GeBAflex-Midi Dialysis Tubes, 8 kDa MWCO,
Geba, Israel) against PBS buffer (16 h, 4 °C).

## Cell Culture and Transfection
HEK293, HEK293T, ACE2-expressing
HEK293T cells, and stable pAGDisplay-RBD cell lines were cultured
at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere in DMEM medium (4.5
g/L glucose, l-glutamine; Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% glutamine (4 mM). Cells were passaged
2–3 times per week using trypsin EDTA solution A (Biological
Industries, USA) for cell detachment. The stably expressing ACE2 HEK293T
cell line was kindly obtained from the lab of Dr. Ron Diskin (Weizmann
Institute of Science) and kept under puromycin antibiotics (0.5 μg/mL,
Invitrogen, USA).

## HEK-pAGDisplay-RBD Stable Cell Line Generation
The
pAGDisplay-based plasmids expressing RBD (1 μg of DNA) were
transfected in a 60 mm culture dish with 80% confluent HEK293 cells
by a JetPrime transfection reagent (Polyplus, France) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. After transfection (24 h), cells
were transferred to a 150 mm culture dish. Subsequently, 48 h after
transfection, the media was replaced by fresh DMEM medium supplemented
with 10% FBS and 1 μg/mL puromycin (Invitrogen, USA). Puromycin-resistant
cells were selected for 1 week with regular replacement of cell media.
Stably transfected cells associated with the top 1% green fluorescence
signals (Puro-eUnaG2), were sorted out from the population using the
S3e Cell Sorter device (Bio-Rad, USA) and further subcultured to single
colonies.

## Characterization of Parental Cells
The presence of
the RBD on the cell surface was measured by fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS). The cells were cultured until full confluence,
then they were detached from the plates by PBS and added to the Eppendorf
tubes. After spinning down (5 min at 500g), the cell
pellet was resuspended in a labeling solution containing fluorescently
labeled, purified ACE2 protein in PBS supplemented with 2% FBS. The
cells were labeled for 1 h on ice and then washed two times with 1
mL of PBS (spun down each time for 5 min at 500g).
After the last wash, the cells were resuspended in PBS with 2% FBS
solution, filtered by 0.45 μm filters, and added to the FACS
tubes. The fluorescence was measured by the LRSII FACS machine (BD
Biosciences, USA) and analyzed by the FlowJo software.

## Preparation of Cell Ghost Vesicles
Vesicles composed
of plasma membranes of cell ghost were prepared as previously described, with some modifications. Briefly, approximately
1 × 107 RBD cells were centrifuged at 500g for 10 min, washed once with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), and
suspended in 0.06% w/v sucrose in 0.25× PBS, supplemented with
1% v/v penicillin streptomycin antibiotics and 0.5% v/v protease inhibitor
cocktail, on a shaker overnight at room temperature. The resulting
cell suspension was subsequently centrifuged at 6000g for 10 min and suspended in 0.06% w/v sucrose in 1× PBS on
a shaker overnight at room temperature. Subsequently, the cell suspension
was centrifuged again at 6000g for 10 min and suspended
in PBS −/–, and extruded sequentially through 10, 5,
1, and 0.1 μm polycarbonate membrane filters (Whatman) using
a mini extruder (Avanti Polar Lipids) 5 times each filter.

## Preparation of Large Unilamellar Vesicles (LUVs)
LUVs
were prepared composed of DOPC. Lipid solution in chloroform was placed
in a glass vial, and the organic solvent was evaporated by 12 h of
vacuum pumping. The lipid film was then hydrated with PBS −/–
to reach the desired concentration and gently vortexed. The resulting
MLV suspension was then sonicated for 10 min to disperse larger aggregates
and the liposomal suspension was extruded 21 times through polycarbonate
filters (100 nm pore size, Avanti Polar Lipids) using a mini-extruder
(Avanti Polar Lipids). Size and concentration were verified using
NTA and the liposomal suspension was used within 2 weeks from extrusion.
The extruded sample is then pipetted on the top of a 10–50%
Optiprep band and ultracentrifuged at 100 000g for 2 h at 4 °C using a SW41 rotor. The ghost vesicles are
then collected from the interface of the gradient and utilized for
further experiments.

## EV Isolation
EV-depleted medium was prepared by two
rounds of ultracentrifugation (100 000g, 16
h) of DMEM with 20% FBS, diluted to 10% FBS, and supplemented with
glutamine. For EVs isolation, cells were cultured in EV-free medium
for 48–72 h, then the medium was collected and processed by
differential centrifugation (400g, 10 min; 2000g, 10 min; 10 000g, 30 min, all
at 4 °C). The final supernatant was collected and EVs were pelleted
at 100 000g at 4 °C for 4 h in an Optima
ultracentrifuge using the Beckman Ti45 rotor (Beckman Coulter, USA).
The EVs pellet was washed with PBS and resuspended in 0.22 μm
filtered PBS. EVs were isolated from the RBD-transfected cells (EVRBD) and control cells (EVnoRBD).

## EV NTA Analysis
The size and concentration of EVs diluted
in PBS (1:1000 or 1:5000) was measured by nanoparticle tracking analysis
using the NanoSight system (Malvern Instruments, U.K.) with a 405
nm laser by acquiring five, 1 min videos at the camera level 16. Threshold
5 was used for the analysis in all samples. Protein content was measured
by the BCA (cells) or microBCA (EVs) protein assay according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich, USA).

## Western Blot
For the Western blot analysis, EVs or
parental cells were lysed by RIPA buffer (1× for cells, 1:1 in
PBS for EVs) supplemented with a proteinase inhibitor cocktail. Proteins
were separated on ExpressPlus PAGE Ready gels 4–20% (A2S, M42015)
and transferred on the cellulose membrane (300 mA, 90 min) using a
BioRad blotting device (BioRad, USA). After overnight blocking in
5% milk in TBST, specific antibodies were applied to the membranes
for 1 h to detect markers: CD81 (B–II, Santa Cruz, USA); c-myc
(9E10, Santa Cruz, USA) (all 1:500); and beta-actin (C4, Santa Cruz,
USA) (1:1000). HRP-conjugated antimouse secondary HRP goat antimouse
IgG antibody (no. 4053, Biolegend, USA) (1:5000 in TBST) was applied
for 1 h before imaging using enhanced chemiluminescence substrate
EZ-ECL Kit (Biological Industries, catalog no. 20-500-120). An ALFA
tag was detected by a homemade fluorescent anti-ALFA tag nanobody
and visualized by a fluorescent reader at 642/662 nm wavelength.

## Binding Assays and Affinity Curve Determination Using Cell-Display
The HEK-pAGDisplay-RBD stable cells grown to 80% confluency were
gently detached by Accutase (1/2 solution in PBS, 3 min, Sigma-Aldrich
catalog no. A6964) and washed by PBS with 2 g/L BSA (PBSB). Aliquots
of detached cells (approximately 2 × 106) were incubated
with a series of CF640R succinimidyl ester-labeled (Biotium, USA,
catalog no. 92108) ACE2 extracellular domain (AA Q18–S740)
solutions (0.2–83 nM) in 1 mL of PBSB for 2 h on ice. After
the incubation, cells in aliquots were separated by centrifugation
(500g, 5 min), washed, and resuspended in ice-cold
PBSB, passed through a cell strainer nylon membrane (100 μM,
SPL Life Sciences, Korea), and analyzed. The expression (eUnaG2-Puro
signal, FL-1, excitation 498 nm, emission 527 nm) and binding (CF640R-ACE2,
FL-4, excitation 642 nm, emission 662 nm) signals were recorded for
10k gated single-cell events by an S3e Cell Sorter (BioRad, USA).
Mean FL-4 fluorescence signal values of RBD + cells, subtracted by
RFnano and the nonspecific signal of the RBD-population, were used
to determine the KD of binding constants
using a noncooperative Hill equation and a nonlinear least-squares
regression using Python 3.7. 

## Cryo-Transmision Electron Microscopy (TEM)

## Sample Preparation
Lacey carbon EM grids were glow-discharged
(30 s, 25 mA) in a Pelco EasiGlow system. A volume of 3.5 μL
of EVs resuspended in PBS −/– at ∼1011 particles/mL concentration were applied onto the EM grid and the
grid was incubated in the humidity chamber of Vitrobot Mark IV instrument
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for 5 min at 100% humidity and at
room temperature, followed by blotting (4.0 s and −10 Blot
Force), and plunge-freezing into precooled liquid ethane. Samples
were imaged using a Talos Arctica G3 TEM/STEM microscope (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, USA), equipped with a OneView camera (Gatan, USA) at an
accelerating voltage of 200 kV using SerialEM. Images were recorded at ×73 000 magnification
(calibrated pixel size 0.411 nm) with a −3.5 μm defocus.

## In Vitro Binding of EVsRBD to the
ACE2 Receptor

## Flow Cytometry
To confirm binding and uptake of EVRBD in ACE2-expressing cells, isolated EVsRBD or
EVnoRBD were fluorescently labeled with 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindotricarbocyanine
iodide (DiR) (ThermoFischer Scientific, D12731) at a concentration
of 15 μM by incubation for 1 h at room temperature. EVs were
then washed three times with the VivaSpin centrifugation filters,
5 min at 14 000g, and 2 min at 1000g in a reverse position. HEK293T or ACE-expressing HEK293T cells were
incubated with labeled EVsRBD or EVnoRBD in
EV-depleted DMEM for 3 h. Then, the cells were detached from the plate
by PBS, washed twice with PBS in the Eppendorf tubes (spun down five
min at 500g), filtered by 0.45 μm filters,
and added to the FACS tubes in FACS solution (PBS with 2% FBS). The
fluorescence signal (APC-Cy7 filter) of cells was measured using a
LSRII cell analyzer flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, USA) and analyzed
by the FlowJo software.

## Fluorescence Microscopy
For visualization by fluorescence
microscopy, cells were seeded on 14 mm-diameter coverslips in a 24-well
plate. The wells were coated with fibronectin by incubation for 45
min. Then, fibronectin was removed and the wells were washed with
PBS before seeding the cells. For uptake of EVs in cells, the DiD-labeled
EVs were dissolved in exosome-free medium and incubated with cells
for 3 h. Then, the medium was removed, and cells were washed two times
with PBS. For staining of cell nuclei, DAPI was dissolved in 2.5%
formaldehyde and the cells were incubated in the solution for 20 min.
After two washes, the coverslips were carefully transferred and mounted
on glass slides and the fluorescence was visualized using a wide-field
microscope (Leica DMI8).

## Detection of ACE2 in Cells
For confirmation of the
presence of ACE2 protein in the ACE2-expressing cells, ACE2-expressing
HEK293T and HEK293T control cells were lysed and the activity of the
ACE protein was assessed by the SensoLyte 390 ACE2 Activity Assay
Kit (AnaSpec, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The fluorescence (excitation 330 nm, emission 390 nm) of the final
product was read within 5–35 min using a plate reader. The
expression of ACE2 protein in cells was also confirmed by Western
blot analysis, as described above, using a rabbit monoclonal ACE2
antibody (ab239924; 1:1000; Abcam, USA). For FACS analysis, the cells
were seeded in a 6-well plate. Then the cells were detached from wells
by PBS and incubated with ACE2 primary antibody (ab239924; 1:1000;
Abcam, USA) for 1 h on ice, washed with PBS and then incubated with
antirabbit fluorescently conjugated secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor
647 nm) for 1 h on ice. The cells were then washed with PBS, filtered
with 0.45 μm filters, and resuspended in PBS with 2% FBS. The
fluorescence signal (APC filter) of cells was measured by a FACS machine
(LRS-II) and analyzed by the FlowJo software.

## Toxicity Evaluation
For the evaluation of the toxicity
of the vesicles, HEK293T cells were seeded in a 96-well plate a day
before the addition of EVsRBD or EVsnoRBD. The
cells were incubated with EVs, vesicle ghosts, and LUVs of different
concentrations (0.6 × 109 to 2.5 × 109 EVs/well, n = 5 biologically independent replications
for each sample) for 4 h. The viability of the cells was measured
with two independent assays, CCK-8 and Cell Titer Blue according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. 50% DMSO was used as a positive
control to represent a cell toxicity scenario.

## Production of Magnetically Labeled EVs
HEK293 cells
stably expressing RBD or without RBD (control) were seeded into 15
cm culture plates at 50% confluency. The next day, SPIONs (Molday
ION Dye Free; 2 mg Fe/mL; BioPal, USA, CL-50Q02-6A-0) were added to
the culture medium at a final concentration of 40 μg/mL. Then,
24 h after, medium was discarded, the cells were washed three times
with 10 mL of PBS, and EV-depleted medium was added to the cells followed
by another 24-h incubation. Afterward, EVs were isolated from the
medium according to the standard protocol and resuspended in PBS.

## Zeta Potential Measurement
The zeta-potential of the
EVs diluted in PBS (108 EVs/mL) was determined using a
zeta-potential analyzer Malvern Zetasizer (Malvern Panalytical Ltd.,
U.K.) according the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Animal Model
Immunodeficient Hsd:Athymic Nude-Foxn1nu
mice and C57BL/6 mice (Envigo) were used in the experiments. All animal
studies were approved in accordance with the Weizmann Institute’s
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines and regulations (approval
number 00580120-3). All animals were kept in a daily controlled room
at the Weizmann Institute of Sciences animal facility with a surrounding
relative humidity level of 50 ± 10% and a temperature of 22 ±
1 °C, with a 12/12 cycle of dark and light phases. Subcutaneous
xenograft tumors were induced by injection of HEK293T (left side)
and ACE2-expressing HEK293T cells (right side) under the skin above
the mouse flank. Mice were kept under isoflurane anesthesia during
the whole procedure. Each mouse received 10 mil of each cell type
in 150 μL of PBS. The tumors were allowed to grow for 2–3
weeks until they reached a sufficient size for imaging (diameter around
0.5–1 cm). If the tumors reached more than 1 cm or the tumor
size was not equal, the animals were removed from the experimental
groups.

## Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI experiments were conducted
on a horizontal 15.2 T horizontal scanner (in vitro and in vivo) using a 1H volume radiofrequency
coil with a 23 mm diameter (Bruker BioSpin, Germany).

## Phantom Measurements
Different concentrations of isolated
EVs were added to glass tubes and imaged using a Rapid Acquisition
with Relaxation Enhancement (RARE) sequence with the following parameters:
time of repetition (TR) 2800 ms; echo time (TE) 42 ms; and resolution
0.23 × 0.23 × 1 mm3. MR images were analyzed
by the ImageJ software or by a custom-made script written in MATLAB
(MathWorks, USA).

## In Vivo MRI of Mice
Prior to MR imaging,
a cannula was inserted into a mouse tail. Mice with induced tumors
were then measured on a 15.2 T MRI scanner before and after injection
of SPIONs-labeled EVsRBD at a dose of 3 × 1011 EVs in 100 μL of PBS administered through a long tube without
changing the position of the animal (n = 5). In a
control experiment, only SPIONs solution (1 mg of iron per kg) was
injected into the tail vein of mice (n = 4). The
mice were measured under general isoflurane inhalation anesthesia
(5% induction, 1% maintenance) up to 4 h after EVs injection using
a gradient echo Fast Low Angle Shot (FLASH) with the following parameters:
TR = 300 ms; TE = 2 ms; resolution of 0.23 × 0.23 × 0.7
mm3. After tuning and matching to the1H frequency,
shimming of the magnetic field, B0 correction,
both axial and coronal images of the tumor area were measured followed
by analysis in the ImageJ software. Regions of interest (ROI) were
outlined around each tumor, muscle, and a noise area outside of the
animals. The contrast-to-noise ratios (CNR) were calculated as follows:
 The CNR difference was calculated as a percentage
of CNR before and after EV injection.

## Fluorescence Imaging
Prior to imaging, mice with induced
subcutaneous tumors (n = 5 for each formulation)
or C57BL/6 mice (n = 4 for each formulation) were
retro-orbitally injected with DiR-labeled EVsRBD or EVsnoRBD (dose of 3 × 1011 EVs in 100 μL
of PBS). Six hours after injection, the mice were intracardially perfused
with 2.5% formaldehyde solution under general anesthesia induced by
ketamine (80 mg/kg) and medetomidine (0.6 mg/kg). Organs (liver, kidneys,
spleen, intestine, heart, lungs, brain) and tumors were excised, fixed
with 2.5% formaldehyde solution overnight, and then kept in PBS. A
day after, fixed organs were measured with IVIS Lumina XR optical
imager (PerkinElmer, USA) with the FOV and exposure time of 1 s (liver),
10 s (kidney, lungs, spleen, heart), 30 s (brain), or 60 s (tumors).
For intravital microscopy, an Olympus microscope MVX was used with
exposure times of 700 ms (Cy7 filter for detection of the DiR signal).

## Histology
The fixed tumor tissues were kept in 1% formaldehyde
solutions and then embedded in paraffin blocks according to a standard
protocol. Tissue slices were cut on a microtome and stained by hematoxylin
& eosin and Prussian blue. The slides were imaged on a Leica DMI8
wide-field fluorescent microscope using a standard bright-field filter.

## Statistical Analysis
All numerical data are presented
as mean ± standard deviation (s.d.). Statistical analysis was
performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0 software (GraphPad Software Inc.,
USA). Comparison of two groups was analyzed by a two-tailed Student’s t test. A p-value of 0.05 and below was
considered significant: *p-value <0.05, **p-value <0.01, ***p-value <0.001,
and ****p-value <0.0001.

## Acknowledgments
This project received funding from the
following sources:
European Research Council (ERC-StG Grant No. 677715 to A.B.-S.), the
Israel Science Foundation (ISF Grant No. 1637/20 to O.A, N.R.-R.,
and A.B.-S. and Grant No. 1268/18 to J.Z. and G.S.), the Clore Institute
for High-Field Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy (A.B.-S.),
the Helen and Martin Kimmel Institute for Magnetic Resonance Research
(A.B.-S.), and the Ben B. and Joyce E. Eisenberg Foundation (to A.B.-S.
and O.A.). A.B.-S. is the incumbent of the Helen and Milton A. Kimmelman
Career Development Chair. O.A is the incumbent of The Miriam Berman
Presidential Development Chair. O.A also acknowledges funding from
the Henry Chanoch Krenter Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Genomics.
Schemes in the figures were prepared using BioRender.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.2c03119.
Confocal images of RBD cells, FACS data and analyses,
ACE2 binding assay, stability determination of the EV formulations,
results of toxicity assays, Western blots, fluorescence images of
tumors, results of biodistribution experiments, MRI data, and analysis
of mice injected with SPIONs; uptake assay of EVs displaying the RBD
of different SARS-CoV-2 mutations; supplementary sequences (nucleotide
sequences) of the used RBDs; and supplementary plasmid map of the
pAGDisplay-RBD construct used in this study (PDF)

## Author Contributions
A.G. and
A.B.-S. designed the study and wrote the manuscript. A.G. carried
out and analyzed all EV-related experiments, including EVs isolation,
characterization, cell experiments, tumor inoculation, in
vivo optical imaging, and MRI experiments (in vitro and in vivo). H.A.-A. assisted with the establishment
of the MRI experiments. J.Z. and G.S. designed the expression vectors
of RBD and its variants, established the cell lines, and purified
the proteins. A.G. and J.Z. performed cell line characterization.
M.F. assisted with EVs isolation and purification. P.A.K. and N.R.-R.
guided and assisted with the establishment of EVs isolation, purification,
and characterization. M.I.M. and O.A. performed the cryo-TEM experiments.
All authors reviewed the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Notes
A preprint version of this work can be found
in Galisova, A.; Zahradnik, J.; Allouche-Arnon, H.; Morandi, M. I.;
Abou Karam, P.; Fisler, M.; Avinoam, O.; Regev-Rudzki, N.; Schreiber,
G.; Bar-Shir, A. Genetically Engineered MRI-Trackable Extracellular
Vesicles as SARS-CoV-2 Mimetics for Mapping ACE2 Binding In
Vivo. bioRxiv2022, 2022.03.27.485958,
DOI: 10.1101/2022.03.27.485958 (accessed March 28, 2022).

## Supplementary Material
nn2c03119_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
nn2c03119_si_001.pdf