pmcRedox BiolRedox Biol2171redox101605639Redox Biology2213-2317ElsevierPMC9418554PMC9418554.1941855494185543598141710.1016/j.redox.2022.102432S2213-2317(22)00204-X1024321Research PaperMacrophage SAMSN1 protects against sepsis-induced acute lung injury in mice
JiangWanli MaChengtai BaiJiawei DuXianjinChina.duxianjin@whu.edu.cn aDepartment of Thoracic Surgery, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430060, ChinabDepartment of Critical Care Medicine, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China∗Corresponding author. Department of Critical Care Medicine, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Jiefang Road 238, Wuhan, Hubei, 430060, China.duxianjin@whu.edu.cn10202213820225641506610243217620221172022482022130820222808202209072024© 2022 Published by Elsevier B.V.2022https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Corrigendum to “Macrophage SAMSN1 protects against sepsis-induced acute lung injury in mice” [Redox Biol. 56 (2022) 102432]
701612024103036Redox Biology10.1016/j.redox.2024.103036PMC1090786238233242Retraction notice to: Macrophage SAMSN1 protects against sepsis-induced acute lung injury in mice [Redox Biol. 56 (2022) 102432]
73862024103226Redox Biology10.1016/j.redox.2024.103226PMC1122953038851952

## Objective
Inflammation and oxidative stress contribute to the progression of sepsis-induced acute lung injury (ALI). SAM domain, SH3 domain and nuclear localization signals 1 (SAMSN1) is a signaling adaptor protein, and mainly regulates inflammatory response of various immune cells. The present study generates macrophage-specific SAMSN1-knockout (Samsn1MKO) and SAMSN1-transgenic (Samsn1MTG) mice to investigate its role and mechanism in sepsis-induced ALI.

## Methods
Samsn1MKO and Samsn1MTG mice were exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) instillation or cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery to induce sepsis-induced ALI. Bone marrow transplantation, cellular depletion and non-invasive adoptive transfer of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) were performed to validate the role of macrophage SAMSN1 in sepsis-induced ALI in vivo. Meanwhile, BMDMs were isolated from Samsn1MKO or Samsn1MTG mice to further clarify the role of SAMSN1 in vitro.

## Results
Macrophage SAMSN1 expression was increased in response to LPS stimulation, and negatively correlated with LPS-induced ALI in mice. Macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency exacerbated, while macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression ameliorated LPS-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in mice and in BMDMs. Mechanistically, we found that macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression prevented LPS-induced ALI though activating AMP-activated protein kinase α2 (AMPKα2) in vivo and in vitro. Further studies revealed that SAMSN1 directly bound to growth factor receptor bound protein 2-associated protein 1 (GAB1) to prevent its protein degradation, and subsequently enhanced protein kinase A (PKA)/AMPKα2 activation in a protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 11 (PTPN11, also known as SHP2)-dependent manner. Moreover, we observed that macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression diminished CLP-induced ALI in mice.

## Conclusion
Our study documents the protective role of macrophage SAMSN1 against sepsis-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI through activating AMPKα2 in a GAB1/SHP2/PKA pathway, and defines it as a promising biomarker and therapeutic target to treat sepsis-induced ALI.

## Keywords
Acute lung injuryAMPKα2InflammationOxidative stressSAMSN1

## Abbreviations
ALI, Acute lung injuryAMs, Alveolar macrophagesAMPK, AMP-activated protein kinaseANOVA, Analysis of varianceASC, Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARDBALF, Bronchoalveolar lavage fluidBMDMs, Bone marrow-derived macrophagesBMT, Bone marrow transplantationCLP, Cecal ligation and punctureDCFH-DA, 2’,7’-dichlorofluorescin diacetateDEGs, Differentially expressed genesEpac, Exchange protein directly activated by cAMPFBS, Fetal bovine serumGab1, Growth factor receptor bound protein 2-associated protein 1GAPDH, Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenaseH2O2, Hydrogen peroxideHCO3-, Sodium bicarbonateInterleukin-6, Interleukin-6LDH, Lactate dehydrogenaseNLRP3, Nucleotide-binding domain-like receptor protein 3PaCO2, Partial pressure of carbon dioxideROS, Reactive oxygen speciesSAMSN1, SAM domain, SH3 domain and nuclear localization signals 1SOD, Superoxide dismutaseTNF-α, Tumor necrosis factor-αpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfnopmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Sepsis is a devastating condition with high mortality due to multi-organ dysfunctions in critically ill patients, and the lungs are the most vulnerable organs, developing to acute lung injury (ALI) and subsequent acute respiratory distress syndrome that are characterized by increased vascular permeability, pulmonary edema, intrapulmonary hemorrhage and impaired gas exchange [ ]. Multiple mechanisms contribute to the progression of ALI, including inflammation and oxidative stress [ , , ]. During sepsis, resident and circulating white blood cells (WBCs) are activated and infiltrate into the lungs, where they release a large number of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), etc. And these cytokines further facilitate the activation and recruitment of WBCs, and then exacerbate lung injury. In addition, WBCs and the pro-inflammatory cytokines also contribute to reactive oxygen species (ROS) overproduction and oxidative damage [ , ]. Both pro-inflammatory cytokines and ROS are potential activators of nucleotide-binding domain-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, which is consistent of NLRP3, apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) and caspase-1, and promotes the maturation and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1β and IL-18) [ , , , ]. Macrophages are the dominant inflammatory cells in the lungs, and play critical roles in sepsis-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI [ ]. Hence, targeting macrophages may develop novel therapeutic strategies against sepsis-induced ALI.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a heterotrimeric protein kinase consisting of three subunits, α catalytic subunit and β as well as γ regulatory subunits, and mainly functions as an energy sensor to regulate metabolic homeostasis [ , , ]. Emerging studies have revealed that AMPKα activation also suppresses inflammation and oxidative stress, and effectively prevents lung injury under different contexts [ , , ]. Accordingly, we recently found that AMPKα activation could reduce inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) instillation [ ]. In contrast, AMPKα deficiency dramatically aggravated LPS-induced endothelial barrier dysfunction and ALI [ ]. These findings identify AMPKα as a promising molecular target to treat sepsis-induced ALI.
SAM domain, SH3 domain and nuclear localization signals 1 (SAMSN1, also known as HACS1, SLy2 and NASH1), a signaling adaptor protein, is preferentially expressed in normal hematopoietic tissues and malignancies, and mainly regulates inflammatory response of various immune cells, including mast cells, lymphoid cells and macrophages [ ]. Zhu et al. revealed that SAMSN1 is upregulated in activated human B cells, and that SAMSN1 overexpression inhibited proliferation of B cells but enhanced its differentiation to plasma cells [ ]. By generating transgenic mice overexpressing SAMSN1 in B and T cells, von Holleben et al. found that SAMSN1 mediated actin cytoskeletal reorganization and membrane ruffle formation of B cells, and that SAMSN1 overexpression significantly impaired B cell spreading and polarization [ ]. Moreover, Amend et al. determined that primary bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) from SAMSN1-nonexpressed KaLwRij mice displayed increased proliferation and expression of inflammatory cytokines [ ]. Besides the immune system, SAMSN1 is also expressed in the lung; however, its role in sepsis-induced ALI remains elusive [ ]. The present study generates macrophage-specific SAMSN1-knockout (Samsn1MKO) and SAMSN1-transgenic (Samsn1MTG) mice to investigate the role and mechanism of macrophage SAMSN1 in sepsis-induced ALI.

2

## Materials and methods
2.1

## Reagents
LPS from Escherichia coli 0111:B4 (#L2360), phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA, #P8139), 1% low melting point agarose (#A9414), deoxyribonuclease I (DNase I) from bovine pancreas (#DN25), Rp-Adenosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphorothioate triethylammonium salt (RpAMPS, #A165), H89 dihydrochloride hydrate (H89, #B1427) and cycloheximide (CHX, #C7698) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Clodronate (CDN) liposome (#CP-005-005) was purchased from Liposoma (Amsterdam, Netherland), and InVivoMab anti-mouse Ly6G (clone 1A8, #BE0075-1) was purchased from Bio X Cell (Lebanon, NH, USA). Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (#23225), streptavidin-coated magnetic particles (#65601), Lipofectamine® RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent (#13778030), TRIzol™ Reagent (#15596018) and Amplex Red Hydrogen Peroxide/Peroxidase Assay Kit (#A22188) were purchased from ThermoFisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) Assay Kit (#ab102526), Myeloperoxidase (MPO) Activity Assay Kit (#ab105136), Caspase-1 Assay Kit (#ab39412), Protein Kinase A (PKA) Kinase Activity Assay Kit (#ab139435), Mouse TNF-α ELISA Kit (#ab208348), Mouse IL-6 ELISA Kit (#ab222503), Mouse IL-1β ELISA Kit (#ab197742), Mouse IL-18 ELISA Kit (#ab216165), Lipid Peroxidation (Malondialdehyde, MDA) Assay Kit (#ab118970), Lipid Peroxidation (4-hydroxynonenal, 4-HNE) Assay Kit (#ab238538), Superoxide Dismutase (SOD) Activity Assay Kit (#ab65354), Glutathione (GSH) Assay Kit (#ab239727) and lucigenin chemiluminescent probe (#ab145310) were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA). Reactive Oxygen Species Assay Kit (#S0033) containing a 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA) probe was purchased from Beyotime (Shanghai, China), while dispase (#354235) was purchased from Corning (NY, USA). BD Pharmingen™ Biotin Rat Anti-Mouse CD16/CD32 (#553143), BD Pharmingen™ Biotin Rat Anti-Mouse CD45 (#553078) and BD Pharmingen™ Biotin Rat Anti-Mouse TER119/Erythroid Cells (#553672) were purchased from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA, USA). Biotin anti-mouse CD104 Antibody (#123603), Biotin anti-mouse CD31 Antibody (#102404), PE anti-mouse CD326 Antibody (#118205), FITC anti-mouse CD45.2 Antibody (#109805) and APC anti-mouse Podoplanin (PDPN) Antibody (#127409) were purchased from BioLegend (San Diego, CA, USA). Mouse Peripheral Blood Monocytes (PBMCs) Isolation Kit (#P5230) was purchased from Beijing Solarbio Science & Techonology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit for RT-PCR (#11483188001) and FastStart™ SYBR® Green Master (#FSSGMMRO) were purchased from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). Small interfering RNA against AMPKα2 (siAmpkα2, #sc-38924), exchange protein directly activated by cAMP (siEpac, #sc-41701), growth factor receptor bound protein 2-associated protein 1 (siGab1, #sc-35432) and scramble (siScr) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, Texas, USA). Lentiviral vectors carrying mutant GAB1 tyrosine 627 to phenylalanine (GAB1Y627F) incapable of binding to protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 11 (PTPN11, also known as SHP2), dominant-negative SHP2 (SHP2 DN), short hairpin RNA against SAMSN1 (shSamsn1, #sc-62434, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), full-length mouse Samsn1 cDNA or mouse Ampkα2 cDNA were generated by Shanghai Genechem Co.,Ltd. (Shanghai, China) as previously described [ ]. Anti-SAMSN1 (#AV45875) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, while anti-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH, #ab8245), anti-NLRP3 (#ab263899) and anti-ASC (#ab155970) were purchased from Abcam. Anti-phosphorylated AMPKα (p-AMPKα, #2535), anti-total AMPKα (t-AMPKα, #5831) and anti-GAB1 (#3232) were purchased from Cell Signalling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose (#sc-2003) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Proteome Profiler Human Phospho-Kinase Array Kit (#ARY003C) was purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA).

2.2

## Animal studies
All mice were fed in a specific-pathogen free environment with controlled temperature (24–26 °C) and constant humidity (50–60%) under a 12/12 h light/dark cycle, and the experimental protocols were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University. SAMSN1 floxed (Samsn1Flox) mice in the C57BL/6 background were generated using the CRISPR-Cas9 system by introducing loxP inserts flanking exon2 to exon7, and PCR for genotyping was performed with primers: 5′ arm forward 5′-TTTCAGTAAGCTTATCTGAGGAAGCAG-3′, 5′ arm reverse 5′-TGTGTAATAGTGGTTAAGACCGTGCT-3’; 3′ arm forward 5′-CATCGCATTGTCTGAGTAGGTG-3′, 3′ arm reverse 5′-TCTGGGTTTGGAGGCTTGACTAGATT-3’. After clarifying that the founder mice were introduced with two loxP inserts at intended sites, their offspring were mated with heterozygous Samsn1Flox mice to obtain homozygous Samsn1Flox mice. Macrophage-specific Cre (LysM-Cre) mice (#004781) were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA) and backcrossed to the C57BL/6J background over 10 generations. To generate macrophage-specific SAMSN1-knockout (Samsn1MKO) mice, Samsn1Flox mice were mated with LysM-Cre mice. Macrophage-specific SAMSN1-transgenic (Samsn1MTG) mice were generated as previously described with minor modifications [ , ]. Briefly, mouse Samsn1 cDNA was subcloned into PiggyBac transposon gene vector under a CD68 promoter, and the coding sequence was flanked by the PiggyBac 5′ and 3′ inverted terminal repeats. The PiggyBac donor and helper plasmids were co-injected into zygotes of C57BL/6J mice, and transferred to pseudopregnant females.
To induce sepsis-induced ALI, 10-week-old male mice were intratracheally injected with LPS (5 mg/kg) and then sacrificed after 12 h [ ]. In the survival study, mice were injected with a lethal dose of LPS (25 mg/kg), and survival rate was calculated every 12 h [ ]. To deplete monocytes, mice were intravenously injected with CDN liposome (150 μL per mouse) or control (Ctrl) liposome 1 day before LPS stimulation [ ]. For neutrophils depletion, mice were intraperitoneally injected with anti-mouse Ly6G antibody (250 μg per mouse) or anti-IgG 1 day before LPS stimulation [ ]. To knock down endogenous AMPKα2 or GAB1, mice were injected with mannose-conjugated polymers-loaded siAmpkα2, siGab1 or siScr at a dose of 2 mg/kg from the tail vain at 4 h before LPS injection [ ]. To further imitate the clinic process, cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery was performed to establish an ALI mouse model in response to bacterial sepsis as previously described [ ]. Briefly, 10-week-old male mice were anesthetized with pentobarbital sodium (50 mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection, and then a midline laparotomy was performed to expose the cecum. Next, the cecum was ligated at ileocecal valve, and its distal part was punctured using a syringe needle with the cecum content being squeezed into abdominal cavity to induce systemic sepsis. Mice in sham groups received the same surgery without CLP. All CLP or sham mice were kept for 12 h before sacrificed.

2.3

## Pulmonary function evaluation
Pulmonary function was evaluated using the non-invasive Buxco system (Connecticut, CT, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions [ , ]. Briefly, mice were pre-adapted in the detecting room 2 days before examination and then were allowed to acclimate inside the chamber for 20 min before formal experiments. After calibration, mice were placed in whole body plethysmography, and respiratory parameters, including airway resistance, lung compliance and tidal volume, were monitored using the FinePointe software.

2.4

## Hematoxylin-Eosin staining and analysis
The lungs were excised, fixed in 10% formaldehyde solution, paraffin-embedded and then sectioned into 3 μm slices, which were then exposed to Hematoxylin-Eosin staining to determine histological damage following standard protocols. Lung inflammation score grading from 0 to 4 was calculated by two independent pathologists blinded to the groups as previously described [ ].

2.5

## Blood gas analysis
Arterial blood samples were collected using a PE10 heparinized polyethylene catheter (Clay Adams; Parsippany, NJ, USA), and partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2), partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) and sodium bicarbonate (HCO3−) were analyzed using a Roche cobas b123 automatic blood gas analyzer (Basel, Switzerland).

2.6

## Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) analysis
To obtain BALF, the lungs were lavaged with 1.0 mL cooled phosphate buffer saline (PBS) for 4 times, and then the liquids were centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 min at 1500 rpm with the supernatants collected to measure protein concentrations by a Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. And the sedimented cell pellets were resuspended, and counted by a hemocytometer and Wright-Giemsa staining [ , ].

2.7

## Pulmonary edema evaluation
The lungs were excised and weighed as the wet weight after wiping out the blood, which were then fired in an 80 °C oven to obtain the constant dry weight. Pulmonary edema was calculated as lung wet to dry ratio [ , ].

2.8

## Detection of LDH, MPO, caspase-1 and PKA activities
Cell lysates from the lungs and macrophages were prepared, and then the activities of LDH, MPO, caspase-1 and PKA were detected using commercial kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.9

## Detection of pro-inflammatory cytokines
The levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the lungs and cell medium were detected using ELISA kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.10

## Analysis of oxidative stress
Cell lysates from the lungs and macrophages were prepared, incubated with 50 μmol/L DCFH-DA probe at 37 °C for 30 min protected from light, and then the intensities were measured at an excitation/emission wavelength of 485/535 nm using a microplate reader. To evaluate the levels of MDA, 4-HNE, total SOD activity and GSH, commercial kits were used, and the results were normalized to protein concentrations [ , , ]. Pulmonary hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and superoxide anion (O2−) were detected using Amplex Red Hydrogen Peroxide/Peroxidase Assay Kit and lucigenin chemiluminescent probe respectively as previously described [ ].

2.11

## Cell isolation and treatment
To isolate alveolar macrophages (AMs), BALF was collected, centrifuged and resuspended in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and then allowed for 1 h adherence [ ]. Type 1 (AT1) and type 2 (AT2) alveolar epithelial cells were isolated as previously described [ ]. Briefly, euthanized mice were exsanguinated, and their lungs were perfused with sterile PBS until pink lungs turned to white. And then, the lungs were instillated with 2.0 mL dispase (50 U/mL) and 0.5 mL 1% low-melt agarose. Next, the lungs were removed and incubated with dispase at room temperature for 45 min, followed by teasing in DMEM with DNase I (10 μg/mL) and incubating at room temperature for an additional 10 min. Single-cell suspensions were prepared using 100, 40, 30 and 10 μm cell strainers, and centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 min at 300 g. Subsequently, cells were resuspended in DMEM containing 10% FBS and incubated with biotinylated anti-CD104, anti-CD16/32, anti-CD31, anti-CD45 and anti-TER119 at 37 °C for 30 min at 1:100 dilution. The undesired cells were removed by incubating resuspended cells with streptavidin-coated magnetic particles (10 mg/mL) at room temperature for 30 min. Enriched cells were washed and resuspended with DMEM, and stained at 4 °C for 10 min with PE-conjugated anti-CD326, FITC-conjugated anti-CD45.2 and APC-conjugated anti-PDPN at 1:100 dilution. Cells were washed, strained using a 35 μm filter cap tube and sorted for CD326+CD45.2−PDPN+ AT1 cells and CD326+CD45.2−PDPN- AT2 cells on a Beckman Coulter Moflo Astrios EQ Flow Cytometer (Brea, CA, USA). Mouse PBMCs were isolated and purified using a commercial kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions as previously described [ ]. To isolate mouse BMDMs, 10-week-old male mice were euthanized by the cervical dislocation method, and the tibias and femurs were collected with their bone marrows isolated. Bone marrow cells were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 20% L929 conditioned medium for 7 days to differentiate into BMDMs as previously described [ ]. In the in vitro studies, these macrophages were stimulated with LPS (100 ng/mL) for 12 h. For the silence of AMPKα2, EPAC and GAB1, BMDMs from Samsn1MTG mice were transfected with siAmpkα2, siEpac, siGab1 or siScr at a dose of 50 nmol/L using Lipofectamine® RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent for 6 h, and then cultured in fresh DMEM medium for an additional 48 h before LPS (100 ng/mL) stimulation for 12 h [ , ]. To inhibit PKA activity, BMDMs from Samsn1MTG mice were incubated with RpAMPS (10 μmol/L) or H89 (10 μmol/L) for 24 h before LPS stimulation [ ]. To further clarify the role of GAB1 and SHP2 in SAMSN1-mediated activation of PKA, BMDMs from Samsn1MTG mice were infected with lentiviral vectors carrying GAB1Y627F or SHP2 DN at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20 for 6 h, and then cultured in fresh DMEM medium for an additional 48 h before LPS (100 ng/mL) stimulation for 12 h. To induce the differentiation from human THP1 cells into macrophages, THP1 cells were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 100 ng/mL PMA for 48 h, and then cultured for an additional 24 h before further treatment to exclude the effect of PMA [ ]. To knock down or overexpress SAMSN1, THP1-derived macrophages were infected with lentiviral vectors carrying shSamsn1 or Samsn1 at a MOI of 50 and 20 for 6 h, and then cultured in fresh DMEM medium for an additional 48 h before LPS (100 ng/mL) stimulation for 12 h.

2.12

## Bone marrow transplantation (BMT)
BMT was performed in mice after total body irradiation (TBI) as previously described [ ]. Briefly, 6-week-old mice were lethally irradiated twice with a dose of 5.5 Gy 4 h before transplantation, and then 1 × 107 BMDMs were injected into recipient mice through tail vein injection. The mice were kept on sulfatrim-containing water (4 μg/mL) for 4 weeks before LPS injection.

2.13

## Non-invasive adoptive transfer of BMDMs
Pulmonary monocytes were depleted by an intratracheal injection of CDN liposome (60 μL per mouse), and then these mice were reconstituted with 1 × 106 BMDMs by non-invasive intratracheal instillation method 2 days after CDN injection [ ]. To investigate the involvement of macrophage AMPKα2, BMDMs from Samsn1Flox or Samsn1MKO mice were infected with lentiviral vectors carrying mouse Ampkα2 cDNA at a MOI of 20 for 6 h, and then cultured in fresh DMEM medium for an additional 48 h before non-invasive adoptive transfer. After 1 more day, these mice were intratracheally injected with LPS (5 mg/kg) to generate LPS-induced ALI.

2.14

## Quantitative real-time PCR
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using standard protocols as previously described [ , ]. Briefly, total RNA was isolated using TRIzol™ Reagent and reversely transcribed using the First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit for RT-PCR according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next, quantitative real-time PCR was performed on a Roche LightCycler 480 System using FastStart™ SYBR® Green Master, and gene expression was quantified by the 2−ΔΔCt method. The primers were provided as following: Samsn1 forward 5′-TTCACGCCAAGTCCCTATGAC-3′, Samsn1 reverse 5′-TTCCCATTGGTGTTTTGCACATA-3’; Ampkα2 forward 5′-CAGGCCATAAAGTGGCAGTTA-3′, Ampkα2 reverse 5′-AAAAGTCTGTCGGAGTGCTGA-3’; Epac forward 5′-TCTTACCAGCTAGTGTTCGAGC-3′, Epac reverse 5′-AATGCCGATATAGTCGCAGATG-3’; Gab1 forward 5′-GAAGTTGAAGCGTTATGCGTG-3′, Gab1 reverse 5′-AGAAAATCCGGTCGATGGTGT-3’; Gapdh forward 5′-AGGTCGGTGTGAACGGATTTG-3′, Gapdh reverse 5′-TGTAGACCATGTAGTTGAGGTCA-3’.

2.15

## Western blot and immunoprecipitation (IP)
Western blot was performed using standard protocols as previously described [ , , ]. Briefly, total proteins were isolated using RIPA lysis buffer and quantified by a Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. Total proteins were then separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and blotted onto polyvinylidene ﬂuoride membranes. After blocking with 5% non-fat milk, the membranes were incubated with indicating primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight, followed by incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h. Finally, protein band was detected using ECL reagent on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc XRS + System (Hercules, CA, USA) and analyzed by Image Lab (Version 6.0). For IP assay, cell lysates were incubated with anti-GAB1 or control anti-IgG at 4 °C overnight, and then immunoprecipitated with Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose, followed by the detection using Western blot [ , ].

2.16

## Protein degradation assay
To investigate the role of SAMSN1 in regulating GAB1 protein stability, BMDMs from Samsn1WT or Samsn1MTG mice were incubated with CHX (10 μmol/L) for indicating times in the presence of LPS, and then SAMSN1 protein levels were evaluated by Western blot [ ].

2.17

## Human phospho-kinase array
Phospho-kinase array was performed to measure alterations of kinase signaling in Samsn1-overexpressed or silenced human THP1-derived macrophages with LPS stimulation using a commercial kit.

2.18

## Microarray data analysis
Four microarray datasets (GSE1871, GSE2411, GSE17355 and GSE165226) were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, and these datasets were generated using murine lungs in response to LPS or CLP stimulation. Raw data of genomic expression were integrated, preprocessed and screened to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) using R software with the limma package, which are defined as fold change >2 and a adj. P value < 0.05. Venn diagram was generated to identify DEGs in the four datasets, and protein-protein interaction network was generated to analyze the functional interactions.

2.19

## Statistical analysis
Data were expressed as the mean ± the standard deviation, and statistical analysis was done using SPSS software (Version 23.0). For comparisons between two groups, a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test was used, while one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was used with adjustment for multiplicity among three or more groups. The values for the correlation were calculated using the Pearson correlation coefficient test. Differences with P value < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

3

## Results
3.1

## Macrophage SAMSN1 expression is increased and negatively correlates with LPS-induced ALI in mice
By screening the four datasets, we identified 58 DEGs in murine lungs during sepsis-induced ALI ( and supplementary Table). Protein-protein interaction network revealed that these hub DEGs mainly encoded inflammatory cytokines (e.g., Il1b and Il1r2) and chemotactic factors (e.g., Ccl2, Ccl3, Ccl9, Ccl12, Cxcl1 and Cxcl2). From the 58 DEGs, we focused on a rarely-known inflammatory gene SAMSN1 that was significantly upregulated during sepsis-induced ALI ( and supplementary Table). Consistent with the microarray data, we also detected an increased Samsn1 mRNA level in LPS-injured lungs in a time-dependent manner ( ). And SAMSN1 protein level in murine lungs was also elevated by LPS stimulation ( ). As shown in , we found that Samsn1 mRNA level in murine AMs was higher than those in AT1 or AT2 cells, and that macrophage Samsn1 mRNA level in murine lungs was dramatically elevated by LPS injection with a slight increase in AT2 cells. Next, we isolated AMs from saline- or LPS-stimulated murine lungs to further evaluate the alteration of macrophage SAMSN1. As shown in A, SAMSN1 protein level was increased in AMs isolated from LPS-stimulated lungs. Interestingly, macrophage SAMSN1 in AMs positively correlated with tidal volume, an index of pulmonary function ( B). In addition, we isolated BMDMs and examined their SAMSN1 expression in response to LPS stimulation. As shown in , Samsn1 mRNA level was increased in LPS-stimulated BMDMs in a time-dependent manner. Meanwhile, SAMSN1 protein level in BMDMs was also upregulated by LPS stimulation ( ). To further validate the expression of SAMSN1 in macrophages and identify its diagnostic value as a serum biomarker in sepsis-induced ALI, we isolated PBMCs from saline- or LPS-injected mice. As shown in C and D, SAMSN1 expression in PBMCs was increased in response to LPS injection, and also positively correlated with tidal volume. Additionally, we divided these ALI mice into low-SAMSN1 and high-SAMSN1 groups using the median ratio of SAMSN1 expression in PBMCs as a threshold. Compared with low-SAMSN1 group, ALI mice with higher SAMSN1 level exhibited lower LDH activity, an index for cellular damage ( E). Accordingly, blood gas analysis demonstrated that the high-SAMSN1 ALI mice featured higher PaO2, and lower PaCO2 and HCO3−, indicating an improved gas exchange ( F and G). Collectively, we reveal that macrophage SAMSN1 expression is increased and negatively correlates with LPS-induced ALI in mice. 

3.2

## Macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency exacerbates LPS-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in mice
To clarify the role of macrophage SAMSN1 in regulating LPS-induced ALI, we used the Cre-LoxP system to generate Samsn1MKO mice. As shown in A and B, SAMSN1 expression was dramatically inhibited in AMs but not in AT1 or AT2 cells in murine lungs. After LPS injection, Samsn1MKO mice exhibited enhanced pulmonary injury and edema, compared with control Samsn1Flox mice, as evidenced by increased LDH activity and lung wet to dry ratio ( C and D). Hematoxylin-Eosin staining identified increased alveolar wall thickness, infiltration of inflammatory cells and collapse of the alveoli in LPS-injured lungs of Samsn1Flox mice, which were further exacerbated by macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency ( E). Pulmonary function evaluation revealed that macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency dramatically elevated airway resistance, and reduced lung compliance and tidal volume of ALI mice ( F–H). Accordingly, decreased PaO2, and increased PaCO2 and HCO3− were detected in LPS-injected Samsn1MKO mice, indicating a further impaired gas exchange ( I and J). And LPS-induced increase of protein concentrations in BLAF was also enhanced by macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency ( K). Moreover, macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency dramatically aggravated the death of mice receiving 25 mg/kg LPS (Figure 2L). Inflammation and oxidative stress contribute to the progression of sepsis-induced ALI. As shown in A, remarkably increased numbers of total cells, neutrophils and macrophages in BALF were detected in LPS-injected Samsn1MKO mice. Additionally, macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency further enhanced LPS-induced increase of MPO activity, an index of neutrophil accumulation in the lungs ( B). And the levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in LPS-stimulated lungs were also elevated by macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency ( C). As shown in D and E, LPS-induced increases of ROS, MDA and 4-HNE in the lungs were further enhanced in Samsn1MKO mice. Further data showed that macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency also increased pulmonary H2O2 and O2− expression upon LPS injection ( ). In contrast, the antioxidant system was compromised by macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency, as evidenced by decreased total SOD activity and GSH level ( F). NLRP3 inflammasome is required for the maturation and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and plays critical roles in the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced ALI. As shown in G and H, macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency dramatically upregulated NLRP3 and ASC proteins, and enhanced caspase-1 activity in LPS-stimulated lungs. As expected, pulmonary IL-1β and IL-18 levels were also increased in LPS-injected Samsn1MKO mice ( I and J). It is well-known that LysM-Cre-mediated genetic editing targets on all myeloid cell lineage, including granulocytes. To exclude the effect of SAMSN1 in polymorphonuclear neutrophils, we first established the chimeric mice through irradiation and BMDMs transplantation. As shown in , TBI mice exhibited lower levels of peripheral WBCs, and all TBI mice died within 14 days after irradiation. Yet, the levels of peripheral WBCs in TBI mice were restored by BMT, reaching to baseline after 4 weeks. Successful BMT was also verified by detecting SAMSN1 protein in PBMCs using Western blot ( ). As shown in , Samsn1-deficient macrophages dramatically promoted LPS-induced ALI, as evidence by the higher levels of LDH activity and lung wet to dry ratio in irradiated Samsn1Flox mice reconstituted with Samsn1MKO BMDMs. Accordingly, LPS-induced pulmonary dysfunction was also aggravated in irradiated Samsn1Flox mice reconstituted with Samsn1MKO BMDMs, compared with those reconstituted with Samsn1Flox BMDMs ( ). Next, we used CDN or anti-Ly6G to deplete monocytes or neutrophils to further clarify the beneficial role of macrophage SAMSN1 in LPS-induced ALI ( ). As shown in , monocyte depletion dramatically prevented the worse ALI in LPS-injected Samsn1MKO mice. However, Samsn1MKO mice suffered more drastic LPS-induced ALI than Samsn1Flox mice, regardless of anti-Ly6G antibody treatment, eliminating the involvement of neutrophil SAMSN1 ( L-O). Collectively, these findings suggest that macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency exacerbates LPS-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in mice. 

3.3

## Macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression ameliorates LPS-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in mice
To further verify the role of macrophage SAMSN1 in LPS-induced ALI, we established Samsn1MTG mice. As shown in A and B, SAMSN1 was specifically overexpressed in AMs but not in AT1 or AT2 cells in murine lungs. LPS-induced ALI was dramatically ameliorated by macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression, as evidenced by decreased LDH activity and lung wet to dry ratio ( C and D). Results from Hematoxylin-Eosin staining identified an improved histological alteration in LPS-injected Samsn1MTG mice, compared with Samsn1WT mice ( E). Accordingly, LPS-induced pulmonary dysfunction was also alleviated by macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression, as evidenced by decreased airway resistance, and increased lung compliance and tidal volume ( F–H). And the increased PaO2, and decreased PaCO2 and HCO3− in LPS-injected mice were also restored in those with macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression ( I and J). Meanwhile, LPS-induced increase of protein concentrations in BLAF was dramatically reduced by macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression ( K). Moreover, macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression dramatically inhibited the death of mice receiving 25 mg/kg LPS (Figure 4L). Consistent with the phenotypic alterations, Samsn1MTG mice exhibited fewer infiltrations of WBCs in LPS-injured lungs ( A and B). And pulmonary TNF-α and IL-6 levels were also decreased by macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression in response to LPS injection ( C). In addition, LPS-induced ROS formation and oxidative damage were also prevented in Samsn1MTG mice, as evidenced by decreased levels of ROS, MDA and 4-HNE ( D and E). Macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression also decreased pulmonary H2O2 and O2− expression upon LPS injection ( ). And total SOD activity and GSH level were partially restored in LPS-injected Samsn1MTG mice ( F). Meanwhile, the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome by LPS was dramatically suppressed in Samsn1MTG mice, as evidenced by decreased levels of NLRP3 protein, ASC protein, caspase-1 activity, IL-1β and IL-18 ( G–J). To further clarify the role of SAMSN1 in AMs, we depleted AMs in Samsn1WT mice using CDN liposome, and then reconstituted AMs with Samsn1WT or Samsn1MTG BMDMs by non-invasive intratracheal instillation method. As shown in , adoptive transfer of Samsn1MTG BMDMs to murine lungs dramatically prevented LPS-induced ALI and pulmonary dysfunction, as evidenced by decreased LDH activity, lung wet to dry ratio, PaCO2, and increased tidal volume and PaO2. And LPS-induced inflammation and oxidative stress were also reduced in CDN liposome-injected Samsn1WT mice by the reconstitution with Samsn1MTG BMDMs ( ). Collectively, these results imply that macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression ameliorates LPS-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in mice. 

3.4

## SAMSN1 modulates LPS-induced inflammation and oxidative stress in BMDMs in vitro
Consistent with the in vivo findings, we found that Samsn1MKO BMDMs exhibited higher TNF-α and IL-6 levels in the medium in response to LPS incubation ( ). And LPS-induced oxidative stress was also aggravated in Samsn1MKO BMDMs, as evidenced by increased levels of ROS, MDA and 4-HNE ( ). Meanwhile, the levels of caspase-1 activity, IL-1β and IL-18 were also higher in Samsn1MKO BMDMs than those in Samsn1Flox BMDMs in response to LPS incubation ( ). In contrast, LPS-induced inflammation and oxidative stress were dramatically alleviated in Samsn1MTG BMDMs ( ). Collectively, we demonstrate that SAMSN1 deficiency aggravated, while SAMSN1 overexpression inhibited LPS-induced inflammation and oxidative stress in BMDMs in vitro.

3.5

## Macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression prevents LPS-induced ALI though activating AMPKα2 in vivo and in vitro
Adaptor proteins are primarily involved in regulating intracellular kinase pathways; therefore, we performed a human phospho-kinase array in human THP1-derived macrophages with SAMSN1 silence or overexpression. As shown in A, SAMSN1 deficiency decreased, while SAMSN1 overexpression increased AMPKα2 (T172) phosphorylation in LPS-stimulated THP1 cells, without affecting AMPKα1 (T183) phosphorylation. Considering the fact that no available antibodies are available to specifically detect AMPKα2 (T172) phosphorylation, and that AMPKα1 is mainly phosphorylated in T183, we used a commercial antibody to detect AMPKα (T172) phosphorylation. As expected, AMPKα (T172) phosphorylation in murine lungs was inhibited by LPS injection, which was decreased in Samsn1MKO mice, but increased in Samsn1MTG mice ( B and C). To further clarify the necessity of AMPKα2, Samsn1MTG mice were intravenously injected with mannose-conjugated polymers-loaded siAmpkα2 to specifically knock down AMPKα2 in macrophages as previously described, and the efficiency was validated in AMs by quantitative real-time PCR ( D) [ ]. As shown in E–G, macrophage AMPKα2 silence blocked the antiinflammatory and antioxidant effects of macrophage SAMSN1 in response to LPS injection, as evidenced by increased TNF-α, IL-6, ROS, MDA and 4-HNE levels. In addition, the decreased LDH activity and lung wet to dry ratio in LPS-injected Samsn1MTG mice were also elevated by siAmpkα2 injection ( H and I). Accordingly, macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression-mediated protective effects against LPS-induced pulmonary dysfunction were blunted in those with AMPKα2 silence ( J-M). Consistent with the in vivo findings, we found that AMPKα2 silence also blocked SAMSN1-mediated antiinflammatory and antioxidant effects in LPS-stimulated BMDMs ( ). In addition, Samsn1Flox or Samsn1MKO BMDMs with or without AMPKα2 overexpression were intratracheally injected into AMs-depleted Samsn1Flox mice to further verify whether macrophage AMPKα2 overexpression would prevent the deleterious effects by SAMSN1 deficiency. As shown in , the aggravated inflammation and oxidative stress in control Samsn1MKO BMDMs-instillated Samsn1Flox mice were dramatically reduced by the reconstitution with Ampkα2-overexpressed Samsn1MKO BMDMs, as evidenced by decreased TNF-α, IL-6, ROS, MDA and 4-HNE levels. Meanwhile, LPS-injured lungs from Samsn1Flox mice that were preconditioned with Ampkα2-overexpressed Samsn1MKO BMDMs exhibited reduced LDH activity and lung wet to dry ratio ( ). Moreover, adoptive transfer of Ampkα2-overexpressed Samsn1MKO BMDMs also alleviated LPS-induced pulmonary dysfunction in AMs-depleted Samsn1Flox mice with control Samsn1MKO BMDMs instillation, as evidenced by increased tidal volume, PaO2, and decreased PaCO2, HCO3− and protein concentrations in BLAF ( ). The overexpression efficiency in BMDMs was validated by quantitative real-time PCR ( ). Collectively, our findings indicate that macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression prevents LPS-induced ALI though activating AMPKα2 in vivo and in vitro. 

3.6

## Macrophage SAMSN1 activates AMPKα2 through GAB1/SHP2/PKA pathway
The secondary messenger cAMP and downstream PKA are classic activators of AMPKα2. Interestingly, SAMSN1 deficiency decreased, while SAMSN1 overexpression increased PKA activity in LPS-stimulated BMDMs without affecting intracellular cAMP level ( A and B). And PKA inhibition by either RpAMPS or H89 significantly blocked AMPKα activation in LPS-stimulated Samsn1MTG BMDMs ( C). Recent studies have demonstrated that EPAC is the other upstream activator of AMPKα2; however, our results showed that EPAC silence did not affect AMPKα activation in LPS-stimulated Samsn1MTG BMDMs ( D and E) [ , ]. Using BLAST data based search with the SH3 domain of SAMSN1, von Holleben et al. identified 14 candidate SAMSN1 SH3 domain-binding proteins [ ]. Among these proteins, we focused on GAB1 for its indispensable regulation on macrophage and sepsis-induced ALI [ , ]. Consistent with the predicted results, we found that SAMSN1 directly bound to GAB1 in BMDMs and prevented its protein degradation without affecting Gab1 mRNA level, thereby increasing GAB1 protein expression in LPS-stimulated Samsn1MTG BMDMs ( F–J). Dixit et al. previously found that GAB1 interacted with SHP2 to activate PKA, and we herein found that siGab1 transfection or GAB1Y627F, SHP2 DN infection dramatically blocked PKA activation in LPS-stimulated Samsn1MTG BMDMs ( K-L) [ ]. Additionally, the inhibition of LPS-induced inflammation and oxidative stress in Samsn1MTG BMDMs was also blocked by GAB1 silence, as evidenced by increased TNF-α, IL-6 and ROS levels (Fig. 7M–N). To further clarify the involvement of GAB1, Samsn1MTG mice were intravenously injected with mannose-conjugated polymers-loaded siGab1 to specifically knock down GAB1 in macrophages. As shown in , macrophage GAB1 silence blocked the antiinflammatory and antioxidant effects in LPS-injected Samsn1MTG mice, as evidenced by increased TNF-α, IL-6, ROS, MDA and 4-HNE levels. In addition, the decreased LDH activity and lung wet to dry ratio in LPS-injected Samsn1MTG mice were also elevated by siGab1 injection ( ). Accordingly, macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression-mediated protective effects against LPS-induced pulmonary dysfunction were blunted in those with GAB1 silence ( ). Collectively, we identify that macrophage SAMSN1 activates AMPKα2 through GAB1/SHP2/PKA pathway. 

3.7

## Macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression diminishes CLP-induced ALI in mice
As bacterial infection is the primary cause of sepsis in clinic, we establish a CLP-induced ALI to enhance the clinical impact of our study. As shown in A, Samsn1WT mice exhibited increased alveolar wall thickness, infiltration of inflammatory cells and collapse of the alveoli in the lungs after CLP surgery, which were dramatically diminished in Samsn1MTG mice. And CLP-induced pulmonary injury and edema were also prevented by macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression, as evidenced by decreased LDH activity and lung wet to dry ratio ( B and C). Accordingly, macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression decreased airway resistance, and increased lung compliance and tidal volume of CLP mice, accompanied by an improved gas exchange ( D–G). And CLP-induced increase of protein concentrations in BLAF was also inhibited by macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression ( H). Consistent with the phenotypic alterations, Samsn1MTG mice also exhibited decreased inflammation and oxidative stress in CLP-injured lungs, compared with Samsn1WT mice ( I–K). Collectively, we prove that macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression diminishes CLP-induced ALI in mice. 

4

## Discussion
Our study documents the protective role of macrophage SAMSN1 against sepsis-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI through activating AMPKα2 in a GAB1/SHP2/PKA pathway. The principal findings are as following: (1) macrophage SAMSN1 expression is increased and negatively correlates with LPS-induced ALI in mice; (2) macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency exacerbates, while macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression ameliorates LPS-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in mice; (3) SAMSN1 deficiency aggravates, while SAMSN1 overexpression inhibits LPS-induced inflammation and oxidative stress in BMDMs in vitro; (4) macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression prevents LPS-induced ALI though activating AMPKα2 in vivo and in vitro in a GAB1/SHP2/PKA pathway; (5) macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression diminishes CLP-induced ALI in mice. Our study highlights the role and mechanism of macrophage SAMSN1 in sepsis-induced ALI, and defines it as a promising biomarker and therapeutic target to treat sepsis-induced ALI.
Emerging studies have demonstrated that inflammation and oxidative stress contribute to the progression of sepsis-induced ALI. During sepsis, Toll-like receptors (TLRs), especially TLR4, are activated and then cooperate with the adaptor protein MyD88 to promote the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), thereby triggering the transcription of various pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-α and IL-6) [ ]. Macrophages are the primary immune cells in the lungs, and play critical roles in regulating inflammatory response. Rayees et al. found that AMs facilitated inflammatory signaling and lung injury during sepsis, and that inhibiting TLR4 inflammatory signaling in AMs dramatically reinstated tissue integrity [ ]. In addition, these inflammatory cytokines also provoke excessive generations of free radicals, which subsequently induce oxidative damage and pulmonary dysfunction. Meanwhile, endogenous antioxidant defenses in the lungs are also compromised by sepsis, resulting in aggravated oxidative damage. Consistently, we found that the levels of inflammatory cytokines and ROS were increased, and the antioxidant defenses (e.g., SOD and GSH) were compromised in murine lungs with LPS instillation. NLRP3 inflammasome is required for the maturation and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and inhibiting its activation is identified as a promising therapeutic strategy to treat sepsis-induced ALI [ ]. In addition to NF-κB, excessive ROS is the other activator of NLRP3 inflammasome. In response to ROS stimulation, thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP) detaches from thioredoxin, binds to NLRP3 to activate NLRP3 inflammasome. Huang et al. reported that LPS-induced ROS overproduction in the lungs dramatically increased TXNIP protein expression and subsequently induced activation of NLRP3 inflammasome [ ]. In this study, we demonstrated that NLRP3 inflammasome was activated in LPS-injured lungs, accompanied by increases of pulmonary IL-1β and IL-18 levels. Yet, macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression prevented, while macrophage SAMSN1 deficiency exacerbated sepsis-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in mice.
AMPKα is initially identified as an energy sensor to regulate metabolic homeostasis, and it has become a strategic cellular target to treat sepsis-induced ALI through inhibiting inflammation and oxidative stress. Huang et al. found that AMPKα was de-activated in LPS-stimulated lungs and macrophages, and that activating AMPKα dramatically prevented LPS-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI in mice [ ]. Consistently, we also revealed that macrophage SAMSN1 overexpression ameliorated sepsis-induced inflammation, oxidative stress and ALI through activating AMPKα2 in vivo and in vitro. GAB1 is an adaptor protein mediating TLRs-triggered innate responses in macrophages, and Zheng et al. found that GAB1 silence dramatically suppressed TLR3/4-mediated production of IL-1β and IL-6 in primary macrophages [ ]. In addition, GAB1 is required for M2 macrophage polarization, and macrophage GAB1 silence prevented a bias toward the M2 phenotype [ , ]. Moreover, Wang et al. showed that alveolar epithelium-specific GAB1 knockout perturbed surfactant homeostasis and predisposed mice to LPS-induced ALI [ ]. In contrast, GAB1 overexpression dramatically reduced LPS-induced inflammation and apoptosis, thereby alleviating LPS-induced ALI in mice [ ]. von Holleben et al. previously identified GAB1 was a potential binding partner of SAMSN1 using BLAST data based search with its SH3 domain [ ]. In this study, we also found that SAMSN1 directly bound to GAB1 to inhibit its protein degradation in macrophages, instead of affecting its transcription, and then facilitated PKA/AMPKα2 activation in a SHP2-dependent manner. Consistent with our present findings, a previous study by Dixit et al. showed that the interaction between GAB1 and SHP2 was essential for PKA activation in endothelial cells [ ].
Of note, there are some weaknesses of this manuscript. First, we did not explored how macrophage SAMSN1 was upregulated in response to LPS injection. Second, only male mice were used in this study, and female mice should also be included in further studies. Third, specific domains mediating the interaction between SAMSN1 and GAB1 were also un-elucidated. Fourth, we mainly used LPS, a major inducer of inflammation during bacterial infection, to generate sepsis in mice; however, this model cannot absolutely imitate polymicrobial sepsis and endotoxemia in clinic. Remick et al. previously compared the mortality and inflammatory response of LPS and CLP models, and found that LPS model did not accurately reproduce the cytokine profile of sepsis, despite similar mortality was observed [ ]. For this reason, we also confirmed the beneficial role of macrophage SAMSN1 in the CLP model, a classic bacterial sepsis in clinic. Further studies using clinically relevant septic ALI models are demanded.
Based on these data, we conclude that macrophage SAMSN1 protects against sepsis-induced ALI in mice, and it is a promising therapeutic candidate to treat sepsis-induced ALI.

## Funding information
This work was supported by grants from the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (82100368).
Author contributions
WLJ and XJD conceived the hypothesis of this study. WLJ, CTM and JWB performed the experiments and analyzed the data. WLJ, CTM and XJD wrote the manuscript. WLJ and XJD revised the manuscript. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors report no potential conflicts of interest in this work.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2022.102432.