pmcMol Biol CellMol Biol Cell1mbc9201390mbocMolecular Biology of the Cell1059-15241939-4586American Society for Cell BiologyPMC9634972PMC9634972.1963497296349723600136510.1091/mbc.E20-06-0387E20-06-03871ArticlesCytoplasmic keratins couple with and maintain nuclear envelope integrity in colonic epithelial cells
StenvallCarl-Gustaf A. NyströmJoel H. Butler-HallisseyCiarán JanssonTheresia HeikkiläTaina R. H. AdamStephen A. FoisnerRoland GoldmanRobert D. RidgeKaren M. ToivolaDiana M. aCell Biology, Biosciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Åbo Akademi UniversitybTurku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku, and Åbo Akademi University, andfInFLAMES Research Flagship Center, Åbo Akademi University, 20500 Turku, FinlandcDepartment of Cell and Developmental Biology andePulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611dMax Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter Campus, 1030 Vienna, AustriagTurku Center for Disease Modeling, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, FinlandhAix Marseille Université, CNRS, INP UMR7051, NeuroCyto, 13005 Marseille, FranceMaginThomasMonitoring EditorUniversity of Leipzig†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Author contributions: C-G.A.S., J.H.N., K.M.R., C.B-H., T.J., S.A.A., R.D.G., and D.M.T. conceived and/or designed the experiments; C-G.A.S., J.H.N., C.B-H., T.R.H.H., T.J., K.R., and R.F. performed the experiments; C-G.A.S., J.H.N., C.B-H., T.R.H.H., and D.M.T. analyzed the data; C-G.A.S., J.H.N., and D.M.T. composed the manuscript; all authors edited the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
*Address correspondence to: Diana M. Toivola (diana.toivola@abo.fi).01112022011120223313420849ar121
1862020
2072022
1882022
16012023160120231811202216072024© 2022 Stenvall, Nyström et al. “ASCB®,” “The American Society for Cell Biology®,” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell®” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology.2022https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial-Share Alike 4.0 International Creative Commons License.Keratin intermediate filaments convey mechanical stability and protection against stress to epithelial cells. Keratins are essential for colon health, as seen in keratin 8 knockout (K8−/−) mice exhibiting a colitis phenotype. We hypothesized that keratins support the nuclear envelope and lamina in colonocytes. K8−/− colonocytes in vivo exhibit significantly decreased levels of lamins A/C, B1, and B2 in a colon-specific and cell-intrinsic manner. CRISPR/Cas9- or siRNA-mediated K8 knockdown in Caco-2 cells similarly decreased lamin levels, which recovered after reexpression of K8 following siRNA treatment. Nuclear area was not decreased, and roundness was only marginally increased in cells without K8. Down-regulation of K8 in adult K8flox/flox;Villin-CreERt2 mice following tamoxifen administration significantly decreased lamin levels at day 4 when K8 levels had reduced to 40%. K8 loss also led to reduced levels of plectin, LINC complex, and lamin-associated proteins. While keratins were not seen in the nucleoplasm without or with leptomycin B treatment, keratins were found intimately located at the nuclear envelope and complexed with SUN2 and lamin A. Furthermore, K8 loss in Caco-2 cells compromised nuclear membrane integrity basally and after shear stress. In conclusion, colonocyte K8 helps maintain nuclear envelope and lamina composition and contributes to nuclear integrity.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-SA

## INTRODUCTION
Keratins (K) are the most abundant intermediate filament (IF) proteins and are divided into acidic type I keratins (K9–28) and basic/neutral type II keratins (K1–8 and K71–80; ). Keratins form obligatory noncovalent heteropolymers in epithelial cells ( ). The main simple epithelial keratins in the human colonic epithelium are K8 (type II), and K18, K19, and K20 (type I), with the additional type II K7 in mouse colon ( ; ). Keratins have multiple functions, including providing cell stress protection, mechanical stability, protein and organelle scaffolding, and modulating protein targeting in cells and tissues ( ; ). Keratin mutations have been linked to several diseases in, for example, skin and liver, while their role in colon and inflammatory bowel diseases is under investigation ( ; ; ; ). However, K8 knockout (K8−/−) mice and mice with intestinal epithelium-specific K8 deletion (K8flox/flox;Villin-Cre) display a colitis phenotype including epithelial erosion and hyperproliferation, disrupted barrier function, mild diarrhea, an ion-transport defect, deregulated epithelial differentiation, and blunted colonocyte energy metabolism ( ; ; ; ; ; ). K8+/− mice, which express 50% fewer keratins than K8+/+ mice, exhibit an intermediate phenotype with moderate hyperproliferation, a partial ion transport defect, and increased susceptibility to experimental colitis, but no obvious spontaneous colitis under basal conditions ( , ; ). Interestingly, K8−/− and K8flox/flox;Villin-Cre mice in two models of colorectal cancer ( ; ), and K8+/– mice in a model combining chemical colitis and colorectal cancer ( ), are highly susceptible to induced colorectal cancer. The colitis and hyperproliferation in K8−/− mice ( ) and the tumor load in K8+/− mice ( ) can be partly ameliorated with antibiotics, indicating that the microbiota plays a crucial part in these K8-deficient colon phenotypes.
The nuclear lamina is a filamentous meshwork beneath the inner nuclear membrane (INM) composed of type V IF proteins, the nuclear A- and B-type lamins, and INM proteins ( ). A-type lamins, mainly lamins A and C, are encoded from the LMNA gene through alternative splicing. B-type lamins, primarily lamins B1 and B2, are encoded by the LMNB1 and LMNB2 genes, respectively ( ). Lamins are important for many nuclear processes, including maintenance of nuclear morphology and integrity, mechanotransduction, chromatin organization, gene expression, differentiation, and proliferation ( ; ; ; ; ). These processes involve interactions between lamins and a multitude of lamin-binding proteins in the INM, nucleoplasm, and chromatin, including LAP2-Emerin-MAN1 (LEM)–domain proteins, lamin B receptor, and SUN proteins ( ; ). For example, a nucleoplasmic LEM-domain protein, lamina-associated polypeptide 2α (LAP2α), is crucial for maintaining and regulating a pool of nucleoplasmic lamin A/C ( ). LAP2α and nucleoplasmic lamin A/C interact with and promote the activity of the cell-cycle repressor retinoblastoma protein (pRb), thus controlling and inhibiting cell proliferation ( ; ; ). Mutations in the lamin genes, mainly in the LMNA gene, cause many severe diseases termed laminopathies, such as Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, muscular dystrophies, and cardiomyopathies ( ).
The nuclear lamina and the cytoskeleton are connected through LINC complexes, which are important for nuclear morphology, positioning, and mechanotransduction ( ; ; ). LINC complexes are composed of outer nuclear membrane (ONM) KASH proteins, including nesprins, connected to INM SUN proteins ( ). The cytoskeleton binds LINC complexes either directly or through cytolinker proteins, such as plectin, and, for example, epidermal keratin IFs in keratinocytes and mesenchymal vimentin IFs are connected to nesprin-3 through plectin ( ; ; ). Little is known about lamin and keratin synergy; however, epidermal K1/K10 loss has been linked to premature loss of nuclei, impaired nuclear integrity, and decreased lamin A/C, emerin, and SUN1 protein levels ( ), and K14 loss in epidermal keratinocytes leads to aberrations in the shape and size of the nucleus ( ). Notably, the role of simple-type epithelial keratins in regulating nuclear lamin function, especially in the colonic epithelium, is unknown ( ). As we hypothesize that simple epithelial keratins may regulate lamins and the nucleus, this study aimed to assess whether the loss of these keratins affects lamins and lamin-associated proteins in K8−/− colonocytes. Here, we show that lamin protein levels correlate with simple epithelial keratin levels, particularly in colonocytes, and that cytoplasmic keratins contribute to maintaining nuclear envelope and lamina composition and provide support for nuclear integrity.

## RESULTS

## Loss of simple epithelial K8 correlates with decreased lamin levels in murine colonic epithelial cells in vivo
To determine whether simple epithelial keratins influence nuclear lamins in colonic epithelial cells, we analyzed lamin A, C, B1, and B2 levels as a function of keratin levels in colonic epithelial cells isolated from K8+/+, K8−/− and K8+/− mice by Western blot analysis. The protein levels of lamins A, C, B1, and B2 in K8−/− mouse colonocytes were significantly decreased compared with K8+/+ ( ). K8+/− colonocytes also exhibited significantly decreased lamin B2 protein levels (twofold), but in contrast to K8−/−, the decrease was moderate ( ). In contrast, microarray analysis revealed a minor up-regulation of lamin A, B1, and B2 mRNA expression in K8−/− mouse colonocytes ( ). However, lamin gene expression analysis by quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) showed that there was no significant change in lamin B1 mRNA levels, while lamin A/C and lamin B2 mRNA levels were decreased on average by 50% in K8−/− colonocytes compared with K8+/+ ( ). Taken together, these data show that the protein levels of the major lamin isoforms A, C, B1, and B2 are decreased in K8−/− colonocytes and that the down-regulation is associated with decreased lamin gene expression, excluding lamin B1 mRNA.
 

## Lamin down-regulation in the absence of K8 is specific for epithelial cells in the colon
To carefully define the location of the decreased lamin levels seen in the K8−/− colon, lamin A immunostaining was performed on K8+/+ and K8−/− colon. K8+/+ colonocytes express lamin A along the entire crypt, while clearly less lamin A was observed in the K8−/− crypt ( ). The weaker lamin signal could also be confirmed by measuring the fluorescence intensity of lamin A, which was approximately 35% less compared with K8+/+ ( ). Intriguingly, the size of cell nuclei is comparable in K8+/+ and K8−/− colonocytes ( ), indicating that the decreased lamin protein levels are not caused by changes in nuclear size, while nuclear morphology analysis revealed that K8−/− nuclei are rounder than K8+/+ nuclei ( ).
 To assess whether lamins are affected in other epithelial tissues normally expressing K8 as a major type II keratin, lamin protein levels were analyzed in the small intestine (ileum), proximal colon, liver, pancreas, and lung (Supplemental Figure 1, A–F). In contrast to the K8−/− colon, the small intestine in K8−/− mice has a mild or negligible disease phenotype and does not display major hyperproliferation or inflammation ( ; ). No changes in lamin A levels were observed in total lysates of K8−/− ileum, lungs, pancreas, and liver, while a decrease was seen in K8−/− proximal colon total lysates (Supplemental Figure 1, A–F). To determine whether the loss of other IF proteins may elicit a lamin phenotype, lamin protein levels were analyzed in vimentin−/− mouse spleen and colon, as vimentin−/− mice were recently found to be more sensitive to chemical colitis ( ). Western blot analysis revealed no changes in the levels of lamin A, C, B1, or B2 in vimentin−/− total colon and spleen lysates compared with vimentin+/+ (Supplemental Figure 1, G–J). Taken together, these findings identify a colon- and colonocyte-specific role for keratins in the regulation of lamin protein levels.

## The colitis and microbiota levels do not contribute to lamin down-regulation in K8
−/− mouse colon
The colonic microbiota plays a crucial role in the K8−/− colon phenotype, as depletion of the colonic microbiota by broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment decreases inflammation and hyperproliferation in K8−/− mice ( , ). Therefore, the impact of inflammation and microbiota on lamin protein expression was assessed in colonocytes from K8+/+ and K8−/− mice treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Antibiotic treatment did not elicit any changes in, or normalization of, K8−/− colonocyte lamin protein levels compared with control (baseline) mice (Supplemental Figure 2, A and B). As seen by myeloperoxidase staining, decreased neutrophil infiltration in K8−/− colon confirmed that the antibiotic treatment ameliorated the inflammation in K8−/− colon (Supplemental Figure 2, C and D; ). Moreover, lamin A, B1, and C protein levels remained unchanged in mice treated with the colitis-inducing chemical dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) compared with untreated mice (Supplemental Figure 2, E and F). These findings exclude the colonic microbiota and the colitis observed in K8−/− colon as major contributing factors for the lamin changes and suggest a more direct role for keratins in the observed lamin phenotype.

## Keratins maintain lamin levels in colorectal adenocarcinoma cells in vitro
To assess whether the effect of K8 down-regulation on colonocyte lamin levels in vivo is reproducible in vitro, human colorectal adenocarcinoma Caco-2 cells were subjected to sustained treatment with K8 and K18 siRNAs. Robust knockdown of keratins (about 80%) elicited a significant decrease in lamin A (about 40%) protein levels ( ). Immunofluorescence analysis of K8/K18 siRNA-treated cells revealed a similar decrease in lamin A levels (about 35%) in cells lacking K8/K18 (Supplemental Figure 3, A and B). Importantly, allowing siRNA-treated cells to recover for 9 days after siRNA treatment completely normalized K8/K18 protein levels ( ), simultaneously rescuing the lamin A phenotype ( ), indicating that lamin protein levels correlate with keratin levels in colon epithelial cells. Furthermore, a similar lamin phenotype manifested in K8−/− Caco-2 cells generated by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene knockout. K8−/− Caco-2 cells exhibited a complete loss of K8, K18, and K19 and a significant decrease in lamins A (about 50%), C (about 50%), and B2 (about 50%) protein levels compared with K8+/+ CRISPR Caco-2 cells, while lamin B1 levels were unchanged ( ). However, in contrast to our findings in vivo, K8−/− CRISPR Caco-2 cell nuclei are, on average, slightly larger than K8+/+ nuclei, while nuclear morphology (roundness) is unchanged (Supplemental Figure 3, C–E).
 

## The K8
−/− colonocyte lamin phenotype manifests rapidly following the loss of K8
We next asked whether the loss of lamins in the keratin-deficient colon of the K8−/− mouse is colonocyte autonomous. For this, intestinal epithelium-specific K8−/− mice were established using the flox-Villin-Cre system. K8flox/flox mice were bred with either Villin-Cre or Villin-CreErt2 mice to generate K8 knockdown specifically in intestinal epithelial cells. K8flox/flox;Villin-Cre mice are K8 deficient from birth, while the loss of K8 expression in K8flox/flox;Villin-CreERt2 mice is tamoxifen-inducible (one injection/day for 5 days, whereafter mice were sacrificed after 25 days). In both intestinal epithelium-specific K8−/− mouse models, lamin A and B1 protein levels were decreased in colonocytes ( ), implying that this phenotype is indeed colonocyte-intrinsic. Next, we assessed at what time point the lamin phenotype manifests following sequential K8 loss over 14 days using tamoxifen-treated K8flox/flox;Villin-CreERt2 mice. While K8 protein levels on average started decreasing on day 1 after injection, the levels had decreased by 40% on day 4 and by ∼90% on day 8 ( ). A similar initial pattern was observed for lamins, with stable and significant down-regulation of lamin A and C protein levels starting 4–5 days after the first injection, while a down-regulation of lamin B2 was observed on day 8 and onward ( ). Lamin A, C, and B2 protein levels were decreased by ∼40% following K8 down-regulation. Lamin B1 protein levels were only reduced by ∼20–30% starting from day 8 ( ). Additionally, a minor lamin ratio shift was observed following K8 loss, with more prominent lamin B1 expression.
 

## LINC complex protein levels are decreased in K8
−/− mouse colonocytes, and SUN2 and lamin A complex with keratins
Loss of K1/K10 disrupts nuclear integrity and may decouple the cytoskeleton and nucleus in the epidermis ( ). To assess whether nucleo-cytoskeletal coupling and nuclear integrity may also be connected to K8 in colonocytes, the levels of the cytolinker protein plectin and several LINC complex and lamin-associated proteins were assayed. K8−/− colonocytes exhibited reduced gene expression of SUN1, SUN2, and the INM protein emerin as seen by qRT-PCR, while no change was seen in plectin, nesprin-3, and LAP2α mRNA levels (Supplemental Figure 4A). SUN1, SUN2, and emerin protein levels were decreased in K8−/− colonocytes, and this down-regulation was larger than indicated by the qRT-PCR analysis, while plectin protein levels were significantly decreased ( ). Out of this group of proteins, only emerin levels were moderately decreased in K8+/− colonocytes compared with K8+/+ ( ). Furthermore, similar to lamin A, SUN2 protein levels were unchanged in the small intestine (ileum) of K8−/− mice compared with K8+/+, further indicating that there is no lamin phenotype in the small intestine (Supplemental Figure 4C). To assess whether the loss of SUN1 and SUN2 affects keratins and lamins, respectively, Caco-2 cells were treated with SUN1 and SUN2 siRNAs for 9 consecutive days (Supplemental Figure 4B). While keratins were unaffected by the loss of SUN1 and SUN2 proteins, lamin A protein levels were significantly reduced by approximately 25% (Supplemental Figure 4B). As keratins affect lamin and lamin-associated protein levels, we tested whether the reverse relationship occurs. Analysis of LAP2α−/− mice showed no change in either keratin or lamin protein levels in colonocytes (Supplemental Figure 4D). In addition, LAP2α is unchanged in K8−/− mouse colonocytes (Supplemental Figure 4E). This suggests that the complex containing lamin A/C, LAP2α and pRb is downstream from keratin-lamin interaction ( ; ), and hence, loss of LAP2α does not alter keratin protein levels. To understand any molecular connection between keratins and nuclear lamins, K8/K18 or lamin A co-immunoprecipitation assays were performed on lysates of Caco-2 cells. K8/K18 co-immunoprecipitated with lamin A and the LINC complex protein SUN2 and, conversely, lamin A coimmunoprecipitated K8, K18, and K19 ( ).
 

## K8 is not detected in colonocyte nuclei
As low levels of nuclear keratins have been reported in HeLa cells ( ), we analyzed whether keratins may be present in colonocyte nuclei. Airyscan microscopy of Caco-2 cells immunostained for K8 and lamin A revealed that keratins and lamins are in close proximity at the nuclear surface, while no nucleoplasmic keratins were observed ( and Supplemental Videos 1–3). Furthermore, treatment of Caco-2 cells with the nuclear export inhibitor leptomycin B (LMB) did not cause any detectable accumulation of keratins in the nucleus (Supplemental Figure 5A and Supplemental Videos 2 and 3). In contrast, nuclear accumulation of the positive control pRb was increased after LMB treatment (Supplemental Figure 5, B and C). Similarly, no nuclear K8 was detected in vivo in mouse colon sections after overexposure of the abundant cytoplasmic keratin filaments ( ). Together, these data indicate that cytoplasmic keratins can complex with LINC complex components and lamins, suggesting that keratins could physically link to the lamina via the LINC complex and may thus affect the mechanical properties of the nucleus, and thereby modulate nuclear function.
 

## Nuclear integrity is compromised following K8 loss in colorectal adenocarcinoma cells, and is further exacerbated by shear stress
The nuclear lamina and the functional coupling of the cytoskeleton and nucleus are important for nuclear integrity. Because the levels of many LINC complex and nuclear lamina components are decreased in K8−/− colonocytes, we assessed whether nuclear integrity is affected following the loss of K8 by transfecting cells with NLS-GFP or cGAS-RFP, which are contained in the nucleus when the nuclear lamina is intact ( ; ; ). K8−/− CRISPR Caco-2 cells showed a significant threefold increase in the percentage of transfected cells with cytoplasmic NLS-GFP compared with K8+/+ cells ( ). Exposure to shear stress for 24 hours in an orbital shaker, which increased K8+/+ nuclear leakage of NLS-GFP, further increased the number of K8−/− CRISPR Caco-2 cells with NLS-GFP in the cytoplasm ( ). A similar threefold increase in baseline nuclear leakiness was seen for K8−/− CRISPR Caco-2 cells transfected with cGAS-RFP compared with K8+/+ cells, while shear stress did not further increase the number of cells with cytoplasmic cGAS-RFP ( ). Taken together, the loss of K8 leads to a compromised nuclear envelope in colorectal cancer cells.
 

## DISCUSSION
In this study, we demonstrate a molecular link between cytoplasmic simple epithelial keratins, LINC complex proteins, lamin-associated proteins, and nuclear lamins, especially in colonocytes (summarized in ). We show that the absence of keratins in colon epithelial cells leads to significantly decreased protein levels of the major lamin isoforms A, C, B1, and B2 in vivo in adult full-body K8−/− mice, and in two models where K8 was deleted only from intestinal epithelial cells (K8flox/flox;Villin-Cre mice, and after tamoxifen administration to K8flox/flox;Villin-CreERt2 mice). Similarly, lamin protein levels decrease in vitro in human Caco-2 cells treated with K8/K18 siRNA or in CRISPR/Cas9 K8−/− Caco-2 cells. Reduced lamin gene expression, except for lamin B1, is likely in part the cause of the decreased lamin protein levels observed in K8−/− colon; however, it is unclear how the loss of keratins could affect lamin expression, as little is known about lamin gene regulation ( ). Matrix stiffness and the vitamin A/retinoic acid pathway have been implicated in lamin A transcriptional regulation ( ). Furthermore, the gene Hey regulates the Drosophila A-type lamin C and B-type lamin Dm0 genes. The loss of Hey is linked to increased lamin Dm0 and decreased lamin C expression in differentiated Drosophila enterocytes ( ). This is intriguing as murine Hey1 and Hey2 are down-regulated in K8−/− colonocytes ( ), suggesting that Hey1 and Hey2 may be involved in colonocyte lamin gene regulation. The concomitant changes in K8 and lamin levels also occur in an acute setting and are closely linked temporally. Lamin levels are also normalized when K8 is allowed to be reexpressed in Caco-2 cell cultures after siRNA treatment. In vivo, reducing intestinal epithelial K8 levels stepwise by treating adult K8flox/flox;Villin-CreERt2 mice with tamoxifen, leads to a 60% drop in colonic K8 protein levels that is accompanied by statistically significant decreases in lamin A and B2 protein levels within 4 d.
 Interestingly, the decrease in lamin protein levels was observed only in the epithelium of the colon, as several other K8−/− simple epithelial tissues, in which K8 is also a major (or the only) type II keratin, exhibited normal lamin and SUN2 protein levels as assessed for, amongst others, the small intestine. Furthermore, no changes in lamin protein levels were observed in the spleen or colon of vimentin−/− mice, suggesting this is a keratin-specific effect. The correlation between keratin loss and decreased lamin levels is likely independent of the microbiota or colitis observed in K8−/− mice, as antibiotic treatment, which eliminates the colonic microbiota and ameliorates colitis and hyperproliferation ( ), did not normalize lamin levels. However, as the effect of keratin loss on lamin levels is not universal for keratin-expressing epithelia or other intermediate filament proteins, we cannot rule out that colon epithelium-specific functions and processes are involved in this regulation. Very little is known regarding the potential roles of lamins in colon homeostasis and function ( ). Low levels of A-type lamins correlate with increased gastric polyp size ( ), and loss of A-type lamins in stage II and III colorectal cancers (CRCs) puts patients at severe risk of cancer resurgence ( ). Because the lack or decreased levels of colonic keratins leads to hyperproliferation and increased susceptibility to CRC tumorigenesis ( ; ; ; ), the lamin phenotype in these mice may be a contributing factor toward the pro-proliferative and pro-tumorigenic phenotype. Nevertheless, mouse intestinal epithelial-specific lamin A knockdown in mice did not lead to increased proliferation as measured by KI67 ( ).
Lamin-associated proteins depend on A-type lamins, and vice versa, for stabilization and correct positioning in the nucleus ( ; ; ; ). Our data show that K8−/− mouse colonocytes have decreased levels of emerin, which is anchored to the INM by lamin A, and therefore the absence of emerin could be caused by decreased lamin A protein levels ( ; ). Weakening or loss of the connection between the nuclear lamina and the cytoplasmic cytoskeleton can be caused by the loss and/or mislocalization of lamins and/or LINC complex proteins, leading to the loss of anchoring sites for connecting the nuclear lamina to LINC complexes ( ). As several LINC complex proteins, including SUN1 and SUN2, and the major lamin isoforms are down-regulated in K8−/− colonocytes, we can surmise that the coupling of LINC complexes and the nuclear lamina may be compromised in these cells. While we could not probe nesprin-3 protein levels due to the lack of a suitable antibody, nesprin-3 gene expression was unaffected in K8−/− colonocytes. Nonetheless, as SUN proteins are required for the correct localization of nesprin-3 at the ONM ( ), and SUN1 and SUN2 are down-regulated in K8−/− colonocytes, nesprin-3 is presumably displaced from the ONM. Furthermore, plectin, a cytolinker protein known to link nesprin-3 to vimentin and keratins ( ; ; ), is decreased in K8−/− colonocytes, which supports the notion that the nucleoskeleton–cytoskeleton link is disrupted from the outside of the nucleus due to the loss of keratins and plectin. Our data in colonocytes support the findings reported for other cell types, that a continuous coupling between the cytoplasmic cytoskeleton and the nuclear lamina and the presence of lamins and lamin-associated proteins, such as emerin, are essential for maintaining nuclear integrity and mechanosignaling ( ; ; ).
Due to the decrease of many proteins along the axis spanning the keratin cytoskeleton, LINC complexes, and the nuclear lamina, we hypothesized that nuclear integrity and mechanosignaling are weakened or disrupted in K8−/− colonocytes, and that nuclei in these cells are more vulnerable to mechanical stress. Indeed, Caco-2 cells lacking K8 exhibit more nuclear membrane ruptures and are more susceptible to shear stress than wild-type cells, indicating that the loss of K8 leads to disruption of nuclear integrity. This is supported by the findings that epidermal K1/K10 loss in mice is associated with decreased levels of lamin A/C, emerin, and SUN1 and a likely decoupling of the cytoskeleton and the nuclear lamina, leading to weakened nuclear integrity and premature loss of nuclei ( ). Similarly, the loss of vimentin in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) causes increased nuclear rupture and DNA damage during cell migration ( ). In addition, MEFs lacking all nuclear lamins display nuclear membrane ruptures, the frequency of which increases even further following mechanical stress, while the frequency of ruptures is reduced following disruption of cytoskeletal forces ( ). It is plausible that the weakened nuclear integrity in K8−/− colonocytes is caused by a combination of events. For example, as K8−/− colonocyte nuclei are not protected by an intact keratin network ( ), and likely have weaker nuclear envelopes as a consequence of reduced lamin levels ( ), they are more prone to nuclear envelope rupturing following exposure to compressive forces in the colon (e.g., peristalsis) and to the pushing and pulling forces of active colonocyte migration ( ). Furthermore, shear stress in lung alveolar cells has been shown to induce K8 phosphorylation and changes in filament assembly, which might also play a role in colonocyte K8 dynamics during mechanical stress conditions ( ; ; ).
In a similar vein, cytoskeletal, LINC complex, and lamin proteins are determinants of nuclear size and shape. Nuclear size is reduced and nuclei are more elongated in K14-deficient mouse epidermis ( ), while depletion of desmin or its ONM binding partner nesprin-3 causes nuclear collapse in rat cardiomyocytes ( ). Furthermore, Vahabikashi and colleagues have shown that lamin B2-deficient MEF nuclei are similar in size to wild-type nuclei, while lamin B1-deficient MEF nuclei are smaller and lamin A/C-, lamin A-, and lamin C-deficient MEF nuclei are larger than in wild-type MEFs ( ). While the disruption of different lamin isoforms had a variety of effects on nuclear size, all lamin-deficient MEFs exhibited rounder nuclei ( ). Interestingly, in contrast to the reduced nuclear size in K14-deficient epidermis and desmin-deficient cardiomyocytes ( ; ), K8 loss did not elicit a change in nuclear size in colonocytes, while the nuclei in K8−/− CRISPR Caco-2 cells were slightly larger than their wild-type counterparts. Consequently, this excludes the possibility that the reduced lamin protein levels in K8−/− colonocytes would have been a consequence of smaller nuclei. The rounder K8−/− colonocyte nuclei could reflect the loss of cytoskeletal/contractile forces that maintain nuclear shape. Taken together, our data and these published studies highlight a clear role for cytoplasmic and nuclear IF proteins in nuclear morphology and function, while the effects are likely cell and tissue type-specific.
Recent intriguing studies have described the presence of low levels of traditionally cytoplasmic keratins inside the nucleus, where they can modulate several signaling pathways ( ; ; ; ). We were, however, unable to detect any nuclear K8 basally in vivo or following LMB treatment of Caco-2 cells. Our 3D cell analysis did, on the other hand, reveal that K8 and lamins are found to be located intimately together by the nuclear membrane, and that it is likely that they complex, as shown by our co-immunoprecipitation analysis, at this location. While we have been unable to elucidate more detailed spatial information on these complexes and where exactly K8 may bind to and interact with the nuclear envelope and its components, our data opens up intriguing new avenues of research regarding how keratins and other IFs may interact with cell nuclei.
In conclusion, we show in this study that simple epithelial keratin filaments offer support to lamins, LINC complex proteins, and lamin-associated proteins in colonic epithelial cells, and that K8 loss leads to dramatically decreased levels of these proteins. Consequently, the coupling between the cytoskeleton and nuclear lamina is disrupted and nuclear integrity is compromised. Our findings indicate a novel, colonocyte-specific role for K8 in maintaining nuclear envelope and lamina composition, nuclear integrity and nuclear function, and that K8 may be a novel cytoskeletal factor involved in the mechanical coupling of the cytoskeleton and the nucleus.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Experimental animals and sample collection
K8+/+, K8+/−, and K8−/− mice in the FVB/n background ( ) and K8flox/flox;Villin-Cre mice and K8flox/flox;Villin-CreERt2 mice in the C57BL/6 background (K8flox/flox mice generated by Karen Ridge, Northwestern University; ) were bred and genotyped by PCR as previously described ( ; ). All animals were housed at the Central Animal Laboratory of the University of Turku and treated according to animal study protocols (no. 197/04.10.07/2013, no. 3956/04.10.07/2016, and no. ESAVI/16359/2019) approved by the State Provincial Office of South Finland. The mice were killed by CO2 inhalation and tissue samples were collected. Pieces of the proximal colon (PC) and distal colon (DC) were collected for protein and RNA analysis and immunofluorescence staining. Colon epithelium was collected for protein and RNA analysis by scraping the luminal side of the colon with a chilled glass slide as previously described ( ). Ileum, liver, pancreas, and lungs were collected for protein analysis. Protein analysis of colon epithelium and PC were performed on samples from 2–5-mo-old male and female mice unless otherwise stated. Pancreas were collected from 2–3-mo-old male and female mice, lungs were collected from 8–10.5-mo-old male and female mice, and liver and ileum were collected from 5.5–6.5-mo-old male and female mice. K8flox/flox;Villin-Cre mice and K8flox/flox;Villin-CreERt2 mice in the C57BL/6 background were of mixed gender and 4–7 mo of age ( ). LAP2α−/− mice were in the C57BL/6 background and 3–3.5 mo old. Spleen and colon were collected from 5–6-mo-old Vim+/+ and Vim−/− mice in the C57BL/6 background.

## Tamoxifen treatment of mice
A 15 mg/ml solution of tamoxifen (Sigma Aldrich, CA) was prepared by dissolving 30 mg tamoxifen in 2 ml corn oil (Sigma Aldrich, CA). K8flox/flox;Villin-CreERt2 mice received an intraperitoneal injection with 100 µl of either tamoxifen (1.5 mg tamoxifen/mouse) or vehicle solution (corn oil) once per day for 5 consecutive days, whereafter the mice were kept for 3.5 weeks before they were sacrificed. For the time-course experiment, mice received an intraperitoneal injection with 100 µl of either tamoxifen (1.5 mg tamoxifen/mouse) or vehicle solution (corn oil) once per day for 3 consecutive days, whereafter they were sacrificed at different time points between 0 and 14 days.

## Antibiotic treatment of mice
Male and female K8+/+ and K8−/− mice were treated with the broad-spectrum antibiotic vancomycin and imipenem (Hospira, IL) administered via drinking water (68 mg/kg body weight/day of each antibiotic) for 8 weeks starting at 18-19 days of age, while control mice received normal drinking water. The drinking water (with or without antibiotics) was changed three times a week. Upon completion of the antibiotic treatment, the 2.5-mo-old mice were killed by CO2 inhalation, and colon epithelium was collected as described above.

## DSS treatment of mice
2% DSS (40 kDa; TdB Consultancy AB, Sweden) was administered in autoclaved water to 2.5-mo-old male BALB/c mice for 8 days. Upon completion of the DSS treatment, the mice were killed by CO2 inhalation and colon total lysate samples were collected.

## Cell culture and sustained siRNA treatment with recovery
Caco-2 cells (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany) were grown on 10-cm cell culture plates in DMEM containing 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin, and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. The cells were cultured at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. For siRNA experiments, Caco-2 cells were plated on 24- or 12-well plates so that the cells were 20–30% confluent at the time of siRNA transfection. Caco-2 cells were mock transfected (all reagents except siRNA), transfected with K8/K18 scramble siRNA, or transfected with K8/K18 siRNA (Supplemental Table 1) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( ). siRNA transfections were performed using 30 or 60 pmol of each siRNA and 1.5 or 3 μl Lipofectamine 2000 per well in 24- or 12-well plates, respectively. For sustained keratin knockdown, siRNA transfections were repeated three times, followed by 72 hours of incubation and subculture after each transfection, and by the end of the third 72-hour incubation samples were collected for protein analysis and immunofluorescence staining. Recovery of cells following siRNA treatment was achieved by incubating previously siRNA-treated cells three times for a 72-hour period, which was followed by subculture. Samples were collected for protein analysis at the end of the third incubation period (9 days after the removal of siRNA).

## CRISPR/Cas9-mediated K8 knockout in Caco-2 cells
K8−/− Caco-2 cells were established with lentivectors and CRISPR/Cas9 technology at the Genome Editing Core at the Turku Bioscience Centre (Turku, Finland). A two-component CRISPR system was used to generate K8 knockout cells ( ). Single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) for K8 (Supplemental Table 2) were designed using the Chopchop tool and cloned according to the Feng Zhang lab protocol.

## Generation of lentiviruses
Separate lentivectors containing spCas9 (lentiCas9-Blast; a gift from Feng Zhang (Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA); Addgene plasmid #52962) and sgRNA (lentiGuide-Puro; a gift from Feng Zhang; Addgene plasmid #52963) were produced in the 293FT packaging cell line by transient cotransfection. In short, on the day of transfection, 50–60% confluent HEK 293FT cells grown on 10-cm dishes were transfected with 14 μg of transfer vector, 4 μg of packaging vector psPAX2 (a gift from Didier Trono, School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; Addgene plasmid #12260) and 2 μg envelope vector pMD2.G (a gift from Didier Trono; Addgene plasmid #12259) using the CaCl2 method. The DNA-HeBS mix was incubated for 30 min at room temperature before adding to the cells. After overnight incubation the medium with DNA precipitate was gently removed from the cells and replaced with fresh full medium. Media containing viral particles was collected after 72 hours, centrifuged at 300 rpm for 5 min at room temperature to remove cell debris, filtered through a 0.45-µm PES filter, and concentrated by ultracentrifugation for 2 hours at 25,000 rpm at 4°C. At least ten 10-cm dishes were prepared for each vector. The pellet containing lentiviral particles was suspended in the residual medium, incubated for ∼2 hours at 4°C with occasional mild vortexing, aliquoted, snap-frozen, and stored at −70°C. The lentiviral titer was determined using a P24 ELISA assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Generation of K8 knockout Caco-2 cells
To generate K8−/− clones in Caco-2 cells, 100,000 cells were seeded per well on 24-well plates. The next day, cells were transduced with Lenti-Cas9 (MOI 1, 3, 6), and 72 hours later 10 μg/ml blasticidin was applied to select only Cas9-expressing cells. Cells transduced with the smallest amount of Lenti-Cas9 particles that survived selection proceeded to the next step. In the second stage, the mixed pool of cells stably expressing Cas9 was transduced with one of the lenti sgRNA vectors (MOI 6, 9, 12), and 72 hours later 3 μg/ml puromycin was applied to the cells to select Cas9+/Lenti sgRNA+ double-positive cells. Based on Western blot results, the cell populations showing the highest reduction in K8 protein levels were single-cell sorted (Sony SH800 cell sorter; Sony Biotechnology, CA) and regrown into clonal cell populations. Out of the three sgRNAs used for K8 knockout, only sgRNA#1 showed a clear decrease in protein level in a mixed cell population and, after single-cell cloning, gave full K8−/− clones.

## Immunoprecipitation
Caco-2 cells from two 10-cm cell culture plates were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and harvested by scraping. Next, the cells were lysed in 1.5 ml lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, 20 mM β-glycerophosphate, 20 mM para-nitrophenyl phosphate, 100 μM ortovanadate, 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and 1X cOmplete mini protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche, Switzerland]), homogenized by passing the cells through a 23G needle 10 times and rested 45 min on ice. For immunoprecipitation, cell lysates were incubated with rabbit anti-lamin A (Abcam, UK) or mouse anti-K18 (L2A1; Bishr Omary, Rutgers University) antibody (not added to control samples) under rotation at 4°C overnight. Protein-A/G magnetic beads (30 μl; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) were added to each sample and the samples were incubated under rotation at 4°C for 20 min. The samples were washed three times in TEG buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mM dithiothreitol and 1X cOmplete mini protease cocktail; Roche, Switzerland), dissolved in 3X laemmli sample buffer, and analyzed by SDS–PAGE and Western blot.

## SDS–PAGE and Western blot
Protein samples were homogenized on ice in homogenization buffer (0.187 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 3% SDS, and 5 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1X cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Switzerland) and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. Sample protein concentrations were determined with a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and the samples were normalized and diluted to 5 µg protein/10 µl with 3X laemmli sample buffer (30% glycerol, 3% SDS, 0.1875 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 0.015% bromophenol blue, and 3% β-mercaptoethanol). The samples were separated on 6–10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels together with Precision Plus Protein Dual Color Standards (Bio-Rad, CA) or iBright Prestained Protein Ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membranes and analyzed by Western blot (primary and secondary antibodies are listed in Supplemental Tables 3 and 4). HRP-labeled proteins were detected with Amersham ECL Western Blotting Detection Reagent (GE Healthcare, UK) or Western Lightning Plus-ECL (Perkin Elmer, MA) and visualized either on SUPER RX x-ray films (Fuji Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) or using an iBright FL1000 imaging system (Invitrogen, CA). Fluorescently labeled proteins were detected using an iBright FL1000 imaging system (Invitrogen, CA). The Western blot results were quantified using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, MD; ) and normalized to loading controls (Hsc70 or β-tubulin).

## Microarray analysis
Colon epithelium was isolated from 4-mo-old male K8+/+ and K8−/− mice as previously described. The isolated colon epithelium was homogenized with a TissueRuptor homogenizer (Qiagen, Germany) and RNA was isolated using a Nucleospin RNA isolation kit (Macherey-Nagel, Germany). Gene expression profiling by microarray and data analysis was performed by the Finnish Functional Genomics Centre at the Turku Bioscience Centre using an Illumina Mouse WG-6 v.2.0 Expression BeadChip (Illumina, CA).

## RNA isolation and quantitative RT-PCR
Total lysates of colon tissue were obtained by collecting and combining pieces of PC and DC from 2–5-mo-old K8+/+ and K8−/− male and female mice. The samples were homogenized with a TissueRuptor homogenizer (Qiagen, Germany) and RNA was isolated using a Nucleospin RNA isolation kit (Macherey-Nagel, Germany). Agarose gel analysis was used to assess RNA quality. cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg of each RNA sample using Oligo(dT)15 Primer (Promega) and M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase (RNase H Minus, Point Mutant; Promega). Quantitative (q)RT-PCR reactions for target genes were prepared using specific primer (Oligomer; Helsinki, Finland or Metabion International, Planegg, Germany) and probe (Universal Probe Library, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) combinations (Supplemental Table 5). The target genes were amplified and detected with an Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 3 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the gene expression levels were normalized to β-Actin. Each cDNA was amplified in triplicates.

## Cryosectioning, fixation, immunofluorescence staining, and imaging
Pieces of PC and DC from 2–5-mo old K8+/+ and K8−/− male and female mice were embedded in Tissue-Tek O.C.T. Compound (Sakura Finetek Europe B.V., Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands) and frozen. The samples were sectioned into 6-µm-thick cross sections with a Leica CM3050 S Research Cryostat (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), mounted on microscope slides and fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS, pH 7.4 (Sigma Aldrich, CA) at RT for 10 min. Caco-2 cells were cultured on cover slips and fixed similarly with 1% PFA at RT for 10 min. The fixed tissue sections and cell samples were stained as previously described ( ). Immunofluorescence staining was performed using the antibodies listed in Supplemental Tables 3 and 4 and counterstained using the nuclear markers DRAQ5 (Cell Signaling, MA) or DAPI (Invitrogen, CA). The samples were mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or VECTASHIELD PLUS (Vector Laboratories, CA). Samples were visualized and imaged at room temperature using a Leica TCS SP5 Matrix confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems) equipped with a 63× Leica PL Apochromat/1.32 oil objective (Leica Microsystems) or a 100× Leica PL Fluotar/1.3 oil objective (Leica Microsystems) using Leica LAS software or a 3i Marianas spinning-disk confocal microscope (Intelligent Imaging Innovations) equipped with a Hamamatsu sCMOS Orca Flash4 v2 C11440-22CU camera (Hamamatsu Photonics, Japan) and a 20× Zeiss Plan-Apochromat/0.8 dry objective (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany) or a 63× Zeiss Plan-Apochromat/1.4 oil objective (Carl Zeiss AG) using Slidebook 6 software. Identical microscopy settings were applied to all samples within one imaging experiment. Images were processed using ImageJ/Fiji ( ; ) and Adobe Photoshop (Adobe, CA) software.

## Leptomycin B treatment
Caco-2 cells were cultured on glass cover slips in 24-well plates until 50–60% confluency was reached. The cells were washed with warm PBS, whereafter 1 ml cell media containing 50 nM leptomycin B (LMB; stock solution in 70% ethanol; Cell Signaling) was added to the wells. Control wells got the same amount of ethanol (negative controls) without LMB. The cells were incubated for 6 hours, washed twice with PBS, and fixed with 100% acetone at −20°C for 10 min. The cells were then washed 3 × 5 min with PBS and immunostained as previously described.

## Video capture
Fixed and stained Caco-2 cells were captured on a Hamamatsu sCMOS Orca Flash4.0 V2 using a 3i Marianas CSU-W1 spinning-disk confocal microscope using a 100× Zeiss Plan-Apochromat NA 1.4 and Z step size 270 nm. DNA-DAPI was imaged with a 405 nm laser and 445/45 nm filter, lamin A–Alexa 488 imaged with a 488 nm laser and 525/30 nm filter, and Keratin 8–Alexa 568 imaged with a 561 nm laser and 617/73 nm filter. The image was deconvolved with Scientific Volume Imaging Huygens Essential version 21.04 using a theoretical PSF and the CMLE algorithm, with SNR:12 and max 40 iterations. The video was created using Arivis Vision4D version 3.5.

## Hematoxylin & eosin staining
Pieces of PC from 2–5-mo-old male and female mice were fixed with 4% neutral formalin and embedded in paraffin. The samples were sectioned into 4-µm-thick longitudinal sections, mounted on microscope slides and stained using hematoxylin & eosin (H&E). The stained samples were scanned using a Pannoramic 250 slide scanner (3DHISTECH, Budapest, Hungary) with a 20× objective. CaseViewer software (3DHISTECH, software version 2.4) was used for creating images for analysis.

## Fluorescence intensity analysis
ImageJ/Fiji was used for quantifying nuclear lamin fluorescence intensity. Cell nuclei were segmented using a fixed mask (default threshold method; threshold range 30–255; dilation using one iteration and one count) that covered both the interior and the nuclear lamina of nuclei in DAPI images. Overlapping nuclei, which could not be segmented, and cell debris were excluded from analysis manually. In addition, only colonocytes lining the colonic crypts were selected for analysis in images of tissue. The mask was overlayed onto lamin A images, and the fluorescence intensity was measured.

## Nuclear morphology analysis
ImageJ/Fiji was used for analysis of nuclear morphology parameters. Briefly, cell nuclei were selected for analysis using a fixed mask that segmented nuclei (default threshold method; threshold range 30–165), whereafter poorly segmented and overlapping nuclei were deselected manually. H&E-stained images of PC were further processed by only selecting surface and crypt colonocytes, with the exception of colonocytes in the bottom of the crypts, as they segmented very poorly due to significant overlapping. The morphology of segmented nuclei was analyzed by measuring nuclear area and roundness (4 * area/[π * major axis2]).

## Nuclear integrity analysis
K8+/+ and K8−/− Caco-2 cells were grown on glass coverslips in 24-well plates. Upon 30–50% confluence, the cells were transfected with plasmids expressing a nuclear localization signal (NLS) tagged with GFP (NLS-GFP in text; pCDH-NLS-copGFP-EF1-BlastiS was a gift from Jan Lammerding; Addgene plasmid #132772) and the cytoplasmic DNA sensor cGAS tagged with mCherry (cGAS-RFP in text; pCDH-cGAS-E225A D227A-mCherry2-EF1-Puro was a gift from Jan Lammerding, Cornell University; Addgene plasmid #132771; ). The transfections were performed with Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions using 0.25 μg of each plasmid and 1.75 μl Lipofectamine 2000 per well. After 24 h of incubation, when the cells had reached 70–80% confluence, the medium was replaced with 500 µl DMEM. The cells were exposed to shear stress for 24 h at a rotational rate of 200 rpm in a horizontal orbital shaker (Thermo Fisher Scientific) based on a previously described setup ( ). Static control cells were placed in the same incubator as the orbital shaker. After 24 h, all cells were fixed with 1% PFA for 15 min and fluorescence staining of DNA (DAPI), mounting, and imaging were performed as described above. The number of cells with only nucleoplasmic or both nucleoplasmic and cytoplasmic NLS-GFP and cGAS-mCherry in healthy cells was quantified.

## Statistical analysis
All quantified Western blot results were statistically analyzed using one way-ANOVA and t test in GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, CA). The results show the mean ± SD with significant differences shown as * = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01, or *** = p < 0.001.

## Supplementary Material
Click here for additional data file.
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Gerhard Wiche (Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna) for the kind donation of the plectin antibody, Jan Lammerding (Cornell University) for the plasmids used in nuclear integrity analysis, Cecilia Sahlgren and Freddy Suarez-Rodriguez (Åbo Akademi University [ÅAU]) for assistance with the orbital shaker model, Pekka Taimen (University of Turku) for fruitful discussions, Keijo Viiri (University of Tampere) for the Cre-villin mouse strains, Petra Fichtinger (Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna) for help with the LAP2α mice, and John Eriksson (Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and ÅAU, and Biosciences/Cell Biology, ÅAU) and members of the Eriksson laboratory, especially Elin Torvaldson and Josef Gullmets, for vimentin
−/− mice, reagents, and discussions. We are grateful to all members of the Toivola laboratory, especially Frank Weckström and Molly Feiring (Biosciences/Cell Biology, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Åbo Akademi University; ÅAU). Imaging was performed at the Cell Imaging and Cytometry Core at Turku Bioscience Centre (University of Turku and ÅAU) and Biocenter Finland. This work was financed by the Academy of Finland 140759/126161/332582/315139 (D.M.T.), the InFLAMES Flagship Programme of the Academy of Finland, Sigrid Juselius Foundation (D.M.T.), Turku Doctoral Programme in Molecular Biosciences at ÅAU (C-G.A.S., J.H.N.), Medicinska Understödsföreningen Liv och Hälsa Foundation (D.M.T., J.H.N., C-G.A.S.), EU FP7 IRG (D.M.T.), ÅAU Centers of Excellence of Cell Stress and Molecular Aging and Cellular Mechanostasis (D.M.T.), The Swedish Cultural Foundation in Finland (J.H.N., C-G.A.S.), Makarna Agneta och Carl-Erik Olins Foundation (J.H.N., C-G.A.S.), Victoria Foundation (C-G.A.S., J.H.N.), K. Albin Johansson Foundation (C-G.A.S., J.H.N.), Magnus Ehrnrooths stiftelse (J.H.N.) Kommersrådet Otto A. Malms Donationsfond (J.H.N.), Waldemar von Frenckells Foundation (J.H.N.), the EuroCellNet COST Action (CA15214; D.M.T., R.F.), National Institutes of Health (NIH) PO1 GM-096971 (R.D.G.), and NIH RO-106023 (R.D.G.).
This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press (http://www.molbiolcell.org/cgi/doi/10.1091/mbc.E20-06-0387) on August 24, 2022.

## Abbreviations used:
IFintermediate filament
INMinner nuclear membrane
K8
–/–K8 knockout mice
K8
+/–K8 heterozygote mice
K8
+/+K8 wild type mice
Kkeratins
LAP2αlamina-associated polypeptide 2α
LINC complexlinker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton complex
LMBLeptomycin B
MEFsmouse embryonic fibroblasts
ONMouter nuclear membrane
pRbretinoblastoma protein.