pmciScienceiScience3532isci101724038iScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC9242679PMC9242679.2924267992937743578975010.1016/j.isci.2022.104685S2589-0042(22)00957-91046852ArticleImmunomodulatory LncRNA on antisense strand of ICAM-1 augments SARS-CoV-2 infection-associated airway mucoinflammatory phenotype
DevadossDinesh AcharyaArpan ManevskiMarko HouserovaDominika CioffiMichael D. PandeyKabita NairMadhavan ChapagainPrem MirsaeidiMehdi BorchertGlen M. ByrareddySiddappa N.sid.byrareddy@unmc.edu ChandHitendra S.hchand@fiu.edu 1Department of Immunology and Nano-Medicine, Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA2Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA3Department of Pharmacology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36688, USA4Department of Physics, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA5Biomolecular Sciences Institute, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA6Miller School of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA∗Corresponding author sid.byrareddy@unmc.edu∗∗Corresponding author hchand@fiu.edu7Present address: Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep, College of Medicine-Jacksonville, University of Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32218, USA
8Lead contact
19820223062022258412510104685111202225420222362022300620223006202205022026924267910.1016/j.isci.2022.104685130062022929377410.1016/j.isci.2022.104685230062022© 2022 The Author(s)2022https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Distinct Mucoinflammatory Phenotype and the Immunomodulatory Long Noncoding Transcripts Associated with SARS-CoV-2 Airway Infection

18520212021.05.13.21257152medRxiv10.1101/2021.05.13.21257152PMC814267034031668

## Summary
Noncoding RNAs are important regulators of mucoinflammatory response, but little is known about the contribution of airway long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in COVID-19. RNA-seq analysis showed a more than 4-fold increased expression of IL-6, ICAM-1, CXCL-8, and SCGB1A1 inflammatory factors; MUC5AC and MUC5B mucins; and SPDEF, FOXA3, and FOXJ1 transcription factors in COVID-19 patient nasal samples compared with uninfected controls. A lncRNA on antisense strand to ICAM-1 or LASI was induced 2-fold in COVID-19 patients, and its expression was directly correlated with viral loads. A SARS-CoV-2-infected 3D-airway model largely recapitulated these clinical findings. RNA microscopy and molecular modeling indicated a possible interaction between viral RNA and LASI lncRNA. Notably, blocking LASI lncRNA reduced the SARS-CoV-2 replication and suppressed MUC5AC mucin levels and associated inflammation, and select LASI-dependent miRNAs (e.g., let-7b-5p and miR-200a-5p) were implicated. Thus, LASI lncRNA represents an essential facilitator of SARS-CoV-2 infection and associated airway mucoinflammatory response.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•COVID19 airway mucoinflammatory response strongly correlates with LASI lncRNA level
•Silencing LASI lncRNA suppresses SARS-CoV-2 viral load and associated inflammation
•LASI lncRNA shows a potential direct interaction with SARS-CoV-2 spike viral RNA
•Hosts of airway epithelial miRNAs are modulated by LASI to regulate inflammation

Molecular biology; Molecular mechanism of gene regulation; Immunology; Virology

## Subject areas
Molecular biologyMolecular mechanism of gene regulationImmunologyVirologypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: August 19, 2022

## Introduction
Vaccination efforts have significantly reduced the spread of COVID-19, although variants arising from genomic mutations pose a significant risk even among vaccinated people ( ; ; ). SARS-CoV-2 gains entry via the upper respiratory mucosa, and any host factor dysregulations occurring during this interaction can result in pulmonary and/or extrapulmonary complications ( ; ; ; ). In the first week of infection, viral shedding and replication are relatively predominant in upper respiratory tract ( ). During these events, virus evades host’s mucosal and innate immune responses, allowing it to move toward the lower respiratory tract and eventually to systemic invasion ( ). As such, limiting shedding and viral replication in the upper respiratory tract blocks disease progression, and various immunomodulators regulate the expression of viral receptors and entry factors. That said, besides being the protective barrier and a competent airway lumen clearance mechanism, airway mucins typically moderate the mucosal immune responses ( ). During SARS-CoV-2 infection, however, induced inflammatory factors drive airway tissue remodeling, and severe inflammation can cause mucus hyperexpression potentially leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Analyzing host-viral interactions is vital for understanding viral pathogenesis. Several notable protein interactions necessary for SARS-CoV-2 infection and/or progression are now well documented; specific roles for the host lncRNAs during SARS-CoV-2 infection remain elusive. Roles for lncRNAs in regulating virtually every cellular function have now been reported including moderating the immune response of infected host cells as well as regulating the genomic packing and replication of several viruses ( ; ; ). LncRNAs play a vital role in regulating the innate immune responses, and recent studies have shown that specific lncRNAs are differentially expressed during host-pathogen interactions following viral infection ( ; ; ; ). Although a few reports have examined lncRNA expression profiles for stratifying the COVID-19 disease severity and associated immune dysfunction ( ; ; ; ), studies examining roles of respiratory epithelial specific lncRNAs in SARS-CoV-2 infection are far more limited ( ; ). Our recent studies identified a novel epithelial lncRNA LASI differentially expressed during the mucus hypersecretory response ( ). In this study, we have assessed the acute mucoinflammatory response, i.e., the excessive mucus expression, inflammation, other immunomodulatory factors, and lncRNAs in a 3D airway tissue model of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 patient nasopharyngeal samples to gain novel insights into early innate responses of human respiratory cells.

## Results

## SARS-CoV-2-infected individuals show induced airway mucoinflammatory responses and increased LASI lncRNA expression
The mucosal immune response of the upper respiratory tract plays a critical role in viral entry, replication and dissemination of systemic infection, and expiratory shedding. Several innate immunoregulatory transcripts of both protein-coding and noncoding RNAs are implicated in the SARS-CoV-2 infection and host antiviral response, yet very few validated roles of lncRNAs have been reported. Therefore, we performed an analysis of the airway immune response in publicly available RNA sequencing datasets obtained from SARS-CoV-2-positive (CoV-2+) patients and uninfected (CoV-2−) controls ( , GeneSet Accession: PRJNA730941) ( ). Our initial analysis examined RNA-seq files obtained from nasal swab samples of 26 CoV-2+ and eight CoV-2− controls. We specifically analyzed for the lung mucoinflammatory response genes and associated lncRNAs, and the expression levels of IL-6, ICAM-1, and CXCL-8 mRNAs were around 10-, 6-, and 5-fold higher in CoV-2+ individuals, respectively, compared with CoV-2− controls ( A). Among the intracellular viral RNA sensor genes analyzed, there was a 3-fold increased expression of IFIH1 (MDA-5) mRNA in CoV-2+ individuals with no significant change in DDX58 (RIG-1) and the downstream mediator IRF3 mRNA expression compared with healthy CoV-2− controls ( A). 
Although roles for airway mucins in innate antiviral immunity are well documented ( ; ), SARS-CoV-2-infection-associated mucin signatures have not been thoroughly evaluated to date ( ). Notably, the airway secretory mucin MUC5AC mRNA levels in the present cohort were 4-fold higher in CoV-2+ individuals than in CoV-2− controls ( B), and there was no significant change in MUC5B mRNA levels. The mRNA levels for mucin transcriptional regulators ( ; ), SPDEF and FOXA3, as well as the ciliogenesis transcriptional factor, FOXJ1, were 2- to 3-fold higher among CoV-2+ individuals ( C). There was no change in FOXA2 and FOXM1 transcription factors ( B) but the mRNA levels of airway secretoglobulin SCGB1A1 was 3-fold lower among CoV-2+ individuals ( B). The expression levels of host factors facilitating the viral entry, such as ACE2, NRP1, DPP4, IFITM, and DDX1 as well as the Spike protein processing cellular proteases such as TMRPSS2, Furin, CTSB, CTSL, and TMPRSS11D showed no significant change between CoV-2 positive versus negative individuals (data not shown).
We have recently characterized airway lncRNAs that play essential roles in innate immune responses of respiratory mucosa ( , ) and propose that these immunomodulatory lncRNAs may be dysregulated during SARS-CoV-2 infection and thus drive the COVID-19-associated respiratory comorbidities. Among the immunomodulatory lncRNAs analyzed ( D), we found a lncRNA antisense to intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) or LASI, described recently ( ), showed 2-fold higher expression in CoV-2+ individuals compared with CoV-2− controls. In contrast, expression levels of NEAT1 or nuclear enriched abundant transcript-1 ( ; ; ) and MALAT1 or metastasis associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript-1 ( ) lncRNAs exhibited no significant change ( D). Thus, our analyses indicate that compared with CoV-2- controls, the airway mucoinflammatory gene signature is strongly correlated with induced LASI lncRNA expression among CoV-2+ individuals.

## COVID-19-positive individuals with higher viral load show increased mucoinflammatory response
Recent epidemiological and clinical studies suggest that there is no difference in SARS-CoV-2 viral load between symptomatic and asymptomatic CoV-2+ individuals; however, disease severity and mortality rate among symptomatic individuals is directly correlated with airway viral load ( ; ; ). Therefore, to assess the correlation of viral load with mucoinflammatory responses and associated lncRNAs, we examined the nasopharyngeal swab samples procured locally from twenty CoV-2+ individuals ( ). Viral load in each subject was determined by qRT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 N1 nucleocapsid viral RNA (vRNA) levels and were assigned as low-viral load (Lo-VL) or high-viral load (Hi-VL) CoV-2+ samples based on the cycle threshold (CT) values of >30 or <30, respectively ( A). Applying this threshold, 10 subjects were characterized as Hi-VL (CT = 25.9 ± 1.3; 7M/3F, 63.1 ± 3.8 years) and 10 as Lo-VL (CT = 35.5 ± 0.7; 6M/4F, 61.5 ± 4.0 years), with Hi-VL subjects exhibiting 100-fold higher CoV-2 vRNA levels than Lo-VL subjects ( A). Interestingly, no significant differences were observed between the two groups in ACE2 ( B) and TMPRSS2 ( C) mRNA levels. Among antiviral interferon responsive genes, we failed to detect DDX58, IFIH1, IRF3, and IFNG transcripts, and there was no difference in IFNB1 mRNA levels between Hi-VL and Lo-VL samples ( D). In contrast, Hi-VL samples exhibited ∼1.5-fold higher IL-6 ( B) and ICAM-1 ( C) mRNAs compared with Lo-VL samples. The expression levels analyzed in individual samples showed that IL-6 ( A) and ICAM-1 ( B) mRNAs significantly correlated with CoV-2 N1 viral RNA levels, showing distinct clustering of Hi-VL and Lo-VL subjects. 
In agreement with RNA-seq database analyses ( ), all of the nasal swab samples in our study cohort showed upregulated mucin expression with Hi-VL samples exhibiting robust ∼10-fold higher MUC5AC ( D) and 4-fold higher MUC5B ( E) mucin mRNA levels. Notably, although Hi-VL subjects trended toward lower MUC2 mRNA expression ( E), they exhibited ∼10-fold higher MUC4 ( F) mRNA expression. SPDEF mRNA expression was also increased by ∼5-fold in Hi-VL subjects ( F), and surprisingly, SCGB1A1 expression was ∼4-fold higher in Hi-VL subjects ( G). However, when analyzed individually, there was no significant correlation (p = 0.0596) between MUC5AC expression levels and CoV-2 viral RNA levels ( C), although SPDEF mRNA levels showed a strong correlation ( D). These data indicate that SARS-CoV-2 viral load dictates the extent of airway mucin and associated inflammatory factor expression among COVID-19-positive individuals.

## Innate immunomodulatory lncRNAs are associated with SARS-CoV-2 viral load
Next, we analyzed the expression levels of select airway lncRNAs in our cohort. We found that compared with the Lo-VL samples, the expression levels of lncRNA LASI ( A), NEAT1 ( B), and a wound and keratinocyte-migration-associated lncRNA 2 (WAKMAR2) ( D) were all significantly upregulated in Hi-VL samples, whereas lncRNA MALAT1 levels were not altered ( C). When analyzed individually, the expression levels of lncRNA LASI ( E), NEAT1 ( F), and WAKMAR2 ( G) significantly correlated with CoV-2 viral RNA levels, with lncRNA LASI showing the highest correlation (r2 = 0.6381; p < 0.0001). These data suggest that LASI lncRNA, which plays pivotal role in airway innate responses ( ), may be involved in SARS-CoV-2-associated airway inflammation. 
Next, we performed an RNA-FISH analysis to examine LASI lncRNA expression in airway epithelial cells of nasal swab samples and cells labeled for SARS-CoV-2 N1 vRNA. Compared with Lo-VL samples, SARS-CoV-2 N1 vRNA and LASI transcripts were enriched in perinuclear and cytosolic regions with increased expression of LASI in Hi-VL subjects ( E). In agreement with qRT-PCR analyses ( A), the H-score values that denote RNA expression per cell, as described recently ( ), were 2.7- and 2.4-fold higher for vRNA and LASI lncRNA, respectively, in Hi-VL compared with Lo-VL samples ( G). The protein expression of MUC5AC mucin as determined by immunopositivity was ∼16-fold higher in Hi-VL versus Lo-VL samples ( F and 3H) with no noticeable change in MUC5B expression ( A and S4B). These datasets indicate that the immunomodulatory LASI lncRNA expression is significantly induced in Hi-VL than Lo-VL patient cells, and its expression strongly correlates with MUC5AC mucin expression in airway cells corroborating the RNA-seq data ( ).

## 3D airway tissue model of SARS-CoV-2 infection demonstrates an immediate-early hyper-mucoinflammatory response
To better understand the association of CoV-2-induced airway inflammatory response and LASI lncRNA, a 3D airway tissue culture model of SARS-COV-2 infection was employed. Briefly, the primary human airway epithelial cells differentiated on air-liquid interface to mimic the conducting airway epithelium were infected with one MOI of SARS-CoV-2 primary clinical isolate (USA-WI1/2020). CoV-2 vRNA load was followed in apical washes, in the basal culture supernatant, and in cells at 0, 1, 4, 24, and 48 h postinfection (hpi). In apical washes, 0.89 × 105 viral genomic equivalents per mL were observed at 1 hpi, increasing to 20.2, 31.2, and 14.7 × 105 at 4, 24, and 48 hpi, respectively ( A). Viral load in basal media supernatant was 0.3 × 105 per mL at 1 hpi then increased to 3.6, 4.3, and 5.0 × 105 at 4, 24, and 48 hpi, respectively ( A). The cellular level of CoV-2 vRNA increased by 2.0-, 7.0-, and 2.6-fold at 4, 24, and 48 hpi, respectively, compared with 1 hpi ( B). Thus, 3D airway cells were productively infected with SARS-CoV-2 clinical isolate, and the virions were shed at ∼ 10-fold higher levels from the apical surface than the basal region. 
The expression of ACE2 mRNA was more than 3-fold suppressed in infected at all time-points analyzed ( B), and TMPRSS2 mRNA levels showed no change at 1, 4, and 24 hpi but was significantly reduced at 48 hpi ( C). Thus, SARS-CoV-2 infection modulates ACE2 and TMRPSS2 expression, as reported earlier ( ; ). Expression of IL-6 mRNA was 8.0-fold induced at 1 hpi with no change at 4, 24, and 48 hpi, although there was a trend toward induced expression ( C). ICAM-1 mRNA expression was 2.0-, 5.4-, and 2.4-fold higher at 1, 4, and 24 hpi, respectively, with no change at 48 hpi ( D). Expression of neither NRP1 (data not shown) nor CXCL-8 ( D) mRNA was affected following infection. However, the expression of SCGB1A1 was induced by 4- to 5-fold at 1, 4, and 24 hpi ( E).
Interestingly, SARS-CoV-2 infection robustly upregulated MUC5AC mRNA expression by 53-, 46-, 37-, and 51-fold at 1, 4, 24, and 48 hpi, respectively ( E). MUC5B mRNA levels was also highly upregulated following infection by 13-, 11-, 16-, and 33-fold at 1, 4, 24, and 48 hpi, respectively ( F). Similarly, MUC2 mRNA levels were 8-, 9-, 10-, and 13-fold at 1, 4, 24, and 48 hpi, respectively ( G), whereas MUC4 mRNA levels were induced by 5-fold at 24 hpi ( H). In addition, there was a 3- to 5-fold induction in SPDEF mRNA levels ( F) and more than a 25-fold induction in FOXA3 mRNA levels following CoV-2 infection ( I).
MUC5AC protein expression was assessed by immunofluorescence and quantified by ELISA to corroborate these results. In agreement with qRT-PCR analyses, CoV-2-infected (CoV-2+) cells showed robust MUC5AC immunopositivity ( G) with as much as ∼40% MUC5AC+ cells observed at 48 hpi compared with 6.0% in uninfected (CoV-2−) controls ( H). In addition, apical wash MUC5AC protein levels were ∼10-fold higher in CoV-2+ cells with ∼120 ng/mL compared with 18 ng/mL observed in uninfected cells ( I). The secreted interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels were at 691 pg/mL in uninfected cells compared with 1400 pg/mL in the CoV-2+ cells at 48 hpi ( J), and ICAM-1 protein levels showed a trend toward increased expression from 823 pg/mL in uninfected cells to 1600 pg/mL in CoV-2+ cells ( K). Remarkably, there was no change in the expression of DDX58, IFIH1, IRF3, and IFNB1 in CoV-2 infected cells at 0, 1, and 48 hpi ( A–S6D).

## SARS-CoV-2 infection induces LASI lncRNA expression that could potentially interact with CoV-2 spike viral RNA
In agreement with the increased LASI lncRNA observed in COVID-19 individuals, there was induced expression of LASI lncRNA at 0, 1, 4, 24, and 48 hpi in our 3D model of CoV-2 infection ( A). Dual-RNA FISH analyses showed CoV-2 N1 vRNA and LASI transcripts co-expression around the nuclear/perinuclear region ( B) with nearly 2-fold more lncRNAs in CoV-2+ cells as assessed by H-score analysis ( C and 5D). We also analyzed the expression of other lncRNAs, and in contrast to recent reports ( ; ; ), the expression of lncRNA NEAT1 ( E) and MALAT1 ( F) was significantly reduced in CoV-2-infected cells at 0, 1, and 48 hpi, whereas WAKMAR2 lncRNA levels were induced by more than 7-fold at 48 hpi ( G). 
As FISH analyses strongly suggest LASI lncRNA and SARS-CoV-2 vRNA may colocalize, the potential for direct interaction was assessed informatically. Notably, our sequence analyses identified a single, high-scoring potential base-pairing between SARS-CoV-2 Spike vRNA (CoV-2 vRNA) and a specific LASI lncRNA sequence. The segment of the modeled CoV-2 vRNA (sequence 1198-1268 nts) after minimization and equilibration is shown in E. This region forms a hairpin where 1227-1237 nts are intra-sequence base-paired with 1244–1254 nts ( F). 3D modeling predicts a structure where this CoV-2 vRNA region can duplex with LASI lncRNA bases 635-646 nts with a stable base-paired model obtained upon relaxing the structure for 100 ns of MD simulation ( G and see online at supplemental data). This structure shows a partially unfolded CoV-2 vRNA sequence with excellent base-pairing with the LASI lncRNA sequence ( H). Compared with the intra-sequence base-pairing in CoV-2 vRNA in F, the inter-sequence base-pairing with LASI lncRNA is energetically more favorable (−9.6 kcal/mol versus −15.0 kcal/mol) at the local interacting region. Moreover, this LASI lncRNA interacting region is conserved among CoV-2 variants of concern (VOCs) such as delta and omicron ( ). Taken together, our experimental and molecular docking simulation studies suggest that LASI lncRNA may serve as the molecular scaffold for CoV-2 vRNA to assist in viral infection and replication.

## Video S1. Molecular docking of SARS-CoV-2 vRNA and LASI lncRNA in a 100-ns relaxation dynamics movie, related to Figure 5

## Blocking LASI lncRNA expression attenuates CoV-2-altered antiviral interferon response effects and suppresses infection-dependent MUC5AC induction
To determine the role of LASI lncRNA in CoV-2 infection and associated mucoinflammatory response, we depleted LASI levels using RNAi (siRNA) technology. Briefly, 3D cultured cells transfected with either LASI-targeting siRNA (siLASI) or a control siRNA (siCTRL) were infected with one MOI of SARS-CoV-2 clinical isolate and then analyzed at 48 hpi. Compared with siCTRL-transfected cells, siLASI-transfected cells exhibited a 7-fold reduction in LASI lncRNA expression ( A). Surprisingly, we observed a marked >27-fold reduction in CoV-2 vRNA load in siLASI-transfected cells ( B). Furthermore, although ICAM-1 ( A), IL-6 ( B), IFNB1 ( C), and IFIH1 ( D) mRNA expressions were unaffected, mRNA levels of the antiviral interferon response gene, IRF3, were significantly reduced in siLASI-transfected cells ( C). In contrast, levels of DDX58 mRNA were conversely induced compared with the siCTRL-transfected cells ( D). Among mucin genes, MUC5AC mRNA levels in siLASI-transfected cells showed a trend toward lower expression ( E) with no change in MUC5B mRNA levels ( E); however, MUC2 ( F) and MUC4 ( G) mRNAs were reduced following CoV-2 infection in siLASI-transfected cells compared with siCTRL-transfected cells. Notably, expressions of the SPDEF ( H) and the lncRNA MALAT1 ( I) and WAKMAR2 ( J) were not altered by siLASI treatment during CoV-2 infection. 
To further explore potential effects on mucin genes, we next immunoprobed for MUC5AC protein expression in siCTRL and siLASI transfected cells infected with CoV-2 at 48 hpi ( F). We found siLASI treatment resulted in a >2-fold reduction of MUC5AC+ cells, where siCTRL-transfected cells had around 17.7% cells showing MUC5AC immunopositivity compared with 7.4% among siLASI-transfected cells ( G). In agreement, MUC5AC-specific ELISA of apical washes from siCTRL-transfected cells averaged 121 ng/mL of MUC5AC content, whereas siLASI-transfected cells averaged 47.5 ng/mL ( H), a more than 2-fold reduction. In contrast, we found ICAM-1 ( K) and IL-6 ( L) levels were not significantly changed in basal media supernatant following CoV-2 infection of siLASI-transfected cells as compared with siCTRL-transfected cells. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that LASI lncRNA represents an essential regulatory mediator in CoV-2 infection and the ensuing mucoinflammatory response of the respiratory airway epithelium.

## LASI lncRNA differentially modulates the host miRNAs associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection
LncRNAs also act as the molecular scaffold or sponge for miRNAs. Thus, they could indirectly modulate host cellular immune responses, for example, by miRNA-mediated target mRNA-decay or by competing for the same miRNA binding region, like ceRNA ( ; ; ; ). In addition, host miRNAs can also directly bind to viral RNAs and/or modify the associated cell signaling mechanisms. So, to identify the miRNAs that LASI lncRNA may regulate, we performed a small RNA-sequencing of our 3D ALI model and analyzed for the expression of miRNAs in SARS-CoV-2-infected cells that are siLASI transfected compared with control cells. From the total of 721 miRNAs sequenced, 155 miRNAs showed significant change. Further data mining revealed a total of 38 miRNAs differentially expressed in SARS-CoV-2 infection, of which seven miRNAs (miR-4488, let-7b-5p, miR-1301-3p, miR-181b-5p, miR-2110, miR-320b, and miR-744-5p) were expressed >2 log-fold higher, whereas twenty-one miRNAs showed lower expression than uninfected cells including miR-23a-3p, miR-30d-5p, miR-200a-5p, miR-200b-3p, and miR-1246. Interestingly, knocking down the LASI lncRNA reverted the expression levels of several of these miRNAs; for example, some of the miRNAs induced by CoV-2 infection were suppressed by silencing LASI lncRNA ( A), of which miR-4488, let-7b-5p, miR-584-5p, miR125-1-3p, and miR-181b-5p showed very high expression in siLASI-transfected and CoV-2-infected cells. At the same time, there were miRNAs suppressed by CoV-2 infection that were highly induced in siLASI-transfected cells, e.g., miR-151a-3p, miR-6510-3p, miR-200a-5p, miR-197-3p, and miR-4644-3p ( B). The changes in the expression levels of select miRNAs were confirmed by qPCR analysis of siCTRL and siLASI cells where levels of miR-4488 ( C), let-7b-5p ( D), miR-150-5p ( E), miR-6510-3p ( F), miR-200a-5p ( G), and miR-197-3p ( H) were confirmed to be reverted in siLASI-transfected cells compared with siCTRL-transfected cells. We also confirmed the expression levels of these lncRNA LASI-regulated miRNAs in nasal swab samples of our cohort and of these miRNAs ( ). Expression levels of let-7b-5p, miR-150-5p, and miR-200a-5p showed a viral-load dependent increased expression. Thus, these data suggest that let-7B-5p, miR-150-5p, and miR-200a-5p may be important mediators of LASI-lncRNA-mediated modulation of CoV-2-induced airway epithelial mucoinflammatory responses. 

## Discussion
The pathogen-specific inflammatory response and subsequent successful resolution of inflammation and associated tissue remodeling in the upper respiratory tract determine the outcome of airborne infections. The SARS-CoV-2 infection continues to be a significant healthcare problem. Many studies suggest that dysregulated inflammation and impaired ability to resolve inflammation and adjoining tissue remodeling are primary causes of increased morbidity and mortality among COVID-19 patients. Airway mucoinflammatory response, being the primary host defense system, is severely altered by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Not much is known about the immediate-early innate responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Thus, in this study, we focused on the effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on airway mucus and inflammatory responses. We analyzed available RNA-seq data from COVID-19 patient nasal swab samples. We found that expressions of immunomodulatory lncRNAs, particularly LASI lncRNA, were altered in infected patients with elevated expression of mucoinflammatory factors. In our independent cohort of COVID-19 patients, the nasal SARS-CoV-2 viral load directly correlated with mucoinflammatory responses where COVID-19 patients with high Hi-VL showed elevated expression of mucins and inflammatory factors compared with Lo-VL patients. Interestingly, we failed to detect any substantial changes in the expression of airway antiviral and interferon response genes in either cohort.
To understand the immediate-early response of AECs to SARS-CoV-2 infection, we examined a 3D human airway tissue model infected with high MOI of SARS-CoV-2 isolate USA-WI1/2020 (B.1.1.7). We observed elevated secretory mucins and inflammatory factors expression as early as 1 h postinfection. Among the airway lncRNAs, we found LASI lncRNA expression strongly correlated with increased mucoinflammatory responses of the 3D airway tissue model.
Importantly, the roles of lncRNAs in the innate airway response to viral infection remain poorly understood. LncRNAs can interact with RNA, DNA/chromatin, and proteins and form RNA-RNA, RNA-DNA (RNA-chromatin), and RNA-protein complexes, leading to gene expression regulation via multiple mechanisms, including modulation of transcription, mRNA stability, and translation ( ; ). Although little is known about specific lncRNA contributions to COVID-19 pathophysiology, several lncRNAs have now been suggested to potentially interact with SARS-CoV-2. Using the experimentally determined secondary structure of HOTAIR lncRNA ( ), a study recently predicted its interacting regions with spike RNA ( ). LINC01505 has also been reported to bear a binding propensity for SARS-CoV-2 3′UTR. In addition, lncRNA H19 has been predicted to carry a significant binding potential for SARS-CoV-2 5′UTR and spike RNA ( ). That said, logistic predictions suggest that most of these lncRNAs interactions, if true, would constitute negative modulators of CoV-2 infection.
In contrast, our data suggest that LASI lncRNA may be a positive modulator of CoV-2 infection. Our computational analyses identified a putative interaction between LASI lncRNA and SARS-CoV-2 Spike RNA, suggesting that LASI may act as a molecular scaffold or sponge for viral RNA, potentially protecting from degradation and/or other host factors. Regardless, we find inhibiting LASI lncRNA attenuates the SARS-CoV-2 viral load and alleviates the expression of inflammatory factors, mucins, and type-1 interferon (IFN) responsive genes in airway epithelial cells. Thus, targeting LASI may not only suppress the mucoinflammatory pathways but could also decrease the number of molecular scaffolds responsible for harboring the viral RNA and other components. Functional-RNA-based therapeutics are currently being actively pursued as potential treatment strategies due to minimal off-target effects to a high-efficiency presentation ( ), and lncRNA-targeted interventions can possibly mimic the mechanisms of many host immune response modulating RNAs ( ).
Acute inflammatory response to SARS-CoV-2 infection alters innate epithelial and vascular remodeling factors ( ; ) with distinct inflammatory signatures reported among COVID-19 patients with low versus higher viral load ( ). Notably, the localized expression and secretion of ICAM-1 and IL-6 by respiratory epithelial cells may regulate airway responses and mucosal tissue remodeling ( ). In previous immunohistological analyses, IL-6 and ICAM-1 expression were reportedly higher in the alveolar epithelium of COVID-19 patients compared with H1N1-influenza-virus-infected patients or uninfected control subjects ( ). We likewise find that ICAM-1 and IL-6 expressions are significantly higher in COVID-19 patients compared with controls, and patients with Hi-VL show increased expression of these inflammatory factors in our cohort.
Also of note, lncRNAs-mediated regulation of immune responses is potentially central to establishing airway mucosal immunity ( ; ; ) and could be dysregulated in COVID-19 patients. Numerous lncRNAs have been experimentally characterized and were shown to affect the immune responses of AEC, exert epigenetic changes, and induce the premature aging of the lung epithelium ( ). However, among the lncRNAs analyzed, we found only LASI lncRNA expression to be consistently elevated in COVID-19 patients, although there were significant downregulations of NEAT1 and MALAT1 lncRNAs ( ), as recently confirmed in a separate computational analysis ( ). Further, we find that an acute effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection on airway mucin expression linked to LASI lncRNA expression could potentially hinder the effective mucociliary clearance of inhaled viral particles. We find the expressions of membrane-bound mucins were significantly upregulated during CoV-2 infection and that depleting LASI lncRNA could suppress the CoV-2-induced expression of these mucin genes. Airway mucins trap inhaled viral particles in the lumens and direct them toward the oropharynx via mucociliary clearance mechanisms. Any dysregulation of these processes leads to mucoinflammatory comorbidities and respiratory viral diseases ( ; ). Excess mucus expression can lead to airway mucous obstruction due to mucin hyperexpression, hypersecretion, and goblet cell hyperplasia, and as reported here, SARS-CoV-2 alters these mucoinflammatory responses in agreement with other seminal studies ( ; ; ; ). If not treated, these conditions can cause a decline in lung function and significantly higher morbidity and mortality. That said, our findings strongly suggest that LASI lncRNA constitutes an important master mucin regulator.
In addition, blocking LASI lncRNA expression in the 3D airway model led to a suppressed expression of MUC5AC protein levels following CoV-2 infection, implicating a direct role of LASI in viral-induced mucoinflammatory response. However, there was no change in any of the mucin regulating transcription factors’ expression among CoV-2-infected cells, unlike our previous observation in the allergic asthma model ( ). This discrepancy observed between the effects of silencing LASI lncRNA in this and our previous study are unexpected and needs further investigation. Interestingly, among IFN response genes analyzed, blocking LASI expression suppressed the IRF3 mRNA expression, with the expression of IFNB1 mRNA also trending lower. In contrast, the upstream mediator DDX58 mRNA expression was significantly induced in cells with suppressed LASI lncRNA levels and IFIH1 mRNA trending toward a higher expression; this noted incongruity between type 1 IFN and its mediators needs more careful analysis, as it could potentially involve the RIG-1-like receptors engaged by siRNAs used for silencing LASI expression in our experimental set-up ( ; ). Recent studies have also highlighted the differential role of DDX58 and IFIH1 in innate immune responses to CoV-2 infection and the role of the cellular lncRNAs therein ( ; ; ). However, the changes in IRF3 and DDX58 expression can also be a cause or consequence of lower infectivity in our experimental set-up as well as in the nasal samples analyzed.
There are various other small ncRNAs called miRNAs that interact with lncRNAs and modulate the gene expression and functions ( ; ). We have also identified several putative miRNA candidates that could assist LASI lncRNA in modulating the mucoinflammatory response genes that contribute to airway inflammation and mucin expression. Our targeted small RNA-seq data implicated many host miRNAs that could possibly mediate the LASI lncRNA-based modulation of SARS-CoV-2 infection and associated inflammation. For example, following CoV-2 infection, a set of miRNAs including miR-4488, miR-584-5p, miR125-1-3p, miR-181b-5p, and let-7b-5p were highly upregulated but blocking the LASI lncRNA resulted in their downregulation compared with controls. These miRNAs might be facilitating the CoV-2 infection in a LASI-dependent manner, where LASI lncRNA may be acting as a molecular sponge or scaffold for these “inflammatory” miRNAs. There is very limited information about the role of these miRNAs. A computational prediction analysis performed by Pierce et al. identified that miR-181-5p binds to the mRNAs of both TMPRSS2 and IFN-γ in human lung tissue ( ). Another RNA-seq data analysis from SARS-CoV-2-infected lung tissues identified that miRNA let-7b-5p might be involved in COVID-19-associated lung pathologies ( ; ).
In contrast, specific miRNAs suppressed by CoV-2 infection were highly induced in siLASI-transfected cells, such as, miR-151a-3p, miR-6510-3p, miR-200a-5p, miR-25-3p, miR-3158-3p, miR-3158-5p, and miR-4644-3p. These miRNAs play an important role in regulating innate cellular responses and signaling pathways ( ; ), suggesting that these miRNAs are an important component of host immune response and are thus suppressed by CoV-2 infection in a mechanism dependent on LASI lncRNA levels. Based on the recent report on the interaction of miR-150-5p with CoV-2 nsp10 gene ( ), we also found that CoV-2 infection modulates miR-150-5p expression in a LASI-dependent manner. It is noteworthy that nasal airway miR-150-5p expression was positively correlated with CoV-2 viral load in our cohort compared with the lower miR-150-5p levels reported in COVID-19 plasma samples ( ). Further investigations are needed to determine the role of miR-150-5p in systemic versus pulmonary inflammation by examining the levels of cellular and plasma miR-150-5p collected from the same subjects. Thus, there is a large number of miRNAs that are directly impacted by LASI lncRNA and could be involved in CoV-2 infection and airway inflammatory response. We also found that there are a number of miRNAs whose expression was not significantly impacted by LASI lncRNA levels, such as miR-1301-3p, which is known to interact with CoV-2 genes/RNAs ( ; ) and miR-320b, which interacts with viral NSP8 gene and is associated with transcription and replication of viral RNAs ( ).
Due to the combined colossal efforts of the continuous global surveillance and the large-scale vaccination drives, COVID-19 has been mitigated to a manageable endemic threat. Nonetheless, with a more significant proportion of the population still infected, the undetected and asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections and invading vaccine/natural antibodies in vaccinated or infected individuals are resulting in the emergence of variants of concerns or VOCs ( ; ), and thus, continuous efforts are needed to improve the current understanding on the host-pathogen interactions for these VOCs and to better prepare for any possible future viral outbreaks. The work presented here strongly suggests that lncRNAs constitute a significant component of our innate immunity that directly interacts with viral RNA and describing these interactions may significantly improve our understanding of host factors involved in the viral response. Specifically, we report that LASI lncRNA in airway epithelial cells is not only a putative scaffold for SARS-CoV-2 RNA but also modulates respiratory mucoinflammatory responses. Thus, modulating specific functional lncRNA expression may aptly equip the host with innate immunity to combat the COVID-19 infection and associated mucoinflammatory comorbidities.

## Limitations of the study
The nonavailability of a more significant number of patient nasal swab samples from COVID-19 subjects and the low yield of airway epithelial cells per sample may underscore the broader implications of the reported findings. The inadequate amount and quality of samples could have also contributed to the undiscernible and/or undetected levels of the genes analyzed that are expressed in low copy numbers such as genes regulating the antiviral and interferon response pathways. Further, our in-vitro studies primarily focused on the acute infection model, and we used high MOI of the original SARS-CoV-2 clinical isolate (B.1.1.7), and only the early time points were analyzed to understand the immediate-early changes in host innate response factors. The miRNAs identified to be responsible for LASI lncRNAs role in CoV-2 infection and associated inflammation need to be further validated by using the targeted molecular editing techniques as well as by longitudinally analyzing a larger study cohort.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Hitendra S Chand.

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Experimental model and subject details

## Datasets and bioinformatics
Raw RNA sequencing datasets were retrieved from the sequence read archive (SRA) database under accession no. PRJNA730941. Single-end FASTQ files for all COVID-19 patients and healthy controls ( ) were obtained using the SRA toolkit version 2.11.2 that was reported recently ( ). FASTQ files were converted to FASTA using seqtk (https://github.com/lh3/seqtk). Reads were aligned to a database consisting of select cDNA sequences (obtained from Ensembl Biomart) using BLAST+ (version 2.11.0). Alignments were required to uniquely map to a single cDNA and bear >94% identity over 100 base pairs. Reads aligning to individual genes were enumerated and gene expression calculated in Reads Per Million (RPM).

## COVID-19 patient samples
COVID-19 patient nasal swab samples (see for demographics) were either obtained from the University of Miami Biobank facility or iSpecimen Inc. (Lexington, MA). There were 13 males and 7 females with the mean age of 62.5±3.51 y. Frozen cell pellets were processed for total RNA isolation and formalin-fixed cells were spread onto the slides for downstream analysis.

## Airway epithelial cell model of SARS-CoV-2 infection
Studies involving SARS-CoV-2 virus infection were conducted at the University of Nebraska Medical Center BSL-3 high containment core facility. SARS-CoV-2 isolate USA-WI1/2020 (BEI; cat# NR-52384, B.1.1.7) was passaged in Vero-STAT-1 knockout cells and viral titer was determined using plaque assay ( ; ). Primary human airway epithelial cells were purchased either from the Marsico Lung Institute Tissue Core (University of North Carolina) or from MatTek Incorp (EpiAirway™, MA). Airway epithelial cells were infected with 1 MOI of SARS-CoV-2 inoculum prepared in culture media. For 3D ALI cultured cells, 200 μL was added to the apical surface and 1 mL was added to the basal side. Infected transwells were incubated for 1 h at 37°C in 5% CO2 incubator and the plates were gently mixed every 15 m. After 30 m, apical inoculum was removed and added to the basal media and after additional 30 m total virus inoculum was removed. Transwells were washed thoroughly with PBS and fresh media was added basally. Apical washes and basolateral medium culture supernatants were collected at 1, 4, 24, and 48 h post-infection (hpi) and stored at −80°C for downstream analysis, viral titration, and cytokine analysis. Cells were either lyzed in RLT buffer (RNeasy, Qiagen Inc) with 143 mM 2-ME for total RNA isolation or were fixed with 4% PFA (paraformaldehyde).

## Method details

## Immunostaining and fluorescent imaging analysis
Formalin-fixed cells were washed in 0.05% Brij-35 in PBS (pH 7.4) and immunostaining was performed as described previously ( ). Cells were stained with antibodies to MUC5AC (Cat# MAB2011, Millipore Inc., Burlington, MA), and MUC5B (Cat# ab77995, Abcam, Boston, MA). Immunolabelled cells were detected using respective secondary antibodies conjugated fluorescent dyes (Jackson ImmunoResearch, PA) and images were captured using the BZX700 Microscopy system (Keyence Corp) and analyzed using NIH ImageJ software.

## Real-Time quantitative PCR for mRNAs, lncRNAs and miRNAs
Total RNA was isolated from swabs or cells using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, MD) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Primer/probe sets for MUC5AC, MUC5B, SCGB1A1, FOXA3, LASI, WAKMAR2, NEAT1, and MALAT1 transcripts were obtained from Applied Biosystems (ThermoFisher Inc.), and the expression levels were quantified by qRT-PCR using TaqMan Gene expression kit (ThermoFisher Inc.). SYBR green-based primer sets for SARS-CoV-2 N1 viral RNA, ACE2, TMPRSS2, NRP1, ICAM-1, IL-6, MUC2, MUC4, MUC16, MUC19, SPDEF, NEAT1, IFIH1, DDX58, IFNB1, and IRF3 mRNA were obtained from BioRad and quantified by qRT-PCR using the iTaq SYBR-green Master Mix (BioRad) in the BioRad CFX96 Real-Time PCR System. Relative quantities were calculated by normalizing data to GAPDH as described previously ( ). To detect the miRNA levels, cDNA was synthesized from isolated total RNA with a TaqMan® Advanced miRNA cDNA Synthesis Kit (Applied Biosystems, ThermoFisher Inc.). TaqMan® Advanced miRNA assays for let-7b-5p, hsa-miR-150-5p, hsa-miR-197-3p, hsa-miR-200a-5p, hsa-miR-125b-1-3p and hsa-miR-4488 were obtained from Applied Biosystems (ThermoFisher Inc.), and the expression levels were quantified by qRT-PCR using TaqMan® Fast Advanced Master Mix (ThermoFisher Inc.). Relative quantities were calculated by normalizing data to U6 snRNA (Applied Biosystems, ThermoFisher Inc.).

## Dual RNA fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH) and quantification
Dual-RNA FISH for LASI and SARS-CoV-2 N1 transcripts was performed using the RNAscope® Multiplex reagent kit (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, CA) per the manufacturer’s protocol, the custom-made probe sets and as described recently ( ). Signals were amplified using Tyramide signal amplification (TSA) reaction using TSA-Plus Cy5 or Cy3 kit (PerkinElmer Bioscience) for LASI or SARS-CoV-2 N1 vRNA, respectively. Images were captured using a structured-illumination module of the BZX700 Microscopy system and analyzed by NIH ImageJ software and RNA FISH expression was quantified as reported recently ( ). Briefly, RNA FISH expression was quantified by RNAscope® data analysis suite (Advanced Cell Diagnostics). Probe signals (dots)/cell were counted and allotted to separate bins as follows: Bin 0 (0 Dots/Cell); Bin 1 (1–3 Dots/Cell); Bin 2 (4–9 Dots/Cell); Bin 3 (10–15 Dots/Cell); Bin 4 (>15 Dots/Cell). Then, the Histo-score (H-Score) was calculated as follows: H-Score = Sum of each (bin number × percentage of cells per bin) i.e., H-score = (0 × % cells in Bin 0) + (1 × % cells in Bin 1) + (2 × % cells in Bin 2) + (3 × % cells in Bin 3) + (4 × % cells in Bin 4). Final scores derived by this metric have a range between 0 and 400.

## Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
Apical washes and basal culture media supernatants from SARS-CoV-2 infected cells were analyzed for MUC5AC mucin and the inflammatory factors, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), protein levels. Apical washes were analyzed for MUC5AC mucin protein levels using specific ELISA (#MBS701926, MyBioSource Inc., CA) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Levels of IL-6 (#430507, BioLegend Inc., CA) and soluble ICAM-1 (#LS-F4019, LifeSpan Biosciences Inc., WA) were measured in the basal culture media supernatants in separate ELISAs following manufacturers’ instructions.

## Modeling of potential interaction site prediction and system preparation
The IntaRNA 2.0 webserver ( ) was used to predict potential RNA-RNA binding sites between the SARS-CoV-2 spike viral RNA and LASI lncRNA. The SARS-CoV-2 vRNA sequence 1227-1238 nucleotide (nt) was predicted to bind LASI lncRNA sequence at 635-646 nt. To generate a 3D structure of SARS-CoV-2 vRNA duplexed with the interacting sequence of LASI lncRNA, SARS-CoV-2 sequence from 1198-1268 nt was used. To allow LASI lncRNA nucleotides to base-pair with SARS-CoV-2 vRNA, we concatenated LASI lncRNA sequence 635-646 nt next to the SARS-CoV-2 vRNA 1227-1238. This tandem sequence was then used to predict the 3D structure using RNAComposer ( ) webserver, with the secondary structure information provided by RNAfold ( ). Finally, LASI lncRNA segment was renamed as a different chain (chain B), with remaining SARS-CoV-2 S vRNA sequence renumbered (chain A). Resulting complex is energy minimized, equilibrated, and further relaxed with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.

## System setup and molecular dynamics simulations
The CHARMM-GUI ( ) Solution Builder tool was used to prepare the system for MD simulations. The solvated system with a physiological salt concentration of 0.15 M KCl contained a total of 87,000 atoms. All-atom MD simulations were performed using the CUDA version of NAMD 2.14 ( ) with the Charmm36m force field ( ). Briefly, the structure was minimized for 10,000 steps with the steepest descent method and equilibrated for 125,000 steps with 2 fs timestep under NVT (constant volume and temperature) conditions. The production run was performed under NPT (constant pressure and temperature) conditions at a temperature of 303.15 K and a pressure of 1 bar. The production run consisted of 2 fs timesteps and a total of 50M steps collecting a 100-ns trajectory. Visualization and analysis of the trajectories were performed with visual molecular dynamics (VMD) ( ).

## RNA interference-based lncRNA silencing
The 3D cultured cells were transfected with siRNA specific to LASI (siLASI) or control siRNAs (siCTRL) using X2 (Mirus biotechnologies) transfection reagent (custom made by IDT technologies Inc.) as per manufacturer’s instructions and as described recently ( ). After 48 h, cells were infected with 1 MOI of SARS-CoV-2 clinical isolate, and cells, apical wash and the basal media supernatant were analyzed at 48 hpi.

## Small RNA sequencing analysis
Small RNA-seq was performed by Novogene inc. using an Illumina HiSeq v4 genome sequencer with 20M SE50 Reads. RNA was isolated from the 3D cultured airway cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 and transfected with siLASI to block LASI lncRNA expression. Briefly, Novogene employed the NEB-Next Multiplex Small RNA Library Prep Set for Illumina (NEB) coupled with automated agarose gel size selection (30 to 200 nt) using the Pipin Prep Instrument (Sage Science) for small RNA library preparation. Raw RNA sequencing datasets were retrieved, and FASTQ files were converted to FASTA using seqtk (https://github.com/lh3/seqtk). Adapter sequences were removed with cutadapt, and reads were aligned to the GRCh38.P10 reference genome using BLAST+ (version 2.11.0) ( ). Alignments were required to uniquely map to a single position and bear 100% identity over at least 17 base pairs. Reads aligning to individual microRNAs were enumerated and gene expression calculated in Reads Per Million (RPM). Heat maps and unsupervised hierarchical clustering were generated using Heatmapper ( ).

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Mean and standard error for replicates of the experiments were calculated, plotted, and analyzed using GraphPad Prism v9.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA). Grouped results were analyzed using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with multiple comparisons, and student’s t-test was used for data analysis between two groups. Data with FDR (false discovery rate) adjusted p-value threshold of ≤0.05 are considered as significantly relevant using Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S9 and Table S1

## Table S2. Airway epithelial miRNAs modulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection and regulated by LASI lncRNA, related to Figure 7
Data shown as reads per million (rpm) per sample.

## Data and code availability

•Data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request

## Acknowledgments
We thank the staff of the University of Miami Biobank and several members of Dr. Byrareddy's lab for technical support. The University of Nebraska Medical Center BSL-3 high-containment core facility is duly acknowledged for allowing us to perform the in-vitro experiments involving live SARS-CoV-2 virus experiments. The facility is administered by the office of the Vice-Chancellor for research and supported by Nebraska Research Initiative. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and prevention deposited the following reagents and obtained through BEI resources, NIAID, NIH: (1) SARS-related coronavirus-2 isolate USA-WI1/2020 (BEI Cat # NR-52384); (2) quantitative PCR (qPCR) control RNA from heat-inactivated SARS-related coronavirus-2 isolate USA-WA1/2020 (BEI Cat # NR-52347). The graphical abstract was created with Biorender. Funding support: NIH AI144374, AI152937, and DA052845.

## Author contributions
Conception and study design: HSC; Formalizing hypothesis: HSC, GMB, SNB; Patient samples and BSL3 experiments: MM2, AA, KP, SNB; Data acquisition: DD, MM1, AA, DH, MDC, KP; Data analysis: DD, MM1, AA, DH, MDC, KP, PC; Data interpretation: DD, MM1, AA, KP, PC, GMB, MN, MM2, SNB, HSC; Drafting the manuscript for important intellectual content: DD, SNB, HSC; Reviewing manuscript: all authors; Approving final version of the manuscript for submission: SNB and HSC. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. All figures are original creations for this manuscript, and no additional permissions are required for inclusion into the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
Dr. Hitendra S. Chand and Dr. Madhavan Nair are coinventor on a US utility patent #10,851,376 for long noncoding RNAs in pulmonary airway inflammation. The authors have no competing financial interests to declare.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.104685.