822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC9706680970668097066803635423810.1021/acsnano.2c08774Exosomes—Nature’s
Lipid Nanoparticles,
a Rising Star in Drug Delivery and Diagnostics
TenchovRumiana SassoJanet M WangXinmei LiawWen-Shing ChenChun-An ZhouQiongqiong Angela 1CAS, a Division of the American Chemical
Society, 2540 Olentangy River Rd, Columbus, Ohio 43202, United
States*Email: qzhou@cas.org.
1011202216111780217802–1784630112022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Exosomes are a subgroup of nanosized extracellular vesicles
enclosed
by a lipid bilayer membrane and secreted by most eukaryotic cells.
They represent a route of intercellular communication and participate
in a wide variety of physiological and pathological processes. The
biological roles of exosomes rely on their bioactive cargos, including
proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids, which are delivered to target
cells. Their distinctive properties—innate stability, low immunogenicity,
biocompatibility, and good biomembrane penetration capacity—allow
them to function as superior natural nanocarriers for efficient drug
delivery. Another notably favorable clinical application of exosomes
is in diagnostics. They hold various biomolecules from host cells,
which are indicative of pathophysiological conditions; therefore,
they are considered vital for biomarker discovery in clinical diagnostics.
Here, we use data from the CAS Content Collection and provide a landscape
overview of the current state and delineate trends in research advancement
on exosome applications in therapeutics and diagnostics across time,
geography, composition, cargo loading, and development pipelines.
We discuss exosome composition and pathway, from their biogenesis
and secretion from host cells to recipient cell uptake. We assess
methods for exosome isolation and purification, their clinical applications
in therapy and diagnostics, their development pipelines, the exploration
goals of the companies, the assortment of diseases they aim to treat,
development stages of their research, and publication trends. We hope
this review will be useful for understanding the current knowledge
in the field of medical applications of exosomes, in an effort to
further solve the remaining challenges in fulfilling their potential.
Keywords: exosome, extracellular vesicle, drug delivery, diagnostics, biomarker, nanoparticle, nanocarrier, blood−brain barrier, therapeutics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Sep 1; Accepted 2022 Oct 21; Issue date 2022 Nov 22.

Nearly 20 years after the discovery
of liposomes, it was found out that similar
lipid vesicles form naturally in living organisms. , These
include membrane-contained nanosized extracellular vesicles (EVs),
secreted from cells as part of their normal process or certain pathologies.
Based on the origin and size of the EVs, as well as on the current
understanding of their biogenesis, they are grouped as follows: exosomes
(diameter ∼30–150 nm); microvesicles or ectosomes (100
nm–1 μm); and apoptotic bodies (50 nm–5 μm). , 
Exosomes are produced in the endosomes of most eukaryotic
cells
and subsequently released in the extracellular space by fusion with
the cellular biomembrane ( ). Their functions are still largely unknown but a
subject of a recent burst of interest as their important roles in
physiological and pathophysiological processes are steadily revealed.
They have been shown to provide means of efficient intercellular communication
and signaling, including transport of bioactive molecules such as
proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids, between cells and across biological
barriers. , These results and the physicochemical properties
of exosomes are reasons that they are viewed as the rising star in
drug delivery and diagnostics. , , However, there is still insufficient knowledge regarding exosome
physiology. In order to make use of the clinical potential of exosomes,
it is necessary to better understand the cellular processes that govern
their biology and membrane trafficking.
 For a long time, synthetic drug nanocarriers have
been developed
to improve the efficacy of therapeutics, to refine their pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics, while lessening the toxicity and side effects. , Many smart artificial delivery systems such as various functionalized,
stimuli-responsive, targeted lipidic or polymeric nanocarriers have
been invented to improve key features of the delivery systems such
as circulation time in the bloodstream, biodistribution, cellular
interactions, and drug loading and release. However, synthetic drug
delivery systems still come across many setbacks, such as non-specific
drug targeting and toxicity of the carriers, immunogenicity, and unsatisfactory
efficacy. Specifically, lipid nanoparticles
(LNPs) have been recognized as favorable vehicles to protect, transport,
and deliver a wide variety of drugs and vaccines to cells. Liposomes, an early kind of lipid nanoparticles,
are a flexible and resourceful nanomedicine delivery system. They
can significantly enhance drug pharmacokinetics. By encapsulating
drugs in liposomes, they are protected against dilution and degradation
or inactivation in the blood. , Lipid nanoparticle
technologies together with other nanotechnological platforms for drug
delivery have improved the efficiency, selectivity, residence time,
and biodistribution of traditional drug carrier systems while reducing
their drawbacks. However, the clinical application of the lipid nanocarriers
has experienced substantial difficulties such as low bioavailability,
toxicity, removal from the bloodstream, or stimulation of innate immune
reactions.
After the discovery of exosomes, it was realized
that they are
quite similar to liposomes, in fact a more complex version of liposomes,
but originating from biological systems. Despite the evident similarities,
exosomes exhibit certain advantages, which make them a preferable
drug delivery vehicle. Their lipid composition is rich in non-lamellar
forming lipids, which may give rise to favorable curvatures in their
lipid bilayer, which has been proven beneficial in drug delivery. Furthermore, the exosome lipid bilayer is highly
asymmetrical, which could be particularly advantageous for their interaction
with the plasma membrane and especially with their target cells. While
liposomes generally do not contain proteins, a large variety of integral
and peripheral membrane proteins are found in exosomes, another favorable
feature in their application in drug delivery. As a result, in the
last 3–4 years, exosomes have become preferable over lipid
nanoparticles as prospective drug carriers. The number of documents,
both patents and journal articles, related to exosomes applied in
drug delivery has significantly surpassed that of lipid nanoparticles,
as revealed by a search in the CAS Content Collection ( ).
 In enhancing exosome efficiency, valuable lessons
learned from
liposome development have been employed. Various techniques found
useful and significantly refined in liposome/lipid nanoparticle production
and drug loading, such as sonication, extrusion, freeze–thaw
cycles, microfluidics, and others, have been successfully applied
in exosomes. Functional modifications that have significantly improved
liposome efficiency have been found useful in exosomes as well. The
most noteworthy of these include targeting by surface-attached ligands
for specific receptors on cells and coating with biocompatible inert
polymers, typically polyethylene glycol (PEG), making the carriers
invisible to phagocytes (PEGylation), considerably extending their
circulatory half-life. 
The applications
of exosomes as a natural carrier platform to deliver
drugs have been regarded as a hope and promise to overcome the limitations
associated with many previously studied drug delivery systems. For
instance, exosomes are originated from biological systems and their
components can be readily metabolized and excreted at the end of the
delivery journey. In addition, exosomes produce a minimal immune response
related to cell therapies, which might be rejected by the recipient. Furthermore, exosomes are believed to exhibit
minimum tumorigenicity, as they could
be readily absorbed and excreted via the blood and urine. Various studies have shown the capacity of exosomes
for promoting angiogenesis, providing cytoprotection, and controlling
apoptosis. The exciting observations
on the delivery potential of exosomes such as their ability to overcome
barriers for conventional colloidal delivery systems, in particular
the blood–brain barrier (BBB), and effectiveness for hard to
deliver molecules such as proteins and RNAs have inspired intense
research on their application as drug delivery vehicles.
Another
especially promising clinical application of exosomes is
in diagnostics. They transport biomolecules from their cells of origin,
which may contain signs of pathophysiological conditions; therefore,
they are widely considered to be essential for biomarker discovery
in clinical diagnostics. Recent studies have shown that exosomes contain
proteins and nucleic acids implicated in cancer and numerous other
diseases, such as neurodegenerative, metabolic, infectious, inflammatory,
and others. Moreover, exosomes can be obtained from easily achievable
body fluids such as blood and urine and are thus appropriate targets
for diagnostic application. , 
Since the EV
terminology is often confusing and has not been standardized
due to the current limitations in isolating a particular type of EVs,
the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles on the Minimal Information for Studies of Extracellular
Vesicles 2018 (MISEV 2018) guidelines suggested the use of alternative
terms such as “small EVs” (<200 nm) or “large
EVs” (>200 nm). However, the
term
“exosome” is still largely used and dominates in the
literature for vesicles of diameter ∼30–150 nm. The
term “exosome” should also not be mixed up with “exosome
complex”, a multiprotein membraneless intracellular complex. 
Observation of small particles in plasma
referred to as “platelet
dust” was reported over 50 years ago. The discovery of exosomes is related to two independent studies
from 1983 focused on the transferrin receptor externalization. , It was subsequently realized that most viable cell types, such as
B and T lymphocytes, dendritic cells, mast cells, intestinal epithelial
cells, neurons, tumor cells, and various kinds of stem cells, release
exosomes. It has become well-established that exosomes play an important
role as messengers of intercellular communication. The interest in
them was strongly enhanced after the power of antigen-loaded exosomes
to eliminate tumors in mice was demonstrated and phase I clinical trials in metastatic melanoma patients vaccinated
with autologous dendritic-cell-derived exosomes were completed, so exosomes emerged as a promising tool for
autologous treatments in cancer. A timeline exemplifying some of the
significant breakthroughs in the field of exosome research , , − is shown in .
 In this paper, we review the advances in the exosome
applications
in drug delivery and diagnostics. We examine data from the CAS Content
Collection, the largest human-curated
collection of published scientific knowledge, and analyze the publication
landscape of recent research on exosome applications in therapeutics
and diagnostics to provide insights into the research advances in
the area. We also discuss the exosome composition and pathway, from
their biogenesis and secretion from the host cells to the recipient
cellular uptake. Subsequently, we assess the methods for isolation
and purification of exosomes, their clinical applications in therapy
and diagnostics, their development pipelines with company research
focuses, disease categories, development stages, and publication trends.
We hope this review can serve as a useful resource in understanding
the current state of knowledge in the field of clinical applications
of exosomes, in an effort to further solve the remaining challenges
for fulfilling their potential.

## Landscape of Exosome Research—Insights from the CAS Content
Collection
The CAS Content Collection is the
largest human-curated collection of published scientific knowledge,
representing a comprehensive resource to access and keep up to date
on the world’s published scientific literature across disciplines
including chemistry, biomedical sciences, engineering, materials science,
agricultural science, and many more, thus empowering quantitative
analysis of global research publications against parameters such as
time, scientific area, medical application, disease, and chemical
composition. Currently, there are over 40,000 scientific publications
(mainly journal articles and patents) in the CAS Content Collection
related to exosomes/extracellular vesicles. Over 25,000 of them are
related to the application of exosomes in drug delivery and diagnostics.
There is a steady, exponential growth of these documents over time
( A). On B, the number of
documents (journal articles and patents) originating from organizations
in the USA have been correlated with the funding from the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), increasing
sharply after 2015. 
 United States, China, Korea, and Japan are the
leaders in the number
of published journal articles ( A) and patents ( B) related to exosomes in therapeutics and diagnostics.
Patenting activity related to exosomes is nearly equally shared between
corporate and academic players ( ). MD Healthcare, Codiak Biosciences, and OncoTherapy
Science have the largest number of patents among the companies ( A), while University
of California, University of Louisville, and Zhejiang University are
the leaders among the universities and hospitals ( B).
 presents
the distribution of patents related to the application of exosomes
in drug delivery and diagnostics with respect to the patent office.
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) received the most
patent applications, followed by the US and China patent offices,
the European Patent Office (EPO), and the Korean and Japan patent
offices. The percentage of Chinese patents, 27.2%, is well below the
average number (63%) of chemistry-related Chinese patents in the CAS
Content Collection from the last 10 years. This shows that exosome
applications are emerging areas, and it may take some time to establish
the technologies. At the same time, the percentage (49.8%) of patents
filed through WIPO is significantly higher than the average number
(18%) of chemistry-related WIPO patents in the CAS Content Collection,
which indicates a strong desire of patenting exosome-related technologies
internationally.
 Patent protection is territorial, and thus, the
same invention
may be filed for patent protection in two or more jurisdictions. Therefore,
we looked at all related filings on exosome applications in drug delivery
and diagnostics. One patent family may be counted multiple times when
it is applied in multiple patent offices. presents the flow of patent filings from
different applicant locations to various patent offices of filing.
There are diverse patent filing strategies: some patent assignees,
such as those from China, file foremost in their home country patent
office (CN), with a smaller proportion filing through the World International
Patent Office WIPO (WO), or other jurisdictions. Others, for instance
United States-based applicants, have a nearly equal number of US and
WO filings and a considerable number of filings at other patent offices
such as the European Patent Office (EP).
 We explored the presence and trends of selected
essential concepts
relevant to the exosome applications in drug delivery and diagnostics
as they appear in the scientific publications ( ). With respect to the cumulative number
of documents, “targeting” and “biomarker”
appear as top concepts in the area ( A), reflecting the rising interest in the
application of exosomes in therapeutics with specificity and diagnostics.
It is noteworthy that the “blood–brain barrier”
concept, although with a relatively low cumulative number of publications,
exhibits the greatest growth rate in the past 2 years ( B), characterizing it as the
trendiest concept in the field.
 The landscape of exosome research as revealed from
the CAS Content
Collection is further explored in the later sections of this paper
with respect to the exosome components and their roles.

## Characterization of Exosomes

## Exosome Pathway—Biogenesis, Secretion, Transport, Uptake
Exosomes are a population of extracellular vesicles. They are being
secreted by many cell types using the endocytic pathway. The formation of exosomes includes three steps:
(i) the endocytic vesicles form from the plasma membrane; these early
endosomes mature into late endosomes; (ii) the endosomal membrane
experiences inward budding, forming multiple intraluminal vesicles
(ILVs) encapsulated within multivesicular bodies (MVB); (iii) the
latter either fuse with the lysosome and bring the ILVs to degradation
or access the cell membrane and discharge the ILVs in the form of
exosomes ( ). , Thus, MVBs and late endosomes comprise ILVs, capturing certain proteins,
lipids, and substances from the cytosol. The cytoskeleton and the
microtubule network are the routes by which MVBs are transported to
the cell membrane where they fuse with the cell membrane and undergo
exocytosis. This way, the ILVs are being secreted as exosomes. , Other MVBs exhibit degradation through lysosomes.
Indications
exist that the endosomal mode of exosome formation—by endosomal
budding—is not the only way of exosome biogenesis. Evidence
has been accumulated indicating that exosomes may also bud from the
plasma membrane directly. , − Altogether, the exosome biogenesis is a complex process with multiple
participants involved in essential cellular functions.
The extracellular
circulation half-life of exosomes has been estimated
to be approximately 2–30 min according to reported pharmacokinetic
profiles. Currently, there is certain
knowledge regarding the exosome biogenesis and secretion, but there
is still insufficient data regarding the uptake of exosomes by various
cells and their signaling pathways. Internalization of the exosomes
by the recipient cells follows the common endocytic pathways; e.g.,
it might be mediated by clathrin, lipid rafts, caveolins, through
phagocytosis, or through micropinocytosis. Likewise, after internalization, exosomes follow the usual endosomal
routes. 
Exosomes are membrane-bound
carriers. Like other EVs, they are
surrounded by a lipid membrane, which encloses their cargo. The typical
exosome cargo includes mainly peptides, small proteins, and nucleic
acids, such as mRNA, microRNA (miRNA), and non-coding RNA (ncRNA). These are used by the cell for signaling, to
manage biological functions and to preserve homeostasis. 

## Physiological Functions of Exosomes in Health and Disease
The intercellular traffic of exosomes plays a significant role
in many physiological and pathological processes, including immune
response, tissue homeostasis and regeneration, as well as in development
of diseases such as cancer, neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, and
other disorders. They are key players in cell–cell communication,
signal transduction, extracellular matrix support and remodeling,
and various other important physiological activities ( ). Furthermore, exosomes play
significant roles in viral infections. 
 

## Exosome Composition
Nearly 100,000 proteins and over
1,000 lipids are found related to exosomes, along with a multitude
of mRNAs and miRNAs, according to various available database collections
such as ExoCarta, a web-based compendium
of exosome proteins, RNA, and lipid database information; Vesiclepedia, a
community compendium for extracellular vesicles; and EVpedia, a web-based resource providing bioinformatics
tools for extracellular vesicles research. The contents enclosed into exosomes vary depending on the cell types
and cellular conditions. Exosomes include proteins originating from
the intracellular endosomal component. They include heat shock proteins,
membrane transport proteins and fusion proteins, as well as a multitude
of tetraspanins, a transmembrane protein family. , With respect to lipid constituents, the exosomal content of cholesterol,
sphingomyelin, saturated phosphatidylcholines, and phosphatidylethanolamines
is higher than that of the plasma membrane. 
With respect to substance classes represented in the publications
related to the exosome applications in drug delivery and diagnostics
in the CAS Content Collection, nucleic acids have the highest share
(Supporting Information Figure S1). Indeed,
the capability of exosomes to carry nucleic acids from cell to cell
is one of their major features attracting attention nowadays. As natural
intercellular shuttles of RNAs, they affect many physiological and
pathological processes and are the appropriate nanocarriers for targeted
delivery of nucleic acids. Moreover,
they have been identified as biomarkers for diagnosing of diseases,
particularly various cancers. The RNAs, which have been examined include
ncRNAs: microRNAs (miRNAs), long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), and circular
RNAs (circRNAs) carried by exosomes. 

## Lipids
Lipids are essential constituents of biological
membranes. As such, they are also abundant in exosomes. The major
membrane lipid classes include phosphoglycerolipids, sphingolipids,
and sterols. Certain lipid kinds are enriched in exosomes compared
to their parent cells, suggesting that some membrane reorganization
occurs upon exosome biogenesis. Lipid
species enriched in exosomes include ceramides (Cer), sphingomyelins
(SM), and gangliosides GM3 from the class of sphingolipids; phosphatidylserines
(PS), phosphatidylethanolamines (PE), phosphatidylcholines (PC), lyso-phosphatidylcholines,
and phosphatidylinositols (PI) from the class of phospholipids; diacylglycerols
(DAG); as well as cholesterol ( ). , 
 The parental cell types and their physiological
status are determinants
of the proportion of the lipid content in exosomes. − Lipids are
critical players in exosome biogenesis. As a result of their various
molecular shapes—cone or inverse cone—they tend to generate
negative or positive membrane curvatures. Lipids with large headgroups
such as PIs and gangliosides or single-chain lipids such as lyso-PCs
induce positive membrane curvature, while smaller headgroup lipids
such as PEs or lipids lacking a hydrophilic headgroup such as ceramides
and DAGs induce negative membrane curvature. , Since these lipid classes are enriched in exosomes, they can significantly
modify their membrane curvature. As a rule, membrane curvature is
very important for cellular functions and trafficking. 
It has been reported that exosomes adjust
their lipid composition
to adjust to their biological function. Such enrichment of specific
lipid classes with respect to the parental cells has been commonly
observed. , , Thus, exosomes are typically enriched in cholesterol which supposedly accumulates in MVBs. It is
important for the generation of intraluminal vesicles, the precursors
of exosomes. Plasma membrane lipid rafts—ordered
and tightly packed membrane microdomains organizing the assembly of
signaling molecules for promoting signal transduction—are supposedly
the origin of the high sphingomyelin content in exosomal membranes. , 
The distribution of lipids in the two layers of the exosomal
membrane
lipid bilayer has been reported to be asymmetrical. Generally, asymmetric arrangement of lipids in the two
membrane leaflets is a fundamental feature of the biological membranes.
It is a consequence of various factors, including the biophysical
properties of lipids, including their miscibility, the ionic composition
of the media on both sides of the membrane, as well as the presence
of transporter enzymes that actively support and maintain the lipid
distribution across the bilayer, including flippases, floppases, and
scramblases. − Membrane asymmetry is believed to be associated
with important biological functions such as apoptosis, cell fusion,
and signaling. In the exosomal membranes,
the sphingomyelin is typically found mostly in the outer leaflet and
phosphatidylserines in the inner leaflet, while phosphatidylethanolamines
seem to be randomly distributed across the bilayer. However, phosphatidylserine is externalized in apoptotic
and malignant cells, attracting macrophages from the immune system. This finding is also useful from the viewpoint
of possible use as exosomal lipid biomarkers for cancer diagnosis. Certain lipids are predominantly allocated
in certain types of exosomes. The process
of biogenesis of exosomes and cargo packaging appears as a well-controlled
process with lipids playing an important role. 
 illustrates
the results from a search on various lipid classes in the CAS Content
Collection in documents related to the medical application of exosomes.
Phosphatidylinositol and its derivatives appear to attract significant
attention in the field. Seven phosphorylated phosphatidylinositols
(PIPs) have been identified in membranes. They can be transformed
into each other by phosphorylation or dephosphorylation of the 3-,
4-, and 5-hydroxyl groups of the inositol headgroup (see the example
of PIP3 in ). PIPs are known as precursors for certain second messengers involved
in signal transduction and, noteworthy, regulate membrane dynamics
and vesicular transport. They have been reported to significantly
affect exosome secretion and macrophage
targeting, which may have provoked the
strong attention in the published literature ( ).
 Cholesterol is another lipid that attracts strong
attention in
the recent exosome publications ( ). Indeed, cholesterol has been reported
to be essential for the entire development of exosomes, for their
biogenesis and release, for their membrane stability, and for entrance
into the target cells. Furthermore,
reports show that exosomes constitute part of the cellular machinery
taking care of the cholesterol balance and that they can assist in
detecting and combating cholesterol-related pathologies. 
Exosomal enzymes are responsible for
the production of bioactive
lipids in exosomes. For example, exosomes contain A2 phospholipases,
which hydrolyze glycerophospholipids to generate arachidonic acid
and other free fatty acids. Arachidonic
acid can be processed to release leukotrienes such as LTB4, involved
in the inflammation, and LTC4/LTD4 which promote angiogenesis. Exosomal
cyclooxygenases COX1/2 and the PGE synthase promote the transformation
of arachidonic acid to the pro-inflammatory prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
(structure included in ) or to the anti-inflammatory and tumor-suppressing
15-deoxy-prostaglandin J2. , The role of exosomes
in mediating lipid metabolism during cancer progression is attracting
much attention recently. Bioactive exosomal lipids, e.g., the prostaglandins
PGE2α, PGE1, and PGE2, are known to be released from macrophages
into the cancer microenvironment. Such
bioactive lipids are a subject of increasing interest in the recent
exosome publications ( ).

## Proteins
Exosomes comprise a broad collection of proteins
including transmembrane proteins, lipid-anchored membrane proteins,
peripheral membrane proteins, as well as soluble proteins inside the
exosome core ( ). 
 Exosomes are rich in certain tetraspanins such as
CD81, CD82, CD37,
and CD63, representatives of the class of the integral membrane proteins. They are membrane proteins including four transmembrane
α-helices. Tetraspanins are believed to have an important role
as organizers of transmembrane and cytosolic proteins, as well as
lipids (e.g., cholesterol) into a membrane network, the tetraspanin
web. Tetraspanins do not exhibit catalytic activities; their function
is to facilitate the trafficking, functioning, and stability of the
other membrane proteins. CD81 and CD63
are frequently used exosomal marker proteins, as well as CD9, another
exosomal tetraspanin, which mediates the membrane metalloendopeptidase
CD10 loading into exosomes. , Certain surface proteins
alter the exosome circulation time. For example, the occurrence of
CD47 or CD55/CD59 on the exosomal membrane can extend the blood circulation
time by avoiding phagocytic clearance. CD47 has been found on the surface of EVs secreted by fibroblasts,
T-cells, and MSCs, and EVs secreted
by antigen-presenting cells and retinal pigmented epithelium express
CD55 and CD59. 
Lipid-anchored
proteins including some glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol-anchored
proteins are present on the exosome surface. Between them are the
ectonucleotidases CD39 and CD73, the
complement-inhibiting proteins CD55 and CD59, glypican-1, prion proteins, and the Hedgehog morphogens attached to the
outer layer by their cholesterol portion. 
Exosomes also involve peripheral surface proteins playing
key roles
in signaling. Representatives of this class are the wingless (Wnt)
proteins, surface-bound bone morphogenetic
proteins, transforming growth factor
β, tumor necrosis factor, cytokines, and
a large collection of other surface signaling molecules. Extracellular
matrix proteins including fibronectin, tenascin C, and ECM1 are also
at the exosome surface. , Some peripheral proteins
are attached to the exosomal phosphatidylserine. 
The exosome inner membrane leaflet carries acylated,
lipid-anchored
proteins, including prenylated GTPases, myristoylated signaling kinases,
and palmitoylated membrane proteins. , , A large part of the composition of exosomes released
by infected cells include acylated Gag proteins. , Furthermore, some Gag proteins, such as the activity-regulated cytoskeletal
(ARC) protein, play a critical role in cognition. , 
The distribution of publications in the CAS Content Collection
among exosomal proteins is presented in . Because of the high content of tetraspanins
in exosomes, they are most often used as specific exosome markers, which explains the abundance of tetraspanin-related
publications in those concerning exosome applications in therapy and
diagnostics ( ). The distribution of documents concerning the major tetraspanin
classes as well as their roles, in particular in therapy (THU) vs
diagnostics (DGN), are shown in Supporting Information Figure S2.
 

## Nucleic Acids
Exosomes comprise RNAs and can transfer
them to other cells and tissues. The exosome-mediated RNA transfer
has been initially reported for mRNAs and miRNAs. , , , , , Exosomal RNA pools are enriched
in small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) and differ from the cellular RNA
profile. , , A wide variety
of RNA species are embedded in the extracellular vesicles. The extracellular
vesicles compendium Vesiclepedia lists over 10,000 entries of EV miRNAs
and over 27,000 entries of EV mRNAs. Upon
internalization of exosomes by the recipient cells, the variety of
cargo RNA species can be released. The subsequent translation of mRNA
into active proteins may result in phenotypical changes. 
miRNA is the dominating RNA found in exosomes.
It has been reported that exosomal miRNAs play an important role in
intercellular communication. Multiple examples of EV-mediated transfer
of miRNAs have been established for a variety of physiological and
pathological events. Reports show that it is highly abundant in exosomes,
with the five most common miRNAs being miR-99a-5p, miR-128, miR-124-3p,
miR-22-3p, and miR-99b-5p. mRNAs carried
in the extracellular vesicles can serve as a source of proteins in
recipient cells. Active translation of exosomal mRNAs into recipient
cells was reported, such as expression of reporter proteins from mRNA
transferred by extracellular vesicles between mast cells and from
glioblastoma to endothelial cells. , 
Exosomes
also contain multiple kinds of DNAs, including single-stranded,
double-stranded, genomic, and mitochondrial DNAs. − Certain inflammatory processes and cell aging are thought to rationalize
the presence of DNA in exosomes. There
is more DNA in exosomes derived from cancer cells than from healthy
cells. It has been suggested that DNA secretion originating form exosomes
may affect the inflammation regulation. It is viewed as a potential
marker of cancer, viral infection, or chemotherapeutic resistance. , , 
Analysis of the data available
in the CAS Content Collection confirmed
that exosomal RNAs are dominated by miRNAs ( A). Annual distribution of the RNA-related
documents within the pool of publications concerning exosome applications
in therapy and diagnostics shows an explosive growth in the last 2–3
years for all RNA types ( B), which is impressive, even considering the overall
rapid growth in interest in all RNA medicines. 
 

## Glycoconjugates
Polysaccharides and glycans are other
exosomal constituents located on their outer surface. , They are predominantly enriched in
mannose
α-2,3- and
α-2,6-sialic acids
complex N-linked
glycans
high-mannose N-glycans
heparan sulfate
polylactosamine
The role of glycans in exosome biology is less well
understood than that of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids, yet there
is evidence that surface glycoconjugates play important roles in exosome
biogenesis, release, targeting, and uptake by cells. Glycoconjugates appear to be an additional source of exosome
biomarkers as well ( ), since variation in glycosylation is characteristic of different
types of cancers. , 
 

## Applications of Exosomes

## Methods for Exosome Isolation/Purification
Speedy,
straightforward isolation methods offering high purity and recovery
are a requirement for large-scale applications of extracellular vesicles
in clinics. Each of the available methods discussed below brings about
certain advantages and disadvantages to exosome isolation and purification.
Based on the application purpose, different methods can be applied
for exosome separation and analysis.

## Ultracentrifugation-Based Isolation Techniques
Ultracentrifugation
is capable of generating very high centrifugal forces, up to 1,000,000g, and is currently one of the most frequently used methods
for exosome isolation, considered as
a gold standard before 2015 ( ). This approach does not require much expertise and
is affordable over time. Furthermore, it is not rather time-consuming,
without considerable sample pretreatment. Differential ultracentrifugation
(DUC) and density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGUC) are the two
popular kinds of preparative ultracentrifugation.
 DUC includes several steps with continuously increasing
centrifugation
forces and durations, with the purpose of sequentially isolating smaller
particles from large ones, such as whole cells, cellular debris, and
macromolecular proteins. Finally, exosomes are separated by ultracentrifugation
at 100,000–150,000g. The technique is time-
and effort-consuming compared with DGUC, because of the multiple steps.
In addition, heterogeneity of exosomes and overlap in the size of
extracellular vesicles lead to contaminations. − 
The separation of particles by DGUC is based on their size,
shape,
and density by utilizing an inert medium of graded densities. Under a given centrifugal force, components
of a sample will reside in the zone corresponding to their density.
This technique has a relatively higher separation efficacy and thus
provides higher purity. It is noteworthy that exosomes are not likely
to be crushed during the separation. However, this method also has the issue of unwanted aggregation
of particles as well as the contamination of proteins and nucleic
acids.

## Ultrafiltration
Ultrafiltration is a size-based technique
frequently used for exosome isolation. Exosomes are being isolated
using membrane filters with a specific pore size defining their molecular
weight or size-exclusion limits. A microfluidic device consisting
of ciliated micropillars has been fabricated to isolate exosomes. Commercial exosome isolation kits have been
designed for exosome isolation from serum, cell culture medium, and
other body fluid. The kits apply rapid
fractionation including a syringe filter with two membranes to capture
the exosomes and the larger extracellular vesicles. It is noteworthy
that a combination method of ultrafiltration with size-exclusion chromatography
(SEC) has been successfully applied in the isolation of exosomes from
adipose tissue. 

## Immunoaffinity Techniques
As more cell-type and disease-specific
protein receptors in the exosomal membrane are being identified, opportunities
are created to develop highly efficient techniques for exosome isolation.
Immunoaffinity techniques have been developed employing the affinity
interactions between surface proteins and corresponding antibodies.
Preferably, markers for exosome immunoisolation are membrane-attached
without soluble parts and are only located on the surface of exosomes.
Thus, the widely popular enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
has been established for isolating and quantifying exosomes from sources
such as blood serum, plasma, and urine. − ELISA results are typically expressed as absorbance measures to
enable a quick comparison with standards of known exosome counts,
thus enabling absorbance measures to be calibrated to quantify the
resultant exosomes. By means of the microplate immunoaffinity approach,
the distinction and yield of exosomes can be assessed with respect
to ultracentrifugation. This method is highly specific, resulting
in extremely pure exosome populations. A corresponding kit was developed
for exosome isolation based on this theory and enables fast isolation
of high-purity and high-yield exosomes. 

## Exosome Precipitation—Polymer-Based Precipitation Techniques
By modifying their solubility or ability to disperse, exosomes
can be precipitated from biological bodily fluids. Polymers that exclude
water such as PEG are utilized for this purpose. Such polymers bind
water and components of lower solubility out of the solution. Samples
are incubated with a PEG (MW ∼ 8000 Da) precipitation solution.
PEG binds water molecules and thus expels less soluble components
out of the solution. Subsequently, the
sediment containing exosomes is settled out by centrifugation or filtration.
This approach is easy to conduct and scalable for large sample size,
which allows easy transition to clinical applications. To date, several
commercial kits utilizing PEG for the isolation of exosomes have been
developed. One of the most widely used kits is ExoQuick (System Biosciences,
Mountain View, CA, USA). Some of these
kits are developed to be compatible with body fluids, as well as culture
medium. Selected kits are summarized and discussed in the following
section. Samples usually require precleaning from cells and cellular
debris before carrying out the precipitation. Urinary exosome precipitation
by these kits has been shown to achieve the highest yield compared
to other techniques. The disadvantage of the method is that the presence
of the polymer may affect downstream analysis due to the positive
charged molecules. 

## Microfluidics-Based Isolation Techniques
These techniques
utilize high-throughput microfluidic tools to isolate exosomes based
on concepts including size, density, and immunoaffinity. The immuno-microfluidic
method is developed based on the immunoaffinity capture technique.
Exosomes are isolated by the specific binding of antibodies immobilized
on the microfluidic chips and bind specifically to exosome markers
(antigens). − The advantages of this technique include
efficient, speedy processing and high grade of purity. Modifications
of the microfluidic method such as size-based microfluidic isolation
using the exosome total isolation chip (ExoTIC), acoustofluidic, and dielectrophoretic techniques have been successfully applied.
The tools are very complicated and expensive with requirement of specific
fabrication skills. In summary, microfluidics is an advanced and promising
technology, but it still needs certain regularization in order to
be considered as a standard exosome isolation method.

## Size-Exclusion Chromatography
According to the accumulating
evidence, size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) has been considered
as the most preferred method for isolation and purification of exosomes. Exosome isolation using SEC has a low level
of contaminants, resulting in a homogeneous isolation of exosomes.
This circumstance has promoted the use of SEC among its competitor
techniques for body fluid exosome-related biomarker identification.
SEC has been used successfully for isolation, purification, and enrichment
of exosomes from an assortment of biological fluids including plasma,
serum, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, saliva, milk, and tears. SEC is
advantageous because it does not require a large sample volume and
the shearing force generated in SEC does not likely damage the original
structure of the vesicles. These distinctive properties make this
technique preferable compared to centrifugation. Presently, SEC is a commonly used technique for isolation
of exosomes from both blood and urine samples. , 
A summary of the most widely used exosome isolation techniques
is highlighted in , including the isolation mechanisms, advantages, and disadvantages. , , − Other isolation methods and method modifications have also been
applied, e.g., asymmetric flow field-flow fractionation (AF4), aptamer-based isolation, and others. Even though various
exosome purification approaches have been developed, it is difficult
for one method to solve all the associated challenges such as low
yield, contaminations, and variations between batches. The combination
of several methods to isolate and purify exosomes would be needed
to characterize exosomes effectively and comprehensively. And it has
been suggested as a promising strategy for improvement of the isolation
outcome, in order to provide exosome subsets with high purity, in
particular with respect to size, morphology, density, number, presence
of exosome-enriched markers, and lack of contaminants. 
 The annual trends in the number of documents related
to exosome
applications in therapeutics and diagnostics concerning various exosome
isolation methods during the years 2014–2021 are shown in . The precipitation
and microfluidic methods are dominating the field, because of their
broad applicability and high efficiency.

## Exosomes as Drug Delivery Vehicles
Exosomes provide
distinct benefits as highly efficient drug carriers. They have been
recognized as a successful platform for delivery of various drugs
because of their ability to mediate cellular communications. Exosomes can be modified by means of their
parental cells to exhibit the desired targeting capability and being
loaded with therapeutic agents with anticipated biological activity.
Exosomal drug formulations are applicable to many diseases including
cancers and infectious, cardiovascular, and neurodegenerative disorders.
Generally, exosomes exhibit a combination of advantages characteristic
of both synthetic drug carriers and cell-mediated delivery methods,
at the same time preventing their drawbacks.
Multiple encapsulation
approaches for exosomes utilizing physical/chemical/biological techniques
have been developed for stocking therapeutic agents into exosomes,
to achieve diverse therapeutic effects and optimum efficiency.

## Cargo Loading
Therapeutic agents can be introduced
into exosomes either before or after exosome isolation. , − Pre-isolation loading methods introduce
the therapeutic molecules into the parental cells before the EV production,
so that they are encapsulated before exosome biogenesis.
Cell transfection of RNA, peptides, and proteins has been
used. , This is the most commonly used approach
for loading therapeutic molecules into exosomes. Another way of pre-isolation
cargo loading comprises simple incubation of the parental cells with
the drug, allowing passive diffusion of the drugs into cells or exosomes
during their biogenesis. 
Advantages: Appropriate for loading nucleic acids
and proteins; large cargos
Disadvantages: Cytotoxicity,
difficult purification
Post-isolation loading methods introduce
the therapeutic agent
after the exosome being collected applying techniques such as co-incubation,
sonication, electroporation, freeze–thaw cycles, and extrusion. , Most of these methods have been acquired from their application
in the liposome-based drug delivery.
In the direct co-incubation method, the therapeutic
agent and the exosomes are mixed and incubated for a certain time
period at room temperature. It is driven by the passive transport
mechanism exploiting the concentration gradient. As a result, therapeutic
small molecule drugs enter through the membrane into the exosomes
or cells, with subsequent secretion of drug-loaded exosomes. Loading is highly dependent on the drug hydrophobicity,
with hydrophobic molecules being loaded more efficiently into exosomes. An incubation time of ∼90 min has been
reported to result in the most efficient loading of exosomes with
synthetic oligonucleotides. The size
of the drug molecule is a substantial loading controlling factor. Loading capacity can be strongly modulated
by tuning the cells/exosomes–drug ratio.
Advantages: Simple, convenient, mild
Disadvantages: Low loading
efficiency
Sonication is a technique using mechanical
energy
to produce temporary pores in the exosomal membranes allowing the
cargo to be encapsulated, with subsequent reorganization and recovery
of the lipid bilayer. , Sonication exhibits higher loading
efficiency, but it could cause deformation of exosomes with subsequent
compromising of their integrity. Also, sonication may lead to heating
and damage of the active agents; therefore, careful temperature and
process controls are critical. , 
Advantages: High loading efficiency
Disadvantages: Heat generation,
possible active agent
damage, aggregation
Electroporation makes possible
the entry of the therapeutic
cargo by applying electrical pulses to modify the dielectric properties
of the membrane, thereby opening recoverable pores and enhancing its
permeability. This way of permeabilization
of exosome membranes is one of the most common techniques applied
for exosome loading. The applied potential can vary significantly
in different cases, from 0.1 to 1000 kV. Disruption of the membrane
lipid bilayer allows hydrophilic compounds such as small DNAs, miRNAs, , and siRNAs to diffuse into exosomes. The method is simple
to operate, has a high loading efficiency, and has been widely applied
to encapsulate siRNAs or miRNAs. However, possible aggregation of
therapeutic nucleic acids during loading caused by metal ions originating
from the electrodes is a likely disadvantage. , Aggregation can be prevented by using protectors such as the trehalose,
citric acid, and EDTA. 
Advantages: High loading efficiency, controllable
Disadvantages: Cargo aggregation
Freeze–thaw cycles are
also successfully used
for drug loading after exosome isolation. The exosomes are being frozen
together with the drug in liquid nitrogen at −80 °C with
subsequent thawing at room temperature for several cycles. A minimum of three freezing–thawing
cycles is needed, and 5–10 cycles are recommended. It is a relatively mild method appropriate
for miRNA and protein loading. Drug
penetrates through exosomal membrane as a result of minor disordering
of the lipid bilayer during the procedure. Moderate loading efficiency
is characteristic for this method. It
can be combined with the co-incubation and/or sonication techniques
for enhancing efficiency. The freeze–thaw
technique has been successfully used to fuse exosomes and liposomes,
thus producing exosome-mimetic particles. 
Advantages: Mild and simple, appropriate for
RNA and
protein loading
Disadvantages: Uncertain efficiency,
aggregation
The extrusion technique includes forcing
the exosomes
to mechanical destruction by using an extruder device. The device
has a heating block and polycarbonate filters with specific pore sizes
(usually ∼100–400 nm). The exosome components are subsequently
reconstructed into a population of nanovesicles incorporating the
intended drug. The method exhibits good
loading efficiency, but the applied excessive shear stress can damage
the vesicles and their protein components. The extrusion method has been found to be appropriate in constructing
exosome-mimetics. 
Advantages: Good loading efficiency, uniform size
Disadvantages: Possible damage of the exosome membrane
The distribution of
documents in the CAS Content Collection related
to exosome applications in therapy and diagnostics with respect to
the applied exosome loading methods is illustrated in . Dominating are physical
methods—electroporation, freeze–thaw, sonication, and
extrusion—while chemical and biological methods, such as transfection
and incubation, are less popular. In fact, various methods turn out
to be appropriate for different cargo loadings.
 A selection of small molecule drugs, which have
been frequently
used as exosome cargo in drug delivery, as seen from the CAS Content
Collection, have been exemplified in Supporting Information Table S1.

## Cell Sources for Derived Exosomes
As a form of cell–cell
messenger, exosomes play a crucial role in different physiological
processes. Exosomes secreted by different tissues and cells exhibit
specific properties. Moreover, understanding the properties of different
cell-derived exosomes can also help us understand the pathogenesis
mechanism of various diseases.

## Exosomes Derived from Tumor Cells
Tumor-derived exosomes
are able to modify tumor progression, including growth, angiogenesis,
invasion, and metastasis. They promote cell development, adhesion,
and cell polarity. , Exosomes derived from tumors
may be involved in various immunomodulatory outcomes, since they carry
both immunosuppressive and immunostimulatory mediators. Furthermore,
tumor-derived exosomes may be used as immunoadjuvants and antigens
in cancer vaccines. They secrete cytokines
and growth factors and can thus protect T-cells from cancer-cell-mediated
apoptosis. Also, tumor-derived exosomes
exhibit a composition related to that of their cells of origin. When
administered, they prefer to fuse with their parent cancer cells,
indicating that exosomes might be distinctively suitable, as Trojan
horses, to deliver anticancer therapeutics. 
Exosomes secreted by cancer stem cells mediate cell–cell
communication and substance exchange, thus regulating processes of
tumor growth metastasis, epithelial–mesenchymal transition,
and angiogenesis by transporting tumor-related mRNA, non-coding RNA,
surface proteins, and encapsulated proteins. In colorectal cancer, exosomes derived from fibroblasts activate
the Wnt signaling pathway, rendering cancer cells to exhibit stem
cell properties, including spherocytosis and tumorigenicity, and increase
the number of cancer stem cells in colorectal cancer cells. Also, exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem
cells can boost breast cancer cell proliferation by activating the
Wnt signaling pathway. Growing evidence
indicates that targeting signal pathways regulated by exosomes could
act on CSCs to inhibit the incidence and development of tumors, which
has become a trending topic in recent years.

## Mesenchymal-Stem-Cell-Derived Exosomes
Mesenchymal
stem cells (MCS) are pluripotent stem cells and can be derived from
certain adult tissues and organs. MSCs are an ideal exosome source.
They inhibit the proliferation of immune cells. MSC-derived exosomes
inherit the immunomodulatory properties. In addition, MSCs have exhibited the highest amount of CD81 expressed
exosomes. , It has been shown that upregulated
miRNAs, especially miR-320C, from MSC-derived exosomes promote osteoarthritis
chondrocyte proliferation. In a myocardial I/R injury study, MSC-derived
exosomes carrying miR-182-5p showed a cardioprotective effect with
improving cardiac function and reducing myocardial infarction, accompanied
with reduced inflammation in vivo. Exosomes from mesenchymal stem cells play an important
role in many diseases and can be used as an adjuvant in supporting
and complementing other therapeutic modalities. Bone marrow MSC-derived
exosomes are being utilized by Direct Biologics, a regenerative biologic
company, in many different clinical trials. Their therapeutic product ExoFlo is currently available under FDA
expanded use protocol for the treatment of COVID-19 acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) (NCT04657458). , It is also under clinical trial for ulcerative colitis (NCT05176366), Crohn’s disease and irritable bowel
disease (NCT05130983), solid organ transplant
rejection (NCT05215288), and mild/moderate
COVID-19 (NCT05125562). 

## Macrophage-Derived Exosomes
Macrophages are known to
exhibit phagocytic ability in the immune system. They are able to identify and eliminate pathogenic microbial
products and tumor cells and are thus important for the prevention
of diseases. Studies have reported that
they are an essential regulator in injury and repair. After chemotherapy,
macrophage-derived exosomes stimulate breast cancer proliferation
and metastasis. Thus, inhibition of exosome secretion is identified
as beneficial for breast tumor prevention. M2-macrophage-derived exosomes could promote cardiac repair in a
mouse model of acute myocardial infarction. miR-1271-5p-enriched macrophage-derived
exosomes suppressed cell apoptosis and enhanced the viability of hypoxia-induced
cardiomyocytes. By downregulating SOX6, miR-1271-5p decreased cardiomyocyte
apoptosis induced by hypoxia and alleviated cardiac injury. 

## Exosomes Derived from T-Cells
Exosomes derived from
T-cells are a subject of growing interest because of their potential
role in controlling innate immune responses. Similarly to the exosomes
from other sources, , these exosomes carry bioactive
miRNA. Exosomal carriers can transport
miRNA from T-cells to antigen-presenting cells. 
In addition to modulating the immune response, T-cell-derived
exosomes participate in tumor inhibition. T-cell secreted exosomes
containing Fas ligand promote tumor infiltration in lungs by enhancing
the expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9, and exosomes released from CD8+CD45+ regulatory T-cells inhibit the response of the CD8+ cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte and the antitumor activity. Exosomes contribute to the tolerance to transplantation as well. Through a clinical trial (NCT04389385), TC
Erciyes University in Turkey is researching the use of COVID-19-specific
T-cell-derived exosomes. This clinical
trial is testing the safety and efficacy of the agent following a
metered inhalation for targeted delivery (Turk-Patent Application
Number: PCT/TR2020/050302). 

## Exosomes Derived from Other Cells
A lot of studies
have been dedicated to identifying the roles of other living-cell-derived
exosomes. Exosomes obtained from fibroblasts rich in miR-21-3p could
induce cardiomyocyte hypertrophy by targeting SORBS2 and PDLIM5. Inhibition
of miR-21-3p diminished cardiac hypertrophy in animals treated with
Ang II. Exosomes extracted from endothelial cells expressing KLF2
can attenuate the formation of atherosclerosis. Exosomes derived from
neural stem cells are being researched by Aruna Biomedical for the
treatment of stroke along with other neurological and neurodegenerative
diseases. Their candidate AB126 shows the ability to cross the BBB
and demonstrates central nervous system specificity. Their preclinical data supports that neural stem-cell-derived
exosomes were more effective than MSC-derived exosomes in improving
cellular, tissue, and functional outcomes in the tested mouse thromboembolic
stroke model. 
The frequency of
using various kinds of exosome donor cells in the studies related
to exosome applications in therapy and diagnostics, as presented by
the number of documents in the CAS Content Collection, is illustrated
in Supporting Information Figure S3. Tumor
cells and stem cells (specifically, mesenchymal stem cells, MSC) are
the most frequently used exosome sources. illustrates the correlation between the
exosome donor cells and the diseases to which the exosomes have been
applied to in studies related to exosome application in therapeutics
and diagnostics, as represented by the number of documents in the
CAS Content Collection. Cancer studies clearly dominate, followed
by inflammation and infection studies. Furthermore, in cancer studies,
antigen-presenting cells and natural killer cells have been frequently
used. Macrophages and stem cells are the most frequently used in inflammation,
while antigen-presenting cells and T-cells are frequently used in
infection.
 

## Delivery of Small Molecules
Exosomes have been recognized
as prospective vehicles for therapeutic small molecules. Generally,
exosomal delivery vehicles exhibit higher biocompatibility due to
their endogenous origin, tissue-specific targeted delivery, drug deposition
in target cells, and favorable drug stability and blood circulation
time, thus improving the effectiveness and pharmacokinetics of the
small molecule drugs, such as curcumin, paclitaxel, doxorubicin, and
withaferin. Exosome-encapsulated curcumin has been reported as able
to reduce inflammation. Exosomes derived
from macrophages and packed with the antitumor drug paclitaxel produced
a strong antitumor effect. Paclitaxel,
doxorubicin, and withaferin were encapsulated in exosomes isolated
from bovine milk and exhibited better antiproliferative activities
against A549 lung cancer cells than the free drugs.

## Delivery of Proteins
Exosomes have been examined and
found particularly promising as delivery vehicles for macromolecular
proteins. The routes of inserting proteins into exosomes include either
genetic engineering—by transfecting the donor with a plasmid
carrying the gene of interest—or direct loading into the exosomes.
A delivery construct for the potent antioxidant catalase has been
developed for treating inflammatory and neurodegenerative disorders,
in particular Parkinson’s disease. SIRPα has been loaded into exosomes for antitumor therapy
by blocking the CD47 receptor on tumor cells. Hyaluronan degradation has been applied to stimulate tumor
penetration by using exosomes holding PH20 hyaluronidase. Moreover, it was reported that the exosome
codelivery of PH20 hyaluronidase and doxorubicin inhibit tumors. 

## Delivery of Nucleic Acids
Because of their ability
to protect nucleic acids from degradation, exosomes have been identified
also as superior carriers for nucleic acids for gene therapy. Thus,
B-cell-derived exosomes has been employed for delivery of a miRNA-155
inhibitor in order to decrease the lipopolysaccharide-stimulated TNFα
production in macrophages. The tumor-suppressing
agent miR-199a-3p encapsulated into exosomes from fibroblasts of ovarian
cancer successfully suppressed c-Met production and inhibited cancer
cell proliferation and invasion. Substantial
inhibition of postoperative breast cancer metastases was attained
by an exosome-based siRNA delivery system comprising biomimetic nanoparticles
including albumin and siS100A4 with an exosome membrane coating. , − CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology has
recently become a preferred tool due to the high precision and efficiency
modifying, deleting, or replacing specific genes. Exosomal nanocarriers were reported to have achieved efficient
delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 plasmids with cancer cell tropism and produced
advanced antitumor effects. 
 exemplifies some
exosome drug delivery systems with relation to diseases and exosome
sources.
 

## Exosomes as Therapeutics
Exosomes are considered a
promising drug delivery system due to their specific structure and
composition allowing them to be used as efficient natural nanocarriers,
as well as their impressive preclinical success. Yet another rapidly
expanding and noteworthy application of exosomes is their use as therapeutic
agents. − 
Exosomes can modify tumor growth because of some proteins
and RNAs which they deliver to the tumor cells. Reports show that tumorigenesis is being controlled, specifically
downregulated, by the transport of miR-139-5p encapsulated into exosomes
in bladder cancer cells. A similar effect
has been observed when miR-381 packed in exosomes is transfected into
triple negative breast cancer cells. miR-140-3p in exosomes isolated
from human colorectal cancer blood samples inhibits cancer cell proliferation.
miR-5100 in exosomes derived from mouse breast cancer xenograft model-associated
macrophages hinders the CXCL12/CXCR4 spreading tumor cells to regional
nodes of the primary tumor. , Other miRNAs secreted
by colorectal cancer exosomes hinder angiogenesis in colorectal cancer. 
With respect to neurodegenerative diseases,
the therapeutic power
of exosomes is augmented thanks to the capability of exosomes to cross
the BBB. For example, the enzymes neprilysin and insulin degrading
enzyme (IDE), which degrade amyloid β peptide, can be found
in exosomes. Uptake of these enzymes results in reduction of amyloid
β levels. Exosomal miRNAs have
been found helpful in neurological diseases including Alzheimer’s
disease. For example, analysis of exosomal miRNAs isolated from mesenchymal
stem cells has been shown to improve various brain disorder pathologies,
including Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,
subarachnoid hemorrhage, and traumatic brain injury. , 
Exosomes are reported to be helpful for treatment of cardiovascular
diseases as well. An example includes cellular conditioning after
acute myocardial infarction. Stem cell exosomes have been reported
to promote angiogenesis, impart cytoprotection, and control apoptosis. , Progenitor cell exosomes supplemented with certain cardioprotective
miRNAs reduce infarct size in an animal model of ischemia-reperfusion
injury. Such exosomes also protect from
ischemia-reperfusion injury, advancing cardiac performance. 
In infectious diseases, exosomes have
been shown to incorporate
pathogen-originated molecules or immunomodulators favoring eradication
of the microorganism and immune balance. , Hence, exosomes are considered as appropriate carriers of substances
to prevent or manage infection, e.g., to control bacterial infections,
sepsis, and COVID-19. MSC-derived exosomes
have been shown to be able to treat infections by expression of microbicidal
peptides cathelicidin LL-37, human β-defensin-2, hepcidin, and
lipocalin-2 and/or by immunomodulation. , Compared to antibiotics, antimicrobial peptides exhibit certain
advantages, such as lower toxicity and immunomodulatory activities,
and are thus preferable. Exosomes have
also become a valuable tool for treatment of sepsis. Thus, miR-27b carried by MSC-derived exosomes induces decline
of the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. miR-21 carried by exosomes gives rise to substantial renoprotection
imparted by remote ischemic preconditioning, proposed as an efficient
therapeutic approach for renal damage caused by sepsis. Patients with severe COVID-19 disease have
been reported to develop a “cytokine storm syndrome”,
leading to acute lung injury, acute respiratory distress syndrome,
organ failure, and ultimately death. Using the model developed for sepsis, exosomes might perform as
a therapeutic strategy for the immunomodulatory cure of COVID-19. The safety and therapeutic efficacy of exosomes
overexpressing CD24 have been assessed, as they are able to directly
suppress a cytokine storm. , , CD24 is an important factor in many human cancers. It is also a
significant participant in controlling the T-cell proliferation and
as such may suppress inflammation. T-cell-derived exosomes have also
been suggested as a useful medication for pneumonia in patients with
early stage COVID-19 infection. A clinical study assessing the safety
and efficacy of such exosomes has been delivered for inhalation by
aerosol. Research on treating severe
COVID-19 pneumonia is carried out based on exosome inhalation as well. , 
The variety of diseases to which exosome systems have been
applied
as therapeutic or diagnostic tools, as demonstrated by our exploration
of the publications in the CAS Content Collection, is shown in . The largest part
(68%) of the publications are associated with cancer, and neurodegenerative,
inflammatory, and cardiovascular diseases are also highly represented
( ).
 

## Advantages and Disadvantages of Exosomes in Drug Delivery versus
Lipid Nanoparticles
Exosomes are small and flexible and exhibit
adhesive proteins on their surface, so they can cross the BBB. At
the same time, they are endogenous; their membrane is composed of
cellular lipids, which imparts them with negligible immunogenicity
and toxicity. Exosomes are rich in proteins and genetic material and
are thus useful for early and accurate diagnosis. More studies on
exosome in vivo biodistribution are required to establish
biodistribution mechanisms and their important features, such as the
route of administration, disease progression, their cells of origin,
and the recipient cell types available to uptake circulating exosomes. 
The endogenous origin of exosomes may
also have disadvantages in the clinical practice. The yield of exosomes
is considerably lower than that of liposomes. The yield of exosomes
is strictly limited by the secretion abilities of cells, the complexity
and expenses for large-scale cell culturing, and the time- and effort-consuming,
low-efficiency procedures for exosome production, making industrial
scale-up manufacture of exosomes a hard to ignore obstacle. 
Additionally, the cargo carrying efficiency
of exosomes is restricted.
They intrinsically carry a large load of natural components, which
significantly complicates and restrains the anticipated cargo loading. Although approaches to engineer exosomes with
enhanced loading capacity are being elaborated, they are still less
efficient than the synthetic liposomes.
As an additional drawback,
the quality control of exosomes is harder
than that of liposomes. Exosomes are highly heterogenic, even when
generated by a single cell type. Due to the lack of sensitive high-throughput
analysis methods, it is hard to separate the heterogeneous exosome
population into homogeneous ones. Furthermore,
since one of the essential functions of exosomes is to remove the
harmful substances from cells, they may be left with undesired and
unsafe macromolecules from their parent cells. Strategies to precisely control the contents of exosomes
are currently still insufficient.

## Exosomes in Diagnostics
To be practicable in clinical
use, a blood biomarker needs to be easy to assess, cost-effective,
specific for the targeted disease, highly sensitive, and easily and
reliably measured. Exosomes are favorable with respect to conventional
biomarkers especially in their higher diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy.
Thus, exosomes are an appropriate tool for clinical diagnostics for
the following reasons:
The disease progression strongly modulates the content
of exosomes; exosomal bioactive substances have been shown to be altered
and are thus highly informative regarding the pathological status. , 
Exosomes can be obtained non-invasively
from easily
available biological fluids including urine, blood, saliva, and even
tears for early and fast diagnosis of diseases such as cancers, cardiovascular
diseases, and neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s
disease. , 
Exosomes are highly stable due to their lipid bilayer
membrane. They can thus circulate even in a harsh tumor microenvironment.
Moreover, the biomembrane protects the exosomal content from degradation
by extracellular proteases. , 
Exosomes express surface markers characteristic to their
cells of origin, so their source can be identified. 
Exosomes can be stored by
freezing, freeze-drying, or
spray-drying and are highly stable, which is of significant importance
for their clinical application. 
Exosomes can permeate through the BBB in
both directions;
they thus afford collecting information about brain cells non-invasively. , 
Exosomes exhibit advantages compared
to conventional
biomarkers in their higher diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy. − 
The significant potential of exosomes in diagnostics
is already widely appreciated, and exosomes are drawing intense attention
as evidence is being accumulated that exosomes contain biological
molecules characteristic of cancer, neurodegenerative, infectious,
and metabolic diseases and can be possibly used as diagnostic biomarkers. , , , − 

## Exosomal Proteins as Diagnostic Biomarkers
Tetraspanins,
a group of membrane scaffolding proteins, are abundant in exosomes.
One of the members of this family is the exosomal marker CD63. It
has been reported that there is a much higher amount of plasma exosomes
comprising the CD63 marker in patients with melanoma as compared to
healthy ones. Furthermore, CD63 has
been found to be elevated in exosomes from various types of human
cancer cells. Thus, exosomal CD63 is suggested as an appropriate protein
marker for cancer. Another tetraspanin,
CD81, is found essential in hepatitis C pathology, seemingly associated
with inflammation and fibrosis. It has thus been identified as a marker
for hepatitis C diagnosis. A higher
expression of CD151, CD171, and tetraspanin 8 (TSPAN8) is reported
in blood serum exosomes collected from lung cancer patients. These findings suggest exosomal proteins are
appropriate biomarkers for cancer diagnosis. Other members of the
tetraspanin family such as CD91, CD82, CD147, CD9, and TSPAN8 have
also been explored as cancer biomarkers. 
Numerous exosomal protein biomarkers have been identified
that can be used to diagnose diseases of the central nervous system.
Glioblastoma-specific receptor EGFRvIII has been detected in glioblastoma-patient-derived
exosomes, suggesting that exosomal EGFRvIII is an appropriate source
of glioblastoma diagnostic information. Exosomes from brain tumor patients were found to comprise EGFR,
EGFRvIII, and TGF-β. Exosomal
amyloid peptides are found in brain plaques indicative for Alzheimer’s
disease. Tau protein phosphorylated
at Thr-181, which is an established biomarker for Alzheimer’s
disease, was detected at elevated levels in exosomes isolated from
cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer’s disease patients. Thus, exosomes are possibly valuable for early
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Exosome Sciences partnered with Boston University researched
the use of their TauSome biomarker (exosomal tau) for diagnosis and
monitoring of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) in living individuals. , With Boston University’s DIAGNOSE CTE study (clinical trial
NCT02798185), they have enrolled 120
former National Football League Players, 60 former college football
players, and 60 healthy controls to develop methods to diagnosis CTE
and to examine potential risk factors. Another biomarker, α-synuclein, the aggregation of which is
considered to play a key role in Parkinson’s disease pathology,
has been reported to be released from exosomes in a Parkinson’s
disease model system. The study showed
that lysosomal dysfunction typical for Parkinson’s disease
increases exosomal α-synuclein release.
The easily and
non-invasively attainable proteins in urinary exosomes
have also been examined as diagnostic biomarkers, especially for urinary
tract diseases. Urinary exosomal fetuin-A has been found to be elevated
in acute kidney injury occurrences. Exosomal
proteins in urine have also been examined as potential biomarkers
for bladder cancer and prostate cancer. Eight urinary exosomal proteins
have been identified as possible biomarkers for bladder cancer. Two identified prostate cancer biomarker proteins
were found in urine exosomes from prostate cancer patients. Twenty-four urinary exosomal proteins notably
differ between bladder cancer and control patients. 
 exemplifies
some candidate exosomal protein biomarkers reported to date for diagnostic
applications.
 

## Exosomal Nucleic Acids as Diagnostic Biomarkers
Exploration
of exosomal RNAs as diagnostic biomarkers has been triggered by the
finding that exosomes contain RNAs. , Indeed, exosomal
RNAs are protected from RNase degradation by the lipid bilayer membrane
and thus can be steadily detected in blood, making them perfect diagnostic
biomarkers. Among all exosomal cargo substances, miRNA has drawn attention
because of its complex roles in regulating the cancer microenvironment
involving angiogenesis, cell proliferation, and metastasis. Its roles
in regulating cellular behaviors in situ or in the
remote recipient cells are under intensive investigation. − 
Exosomal miRNAs are being most commonly utilized as cancer
biomarkers. Thus, eight miRNAs were identified in serum exosomes from
ovarian cancer patients which are missing in healthy controls, suggesting
that easily attainable exosomal miRNAs are appropriate diagnostic
markers. Exosomal miRNAs from lung adenocarcinoma
were significantly different from the control patients. Thus, exosomal
miRNAs are a possible tool for screening for lung adenocarcinoma. Similarly, the miR-141 level is supposedly
a forceful diagnostic marker for prostate cancer. Researchers from Hackensack University Medical Center are
also currently recruiting for a clinical trial (NCT03694483) that
will purify prostate-cancer-derived exosomes and characterize their
miRNA for the potential development of a prostate cancer liquid biopsy
assay. 
A simple, urine-based liquid
biopsy test has been developed by
Exosome Diagnostics called ExoDx and
is commercially available to provide risk probabilities of aggressive
prostate cancer in patients. The ExoDx test was granted FDA Breakthrough
Device Designation in 2019 and uses
RNA copy numbers of ERG, PCA3, and SPDEF to develop a predictive count
to correlate the probability that a patient may develop prostate cancer. 
Exosomal miRNAs are reported as hopeful
biomarkers for esophageal
squamous cell cancer. Exosomal miR-21 has been found to be high in
esophageal squamous cell cancer patients’ serum. Serum miRNA-1246 exhibits a sensitivity of
71.3% and a specificity of 73.9% for esophageal squamous cell cancer
diagnosis. Serum miRNA-1246 has been found to also be significantly
correlated with the tumor, lymph node, and metastasis stage and is
a strong risk factor for poor survival. 
Exosomal miRNAs have been identified as possible biomarkers
for
diagnosing cardiovascular diseases and renal fibrosis as well. − Recently, a study of tear exosomes concluded that miR-145-5p, miR-214-3p,
miR-218-5p, and miR-9-5p are dysregulated during diabetic retinopathy
development. Furthermore, tears were
established as another easily accessible body fluid expected to improve
molecular diagnostics to diagnose ocular, neurodegenerative, and systemic
diseases, as well as cancer. Thus, the study of miRNAs in tear exosomes
has shown that miR-145-5p, miR-214-3p, miR-218-5p, and miR-9-5p are
dysregulated during diabetic retinopathy development 
Another possible diagnostic biomarker besides miRNAs
are the exosomal
mRNAs. , For example, specific features for diagnosing
prostate cancer have been identified in circulating exosomal mRNA. Urinary exosome mRNA has been suggested as
a tool for non-invasive detection of kidney disease. 
Searching for biomarkers among RNAs to be used in
non-invasive
diagnostics has been booming in recent years. Representative examples
of exosomal miRNAs reported as cancer therapeutic and diagnostic agents
are shown in .
 A search in the CAS Content Collection found an extensive increase of the number of
documents related to
exosome applications in diagnostics ( A). A comparison with the therapy-related
exosome documents demonstrates that, although at present they outnumber
the diagnostic-related documents ( ), the annual growth of the diagnostic exosome
documents has begun to dominate ( A, inset).
 

## Exosomes as Therapeutic Targets
Exosomes are known
to be related to the pathogenesis of various illnesses such as cancer,
neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, and others. Provided that exosome
amounts are frequently enhanced and related to the severity of the
diseases, in particular for cancers, a successful therapeutic strategy
may involve reducing exosome production and circulation to normal
levels to prevent disease progression. − With this perception, numerous
studies are intended to modify the exosome pathway at its various
steps, including production, release, and uptake. 
A number of approaches have been explored for inhibiting exosome formation. The endosomal sorting complexes
required for transport (ESCRT) are known to be involved in multivesicular
body biogenesis Several reports have
correlated the exosome secretion to the ESCRT-0 protein hepatocyte
growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HGS, HRS), by reporting
decreased exosome release in HRS depleted dendritic cells and tumor
cells. , Mechanisms of exosome formation which do
not depend on ESCRT are known too. They include ceramide or the tetraspanins.
The small-molecule inhibitors of sphingomyelinase, the enzyme generating
ceramide from sphingomyelin, are able to reduce endosomal sorting
and production, causing a reduction in tumor growth. , Otherwise, the formation of exosomes may be controlled by certain
signaling pathways triggered by Ras homologue family member A or ADP-ribosylation
factor 6 (ARF6). , Targeting these pathways may
produce a distinct therapeutic effect on tumor progression.
Other strategies that block exosome secretion have been developed
as well. The sphingomyelinase inhibitor drug GW4869 causes inhibition
of intraluminal vesicle formation and release of exosomes. , Inhibition of exosome production has been accomplished by attenuation
of sphingomyelinase 2, which manipulates the synthesis of ceramide
and restrains angiogenesis and metastasis in breast cancer. Numerous modulators of exosome fabrication
from prostate cancer cells have also been reported recently. 
Another way of modulating extracellular
exosome levels is by inhibiting exosome release. Certain
proteins, such as small
GTPases of the Rab family, are associated with the discharge of exosomes.
Thus, Rab27a and Rab27b are significant regulators of exosome release
and the same is true for their effector proteins. , Silencing Rab27a by RNA interference can reduce tumor growth. Lipids are also shown to be involved in the
exosome secretion regulation. Diacylglycerol kinase downregulation
results in the suppression of the secretion of exosomes containing
the Fas ligand. Exosome discharge includes
fusion of MVBs with the cell membrane as a final step. This process
is mediated by the SNARE complex machinery, with the SNARE protein
Ykt6 involved. Lastly, cellular pH also
modulates exosome secretion, via modulation of proton pump inhibitors. Furthermore, studying the exosome roles has
revealed that suppression of melanoma progression is correlated with
exosomes released by natural killer cells. 
Exosome uptake inhibition is another way to modulate
exosome activity. Cells uptake exosomes using various endocytic pathways,
such as clathrin-dependent endocytosis as well as clathrin-independent
routes, e.g., macropinocytosis and phagocytosis. − Exosome treatment with proteinase K has been reported to significantly
reduce uptake by ovarian cancer cells, which is an indication that
proteins located on the exosomal surface may operate as uptake receptors. The uptake of tumor exosomes is supposedly
mediated by the membrane phosphatidylserine that is possibly inhibited
by diannexin. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans
allegedly operate as internalization receptors of cancer cell exosomes.
Such an uptake route appears to be significant, since heparin treatment
considerably inhibits the cancer cell migration stimulation mediated
by exosomes. Besides, exosome uptake
is inhibited by dynamin2 knockdown, required for clathrin and caveolin
endocytosis pathways. 
Another
successful strategy of treating cancer has been exploited
by physical elimination of exosomes secreted by cancer
cells. Communication among cells in tumors is mostly via chemokines,
cytokines, or growth factors. , Exosomes from tumor
cells are noted to facilitate these kinds of communications, thus
playing a role in tumor progression. Therefore, the removal of exosomes secreted by cancer cells is one
of the exosome-targeting therapeutic approaches. A hemofiltration
system capable of targeting cancer cell exosomes by specifically targeting
at human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) on the exosome
surface was utilized. That caused selective
elimination of cancer-derived exosomes, which proved to be very valuable
for cancer treatment. 
Collectively,
these data reinforce the hypothesis that elimination
of exosomes or inhibition of their secretion, release, or internalization
mechanisms may have favorable effects in cancer therapy. Thus, a good
understanding of the disease-specific mechanism of exosome pathways
is needed in finding specific therapies intervened by targeting exosomes. 

## Other Applications

## Exosomes in Food and Cosmetics
Prospective applications
of exosomes are also in cosmetics and food. It has been reported that stem-cell-derived exosomes are able to
perform significantly in skin cosmetology, specifically in promoting
wound healing, alleviating skin aging, and preventing scar formation. , For example, exosomes derived from induced pluripotent stem cells
are able to modulate the expression of MMP-1/3 and enhance the expression
of type I collagen in senescence skin fibroblasts. Exosomes from adipose stem cells were reported as able
to promote wound healing through the PI3K/Akt signaling route and
to increase the amount of collagen type I and type III in fibroblasts. A search in the CAS Content Collection revealed
a sharp growth in the number of documents related to applications
of exosomes in cosmetics in the last 3 years (Supporting Information Figure S4A).
Bioactive compounds—polyphenols,
vitamins, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and others—are common
food supplements aiming to elevate nutritional value. However, their
effect can be compromised by their poor bioavailability, limited water
solubility, and metabolic alterations; thus, they require carriers.
While extracellular vesicles and specifically their exosome subclass
have emerged demonstrating an impressive potential to realize efficient
delivery of bioactive compounds, they can successfully serve as carriers
of such food-related bioactive compounds, as well. Indeed, the interest
in applications of exosomes in food has rapidly grown in the recent
years (Supporting Information Figure S4B).
Recent studies verified isolation of exosomes from food
stuff such
as lemon, ginger, and milk. Such food-derived
exosomes can be uptaken in the intestine to act locally and can allegedly
play roles in alleviating diseases and especially in modulating gut
microbiota, yet the underlying mechanism is still unclear.

## Exosomes from Plant Cells
The existence of EVs in plants
has been long debated because of the existence of the cell wall. Growing
evidence implies however that plants also secrete EVs performing various
functions such as unconventional protein secretion, RNA transport,
and pathogen defense. 
It has been
hypothesized that edible structures within cells of plants such as
ginger, aloe, and others might have clinically valuable anti-inflammatory
effects on the intestinal lining of patients with inflammatory bowel
disease (clinical trial NCT04879810). Exosomes from ginger or aloe are being tested for the treatment
of polycystic ovary syndrome (NCT03493984). Grape exosomes are in a clinical trial as an anti-inflammatory agent
to decrease the frequency of oral mucositis following radiation and
chemotherapy treatment of head and neck tumors (NCT01668849). 

## Exosomal Drug/Biomarker in the Development Pipeline
Companies are working to progress exosome research from conception
to commercialization. To start, many companies are offering services
and products for exosomal research. Many other companies, medical
centers, universities, and research organizations are looking to utilize
exosomes for therapy and diagnostics to target diseases with high
unmet needs. Promising preclinical therapeutic and diagnostic exosome
research is explored in this section. Selected clinical trials utilizing
exosomes as therapeutics and diagnostics are also highlighted. Lastly,
clinical trials that research exosomes as the disease target are examined.

## Companies Offering Services and Products for Exosome Isolation,
Purification, Characterization, and Engineering
As exosome
research has grown dramatically within the past decade ( ), so have the number of companies
offering services and products for exosome isolation, purification,
characterization, and engineering for both therapy and diagnosis.
A selection of these companies is discussed along with their services
and products within .
 

## Therapeutic Exosome Companies
The number of companies
that are utilizing exosomes for therapy is also expanding. Both preclinical
and clinical works are progressing exosome therapeutics through companies’
pipelines. A thorough review of exosome therapeutic companies reveals
that the most highly represented diseases are cancer, neurological
and neurodegenerative diseases, lung diseases, and wound healing ( and Supporting Information Table S2).
 

## Preclinical Therapeutic Exosomes
A growing number of
companies are researching exosomes in hopes of advancing their therapeutic
discoveries to the clinic. While historically MSC-derived exosomes
were researched for therapy, a shift is taking place and companies
are starting to focus research effort on organ-specific exosomes such
as cardiac-derived exosomes or neural-derived exosomes for more targeted
specificity in treating diseases. displays selected preclinical companies
focusing their research efforts to the highly represented targeted
diseases from .
 

## Preclinical Diagnostic Exosomes
Companies, medical
centers, and universities are also focusing their research efforts
on discovering exosome biomarkers and representative tests for diagnosis
of hard-to-treat diseases earlier, to help aid in the treatment success
and patient survival. While cancer is the most highly represented
disease for diagnosis through exosomes (Supporting Information Table S2), many other diseases can be diagnosed
with exosome detection and organizations are working to develop these
appropriate assays ( ). Many universities are also hard at work researching exosome
disease diagnosis. explores promising preclinical companies, medical centers,
and universities researching exosome disease diagnosis. The current
field of exosome diagnostics and developed assays is still relatively
small with room to grow as more promising early disease biomarkers
are researched and discovered.
 

## Conclusions and Perspectives
As demonstrated by data
analysis of the CAS Content Collection,
the interest in exosome exploration has grown significantly in the
recent years. A growing number of studies provide valuable knowledge
regarding this notable subtype of EVs. Indeed, exosomes exhibit distinctive
functions as intercellular messengers, potential to modulate cellular
bioactivities, as well as substantial therapeutic capacity, in disease
diagnostics and targeted drug delivery. Their advantages over traditional
pharmaceutical nanocarriers distinguish them as a rising star in both
therapeutics and diagnostics. In this review, we provide a landscape
of the global research effort for exosome development for medical
applications, along with the challenges and growth opportunities for
fulfilling their potential.
Exosomes are released from most
cell types into the extracellular
space following fusion of multivesicular bodies with the cellular
membrane. , , , During the process of exosome secretion, parent cell
information is stored in the exosomes, in their constituent lipids,
proteins, and nucleic acids, which are then able to manipulate the
functions of recipient cells on arrival. The content of the exosomes
is therefore characteristic to the cell of origin, permitting parent
cell signals to be communicated to neighboring cells without direct
cell-to-cell contact. A foremost advantage over signaling molecule
secretions is that exosomes are able to deliver signals at large distances
without any dilution or degradation, because the biomolecules are
being safely transported within their lipid bilayer capsule.
With significant research being devoted to exosome medical applications—in
drug delivery, in diagnostics, as therapeutic targets, or as therapeutics
themselves—it is vital to review and recapitulate the progress
made, along with the persisting challenges. , , Although exosome analyses have intensely
evolved in the recent years, their exact mechanisms of biogenesis
and uptake are still largely unknown. Furthermore, the challenges
in efficient and successful exosome isolation are still persisting,
primarily due to the complexity of bodily fluids, the extensive overlap
of the physicochemical and biochemical characteristics among the exosomes,
lipoproteins, viruses, and other extracellular vesicles, as well as
the heterogeneity of exosomes. Thus, developing efficient and reliable
isolation and characterization techniques is critical to further advance
in this area, in order to examine the cargo contents and functions,
which would shed light on the biogenesis and uptake in return. Furthermore,
fundamental questions in the field such as the secretory regulation
mechanism of exosomes, the exosomal content sorting mechanism, and
their intercellular transduction pathway are still to be answered
too. To fully utilize the exosome potential, basic research and emerging
advanced technologies need to be combined, which will set forth their
therapeutic applications.
Clinical applications of exosomes,
although highly promising, are
hindered by the lack of standardization in exosome isolation and analysis,
which has become a major challenge in the field. The use of inconsistent protocols for sample handling,
analysis, and data control leads to discrepancy that significantly
affects analysis, makes interstudy comparisons difficult, and overall
complicates the knowledge development. Thus, standardization in exosome
preparation such as specimen handling, isolation, and quantification
still has to be established. , 
Thus, some appealing
challenges in exosome knowledge include the
following:
Potent isolation methods that do not compromise
on the purity of the isolated specimens are required in order to exploit
exosomes in biomedical research and therapeutics—such methods
are the primary prerequisite for exosomal large-scale application
in medical practice. Additionally, recent studies have shown that
an appropriate combination of several methods to extract and purify
exosomes can effectively contribute to solving this problem. , 
The exact mechanisms involved
in the biogenesis,
secretion, and fusion of exosomes have not yet been fully elucidated
and require further research. It is also mostly unknown whether incorporating
cargo into exosomes is a selective or a random process, although data
is accumulating that suggests a certain degree of cellular control.
The underlying mechanism of how exosomes
communicate
with the target cells and how selectivity is achieved is not yet well
understood. Advanced knowledge on these processes is a prerequisite
to develop effective therapeutics that target exosome communication
and for the development of engineered exosome-derived therapeutic
vehicles.
Exosome loading capacity and methods for
enhancing their targeting need to be optimized and improved
for their large-scale application in clinic.
Studies have demonstrated that exosomes are able to permeate
the BBB from the brain to the bloodstream as well
as from the blood to the CNS; however, only limited knowledge exists
about the mechanisms exosomes use to cross the BBB. , Understanding of the surface markers required to cross the barriers
protecting the brain and the ones needed to target the cells or tissues
responsible for a pathology is needed in order to make use of this
notable ability of exosomes. 
Standardization of exosome
preparation,
including source selection, isolation, characterization, drug loading,
stability, targeting, and quality control, in compliance with good
manufacturing practice, is an important aspect in the clinical application
of exosomes and needs to be advanced. There is thus an urgent need
to develop guidelines for manufacturing, storage, and administration
of therapeutically relevant exosomes, with respect to safety and quality
GMP standards to be followed.
The prospective
use of exosomes as a delivery vector
needs further deep assessment. The tractability of the exosomes needs
to be improved, and the possibility to package multiple drugs for
combination (immuno)therapy needs to be explored. With personalized
medicine models emerging and being advanced, it is important to assess
the potential for developing personalized approaches for delivering
therapeutically relevant exosomes.
Advanced
knowledge on the pharmacokinetic profile and biodistribution of exosomes is still particularly
insufficient and is a required step toward their practical utility
in clinics.
The nature of the cargo in
exosomes soundly depends
on the origin of the cells where the exosomes are released. It is
thus important to know how the cargo is packed in exosomes, since
cancer cells are known for their heterogeneity and the nature of cargo
from each cancer cell will be distinctive. Such knowledge would advance
designing strategies for early diagnosis and monitoring treatment
response by using exosomes. 
Cells modulate the composition of exosomes
in response
to exogenous stress. Understanding the mechanisms involved might result
in the development of therapeutics that take advantage of this property.
An emerging area of exosome research currently
gaining
considerable attention is their potential application in cancer immunotherapy,
in particular developing anticancer vaccines. Various cells such as
B-cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, cancer cells, and normal cells
have been employed for isolating exosomes as possible agents in cancer
immunotherapy. These cells all exhibit characteristic composition
profiles directly involved in anticancer immunotherapy.
Since exosomes represent an advanced potential treatment
strategy
in a wide range of therapeutic areas, possibly as cell-free regenerative
medicines, as treatments for cardiovascular, CNS, and oncological
disorders, as vectors for gene therapy, as immune modulators, and
as drug delivery vehicles, their innovation and range of uses means
that there will be specific regulatory classification and jurisdiction
issues to be clarified to enable development plans to be established.
In recent years, concurrent advances have been witnessed in the exosome
expertise for next-generation diagnostics, disease supervision, and
individualized diagnosis and therapy. These are widely applied for
early diagnosis and delivery systems with high efficacy. Further advances
in the drug loading strategies and modification methods will enable
clinical translation in the future, with a tangible patient benefit.

## Glossary

## Vocabulary
extracellular vesicleslipid-bilayer-surrounded
particles, which are secreted by cells into the extracellular space;
they represent a route of intercellular communication and contribute
to a wide range of physiological and pathological processes
exosomesa nanosized subset
of extracellular
vesicles (diameter ∼30–150 nm) comprising bioactive
cargos, including proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and metabolites
biomarkerindicator
of normal or pathogenic
biological processes, or pharmacological responses to a therapeutic
intervention, which can be measured objectively, accurately, and reproducibly
drug targetingdelivering
medication
to a patient in a manner that results in predominant drug accumulation
in a specific body area (organ, cellular, and subcellular level of
specific tissue) in order to overcome the toxic effect of conventional
drug delivery
blood–brain
barrierhighly selective
boundary of endothelial cells that prevents solutes in the circulating
blood from non-selectively crossing into the extracellular fluid of
the central nervous system

## Appendix: Exosomes in Clinical Trials

## Exosome Therapeutics in Clinical Trials
Currently,
the total number of clinical trials registered at https://clinicaltrials.gov for exosomal therapeutics is 59 clinical trials (Supporting Information Table S2). The most highly researched
targeted diseases for exosome therapeutics include lung disease (11
clinical trials), SARS-CoV-2 infections (9 clinical trials), and cancer,
heart disease, and neurological diseases (all with 4 clinical trials).
Highlighted clinical trials with respect to these diseases are listed
in .
 

## Exosome Diagnostics in Clinical Trials
Currently on https://clinicaltrials.gov, there is a total of 208 clinical trials with exosomes being used
for diagnosis (Supporting Information Table S2). Over half of these clinical trials (108 clinical trials) are related
to cancer diagnosis utilizing exosomes. Other highly represented diseases
include neurological diseases (15 clinical trials), cardiovascular
diseases (13 clinical trials), and lung diseases (6 clinical trials).
Early diagnosis of these diseases is crucial for better prognosis.
The large number of clinical trials of exosomes in diagnosis highlighted
the value and advantage of using exosomes in early disease diagnosis. highlights the
companies, medical centers, and universities related to exosome diagnosis
of these diseases.
 

## Exosomes as the Disease Target in Clinical Trials
Using
exosomes as targets is another avenue that is being explored for disease
treatment. Aetholon Medical is a California-based clinical company
that has designed an investigational medical device called the Hemopurifier.
Targeting circulating exosomes, the Hemopurifier captures viral and
bacterial toxins and cancer exosomes to treat disease. To date, Aetholon
has used the Hemopurifer to treat patients with ebola, hepatitis C,
HIV, and COVID-19. Their two current
clinical trials are explored in .
 

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.2c08774.
Table S1, exemplary small molecule drugs
delivered by exosomes; Figure S1, classes of substances
represented in the documents related to exosome applications in therapy
and diagnostics as found in the CAS Content Collection; Figure
S2, percentages of documents concerning the major tetraspanin
classes in the documents related to exosome applications in therapy
and diagnostics, along with role indicators for the top three tetraspanin
classes; Figure S3, number of documents related to exosome
applications in therapy and diagnostics, in which various kinds of
cells have been used as exosome donors; Figure S4, annual
trend of the number of documents in the CAS Content Collection related
to the exosome applications in cosmetics and food (PDF)
Table S2, therapeutic
and diagnostic exosome
clinical trials (XLSX)

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
nn2c08774_si_001.pdf
nn2c08774_si_002.xlsx

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
nn2c08774_si_001.pdf
nn2c08774_si_002.xlsx