822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC9951229995122999512293670152810.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00534Spin Hyperpolarization
in Modern Magnetic Resonance
EillsJames BudkerDmitry CavagneroSilvia ChekmenevEduard Y ElliottStuart J JanninSami LesageAnne MatysikJörg MeersmannThomas PrisnerThomas ReimerJeffrey A YangHanming KoptyugIgor V †Institute
for Bioengineering of Catalonia, Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, 08028Barcelona, Spain‡Johannes
Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, 55128Mainz, Germany§Helmholtz-Institut,
GSI Helmholtzzentrum für Schwerionenforschung, 55128Mainz, Germany⊥Department
of Physics, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California94720, United States∥Department
of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Madison, Wisconsin53706, United States¶Department
of Chemistry, Integrative Biosciences (IBio), Karmanos Cancer Institute
(KCI), Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan48202, United States#Russian
Academy of Sciences, Moscow119991, Russia⊗Molecular
Sciences Research Hub, Imperial College
London, LondonW12 0BZ, United Kingdom∇Centre
de RMN à Hauts Champs de Lyon, Université
de Lyon, CNRS, ENS Lyon, Université Lyon 1, 69100Villeurbanne, France○Institut
für Analytische Chemie, Universität
Leipzig, Linnéstr. 3, 04103Leipzig, Germany●Sir
Peter Mansfield Imaging Centre, University Park, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, NottinghamNG7 2RD, United Kingdom▼Institute
of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry and Center of Biomolecular Magnetic
Resonance, Goethe University Frankfurt, , 60438Frankfurt
am Main, Germany□Department
of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, UC Berkeley, and Materials Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, California94720, United States■International Tomography Center, Siberian
Branch of the Russian Academy
of Sciences, 630090Novosibirsk, Russia*Email: jeills@ibecbarcelona.eu.
*Email: koptyug@tomo.nsc.ru.
2612023123414171417–15512522023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Magnetic resonance techniques are successfully utilized
in a broad
range of scientific disciplines and in various practical applications,
with medical magnetic resonance imaging being the most widely known
example. Currently, both fundamental and applied magnetic resonance
are enjoying a major boost owing to the rapidly developing field of
spin hyperpolarization. Hyperpolarization techniques are able to enhance
signal intensities in magnetic resonance by several orders of magnitude,
and thus to largely overcome its major disadvantage of relatively
low sensitivity. This provides new impetus for existing applications
of magnetic resonance and opens the gates to exciting new possibilities.
In this review, we provide a unified picture of the many methods and
techniques that fall under the umbrella term “hyperpolarization”
but are currently seldom perceived as integral parts of the same field.
Specifically, before delving into the individual techniques, we provide
a detailed analysis of the underlying principles of spin hyperpolarization.
We attempt to uncover and classify the origins of hyperpolarization,
to establish its sources and the specific mechanisms that enable the
flow of polarization from a source to the target spins. We then give
a more detailed analysis of individual hyperpolarization techniques:
the mechanisms by which they work, fundamental and technical requirements,
characteristic applications, unresolved issues, and possible future
directions. We are seeing a continuous growth of activity in the field
of spin hyperpolarization, and we expect the field to flourish as
new and improved hyperpolarization techniques are implemented. Some
key areas for development are in prolonging polarization lifetimes,
making hyperpolarization techniques more generally applicable to chemical/biological
systems, reducing the technical and equipment requirements, and creating
more efficient excitation and detection schemes. We hope this review
will facilitate the sharing of knowledge between subfields within
the broad topic of hyperpolarization, to help overcome existing challenges
in magnetic resonance and enable novel applications.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jul 30; Collection date 2023 Feb 22.

1.

## Introduction
Nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), and other magnetic
resonance (MR) techniques address the interactions of nuclear or electron
spins with their surroundings and thus provide rich spectroscopic
information. The quantitative, real-time information that can be extracted
has proven invaluable for many applications ranging from medical imaging
to solid materials analysis, from protein structure elucidation to
industrial process monitoring, and many others. The fields of physics,
chemistry, structural biology, and medicine all bear Nobel Prizes
owing to the design and application of NMR and MRI methods (see the Supporting Information for abbreviations and
notation for this paper).
Past and present advances in NMR spectroscopy
and imaging have
had an impact on virtually every field of science and engineering.
What makes NMR and related techniques so uniquely powerful is the
long times for which nuclear spins produce coherent observable signals
after they are excited. By observing the nuclear spins for time scales
of seconds or tens of seconds, the spectral resolution that can be
obtained is often on the order of hertz or better. Not only does this
enable the extraction of spectral fingerprints at high resolution,
but it also provides access to processes including translational and
rotational diffusion, slow molecular motion, and chemical or physical
transformations taking place over relatively long time scales. This
advantage arises mostly from the weak interaction of nuclear spins
with their surroundings. The magnetic dipole moments of nonzero-spin
nuclei are quite small (e.g., compared to that of an electron); hence
the molecular processes that couple to the spins to drive relaxation
of NMR signals are correspondingly weak.
Unfortunately, the
small interaction energies pose a significant
drawback: the signals attainable in NMR experiments are notoriously
weak. Many other spectroscopic methods involve the interaction of
matter with electromagnetic radiation, but the observed transitions
might correspond to electronic, vibrational, or rotational degrees
of freedom, which are all associated with greater energy than nuclear
spin flips. The higher-energy electromagnetic radiation absorbed/emitted
by samples probed by spectroscopies such as ultraviolet–visible
(UV–vis), Raman, infrared (IR), or microwave (MW), can be detected
with orders of magnitude greater sensitivity than the radiofrequency
signals produced by nuclear spins in an NMR experiment. The weak interaction
of magnetic nuclei with oscillating and static magnetic fields limits
the sensitivity in NMR experiments in more than one distinct way,
as briefly outlined below.
To illustrate the underlying concepts
in relatively simple terms,
let us consider an ensemble of nuclei with a nonzero spin. The interaction
of the spins with an applied static magnetic field gives rise to the
nuclear magnetization of the object ( ), which is inevitably rather small because
of the aforementioned weakness of the interaction. Essentially, the
magnetic field tends to orient nuclear spins along one direction but
fails to efficiently compete with thermal randomization of spin orientation.
As a result, the orientational preference of spins in a magnetic field
is rather weak.
 In somewhat more quantitative terms, the degree
of spin orientation
can be characterized by spin polarization. For an ensemble of isolated
spin-1/2 species with a gyromagnetic ratio γ in a static magnetic
field, the definition of polarization, p, is relatively
straightforward:
1 where ni is the number of species in state i; the
states α and β are Zeeman states of the spins that correspond
to orientation along or against the external magnetic field ( a), and sgn(γ)
is the sign (+1 or −1) of the gyromagnetic ratio. The intensity
of a signal in an NMR spectrum is directly proportional to the polarization
of nuclear spins in an object.
 Polarization of a thermally equilibrated spin system, ptherm, depends on the strength of the applied
magnetic
field, the temperature, and the gyromagnetic ratio of the nuclei,
γn. At ambient temperatures, the spin polarization
of a sample at thermal equilibrium in the magnets of modern NMR instruments
is on the order of 10–4 to 10–5 for 1H nuclei (and even lower for other nuclei with smaller
γn). The spins in α and β states give
opposed contributions to an NMR signal, which means that effectively
only one in every 10,000–100,000 spins contributes to the observable
signal ( b).
Note that the factor sgn(γ) in ensures that ptherm is
always positive, both for species with a positive γ (e.g., 1H, 13C, etc.; nα > nβ) and for those with a
negative
γ (e.g., e–, 15N, etc.; nα < nβ).
Low spin polarization levels lead to low signal intensities
in
NMR, and thus to a low sensitivity achievable in the experiments.
The low sensitivity precludes the exploitation of magnetic-resonance-based
techniques for many applications, such as rapid analytical NMR for
use in combinatorial synthesis and screening, chemical and pathogen
detection, portable NMR and MRI for in-field use for chemical sensing
or emergency medical diagnosis, and localized in vivo spectroscopic
studies of targeted tissues. In each of these cases, the limiting
factor is the limited amount or concentration of a substance available
to probe, the short time scale for which the sample observation is
feasible, and/or the impossibility to use a large and delicate superconducting
magnet to induce sufficient polarization. Particularly demanding in
terms of sensitivity are the modalities of magnetic resonance requiring
spatial resolution, such as MRI and in vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS). The volume element (voxel) that gives rise to a localized NMR
spectrum or to an image pixel in MRI usually represents a tiny fraction
of an entire sample/object. In such experiments, a 2-fold isotropic
improvement in spatial resolution in all three dimensions decreases
the voxel volume 8-fold and thus decreases the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) in the spectrum or image by almost an order of magnitude.
Significant improvements in sensitivity of NMR-based techniques
can thus largely facilitate the implementation of a broad range of
novel and advanced applications. Numerous strategies to improve the
SNR in magnetic resonance are known and are being explored and exploited,
from the implementation of pulsed Fourier-transform NMR with its multiplex
advantage enabling faster signal averaging, to the introduction of
more efficient inductive detectors, detector miniaturization, noise
reduction through the use of cryoprobes and cryogenically cooled signal
preamplifiers, to name a few. These technological advances are important,
but subsequent progress in this direction is challenging and is likely
to be incremental, so that further significant SNR improvements call
for different solutions. Another general strategy is to increase the
commonly low equilibrium spin polarization by either cooling a sample
or placing it in a stronger magnetic field. Both approaches result
in a larger sample magnetization and thus provide stronger NMR signals.
However, significant sample cooling is not always suitable, while
designing NMR magnets with ever-increasing field strength is a slow,
technologically challenging, and costly trajectory. 
As an alternative to increasing the intrinsically
low polarization
levels at thermal equilibrium, it is possible to enhance nuclear spin
polarization by forcing the spin system into a nonequilibrium state;
this phenomenon is known as hyperpolarization. There are a plethora
of techniques through which spins can be hyperpolarized far beyond
the thermal equilibrium state, and some of them can deliver spin polarization p approaching unity. Given that the typical thermal equilibrium
polarization levels for nuclear spins do not exceed 10–4–10–5, achieving phyp ∼ 1 corresponds to signal enhancements of 4–5
orders of magnitude or more ( c). For all practical purposes, the signal enhancement
can be defined as
2 where I and I0 are the intensities
of the signal acquired for a hyperpolarized and thermally polarized
spin system, respectively, but under otherwise identical experimental
conditions. In the case of spin-1/2 species, signal intensity I is
directly proportional to polarization p, so that
I/I0 = phyp/ptherm, but we use as a more general definition of NMR signal enhancement.
Signal enhancements of several orders of magnitude significantly
widen the scope of applications of NMR and MRI, even on high-field
instruments traditionally associated with a higher SNR and spectral
resolution. In addition, there is a more recent yet powerful trend
in magnetic resonance: the development of instrumentation and applications
in low, ultralow, and even zero magnetic fields. , One
major incentive behind this line of research is the practical utility
of having a compact instrument under a fume hood, or a mobile device
that can be brought to an object or living organism under study. However,
there are also more fundamental reasons for employing near-zero magnetic
fields since certain studies are not feasible with modern high-field
NMR instruments. Some prominent examples include NMR spectroscopy
with ultrahigh spectral resolution not compromised by magnetic field
inhomogeneity, , monitoring of chemical reactions
in metal containers, and exploration of
the complete (untruncated) molecular spin Hamiltonian. Clearly, for magnetic resonance at low and ultralow magnetic
fields, the advantages of spin hyperpolarization are even more dramatic
due to a much larger difference in polarization between thermally
equilibrated and hyperpolarized states, compared to high fields.
The central focus of this review is the description of hyperpolarization
techniques that enhance spin polarization to overcome the sensitivity
limitations of magnetic resonance and its applications. Recent years
have witnessed an explosive growth in the number of available hyperpolarization
techniques and approaches, in the scope of the emerging applications
ranging from materials science to physics, chemistry, biology, medicine,
and beyond, and in the number of research groups involved in such
studies. With so many recent developments in this research area, it
is often hard even for established researchers to navigate the emerging
literature, let alone younger scientists and students. Moreover, while
a substantial number of reviews on the subject have appeared over
the years, the majority of them only cover one or a few individual
techniques, either closely interrelated or considered most important
and/or advanced. As a result, it may be difficult to evaluate common
features, challenges, and potential solutions of existing hyperpolarization
approaches. In this review, we attempt to consider the multitude of
currently known hyperpolarization techniques together, in a single
treatise, aiming to provide a clear unified picture of the entire
field of hyperpolarization in magnetic resonance.
In we
discuss in detail the underlying principles, sources, and transfer
mechanisms of hyperpolarization. This way we strive to enhance the
cross-fertilization between different hyperpolarization techniques,
to stimulate creative thinking that will eventually lead to novel
hyperpolarization approaches and techniques, and to help systematically
consider the common problems and bottlenecks that are often similar
across the field of hyperpolarized magnetic resonance. This approach
is also expected to provide a different view of the current and emerging
advanced applications of hyperpolarization techniques and the problems
that they can address. The individual techniques are then discussed
in , with
appropriate references for the in-depth technical details provided.
Their relevant and illustrative applications are highlighted, which
mostly cover chemistry and materials science, with a few examples
from biomedicine.
In addition to the low polarization of an
ensemble of nuclear spins,
there are other adverse consequences of the weakness of their interactions
with magnetic fields. The coupling of spins to any detector is inevitably
weak as it is characterized by the corresponding magnetic moment which,
for a given spin polarization p, is proportional
to the gyromagnetic ratio of the spins. Furthermore, in the case of
coil- and resonator-based inductive NMR detectors which are used in
the majority of NMR and MRI probes, the detection sensitivity scales
linearly with the frequency at which the spins precess in a magnetic
field (i.e., the frequencies of the NMR transitions). These frequencies
are relatively low, limiting the efficacy of inductive detection.
Major efforts are currently devoted to the development of alternative
sensors able to significantly outperform traditional inductive detectors
in terms of NMR detection sensitivity. Since advanced and emerging
NMR techniques involving novel sensors often utilize spin hyperpolarization,
the efforts to improve detection sensitivity will also be addressed
to some extent. The field of spin-based electronics (spintronics),
which relies on the changes in spin states for information processing
(e.g., data storage and manipulation), will be mentioned only inasmuch
as the spin polarization processes in solid materials are concerned.
The production of nonequilibrium and entangled spin states based on
the principles of spin hyperpolarization will, without doubt, have
a major impact on the development of spintronics, quantum computing,
and related fields. Finally, a major application of hyperpolarization
to nuclear targets for particle-accelerator
experiments is briefly mentioned in this review.
The number
of papers on hyperpolarization published annually is
currently experiencing an exponential growth, with more than 6,400
studies published before 2023 according to Web of Science. In this
review, we focus on work published in the last 10–15 years,
yet key earlier publications introducing important concepts and experimental
developments are included to provide a more complete picture of the
field.

2.

## SPIN HYPERPOLARIZATION - PRINCIPLES, SOURCES,
AND SOURCE-TO-TARGET TRANSFER MECHANISMS
2.1.

## What Is Spin Hyperpolarization?
One
of the key reasons for preparing a spin system in a hyperpolarized
state is to have a higher SNR in spectroscopic or imaging applications.
The goal here would be to achieve the signals in a magnetic resonance
experiment that are significantly stronger than those available under
thermal equilibrium conditions. With that in mind, for the purpose
of this review we qualitatively define a hyperpolarized system of
nuclear spins as a nuclear spin system that is not at thermal
equilibrium, which can give rise to a useful enhancement of signals
in an NMR experiment.
We realize that definition of
a “useful” enhancement, and thus a delineation between
a hyperpolarized and a nonhyperpolarized system, can be subjective
and may need further elaboration. For the simple case of an ensemble
of spin-1/2 nuclei considered above, a reasonable requirement would
be that the achieved increase in polarization, |phyp| – ptherm, is larger than ptherm, where ptherm is the polarization p of spins under thermal equilibrium (ptherm > 0, see ), and phyp is that of the hyperpolarized
spin state. In other words, hyperpolarization should at least double
the NMR signal compared to thermal equilibrium. In SNR-limited acquisitions,
this would reduce the experiment duration by 4-fold, which is certainly
useful. At the same time, an exact quantitative definition of phyp is not of paramount importance as the whole
idea behind hyperpolarization is to deliver signal enhancements that
are large enough to be useful in a magnetic resonance experiment,
and preferably, enhancements by several orders of magnitude.
It is important to note that the considerations presented above
apply only to an ensemble of isolated spin-1/2 nuclei; in cases involving
coupled spin systems, nuclei with spin I > 1/2,
or
systems that evolve under environmental changes, varying spin dynamics,
or chemical interactions, it is more difficult to define polarization.
Often the terms polarization and magnetization are used interchangeably.
This is notably the case for isolated spin-1/2 nuclei, for which Zeeman
order (i.e., polarization) always corresponds to magnetization. However,
only rank-1 polarization moments correspond to magnetization, whereas
nuclei with spin >1/2 or coupled spin systems support higher-order
polarization moments. For instance, for nuclei with spin I = 1 such as 14N, which have three energy sublevels, an
overpopulation of the middle sublevel is not associated with any spin
magnetization, and yet such a spin state can result in a major NMR
signal enhancement.
Here, we briefly dwell further on the definition
of polarization
in more technical terms. Polarization is closely linked to the concept
of “spin order”, and we define a system as polarized
if the density operator that describes the state of the spin system
is anisotropic, i.e., it varies upon rotation of the reference coordinate
frame. The degree of polarization depends on the degree of anisotropy.
“Spin order” is commonly used as a qualitative term,
but represents a quantity related to the entropy of the spin system;
it is zero when entropy is maximized, and tends to unity when the
system is in a pure quantum state. , There are specific
types of spin order that are commonly encountered such as Zeeman order
and dipolar order; Zeeman order represents the degree of polarization
of the spins along the applied external magnetic field, while dipolar
order describes the degree of polarization of the spins with the magnetic
fields generated by neighboring spins. An interested reader can find
an in-depth discussion of this matter elsewhere. 
Hyperpolarization has been around since the dawn
of NMR, and since
that time has found an ever-widening range of applications. Hyperpolarization
techniques range from simple to sophisticated ones. A spin system
can be hyperpolarized, for example, by allowing the sample to reach
thermal equilibrium at a given magnetic field, followed by suddenly
reducing the strength of the field to the value at which an actual
NMR experiment is performed. Until the nuclear spins have relaxed
to their new thermal equilibrium state, the polarization exceeds that
at thermal equilibrium, and the spins in the sample can remain hyperpolarized.
This sample “prepolarization approach” is particularly
useful for NMR at zero and ultralow magnetic fields where equilibrium
spin polarizations and the resulting NMR signal intensities are essentially
negligible.
The strength of the interaction of spins with a
static magnetic
field is proportional to the gyromagnetic ratio (γn) of a nucleus, and the same applies to ptherm. For instance, γ(1H)/γ(13C) ≈
3.976, so that ptherm(1H) is
ca. 4-fold larger than ptherm(13C). This difference in polarization between nuclear spins of different
isotopic species means that in many cases there is an internal source
of hyperpolarization in a system. If spin state populations are redistributed
among spin sublevels in such a way as to enhance the signal-to-noise
ratio for the transition between a particular pair of sublevels, this would be one more example of hyperpolarization.
Interestingly, this encompasses many routine NMR experiments in which
signals of low-sensitivity low-γ nuclei (e.g., 13C, 14N, etc.) are enhanced by transferring polarization
from a coupled nucleus with higher initial polarization, often a proton.
For instance, in a 13C{1H} NMR experiment performed
on a liquid with proton decoupling (either gated or not) by continuously
irradiating the 1H spins with a radiofrequency magnetic
field, such polarization transfer is induced by cross-relaxation processes,
with 13C NMR signal enhancement of up to a theoretical
maximum of I/I0 = 1 + 0.5γ(1H)/γ(13C) ≈ 3. There are also
techniques that do not rely on relaxation processes for efficient
manipulation of polarization. Such polarization transfer is ubiquitous
in solid-state NMR, including nuclear
quadrupole resonance (NQR), where cross-polarization
(CP) from protons is used to enhance signals of lower-γ nuclei.
In NMR of quadrupolar nuclei with half-integer spin in solids, the
central transition in the NMR spectrum can be enhanced by selective
population inversion of the sublevels corresponding to the satellite
transitions. Examples from solution-state NMR include INEPT (insensitive
nuclei enhanced by polarization transfer) and DEPT (distortionless
enhancement by polarization transfer) and similar sequences. 
The polarization transfer schemes listed
above are quite illustrative
and useful in practice, but the signal enhancements they provide are
limited to a value comparable to the ratio of the γn values of the involved nuclei. (At the same time, we note that for
polarization transfer between concentrated and dilute spins, the possibility
to achieve higher polarization gains has been discussed in the literature. ) Fortunately, diverse hyperpolarization techniques
capable of providing dramatically larger sensitivity improvements
are currently available. Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) replies
on electron–nuclear polarization transfer, to utilize the significantly
higher polarization of electron spins. It is used, often in combination
with magic angle spinning (MAS), to probe protein structure and dynamics,
as well as to study biological assemblies such as membrane proteins,
ribosomes and viral capsids. , DNP is also employed
to enhance signals for surface characterization, a method known as
dynamic nuclear polarization surface-enhanced NMR spectroscopy (DNP
SENS), to investigate hybrid materials, organometallic surface species,
and metal–organic frameworks. Yet
another DNP technique known as dissolution DNP (dDNP) has been used to study protein structure and interactions in
the solution state, for real-time monitoring of rapid chemical processes,
and for producing hyperpolarized biomolecules for in vivo imaging. − Human lung imaging has been performed using inhaled noble gases
(e.g., 129Xe and 3He) hyperpolarized via optical
pumping. Metabolites have also been hyperpolarized
for preclinical biomedical imaging using parahydrogen-induced polarization
(PHIP), , a technique based on the use of H2 in its singlet nuclear spin state which is called parahydrogen.
In addition, PHIP has been employed to determine hydrogenation reaction
mechanisms of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic processes. The scope of molecules
that can be polarized using parahydrogen is further broadened by the
technique known as signal amplification by reversible exchange (SABRE). A hyperpolarization technique that has been
used to extract information on reaction mechanisms involving free
radicals is chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization (CIDNP).
The photochemically triggered version of this method (photo-CIDNP)
is also employed to characterize the surface structure of peptides
and proteins by hyperpolarizing amino acid residues. , These and other powerful hyperpolarization techniques are presented
in greater detail in subsequent sections of this review. Hyperpolarization
techniques have also been used for applications beyond chemistry and
biology, such as spin-polarized targets for solid-state physics and
particle accelerator experiments. , , Exciting possibilities such as nuclear spintronics and searching for exotic spin-dependent interactions are on the horizon.
The advantages of
spin hyperpolarization for achieving dramatic
signal enhancement in magnetic resonance are vast and impressive;
however, utilization of hyperpolarized spin systems in magnetic resonance
experiments presents a number of challenges as well. The biggest limitation
in the use of hyperpolarization is in its inherently transient nature:
once a hyperpolarized state is produced it begins to decay due to
spin relaxation. The entropy increase over time drives the highly
ordered system back toward its more disordered thermal equilibrium
state. The time scale of this process can vary greatly and depends
on many factors such as the type of nuclei, temperature, the state
of matter, molecular structure, magnetic field, etc. The topic of
nuclear spin relaxation is covered in much greater detail elsewhere. − When we speak about nuclear spin relaxation, more often than not
we refer to the spin–lattice relaxation time constant, T1n, or the time constant describing the loss
of signal after radiofrequency (RF) excitation, T2n or T2n* (the true relaxation
rate of an ensemble of spins, and the observed relaxation rate caused
by a distribution of magnetic fields experienced by the spins), although
coupled spins can support states with vastly different relaxation
times. Usually high-spin-order states of many correlated spins have
reduced relaxation times, since the relaxation rates of the individual
spins contribute to the overall state relaxation, but this is not always the case.
In highly symmetric
molecules, specific configurations of nuclear
spins can support long-lived spin states (LLSSs) which are immune
to certain relaxation mechanisms, and can have relaxation times that
greatly exceed T1n. , There are many examples of LLSSs in coupled spins systems, and understanding
the molecular symmetry is crucial to predicting them. Not only do LLSSs provide a means by which spin polarization
can be stored for times longer than T1n, , but, as discussed in , for some hyperpolarization
techniques they are a crucial and necessary consequence of the hyperpolarization
process. One rather remarkable example of a LLSS is associated with
molecular hydrogen, H2. Its pair of coupled 1H spin-1/2 nuclei give rise to four eigenstates of the nuclear spin
wave function: one singlet (I = 0) and three triplet
(I = 1) spin states. An entire subfield of hyperpolarization
experiments relies on enriching and utilizing parahydrogen. This state
of enriched singlet order and depleted triplet order, known as a singlet–triplet
imbalance, is a highly nonequilibrium spin state. The spin state of
parahydrogen is a long-lived spin state which is immune to the key
intrapair relaxation mechanisms (dipole–dipole, chemical shift
anisotropy, and spin rotation). Parahydrogen is thus stable in the
gas phase for long times (from hours to weeks and possibly longer,
depending on conditions ) and is a very
versatile source of hyperpolarization ( ). However, it cannot provide signal enhancement
in an NMR experiment without additional chemical manipulations. Therefore,
unlike LLSS of molecules with an imperfect symmetry, the I = 0 singlet spin state of parahydrogen is not itself hyperpolarized
according to our definition of hyperpolarization as it cannot give
rise to NMR signals without first breaking the equivalence of its
two protons, and it cannot be used for temporarily and reversibly
storing hyperpolarization in an NMR experiment.
It is evident
that an intrinsically transient hyperpolarized spin
state can be useful only while it lasts. Therefore, prolonging the
lifetime of hyperpolarization and its efficient utilization within
the available time window are the issues of paramount importance in
this context. The impact of relaxation on hyperpolarization-enhanced
NMR can be considered in three distinct stages of the experiment:
(1)Preparation –
Many hyperpolarization procedures are designed to avoid relaxation
of the sample competing with the polarization process, which otherwise
would limit the final polarization. However, this is not always the
case–some hyperpolarization methods rely on establishing thermal
equilibrium under conditions that give high nuclear spin polarization
(i.e., low temperature and high magnetic field), and in these cases
it is beneficial to enhance the rate of relaxation during the hyperpolarization
process to make polarization buildup faster.
(2)Modification –
Once created, the transient nature of the polarization limits our
ability to carry out procedures such as transporting the samples to
a different location, chemically modifying the sample, or purifying
the samples, for instance, for use in a biological system. Therefore,
sufficiently rapid procedures must be developed and implemented, and
this represents a significant portion of ongoing research in the field.
(3)Utilization –
In applications one cannot study processes or dynamics with time scales
much greater than the time scale on which relaxation occurs, unless
the sample can be repolarized or fresh hyperpolarized material supplied
to the system repeatedly or continuously.
One focus of this review is on the measures that have
been taken
to circumvent the challenges presented by the transient nature of
spin hyperpolarization. Examples include generating hyperpolarization
in situ (i.e., at the point of detection) to avoid relaxation losses
during transport, , choosing/changing the state of
matter to take advantage of slower relaxation, for example, in cryogenically
cooled solids, , transferring the hyperpolarization
to slower-relaxing lower-γ nuclei with the possibility to transfer
back to a high-γ nucleus for a more sensitive readout, , and temporarily storing hyperpolarization in long-lived spin states. , − 
Once at the point of detection, more tricks
can be played to extend
the time for which the hyperpolarized sample produces observable signals,
or to extract the maximum information possible within the short time
period. It is common to use a number of small and/or variable flip-angle
RF pulses to only slightly deplete the hyperpolarized state for observation
by each individual pulse without completely destroying it. One can also use flip-back pulses to return
the magnetization to be along the field axis between scans so that
it relaxes with the longitudinal relaxation time T1n rather than T2n*. , Another strategy for hyperpolarized samples which undergo chemical
conversion or exchange between pools is frequency-selective excitation
of one component to maximize signal without perturbing other components. Ultrafast acquisition methods have been introduced
to allow two-dimensional NMR spectra to be obtained with hyperpolarized
samples. , There is also a great wealth of advanced
imaging strategies to extract the maximum amount of information from
hyperpolarized samples before the signal is lost, which are covered
in greater detail elsewhere. 

2.2.

## Sources of Hyperpolarization
Most
hyperpolarization techniques that have been demonstrated to date rely
on a polarization source that can act as a reservoir of low entropy
with which the nuclear spins can exchange energy to lower the nuclear
spin temperature. The common sources of polarization ( ) are the internal degrees
of freedom in molecules and materials such as rotational, vibrational,
electronic, or nuclear spin states. These sources can be replenished
directly by establishing thermal equilibrium characterized by Boltzmann
statistics under the experimental conditions, by thermally induced
or photoinduced processes in molecular species or materials, or by
literally sorting the species in different spin states by chemical
reactions or physical interactions. Another powerful source of hyperpolarization
is provided by circularly polarized photons which can induce electronic transitions that lead to electron or
nuclear spin polarization upon light absorption.
 The polarization sources directly couple to the
target nuclear
spins, yet in some cases polarization is passed sequentially via one
or even several intermediate sources until it reaches the target spins.
The exchange of entropic energy, and hence polarization transfer,
is mediated by these couplings. For prepolarization of nuclear spins
under high B0/T conditions
(where B0 is the magnetic field and T is temperature), the spins are coupled to the thermal
bath through the interaction with local magnetic fields. When electron
spins are the polarization source, the coupling to nuclei is via the
hyperfine interaction, either dipole–dipole or Fermi contact.
When other nuclear spins are the polarization source, the coupling
is via dipole–dipole or scalar (J) couplings. Quantum-rotor-induced
polarization and hyperpolarization processes involving nuclear spin
isomers of molecules (NSIM) are based on the coupling of nuclear spin
states to rotational states due to the Pauli exclusion principle.
Different mechanisms can be used to allow the polarization transfer
between the source and the target nuclei. Incoherent (i.e., stochastically
fluctuating) processes can lead to polarization exchange between the
source and the target nuclei, such as relaxation and cross-relaxation
of spins. Alternatively, this can be done coherently (i.e., in a controlled
manner) by adiabatically exchanging spin-state populations via irradiating
the sample with a microwave/radiofrequency field or bringing it to
a relatively low magnetic field in which spins become strongly coupled. Other methods include spin-selective chemical
reactions, reactions/interactions that break the symmetry of an otherwise
unobservable spin state, and collisional polarization transfer by
spin exchange. Polarization transfer can also be mediated, due to
angular momentum conservation, upon absorption of polarized photons
and upon interaction between spins and chiral environments.
These concepts are illustrated in that shows the polarization sources, coupling
type, and polarization transfer mechanisms, and links these to specific
hyperpolarization techniques. While this picture is useful, it is
not possible to make it exhaustive and to reflect every possible scenario.
One of the exceptions not included in the figure is algorithmic cooling, which makes use of tailored polarization transfer
schemes between nuclear spin states with different relaxation times
to achieve p > ptherm. Another example is enrichment of nuclear spin isomers of symmetric
molecules through NSIM-dependent physicochemical interactions such
as light-induced drift, adsorption onto surfaces, exchange reactions,
selective photolysis, etc. Enriched NSIM
of symmetric polyatomic molecules are yet to become a useful source
of hyperpolarization, with only one demonstration of this exciting
possibility reported to date. 
2.2.1.

## Thermal Bath of the Surrounding Lattice
The hyperpolarization methods described in this section rely on
building up polarization via Boltzmann statistics, and there are four
distinct cases: (1) polarizing the target nuclear spins directly at
low temperature and/or high magnetic field, and detecting under different
conditions; (2) using pulse sequences to manipulate spin state populations
of a single nucleus type species to enhance a specific transition;
(3) transferring spin order to the target nuclei from coupled nuclei
with higher polarization; (4) transferring spin order to the target
nuclei from unpaired electrons.
2.2.1.1.

## Polarizing the Target Nuclear Spins Directly
at Low Temperature and/or High Magnetic Field
As described
in , polarization
of spins with a gyromagnetic ratio γ depends on magnetic field
(B0) and temperature (T). The thermal equilibrium polarization of an ensemble of spin-1/2
particles is given by
3 where kB is the
Boltzmann constant and h is the Planck constant.
The polarization of four different types of spin-1/2 particles is
shown as a function of T/B0 in . High
levels of polarization can be generated by allowing the system to
reach thermal equilibrium under high B0/T conditions, but the system is not hyperpolarized
as long as it remains at thermal equilibrium. However, if the sample
is rapidly warmed, or the magnetic field is reduced for detection
before the spins relax, then the spin system is hyperpolarized. For
low- or zero-field experiments , this is called “prepolarization”,
and the spins can be polarized in a permanent magnet followed by physical
shuttling to low field, or polarized
in situ using an electromagnet that can be switched off prior to detection. 
 A more extreme case of prepolarization is “brute
force”
hyperpolarization wherein a sample is cryogenically cooled at high
field, and is then given time to reach thermal equilibrium polarization
before being rapidly warmed for detection. The challenge is that, under the cryogenic polarizing conditions,
the relaxation times and thus the time it takes the spins to become
thermally equilibrated can become quite long, but this method can
lead to proton polarization approaching 1% at high field and liquid
helium temperature. This topic is discussed in greater detail in . We note that
the concept of cooling the sample to lower the entropy of the nuclear
spins is the reverse of the magnetocaloric effect (or nuclear demagnetization
refrigeration). , 

2.2.1.2.

## Using Pulse Sequences to Manipulate Spin-State
Populations of a Single Nucleus Type Species to Enhance a Specific
Transition
Hyperpolarization may also result from population
transfer between spin states of quadrupolar nuclei to increase the
intensity of a transition between certain magnetic sublevels. , , This method requires restricted
molecular motion (e.g., a solid-state sample) so that the quadrupolar
coupling is not isotropically averaged by rapid molecular reorientation, and hence the transition frequencies between
magnetic sublevels with magnetic quantum number mI are different, and can be addressed individually using
“soft” RF pulses or adiabatic fast passage through corresponding
resonances for level population inversion. The populations may be
spread over a number of energy levels giving rise to multiple spectral
lines, but it is possible to shuttle populations between the states
to selectively enhance specific transitions. The concept is illustrated in which shows relative populations of spin
sublevels and the corresponding NMR line intensities calculated using
SpinDynamica. Signal enhancements of
up to 2I (e.g., 5 for a spin-5/2 nucleus) can be
achieved this way, provided that the outer (satellite) transitions
are completely inverted adiabatically and in the proper order and
that the central transition is then probed with a selective 90°
flip-angle pulse. This is a somewhat unique type of hyperpolarization
experiment since the entropy of the nuclear spin system is not reduced,
but the spin temperature of specific transitions is lowered.
 
2.2.1.3.

## Transferring Spin Order to the Target
Nuclei from Coupled Nuclei with Higher Polarization
A common
type of signal enhancement scheme for both solid- and solution-state
NMR is polarization transfer experiments in which the polarization
source is coupled spins of another kind that have higher polarization.
In solid-state NMR, cross-polarization (CP) pulse sequences can be employed to transfer polarization via
dipolar couplings from protons to lower-γ X nuclei, giving,
in principle, an enhancement factor of γ(1H)/γ(X),
where γ(X) is the gyromagnetic ratio of the X nucleus. This has the additional benefit that the experiment
can be repeated at a rate governed by the higher-γ nuclear T1n (e.g., that of protons) rather than the T1n of the X nucleus, which is often favorable
for faster signal averaging. Similar experiments exist for solution-state
samples, although rapid molecular tumbling leads to averaging of the
dipolar couplings, hence scalar J-couplings are used to mediate the
polarization transfer. The INEPT and
DEPT pulse sequences are examples of
coherent transfer schemes which rely on using RF pulses to drive polarization
transfer between the nuclei of different types.
An alternative
is to use the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE), which is a change in
intensity of a nuclear spin transition when another nucleus is saturated
or perturbed. This differs from coherent
polarization transfer since the effect is mediated by dipole–dipole
cross-relaxation processes between the coupled spin pairs. More specifically,
in the simplest case of a two-spin system the effect relies on a difference
between the relaxation-driven zero-, single-, and double-quantum transition
probabilities, which depend strongly on the distance between the coupled
nuclei. This distance dependence gives rise to the widespread application
of NOEs for molecular structure determination in, for example, NOE
spectroscopy (NOESY) experiments. Decoupling
of a coupled nucleus from another that is being detected can also
involve saturating nuclear transitions which can give rise to an NOE
of the nucleus being detected. We note, however, that application
of continuous RF irradiation during signal acquisition only (inverse
gated decoupling) does not itself generate hyperpolarization on the
detected nuclei, despite having the appearance of enhancing the intensity
of an NMR line. In this case the transitions are not enhanced beyond
their thermal equilibrium level, and the increase in intensity is
brought about by the collapse of a multiplet into a single line. At
the same time, gated (RF irradiation prior to signal acquisition)
and regular decoupling do induce the NOE-based spin hyperpolarization.
Experiments which use thermal polarization of coupled protons (or
any higher-γ nucleus) are fairly ubiquitously employed in NMR
experiments and are not usually referred to as hyperpolarization.
This is probably because these methods essentially give enhanced NMR
signals “for free”, with little to no additional equipment
or experimental intervention required, and because the achievable
signal enhancements are modest. Hence, these techniques will not be
discussed in detail in this review since they are already well-established;
many commercial NMR instruments allow this type of hyperpolarization
to be implemented at the touch of a button, and there is little ongoing
development or possibility for cross-fertilization with other hyperpolarization
techniques.

2.2.1.4.

## Transferring Spin Order to the Target
Nuclei from Unpaired Electrons
Significantly higher thermal
polarization levels can be achieved for electrons: they are polarized
∼658-fold more than protons under the same typical conditions
( ). Therefore,
the “brute force” approach described above for nuclei
requires less severe conditions for polarizing electron spins. Thermally
polarized electron spins often serve as a useful and powerful source
of hyperpolarization for nuclear spins. The Overhauser effect discussed
above in the context of nuclear–nuclear interactions was, in
fact, first predicted and demonstrated for electron–nuclear interactions, and
was later extended to nuclear–nuclear systems. Hyperpolarizing nuclear spins in the solution state by
saturating electronic transitions of unpaired electrons to transfer
the large thermal polarization from electron spins via the Overhauser
effect is called Overhauser DNP, and is covered in more detail in .
Overhauser
DNP is a somewhat unique DNP technique since it relies on cross-relaxation
processes to generate nuclear spin polarization. By contrast, the
majority of solid-state DNP experiments now use coherently driven
electron–nuclear polarization transfer, which is somewhat analogous
to the coherent nuclear–nuclear polarization transfer experiments
discussed above (e.g., cross-polarization). For polarization transfer,
the EPR line of an unpaired electron needs to be saturated, and this
requires high-power microwave sources which were not originally available
for high-field/high-frequency experiments. In a breakthrough that
has since been referred to as “the renaissance of DNP”, a gyrotron was employed as a microwave source
to allow DNP to be performed at 5 T. Before
that, DNP was performed at 1.4 T, which limited the available electron
polarization. The unpaired electrons in paramagnetic species which
are crucial for these experiments are provided by doping the samples
with free radicals or paramagnetic metal ions or, alternatively, by
generating free radicals in situ. Electron
spin angular momentum and nuclear spin angular momentum interact in
materials via electron–nuclear hyperfine interaction, either
static or dynamic; this coupling enables the transfer of energy between
the electron and nuclear spin baths via several specific mechanisms. Solid-state DNP experiments are usually carried
out at high field under cryogenic conditions and can lead to some
of the highest NMR signal enhancements achievable via hyperpolarization,
since near-unity thermal polarization of electron spins can be readily
established near liquid helium temperatures in magnetic fields available
with commercial instrumentation ( ). These DNP techniques are discussed in
more detail in and .
Dynamic nuclear polarization is a general term that
encompasses
many techniques in which the polarization of unpaired electron spins
is transferred to coupled nuclear spins. Note that this does not include CIDNP ( and ), and the
name is a misnomer that stemmed from an initial misinterpretation
of the mechanism that gives rise to CIDNP signals that was later corrected. 
The techniques mentioned above use thermal
equilibrium polarization
of electron spins, either at ambient (Overhauser DNP) or cryogenic
(solid-state DNP and dissolution DNP) conditions as the hyperpolarization
source for nuclei, but it is not difficult to surmise that one could
also use hyperpolarized electrons for this as well. Such existing
possibilities are introduced below in .

2.2.1.5.

## Statistical Polarization
Finally,
we mention a somewhat separate case of “statistical polarization.”
Consider for example an ensemble of N independent
spin-1/2 nuclei. If this ensemble is prepared in a random fashion,
by randomly preparing each nucleus in either spin-up or spin-down
state with respect to an arbitrarily chosen quantization axis, then
an excess of either spin-up or spin-down nuclei on the order of N0.5 is expected in each realization of the ensemble.
This kind of random polarization enables magnetic resonance noise
spectroscopy and even imaging, which
becomes particularly advantageous for small-N samples.
This “do nothing” polarization approach is especially
effective in the case of single-spin NMR (see, for example, ref ( ) and references therein),
where the signal size in the case of stochastic polarization is essentially
equal to that of a fully polarized sample. Interestingly, since stochastic
polarization makes use of a transient nonequilibrium state, it fits
our heuristic definition of hyperpolarization given above.

2.2.2.

## Correlated and Hyperpolarized States of
Electron Spins in Molecules and Materials
As mentioned above,
large thermal polarization of electron spins is much easier to achieve
compared to nuclei ( ). At the same time, it may be advantageous in practice to
use hyperpolarized electron spins since, unlike achieving high equilibrium
polarization levels, major hyperpolarization of electron spins is
available at significantly milder or even ambient conditions, i.e.,
without cryogenic sample cooling and application of high magnetic
fields.
Similar to nuclear spin hyperpolarization, creating
hyperpolarization of electron spins also requires a suitable source.
As shown below, in many (albeit not all) cases, the source of electron
hyperpolarization can be traced back to the correlated states of electron
spins. Indeed, the state of electron spins that participate in the
chemical bonds in molecules and materials is governed by the Pauli
exclusion principle. As a result, a chemical bond in a molecule is
usually associated with an overall singlet (spin-zero) state of the
paired electrons shared by two bonded atoms.
As electronic energies
associated with chemical bonds are much
larger than the energies associated with other molecular degrees of
freedom, the energy separation of different electronic spin states
(e.g., the singlet and the triplet states of a molecule) is significantly
larger than the energy of the thermal bath. Stable molecules residing
in a ground electronic state are thus ultimately enriched with the
corresponding spin state of the electrons under any realistic conditions.
The correlated electron spin states of molecules and materials are
thus omnipresent in nature and can serve as a useful primary source
of spin hyperpolarization for developing various experiments. This
can be achieved in a number of different ways:
(1)Photoexcitation of an electronic transition
in a molecule or material results in a number of spin-selective interconversions
within and between the electronic singlet and triplet manifolds of
molecular states (see , , , and ). For instance, photoexcitation
of a molecule possessing a singlet ground state S0 is most
efficient if the singlet electronic state is retained, with the molecule
ending up in an excited singlet state Sn (n > 0). Subsequent
internal conversion within the Sn manifold and intersystem
crossing (ISC) to the manifold of triplet states, Tn, can
proceed efficiently in a solid, liquid or gas phase. ISC can be spin-state-selective
and thus can produce hyperpolarization of electron spins in paramagnetic
(e.g., triplet) molecules. As a result, EPR spectra of photoexcited
triplet molecules in molecular glasses and sometimes in solution show
dramatically enhanced signal intensities ( and ). Chemical
transformations of hyperpolarized triplet molecules in solution can
yield free radicals that inherit hyperpolarization in the spin states
of their unpaired electrons ( ).
(2)The same principles apply for other
multiplicities of the ground state of molecules and materials as well.
A prominent example is the ground electronic triplet state of nitrogen-vacancy
(NV) centers in the diamond ( ). Upon a photoinduced transition to an
excited triplet state followed by spin-state-selective ISC between
the triplet and the singlet manifolds, the NV center efficiently ends
up in one out of the three electron spin sublevels of the triplet
ground state. This highly overpopulated state of the electron spins
at the NV center can serve as the source of hyperpolarization for
magnetic nuclei in the diamond and, potentially,
in molecules in contact with the diamond surface ( ).
(3)In thermal or photochemical transformations
of molecules in solution or in a solid material, free radical species
can be often produced. As mentioned in (1) above, the latter can inherit
hyperpolarization from their precursors if it is available. There
is, however, a different mechanism that can produce hyperpolarized
free radicals from a nonhyperpolarized precursor (e.g., a triplet,
a doublet or a singlet) molecule. Such effects are addressed and utilized
by a family of techniques collectively known as chemically induced
dynamic electron polarization (CIDEP), which is related to CIDNP fundamentally
and terminologically, and is equally unrelated to DNP. CIDEP can provide
high levels of electron spin hyperpolarization via a number of different
mechanisms. CIDEP effects ( ) are observed in photoinduced (or sometimes thermal)
chemical reactions which generate paramagnetic species such as molecular
triplet states, radical pairs, radicals or biradicals, which often
carry a significant load of electron spin hyperpolarization at easily
attainable experimental conditions. As mentioned above, the primary
source of electron hyperpolarization in these cases is the correlation
of electron spins in the starting molecule or material, which is converted
to hyperpolarization of unpaired electron spins either directly or
via intermediate nonequilibrium spin states.
Hyperpolarized spins of unpaired electrons in paramagnetic
species
can in their turn become a major source of hyperpolarization for nuclear
spins. One prominent example involving hyperpolarization transfer
from paramagnetic triplet species to nuclei are the techniques known
as triplet-DNP (tDNP) and optical nuclear polarization
(ONP). The transfer of polarization from electrons to nuclei is spontaneous
in ONP, while it is induced by microwave or radiofrequency irradiation
in tDNP ( ). Overhauser-type DNP driven by electron–nuclear
cross-relaxation can transfer polarization from hyperpolarized electron
spins of short-lived or stable , free radicals to nearby nuclei.
Paramagnetic species produced
in chemical and photochemical reactions
are also responsible for nuclear spin polarization generated by various
mechanisms of CIDNP. However, the underlying mechanisms may be different
in that they rely on spin sorting by a chemical reaction rather than
on direct hyperpolarization transfer from unpaired electrons. The
CIDNP techniques (primarily, photo-CIDNP) are considered in detail
in and .
Hyperpolarization of electron spins is
also possible using a source
that is different from the correlated spin states of electrons in
a chemical bond. In particular, spin-polarized photons can be used
as a powerful primary source of hyperpolarization for other types
of spins. Indeed, in the early days of magnetic resonance it was realized
that transient excited-state electrons created by light absorption
could provide for high levels of electron spin polarization. This is widely utilized for hyperpolarizing
the unpaired electron spins of alkali-metal atoms in a vapor, which
is useful for many practical applications When combined with cross-relaxation
to nuclei, “optical pumping” of nuclear spins was born,
in which hyperpolarized electrons of Rb vapor are utilized as a source
of nuclear hyperpolarization of noble gases ( ).
This and related methods are discussed further in . Besides, in 1968 it
was reported that light absorption in semiconductors can produce hyperpolarized
electrons via the optical absorption selection rules associated with
polarized light excitation. A host of
condensed matter physics phenomena resulted from such studies , and are discussed further in .
The examples above do not exhaust
the list of possible ways to
produce hyperpolarized electrons. In the late 1950s and early 1960s,
“hot” conduction electrons , were invoked to provide for Overhauser-type cross-relaxation processes.
Here cross-relaxation driven by, e.g., the electron–nuclear
hyperfine interaction, connects the nuclear spin temperature to the
difference between the electron spin temperature and the temperature
corresponding to their mean kinetic energy under applied DC current.
This effect induced via the application of a static electric field
was employed to polarize 115In, 121Sb, and 123Sb nuclei in indium antimonide. An electric current flowing through an oriented ferromagnetic domain
can also inject polarized electrons across its interface with a nonmagnetic
metal or semiconductor, and lead to nuclear hyperpolarization via
the (Overhauser type) DNP driven by cross-relaxation. This effect,
spin-injected DNP (SIDNP), has been proposed and demonstrated , via electroluminescence in quantum
heterostructures. Further optimization of this approach, including
the use of higher-temperature ferromagnetic semiconductors, suggests
the tantalizing possibility of using high electron polarizations to
provide significant nuclear hyperpolarization in bulk at modest temperatures.

2.2.3.

## Correlated States Involving Nuclear Spins
in Molecules
There exist many kinds of nonequilibrium spin
states in molecules and materials that do not immediately lead to
an observation of an enhanced NMR signal, and are thus not classified
in this review as hyperpolarized. Some such states can even give no
observable NMR signal at all. However, such states can still be very
useful in the context of signal enhancement in magnetic resonance
because they can be employed as hyperpolarization sources if appropriate
additional chemical or physical manipulations with the system or object
are performed. One example is the correlated state of electron spins
in chemical bonds considered in the preceding section. Another possibility
considered below involves correlated states of nuclear spins and their
coupling with molecular rotational wave functions, a topic frequently
studied in the context of vibrational–rotational spectra of
homonuclear diatomic molecules. While the energies associated with
nuclear states are small compared to rotational energies, the rotational
state restricts what kind of nuclear spin state the molecule can occupy.
This results in equilibrium nuclear spin order governed by Boltzmann
factors containing rotational energy. A representative example which
is recurringly encountered throughout this review is the hydrogen
molecule, H2. Because of its molecular symmetry, only certain
combinations of its rotational and nuclear spin wave functions are
allowed.
Molecular hydrogen (H2) is the most renowned
and remarkable example of a molecule existing as a mixture of its
different modifications (NSIM), namely orthohydrogen (I = 1) and parahydrogen (I = 0). Parahydrogen has proven to be a versatile source of strong
hyperpolarization ( ). Interestingly, the highest polarization is achieved
when pure parahydrogen is used, which itself has no nuclear spin and
thus gives no NMR signal. According to our definition of hyperpolarization,
we do not consider parahydrogen a hyperpolarized system. Yet, it possesses
a highly correlated spin state that can be exploited to produce hyperpolarization.
This requires breaking the symmetry of an H2 molecule in
a suitable chemical (catalytic) process.
The nonmagnetic but
highly ordered spin state of parahydrogen can
be used as a source of hyperpolarization of nuclear spins in two different
ways. Both require breaking the symmetry of the H2 molecule,
which is essentially equivalent to a chemical activation of the H2 molecule by breaking the H–H chemical bond. One approach (PHIP) operates via incorporation of both H
atoms of a parahydrogen (p-H2) molecule into one product
molecule by catalytically hydrogenating a suitable unsaturated precursor.
This way the initial singlet nuclear spin state of p-H2 is inherited by the product molecule and evolves there into a hyperpolarized
spin state. Another (SABRE), sometimes
referred to as non-hydrogenative PHIP, is based on bringing a suitable
substrate and an activated p-H2 into temporary contact
on the metal atom of an Ir-based metal complex in solution, with spin
evolution taking place in this temporary assembly to generate hyperpolarization.
Continuous exchange of coordinated H2 and substrate with
their free counterparts in solution replenishes the polarization source
and leads to a buildup of polarization on the free substrate. These
techniques are detailed further in .
Importantly, in addition to H2 and its heavy isotopologue
D2, other symmetric molecular gases also have two or more
NSIM. They attract significant interest, both in fundamental science
and for some practical applications. First and foremost, the existence
of NSIM (formerly referred to as allotropes in the case of H2) is one of the key cornerstones and the early predictive triumphs
of quantum mechanics. In modern science,
of significant interest are the properties of NSIM, including NSIM
interconversion processes and their behavior
upon phase transitions, , the NSIM-related selection
rules in molecular spectroscopy , and upon
chemical transformations, and more.
Notably, the reactivity of H2O with trapped diazenylium
ions (N2H+) was reported to be different for
para- (I = 0) and orthowater (I =
1). In addition, NSIM of polyatomic
molecules (e.g., H2O, NH3, H2CO,
CH4) attract significant attention in astrophysics and
astrochemistry research. , It is often assumed
that the ortho–para ratio (OPR) of these molecules in outer
space can remain unchanged for millions and even billions of years,
so that spin temperature could reflect the conditions of the formation
of comets, dark molecular clouds and protostars. This issue, however,
remains controversial at present, awaiting more detailed studies of
the properties of nuclear spin isomers of symmetric polyatomic molecules.
Of interest in the context of this review is that the highly correlated
nuclear spin states of NSIM of symmetric polyatomic molecules, much
like that of parahydrogen mentioned above, can potentially yield major
NMR signal enhancements. However, rotational energy quanta of polyatomic
molecules are significantly smaller compared to that of a much smaller
and lighter H2 molecule ( ). The smaller energy separations between
the rotational states of polyatomic molecules can decrease even further
when molecular rotations become restricted upon sample condensation/freezing
(except for certain molecules trapped in inert cryomatrices and in
part for solid CH4). As a result, while cryoenrichment
of p-H2 is facile and also works reasonably well for orthodeuterium
(o-D2, I = 0,2), it is not generally applicable
to NSIM enrichment of polyatomic molecules ( ).
 Therefore, NSIM research with polyatomic molecules,
including NSIM-based
hyperpolarization, requires alternative techniques of enrichment.
While several such techniques are known today (see also ), most of them are unable to produce the quantities
and enrichment levels sufficient for any NMR experiment. One successful
approach for water NSIM enrichment and exploration by NMR is based
on an individual H2O molecule incarcerated in a C60 fullerene cage, H2O@C60 ( ). The useful property of this system is that the C60 host
can be used both as a solid powder and dissolved in a liquid, while
the entrapped H2O molecule essentially remains under gas-phase
conditions. The first NSIM interconversion studies with endofullerenes
were in fact done with H2@C60. However, the enriched NSIM of endofullerenes with symmetric
guest molecules are impossible to use in a chemical reaction required
to break the symmetry of the incarcerated guest, and thus cannot be
widely used for hyperpolarization purposes.
 In contrast, enrichment of ethylene (C2H4) NSIM was achieved by hydrogenating acetylene (C2H2) with parahydrogen over a Pd/TiO2 catalyst ( ). Unlike in studies where the strong
hyperpolarization is
observed upon catalytic addition of parahydrogen to an unsaturated
nonsymmetric substrate ( and ),
ethylene is a symmetric molecule itself, and no NMR signal enhancement
can be observed. However, the spins of the parahydrogen-derived H
atoms can remain partially correlated after they are incorporated
in ethylene, yielding NSIM enrichment. To reveal this, the ethylene
was used in a subsequent reaction to produce an asymmetric product
which broke the equivalence of the pH2-derived protons,
thereby converting the correlated spin state of ethylene into enhanced
NMR signals. To date, this is still a rather rare example of a study
which demonstrates hyperpolarization induced by NSIM of a freely rotating
symmetric polyatomic molecule. Hopefully, further advances in NSIM
enrichment protocols will change this in the near future.
 Similar correlated states may arise for molecules
with no overall
symmetry if they possess a fragment with a local symmetry such as
the methyl CH3 rotor. CH3 groups in molecules
possess the necessary symmetry properties for the three coupled protons
to support long-lived spin states, and to act as a source of hyperpolarization.
Analogous to the case of the H2 molecule, the methyl group
symmetry leads to a coupling of the rotational eigenstates to the
spin eigenstates, and if the methyl rotor is relatively sterically
unhindered, the energy separation between rotational states can be
sufficient to allow for overpopulation of the lowest-energy rotational/spin
state by cooling. In this way the nuclear
spin polarization can be increased far beyond what would be achievable
without the coupling of the spatial and spin wave functions, although
this method is limited in applications to just a handful of molecules
with the necessary steric properties of the methyl rotor. Hyperpolarization
via cooling of a methyl moiety was originally known as the Haupt effect,
and is now referred to as quantum-rotor induced polarization (QRIP).
The possibilities provided by the correlated states of the CH3 rotor are considered further in .

2.2.4.

## Circularly Polarized Photons
Photons,
the quanta of light, are spin-1 entities. Polarized spin angular momenta
of light are available if a light beam has circular polarization.
Circularly polarized photons are easily produced by passing linearly
polarized light through a quarter-wave plate if the axis of the birefringent
material (i.e., a perpendicular crystal axis system, each with different
index of refraction) is at 45° to the polarization axis of the
incident light. The resulting phase difference between the two perpendicular
components of the light creates either left-handed or right-handed
polarized light. Light emitted from a laser is usually (but not always)
linearly polarized; however, diode-array lasers and laser light passing
through fiber optics may have to be passed through an optical cube
first to ensure only linear polarized light enters the quarter-wave
plate. Furthermore, optical lenses may have to be used to increase
the beam diameter and thereby to reduce the power density to ensure
the quality of the resultant circular polarization. Photons are thus
extremely easy to spin-polarize, and when such a photon is absorbed,
conservation of the angular momentum may result in a change of the
spin state of the light-absorbing substance: an atom, a molecule,
or a material. This effect is used in several important practical
and emerging applications ( ).
One example is the metastability-exchange
optical pumping (MEOP) technique suitable for hyperpolarizing nuclear
spins of 3He gas ( ). A weak RF discharge is used to promote 3He atoms from the ground to the metastable excited state,
followed by photoexcitation with circularly polarized light. Angular
momentum transfer from a photon to spin degrees of freedom of a He
atom upon light absorption creates nuclear spin polarization for the
metastable 3He states which is subsequently passed to the
pool of 3He in the ground state in collisional spin exchange
processes. 
Polarized photons can
similarly polarize electrons of paramagnetic
species ( ). An illustrative example is an optically pumped atomic magnetometer,
in which circularly polarized light is used to excite the D1 spectral transition line of atoms in alkali metal (e.g., 87Rb) vapor, thereby creating a hyperpolarized state of their electron
spins. A laser beam orthogonal to the
pumping beam then probes the optical rotation of linearly polarized
light to measure the magnitude of a magnetic field experienced by
the electrons. The same hyperpolarization principle is employed in
atomic clocks widely used as precise frequency standards based on
the accurately known frequencies of hyperfine transitions in 133Cs and 87Rb.
One of the practical applications
of circularly polarized light
as a source of hyperpolarization of electron spins important here
is the optical pumping of rubidium vapor for hyperpolarization of
nuclear spins of noble gases such as 3He, 83Kr, 129Xe. Hyperpolarization of rubidium electrons is
transferred to the noble gas nuclei in briefly formed collisional
complexes in the gas phase by means of spin exchange driven by the
electron–nuclear hyperfine interaction ( ). This spin-exchange optical
pumping (SEOP) technique provides a remarkable and illustrative example
of combining several polarization sources in succession to achieve
the final goal. Indeed, first, the spins of photons are polarized
by imposing circular polarization on a laser beam; this hyperpolarization
is then transferred to unpaired electrons in Rb atoms upon light absorption,
followed by the gas-phase-collision-mediated transfer to nuclear spins
of a noble gas (e.g., 129Xe), and the sequence can be continued
even further, e.g., by dissolution of hyperpolarized 129Xe gas and hyperpolarization transfer to the 1H nuclei
of a solvent or by admitting hyperpolarized 129Xe gas to porous materials with subsequent hyperpolarization
transfer to various nuclei on a solid surface. , Such transfer can be mediated by the spin-polarization-induced nuclear
Overhauser effect (SPINOE) for both cases, while for solids other
transfer mechanisms (e.g., cross-polarization, thermal mixing) are
also possible. , The resulting polarization of,
e.g., 1H nuclei of a solvent or a solid material surface
can be passed further on to other types of nuclei using various polarization
transfer mechanisms.
Dissociation of molecules under circularly
polarized light is used
to produce photofragments with polarized electron and nuclear spins,
which can be used for a number of applications, from magnetometry
to experiments in atomic and nuclear physics. 

2.2.5.

## Spin-Sorting Phenomena
The populations
of different nuclear spin states in thermal equilibrium under most
realistic conditions are close to being statistical; for instance,
there is an essentially equal number of spin-1/2 nuclei in α
and β states in an applied magnetic field at room temperature
( ). An attractive
possibility would be to separate the ensemble of species (e.g., atoms
or molecules) into groups based on the spin states of the species
involved, e.g., with species carrying spins in the α state collected
in the first group, and species with β spin state in the second
one. Here, Maxwell’s demon certainly comes to mind, but unlike
the separation of hot and cold atoms or molecules in that thought
experiment, spin sorting is a reality.
One possibility stems
from the classical Stern–Gerlach-type experiments in atomic and molecular beams which were used
in the early days of quantum mechanics to prove that spatial orientation
of angular momentum is quantized. Particles with a nonzero magnetic
moment passing through a strong magnetic field gradient are deflected
from a straight path in different directions depending on the orientation
of their nuclear spin with respect to the applied field. This leads
to a separation of a beam into 2I+1 separate beams
with different Iz quantum
numbers, achieving a clean sorting of particles based on their spin
state, i.e., a decrease in entropy.
Furthermore, the beam separation
approach was used relatively recently
to produce beams of H2O and CH4 with hyperpolarized
nuclear spins. Because of the necessarily low densities of molecular
beams under collision-free conditions in such experiments and a fast
relaxation of nuclear spins in the gas phase, these experiments are
not immediately suitable for NMR. However, there is more to these
experiments than just nuclear spin polarization when symmetric molecules
such as H2O and CH4 are involved: the separation
of their NSIM is achieved as well. For instance, ortho- and parahydrogen
mentioned above could be separated in such an experiment, but this
would be impractical as nowadays enrichment of parahydrogen can be
achieved far more readily ( ). However, in contrast to NSIM of H2, NSIM of symmetric polyatomic molecules are not easily accessible,
but could be of major interest for expanding the range of available
sources of nuclear hyperpolarization in the experiments similar to
those performed with parahydrogen ( , , and ). Successful separation of ortho- and parawater
has been achieved in cold molecular beams using the gradient of a
magnetic field (the Zeeman effect), and
was later extended to acetylene and methane. Ortho- and parawater separation was also successfully achieved in
cold molecular beams using the gradient of an electric field (the Stark effect) ( ). However, due to the low density of molecular
beams required for such separation in either technique, the quantities
produced (∼108–1010 molecules/s)
are rather low, and the use of NSIM of polyatomic molecules in the
NMR context would require further improvement of the technique to
provide much larger quantities of enriched NSIM than it is possible
today.
 An alternative and rather advanced approach for
sorting NSIM of
symmetric molecules is the so-called light-induced drift (LID) technique. It is based on a velocity-selective rovibrational
photoexcitation within a Doppler-broadened absorption line of one
of the NSIM, while other one or more NSIM serve as the buffer gas.
A small (ca. 0.1–1%) change in the collisional cross-section
upon photoexcitation produces a slow directional drift of the photoexcited
NSIM, leading to a spatial separation of different NSIM in an illuminated
cell. LID has been successfully used to enrich NSIM of CH3OH and isotopologues of CH3F and C2H4. The achieved enrichments (e.g., 1–3%
at 1 Torr ) are sufficient for detection
and characterization with laser spectroscopy, including the measurement
of NSIM interconversion rates. However, it remains to be seen whether
or not this can be sufficient for signal enhancement in NMR experiments.
Hyperpolarization by spin sorting is also encountered in the broad
field of CIDNP and related phenomena ( , , and ) where nuclear spins are sorted by a chemical
reaction. For instance, when photoexcitation of a suitable chromophore
molecule results in the formation of, for instance, a spin-correlated
pair of neutral radicals in the triplet electronic state, recombination
or disproportionation of the radical pair is not possible unless/until
the pair converts to a singlet spin state. The dynamic singlet–triplet
(S-T) interconversion of the radical pair is driven by the local magnetic
fields experienced by its unpaired electrons, which includes hyperfine
interactions with nuclear spins of the participating radicals. Thus,
the rate of S-T interconversion can depend on the orientation of nuclear
spins, and those nuclear spin orientations that cause faster T →
S conversion will end up in the product molecule faster, while radical
pairs with other nuclear spin orientations will take longer to interconvert,
so that nuclear polarization of the opposite sign can be lost in radicals
due to relaxation or end up in different products produced by secondary
reactions of the radicals escaping from the initial radical pair.
For reversible reactions such as electron transfer processes between
electron donor and acceptor molecular species, significant levels
of hyperpolarization may be accumulated this way on the starting species
without much chemical conversion or degradation. These and other possibilities
are discussed in more detail in and . The spin-sorting
process by a chemical reaction can be further assisted externally;
in the technique of stimulated nuclear polarization (SNP) the T → S interconversion in a transient
radical pair or a biradical is accelerated by flipping one of the
electron spins with an applied microwave magnetic field, which is
possible if the EPR spectra of the two paramagnetic species are sufficiently
different owing to the difference in their g-factors or nuclear hyperfine
patterns. Furthermore, the interconversion can be accelerated selectively
for a chosen orientation of nuclear spins by selectively exciting
the respective component of an EPR spectrum with a resolved hyperfine
pattern. This leads to acceleration of the chemical reaction for that
particular nuclear spin state selectively, and hence leads to spin
polarization in the reaction product. This possibility is discussed
in .
Electron spins are also polarizable by spin sorting or spin filtering
processes. This is used in particular for producing polarized targets
in atomic and nuclear physics, for example, using an atomic beam source
to produce a beam of hydrogen atoms which is then separated into two
beams with opposite electron spin orientations after passing through
a strongly inhomogeneous magnetic field. Spin sorting or spin filtering is also widely employed in the field
of spintronics. This includes (but is far from being limited to) the
injection of polarized electrons across an interface between a ferromagnet
and a metal or semiconductor and the SIDNP effect mentioned earlier.
Yet another way to polarize electrons is to pass them through chiral
environments. According to the current understanding of this phenomenon
termed chirality-induced spin selectivity (CISS), − no spin flipping is involved in the process. Instead, this approach
relies on a more efficient transmission of the electron with the favored
spin orientation (either parallel or antiparallel to its velocity
depending on the helicity of the medium) as a consequence of reduction
in backscattering, i.e., represents spin sorting or spin filtering.
We note, however, that currently the origin of this effect is not
fully understood, and alternative explanations are being advanced
in the literature. CISS effect has been
observed for both individual chiral organic molecules and their self-assembled
monolayers (SAM) on a suitable substrate, for instance oligopeptides,
proteins and double-stranded DNA oligonucleotides, as well as for
chiral inorganic thin films. Spin filtering has been reported for
electron transport through chiral media over distances from a few
to a few tens of nanometers. CISS was shown capable of achieving high
polarization levels at room temperature; for instance, spin filtering
in excess of 85% was reported with helical π-conjugated materials
based on supramolecular nanofibers. 
There are a number of important implications and potential applications
of CISS. For one, it may play an important role in electron transfer
in biomolecules and biological systems. In particular, substantial
spin polarizations were reported for electron transfer through the
helical protein bacteriorhodopsin embedded in its native membrane
environment (pe ∼ 15%) and for photoinduced electron transfer in Photosystem
I (PSI) (pe ∼ 40–80%). The CISS effect may also provide access to
the separation of enantiomers by adsorption on magnetized surfaces , as well as enantiomer-selective chemistry in an adsorbed molecular
adlayer induced by electron transfer through the underlying CISS-active
chiral monolayer. CISS effect was demonstrated
to affect redox chemistry, with an interesting example of spin control
of multielectron-transfer reactions is the (photo)electrochemical
splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. Polarization of electron
spins achieved by coating the anode of an electrochemical cell with
a chiral layer (e.g., a molecular monolayer, a polymer film, or an
inorganic oxide) can facilitate formation of triplet O2 (S = 1) and suppress recombination of hydroxyl
radicals into the side product H2O2; this results
in the decrease of reaction overpotential and an increase in the overall
efficiency of H2O splitting. A combination of CISS with
an artificial molecular motor was implemented to reversibly switch
chirality and achieve the associated inversion of spin polarization
of transmitted electrons by applying external stimuli, paving the way to novel spintronic devices.

3.

## HYPERPOLARIZATION TECHNIQUES
In this
part of the review, we discuss individual hyperpolarization
techniques in more detail, starting with the general underlying principle
and the hyperpolarization source(s) involved, and the mechanisms that
link the source to the actual spin hyperpolarization. This is followed
by a brief description of the instrumentation required to implement
the technique and the practical realization of the hyperpolarization
procedure. Typical applications of the technique are then illustrated
with representative examples, including the common molecular species
and/or materials targeted and hyperpolarization levels achieved. Finally,
potential promising extensions are described, and the primary unsolved
issues that could advance the technique further and broaden the range
of its applications are pointed out.
3.1.

## Brute Force
As described in ( ), nuclear spin polarization
in thermal equilibrium depends on temperature T and
the strength of the external magnetic field B0. A nuclear spin system can be highly polarized by allowing
the sample to equilibrate to the thermal (Boltzmann) polarization
under cryogenic conditions and/or in a high magnetic field. In many
experiments, this brute force approach is used to hyperpolarize samples
for low-, ultralow-, or zero-field detection. , , The sample is prepolarized in a large magnetic
field supplied either by a permanent magnet array, or an electromagnet,
and after shuttling the sample to the lower-field region or switching
off the polarizing field, the signal is detected. We will not discuss
this straightforward implementation of the brute force approach further,
since in these cases the nuclear spin polarization does not exceed
that attainable in a regular high-field NMR experiment. To exceed
the polarization achievable in a high-field experiment, the sample
can be cryogenically cooled. shows the polarization of different spin-1/2 particles
as a function of T/B0. After the polarization step, the sample can be extracted from the
polarization instrumentation and returned to ambient temperature on
a time scale less than the nuclear spin relaxation.
Early experiments
originated in the field of condensed matter physics, with the goal
of producing large quantities of hyperpolarized 3He and 129Xe. , The advent of medical lung imaging
using hyperpolarized noble gases sparked further interest in brute
force as a method to produce large quantities of hyperpolarized 3He and 129Xe. , In recent
years, experimental efforts have been focused on polarizing small
organic molecules, with a particular focus on metabolites. , The brute force approach has a number of advantages over other hyperpolarization
methods: (1) there is no need for microwave/radiofrequency irradiation
of the sample, which reduces equipment complexity and means the sample
need not be confined to a cavity; (2) extraneous molecules such as
free radicals or catalysts are not required, which circumvents the
need for downstream purification and quality assurance; (3) the method
is in principle general and applicable to any sample; and (4) homogeneity
of the polarizing field is not critical, which means large sample
volumes can be used. However, at low temperatures most molecular motion
is frozen out, and nuclear spin-relaxation times can become very long.
Indeed, long nuclear spin T1n times (often
tens or hundreds of hours) under the high B0/T conditions have precluded widespread use of the
brute force approach.
In contrast to all other methods discussed
in (see ), brute force does
not require any specific
mechanism to convert an external source of polarization into nuclear
spin polarization; with this approach the nuclear spins are polarized
directly.
The instrumentation required for brute force experiments
can be
relatively simple. A cryostat is needed to cool the samples, and this
should be mounted in a high-field magnet. Most experimental demonstrations
have employed liquid helium baths vacuum-pumped to lower the temperature
to 1–2 K, or dilution refrigerators that can operate down to
millikelvin temperatures. After the cooling process and relaxation
of the spins to the low-temperature equilibrium, the sample should
be warmed on a time scale much less than the nuclear spin relaxation
time. This can be done after a rapid pneumatic ejection of the solid
sample from the cryostat, or via rapid
warming of the sample without physical extraction. , 
Accepting long polarization build-up times, the polarization
of
nuclear spins is still only modest even under high B0/T conditions. Assuming a 10 T external
field, the polarization of an ensemble of protons is only ∼1%
at 1 K ( ).
To reach near-unity polarization, the temperature should be on the
order of millikelvin, which requires the use of significantly more
complicated cryogenic equipment and can lead to even longer T1n times.
To date, brute force has only
been widely applied in the context
of prepolarizing samples in high field for low/zero-field detection.
Prohibitively long nuclear spin T1n values
at low temperature have precluded widespread application of this technique
for generating highly polarized samples for high-field detection.
One solution to the long polarization build-up times at cryogenic
temperatures is to induce relaxation by doping in relaxation agents,
but importantly the relaxation mechanism should be reduced or “switched
off” during the sample warming/transport step to avoid significant
polarization losses at the higher temperature. A particularly elegant
demonstration of this concept was shown in the production of hyperpolarized 129Xe. Its T1n at ∼1 K is many tens of hours which means brute
force polarization would not be feasible, but this was lowered to
just tens of minutes by adsorbing a layer of 3He onto the
sample surface. Translational motion of 3He across the
surface modulates the 3He–129Xe dipolar
couplings, which acts as a relaxation pathway. Importantly, this pathway
could be “switched off” by displacing the spin-1/2 3He atoms with spin-0 4He prior to the warming step.
However, the relaxation induced by the 3He was only effective
for a monolayer of 129Xe, and a different approach would
be needed for bulk samples.
One promising route for bulk samples
is to dope in paramagnetic
metal ions (e.g., holmium, cerium, dysprosium) complexed with diethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid (DTPA) and freeze the sample as a glass to ensure homogeneous
dispersion. These metal complexes can induce nuclear spin relaxation
at low temperatures because there is spectral density overlap between
the electron transitions and the nuclear Larmor frequencies, a mechanism
that becomes inactive at higher temperatures. , Unfortunately, the relaxivity of these complexes decreases rapidly
below 1 K, which limits the polarization that can be achieved. In
another approach, copper and platinum nanoparticles (1050 nm size
range) were shown to be effective relaxation agents at subkelvin temperatures. The relaxation mechanism is not fully understood,
but it relies at least in part on energy transfer between the nuclear
spins and the conduction electrons of the metal. With this approach,
an impressive 13C polarization of up to 18% in the solid
state was achieved by cooling the sample to 15 mK. It should be noted
that the nanoparticle relaxivity cannot be “switched off”
prior to sample warming and extraction, so a dissolution approach
similar to that used in dDNP experiments ( ) would be appropriate
in order to dilute the nanoparticles at the time of warming. In these
experiments, the samples were [1-13C]sodium acetate and
sodium phosphate dissolved in water–glycerol solutions, with
glycerol included to aid in forming a glass upon sample freezing.
The eventual goal is to polarize a range of nuclei (often 13C with a view toward biological application), but 1H spins
typically have shorter relaxation times due to the stronger coupling
to the magnetic environment and are in much higher abundance if the
solvent is protonated. Indeed, it was demonstrated that the proton
spin bath (predominantly from water and glycerol) can be polarized
via brute force, and this polarization transferred to other nuclei
in the sample via low-field thermal mixing (LFTM). If the external field is reduced such that the dipolar
couplings dominate for a short period of time, the Zeeman polarization
can be transferred to coupled spins by spin diffusion. This technique
was studied in detail on samples of [1-13C]pyruvic acid
polarized at 2 T below 20 K, and the mixing times on the order of
100 ms in a field between Earth’s field and 10 mT were found
optimal for 1H → 13C polarization transfer. 
The previously described NMR experiments
were all performed in
situ on the cryogenically cooled solid-state samples. A promising
extension is to pneumatically eject the solid hyperpolarized material
from the polarizer and allow LFTM to occur in Earth’s magnetic
field as the sample travels between the polarizing magnet and a high-field
dissolution station. The experiments
were performed on [1-13C]pyruvic acid polarized at ∼2
K in a 14 T field, which was dissolved in warm water in a 2 T field
and measured at 1 or 9.4 T. The proton T1n time in this sample was approximately 10 times shorter than the 13C T1n, which made it possible
to leverage the faster polarization build-up on the protons, followed
by transfer to 13C by LFTM. The experimental apparatus
and results are illustrated in . In an extension to this work, the authors
showed that after polarizing in the 14 T magnet, the pyruvic acid
could be ejected as a solid and stored at 60 K in a portable 1.3 T
magnet. In this condition it was driven
in ∼10 min to a separate location and then dissolved for solution-state
NMR imaging experiments in phantoms.
 In this work the 13C polarization measured
in the solution
state was approximately 0.1%, which is limited by the relatively high
polarization temperature (∼2 K). Although this is not enough
polarization for in vivo imaging applications of [1-13C]pyruvate,
this is a promising demonstration of a general hyperpolarization method
that can be used to improve NMR signals by orders of magnitude in
a general way. One point to note is that the modest 1H T1n times are likely a result of rotational motion
of the methyl groups in pyruvate acting as a relaxation pathway, and
other molecules not possessing similar degrees of motional freedom
might exhibit longer polarization build-up times.
The greatest
drawback to the brute force approach is the long times
required to build-up sufficient polarization at cryogenic temperatures.
However, the method does not in principle require field homogeneity
of the polarizing magnet of better than a few percent, which means
that it should be possible to polarize many samples at the same time
in a magnet with a large bore. This would help to overcome the challenge
of long sample T1n times since many samples
could be polarized together and extracted on demand.
In addition
to using high-field magnets, there is another (less
general) way to effectively produce high magnetic fields on nuclei. , The idea is that the magnitude of magnetic hyperfine interactions
in some paramagnetic compounds can reach into the gigahertz range,
meaning the nuclei “see” a magnetic field from the electrons
on the order of 100 T.
We now briefly mention a “brute-force”
polarization
experiment that serves as a paragon of ingenuity and, moreover, played
a pivotal role in modern science. In 1956, parity nonconservation
was discovered–this is a lack of “mirror symmetry”
in the weak interaction. The experiment
required a considerable degree of nuclear spin polarization of 60Co nuclei (I = 5), but common cryogenic
techniques at the time did not permit cooling below about 1.2 K achievable
by vacuum-pumping on liquid helium. Sample temperatures down to about
3 mK were achieved by using the technique of adiabatic demagnetization.
A sample containing 60Co nuclei was deposited onto a film
of a paramagnetic salt with a highly anisotropic g-factor. After the
electrons were polarized in the paramagnetic substrate along the high-g
direction, the magnetic field was reduced to depolarize the electrons
and hence cool the sample (i.e., adiabatic demagnetization). Reintroducing
the magnetic field in the same direction would lead to repolarization
of the electrons, and hence reheating of the sample. However, by applying
the magnetic field in the low-g direction, reheating is considerably
reduced, and the nuclear spins can be highly polarized. This “trick” yielded the necessary experimental conditions: 60Co nuclei polarized along a magnetic field defining the axis
of the experiment.

3.2.

## Overhauser Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
3.2.1.

## The Technique
The dynamic nuclear
polarization (DNP) techniques, including Overhauser-enhanced DNP (OE-DNP),
rely on the fact that, owing to the larger gyromagnetic ratio γ,
spins of unpaired electrons attain larger equilibrium polarizations
in an external magnetic field compared to that of nuclear spins ( ). Thus, upon polarization
transfer from electrons to nuclei ( ) the maximum possible sensitivity
enhancement in a DNP NMR experiment (ε) corresponds to γe/γn where γe and γn are the gyromagnetic ratios of the electron and the nucleus
being polarized, respectively. OE-DNP was theoretically predicted
for metals by Overhauser and shortly
after that experimentally confirmed by Carver and Slichter, , who reported that the saturation of conducting electrons in metallic
lithium at their Larmor frequency led to a 100-fold enhancement of
the 7Li NMR signal. Soon after that it was found that this
mechanism is also effective in liquids: either for transferring polarization
from unpaired electrons of paramagnetic species to nuclear spins of
diamagnetic molecules, or between nuclear
spins with different gyromagnetic ratios (nuclear Overhauser effect, NOE; ). In fact, Overhauser DNP described
in this section is the only mechanism of dynamic nuclear polarization
in liquids, in contrast to solids where several DNP mechanisms are
known ( and ).
OE-DNP relies on the saturation
of allowed transitions of unpaired electron spins by microwaves. If
the unpaired electron spin is coupled to a nuclear spin via hyperfine
interaction, the processes that drive the electron spin system back
to thermal equilibrium involve, inter alia, electron–nuclear
cross-relaxation processes which flip both spins, thereby transferring
polarization from electrons to nuclei. The efficiency of this process
is largely governed by the coupling factor ξ between the electron
and nuclear spins which accounts for the details of the mechanism
responsible for the polarization transfer. From the Solomon equations it can be derived as
4 with W1n being
the single-quantum nuclear spin relaxation rate and W2 and W0 the double- and zero-quantum
electron–nuclear cross-relaxation rates, respectively ( ). The cross-relaxation
processes are induced by the modulation of the hyperfine coupling
between the electron spin and the nuclear spin by dynamic processes.
Depending on the specific model for such dynamic modulation, analytical
expressions for the coupling factors have been derived. Usually, these
dynamics are described by a specific correlation time τc and the related spectral density functions J(ω,τc) for each individual process. The J(ω,τc) values at the Larmor frequencies
of the nuclear (ω = ωn) and (more importantly)
the coupled electron–nuclear spin transitions (ω = ωn ± ωe) are important for the cross-relaxation
processes to occur and allow one to calculate the cross-relaxation
rates W0 and W2. The coupling factor ξ
can take values between −1 (scalar/isotropic hyperfine coupling,
where only flip-flop cross-relaxation processes occur) and +1/2 (exclusively
anisotropic dipolar hyperfine coupling). , − At high magnetic fields (and correspondingly high electron spin
Larmor frequencies), where ωeτc >
1, all these spectral densities J(ω,τc) approach zero, leading to a coupling factor of zero and
therefore vanishing DNP enhancements ( ).
 In addition to the coupling factor, the efficiency
of OE-DNP depends
on other parameters as well, and the achievable polarization is given
by the Overhauser formula: 
5 where the gyromagnetic ratios for the unpaired
electron and nuclear spins are given by γe and γn, respectively, f is called the leakage factor,
and s the saturation factor. For a free organic radical
and a proton nuclear spin, the γe/γn ratio is ca. −658 (γe is negative), leading
to a maximum achievable DNP enhancement of 659 for ξ = −1
(scalar coupling) and −328 for ξ = +1/2 (dipolar coupling)
at high enough microwave power (s = 1) and radical
concentration (f = 1). For a 13C nuclear
spin, the maximum achievable DNP enhancement amounts to 2618 for pure
scalar coupling. The saturation factor s describes
the level of saturation of the electron spin transition by microwave
(MW) irradiation. It depends on the microwave field strength and the
EPR spectral properties of the paramagnetic molecule. These are the
electron spin relaxation times T1e and T2e, the hyperfine coupling constants to the
nuclei of the radical itself, and also the Heisenberg exchange rates
which depend on the radical concentration. These parameters can be
determined independently from EPR experiments. With large enough microwave excitation power, the saturation
factor reaches unity. The leakage factor f describes
the efficiency of the relaxation of the observed nuclear spins by
the electron spins of the paramagnetic molecules. It depends on the
concentration of paramagnetic molecules and their electron spin relaxation
rates. The leakage factor can easily be determined by NMR T1n measurements on samples with and without
paramagnetic molecules present. For radical concentrations in the
low millimolar range and higher, this factor is typically close to
unity.
Proton spins of diamagnetic target molecules in solution
containing
paramagnetic radicals show mostly negative OE-DNP enhancements arising
from dipolar hyperfine couplings between the electron spin of the
radical and the nuclear spin of the target molecule, modulated by
translational diffusive motion and rotational motion of short-lived
solvate-radical complexes. Other nuclei, such as 13C, 19F, 15N, and 31P, can also have significant
DNP enhancements arising from a fast modulation of the scalar hyperfine
coupling by collision of target molecules with the radical and via
formation of their short-lived complexes. Because of the opposite
signs of the coupling factors arising from the scalar and dipolar
hyperfine contributions, a significant reduction of the overall DNP
enhancement can occur at lower magnetic fields, where both mechanisms
are effective. − This compensation effect can lead to a nonmonotonous
field-dependence of OE-DNP enhancements for 13C nuclei as visualized in b.

3.2.2.

## Practical Aspects
The instrumentation
required for OE-DNP depends on the magnetic field used for the microwave
excitation and NMR detection. If the
OE-DNP experiment is performed at low magnetic fields (0.3 T) to achieve
optimal coupling factors, standard X-band EPR equipment can be used
for the irradiation of the electron spin of the free radical. With
NMR detection at the same field the challenge is to obtain enough
spectral resolution, especially for proton spins. Recently it was
shown that with improved magnetic field homogeneity and low paramagnetic
concentrations line widths less than 4 Hz could be achieved at 0.3
T. Experimental setups also exist for
ultralow magnetic fields for imaging applications, for detection of low-γ nuclei, monitoring of flow reactions or for magnetometry. Recently, also
a miniaturized setup working at 0.5 T magnetic field was described
for microfluidic chip applications. 
Experiments can also be performed with a subsequent detection at
higher magnetic field to improve the spectral resolution. In this
case, the reachable enhancement is lowered by the ratio of the polarizing
and detection fields, and the challenge is to achieve a fast and efficient
transfer of the hyperpolarized liquid from the low polarization field
(0.3 T) to the NMR detection field to avoid polarization loss within
the transfer time. This can be accomplished with flow systems, or shuttling of the sample or the entire probe. 
If, alternatively, the OE-DNP polarization buildup is accomplished
directly (in situ) at high NMR detection fields, the experimental
requirements are more stringent. First, high-frequency microwave sources
in the >100 GHz range are required for the saturation of electron
spin transitions. Microwaves in this range can be generated by up-converting
the output of semiconductor sources, thus covering the range of up
to 300 GHz (with power <1W), or by gyrotron sources which can deliver
power in the range above 10 W. Second, in this case, care should be
taken to avoid heating of the liquid sample by high-frequency microwave
irradiation. Heating can be reduced considerably by placing the sample
into a resonant MW structure. Such specific DNP (NMR/EPR) double-resonance
structures limit the sample volume to a few microliters only, depending
on the microwave frequency.
Because the strong increase of the
sample temperature is a function
of applied microwave power PMW at high
microwave frequencies, it is difficult to extract the maximum achievable
enhancement (for s = 1) from the intercept of the
plot of I0/(I – I0) against 1/PMW, something that is possible at lower microwave frequencies. For
the same reason it is hardly possible to determine the saturation
factor from recording the EPR intensity as a function of the square
root of MW power. Pulsed electron–electron double resonance
(ELDOR) was proposed as a method to determine the effective saturation
factor; however, such experiments performed
at lower MW frequencies are also not easy to implement at high MW
frequencies. One way to solve this problem arises from the effect
of the saturation factor on the paramagnetic shift in an NMR spectrum
of diamagnetic species in solution. At full saturation, the electrons
become completely depolarized, and the paramagnetic shift disappears.
The separation of the temperature effect into the chemical shift and
the variation of the paramagnetic shift under MW irradiation is facilitated
by an enhanced chemical shift resolution at high magnetic fields. shows how the
suppression of the paramagnetic shift by saturation of the electron
transitions can be observed on an aqueous solution of 4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl
(TEMPOL) radical. 
 For OE-DNP, nitroxide radicals are mostly used.
Typically, radical
concentrations in the range of 1–100 mM are used, which result
in leakage factors of almost unity. NMR line broadening is only observed
for high radical concentrations (>100 mM), partly because of the
reduced
spectral resolution obtained with the double-resonance structures.
The reduced amount of sample inside the double-resonance structure
limits the overall sensitivity, which can make reliable measurement
of the thermal equilibrium (Boltzmann) signal demanding, for example
for 13C signals at natural isotope abundance or low-γ
nuclei. On the other hand, such MW-resonant structures increase the
MW field strength at the sample, meaning that solid-state MW sources
with moderate power might be sufficient to saturate the electron spin
system.
All OE-DNP experiments performed directly at high magnetic
fields
have been performed with a continuous-wave (CW) irradiation with MW
so far, mostly because a fast and efficient switching at high microwave
frequencies is nontrivial to achieve. Potentially, MW irradiation
with short inversion pulses could reduce sample heating and lead to
efficient polarization transfer, especially in the case of inhomogeneously
broadened lines, resulting from slow tumbling of a nitroxide in viscous
environments. In such cases, pulsed excitation can achieve higher
saturation levels compared to continuous-wave excitation. , 

3.2.3.

## Applications, Frontiers, and Challenges
OE-DNP in liquids has been studied extensively at low magnetic
fields (<1.5 T) since the 1960s. , , DNP enhancements of ca. −180 for water proton
spins in the presence of deuterated 15N-labeled 4-oxo-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl radical (15N-TEMPONE) have been observed
at X-band frequencies and could be modeled
quite well by using an independent experimental determination of the
saturation factor s and the leakage factor f, and the coupling factor ξ estimated by taking account
of translational and rotational motion of the spin-bearing molecules
in solution using the classical diffusion equation. Quantitative comparisons with the experimentally obtained
DNP enhancements have been used to derive local information on the
translational dynamics of the paramagnetic molecules and of the target
molecules bearing the nuclear spin as well as information on their
encounter complexes in liquid solutions. − Recent applications are the investigation of polymers, ionic liquids
and viscous liquids in combination with field-cycling NMR, the investigation of local water dynamics in
soft materials and at the surface of
biomolecules or potential applications
in electrochemical cells. 
OE-DNP
was also used to increase the sensitivity for MRI applications. OE-DNP
MRI detection of free radicals, called PEDRI (proton–electron
double resonance imaging) was pioneered by the Lurie group. It relies on the fact that signal enhancement
in an image obtained by MRI under OE-DNP conditions reflects the local
concentration of paramagnetic species. To achieve large enough sample
penetration depth of the oscillating electromagnetic fields that saturate
the electron spin transitions, polarization transfer is typically
performed at low magnetic fields, i.e., at low resonance frequencies.
Field cycling after the polarization transfer step has been developed
to obtain images at higher detection fields. OE-DNP has also been used for flow imaging of hyperpolarized aqueous
solutions. Again, similar to spectroscopic applications, the hyperpolarization
step could be performed at lower magnetic fields , or directly at the field of the magnet used for imaging. , Continuous streams of radical-free liquids including water can be
produced if radicals are immobilized on a suitable porous solid material or a gel. , 
More
recently, OE-DNP was also explored at high magnetic fields
(>3 T) to achieve increased chemical shift resolution for spectrally
resolved NMR applications. This is in conflict with the decreasing
spectral densities (and therefore the coupling factor and the DNP
enhancements) predicted for higher magnetic field values ( ). DNP studies
at various magnetic field strengths were performed to experimentally
access and understand the dynamic processes in the terahertz regime
relevant for OE-DNP processes at high magnetic fields. The first approach
is to perform the OE-DNP experiment by microwave irradiation at low
magnetic field and flow or shuttle the liquid subsequently to high magnetic field
for NMR detection. The second approach
is to perform OE-DNP experiments directly at the high magnetic field
used for NMR detection (3.4 or 9.2 T). − An impressive Overhauser 1H DNP enhancement of ca. −80 for water and 13C DNP enhancements of ca. +600 for 13C-tetrabromomethane
in the presence of dissolved nitroxide radicals have been demonstrated
at a magnetic field strength of 9.2 T. , Because most
solvents strongly absorb microwaves in this frequency range, microwave
resonance structures have been used to avoid excess heating of the
sample. , 
In , examples
of proton and carbon OE-DNP enhancements at a magnetic field of 9.4
T are illustrated. a shows the OE-DNP enhancement for water protons in an aqueous
TEMPOL solution. A Fabry–Pérot/stripline 260 GHz/400
MHz double-resonance structure was used to saturate the electron spin
transitions and to detect the proton NMR free induction decay (FID)
signal. This structure can accommodate
a 90 nl sample with only a moderate sample heating (by 30 °C)
by the high-frequency excitation with 3 W of microwave power. The
sample temperature can be further raised by applying more microwave
power, increasing the diffusion constant D and therefore
also increasing the coupling factor and the DNP enhancements. More recently this probe has been further improved
to a triple-resonance probe including a 13C channel and
increased temperature stability of the sample under MW irradiation
conditions. The 13C DNP enhancement
of 13C-labeled chloroform with 100 mM of deuterated 15N-TEMPONE is illustrated in b. In this example, the DNP experiments
at 9.2 T have been performed using a cylindrical/helical double-resonance
structure tuned to the electron spin/13C resonance frequencies. For this type of cavity, the sample volume
was restricted to 35 nL. Also, because a higher mode along the capillary
length was used for the microwave cavity, more of the electric field
component of the microwave was absorbed by the sample, leading to
the liquid sample temperature rising by 50 °C. Recently, it was
demonstrated that large 13C scalar enhancements can also
be obtained in aqueous solutions at room temperature, which is interesting
for potential biological applications. 
 Recently, it was shown that even without microwave
resonant cavities,
decent 13C (ε ≈ + 70) and 1H (ε
≈ −10) OE-DNP enhancements could be reached at high
magnetic fields. , This was achieved by supplying
high microwave power from a gyrotron directly to the sample and trying
to avoid heating by placing the sample on a substrate with high thermal
conductivity or by solvents characterized
by low microwave absorption. This facilitates
obtaining high-resolution NMR spectra, but strong local heating of
the sample by microwave irradiation might also lead to degradation
of some radicals commonly used for DNP. NMR relaxation dispersion
measurements are useful to obtain information on the relaxation rates
and spectral density profiles necessary to predict DNP coupling factors. , , At high magnetic fields, small
contributions of fast fluctuations, which are difficult to detect
by NMR dispersion curves, might contribute significantly to OE-DNP
enhancements. , Molecular dynamics simulations
of the radical in its liquid environment have proven to be very useful
to predict the coupling factors quantitatively in such cases. , − , − Fast local dynamics were also postulated to be the reason for the
observed acyl chain proton DNP enhancements of up to −15 at
a magnetic field of 9.4 T in ordered lipid bilayers doped with nitroxide
radicals ( ). (Note that, in some papers, signal
enhancement is defined as (I – I0)/I0, which is different
from that given by and used throughout this review.) Surprisingly, OE-DNP enhancements
were also observed at high magnetic fields in solid ortho-terphenyl
doped with BDPA (1,3-bis(diphenylene)-2-phenylallyl) radicals at low
temperatures. Again, molecular dynamics
simulations and quantum chemical calculations revealed fast local
dynamics of BDPA, rationalizing the size and field dependence of the
OE-DNP enhancements observed at high magnetic fields. , 
 It has been demonstrated by several groups that
sufficient OE-DNP
enhancements can be indeed achieved on liquid samples even at high
magnetic fields. The main restriction to real applications is due
to the strong sample heating by microwave excitation and/or the strongly
restricted sizes of the sample that can be put into a MW resonance
structure. This reduces the typical NMR sample size by a larger factor
than the achieved OE-DNP enhancement. Therefore, the method can so
far not be used to enhance NMR signals of large volume samples at
high magnetic fields. Thus, most studies at high magnetic fields have
been centered on the investigation of the fundamental mechanism responsible
for the OE-DNP efficiency and the optimization of the experimental
conditions. Because OE-DNP at high magnetic fields relies on a short-distance
encounter complex between the DNP agent and the target molecule, it
could also be interesting for studies of specific interactions and
complexes in biomolecular systems. Applications of OE-DNP at high
magnetic fields might be of interest for samples which are naturally
limited in size, as the output from a high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) analysis or a microstructured chemical reactor, or which are
restricted to 2D-surfaces as, for example, ordered lipid bilayers
or catalyst surfaces. In such cases, the small amount of available
sample could be enhanced by OE-DNP and observed with high enough chemical
shift resolution. Further development of probe structures with efficient
MW excitation of samples much larger that the fundamental MW wavelength
and sensitive NMR detection with high spectral resolution might be
possible to achieve and would open up many avenues to new and interesting
applications.
Conventionally, OE-DNP utilizes thermal equilibrium
polarization
of unpaired electron spins to enhance polarization of nuclear spins,
as discussed above. At the same time, an attractive yet challenging
possibility mentioned in is to use hyperpolarized electron spins
in OE-DNP experiments, thereby increasing the maximum achievable nuclear
spin polarization enhancements beyond the γe/γn ratio. One example of the implementation of such approach is the use of chemically induced dynamic electron
polarization (CIDEP; ) generated via the radical-triplet pair mechanism
(RTPM); this possibility is illustrated in . Several other examples of various DNP
effects in short-lived radicals in solution can be found in .
 

3.3.

## Solid-State Dynamic Nuclear Polarization with
Magic Angle Sample Spinning
3.3.1.

## The Technique,
Similar to DNP based
on the Overhauser effect (OE-DNP, ), DNP enhancement in solid-state NMR spectroscopy
relies on polarization transfer from unpaired electrons to the coupled
neighboring nuclear spins ( ) upon MW irradiation near the electron
Larmor frequency, providing the maximum sensitivity enhancement ε
= γe/γn of, e.g., |ε| ≈
658 for protons. In fact, OE-DNP, which is currently mainly exploited
for DNP in liquids, was originally demonstrated in metallic lithium. This pioneering experiment stimulated research
into the spin physics of DNP, and a number of other solid-state DNP
mechanisms that are discussed below were discovered in the late 1950s
and early 1960s. − The potential of DNP to increase the NMR sensitivity for rare or
low-γ nuclear spins in the solid state was soon realized, and with the introduction of suitable probe
hardware, the DNP technique became compatible
with modern solid-state NMR approaches, i.e., with cross-polarization
(CP) and magic angle spinning (MAS). This in turn led to the first
high-resolution DNP-enhanced solid-state NMR studies in the 1980s,
reported on materials such as coal, doped polymers or diamond thin
films. , These experiments were carried out at room
temperature and low magnetic fields, typically 1.4 T, in a handful
of laboratories worldwide. Thus, DNP-enhanced solid-state NMR under
MAS remained little used before experiencing a renaissance in the
90s, thanks to the work done by Griffin and co-workers who, with the
introduction of gyrotron sources capable of delivering high-power
high-frequency continuous microwaves, made it compatible with high
magnetic fields (>5 T) and demonstrated
that high sensitivity gains could be accomplished at cryogenic temperatures
(<100 K) using nitroxide dopants as the source of electron polarization. The first application on a biomolecule was
reported in 1997 with the DNP-enhanced 15N NMR spectrum
of the T4 lysozyme protein in glycerol–water solutions frozen
at 40 K, doped with the nitroxide free radical 4-amino-TEMPO. The data were acquired at a magnetic field
of 5 T and at a spinning frequency of 3.2 kHz, and enhancement factors
of up to 100 were reported. Over the years, the efficiency of DNP
MAS NMR has been improved steadily, notably with the introduction
of ever-more efficient polarizing agents and optimized sample formulations
(detailed below). Today, DNP signal enhancements of ∼100 to
300 can be typically achieved on commercial instruments operating
at ∼100 K. Enhancement factors of 200 were recently reported
at the highest magnetic field available today for DNP MAS NMR, 21.1
T, at a spinning rate of 65 kHz using a 0.7 mm cryogenic MAS probe. 
The general principle of DNP-enhanced
solid-state NMR under MAS is illustrated schematically in . In the case of
a radical-free substrate, the polarizing agent (the source of unpaired
electrons) is typically introduced in the form of an exogenous mono-
or biradical dissolved in a glass-forming solution. Depending on the
system of interest, other, more appropriate ways of formulating the
sample were proposed, and these are discussed below. Continuous irradiation
of the cryogenically cooled sample with microwaves at or near the
EPR frequency results in transfer of polarization from the highly
polarized electron spins of the paramagnetic dopant to the protons
of the substrate through a number of mechanisms described in the next
few paragraphs. Proton–proton spin diffusion, mediated by the
protons of the frozen solvent matrix, then relays the hyperpolarization
among the 1H nuclei to the molecular solid or material
under study, where it is finally transferred to low-γ nuclear
spins such as 13C, 29Si, 15N, 31P, 27Al, 17O, etc., either by cross-polarization
or by any other 1H-X dipolar-based polarization transfer
scheme. This methodology is referred to as indirect DNP. We note here
that indirect DNP generated by 1H-X cross-relaxation transfers
mediated by methyl reorientation has also been described. Alternatively, the large electron polarization
of the polarizing agent can be transferred directly to the low-γ
nuclei of interest and observed in a single-pulse experiment, a process
called direct DNP. As will be discussed later on, homonuclear spin
diffusion among rare, low-γ nuclear spins can also be exploited
to efficiently distribute the directly or indirectly enhanced nuclear
polarization.
 Several schemes have been described and implemented
for DNP MAS
NMR that transfer the polarization from the unpaired electrons of
the dopant to adjacent nuclei. The underlying mechanisms have been
reviewed quite extensively. , Here, we briefly describe
the three main mechanisms encountered in DNP-enhanced solid-state
NMR: the solid effect, the cross effect and the Overhauser effect.
Their relative efficiency is dictated by several factors, such as
molecular structure of the polarizing agent, its concentration, its
electronic properties (from relaxation rates of the electrons to the
size of magnetic interactions), as well as external magnetic field
strength, sample temperature, and spinning frequency.
The solid
effect (SE), discovered in the late 1950s, − is a two-spin process in a dipolar-coupled spin system comprising
one electron and one nuclear spin ( ). It relies on nominally forbidden two-spin
transitions upon microwave irradiation at ωMW = ωe + ωn or ωMW = ωe – ωn, where ωMW,
ωe, and ωn are the microwave frequency,
the electron, and the nuclear Larmor frequencies, respectively. Electron–nuclear
spin flips are excited, and the nominally forbidden zero-quantum (ZQ)
and double-quantum (DQ) transitions yield negative and positive enhancements,
respectively. The probabilities for these ZQ and DQ transitions scale
with 1/B02 and therefore the
efficiency of SE DNP diminishes at high fields. The SE is well-resolved for a radical with a narrow EPR
spectrum, i.e., if the EPR line width Δωe is
smaller than the Larmor frequency ωn of the nuclear
spin to be polarized (Δωe < ωn), such as trityl or BDPA (1,3-bisdiphenylene-2-phenylallyl; ), as well as for
paramagnetic metal ions and metal complexes. Preferable conditions
for the SE mechanism are high concentrations of slowly relaxing nuclear
spins together with low quantities of rapidly relaxing electron spins.
In this way, electron spins can interact with a number of dipolar-coupled
nuclear partners in a short time period and participate multiple times
in the electron–nuclear spin transitions. a shows the experimental field
profile for 1H DNP enhancement obtained with BDPA radical, where the two extrema that correspond to the
two SE conditions are separated by twice the nuclear Larmor frequency.
 The cross effect (CE) process, described in the
1960s, , is today the most popular mechanism in DNP
MAS NMR ( ). It involves three dipolar-coupled
spins: two electrons and a nucleus. When the difference of the EPR
frequencies of the two electrons ωe1 and ωe2 matches the Larmor frequency of the nucleus, some of the
eight energy levels of the three-spin system happen to be degenerate.
Upon irradiation at one of the two electron Larmor frequencies, electron–electron
flip-flops are induced that transfer the difference of electron polarization
to the nucleus. The saturation of the electron with the higher EPR
frequency leads to a negative enhancement while the saturation of
the other electron leads to a positive enhancement. The condition
ωn = |ωe1 – ωe2| is the so-called CE matching condition. The rotation of the sample
under MAS modulates the resonance frequencies of the electron and
nuclear spins and complicates this picture. The cross effect under
MAS has been recently described as a series of spin transitions of
different degrees of adiabaticity at avoided crossings (a.k.a. anticrossings)
of energy levels (LAC): (1) electron-microwave crossing, when the
microwave frequency crosses the EPR frequency of one electron (i.e.,
when ωMW = ωe1 or ωMW = ωe2); (2) three-spin crossing, when the difference
of the EPR frequencies crosses the NMR frequency (i.e., when ωn = |ωe1 – ωe2|);
and (3) electron–electron crossing when ωe1 = ωe2. − This mechanism is particularly
efficient for paramagnetic species having a broad inhomogeneous EPR
line (with the width larger than ωn), such as bis-TEMPO
biradicals, for which the CE matching condition between two nitroxide
moieties with different orientations is permitted by the anisotropy
of their g-tensors. b shows the field profile of DNP enhancement
obtained with TEKPol measured at 9.4
T, which is characteristic of dinitroxide
biradicals. Experiments are typically recorded at the magnetic field
yielding the maximum positive enhancement factor. As the EPR line
width of TEMPO-based biradicals increases linearly with the external
field, the efficiency of the CE mechanism is expected to scale at
least with the inverse of the field. Recent theoretical work on CE
DNP enhancements under MAS predicts a dependence between 1/B0 and 1/B03 for dinitroxides. , , Such a downward dependence is, however, not expected for CE DNP
when hetero- or hybrid biradicals composed of a nitroxide moiety linked
to a radical with a narrow EPR line are used. c shows the asymmetric field profile of
DNP enhancement obtained with HyTEK2, measured at 9.4 T, which is characteristic of hybrid biradicals.
 Under fast sample rotation, the MAS-induced modulation
of the two
electron frequencies leads to a sizable probability of nonadiabatic
electron–electron crossings that attenuate the spin polarization
differences between the electrons. This subsequently reduces nuclear
spin polarization achieved via the CE mechanism, a phenomenon called
nuclear depolarization, which also occurs in the absence of microwave
irradiation. , 
The Overhauser effect
(OE) ( ) is
a third mechanism that has recently
attracted a renewed interest in DNP MAS NMR after the discovery in
2015 that significant OE DNP enhancements could be observed in insulating
solids doped with BDPA and its derivatives. Importantly, the experimental data demonstrated that the efficiency
of the OE scaled favorably with increasing magnetic fields. The OE
is a two-spin process. However, in contrast to the SE, the microwave
irradiation is applied at the single-quantum EPR transitions of the
electron and the enhancement is generated by zero-quantum and double-quantum
relaxation ( , ). In
insulating solids, the OE is based on stochastic modulation of scalar
hyperfine couplings between electron and nuclear spins. The OE is observed on the field profile of
BDPA ( a)
midway between the frequencies corresponding to the two SE conditions.
Finally, we note that while all these mechanisms rely on the presence
of hyperfine coupling between unpaired electrons and neighboring nuclei
(usually protons), there is currently no detailed understanding of
where these nuclei are located with respect to the polarizing agent,
and whether there is a distance of a few tenths of a nanometer within
which no DNP transfer would occur: the so-called spin-diffusion barrier
in which spin diffusion from the protons nearest to the electron to
the bulk is slowed down by the pseudocontact shifts. This question was recently addressed by analyzing the SE
between one electron and two protons (three-spin SE) using a trityl
radical in a glassy water/glycerol matrix. It was demonstrated that the size of the spin diffusion barrier
is less than 0.6 nm, and that the protons involved in the initial
transfer step reside on the trityl species.

3.3.2.

## Practical Aspects
DNP MAS NMR experiments
require the availability of dedicated instrumentation. As mentioned
previously, DNP MAS NMR was not accessible at high magnetic fields
until the 1990s, when Griffin and co-workers proposed the use of high-frequency
and high-power gyrotrons to generate continuous microwave irradiation.
In parallel, they developed cryogenic MAS probes to carry out experiments
at low temperatures where the saturation of the electron spin transitions
is facilitated and their polarization is larger. Commercial DNP hardware
is nowadays available from Bruker Biospin, which is built according
to the design initially proposed by Griffin’s group. , In this design, microwaves are generated by fixed-frequency gyrotrons
capable of producing 50 W at 263 GHz (9.4 T) and 395 GHz (14.1 T),
and 20 W at 527 GHz (18.8 T). The microwaves are supplied to the NMR
probe via a transmission line that irradiates continuously a 3.2 (sapphire),
1.3, or 0.7 mm (zirconia) rotor ( a). The NMR magnet is equipped with a sweep
coil, the current in which is adjusted to achieve an optimal field
for DNP transfer. The probe cooling is achieved via three independent
cold nitrogen gas channels (the bearing, drive, and variable temperature
gas) through a liquid nitrogen heat exchanger. A sample temperature
of around 100 K is typically reached, which can be measured by inserting
microcrystalline KBr in the NMR rotor. The distribution of the microwaves
strongly depends on the design of the probe, such as the use of converging
lenses or spacing of the windings of the RF coil, as well as on the
rotor diameter and the magnetic field. 
 Furthermore, various groups have recently introduced
ultralow-temperature
(∼30 K) NMR probes suitable for MAS NMR experiments. Several
designs have been proposed, where helium is used as cold gas for sample
cooling and spinning within low-cost, closed loop systems. , At these low temperatures, a substantial improvement in the DNP
polarization transfer is expected due to prolonged electron relaxation
times. A proton DNP enhancement factor as high as 677 was thus reported
at a sample temperature of 55 K. Ultralow
temperatures also open the possibility of exploiting compact, low-power
microwave sources, such as solid-state diode sources or klystrons.
These latter have been shown to be also suitable for DNP MAS NMR at
around 100 K, although smaller enhancements
than those achievable with high-power gyrotrons were reported. More
recently, it was demonstrated that 250 mW diode sources operating
at 263 GHz could be employed to get sizable proton enhancements of
up to 120 at the sample temperature of 100 K. 
While these low-cost devices currently provide lower
DNP enhancement
factors than high-power sources ( b), they can be rapidly swept over a wide
range of frequencies and can generate pulses of microwave radiation,
thus holding promise for the near-future developments in the DNP MAS
NMR instrumentation. Finally, we note the recent demonstration that
electron decoupling (though not yet available on commercial instrumentation)
could be beneficial for improving spectral resolution in DNP MAS NMR. 
A significant number of polarizing agents
have been proposed as
exogeneous electron sources to enable efficient solid-state DNP under
MAS. They mostly belong to four main families: dinitroxides, hetero-
or hybrid biradicals, derivatives of BDPA, and paramagnetic metal
ions. The design of efficient polarizing agents for DNP MAS NMR is
an extremely active area of research, with continuous progress over
the last 20 years. Here, we briefly review the stepwise advances that
have led to the paramagnetic agents in use today as well as their
relative merits, notably with respect to their DNP performance at
high magnetic fields and/or high MAS frequencies. Dinitroxides and
heterobiradicals invoke CE DNP, whereas BDPA derivatives are suitable
for SE and OE DNP, and paramagnetic metal ions for SE DNP.
While
the first DNP MAS NMR experiments were performed using samples
doped with high concentrations of the nitroxide monoradical 4-amino-TEMPO, it was demonstrated in the mid-2000s that dinitroxides,
in which two TEMPO radicals were linked together to control the size
of their electron–electron dipolar interaction, provided significantly
higher DNP enhancement factors. This
discovery led to the introduction of TOTAPOL dinitroxide biradical (shown in a) that has been used by the DNP MAS NMR
community for more than a decade. Rigid tethers constraining the mutual
orientation of the two TEMPO moieties in a nearly orthogonal conformation
were later proposed with the bis-TEMPO-bisketal (bTbK) biradical ( a). The design of bulky radicals having long electronic
relaxation times facilitating the saturation of the EPR lines was
another landmark achievement that led to the introduction in 2013
of TEKPol and AMUPol ( ). Today, these two biradicals are among the most efficient polarizing
agents for DNP MAS NMR at intermediate magnetic fields, providing
proton enhancement factors of ∼200–300 at 9.4 T and
100 K in frozen organic and aqueous solutions, respectively. Several
variants were proposed. , Notably, the importance
of the local (open) geometry around the unpaired electrons was recently
demonstrated, and new, highly efficient, urea-based biradicals introduced. 
While AMUPol- or TEKPol-like systems
remain the polarizing agents
of choice for today’s DNP MAS NMR, their performance drastically
degrades with increasing magnetic fields. This agrees with theoretical
analyses of CE DNP with dinitroxides under MAS conditions, predicting
that the probability for electron–electron–nucleus three-spin
crossings scales down with the magnetic field. , As a consequence, these dinitroxides become inefficient at magnetic
fields approaching ∼18 T. Thus, the proton enhancements achieved
with AMUPol and TEKPol typically drop from ∼200–300
at 9.4 T to ∼10–30 at 18.8 T.
One approach to
obtaining larger enhancements at high fields consists
in implementing CE DNP with radicals with narrow EPR lines. A direct 13C CE DNP enhancement at 5 T with a solution of sulfonated
BDPA (SA-BDPA) and trityl radicals achieved by saturating the slowly
relaxing SA-BDPA moiety was reported in 2013. In 2015, a new family of biradicals was introduced in which
the trityl radical characterized by a narrow EPR line and a nitroxide
are chemically tethered. In contrast
to dinitroxides, these hybrid biradicals, dubbed TEMTriPols, yield
DNP enhancements that increase with magnetic field. A proton signal
enhancement factor of 65 at 18.8 T (two times higher than with AMUPol
at this field strength) was reported with the best radical in this
series, TEMTriPol-1. This work notably highlighted the key role of
exchange coupling in the design of biradicals for DNP in very high
fields. Several TEMTriPol derivatives were recently proposed for efficient
DNP MAS NMR of biomolecules. 
Along
similar lines, a new family of heterobiradicals consisting
of a BDPA moiety linked to a nitroxide were introduced in 2018. 1H DNP enhancement factors of 180
at 18.8 T and 60 at 21.1 T were reported with HyTEK2, the best radical
in the series. Importantly, hybrid or heterobiradicals show a favorable
spinning-frequency dependence and no or little depolarization. In other words, the absolute sensitivity gain
that they provide does not decrease with increasing MAS frequencies,
in contrast to the case for AMUPol- or TEKPol-like radicals. Based
on the idea that relatively high magnetic interactions led to improved
DNP performance at high magnetic fields, the structure of nitroxide
biradicals was recently revisited. New water-soluble dinitroxides,
dubbed AsymPolPOKs and TinyPols were proposed that substantially outperform
AMUPol at 18.8 T. Notably, proton DNP
enhancement factors as high as 90 and 38 were reported with the TinyPol
biradical in bulk frozen solutions at 18.8 and 21.1 T, respectively.
BDPA derivatives are another family of polarizing agents suitable
for DNP MAS NMR. As already briefly mentioned, they recently received
a renewed interest after the discovery that these radicals provided
efficient OE DNP at high magnetic fields. Proton sensitivity enhancement factors of up to 100 could be achieved
at 18.8 T with BDPA in OTP, a solvent that forms a rigid glass at
cryogenic temperatures. However, OE
DNP in insulating solids currently requires build-up times of several
tens of seconds, which may compromise the gain in overall sensitivity.
The molecular stochastic motions responsible for OE DNP in BDPA have
been elucidated by molecular and spin dynamics simulations and mixed-valence compounds have been recently
proposed as efficient polarizing agents for OE DNP at high field. 
Finally, paramagnetic transition metal
and lanthanide complexes
can also be employed as the electron source for DNP MAS NMR. High-spin
Gd3+ and Mn2+ metal complexes were used to efficiently polarize low-γ nuclei such
as 13C and 15N via the SE. Recently, a proton
enhancement of 37 was measured at 100 K and 9.4 T in aqueous solutions
for [Gd(tpatcn)] (tpatcnH3 = 1,4,7-tris[(6-carboxypyridin-2-yl)
methyl]-1,4,7-triazacyclononane). These
paramagnetic metal complexes represent promising alternative polarizing
sources to dinitroxides, hybrid biradicals, or BDPA derivatives, notably
in reducing environments, as discussed below.
 shows
the molecular structure of some of the most efficient polarizing agents
available today for DNP MAS NMR in aqueous or organic solutions at
both intermediate and high magnetic field regimes, and summarizes their DNP performance.
This latter is usually assessed from the enhancement factor ε
defined as the intensity ratio in NMR spectra recorded with microwaves
on and off. However, other parameters have to be considered in order
to evaluate the real, overall sensitivity gain provided by DNP. In
particular, the polarization build-up time as well as the magnitude
of the depolarization induced by the paramagnetic agent and its propensity
to quench part of the sample by paramagnetic effects are key factors
that affect the efficiency of a polarizing agent. Several articles
and reviews have recently described the relevance of these factors
for a proper comparison of radicals’ performance under various
experimental conditions. , 
 Sample formulation is very important in DNP MAS NMR,
and many efforts
have been devoted to developing widely applicable sample formulation
procedures providing high enhancement factors on the systems of interest.
The most common procedure for intrinsically radical-free substrates
consists in embedding them into a glass-forming matrix that contains
the polarizing agent. Glycerol/water or DMSO/water mixtures (also
known as “DNP juices”; DMSO is dimethyl sulfoxide) as
well as solvents such as TCE or organic phases such as OTP are frequently
employed as DNP polarizing matrices. Solutions that crystallize (i.e.,
do not form a glass) upon freezing lead to an inhomogeneous distribution
of the radicals and to poor DNP efficiency. For powdered molecular
solids and organic, inorganic and hybrid materials, samples for DNP
experiments are usually prepared by incipient wetness impregnation
(IWI). In this approach, the dry powders
are impregnated with a minimal amount of the radical-containing solution.
This latter either penetrates the pores of porous materials by capillary
action, or simply wets the surface of nonporous systems. In contrast,
most successful experiments on biomolecules have relied on dissolving
or immersing them in the solution containing the polarizing agent
before precipitation or sedimentation, while cellular preparations
are typically formulated from pellets resuspended in a radical matrix.
The solvent phase can possibly be removed by drying the sample after
impregnation in the so-called matrix-free approach that has been demonstrated on a range of biomolecular systems
including membrane proteins. Alternative matrices such as acrylamide
gels of various cross-linking densities have been proposed for substrates
prone to aggregation upon sample cooling such as quantum dots. Colloidal nanoparticles can also be dispersed
in mesoporous silica or over a support
material with favorable dielectric properties after immersion in the
radical solution. 
The overall
proton density in the DNP sample is a key parameter,
and partial deuteration of the polarizing matrix is often used to
channel the polarization more efficiently from the unpaired electrons
to the protons of a substrate. The concentration of the polarizing
paramagnetic agent is another crucial factor, as it determines not
only the signal enhancement factor ε and the build-up time of
the enhanced polarization, but also paramagnetic bleaching (i.e.,
the fraction of substrate that cannot be observed due to strong paramagnetic
effects induced by the unpaired electrons of the dopant), broadening
of NMR lines and reduction of nuclear spin coherence times. In practice,
the optimal radical concentration is often considered as the one providing
the highest overall sensitivity gain (as defined previously), or the
highest signal-to-noise ratio per unit time and per unit of mass for
the signals of interest. All these concentration effects have been
carefully investigated in model frozen glassy matrices, , − as well as in real samples. While optimal concentration typically
lies between 5 mM and 20 mM, a universal radical concentration does
not exist, notably as the affinity of the radical for the substrate
and therefore local concentrations may enter into play. Thus, the
optimal radical concentration to investigate surfaces is not the same
across materials but depends on their surface area as well as on interactions
with functional groups. 
The potential
reduction of the radical by the substrates of interest
is another element to consider when formulating the DNP sample. Dedicated
strategies have thus been designed to investigate surfaces where highly
reactive species (e.g., Lewis acidic metal centers in heterogeneous
catalysts) lead to the degradation of the exogenous polarizing agent
and/or to a modification of the properties of the material (e.g.,
deactivation of the catalyst by coordination of the free radical).
Polarizing agents that encapsulate the radical into hydrophobic carbosilane
dendrimers have thus been proposed to inhibit a direct contact with
reactive surfaces and restore sizable enhancement factors. Deleterious interactions with the exogenous
dopant could also be reduced by tuning the surface hydrophobicity
of nanoparticles, so as to promote their aggregation in the polarizing
solution, which in turn prevents a (bulky) radical from diffusing
between particles and reacting with the surface fragments. It was recently shown that adsorption of pyridine
molecules on the surface of a reactive material prior to IWI was an
effective approach to prevent a close proximity between radicals and
reactive acid sites. Along similar lines,
a sterically hindered mononitroxide, less prone to reduction than
AMUPol or TOTAPol-like molecules, was proposed for DNP MAS NMR of
cells. Finally, we note that metal complexes
were recently suggested as alternatives to dinitroxides for DNP formulations
in reducing environments. 
The
formulations described above are especially efficient in enhancing
NMR sensitivity of surface or subsurface layers of functional materials
or the cores of protonated solid-state compounds (including biomolecules
and microcrystalline molecular solids), where the enhanced nuclear
polarization around electrons is efficiently transported from protons
of the polarizing medium to the surface and then possibly to the bulk
of the substrates by proton–proton spin-diffusion. As already
briefly mentioned, spin diffusion among low-γ, spin-1/2 nuclei
can also be exploited to relay nuclear hyperpolarization from the
surface to the bulk of inorganic materials. Alternatively, specific formulation protocols have recently been
proposed to polarize proton-free materials, consisting in doping inorganic
solids with paramagnetic ions such as Gd(III) and Mn(II) distributed
in the bulk sample that act as endogenous DNP agents. Such formulation protocols lift the requirement
of efficient spin diffusion among rare nuclei and yield sizable direct
DNP enhancements at the core of the inorganic substrate. summarizes the
above-described DNP formulation efforts targeting proton-free systems.
 Finally, we note that some materials or biological
macromolecules
have naturally occurring endogenous polarization sources such as stable
organic radicals or paramagnetic metal ions , that can be exploited as free electron sources for DNP MAS NMR.
Also, it has been recently shown that γ-irradiation of inorganic
materials may induce formation of stable radicals that are suitable
for high-field DNP MAS NMR. 

3.3.3.

## Applications
DNP-enhanced solid-state
NMR under MAS is widely applied in materials science. Over the last
ten years, it has developed as a unique methodology for characterizing
the surface structure of organic, inorganic, and hybrid materials,
in an approach called DNP SENS (DNP surface enhanced NMR spectroscopy).
The large enhancement of the NMR signals provided by DNP is indeed
particularly relevant to probing the structure of surfaces as the
functionally relevant sites conferring their properties to functional
materials are often diluted and as isotopic labeling on surfaces is
often difficult, if not impossible. The first proofs of concept were
reported in 2010 on model mesoporous silica matrices of high surface
area. Since then, applications of DNP
SENS have flourished and concern a large range of substrates such
as high-performance organometallic or metal oxide catalysts, metal–organic
frameworks, ligand-capped nanoparticles, quantum dots, zeolites, biominerals,
and organic thin films. In these studies, the enhanced proton polarization
is usually transferred to low-γ spin-1/2 nuclei (13C, 31P, 29Si, 119Sn, or 15N) located at the surface of the materials. The signal of surface
quadrupolar nuclei, of interest in many modern inorganic or hybrid
materials, can be similarly enhanced. Several 27Al DNP
SENS NMR spectra have been reported for a variety of systems, including
on-surface species having relatively large quadrupolar broadening. , Successful DNP SENS experiments were also carried out on low-γ
and/or low abundance nuclei such as 17O at natural abundance, 43Ca, 89Y, 95 Mo, 47Ti, or 49Ti, or
on nuclei with extremely broad chemical shift anisotropy (CSA) patterns
such as 195Pt. , As is the case for
conventional solid-state NMR, the detection of low-γ nuclei
on surfaces can be facilitated by combining DNP with proton detection. Notably, a sensitivity gain by more than a
factor of 8 by indirect detection for 89Y DNP MAS NMR was
reported. For more details on the development
of DNP SENS in materials science, the reader may refer to recent reviews. , We further note that DNP MAS NMR brought new opportunities to the
field of catalysis, from the characterization
of the support itself to the full structure determination of single-site
species or the identification of reaction intermediates. , 
In the following, two selected recent case studies are described
that illustrate the strong amplification power of DNP for NMR of surfaces
and the unique structural insight that can be gained by this hyperpolarization
technique.
The first example concerns the detailed investigation
of Brønsted
acidity of catalytic oxide supports by 17O DNP SENS. In this work, the authors were able to observe
the surface 17O NMR signature at natural abundance for
various silica and silica–alumina materials. The signals of
aluminols, silanols and acidic bridging hydroxyls could be distinguished
as illustrated in . The authors were also able to measure the O–H bond
length with high accuracy (subpm precision) by implementing DNP-enhanced
2D proton-detected local field experiments, which report directly
on the lability of the OH protons and on the acidity of the oxide
surface.
 The second example refers to the characterization
of molecules
immobilized on wafers. By combining
DNP methods with Carr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill (CPMG)
acquisition and optimized sample formulations, 31P NMR
spectra could be acquired from less than ∼100 pmol oligonucleotide
functionalities deposited onto silicate glass and sapphire wafers
with surface areas on the order of 0.01 m2/g, as illustrated
in a. Overall
sensitivity enhancement factors of up to half a million and above
with respect to conventional NMR experiments were reported. Such an
improvement in sensitivity allowed the authors to perform 2D NMR experiments
( b), to probe
conformational changes due to ion binding as well as to follow photochemical
degradation reactions.
 DNP-enhanced NMR spectroscopy has recently emerged
as a high-sensitivity
approach to probe not only the surface but also the core of inorganic
materials. This has become possible thanks to recent formulation efforts
discussed above ( ). In particular, efficient DNP MAS NMR of bulk battery anode
materials, phosphor materials, metal oxides, and quartz has been reported. − , 
Applications of DNP MAS
NMR in pharmaceutical research date back
to 2014 when Rossini et al. demonstrated in a landmark paper that
the technique could be applied to characterize an active pharmaceutical
ingredient (API) in over-the-counter drugs. By impregnating ground tablets with a polarizing solution chosen
to be a nonsolvent for the solid compounds, DNP enhancement factors
of between 40 and 90 were reported at 9.4 T for various commercially
available formulations of the antihistamine drug cetirizine dihydrochloride,
containing from 4.8 to 8.7 wt % API. The DNP-enhanced 1D and 2D 1H-13C and 1H-15N solid-state
NMR spectra of the formulated APIs at natural abundance revealed direct
contacts between the API and some of the polymer excipients. The experiments
also enabled to measure in situ the size of the API domains within
the complex superstructure of the formulated drugs from the variation
of the DNP enhancement as a function of the polarization time or the
interscan delay. Since then, other key developments were achieved
in pharmaceutical research, with the demonstration that DNP-enhanced
NMR spectroscopy could be applied to distinguish drug polymorphs, for instance from their 35Cl NMR
signature in low wt% API-dosage forms, or to characterize the multicomponent structure of pharmaceutical
salts and cocrystals, drug-delivery
systems such as lipid nanoparticles, crystalline drug nanoparticles, or
TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibrils. 
In all these studies, the samples were prepared by IWI. An
alternative
approach was recently introduced for in situ DNP NMR investigation
of pharmaceutical drugs. It was proposed
to add polarizing agents directly during the preparation of the formulations,
with amorphous solid dispersions (ASD) obtained by either spray drying
or hot-melt extrusion, two processes widely used in pharmaceutical
industry. Proton enhancement factors of up to 25 were reported for
formulations doped with 1% AMUPol, which enabled rapid detection of
the API NMR signature in commercialized compounds of low drug loading.
Many pharmaceutical compounds contain fluorine atoms. A combination
of trifluoroethanol-d3 with 12 mM AMUPol
was proposed as a versatile glassy matrix for DNP-enhanced 19F NMR spectroscopy, and the 19F resonances of the fluorouracil
API diluted in an excipient matrix of cellulose were successfully
detected, as illustrated in . We finally note that
DNP MAS NMR has been recently applied to provide for the first time
an atomic-scale description of the interface between antigen and aluminum-based
adjuvants in vaccine formulations and to identify differences in bonding
strength depending on the adjuvant provider. 
 DNP-enhanced MAS NMR has also established itself
as a key spectroscopic
approach in structural biology to characterize the structure of large
biomolecular complexes such as amyloid fibrils, viral capsids and
membrane proteins, to probe intermolecular distances in protein–ligand
or protein–protein assemblies, and to elucidate structural
elements of proteins directly in their cellular environments. Several
recently published reviews provide an overview of the advances in
biomolecular DNP NMR. , 
Unlike the case of materials
and microcrystalline molecular solids,
the resolution of DNP-enhanced NMR spectra of biomolecules is drastically
compromised. Indeed, various conformers that undergo rapid exchange
at ambient temperature are frozen at the DNP cryogenic temperatures,
which leads to broad chemical shift distributions. Those same cryogenic
conditions, however, enable conformational ensembles to be directly
examined, , or transient species to be detected
during protein folding and assembly. 
Two representative studies are described below that highlight
the
outstanding potential of DNP in structural biology. The first refers
to DNP MAS NMR of ubiquitin at endogenous concentrations in human
cells, in which 1D and 2D in cell NMR
spectra of 13C-labeled ubiquitin introduced in the cellular
milieu by electroporation were detected with high sensitivity. The
proper internalization and location of the radical was tracked by
confocal microscopy using PyPol radical (a variant of AMUPol) conjugated
to a fluorescent tag ( a). Proton DNP enhancement factors as high as 130 and 35 were
reported at 9.4 T ( b) and 18.8 T, respectively, which enabled fast acquisition
of two- and three-dimensional correlation spectra of both in vitro
and in cell samples ( c). The assignment of the resonances suggested that ubiquitin
remains folded after delivery into the cells.
 The second study concerns time-resolved conformational
changes
during folding and self-assembly of melittin, a 26-residue peptide
that forms a helical tetramer at high pH. Using a dedicated apparatus for rapid solution mixing, freeze-trapping
and rotor filling, the sensitivity enhancement provided by DNP was
exploited to monitor the NMR signature of intermediate states. It
was demonstrated that helix formation in melittin after a rapid pH
jump was concomitant with the appearance of intermolecular contacts
characteristic of antiparallel dimers, as indicated by changes in
chemical shifts as well as by the detection of intramolecular contacts
in two-dimensional correlation spectra. Such an approach would be
impractical without sensitivity enhancement by DNP.

3.3.4.

## Frontiers and Challenges
DNP MAS
NMR is a rapidly evolving field of research, with numerous ongoing
developments in instrumentation, NMR methods, and formulation of the
samples. The new directions for the 21st century have been recently
reviewed. Here, we briefly mention some
of these emerging frontiers.
As discussed above, while extensive
research has been conducted on dinitroxides, these polarizing agents
show limited efficiency at high magnetic fields and fast MAS. However,
there is still much room for improvement in the chemistry of hybrid
biradicals and biradicals with narrow EPR lines. The ideal polarizing
agent for CE DNP at high field, which does not exist yet, would consist
of two radicals with electron Larmor frequencies separated by the
proton Larmor frequency. The development of metal-ion complexes for
DNP remains at an early stage. The synthesis of new triradical structures
may also expand the portfolio of effective DNP agents and open new
windows of opportunity. , 
In terms of
instrumentation, the development of low-power, compact
and cost-effective solid-state diode microwave sources in place of
gyrotrons is expected to accelerate, and although currently limited
to frequencies below 263 GHz, such sources will likely become more
and more widespread. In parallel, we anticipate that microwave sources
capable of phase-coherent pulses for electron decoupling and pulsed
DNP methods , will be developed. These technological
advances, jointly with the introduction of sophisticated time-domain
(non-CW) techniques, such as Nuclear Orientation Via Electron Spin
Locking (NOVEL) ( and ) or Time-Optimized (TOP) DNP, will open exciting experimental possibilities and will drive new
applications in the future. Notably,
pulsed DNP represents a potential solution to overcome the unfavorable
field dependence of CW DNP as well as to reconcile this technique
with applications at high temperatures.
Indeed, the requirement
to perform CW DNP at cryogenic temperatures
seriously restricts its applicability, notably for the study of solid
biomolecules and for the investigation of dynamic and real-time events.
Development of dedicated strategies suitable for elevated temperatures
is thus one of the main challenges of DNP MAS NMR in the future. Rigid
polarizing matrices that maintain high enhancement factors at ambient
temperatures have been proposed and implemented to monitor conformational
changes upon temperature increase in drug formulations. Recently, conduction electrons of lithium metal
were used for room-temperature OE-DNP NMR of battery materials, demonstrating
that NMR signals of molecular species at the solid-electrolyte interface
could be selectively enhanced. These
latter experiments open future avenues for in situ and operando DNP-enhanced
NMR of working materials.
In structural biology, following the
recent observations at 18.8
T and fast MAS, an increase in resolution
is envisioned for DNP NMR at even higher magnetic fields, where the
homogeneous component of the NMR lines will be largely reduced, a
regime which should facilitate in vitro or in cell structural investigation
of large protein complexes and biomolecular machines.

3.4.

## Dissolution Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
3.4.1.

## The Technique
Similar to OE-DNP
( ) and
MAS DNP ( ), dissolution dynamic nuclear polarization (dDNP)
exploits the much larger polarization of electron spins as a source
( ) to enhance nuclear spin polarization, theoretically, by factors
of up to γe/γn, i.e., |ε|
≈ 658 for 1H and even more for lower-γ nuclear
spins such as 13C, 15N, etc. ( ). Microwave irradiation is
applied at a frequency which is marginally nonresonant with respect
to the electron spin resonance frequency, which enables a flow of
electron spin polarization directly to nearby nuclear spins of interest. , The major difference with other DNP techniques is that dDNP aims to enhance nuclear spin polarization at a significantly
lower temperature, i.e., in experimental conditions where electron
spins are substantially polarized even in a moderate magnetic field
(for example, pe,therm ≈ 99.93%
at 1.2 K and 7.05 T, see ). Under microwave (MW)
irradiation, the out-of-equilibrium electron–nuclear spin system
is driven back toward its initial state population hierarchy via relaxation
phenomena. This redistribution process is dominated by electron spin
relaxation, which is orders of magnitude faster than nuclear spin
relaxation. The longitudinal electron relaxation time constant (T1e) is typically of the order of ∼100
ms at liquid helium temperatures, while
the nuclear spin–lattice relaxation time constant (T1n) is on the order of tens of minutes to hours.
Efficient saturation of electron spin transitions results in increased
nuclear spin polarizations with remarkable enhancements with respect
to thermal equilibrium nuclear polarizations. Finally, as the name
of the technique implies, the frozen polarized sample is converted
into the liquid state with retention of a substantial fraction of
nonequilibrium nuclear spin polarization.
The DNP mechanism(s)
operating in the presence of microwave irradiation hinges on the nature
and concentration of the polarizing agent, the nuclear spins of interest,
the temperature and the static magnetic field strength. The three
predominant mechanisms present under dDNP conditions
are the solid effect (SE), the cross effect (CE) and thermal mixing
(TM).
The two-spin SE mechanism is operative in a dipolar-coupled
single-electron–single-nucleus
spin system and is most efficient at the microwave irradiation frequency
ωMW = ωe ± ωn with radicals possessing a relatively narrow EPR line. The resulting
NMR signal enhancement (DNP profile) at these matching conditions is seen in . The CE is a two-electron–single-nucleus
spin mechanism with the matching condition ωe1 –
ωe2 = ωn, best implemented using
radicals with a wide EPR line such as the nitroxide TEMPO(L) or biradicals. CE DNP can sometimes also be observed at reduced
radical concentrations, , − despite the low probability of finding two radicals close enough
to each other to ensure sufficient coupling of their electron spins
and with such orientations that their EPR frequencies are separated
by ωn. As both SE and CE are widely used in MAS DNP,
they are described in more detail in . In contrast, TM is only active at low
temperatures (typically ≤4.2 K) where the inhomogeneously broadened
EPR line is characterized by fast spectral diffusion between spin
packets at different frequencies and behaves highly collectively under
microwave irradiation due to a strongly coupled spin system and slow
relaxation. Clearly, a large number of spin packets within a wide-line
EPR spectrum do not fulfill the CE condition. Rather, at lower temperatures
the TM mechanism becomes effective when T1e is sufficiently lengthened and spectral diffusion for electron spins
over the entire EPR line width is accomplished on a time scale less
than T1e. The TM mechanism is particularly
active in homogeneously broadened electron spin systems, i.e., at
relatively high electron concentrations.
 The low concentration of free electron spins compared
with nuclear
spins of interest in a typical dDNP-compatible sample
implies that only clusters of nuclear spins localized in the vicinity
of the polarized electron spins become hyperpolarized directly. Nuclear
spin diffusion can then effectively spread the existing polarization
throughout the sample if the bulk nuclear spins are in dipolar contact
with a polarized nuclear spin, although
with less efficiency for the nuclear spins in the immediate vicinity
of the paramagnetic center (the “core”), since the unpaired
electron can dramatically shift the resonance frequencies of the nearby
nuclear spins. Ultimately, hyperpolarization
of nuclear spins spreads by spin diffusion to nuclei in the electron-spin-depleted
regions of the frozen sample which do not participate in direct hyperpolarization.
It should also be noted that the NMR signals deriving from the core
nuclear spins are “bleached” due to large frequency
shifts and short nuclear spin–spin relaxation time constant
(T2n) attributed to strong hyperfine interactions
with nearby electron spins. The enhanced NMR signals therefore largely
correspond to bulk nuclear spins which are hyperpolarized via nuclear
spin diffusion.

3.4.2.

## Practical Aspects
Ardenkjær-Larsen
and co-workers first presented their dDNP instrumentation
back in 2003 ( ). Two key system requirements were clearly
necessary: (1) low temperatures (T) commonly provided
by a bath of liquid helium with 1.2 K < T <
4.2 K; and (2) a sufficiently strong magnetic field (B0), instrumentation for state-of-the-art dDNP experiments provides a magnetic field B0 in the range from 3.35 to 7.05 T. Recently, dDNP at higher magnetic fields has also been achieved. , A major part of a dDNP instrument, the “polarizer”,
is composed of a superconducting NMR magnet and a cryostat with a
reservoir of liquid helium to keep the sample suitably cold for extended
periods of time (many hours). Cryostats specifically designed for dDNP experiments minimize consumption of liquid helium and
have tailor-made components for sample insertion/dissolution and microwave
irradiation.
 Another important part of a dDNP
instrument is
a microwave source and the system for delivery of microwaves to the
sample region. The microwave frequency itself is defined predominantly
by the magnetic field strength of the polarizer, and minimally by
the choice of target nuclear spins to be polarized. A beam of microwave
radiation, although not necessarily coherent, is required. It is therefore
possible to use oversized waveguides to reduce power attenuation during
microwave delivery. Precisely positioned mirrors are housed within
the waveguide, directing the microwave beam through the radiofrequency
(RF) probe (see below) to reach the sample volume. Microwave power
of a few tens of mW at the position of the sample is sufficient to
saturate a specific part of the EPR spectrum, and as a result, microwave
powers as low as only 25 to 100 mW are typically used. 
An RF probe placed within the bore of
the dDNP
polarizer fixes the position of an RF coil structure at the region
with the highest and most homogeneous magnetic field B0. Running through the RF probe center is a pathway for
an insertion stick to position a sample cup inside the RF coil network.
The RF probe also firmly supports coaxial cables, permitting excitation
RF pulses and NMR signals to propagate to and from the RF coil (sometimes
inductively coupled) via a preamplifier to the NMR spectrometer. Being
able to monitor the polarization build-up for a sample by detecting
NMR signals throughout a dDNP experiment is possible
with instrumentation such as the Oxford HyperSense polarizer. However,
the need for accurate quantification of nuclear spin polarization
and the ability to acquire quantitative thermal equilibrium NMR signals
without DNP but with high levels of sensitivity and stability drives
the development of highly sophisticated instrumentation, such as the
prototype polarizer produced by Bruker Biospin. The majority of RF
probes for dDNP are only suitable for one-channel
RF irradiation, and typically the build-up of 13C polarization
is primarily followed during the microwave irradiation time period.
In the past, several designs for RF coils were proposed in order
to monitor signal build-up during dDNP experiments.
Initially, such designs were intended for the detection of a single
type of nuclear spins (13C in particular) as, for example,
in the Oxford HyperSense polarizer and later on in the GE SpinLab
polarizer, as well as in some home-built dDNP equipment. , Such a design is typically based on a saddle coil, large enough
to allow sample dissolution and access from the top, connected via
a coaxial line (typically, 0.5–1 m long) to a remote tuning
and matching circuitry located outside of the cryostat. Such designs
may provide poor sensitivity and low RF field strengths B1 but are fully adequate to monitor polarization build-up.
In 2010, preliminary results were reported on the use of a doubly
tuned NMR circuit in the context of dDNP in order
to perform 1H to 13C cross-polarization (CP)
experiments. This concept was developed
further and resulted in a first publication of a working CP RF coil
under dDNP conditions at 3.35 T (although incompatible
with dissolution at that stage). This
first design was based on a locally tuned 4 mm diameter horizontal
solenoidal coil immersed in a liquid helium bath at 1.2 K together
with all the tuning and matching elements. This provided a means to
afford high quality factors and thus perform efficient CP experiments
with B1 values corresponding to nutation
frequencies exceeding 60 kHz on both channels. This first study reported
sensible improvements for 13C DNP, both in terms of the
final polarization attained and the acceleration of signal build-up.
This concept was further implemented in a polarizer operating at 6.7
T, resulting in 13C polarizations exceeding 70% in 20 min, and then coupled with sample dissolution. The RF coil design became more sophisticated, and consisted of two separate locally tuned
coils for 1H and 13C inductively coupled (no
electrical contact) to the coaxial line ( ). Similar techniques were subsequently
implemented by other groups using the solenoidal design, and later the
Alderman-Grant RF coil design with local double-tuning and matching
capabilities.
 One major downside of dDNP instrumentation
is
the high liquid helium consumption that working near 1 K implies,
and its associated cost. This can be circumvented by the use of cryo-consumption-free
instruments. Implementations of such hardware within the dDNP community are discussed in the literature. , , , Liquid helium is replenished by recondensation of evaporated helium
by a cryo-cooler integrated into the cryostat-magnet system. “Conventional”
polarizers typically require 50–100 L of liquid helium per
week (typ. $15–25 per liter, current pricing). Future versions
of commercial equipment will inevitably feature a cryo-consumption-free
technology which is already implemented in the GE SpinLab polarizer.
dDNP-compatible samples need to become glassy
when frozen to ensure a random distribution (i.e., no aggregation)
of polarizing agents upon freezing. A mixture of protonated and deuterated
solvents, e.g., H2O, D2O, etc., and glass-forming
compounds, e.g., glycerol, DMSO, etc., (added to avoid crystallization
upon freezing) is usually used to codissolve the sample of interest
and the chosen polarizing agents, e.g., TEMPO(L), trityl, etc., to
optimal concentrations. The presence of a small amount of protons
(typ. 10%) in a partially deuterated solvent is often beneficial in
experiments tailored to exploiting CP methodologies. The sample is
pipetted into a sample cup and inserted into the dDNP polarizer. The sample region is filled with liquid helium prior
to sample injection, which establishes a homogeneous glassy sample
upon contact of the dDNP mixture with the cryogenic
liquid inside the polarizer. At this point, the molecule of interest
and the paramagnetic agent are homogeneously embedded within the frozen
glassy solid. Alternatively, liquid dDNP mixtures
can be pipetted into a Dewar flask containing liquid nitrogen, and
the frozen beads quickly placed in the sample cup and transferred
to the polarizer before any melting occurs.
Dopants containing
free electron spins in a dDNP
sample deleteriously reduce the T1n of
liquid-state nuclear polarization after dissolution (see below). To
combat such a problem, a series of porous materials were synthesized
to spatially separate paramagnetic centers from the nuclear spins
to be polarized in the solid state. Other
sample formulation strategies that result in remarkably long values
of T1n utilize powders impregnated with
DNP juice or transient radicals produced by UV irradiation of the
sample. These strategies were employed in the transport of hyperpolarized
metabolites and are suitable for producing
radical-free solutions post dissolution. These approaches are discussed
in more detail later in this section.
Once the dDNP-compatible sample is inserted in
the polarizer and frozen, microwave irradiation is activated and,
depending on the radical type, polarizing agent concentration, and
choice of microwave frequency, the polarization of the nuclear spin
isotope of interest accumulates at a particular rate. As a rule of
thumb, a lower radical concentration gives a lower nuclear polarization
build-up rate, and as a result, a paramagnetic radical concentration
of 15–50 mM is used for dDNP experiments.
This ensures that, for 1H nuclear spins at 3.8 K, the DNP
build-up time constants are suitably short, for example, τDNP ≈ 40 s at 50 mM TEMPO(L) concentration, and that
a sufficient nuclear polarization, e.g., p(1H) > 60%, is obtained within 5 × τDNP. At
higher
radical concentrations, although faster polarization build-up rates
can be achieved, this comes at the detriment of a reduced maximum
polarization. For 13C nuclear spins, polarization build-up
times are often much longer (on the order of hours) but the 13C polarizations achieved can be on the order of tens of percent.
At lower temperatures, greater nuclear spin polarization levels are
certainly achievable for all nuclear spin species but often with significantly
longer polarization build-up times.
In a conventional dDNP setup, after a satisfactory
nuclear polarization (e.g., p(13C) >
60%)
is achieved, a superheated solvent (e.g., D2O at >150
°C)
is directly injected into the sample cup through a “dissolution
stick” under helium gas pressure (6–9 bar). The use
of liquid-driven transfer of hyperpolarized samples has also recently
been proposed. The frozen dDNP solution rapidly melts upon contact with the warm solvent, so
long as the sample is raised above the liquid helium reservoir prior
to the injection of the superheated solvent jet to prevent the dissolution
medium from freezing in the liquid helium environment. Since the time
taken to dissolve the dDNP sample (seconds) is typically
much shorter than T1n, the relaxation
caused by paramagnetic sources at elevated temperatures prior to dissolution
is insignificant. However, the magnetic field at the point of dissolution
should remain relatively high (several tesla is best) in order to
maintain the hyperpolarization previously accrued in the solid state.
The RF probe (see above) must also act as a fluid pathway for the
quick (in a fraction of a second) expulsion of the hyperpolarized
sample from the dDNP polarizer. The newly liquid-state
sample is flushed out of the dDNP polarizer under
the pressure of helium gas and is propelled toward the point of use. Dissolving frozen samples polarized at liquid
helium temperatures provides the greatest possible signal enhancements
for solution-state NMR experiments.
Paramagnetic relaxation
in the presence of free electron species
in the liquid produced upon dissolution attenuates the lifetime of
hyperpolarized magnetization throughout the sample transfer stage
from the polarizer to the point of use. Relaxation due to paramagnetic
agents is most rampant in regions of low magnetic field, which can
be avoided by constructing a magnetic tunnel along the sample transfer
route. A permanent magnet Halbach array
with a sufficiently high magnetic field (hundreds of mT) is often
used for this purpose. Paramagnetic relaxation after dissolution can
be also countered by adding beads of frozen sodium ascorbate to the dDNP sample cup before hyperpolarization. Upon dissolution,
the individual beads of sample and ascorbate are melted simultaneously,
and the chemicals are intimately mixed by the hot jet of dissolution
solvent. The paramagnetic centers are scavenged by the ascorbate molecules
yielding ascorbyl radicals which rapidly disproportionate to diamagnetic
species in the hyperpolarized solution. 
An approach alternative to conventional dissolution is to
eject
the frozen hyperpolarized sample as a solid “bullet”, with the key advantage of its scalability toward
small (e.g., ≤80 μL) sample volumes suitable for high-resolution
NMR while maintaining high concentrations of target molecules. In
the practical implementation of this approach, the polarized frozen sample in a polytetrafluoroethylene
(PTFE) cylinder is transferred over a distance of a few meters in
as little as 70 ms using pressurized helium gas through a tunnel enclosed
in a solenoid that provides a magnetic field of ∼75 mT. Upon
arrival in the NMR magnet, the “bullet” is dissolved
in a preheated solvent, and the hyperpolarized solution is drawn into
a 5 mm NMR tube. A 13C polarization p(13C) > 30% was achieved for [1-13C]pyruvic acid.
Further refinement of this approach resulted in the NMR line widths
of the order of 3 Hz at similar levels of 13C polarization. 

3.4.3.

## Applications
dDNP has a direct impact on in vivo research. The first successful
study demonstrating the feasibility of hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate as a noninvasive marker of tumor metabolism was completed
in 2013. Hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate was safely injected in patients with prostate cancer and
real-time MRI experiments took advantage of the high intensity signals
to characterize pyruvate–lactate conversion rates in localized
tumors. dDNP has also
been employed to assess tumor grades − and to continuously
monitor cancer cells of living organisms in response to treatment. Today, hyperpolarized MRI is moving toward
clinical applications, which is an important driving force for the
whole field of dDNP research. A vast majority of
the studies using dDNP are indeed focusing on such
applications and are published at a high pace. As mentioned earlier,
most studies focus on detecting and following prostate cancers , and the potential metastasis to bone and liver ( ). Other studies have also shown the great potential of dDNP for detecting breast cancer, or
brain metabolism and glioblastoma. More recently, detection of renal tumors and even whole abdomen metabolism was reported.
 A number of applications of dDNP
related to NMR
spectroscopy solely are also emerging, especially as the method is
becoming increasingly robust and repeatable, , getting closer to high resolution NMR spectroscopy standards.
Hyperpolarized water has been gaining increased interest in NMR
experiments as of late and could be an alternative to gadolinium-based
contrast agents for MRI investigations. Recently, polarization levels of water after dissolution were reported
to be in excess of 65% after using UV-generated radicals (see below)
in dDNP experiments ( ). As
a result, a number of applications become possible, for example, the
opportunity to rapidly acquire 2D NMR spectra which reveal the nature
of ligand interactions with liposomes. Spontaneous transfer of magnetization from hyperpolarized water
to natural abundance nitrogen sites in urea was also demonstrated
and impressively observed with only a single 15N NMR signal
acquisition, which may open a new route for hyperpolarization of insensitive
nuclear spins.
 Since dDNP is somewhat restricted
to smaller molecular
sizes which ensure T1n times of more than
a few seconds necessary for sample dissolution and transfer, most
notably metabolites (including their ionic forms) have been thoroughly
investigated for biological applications. In addition to the aforementioned pyruvate and water, a number of
other small molecules have been screened for drug-binding studies,
alongside the study of cell extracts and heteronuclear metabolomics. , , A number of nonenzymatic reactions
have also been investigated with dDNP experiments,
including catalytic polymerization of dissolved hyperpolarized gases, ring-closing metathesis, and the rate determination of a Diels–Alder reaction. At the same time, the high levels of nuclear
polarization achieved with dDNP have allowed development
of applications focused on larger molecular sizes, such as 1H-15N 2D NMR experiments for the study of osteopontin, probing RNA refolding, and structural elucidation at natural isotopic abundance. 
The concepts of dDNP
and long-lived spin states
(LLSSs) were conceived at roughly the
same time, with the first publications appearing in 2003 and 2004, respectively.
However, the potential to have hyperpolarized substances with long
storage lifetimes was not realized until the two approaches were first
combined in 2009. Since then, a number
of LLSSs were produced with dDNP.
dDNP was put to use for small molecules with hindered-rotor
methyl groups at low temperatures, where the LLSSs are populated as
a result of the strong Zeeman polarization afforded by dDNP, similar to the case of the chemically
equivalent proton spin pair of the CH2 group of ethanol. Overpopulation of LLSSs for chemically inequivalent
nuclear spin pairs was also achieved by their direct overpopulation
in the frozen solid sample for the case of [1,2-13C2]pyruvic acid. Disappointingly,
the large isotropic chemical shift difference between the 13C-labeled nuclear sites engendered their rapid relaxation, and no
distinct advantages could be demonstrated compared to ordinary Zeeman
polarization. The monodeuterated methyl group of N-CH2D-2-methylpiperidine
displays a much smaller 1H chemical shift difference, and
as a result, hyperpolarized long-lived NMR signals were observed more
than one minute after dissolution. A
more impressive result, with hyperpolarized NMR signals persisting
for ca. 30 min, was demonstrated for 13C spin pairs by
the ingenious combination of magnetic field cycling and specific RF
pulse sequences. 
Biologically relevant
enzymatic conversion of a chemical compound,
such as fumarate into malate, was probed via dDNP. In this case, the magnetically equivalent fumarate
proton spins were trapped in an LLSS, and the silent LLSS was then
revealed as intense NMR signals via a chemical reaction. In another
example, LLSSs were used to accurately determine the dissociation
constants of weakly binding ligands to the protein Hsp90. The long lifetimes of the LLSSs permitted characterization
of ligands with an extremely wide range of affinities in competitive
binding studies. Since LLSS decay time scales are more sensitive to
ligand binding than the T1n, T1ρ, and T2n relaxation
time constants ( ), the scope of ligand screening can easily be extended to
arbitrary ligands by employing covalent attachment of functional groups
exhibiting LLSSs that can be readily overpopulated. These weakly binding spy ligands are displaced by high-affinity
competitors, with the approach enabling the use of substantially decreased
protein and ligand concentrations and significantly increased sample
throughput.
 The unusual combination of dDNP
with zero- and
ultralow-field (ZULF) NMR has recently shown promising results. , ZULF NMR is a modality of magnetic resonance which does not require
strong magnetic fields. Sufficient nuclear
spin polarization is often achieved by adopting hyperpolarization
techniques. ZULF NMR spectra of a handful of metabolites were enhanced
by factors of ca. 104 with dDNP employed
as the hyperpolarization method.

3.4.4.

## Frontiers and Challenges
Numerous
refinements of the dDNP technique were implemented
over the years. Adjustment of the microwave frequency at the source
is desirable in order to pursue hyperpolarization of different nuclear
spins with a range of radical sources. Additionally, the capability
to perform frequency modulation considerably boosts both the polarization
levels and build-up rates at reduced concentrations of free radicals ( ).
 The construction of dDNP RF probes
with multiple
RF-channel pulse and receive capabilities introduces the prospect
of performing more sophisticated NMR experiments under dDNP conditions. One such advent which has greatly contributed to
the output of dDNP experiments is the implementation
of CP and adiabatic demagnetization RF pulse sequences. The introduction of CP has forged a route to
impressively high levels of both 13C (phyp ≈ 60%) and 15N (phyp ≈ 25%) polarization, which can be achieved
in a mere few tens of minutes , ( ).
 Commonly, liquid-state polarization levels are
measured by comparing
the hyperpolarized NMR spectrum with the thermal equilibrium NMR spectrum
of the same sample, or a reference sample of known concentration,
taking into account differences in acquisition parameters, e.g., RF-pulse
flip angle, number of transients, receiver gain, etc. An alternative
strategy, known as spin polarimetry magnetic resonance (SPY-MR), which
does not rely on time-consuming acquisition of thermal equilibrium
NMR signals, allows for an instant quantification of polarization
since the detection of additional NMR signals is not required. For a scalar-coupled heteronuclear system of
two spin-1/2 nuclei, the liquid-state thermal equilibrium NMR spectrum
of either nucleus yields a doublet with NMR lines of approximately
equal intensity, since the polarization of both spin types is small.
Now consider the case where one spin (i) is hyperpolarized.
The polarization of the other spin (j) should be
sufficiently high as to allow single-shot detection of its NMR signal
after sample dissolution. The polarization of spin i can be inferred from the NMR spectrum of spin j, since, in this case, the doublet line shape is asymmetric. The
value of the polarization of spin i is directly read
out from the NMR spectrum of spin j by using the
following equation:
6 which assumes that both nuclear species have
gyromagnetic ratios of the same sign. Jij is the heteronuclear
scalar coupling constant, and ILFj and IHFj are the low-field
(LF) and high-field (HF) resonances of the NMR spectrum of spin j, respectively. Similarly, in the solid-state prior to
dissolution, indirect line shape polarimetry approaches have also
recently been proposed. One important
example is that of H2O and D2O. Low spin temperatures,
violating the high-temperature approximation for the nuclear Zeeman
interaction, lead to characteristic asymmetries in NMR powder spectra.
DNP has been employed to enhance the population of the ground nuclear
spin state of water molecules, which produce asymmetric 1H NMR spectra. This approach was recently
demonstrated for 1H echo-detected NMR spectra of H2O; it avoids time-consuming
comparisons with low intensity thermal equilibrium 1H NMR
spectra acquired without microwave irradiation. After ∼34 min
of DNP at 7.05 T and ∼1.2 K, a 1H polarization p(1H) = 75% was found by comparing the experimental
spectrum with line shape simulations ( ). Such an asymmetry is also present in
the 2H echo-detected NMR line shape of highly polarized
deuterium spins in D2O. 
 Another notable case is that of 15N2O. This
nontoxic anesthetic gas exhibits remarkably long hyperpolarization
storage lifetimes in low magnetic fields, and is therefore of great interest for the imaging modality MRI.
The 15N NMR line shape of 15N2O in
a solid-state matrix (frozen mixture doped with trityl radical in
an organic solvent) hyperpolarized by dDNP is additionally
highly asymmetric. 
Early in the
1980s, research groups started developing sample formulations
such as solid matrices grafted with nitroxide radicals which were later used in the context of OE-DNP for flowing solutions in and out of the
DNP volume. In 2013, this concept of polarizing matrices was implemented
in the contexts of MAS DNP and dDNP for the first
time. These hybrid polarizing solids (HYPSO) were successfully used
for dDNP thus yielding
pure hyperpolarized solutions while the matrices containing paramagnetic
free radicals could be filtered out inline during the dissolution
process ( ). HYPSO matrices are compatible with a number of molecules, , including those of biological interest, and remove the requirement
of adding glassing agents to produce dDNP-compatible
samples. The DNP performance of such matrices was subsequently improved
as a result of further development based on different pore geometries
and radical localization (such as within the pore walls of the material
itself rather than on its surface). , , In parallel to the development of silica matrices,
polymer matrices were implemented for dDNP, first as thermoresponsive hydrogels, and then
as thermoresponsive thermoplastics. The
great advantage of such approaches is that these polymers tend to
naturally precipitate during the dissolution process and are thus
easily filterable.
 More recently, the concept of hyperpolarizing polymers
(HYPOPs)
with increased pore sizes (typ. pores >100 nm in diameter) was
used
to generate hyperpolarization that can survive for hours. In this approach, free radicals are covalently
attached within the bulk (wall) of a porous polymer matrix that can
be impregnated with an arbitrary solution of molecules. Pores (typ.
0.1–1 μm in diameter) are tailored in such a way that
hyperpolarization can be built up rapidly (within minutes) on 1H nuclear spins and then transferred via conventional CP protocols
to 13C nuclear spins, subsequently lasting for hours or
days at cryogenic temperatures. Recently, levels of polarization exceeding p(13C) > 25% were reported using this approach
in HYPOP matrices. The polarization was generated within tens of minutes,
while polarization lifetimes exceeded five hours, providing the possibility
of transporting the hyperpolarized sample to the point of use. , Furthermore, hyperpolarization of 13C nuclear spins in
isotopically labeled metabolites alanine and glycine was shown to
survive a 16-h storage period in a moderate magnetic field outside
of a polarizer ( ). The use of an impregnated
micropowder with radical sources hidden away from the nuclear spins
of interest was key to extending storage lifetimes and allowed an
overall 13C polarization enhancement of up to 3 orders
of magnitude to be observed almost a day later. Being able to transport
hyperpolarization for such long periods would remove the requirement
of the polarization process being carried out close to the point of
use.
 An alternative strategy is based on the use of
photoinduced radical
species that can be transiently generated by UV irradiation and are
subsequently annihilated thermally at temperatures below the dDNP sample melting point. This enables removal of hyperpolarized 13C-bearing substances from the polarizer in the solid state,
since the radicals are annihilated and no longer significantly contribute
to nuclear spin–lattice relaxation, while simultaneously maintaining
augmented 13C polarization levels; this has applications
to the storage and transport of hyperpolarized products. The first dDNP experiment using UV-induced radicals dates back to
2013 and was conducted with neat pyruvic acid. Later on, it was shown that by warming up the dDNP sample without melting it, radicals could be annealed while preserving
a large fraction of the hyperpolarization in a radical-free environment,
therefore enhancing the hyperpolarization lifetime by orders of magnitude.
Melting the solid-state sample many minutes after its extraction from
the polarizer revealed liquid-state 13C polarizations for
pyruvic acid of ∼8%. 

3.5.

## Chemically Induced Dynamic Electron Polarization
Chemically induced dynamic electron polarization (CIDEP) is a well-known
phenomenon that leads to perturbation of the populations of electron
spin energy sublevels in paramagnetic species ( ). In most cases, spin-polarized
radicals, triplet molecules or other paramagnetic species generated
as a result of CIDEP in the presence of a magnetic field can be detected
by EPR spectroscopy. To date, the CIDEP effect has been used for a
variety of purposes, including mechanistic investigations of organic
reactions , and analysis of macromolecular
solvent exposure and dynamics. , Further, in the context
of this review, CIDEP effects are important because, as stated in , nonequilibrium
electron spin populations can also serve as a useful source of nuclear
spin hyperpolarization. Indeed, polarization of electron spins generated
via CIDEP can lead to sensitivity enhancements in NMR spectroscopy. Examples of the use of polarized free radicals
and triplet electronic states of molecules for signal enhancement
in NMR can be found in and , respectively. While
CIDEP has been observed in both solids and liquids, this overview
focuses on applications to the liquid state, with only brief excursions
to solids.
Several CIDEP mechanisms are known to date. Most
of them involve transient or stable doublet-state radicals (i.e.,
radicals bearing a single unpaired electron) or nonequilibrium singlet
or triplet molecules, biradicals, or radical pairs. , 
The major proposed mechanisms for the CIDEP effect are summarized
next. We first consider the triplet mechanism , (TM) of CIDEP, which can be further categorized into population-type
(p-type TM, a) or depopulation-type (d-type TM, b). The CIDEP phenomena that proceed via
both the p- and d-type TM involve a ground-state precursor molecule
(S0P) that is eventually converted into a triplet-state
intermediate (T1P). This conversion often takes place upon
photoexcitation of S0P within the manifold of molecular
singlet states SnP (see ). In the case of p-type TM ( a), anisotropic
spin–orbit coupling in P leads to spin-selective intersystem
crossing (ISC) from the Sn to the Tn manifold,
resulting in largely unequal populations of the three triplet sublevels
in T1P. , In contrast, in the case of
d-type processes ( b), nonequilibrium populations of the three triplet sublevels
of T1P are generated due to their unequal decay rates.
Both processes can yield a strong hyperpolarization of electron spins
of T1P, which is observable as a major signal enhancement
in the EPR spectra of molecular triplets in glassy solids (see below
and also ) and in solution. For chemically reactive
triplet molecules, the T1P state can then yield doublet
radicals (DR•) each possessing a single
unpaired electron (or other paramagnetic species, e.g., ion-radicals
or biradicals). These radicals can inherit strong hyperpolarization
of electron spins from their triplet precursors, thus providing a
major signal enhancement in their EPR spectra. Thus, a key feature
shared by the p- and d-type TM processes is that they both go through
a triplet intermediate bearing nonequilibrium electron spin sublevel
populations. The two mechanisms ultimately give rise to similar spectral
features in the EPR spectra of doublet radicals, with all resonances
of each species bearing the same phase and displaying uniform initial
enhancement.
 Another common CIDEP mechanism proceeds via radical
pairs (RPs)
with a certain overall electron spin multiplicity (a triplet or a
singlet), , , either in a photoinduced or sometimes in a thermal chemical reaction,
and is commonly referred to as the radical pair mechanism (RPM). This
CIDEP mechanism can be further divided into two subcategories, depending
on whether the triplet-singlet mixing happens between S and T0 ( c) or S and T– (via level anticrossing, d) electron spin
states of a radical pair or a biradical. In typical X-band EPR experiments,
the dominant transition is between T0 and S states ( c). This transition
probability depends on the g-factors, hyperfine coupling constants
and nuclear spin configurations of both radicals. In the end, variable
degrees of polarization levels (both positive and negative) are generated
for resonances corresponding to different nuclear spin configurations.
As a result of this hyperpolarization, the EPR spectrum shows absorptive
and emissive enhancements for distinct spectral lines, e.g., an A/E
(absorption/emission for the low/high field EPR signal component)
or E/A pattern. On the other hand, if the hyperfine interaction is
strong and translational diffusion is slow, mixing between the T– and S states via LACs (level anticrossings) may become
dominant ( d), leading to emissive enhancements. This mechanism is expected to be particularly efficient when the
exchange interaction J of the two radical centers averaged over the
T-S mixing time is sufficiently large to bring the T– (in the usual case of J < 0) and S energy levels closer in energy
(see ).
A typical example is provided by transient biradicals with sufficiently
short linkers between the two radical centers. 
Alternatively, CIDEP can be generated via the spin-correlated
radical
pair mechanism − (SCRPM), whose major features are illustrated
in e. This
mechanism involves chemical generation of an RP with the two electron
spins correlated in such a way that only some of the possible electron
spin states of the newly generated RPs are initially populated. This
phenomenon leads to nonequilibrium intensities of EPR transitions
associated with those states. In the example shown in e, the spin-correlated radical
pair (SCRP) originating from a singlet precursor exclusively populates
the |αβ > and |βα > electron spin states.
This scenario leads to two antiphase CIDEP doublets, upon detection
via time-resolved EPR (TR-EPR). Importantly, to observe the SCRPM
CIDEP effect in an EPR spectrum, there must be a weak but nonzero
exchange coupling J between the two unpaired electrons (or dipolar
coupling if molecular motion is slow enough). If this coupling is
too strong, the exchange interaction can no longer be treated as a
perturbation to the Zeeman Hamiltonian and a more advanced treatment
of the phenomenon becomes necessary. Conversely, if J = 0, the intensity of the spectral lines with opposite
phases (within each antiphase doublet) cancels out, leading to no
net EPR signal. In practice, SCRPM CIDEP in liquids usually requires
restricted translational diffusion of the radicals composing the RP.
In this way, a significant exchange coupling persists over the course
of the RP lifetime. Common approaches to achieve slow and/or restricted
translational diffusion include embedding the spin-correlated RP into
micelles, using highly viscous solvents, employing biradicals belonging
to a rigid structural framework, or focusing on structurally constrained
photosynthetic systems. , Alternatively, CIDEP
proceeding via SCRPM can be generated in the solid state. , In contrast to RPM CIDEP, which requires some time for the S and
T electronic states of an RP to mix, SCRPM CIDEP is generated as soon
as the SCRP is produced.
In addition to direct polarization
of multiple paramagnetic species
as a result of CIDEP, the initially polarized species can then transfer
their spin polarization to other paramagnetic species ( f), thereby propagating hyperpolarization
throughout the sample. This process is known as electron spin polarization
transfer (ESPT). A typical CIDEP proceeding
via the ESPT mechanism is illustrated in f. ESPT is possible upon both reactive and
nonreactive collisions. Polarization can be transferred from a hyperpolarized
triplet molecule to a doublet radical, or between two different stable
radicals when one of them is polarized via an appropriate CIDEP mechanism,
mediated by spin exchange. Polarization transfer via ESPT was also
observed upon chemical reactions involving various radicals, biradicals,
and diamagnetic and/or paramagnetic molecules. 
Another mechanism involving molecular triplet states
is the radical-triplet
pair mechanism (RTPM, a), which was initially proposed in 1989 and further explored later. − CIDEP proceeding via
RTPM requires a stable doublet radical (DR•) and, most typically, a chromophore photoexcited to a triplet electronic
state (TX). The two components can be either free in solution,
or tethered to each other via a flexible covalent link. Upon collision
between DR• and TX, two different
types of radical-triplet pairs are produced; they are shown enclosed
in square brackets in a. Namely, the radical–triplet pair can either be in
a quartet or in a doublet electron spin state, denoted as Q[R•..X] or D[R•..X],
respectively. According to conservation of the total spin angular
momentum, only the doublet pair can convert into DR• and SX, where the triplet state of the
chromophore has been converted into its singlet state. Electron spin
hyperpolarization is generated because of either zero-field-splitting-dependent
(ZFS-dependent) or hyperfine-interaction-dependent (HFI-dependent)
LACs. These LACs enable transitions between specific quartet substates
and the doublet state of the triplet radical pair. As a result, electron
spin hyperpolarization is generated and the respective TR-EPR spectra
bear the features illustrated in a. In general, the observed spectral pattern
is the combination of net emissive and E/A type polarization (denoted
as E*/A in the literature). As a rule,
the ZFS-dependent route leads to a net emissive polarization while
the HFI-dependent path gives rise to E/A-type polarization.
 Remarkably, the RTPM mechanism results in hyperpolarization
of
stable free radicals that are already present in solution before optical
irradiation. In contrast, the other mechanisms usually require in
situ generation of radicals. Moreover, RTPM-governed processes do
not require any chemical reaction. This feature enables unique applications
specifically targeting EPR or NMR sensitivity enhancement, as discussed
below.
Yet another sequence of events, known as the reverse
quartet mechanism , (RQM), was proposed for CIDEP.
This mechanism has some features
in common with RTPM and usually requires a pair consisting of a stable
radical and a chromophore that can be photoexcited to its triplet
electronic state. Unlike RPTM, however, the two components must be
rigidly bound to each other to prevent relative motions between the
triplet chromophore and the doublet radical (see D0 in b). Provided that
the exchange interaction J between the triplet chromophore and the
radical is much larger than the difference in their Zeeman frequencies,
the radical-triplet pair must be treated as a doublet or quartet spin
system. TR-EPR spectroscopy performed on RQM-polarized samples displays
some characteristic features. Namely, the spectrum is first enhanced
in one direction (for example, corresponding to net emission) but
later in time, as data collection continues, the spectrum undergoes
inversion (for example, to net absorption), as shown in b. Shortly (ca.
1 μs) after a laser pulse, the quartet excited state Q1 is populated and is characterized by a nonuniform population of
electron spin sublevels, resulting in the initial electron spin polarization.
Later, due to nonuniform electron spin–lattice relaxation,
the electron spin polarization reverses. The absorptive vs emissive
nature of the hyperpolarization was shown to be governed by the sign
of exchange interaction J. A detailed
description of this mechanism can be found elsewhere. 
The experimental apparatus necessary
to generate and observe CIDEP
effects is similar to the one employed in TR-EPR. , The main components are shown schematically in a. Briefly, the setup consists
of a microwave bridge, a tunable magnet and an excitation source.
These three components are linked to the console. Usually, an excimer
or a solid-state (e.g., Nd:YAG) pulsed laser serves as an excitation
source to generate transient radicals and/or photoexcited molecules
in triplet states. In general, TR-EPR spectra are acquired by either
continuous-wave TR-EPR (CW-TR-EPR) or pulsed Fourier-transform TR-EPR
(FT-TR-EPR). In the former case ( b), the CIDEP EPR signals of short-lived
radicals or other transient paramagnetic species produced by a laser
pulse are read as an output of a fast preamplifier under continuous
MW irradiation. These are integrated with a boxcar integrator or a
fast digital oscilloscope for a preselected duration after the laser
pulse and averaged over a number of laser pulses at a preset value
of the magnetic field B0. , Then the magnetic field is stepped to the next value to generate
the EPR spectrum. Alternatively, B0 is
slowly swept continuously in some studies. The observation of evolution
of CIDEP effects in time is achieved by shifting the signal integration
time window and repeating the entire experiment. Several examples
of the hyperpolarization-enhanced EPR spectra of paramagnetic species
detected in CW-TR-EPR experiments are given in . In the case of FT-TR-EPR ( c), after the laser pulse
a short microwave pulse is applied to generate a free induction decay
or a spin echo EPR signal. The time-domain data are then either Fourier-transformed
to generate the EPR spectrum, or the echo signal is integrated. The
temporal evolution of the EPR spectrum exhibiting CIDEP in this case
is monitored by changing the delay between the laser pulse and the
MW pulse.
 Given that CIDEP effects lead to strong perturbations
of the electron
spin-state populations, they are widely applied to enhance the sensitivity
of TR-EPR spectroscopy. Some representative CIDEP applications targeting
the enhancement of electron spin polarization are briefly discussed
next. Numerous studies exploiting RTPM CIDEP for electron spin hyperpolarization
purposes are available in the literature. For instance, CIDEP effects
were generated via the RTPM mechanism in the context of the stable
radical TEMPO and a few photoinduced triplet states. Up to 280-fold EPR signal enhancements were observed upon
using TEMPO and 1-chloronaphthalene in isopropyl alcohol at 226 K.
The enhancement factors were strongly dependent on the translational
diffusion coefficient. Raising the temperature from 226 to 270 K resulted
in a 7.4-fold increase in translational diffusion coefficient, causing
a 74% decrease in the enhancement factor. Moreover, switching the
solvent to benzene, a much less viscous liquid than isopropanol, led
to an additional 10.4-fold increase in diffusion coefficient and a
97% decrease in enhancement factor. Similar effects were observed
in later studies. More recently, a covalently
linked chromophore-radical system capable of achieving up to 320-fold
polarization enhancements by effectively restricting the relative
translational diffusion of the triplet chromophore and the radical
was developed. Finally, CIDEP in aqueous
media was demonstrated for a nitroxide radical using eosin Y or rose
Bengal as the chromophore, gaining an impressive polarization enhancement
of up to 150-fold. The latter development
in aqueous media paves the way to future applications to biological
systems.
While RTPM has been the prevalent CIDEP mechanism when
significant
enhancements in electron spin polarization have been targeted, CIDEP
proceeding via the RQM mechanism has also played a role. RQM was first
proposed and developed for a complex
of fullerene with the TEMPO radical, as shown in . Later, RQM CIDEP was demonstrated
for a pyrene–TEMPO complex, achieving up to a 30-fold enhancement
in electron spin polarization. An additional
example of RQM application is provided by recent studies exploring
the CIDEP dependence on the chemical nature of photoexcitable chromophores
containing a variety of metal ions. , 
 An overview of the major CIDEP-mediated electron
spin polarization
enhancements achieved to date is provided in .
 Thanks to the ability to strongly enhance EPR signals,
CIDEP can
be employed for structural and dynamic studies of macromolecules,
especially when it proceeds via the RTPM mechanism. Given that RTPM
requires an interaction between a stable radical and a triplet chromophore,
it can be employed to monitor solvent exposure, similarly to the nuclear-spin-dependent
photochemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization (photo-CIDNP)
technique ( ). For instance, the solvent exposure of tryptophan (Trp) amino acid
in proteins can be probed by adding the stable radical TEMPO to protein
solutions. Upon optical irradiation,
Trp is converted to its triplet state. If this amino acid is solvent-exposed
within the host protein, the triplet state can be quenched by dissolved
TEMPO thereby leading to an enhancement of the EPR signal of the nitroxide
via RTPM mechanism ( a). The solvent exposure of chlorophyll in samples including
protein-bound chlorophylls can also be probed via the same approach. 
Another strategy to investigate the structure
and dynamics of macromolecules
relies on RTPM-mediated CIDEP for a chromophore-radical pair of the
probes covalently attached to a macromolecule. The probes can be naturally
occurring (e.g., Trp within a polypeptide or protein) or extrinsic
(e.g., 4-benzoylphenylalanine as triplet precursor and 4-amino-1-oxyl-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-4-carboxylic
acid, a.k.a. TOAC, as a stable radical). Given that polarization generated
by RPTM CIDEP is distance-dependent, this method can provide qualitative
information on the distance between the probes, thus shedding light
on macromolecular conformation and dynamics. , , Triplet states of suitable chromophores
hyperpolarized via TM CIDEP were shown to be applicable to sensitive
nanometer distance measurements between spin labels by EPR techniques
in labeled biomolecules. , 
Overall, the
CIDEP phenomenon is triggered photophysically or (photo)
chemically and leads to generation of strong hyperpolarization of
electron spins in paramagnetic species. These include transient or
even stable free radicals, radical-ions, biradicals, and triplet molecular
species. Quite often, several CIDEP mechanisms can operate at the
same time. This significant perturbation
of the population of electron spin states can be a useful tool in
organic photochemistry. , Specifically, CIDEP
is useful to explore the mechanisms of chemical reactions including
the direct and sensitive detection of short-lived reaction intermediates.
In addition, CIDEP can be intentionally generated, mostly upon photoirradiation,
for enhancing electron spin polarization to learn about solvent exposure
of macromolecules. The RTPM and RQM mechanisms are prevalent in applications
targeting enhanced electron spin polarization, with the major goal
of increasing the sensitivity of EPR. Finally, electron spin polarization
generated via CIDEP provides yet another opportunity for increasing
NMR sensitivity (see also , , and ). The progress
in the field achieved so far, briefly surveyed here, suggests that
CIDEP will become an increasingly popular technology in the future.

3.6.

## Photochemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
in Liquids
3.6.1.

## The Technique
In 1967, Bargon and
co-workers discovered the presence of unusual emissive resonances
in the NMR spectrum of reaction products resulting from the thermal
decomposition of dibenzoyl peroxide and di-p-chlorobenzoyl
peroxide. During the same year, Ward
and colleagues independently discovered the surprising proton nuclear
spin polarization generated during the reaction of various organometallic
compounds. In both cases, free radicals
were identified as key reaction intermediates, and the phenomenon
was named chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization (CIDNP)
based on the (incorrect) assumption that the underlying mechanism
was similar to that of OE-DNP ( ). Later, it became clear that similar
effects can also be generated upon photochemical triggering. For instance,
optically excited photosensitizer dyes can collide in solution with
oxidation-prone molecules and undergo redox reactions, giving rise
to radical pairs. The latter can then rapidly undergo further processes
leading to the conversion of the molecule of interest to a nuclear-spin-hyperpolarized
species. , This effect is known as photochemically
induced dynamic nuclear polarization (photo-CIDNP).
A correct
mechanism for the nonphotochemically triggered CIDNP was first proposed
in 1969. The process was envisioned to involve formation of transient
radical pairs rather than individual radicals , and was named the radical pair mechanism (RPM; ). This process essentially
relies on spin sorting by a chemical reaction ( ). When a radical pair
is produced, the spin states of its unpaired electrons are correlated.
The correlated electron spin state is inherited from the electronic
spin state (e.g., a singlet or a triplet) of the pertinent precursor
( ). The
spin-correlated radical pair then evolves to produce nuclear spin
hyperpolarization.
A similar mechanism was later suggested for
the photochemically
triggered version of the process (photo-CIDNP) in liquids, and rapidly
gained supporting evidence. , A scheme illustrating
the essential features of this mechanism is shown in . Briefly, the ground-state
photosensitizer dye (S0D) is electronically excited to
a singlet excited state (S1D). The latter often undergoes
intersystem crossing (ISC) and populates a triplet state (TD). The triplet-state dye then reacts with the molecule of interest
(M) transiently oxidizing it and giving rise to a radical pair (RP)
preserving the triplet electron spin state. According to the Pauli
exclusion principle, to regenerate the original version of the molecule
of interest M, a triplet RP must first undergo triplet–singlet
conversion (T-S mixing) to the singlet state before the onset of recombination.
The above process is referred to as geminate radical pair recombination,
which proceeds extremely rapidly (0.1–100 ns) and does not
alter nuclear spin states. Importantly, the T-S mixing is driven by
the hyperfine couplings (A) of electron spins of the two radicals
constituting the RP and the difference in their g-factors (Δg). Therefore, the T-S mixing frequency depends on the nuclear spin
states of both radicals, and is generally more favorable for one nuclear
spin state than another, as schematically illustrated in . This important
property leads to the kinetic sorting of RPs across different chemical
pathways based on nuclear spin states of the radicals involved and
results in hyperpolarization of the molecule of interest. illustrates a
representative example of this phenomenon. Briefly, RPs carrying one
nucleus in the α state may preferentially undergo T-S mixing
and conserve this nuclear spin state upon their recombination. Under
these circumstances, RPs bearing the same nucleus in the β state
preferentially escape from a solvent cage and separate into their
individual radical components, whose electron spins become uncorrelated. Individual radicals may then randomly collide
with one another and form new radical pairs denoted as F-pairs. The
subset of F-pairs bearing the singlet electron spin configuration
may then recombine and give rise to the starting parent species. However,
before this collision, and depending on relative concentrations, viscosity
and temperature, a significant degree of paramagnetic relaxation takes
place, on the microsecond time scale. This results in a Boltzmann
distribution of nuclear spin states in the cage-escaped radicals and
in the loss of the initial overpopulation of the nuclear β state.
As a result of the overall process, the nuclear α state in M
becomes enriched at the expense of the β state, resulting in
positive (absorptive) nuclear spin hyperpolarization. Alternatively,
it is also possible that faster T-S mixing may be experienced by radical
pairs with a β nuclear spin state, in which case emissive nuclear
hyperpolarization is generated in M. The mechanism highlighted above
recapitulates only the essential features of the process, and more
thorough descriptions are available elsewhere. − It is worth noting that the effect of multiple nuclear–electron
couplings and the role of additional potential side reactions, e.g.,
undesired degradation processes, are not included in a. Some of the remaining F-pair
population (not shown in a) can also lead to additional hyperpolarization. 
 In a number of cases, photo-CIDNP proceeds via
a modified mechanism.
For instance, photo-CIDNP is noncyclic when the hyperpolarized reaction
products differ from the starting materials. This situation is most
common in organic photochemical reactions involving neutral radical
intermediates. In this case, RPs are
often produced as a result of hydrogen atom abstraction or chemical
bond cleavage processes ( ). The recombination
products arising from the geminate RP are often different from the
products formed by radicals that escape from the solvent cage. In
the latter case, the α and β nuclear spin states, which
give rise to enhanced absorptive (A) and emissive (E) NMR signals,
respectively, can end up in different products, consistent with Kaptein’s
rules. Another notable example is provided
by intramolecular photo-CIDNP initiated by dyes in a singlet excited
electronic state. In this case, a mechanism somewhat different from
that of a
applies, as reported in the literature. , , Further, the case of macromolecules bearing a built-in
dye (e.g., flavoproteins) with a rotational correlation time longer
than the time scale of hyperfine coupling (i.e., the inverse of the
hyperfine anisotropy) yet shorter than the chemical shift time scale
(i.e., the inverse of the chemical shift anisotropy), is particularly
interesting. When the above conditions
are met, a solid-state-like photo-CIDNP process ( ), known as the triplet
mechanism, applies. This mechanism operates via nuclear-spin-dependent
ISC and dominates at high applied fields. Conveniently, the averaging
of chemical shift anisotropy mediated by molecular tumbling enables
retention of liquid-like NMR spectral features. 
 Here, we focus on photo-CIDNP experiments at high
applied magnetic
fields, where the electronic Zeeman component of the Hamiltonian largely
exceeds the hyperfine interaction. Thus, the T0 electronic
state of the radical pair ends up mixing with the singlet state S,
at appropriate inter-radical distances. Conversely, under low-field
conditions the electronic Zeeman interaction is comparable to the
hyperfine component of the Hamiltonian, and mixing can also occur
between the T+/T– and the S states, typically
referred to as level anticrossing (LAC). Whether LAC occurs between
T+ and S or between T– and S depends
on the relative values and signs of the exchange interaction J between
radical pair electrons and the hyperfine coupling A. , A similar situation is encountered, for
instance, in the case of transient biradicals or radical pairs confined
in micelles when the exchange interaction of the two unpaired electrons
J is nonvanishing (e.g., |J| > |A|) owing to their
close proximity in space. As J is negative in most common cases, this
brings the S and T– (rather than T+)
states close in energy ( b) and results in a dominant T–-S
mixing. 

3.6.2.

## Practical Aspects
To perform photo-CIDNP
experiments, a setup comprising an NMR spectrometer and appropriate
optical components is required. Conveniently, photo-CIDNP hyperpolarization
develops rapidly, within less than 1 s of optical irradiation, and
takes place in situ within an NMR tube. Therefore, photo-CIDNP can
be carried out with commercially available NMR spectrometers. In essence,
in most cases no modifications to the conventional NMR hardware and
no sample transfers from a different part of an apparatus are necessary.
Numerous types of optical systems of the UV and visible range have
been employed in photo-CIDNP to date. While in the early days CW illumination
with optically filtered light of a xenon arc or mercury-vapor UV lamps
was often used, nowadays the three most representative categories
include lasers coupled with quartz rods, laser/optical-fiber setups,
and light-emitting diodes (LEDs) coupled with optical fibers ( ).
 Directing laser light onto NMR samples via a quartz
rod as schematically
illustrated in a is a common choice. Quartz rods exhibit excellent light transmission
in the UV–vis range and are compatible with pulsed lasers.
These features are crucial for time-resolved photo-CIDNP experiments,
as well as for experiments employing a wide variety of dyes, including
those absorbing in the UV region. Such an apparatus is versatile but
also not entirely straightforward to implement, especially in terms
of installation and alignment. Namely, this setup requires accurate
vertical guiding of laser light onto the sample, from either the top
or the bottom of an NMR magnet. This arrangement is not always compatible
with all spectrometer geometries and room dimensions, and may pose
safety challenges, and in addition may lead to light beam attenuation
by the sample. An alternative design based upon horizontal irradiation
onto the side of the NMR tube overcomes
geometrical issues, yet it requires some NMR probe modifications.
A second illumination strategy uses an optical fiber ( b) and usually
involves a CW laser as a light source with irradiation timing controlled
by the spectrometer through a software-controlled shutter. Laser light
is guided into the optical fiber via mirrors, lenses, and a fiber
coupler. The optical fiber is typically introduced into the NMR tube
via a coaxial insert, and the fiber/coaxial-insert/NMR-tube setup
is conveniently placed inside the magnet from above, as in conventional
NMR experiments. A more sophisticated setup involves stepwise tapering
of the optical fiber at the NMR tube end followed by deep insertion
into the NMR tube, enabling a more uniform sample irradiation. This fiber modification is particularly convenient
in the case of samples with high optical density. Optical fibers are
easier to handle and align than a quartz-rod setup. In addition, unavoidable
light losses can be countered upon employing high-power lasers and
optional fiber tapering. A downside
of this setup is that commercially available optical fibers cannot
typically withstand the high transient energy density of pulsed lasers. This limitation renders this apparatus incompatible
with photo-CIDNP applications requiring pulsed laser irradiation,
including time-resolved photo-CIDNP. Moreover, specialized optical
fibers are required if CW UV lasers are employed, for example, when
irradiation of dyes like 2,2′-bipyridine is desired (irradiation
wavelength is 355 nm).
Finally, LEDs have recently replaced
lasers in photo-CIDNP , , and other light-assisted NMR
technologies. LEDs are much cheaper,
more portable, and easier to handle and maintain than high-power lasers.
They are also capable of producing pulsed irradiation with typical
rise/fall times of a few μs. Due
to LED output beams being uncollimated, it is preferable to guide
the light into the optical fiber directly at the LED source ( c). To optimize
sample irradiation, the fiber tip reaching the NMR sample can be sanded
or etched. This procedure exposes part of the fiber core, enabling
more pervasive light escape. 
LEDs
coupled to optical fibers usually deliver less optical power
than high-power lasers, and this may in principle be viewed as a disadvantage.
As discussed below, however, the recent realization that photo-CIDNP
hyperpolarization depends only weakly on optical irradiation power
at low (micromolar and submicromolar) concentrations of the molecule
of interest, has actually rendered low-power
irradiation preferable. As a consequence, the replacement of lasers
with LEDs does not compromise sensitivity in many desirable applications
targeting low sample concentrations. , , Overall, the use of LEDs in photo-CIDNP rendered
this technique considerably safer, more affordable and easier to implement,
and proved to be particularly advantageous for low-concentration photo-CIDNP
(LC-photo-CIDNP; see below) experiments.
As mentioned above,
most studies are performed in situ. An exception
to this common practice is the case of field cycling. Briefly, photo-CIDNP
polarization of any given sample depends on the strength of the applied
magnetic field, , and signal enhancements are
expected to differ drastically between low fields (e.g., micro- to
millitesla) and the commonly employed higher fields of 7.05 to 28.2
T (300 MHz to 1.2 GHz 1H frequency). In cases where greater enhancements are predicted at lower
fields, one can carry out photo-CIDNP polarization under low-field
conditions and then transfer the sample to a higher field for detection.
This procedure has the inherent advantages of preserving the high
spectral resolution of high-field NMR while exploiting the higher
photo-CIDNP enhancements attainable at low magnetic fields. For this
experiment, field-cycling components must be installed to enable generation
of a tunable low magnetic field located well above or below the receiver
coils, followed by rapid mechanical shuttling of the hyperpolarized
sample from the low-field to the high-field area for detection. The optimal magnetic field for photo-CIDNP
hyperpolarization depends on the g-factors and hyperfine coupling
constants of the radicals produced in the reaction of interest. Therefore,
the potential advantage of switching magnetic field during a photo-CIDNP
experiment needs to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. , An example of the expected dependence of photo-CIDNP polarization
on an applied magnetic field is provided in . The simulations in this figure were carried
out according to known procedures, , and employed
published values of relevant parameters. − 
 Another specialized application involves performing
photo-CIDNP
on microscale-volume samples. For instance, a microfluidic apparatus
coupled with a LED and an optical fiber was developed for experiments
with 1 μL sample volume. This setup
enables flow-through experiments that accomplish high-sensitivity
detection by continuously replenishing the NMR sample, hence bypassing
challenges associated with photodegradation, and also enables experiments
aimed at probing reaction kinetics via two-channel micromixing.
Given that photo-CIDNP polarization typically builds up and decays
relatively fast (<1 s) and in situ, the pulse sequences employed
in photo-CIDNP typically include time delays, UV–vis illumination,
and radiofrequency (RF) irradiation within the same single-transient
train of events. 1D 1H photo-CIDNP pulse sequences can
be as simple as pulse-acquire preceded by laser or LED optical irradiation,
and may include RF pulse schemes for solvent suppression. In addition, 1H, 13C, or 15N presaturation may be
performed before optical irradiation to eliminate thermal polarization,
so that the resulting spectrum reflects solely photo-CIDNP hyperpolarization. − 
In order to increase the overall sensitivity, experiments
involving
pulsed lasers may feature multiple laser pulses before one single
RF pulse train. The magnetization can then be temporarily stored in
the transverse plane between individual laser pulses. The experiments targeting heteronuclei (i.e.,
photo-CIDNP effects for nuclei other than 1H) often involve
polarization transfer to 1H, to further enhance sensitivity.
This purpose is efficiently fulfilled by pulse sequences employing
reverse-INEPT or similar RF pulse schemes. , , , 
In many cases, 2D experiments involving heteronuclei utilize
photo-CIDNP-adapted
heteronuclear single- or multiquantum correlation (HSQC, HMQC) pulse
schemes or simpler 2D reverse-INEPT RF schemes, and usually involve
photo-CIDNP-enhanced 13C/15N coherence. − Other more complex pulse schemes reported to date involve initial
transfer of 1H thermal polarization to 15N before
optical irradiation, resulting in the constructively combined 1H thermal and 15N photo-CIDNP polarizations, yielding
higher sensitivity. Another fairly sophisticated
approach includes the use of a second optical irradiation per transient.
This procedure enables photo-CIDNP enhancement of 1H followed
by magnetization transfer to 15N and another optical irradiation
to enhance 15N polarization, so that the two photo-CIDNP
enhancements add up, yielding higher sensitivity. Photo-CIDNP 1H-13C heteronuclear
correlation spectroscopy has been particularly popular and has led
to the development of a class of pulse sequences based on the reverse-INEPT RF scheme which share the early
generation of strong 13C hyperpolarization followed by
coherence transfer to 1H and detection. Standard constant-time evolution and pulsed-field-gradient
sensitivity enhancement schemes can be included. − 
The basic photo-CIDNP pulse sequence 13C PRINT (photo-CIDNP-enhanced constant time reverse
INEPT) was optimized (13C
PREPRINT, perturbation-recovered PRINT) for additional sensitivity
advantage provided by cryogenic NMR probes. Selective 13C 180° flip-angle pulses were recently
introduced in experiments targeting the photo-CIDNP enhancement of
α-carbons (13Cα) to enable full
decoupling of carbonyl carbons (13C′) from 13Cα. The resulting pulse sequence is known
as 13C PRESPRINT (perturbation-recovered selective-pulse
PRINT). Finally, it should be noted
that photo-CIDNP pulse sequences do not usually need the conventional
recycle delay (1–2 s) as most of the nuclear polarization relevant
to photo-CIDNP is generated within 0.1–0.2 s of optical irradiation. The 13C RASPRINT (rapid-acquisition
selective pulse PRINT) combines this advantage with optimal solvent
suppression to further increase sensitivity by 2-fold. 
 provides
an overview of the sensitivity advantages provided by the major photo-CIDNP
pulse sequences and experiments developed to date.
 The basic composition of a photo-CIDNP sample in liquids
can be
fairly simple. In addition to the molecule of interest and the solvent,
a suitable photosensitizer is required. A number of different photosensitizer
dyes have been employed in photo-CIDNP to date. Some representative
examples are shown in . Historically, flavins were the most popular dyes in photo-CIDNP
experiments designed to identify the solvent exposure of the amino
acids tryptophan, tyrosine and histidine within proteins. , Flavin mononucleotide (FMN) has been particularly useful for this
purpose. Flavins proved to be effective
at mediating photo-CIDNP in aromatic amino acids and proteins , , as well as in nucleotides (including
oligonucleotides). Another commonly
used photosensitizer is 2,2′-bipyridine (a.k.a. 2,2′-dipyridyl) , which absorbs light in the UV region of the spectrum. Fluorescein,
a well-known chromophore (and fluorophore) absorbing in the visible
region of the spectrum, was introduced as an efficient dye tailored
to photo-CIDNP experiments targeting low-concentration samples (see below). Finally, the recently introduced
Atto Thio 12 dye leads to higher enhancements than other dyes for
the specific detection of tyrosine in solution. It is worth noting that photosensitizer dye and the molecule
of interest do not have to be separate entities. For instance, flavin-bound
proteins can undergo intramolecular photo-CIDNP. In this case, the
endogenous flavin is the dye, and aromatic residues within the protein
serve the role of the molecule of interest. In addition, dyads, i.e.,
molecules encompassing covalently linked electron-donor-bridge-acceptor
units, can also undergo intramolecular photo-CIDNP. In this case,
optical irradiation leads to donor photoexcitation, followed by intramolecular
transfer of electron from the donor to the acceptor, leading to the
formation of a biradical. The sensitivity
gains afforded by the major photo-CIDNP sensitizer dyes are summarized
in .
 Importantly, the concentrations of dye and the
molecule of interest
influence the degree of achievable polarization. Higher dye concentrations,
however, do not necessarily lead to higher photo-CIDNP polarization,
as overly concentrated dyes attenuate light transmission and prevent
most of the sample from being effectively irradiated. , An optimal dye concentration depends on sample tube and fiber-optic
dimensions and geometry, as well as on the dye extinction coefficient
and light wavelength. Tailor-shaped optical fiber tips and microscale sample volumes have enabled the use of higher dye concentrations. Another
challenge is posed by the fact that for a few photosensitizer dyes
(e.g., fluorescein), intrinsic fluorescence leads to partial depopulation
of the excited singlet state of the dye back to the ground state S0. This measurably reduces the yield of ISC to the triplet
state of the dye upon optical excitation, thus reducing the photo-CIDNP
sensitivity advantage. To circumvent this problem, additives containing
heavy atoms can be introduced to accelerate ISC via a phenomenon known as the external heavy atom effect. 
The basic sample composition and preparation
procedures described
above, however, are far from being ideal. Optical irradiation of a
sample implies that a certain extent of photodegradation is unavoidable.
Photodegradation processes may affect both the photosensitizer dye
and the molecule of interest, and are usually mediated by excited
electronic states or radical intermediates, including the escape species
in . In particular,
the transiently generated triplet state of the dye can interact with
molecular oxygen present in solution, , typically
at ca. 280 μM concentration. As schematically shown in a, collisions with
molecular oxygen not only quench the triplet state of the dye, but
also generate highly reactive singlet oxygen which promotes sample
degradation and is known to generally take place in the presence of
a wide variety of dyes. , Other common light-induced
degradation pathways, summarized in in the case of the FMN dye, include slow
degradation of dye and molecule of interest via radicals of both species
( b,c) and
singlet oxygen-mediated processes ( a).
 Photodegradation prevents long-term data collection
in photo-CIDNP , , such as signal averaging or
multidimensional NMR. A number of strategies were recently adopted
to circumvent the above challenges. First, singlet-oxygen-mediated
degradation can be prevented by removing molecular oxygen from photo-CIDNP
NMR samples. This is done by either Ar/N2 purging or via addition of oxygen-scavenging enzymes,
typically glucose oxidase (GO) and catalase (CAT). , Molecular oxygen concentration can be monitored in solution with
commercially available devices. It is
worth noting that oxygen depletion becomes increasingly important
at lower concentrations of the molecule of interest. , Second, the extent of dye degradation can be attenuated by chemically
reversing the actual degradation process , or by selecting particularly photostable dyes. Third, degradation of both components can be substantially
reduced upon employing low- or sub-μM concentrations of reductive
radical quenchers (e.g., ascorbic acid). Alternatively, photodegradation can be altogether bypassed by rejuvenating
or replacing the sample during data collection, for instance, by stirring
the sample after each signal acquisition in a 2D NMR experiment to
recursively enrich the optically irradiated region with fresh intact
molecules. Alternatively, a microfluidic
continuous-flow apparatus was employed to replenish NMR samples in
real time during data collection. 
Interestingly, dissolved oxygen can sometimes produce beneficial
effects. When FMN is employed as a dye, 1,5-dihydroriboflavin 5′-(dihydrogen
phosphate), typically denoted as FMNH2, is generated during a photo-CIDNP experiment ( b). In this case,
part of the dissolved molecular oxygen can reoxidize FMNH2 back to FMN, thus enabling multiple rounds of photo-CIDNP via dye
recycling. Yet, the overall unfavorable effects listed above justify
the need to deplete molecular oxygen even when FMN is employed as
the dye. Approaches adopted to reoxidize FMN include addition of H2O2, mechanical mixing , and addition of catalytic amounts of the nitrate reductase (NR)
enzyme, which specifically oxidizes FMNH2 back to FMN even
in the absence of molecular oxygen. 

3.6.3.

## Applications
To date, photo-CIDNP
has been exploited either as a reporter of solvent exposure, , , as a probe of organic reactions
involving radicals, , , − or as an NMR sensitivity enhancement tool. For instance, time-resolved
photo-CIDNP can be employed to measure the T1n relaxation time of aromatic radicals in proteins. This parameter
provides valuable information about protein global and local dynamics. Time-resolved photo-CIDNP also enables the
analysis of supramolecular host–guest interactions. By acquiring
photo-CIDNP NMR and EPR data, one can learn valuable information on
the structure, reaction mechanism, g-factors and
hyperfine coupling constants of radical intermediates pertaining to
reactions of interest. In addition,
under appropriate zero-to-low field conditions, photo-CIDNP is capable
of generating long-lived nuclear spin states with relaxation times
of the order of tens of seconds. − These long-lived spin
states pave the way to investigations focusing on slow processes. , Further, theoretical arguments predict that the ratio between regular T1n and the relaxation time of the corresponding
long-lived nuclear spin state depends on molecular geometry. This property was exploited to determine torsion
angles of a variety of small-molecule isotopologues. 
In addition to studies focusing on 1H, 13C, and 15N, photo-CIDNP hyperpolarization of other
nuclei has also been investigated. For instance, 19F-labeled
Tyr was hyperpolarized via 19F photo-CIDNP, achieving a
ca. 14-fold sensitivity enhancement, and enabling 19F MRI
of this compound. Another application
involved 31P photo-CIDNP to study the interaction between
phosphonium-iodonium ylide and p-methoxyphenylacetylene. This investigation yielded interesting information
about the mechanism of the reaction between the two compounds. 
Next, a more recent class of applications
that primarily target
photo-CIDNP as a source of nuclear spin hyperpolarization and sensitivity
enhancement in liquids is illustrated below via a number of representative
examples. summarizes
the current status of photo-CDNP nuclear hyperpolarization in solution,
whereas photo-CIDNP in solids falls into a different mechanistic category
addressed separately in .
In liquids, the aromatic amino acids tryptophan,
tyrosine, and
histidine can be hyperpolarized via photo-CIDNP and give rise to sensitivity
enhancements of up to 200-fold, both
as free amino acids and within proteins. , , , , , , In addition, other aromatic
molecules including nucleotides, , p-fluorophenol and oligophenols can be hyperpolarized. In 1999, Hore and Dobson in their experiment on 1H-15N-tryptophan achieved 6- and 100-fold sensitivity improvement for 1H and 15N nuclei, respectively, relative to the
spectra acquired without sample illumination. These authors also collected photo-CIDNP-enhanced 2D 1H-15N data on the hen lysozyme protein. Later,
this approach was further developed by introducing new pulse sequences
that enhance NMR sensitivity more significantly
by exploiting 13C hyperpolarization. In addition, the use of catalytic amounts of commercially
available oxygen-depleting enzymes to effectively remove molecular
oxygen was exploited. The combined use
of the latter two approaches resulted in a ca. 20-fold improvement
in NMR sensitivity (defined as SNRt = SNR/(time)1/2, with time denoting the total experiment time) relative to reference 1H-13C constant-time spin–echo HSQC (CT-SE-HSQC)
experiments. 
To the best of our
knowledge, the largest 13C polarization
enhancement achieved via photo-CIDNP was observed on a variant of
the light-oxygen-voltage-sensing (LOV) domain of phototropin, a blue-light
receptor protein responsible for regulating the phototropic response
in higher plants. This protein bears
an FMN moiety that serves as an intramolecular photo-CIDNP sensitizer.
An astonishing 6,000-fold polarization enhancement of the 13Cγ of this protein’s Trp491 was
observed. 
Intriguingly, the coupling
of 1H photo-CIDNP with microfluidics
enabled a low detection limit, namely 5 nanomoles (1.1 μg) of N-acetyl-l-tyrosine and 20 nanomoles (7.3 μg)
of guanosine monophosphate (GMP). These 1H photo-CIDNP
experiments were performed on microscale sample volumes (1 μL). The authors also performed 19F photo-CIDNP
with the same apparatus, and were able to detect 0.8 picomoles (90
pg) of p-fluorophenol ( b). 
 
3.6.4.

## Frontiers and Challenges
In 2016,
it was demonstrated that the fluorescein dye significantly outperforms
FMN as a photo-CIDNP sensitizer at low concentrations of the molecule
of interest (low- to submicromolar). For instance, the mere replacement
of FMN by fluorescein led to an additional sensitivity enhancement
of more than 5-fold at a 10 μM concentration of the molecule
of interest ( ), enabling efficient detection of 1 μM of uniformly labeled 13C-15N-Trp within 8 scans at room temperature on
a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer. This effect
is primarily due to the long lifetime of the triplet excited state
of this dye (20 ms) relative to other
traditional photosensitizers. This property
is of key importance despite the fact that the intrinsic fluorescence
of this photosensitizer leads to a reduced yield of ISC to the triplet
state. The long-lived triplet state of fluorescein is essential to
warrant sufficient time for molecular collisions of photoexcited triplet-state
dye with the molecule of interest, especially at low concentrations
of the molecule of interest (low micromolar to nanomolar) and dye
(low- or submicromolar). Conveniently, enhancements become much higher
at lower concentrations of the molecule of interest ( ).
 The superior performance of fluorescein at low
sample concentrations
led to the trend of combining long-lived triplet-state photosensitizers
with low- to submicromolar sample concentrations in an oxygen-free
environment. This modus operandi resulted in the introduction of a
new branch of photo-CIDNP denoted as low-concentration photo-CIDNP
or LC-photo-CIDNP. This particularly
convenient nuclear hyperpolarization technology enables the detection
of highly dilute solutions of the molecules of interest (in the low-micromolar
and nanomolar range). In contrast, all prior photo-CIDNP applications
require sample concentrations of at least hundreds of micromoles per
liter.
Photo-CIDNP experiments where fluorescein serves as the
dye employ
low-micromolar to nanomolar sample concentrations and conventional
5 mm NMR tubes and fiber-optic tips. The optimal dye concentration is within the low-micromolar to submicromolar
range. This straightforward and minimally
perturbative arrangement is sufficient to yield enhancement factors
ε > 300, and more than 200-fold sensitivity enhancements
in
SNRt ( ). Conveniently, the above setup is applicable to a variety of molecules
of interest, including the amino acids tryptophan (Trp) and tyrosine
(Tyr), either in isolation or within proteins. Laser-driven LC-photo-CIDNP
in the presence of glucose, GO/CAT oxygen-depleting enzymes and the
fluorescein photosensitizer dye led to the rapid acquisition of spectra
of 200 nM Trp, with 55-fold sensitivity
enhancements of aromatic resonances relative to 1H-13C SOFAST-HMQC (band-selective optimized flip-angle short-transit
HMQC). LC-photo-CIDNP is also effective on dilute proteins. Namely,
500 nM and 5 μM 13C-labeled proteins were recently
detected via 1D and 2D LC-photo-CIDNP, respectively. With the advent of LED-driven LC-photo-CIDNP, comparable
detection limits were achieved at a lower cost, with a 208-fold increase
in sensitivity for Trp α-protons (500 nM, 76 ng) relative to 1H-13C CT-SE-HSQC ( a). Further,
the combination of LED irradiation and selective isotope labeling,
in the presence of small amounts of ascorbic acid (2 μM), recently
enabled the detection of 20 nM (2.8 ng) Trp in solution. In this study, LC-photo-CIDNP attenuation effects
where minimized upon employing Trp-α-13C-β,β,β,2,4,5,6,7-d7, a Trp isotopologue bearing a 13Cα-1Hα pair surrounded
predominantly by non-NMR-active and low-γ nuclei. 
Given that LC-photo-CIDNP is tailored
to very low concentrations
of the molecule of interest (low- or submicromolar), dyes with a long
triplet-state lifetime and oxygen depletion strategies are an absolute
requirement. Further, LC-photo-CIDNP
displays a dependence on key NMR parameters which is different from
that of conventional photo-CIDNP. The most important difference is
the nuclear spin hyperpolarization dependence on optical irradiation
power.
Higher optical irradiation power enhances the transient
population
of the triplet excited state of the dye, TD. At concentrations
of the molecule of interest exceeding ca. 10 μM, this effect
leads to more collisions between TD and the molecule of
interest M, ultimately leading to a higher photo-CIDNP polarization.
At lower concentrations of M, however, , the reaction
between TD and M causes a more sizable depletion of ground-state
M, thereby reducing the steady-state concentration [M]SS. Under these conditions, [M]SS becomes nearly inversely
proportional to [TD]. Thus, the product of [TD] and [M]SS becomes roughly constant and nearly independent
of optical irradiation power. As a result, the optical irradiation
power dependence of LC-photo-CIDNP is much weaker than that of regular
photo-CIDNP ( a,b). This feature is practically convenient because it enables the
use of safer and cheaper low-power light sources, including LEDs,
with no loss in sensitivity ( c). 
 Due to its fast in situ polarization buildup, LC-photo-CIDNP
can
also be readily combined with 2D NMR techniques, which is particularly
useful in the case of macromolecules, e.g., proteins, bearing many
NMR-active resonances ( a). For instance, an LC-photo-CIDNP 2D 1H-13C correlation spectrum was recently acquired in 2.5
min at 5 μM protein concentration on a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer
( b). Finally, it is worth noting that photo-CIDNP
provides spectral editing, given that only aromatic residues are selectively
enhanced, resulting in a convenient reduction in spectral complexity
( c).
 Overall, photochemically induced dynamic nuclear
polarization enables
significant enhancements in NMR sensitivity in solution under mild
conditions. This technology bears an exciting potential for additional
future advances, including the extension to other biomolecules and
the detection of even lower sample concentrations, down to the low-
and subnanomolar concentration regimes.

3.7.

## Stimulated Nuclear Polarization
Nuclear
spin sorting via the radical pair mechanism of CIDNP ( ) relies on spontaneous
nuclear-spin-dependent T-S interconversion in transient RPs driven
by magnetic interactions of electron spins. In contrast, in the stimulated
nuclear polarization (SNP) technique , the rate
of T-S interconversion is altered by applying a resonant MW field
to the electron spins. At low powers, MW irradiation can affect a
single EPR transition of RP, thereby accelerating T-S conversion only
in a subset of RPs with a selected configuration of their nuclear
spin states. Similar to CIDNP, faster T-S transition for RPs with
α or β nuclear spin state followed by recombination of
the RP will result in enhanced absorption or emission, respectively,
in the NMR spectrum of the diamagnetic product. As both CIDNP and
SNP processes act concurrently, SNP effects are usually extracted
as the difference in NMR signal intensities with and without MW irradiation,
plotted vs the B0 field at fixed MW frequency.
This dependence is sometimes called an “SNP spectrum”
of an RP. As the power of the incident MW irradiation is increased,
this first leads to faster T-S transitions in RPs and larger SNP effects.
However, for MW fields B1 comparable to the hyperfine couplings
in the radicals, spin-locking effects can cause a sign change of the
observed SNP effects or even their suppression. , 
The equipment required to perform SNP experiments combines the elements used for CIDNP ( ) and OE-DNP
( ). A
light source (a laser or a UV lamp) is used to produce transient radical
pairs or biradicals by illuminating a solution of suitable reactants.
In addition, a source of MW irradiation is required to manipulate
the unpaired electron spins. The EPR and NMR parts of the experiment
are commonly separated in space and time by implementing sample transfer/shuttling.
The sample solution can be continuously flown, from the cell which
combines sample photoexcitation and MW irradiation in a relatively
low magnetic field of an auxiliary magnet, to the probe of a commercial
NMR spectrometer. As the transient free radicals are no longer present
during the sample transfer, the T1n times
of diamagnetic products (a few to a few tens of seconds) are sufficient
for the transfer of a polarized sample. SNP experiments have been
performed at different fields and MW frequencies: ca. 100, 300, and
1500 MHz (technically, the RF range) as well as ca. 9.5 GHz. In the
latter case, commercial X-band EPR equipment can be used. In one implementation, both EPR irradiation and NMR detection were performed at
300 MHz by shuttling an entire probe between an electromagnet and
a superconducting NMR magnet.
A time-resolved variant of SNP , requires
a pulsed laser and a pulsed MW source and is implemented by varying
the delay between the light pulse and the leading or trailing edge
of a MW pulse, or sometimes its duration. The achieved time resolution
can be on the order of 5–30 ns, which is sufficient to, e.g.,
separate the contributions of geminate and F-pairs (RPs formed upon
random collisions of transient radicals; ) to the observed nuclear polarization.
Multiple laser pulses can be used to accumulate sufficient NMR signal
in the diamagnetic products.
In an SNP experiment, the magnetic
field is swept or stepped across
the entire EPR spectrum while the MW frequency is kept constant, and
the intensity of a chosen signal in an NMR spectrum of a reaction
product is monitored. At relatively low MW powers, the resulting field
dependence of the SNP effect is essentially an EPR spectrum of the
transient RP. Since the RPs are short-lived (e.g., nanoseconds), the
lines in such spectrum are measurably broader than one observes in
conventional EPR spectra in liquids. It should be noted, however,
that short-lived RPs are often not directly detectable by EPR.
In contrast to TR-EPR which attempts to detect transient radicals
during their lifetime, in SNP the effect of MW irradiation on RPs
is stored in the nuclear polarization of the diamagnetic reaction
products. Different reaction products can be chosen for observation
to reflect different chemical prehistory of the RPs in complex reactions.
Furthermore, different types of nuclei (e.g., 1H, 13C, 31P) and different signals in the acquired
NMR spectrum can be interrogated. 
SNP effects for RPs composed of neutral radicals have been addressed
in photochemical reactions involving ketones, aldehydes, peroxides
or quinones. An example of an SNP spectrum
obtained upon photolysis of p-benzoquinone is shown
in . SNP
effects were also studied , in radical-ion pairs
produced in photoinduced electron transfer reactions.
 A number of SNP studies addressed RPs in micelles
composed of alkyl
sulfate surfactants in an aqueous medium produced via chemical bond
cleavage or hydrogen atom abstraction upon photolysis of ketones. − The lifetimes of micellized RPs (100–1000 ns) are sufficient
to monitor their kinetics in time-resolved SNP experiments. Furthermore,
since two radicals of an RP are forced to stay close to each other,
the exchange interaction (J) of the unpaired electrons significantly
affects the spin dynamics and the shape of SNP spectra (similar to
CIDEP effects, ). In particular, it was reported , , that with decreasing micelle
size by using surfactants with a shorter alkyl chain, the separation
of the extrema in SNP spectra tends to decrease to one-half of the
corresponding hyperfine coupling (HFC) value ( ), the feature which is well-known from
the EPR spectra of, for example, stable biradicals in the limit of
strong/fast spin exchange.
 An even more rigorous restriction on the separation
of the radical
centers is imposed in transient biradicals produced, for instance,
upon photoinduced cleavage of cyclic ketones. , − This yields a biradical with a flexible
polymethylene chain which links the two paramagnetic centers. Similar
to RPs in micelles, the conformation-averaged value of the exchange
interaction J can be manipulated by changing the polymethylene chain
length in the parent ketone. For shorter chains, this leads to a switch
in the predominant T-S mixing mechanism from T0-S to T–-S (for negative J), , and an associated
change in the SNP patterns from E/A or A/E type to the entirely emissive
SNP spectra as the result of T–α-Sβ
spin transitions. The separation of the lines in the SNP spectra can
be reduced to half the HFC value not only for large values of |J|,
but also by fast recombination of RPs and biradicals even when J =
0. Time-resolved SNP studies of biradicals
addressing kinetic information were also reported. 
In addition to radical pairs, microwaves inevitably
affect radicals
that, for instance, escape from the geminate RP. As a result, DNP-type
effects are often observed, , , , either alone or together with
SNP. In the OE-DNP experiments in solution ( ), stable paramagnetic species are used,
and nuclear polarization is created on the nearby diamagnetic molecules.
In contrast, MW irradiation of transient paramagnetic radicals produces
polarization of their own nuclear spins which is preserved upon their
chemical transformation to diamagnetic products. In fact, the cage-escape
and F-pair products often show the combination of SNP and DNP effects ( ).
 DNP effects in radical-ions produced by photoinduced
electron transfer
between a donor (D) and an acceptor (A) were addressed in several
studies. , In such case, an essential role is played
by the degenerate electron exchange processes of the type D•+ + D → D + D•+ and A•– + A → A + A•–, which transfer the DNP-derived
nuclear polarization (indicated by bold face) from radical-ions to
diamagnetic species as well as govern the appearance of the observed
dependence of DNP effect on B0 at constant
MW frequency. A representative example demonstrating DNP effects in
dimethylaniline radical cation is shown in .
 Finally, several other effects should be mentioned
in this context.
The electron spins of radicals that escape from the primary RPs can
be hyperpolarized owing to CIDEP effects ( ). In such cases, electron–nuclear
cross-relaxation can convert the hyperpolarization of electron spins
to nuclear polarization even in the absence of any MW irradiation.
Application of MW irradiation to such radicals before they relax to
thermal equilibrium perturbs the polarized state of their electrons
and thus affects the cross-relaxation process, leading to a decrease
or even an increase of the resulting nuclear polarization. The sign and magnitude of such DNP effects
reflect the corresponding CIDEP effects observed in TR-EPR spectra
( ). Yet another
interesting possibility considered earlier was the perturbation of nuclear spin state populations in transient
radicals to alter the resulting nuclear polarization of the diamagnetic
products, thereby accessing the NMR-detected nuclear resonance spectra
of transient radicals. It is further noted that at magnetic fields
comparable to HFC values of the radicals involved, an RF field induces
mixed electron–nuclear spin transitions, which can also result
in nuclear polarization of diamagnetic products. 
 
3.8.

## Photochemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
in the Solid Phase
Chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization
(CIDNP) can be induced thermally, as originally discovered, , or photochemically (photo-CIDNP).
CIDNP in the fluid phase was addressed in , with one notable example being CIDNP
in a cyclic photochemical reaction of a flavin dye and an aromatic
amino acid in aqueous solution. In this section, we discuss the occurrence
of CIDNP effects in the solid state, in combination with magic angle
spinning NMR (photo-CIDNP MAS NMR), which has been recently reviewed. 
While DNP ( , , and ) relies on the presence of radicals, and ONP
( ) is
based on triplet states, CIDNP always requires the presence of radical
pairs (RPs) possessing correlated electron spins. The concept of a
spin-correlated RP was introduced earlier ( and ). , It is based on two organic radicals, R1 and R2, which form a common spin state: either a singlet or a triplet state.
If these states of the radical pair are not its eigenstates, the RP
might oscillate between these two collective spin states via their
coherent superposition. As it can be rationalized in vector representation, the frequency of this oscillation depends on
the difference in the g-factors of these two radicals (Δg), with a large value of Δg allowing
for fast oscillations. In the radical pair mechanism (RPM) , ( and ), the oscillation between the spin states of
a spin-correlated RP is modulated by the hyperfine interactions of
unpaired electrons with magnetic nuclei such as protons. Depending
on the nuclear spin state, such oscillation of the RP can be accelerated
or slowed down.
Let us take the case that only one of the two
radicals possesses
one spin-1/2 nucleus, with the hyperfine splitting (given by the coupling
constant A) being roughly twice the difference in the Zeeman frequencies
of the two radicals (determined by Δg) (see ). There are two
possibilities, depending on the orientation of the nuclear spin. Assuming
the Boltzmann-weighted distribution of the two nuclear spin orientations
(i.e., nα:nβ ≈ 50:50), there
is a 50% chance that the spin evolution of the RP is essentially stopped
and the electron spin state of the RP is maintained. There is also
a 50% chance that the oscillation of the electron spin state accelerates.
Thus, if a spin-correlated RP is born in a triplet state, in one case
it will stay in the triplet state, while in the other it will interconvert
into a singlet state. The RP can only recombine in its singlet state,
while in the triplet state its radicals might diffuse apart. This
spin-sorting process ( ) implies that nuclear spin states “decide”
on the fate of a chemical reaction. This is an amazing result: nuclear
spins, for which the energies of magnetic interactions are tiny compared
to the enthalpies of chemical reactions, are able to control the kinetics
of chemical transformations. 
In
solid state, in contrast to most liquids, dipolar interactions
are not averaged to zero and anisotropies occur. Thus, two new mechanisms
that combine spin evolution and chemical reaction were proposed: (1) a fully coherent transformation of nuclear coherences
to nuclear polarization called three-spin mixing (TSM). Here, during the free spin-evolution of the
RP under the influence of the pseudosecular part of the anisotropic
hyperfine interaction, electron coherence is converted into electron
hyperpolarization which is transformed into nuclear hyperpolarization
if a triple matching condition is fulfilled; (2) a
coherent mechanism relying on the difference of the decay rates of
the two spin states of the RP, called differential decay (DD). Since for the singlet-born RP in photosynthesis,
the fraction of singlet RPs will exceed the fraction of triplet RPs
(because the decay of the RP is much faster from its triplet state
than from its singlet state), selective enrichment of particular nuclear
spin states occurs. Both mechanisms exclusively occur in solid state
and follow certain sign rules. Recently,
in the context of explaining field-cycling MAS NMR data, the theory was reformulated and extended within
the framework of level crossings and level anticrossings, , which is also successfully applied to other hyperpolarization methods.
Observation of the solid-state photo-CIDNP effect requires a solid-state
NMR experiment. Therefore, magic angle spinning (MAS) of the sample
is demanded. The sample is placed in an optically transparent rotor
made from sapphire. Such sapphire rotors are presently available with
3.2, 4.0, and 7.0 mm diameters. Sapphire rotors can be used from cryogenic
to ambient temperatures and are chemically inert. The bottom half
is massive sapphire, while the sample occupies the upper half. Sapphire
rotors are rather fragile. To avoid microscratches on their surface,
the pneumatic sample lift should be avoided and the MAS frequency
limited to, for example, 8 kHz for 4 mm rotors. Furthermore, an illumination
setup is required for CIDNP experiments ( ). In a typical setup, a 1000 W xenon lamp,
emitting the full white spectrum from ultraviolet to near-infrared
similar to sunlight, is used. Depending on the sensitivity of the
sample, it might be necessary to block ultraviolet radiation, for
example, using Schott glass filters. Against infrared radiation, a
water filter might be a good choice. Alternatively, lasers can be
used for sample illumination. Selecting the wavelength for monochromatic
illumination, one should keep in mind that, for samples with high
optical density, it is not the Lambert–Beer law that applies,
but rather the Kubelka–Munk–Schrader theory. Therefore, it is advisable to choose a wavelength
so that the light is able to penetrate deep into the sample. The MAS
rotation allows illumination of the sample from all sides. One can
expect that soon laser diodes will provide sufficient power, which
may offer new illumination strategies. For the delivery of light into
the MAS probe, fiber bundles with a heat-conducting metal husk at
one end and a porcelain husk which does not affect the NMR experiments
at the other end, are recommended. The stator has to have a hole which
can be drilled into the tile carrying the coil. The coil might have
to be modified so that it allows for sufficient irradiation of the
rotor.
 Until now, two types of systems have been demonstrated
to show
the solid-state photo-CIDNP effect: photosynthetic reaction center
(RC) proteins as well as some flavoproteins. The discovery of the
solid-state photo-CIDNP effect in 1994 by Zysmilich and McDermott
succeeded with a purple bacterial RC protein studied by 15N MAS NMR. To this end, the RC was
isolated from the membrane, the electron-accepting quinones were chemically
prereduced to allow for induction of cyclic electron transfer, and
the sample was uniformly labeled with 15N isotope. While
studying and optimizing the effect, it turned out that the NMR signal
enhancement is so strong that enhanced NMR signals could be obtained
also from photosynthetic membranes, cells and entire plants ( ). The possibility to study such large units is
very useful since, for many organisms, no procedure to isolate RC
proteins is known. Therefore, sample preparation can be rather straightforward;
however, cyclic electron transfer always needs to be introduced, for
example by prereduction of the acceptor site. Isotope labeling, for
example 15N labeling of bacteria, is rather straightforward,
while introduction of 13C labels into plants is very demanding.
Interestingly, also with a photosynthetic membrane under liquid-phase
conditions, 13C photo-CIDNP signals were obtained, and
even a 13C-13C COSY experiment was possible. In the slow-tumbling regime, the large anisotropic
electron–nuclear interactions are preserved over the time period
required for polarization transfer, as in solids, and therefore the
“solid-state” photo-CIDNP effect can occur.
 The other systems showing the solid-state photo-CIDNP
effect, as
discovered in 2010, are specific flavoproteins
such as light-oxygen-voltage-sensing (LOV) domains. These proteins
need to be mutated since the photochemically active cysteine, forming
a covalent bond to flavin, has to be removed to allow for cyclic electron
transfer and formation of an RP. 
The achievable polarization depends strongly on the strength of
the external magnetic field ( ). − , There is
apparently an enhancement maximum in the range of typical NMR fields.
A low-field maximum, attributed to S-T– mixing in
liquid-state NMR ( ), is predicted by theory but
has not been demonstrated experimentally.
 Photo-CIDNP MAS NMR experiments allow for direct
measurement of
the enhancement factor by comparing the spectra obtained with and
without illumination under otherwise the same conditions. Often the
“dark” signal of the methyl groups of the protein is
taken to obtain an absolute scale. These experiments have shown enhancement
factors of more than 80,000 for 13C MAS NMR under continuous
illumination ( ). Such nuclear spin order close to
unity is obtained by building up hyperpolarization during several
photocycles.
 As mentioned above, samples are either photosynthetic
RC proteins
or flavoproteins. Despite several trials, photo-CIDNP experiments
with artificial photosynthetic systems did not succeed. On the other
hand, all natural photosynthetic systems that have been tested show
the CIDNP effect.
Photo-CIDNP MAS NMR has been done with two
motivations. On one
hand, the aim was to resolve the exact mechanism of the solid-state
photo-CIDNP effect. To this end, mainly time-resolved laser-flash
experiments as well as magnetic field
dependence studies − were performed. On the basis of the understanding
of the effect, photo-CIDNP MAS NMR was developed into an analytical
method allowing one to study electronic structures, kinetics and molecular
dynamics of RPs. 
On the other
hand, photo-CIDNP MAS NMR has always been used to
learn about the fundamental processes in natural photosynthesis and
efficient electron transfer in nature. Even without understanding
the origin of the solid-state photo-CIDNP effect, NMR chemical shifts
are directly available to obtain information on the ground electronic
state of electron-pumping photochemical machinery of RCs. Of particular
interest is the RC of photosystem II of plants, having the highest
oxidizing force in living nature, able to oxidize water to molecular
oxygen. Here, a monomeric chlorophyll cofactor appears as donor, not
a dimer as in various other RCs. It turned out that the donor chlorophyll
carries a strongly asymmetric electron spin density which is spread to the axial histidine leading to the so-called
hinge-model. , 
Another long-standing
question is the difference in the symmetry
of the light-induced electron transfer between bacterial RCs of the
purple bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides and photosystem I of plants. In purple bacterial RCs, both cofactors
are forming the electron donor, the so-called “special pair”,
however, the electron is transferred selectively into one of the two
cofactor branches. On the other hand,
in photosystem I, no functional symmetry breaking occurs and both
branches of cofactors are active. Chemical shifts of the two cofactors
in the “special pair” are rather different; however, the differences are not much larger
than those observed in the donor dimer of photosystem I. Therefore, the ground-state electronic structure
does not appear to be the decisive factor. Interestingly, there is
a large asymmetry in the electronically excited state of the donor
molecules in bacterial RCs, as shown by the analysis of the signature
of the donor triplet state on the solid-state photo-CIDNP effect, implying that orbital factors related to orbital
overlap and therefore electron-transfer kinetics are very different
between the two cofactors. Hence, it appears that orbital overlap
is a key factor deciding on the electron transfer pathway.
Two
forms of the ancient heliobacteria, which might be the oldest
survivors of the period of early photosynthesis, have been studied.
The protein structure of heliobacterial RCs is highly symmetrical; however, an oxygenated product can be formed
showing a dramatic color change of the sample from brown to green,
and no intermediate is reported. In both forms, called Braunstoff
and Grünstoff, the solid-state photo-CIDNP effect was observed
and the transformation of both forms studied, providing evidence that
spin-correlated RPs occur in both forms of preparation. 
Diatoms (Greek: dia = through, tomos
= knife: i.e., “the
cuttable” because cell proliferation has been studied on these
systems), a major form of algae living in the ocean, also have two
RCs like plants, photosystems I and II, and were studied with photo-CIDNP
MAS NMR. Comparing photosynthetic RCs
of three types of diatoms, chemical shifts similar to those in RCs
of plants were observed, suggesting a similar ground-state electronic
structure. It remains puzzling that the magnetic field dependence
of the 13C solid-state photo-CIDNP effect in photosystem
II of the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum is different from that in plants.
The discovery of the solid-state
photo-CIDNP effect in flavoproteins opened
a new world of experiments, in particular
because in these systems the electron donor is an aromatic amino acid
which, using side-directed mutagenesis, can be shifted to other positions
in the protein, varying distance, orientation and strength of couplings
( ). , Presently, understanding of the photo-CIDNP mechanism in flavoproteins
is required. It must be distinguished from that in photosynthetic
RCs, in which the RP is born in a singlet state, while in flavoproteins
the electron transfer is initiated by the triplet state of the flavin
cofactor.
 The photocycle of a standard photo-CIDNP experiment
is shown in . Using nanosecond
laser pulses, time-resolved photo-CIDNP MAS NMR experiments allowed
to elucidate the kinetics and mechanism occurring in photosynthetic
RCs. In addition, the initial signal
intensity in time-resolved photo-CIDNP MAS NMR refers to the enhancement
due to the RPM and can be related to the isotropic hyperfine coupling
constants. While the RP recombines and the sample becomes diamagnetic,
the nuclear hyperpolarization remains and decays with the normal nuclear
spin relaxation kinetics governed by T1n. Hence, during NMR detection, there are no unpaired electron spins
remaining, and thus no paramagnetic broadening of the NMR lines. Furthermore,
in selectively 13C-labeled samples, spin diffusion between
different nuclear positions can nicely be followed. Recently, it was
possible to transfer the 13C and 15N hyperpolarization
of the cofactor to the nearby protons within the protein pocket. These “spin-torch” experiments
are opening the possibility to study not only the molecules forming
the RP but also their direct environment.
 Presently, there are efforts toward developing
photo-CIDNP MRI.
Ideally, one would install solid-state photo-CIDNP agents, such as
proteins or artificial dyads, capable to bind to selective surfaces
and observe these selectively labeled surfaces with MRI methodology.
It would be useful to incorporate the know-how used in fluorescence
spectroscopy by using agents such as green fluorescent protein (GFP)
to label particular biological surfaces.
Finally, there is no
fundamental reason why artificial systems
could not show the photo-CIDNP effect. Hence, one would expect that
future attempts will eventually lead to success in such studies. Furthermore,
the occurrence of the solid-state photo-CIDNP effect is apparently
affected by the isotopic labeling pattern. Here, a systematic study
would be desirable.

3.9.

## Optical Nuclear Polarization and Triplet Dynamic
Nuclear Polarization in Molecular Crystals
The optical nuclear
polarization (ONP) and triplet dynamic nuclear polarization (tDNP; a.k.a. MW-induced ONP, MI-ONP; RF-induced ONP, RF-ONP;
Hartmann–Hahn ONP, HH-ONP) techniques − utilize strong polarization of electron spins of the lowest triplet
state T1 of a suitable guest chromophore molecule (or sometimes
a triplet radical pair) in a host matrix produced upon photoexcitation
of the guest by spin-selective intersystem crossing (ISC) between
its singlet and triplet manifolds ( ) ( ). The subsequent transfer of polarization
from electrons to nuclei during the lifetime of the polarized T1 state can be either spontaneous (in ONP) or induced by a
microwave (MW) or radiofrequency (RF) field (in tDNP). As the ISC from T1 back to the ground diamagnetic
S0 state does not change the nuclear spin states, the initial
nuclear polarization of the guests or their immediate neighbors is
preserved and then spreads over the network of nuclei in a solid sample
by spin diffusion. This is facilitated by the absence of a diffusion
barrier ( ) and the long nuclear spin relaxation times T1n in a diamagnetic solid since the photogenerated paramagnetic
species are short-lived. In contrast to dDNP ( ) and MAS DNP
NMR ( )
techniques, tDNP can be achieved without resorting
to cryogenic temperatures and/or high magnetic fields.
 In most cases, coherent polarization transfer from
electrons to
nuclei is mediated by mixing of states by the static hyperfine interaction
(HFI) between electron and nuclear spins. In ONP, this is efficient
only in the vicinity of an avoided energy level crossing (LAC) ( ). At other B0 fields, application of a MW or RF field is
essential. In the solid effect ( and ), the oscillating
(B1e) field drives the nominally “forbidden”
flip-flip (ΔSz +
ΔIz = ±2)
and flip-flop (ΔSz + ΔIz = 0) mixed
electron–nuclear spin transitions which are partially allowed
by HFI. However, when the EPR line width exceeds nuclear Larmor frequency,
the polarization transfer is inefficient as concurrent flip-flip and
flip-flop transitions lead to opposing nuclear polarization (differential
solid effect). More efficient schemes are based on driving the allowed
electron spin transitions in combination with electron–nuclear
cross-polarization under condition similar to Hartmann–Hahn
matching (see below).
 The Overhauser-type incoherent transfer driven
by cross-relaxation
is also possible, for instance when energy transfer from a photoexcited
guest to a host matrix produces mobile triplet excitons with modulated
HFI. Several transfer mechanisms can be operative simultaneously and
often destructively. For instance, all three mechanisms (Overhauser,
ONP, and tDNP) were observed in doped anthracene
crystals. In the case of coherent polarization
transfer, oscillations in nuclear polarization can occur under appropriate
conditions, particularly for high B1 and
moderate B0 fields. − Coherence transfer pathways have been analyzed in some detail. 
Photoexcitation of a chromophore molecule
requires a suitable light
source, preferably a pulsed laser. For instance, the most efficient
photoexcitation of the pentacene guest in naphthalene or p-terphenyl host crystals is from the S0 to S1 state at 600 and 590 nm, respectively ( ). Higher excitation energies can be used
if the host crystal is transparent at the chosen wavelength (e.g.,
naphthalene at 337 nm of a pulsed N2 laser), but light
absorption may be less efficient, and the excess energy is released
as heat, changing the sample temperature and damaging its crystalline
structure. While electron spin polarization is independent of magnetic
field, in low magnetic fields the anisotropic HFI of the triplet electronic
spin state required for polarization transfer is greatly reduced in
first order when the electron Zeeman energy is significantly below
those of the zero-field transitions. Therefore, a suitable magnet is required. The tDNP experiments additionally require a (pulsed) MW or RF source.
Many experiments use the widely available X-band (9–12 GHz)
EPR equipment, but several studies were
performed either at much lower frequencies or at ∼18 GHz. − Experiments have been performed from cryogenic (4 K and above) to
room temperature (RT), with lower temperatures
often providing higher polarization levels. NMR signal detection is
performed either in situ or by shuttling the sample to a dedicated
NMR probe either within the same or in a separate magnet. Attaining
the highest polarizations requires capabilities to sweep magnetic
field or MW/RF frequency (see below), and to carefully control crystal
orientation with respect to the B0 field.
The tDNP technique has so far been demonstrated
with a rather limited range of chromophore guest molecules and host
matrices. A single crystal of naphthalene doped with pentacene is
one of the most efficient and widely used systems for ONP/tDNP, with pentacene substituting two naphthalene molecules
in the lattice without perturbing the rest of the crystal ( ). For room temperature
experiments, p-terphenyl is a better host as it allows
higher dopant concentrations facilitating polarization buildup, and
is much less prone to sublimation. Dopant concentration (∼10–1000
ppm) determines the uniformity of light absorption in the sample;
clustering of chromophore molecules can, for instance, cause quenching
of the triplet state. Good-quality doped single crystals are often
grown using the conventional Bridgman method. A number of experiments
were also reported in which, contrary to the initial misinterpretation,
the guest (e.g., anthracene, acridine, phenazine) photochemically
abstracts an H atom from the host (e.g., fluorene, anthracene) to
produce a triplet radical pair. , 
 A highly spin-selective ISC from the S1 state to the
triplet manifold of pentacene upon its photoexcitation in p-terphenyl host ( ) populates the three triplet sublevels Tx, Ty, Tz in the reference frame of the zero-field-splitting (ZFS) tensor
as Px:Py:Pz = 0.76:0.16:0.08. The magnitude
and sign of the observable electron polarization in the lab frame
of reference largely depends on the orientation of the chromophore
molecule with respect to B0. For pentacene
in the x||B0 orientation ( ), the populations of the
T+, T0, and T– states are P+:P0:P– = 0.12:0.76:0.12, maximizing the population difference
for the T+-T0 pair at 73%. Even larger electron
polarizations can be achieved for pentacene in naphthalene host, whereas more air-tolerant 6,13-diazapentacene
and 5,12-diazatetracene in p-terphenyl matrix yielded
49% and 66% electron polarization, respectively, at RT and B0 ∼ 0.676 T. Other orientations give lower usable polarizations. For pentacene, T1e ∼ 100 μs is longer than the
lifetime of its T1 state (∼20 μs for T0, ∼ 80 μs for T+ and T–) and thus has little effect on electron polarization. However, because
the reverse ISC from T1 to S0 is also spin-selective,
photoexcitation with a continuous-wave (CW) source or long laser pulses
leads to considerably lower time-averaged electron polarizations (e.g.,
max. ∼ 12% for pentacene/naphthalene ).
In ONP, spontaneous polarization transfer to nuclei is efficient
when the B0 field is set to achieve conditions
close to a LAC ( ). The optimum field value thus depends on the exact ZFS parameters
and crystalline sample orientation with respect to B0. Rapid B0 switching away
from the LAC after a laser pulse can increase polarization levels. 
In tDNP, B0 is usually
chosen to set the system away from a LAC, and the transfer of electron
polarization to nuclei is mediated by application of a MW (or RF)
field. Since EPR spectra are broadened inhomogeneously , ( ), CW
MW irradiation affects only a small fraction of electron spins and
is thus less efficient compared to pulsed MW irradiation. In the pulsed
scheme termed NOVEL (nuclear orientation via electron spin locking), , the electron spin magnetization is locked in the rotating frame.
The value of the locking field B1e is
chosen to match the Rabi (nutation) frequency of an electron in the
rotating frame to the Larmor frequency of the nuclei in the lab frame , (modified Hartmann–Hahn condition, √2γeB1e = γnB0). We note that NOVEL is also applied in some studies
to generate nuclear spin hyperpolarization using color centers in
diamond ( ). An even more efficient scheme termed integrated solid effect (ISE)
implements the matching condition for a much larger fraction of electron
spins by an adiabatic fast passage through the inhomogeneously broadened
EPR line. This is achieved by sweeping the B0 field or MW frequency during a single MW pulse, e.g., an
8–20 μs sweep over a 5–20 mT range for pentacene
with 20–90 μs lifetime of its T1 state. The polarization transfer from electrons to
nuclei at the matching condition is fast, on the order of a few hundred
ns.
 Nuclear polarization produced by a single polarization
cycle is
rather low, in particular because the yield of S → T ISC can
be rather low, e.g., 2–3% for pentacene at low temperatures
(but possibly larger at RT ). A laser
pulse much longer than the S1 state lifetime achieves repetitive
S0 → S1 re-excitations, accumulating
electron population in the T1 state. For pentacene, the
S1 state lifetime is ∼20 ns, and 800–1000
ns laser pulses were shown to be efficient. However, illumination should be shorter than the relaxation and
decay times of the T1 state, otherwise its polarization
is degraded. Furthermore, multiple repetitions of the entire polarization
cycle at a rate of up to several kHz can be used to accumulate much higher polarization levels within
the T1n time of a diamagnetic sample ( ). For naphthalene
host at ∼0.3 T, T1(1H) ∼ 40 min at RT in the absence of light, and ∼1000
min at 77 K even under pulsed illumination. 
 The nuclear polarization build-up time depends
on the sample and
the experimental conditions; values ranging from a few minutes to
several hours have been observed. It can be shortened dramatically
using partial deuteration of the sample to reduce the size of the
pool of polarizable nuclei. This also tends to increase T1n and usually yields higher polarization levels. For
instance, for pentacene-naphthalene at 105 K, deuteration of the host
(∼99%) resulted in T1n ∼
105 s for residual protons and a dramatic shortening of
the build-up time from ∼(1–2) × 104 s
down to 357 s ( ).
 Achieving maximum efficiency of nuclear polarization
thus requires
a careful optimization of numerous parameters. For the pentacene/naphthalene
single crystal, the highest bulk 1H spin polarizations
achieved were ∼70% at 105 K , , and ∼80% at 25 K; for a doped p-terphenyl crystal at RT, polarization
of ∼34% was achieved. Cross-polarization
(CP) and field cycling can be used to transfer polarization from 1H to other nuclei such as 13C , and 19F. 
Besides
the studies of their principles and practical aspects,
ONP and tDNP were used to perform time-resolved spectroscopy
of excited triplet states in molecular solids and enhanced NMR of
molecular crystals. For instance, the ONP/CP combination was applied
to evaluate the 13C CSA tensors for all carbon atoms of
fluorene doped with acridine. tDNP scheme can be also used for optically detected NMR
and nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) experiments. , 
In addition, application of tDNP in nuclear
physics
for experiments with radioactive nuclear beams and for spin filtering/polarization
and small-angle scattering of polarized neutron beams was pursued
systematically. For naphthalene doped with pentacene-d14, T1n ∼ 920 h at
0.5 T and 25 K, and ∼800 h at 20 mT and 6 K, and a polarization
level of ∼80% were achieved. Such
extremely long relaxation times allow one to polarize the sample under
optimum conditions and then transport it to a neutron beamline and
use it for several days with little polarization loss. As an example
of applications which are potentially interesting for quantum information
processing, a multiqubit entanglement in the system of 14 strongly
polarized 1H spins at 295 K was demonstrated with the pentacene/p-terphenyl single crystal. 
Compared to oriented single crystals, the EPR spectra of polycrystalline
samples are broad superpositions of contributions from differently
oriented triplet molecules ( ). Polarization transfer to nuclei is still possible
by limiting the field/frequency sweep to the most intense parts of
an EPR spectrum corresponding to the most favorable orientations.
However, the efficiency is significantly reduced as all triplet guests
shorten T1n while only their fraction
contribute to nuclear polarization. For polycrystalline sample of
pentacene/naphthalene-d8, this yielded
1–3% polarization as opposed
to ∼70% achieved with a single crystal. Mechanical grinding
of single crystals can measurably reduce T1n, from ∼29,000 to 4000 s, likely by creating free radicals.
For pentacene in benzophenone or o-terphenyl glass,
polarization achieved at 120 K was 1.45%. Modest 1H NMR signal enhancements were achieved for some
other polycrystalline and glassy samples
Recent efforts include attempts
to utilize tDNP
in the liquid phase. For instance, polycrystalline benzoic acid doped
with pentacene (with one or both components isotopically labeled)
polarized at B0 = 0.38 T and RT and then
dissolved with a hot solvent at high field yielded polarization of
up to 0.88% for 1H ( ) and 0.22%
for 13C after CP. In a more
recent study, tDNP was used to transfer polarization
to several organic molecules in solution. To this end, a single crystal of naphthalene doped with deuterated
pentacene with phyp(1H) ≈
20–25% was transferred at RT in a hand-held magnet, crushed,
and dissolved to produce a concentrated (1.8 M) solution of hyperpolarized
naphthalene in CDCl3 containing low concentrations of several
organic molecules. As a result of intermolecular NOE-mediated polarization
transfer, this procedure demonstrated signal enhancements beyond ε
= −200 at 1.45 T, with the highest polarization (phyp∼ 0.86%; ε = −1730 ± 60) achieved
for CH protons of propargyl acetate.
 Another approach used a stable aqueous dispersion
of 100 nm nanocrystals
of p-terphenyl doped with pentacene obtained by ball-milling
of the bulk crystals in a surfactant solution, producing 0.083% 1H polarization at RT for nanocrystals but not for water ( ). Transfer of 1H polarization from the
host nanocrystal to bulk water was achieved recently, albeit with
ε = 2.4 or lower at 0.66 T. Polarization
of 31P and 1H nuclei in a derivatized C60 fullerene in frozen toluene-d8 was demonstrated in the context of qubit manipulations for quantum
computing. 
 The major limitations of tDNP
are a limited range
of known suitable guest chromophores, sample preparation restrictions,
and suitable experimental conditions. In particular, pentacene solubility
and perturbation of a host crystal limit the range of potential host
compounds. Alternative sample preparation strategies were demonstrated
for introducing pentacene in films of p-terphenyl
or trans-stilbene (phyp(1H) ≈ 4–13%) and eutectic mixtures of target compounds (e.g., aromatic carboxylic
acids) with benzoic acid-d6 (phyp(1H) ≈ 0.3–1.2%). Pentacene functionalized with metal-coordinating
carboxylate moieties (4,4′-(pentacene-6,13-diyl) dibenzoic
acid) and incorporated in a diamagnetic metal–organic framework
(MOF) [Zn(MeIM)2]n (ZIF-8; MeIM = 2-methylimidazolate)
demonstrated ε ∼ 58 (at RT) and up to 100 (at 220 K)
for the host 1H nuclei at B0 = 9.67 T. This approach could be potentially
used to hyperpolarize molecules in solution via their reversible association
with such functionalized MOFs.
Significant aggregation and phase
separation of hydrophobic acenes
in biologically relevant environments severely degrades their performance
as polarizing agents. A recent study introduced a water-soluble porphyrin derivative, sodium salt of
tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin (TCPPNa), which was shown to generate
up to 60% electron polarization in several crystalline and amorphous
sugars and sugar alcohols. Moreover, for crystalline erythritol doped
with TCPPNa, ε > 120 was observed at 0.65 T.
Aggregation
of guest molecules and perturbation of host crystal
structure limit guest concentrations in tDNP experiments.
One approach to overcome this limitation is the use of charge-transfer
materials comprising molecular cocrystals, in which the fraction of
triplet-generating molecules is 50%, i.e., 2 orders of magnitude higher
than in conventional tDNP samples. Electron spin
polarization produced upon photoexcitation of a 1:1 cocrystal of phenazine
and 1,2,4,5-tetracyanobenzene (PNZ/TCNB) at 445 nm was sufficient
to generate maser oscillations at 2412 MHz in a high-Q MW cavity. 
Hyperpolarization techniques based on
the same principles as ONP
and tDNP are also applied to paramagnetic color centers
associated with lattice vacancies in certain materials. In particular,
in silicon carbide (SiC) a silicon vacancy and an adjacent carbon
vacancy constitute a defect with a triplet electronic ground state.
Polarization of 13C and 29Si nuclei in SiC can
be achieved by near-IR broadband illumination in a magnetic field
of 30–50 mT to bring the electron–nuclear spin states
to a LAC either in the ground state (GSLAC) or in the excited state
(ESLAC). For the 4H polymorph SiC wafer, these two conditions were
revealed as two prominent maxima in the B0 field dependence of 29Si polarization at B0 = 30.0–33.5 mT and 46.5–49.0 mT, respectively,
with the highest polarization reaching 99 ± 1%. Potential application of hyperpolarized SiC in MRI was
demonstrated. Similar electronic spin
states are associated with nitrogen-vacancy defects in diamond. These
states can be interrogated and manipulated at either ensemble or single-spin
level, making them useful for a range of fundamental and practical
applications. Given the importance of this field of research and its
rapid progress, the use of color centers in diamond for hyperpolarization
purposes is addressed separately in .

3.10.

## Nuclear Polarization with Nitrogen-Vacancy
Color Centers in Diamond
The negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy
(NV) color center in diamond ( ) holds a special
place among the plethora of paramagnetic centers both in diamond and
other crystals due to a unique combination of its properties that makes it uniquely suitable for a multitude
of applications, including sensing magnetic and electric fields, mechanical
rotation, temperature and strain, generation of single photons on
demand, performing quantum operations, and, as relevant to this review,
for nuclear hyperpolarization. The basic idea of nuclear polarization
using NV centers (sometimes referred to as NV-DNP) is the same as
in other DNP techniques: electron polarization of the paramagnetic
center, that can be generated in NV centers by application of an optical
field followed by spin-selective ISC ( ), is transferred to that of nuclear
spins. Electron polarization of NV centers in the form of preferential
population of the mS = 0 sublevel (mS is the projection of the electron spin on
the NV axis) of the ground electronic 3A2 state
is achieved when the center is optically excited into the 3E state (see b). While the centers can radiatively decay
back to the ground state, there is also spin-dependent intersystem
crossing (ISC) into singlet states that provides a pathway for the mS= ± 1 states to decay into mS = 0, responsible for the population accumulation in
this state. Significant hyperpolarization of 14N (I = 1) or 15N (I = 1/2) nuclei
intrinsic to the NV center was demonstrated, as well as that of 13C in the vicinity of NV centers and in the bulk of the diamond
crystal. At the same time, efficient transfer of polarization outside
of the diamond remains an open challenge that researchers have begun
to tackle only recently (see below).
 DNP of 13C in bulk diamond was initially
implemented
at cryogenic temperatures. − The transfer of the electron
polarization to 14N/15N and 13C nuclei
proximal to the NV centers at room temperature was first discovered
in the work involving single NV centers , and later demonstrated with ensembles. 
One approach for transferring electron polarization to nuclei
involves
bringing magnetic sublevels of the NV center to near crossing via
application of an external magnetic field. If the near-degenerate
states show an avoided crossing, a.k.a. level anticrossing (LAC),
due to hyperfine or superhyperfine interactions, this typically creates
favorable conditions for polarization transfer to nuclei. Using NV
centers in diamond, nuclear hyperpolarization is achieved in the vicinity
of both the 3E excited-state level anticrossings , (ESLAC, occurring around 50 mT for a field collinear with the NV
axis) and the ground-state level anticrossings (GSLAC, occurring around 100 mT).
Complementary to
the techniques relying on LAC are nuclear polarization
techniques operating away from anticrossings that employ sequences
of selective hyperfine-structure-resolved microwave transitions changing
the electron spin projection mS for a
system in a selected |mS, mI⟩ state, radiofrequency transitions changing the
nuclear projection mI, and green laser
pulses resetting NV centers to the mS =
0 state while preserving the nuclear spin. With proper choices of
the pulses, such an operation results in enhanced population of the
target nuclear state and can be used recursively to increase the polarization. 
For bulk NMR applications, of particular
interest is using the
relatively dilute NV centers in order to hyperpolarize the 13C nuclei everywhere in the diamond samples, including the regions
relatively far from the color centers. Such “polarization spreading”
relies on spin diffusion, that turns out to be efficient in diamond. In this experiment, a diamond single crystal
containing NV centers was placed in a ≈50 mT fringe field of
an NMR magnet and irradiated with green light. After a period of polarization,
the sample was shuttled into the NMR magnet, where 13C
NMR spectra were recorded, demonstrating bulk polarization levels
averaged over the volume of the crystal in excess of 0.5%. The sample
remained at room temperature for the duration of the experiment, and
the sign of the 13C magnetization could be controlled by
finely tuning the polarization field in the vicinity of the ESLAC. Similar experiments were later carried out
and described elsewhere. , The authors identified
an additional bulk hyperpolarization mechanism that is efficient in
the same range of magnetic fields as ESLAC but is related to optically
induced cross-relaxation in the NV center ground state and involves
the electron spin of a substitutional nitrogen impurity (the P1 center)
with its 14N nucleus. According to the authors’
analyses, this mechanism dominates the bulk polarization.
Similar
efficiency and control of nuclear hyperpolarization as
demonstrated with bias fields of around ≈50 mT are also obtained
in the vicinity of the GSLAC. 
The instrumentation needed for NV-based hyperpolarization largely
depends on the specific technique used. For example, experiments utilizing
the fringe field of a high-field NMR magnet used for detection require
a sample shuttling system, while experiments using a static magnetic
field or microwave sweeps require corresponding electromagnets and
microwave sources. A common element is intense (milliwatts to tens
of watts of power) sources of green light, which could be continuous-wave
diode-pumped solid-state lasers or light-emitting diodes.
Bulk
hyperpolarization intrinsic to diamond is often carried out
with commercially available high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT)
or chemical-vapor-deposition (CVD) single-crystal diamond with natural
abundance of 13C isotope (1.1%), although 13C-depleted or 13C-enriched (up to essentially 100%) material
has been produced as well. It is important to note that whether enrichment
leads to an increase in the density of polarized nuclear spins in
the bulk or in overall polarization is a nontrivial matter , and may depend on the specific hyperpolarization strategy employed.
The nitrogen content of HPHT diamond typically ranges up to ≈200
ppm. To create the NV centers in the bulk, crystals are irradiated
with relativistic charged particles, most often electrons with energies
1–15 MeV, that penetrate the material and produce crystal vacancies
due to ionization losses. The samples are subsequently annealed to
immobilize the vacancies and form the NV centers with a typical relative
concentration of several ppm. Some experiments use ultrapure CVD diamond
with low defect concentration, so single NV centers can be isolated.
In some cases, a layer of NV centers several nm below the surface
of the diamond is desired. Such layers are created by ion implantation
or, more recently, with CVD overgrowth techniques, allowing enhanced
coherence and optical properties of shallow NV centers. Some of the
work described below employs micro- and nanodiamond.
Early work
on bulk hyperpolarization of 13C nuclei in
diamond showed that efficient hyperpolarization could only be achieved
when the bias magnetic field was aligned within a small angle (less
than a degree) to an NV axis which is collinear with one of the four
main diagonals of the diamond cubic lattice. However, since many applications
call for polarization in randomly oriented polycrystalline and powdered
samples, this was a serious drawback.
Luckily, it was subsequently
shown , that bulk 13C polarization can
be achieved also for randomly oriented
diamond particles with efficiencies comparable to those achieved for
well-aligned single crystals. For instance, >0.25% bulk 13C polarization was demonstrated with ≈200 μm diamond
particles. The experimental arrangement
used in this work resembles that of
the earlier study ( ): hyperpolarization occurs
in a low field, and the sample is shuttled into a high field for NMR
detection. However, in this approach, polarization transfer from electrons
to nuclei is accomplished by application of frequency-swept microwaves.
As usual, the electron spins of the NV centers are optically pumped
into the mS = 0 state, a process that
is largely independent of the NV orientation or magnetic field, as
long as it is sufficiently weak (≲30 mT ). The transfer of polarization to nuclei occurs as a result
of the microwave frequency sweep over a sequence of rotating-frame
LACs, where the parameters are carefully tuned to ensure adiabatic
passage through “strong” LACs (i.e., anticrossings with
relatively large minimum separation of the eigenstates), with partial
failure of adiabaticity at “weak” LACs. Moreover, light
intensity should be low enough to keep low the probability of an optical
transition during the passage through a LAC. An interesting feature
of the technique is that the sign of hyperpolarization can be reversed
by reversing the direction of the microwave frequency sweep. A detailed
theory developed to describe the hyperpolarization dynamics corresponding
to this method is reported elsewhere. 
 The hyperpolarization technique used by Ajoy et
al. has many attractive features for
practical
applications, while not requiring an excessively expensive apparatus.
Indeed, hyperpolarization occurs at room temperature, microwave equipment
in the 2–4 GHz range and green-light lasers employed in this
work are readily available, and, most importantly, polycrystalline
and powder samples can be used because the hyperpolarization mechanism
works for an arbitrarily oriented sample. A microwave-free technique
based on similar ideas and utilizing a bias field sweep across LAC
has been recently demonstrated as well. 
If NMR measurements are to be performed at high field, a viable
approach is in situ dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) achieved by
optically pumping NV centers (to the mS = 0 state) and driving a microwave transition to one of the mS= ±1 states. Electron polarization is
transferred to the bulk 13C nuclei via dipole–dipole
interactions, although the details of the mechanism are not fully
understood. The experiment was performed
in a 420 mT field and the bulk 13C polarization of a 2
mm × 2 mm × 0.3 mm natural isotopic abundance single-crystal
diamond was measured to be 6%. The polarization was also found to
be tolerant to a crystal misalignment (i.e., the angle between the
NV axis and magnetic field) of several degrees. A disadvantage of
this method is that it requires microwaves of relatively high frequency
(e.g., 8.9 and 14.6 GHz ).
While
the thrust of much of the ongoing work is toward transferring
hyperpolarization outside of the diamond or using diamond itself as
an imaging contrast agent, there are also important applications making
use of hyperpolarization within diamond. For instance, low-field hyperpolarization
was used to study many-body thermalization
of the spin system and the mechanisms of spin diffusion, itself responsible
for the spread of hyperpolarization in the bulk of the crystal. Another
future application is 13C-nuclei-based diamond rotation
sensors. 
In addition to polarization
transfer due to cross-relaxation in
the laboratory or rotating frame, NV-based hyperpolarization is also
possible using Hartmann–Hahn techniques where microwaves are
used to drive the NV electron spins and the Rabi frequency of the
electrons is matched to the Larmor frequency of the target nuclei. This approach is known as nuclear orientation
via electron-spin locking (NOVEL; ).
As mentioned above, it has been
a major goal in the field of NV-diamond-based
nuclear hyperpolarization to somehow transfer the polarization to
nuclei outside the diamond, and in particular, to polarize liquids
or gases relevant to bioanalytical applications ( ). Two scenarios can be considered:
(1) direct transfer of the NV electron polarization to nuclei outside
the diamond crystal, and (2) transfer of polarization between NV-hyperpolarized
nuclei inside the diamond and external nuclei. In both cases, one
seeks to have large surface area of contact between diamond an external
fluid. This suggests using microstructured bulk diamond or, if possible,
micro- or nanodiamond. In the former case, it was theoretically found
that it is best to use surfaces with micrometer-scale roughness. A variety of protocols for polarization transfer
have been considered, for example, field-sweep “spin-ratchet”
techniques; however, we are not aware
of any published reports of direct experimental observations of polarization
transfer to external nuclei.
 On the other hand, several groups have reported
impressive results
based on indirect observation of such polarization transfer. − In particular, polarization transfer from the NV centers to external
nuclei using a cross-relaxation-induced polarization technique was
described recently, in which a magnetic
field applied along the NV axis with a magnitude of about 100 mT brings
the magnetic sublevels of the electron spins in the color center close
together, so that the residual separation matches the Zeeman frequency
of the target nucleus (on the order of a MHz), facilitating cross-relaxation.
Repeated optical pumping cycle on an NV center results in considerable
transfer of polarization to the surrounding nuclei. In another study, single NV centers some 10 nm deep from the
diamond surface (which is a trade-off for sufficiently strong coupling
to the outside nuclei and maintaining good relaxation properties of
the NV center) were used and the polarization of the target nuclei,
the protons in poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) applied to the surface
of the diamond, was measured indirectly via the disappearance of the
target-ensemble cross-relaxation feature as observed with the NV center
itself. The attractive features of this approach include microwave-free,
room-temperature operation, the possibility to tune to a specific
target nucleus (with tuning accomplished by minute changes of the
bias magnetic field) and high (50%) polarization levels inferred.
In addition, the method does not require any chemical reactions, which
is a feature of all NV-diamond-based hyperpolarization techniques.
The projections for this approach are optimistic: for example, it
is envisioned that NV arrays with surface
density of 4 × 1011 cm–2 over a
4 mm × 4 mm diamond surface can achieve a polarization transfer
rate of 4 μL s–1 at a polarization level of
80% for a concentrated 1 M solution of MRI contrast agent hydroxyethyl
propionate (HEP) enriched with a 13C isotope, 13C5H10O3.
Experiments on NV-based
hyperpolarization of nuclei outside the
diamond are beginning to go beyond proof of principle and method development
toward scientific applications. As an example, the protons in oil were polarized via NOVEL and the diffusion
coefficient was measured in a layer of oil adjacent to the diamond
surface and compared to that in the bulk, a direct probe of nanoscale
hydrodynamics.
Finally, we remark that paramagnetic defects
in diamonds other
than NV centers can also be used to hyperpolarize external nuclei.
An example is the report of enhanced MRI with nuclei proximal to nanodiamond
hyperpolarized with an Overhauser technique. 

3.11.

## Parahydrogen-Based Hyperpolarization Techniques
In the H2 molecule was introduced as a leading example of
a molecular system with the necessary symmetry properties to act as
a source of nuclear spin hyperpolarization and support long-lived
spin states. Before we discuss the parahydrogen-based hyperpolarization
techniques, we briefly describe the properties of parahydrogen that
make it uniquely suitable for a range of such techniques and their
promising applications.
3.11.1.

## Parahydrogen, Its Basic Properties and
Enrichment
Molecular H2 exists as two different
(ortho and para) modifications because the Pauli principle imposes
strict requirements on the combined symmetry of the spin and rotational
(in general, rovibronic) parts of the total molecular wave function.
Hydrogen nuclei are identical fermions, thus in the ground vibronic
state parahydrogen (I = 0) is allowed to have rotational
states with even rotational quantum numbers (J =
0, 2, 4, ...) only, while orthohydrogen (I = 1) has
odd values of J (J = 1, 3, 5, ...). Other combinations are strictly forbidden, and
thus the nuclear spin state of the H2 molecule is impossible
to change without an associated change in the rotational state. Therefore,
nuclear spin conversion (NSC) inevitably involves a significant change
in molecular energy. For H2 gas, the smallest energy difference
is between the lowest ortho (I = 1, J = 1) and para (I = 0, J = 0) states
of H2 which amounts to ca. 170.5 K ( a), i.e., is
in the terahertz range. For comparison, an energy change associated
with flipping a nuclear spin in molecules with no molecular symmetry
in an NMR experiment does not normally exceed hundreds of MHz.
Normal H2 is available in high-pressure cylinders or can
be produced with a hydrogen generator by water electrolysis. As H2 is a highly flammable gas, it is advisable to use an H2 sensor in the lab when such experiments are performed to
warn of accidental leaks.
At room temperature and above, the
equilibrium composition of H2 approaches the statistical
ortho–para ratio (OPR)
of 3:1, referred to as normal hydrogen (n-H2) ( b). H2 can be a source of hyperpolarization only if the OPR deviates from
this value. The problem of enrichment of H2 in the para
spin state (p-H2) has been solved for industrial H2 liquefaction processes, and
is easy to perform on a small scale as well (see below). , Since the rotational energies are much larger than spin interaction
energies (e.g., Zeeman, dipolar, etc.), the energy separation of different
spin states of H2 is relatively large ( a). Therefore, at cryogenic
temperatures, the thermal equilibrium is shifted from n-H2 toward p-H2 fractions above the 25% p-H2 equilibrium
content at room temperature. In practice, this is often done by flowing
H2 gas through a cryostat containing a paramagnetic solid
material such as charcoal or iron(III) oxide to accelerate equilibration
by promoting ortho–para H2 conversion. The conversion
process is schematically illustrated in a. 
 As can be seen in b, the p-H2 enrichment that can
be achieved depends
on the temperature at which ortho–para conversion is performed,
which in turn governs the design of the converter. Inexpensive immersion-type
systems that use a bath of liquid nitrogen operate at 77 K and yield
H2 mixtures with a ca. 50:50 ortho–para ratio. − Higher enrichments require the use of lower conversion temperatures;
for instance, ∼99.8% parahydrogen can be produced at H2 boiling point (ca. 20.3 K). The implementation of an immersion-type
converter in combination with a liquid helium dewar has been reported
which operates at 30 K (an incorporated heater is used to prevent
condensation of H2 to avoid potential safety issues) and
yields ∼97% p-H2 at 4.5 bar and 300 mL/min flow
rate. A more popular option is based
on the use of closed-cycle cryostats , which can
easily reach para enrichments close to 100%. Such equipment is substantially
more expensive, and carries the cost of ∼50,000–125,000
USD (ca. 2021). A stand-alone helium-free generator is offered by
Bruker with production capacity of ∼0.15 standard liters per
minute (SLM) at ∼6 bar pressure of ∼92% p-H2 fraction. More advanced setups have been developed around ARS closed-cycle
helium cold-heads with production capacity of up to 4 SLM at up to
50 bar pressure and over 98% p-H2 fraction. , Note that 50% para enrichment yields a maximum polarization level
of 1/3 of that obtained with pure p-H2, which is already
sufficient for many applications. A potentially simpler alternative
is to use bottles of liquid hydrogen, which is transported and stored
in the para spin state.
It is also advantageous that parahydrogen
is the most long-lived
nuclear spin state ( ) known to-date, as both radiative and nonradiative
spontaneous ortho–para transitions are forbidden for an isolated
H2 molecule due to the symmetry of the hyperfine Hamiltonian.
Thus, once enriched, after the catalyst is removed parahydrogen can
be stored under ambient conditions for days/weeks. The NSC to n-H2 is induced by intermolecular
interactions and by collisions with container walls so that the actual
storage time depends on storage conditions (container quality, admixture
of oxygen and other gases, etc.).
Below we describe in detail
how hyperpolarization of nuclear spins
can be achieved by using p-H2 in homogeneous ( ) or heterogeneous
( ) catalytic hydrogenation reactions or in reversible chemical exchange
processes ( ).

3.11.2.

## Homogeneous Parahydrogen-Induced Polarization
This section covers parahydrogen-induced polarization (PHIP) effects
achieved by catalytic hydrogenation reactions in homogeneous solutions
(sometimes referred to as hydrogenative PHIP) whereby the p-H2 molecules react irreversibly with unsaturated moieties of
other molecules, and the product molecules are hyperpolarized ( c).
3.11.2.1.

## The Technique
Homogeneous hydrogenation
with p-H2 is almost always performed using transition metal
catalysts. There are a few important
considerations: (1) the time scale of the chemical reaction should
be similar to or shorter than the time scale of the nuclear spin relaxation,
which is typically seconds or tens of seconds in the products but
may be even shorter in reaction intermediates; (2) a suitable unsaturated
moiety (often, a double or a triple carbon–carbon bond) in
a precursor molecule is required so that hydrogen atoms of an H2 molecule can be incorporated in the reaction product via
a hydrogenation reaction; (3) usually, the reaction must be carried
out in a pairwise manner, meaning that the protons from one p-H2 molecule are transferred together to the same product molecule,
and not scrambled. In this section, we review how these limitations
affect the design of PHIP experiments, how they can be partially overcome,
and how in some cases they can be leveraged to enable applications
of PHIP.
Parahydrogen itself cannot produce observable NMR signals,
because the two protons are in a spin-0 singlet state. A chemical
interaction is required to temporarily or permanently break the magnetic
or chemical equivalence between the two protons; this can lead to
hyperpolarization and enhanced NMR signals. The size of the interaction
breaking the proton equivalence is key. If the interaction energy
is larger than the proton–proton J-coupling, the singlet state
is no longer an eigenstate, and enhanced NMR signals can be directly
excited and observed. In this case the protons are described as being
“far from magnetic equivalence” (also referred to as
weak coupling of nuclear spins). Typical examples are when there is
a large chemical shift difference at high field, or if one of the
protons is directly bound to a heteronuclear spin (e.g., 13C) to which it has a large J-coupling. If the interaction energy
that breaks the equivalence is smaller than the proton–proton
J-coupling, the singlet state remains close to an eigenstate, and
a suitable pulse sequence or magnetic field manipulation is required
to convert the singlet order into observable magnetization. This is
referred to as the near-equivalence regime (strong coupling of nuclear
spins). The arctangent of twice the ratio between the proton–proton
J-coupling and the equivalence-breaking interaction strength is known
as the “Goldman angle”. There are techniques to generate enhanced signals in both cases,
on the protons or on J-coupled heteronuclei. However, if the chemical
reaction produces a molecule in which the hydrogen atoms remain magnetically
equivalent, the spin order remains “locked” in the unobservable
singlet state, and a further reaction is required to break the equivalence
of the two protons. , , 

3.11.2.2.

## Practical Aspects
The instrumentation
for a variety of PHIP experiments was reviewed recently. The first requirement for PHIP is a way of
generating enriched parahydrogen, as described in detail in . The
next requirement is an apparatus in which to carry out the chemical
reactions. This importantly requires dissolving hydrogen gas into
solution, which is often the rate-limiting step which needs to be
performed rapidly on the time scale of nuclear spin relaxation to
avoid excessive polarization losses. In many cases it is sufficient,
and often even expedient, to perform the hydrogenation in an NMR tube
within an NMR instrument, so that the signal can be acquired during
the hyperpolarization process or immediately afterward. A pressurizable
NMR tube containing a catalyst and an unsaturated precursor in the
reaction solution under an atmosphere of parahydrogen at a pressure
of 1–10 bar can be shaken to dissolve the hydrogen into solution
and initiate the chemical reaction. For
applications (e.g., in biomedicine) that require a single bolus of
hyperpolarized material at high concentration or volume (∼100
μL or more) of polarized molecules, more sophisticated setups
exist that involve bubbling of p-H2 into a pressurized
reaction vessel, or spraying the reaction
solution into an atmosphere of parahydrogen. , For other applications such as pulse sequence optimization or acquiring 2D NMR spectra, it is often beneficial to have PHIP signals at steady state.
For this purpose it is problematic to bubble or mechanically mix the
parahydrogen into solution, because: (1) this is inherently irreproducible;
(2) it is impractical to do NMR on an inhomogeneous sample; and (3)
the solutions need to be periodically replaced since the reactions
are irreversible. Microfluidic implementation of PHIP can be advantageous; parahydrogen can be brought into solution nondisruptively
through a membrane, with the solution
flowing at a constant rate into the detection volume.
To implement
a pairwise hydrogenation required for PHIP, a precursor molecule that
can receive a pair of hydrogen atoms and a suitable catalyst are required.
Currently, transition metal complexes are used as catalysts to produce
PHIP in homogeneous (liquid-phase) hydrogenations, with rhodium and
ruthenium making up the majority. Some PHIP catalysts (e.g., Rh(dppb)(COD)BF4; dppb = 1,4-bis(diphenylphosphino)butane, COD = cyclooctadiene)
require an activation step in which one of the ligands (COD in this
case) is hydrogenated and leaves the metal center, yielding free coordination
sites; this can be done before addition of the precursor to the solution. 
In a typical experiment, a solution of
the unsaturated precursor
and hydrogenation catalyst is prepared, usually in a deuterated solvent
since this extends the relaxation times of the hyperpolarized nuclei
throughout the chemical reaction. A solvent is usually chosen that
gives a high rate of reaction and/or allows for further steps to be
carried out (such as purification or rapid sample transport). In most
cases, the solvent is degassed to remove residual oxygen, which is
paramagnetic and leads to faster conversion of p-H2 back
to n-H2, as well as relaxation of the hyperpolarized molecules
of interest. Also, it is common for the solution to be heated to increase
the rate of reaction.
PHIP signals can be generated in simple
pulse-acquire experiments.
In a PASADENA (parahydrogen and synthesis allow dramatically enhanced
nuclear alignment) experiment, the hydrogenation
reaction ( a) is carried out at a high field, and there should be a chemical
shift difference between the protons in the product molecule. Hyperpolarization-enhanced
signals are excited by applying an RF pulse, with maximum enhancement
given by a 45° flip-angle pulse (not 90° as is the case
with thermal equilibrium polarization). In PASADENA experiments, nuclear spins of the parahydrogen-derived
protons (I1 and I2) are in a correlated state of I1zI2z spin
order, which differs from thermal equilibrium spin order of the form I1z + I2z. The resulting spectra thus show a characteristic
antiphase (e.g., absorption/emission) pattern, with individual resonances
enhanced beyond their thermal equilibrium intensity, but with no or
little net increase in magnetization (for a weakly coupled spin system,
see b). Such
antiphase NMR signals are not amenable to imaging or to spectroscopy
in inhomogeneous fields, since magnetic field gradients (applied,
or intrinsic) cause the enhanced antiphase peaks to destructively
interfere, which results in partial or complete cancelation of the
hyperpolarization-enhanced NMR signals. To overcome this, pulse schemes
have been developed known as out-of-phase echoes , which can be applied prior to imaging or as part of the imaging sequence. At the same time, the properties of the I1zI2z spin
order produced in PASADENA experiments can be leveraged to selectively
observe PHIP signals while suppressing background signals of the solvent,
the unreacted precursor, etc., which might be present in far higher
concentration. For this purpose, pulse sequences termed “only
parahydrogen spectroscopy” (OPSY) have been developed. , 
 In an alternative experiment known as ALTADENA
(adiabatic longitudinal
transport after dissociation engenders nuclear alignment), the hydrogenation reaction is carried out at
a magnetic field low enough that the chemical shift difference between
the parahydrogen-derived protons in the product molecule is suppressed,
i.e., in the strong coupling regime. After the hydrogenation step,
the sample is brought to a high field for NMR signal acquisition.
The patterns of the multiplets in the NMR spectra of ALTADENA experiments
( c) differ
from those in PASADENA in both sign and intensity, with the largest
enhancement observed for a 90° flip-angle pulse.
An experiment
in a sense similar to PASADENA exists for molecules
in which the protons have a large difference in their J-coupling constants
to a third spin, since this interaction breaks the proton equivalence
in place of the chemical shift difference. This is particularly relevant at zero- to low-field, where chemical
shift differences are suppressed. It is possible to hydrogenate a
molecule at zero field, and if a third nuclear spin in the molecule
breaks the proton equivalence, hyperpolarization-enhanced signals
can be observed after applying a magnetic field pulse. 
In cases where the protons are in the
near-equivalence regime,
more sophisticated pulse sequences are required to convert the singlet
order into magnetization, and for this purpose hard-pulse sequences
such as singlet-to-magnetization (S2M) and its improved generalized
version (gS2M) have been developed. , Another option
is spin-lock induced crossing (SLIC)
which involves applying a constant-amplitude weak RF field to the
protons, and alternative methods exist in which the weak RF field
is adiabatically ramped. − Polarization can be also transferred
to another proton in the product molecule, either by using these RF-pulse-based
methods that exploit the difference in its J-couplings to the two
p-H2-derived hydrogens, or by achieving the near-equivalence
regime by placing the sample in a low static magnetic field of an
electromagnet or a permanent magnet.
Because heteronuclei relax
much slower than protons in liquid-phase
experiments, it is often desirable to transform the proton singlet
order into magnetization of a heteronucleus (e.g., 13C, 15N) via intramolecular J-couplings. To this end, the S2M sequence
was modified to achieve singlet-to-heteronuclear-magnetization (S2hM)
conversion, , and a more general form was
developed (gS2hM). The SLIC sequence
was also modified for this purpose, and
many methods that use constant or adiabatically
ramped RF fields are in use, such as adiabatic passage spin order
conversion (APSOC) and adiabatic SLIC (aSLIC). Many other hard-pulse-based methods exist for polarization
transfer to heteronuclei, and a more thorough review of this topic
can be found elsewhere. 
In high-field
experiments, a chemical shift difference between
the protons in the reaction intermediate (often, a dihydride metal
complex) can lead to singlet–triplet mixing and a loss of spin polarization. This can be partially
alleviated by spin-locking the protons during the hydrogenation to suppress the chemical shift difference,
or by applying a purge pulse prior to signal excitation. 
Alternatively, it is possible to work
at a low field, and achieve
spin order conversions by varying the applied static magnetic field.
One of the most common methods is known as magnetic field cycling;
after the hydrogenation step, the magnetic field is diabatically (rapidly)
reduced to a near-zero field, and then adiabatically (slowly) increased
back to an intermediate/high field. An
alternative approach is to adiabatically invert the magnetic field
(i.e., pass from negative to positive field values, or vice versa), and in the simplest case it is possible to
spontaneously hyperpolarize a heteronucleus by performing the hydrogenation
with parahydrogen at an ultralow field. The magnetic fields required for these polarization transfer experiments
are typically on the order of hundreds of nanotesla to microtesla.
The constraints on field homogeneity are usually weak (on the order
of a hundred nanotesla or more) since the polarization transfer is
close to optimal for a relatively broad range of magnetic field values.
Adiabatic ramping of the RF field or external magnetic field is
necessarily slow, and fast spin relaxation can reduce the efficiency
of the process. To overcome this problem, constant-adiabaticity schemes
have been implemented at both a high field and an ultralow field, which are designed
to yield the highest degree of adiabaticity for a given field-ramp
duration. Another problem that can be encountered during spin order
conversion at ultralow field is quadrupolar nuclei in the molecules
becoming strongly coupled to the hyperpolarized spins. For the majority
of quadrupolar nuclei, T1n is so short
they “self-decouple” from the spin-1/2 nuclei and do
not act as a polarization sink, but this is not the case for deuterium
or 14N nuclei. For this reason,
a low-field scheme known as WOLF (weak oscillating low field) was
developed where polarization transfer is completed at low field without
entering the problematic ultralow-field regime. 
Polarization levels in PHIP experiments range from
only a few times
higher than that at thermal equilibrium to tens of percent, reflecting
the wide range of chemical systems and optimizations of the specific
cases. Spin relaxation during the reaction leads to a trade-off between
the produced amount of hyperpolarized product and its polarization
level. Because the rate of polarization transfer to other spins is
approximately given by the size of the J-couplings between the p-H2 protons and the target nucleus, the final polarization level
is further reduced if this or other additional steps such as sample
transport or purification are required. Despite that, in a few cases,
often those that are used to produce hyperpolarized metabolites for
imaging applications, optimization of experimental protocols yielded
polarization levels over 10% for 13C nuclei. 
Some key questions can be answered to
estimate the likely outcome
of a PHIP experiment: (1) How fast does the chemical reaction go to
completion? (2) Does the hyperpolarized molecule contain additional
spins that might induce faster relaxation of the p-H2-derived
protons? (3) If polarization transfer is required, are the J-couplings
large enough to facilitate fast transfer? (4) Are there additional
spins in the molecule to which polarization can spread and be lost
from the nuclei of interest?
To extend the range of molecules
polarizable via PHIP, the side
arm hydrogenation (SAH) procedure was developed. A molecule of interest (e.g., [1-13C]pyruvate
or [1-13C]acetate) is functionalized with a side arm moiety
(e.g., a vinyl or propargyl group) which can be hydrogenated. After
hydrogenation in an organic solvent, the polarization is transferred
to the 13C spin, and an aqueous basic solution is added
to cleave off the side arm through a saponification reaction. The
chemical system is chosen such that the molecule of interest ends
up in the aqueous phase, and the side arm remains in the organic (hydrophobic)
phase along with the catalyst. This method is illustrated in . 
 Another important practical issue is the presence
of the catalyst
and other toxic components in the hyperpolarized solution which, for
some specific applications such as generating PHIP-polarized metabolites
for preclinical imaging, need to be removed. There are currently a
few options for achieving this. The first is to avoid bringing the
catalyst into solution in the first place, either through the use
of heterogeneous catalysis, or homogeneous catalysts tethered to an
insoluble support. This possibility is covered in more detail in . If a
homogeneous catalyst is used and needs to be removed, catalyst scavenging
with commercially available metal scavengers or with a cation-exchange filter has
been shown to be effective. However, a more thorough purification
is often needed to additionally remove reaction side-products and
unreacted starting material, and for this purpose two methods have
been demonstrated.
One is the liquid–liquid phase extraction
used in the SAH
procedure described above. Another successful method used for purifying
PHIP solutions demonstrated for [1-13C]fumarate is precipitation. After the polarization process, the pH of the
solution is lowered; this causes fumarate to rapidly (in less than
a second) precipitate out as solid fumaric acid, leaving the remainder
of the reaction solution behind to be vacuum-filtered away. The solid
fumaric acid can then be redissolved into a buffered solution for
applications. Both methods involve relatively simple chemical purification
procedures that rely on solubility differences between the desired
product molecule and other species in solution, and we expect many
similar methods to emerge to purify other PHIP-polarized molecules.

3.11.2.3.

## Applications
The PHIP approach
is rather diverse in terms of current and potential applications.
While the major incentive for developing hyperpolarization techniques
today is related to current and future biomedical applications, in
the early days of PHIP its main application was in the mechanistic
studies of homogeneous catalytic processes in solution that involve
activation of H2. − Note, however, that the initial experimental observations of PHIP
were originally interpreted in terms of a different hyperpolarization
mechanism (CIDNP; ), which inevitably led to incorrect mechanistic conclusions. 
As already mentioned, observation of
PHIP effects reveals that addition of H2 is pairwise, which
is an important mechanistic detail in itself. , Furthermore, PHIP is generated as soon as the symmetry of p-H2 is broken, which often takes place already upon activation
of p-H2 by a metal complex. This makes the direct detection
and unambiguous structural identification of the key low-concentrated
intermediates feasible. For many catalysts comprising neutral and
cationic transition metal complexes, previously unobserved mono- and
binuclear dihydrides have been successfully detected, and their detailed
transformation pathways and the roles in the reaction mechanism established.
Similar studies were performed in the absence of unsaturated substrates
to focus in more detail on the H2 activation by metal complexes
and clusters, on the formation of dihydride and polyhydride complexes,
their structure and dynamics including isomerization and ligand exchange. , , We note that for detection of
short-lived reaction intermediates, the experiments have to be performed
in situ (PASADENA).
PHIP can also be used to determine the enantioselectivity
of asymmetric
hydrogenation reactions; , this is illustrated
in for hydrogenation
of methyl-α-acetamido cinnamate over a rhodium-based asymmetric
hydrogenation catalyst. Determination of the enantioselectivity of
this reaction using parahydrogen is possible because the PHIP-derived
protons are distinguishable from the proton with thermal-equilibrium
nuclear spin polarization. While the protons are hyperpolarized, the
product molecule contains two chiral centers, and this diastereomerism
means the chirality can be directly revealed in 1D 1H NMR
spectra; something that is no longer possible after the protons relax
and the molecules contain only one chiral center (and are hence enantiomers).
 A significant sensitivity boost provided by PHIP
is also useful
for chemical reaction monitoring, , enhancing
NMR signals for low- or zero-field NMR (where thermal-equilibrium polarization
levels are prohibitively low), and metabolomics and trace analysis (the latter application is discussed in more
detail in ).
Currently, PHIP is widely applied to produce hyperpolarized
molecules
for MRI, both for perfusion imaging and
for metabolic imaging. In general, dissolution
DNP ( )
can produce solutions with higher polarization and a wider range of
hyperpolarized molecules, but PHIP has an important role to play since
it is comparatively inexpensive and has a higher turnover rate (on
the order of one sample per minute). For in vivo imaging, a key requirement
is that the hyperpolarized solution be pure from toxic substances.
Particularly promising in this context are the production of hyperpolarized
[1-13C]pyruvate by side arm hydrogenation and of hyperpolarized [1-13C]fumarate produced
via an uncommon trans hydrogenation over a Ru-based catalyst ( ) outlined above. Both methods have been applied for
in vivo metabolic imaging. , Other PHIP-polarized
molecules have been used for in vivo imaging in mice, including succinate
and phospholactate, and hydroxyethyl
propionate. Nevertheless, because of
the specific requirements of the PHIP technique. its applications
in vivo remain rather challenging at present. However, given the high
solution turnover rates and ease with which PHIP polarizers can be
installed, this hyperpolarization technique might be more suited for
in vitro studies, especially for high-throughput applications in e.g.,
drug discovery. Indeed, there are already a number of examples of
in vitro studies using PHIP-polarized molecules. , , 
 A technique similar to PHIP called orthodeuterium-induced
polarization
(ODIP) exists that uses molecular deuterium (D2) in place
of molecular hydrogen. Since deuterium
nuclei are bosons with nuclear spin I = 1, the overall
wave function of D2 must be symmetric with respect to the
permutation of the two nuclei, and this constrains symmetric and antisymmetric
spin states to symmetric and antisymmetric rotational states, respectively.
Although the energy separation between rotational states of D2 is smaller than that of H2 due to its larger moment
of inertia, it is still possible to achieve relatively high ortho
enrichment by cooling ( ). The room temperature fraction of orthodeuterium (o-D2) is 66.7%, but this rises to 92.5% at 30 K. Conventional PHIP experiments such as PASADENA and ALTADENA
can then be performed using o-D2 in place of p-H2: simulated and experimental spectra are shown in . ODIP is a promising route
to hyperpolarizing deuterium nuclei in solution, which is usually
challenging because of the short T1n due
to quadrupolar relaxation.
 
3.11.2.4.

## Frontiers and Challenges
A combination
of factors including typically lower polarization levels, the limited
range of molecules that can be hyperpolarized via PHIP, and the necessity
to develop dedicated procedures to purify the PHIP-polarized solutions
for in vivo use have hindered such applications to date.
The
vast majority of PHIP experiments in liquid phase involve stereoselective
cis hydrogenation of an unsaturated substrate. At the same time, examples
exist of alternative hydrogenation pathways such as trans hydrogenation
(anti addition of the two H atoms), gem-hydrogenation
(addition to the same carbon atom), hydroformylation, and methoxycarbonylation. The latter two reactions provide notable examples of PHIP
effects observed in reaction products and intermediates which inherit
only one of the two H atoms from p-H2 molecule–the
so-called one-H PHIP. We note, however, that observation of one-H
PHIP still requires that the initial activation of p-H2 molecule which breaks its symmetry is pairwise and is followed by
spin evolution in a pair of nonequivalent hydrides.
Finding
hydrogenation catalysts that can yield alternative product
molecules is key to widening the scope of hydrogenative PHIP. The
majority of PHIP reactions are carried out using rhodium catalysts,
but other metal catalysts are used such as ruthenium, palladium, platinum–tin, iridium, osmium, and cobalt, and
it is even possible to observe PHIP and SABRE effects with metal-free
catalysts. , 
In some cases, the parahydrogen
protons end up occupying chemically
and magnetically equivalent positions in the product molecule, and
the spin order of the proton spin singlet state remains locked in
this nonmagnetic state until a further chemical reaction breaks the
equivalence, releasing hyperpolarized NMR signals. These demonstrations
are promising since the singlet order can persist for times much longer
than the proton T1n time, , meaning the enhanced spin order can be stored in this manner and
revealed as hyperpolarization by a chemical reaction. This has been
used as a way of measuring the lifetime of proton spin singlet order, and as a method for performing metabolic imaging
with protons rather than the more-commonly used 13C nuclei. 
Another extension to PHIP is the use
of light-activated catalysts. The addition
of fresh parahydrogen to a metal
center can be initiated by a laser pulse, which removes H2 from the metal center, leaving free coordination sites for fresh
p-H2 to add across.
One interesting phenomenon is
using parahydrogen as a polarization
source to induce a radiowave maser (RASER). The RASER is based on a well-known effect in NMR, namely “radiation
damping” (in fact, like many
terms in NMR, this is also a misnomer as there is essentially no radiation
involved in NMR). Essentially, when the magnetization of a sample
that is efficiently coupled to a tuned coil is large enough, it can
induce a current in the coil, which acts back on the sample as a time-dependent
additional magnetic field. If the magnetization starts out inverted
(oriented along −z) and is weakly perturbed,
the radiation-damping field pulls the magnetization back along +z, and the trajectory taken brings the magnetization vector
temporarily into the xy-plane. This is the basis of parahydrogen RASER
effects; when part of the NMR signal is inverted (e.g., some of the
resonances in a PASADENA spectrum), the inverted magnetization can
self-excite to yield transverse magnetization. If the experiment is
set up in a way to produce continuous PASADENA signals, this self-excitation
can in principle persist forever. Hydrogenative-PHIP-based RASER has
been demonstrated at high field (14 T) and in a benchtop NMR device (1.4 T); the high-field RASER is illustrated in .
 PHIP-X is a recent development with the potential
to make PHIP
a more general hyperpolarization method. In this experiment, a compound with an exchanging proton (e.g.,
an unsaturated alcohol) is hydrogenated at a low field, and since
the protons are strongly coupled, the exchangeable proton becomes
polarized. It can then carry the polarization into other molecules
with which it undergoes chemical exchange. This has been used to hyperpolarize
protons in pyruvate and lactate, and 13C spins in glucose.
Although the polarization levels are currently much lower than 1%,
this method holds promise as a more general method for creating PHIP-based
hyperpolarization.
Another route to developing a more general
hyperpolarization method
using PHIP is based on the spin-polarization-induced nuclear Overhauser
effect (SPINOE). Molecules in solution
that experience fluctuating dipolar couplings to a hyperpolarized
source molecule can become hyperpolarized through the intermolecular
nuclear Overhauser effect. This was originally demonstrated using
laser-polarized 129Xe, and
has also been shown using dDNP-polarized [1,4-13C2]fumarate. Recently,
it was shown that molecules polarized by PHIP can also be used as
the polarization source in a parahydrogen- and RASER-induced NOE (PRINOE)
experiment. , Hydrogenation of a suitable
precursor such as (perdeuterated) vinyl acetate with parahydrogen
under PASADENA or ALTADENA conditions was used to produce hyperpolarized
ethyl acetate. In both types of experiments, no net magnetization
is produced on the protons, since the enhanced NMR signals are in
equal part positive and negative. Upon application of a 2–5°
flip-angle pulse, the positive and negative NMR signals experience
strong radiation damping, causing the magnetization vectors to reorient
along the magnetic field axis. The result is net magnetization, which
can then lead to polarization of other molecules in solution via an
intermolecular NOE. Enhancements of up to −3 were obtained
on the protons of 100 mM N-acetyl-l-tryptophan
in solution. Similar results were demonstrated for several other substrates and target molecules,
including hyperpolarization of heteronuclei (19F, 31P). The procedure and some results are illustrated in .
 The biggest limitation of PHIP is that it is not
a general technique:
specific reaction pathways must be designed, and there is great scope
for extending PHIP to chemical reactions beyond producing alkenes
and alkanes via cis hydrogenation. There is already some precedent
for this as mentioned above, but there is much room for innovation.
Even when a suitable synthetic route is found for hyperpolarizing
a desired molecule, the solutions are contaminated with the catalyst,
reaction side products, and unreacted precursor. Some specific methods
have been designed to purify PHIP-polarized molecules from solution,
and a few examples of PHIP-catalysts being filtered out of solution
exist, but there is clearly ample room for more physicochemical purification
methods to be employed to yield clean hyperpolarized solutions.

3.11.3.

## Parahydrogen-Induced Polarization in Heterogeneous
Catalytic Processes
Similar to PHIP produced in homogeneous
catalytic processes ( ), its heterogeneous version (HET-PHIP) , , , uses the correlated nuclear spin state of parahydrogen (p-H2) as hyperpolarization source and usually requires pairwise
H2 addition to a substrate. This implies incorporation
of both hydrogen atoms of a p-H2 molecule into the same
product molecule where they become chemically or magnetically inequivalent.
The requirement of pairwise H2 addition, however, is much
more difficult to meet with typical heterogeneous (solid) catalysts,
so much so that HET-PHIP was considered impossible. 
For hydrogenations in a liquid phase (slurry), unsaturated
substrates are usually dissolved in a suitable solvent. For gas-phase
hydrogenations, gases can be premixed with p-H2 before
the reaction. Another approach is to bubble p-H2 through
a volatile liquid and supply the p-H2/vapor mixture to
the solid catalyst for hydrogenation. In either case, it is required
that a substrate possesses an unsaturated moiety (e.g., a double or
a triple carbon–carbon bond) which can be catalytically hydrogenated.
In situ hydrogenations (PASADENA) can be performed directly in
an NMR tube loaded with catalyst and, if required, with substrate
solution (for gas–liquid–solid hydrogenations), while
p-H2 (or its mixture with other gases or vapors for gas–solid
hydrogenations, ) is supplied and then vented via the connected tubing/capillary. For elevated gas pressures, medium- or thick-walled
NMR tubes may be required. Solid catalyst particles are agitated when
p-H2 is bubbled through the catalyst slurry or when the
gas is supplied at high flow rates to a dry catalyst powder; in both
cases, this can significantly accelerate the reaction by reducing
mass transport limitations. For a continuous-flow hydrogenation outside
an NMR magnet (ALTADENA), the solid catalyst can be placed between
glass wool plugs in a flow-through reactor. For catalyst pretreatment
and/or to facilitate the reaction, the reactor can be heated from
outside.
 After the reaction is performed in a solid–liquid
slurry,
the solid catalyst can be filtered out in most cases. An alternative
scheme involves a continuous stream of a reacting fluid constantly
supplied to the reactor and collected downstream. Continuous production
of hyperpolarized allyl and propyl acetates in methanol-d4 was recently achieved using
a setup combining membrane dissolution of p-H2 and a packed-bed
catalytic reactor for flow-through hydrogenation of propargyl acetate
( ). A modified
setup for achieving a steady-state polarization level upon recirculation
of a reacting solution at low per-pass conversion levels was reported
later. The continuous hydrogenation
approach is particularly easy to implement for producing continuous
streams of hyperpolarized gases. Transfer of the polarized gas to
an NMR instrument should be fast to avoid significant polarization
losses caused by relaxation.
 The first demonstration of HET-PHIP effects was achieved with rhodium complexes immobilized
on solid
supports (silica, polymers). The expectation that such catalysts would
inherit the pairwise reaction mechanism from their homogeneous counterparts
was indeed confirmed experimentally in both liquid- and gas-phase
hydrogenations. Furthermore, soon after, the industrial-type catalysts
comprising metal nanoparticles (MNP) deposited on oxide supports were
also shown to produce HET-PHIP effects. Extensions to metal oxides, sulfides and carbides and other types
of solid catalysts followed, , with some of them
being of significant importance for modern industrial catalytic processes.
Performance of different catalysts is usually compared in terms
of the percentage of pairwise selectivity (PS) of H2 addition
instead of polarization level phyp (phyp = PS × (4f –
1)/3 in ALTADENA and 0.5 × PS × (4f –
1)/3 in PASADENA experiments, where f = [p-H2]/([p-H2] + [o-H2]) is the parahydrogen
fraction in H2). Another essential factor to consider is
the amount of the hyperpolarized product (i.e., the conversion of
reactants to products, X) accumulated before relaxation
becomes significant.
HET-PHIP has a clear potential to produce
catalyst-free hyperpolarized
liquids and gases for magnetic resonance applications, potentially
including biomedical research and practice. For instance, rapid continuous
production and imaging of substantial quantities of catalyst-free
hyperpolarized gas is of interest in
the context of MRI of lungs. A promising recent result is the hydrogenation
of ethyl vinyl ether with p-H2 to produce and image hyperpolarized
diethyl ether, a well-known anesthetic ( ).
 Polarization transfer from 1H to heteronuclei
( ) is a
viable strategy to extend the hyperpolarization lifetime in the liquid
phase. For instance, 1.2% polarization of 13C nuclei was
obtained for hydroxyethyl propionate in water, while heterogeneous hydrogenation of neurine , was used to polarize 15N nuclei of a choline derivative
up to 12.2%. In contrast, for hyperpolarized gases, this approach
is impractical because for gases the T1n times of heteronuclei are often significantly shorter than those
of protons because of the dominating spin-rotation-induced relaxation.
Despite that, 1H → 13C polarization transfer
was successfully demonstrated for propane. 
A rather powerful approach for extending the scope of substrates
for PHIP is side arm hydrogenation (PHIP-SAH; ). The HET-PHIP-SAH approach
was demonstrated for the production of a catalyst-free aqueous solution
of hyperpolarized ethanol and acetate by hydrogenating vinyl acetate
vapor and then hydrolyzing the hyperpolarized ethyl acetate by dissolving
it in a basic aqueous medium. Aqueous
solutions of hyperpolarized glycine and alanine amino acids were produced
by hydrogenation of corresponding vinyl esters followed by polarization
transfer to carbonyl 13C and subsequent ester hydrolysis. The 13C polarization levels achieved
this way for the unprotected amino acids were ca. 0.3% ( ).
 Interestingly, hyperpolarization of water and OH
protons of ethanol
and methanol was observed when p-H2 was bubbled through
a suspension of silica-encapsulated Pt3Sn intermetallic
nanoparticles in the corresponding liquid. 
Importantly, HET-PHIP is not merely an extension of PHIP studies
based on homogeneous hydrogenations, but is an important field of
research in its own right. In fact, the overwhelming majority of industrial
catalytic processes are heterogeneous. In particular, heterogeneous
hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis processes are the key elements in
the chemical and petrochemical industries, for instance, pharma and
hydrotreating of oil. PHIP effects have already proven useful in the
studies of mechanisms of catalytic processes involving metal complexes
in homogeneous solution ( ). Thus, successful demonstration of
HET-PHIP effects , , opens a gateway toward the studies of mechanisms of industrially
important processes.
Indeed, a mere observation of the PHIP
effect already reveals an
important mechanistic detail: an involvement of pairwise H2 addition to a catalytic center and to a substrate. There is thus
an apparent disagreement with a fundamentally nonpairwise nature of
the broadly accepted hydrogenation mechanism for MNP catalysts, attributed
to Horiuti and Polanyi, via dissociative
chemisorption of H2 on the metal surface followed by sequential
addition of random H atoms to an unsaturated compound. Therefore,
successful observation of HET-PHIP effects over a variety of MNP-based
catalysts indicates that the relevant mechanistic details for such
catalysts are far from being fully understood.
A lot of efforts
are devoted to establishing the nature of catalytically
active sites responsible for pairwise H2 addition on supported
metal catalysts. To this end, various metals (e.g., Pt, Pd, Ir, Rh,
Cu, Co, Ni) on a variety of solid supports were prepared and studied
under a broad range of experimental conditions in both liquid- and
gas-phase hydrogenations with p-H2. , Nevertheless, the possible nature of the active sites involved in
pairwise H2 addition on supported metal catalysts essentially
remains an open question. One recent study discusses correlation of pairwise selectivity with preferential
syn vs anti addition of H2 to triple C–C bonds;
however, cis–trans isomerization of the double bond in the
hydrogenation product may significantly affect the interpretation
of such experiments.
At present, 1H polarization
levels commonly obtained
with HET-PHIP are in general lower than those in homogeneous hydrogenations
( ). The highest catalytic activity is achieved with supported MNPs
of platinum group metals (Pt, Pd, Ir, Rh), but their PS values usually
do not exceed 2–3% and vary significantly depending on the
catalyst and the experimental conditions used. Nevertheless, higher
PS values are sometimes achieved; for instance, in hydrogenation of
1,3-butadiene ( ) and propylene over optimized Rh/TiO2 catalyst, the PS
values were 4.5 (X ∼ 15%) and 7% (X ∼ 22%), respectively Capping the surface of MNPs with ligands possessing a thiol functionality , , was reported to increase polarization
levels, but at the expense of significantly reduced conversion (e.g., phyp up to 60% at X < 1%
for 4-mercaptobenzoic acid ).
 Apart from supported metals, HET-PHIP effects were
also successfully
demonstrated with other catalyst types. , Among metal
oxides, CeO2 demonstrated remarkable selectivity in semihydrogenation
of alkynes to alkenes and an interesting dependence of behavior on
the shape of its nanocrystals. Molybdenum
carbides are extensively studied in catalysis in the context of the
search for replacing noble-metal catalysts. For Mo2C catalysts,
the presence of hexagonal close-packed (HCP) phase was essential to
achieve selectivities to pairwise H2 addition comparable
to those of supported MNPs. 
In
addition to hydrogenation of various unsaturated compounds,
extending the HET-PHIP approach to other catalytic processes involving
H2 is also of major interest. , In particular, it was used to reveal the differences in the mechanisms
of thiophene hydrodesulfurization over MoS2/γ-Al2O3 and Pt/TiO2 catalysts. Thus, similar processes (e.g., hydrodenitrogenation,
hydrodeoxygenation) may be potentially addressed as well. Pronounced
HET-PHIP effects were also reported in the oligomerization of acetylene
over Pd MNPs of different shapes and sizes supported on SiO2. At the same time, attempts to observe
HET-PHIP effects for higher hydrocarbons and oxygenates produced from
CO and H2 via Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) were
so far unsuccessful.
Another direction of HET-PHIP application
is its use in the spatially
resolved studies of operating model reactors. , , Sensitivity enhancement is particularly
advantageous for imaging of gases with their low spin density compared
to liquids. HET-PHIP has proven useful for MRI studies of operating
(micro) reactors, including small packed catalyst beds with diameters
ranging from several mm down to 150 μm ( ), and catalyst
layers deposited on the walls of cylindrical glass structures. , The resulting images can successfully visualize mass transport and
product distribution in operating model reactors.
 One of the important trends in modern heterogeneous
catalysis is
the exploration of catalysts with well-defined isolated metal centers,
for instance single-atom catalysts (SAC) which comprise individual
metal atoms (or sometimes small clusters) stabilized on a suitable
porous support. The perceived advantages of SACs include the ultimate
utilization of expensive noble metals and the possibility to combine
the advantages of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts. The semblance
between SAC and homogeneous catalysts implies that they may be expected
to provide high levels of pairwise H2 addition selectivity.
Indeed, gold-based SAC supported on multiwalled carbon nanotubes,
Aun/MWCNT (n = 1 or a
few), demonstrated rather significant selectivity in pairwise H2 addition to 1,3-butadiene (PS = 7–11% and PS = 3–6%
for butane and 1-butene, respectively; X ∼
0.5%). Single Pt-atom catalysts, Pt1/CeO2, containing only 8–16 ppm of Pt were
shown to provide pairwise selectivity of up to ca. 6% ( ). 
 An alternative strategy is the dilution of an active
metal in order
to both localize the catalytically active site and prevent diffusive
migration of activated hydrogen away from it. In particular, in bimetallic
catalysts such as single-atom alloys and intermetallic compounds,
an active metal atom is surrounded by another metal which is far less
active in the reaction. Examples include propylene hydrogenation (PS
∼ 11%, X < 1%) over Pt–Sn intermetallic
NPs with a mesoporous silica shell ( ), , Pd–Au core–shell
systems, and propyne hydrogenation (PS
∼ 9.3%, X ∼ 20%) over intermetallic
Pd–In/Al2O3 catalyst ( ). 
 Exploration of immobilized transition metal complexes,
the approach
that was used in the initial demonstration of HET-PHIP feasibility, is also worth pursuing further. So far, they
demonstrate propensity to metal leaching and significant structural transformations in liquid-phase reactions and chemical degradation in gas-phase
processes. However, recent results demonstrated that Ir-based catalysts may be more efficient
(PS ∼ 9%, X ∼ 10%) and stable ( ). Silica-supported
vanadium oxo organometallic complex demonstrated signal enhancements
of 200–300- and 1300-fold in the gas-phase hydrogenation of
propylene and propyne, respectively. Instead of tethering a metal complex to a support, it may be more
efficient to design a catalytic center on an oxide surface using surface
organometallic synthesis. Interestingly, even Co(II) and Cr(III) surface sites
showed HET-PHIP effects despite their paramagnetic nature.
 Curiously enough, and despite the expectations,
even the advanced
types of heterogeneous catalysts mentioned above cannot so far achieve
polarization levels demonstrated with transition metal complexes in
homogeneous PHIP. It is possible that, in addition to pairwise selectivity,
the observed polarization levels are also largely governed by the
relaxation-induced losses in reaction products and intermediates -
an issue which calls for an in-depth study.
For a detailed mechanistic
understanding of catalytic processes,
direct detection of short-lived reaction intermediates at low concentrations
can be a major advance. NMR signal enhancement provided by PHIP can
make this a reality, as demonstrated convincingly with metal complexes
in solution ( ). However, for heterogeneous processes, this is still an
unaccomplished and challenging task. To this end, MAS NMR with a continuous
flow of gaseous reactants was attempted in hydrogenation of unsaturated
gaseous hydrocarbons over several heterogeneous catalysts. − While polarized products adsorbed on the porous support were observed,
no reaction intermediates could be detected in such studies so far.
At the same time, heterolytic activation of p-H2 on the
surface of ZnO was reported to exhibit an antiphase PHIP pattern ( ) in the wide-line 1H NMR spectra provisionally attributed to the neighboring
Zn–H and O–H moieties. 
 The key practical problem to solve in HET-PHIP
is the relatively
low level of polarization achieved with the majority of heterogeneous
catalysts compared to their homogeneous counterparts, often combined
with low amounts of product produced. Development of more efficient
catalysts is hampered largely because an understanding of the mechanisms
of pairwise H2 addition on MNP-based catalysts is lacking.
A major complicating issue well-known for such catalysts is the existence
of a variety of different active sites on their surfaces, both inherent
to the initial catalyst structure and possibly produced in the course
of reaction. Further studies are thus required to establish the nature
of active sites on MNPs responsible for pairwise H2 addition.
As mentioned in , nuclear spin isomers (NSIMs) of polyatomic molecules
could be used similarly to p-H2 for spin hyperpolarization,
and could dramatically expand the range of applications of the technique.
In particular, reactions not involving H2 (e.g., oligomerization,
metathesis and other key industrial processes) could become accessible,
and higher hyperpolarization levels may be achievable. Currently,
practical NSIM enrichment procedures for polyatomic molecules do not
exist. Nevertheless, the feasibility of NSIM enrichment for ethylene
by hydrogenating acetylene with parahydrogen and its use for NMR signal
enhancement in a subsequent chemical reaction has been demonstrated, providing a glimpse of what the future may hold.

3.11.4.

## Signal Amplification by Reversible Exchange
3.11.4.1.

## The Technique
Signal amplification
by reversible exchange (SABRE) relies on simultaneous reversible binding
of p-H2 and to-be-hyperpolarized substrate to a metal complex, . , The SABRE approach, pioneered by Duckett and co-workers, does not
require an actual hydrogenation of unsaturated compound to produce
hyperpolarization, and is therefore sometimes referred to as a non-hydrogenative
variant of PHIP ( ). − It is proposed and commonly accepted that polarization transfer
from p-H2-derived hydrides to the nuclear spins of substrate
in a transient complex is accomplished via spin–spin couplings
when the condition for spin level anticrossing (LAC) is met. However, a more recent work shows that efficient
SABRE polarization transfer can happen using pulsed magnetic fields
that put a spin system far away from the LAC condition. In the original pioneering demonstration, the
LACs were conveniently generated at a magnetic field of 2–10
mT for efficient transfer of p-H2-based singlet spin order
to protons of an exchangeable substrate molecule. , The substrate protons that are coupled to p-H2-derived
hydrides via spin–spin interactions are hyperpolarized first,
and the network of 1H-1H spin–spin couplings
in the substrate molecule propagates the hyperpolarized state to other
substrate protons, a. , Proton polarization values phyp(1H) in excess of 50% have been
achieved. 
 The SABRE approach enjoyed a number of substantial
extensions since
its invention, which significantly expanded the range of amenable
substrates. The first class of compounds hyperpolarized with SABRE
was based on N-binding to an Ir-based complex: most notably nitrogen
heterocycles on hexacoordinate Ir-based catalyst with an N-heterocyclic carbene ligand ( ). Sulfur-, phosphorus-, and
oxygen-containing , transiently binding molecules
have been shown to successfully undergo SABRE hyperpolarization. Recently
Co-based complexes have been shown to facilitate SABRE process, too. 
Moreover, SABRE of substrates possessing
exchangeable protons leads
to net hyperpolarization of bulk protons via the effect termed SABRE-Relay. This way, polarization can be propagated to
molecules which do not directly bind to a SABRE catalyst, demonstrating
the utility of SABRE to hyperpolarize a wide range of targets that
can participate in proton exchange processes. 
Furthermore, it was also demonstrated , , that LACs between p-H2-derived hydrides and a heteronucleus of a substrate can be successfully
established at magnetic fields below 1 μT. , This approach, termed SABRE-SHEATH (SABRE in shield enables alignment
transfer to heteronuclei), was extended
to 15N, 13C, 19F, 31P, and other spin-1/2
nuclei. Polarization of 15N nuclei phyp(15N) > 50% was demonstrated. The use of microtesla magnetic fields also
allows establishing
intramolecular spin–spin relays between 15N–15N and 15N–13C coupled spin pairs that enable spontaneous propagation
of p-H2-derived hyperpolarization throughout a substrate
molecule via the network of heteronuclear spin–spin couplings, b. 
The field requirement for “canonical”
homonuclear
SABRE and heteronuclear SABRE-SHEATH is provided by the analysis of
requirements for LACs matching conditions in a AA′BB′
four-spin system ( ) formed in the equatorial plane of the activated SABRE catalyst
by the two hydrides and a pair of substrate spins experiencing spin–spin
couplings with the hydrides: 
7 where J1T = ±(JAA – JBB), J2T = ±(JAA + JBB – (JAB + J′AB)/2), and σA and σB are chemical
shifts of the two nuclei. The matching conditions for a three-spin
system are similar. 
It follows
that, for example, for a homonuclear spin system of 1H
nuclei (γA = γB = γ(1H) = 42.6 MHz/T), and for J1T ∼ 9 Hz and
(σB – σA) = 32 × 10–6 (32 ppm), an optimum Btransfer is ∼6.6 mT. For a heteronuclear
case, e.g., when nucleus B is 15N, the optimum transfer
field is ∼0.4–0.6 μT. demonstrates
an example of 15N SABRE-SHEATH for [15N3]metronidazole with a clear maximum in polarization at B0 ∼ 0.6 μT.
 It was also shown that singlet spin order of p-H2-derived
hydrides can be employed to create singlet states on the nuclear spin
pairs in a substrate; − as a result, it was possible to extend the
lifetime of 15N–15N singlet states to
over 20 min. 
The account of SABRE
at low magnetic fields would be incomplete
without mentioning the studies performed at subnanotesla fields. A particular feature of this experiment is
that NMR detection of polarized pyridine was accomplished in situ
and at zero- to ultralow-field (ZULF) conditions with an optically
pumped atomic magnetometer inside a magnetic shield. An interesting
recent application of SABRE-ZULF is a continuous production of relatively
large quantities of hyperpolarized material, on the order of several
cm3/min of hyperpolarized solution with >1017 polarized 15N nuclei of a labeled material per cm3, with prospects of increasing this much further in the future.
This holds great promise for applications in chemistry, biomedicine,
and fundamental physics. Currently investigated
applications of in situ SABRE-ZULF include the ZULF NMR study of systems
undergoing chemical exchange as well
as biomolecular analysis. The polarization
method used in SABRE-ZULF experiments is essentially the SABRE-SHEATH
approach described above.
In addition to the use of millitesla,
microtesla and subnanotesla
fields, SABRE has been demonstrated at high magnetic fields too, where
the polarization transfer is accomplished via cross-relaxation. 
Besides the use of static magnetic fields
to establish LACs, radiofrequency
(RF) pulses can also be employed to create LACs between p-H2-derived hydrides and 1H, 15N, or 19F spins of an exchangeable substrate. Several RF pulse sequences were
developed including LIGHT-SABRE (low-irradiation generation of high-tesla
SABRE), SLIC-SABRE (spin-lock induced
crossing SABRE), RF-SABRE, QUASR-SABRE (quasi-resonance SABRE), etc. All in all, SABRE can be induced by a
wide range of approaches involving static and alternating magnetic
fields, clearly demonstrating the versatility of this technique.

3.11.4.2.

## Practical Aspects
Similar to
PHIP experiments based on homogeneous ( ) and heterogeneous ( ) hydrogenation processes,
the key requirement for SABRE hyperpolarization technique is access
to p-H2, which is typically produced at cryogenic temperatures
using a p-H2 generator, as
described in more detail in . In addition, SABRE instrumentation
must: (1) provide efficient contact between SABRE catalyst and p-H2, and (2) establish LACs during simultaneous chemical exchange
of p-H2 and to-be-hyperpolarized substrate to achieve polarization
transfer ( , ). , Therefore, the core component of any SABRE polarizer is the reaction
vessel, where simultaneous chemical exchange of p-H2 and
to-be-hyperpolarized substrate occurs on the metal atom of a suitable
metal complex.
 To date, p-H2 delivery has been accomplished
via three
approaches. In one approach, an outgassed
solution of catalyst and the to-be-hyperpolarized substrate is loaded
in a container (e.g., a 5 mm NMR tube), which is pressurized with
p-H2 gas. The sample is next shaken vigorously to establish
good mixing between the gas and liquid phases. The key advantage of this approach is fast (on the time
scale of a few seconds) and efficient saturation of the solution with
p-H2. To repeat the SABRE experiment, the sample needs
to be outgassed and repressurized with p-H2, thereby representing
a shortcoming of this approach. , 
In
the second approach, a catheter is placed inside the solution
to provide a flow of p-H2 ( ) regulated by mass-flow controllers (MFCs) or needle valves. Parahydrogen is bubbled through the solution continuously for replenishment
with fresh p-H2 during the polarization buildup of the
SABRE process, while the spent hydrogen is exhausted. The gas flow
is ceased after the polarization process is finished, and the flow
can be restarted later. As a result, this approach can enable quick
(in less than a second) rehyperpolarization of a SABRE sample for
systematic studies of relaxation dynamics and optimization of polarization
efficiency. A variant of this approach
employs a reaction cell through which p-H2 is blown. This
cell is placed in the B0 coil to produce
LACs, and the hyperpolarized solution
is continuously circulated between the reaction cell and the NMR detector
( a); as a result, it becomes possible to optimize
experimental parameters, e.g., the magnetic field B0 ( c). The disadvantage of this approach
is the relatively large size of bubbles delivered by catheters resulting
in suboptimal dissolution of fresh p-H2 and its transfer
to the catalyst.
The third approach employs hollow fibers for
p-H2 dissolution
in the liquid phase. Parahydrogen is
infused continuously while used H2 is removed at the same
time. This approach mitigates the shortcomings
of the above-mentioned bubbling technique.
The hardware required
to create LACs can be divided in three categories.
The first kind employs an electromagnet or a permanent magnet capable
of creating static magnetic fields of a few millitesla to establish
LACs required for polarization transfer. Second, in the SABRE-SHEATH approach which requires submicrotesla
fields (i.e., fields lower than the Earth’s magnetic field
by at least 2 orders of magnitude), the use of a μ-metal magnetic
shield is typically required. The desired
field can then be created by the use of a calibrated electromagnet
placed inside the shield ( ). Third, for creating
LACs using RF pulses, the RF irradiation capabilities of NMR spectrometers
and MRI scanners can be employed. , 
Of
note, in some applications of SABRE (see below), sensing may
be performed using the NMR signatures of hyperpolarized metal hydride
complexes which can be efficiently hyperpolarized via the exchange
of p-H2 on the metal complex irrespective of the applied
magnetic field. As a result, for this group of applications, there
is no need to induce LACs, mitigating the requirement for the instrumentation.
Microfluidic devices are being adapted for the development of advanced
SABRE instrumentation for detection of small amounts of an analyte.
Detection sensitivity is frequently a challenge for microfluidics
applications. The SABRE hyperpolarization technique is well suited
to address this limitation, because it can provide selective (i.e.,
only for compounds amenable to SABRE polarization) NMR signal enhancement
at room temperature without chemical modification of the analyte. a shows the overall design of a microfluidic NMR probe
that enables mixing of p-H2 with the incoming solution
and is interfaced with an NMR spectrometer ( b). Fresh p-H2 gas flows into
the RF probe and enters the solution through a gas-permeable polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) membrane ( c). The arrangement of in and
out ports for p-H2 gas and nicotinamide solution is shown
in d,e.
NMR spectroscopic chemosensing of microliter sample volumes, nanoliter
detection limits, and micromolar concentrations corresponding to picomole
molecular sensitivity were achieved. 
 In a typical sample preparation, SABRE precatalyst
and to-be-hyperpolarized
substrate compound are mixed in a suitable solvent. Dissolved O2 is removed by purging the resulting solution with inert gas
(e.g., argon) or, in some applications, by several freeze–pump–thaw
cycles. The presence of molecular oxygen
causes several deleterious effects. First, oxygen can coordinate to
the SABRE catalyst thus hindering the exchange of p-H2 and
substrate. Second, paramagnetic O2 molecule may cause accelerated
undesirable spin–lattice relaxation of the hyperpolarized state. , 
The next important step is precatalyst activation ( ). The most widely
used precatalyst
as of ca. 2022 is IrCl(COD)(IMes), where IMes is 1,3-bis(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)
imidazol-2-ylidene and COD is cyclooctadiene. Its activation with H2 leads to hydrogenation
of the COD ligand, its removal, and formation of a hexacoordinate
complex ( , a). , , The two axial nonexchangeable
positions are occupied by the IMes ligand and a substrate molecule. The four exchangeable equatorial positions
are occupied by two hydrides and the substrate molecules (and sometimes
by coligands or solvent molecules). It
has been shown that substrate molecules (e.g., most notably pyridine)
in the equatorial plane in this complex can both undergo exchange. Alternatively, a substrate molecule can occupy
two binding sites of the Ir-IMes complex, e.g., most notably pyruvate,
representing a bidentate versus monodentate ligand coordination to
the metal center. 
 Complete catalyst activation takes anywhere from
a few minutes to a few hours depending
on the experimental
procedures. The activated complex can be stable for many hours and
potentially days. Following the catalyst
activation, SABRE hyperpolarization process is performed via introduction
of p-H2. As p-H2 and substrate exchange happen
on the time scale ranging from milliseconds to hundreds of milliseconds, multiple sequential exchange events lead to
polarization buildup of bulk free substrate over time ( d, d). Spin–lattice relaxation acts as a limiting
factor for achieving the steady state. In the vast majority of cases,
the steady-state equilibrium is thus achieved over the course of a
few seconds to 1–2 min. The detailed chemical kinetics and
spin dynamics of the formation of SABRE hyperpolarization have been
thoroughly described elsewhere. , 
In
the case of metabolomics and other analytical applications,
SABRE offers a tremendous utility because the hyperpolarization process
can be conveniently performed and repeated in a conventional 5 mm
NMR tube. The rehyperpolarization reproducibility
enables 2D NMR spectroscopy. − However, biomedical applications
demand preparation of biocompatible solutions. In SABRE, alcoholic solutions of the Ir-IMes catalyst are
typically employed, whereas biomedical applications require preparation
of a solution of hyperpolarized substrates that is free from Ir metal
and organic solvent(s). 
There are
a number of ways to obtain such solutions. The first
group of methods rely on heterogeneous (HET) catalysis, where the
SABRE catalyst is immobilized on a solid support. As a result, once
hyperpolarization process is completed, the solution can be easily
separated from the solid phase ( a). Although
substantial progress has been made in this direction, the achieved 1H and 15N polarization levels are approximately an order
of magnitude lower than those reported for homogeneous catalysts.
Future catalyst optimization may allow obtaining substantially higher
polarization levels using HET-SABRE. The alternative solution for catalyst removal is the use of materials
that can irreversibly bind the SABRE catalyst ( b). Indeed, a number of functionalized solid materials were demonstrated
to bind the SABRE catalyst after the hyperpolarization process. , For example, commercial functionalized silica beads (mercaptopropyl
silica, QuadraSil MP, Sigma-Aldrich 679526, and 2-mercaptoethyl ethyl
sulfide silica, Sigma-Aldrich 745111) bind the catalyst, and the resulting
hyperpolarized solution can then be separated from the solid material
together with the captured Ir-containing species. , Another alternative is the phase extraction approach, where the
catalyst is retained in organic layer, while hyperpolarized substrate
migrates to an aqueous layer after the SABRE hyperpolarization procedure. This procedure is similar to the one used in
combination with the PHIP-SAH approach ( ).
 Similarly, an organic solvent use can be obviated
by performing
SABRE hyperpolarization in aqueous media. , , Indeed, a number of reports
have shown its feasibility for 1H and 15N spins
in biologically relevant molecules. To date, these pioneering efforts
yielded polarization values approximately an order of magnitude lower
than the corresponding values in organic solvents. , 

3.11.4.3.

## Applications
Biomedical applications
are the key driver behind the development of hyperpolarization techniques. Although SABRE-hyperpolarized biocompatible
compounds have not been demonstrated as contrast agents in vivo yet
(ca. 2022), a number of such compounds are now in development for
potential bioimaging applications of the SABRE hyperpolarization techniques.
Here, we briefly summarize most notable substrates under development. Both [1,2-13C]pyruvate and [1-13C]acetate have been successfully hyperpolarized with the vision that
SABRE can potentially provide a substantially cheaper and faster gateway
to these hyperpolarized contrast agents that have already been validated
in vivo using the dDNP technique ( ). Of note, [1-13C]pyruvate hyperpolarized by dDNP is under evaluation
in over 30 clinical trials and numerous clinical studies (ca. 2022). This molecule undergoes metabolic conversion
to hyperpolarized [1-13C]lactate, 13C-bicarbonate,
and [1-13C]alanine, which can be mapped in vivo using the
magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) technique. As a result, the abnormal metabolism of many
diseases can be detected in real time, paving the way to future diagnostic
application of MRSI using hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate
for detection, staging and monitoring
response to treatment of cancer and
other diseases. 
A number of drugs
have been successfully hyperpolarized with SABRE as well, including
pyrazinamide, isoniazid, and dalfampridine. , The key rationale for SABRE hyperpolarization of such targets is
to employ them as xenobiotics for potential imaging applications.
Because in vivo proton T1n times are
rather short (ca. several seconds in the best-case scenario), substantial
efforts are focused on developing SABRE for hyperpolarizing 15N and 13C nuclei in compounds that, in addition to biomedical
relevance, satisfy three key conditions: high polarization levels,
long hyperpolarization lifetimes (typically, for heteroatoms without
directly attached protons), and safe profile at a dose of at least
a few hundred milligrams. To that end, both [1-15N]nicotinamide and nicotinamide with natural 15N isotope abundance have been successfully hyperpolarized; this can be potentially employed for metabolic
sensing of this key metabolite. 15N nuclei of [15N2]imidazole have been hyperpolarized for the purpose
of pH sensing using 15N NMR, which was successfully demonstrated
in vitro ( a). Furthermore, a nitroimidazole class
of compounds have been hyperpolarized by SABRE-SHEATH with the vision
that they can be employed as hypoxia-sensing probes. , The radioactive 18F variants of structurally similar
compounds (most notably FMISO, or fluoromisonidazole ) have already been successfully employed in positron emission
tomography (PET) for hypoxia sensing in cancer. However, they require
long clearance time (over 2 h), which is a substantial drawback of
this imaging technique in addition to the use of radioactivity. Hyperpolarized 15N-labeled nitroimidazoles can potentially address this shortcoming,
because, during metabolism, the 15N NMR signals of the
labeled sites experience substantial changes in chemical shifts (up to a few hundred ppm, b). Several representative examples from this class of compounds have
been hyperpolarized via SABRE-SHEATH with 15N polarization
exceeding 50%: metronidazole (including [15N3]metronidazole, ), ornidazole, and nimorazole. Given that these compounds are already approved
for medical use for treatment of anaerobic infections, rapid clinical
translation may be envisioned. Moreover, nimorazole is in phase 3
clinical trials as a radiosensitizing agent, and theragnostic applications
of this hyperpolarized biomolecule have been proposed. The T1(15N) values of up to 10 min have been demonstrated in this class of
compounds, making them suitable for biomedical translation. The development of many other biocompatible
compounds is expected to expand the repertoire of hyperpolarized drugs.
 MR imaging of SABRE-hyperpolarized compounds was
demonstrated successfully,
including 1H, 13C, , and 15N MRI , , (see, for example, f,g). Although 15N NMR detection sensitivity is generally regarded to be low
(∼1% of that of protons even for 15N-enriched samples
in a hyperpolarized state), it is envisioned that indirect detection
can mitigate the sensitivity challenge. For instance, production and
prolonged storage of hyperpolarization on 15N nuclei with
its subsequent transfer to 1H nuclei for NMR signal detection
were successfully demonstrated with SABRE for 15N-labeled
diazirines in addition to an earlier
demonstration for 15N-labeled choline hyperpolarized with dDNP. 
Several other applications
of SABRE (besides biomedical ones) have
also emerged, and they are succinctly discussed below.
The field
of SABRE-hyperpolarized biochemicals is evolving rapidly,
including amino acids, peptides, and water. New
applications are emerging quickly, e.g., SABRE-enhanced characterization
of protein–ligand interactions. Moreover, the SABRE-Relay approach
described above opens up an opportunity to hyperpolarize molecular
targets that do not directly interact with the polarization transfer
complex.
SABRE has been shown to improve the detection limit
of high-field
NMR spectroscopy down to the nanomolar range. In addition to direct detection of SABRE-hyperpolarized
substrates, the hydrides of the iridium complex can themselves serve
as the indirect sensing moieties of the exchanging substrate ( ). This indirect sensing becomes possible because
the chemical shift of the hydride resonance changes when the exchanging
substrate coordinates to the complex. It has been demonstrated that multiple resonances corresponding
to multiple exchanging substrate species can be detected when the
catalyst is activated in the presence of 1-methyl-1,2,3-triazole (MTZ), b,c. MTZ binds strongly to the iridium complex,
rendering a competitive ligand binding in the presence of other substrate
molecules in the solution. This approach was successfully extended
to 2D NMR spectroscopy for simultaneous detection of multiple substrates
in the solution in the presence of MTZ, and quantitative trace analysis of complex mixtures with applications related to analysis of biofluids
and extracts ( d–g). − Another study reports on an approach for
the detection and quantification of α-amino acids down to submicromolar
concentrations in complex mixtures based on the propensity of these
compounds for strong axial–equatorial bidentate binding to
the Ir center. One attractive feature
of this approach for practical applications is that it can be used
for complex biofluids such as urine with essentially no sample pretreatment
apart from dilution of an aqueous mixture with methanol.
 SABRE is also currently utilized for radiofrequency
amplification
by stimulated emission of radiation (RASER), a variant of maser operating
in the radiofrequency range. A sufficiently high magnetization (usually
inverted; see for more details) required for RASER conditions can
be easily achieved with canonical SABRE
of protons performed in the millitesla magnetic field range. Moreover, the sample can be continuously hyperpolarized
with SABRE for extended periods of time, allowing one to sustain RASER
activity for minutes (and potentially much longer). The pioneering
demonstration of RASER was achieved in the millitesla range. , More recent work employed a compact membrane reactor capable of
continuous supply of parahydrogen to the SABRE solution that is circulated
continuously between polarization transfer field (e.g., 6 mT for proton
polarization) to the detection field (e.g., 1.1 or 9.4 T). This recent advance allows one to create SABRE-induced
RASER at an arbitrary frequency, with up to 400 MHz RASER demonstrated
so far. 
SABRE is also well-suited
for signal enhancement of the reactants
and products in chemical reaction monitoring. For example, benchtop
NMR spectroscopy was employed in conjunction with SABRE to monitor
the conversion of [IrCl(COD)(IMes)] in the presence of an excess of
p-H2 and a substrate (4-aminopyridine or 4-methylpyridine)
into [Ir(H)2(IMes)(substrate)3]Cl. Moreover, the authors employed this approach
for monitoring the substrate deuteration. In another study, SABRE was employed to monitor chemical synthesis
of methyl 2-(nicotinamide) acetate, providing
signal enhancements over 130-fold with 50%-enriched p-H2. Most recently, SABRE was utilized to produce high levels of 15N hyperpolarization of a
range of important nitrogen-containing synthons, such as NO2–, PhCH2NH2, ND3, NaN3, and NO3–, all exhibiting
sufficiently long T1n times to permit detection of hyperpolarized
products and intermediates upon their chemical transformations to
a range of potentially useful nitrogen-rich products.
SABRE
can be also used to generate long-lived states of nuclear
spins. The nascent singlet spin state of parahydrogen-derived hydrides
is naturally well-suited to induce singlet state on the substrate
molecules that undergo exchange on the metal center. Some representative
examples are the creation of the singlet state of pyridine protons, 15N-15N singlet state
in diazirine and 13C-13C singlet state in 1-phenyl-2-(4-pyridyl) acetylene. The substantially prolonged lifetime of singlet
or pseudo singlet states of the substrate is beneficial for hyperpolarization
applications. For example, the time constant of exponential decay
for the 15N-15N singlet state can reach 20 min
in favorable cases. The utility of the long-lived singlet spin states
has been expanded to other substrates , including
the most notable case of hyperpolarized [1,2-13C]pyruvate. 

3.11.4.4.

## Frontiers and Challenges
The
SABRE technique, introduced in 2009, is still undergoing the phase of rapid development as described
above. The key SABRE requirement is the simultaneous chemical exchange
of p-H2 and to-be-hyperpolarized substrate on a metal complex.
The metal complex and its structural, chemical, and electronic properties
are key to maximizing SABRE efficiency, and were explored in detail. − However, so far [IrCl(COD)(IMes)] remains the most widely used precatalyst
in both fundamental studies of the SABRE effect and its applications.
Many substrates naturally bind to the iridium-based hexacoordinate
complex: most notably N-containing heterocycles, diazirines, Schiff bases, and others. In
cases when the substrate direct binding with a metal complex is either
too weak or too strong (i.e., the exchange is too fast for spin dynamics
to establish polarization transfer, or too slow for a hyperpolarized
substrate to be released), various strategies have been developed
including the addition of a coligand to modulate the substrate binding. Addition of coligands has led to development
of the SABRE-Relay variant mentioned earlier. To conclude, the strategic ongoing experimental efforts
are focused on expanding the scope of substrates, development of more
efficient and robust hyperpolarization schemes, preparation of biocompatible
hyperpolarized solutions, validation in cellular and animal models
of various diseases, developing new applications and expanding the
scope of already established ones. These advances become fundamentally
possible because the SABRE technique is relatively straightforward
with respect to chemistry and instrumentation. 
The theoretical basis for SABRE was developed shortly after the seminal feasibility publication. Theoretical modeling and description of SABRE
effects have been expanding and evolving hand in hand with the experimental
efforts. In particular, the role of LACs and other polarization transfer mechanisms in SABRE was analyzed, and a simple analytical model of SABRE developed, which was later expanded to include spin dynamics. Because SABRE can occur in multiple regimes
with respect to the application of static fields and RF pulses, the
theoretical modeling of each SABRE “flavor” requires
special consideration, for example, high-field SABRE or SABRE-Relay. 

3.12.

## The Haupt Effect and Quantum-Rotor-Induced
Polarization
In the CH3 methyl rotor was
highlighted as an example of a molecular system with the necessary
symmetry properties to support long-lived spin states and act as a
source of nuclear spin hyperpolarization. We now examine more closely
how nuclear spin polarization can be generated by equilibration of
the system at low temperature.
The molecular symmetry group
of the methyl moiety is C3, which has
3 irreducible representations, A, Ea, and Eb; note that this
is not the spatial point symmetry group, which would be C3v, but C3 is used because
the reflection planes of C3v are not experienced
by the methyl group since this would require bond-breaking. The nuclear
spin states are grouped such that their transformations belong to
one of the three irreducible representations, and these are shown
in .
 The spatial eigenstates of the methyl rotor are shown
in . The
rotational
states are labeled (i), and each rotational state is split further
into states which possess A, Ea, or Eb symmetry. The E states are degenerate, and their energy separation to
the A state is called the tunnel splitting, or tunnel
frequency, and depends crucially on the hindering barrier to methyl
rotation. Lowering the hindering barrier leads to an increased tunnel
splitting.
 For the case of two coupled indistinguishable spin-1/2
particles
(e.g., the nuclei in an H2 molecule), the Pauli principle
dictates that the combined spatial (ψR) and spin (ψS) wave function must be antisymmetric with respect
to particle exchange. In the case of the methyl rotor with three coupled
and indistinguishable spin-1/2 particles, the Pauli principle dictates
that the combined wave function must be of A symmetry,
which means that the allowed combinations are ψRAψSA, ψREaψSEb,
and ψREbψSEa. Hence, by cooling such a system and
selectively populating the rotational eigenstates of A symmetry, the nuclear spin eigenstates of A symmetry
are also populated.
In practice, this is only possible for molecules
which exhibit
relatively unhindered methyl rotation in the solid state (i.e., while
frozen), and hence have a large tunnel splitting, on the order of
(or larger than) 0.1 meV, corresponding to the temperatures achievable
in the cooling process. In typical quantum-rotor-induced polarization
(QRIP) experiments, temperatures down to ∼1 K are used, since
this can be readily achieved using liquid helium. This cooling process
engenders an A/E population imbalance
of the nuclear spin states, although note from the spin states given
in that this
does not correspond to net Zeeman polarization (or magnetization),
similar to the case of enriched parahydrogen ( ). In contrast to parahydrogen, however,
the A/E imbalance of a methyl rotor
can be converted into dipolar or Zeeman observable nuclear spin polarization
by the application of a sudden temperature jump. Transitions between
nuclear spin states belonging to different irreducible representations
of the C3 symmetry group are symmetry
forbidden, which means the nuclear spins do not become polarized immediately
following the temperature jump. A symmetry-breaking interaction/mechanism
is required to allow transitions. Two different varieties of QRIP
experiment have been demonstrated, known as the Haupt effect and dissolution
QRIP (dQRIP).
The Haupt effect was first shown
in 1972 by Haupt , using polycrystalline solid
γ-picoline, cooled to low temperature.
This molecule has a relatively large tunnel splitting in the solid
state of approximately 0.5 meV (6 K), and hence can be polarized efficiently
by QRIP. After a build-up of the A/E imbalance at low temperature, the sample is subjected to a sudden
temperature jump which alters the equilibrium population distribution.
Transitions between states belonging to the same symmetry species
are relatively rapid, but A–E transitions are slow in comparison, since they require a change
in both the spin and spatial symmetry. A–E transitions are weakly allowed by spin–spin dipolar
couplings, since this interaction involves both spin and spatial components.
The dipolar couplings shift the energies of the A states either up or down, and the resulting A–E transitions are either up-shifted or down-shifted in energy.
Importantly, the difference in transition probabilities weighted by
the transition energies for the up- and down-shifted energy levels
is nonzero. This leads to a build-up of dipolar order in the solid,
but this process alone does not lead directly to nuclear Zeeman polarization.
However, the dipolar order can be observed directly in the solid state
as was done in the original experiments, or transformed into Zeeman polarization with resonant radiofrequency
(RF) pulses. The temperature jump can be either in a positive or negative
direction, which leads to positive or negative dipolar polarization.
The Haupt effect is illustrated in . A more rigorous description of the Haupt
effect can be found elsewhere. 
 The first dQRIP experiment was
shown in 2012, also on γ-picoline.
In a dQRIP experiment, the nuclear spin polarization
generated in the solid
state is observed in the solution state after dissolution of the sample
in a warm solvent. In this case, since the dipolar couplings are time-averaged
to zero by the rapid isotropic molecular tumbling in solution, the A/E imbalance is substantially preserved
in the solution state. However, although the dipolar couplings no
longer produce any observable splittings in the NMR spectra, they
appear in the fluctuating interactions and can cause spin relaxation.
The protons in the methyl rotor are magnetically equivalent, and fluctuating
dipolar couplings between the protons cannot induce A/E transitions. However, the presence of a 13C spin in the methyl group allows 1H-13C cross-relaxation processes to convert the long-lived A/E imbalance into observable hyperpolarized nuclear
spin order on both 1H and 13C nuclei. , The cross-relaxation rate, and hence the time constant describing
the build-up of observable nuclear polarization, is determined by
a combination of the methyl group rotational correlation time τR and the overall molecular tumbling correlation time τc. Neglecting extraneous relaxation effects, if τR were zero the A/E imbalance
would be infinitely long-lived, but not observable. There is hence
a trade-off between the long-lived nature of the A/E imbalance and its conversion into observable
magnetization. This experiment was originally called a QRIP experiment,
but is now more appropriately referred to as dQRIP
to better distinguish it from a Haupt effect experiment, since both
rely on the broad topic of QRIP. In an experimental manifestation of the dQRIP effect is shown. A more detailed description of dQRIP is given elsewhere. 
 An appealing feature of QRIP experiments is the
simplicity of the
required instrumentation. To generate polarization, the material is
cooled to cryogenic temperatures with liquid helium. Increased polarization
is available if the temperature is further lowered by vacuum pumping
of the helium. A temperature jump is
then used, which can either be controlled with a heater next to a
sample in the solid state as in Haupt-effect experiments, or by dissolution
of the sample in a warm solvent as in dQRIP experiments.
Note that the temperature jump does not need to be to higher temperature;
the Haupt effect has also been shown for jumps to a lower temperature. For dQRIP experiments, the
cryogenic and dissolution equipment is similar to that required for dDNP ( ) but there are two important differences: (1) no electromagnetic
(MW or RF) irradiation of the sample is required since nuclear/electronic
transitions do not need to be driven; and (2) it was demonstrated
that QRIP is independent of magnetic field, which means no high-field magnet is required for the polarization
step which can be conveniently performed in Earth’s field.
The polarization levels in QRIP experiments are typically low,
since the tunnel splittings are generally not much larger than the
sample temperatures attained in experiments (∼1 K). However,
a 1H polarization level of 3% has been reported for Haupt-effect
experiments on γ-picoline. For dQRIP, the highest reported signal enhancement was also
on a sample of γ-picoline: a 13C enhancement of 530
was seen at 9.4 T, corresponding to ∼0.4% polarization. This was achieved using an automated dissolution
setup. A dedicated dissolution setup is not required; it was shown
that the polarization step can be carried out on a sample in an NMR
tube submerged in liquid helium, the sample can then be extracted
and dissolved by injection of a warm solvent, and finally placed in
a high-field NMR magnet for signal acquisition. This manual procedure leads to polarization levels lower
by close to an order of magnitude due to the additional time delay
between polarization and signal observation, but requires minimal
apparatus. In this work the authors showed enhancements of between
2 and 30 at 9.4 T for a number of other molecules such as 2,4-dibromo-1,3,5-trimethylbenzene,
lithium acetate, and toluene. The achievable polarization level of
a given molecule is approximately predicted by the tunnel splitting
in the solid state, and QRIP has not been observed- on methyl rotors
with a tunnel splitting of <1 μeV (∼10 mK). Although 1H-13C cross-relaxation can lead to hyperpolarized
NMR signals after the sample cooling and dissolution steps, it has
been rigorously shown that these signals can only be attributed to
a QRIP mechanism if the methyl rotor has sufficiently free rotation. 
To date, QRIP has been studied at a fundamental
level to understand
the mechanisms and to investigate possible extensions of the technique,
but it has not been applied as a hyperpolarization method to overcome
challenges in magnetic resonance caused by limited sensitivity.
It was shown that 15N-acetonitrile, which itself does
not exhibit QRIP effects due to the small methyl tunnel splitting,
can be weakly hyperpolarized by inclusion in a frozen γ-picoline
solid matrix. The γ-picoline proton
dipolar polarization generated via the Haupt effect was transferred
into 15N Zeeman polarization in the acetonitrile by adiabatically
ramped RF fields.
In a different strategy, molecules of acetonitrile
were trapped
in a solid Kr matrix (0.5 mol %) to reduce the barrier for rotation
of the methyl group. The authors were
able to demonstrate the Haupt effect in the methyl rotor, and estimated
the tunnel splitting to be approximately 50 K. This large enhancement
in the tunnel splitting by incorporation of a molecule in a noble
gas matrix is a promising technique that might allow QRIP to be used
to polarize a much wider range of molecules, and improve the attainable
polarization levels to near-unity.
As is the case with PHIP
( ), the spin polarization attained in
a QRIP experiment is independent of the external magnetic field, which means that it is particularly suited
to low- or zero-field NMR detection. A nuclear quadrupole resonance
(NQR) experiment was shown on a sample of γ-picoline using the
following procedure: (1) generate dipolar order on the protons by
a temperature jump from 7.5 to 55 K at zero field; (2) adiabatically
ramp the field to 17.7 mT to convert the dipolar order to Zeeman order
and allow 1H-14N spin mixing; (3) adiabatically
return to zero field and acquire a hyperpolarized-14N NQR
spectrum. The authors showed an impressive 2 × 103 enhancement of the signals over the thermal equilibrium NQR signals
at 7.5 K; unfortunately, the number of molecular targets this type
of experiment is applicable to is limited.
Despite the simplicity
of the required instrumentation, there are
some significant limitations in the generality of QRIP. The method
is limited to molecules containing a quantum rotor moiety; to date
QRIP has only been demonstrated on molecules containing a CH3 group, and the specific case of H217O@C60 (17O-enriched water trapped in a fullerene cage). In addition to this, the quantum rotor should
possess a tunnel splitting in the solid state of at least on the order
of one hundred millikelvin (or around 10 μeV) so that Boltzmann
polarization leads to a significant A/E population imbalance. For this reason, QRIP has been found to be
limited to only a handful of molecular systems. Another limitation is in the ability to utilize the engendered
hyperpolarization: in Haupt-effect experiments the sample remains
in the solid state in the cryostat; in a dQRIP experiment
the sample is extracted from the polarizer as a solution, but in this
case no permanent dipolar couplings exist to allow for coherent polarization
transfer, and instead, Zeeman polarization is produced by 1H-13C cross-relaxation caused by the fluctuating dipolar
couplings. One future direction might be to use a chemical reaction
or physical interaction of a molecule polarized via dQRIP to render the methyl protons magnetically inequivalent, and
allow for coherent transfer of the A/E imbalance into spin hyperpolarization, which could lead to much
larger signal enhancements. This is a particularly exciting prospect
since the A/E imbalance in a 13CH3 group corresponds to a symmetry-protected
state which is long-lived in comparison to the nuclear spin T1n times. , 

3.13.

## Optical Pumping of Noble Gas Isotopes
The terminology “optical pumping” has been used in
a variety of processes; however, for spin-exchange optical pumping
(SEOP) and metastability-exchange optical
pumping (MEOP) , as described in this review,
the goal of optical pumping (OP) is to hyperpolarize the nuclear spins
of a gas-phase system, typically, noble gas atoms.
3.13.1.

## The Technique
There are five stable
(i.e., nonradioactive) noble gas isotopes with a nonzero nuclear spin.
Historically, the most commonly used noble gas isotope for pulmonary
MRI is 3He (nuclear spin I = 1/2) that
can be hyperpolarized via SEOP, and it is the only isotope that has
been successfully pumped through MEOP. Unfortunately, 3He is currently exclusively produced from tritium decay by the nuclear
weapons industry leading to a waning stockpile as it is used for many
further applications beyond MRI and NMR spectroscopy. It is increasingly
being replaced by 129Xe (I = 1/2) that
is a renewable resource obtained from air liquefaction; it is found
at high natural abundance, and advancement in SEOP methods enables
high polarization of this isotope. There are three additional NMR-active
noble gas isotopes that are stable, but all of them have nuclear spin I > 1/2 and, therefore, possess nuclear electric quadrupole
moments that cause fast T1n relaxation.
The three isotopes are 21Ne (I = 3/2), 83Kr (I = 9/2), and 131Xe (I = 3/2). All three are used to a much lesser extent than 129Xe but show some interesting properties due to the high
nuclear spin. Due to the very low natural abundance of 21Ne, this isotope has found few applications. Beyond noble gas isotopes,
SEOP of gas-phase molecules, such as molecular hydrogen or hydrocarbons,
is also possible in principle; however,
fast relaxation driven by spin-rotation interaction typically counteracts
the build-up of hyperpolarization and therefore limits the polarization p that can be achieved. This relaxation also leads to rapid
loss of the modest polarization in these molecules, and practical
applications remain largely unexplored for this reason.
The
high nuclear spin I > 1/2 for three of the five
NMR-active
noble gas isotopes requires a closer look at the definition of spin
polarization p. Commonly, for spin-1/2 systems, the polarization p is introduced in
a semiclassical description using the difference in the populations nα and nβ of the α and β spin states, normalized by the total
number of spins (see ). Populations under thermal equilibrium are governed by the Boltzmann
distribution, and at temperatures where the high-temperature approximation
is applicable, for I = 1/2 the polarization can be
expressed as
8 (cf. ). For an arbitrary spin I, the high-temperature
approximation gives 
9 Note that for I =
1/2, gives the same
result as . The polarization
of a hyperpolarized
system is typically determined from the thermal equilibrium polarization
of multiplied by
the experimentally obtained enhancement factor. displays thermal equilibrium polarization
values for the various noble gas isotopes at 3 T magnetic field strength.
Note that provides
the polarization as a fraction of unity, i.e., the maximum polarization
possible. Alternatively, polarization values are reported as a percentile
with the maximum possible polarization of 100%.
 Both SEOP and MEOP , use circularly polarized photons ( ) as a primary source for the hyperpolarization
of electron spins of an atomic system in the gas phase (i.e., alkali
metals in SEOP, and metastable 3He* in MEOP, see below)
which then serves as an intermediary source to obtain the final goal
of noble gas nuclear spin hyperpolarization ( ).
The hyperpolarization of noble gases
is a two-step process. The
first step is optical pumping of electrons of an atomic system to
produce electron spin polarization. In the second step, described
further below, this polarization is transferred to the nuclear spin
of a noble gas.
SEOP (in contrast to MEOP, see below) requires
alkali metal atoms,
and optical pumping of their electron spins is used to produce hyperpolarization
intermediaries ( ). Alkali metals have low melting points and high vapor pressures
sufficient for performing SEOP at a fairly low temperature. Depending
on the noble gas isotope to be hyperpolarized, the temperature for
SEOP with rubidium, the most commonly used alkali metal for this process,
is typically in the range of 373–453 K. Rubidium has a melting
point of 312.4 K (39.3 °C), although cesium is a promising additional
contender. Rubidium density in the gas
phase as a function of temperature can be calculated according to
the following empirical equation: 
10 where [Rb] is expressed in the units of atoms
per m3 and T is temperature in kelvin.
At a temperature of 373 K (100 °C), close to that commonly used
for 129Xe SEOP, one obtains [Rb] = 6.0 × 1018 m–3. Like all alkali metals, Rb has a single electron
in its outer electron shell, i.e., the 5s orbital in the case of Rb.
If the laser is tuned in resonance with the D1 transition,
the outer electron will be pumped from the 5s level to the 5p energy
level. Using term symbols, the transition is 5 2S1/2 → 5 2P1/2 and this requires photons
in the near-infrared with a wavelength of 794.7 nm, where high laser
power is readily available. Note that other transitions can be used
as well, for instance, the D2 transition. 
 depicts
the energy levels if a small magnetic field is present that lifts
the 2-fold degeneracy of the 2S1/2 and 2P1/2 levels into two sublevels each due to the
z-quantization of the total electron angular momentum J = 1/2 of the electron shell that is dictated by the electron spin
quantization (i.e., mS = +1/2 and −1/2).
 Upon absorption of circularly polarized (σ±) photons, that carry either +1 or −1 spin projection,
the
angular momentum is transferred to the electrons. The selection rule
ΔmJ = ±1 applies if the magnetic
field direction that defines the quantization axis of this process
is parallel or antiparallel to the light propagation. The sign in
the selection rule depends on the handedness of the σ± photons and the beam direction in the magnetic field (i.e., parallel
or antiparallel).
The optical pumping procedure is illustrated
in for
the ΔmJ = +1 scenario that allows
only for electrons in the mS = −1/2
sublevel of 2S1/2 to be excited into the mS =
+1/2 sublevel of 2P1/2. Note that the spin orientation
of the electrons pumped into the 2P1/2 level
is only transient due to (1) rapid collisional mixing and (2) relaxation
into both sublevels of 2S1/2. Under continuous
laser irradiation, an ongoing selective population depletion of one
of the two 2S1/2 sublevels (i.e., the mS = −1/2 sublevel in ) through the selective pumping
process causes the population of the other sublevel (i.e., mS = +1/2) to accumulate. As a consequence, a
steady-state electron spin polarization occurs, described by 
11 where
12 is the optical pumping rate that depends on
the power density Φopt(λ,z,r) of the laser
light within the width of the D1 transition wavelength,
but also on the radial profile (r dependence) of the laser beam and
the position z along the axis of propagation of laser light through
the light-absorbing rubidium vapor and its pressure and gas composition
dependent absorption cross section σ(λ) 
The maximum value of pRb(z,r) is unity
but the “spin destruction” rate ΓSD counteracts the pumping process and may therefore reduce this value.
Spin destruction describes all processes that lead to a reduced population
accumulation at the mS = +1/2 sublevel
in . Note
that, unlike the 2P1/2 sublevels, the sublevels
of 2S1/2 usually do not exhibit rapid collisional
mixing. This crucial effect that makes optical pumping feasible is
due to the l = 0 orbital angular momentum of the
S-term (s orbital) and hence there is no possibility for spin–orbit
coupling with the electron spin. Atomic collisions are therefore much
less effective in causing electron relaxation in s orbitals compared
to p orbitals. Nevertheless, strong atomic deformation through collisions
with heavy noble gas atoms still causes significant Rb electron spin
depolarization with an overall rate constant
13 that is the product of the number density
of the corresponding gas species [Mi] in the collision
and their specific spin-destruction rate constants κsdi, summed up for all species present in the SEOP mixture. The Rb spin-destruction
rate constant caused by xenon is κsdXe = 5.2 × 10–21 m3 s–1, a value that is about 3 orders
of magnitude larger than that of helium and still 500 times larger
than that of molecular nitrogen. Therefore, it is important to keep
the xenon number density low during SEOP either through low total
gas pressure or at least through low xenon partial pressures in mixtures
diluted with other buffer gases such as helium, molecular nitrogen,
or other gases.
The diminished Rb electron spin polarization
reduces the polarization
that can be passed to the noble gas nuclei, as described further below.
However, it may have a further detrimental effect as it also increases
the likelihood of the “rubidium runaway” effect. A high
alkali metal density in the gas phase, in particular a high density
of dark, nonpolarized rubidium, leads to an increased heating effect
that, in turn, increases the Rb gas phase density even further. This
is detrimental to the overall SEOP as the laser light will no longer
be able to penetrate along the entire length of the SEOP cell. Cooling the front of the cell may mitigate
this effect but a high xenon density makes this more challenging. 
Rubidium–rubidium atomic collisions
can also lead to spin
destruction as the specific rate constant is κsdRb–Rb ≈ 8.1 ×
10–19 m3 s–1; however,
this effect can usually be ignored at the low number density [Rb]
at typical 129Xe SEOP temperatures (see ). This is different for the production
of hyperpolarized 83Kr with high SEOP temperatures around
433 K (160 °C) where Rb–Rb collisions can contribute up
to 20% to the electron spin destruction, in particular since the spin
destruction rate from collisions with krypton atoms is about five
times lower than that caused by xenon collisions. 
At lower pressures, a significant Rb polarization
loss is also
induced by spin-rotation interactions but at typical SEOP pressures this contribution can be neglected. Lastly, a strong but avoidable contribution
to Rb electron spin depolarization originates from radiation trapping.
Fluorescence upon relaxation of pumped Rb electrons back into the
S-levels (5 2P1/2 → 5 2S1/2) may be detrimental to the Rb spin polarization because
it can lead to radiation trapping where a single incident circularly
polarized photon gives rise to multiple scattered photons that are
arbitrarily polarized. Unlike monatomic noble gases, molecular nitrogen
can quench the fluorescence by dissipating the energy from excited
rubidium electronic states into vibrational modes. , Relatively small number densities [N2] present in SEOP
mixtures with about 5% N2 at ambient pressure can largely
eliminate this effect. , Molecular hydrogen
can also serve as a radiation-quenching agent although it is less
effective and higher densities are required. 
Another essential part of the SEOP process is spin exchange.
The
optical pumping process described above causes Rb electron spin hyperpolarization.
In order to produce hyperpolarized noble gas, Rb electron spin polarization
needs to be transferred to the nuclear spin of the noble gas, a process
that is driven by Fermi contact interaction upon a close contact of
a noble gas atom with a rubidium atom in the gas phase. Direct dipolar
interactions between an electron spin and a nuclear spin, i.e., dipolar
interactions through space, average to zero due to fast motion in
the gas phase. However, the Fermi contact interaction is a scalar
interaction between the electron spin Ŝ and
nuclear spin Î and the corresponding Hamiltonian
is
14 where μn and μB are the nuclear and Bohr magneton, γn is
the gyromagnetic ratio of the noble gas (NG) isotope involved in the
spin exchange, and P(r) is proportional to the probability
of finding the alkali metal outer electron at the location of the
noble gas nucleus, i.e., the square of the electron wave function
at the location R0NG of the
noble gas atomic nucleus. A plot of the wave function during close
proximity interaction between Rb and Xe is shown in that illustrates the high
value expected for |ψ(R = R0Xe)|2, crucial for the Fermi contact
interactions to take place. 
 The scalar interaction, written as the dot product
of the electron
spin and nuclear spin operators Ŝ and Î, respectively, can be rewritten using the raising
(Î+ = Îx + iÎy) and lowering (Î– = Îx – iÎy) operators:
15 The terms Î+Ŝ– and Î–Ŝ+ are sometimes called flip-flop
operators that describe spin exchange. Spin exchange requires that
|ψ(R = R0NG)|2 > 0 and this is the case during binary collisions
( a) between
alkali metal and noble gas atoms in the gas phase. The Fermi contact
interaction is particularly effective in three-body collisions, where
a third atom or molecule dissipates the energy from the collisions,
that can lead to the creation of van der Waals complexes that exist
temporarily until a collision with another body causes them to break
up again. b shows the spin exchange within a van der Waals complex that is
typically much more efficient than spin exchange driven by binary
collisions. Not all binary collisions and, similarly, not all van
der Waals complex interactions result in spin exchange. However, transfer
of the electron spin polarization to the nuclear spins will eventually
take place as long as there is a sufficient number of successful events.
Spin exchange driven by the flip-flop operator does not only cause
nuclear spin polarization, but likewise leads to nuclear spin depolarization
if depolarized Rb electrons are present. However, as the process takes
place under continuous laser irradiation, depolarized Rb electrons
are continuously pumped back into their hyperpolarized state and high
electron spin polarization can be maintained. For this reason, it
is important to avoid areas within the SEOP cell that are obstructed
from laser irradiation as this leads to “dark” (i.e.,
depolarized) rubidium.
 Note that the Fermi contact Hamiltonian does not
contain any double-quantum
terms, i.e., Î+Ŝ+ or Î–Ŝ–, that would enable a competing
two-spin flip-flip process to cause nuclear spin depolarization. Therefore,
as long as optical pumping keeps the electron spin polarization at
high levels and “dark rubidium” is largely avoided,
the Fermi contact interaction effectively leads to a directed transfer
of hyperpolarization from the electrons to the noble gas nuclear spins
until a steady-state nuclear spin polarization level is reached.
In addition to the fundamental mechanisms of SEOP described above,
the time dependence of the process and a quantitative description
of the spin polarization deserve further consideration. The Fermi
contact interaction drives the spin exchange process that is quantified
by the spin exchange rate γSE 
16 The process is driven by two contributions:
(1) spin exchange that
takes place within short-lived rubidium–noble gas van der Waals
complexes in the gas (often termed a “three-body” process,
see b)
that are characterized by the rate constant, γRbNG; and (2) spin exchange during short-duration binary collisions,
represented here by the velocity-averaged binary spin exchange cross-section
⟨σv⟩. Spin exchange
from “three-body” process within van der Waals complexes
is far more efficient for xenon than Rb–Xe spin exchange through
binary collisions. Unfortunately, high noble gas density [NG] reduces
the three-body spin exchange rate due to increased collision rates
between the van der Waals complexes and the heavy noble gas atoms
that reduce the lifetime of these fragile complexes. In this effect is expressed through
γRbNG/[NG] that provides an important reason to keep
the noble gas concentration low. This is in addition to the detrimental
effect of high [NG] on Rb spin polarization described by and .
The situation is somewhat
different for krypton where a large proportion
of spin exchange takes place through binary collisions as three-body
events are less effective. However, a high krypton density is still
detrimental for the achievable rubidium electron spin polarization,
but also because of the 83Kr T1n relaxation time dependence on [Kr] (see below). Short T1n relaxation time is even more of a concern for SEOP
of 131Xe.
The N2 molecules in the SEOP
mixture also contribute
to the Rb–NG van der Waals dimer breakup and this contribution
is quantified by the specific or characteristic pressure ratio b = P0(NG)/P0(N2) of the gases used , , and by the actual partial pressure ratio r = P(N2)/P(NG) of those gases in a mixture. Note,
however, that some nitrogen is always needed for SEOP because of its
radiation-quenching effect, unless replaced by other quenching agents
such as molecular hydrogen. Lastly, suggests that increasing the SEOP temperature increases
the exchange rate due to increased rubidium density [Rb]; however,
this is offset by detrimental effects on the optical pumping, radiation
quenching, and laser light penetration at higher temperatures.
The time-dependent noble gas spin polarization pNG(t) build-up is described by , 
17 where pRb is the
average value of rubidium polarization within the SEOP cell that replaces pRb(z,r) from due to gas flow and convection in the pump cell during
the buildup of pNG(t) that can take many
minutes. The achievable polarization pNG(t) can be affected by Γ, the longitudinal
relaxation rate 1/T1n of the noble gas
atoms. The gas-phase relaxation time T1n of the monatomic noble gases can be long: depending on the isotope
and specific conditions, it may range from days (in the case of 3He) to many hours (129Xe, 21Ne). However,
fast relaxation can be a problem for SEOP with 83Kr (T1n on the order of minutes at typical noble
gas partial pressures around 3–15 kPa) and even more so for 131Xe (T1n on the order of tens
of seconds).
The polarization pNG(t) in increases
in time during
the SEOP process until a steady-state value pNG is reached. Operational SEOP conditions that optimize rubidium
density [Rb], laser power, the effectiveness of van der Waals complexes,
and other factors for a maximum spin exchange rate γSE will also shorten the pumping process time to reach the steady state.
Note, however, that high temperature and even high laser power may
have an adverse effect on the rubidium (or other alkali metal) electron
spin polarization pRb and, although steady
state may be reached faster due to a high γSE, the
obtained nuclear spin polarization pNG may be lower than the polarization achievable at a lower temperature.
The ideal SEOP conditions depend on the alkali metal used for optical
pumping, the noble gas isotope, the hyperpolarized noble gas volume
that needs to be generated, and practical considerations such as available
laser power, total gas pressure, and limitations by the intended applications.
However, common to all SEOP is that the presence of the noble gas
itself (other than helium and perhaps neon) causes electron spin depolarization
of the alkali metal atom that is detrimental to the achievable polarization pNG. Therefore, the noble gas is usually kept
at a low partial pressure around 3–15 kPa. In some SEOP experiments,
overall gas pressures below ambient can be utilized, however in the
production of hyperpolarized noble gas as NMR probing agent or as
MRI contrast agent, SEOP typically takes place at ambient pressures
or above. Therefore, the noble gas intended for hyperpolarization
is usually highly diluted in buffer gases. For example, the best results
for the hyperpolarized 129Xe production in clinical pulmonary
MRI are currently obtained with SEOP using 1–5% Xe, 5–10%
N2 balanced by helium. , shows the dependence
of 129Xe hyperpolarization on gas pressure and mixture
composition in a stopped-flow SEOP experiment.
 It is important to note that SEOP within a high
magnetic field
region of B0 ≫ 10 mT effectively
suppresses spin exchange in van der Waals complexes. In this case,
the less effective binary collisions provide the dominant spin-exchange
contribution and thereby reduce the speed of the process for 129Xe and the achievable polarization. A further consideration is the spin state that is populated
by the SEOP process (|α⟩ or |β⟩, i.e., parallel
or antiparallel with respect to the thermally polarized state) that
depends on the choice of the circularly polarized light (i.e., σ+ or σ–), the direction of the magnetic
field in the SEOP process (i.e., parallel or antiparallel, see discussion
above), but also on the absolute sign of the gyromagnetic ratio of
the noble gas isotope. Note that 131Xe is the only stable
NMR-active noble gas isotope with a positive gyromagnetic ratio. The
effect of the pump direction is illustrated in showing a side-by-side comparison
of SEOP with 129Xe and 131Xe. The spin orientation
in typical MRI and most NMR spectroscopy experiments does not affect
the experiments substantially. However, in rare and specific experiments
using coils with high Q factors and condensed hyperpolarized 129Xe, radiation-damping effects can trigger depolarization
if the spin orientation of the hyperpolarized state is opposite to
that of the Boltzmann polarization. , 
 The alternative method to hyperpolarize noble gases,
namely metastability-exchange
optical pumping (MEOP), has been developed since the 1960s, but the feasibility of this process is mostly
limited to 3He with its fairly simple electronic structure.
However, spin-exchange optical pumping with 3He is an intrinsically
slow process that typically takes in excess of 12 h to provide 3He with p = 40% at a 1 L quantity at atmospheric
pressure. In contrast, MEOP enables a
more rapid production of 3He with p =
50–60% at rates of 0.4–1 L/h at atmospheric pressure. , Note, the process takes place at a total pressure of a few mbar
and the hyperpolarized 3He needs to be recompressed to
the required pressure for various applications. If the intended usage is for inhalation as pulmonary MRI
contrast agent for example, compression to slightly above ambient
pressure is required. Although supply problems may impede widespread
medical usage of hyperpolarized 3He in the future, the
gas is also important as a nuclear target for fundamental physics
applications and the MEOP process shall
therefore briefly be described here.
Like SEOP, MEOP is based
on transferring angular momentum from
circularly polarized photons to electron spins. However, unlike SEOP
where the single electron of the outer s-shell in gaseous alkali metal
atoms is used, MEOP utilizes the metastable 2 3S1 electronic state of helium (3He*) generated through plasma
discharge induced by radiofrequency irradiation. The 2 3S1 state is metastable because relaxation into the 1 1S0 ground state is forbidden by the selection rules
as a change from a triplet to a singlet state would violate the multiplicity
preservation constraint and, furthermore, transition between S terms
would violate the requirement for parity change in electronic dipole
transitions of centrosymmetric systems. Hence the 2 3S1 state can serve as a temporary “ground” state
for the optical pumping process. Circularly polarized laser light
at a wavelength of 1083 nm pumps the electrons into the various 2 3PJ states (J = 0, 1, 2). The details
of this process are beyond the scope of this review but it is conceptually
analogous to the one in SEOP. MEOP takes place in a magnetic field
(aligned with the laser beam) that breaks the 2-fold degeneracy of
electron mS = ±1/2 states of the
metastable 3He*, separating the corresponding energy levels.
Like in SEOP, relaxation processes during optical pumping cause depletion
of some of the states and population accumulation in the other states,
ultimately leading to high electron spin polarization in metastable 3He*. The hyperfine interaction affords a large intra-atomic
coupling between the 3He* nucleus and its electrons that
leads to high nuclear spin polarization. Metastability exchange collisions
with 3He in the 1 1S ground state transfer this
nuclear polarization at a rate that is 4 orders of magnitude higher
than the fastest spin exchange between 3He and an alkali
metal. The process described in denotes the nuclear spin states with |α⟩
and |β⟩:
18 Due to its relatively large gyromagnetic
ratio γ, 3He is more susceptible than all other noble
gases to paramagnetic
relaxation that exhibits a γ2 dependence. Therefore,
great care needs to be taken to avoid contact of 3He with
all paramagnetic surfaces to prevent depolarization during recompression,
and specialized containers should be used to transport it. Similarly, 3He is more susceptible than other noble gases to relaxation
caused by diffusion in strong magnetic field gradients. 

3.13.2.

## Practical Aspects
We now briefly
discuss practical implementation of SEOP and concepts for polarizer
systems. A continuous wave, circularly polarized ( ) laser beam that illuminates
the entire region of optical pumping with sufficient power for the
specific pumping process is needed. SEOP pressures far below the ambient
pressure were utilized in many of the pioneering studies. , , − However, with the usage of high-power solid-state laser diodes and
their inherent broad line width of about 2 nm, pressure broadening
of the rubidium D1 transition at elevated SEOP gas pressures
became advantageous. With further improved laser technology, narrowing
of the solid-state laser emission to typically a 0.2 nm line width
with an output power of 100 W and above has increasingly become available
and affordable. , , Nevertheless, this line width still benefits from some pressure
broadening and many of the notable polarizer systems perform SEOP
at around 1–2 bar. This pressure range enables straightforward
continuous-flow operation but also comes with the additional benefit
of a reduced risk of contamination with the ambient air that oxidizes
the highly reactive alkali metal within the SEOP cell, effectively
reducing, if not eliminating, its functionality.
Some applications
require generation of high volumes of up to liter quantities of purified
hyperpolarized noble gas at high polarization levels of p > 10%, and a number of innovations and studies with continuous-flow
SEOP have led to very high spin polarization values of up to p = 50% at high production rates, generating a liter quantity
within 30 min or less. , − For pulmonary MRI, the production of concentrated hyperpolarized 129Xe at ambient pressure at p(129Xe)>10% polarization and a production rate of several liters per
hour at ambient pressure is desirable. Technological improvements
have led to systems that significantly exceed these requirements,
thus enabling more demanding applications and reducing the need of
isotopically enriched 129Xe. Most systems utilize SEOP
in a continuous-flow mode, where a lean 129Xe gas mixture of typically 1% to 5% 129Xe in
a buffer gas mixture of 5–10% N2, balanced by 4He constantly flows through the SEOP cell. The lean mixture
maximizes spin exchange efficiency, but the gas flow needs to be sufficiently
slow to allow for the desired polarization build-up during the passage
of 129Xe gas through the SEOP cell. Typically, the passage
times are somewhere between 30 s to several minutes. Conflicting with
the slow flow rate are two further requirements: (1) the demand for
a production rate of several liters at ambient pressure of concentrated
hyperpolarized 129Xe per hour, and (2) the concentration
process that typically utilizes cryogenic capturing of hyperpolarized 129Xe in the frozen state as polycrystalline “Xe snow”
until the desired amount of hyperpolarized 129Xe has been
accumulated. , , , The cryogenic accumulation process
is limited by the longitudinal relaxation times of T1n = 150 min for 129Xe in the polycrystalline
“snow” phase that have been reported for 77 K at magnetic
field strength of 2.08 T; however, these
field strengths are difficult to achieve, in particular with permanent
magnets that are typically used for this purpose, and a more realistic T1n = 84 min was reported for a polarizer with
hyperpolarized 129Xe accumulation at 0.3 T. 
A remarkable, fully automated SEOP system
that, including cryogenic
separation, generates several liters of hyperpolarized 129Xe per hour at a spin polarization phyp = 50% was developed by Hersman and co-workers. Further promising results were reported by Wild and co-workers
who designed a SEOP system with optimized photon efficiency that is
capable of producing, for example, 300 mL of cryogenically accumulated
hyperpolarized 129Xe at p(129Xe) = 30% within 5 min and one liter of hyperpolarized 129Xe at p(129Xe) = 25% within about 15
min. Utilizing a commercial polarizer
from Polarean, generation of one-liter volumes of hyperpolarized 129Xe p(129Xe) = 30% within 15
min was recently reported. The authors
predict that substantial further improvements are possible if the T1n times of cryo-accumulated 129Xe
can be increased through improving the surface chemistry, better design
of the cold trap to maximize its efficiency, and an increase in the
applied magnetic field strength. Commercial polarizers (Polarean 9820-A,
Durham NC; ) based on a design by Driehuys and co-workers are used at various sites for clinical pulmonary MRI research. Usually, 129Xe with isotopic enrichment
levels of >90% is being used as it improves the signal intensity
about
4-fold over the xenon gas at natural isotopic abundance.
 Another approach toward high-volume production
of highly polarized 129Xe is the stopped-flow polarizer
concept, where the SEOP
cell is filled with a xenon-rich buffer gas mixture, containing typically
50% of xenon gas. After a set time for SEOP, the cell is cooled to
precipitate the alkali metal and the mixture of hyperpolarized 129Xe and buffer gas is dispensed in a single batch per SEOP
cycle (note, however, that the production is without further concentration
of xenon, cryogenic or otherwise, and this simplifies the process,
but not without consequences, as discussed below). Remarkably high
polarization values of up to p(129Xe)
= 90% have been achieved with this technology at the cost of reduced 129Xe concentration of
17% Xe in N2; however, high values of p(129Xe) = 74% were also achieved in a much more concentrated
50% Xe–N2 mixture. Further advances with the same concept were implemented in a commercial
polarizer XeUS ( ) that recently produced p(129Xe) = 89% in a 50% xenon–buffer gas mixture at a 1 L quantity
with a monoexponential build-up rate of γSE + Γ
= 0.045 min–1. According
to , a process
with a build-up rate of 0.045 min–1 and a steady-state
polarization of p(129Xe) = 89% results
in p(129Xe) = 62% after 30 min of SEOP.
 At this point, it is useful to consider the effect
of the hyperpolarized 129Xe dilution. The signal in NMR
is proportional to the product
of polarization and the dilution factor f; this product
has been used to define the apparent polarization papp which provides the same signal as a 100% concentrated
hyperpolarized 129Xe gas with the polarization p that equals the papp of the
dilute mixture: 
19 For example, p(129Xe) = 62% obtained
after 30 min of SEOP in a 50% xenon–buffer gas mixture equals papp = 31% at the same total pressure and temperature
which is thus straightforwardly compared with the polarization after
cryogenic separation following continuous-flow SEOP.
Another
concept incorporates the production volume of hyperpolarized 129Xe and is defined as the dose equivalent volumes, DE, to
100% polarized and 100% isotopically enriched and concentrated xenon: 
20 where f129 is
the isotopic fraction of 129Xe and V129 is the production volume. Essentially, informs about the amount of pure 129Xe at 100% polarization that provides the same signal intensity
as the actual mixture administered. A further approach introduced
for hyperpolarized protons is the fully polarized spin concept. The detailed discussion is beyond the scope
of this review. However, whatever concept is used, there is a need
for standardization such as the definition of , in particular, with respect to gas dilution.
Separation of hyperpolarized noble gas is often required after
SEOP, and there are alternative processes that achieve this goal.
Unlike batch mode SEOP that can utilize high xenon density, SEOP in
a continuous-flow mode requires lean mixtures and, therefore, subsequent
concentration of the hyperpolarized gas is essential. In practice,
the hyperpolarized 129Xe–buffer gas mixture is flown
through a coldfinger at liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K, at a magnetic
field of typically 0.3 T) causing the xenon to solidify while the
buffer gases are exhausted. Rapid warming of the coldfinger in a water
bath, for example, leads to sublimation of the concentrated 129Xe gas with high spin polarization, usually into a Tedlar bag at
atmospheric pressure. However, cryogenic separation is inherently
a “batch mode” production process that disrupts on-demand
continuous flow needed for a number of applications. − Indeed, some applications, such as HyperCEST molecular imaging,
require very stable polarization conditions and, therefore, the SEOP
process should be maintained in a continuous-flow mode by diverting
the hyperpolarized 129Xe into a bypass line when the delivery
to the actual sample is temporarily stopped during data acquisition. , Furthermore, cryogenic separation is not an option at all for the
production of hyperpolarized 83Kr and 131Xe
due to the fast quadrupolar relaxation of these isotopes with nuclear
spin I > 1/2. Note that 3He and 21Ne can be hyperpolarized in highly concentrated form through
SEOP
in the presence of a small amount of molecular nitrogen for radiation
quenching. However, as discussed above, 83Kr, 129Xe, and 131Xe need to be at a low density in order to
achieve high spin polarization. An innovative alternative approach
is to use an organic compound to serve as a buffer gas that exhibits
the following properties: (1) it may not react with the alkali metal,
(2) it contains double or triple bonds leading to vibrational frequencies
in the molecule that enable for radiation quenching, and (3) it condenses
at temperatures far above xenon liquefaction. , , This method produces a constant
stream of 70% concentrated hyperpolarized 129Xe but the
polarization is typically in the p = 10% regime.
This method, however, is unlikely to be applicable to I > 1/2 isotopes. A chemical separation methodology was reported
recently
that uses molecular hydrogen as a buffer gas and radiation quenching
agent. , , Despite having
only a single bond, the low mass of the hydrogen molecule leads to
a sufficient cross-section for radiation quenching, although about
an order of magnitude below that of molecular nitrogen. However, hydrogen
has been shown to work well as long as it is not mixed with any other
buffer gases. Following SEOP, the buffer
gas is reactively removed through catalytic combustion and the resulting
water vapor is condensed at room temperature. This chemical, rather
than physical separation process is explored for the production of
purified hyperpolarized 83Kr as an MRI contrast agent.

3.13.3.

## Applications
Applications of hyperpolarized
noble gases are briefly overviewed below, for hyperpolarized 129Xe in particular, and to a lesser account for 3He, 131Xe, and 83Kr, and references to various
reviews on the subject are provided as well.
In clinical applications,
hyperpolarized 3He pulmonary MRI has been increasingly
replaced by hyperpolarized 129Xe MRI and a number of excellent
protocols were developed or adapted from 3He MRI to probe
different structural and functional parameters of lungs in health
and disease. , − Perhaps the most straightforward application of hyperpolarized 3He and 129Xe are static pulmonary ventilation images
that reveal ventilation defects or the
response to airway-hyperresponsiveness challenges in asthma. MR velocimetry measurements can be utilized to study gas-phase flow and dynamics in
the lung. However, stochastic terms from Brownian motion may be on
the same order of magnitude as the coherent term arising from the
flow and this can lead to a strong interplay that may lead to averaging
of a velocity distribution, for example. Velocimetry experiments in
lungs are experimentally demanding since they cannot be performed
in a continuous-flow mode; despite that, such measurements were reported
with hyperpolarized 3He. 
Gas diffusion in the respiratory zone of the lungs is restricted
by alveolar walls and measurements of the apparent diffusion coefficient
(ADC) with hyperpolarized noble gas can provide valuable insights
into lung morphometry. , Although the 129Xe self-diffusion coefficient in air, D(129Xe-air)
= 0.14 cm2 s–1, is six times smaller
than that of 3He in air, D(3He-air) = 0.86 cm2 s–1, the ADC data for both gases in lungs
usually correlate well and ADC value is elevated in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). , 
Two interesting properties of 129Xe, that are almost
completely absent in 3He, are significant solubility in
tissue and large chemical shift range that enables one to distinguish
between gas and various dissolved phases. The total range of the 129Xe chemical shift, responding to different chemical environments
(excluding xenon compounds) is almost 300 ppm depending on the materials
and solvents. − The chemical shift of 129Xe NMR
signal in the bulk gas phase increases by about 0.6 ppm/bar in pure
xenon and is usually referenced as 0 ppm at the zero pressure limit.
The chemical shift of 129Xe is useful for pulmonary MRI
as chemical-shift-selective MRI of dissolved xenon in lungs is possible
due to the significant frequency shift between 129Xe in
the gas phase (set to 0 ppm), the tissue-dissolved phase (TP) around
195 ppm and xenon interacting with red blood cells (RBC) at around
215 ppm. , Although dissolved-phase xenon
amounts to only about 1–2% of the total inhaled xenon, such
xenon is constantly replenished from the alveolar gas phase through
rapid diffusive exchange. This allows for rapid signal averaging in
the millisecond regime if chemical-shift-selective excitation of the
dissolved phase is utilized. , 
This concept
can be used to probe gas transfer through the lung
parenchyma for early diagnosis of interstitial lung diseases such
as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) or the monitoring of the scarring
of lung tissue related to the long-term effects of the corona virus
disease (long-COVID). Generally, scarring will slow oxygen uptake
into the blood as the lung parenchyma, i.e., the pulmonary gas–blood
barrier, thickens and therefore the breathing process is impeded.
The xenon uptake into the blood is therefore a promising biomarker
for interstitial lung diseases. shows pulmonary 129Xe NMR spectra
that demonstrate the concept of 129Xe as a biomarker for
gas exchange in the lung. shows ratio
maps of the various phases in the lung. Dissolved-phase hyperpolarized 129Xe imaging can also
be applied as an investigative tool for neuroimaging with initial
work performed on rodents. − In clinical work, the NMR spectrum
of hyperpolarized 129Xe in the human head shows a peak
at 189 ppm associated with soft muscular tissue, at 193 ppm from xenon
dissolved in white matter, at 196 ppm from xenon dissolved in gray
matter, at 200 ppm from xenon dissolved in interstitial and cerebrospinal
fluids, and at 217 ppm in red blood cells. 
 Of particular importance for biomedical applications,
including
molecular imaging, is the concept of xenon biosensor. Molecular imaging
enables the in vivo detection of the spatial distribution of specific
target molecules that serve as “biomarkers” in an organism.
Molecular imaging seeks to enable early detection of disease, allows
for better monitoring of treatment efficacy in personalized or stratified
medicine, and is useful for drug development in preclinical and clinical
studies. The challenge for molecular MRI comes from low signal intensity
typically associated with dilute concentrations of the target molecules
and by the complexity of the associated NMR spectra. The 129Xe biosensor concept, pioneered by Pines, Wemmer, and co-workers, , , , utilizes an encapsulating agent, such as cryptophane cages, that
can reversibly bind Xe atoms with fast rates of exchange. The large
chemical shift range of 129Xe leads to a distinguishable
signal separation between encapsulated xenon atoms in the hydrophobic
cavity and xenon in the solvent and is an elegant path to enable molecular
MRI due to the simplicity of the corresponding
NMR spectra. To utilize the biosensor for molecular imaging, biosensor
molecules have cages that are linked to bioactive ligands for specific
binding affinity for a particular biomarker, i.e., for a specific
biomolecule that is upregulated in a particular disease.
The
concept is translated from optical imaging with fluorescence
markers and the initial work utilized biotin as a ligand for the protein
avidin, but the concept was soon extended to peptide–antigen
recognition, to specific binding to
nucleotide targets in the study that demonstrated in vitro recognition
of a DNA strand, and to cancer biomarkers. Since these early studies, a wealth of hyperpolarized 129Xe biosensor molecules and concepts were developed, as reviewed
elsewhere. − 
The sensitivity of the biosensor concept can be significantly
amplified
further through an indirect detection scheme. This is achieved via the combination of chemical exchange
saturation transfer (CEST) with hyperpolarized 129Xe (HyperCEST)
that is in rapid exchange between two sites. A sensitivity of tens
of nanomolar concentration with antibody-based HyperCEST biosensors
for in vitro molecular imaging of cells has been reported. Some of the biosensors require a substantial
effort in organic synthesis, but a fairly accessible cage system for
the development of in vivo HyperCEST molecular imaging protocols is
cucurbit[6]uril (CB6). illustrates the concept
of HyperCEST molecular imaging where nonfunctionalized CB6 was injected
intravenously into a rat to demonstrate a proof of concept that HyperCEST
signals can be obtained in a living organism. More recently, the concept was optimized further, in particular with respect to one of the key
requirements of HyperCEST, i.e., high reproducibility of 129Xe hyperpolarization and constant concentration during the measurements.
Note that a fully working biosensor concept would require functionalization
of the HyperCEST agent to serve as a sensor for biomarker molecules,
for example, thereby enabling molecular imaging of the biomarker presence.
However, at present there is no published study with an actual functionalized
cage system that would utilize the HyperCEST biosensor concept in
an animal model in vivo.
 HyperCEST utilizes exchange between cage-bound
xenon atoms with
“free” or “pool” xenon atoms of the bulk
solution within the vasculature or tissues. A presaturation pulse,
applied to the resonance of the xenon-cage complex, depolarizes the
bound xenon, but it is the exchange, that is fast compared to the
time scale of the presaturation pulse, which causes depletion of the
signal of hyperpolarized 129Xe in solution. The depletion
can be “accumulated” over time as long as irradiation
is applied. HyperCEST allows for nanomolar sensitivity because the 129Xe signal arising from the bulk solution is much stronger
than that from xenon bound to the small number of sensor molecules.
Usually, the measured signal depletion is relative to that of a control
experiment where the presaturation pulse is applied at a resonance
frequency at the same spectral distance to the solution peak but at
the opposite side. The important difference to methodology with hyperpolarized
molecules is that the biosensor molecules can be injected before the
hyperpolarized 129Xe is inhaled. Therefore, no relaxation
takes place until xenon is inhaled.
129Xe NMR is
a useful tool in materials science and
engineering applications as well. NMR spectroscopy with thermally
polarized 129Xe has been extensively applied to the study
of porous materials but the strength of hyperpolarized 129Xe is in the detection of dynamic processes; see the reviews published
on this subject. , , A recent example of the study of a dynamic process is the utilization
of xenon chemical shift for the observation of the temperature dynamics
during the first 100 s of the start-up of a catalytic hydrogenation
reaction. Another engineering application,
investigating the structure-transport relationships in the hierarchical
porous structure of a catalytic diesel particulate filter (DPF) monolith,
illustrates the (back) translation of MRI technology from medical
application to engineering sciences. Using transport-weighted MR images of hyperpolarized 129Xe, the authors where able to show the locations of high porosity
in the regions that are largely void of the actual washcoat catalyst
causing most of the gas to bypass the active sites. Similarly, using
continuous-flow conditions at reduced water content, the hyperpolarized 129Xe MRI signal largely, but not completely, disappeared indicating
that the active catalytic sites have become accessible ( ). This observation
suggests that paramagnetic (catalytic) centers are mostly located
within the smallest pores that become accessible for gases only once
almost all of the water in the material has evaporated.
 Applications of the quadrupolar noble gas isotopes
are much less
numerous. The high hyperpolarization achievable for 83Kr
makes this isotope a potential candidate for pulmonary MRI contrast.
The 83Kr T1n times in the pure
gas are on the order of minutes and therefore sufficiently long for
clinical applications. For tissues with high surface-to-volume ratios
S/V, quadrupolar relaxation during surface adsorption of 83Kr becomes the dominating relaxation mechanism. A large number of
adsorption and desorption events depletes polarization in the gas
phase, and this effect is the dominating cause for relaxation observed
in the lung. Since the 83Kr T1n relaxation predominantly occurs at the surfaces, the effect has
been dubbed “surface quadrupolar relaxation” or SQUARE.
SQUARE causes a S/V-dependent T1n contrast
leading to 83Kr depolarization. Furthermore, SQUARE T1n times are also dependent on the chemical
composition of the surface. shows hyperpolarized 83Kr T1n SQUARE maps in an animal model of emphysema where the
S/V is reduced and in a control lung. The work suggests that SQUARE
of hyperpolarized 83Kr is promising as a potential biomarker
for the condition. 
 Hyperpolarization of electron spins of atomic systems
in the gas
phase produced by optical pumping is the essence of another important
technology which is utilized in optically pumped magnetometers (OPMs).
While this application does not involve hyperpolarization of nuclear
spins, OPMs are of interest in a range of magnetic resonance applications,
including their use as highly sensitive NMR signal detectors. It is,
therefore, briefly outlined below.
There are many different
types of OPM devices, including 3He- and 4He-based
magnetometers, that have been extensively
studied. For alkali-metal-based magnetometers,
the principle of operation is similar to that shown in where the D1 transition between the 2S1/2 and 2P1/2 levels is pumped with σ+ photons
from a powerful light source, typically a laser. Potassium, rubidium,
or cesium and their D1 transition are common choices. For
a full description; however, one needs to consider the hyperfine interaction
with the nuclear spins. For instance, for an OPM with the vapor of
the rubidium isotope 87Rb (I = 3/2), the
hyperfine coupling between nuclear spin I and the
electron total angular momentum J gives the total
angular momentum F = 1 or F = 2. Because of the section rule ΔmF = +1, optical pumping in combination with
relaxation processes (see discussion of ) eventually produces an overpopulation
of the mF = 2 sublevel of the 2S1/2 state only, which can reach the ultimate limit of
100% in tens of milliseconds. The light transmission depends on the
optical pumping rate; for the 100% population of the mF = 2 sublevel, no further pumping can take place and
the medium becomes optically transparent. In the most straightforward
systems, the pump beam is also used as the detection beam, and the
intensity of transmitted light is detected with an optical detection
system, e.g., a photodiode.
In the simplest case of a single
beam, zero-field OPM with no additional
magnetic field applied, the magnetometer detects the response of polarized
electron spins to an external magnetic field. In the presence of a
weak magnetic field that is not aligned with the laser beam, the magnetization
vector rotates away from the laser beam direction, and laser pumping
recommences. This can be observed through the weakening of the beam
transmission. For very weak magnetic fields, the response is linear
and the smallest detectable change in the field is
21 where N is the number density
of rubidium atoms, V is the cell volume, t is the integration time, γe is the electron
gyromagnetic ratio, and the time constant τ is a measure of
the dephasing time, i.e., the T2e time,
but also includes the pumping rate. Depending on the volume of the
cell, the alkali metal vapor density, and the relaxation time, experimental
sensitivity values in the 10–16 T Hz–1/2 have been reported, with a predicted theoretical sensitivity as
high as 10–18 T Hz–1/2. 
In an alternative detection scheme,
a second (probe) beam perpendicular
to the pump beam can be applied. This probe beam can be linearly polarized
and the induced rotation of its polarization plane by a magnetic field
is used for detection.
OPM devices exhibit high sensitivity
to measure weak magnetic fields
that is similar to that of superconducting quantum interference device
(SQUID)-based magnetometers. , However, unlike SQUID-based
magnetometers, OPM devices do not require cryogenic cooling and the
associated cryogenic hardware. OPM technology therefore allows for
miniaturization, cost reduction, portability, and enables applications
where, at noncryogenic temperatures, close proximity of the magnetometer
to the source of the magnetic field is required. OPMs are used in
a wide range of magnetic field measurements in geology, archeology,
space exploration, magnetic microscopy, and a particularly exciting
application is the usage of OPM for magnetoencephalography (MEG) that
enables direct imaging of human brain electrophysiology. 
Importantly, OPM-based technology has
been explored for the detection
of faint NMR signals at zero and ultralow magnetic fields (ZULF) where
scalar couplings dominate over Zeeman interactions. , OPM can also be used for higher field strengths, including the Earth
magnetic field range. These measurements enable a number of experiments
that are otherwise not feasible, for example the NMR study of porous
metals or even samples inside a metal container that would be impermeable for electromagnetic fields at
standard NMR frequencies.

3.13.4.

## Frontiers and Challenges
Future
extensions of SEOP and its applications are certainly envisioned,
and further progress in this field will be facilitated by overcoming
a number of unsolved issues. If utilization of the unique properties
of the highly hyperpolarized noble gases during the past decades provides
any indication, a wealth of stunning and “never before thought
of” applications will continue to emerge. However, the main
thrust of applications will likely be in the biomedical field, in
particular for pulmonary MRI, the most impactful area of hyperpolarized
noble gas utilization to-date. Indeed, pulmonary MRI with hyperpolarized 129Xe has already received clinical approval status for a varying
degree of usages in at least three countries (in the UK in 2016; in
the PR China and the USA in 2022). The study of lungs affected by
long-COVID is a timely and prominent example of stunning research
enabled by this methodology. However, a successful future for hyperpolarized
noble gas MRI in everyday clinical settings demands resolving several
outstanding issues. One issue is the standardization of the technology
to improve the value of the generated data for radiologists. Furthermore,
MRI in general, and hyperpolarized noble gas MRI in particular, are
diagnostic methodologies that are not cheap, a problem that is even
more pronounced by the fact that simple lung function tests often
provide sufficient information at a low cost. Nevertheless, the ability
to observe lung function in health and disease with high spatial resolution
provides convincing arguments for specialized researchers. However,
for more general applications, the polarizer technology must become
more user-friendly and more cost-efficient. It is also instructive
to look at the rise of general MRI: since the early magnetic resonance
experiments that utilized magnetic field gradients for spatial encoding,
the success story of MRI was not only due the marvelous and crucial
work of visionary physicists, chemists, engineers, and medical researchers
in academia and industry. It also relied on one key development outside
the world of magnetic resonance and superconductors, namely the availability
of ever-increasing computational power at affordable costs. Similarly,
the increasing output power of line-narrowed, semiconductor diode
array lasers has enabled and improved practical hyperpolarized noble
gas MRI over the years. High power of 200 W and more has become available
but affordability and reliability of the lasers can still be improved.
Beyond pulmonary MRI, the development of hyperpolarized Xe biosensors
is promising but the methodology has only recently made the first
steps outside test tubes into in vivo research on animals. Human subject
usage will not happen in the near future but will keep generations
of researchers busy as potential benefits may be significant. There
are only a few engineering applications of hyperpolarized noble gas
MRI but this field may benefit from back-translation of medical technology
into the physical sciences. Clearly, hyperpolarized noble gas NMR
spectroscopy and MRI will continue to benefit materials science and
chemistry research for the probing of the structure and transport
properties of porous systems. Future work will also seek further advancement
of the detection of hyperpolarized noble gases and a broad range of
hyperpolarized molecules at low fields with OPM sensors.

3.14.

## Nuclear Spintronics
Beginning in
the late 20th century with the discovery of giant magnetoresistance, , conventional solid-state electronic devices began to exploit the
spin of electrons to control currents and interconvert electrical
and magnetic signals for novel computational and information storage
devices. The era of spintronics was born and is at present the subject
of many reviews and texts. Emerging more recently is the examination
of nuclear spintronics wherein extremely
long-lived nuclear spin states, their couplings to electrons and (weakly)
other nuclei, are considered as schema for computation, memory, and
other informational technology processes.
For three reasons,
the development of solid-state nuclear spintronics is closely related
to hyperpolarization of nuclear spins. First, inductive signal detection
is fraught with poor sensitivity: a robust spintronics device should
not require minutes-to-hours of signal averaging. Hence hyperpolarization
affords more rapid interrogation of nuclear spins. Second, computation
with nuclear spins requires “initial state preparation,”
the quantum equivalent of setting all the registers to a specified
value in conventional computing: some hyperpolarization schemes may
be seen as a way to initiate a specified nuclear polarization. Third,
the quantum fluctuations of transverse magnetization, and the incoherent
RF excitations of longitudinal magnetization associated with the transverse
fluctuations, produce spin noise that decoheres those nuclei or electrons
of interest that are to be used for
computation and information storage and readout.
Further criteria
need to be met to imagine nuclear spintronics
devices. For example, the DiVincenzo criteria for quantum computation requires: (1) qubits (e.g., nuclear
and electron spin quantum states); (2) initial state preparation;
(3) coherence times long enough for thousands-to-millions of operations;
(4) logic gates; and (5) high-fidelity readout. Memory and control
spintronic devices pose similar restrictions on the properties of
the nuclear spins. All these criteria are common in NMR spectroscopy
employing hyperpolarization (though they are given different names,
for example, a CNOT gate may be a selective π-pulse in a two-spin
system), and thus the NMR community has joined the quantum information
processing (QIP) and spintronics communities in discerning solid-state
platforms where nuclear hyperpolarization can be generated and controlled
with these criteria in mind. NMR, as deployed by chemists for structural
determination, was presented for quantum computing in a landmark work, and benchmarked against other quantum computing
technologies. , By the end of the 20th century,
however, it became clear that liquid-state NMR would not scale to
be a useful quantum computing technology. On the other hand, there are other ways where nuclear spin states
are deployed for quantum technologies.
As seen in , hyperpolarization
of electrons and 13C nuclei
at the NV defect in diamond is extensively studied toward these ends
owing to the ability to optically prepare high levels of spin polarization
and optically read out electron and nuclear spin states where the
electrons exhibit millisecond coherence times. Similar progress toward
this end is being made with tDNP ( ). Here we examine the progress
toward nuclear spintronics in two other platforms: compound semiconductors
and dopants in silicon.
Laser light of an appropriate wavelength
and polarization ( ) impinging
on compound semiconductors yields nuclear spin polarizations of tens
of percent. Dubbed “optical pumping” or “OPNMR,”
it has been the subject of many studies. At energies close to the band gap (i.e., the electron Bloch wavevector k equal to zero), the conduction band wave functions have
orbital angular momentum L = 0 and electron spin
angular momentum S = 1/2, for a total electron angular
momentum J = 1/2. The valence band wave functions
have orbital angular momentum L = 1 and spin angular
momentum S = 1/2, for a total angular momentum J = 3/2 or J = 1/2. The J = 1/2 states are “split-off” to lower energy (and
are ignored here) so that circularly polarized light with helicity
σ+ tuned to the band gap (1.52 eV in GaAs) drives
transitions from the mJ = −3/2
valence band state to the mS = −1/2
conduction band state and from the mJ =
−1/2 state to the mS = +1/2 conduction
band state, with relative probabilities of 3:1. Thus, an excess of
conduction electrons with mS = −1/2
is created. These photoexcited electrons may then be captured at defects,
and nuclear spins proximate to the defect are polarized via an Overhauser
cross-relaxation between nuclei and electrons. The rate constants
associated with this Overhauser process are affected by the detailed nature of the electron–nuclear
couplings (Fermi contact, dipolar, indirect), which in turn may also
be affected by the experimental design. Subsequent nuclear spin diffusion may carry this local polarization
to bulk nuclei. The literature reports that this scheme for nuclear
hyperpolarization may also be realized by manipulating the ensemble-averaged
expectation value of the electron spin polarization via light modulation, application of fields, , injection of electrons from magnetic materials, , , and dipolar order. In short, there are several ways to hyperpolarize
electron and nuclear spins in these materials, setting the stage for
potential quantum devices. GaAs has been a particularly fruitful venue
for such demonstrations.
Optical pumping in GaAs semiconductors
is best illustrated by the
“OPNMR profile” where the bulk NMR induction signal
from, for example, 69Ga, is monitored as a function of
optical excitation frequency and light helicity. “Spectra”, or OPNMR profiles, represent the
compilation of bulk NMR signal intensities on the ordinate and laser
photon energy on the abscissa, as shown in . The magnitude of these 69,71Ga NMR signals (as well as those of 75As) approach tens
of percent polarization, a significant hyperpolarization. These spectra
are parsed qualitatively into three regimes based upon the energy
of excitation photons relative to the optical band gap of the material:
“sub-gap” (<1.505 eV for GaAs), “mid-gap”
(1.5–1.52 eV), and “super-gap” (>1.52 eV).
Subgap
excitation leads to direct pumping to defect sites; midgap pumping
yields mS = ±1/2 conduction band
electrons, depending on the polarization of light, where the electrons
are subsequently captured at defects; supergap pumping leads to free
electron carriers with spatial trajectories determined by the applied
magnetic fields of the NMR instrument. These features appear in the
OPNMR profiles of many bulk compound semiconductors besides GaAs. Quantitative models for some aspects of these
regimes are described in the literature; for example, elegant data , and a sophisticated model describe
the supergap OPNMR profiles as variations in optical absorption due
to the presence of Landau energy levels for the initial and final
photoabsorption electron states. Midgap excitation, however, has been
studied most frequently, as described below.
 OPNMR in the midgap regime exhibits a maximum in
the OPNMR signal
( ). Here
the bulk 69,71Ga nuclear spin polarization is the result
of a competition between two different mechanisms: the so-called “hyperfine”
mechanism, producing large polarizations via Overhauser enhancement
by captured spin-polarized photoexcited electrons at defect sites, and a “quadrupolar” relaxation
mechanism that drives nuclear spins to thermal polarizations. The rates of both relaxation mechanisms are
determined by the concentration of free electrons and shallow donor
occupation fraction, which varies throughout the depth of the sample.
The resulting competition between these two mechanisms produces some
interesting effects.
In the regime of low illumination intensities,
quadrupolar-driven
nuclear spin relaxation gives rise
to unusual phenomenology by probing the kinetics of the pumping process
of the nuclei using a train of light pulses of variable repetition
rate. Owing to the spectral differences
in the NMR response of near-defect and bulk nuclear spins, two classes
of recombination centers influencing nuclear spin relaxation were
identified. One class comprises shallow defects (i.e., defect characterized
by energy levels near in energy to the band edges) preferentially
inducing hyperfine-driven nuclear spin hyperpolarization, whereas
the other class is formed by deep defect centers (i.e., those characterized
by energy levels deep into the band gap) and are mostly responsible
for quadrupolar relaxation that diminishes the NMR signal rapidly
with time. Fractioning of the illumination time into low duty cycles
of light-on/light-off intervals afforded the evolution of the spin
polarization over mesoscale distances, where it was found that the
defect-centered electric field gradient that induces relaxation has
an effective range exceeding several tens of nanometers ( ). Articulating
cycles of optical pumping with radio frequency control pulses timed
to shape the resulting nuclear polarization as it spreads away from
the defect may create “onion-like” patterns in which
the polarization successively changes sign or amplitude over concentric
layers of predefined thickness. Because the “pitch”
in these structures is ultimately influenced by the nuclear spin relaxation,
one could articulate experiments that detect trapped charges, discern
the spatial profile of hyperfine interactions, or use internal fields
to direct electrons in a device.
 A second demonstration of nuclear spin patterning
also exploits
the two nuclear spin relaxation mechanisms in optically pumped GaAs where ∼50 μm patterns of 69Ga polarization are created with no ferromagnets, no lithographic
patterning techniques, nor quantum-confined structures. Here a wafer
of GaAs is placed in a high-field NMR instrument with application
of a constant gradient for a 1D image of the NMR-active nuclei from
front-to-back. After saturating 69Ga magnetization with
a string of RF pulses, illumination of the wafer with midgap light
results in a positive NMR signal near the surface where the quadrupolar
relaxation mechanism dominates (defects are all ionized due to surface-derived
electric fields, thus no hyperpolarization signal); negative hyperpolarization-enhanced
NMR signals appear a few hundred micrometers into the wafer owing
to Overhauser cross-relaxation from polarized, defect-bound electrons
produced by σ+ illumination; and further into the
wafer, the light intensity falls so low that once again the quadrupolar
relaxation mechanism dominates ( ), resulting in an up-then-down-then-up
NMR signal. One goal for such research is to construct patterned nuclear
polarization in GaAs where Zeeman fields are spatially controlled
for electron-spin-based devices. These Zeeman fields may be used,
for example, to selectively tune the resonance frequency of confined
electrons. Coherent electron spin rotations have already been achieved by causing electrons to drift through a region
of magnetized nuclei. The authors surmise that micron-level, three-dimensional
patterning of nuclear magnetism would provide a new degree of freedom
in semiconductor spintronics that will be easily integrated into existing
device architectures with optical and electrical control.
 At the turn of the 20th century, a novel form of
quantum computer
was proposed, namely the pairing of
an electron and a phosphorus atom in crystalline silicon. Here the 31P phosphorus dopant in silicon is 4-fold coordinated and
is associated with a single unpaired electron that, at cryogenic temperatures,
is localized at the phosphorus atom with polarizations on the order
of tens of percent. The low temperature and presence of an applied
Zeeman field B0 provide high electron
polarization. This structure forms an AX spin system, a classic two-spin
system that can be understood and manipulated with NMR/EPR methods.
To understand how this works as a quantum computer, we must take a
brief aside and consider how the “up or down” spin states
of a four-level spin system composed of two coupled spins ( ) may be viewed
as a logic gate. 
 A logic gate is imagined by considering an operation
wherein one
of the two spins is flipped conditional on the state of the other
spin. The red arrow in a demonstrates this operation, namely a selective RF
pulse on the 31P nucleus. The coupling Hamiltonian for
the two-spin system, JIzSz leads to oscillation
of magnetization between the two spins. In its simplest form, the controlled NOT (CNOT) gate is just a selective
180°-pulse applied to the 31P spin.
The realization
of this structure for quantum computing has been
reviewed and is the subject of active
research, beginning with the construction of a silicon transistor
that enables read-out and control of a single electron spin provided the construct is held at low temperature
(<1 K) and ∼1.7 T magnetic field. A powerful graphic (see
Supplementary Movie 1 in ref ( )) shows how the transistor both initializes and reads out
the electron spin via application of dc and microwave fields. A fascinating
attribute of this detection scheme is that the electron spin is detected
in a time short relative to the nuclear spin flip. Whereas the AX
spin system with some coupling between the spins produces a doublet
in the 31P NMR spectrum and a doublet in the EPR spectrum
at a specified orientation of the crystal in a magnetic field, in
these experiments only a single EPR peak is observed, with the phosphorus
spin being either “up” or “down” ( ), owing to the
fact that single spin transistors rely of differing tunneling rates
of spin-up and spin-down electrons with applied voltage. This strategy remains an active area of research. , 
 It is important to note that hyperpolarized metal
atoms in the
gas phase form the basis for quantum information processes, following
from Alfred Kastler’s original work. Here, as with NV defects in diamond ( ), the initialization and readout take
place with optical methods, thereby affording great sensitivity. Atoms
are arranged in space via optical tweezers, subject to significant
cooling (cf. optical pumping of rubidium, ) then interrogated using fluorescence
methods. shows the Jablonski diagram for a metal
atom such as strontium where the levels are labeled according to the
total angular momentum F⃗ = I⃗ + L⃗ + S⃗, with I, L, and S being the
nuclear spin, orbital, and electron spin angular momenta, respectively.
In this ingenious scheme, Sr atoms
are loaded into the optical chamber, imaged to locate them in space,
“tweezed” to a specified spatial arrangement, laser-cooled
(for example, using light at ∼690 nm) at the 3PJ to 1S0 transition, a, and then individually
manipulated. The readout of the spin state of each qubit (atom) is
done via fluorescence at 461 nm. Detection of the nuclear spin is
accomplished by driving with a π-pulse the |1S0, F = 9/2, mF = −9/2⟩ nuclear spin ground state to the |3P0, F = 9/2, mF = −9/2⟩ upper state, thereby placing all the polarization
into the upper state; the subsequent fluorescence image will appear
darker, yielding selective spin readout. The nuclear spin states of
individual atoms are thereby encoded, the prerequisite for nuclear
spin quantum computing. This contemporary example demonstrates the
synergism between methods to develop and understand optical paths
to hyperpolarization (e.g., NV centers) and the emergence of qubits
for quantum computing.
 

4.

## SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
Nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy and imaging are handicapped
by low sensitivity, and this is a barrier to many applications. The
signal-to-noise ratio achievable in NMR experiments is constantly
improving as we employ higher-field NMR magnets, design more sensitive
detectors (e.g., cryoprobes), and invent more efficient excitation
and acquisition strategies. However, these three streams of development
are drying up, and it is still difficult to imagine carrying out NMR
spectroscopy on dilute gases in the atmosphere, studying the dynamics
of a single protein molecule, or imaging cell cycles or enzyme function
in the body.
Hyperpolarization can enhance the signal in an
NMR experiment by
orders of magnitude, and is already radically shifting the boundaries
of what is possible with NMR. Hyperpolarization is almost as old as
NMR itself, and the past decades have seen a multitude of hyperpolarization
techniques develop and mature at different rates, opening new possibilities
along the way. In addition to a quest for a better understanding of
hyperpolarization mechanisms and developing more powerful hyperpolarization
approaches, some of the major directions in this field are an enhanced
analysis of composition, structure and function of complex samples,
production and application of useful hyperpolarized agents and tracers,
development of ultrasensitive detectors and signal detection schemes
for magnetic resonance and beyond, and exploration of new physics
and chemistry. For instance, it is now possible to undergo MRI with
hyperpolarized tracers in a hospital, whether it be lung imaging with
hyperpolarized 129Xe, or metabolic imaging with hyperpolarized
[1-13C]pyruvate. Biomedical applications clearly provide
a major impetus for the development of hyperpolarization techniques,
and a broader translation of hyperpolarization technology to clinical
research and adaptation to clinical practice and environment are certainly
warranted. On the spectroscopy side, hyperpolarization has become
a widely used tool for protein structure elucidation, surface characterization,
materials analysis, and studies of chemical reactions. One exciting
current direction is sample miniaturization, from microliter-volume
to single-cell, and even single-spin detection schemes. Beyond the
realm of applications, new physical phenomena have emerged from the
orders-of-magnitude enhanced spin sensitivity, such as the surprising
many-body physics of arrays of coupled spins, detectors that probe
fundamental cosmological questions, and the complex role symmetry
and quantum statistics play in chemical reactions.
Despite all
this, there are still fundamental and practical limitations
to applications of hyperpolarization. Because of the specificity of
the physical and chemical methods employed to create hyperpolarization,
there is not a single hyperpolarization technique which has the potential
to become a universal solution for each and every need in the near
future. The existing techniques differ in many aspects, including
the range of hyperpolarizable substances, required instrumentation
and experimental conditions, implemented protocols and procedures
for preparation and utilization of hyperpolarized substances, applications
they target, etc. At the same time, opportunities for cross-fertilization
across the field certainly exist: there are numerous common aspects,
from fundamental phenomena to key objectives and challenges and experimental
implementations. Identifying them can be useful for the entire field
to move forward faster.
One of the key challenging goals common
to all hyperpolarization
techniques is maximizing achievable polarization levels toward the
ultimate 100% polarization, with the highest NMR signal enhancement
providing much more flexibility in experimental design and information
content of such experiments. By now, several techniques have demonstrated
the capability of providing polarizations well above 50%, albeit for
a select few suitable targets, while other techniques must still overcome
various specific challenges and limitations to achieve comparable
polarization levels. While there is no common recipe for the entire
hyperpolarization field to achieve this goal, there are some general
approaches that can be shared for attaining higher polarization levels
without compromising utility in the intended applications. In particular,
proper design of molecular topology and sample morphology, optimization
of sample formulation (e.g., concentrations and distribution of polarizing
agents/centers and target spins), and isotopic substitution can be
the effective tools. Development of reliable theoretical models is
also essential in this respect. While applications such as complex
mixture analysis or detection of low-concentrated species aim at achieving
the largest NMR signal enhancement, other applications such as production
of hyperpolarized tracers may require maximizing molar polarization
(the product of polarization and concentration of the target compound)
or the production volume.
A common theme for essentially all
hyperpolarization techniques
is to find ways to polarize a broader range of substances. Once again,
while universal solutions elude researchers, examples of approaches
that can be used more broadly across the entire field are an introduction
of polarizable functionalities by chemical modification, polarization
transfer by means of physical (e.g., spin diffusion or NOE) or chemical
(e.g., proton exchange) mechanisms from polarized spins to those that
cannot be polarized directly, and polarization transfer across interfaces
between different materials and different phases.
Another common
multifaceted aspect is the transient nature of the
hyperpolarized states of spins due to relaxation processes. Relaxation
times of spins significantly affect polarization buildup rates as
well as the steady-state polarization levels that can be achieved.
In particular, long relaxation times may be a disadvantage because
the time to achieve maximum polarization levels may become impractically
long. At the same time, very short relaxation times during polarization
buildup often result in reduced steady-state polarization levels.
Sometimes, achieving higher polarization levels at accelerated buildup
rates is possible by transferring polarization between spins of different
types. Alternatively, adjustment of relaxation times may be desirable
to rapidly achieve high levels of hyperpolarization. Similarly, while
reduced relaxation times may be beneficial for hyperpolarization production,
they are often detrimental for the subsequent use of hyperpolarized
substance. To “decouple” the incompatible relaxation
requirements of the hyperpolarization preparation and utilization
stages, some techniques efficiently modify spin relaxation rates by
dilution/trapping/immobilization/filtration/quenching/precipitation
of a relaxation agent or by adjusting experimental conditions such
as magnetic field, temperature, aggregation state, etc.
Obviously,
long relaxation times are advantageous once a hyperpolarized
system is produced, to have ample time to observe the enhanced NMR
signals of the hyperpolarized substances or the products of their
transformation. Furthermore, in many cases hyperpolarization is not
produced in situ, and the hyperpolarized substance may need to travel
a certain distance before detection, be it a simple sample transfer
from a polarizer to an NMR or MRI probe, delivery to a specific tissue/organ
in a living organism after administration, or a long-distance transportation
of a prepolarized material to an NMR/MRI facility. Relaxation losses
during transport can be substantial, and to preserve as much polarization
as possible, careful planning and design of the sample composition
and conditions (e.g., temperature, magnetic fields) along the delivery
path is required.
In many cases, low-γ heteronuclei (e.g., 13C, 15N) have much longer relaxation times compared
to 1H, and therefore polarization transfer to such nuclei
is a common
approach for extending hyperpolarization lifetime in a condensed phase.
We note, however, that for gases the situation may be quite different.
In contrast to 3He and 129Xe characterized by
very long relaxation times, for polyatomic molecules in the gas phase
the relaxation is in general faster than in condensed phase, and relaxation
of heteronuclei may be much faster than that of protons.
There
is also a remarkable possibility to extend polarization lifetimes
beyond the conventional times of spin relaxation through the use of
the unique properties of long-lived spin states, in which a correlated
spin state is often protected by molecular symmetry and thus preserved
for times far exceeding the conventional spin relaxation times. While
this approach is not universal, it is certainly worth exploring when
one expects long hyperpolarized sample delivery times and/or intends
to monitor spin dynamics or sample evolution over extended periods
of time.
Another common challenge is the most efficient use
of hyperpolarization
after it is created. In multishot experiments such as multidimensional
NMR or kinetic/imaging studies, small flip angles are often used to
keep sufficient polarization for subsequent excitations. An alternative
approach is based on sample repolarization (in situ or with sample
recirculation or shuttling) or a continuous hyperpolarization production
(with or without refreshing the sample), often requiring a high degree
of polarization reproducibility. Some rapid MR imaging sequences rely
on the formation of a steady-state for sample magnetization; they
are designed for spin systems which are initially at thermal equilibrium.
For a hyperpolarized initial state, formation of a true steady-state
is not possible unless hyperpolarization can be generated continuously
during NMR signal detection. Such sequences may need to be redesigned
for their efficient application to hyperpolarized samples. An antiphase
NMR signal shape produced by some of the techniques results in a partial
signal cancelation upon its broadening and, if not accounted for,
can be particularly devastating in the presence of strong magnetic
field gradients used in MRI.
As the majority of techniques cannot
be applied efficiently to
pure chemicals, it is often desirable or even mandatory to purify
hyperpolarized substances after they are produced. In this respect,
applications in vivo are likely the most demanding in terms of sample
purity and biocompatibility. Free (bi) radicals and transition metal
complexes are the examples of the sample components essential for
some hyperpolarization processes but undesirable in the final sample.
Various strategies to remove or neutralize them are being developed,
including immobilization on porous solids with subsequent filtration,
phase separation, quenching, scavenging with properly functionalized
sorbents, etc. In addition, organic solvents, which are potentially
toxic, often yield substantially higher polarization levels than obtained
in an aqueous medium. Thus, extraction of the hyperpolarized compound
accompanied by phase separation or purification by precipitation may
need to be implemented. The presence of other impurities may need
to be carefully considered, including side products and unreacted
material in the chemistry-based hyperpolarization process.
Going
further, a broader range of accessible experimental conditions
is desired, both for production and for utilization/observation of
hyperpolarization. Often, an increase in polarization levels may be
achieved by going to more challenging conditions (e.g., cryogenic
temperatures, elevated pressures, stronger magnetic fields, larger
sample irradiation power), and this is certainly warranted for state-of-the-art
experiments or for operation of specialized hyperpolarization facilities
that may replace on-site production of hyperpolarized agents that
sustain long hyperpolarization lifetimes. In addition, while hyperpolarization
may not require higher magnetic fields to achieve stronger spin polarization,
advanced NMR and MRI instrumentation is nevertheless attractive for
achieving the increased spectral and spatial resolution. At the same
time, to promote accessibility of the hyperpolarization techniques
for everyday practice, they need to be made more affordable. Thus,
further efforts are required to reduce the cost of equipment and make
it compact, reduce consumption of expensive consumables, implement
milder (e.g., ambient) conditions for delicate samples, provide higher
turnover rates, etc. Conjugation with benchtop NMR spectrometers and
other compact and/or portable NMR and MRI devices for signal detection
is becoming increasingly popular. Furthermore, hyperpolarization provides
the required sensitivity enhancement for performing NMR experiments
at zero-to-ultralow magnetic fields (ZULF NMR), a rapidly emerging
magnetic resonance modality with a broad range of new and exciting
possibilities.
One of the more challenging aspects of hyperpolarization
when applied
to sample analysis is in retaining the quantitative aspect of NMR.
This means creating equal polarization levels of different components
in a hyperpolarized sample, and even perhaps achieving the same polarization
levels between samples polarized on different days. This challenge
is further complicated by relaxation: even if quantitative polarization
levels on all spins in an ensemble can be achieved, they will relax
at different rates prior to signal acquisition, leading again to unequal
polarizations. It may be expedient to first target a pseudoquantitative
approach, in which the polarization levels of all spins in a mixture
are not equal, but the proportional polarization on each species is
known in advance and can be factored in.
There is thus plenty
of room for further optimization of the existing
hyperpolarization techniques and making them more universal, including
development of more efficient polarizing agents, refinement of the
hyperpolarization equipment and protocols, and minimization of losses
at all stages, i.e., during production, delivery, sample purification,
quality control and utilization. Yet one of the objectives of this
review is to demonstrate that, while the number of known sources of
hyperpolarization remains quite limited ( ; ), introduction of new hyperpolarization techniques
is inevitable through the broader and more sophisticated uses of available
hyperpolarization sources. Such new possibilities, overlooked so far,
will certainly emerge. In particular, polarization sources like circularly
polarized light and nuclear spin isomers of polyatomic molecules currently
appear underutilized.
Given the remarkable fundamental and practical
developments outlined
in this review, it is clear that this field will continue expanding,
contributing substantive new scholarship in spin fundamentals, as
well as new technologies for implementation and applications. New
applications and discoveries remind us that NMR, though an old methodology,
remains young in its potential for new science.

## Acknowledgments
J.E. thanks Román Picazo-Frutos for providing
feedback on parts of the text and Christian Bengs and Malcolm H. Levitt
for stimulating discussions. J.E., D.B., and S.J. received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No.
766402. J.E. was supported in part by a Fundació Bosch Aymerich
(FBA) fellowship through the Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology,
and Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 101063517. D.B.
is grateful for useful discussions and critical input from Victor
Acosta, Andrey Jarmola, Muhib Omar, Alex Retzker, and Huijie Zheng,
and acknowledges the support of the work by the Cluster of Excellence
“Precision Physics, Fundamental Interactions, and Structure
of Matter” (PRISMA+EXC 2118/1) funded by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) within the German Excellence Strategy (Project ID
39083149), by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (project Dark-OST,
grant agreement No. 695405), and by the DFG Reinhart Koselleck project.
D.B. was supported in part by the DFG, projects # 465084791 and #
505655990. T.P. thanks Vasyl Denysenkov for his contributions to this
work and the German Research Society (DFG) for funding. J.M. thanks
the Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (NWO),
the Volkswagen-Stiftung, and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
for longstanding support. J.E., D.B., and I.V.K. thank Dr. John Blanchard
for helpful discussions. I.V.K. thanks the Russian Ministry of Science
and Higher Education (Contract No. 075-15-2021-580) for financing
purchase of equipment and Russian Science Foundation (RSF Grant No.
22-43-04426) for financial support of research, and Dr. David Neuhaus
for useful discussions of NOE. A.L. has received funding from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under Grant Agreement No. 101008500 (“PANACEA”). S.J.
has also received support and funding from the ENS-Lyon, the French
CNRS, Lyon 1 University, Bruker Biospin, and the European Research
Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program (ERC Grant Agreement No. 714519/HP4all). J.A.R.
acknowledges support from the U.S. Department of Energy through Grant
No. BES-DE-SC0020638. S.C. acknowledges support from the National
Institutes of Health (Grants R01GM125995 and S10OD012245) and from
the National Science Foundation (Grants MCB 2124672 and CBET 1912259).
E.Y.C. acknowledges the support from NIBIB R01EB029829, NSF CHE-1904780,
DOD CDMRP under W81XWH-20-10576, NHLBI R21HL154032. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

## Biographies
James Eills obtained his Bachelor
of Chemistry degree from the
University of Southampton in 2014, and then carried out his Master’s
research at UC Berkeley under the supervision of Prof. Dmitry Budker
and Prof. Alex Pines. He returned to Southampton to complete a Ph.D.
with Prof. Malcolm H. Levitt FRS developing hyperpolarization techniques.
In 2018, he joined the group of Prof. Dmitry Budker as a postdoctoral
researcher to work on zero-field NMR. Since 2022 he has been working
as a Marie Curie Postdoctoral Fellow with Dr. Irene Marco-Rius at
the Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia, applying microfluidic
hyperpolarization methods for diagnostics and precision medicine.

Dmitry Budker obtained his undergraduate
degree from Novosibirsk
State University in 1985 and Ph.D. in Physics from UC Berkeley in
1993 advised by Prof. Eugene D. Commins. From 1995, he has been on
the physics faculty at UC Berkeley. In 2014, he became a Matter-Antimatter
Section Leader at the Helmholtz Institute Mainz and a University Professor
at the Johannes Gutenberg University. His research interests span
tests of fundamental symmetries of nature, spectroscopy of complex
atoms, searches for dark matter, sensitive magnetometry in the lab,
in the field and in the sky, physics and applications of color centers
in diamond, and zero- to ultralow-field NMR. He is a coauthor of five
books and over 350 research papers and reviews.

Silvia Cavagnero studied chemistry at the “La Sapienza”
University in Rome (Italy) where she received her undergraduate degree
(Laurea) in 1988. She then moved to the US where she got a Master’s
degree from the University of Arizona (Tucson, AZ) with Victor J.
Hruby in 1990. She later earned a Ph.D. in Chemistry at the California
Institute of Technology (CALTECH, 1996) under the guidance of Sunney
Chan, working on the conformational dynamics of hyperthermophilic
proteins. At Caltech, she learned NMR theory with Dan Weitekamp and
Sunney Chan. She did a postdoc with Peter Wright at the Scripps Research
Institute (La Jolla, CA) working on the atomic-resolution NMR analysis
of protein folding kinetics via HDX pulse labeling, and on novel bicelle
systems to assess residual dipolar couplings in solution. In 2000,
she moved to the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where she is now
a Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Associate Director
of the Biophysics Graduate Program. Her interests include the development
of optically enhanced technologies, including LC-photo-CIDNP, to increase
NMR sensitivity and to probe protein folding and dynamics in the cellular
environment.

Eduard Y. Chekmenev received
his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry (supervisor
Prof. Richard J. Wittebort) in 2003 at the University of Louisville,
KY (USA). He performed postdoctoral research training at the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Tallahassee, FL under Prof. Timothy
Cross in 2003–2005. He also completed postdoctoral fellowship
at Caltech (under Prof. Daniel P. Weitekamp) and Huntington Medical
Research Institutes (under Dr. Brian D. Ross) in Pasadena, CA (USA)
in 2006–2009. In 2009, Dr. Chekmenev started independent hyperpolarization
research program at Vanderbilt University Institute of Imaging Science
(VUIIS) in Nashville, TN (USA), where he was tenured in 2015. In 2018,
his research program has transitioned from Vanderbilt University Medical
School to Wayne State University in Detroit, MI (USA) to continue
to pursue research projects on translation of MR hyperpolarization
to biomedical imaging applications. He was promoted to full professor
in 2021. Research interests are focused on parahydrogen-induced polarization,
spin exchange optical pumping, and their applications to biomedical
and biomolecular magnetic resonance broadly defined.

Stuart J. Elliott obtained his Bachelor of Science and
Master of
Physics degrees from the University of Warwick in 2013. He was then
a Ph.D. student with Prof. Malcolm H. Levitt FRS at the University
of Southampton until 2017, with his research mainly focused on long-lived
spin order in NMR experiments. In 2018, he joined the group of Prof.
Sami Jannin at Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 as a postdoctoral
researcher in dDNP, before becoming a postdoctoral
researcher in MAS DNP with Prof. Frédéric Blanc at the
University of Liverpool. Since 2021 he has been working at Imperial
College London where he holds the role of NMR Facility Manager. His
current research interests include multiple quantum filtered NMR of
quadrupolar nuclear spins.

Sami Jannin
obtained his Ph.D. in Physics from the EPFL in 2009
advised by Dr. J. Van der Klink. In 2009, he joined the group of G.
Bodenhausen as a postdoctoral research associate and then as a Bruker
DNP research scientist. In 2016, he became a University Professor
at the Very High Fields NMR Center in Lyon where he holds the position
of Deputy Director and heads a research group working on dissolution
dynamic nuclear polarization (dDNP). His research
interests are spanning from the development of new dDNP methods and instrumentation to the exploration of various dDNP-enhanced NMR applications in diverse fields such as
analytical chemistry, drug discovery, and metabolomics.

Anne Lesage is working at the High Field NMR Center
in Lyon, France,
a research unit affiliated with the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), the Université Claude Bernard de Lyon
(UCBL) and the Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon (ENS Lyon),
where she heads a group working on hyperpolarized solid-state NMR.
She received a Master degree of Engineer in 1992 from the Ecole Centrale
de Paris, France and a Ph.D. degree in 1995 on protein structure determination
by solution NMR. She began her permanent position at the CNRS in 1994
in the Chemistry Department of the ENS de Lyon, where she has been
working for more than 20 years, on the development and application
of new solid-state NMR methods. Her main research activities currently
focus on high-field DNP-enhanced NMR under magic angle spinning for
the investigation of surfaces, materials and biomolecules. She is
the coauthor of 200 publications and reviews. She is also leading
the French National High-Field NMR Infrastructure.

Jörg Matysik studied Chemistry at Essen University
where
he obtained his degree (1992) in the group of Prof. B. Schrader working
with vibrational spectroscopy. For his Ph.D. (1995) he investigated
photoreceptors with Raman spectroscopy at the Max-Planck-Institut
für Strahlenchemie in Mülheim/Ruhr. As JSPS and Humboldt
fellow he worked with Raman spectroscopy on heme proteins at the Institute
for Molecular Sciences in Okazaki (Japan). From 1997 to 2012, he has
been at the University of Leiden, initially as Marie-Curie fellow
and Casimir-Ziegler awardee in the NMR group of Prof. H.J.M. de Groot
and later as assistant professor. He was chairman of COST action TD1103
on spin-hyperpolarization (2013–2015). Since 2013, he has been
chair of Molecular Spectroscopy, is director of the Institute of Analytical
Chemistry, and head of the Aufbaustudium “Analytik & Spektroskopie”
at the University of Leipzig. He has been chair of the Fachgruppe
Magnetic Resonance of the German Chemical Society (GDCh) since 2021.

Thomas Meersmann received his Chemistry degree
from the University
of Tübingen, Germany in 1993. He obtained his Ph.D. in 1997
from the University of Lausanne, Switzerland, working on NMR coherence
transfer and relaxation in the group of Professor Geoffrey Bodenhausen.
He became a research fellow at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
(NHMFL) in Tallahassee, Florida and joined Pines group at the University
of California, Berkeley as a Feodor Lynen Fellow of the Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation in 1998. In 2000, he was appointed to a faculty
position at the Chemistry Department of Colorado State University,
and became a tenured Associate Professor in 2006. In 2009, he was
offered his current Professorship in Translational Imaging at the
School of Medicine and the Sir Peter Mansfield Imaging Centre of the
University of Nottingham, UK, and also joined the Department of Electric
and Electronic Engineering at the University of Nottingham at Ningbo,
China in 2018. His work focuses on hyperpolarized noble gases and
MRI contrast development.

Thomas Prisner
studied physics at the University of Heidelberg,
where he received his degree in Physics in 1984. He performed his
experimental degree work at the Max-Planck-Institute of Medical Research
in Heidelberg in the group of Prof. Karl Hausser. He moved for his
Ph.D. studies in physics to the group of Prof. Klaus-Peter Dinse at
the University of Dortmund. After receiving his Ph.D. in Physics in
1988, he worked as postdoctoral researcher in the group of Prof. Robert
Griffin at MIT, MA (USA) until 1990. He performed his Habilitation
in experimental physics at the FU Berlin in 1996. Since 1996 he is
a full professor at the Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry
at the Goethe University in Frankfurt am Main, Germany and member
of the Biological Magnetic Resonance Center in Frankfurt. His research
focuses on method developments in EPR and biomolecular applications
of these methods and exploring the potential of high-field liquid-state
DNP.

Jeffrey A. Reimer received his Bachelor’s
degree (with honors)
in Chemistry from the University of California at Santa Barbara. He
obtained his doctorate in Chemical Physics from the California Institute
of Technology while working with physicists from Xerox PARC examining
the chemistry and the physics of solar cell materials. Prior to his
appointment at as a faculty member at Berkeley, he conducted basic
and applied research in semiconductor science and technology as a
postdoctoral fellow at IBM Research in Yorktown Heights, New York.
His research examines the use of MR and related methods to provide
insight into the chemistry of materials systems aimed at environmental
protection, human sustainability, and technological innovation.

Hanming Yang studied chemistry at University
of Colorado where
he received his Bachelor’s degree in 2016. He then joined the
University of Wisconsin, Madison and worked in the group of Prof.
Silvia Cavagnero, where he received his Ph.D. degree in 2021. His
research interests include sensitivity enhancement in biomolecular
NMR.

Igor V. Koptyug studied physics
at the Novosibirsk State University
where he received his degree in Chemical Physics in 1985. He then
became a junior researcher at the Institute of Chemical Kinetics and
Combustion and received his Ph.D. degree in 1991 there. In 1992–1995
he was a postdoctoral researcher in the photochemistry group of Prof.
N.J. Turro (Columbia University, New York). Since 1995 he has been
working at the International Tomography Center, SB RAS, in various
capacities, where he currently holds positions of Head of Research,
Chief Research Scientist, and a research group leader. He earned his
Dr. Sci. (Habilitation) degree in Catalysis in 2003 and a title of
Professor in 2006, and was elected as a Corresponding Member of the
Russian Academy of Sciences in 2022. His research interests primarily
include signal enhancement in NMR and applications of NMR and MRI
in catalysis research.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00534.
Abbreviations and notation used (PDF)

## Author Contributions
CRediT: James Eills conceptualization, writing-original draft, writing-review
& editing; Dmitry Budker writing-original draft,
writing-review & editing; Silvia Cavagnero writing-original
draft, writing-review & editing; Eduard Y. Chekmenev writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Stuart
J. Elliott writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Sami Jannin writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Anne Lesage writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Jörg Matysik writing-original draft, writing-review
& editing; Thomas Meersmann writing-original draft,
writing-review & editing; Thomas F. Prisner writing-original
draft, writing-review & editing; Jeffrey A. Reimer writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Hanming
Yang writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Igor V. Koptyug conceptualization, project administration,
writing-original draft, writing-review & editing.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): Eduard Y. Chekmenev
has a stake of ownership in XeUS Technologies Ltd.

## Supplementary Material
cr2c00534_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
cr2c00534_si_001.pdf