pmceBioMedicineEBioMedicine2749ebiom101647039eBioMedicine2352-3964ElsevierPMC9535427PMC9535427.1953542795354273620205310.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104278S2352-3964(22)00460-11042781ArticlesSIRPα maintains macrophage homeostasis by interacting with PTK2B kinase in Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and through autophagy and necroptosis
WangDi LinYunkai XuFeihong ZhangHui ZhuXiaoyan LiuZhen HuYuan DongGuanjun SunBingqi YuYanhong MaGuoren TangZhigang LegardaDiana TingAdrian LiuYuan HouJiahouj@live.com DongLiweidonliwei@126.com XiongHuabaoxionghbl@yahoo.com aInternational Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, the Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, National Center for Liver Cancer, Shanghai, ChinabDepartment of Medicine, Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, AmericacInstitute of Immunology and Molecular Medicine, Jining Medical University, Jining Shandong, ChinadThe Eighth Medical Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, ChinaeDepartment of Clinical Laboratory, Shenyang Thoracic Hospital, Shenyang Liaoning, ChinafDepartment of Clinical Laboratory, Shenyang Tenth People's Hospital, Shenyang Liaoning, ChinagNingxia No. 4 People's Hospital, Yinchuan Ningxia, ChinahHunan Chest Hospital, Changsha Hunan, ChinaiProgram of Immunology and Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Center for Diagnostics & Therapeutics, Georgia State University, Atlanta, AmericajDepartment of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan Ningxia, China⁎Corresponding author at: Institute of Immunology and Molecular Medicine, Jining Medical University, Jining Shandong, China. xionghbl@yahoo.com⁎⁎Corresponding author at: International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, the Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. donliwei@126.com⁎⁎⁎Corresponding author at: Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan Ningxia, China. houj@live.com1These three authors contribute equal to this work.
112022031020228541832910427817820212982022692022031020220710202222052024© 2022 The Author(s)2022https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary

## Background
To determine whether SIRPα can be a diagnostic marker of pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) and the molecular mechanism of SIRPα regulating macrophages to kill Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB).

## Methods
Meta-analysis combined with subsequent qRT-PCR, western-blotting and flow cytometry assay were used to detect SIRPα expression in PTB patients. Cell-based assays were used to explore the regulation of macrophage function by SIRPα. SIRPα−/- and wide type macrophages transplanted C57BL/6J mice were used to determine the function of SIRPα on MTB infection in vivo.

## Findings
SIRPα levels are closely correlated with the treatment outcomes among PTB patients. Cell-based assay demonstrated that MTB significantly induces the expression of SIRPα on macrophages. SIRPα deficiency enhances the killing ability of macrophages against MTB through processes that involve enhanced autophagy and reduced necroptosis of macrophages. Mechanistically, SIRPα forms a direct interaction with PTK2B through its intracellular C-terminal domain, thus inhibiting PTK2B activation in macrophages. Necroptosis inhibition due to SIRPα deficiency requires PTK2B activity. The transfer of SIRPα-deficient bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) into wild type mice resulted in a drop of bacterial load in the lungs but an enhancement of inflammatory lung damage, and the combination of ulinastatin and SIRPα−/−→WT treatment could decrease the inflammation and maintain the bactericidal capacity.

## Interpretation
Our data define SIRPα a novel biomarker for tuberculosis infection and underlying mechanisms for maintaining macrophage homeostasis.

## Funding
This work was financially supported by the Chinese National Natural Science Foundation project (No.81401635). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## Keywords
MacrophageNecroptosisAutophagyImmune responseBiomarkerpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Research in context

## Evidence before this study
Macrophages serve as the first line of defense against MTB. SIRPα has been reported to negative regulate the macrophages proinflammatory function.

## Added value of this study
We found that SIRPα forms a direct interaction with PTK2B through its intracellular C-terminal domain and compromises the interaction between PTK2B and SHP-1, thus inhibiting PTK2B activation in macrophages. Inhibited PTK2B by SIRPα could decrease autophagy and enhance necroptosis, which play the key role in intracellular tuberculosis clearance.

## Implications of all the available evidence
Our findings provide exciting insights into the pathogenesis of tuberculosis and suggest that novel therapeutics that block SIRPα might be beneficial in the management of MTB infection, opening a wealth of new possibilities in the treatment of PTB.

Alt-text: Unlabelled box

## Introduction
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) is the pathogen responsible for pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB). Anti-MTB treatments are usually long, and the treatment outcomes are uncertain due to increasing MTB resistance; therefore, the global status of PTB is still a global emergency. One of the clinical problems of PTB is that there are few useful indicators to predict disease activity, therapeutic response, relapse, and mortality. In addition, few markers can distinguish PTB from other lung diseases such as pneumonia and lung cancer. 
Microarrays have been widely used to determine the global differentially expressed genes in response to MTB infection in patients. Unfortunately, there is only modest overlap in the set of genes identified among the studies, probably as a result of multiple factors such as lab-specific effect, region-, and treatment-specific effects. On this understanding, a meta-analysis of multiple microarray data would be a powerful tool to define PTB-associated genes. In this study, by performing a meta-analysis on six PTB blood microarray experiments, we identified a series of targets, among which the signal regulatory protein α (SIRPα, also called CD172a), an immunosuppressive factor, was found to be specifically upregulated during MTB infection.
SIRPα is mainly expressed on myeloid cells such as monocytes/macrophages and dendritic cells. Macrophages act as the first line of defence against MTB by limiting the growth of MTB, and their activity is correlated with MTB clearance. MTB can also successfully modulate the intracellular environment and thus establish a safe niche within host macrophages for its survival. Progression of the active PTB disease is almost universally regarded as a ‘failure’ of the host's immune system to control the infection. This process is usually accompanied by the molecular dysregulation of the critical balance between the macrophages and MTB, which may serve as an instrumental biomarker in determining the outcome of the infection. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the upregulation of the immunosuppressive factor SIRPα in MTB infection could be a means for MTB to escape from macrophage capture. If so, the expression of SIRPα might be closely related to the development and prognosis of PTB.
Many disease markers are also therapeutic targets because they are involved in the regulation of disease progressions. SIRPα is a cell-surface protein, and the cytoplasmic region of SIRPα contains four immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) that, upon ligand binding, become phosphorylated and interact with the SH2-domain-containing tyrosine phosphatases (PTPase) SHP-1 and SHP-2 to mediate various biological functions. Waters et al. reported that peripheral blood cells expressing SIRPα in M. bovis-infected calves proliferated upon in vitro stimulation with ESAT-6/CFP-10, suggesting that SIRPα may have a pivotal role in the immune regulation against MTB. One of the best-documented functions of SIRPα is its inhibitory role in the phagocytosis of host cells by macrophages. van Beek et al. demonstrated that SIRPα acts as a critical negative regulator of the respiratory burst, and therefore inhibits the antimicrobial activities of phagocytes against Salmonella. Baral et al. also showed that SIRPα impairs intracellular killing ability against Burkholderia pseudomallei. Nevertheless, Li et al. showed that SIRPα mutant mice have an increased susceptibility to infection with Salmonella typhimurium, indicating that SIRPα may also be required for successful host defense against infection. These reports indicate that the role of SIRPα in the host's defence against infection is complicated and should be further explored.
In order to evaluate whether SIRPα is a target of anti-MTB immunotherapy, we explored how SIRPα regulates the interaction between macrophages and MTB. In this report, we demonstrated that high levels of SIRPα predict poor treatment outcomes in patients with PTB. Interestingly, we aimed at first at examining the involvement of SIRPα in autophagy in the context of MTB infection, but the results suggested that SIRPα was also involved in necroptosis. As such, SIRPα negatively regulates PTK2B activity, subsequently inhibiting autophagy and promoting necroptosis. Our findings provide exciting insights into the pathogenesis of tuberculosis and suggest that novel therapeutics that block SIRPα might be beneficial in the management of MTB infection, opening a wealth of new possibilities in the treatment of PTB.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics
The human study was approved by the Ethics Committee of all involved hospitals (the Eighth Medical Center, Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) General Hospital (named PLA 309 hospital before 2018) as the lead site, ethical approval #2014GKJ003). Informed consent was obtained from all patients before participation. All experiments were carried out according to the principles of the Helsinki Declaration.
The animal study protocols were prepared before the study and were registered in and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the Eighth Medical Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital (ethical approval #2016GKJ009).

## Meta-analysis
Gene expression data sets were queried from the GEO database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) using key words such as “tuberculosis” and “human” and using either RNA microarrays or RNA high-throughput sequencing platform. The datasets that included latent tuberculosis infections were excluded. For each dataset, we normalized the gene expression profiles using the quantile method (method=”Q”) using the IntClust package in R (3.5.1), filtering out genes with >75% missing values. Differentially expressed genes were analyzed using a t-test in the limma package in R (v3.5.1). Multiple hypothesis correction for p values were determined by using Benjamini and Hochberg method. The statistics and P-values for each gene were obtained in each dataset. The metafor package was used to perform the meta-analysis in six datasets (GSE25534, GSE42832, GSE56153, GSE83456, GSE95563, and GSE107731) that satisfied our criteria. Mixed effect models, Hedges estimator REML and Hunter-Schmidt estimator, were used to evaluate the genes in the six datasets. We used metafor packages (https://wviechtb.github.io/metafor/) to compute the β, SE, Z-values, P-values, I2, and H2 for each gene. The integrated gene expression profiles of the six datasets for significantly differentially expressed genes were clustered and plotted as a heatmap for visualization via the pheatmap and RColorBrewer packages in R (3.5.1).

## Patient samples
For the patients who agree to join this study and meet the inclusion criteria of each disease group in the hospital, each patient was assigned a random sequence generated by Excel (version 2013). Then the included patients were selected by random numerical sequence.
To verify the results of the meta-analysis, blood samples from 15 outpatients with PTB, 15 outpatients with NSCLC, and 15 HCs from the Eighth Medical Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital Hospitals were used for qRT-PCR preliminary testing. To further study the expression patterns of SIRPα in the blood of patients with PTB, 74 inpatients with PTB from the Eighth Medical Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 35 inpatients with PTB from Shenyang Thoracic Hospital, 40 inpatients with PTB from Ningxia No. 4 People's Hospital, 10 inpatients with PTB from the General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, 43 inpatients with PTB from the Hunan Chest Hospital, and 90 HCs, were included. To study the differential diagnostic characteristics of SIRPα, 36 inpatients with PTB extra-PTB, 29 inpatients with PTB NSCLC, 23 inpatients with community-acquired PA, and 23 patients with latent tuberculosis at the Eighth Medical Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital were included.
The inclusion criteria of PTB subjects were described as following: 1) Refer to the gold standard of PTB diagnosis, subjects whose sputum culture was positive; or 2) Subjects whose sputum smear was positive, and imaging diagnosis also indicated PTB; or 3) Subjects who have granulomatous histopathology of transbronchial lung biopsy and consistent clinicoradiological findings. Patients younger than 18 years old or with incomplete admission or follow-up data were excluded from this study. All patients received double-blind and standard treatment according to the Chinese tuberculosis treatment guidelines.
Blood and BAL samples were drawn at admission before the start of the anti-MTB drugs. Clinical data, including age, sex, comorbidities, history of PTB, laboratory data, and results of acid-fast smear, mycobacterial culture, and drug susceptibility test, as well as anti-MTB treatment course and outcomes, were recorded in a standardized case report form. The patients with PTB were followed for at least 6 months after anti-MTB treatment or until death.

## Isolation of human monocytes/macrophages from BAL and blood samples
BAL were isolated by adding the erythrocyte lysate buffer. PBMCs were isolated by density gradient centrifugation using Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA). For those that needed to be stimulated differentiation into macrophages, the cells were cultured in 6-well tissue culture plates (Corning Inc., Corning, NY, USA) at a density of 2 × 106 cells/ml for 7 days in RMPI 1640 medium supplemented with recombinant GM-CSF (10 ng/ml).

## Immunohistochemistry of lung tissues
The tissue sections (3-μm thick) were dewaxed, rehydrated, and immersed in methanol containing 0.3% hydrogen peroxide (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., Beijing, China, #10011218) for 30 min to block endogenous peroxidase activity. The sections were heated in a pressure cooker filled with 10 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic (EDTA, Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA, #34550) buffer (pH 8.0) for 2 min. After cooling, the sections were incubated in 1% blocking serum (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA, #20773) for 30 min to reduce nonspecific binding. Primary SIRPα (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, #13379) or PTK2B phosphorylation (Invitrogen Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA, #44-618G) antibodies were diluted 1:350 and incubated with the sections at 4°C overnight. Sections without antibody incubation were set as negative control. Following incubation with biotinylated secondary antibody (Millipore Corp., Billerica, MA, USA, #20775), the streptavidin-biotin complex/horseradish peroxidase (Millipore Corp., Billerica, MA, USA, #20774) was added. Finally, the signal was developed with diaminobenzidine (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark, #K3468), and the slides were counterstained in haematoxylin. Stained sections were quantified in a blinded manner without prior knowledge of the clinical information using the German immunoreactive score (IRS). IRS was calculated by multiplying the intensity of stain (0-4) with the percentage of positive cells (0-4) and scores ranging from 0 to 16 were obtained. IRS over 8 was considered as "high level", and IRS within 0-8 was considered as "low level".

## Strains and colony-forming unit (CFU) determination
The Bacille Calmette Guerin (BCG) and standard MTB H37Rv strains (ATCC 27294) were purchased from the Beijing Institute for Tuberculosis Control. Ten clinical isolates, which were identified and characterized for their susceptibility to the first line and second-line antibiotics by our team at the Eighth Medical Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital in our previous work, were randomly selected in this work and numbered from A to J (Supplementary Figure S4a). All isolates were cultured using the Middlebrook 7H10 agar medium before use. L. monocytogenes was from the National Center for Medical Culture Collections and was grown on BHI agar plates. E. coli was from the National Center for clinical laboratories and was cultured using LB agar medium. For the CFU determination, tissues or cultured cells were homogenized, and the viable bacteria were grown on the appropriate medium and enumerated by the pour plate method after serial dilution. Colonies of L. monocytogenes were enumerated 24 h after incubation at 37°C. Colonies of BCG were determined 21 days after incubation at 36.5°C.

## Mice
SIRPα−/− mice were constructed and generated in previous reports. RIPK1(-/-) and RIPK3(-/-) mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (West Grove, PA, USA). Wide type C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co. Ltd., Beijing, China. All mice were raised at 21-23°C and 40 ∼ 60% humidity.

## Mice BMDMs preparation
Bone marrow cells were isolated from the tibias and femurs of the mice, and the cells were cultured in a complete DMEM medium supplemented with GM-CSF (10 ng/ml). On day 6 or 7, BMDMs were harvested and seeded in fresh complete DMEM medium at 2 × 106 cells/ml.

## Human macrophages culture and sorting
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated by density gradient centrifugation and macrophages were prepared using published protocols (Specific lipid mediator signatures of human phagocytes: microparticles stimulate macrophage efferocytosis and pro-resolving mediators). Briefly, monocytes were purified using monocyte isolation kit (StemCell Technologies) yielding a 93%-97% CD14+ population. These cells were then cultured in tissue culture plates for 7 days in RPMI 1640 (10% human serum). Macrophages were differentiated using 20 ng/mL GM-CSF for 6 or 7 days. Subsequently, cells were harvested and sorted into SIRPαhigh (CD172a+) and SIRPαlow (CD172a−) subset cells using a FACS-Aria (Becton Dickinson, >98% purity) according to previous report. 

## Cell line culture
Human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells were provided by Hunan Fenghui Biotechnology Co., Ltd (STR profiling was shown in supplementary file), and were cultured in DMEM (Hyclone, Logan, UT) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Hyclone), 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and maintain in 5% CO2 at 37°C.

## Measuring the phagocytosis and killing activity of macrophages on the strains
Measuring the phagocytosis and killing activity of macrophages on the strains was performed according to previous report. Briefly, BMDMs from mice or PBMCs from humans were induced into macrophages by appropriate methods. Subsequently, strains were added to the macrophage cells at MOI (bacteria/cell ratio) of 1:10 and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. Using DMEM medium, cells were washed and fresh DMEM supplemented with 200µg/ml amikacin was added to the cells further for 2 hours to kill extracellular bacilli. After this four-hour phagocytosis period, infected macrophages were washed with PBS and lysed using 0.05% Tween 20 to release internalized bacteria, and the phagocytosis was measured by CFU counting determination of these bacteria. In rest of the wells, amikacin was removed from medium, and infected cells were further incubated for another 24 h. After completion of 24 h, extracellular bacteria were evaluated by CFU counting determination of culture supernatants, and total mycobacterial number (intracellular and extracellular) was assessed by CFU counting determination of whole cell cultures that were lysed according to previous report. Due to differences in initial phagocytosis of bacteria between groups, the total survival of bacteria is presented as fold change in CFU compared to the initially internalized bacteria.

## In vivo PTB modelling and tumour bearing modelling
The 6-8-week-old female C57BL/6J mice, about 20g weight, were pre-numbered, and were randomly divided into three groups, based on the random sequence generated by Excel (version 2013): PTB modelling group; tumour bearing modelling group and healthy control group. For the PTB modelling group, 4-6-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were infected by a transtracheal injection using 0.2 mL of a suspension containing 1 × 103 CFUs of viable BCG or H37Rv cells. The left lung lobes and spleen were removed aseptically on day 28 to identify if the infection was successful. For tumour bearing model, C57BL/6 mice were subcutaneously inoculated with 0.2 ml/each of Lewis cells (1 × 107 cells/ml) below the right forelimb armpit. After 2 weeks, the tumour bearing model was established when the size of the tumour grew to about 65 mm3. Mice receiving equal volume PBS injection were set as the control group. Each treatment group was composed of eight mice, which were kept in a cage. This sample size was determined on the basis of empirical data from pilot or previous experiments, which were sufficient to detect differences as small as 10% using the statistical methods described. Totally 24 mice were used for this experiment. All mice after specific treatment were tested accordingly.

## Macrophage transplantation
The 6-8-week-old female C57BL/6J mice, about 20g weight, were pre-numbered, and were randomly divided into several groups, according to different treatment. Mice were first infected by a transtracheal injection of 0.2 mL of a suspension containing 1 × 103 viable BCG or H37Rv cells, and that receiving equal volume PBS injection were set as the control group. Seven days later, the BCG infected mice, H37Rv infected mice and control mice were injected with GdCl3 (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA; 10 mg/kg) to eliminate macrophages in vivo and received an injection of 107 SIRPα−/- macrophages and the WT controls, together with or without ulinastatin treatment. After 21 days, the mice were sacrificed by CO2 inhalation, to reduce pain, suffering and distress. The left lung lobes were removed aseptically, homogenized, and plated on Middlebrook 7H10 agar medium (supplemented with oleic acid, albumin, dextrose, and catalase) with 10-fold serial dilutions to determine the CFUs. Samples of right lungs were fixed in 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin, and sections were cut and stained with hematoxylin and eosin or Ziehl-Neelsen acid-fast stain for evaluation of tissue pathologic changes or bacillary load in a blinded fashion by a pathologist. Each treatment group was composed of eight mice, which were kept in a cage. This sample size was determined on the basis of empirical data from pilot or previous experiments, which were sufficient to detect differences as small as 10% using the statistical methods described. Totally 96 mice were used for this experiment. All mice after specific treatment were tested accordingly.

## RNA sequencing and analysis
RNA was isolated from about 106 cells with TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA). Total RNA was purified by the Qiagen RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands, #74106). Purified RNA was analyzed on an ND-8000 spectrophotometer (Nanodrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA), agarose electrophoresis, or a 2100-Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to determine the quantity of RNA. Single- and double-stranded cDNA was synthesized from mRNA samples using SuperScript II (Invitrogen Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA). High quality total RNA (1 µg) was used as the starting material. The Truseq RNA sample preparation kit (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA, #RS-200-0048) was used for mRNA purification and fragmentation, first-strand cDNA synthesis, and second-strand cDNA synthesis. The double strands cDNA was purified for end-repair, dA tailing, adaptor ligation, and DNA fragments enrichment. Quantification of the libraries was done using Qubit (Invitrogen Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA, #Q33327) according to the Qubit user Guide. The constructed library was sequenced on a Hiseq 4000 sequencer (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).

## Read alignment and transcript assembly
The paired-end raw reads were aligned using TopHat version 1.2.0, which allows two mismatches in the alignment. The aligned reads were assembled into transcripts using cufflinks 2.0.0. The alignment quality and distribution of the reads were estimated using SAMtools. From the aligned reads, the de novo transcript assemblies were performed to capture the major splice rearrangements and novel variations that occur in the transcriptomes samples using cufflinks version 1.3.036. The cuffcompare program was used to identify transcripts that were identical to the reference human genome (the Ensembl GRCh37.62 B (hg19) reference genome). Further analysis and novel isoform calls were performed through the reconstructed transfrags that comprise novel splice junctions and share at least one splice junction with a reference transcript. The global statistics, which include the distributions of FPKM scores across samples and the dendrogram that shows the relationship between the samples based on the reconstructed transcripts, were analyzed using the cummeRbund package of the cufflinks suite.

## GO and pathway analysis
To associate cellular functions with the set of differential expressed genes, we used Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/) and Reactome pathway analysis (https://reactome.org/).

## Cytotrap yeast two-hybrid analysis
Total RNA was isolated from K562 cells (American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Manassas, VA, USA) using the RNAaqueous kit (Ambion, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, #AM1920) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Total RNA (200 μg) was obtained, and poly(A) RNA was purified using the Poly(A) Purist kit (Ambion, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, ##AM1922) according to the manufacturer's instructions. A total of 5 μg of poly(A) RNA was recovered, and a cDNA library was synthesized and cloned into a pMyr XR vector using the Cytotrap XR library construction kit (Stratagene, Wilmington, DE, USA, #ST200444). The control plasmids for the two-hybrid assay were provided with the kit. The bait plasmid pSOS-HA-NUP98-HOXA9 (pSOS-SIRPα) was constructed by subcloning HA-tagged NUP98-HOXA9 (SIRPα) in-frame from pcDNA3-HA-NUP98-HOXA9. The Cytotrap yeast two-hybrid analysis was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, the mouse lung cDNA library in the pMyr vector and pSOS-HA-NUP98-HOXA9 (pSOS-SIRPα) were co-transformed into the cdc25H yeast strain, plated in a selective medium containing glucose as the carbon source, and incubated at room temperature until the colonies appeared. Colonies were replicated into a selective medium containing galactose as the carbon source and incubated at 37°C until the colonies appeared. Temperature-resistant colonies were isolated, patched into fresh selective plates, grown, and replica-plated again to confirm the growth and eliminate false positives. The patches were grown in a liquid medium to isolate the pMyr plasmid DNA containing the positive clones. The isolated plasmids were amplified in Escherichia coli, and purified DNA was sequenced using primers on both sides of the cDNA insert regions. The cDNA inserts were identified using the National Center for Biotechnology Information BLAST application.

## Flow cytometry
For flow cytometry analysis of cell-surface markers, the cells were stained with antibodies in PBS containing 0.1% (wt/vol) BSA and 0.1% NaN3. Human BD Fc block antibody (BD Biosciences Cat# 564219, RRID:AB_2728082) and purified rat anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (Mouse BD Fc Block™) (BD Biosciences Cat# 553141, RRID:AB_394656) were used to block Fc in human samples and mice samples, respectively. Flow cytometry data were acquired on a FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lake, NJ, USA) or a Beckman Coulter Epics XL benchtop flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA), and data were analyzed with the FlowJo Software (TreeStar, Ashland, OR, USA). For each batch of SIRPα levels determination, flow cytometry was performed on each tested samples and an additional blank control (cell-free control). The mean fluorescence intensity is considered to represent the SIRPα levels. One healthy control sample (one of the healthy controls) was randomly selected to be tested in each batch. The SIRPα level of this healthy control sample was identified as "1", and the normalized SIRPα levels of all other samples was set as the “fold change” relative to that of control sample. The APC linked CD172a (SIRPα) monoclonal antibody (15-414) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 17-1729-42, RRID:AB_1944409), the PE linked CD14 monoclonal antibody (61D3) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 12-0149-42, RRID:AB_10598367) and the PE linked F4/80 monoclonal antibody (BM8) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 12-4801-82, RRID:AB_465923) for flow cytometry were all purchased from eBioscience, Thermo Fisher Scientific.

## Quantitative RT-PCR assay
RNA was extracted with an RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands, #74106), and cDNA was synthesized using SuperScript III RT (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). An ABI 7900 real-time PCR system was used for quantitative PCR, with primer and probe sets obtained from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA, USA). The results were analyzed using the SDS 2.1 software. The expression of each target gene was presented as the “fold change” relative to that of control samples.

## Western blot
The cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed with protein lysate (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). After centrifugation at 5000 × g for 15min at 4°C, the protein concentration was measured with a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Pierce Chemical, Dallas, TX, USA). Fifty microgram aliquots of lysates were loaded on a sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) polyacrylamide 10% gradient gel and transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. The membranes were blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk in Tris-buffered saline, pH 7.4, containing 0.05% Tween 20, and were incubated with primary antibodies (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:5000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. The protein of interest was visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) western blotting substrate (Pierce Chemical, Dallas, TX, USA) and the Chemidoc XRS Gel Documentation System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The primary antibodies used in this study are as follows: CYLD(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 8462, RRID:AB_10949157); β-actin(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3700, RRID:AB_2242334); MLKL(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 37705, RRID:AB_2799118); p-MLKL(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 37333, RRID:AB_2799112); SIRPα for western(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 13379, RRID:AB_2798196); SIRPα for IP: (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-136067, RRID:AB_2188059); iNOS (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 13120, RRID:AB_2687529); SQSTM1(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 39749, RRID:AB_2799160); LC3-I/II(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 12741, RRID:AB_2617131); PTK2B(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3292, RRID:AB_2174097); p-PTK2B(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3291, RRID:AB_2300530); UB (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3936, RRID:AB_331292); GAPDH(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 5174, RRID:AB_10622025); FLAG(Abcam Cat# ab125243, RRID:AB_11001232); Myc(Abcam Cat# ab32, RRID:AB_303599); RIPK1(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3493, RRID:AB_2305314); p-RIPK1(Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 83613, RRID:AB_2800023).

## Cytokine ELISA assay
The supernatants from the cell cultures were collected after activation under various conditions, and the secreted cytokines in the supernatants were measured by ELISA kits. The ELISA kits for IL-12p40 (#PM1240 for mouse and #PD2300B for human), IL-6 (#PM6000B for mouse and PD6050 for human), and TNFα (#PMTA00B for mouse and PDTA00D for human) were purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA).

## Confocal microscopy
Confocal microscopy was performed as described previously. After the appropriate treatments, the cells on coverslips were washed three times with fresh PBS, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X-100 (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) for 10 min, and incubated with LC3 antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, #4108) or LAMP1 antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 3243, RRID:AB_2134478) for 2 h at room temperature. The cells were washed with PBS to remove excess primary antibodies and incubated with secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Nuclei were stained with DAPI for 1 min. After mounting, fluorescence images were acquired using a confocal laser-scanning microscope (Zeiss 780; Carl Zeiss GmbH, Oberkochen, Germany).

## Cell death assay
Cell death was analyzed by propidium iodide staining, followed by flow cytometry. The cells were fixed in cold 70% ethanol for at least 30 min at 4°C. The cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 10 min and resuspended in PBS. The cells were treated with RNase and stained with propidium iodide (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, #BMS500PI), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The cells were analyzed using a FACSCalibur system (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lake, NJ, USA).

## Statistical analysis
We calculated sample size requirement by using PASS software. For clinical sample size determination, COX Regression procedure was used and the parameters were described as following: Power=0.8; Alpha=0.05; P (Overall Event Rate)=0.2; B (Log Hazard Ratio)=1; R-Squared of X1 with other X's=0.18; S (Standard Deviation of X1)=0.571. For mice sample size determination, Two-Sample T-Tests Assuming Equal Variance procedure was used and the parameters were described as following: Power=0.9; Alpha = 0.05; Group Allocation: N1 = N2; μ1 = 5.5; μ2 = 3.8; σ = 0.98. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 24.0 software (SPSS) and GraphPad (Prism 8.0, GraphPad). Descriptive data were summarized as mean (SD). The difference between two group were compared using Student's t-test for continuous variables and using Pearson's Chi-square test for discrete variables. If any continuous variables were non-parametric, Mann-Whitney U-test was employed. Univariate survival analysis was performed by Kaplan-Meier analysis followed by Log Rank testing. The univariate and Multivariate COX proportional hazards regression analysis was used to evaluate the relationship between the gene expression values and the OS of PTB patients. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Role of funding source
Funders did not participate in study design, data collection, data analyses, interpretation, or writing of report.

## Results

## Identification of a set of dysregulated genes in PTB using microarray meta-analysis
By searching the gene expression omnibus (GEO) database, we found that six microarray datasets determined the differential transcriptomes in whole blood samples between patients with PTB and healthy controls (Supplementary Table 1). The raw data were extracted from the website database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/) and were used for the meta-analysis study (Supplementary Dataset 1). A cutoff of meta-P-values at 1E-05 was used to filter the differentially regulated transcripts, and a total of 76 targets were identified ( a upper panel). The KEGG pathway enrichment was performed for the 76 identified targets, and the results indicated that 19 targets were immune system-related genes (ISRGs) ( a below panel). The re-clustered heatmap plot and forest maps of these ISRGs are shown in b and Supplementary Figure S1, respectively. 
Next, we validated whether the above ISRGs could be the potential PTB specific biomarkers. Considering that the imaging characteristics and many molecular characteristics between non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) and PTB patients are usually very similar, which makes it difficult to distinguish PTB from NSCLC, we also compared the ISRGs expression profiles in PTB and NSCLC samples. qRT-PCR was used to test the ISRGs’ mRNA expression in blood samples from 15 outpatients with PTB, 15 outpatients with NSCLC, and 15 healthy controls at the Eighth Medical Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital. We found that although the ISRGs’ mRNA expressions were mostly higher in PTB patients than in the healthy controls, only SIRPα mRNA expression could differentiate PTB from NSCLC ( c, P<0.05 for all, MX2, CD74 and NCKAP1L Mann-Whitney U-test, others student t-test). Therefore, we selected SIRPα to determine its protein expression patterns in the clinical samples of patients with PTB from multiple hospitals.

## Identification of elevated SIRPα levels in monocytes/macrophages of patients with PTB by multicenter clinical sample testing
The multicenter study was conducted at five hospitals, one in China's capital (Beijing), one in Northeast China (Shenyang), one in Central China (Changsha), and two in Northwest China (Ningxia). The clinical characteristics of the included subjects are shown in Supplementary Table 2. There were no significant differences between patients with PTB and healthy controls regarding age, sex, and body mass index (BMI). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and bronchoalveolar lavage leukocytes (BALs) samples were collected from all subjects, and western blotting analysis demonstrated that the SIRPα protein expression was significantly higher in both PBMCs (P =0.0244, student t-test) and BALs (P =0.0101, student t-test) of patients with PTB ( d). Flow cytometry demonstrated that the monocytes/macrophages of both PBMCs (P <0.001, student t-test) samples and BALs (P < 0.001, student t-test) samples ( e, Supplementary Figure S2) from the patients with PTB also had significantly higher SIRPα levels.
Furthermore, we found that SIRPα expression in blood monocytes/macrophages could distinguish active PTB from latent MTB (P =0.0184, student t-test), NSCLC (P <0.001, student t-test), and infectious pneumonia (PA) subjects (P =0.0394, student t-test)), but the differences between PTB patients and extrapulmonary tuberculosis patients (P =0.1486, Mann-Whitney U-test) did not reach statistical significance ( f).
We then determined the predictive value of SIRPα expressions on PTB prognosis. We assigned the 203 PTB patients to the high SIRPα expression group (SIRPα-H group) and low SIRPα expression group (SIRPα-L group) based on the blood flow cytometry results for monocytes/macrophages and using the median expression of SIRPα as the cutoff value (normalized SIRPα median = 1.48). SIRPα expression could predict 6-month mortality ( g, P<0.001, Kaplan-Meier). Furthermore, during the initial 2 months of anti-MTB treatments, the sputum smear conversion rate (P<0.001, Kaplan-Meier) and cough conversion rate (P<0.001, Kaplan-Meier) were significantly lower in the SIRPα-high group than in SIRPα-low patients ( h). Moreover, SIRPα expression positively correlated with blood disseminated tuberculosis and cigarette use (Supplementary Table 3). These data indicated that high SIRPα expression was correlated with poor treatment outcomes among patients with PTB. To exclude the influence of therapeutic techniques on treatment outcomes, we allocated the patients with PTB according to the hospitals they were visiting. Expectedly, there were no significant differences in the treatment outcomes among hospitals (data not shown). Finally, to determine the prognostic value of SIRPα with regards to outcome, we performed Cox proportion-hazard regression analyses. The univariable analyses demonstrated that several factors, including SIRPα expression, were significant predictors of mortality (Supplementary Table 4). As SIRPα showed association with blood-disseminated tuberculosis and a history of cigarette smoking, a multivariable analysis was performed to assess the independence of the prognostic effect of SIRPα. The results showed that SIRPα, together with blood disseminated tuberculosis pattern, acid-fast staining grade before treatment, and cough grade before treatment, was strongly associated with 6-month mortality (Supplementary Table 5).
Collectively, the above clinical data suggested that SIRPα expression in PBMCs and BALs might have a close relationship with PTB and might be an indicator to distinguish it from other diseases, but the mechanisms involved require additional exploration.

## Induced SIRPα expression by MTB suppresses the macrophage phagocytosis and killing abilities against MTB
Therefore, we next used BCG- (P<0.001 for BAL and P = 0.0017 for PBMCs, student t-test) and H37Rv- (P<0.001 for BAL and P<0.001 for PBMCs, student t-test) infected mice to explore the effects of MTB on SIRPα expression. Both BCG- and H37Rv-infected mice showed increased SIRPα expression in PBMCs and BALs, while the SIRPα expression in lung cancer mice (P = 0.037 for BAL and P = 0.0061 for PBMCs) was significantly lower than that of the healthy control group (Supplementary Figure S3a-b). The mouse model results confirmed the clinical findings and prompted us to investigate whether SIRPα could regulate the anti-MTB immunity of macrophages.
Hence, we cultured the PBMCs from three random HC blood each batch, with GM-CSF to promote differentiation into macrophages (marker: CD14+), and sorted the cells into CD14+SIRPαhigh and CD14+SIRPαlow subset. SIRPα expressions in these two subsets were confirmed by western blotting assay (data not shown), and these two subsets were cultured again, with BCG or H37Rv challenge at MOI of 10. The phagocytosis (P = 0.0389 for BCG and P = 0.0462 for H37Rv) and killing ability (P = 0.0444 for BCG and P = 0.0209 for H37Rv, student t-test) against BCG or H37Rv of SIRPαlow macrophages was stronger than that of the SIRPαhigh group ( a-b). Meanwhile, the pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as COX2 (P = 0.0311 for BCG and P = 0.0367 for H37Rv), IL-6 (P = 0.0100 for BCG and P = 0.0066 for H37Rv, student t-test), and TNFα (P = 0.0286 for BCG and P = 0.0255 for H37Rv, student t-test) in BCG- or H37Rv-stimulated SIRPαlow macrophages were significantly higher than those of SIRPαhigh macrophages ( c). Subsequently, we used SIRPα−/− and wild type mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) to generate macrophages, and obtained similar results to those of human macrophages, which all indicated that SIRPα plays a negative regulatory role in macrophage phagocytosis and killing ability against MTB. ( d-f, P<0.05 for all, student t-test). 
We used 10 clinical MTB strains (strains A-J, Supplementary Figure S4a), including multidrug-resistant strains and extensively drug-resistant strains, to challenge the macrophages, and found that the phagocytosis and killing ability of macrophages was similar among different strains (Supplementary Figure S4b-e, P<0.05 for all, student t-test). And, this function was also seen against other intracellular bacteria, such as Listeria spp. (Supplementary Figure S4f-i, P<0.05 for all, student t-test).
We then performed RNA-sequencing assays to determine transcriptional differences between CD14+SIRPαhigh and CD14+SIRPαlow macrophages, and between wild type and SIRPα−/- macrophages (Raw data was uploaded in http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/848343, BioProject ID: PRJNA848343). Volcano plot displays the number of genes with significant differences between human CD14+SIRPαhigh macrophages and CD14+SIRPαlow macrophages and between mice WT and SIRPα−/− macrophages ( g). The identified targets varied greatly between humans and mice, and therefore we used a Venn graph to identify the overlapping series ( h). The clustering of the overlapping targets revealed that besides the cytokines, SIRPα might also regulate the expression of autophagy- and necrosis-related genes ( i).

## SIRPα deficiency blocks necroptosis to enhance the killing against MTB
RNA-sequencing results suggested that SIRPα regulates macrophages necrosis. Consistently, propidium (PI) staining demonstrated that SIRPα−/− macrophages showed less H37Rv induced necrosis than WT macrophages ( a, P<0.001, student t-test). In MTB infection, macrophage necrosis is typically accompanied by extracellular bacterial spread. Here, extracellular MTB loads were slightly lower in SIRPα−/− macrophages 4 days after infection, which is correlated with the necrosis rate ( b, P = 0.0379, student t-test). 
Necroptosis is a type of programmed necrosis that requires signalling through a Receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1)/Receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3)/ Mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL)-dependent pathway. CYLD is an important necroptosis element and has been reported to be cleaved by Lipopolysaccharides (LPS). Western blot here confirmed that H37Rv stimulation had similar effect on CYLD as LPS, and CYLD level was decreased in SIRPα−/− macrophages under both LPS (P<0.001, student t-test) and H37Rv (P<0.001, student t-test) stimulation ( c-d). Meanwhile, we found that RIPK1−/- and RIPK3−/- macrophages decreased the total MTB survival rate at 24 h after the BCG, H37Rv, or clinical MTB strains challenge when compared to the wild type controls (Supplementary Figure S5a-b, P<0.05 for all, student t-test), indicating that necroptosis inhibition is a benefit for MTB killing, which is consistent with a previous report. These above results lead us to ask whether necroptosis pathway mediates the SIRPα function on MTB.
Cells undergo necroptosis when stimulated with low doses of LPS or bacteria in the presence of benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethyl ketone (zVAD-fmk). In this study, we found that the necroptosis marker, phosphorylated MLKL, was significantly induced by a low dose of LPS (1 ng/mL) or H37Rv (0.1 MOI) stimulation, and it was decreased in SIRPα−/− macrophages, compared with the wild type group (P<0.001 for both LPS and H37Rv treatment, student t-test), whereas the expression of total MLKL (P = 0.5462 for LPS treatment and P = 0.7768 for H37Rv treatment, no statistical difference) was not affected ( e-f). Similarly, LPS- or H37Rv-induced necroptosis was significantly attenuated in SIRPα−/− macrophages, compared with the wild type controls ( g-h, P<0.001 for both LPS and H37Rv treatment, student t-test). We blocked the necroptosis with a RIPK1 inhibitor, Necrostatin-1 (NEC-1), and the data indicated that blocking necroptosis could enhance the phagocytosis (P = 0.3438, no statistical difference) bactericidal ability (P = 0.5322, no statistical difference) of wide type (WT) and SIRPα−/- macrophages to similar levels ( i-j). These results indicated that necroptosis plays an essential role in mediating the SIRPα functions on bactericidal ability.

## SIRPα deficiency triggers autophagy of macrophages under MTB infection
On the other hand, autophagy has been reported as one of the most important means to combat exogenous infections. Since the RNA-sequencing results from g showed that autophagic process might also be regulated by SIRPα, we therefore explored the role of autophagy in MTB infection. a-b showed that SIRPα−/- could enhance the co-localization of H37Rv with microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) positive autophagosomes (P =0.0250) and lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1) positive lysosomes (P =0.0193), as revealed by confocal microscopy. Furthermore, the expression of SQSTM1 increased within 18 h after H37Rv challenge (P<0.001, student t-test), while significantly decreased in SIRPα−/- macrophages when compared to wild type cells (P<0.001, student t-test), and iNOS was enhanced (P<0.001, student t-test) at the same time points ( c). Interestingly, treatment with the anti-inflammatory factor IL-4 reduced the SQSTM1 and iNOS expression significantly in the two groups to the same levels ( c, P =0.8329, no statistical difference), indicating that SQSTM1 enhancement by SIRPα deficiency might be an inflammation-dependent event. Furthermore, the autophagy flux inhibitor bafilomycin A1 (Baf A1) was used to detect the effect of SIRPα on the autophagy marker LC3-II. Here, we showed that Baf A1 increased LC3-II expression in SIRPα−/- macrophages (P<0.001, student t-test), compared with the WT macrophages ( d), indicating that SIRPα deficiency enhanced autophagy. 
The relationship between SIRPα and autophagy is predictable, because the pro-inflammatory environment produced by SIRPα deficiency contributes to the occurrence of autophagy. However, it was initially unexpected that SIRPα deficiency could suppress necroptosis since many of SIRPα deficiency-induced cytokines, such as TNFα, have been reported to mediate the enhancement of necroptosis. Previous literatures reported that autophagy process inhibits the occurrence of necroptosis, while necroptosis process can promote autophagy, indicating that there is a negative feedback crosstalk between autophagy and necroptosis. Here, when we use 3-methyladenine (3-MA) to block autophagy, the enhanced phagocytosis and killing ability against H37Rv of SIRPα(-/-) macrophage was partly reversed, but still higher than in wild type cells ( e-f, P = 0.0476 for phagocytosis and P = 0.0430 for killing ability), and interestingly, the phagocytosis and bactericidal ability of wild type and SIRPα−/- macrophages was enhanced to similar level (P = 0.4041 for phagocytosis and P = 0.8700 for killing ability, no statistical difference) after necroptosis was blocked by NEC-1, no matter whether 3-MA was added or not ( e-f), suggesting that necroptosis decreasing, rather than autophagy enhancement, is the main way to mediate SIRPα−/− function against MTB.

## SIRPα intracellular tail binds directly to PTK2B
The above experiments showed that SIRPα affects necroptosis and autophagy. Having clarified some of the functional impacts of SIRPα deficiency in macrophages, we then sought to understand the direct molecular mechanisms behind its activity. SIRPα is a cell surface protein with an intracellular tail that contains the inhibitory ITIM motif domains. To identify possible interaction partners of this domain, we used a CytoTrap yeast two-hybrid assay, in which the interaction between the target and the SIRPα intracellular tail occurs in the cytoplasm, in accordance with previous reports. Several positive clones were sequenced and identified by BLAST ( a). Protein tyrosine kinase 2B (PTK2B) (also called PYK2) was one of the positive targets and confirmed by the clone growth ( a-b), indicating that PTK2B has the potential to interact with SIRPα directly. We further confirmed the interaction by coimmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) of endogenously expressed SIRPα with PTK2B protein from mouse BMDMs, and this interaction could be enhanced under H37Rv treatment ( c, P<0.001, student t-test). Next, we constructed the Flag-tagged full-length SIRPα vector, together with mutants carrying a deletion of 87 amino acids at the cytoplasmic tail (SIRPα-∆87) or specific phosphorylation site mutations in the ITIM domain ( d) and transfected them into 293T cells. Co-IP of exogenous SIRPα with endogenous PTK2B demonstrated that most of the phosphorylation site mutations in the ITIM domain could completely inhibit the binding of SIRPα and PTK2B (P<0.001, student t-test). In contrast, the Y1 mutation could only slightly weaken the binding of these two proteins ( e, P = 0.0479, student t-test), indicating that the Y1 site has poor participation in SIRPα-PTK2B binding. 

## The inhibition of necroptosis and enhancement of killing against MTB by SIRPα deficiency requires PTK2B activities
We hypothesized that SIRPα might regulate PTK2B activities because of the binding. We found that PTK2B phosphorylation was significantly decreased under H37Rv treatment for 2 h (P<0.001, student t-test), whereas the PTK2B phosphorylation levels were significantly higher in SIRPα−/− macrophages (P<0.001, student t-test), compared with the WT controls ( a). Meanwhile, the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (also a ubiquitination inhibitor) reversed the H37Rv function on PTK2B phosphorylation ( b, P<0.001, student t-test). Furthermore, the ubiquitination degradation levels of PTK2B were decreased in the SIRPα−/− group, compared with the wild type controls ( c, P<0.001, student t-test). The above results indicated that SIRPα deficiency upregulate the PTK2B phosphorylation and inhibit its ubiquitination degradation, and therefore play its biological and immunological functions. 
We randomly selected PTB patients with typical tuberculous pathological areas (caseous necrosis areas) in their lung tissues from the SIRPα-H group (n = 16) and in the SIRPα-L group (n = 16), respectively, and performed immunohistochemistry for SIRPα and P-PTK2B. Generally, both is highly expressed at the edge of caseous necrotic structure, and low in the necrotic interior ( d, supplementary figure S6a-b). The phosphorylation levels of PTK2B were negatively correlated with the expression of SIRPα, based on the IRS score ( d, P = 0.0325, student t-test), which is consistent with the cytological results.
Since the results above indicated the importance of PTK2B in the function of SIRPα, we transfected PTK2B small interfering RNA (siRNA) (named PTK2B-KD) into WT and SIRPα−/− macrophages. Western blotting assay confirmed the depletion of the PTK2B protein expression in the wild type and SIRPα−/- macrophages ( e, P<0.001, student t-test). Based on this cell model, we confirmed that the MLKL phosphorylation levels decreasing by SIRPα deficiency required PTK2B activity ( f, P<0.001, student t-test). Meanwhile, necroptosis inhibition by SIRPα deficiency was reversed in SIRPα−/− PTK2B-KD cases (P<0.001, student t-test), whereas under NEC-1 treatment, the necroptosis rate of wild type, SIRPα−/−, PTK2B-KD, and SIRPα−/−PTK2B-KD macrophages decreased and tended to be similar ( g, P>0.05, not significant). Similar to the trend of the necroptosis rate, the phagocytosis and killing ability inhibition by SIRPα deficiency was reversed in SIRPα−/− PTK2B-KD cases (P = 0.0021 for phagocytosis and P = 0.0224 for killing ability, student t-test), whereas under NEC-1 treatment, the bacterial load of the wild type, SIRPα−/−, PTK2B-KD, and SIRPα−/−PTK2B-KD macrophages decreased and tended to be similar ( h, P>0.05 for all, not significant), indicating that the function of SIRPα deficiency against intracellular MTB requires necroptosis inhibition by PTK2B activation. Besides, RNA-sequencing data demonstrated that of the genes significantly regulated by SIRPα, a total of 488 targets (19.0%) could be reversed in SIRPα−/−PTK2B-KD cases, indicating that many SIRPα-related signalling, including phagocytosis and intracellular tuberculosis killing pathways, are mediated by PTK2B ( i, P<0.05 for all, student t-test).
Even if the above results indicated the involvement of the SIRPα/PTK2B axis in PTB, the involvement of the SIRPα/PTK2B axis in necroptosis remained to be elucidated. Therefore, we tested several key proteins involved in necroptosis for the ability to bind to PTK2B in order to elucidate the possible regulatory role of the SIRPα/PTK2B axis on necroptosis. Co-IP assays demonstrated that PTK2B could bind to RIPK1 on its death domain directly ( a, P<0.001, student t-test), and this association was confirmed by co-localization of the RIPK1 death domain with PTK2B, as determined by a confocal microscopy assay ( b, P<0.001, student t-test). Previous reports demonstrated that proteins binding to the RIPK1 death domain could inhibit the RIPK1 activation and therefore block RIPK1-mediated necroptosis. Here, we found that in PTK2B-KD macrophages, the RIPK1 phosphorylation levels were significantly higher than that in wild type controls ( c, P<0.001, student t-test). Necroptosis was also proved to be induced by PTK2B-KD transfection (P =0.0011, student t-test) through a RIPK1-dependent manner ( d). Collectively, the above results suggest that SIRPα-PTK2B binding might impact the PTK2B activities. SIRPα knockout thus activated PTK2B activation and decreased the necroptosis processing in macrophage by relieving the inhibitory effect of PTK2B on RIPK1 ( ). 

## Adoptive transfer of SIRPα-deficient macrophage transplants enhances the killing ability against MTB pathogenesis in mouse models
To assess the killing effects of SIRPα against the MTB in vivo, we generated SIRPα−/−, PTK2B-KD, and SIRPα−/−PTK2B-KD macrophages mouse models using bone marrow transplantation, which has been shown to mediate donor engraftment of macrophages by more than 90%, according to a previous report. Wild type mice were reconstituted with wild type (WT→WT), SIRPα−/- (SIRPα−/- →WT), PTK2B-KD (PTK2B-KD→WT), or SIRPα−/−PTK2B-KD (SIRPα−/− PTK2B-KD→WT) macrophages and then were infected with BCG or H37Rv. A decrease in bacterial load in the lungs was seen in SIRPα−/- →WT mice at 28 days after BCG or H37Rv infection (P=0.0017 for BCG and P<0.001 for H37Rv, student t-test), whereas SIRPα−/−PTK2B−/−→WT could reverse (P=0.0011 for BCG and P<0.001 for H37Rv, student t-test) this effect ( a-b). The results indicate that SIRPα deficient macrophage transplant enhances the killing ability against MTB in vivo. Nevertheless, we also found that the side effect of this treatment is that it may increase the inflammatory damage caused by MTB infection. The analysis of total lung mRNA expression at 3 days after BCG infection revealed that SIRPα−/−→WT produced more TNFα and IL-6 and that SIRPα−/−PTK2B−/−→WT could reverse this regulation ( c-d, P<0.05 for all, student t-test). One side effect is that SIRPα−/−→WT resulted in a larger inflammatory area of infected lungs in a PTK2B-dependent manner ( e-g, P<0.001, student t-test). 
Urinary trypsin inhibitor (ulinastatin) is widely used to block inflammatory damage. In this study, ulinastatin was used to pretreat SIRPα−/- →WT mice, followed by BCG or H37Rv infection. Ulinastatin had no effect on the control effect of SIRPα−/−→WT on mycobacteria load (Supplementary Figure 7a-b, P = 0.8146 for BCG and P = 0.8757 for H37Rv) but could significantly downregulate the TNFα and IL-6 mRNA levels (Supplementary Figure 7c-d, P<0.001 for all, student t-test) and decrease the inflammatory area (Supplementary Figure 7e, P<0.001 for all, student t-test) in the lungs of the infected mice. The above results indicated that the combination of ulinastatin and SIRPα−/−→WT might be a potential anti-MTB regimen.

## Discussion
Blood-based biomarkers for PTB have many benefits, such as relative ease of collection, short detection period, simple laboratory requirements, and safety of detectors. The initial goal of this work was to identify novel blood diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for PTB. Many previous efforts have been forwarded to develop PTB biomarkers through genome-wide detection (RNA-sequencing and microarray) (Supplementary Table 1). Such studies acknowledged a variety of limitations, including being single-center studies and using a single platform, which lacks reproducibility and robustness. By using a meta-analysis, we implemented a cross-platform integration, which yielded a series of dysregulated targets in patients with PTB. As expected, MTB infection promotes the secretion of a large number of pro-inflammatory factors. The KEGG analysis and a review of the literature revealed that SIRPα, one of the negative regulators of immunity, was also significantly upregulated. This result gave us an important hint: the immune escape ability of MTB might be partly achieved by the upregulation of SIRPα in macrophages. If so, SIRPα expression patterns might be specific to PTB patients, thus differentiating PTB from other diseases such as cancers because previous reports demonstrated that SIRPα was significantly decreased in several cancer types, compared with healthy controls. , qRT-PCR results of all the genes summarized in B against a small number of clinical samples showed that SIRPα was the only target with the opposite expression trend in PTB and NSCLC, which preliminarily confirmed our prediction. Through analysis of data from multiple centers, we observed that SIRPα-positive macrophages and SIRPα expression were at higher levels in PBMCs and BAL from PTB patients when compared with that of HCs or NSCLC patients. PTB and NSCLC are very similar in the early stage of onset and are challenging to differentiate. This work suggests that it is possible to differentiate the two diseases based on SIRPα expression. Moreover, SIRPα expression could also distinguish PTB patients from pneumonia and latent infection.
Previous literatures reported that bacteria and LPS can regulate SIRPα expression by regulating TLR/NF-kappaB signalling pathway. As we know, MTB also interacts with macrophage by recognizing and acting on the TLR. Therefore, TLR/NF-kappaB may be an important way to mediate the regulation of SIRPα expression by MTB. It was pointed out that there are multiple signalling pathways regulating SIRPα expression. Our ongoing work also found some immunomodulator can regulate SIRPα expression (data not shown). Therefore, how MTB regulates SIRPα needs further study.
As seen in previous studies, , our findings demonstrated that SIRPα deletion enhances the production of inflammatory factors and the clearance of pathogens in macrophage and in mouse models. Since SIRPα negatively regulates various biological functions, these results were expected. Nevertheless, this result was not enough to fully elucidate the regulatory role of SIRPα in host organisms. As we know, macrophages can be generally differentiated into classically activated macrophages (M1) or alternatively activated macrophages (M2) in response to microbial stimuli, but there are many more different macrophage subsets according to the expression characteristics of surface markers. Even in the same person's blood, there are multiple macrophage subtypes at the same time. The highlight of our work is that we elucidated that the CD14+SIRPαlow macrophage subsets play the primary killing role against pathogenic bacteria in human blood. This explains why SIRPαhigh macrophages correlated with poor treatment outcomes of patients with PTB. RNA sequencing determination with both human (CD14+SIRPαhigh vs. CD14+SIRPαlow) and mice macrophages (WT vs. SIRPα−/−), followed by functional clustering of differential genes, identified new cellular functions regulated by SIRPα. Notably, autophagy and necroptosis were confirmed to be SIRPα-regulated cell processes that are required in intracellular MTB clearance.
Autophagy has been demonstrated as a novel mechanism to kill bacteria, and numerous studies emphasize a role for autophagy in macrophages during MTB infection. , , , Necrotic cell death, which can be triggered by TNF-α under certain conditions, has been reported to result in tissue damage and granuloma formation. , Generally, both autophagy and necrosis are enhanced by excess inflammation, and they, in turn, could affect each other. Nevertheless, in the present study, we confirmed that SIRPα deletion promoted the autophagy process but inhibited programmed necrosis. It will be interesting to explore how necroptosis was blocked when many of the necroptosis factors, such as TNFα and iNOS, were enhanced in SIRPα-knockout macrophages.
The intracellular region of SIRPα contains two ITIMs with four tyrosine residues phosphorylated in response to stimuli. This region plays an important role in transmitting downstream signals. The CytoTrap yeast two-hybrid assay and co-IP demonstrated that PTK2B was a promising target, which could bind to the intracellular region of SIRPα. Our results indicate that SIRPα deletion increased the association of SHP1 with PTK2B, leading to the activation of PTK2B. Geng et al. reported that in a hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, overexpression of PTK2B resulted in transfectants developing less necrosis and apoptosis. In this study, we found that PTK2B knockout enhanced necroptosis in wild type macrophages. Meanwhile, the suppression of necroptosis by SIRPα knockout requires PTK2B, suggesting that PTK2B activation might be the cause of SIRPα-knockout-induced necroptosis. PTK2B has been reported to interact with SHP-1 and Src, and this might play an important role in various macrophage functions. While normal SIRPα expression might act to sequester SHP-1 and PTK2B separately, the ablation of SIRPα expression might release both proteins to freely interact to influence necroptosis. After all, several reports have demonstrated that the Src family is involved in necroptosis, , and other PTK2B interaction partners such as Calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) are also associated with necroptosis. Nevertheless, we did not find any direct evidence that PTK2B mediates the regulation of necroptosis. In this study, we found that PTK2B could directly target the RIPK1-DD. Meng et al. showed that RIPK1-DD mediated the activation of RIPK1 to control necroptosis and other cell death types. Kurenova et al. confirmed that proteins binding to RIPK1-DD could negatively regulate the RIPK1 activation and suppress RIPK1-mediated cell death. Our results, combined with these previous reports, indicated that SIRPα-PTK2B-RIPK1 is a new and promising necroptosis-related cell death signalling. This result can explain the molecular mechanism of SIRPα regulating PTB progression since we confirmed the important role of necroptosis in the bactericidal effect of macrophages against MTB. On the other hand, this finding can also be used for reference in the study of tumour cell survival and death switch regulation.
Different cell death forms have different effects on host-MTB interaction. Generally, apoptosis and autophagy positively mediate the sterilization of macrophages against intracellular MTB, whereas necrosis is considered host detrimental. Behar et al have summarized the function of different type of cell death against tuberculosis, and indicated that necrosis could allow the pathogen to escape intracellular defence mechanisms and allows the pathogen to disseminate. Also, necroptosis is one of the principal pathological features of tuberculous granulomas, and a report by Roca et al. indicated that pharmacological interventions on the necroptosis pathway could act as host-targeting antituberculosis drugs. However in contrast, some reports indicated that necrosis might also be a crucial host defence to microbial infection, as well as being critical for organ development and cellular homeostasis in multicellular organisms. Meanwhile, some research groups showed that necroptosis could not affect the survival of tuberculosis in the host. The opposite results may be because the authors used different models and different necroptosis stimuli. It also suggested that the mechanism of necroptosis in macrophages is complex and needs more extensive study.
Our cytological experiments indicated the positive antibacterial effect of SIRPα knockout genotype, but there are also contrary reports. Li et al. found that SIRPα−/− could increase erythropoiesis as well as heightened susceptibility to Salmonella infection.  reduce the amount of red blood cells and increased susceptibility to Salmonella infection, indicating that SIRPα might play different roles in different cell types. Therefore, we used macrophage transplantation technology to construct the mice model with SIRPα−/− macrophages (SIRP expression still exists in other cells). This study found that SIRPα−/− macrophages transplantation can play a stronger anti-TB activity than WT macrophages transplantation, which is consistent with the mechanistic findings of this study. One side effect of this method is that it will also cause more serious inflammatory damage, which might be induced by high level of pro-inflammatory cytokines secretions. Interestingly, we found that co-treatment with SIRPα−/− macrophages and ulinastatin, a commercial anti-inflammatory drug, could exert the curative effect of anti tuberculosis and anti-inflammatory at the same time, and this might provide a new way for PTB treatment.
In conclusion, the inhibitory effect of SIRPα on bactericidal activity leads to considering the possibility that the changes in SIRPα expression might be a prognosis indicator in MTB infection. We first found a negative correlation between SIRPα expression and phosphorylation of PTK2B in lung tissues of PTK2B patients. Interestingly, SIRPα expression was also associated with poor prognosis. Altogether, our results define SIRPα as a biomarker for MTB infection and underlying mechanisms for maintaining macrophage homeostasis through autophagy and necroptosis. SIRPα knockout plays a major role in killing MTB by weakening necroptosis. In addition, SIRPα knockout can improve the MTB killing activity of macrophages by strengthening autophagy, but only as an auxiliary or partial role, and SIRPα knockout weakens necroptosis and strengthens autophagy but through different pathway. Autophagy strengthening will also lead to necroptosis strengthening, which might cause by negative feedback. Those findings provide exciting insights into the pathogenesis of tuberculosis and suggest that novel therapeutics that block SIRPα might be beneficial in the management of MTB infection, opening a wealth of new possibilities in the treatment of PTB.
There are some limitations for this work, and the most important one is the sample size. We calculated sample size requirement by using subial module of PASS software, and obtained that the sample size required for this work was 146 cases. We first screened a series of candidate markers and found that SIRPα had the most advantage. This conclusion is based on a small number of samples testing. Similarly, we found that the expression of SIRPα can distinguish PTB from pneumonia and lung cancer, which is also based on a small number of samples. In order to be more rigorous, these conclusions need to be verified based on large sample size testing in the subsequent study. We tested the correlation between SIRPα and clinical and prognostic indicators in PTB patients. The included sample size for the correlation determination of SIRPα and clinical and prognostic indicators of PTB patients is larger than the required sample size, and these samples are from 5 hospitals in 4 regions. However, it is still insufficient to fully reflect the relationship between SIRPα and clinical phenotypes of PTB patients in different regions in China. More regional participation and larger scale research are still needed. In addition, the dynamic changes of SIRP expression in tuberculosis patients also need further monitoring.

## Contributors
HX, LD, DW and JH conceived and coordinated the study; DW, YL, FX, HZ, XZ, YH, GD and DL designed, performed and analyzed the experiments, wrote the paper. ZL, BS, YY, GM and ZT carried out the clinical data collection. AT and YL made and raised mice. DW performed the mice-based experiments and was aware of the group allocation at the different stages of the experiment. HX, LD, DW and JH have verified the underlying data. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

## Data sharing statement
The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

 Appendix

## Supplementary materials

Image, application 1
Image, application 2
Image, application 3
Image, application 4

## Acknowledgements
We thank professor Ying Li (IRCBC, SIOC, Chinese Academy of Sciences,) for her providing us the pcDNA3.1-Myc-RIPK1, pcDNA3.1-Myc-RIPK1-DD, and pcDNA3.1-Myc-RIPK1-∆DD plasmids as gifts. This work was financially supported by the Chinese National Natural Science Foundation project (No.81401635).
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104278.