822acssdACS Applied Bio MaterialsACS Appl Bio MaterPMC9945087994508799450873664757410.1021/acsabm.2c00845Self-Assembled Oleic
Acid-Modified Polyallylamines
for Improved siRNA Transfection Efficiency and Lower Cytotoxicity
SalvadorCristian AndreozziPatrizia RomeroGabriela LoinazIraida DupinDamien MoyaSergio E †CIC
biomaGUNE, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Donostia-San Sebastián20014, Spain‡CIDETEC,
Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Parque Científico
y Tecnológico de Gipuzkoa, Miramon Pasealekua, 196, Donostia-San Sebastián20014, Spain§Consorzio
Sistemi a Grande Interfase, Department of Chemistry ‘Ugo Schiff’, University of Florence, Via della Lastruccia 3, Sesto Fiorentino50019, Florence, Italy∥Department
of Biomedical Engineering and Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio78249, Texas, United States*Email: ddupin@cidetec.es. Phone: +34 943 30 90 22.
*Email: smoya@cicbiomagune.es. Phone: +34 943 00 53 11.
171202362529529–5422322023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Small interference RNA (siRNA) is a tool for gene modulation,
which
can silence any gene involved in genetic disorders. The potential
of this therapeutic tool is hampered by RNA instability in the blood
stream and difficulties to reach the cytosol. Polyamine-based nanoparticles
play an important role in gene delivery. Polyallylamine hydrochloride
(PAH) is a polycation displaying primary amines that can be easily
chemically modified to match the balance between cell viability and
siRNA transfection. In this work, PAH has been covalently functionalized
with oleic acid at different molar ratios by carbodiimide chemistry.
The substituted polymers form polyplexes that keep positive surface
charge and fully encapsulate siRNA. Oleic acid substitution improves
cell viability in the pulmonary cell line A549. Moreover, 6 and 14%
of oleic acid substitution show an improvement in siRNA transfection
efficiency. CD47 is a ubiquitous protein which acts as “don’t
eat me signal.” SIRPα protein of macrophages recognizes
CD47, leading to tumor cell phagocytosis by macrophages. By knocking
down CD47 with siRNA, cancer cells become vulnerable to be eliminated
by the immune system. PAH–oleic acid substitutes show high
efficacy in silencing the CD47 protein, making them a potential candidate
for immunotherapy.
Keywords: siRNA delivery, polyallylamine hydrochloride, polymeric nanoparticles, oleic acid, CD47

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Oct 2; Accepted 2022 Dec 4; Collection date 2023 Feb 20.

1.

## Introduction
RNA interference is a
natural pathway occurring in the cell cytosol
that regulates endogenous gene expression and protects cells from
exogenous nucleic acids. It is triggered by any double-stranded RNA,
and its outcome is the knockdown of specific genes. This pathway involves microRNA (miRNA) and small interference
RNA (siRNA), which bind sequence-specific to mRNA, resulting in the
degradation of gene-specific mRNA. siRNAs
and miRNAs can be artificially synthesized to target any therapeutically
interesting gene and hamper its expression. , It
has a great therapeutic potential to treat any disease provoked by
the malfunction of a gene and has several advantages over small molecules
and monoclonal antibody therapies. Considerable
efforts have been made since the discovery of RNA interference in
1998 that made possible in 2018 the approvement
by the FDA of the first medicament based on siRNA therapy. Onpattro,
produced by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, is the first RNAi drug for the
treatment of hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis with polyneuropathy
in adults. In 2019, the FDA also approved
GIVLAARI against acute hepatic porphyria. , 
Despite the promising and powerful therapeutic outcomes offered
by siRNA technology, some drawbacks still hamper its clinical translation.
siRNAs cannot be systemically administered because they are degraded
by endonucleases. In addition, siRNA is
7–8 nm long, with a 2–3 nm diameter and a molecular
weight of 13–16 kDa displaying negative charges, which make siRNA easily cleared out instead of
accumulating in targeted tissues. Fenestrated
vessels, such as in liver, are the most common final destination of
siRNA, which ends up being eliminated through the gallbladder to the
intestine. , Moreover, at the cellular level,
free siRNAs cannot escape the endosome and translocate into the cytosol,
where they must act.
Several delivery platforms have been developed
to overcome all
these limitations and effectively deliver siRNAs in their site of
action. siRNA nanoformulations aim at
overcoming biological barriers, ensuring that siRNAs are protected
from endonucleases. Clearance occurs in the glomerulus. The glomerulus
pore has a diameter of around 8 nm, and thus larger particles entrapping
siRNA avoid its filtration through the kidneys. Carriers that are
not cleared, degraded, or phagocytosed leave the endothelium to reach
target tissues. Most carriers cross the cell membranes by endocytosis,
and endocytic vesicles fuse with early endosomes and become acidic
in the inner environment. , Some of these nanocarriers,
like cationic lipids and/or polymers, protonate at endosomal pH. Low
pH triggers disruption of the endosomal membrane by complexation with
negatively charged lipids or by creating an osmotic difference with
the cytosol, which results in their translocation and the release
of the siRNA in the cell cytoplasm. 
Several nanomaterials have been used for siRNA delivery like lipid
nanoparticles, polymer nanoparticles, exosomes, aptamers, and inorganic nanoparticles. , Cationic polyelectrolytes and lipids are without any doubt the most
efficient in complexing siRNAs through their positive charges via
electrostatic interactions. However, positive charges induce toxicological
endpoints over a certain concentration, limiting the therapeutic outcome.
Therefore, it is critical to have control on the density of positive
charges in the carriers, which are needed for complexation and translocation
but are sources of toxicity as well. There are some fundamental differences
between polyelectrolytes and lipids for siRNA complexation. Polyelectrolytes
interact with nucleic acids at several charged groups per polymer
chain, whereas lipids have a more labile binding with nucleic acid.
The lipid-siRNA complex is easier to break, and lipids have a greater
capacity for reorganization during translocation in the cytoplasm.
Lipids can also fuse with endosomatic membranes, facilitating translocation
in the cytoplasm. Aliphatic lipid chains
also help in the encapsulation of nucleic acids. In fact, charged
lipids have been shown to be more efficient at encapsulating nucleic
acids than polyelectrolytes. However, polycations have more loading
capacity and are more likely to induce osmotic swelling within the
endosomes, triggering endosomal escape. An ideal carrier for siRNA
delivery would combine characteristics of both polycations and cationic
lipids. In the literature, we can find reports on polyethylenimine
(PEI) modification with lipids to form the so-called lipopolyplexes.
Lipopolyplexes show an enhanced transfection efficiency coming from
the combination of the polymers with lipids and a reduced cytotoxicity. In some reports, liposomes are prepared with
an inner core of PEI. − However, the most common approach is to modify the
backbone of PEI with aliphatic chains. , Long aliphatic
chains of C18 carbons, that is, stearic, linoleic, and oleic acid
(OA), resulted in better performance than shorter C8 and C14 aliphatic
chains, that is, caprylic and myristic acids. , 
Efforts have been made toward bringing new siRNA-based therapies
against cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by targeting oncogenes related to
tumor angiogenesis (VEGF), tumorgenesis downstream pathways (KRAS),
and tumor maintenance proteins that confer resistance to chemotherapy
(BCL2). Some therapies involve reprograming
immunogenic cells toward cancerous cells, such as T lymphocytes, natural killers, and tumor-associated macrophages. Another
interesting strategy is to modify tumor cells for being eliminated
by macrophages. 
CD47 is a transmembrane
protein ubiquitously expressed in normal
cells and overexpressed in cancer cells. CD47 acts as a “don’t
eat me signal,” It is recognized by signal regulatory protein
α (SIRPα) expressed in macrophages promoting the inhibition
of phagocytosis. CD47 labels cells permitting macrophages distinguishing
between “native” and “foreign” cells,
where stronger cells are deleted by engulfment. Mutant genes in NSCLC
and in other types of cancers overexpress CD47. Knocking down the
levels of CD47 in lung tumors is a promising approach to treat NSCLC.
Recent studies have demonstrated the efficacy of blocking SIRPa/CD47
interactions with anti-CD47 antibodies. , Few papers
have studied the knockdown of CD47 in melanoma, ovarian cancer, and lung cancer by using siRNA therapy.
The aim of this
work is to combine polyamines with C18 aliphatic
chain to create a vector nanoparticle for complexation of siRNA with
enhanced silencing efficiency and low toxicity that benefit from advantageous
properties of both lipids and polymers. Polyallylamine hydrochloride
(PAH), a polycation displaying primary amines, has been conjugated
with OA through carbodiimide chemistry. In previous work, we have
shown that PAH/siRNA complexes disassemble at endosomal pHs releasing
the siRNA, while they are very stable at physiological pHs, and they
are also toxic at relatively low polymer concentrations. By combining
PAH with lipids, we will be able to control charge density and modulate
toxicity but retaining the advantages of primary amines for siRNA
delivery. Here, we show for the first
time that the OA-modified PAH results in a promising nanoparticle
carrier for siRNA delivery, and we test its capacity in immunotherapy
for knocking down the CD47 protein.

2.

## Materials and Methods
2.1.

## Materials
All materials used in the
experimental section are described in the Supporting Information.

2.2.

## Synthesis and Characterization of Oleic Acid-Substituted
Polyallylamine
PAH of 17.5 kDa was substituted covalently
with OA via the carbodiimide/N-hydroxysuccinimide reaction. Different
molar ratios of −NH2/–COOH were tested: 1:0.01,
1:0.02, 1:0.05, 1:0.1, and 1:0.2, hereafter named PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2,
PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20. The corresponding molar amounts
of OA were dissolved in 48 mL of DMSO. 3-Ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride
(EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) were added to
the OA solution at 10:10:1 molar ratio of EDC/NHS/–COOH. The
solution was stirred at 37 °C for 30 min to achieve preactivated
NHS esters of OA. 100 mg of PAH was dissolved in 12 mL of deionized
water (diH2O) and added dropwise to the DMSO solution during
1 h. The mixture of water/DMSO was stirred for 72 h at 37 °C.
The polymer was purified by dialysis against diH2O for
10 days, changing diH2O twice a day. Finally, the dialyzed
aqueous solution was freeze-dried until obtaining a white cottonlike
powder. Free OA presence was assessed by thin-layer chromatography
(TLC). The degree of OA substitution was determined by 1H NMR (500 MHz D2O): δ ppm 0.8 (m, −CH3 oleyl), 1.1–1.5 (m, −CH2 oleyl and
PAH), 1.5–2.1(m, −CH2–CH2–CO–N, oleyl; −CH2–CH=CH
Oleyl; −CH– PAH; −CH2–CO–N,
Oleyl), 2.8–3.3 (s, −CH2–N), 5.5 (s,
−CH=CH−). The degree of substitution for the
different ratios of amines to lipids employed was evaluated comparing
the methyl protons of the oleyl chain at δ 0.8 and multiplet
at δ 2.8–3.3. The OA-substituted polymers obtained were
named as the original amount of OA added to the reaction: PAH, PAH.OA.1,
PAH.OA.2, PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20.

2.3.

## Preparation of siRNA/Polymer Polyplexes
siRNA/polymer complexation was performed for the following N/P
ratios: 2.5, 5, 10, and 15. The N/P ratio is defined as the moles
of nitrogen present in the polymer divided by moles of phosphates
in the siRNA. The corresponding amount of the polymer was dissolved
in 50 μL of RNAse-free water to achieve the desired N/P ratio.
The corresponding amount of siRNA was added to polymer aqueous solution
and then mixed by pipetting up-down or by a short vortex. Samples
were incubated for 15 min at room temperature (RT) to allow both molecules
to form complexes.

2.4.

## Size by DLS and Z-Potential
Freeze-dried samples were dissolved in diH2O with the
help of vortex and a sonication bath. Samples were diluted until achieving
a 100 μg/mL concentration in 200 μL of diH2O and filtered through 0.44 μm filters. Polyplexes at different
N/P ratios of 2.5, 5, 10, and 15 were formed as described above, scaling-up
to 200 μL and filtering through 0.44 μm. Dynamic light
scattering (DLS) measurements were conducted in a disposable low volume
cuvette (BRAND UV cuvette micro-7592) and zeta potential in DTS1070
cuvettes. DLS and aqueous electrophoresis measurements were performed
in a Zetasizer nano ZS ZEN3600 model (Malvern Instruments Ltd.) at
a laser wavelength of 633 nm and a scattering angle of 173° to
obtain the hydrodynamic diameter and Z-potential.

2.5.

## Transmission Electron Microscopy
Free polymer and polyplexes were prepared at a final concentration
of 100 μg/mL polymer in RNAse-free diH2O. Samples
were filtered through 0.44 μm filters, and 5 μL were transferred
onto a carbon film coated copper grid (400 mesh), previously hydrophilized
by glow discharge. After 5 min of incubation, the solution was removed
with a filter paper. Samples were negatively stained with 5 μL
of ammonium molybdate pH 7, 12% w/v by 5 min incubation. Grids were
washed with diH2O and overnight dried before being measured.
Transmission electron microscopy measurements were performed with
a JEOL JEM 1010 microscope operating at an acceleration voltage of
100 kV.

2.6.

## Quant-IT Ribogreen
Quant-IT ribogreen
assay was used to quantify siRNA encapsulation. Quant-IT ribogreen
is a fluorophore which binds to siRNA and other nucleic acids when
these are free in solution but not when they are complexed as in polyplexes.
siRNA-polyplexes at four different N/P ratios were made as described
above. Then, the protocol provided by the manufacturer was followed
for two groups: untreated and treated with heparine. Fluorescence
was measured exciting at 480 nm and emitting at 520 nm in a fluorescence
plate reader Synergy HT by Biotek. Then, the encapsulation efficiency
was calculated as follows
 U = untreated; T = treated with Heparin solution.

2.7.

## Cell Culture
A549 human pulmonary
cell line was cultured with Eagle minimum essential medium (EMEM)
supplemented with 10% v/v fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% v/v penicillin–streptomycin
(P/S). A549 stably expressing eGFP (A549-GFP) were kept in EMEM medium
supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% P/S, and 10 μg/mL blasticidin.

2.8.

## Cytotoxicity Assay: MTS and Live/Dead
Cytotoxicity of polyplexes was evaluated for the A549 cell line after
24 h exposition. The cells were seeded in a 96-well plate using EMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% P/Sand incubated for 24 h. When the
cells were confluent, polyplexes were added to the cell culture freshly
prepared as described above. PAH, PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2, PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10,
and PAH.OA.20 at four different N/P ratios were tested, with a final
siRNA concentration of 200 nM per well. Medium was replaced in each
well with OptiMEM reduced serum medium, and polyplexes were added
to the well in four technical replicates. After 24 h of incubation
at 37 °C, and 5% CO2 MTS CellTiter 96 Aqueous One
solution or live/dead test was conducted. A corresponding volume of
MTS solution was added to each well and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C
and 5% CO2. Absorbance of the formazan resulting product
was measured at 490 nm in a Synergy HT plate reader by Biotek.
For live/dead, kit components Calcein AM and ethidium homodimer-1
were diluted in cell medium to recommended working concentrations
of 2 and 4 μM, respectively. Solution was added to the wells,
and the plate was incubated 45 min at room temperature. Right after,
the cells were washed and observed under a microscope.

2.9.

## Polymer Labelling with Fluorophore Atto-633
Fluorophore Atto-633-NHS ester was attached to PAH, PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2,
PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20 following provider’s instructions,
with a few modifications. Labelling was performed adding 1 molecule
Atto-633 per 2000 monomers of the polymer. Between 5 and 8 mg of different
polymers and 0.02 mg of Atto-633 were used. The polymers were dissolved
in 2 mL of diH2O, and pH was adjusted to about 8. A solution
of 20 μL of Atto-633 in DMF was added to the polymer solution.
The Reaction was stirred for 2 h protected from light. The reaction
product was purified by PD-10 desalting columns and dialysis in a
Floatlyzer G2 2.5–5 kDa against water for 2 days. Samples were
freeze-dried and analyzed by 1H NMR (500 MHz D2O) and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) to verify that
the entire dye was attached to the polymer.

2.10.

## Cell Uptake Studies
A549 cells were
cultured in 8-well ibidi plates at 30.000 cell/well. 24 h after, polymers
labeled with Atto-633 (PAH, PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2, PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10,
and PAH.OA.20) were used to form polyplexes with siRNA-6-FAM at ratio
N/P 5 as described above. The final concentration of siRNA per well
was 200 nM. The resulting polyplexes were exposed to confluent cells
for 24 h for transfection. Then, the cells were washed with DPBS,
fixed with 4% v/v paraformaldehyde (PFA), and permeabilized with 0.5%
v/v Triton-X-100, washing with DPBS between steps. After that, the
cell nucleus was stained with dilution of 1:2000 Hoechst 33342 and
actin with ActinRedTM 555. Fixed cells ready for imaging were embedded
in DPBS. Ibidi plates were set up using confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM, Zeiss LSM 510). CLSM images were acquired by exciting at 405,
488, 56,1 and 633 nm laser lines, with a 63× objective. Z-stack experiments were also performed and displayed as
orthogonal view processed by ZEN 3.3 software and ImageJ.
Quantification
of siRNA-6-FAM internalization by flow cytometry was carried out as
follows. 60.000 cells/well A549 cells were seeded in a 24-well plate.
After 24 h, polyplexes were formed at N/P 5 with different polymer
substitutions and siRNA-6-FAM, keeping a final concentration of siRNA
at 200 nM per well in every condition. Polyplexes were exposed to
confluent cells embedded in OptiMEM media. After 24 h of incubation,
the cells were washed and lifted with 0.25% trypsin/ethylenediamine
tetraacetic acid (EDTA) without phenol red. Trypsin was blocked by
adding DPBS 10% FBS, and the resulting cell containing solution was
transferred to a flow cytometry tube. 10,000 events were measured
using FACS diva Canto II software. Data are showed as percentage of
events that have 6-FAM fluorescence. Setting parameters as nontreated
cells present 0% of fluorescence.

2.11.

## Delivery Efficiency by Flow Cytometry
Delivery efficiency of siRNA inside cells was assessed by measuring
the siRNA silencing of the GFP protein by flow cytometry. A549 cells
stably expressing eGFP (A549-GFP) were seeded in 24-well plates at
60,000 cells/well using EMEM, 10% v/v FBS, 1% v/v P/S, and 10 μg/mL
blasticidin. Transfection was performed using polyplexes of PAH.OA/siRNA
anti-eGFP at ratios N/P 2.5, 5, and 10 using 0.1 nmol of siRNA to
achieve a final concentration of 200 nM per well. Lipofectamine RNAimax
was used as the positive control, and the complex was prepared following
the protocol provided by the manufacturer using the same amount of
siRNA. Cell media were substituted by OptiMEM, and complexes were
distributed into the well. After 24 h of incubation, the cells were
washed and refreshed with growth media. The cells were incubated between
72 and 96 h after transfection to obtain an effective protein reduction.
Once incubation was finished, the cells were lifted with 0.25% trypsin/EDTA
without phenol red. Trypsin effect was blocked with DPBS and10% FBS,
and the resulting cells solution was transferred to a flow cytometer’s
tube. Samples were measured with a FACS diva canto II flow cytometer.
FITC filter was applied to count GFP-expressing cells. Software BD
FACS Diva was used to measure the mean fluorescence intensity of 10,000
events per condition. Data are presented as relative GFP expression
normalized to the intensity of the nontreated cells, considered 100%
of GFP-expression. Every condition had 2 technical replicates.

2.12.

## mRNA Quantification by RT-qPCR
A549
cells were seeded in a 24-well plate at 60,000 cells/well. Four wells
per condition were used. 24 h after, confluent cells were transfected
with polyplexes to OptiMEM media. Polymers with different substitutions
of OA were complexed with 0.1 nmol of anti-CD47 siRNA and 0.1 nmol
of negative control siRNA at a ratio of N/P 5, resulting in 200 nM
of final siRNA concentration per well. After 24 h, the cells were
washed with DPBS and fresh growth media were added to the well for
48 and 72 h. Levels of mRNA-CD47 were measured 24, 48, and 72 h after
transfection. mRNA was extracted following the instructions of QIAGEN
mini kit. Briefly, after the cells were washed, 350 μL of RLT
buffer supplemented with β-mercaptoethanol was added to the
wells. Wells were scratched with a pipette tip, and the solution was
collected in a 2 mL tube. Solution was homogenized by passing through
the needle of a syringe 5 times. The homogenized lysate was transferred
to a gDNA eliminator spin column and centrifuged and flow-through
was saved to the next step. 350 μL of ethanol was added to the
solution, and this was transferred to the provided RNeasy spin column.
The solution was centrifuged, and the flow-through was discarded.
Then, RNA retained in the column was washed consecutively with buffers
RW1 once and RPE twice. Finally, RNA was eluted with RNAse-free water,
and the concentration was quantified with NanodropTM One. RNA obtained
was transformed to cDNA using a reverse transcription system by Promega.
RNA was diluted until having the same concentration for all conditions
of 100 ng. Then, a master mix of MgCl2, reverse transcription
buffer, dNTPs, RNAsin ribonuclease inhibitor, Oligo(dT)15, and AMV
reverse transcriptase was added to the RNA samples and set on a Biometra
T1 thermocycler. Samples were heated 1 h at 42 °C. Once the retrotranscription
finished, the samples were stored at −20 °C or directly
proceeded to the next step. cDNA samples were amplified for specific
gene human CD47 and the housekeeping gene human GAPDH. Bio-rad iTaq
Universal SYBR green supermix was used with specific primers already
designed by Bio-Rad for gene CD47. Samples of every condition were
put on 96-well PCR plates by triplicates, three replicates for the
target gene and three for the housekeeping gene. Plates were introduced
in a Bio-Rad CFX connect Real-time PCR system. Amplification cycles
were first 95 °C denatured followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C
5 s and 60 °C 30 s annealing and extension. Ct data of each sample
were obtained after PCR had finished. Delta–delta Ct method
(2–ΔΔCt)
was used to calculate the relative fold expression of CD47 in A549
after being transfected by siRNA anti-CD47.

2.13.

## Immunocytochemistry of CD47 Protein
A549 cells were cultured in 8-well ibidi plates at 30,000 cell/well.
24 h after, polymers (PAH, PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2, PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10,
and PAH.OA.20) were used to form polyplexes with siRNA anti-CD47 and
siRNA negative control both at N/P 5, keeping the concentration of
siRNA at 200 nM per well. Cells were exposed to the polyplexes 24
h, and after that, they were washed and refreshed with new growth
media and let the siRNA take effect up to 72 h. At this point, the
cells were fixed with 4% v/v PFA and permeabilized with 0.5% v/v Triton-X-100.
Cells were incubated with 5% BSA in PBST (0.1% Tween20) for 30 min
at room temperature. Then, the cells were incubated with the primary
antibody against CD47 overnight at 4 °C in 1% BSA PBST or only
in 1% BSA PBST. Next day, the wells were washed and incubated with
the secondary antibody goat against mouse FITC for 30 min at RT. Cells
were washed again and incubated in a solution of 2 μg/mL Hoechst
33342 at RT for 10 min. Finally, the ibidi plate was observed using
a Zeiss LSM 510 confocal laser scanning microscope at 63×x objective,
and images were taken exciting cells with the 405 and 488 nm lasers.

2.14.

## Western Blot of CD47
A549 cell line
was seeded in 56 cm2 Petri dishes at 1,700,000 cell/dish
using growth media EMEM, 10% FBS, and 1% P/S. The cells were transfected
with polymer/siRNA-CD47 PAH-substituted polymers (PAH, PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2,
PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20) and lipofectamine RNAimax as a
control, having 200 nM of final siRNA concentration per Petri dish.
After 72 h, the protein was extracted using 1 mL of RIPA buffer supplemented
with 1% v/v phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride, and 100 μL/mL protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein
concentration in the supernatant was determined by the Bradford test
using BSA standard. 90 μg of protein of each condition was mixed
with TruPAGE LDS sample buffer (Laemmli buffer) and TruPAGE DTT sample
reducer incubated at 80 °C 10 min. A 10% bis-acrylamide sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel was run in TruPAGE TEA-Tricine SDS for 30
min for stacking at 80 V and 60 min at 120 V for resolving. Once the
gel was completed, proteins were transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride
membrane previously activated using a wet transfer chamber filled
with cold 1× TruPAGE transfer buffer. Transfer lasted 1 h at
constant 350 mA. Then, the membrane was blocked with 5% milk in TBST
for 1 h at RT. After that, the membrane was treated with primary antibodies.
Dilution 1/500 of CD47 in 5% milk TBST and 1/2000 of cyclophilin A
(CPA) overnight at 4 °C was done while stirring in a roller mixer.
Next day, 3× washes were performed with TBST before incubation
with the secondary antibodies 1/2000 goat-anti-mouse-HRP for CD47
and 1/2000 goat-anti-rabbit-HRP for CPA 1 h at RT. Finally, the electrochemiluminescence
substrate was applied to the membrane, and chemiluminescence was revealed
by a iBright imaging system.

2.15.

## Flow Cytometry Evaluation of CD47 Knockdown
A549 cells were cultured in a 24-well plate at 60,000 cells/well
in growth media EMEM, 10% FBS, and 1% P/S. 24 h after, the cells were
transfected with polyplexes formed with different polymers PAH, PAH.OA.1,
PAH.OA.2, PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, PAH.OA.20, and either siRNA anti-CD47
or negative siRNA at 200 nM per well. Lipofectamine RNAimax was used
as the positive control following the manufacturer’s instructions.
All conditions were performed in duplicate. OptiMEM media was used
for the transfection, which lasted 24 h. Then, the cells were washed
with DPBS and refreshed with growth medium. The cells were kept in
the incubator to reach 72 h after transfection for giving time to
the siRNA to knockdown the protein. At this point, the cells were
lifted with trypsin/EDTA 0.25%, and the cell suspension was transferred
to a 2 mL tube. The cells were pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended
in blocking solution 5% BSA in DPBS for 30 min RT. Right after, the
cells were washed and incubated for 30 min in 2% BSA with 1 μg
of primary antibody against CD47 at RT. After washing the cells, the
secondary antibody anti-mouse-488 was added to the cells at 10 μg/mL
and incubated for 30 min. Then, the cells were transferred to flow
cytometer tubes and measured with the FACS diva canto II. Mean FITC
was collected from the cytometer, and relative expression of CD47
was calculated by dividing the FITC mean of siRNA CD47 by the FITC
mean of negative siRNA.

3.

## Results and Discussion
3.1.

## Synthesis and Characterization of Oleic Acid–Polyallylamine
Substitutions
PAH is a linear polycation with primary amines
previously studied as a potential nucleic acid carrier for siRNA delivery. , PAH has been also modified with cholesterol, , methylglycolate, and several acrylates in order to improve its delivery efficiency
for siRNA and pDNA. In this work, a 17.5 kDa PAH was covalently modified
with OA via amide bonds using carbodiimide chemistry. Five different
molar substitutions were performed with increasing amounts of OA.
Reactions were carried out starting from 100 mg of PAH and adding
OA following a molar ratio of −NH2/–COOH
1:0.01, 1:0.02, 1:0.05, 1:0.1, and 1:0.2. Hereafter, the polymers
obtained are named PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2, PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20
corresponding to the molar amount of OA added to the reaction. Polymers
were purified, and the absence of free OA after purification via dialysis
was confirmed by TLC (Figure S1). From 1H NMR measurements ( ), it can be deduced that the solubility in water of
PAH decreases for the PAH substituted with the highest amount of OA.
The exact amount of OA attached to PAH could not be assessed due to
this solubility issue, especially for PAH.OA.20. However, an approximate
degree of amine substitutions were obtained: 1, 2, 6, 14, and >14%,
corresponding to PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2, PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20
samples, respectively. FTIR and elemental analysis confirmed the presence
of OA in the polymer. Surprisingly, the percentage of oxygen seemed
to decrease with increasing OA functionalization. This unexpected
decrease was attributed to the water associated with PAH, which is
a very hydroscopic polymer. The modification of PAH with the hydrophobic
OA reduces the hydration of the polymer chains. FTIR analysis (Figure S2) showed that the 3000 cm–1 corresponding to the regions of −CH2–CH3– and −CH2–CH2–
increase and sharpen with the amount of grafted OA, as well as the
appearance of a peak in the 1735 cm–1 corresponding
to the amide formed by the amines of PAH with the carboxylate groups
of OA. Elemental analysis (e S1) showed that the relative carbon analysis
(Table S1) showed that the relative carbon
content increased gradually with the substitution of OA.
 
3.2.

## Complexation of siRNA and Carrier Evaluation
The OA-substituted polyamines complex with negatively charged nucleic
acids by electrostatic interactions, forming polyplex nanoparticles
( A). Using
different ratios of polymer to siRNA can largely affect the performance
of the polyplexes in the delivery of siRNA to the cell cytosol. The
N/P ratio is defined as the moles of nitrogen present in the polymer
divided by the number of moles of phosphates present in the siRNA.
Low polymer-to-siRNA ratios could result in a limited entrapment of
siRNA, while large ratios may affect cell viability because of the
excess of amino groups available. Four N/P ratios were tested to determine
the best N/P ratio for polyplex preparation. The N/P ratios used were
2.5, 5, 10, and 15 for both PAH and OA-derived PAHs.
 Unmodified free PAH is soluble in water and does
not form nanoparticles.
However, when it is complexed with siRNA, nanoparticles are formed
with a hydrodynamic diameter of 100–150 nm depending on the
N/P ratio ( B, Z average and ). PAH substituted with OA self-forms nanoparticles
in water without siRNA. Aliphatic chains of OA pending from the polymer
backbone associate with hydrophobic interactions. The level of substitution
impacts on the size of the self-assembled structures. Low-substituted
PAH (PAH.OA.1 and PAH.OA.2) results in nanoparticles with sizes around
250–350 nm. Highly substituted polymers (PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10,
and PAH.OA.20) form structures around 150 nm ( B and ).
 After the addition of siRNA, the polymer reorganizes
and forms
assemblies of different sizes. Low-substituted PAH (PAH.OA.1 and PAH.OA.2)
forms assemblies of smaller sizes, 150–250 nm, compared to
the free polymer. Highly substituted polymers (PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10,
and PAH.OA.20) form assemblies of 150 nm, same size as the nanoparticles
based on the free polymer. The N/P ratio has a limited influence on
the size of the nanoparticles. All N/P ratios have similar size, and
its PDI is between 0.2 and 0.3 in all conditions, as observed by DLS
( ). When functionalized
with OA, the polymer self-assembles in water to form colloids of 117
to 322 nm (see blue line and , only polymer). When the siRNA is complexed to the PAH-OA, a significant
effect of the N/P ratio on the size of polyplexes could not be observed.
This is probably because both complexation with siRNA and self-assembly
of PAH-OA play a role in the formation of polyplex nanoparticles and
determine the nanoparticle size. It is to note that for most of the
cases, the polyplexes are smaller than the nanoparticles formed by
the self-assembly of PAH-OA without complexation with siRNA. Polyplexes
were previously filtered before DLS measurements to remove large aggregates.
Hydrodynamic diameter measurement of the pristine dispersion showed
the presence of a small amount of large aggregate. As DLS is an intensity-based
measurement, these larger aggregates scattered much more light than
the individual polyplexes and shielded the presence of the main population.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image in D is representative of the
polyplexes formed with substituted PAH.OA.10 and siRNA at N/P ratio
5. The other PAH.OA substitutions are showed in Figure S5. Polyplexes substituted with a higher amount of
OA (PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20) are round-shaped, with sizes
of 12 nm in diameter, which tend to aggregate into larger structures.
The smaller size measured by TEM, compared with DLS measurements,
is probably due the presence of a small fraction of larger aggregates
of polyplexes. DLS tends to oversize the Z-average.
This is because a small population of large particles scatters much
more light than small ones. Such differences in size between DLS and
TEM data have also been found in polyplexes based in other polycations
with pDNA and siRNA. , Moreover, when we consider the
number distribution (Figure S3) instead
of the Z average, the mean size of the polyplex decreases
to around 50 nm for the polyplexes with the highest oleic substitutions
(PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20), while for the lowest substitutions,
average sizes are around 100–200 nm. These values are more
in agreement with the TEM. Different substituted polymers without
siRNA (Figure S4) form nanoparticles with
the same round shape and similar sizes, except for free PAH that does
not form complexes.
Zeta potential of PAH/siRNA polyplexes varies
from +15 to +30 mV
depending on the N/P ratio ( C). PAH.OA/siRNA N/P 2.5 polyplexes have negative Z-potential with PAH.OA 6, 14, and >14% and positive
in
1 and 2% OA substitution. When the N/P ratio is higher, the Z-potential turns positive with values higher than for nonsubstituted
PAH, from +30 to +40 mV. When siRNA is complexed to substituted PAH,
the Z-potential is reduced by 10 mV, except for higher
substitutions of OA where the Z-potential remains
practically constant. As the degree of substitution of PAH with OA
molecules increases the Z-potential values increase
as well, despite the larger amount of amide bounds formed, which cannot
be protonated as primary amines. This has also been observed for the
substitution of PEI with lipids. The
increase in the substitution of amines by OA increases the hydrophobicity
of the chains, facilitating hydrophobic interactions for the stabilization
of the assemblies and polyplexes, which lead to a displacement of
positive charges from the inner to outer regions of the assemblies
and result in a higher zeta potential than for less-substituted polymers. 
The amount of siRNA encapsulated in the
polyplex nanoparticles
was quantified with the quant-IT ribogreen test: a fluorophore that
attaches to nucleic acids when nucleic acids are free in solution
but not when complexed. From the test, it was determined that PAH
and PAH.OAs encapsulate more than 90% of the total siRNA ( E). Moreover, for
a low N/P ratio, the same amounts of siRNA are entrapped as higher
N/P, meaning that there are strong interactions between the polymer
and nucleic acids.
The optimal density of amine groups for a
nucleic acid carrier
has been widely discussed. − Amino groups in polycations condense
nucleic acids but also cause cytotoxicity. Several modifications in
the polycations have been performed aiming at reducing toxicological
endpoints. Polyethylene glycol grafting has been frequently employed
for modifying polycations, such as PEI, − PLL, , or chitosan, and reducing their toxicity.
Other chemical modifications of polycations such as hydrophobic modifications
can be beneficial for increasing the cell viability. The toxicological impact of oleic acid modification of
PAH has been assessed in the pulmonary cell line A549. MTS and live/dead
assays have been used to evaluate the metabolic activity and the membrane
damage after being treated with the PAH.OA/siRNA polyplexes, respectively
( A,B). All
polyplexes transport the same amount of siRNAs, the final concentration
delivered to the cells being 200 nM. Therefore, cytotoxicity only
depends on the amount of the polymer and the degree of oleic acid
substitution. Live/dead experiment consists in the staining of the
cells with two dyes, Calcein AM and ethidium homodimer-1 (EtdH-1).
Calcein AM does not exhibit fluorescence by itself and can diffuse
easily inside the cell through the plasmatic membrane. Once inside,
ubiquitous esterases convert Calcein AM to calcein that has strong
fluorescence activity. Good enzymatic activity inside the cell correlates
with living cells. On the other hand, EtdH-1 cannot pass through an
intact plasma membrane. It only enters through damaged membranes and
strongly binds to DNA in the nucleus. Confocal images of A549 cells
after being exposed to polyplexes are shown in A for different N/P ratios. The MTS assay
is a tetrazolium compound that is reduced by cells to the colored
product formazan. The reduction is carried out by NAPDH and NADH,
product molecules of metabolic activity of the cells. Absorbance of
formazan is correlated with the number of living cells in the culture.
The plot in B represents absorbance data normalized to nontreated cells as 100%
of viable cells. Same polymers and N/P ratios have been used as in
the live/dead experiment. Low N/P ratios of 2.5 and 5, corresponding
to the lowest amine exposure, are not cytotoxic for all substituted
PAHs, with cell viability about 100% with respect to nontreated cells.
The highest N/P ratio of 15 is cytotoxic for all substitutions except
for PAH.OA.10 and PAH.OA.20. N/P 10 is cytotoxic in PAH and PAH.OA.1.
However, the viability increases for higher oleic acid substitutions.
At the highest N/P15, the polymers with low degrees of substitution
(1% DSs) have 10% viability, while >14% DS oleic acid substitution
results in 90% viability. We can conclude that oleic acid conjugations
reduce PAH toxicity due to the reduced number of amines available
after attachment of the oleic acid and to the self-assembly of the
modified polymer, shielding a significant amount of the primary amines.
Similar results were obtained with the hydrophobic modifications of
PEI , that showed lower cytotoxicity because of
the reduction in the number of primary amine groups. Nevertheless,
large amounts of polymer remain cytotoxic. PAH.OA.10 shows low toxicity
in the MTS assay for N/P 10 and 15; however, some damaged cells could
be observed with the live/dead assay.
 The capacity of polyplex nanoparticles to cross
cell membranes
was evaluated in vitro through CLSM localizing labeled siRNA and carriers
inside the cell. Commercially available 6-carboxyfluorescein siRNA
(siRNA-6-FAM) and Atto-633-labelled PAH via carbodiimide chemistry
were used. Characterization of the labeled polymers was performed
with 1H NMR and FCS. NMR shows that Atto-633 is covalently
attached to polymers, and FCS shows that there is no free fluorophore
(Figure S6). The two fluorophores were
selected as they are not overlapping in terms of their absorption/emission
spectra neither to Hoescht 33342 or Actin Red which were used to stain
nucleus and actin cytoskeleton, respectively.
Atto-633-labeled
polymers and negative siRNA-6-FAM were complexed
in RNAse-free water at N/P 5. This ratio was chosen for all PAH substitutes
as a compromise between polyamine cytotoxicity and the presence of
enough positive charges to promote the siRNA translocation and delivery
in cytosol. A549 cells were incubated for 24 h with the polyplexes
using the different substituted polymers PAH, PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2,
PAH.OA.5, PAH.OA.10, and PAH.OA.20. Confocal images show both siRNA
and polymer colocalizing inside the cells for PAH and PAH.OA.10 polyplexes
in A and for
the remaining substitutions in Figure S7. To confirm that nanoparticles are internalized in the cell, z-stack images were conducted. Images are displayed as an
orthogonal view ( B,C and S8). From confocal images
and orthogonal view, it can be appreciated that polyplexes are located
inside the cell as well as attached to the cell surface. The smallest
polyplex nanoparticles have rapidly incorporated into the cells within
2 h, while larger particles or aggregates (>500 nm) have a slower
cell uptake. As it has been reported in the literature with PEI, different uptake pathways are taking place according
to the size. Internalization of siRNA-6-FAM has been quantified by
a flow cytometer 24 h after polyplex administration. Data represent
the percentage of fluorescent cells of a total of 10,000 events. Nontreated
cells have been considered 0%. Above 70% of the cells were transfected
with the polyplex nanoparticles in each condition ( -D). No significant difference
was found among the different PAH substitutes, meaning that oleic
acid has no apparent influence on the cell membrane penetration and
cell uptake. Same results have been obtained in linear PEI 2 kDa with
aliphatic substitutions. This could be
explained because aliphatic chain is not triggering additional interactions
with the cell membrane.
 All synthesized oleic acid-PAH substitution can
entrap siRNA and
are able to deliver it inside cells. However, a strong obstacle to
overcome cytosolic delivery is the escape from the endosome. To prove
the delivery efficiency of our system into cancerous cells, the silencing
functionality of encapsulated siRNA has been assessed. For this purpose,
siRNA against GFP protein was administrated to human A549 pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cells overexpressing the green fluorescence protein,
A549-GFP cells. A reduction in the GFP fluorescence is indicative
of a good delivery and silencing efficiency of the carrier. Cells
were transfected with PAH.OA/siRNA anti-GFP at N/P 2.5, 5, and 10.
N/P 15 was removed from the assay due to the cytotoxicity found in
viability experiments. Cell fluorescence was measured by a flow cytometer
96 h after transfection. GFP expression is represented as a relative
expression compared to nontreated cells. shows a low transfection efficiency for
N/P 2.5 in all polymers, where the expression of GFP is above 70%.
N/P 5 and N/P 10 resulted in delivery efficiency up to 50% in PAH,
PAH.OA.1, and PAH.OA.2. However, it must be taken into account that
these oleic substitutions are toxic at N/P 10, so the rigorous data
are taken as N/P 5. The efficacy increased in PAH.OA.5 and PAH.OA.10
reducing the GFP expression up to 60 and 70%, respectively. However,
PAH.OA.20 showed lower transfection compared to the nonsubstituted
PAH. Best efficiencies were obtained for PAH.OA.10 at N/P 5 and N/P
10. PAH substitution with oleic acid increases the siRNA delivery
efficiency up to a certain degree. Every substitute can cross the
cell membrane; however, our results hint that there are differences
in the ability of escaping from the endosome. PEI aliphatic substitutions
led as well to an improvement in the transfection efficiency but not
to an increase in the cell uptake. , PAH.OA.10
polyplexes appear to be the best candidates to escape from the endosome
and release cargo. How polymers and other
carriers such as lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) escape endosome is a debate.
The most accepted hypothesis lies on the pKa value of the polymer
or nanoparticle which should be closed to the endosomal pH, that is,
6, when acidification starts. Thus, amino groups act as a pH buffer
of incoming proton during endo-lysosomal acidify cation. Proton accumulations
cause osmotic swelling and compartment disruption. This effect is
called “proton sponge.” To elucidate how polyallylamine
modified with oleic acid would overcome endo-lysosomal compartments,
CLSM studies have been carried out, labelling siRNA with the Cy5 fluorophore
and lysosomes with Lysotracker green (Figure S10A,B). CLSM images have been obtained at different time points: 2, 24,
and 48 h after transfection. Lysosomes are the final destination of
the endocytic pathway, where the acid hydrolases digest all molecules.
If the labelled siRNA manages to escape from the endosome before fusing
with the lysosome, we should see fluorescence from siRNA not colocalizing
with the labelled lysosomes. In the CLSM images, in a majority of
the cases, we observe colocalization (Figure S10A), meaning that siRNAs are present within the lysosomes. However,
the presence of siRNA outside the lysosomes can be distinguished.
A small leakage of siRNA molecules into the cytoplasm can be hypothesized,
although most of them remain in the lysosomal interior. These data
are in accordance with the studies done in LNPs, in which it is shown
that only 1–2% of transfected siRNA manage to escape from the
endosome at early stages, although the
leaked siRNA, approximately 2000 copies, are sufficient to promote
gene knockdown. Some works , show that endosomes remain intact after escape occurred, meaning
that there are other ways to overcome the endosome barrier. The electrostatic
interaction of the amines of the polymer with the endosome membrane
and membrane disruption is another alternative explanation to cytosol
translocation. In any case, the proof of translocation is given by
the successful transfection. The siRNA cannot silence if it does not
reach the cytoplasm to complex the mRNA escaping from the endosomes.
 The improvement in transfection efficacy with oleic
acid is probably
indicative of the polymers having weaker interactions with the polyamines
that lead to an easier release of the siRNAs in the cytosol. Larger
substitutions of oleic acid, that is, >14%, provide more stability
to the polyplexes, preventing the release of the siRNAs in the cytosol.
Additionally, the decrease in the number of positive charges makes
less effective the interaction of the carriers with the membrane to
facilitate translocation of the polyplexes.

3.3.

## CD47 Silencing
CD47 is a transmembrane
protein overexpressed in cancer cells and is recognized by macrophages
as a “don’t eat” signal. Blocking the interaction between CD47 and SIRPα in macrophages
will promote the phagocytosis of cancer cells as demonstrated in previous
works. , , , To explore the potential of OA-modified PAH as a
vector for siRNA involved in pulmonary cancer immunotherapy, we tested
its delivery capacity against the therapeutic target gene CD47. For
this purpose, mRNA expression and protein quantity of the CD47 gene
were evaluated after treatment with siRNA anti-CD47 using different
PAH substitutes as carriers. As in previous experiments, N/P 5 was
chosen to keep the balance between transfection efficiency and cytotoxicity.
mRNA levels were evaluated at 24, 48, and 72 h after transfection.
Results are normalized to the control of nontreated cells after applying
the delta–delta Ct method (2–ΔΔCt). As already observed for GFP transfection, PAH.OA.10 exhibited
the best reduction of mRNA levels ( A). Maximal reduction of mRNA levels takes
place 48 h after transfection, and after 72 h, mRNA levels recovered
slightly. To ensure that the reduction of mRNA levels is not due to
an interaction of the polymer, siRNA with no silencing toward CD47
was used as the negative control. Negative control siRNA/PAH.OA.5
and PAH.OA.10 did not reduce CD47 mRNA. Knockdown of CD47 protein
after release of siRNA using PAH.OA polymers was evaluated by western
blot and immunofluorescence of CD47 in A549. Confocal microscopy images
after immunostaining with CD47 antibodies are shown in B for nontreated cells and
cells administrated with PAH and PAH.OA.10 nanoparticles and in Figure S8 with PAH.OA.1, PAH.OA.2, PAH.OA.5,
and PAH.OA.20. Left column represents the transfection with a negative
control siRNA. Right column corresponds to the transfection with siRNA
anti-CD47. Results show that the CD47 protein was fully expressed
in the cell membrane after transfection with the negative control
siRNA. However, the expression decreased with the delivery of siRNA
anti-CD47, partially for PAH, PAH.OA.1, and PAH.OA.2, and mostly disappeared
with PAH.OA.5 and PAH.OA.10. CD47 expression remained unchanged with
PAH.OA.20. A western blot of protein CD47 after transfection with
siRNA anti-CD47 is shown in D. CPA was chosen as the endogenous gene because of
good separation in molecular weight (18 kDa) with respect to CD47
(47–52 kDa). CPA expression is not changed after treatment
with siRNA-CD47 polyplexes. However, some polyplexes modified the
expression of CD47. PAH.OA.5 and PAH.OA.10 showed thinner and weaker
bands compared to PAH, PAH.OA.1, and PAH.OA.2. These data correlate
with mRNA levels ( A) and immunofluorescent images ( B and S9). Quantification
of CD47 knockdown was achieved by staining A549 with the CD47 antibody
and measuring fluorescence from the cells by flow cytometry. siRNA
negative control and siRNA anti-CD47 were used to transfect A549 cells
with the oleic acid-modified PAHs. 72 h after transfection, the cells
were harvested and stained with CD47 antibodies. An isotype antibody
was used as the control of the anti-CD47 antibody (data shown in Figure S11). Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. C shows the normalized
data from CD47 fluorescence, calculated as fluorescence of CD47 treated
with siRNA CD47 divided by fluorescence of CD47 treated with negative
siRNA using the same polymer. For PAH.OA.10, CD47 expression was reduced
to 33%, a transfection close to the 25% expression obtained with lipofectamine
RNAimax considered as the positive control. PAH.OA.5 proved to be
the second most effective polymer resulting in an expression of CD47
at around 43%. PAH, PAH.OA.1 PAH.OA.2, and PAH.OA.20 did not achieve
more than half protein knockdown. This data correlate with the mRNA
analysis, western blot, and immunofluorescence, as well as with siRNA
anti-GFP.
 PAH modified with OA is a good carrier for siRNA
to reduce CD47
expression in terms of transfection efficacy and toxicity. Ongoing
work is focused on in vivo transfection and on exploring the inhalation
route for siRNA delivery to lung cancer.

4.

## Conclusions
OA modification reduces
positive charges in PAH without affecting
the capacity of the polyamines to form complexes with siRNA while
significantly reducing the cytotoxicity of the polyplexes. In addition,
the degree of substitution of PAH with OA increases the silencing
efficacy for GFP for intermediate substitutions, that is, PAH.OA.5
and PAH.OA.10. At higher substitutions, the transfection efficacy
decreased again. A reduction of CD47 expression down to 33% of the
original value is obtained for 14% substitution of OA, which is approximately
half of the expression obtained for pristine PAH, that is, 60%. To
conclude, OA functionalization of PAH provides a means to fine tune
the charge of polyamines, improving the transfection efficacy and
decreasing the toxicity, thus enhancing the therapeutical potential.
The results of this work highlight the importance of charge balancing
in polyamines defining toxicological endpoints, favoring complexation
with nucleic acids, and facilitating nucleic acid release and translocation
into the cell cytoplasm. Our results show the potential application
of the carriers in therapy, particularly for the CD47 silencing in
the cancer cell, which is an interesting approach to fight solid tumors
by modulating cancerous cells.

## Acknowledgments
S.E.M. thanks the PID2020-114356RB-I00 project from
the Ministry of Science and Innovation of the Government of Spain.
S.E.M. and G.R. acknowledge support from the H2020 MSCA-RISE 2020
Project SUPRO-GEN, grant agreement No. 101008072. This work was performed
under the Maria de Maeztu Units of Excellence Program from the Spanish
State Research Agency—grant no. MDM-2017-0720. We thank Tanja
Lüdtke for FCS measurements.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsabm.2c00845.
Materials, FTIR spectra of PAH.OA polymers; TLC; elemental
analysis; DLS by number distribution; TEM images of PAH.OA assemblies
and polyplexes; 1H NMR and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy
of labelled PAH.OA; CLSM images of the localization of labelled polyplexes;
immunofluorescence microscopy; and flow cytometry data (PDF)

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
mt2c00845_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
mt2c00845_si_001.pdf