pmcACS OmegaACS Omega3686acsomega101691658aoACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical SocietyPMC9835549PMC9835549.1983554998355493664347510.1021/acsomega.2c040781ReviewAdvances in Lung
Cancer Treatment Using Nanomedicines
SharmaAkshansh ShambhwaniDevanshi https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2065-897XPandeySadanand https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3793-0450SinghJay LalhlenmawiaHauzel https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8946-5423KumarasamyMurali https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3823-6572SinghSachin Kumar ChellappanDinesh Kumar GuptaGaurav PrasherParteek DuaKamal https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2241-0054KumarDeepak †Department
of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shoolini University, Solan 173229, India‡Swami
Keshvanand Institute of Pharmacy, Jaipur 302025, India§Department
of Chemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, Gyeongbuk 38541, South Korea∥Department
of Chemistry, Institute of Science, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi 221005, India⊥Department
of Pharmacy, Regional Institute of Paramedical
and Nursing Sciences, Zemabawk, Aizawl, Mizoram 796017, India#Department
of Biotechnology, National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Hajipur 844102, India¶School
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Lovely Professional
University, Phagwara 144411, India□Faculty
of Health, Australian Research Centre in Complementary and Integrative
Medicine, University of Technology, Sydney, Ultimo-NSW 2007, Australia■Department
of Life Sciences, School of Pharmacy, International
Medical University, Kuala Lumpur 57000, Malaysia○Department
of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Suresh
Gyan Vihar University, Jaipur 302017, India●Department
of Pharmacology, Saveetha Dental College, Saveetha Institute of Medical
and Technical Sciences, Saveetha University, Chennai 602117, India△Uttaranchal
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Uttaranchal
University, Dehradun 248007, India▲Department
of Chemistry, University of Petroleum &
Energy Studies, Dehradun 248007, India▽Discipline
of Pharmacy, Graduate School of Health, University of Technology, Sydney, Ultimo-NSW 2007, Australia*sadanand.au@gmail.com.*kamal.dua@uts.edu.au.*guptadeepak002@gmail.com.29122022100120238142617610412906202213102022291220221301202316012023© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2022The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
Carcinoma of the lungs is among the most menacing forms
of malignancy
and has a poor prognosis, with a low overall survival rate due to
delayed detection and ineffectiveness of conventional therapy. Therefore,
drug delivery strategies that may overcome undesired damage to healthy
cells, boost therapeutic efficacy, and act as imaging tools are currently
gaining much attention. Advances in material science have resulted
in unique nanoscale-based theranostic agents, which provide renewed
hope for patients suffering from lung cancer. Nanotechnology has vastly
modified and upgraded the existing techniques, focusing primarily
on increasing bioavailability and stability of anti-cancer drugs.
Nanocarrier-based imaging systems as theranostic tools in the treatment
of lung carcinoma have proven to possess considerable benefits, such
as early detection and targeted therapeutic delivery for effectively
treating lung cancer. Several variants of nano-drug delivery agents
have been successfully studied for therapeutic applications, such
as liposomes, dendrimers, polymeric nanoparticles, nanoemulsions,
carbon nanotubes, gold nanoparticles, magnetic nanoparticles, solid
lipid nanoparticles, hydrogels, and micelles. In this Review, we present
a comprehensive outline on the various types of overexpressed receptors
in lung cancer, as well as the various targeting approaches of nanoparticles.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9ao2c04078document-id-new-14ao2c04078ccc-price1

## Introduction
Cancer has become one
of the paramount and most serious health
concerns globally, affecting people in both developing and developed
countries. , Lung cancer is one of the deadliest cancers,
accounting for a high mortality rate, and is the most frequent cause
of tumor-related fatalities. It is essentially categorized into primary
and secondary cancers. Based on the histological assessment, lung
carcinoma is subdivided into non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC),
small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC), mesothelioma, sarcoma, and carcinoid.
SCLC and NSCLC are the most commonly occurring, i.e., they represent
around 90% of all forms of lung cancers, while the incidence of other
types has been rare. , NSCLC is further subclassified
into four types: adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, large-cell
undifferentiated carcinoma, and Pancoast tumor. , SCLC
is an aggressively growing tumor and is categorized into small-cell
and ''oat cell'' cancer combined. Smoking
habits, hereditary factors, urbanization, and environmental factors
(like exposure to arsenic, toxins, and asbestos) are the primary causative
factors contributing to the pathogenesis of lung cancer. − As per the statistics released by the World Health Organization
(WHO), in 2020 alone there were around 2.21 million diagnosed cases
of lung cancers, along with 180 million deaths. 
Conventional strategies such as chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
and
surgical resection, either separately or in combination, have been
the mainstay of the current treatment regimens. , However, severe adverse reactions are well reported with such traditional
treatment methods. Moreover, the damage caused by radiotherapy to
the surrounding healthy cells is evident, and thus it should not be
the preferred treatment in patients who already have severely compromised
pulmonary systems, as this may lead to loss in the functionality of
the lungs. , Radiotherapy has also been used
in combination with chemotherapy and/or surgery lately. The main principle on which chemotherapy works
is by hindering the synthesis of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and mitosis,
which eventually leads to the death of rapidly spreading cancerous
cells. As the chemotherapeutic agents are non-selective, they tend
to impart undesirable adverse side effects to the surrounding normal
cells, which is one of the major reasons behind the high mortality
rate in tumor patients. The drug regimen is, moreover, administered
in specific cycles with regular breaks in between, which is essential
for the recovery of non-selectively damaged cells. But these breaks
may eventually restore even the carcinoma cells which were supposed
to be weakened or killed by the therapy. Furthermore, this could also
lead to myelosuppression, which requires extending the duration of
the break and/or even discontinuation of the agents. In addition, non-targeted cytotoxicity and the prevalence
of highly structured physical, physiological, and enzymatic barriers
make targeted drug delivery extremely difficult, which restricts drug
distribution to the target location. Moreover,
the advent of multi-drug resistance (MDR) substantially reduces treatment
effectiveness for the majority of malignancies. As a result, nanotechnology has emerged as a widely recognized
and promising approach in the battle against cancer.
Nanoparticles
(NPs) are colloidal particles with a diameter of
less than 100 nm, which are combined with a therapeutic agent that
is usually encapsulated inside the particle matrix, which is either
adsorbed or conjugated on the surface by structural changes to enhance
therapeutic stability and selective targeting. Nanoparticles are effective
theranostic agents due to their dimensional resemblance to biomolecules,
high surface-to-volume ratio, and potential for surface modification. Theranostic agents are tools that include cancer
cell imaging and treatment by incorporating numerous methods that
allow for a comprehensive diagnosis, molecular imaging, and a specific
treatment regimen all at the same time. Nanoparticles possess a sub-micron
size, which allows for deep tissue infiltration, penetration through
epithelial fenestrations, and usually effective uptake by targeted
cells, which elevates the bioavailability of therapeutic components. , By fabricating the particle polymer properties, it is possible to
maximize the amount and rate of drug release.
Nanotheranostics
provide significant advantages over conventional
therapeutic, diagnostic, and pharmaceutical approaches ( ). As there is a probability
of surface modification and a tendency
for both passive and active drug targeting, nanoparticles are intriguing agents which can be used in extremely
precise in vitro and in vivo imaging
and as targeted treatment sensors. , The nanotechnology
research in this field encompasses a wide variety of component systems
that modulate the speed and direct the drug to be released at a specific
site. Quantum dots, liposomes, polymeric
nanoparticles, inorganic nanoparticles, magnetic nanoparticles, dendrimers,
and gold nanoparticles are among the most investigated and promising
systems.
 Different synthetic and natural compounds have been
synthesized
and isolated and evaluated against lung cancer cell lines, but still
their mechanism of action needs to be explored. − To overcome the challenges associated with conventional
chemotherapy, the development of novel drug delivery systems which
can either passively or actively target carcinoma cells is urgently
required. Given the larger surface area
of the alveolar region, drug delivery to the lungs has provided numerous
promising opportunities for enhancing treatment efficacy. Lack of
mechanistic insights into the underlying cellular mechanisms behind
tumoral heterogeneity has drawn considerable attention to develop
the relevant treatment approaches and therapeutic strategies. Because
therapeutic responses are generally influenced by the emergence of
resistant subpopulations and variations in molecular phenotypes, hence
understanding tumor heterogeneity is therapeutically beneficial. For the past two decades, the rise of nano-based
delivery systems has created immense opportunities in clinical therapeutics
and enhanced bioavailability by demonstrating desirable properties
such as the prolonged retention of therapeutics in the lungs, consequently
reducing the amount of dose administered and improving patient compliance. This comprehensive review also discusses the
applications of novel drug delivery vehicles that employ nanomolecules
in the treatment and diagnosis of lung cancer.

2

## Overexpressed Receptors
2.1

## Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)
Overexpression of transmembrane protein EGFR plays a crucial role
in the advancement of carcinoma. It consists of an intracellular fragment
of tyrosine kinase activity and an extracellular section that includes
the ligand-binding area responsible for the regulation of tumor growth
(invasion, angiogenesis, metastasis, and proliferation of cells). Conformational modifications arise when ligands
bind to the attaching area. The binding of ligands and activity of
tyrosine kinase further leads to autophosphorylation that triggers
alterations in the signaling pathways. , These tyrosine
kinase inhibitors are more effective for altered EGFR in cancer. Mutations arising due to the overactivation
of EGFR alter the signal transduction pathways. Attachment of ligands
present on the outer side of the cell further leads to cell multiplication
and anti-apoptosis. , 

2.2

## Growth Hormone Receptor (GHR)
GHR
is a single-pass transmembrane receptor with at least one cytokine
receptor homology domain (CRHD) in its extracellular portion. The
CRHD has two fibronectin III (FNIII)-like folds. GHR overexpression
has been identified in A549 NSCLC and other related cancers. , 

2.3

## Folate Receptors
The folate receptors
demonstrate a greater binding affinity for folic acid. It comprises four different forms: Folate Receptor
Alpha (FRA), Folate Receptor Beta (FRB), Folate Receptor Gamma (FRG),
and Folate Receptor Delta (FRD). FRA is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored
glycoprotein present on the cell surface which is referred as FOLR-1
or folate binding protein (FBP) and assists in the delivery of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate
(5-MTF) (an active form of folate). − Overexpression of the
FRA has been observed in lung-like solid tumor types and direct or
indirect pathway of absorption of folate proves to be advantageous
for the growth of cancer cells. − Several studies have reported
on the elevated levels of overexpressed FRA in NSCLC. , The U.S. FDA (United States Food and Drug Administration) has approved
various techniques that target FRA. 

2.4

## Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptors
(VEGFR)
The VEGFRs were first recognized as a vascular permeability
factor that trigger vascular leakage when exuded by tumor cells. , FLT-1 (VEGFR1), FLK-1 (VEGFR2), and FLT-4 (VEGFR3) are three major
types of tyrosine kinase receptors that exclusively bind to mammalian
VEGFR. These receptors feature seven extracellular immunoglobulin-like
domains which get stimulated by ligand-mediated dimerization. These receptors are frequently overexpressed
in NSCLC and possess an acknowledged significance in angiogenesis,
proliferation, and metastasis of tumor cells. , 

2.5

## Luteinizing Hormone-Releasing Hormone Receptor
(LHRHR)
Overexpressed LHRHR found in the cytoplasmic membrane
of lung cancer cells could be utilized for targeting the cancer cells
without causing any harm to healthy natural cells. Several studies have shown successful targeted screening
and delivery of antitumor drugs to the cancerous cells by employing
LHRH peptides, by boosting their concentration in the tumor microenvironment
and reducing undesirable interactions with the surrounding healthy
cells. 

2.6

## Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor (FGFR)
The extracellular component of FGFR is made up of immunoglobulin
resembling domains that possess greater affinity for FGF ligand, consist
of a transmembrane region, and possess tyrosine kinase activity. This family of receptors is classified into
four groups FGFR1 to FGFR4. Unusual FGF/FGFR signaling, alterations
or amplification of genes (oncogenic) may contribute to tumorigenesis
and therapy resistance in various cancers such as malignant melanoma
and solid tumors. , Elevated expression of FGFR1
is reported in NSCLC with varying ratios in squamous cell carcinomas
and lung adenocarcinomas. , 

2.7

## Cluster of Differentiation 44 (CD44)
CD44 is a membrane glycoprotein receptor that plays an important
role by binding to hyaluronic acid particularly to help normal and
cancer stem cells attach, differentiate, perform homing, and migrate. CD44 overexpression was found in pneumocytes
(type II) and squamous metaplasia, in lung cancer. The cluster of differentiation 44v6 has been linked to
lymph node metastases in NSCLC patients. − 

2.8

## Integrins
Integrins belong to transmembrane
heterodimeric glycoprotein family that consists of non-covalently
linked alpha and beta subunits. They
are dependent on the orientation patterns exhibited in the middle
of 18 α and 8 β subunits, and there are 24 distinct integrin
receptors. Integrins are detected in
almost 82% of all NSCLC patients, regardless of differentiation type
or degree. On the other hand, just 13% of SCLCs demonstrated an overexpressed
α3β1. Downregulated levels
of integrin expression have been related to SCLC, as well as the disease’s
high severity and potential to spread. 

2.9

## Mer or Axl as Receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK)
RTKs are members of the group of transmembrane proteins, with a
large amount of variation in the extracellular area and a common intracellular
tyrosine kinase domain. Axl is a key member of the RTK family TYRO3-AXL-MER
(TAM). AXL overexpression was observed in NSCLC ADC (antibody–drug
conjugates). The TAM family’s
second most significant member, MER, was identified from a chicken
retrovirus RLP30. Mer overexpression was reported in T-cell acute
lung carcinoma. , Overexpression of these receptors
has been linked to chemotherapeutic treatment resistance, tumor growth,
and advancement in the cancer metastatic stage. 

2.10

## Interleukin-22 Receptor
The cytokine
interleukin-22 (IL-22) is a member of the IL-10 cytokine family. Expression
is shown by macrophages, alveolar cells, and T cells in the lungs
and operates entirely on IL-22-R1 (IL-22-receptor 1). Zhang with his team (2008) found IL-22 and IL-22R1 upregulation in cancerous tissue and serum
of patients, and since then it has been shown that it protects cancerous
cell lines from serum deprivation led cell death triggered by therapeutics.

2.11

## Adenosine Receptors (AR)
A1, A2A, A2B, and A3 are the members
of G-protein-coupled adenosine receptors. Of these, it is reported
that A3 has been highly expressed in the lung tissues, although the overexpression varies when compared
to that of other ARs that are elevated at various degrees in the lung. The Cancer Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP) reported
that the expression of A3AR was higher in malignant tissues
as compared to normal tissues of the same patient. 

2.12

## Chemotactic Cytokine CXCR4 Receptor
Chemotactic cytokine receptors have 7 transmembrane-spanning helixes
and belong to the class of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR). They
bind to a chemotactic cytokine ligand and participate in the migration
of a number of cell types. CXC and CC
are the two primary types of chemokines. The first two cysteine residues
in CXC are separated by an amino acid, whereas it is adjacently placed
in chemotactic cytokines. CXCR4 is a
chemotactic cytokine receptor that is solely activated through CXCL12. This pair is responsible for the spread of NSCLC
cancer. According to Saintigny and Burger (2012), elevation of CXCR4/CXCL12
linkage was related to a later stage of illness and a worsened diagnosis. The receptor linkage was reported in approximately
80% of non-small-cell lung carcinoma tissue sections collected from
cancer patients in stages IA to IIB. 

2.13

## Bombesin Receptor
The GPCR family
of human bombesin receptors has three subcategories: the BB1 receptor,
which links neuromedin (NMB) with strong potential, the BB2 receptor,
which aids in binding GRP (gastrin-releasing peptide), and the BRS-3
(bombesin receptor subtype-3). Due to
its strong structural similarity with the other two bombesin receptors,
BRS-3 is categorized as a member of the bombesin receptor family.
BB1 and BB2 receptors have been found to be overexpressed in most
types of lung carcinoma, and they essentially contribute in enhancing
the growth of malignant cells, which frequently function by autocrine
mechanisms. When BRS-3 gets activated,
it leads to the elevation of intracellular calcium and phospholipase
C, further leading to activating PKC (protein kinase C) and MAPK (mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway). Hence, BRS-3
consequently phosphorylates ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase)
tyrosine and expresses Elk-1 (ETS like-1 protein) and c-Fos, which
is the reason behind excessive growth of lung tumor cells. 

2.14

## PETA-3/CD151
Tetraspanins (Tspan)
consist of the following transmembrane domain proteins: (i) N-cytoplasmic
domain, (ii) C-cytoplasmic domain, and (iii) two extracellular domains. CD151 (cluster of differentiation 151), CD9,
and Tspan12 are three of the 33 human tetraspanin proteins that have
shown significance in tumorigenesis. Clinical
investigations have found a strong link, associating the expression
of CD151 protein with the sufferers of NSCLC, suggesting that it might
be an efficient diagnostic tool for NSCLC, especially in patients
of adenocarcinoma. 

2.15

## Sigma (σ) Receptors
σ1
(sigma-1) and σ2 (sigma-2) are membrane-bound protein sigma
receptors, each with its own pharmacological profile. Six out of 15
human adenocarcinoma samples and 12 out of 15 human SCLC samples have
shown considerable overexpression of σ2 receptors. Various studies
conducted on σ2 have demonstrated that it is a promising bioindicator
which has the potential to be exploited as a new chemotherapeutic
target. , 

2.16

## Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) Receptors
The ALK gene is responsible for encoding the human enzyme ALK receptor,
also known as CD26. This receptor belongs to the superfamily of insulin
receptors and exhibits an enhanced conformance to leukocyte tyrosine
kinase. Genetic arrangement had earlier led to the initial identification
of ALK receptor in anaplastic large cell lymphomas, following which, it has been reconfigured, mutated, or
amplified in a series of cancers including neuroblastoma, lymphoma,
and NSCLC. 

2.17

## ROS Proto-oncogene 1, Tyrosine Kinase Receptor
The ROS1 (c-ros oncogene 1) gene is a receptor tyrosine kinase
that structurally resembles the ALK protein. After the first report
on ROS1 rearrangements in NSCLC was published, consequently altered ROS1 was identified in patients as
a distinct type of molecule. 

3

## Targeting Approach of Nanocarrier
The
interactions between nanomaterials and biological systems must
be thoroughly investigated in order to develop an efficient nanoparticulate
system for delivery of drugs. Three phases must be fulfilled before
the nanoparticle-drug delivery system reaches the tumor. They initially
circulate through the body and are substantially ingested by macrophages
from the reticuloendothelial system (RES). Subsequently, they proceed to permeate and deliver drugs to the
tumor. Eventually, they accumulate at the tumor site where they exert
pharmacological effects. However, before NPs reach the malignant cells,
they are more inclined to interact with immune cells (macrophages
and neutrophils) in the RES (liver and spleen) via blood circulation
and are eliminated by urinary clearance. Perpetuating the blood circulation is required to reduce RES deposition,
however; a prolonged vascular circulation of NPs enhances the likelihood
of immunological interactions with the RES. Thus, specific surface
alteration can considerably boost the absorption and dispersion of
smaller NPs in tumor tissues. Drugs that are hydrophobic are more
soluble when they are combined with polyethylene glycol (PEG). It
is advantageous to modify the nanoparticle surface of hydrophobic
drugs by amalgamating it with PEG because it elevates solubility,
prolongs circulation period, and targets specified tumors through
an enhanced permeation and retention (EPR) effect. Two generations of PEG conjugation approaches are used:
the first generation, also known as PEGylation by randomization, and
the second generation, also known as the targeted approach. Specific
targeted drug delivery can be achieved by PEGylation, through active
and passive routes. Numerous nanoparticles have been synthesized with
an improved PK (pharmacokinetic) profile via PEGylation technique.
Since such PEGylated NPs can significantly evade RES observation than
the control nanoparticles, they are frequently referred to as “stealth”
nanoparticles. Strategies involved in
the development of target-specific small molecules are respectively
modified through inserting a nanocarrier inside the surface-functionalized
novel nanosystem or by surface modification of the novel carrier (see ). Localized drug
delivery of nanosystem for lung cancer therapy has fundamental advantages,
but an undiscriminating release of anti-cancer drugs can be lethal
for non-cancerous cells and the lung parenchyma. Targeted drug delivery
systems provide a selective release of the drug directly into the
cell. These modified novel delivery compositions are required to reduce
cell toxicity. In addition, they also help in increasing the retention
time and efficacy of the drug. These novel drug deliveries of small
molecules play an important role in lung cancer treatment.
 Strategies are generally classified into three
categories: (1)
receptor-based targeting, (2) passive targeting, and (3) stimuli-responsive
system-based targeting.
3.1

## Receptor-Based Targeting
Modification
of the drug nanocarrier surface results in the delivery of the drug
which is specific to the tumor cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis.
Folic acid, transferrin, albumin, hyaluronic acid, RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartic
acid), and herceptin have been utilized for modifying the surface
of nanocarriers and now have improved the tumor-targeting efficiency.
Here are some receptor-based targeting approaches which are contributed
by many researchers for providing targeted delivery of novel nanocarrier
in terms of permeation, cell uptake, and tumor internalization
EGFR Receptor-Based Targeting: Herceptin could be
used as an option for receptor-based targeting. Herceptin identifies
HER2 receptors overexpressed in breast cancer tumor cells. Paclitaxel
(PTX) and docetaxel (DTX) nanocarriers modified with herceptin were
employed to avoid drug loss before it reaches the targeted cells and
organs. Herceptin-modified nanocarriers could be prepared by adsorption
reactions which are carried out overnight with moderate shaking at
room temperature. Such modifications have enhanced cellular uptake,
improved the release of drugs, and have demonstrated cytotoxic activity. 
Transferrin/Folic Acid Receptor-Based
Targeting: Paclitaxel nanocarrier was reportedly inserted
with apo-transferrin
to provide a selective target delivery. Another example of paclitaxel
is the modification of the paclitaxel nanocarrier superficially with
transferrin surface protein which had previously provided higher tumor
inhibition. Selective tumor-targeting peptide, XQ1(HAIYPRHGGGF),
binds with transferrin receptors and thus improves the antineoplastic
action of camptothecin nanocarriers on HeLa and A549 cell lines. 
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor
Receptor-Based Targeting: Oral treatment of bovine lactoferrin
(BLF) reduced VEGF overexpression
in lung cancer cells, which is linked to vascularization and angiogenesis,
as per immunohistochemistry examination. These mechanisms serve as
a crucial contributor to the tumor development, including tumor progression,
penetration, and metastasis. BLF could block angiogenesis, which makes
it useful for treating the carcinoma efficiently. 
Luteinizing Hormone-Releasing Receptor-Based
Targeting: Tartula et al. discovered that luteinizing hormone-releasing
receptor
fabricated nanostructured lipid carriers (LHRH-NLC) had success in
delivering paclitaxel to the lungs via inhalation. The results showed
that Luteinizing hormone-releasing receptor conjugated nanostructured
lipid paclitaxel had 16 times better apoptosis than the standard drug
and was selectively localized in tumor sites compared to non-targeted
NLC nanoparticles. 
CD44
Receptor-Based Targeting: Hyaluronic acid-coated
lapatinib nanocarriers are used in active targeting of the CD44 receptor
which is overexpressed by the cancer cells. Another type of a nanocarrier of paclitaxel was combined with hyaluronic
acid that binds to CD44, which is a cell surface receptor upregulated
in some other types of cancer (gastric or breast). This intercellular adhesion molecule binds with a receptor
for hyaluronic acid-mediated motility for tumor-selective targeting.
Integrin Adhesion Molecule αvβ3-Based Targeting: RGD engineered nanocrystals can
attach to αvβ3, an integrin attachment protein seen on
tumor cells, and then could be incorporated via receptor-mediated
endocytosis. To achieve αvβ3-based targeting, RGD-modified
NCs (nanocapsules), such as RGD-modified PTX NC, may be synthesized via the Schiff base reaction.
Sigma-1 (σ1) Receptor-Based Targeting: Ligands
include [18F]FTC-146, [18F]fluspidine, donezepil, while for sigma2, it includes [11C]RHM-1, [18F]ISO-1, siramesine,
WC-26, DTG (1, 3-ditolyl guanidine), and SV119. Drugs that modulate ion channels and antiproliferative
processes, have shown anti-cancer efficacy when acting on the sigma1
and sigma-2 receptors. As a result, the medication acting on receptors
makes it an effective potential chemotherapeutic tool in treating
lung carcinoma cell lines. 
ROS Proto-oncogene 1 Receptor-Based Targeting: Crizotinib
was first discovered to have anti-cancer efficacy in
individuals with advanced type NSCLC who had a ROS1 fusion. Other examples that inhibit the ROS1 receptor
(c-ros oncogene 1) are ROS1 Ceritinib (LDK378), Lorlatinib DS-6051ba and Entrectinib 
Other Endocytosis: Targeted drug delivery
could
be done by the endocytosis pathway such as caveolar or clathrin-mediated
endocytosis. Modified paclitaxel nanocarriers are prepared by albumin
absorbed paclitaxel nanocarrier and triphenyl phosphonium cation.

3.2

## Passive Targeting
Passive targeting
approaches enhance the infiltration rate in circulatory vessels in
the cancer microenvironment by EPR effect as compared to the usual
healthy condition. Enhancing the permeability and retention generally
increases 20% to 30% targeting ability as compared to healthy cells. , Tumors generally grow in unfavorable conditions such as hypoxia
or inflammation and rapidly growing cancerous tumors block the new
vessels or blood vessels which are present in the surrounding environment.
This selectively enhanced permeation of nanosystems might help the
tumor stroma and furthermore such enhancement in the permeation in
newly generated vessels could improve the retention time. However,
drainage of lymph could remove such small molecules and may also decrease
the retention time of the drug. Therefore, the regulation of lymphatic
drainage is necessary. Physico-chemical characteristics including
charge, particle size, and surface-related chemistry are known to
improve the EPR effect-based passive targeting to the tumor. It is
challenging for a drug molecule which possesses a certain degree of
therapeutic value to lodge itself effectively in all target cells. Uneven targeting of tumor cells is the basic
limitation that could be overcome by producing more target-specific
novel nanocarriers that efficiently link with tumor cells following
the irruption process. NDDSs (novel drug delivery systems) containing
small molecules improve their pharmacokinetic profile by increasing
the retention time and reducing unwanted adverse effects that occur
due to the target specificity of the drug.

3.3

## Stimuli-Responsive System-Based Targeting
A stimuli-responsive system-based targeting could provide effective
and selective therapies. Tumor cells have many key variations in their
intracellular cytosolic levels and extracellular tumor microenvironments
such as hypoxia, temperature, pH, and glutathione levels. Release
of the drug from polymers on exposure to a stimulus specific to a
tumor cell microenvironment or providing various types of polymers
from the surroundings might be a viable strategy for the preparation
of such nanocarrier inserted drugs.
pH-Responsive Systems: Over the years, the lower pH of the tumor microenvironment (4.5–6.5
pH) and lysosomes (5.5–6.8 pH) have been explored to directly
release of a drug to the extracellular tumor microenvironment or intracellular
cytosol, mitochondria, and nucleus. Liang et al. used a pH-responsive peptide and mannitol-based spray-dried
powder inhalation system to improve nucleic acid transfection and
ensure stability in the prevalence of broncho-alveolar lavage media,
delivering payloads to tumor areas with lower pH values.
Temperature-Responsive Systems: As hyperthermia
is one of the characteristics of tumorous tissues, modifying the medication
release rate in a temperature-dependent way at a specific location
has proven highly beneficial in cancer therapy. Moreover, the surface
of nanocrystals may be modified using thermo-responsive polymers.
To encapsulate 5-Fluorouracil, Wu et al. employed cellulose nanocrystal grafted thermo-responsive PNIPAM
[poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)] brushes. When the temperature
was elevated from 25 °C to 37–40 °C, PNIPAM was shown
to produce a multiple-fold increase in drug release from the system.
The thermo-responsive release method can also be utilized with stimulus-guided
methods, in which the medication is released in response to an external
signal.
Enzyme-Responsive Systems: Since specific
enzymes
are present at the tumor site, it is possible to employ them to selectively
release medicines from enzyme-responsive systems. Tagami et al. described a doxorubicin-loaded hybrid liposomal
system made up of phospholipids and poloxamer 188 that was sensitive
to the PLA2 (phospholipase A2) enzyme expressed in cancer cells. The
presence of the PLA2 enzyme resulted in an 8-fold increase in the
release of drugs. Enzyme-responsive nanocarriers can be utilized to
encapsulate medication nanocrystals and transport them via the pulmonary
route for cancer therapy at a local level.
Ligand-Attached
Stimuli-Targeted Systems: Pulmonary
delivered receptor-based targeting mixed with stimuli-responsive system-based
drug delivery can be utilized to improve drug intracellular localization
in lung cancer cells. Tseng et al. created
gelatin nanoparticle-based aerosols with EGFR receptor targeting for
pulmonary administration in mice. The aerosolized method improved
the intracellular accumulation of the drug substance in lung cancer
cells. Such systems could be exploited to deliver additional treatments
such as drug nanocrystals through the lungs. Similarly, the extracellular
release of the payload was inhibited when the intracellular concentration
of siRNA (small interfering RNA) was enhanced with higher stability
by a siRNA-loaded dextran nanogel covered with pulmonary surfactant
surface and adorned with folate.
Redox-Responsive Systems: Redox-sensitive systems
offer great potential and offer several advantages in cancer therapy.
Such stimuli-responsive methods have been proved to be effective for
delivering anti-cancer medicines to cancer cells selectively. Tumors,
or more particularly, cancer cells, have an increased amount of intracellular
ROS, which can be exploited to deliver pulmonary nanoparticle systems
to cancer cells. A liposome-based nanosystem comprising of a redox-sensitive
cationic oligopeptide lipid with proton sponge effect, soya PC (phosphatidylcholine),
and cholesterol was developed for the co-delivery of paclitaxel and
anti-survival siRNA in a study done by Chen and co-workers. The synthesized liposomes were quick to release
the drug and siRNA into the cytosol, through endo-lysosomal leakage,
which consequently resulted in a reduced survival expression and elevated
apoptosis induction.
Magnetic Field-Responsive Systems: Using magnetic
fields as an external trigger, site-specific delivery of therapeutic
substances to the cytosol or extracellularly localized malignancies
in the lungs have also been described. Park et al. used PEG-polyethylenimine-DOPA (dopamine) to synthesize
a magnetite nanocrystal cluster that exhibited magnetically induced
intracellular transport of loaded siRNA into cancer cells.
Multi-Stimuli-Responsive Systems: Multiple multi-responsive
delivery methodologies for the pulmonary delivery of biomolecules
to cancer cells have been established previously. Qu et al. presented a dual redox and pH-responsive system
dependent on a GSH (glutathione) sensitive disulfide linker and a
pH-sensitive moiety, which specifically released the drug in the tumor
microenvironment with elevated anti-tumor activity.

4

## Nanocarrier-Mediated Drug Delivery Systems
 illustrates
several types of nanocarriers which are being employed in lung cancer
therapy. In addition, due to the regulated drug release pattern and
improved in vivo efficacy of encapsulated drugs,
their acceptance is now well recognized. Various types of natural,
semi-synthetic, and synthetic forms of nanomaterials are now utilized
as drug delivery vectors. 
 4.1

## Liposomes
Liposomes are gaining much
significance lately as a potent anti-cancer drug delivery tool. Liposomal
research has expanded in the past decade because of its excellent
biocompatibility, resulting in a plethora of newly formed formulations
like: archaeosomes, virosomes, temperature-responsive liposomes, and
cationic liposomes. Liposomes are nanocarrier
tools, synthesized from natural or synthetic lipids and occur as single
or multiple bilayer forms. Banham developed
liposome-derived phospholipid vesicles in 1965, and they were quickly
identified as prospective medication carriers. These are classified as multilamellar vesicles ( ) made of several
concentric phospholipid bilayers (1.0–5.0 μm), as well
as big (500–1000 Å) and small (300–500 Å)
unilamellar vesicles. Several drugs
which were approved lung cancer therapy are being continuously developed
into liposomal formulations. Etoposide (ETP), doxorubicin (DOX), paclitaxel
(PTX), irinotecan (IRI), erlotinib, docetaxel (DTX), vinorelbine (VNB),
cisplatin (CPPD), and epirubicin were developed as liposomal formulations.
In addition, the antimetastatic efficacy of DOX conjugated liposome
and tretinoin have been studied as chemotherapeutic agents for cancers
that have spread to the lungs (melanoma, breast cancer). − The importance of liposomes is associated with its enhanced efficiency
and less invasive drug delivery to the bronchial tissues which is
a consequence of their prolonged release characteristic and the increased
probability to target-specific administration of the therapeutic agents. Remote-loading or gradient methods have been
used to load hydrophilic pharmaceuticals such as DOX, which is a hydrophilic
weak base molecule. Liposomal-based formulation serves as a solubilizing
matrix for hydrophobic, water-insoluble compounds like PTX, as well
as a means for lowering medication-related toxicity. 
 Stealth liposomes or PEGylated liposomes are synthesized
through
modifying the lipid bilayer surface and by incorporating the synthetic
PEG into the mixture. When insertion of cholesterol into the lipoidal
layer is executed, attaching the liposomal membrane with PEG allows
the liposome to circulate in the blood system for longer periods which
results in its diminished absorption by the phagocytic system. Therapeutic activity is initiated, when the
drug molecule passes through the cellular membrane to intracellular
sites of action. As a result, ligand-targeted liposomes were proposed
to improve the selectivity of liposome-mediated administration. This
technique has gained considerable attention for utilization in lung
cancer-based treatment and research. In lung cancer, the main targeting
strategies include (i) specific targeting of the tumor microenvironment
(TME), (ii) overexpressed receptor-mediated targeting, and (iii) targeting
the organelle in demand. Attaching a target-specific ligand with DSPE-MPEG
(1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[maleimide(polyethylene glycol)] integrates the
ligand with the membrane during the generation of liposome. Sometimes
the ligand gets infiltrated into the lipoplasmic surface. Cetuximab possesses significant inhibitory activity on
EGFR and EphA2 (Ephrin A-family) receptors. This ligand was linked
to the maleimide group of DSPE-MPEG through the surface of liposomal
bilayer. DSPE-PEG was coupled with small molecules such as arginylglycylaspartic
acid (which targets overexpressed integrin receptors) and anisamide
(which targets overexpressed sigma receptors). A CD44 receptor-targeting
hyaluronic acid ligand was reported to be coupled with DOPE (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3- phosphoethanolamine). Khatri et al. demonstrated
that RGD grafted liposomes carrying siRNA were more efficiently absorbed
by NSCLC cells from a target-specific and multipurpose-based epirubicin
liposomal formulation. The formulated
multipurpose epirubicin liposomes were found to have better tumor
targeting efficacy, a longer survival time, and a greater anti-cancer
effect than non-targeted liposomes liposomes. , Octreotide is a tumor marker that may be linked onto the liposomal
membrane by selectively binding with the overexpressed somatostatin
receptors. , 
There are several types
of liposomal formulations in various phases
of clinical trials to treat NSCLC ( ). Several
preclinical investigations have shown that targeted and non-targeted
liposomal drug delivery methods could improve biodistribution and
therapeutic efficacy. Doxil was the
first FDA-approved (U.S. Food and Drug Administration) nanodrug in
1995. Utilization of PEGylated nanoliposomes, aided in extending the
drug circulation time and preventing RES. Doxil and topotecan have entered phase I clinical trials as potential
treatment modules in SCLC. However, no information from this study
is available. The chemotherapeutic drug
CPPD is the most widely utilized drug in lung cancer treatment regimens.
SPI-077 (Alza Corporation) was the first liposomal CPPD to be developed,
containing the same lipid makeup as Doxil. Animal studies and preclinical
trials revealed promising efficacy in NSCLC treatment and a potential
delay in proliferation and growth of tumor cells when compared to
CPPD. According to the data provided by phase I/II trials, large doses
of liposome-based CPPD when administered are safe and have less toxicity
in patients with NSCLC. The potency of lipoplatin in NSCLC was compared
in two clinical trials which were randomly conducted (phase II and
phase III). Lipoplatin conjugated gemcitabine or lipoplatin conjugated
paclitaxel were observed to be as effective as cisplatin conjugated
gemcitabine or cisplatin conjugated paclitaxel. Additionally, these
formulations were proven to be substantially less toxic. In NSCLC patients (stage III and stage IV),
stimuvex exhibited satisfactory results in the initial stage trials. This was the earliest cancer vaccine which
entered multiple advanced phase III clinical studies around the world
(START, INSPIRE, STRIDE).
 The necessity for consistency in biological fluids
is one of the
concerns with liposomes, when employed as drug delivery vehicles.
Drug molecules leak into natural tissues, as a result, producing undesired
effects. In conclusion, future research on liposomal conjugated drug
delivery could be designed through functionally versatile platforms
by administering target-specific theranostic agents for cancerous
cells. Liposomes have also shown magnificent biodegradability and
biocompatibility for lung cancer as theranostics. Furthermore, liposomes
have an advantage over other nanoparticles since they can retain a
large number of therapeutic substances and are easy to develop and
utilize for long-term drug delivery. For morphological evaluation
using MRI, contrasting compounds such as gadolinium (Gd) are often
utilized. Although liposomes conjugated
with Gd have been proven to have no toxicity or adverse effects in
normal cells, these complexes might be used as a promising theranostic
tool for cancer therapy if loaded with antitumor agents and coupled
with particular ligands of interest. Cheng et al. employed the EGFR binding interactions of a novel peptide
GE11 in doxorubicin-encapsulated liposomes to evaluate size range,
zeta potential, drug encapsulation efficiency, and shape. In A549
cytotoxicity, it was reported that a 10% GE11 density was optimum.
They discovered that GE-11 altered liposomes accumulated and retained
2.2-fold more than unmodified liposomes using a near-infrared (NIR)
fluorescence imaging system. Additionally,
they will be capable enough for triggering targeted delivery at specific
locations where an outcome is required. Furthermore, surmounting the
therapeutic resistance will be the objective in modified and improved
liposome-based drugs. Advancements in treating lung cancer through
therapy, could be achieved by implementing the suggestions discussed,
which also aim at minimizing the side effects caused on healthy cells
and tissues.

4.2

## Polymeric Nanoparticles
Different
polymers are employed to encapsulate drugs which constitutes a class
of nanoparticles known as polymeric nanoparticles ( ). Such polymeric NPs are employed
to target-specific tumor cells or tissues by linking them to the ligand
and increasing the affinity and stability of the drug. Polymeric nanoparticles are widely demanded
for both active and passive strategies of targeting malignant cells.
There are several polymers that can be used in the synthesis of polymer
nanoparticles. Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA),
poly(lactic acid) (PLA), and a few additional polymers [poly(glycolic
acid) (PGA), poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), poly(acrylic acid)
, etc.] are frequently used polymers in nanoparticles. PLA is a polyester
created from lactic acid which is biodegradable. The copolymer of
lactic acid and glycolic acid, known as polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA), is both biodegradable and biocompatible. The
U.S. FDA and EMA (European Medicines Agency) have validated PLGA as
a drug delivery vehicle for parenteral route of administration. The use of polymeric nanoparticles in the treatment
of lung cancer demonstrates encouraging outcomes. Taxanes-loaded PEG-PLA
(polyethylene-glycol-modified polylactic acid) nanoparticles have
greatly increased the efficacy of chemotherapy and radiation treatment in vitro and in vivo (A549 lung tumor xenograft
model). By co-entrapping paclitaxel
and cisplatin within PEG-PLA block copolymers, Kim et al. created
nanoparticles for the treating lung cancer, which have entered clinical trial phase II under the name Genexol-PM
for advanced NSCLC.
 Wang and his team developed a prodrug-based nano-drug
delivery
system where prodrugs of baicalein (BCL) and paclitaxel (PTX) were
used. These NPs were created by nanoprecipitation,
and the innermost core was made of PLGA polymer conjugated with BCL
and PTX. The MTT (3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) assay was implemented to conduct in vitro cytotoxicity tests. In A549 cells, PTX-BCL NPs showed higher cytotoxic
effects (P < 0.05) compared to other NP formulations
or free-drug solutions. Additionally, PTX-BCL solution demonstrated
lower cytotoxicity than PTX-NPs and BCL NPs. Thus, the exponential
usage of polymeric nanoparticles is producing chemotherapeutics for
tumor treatment which are advanced, revolutionary formulations with
least harm to healthy cells and which can be optimally delivered to
cancerous tissues.

4.3

## Dendrimers
Dendrimers are intensely
branched, highly biocompatible, uniformly structured, and complex
molecules (having a diameter of 2–10 nm) of spherical or globular
appearance. The innermost core of the dendrimer has a tree resembling
orientation which has numerous extensions attached to it. It exists
in two different forms: high-molecular-weight (hyperbranched, dendronized,
and brush polymers) and low-molecular-weight dendrimers (monodispersed
and highly symmetrical polymers). The
unique properties exhibited by dendrimers are their multivalent nature,
their excessively branched core, their uniform globular shape, and
their distinguishable molecular weight. These promising features include
them in the list of intriguing new drug delivery scaffolds. Their tendency to precisely modify or adjust
their size, form, and surface characteristics, make them a typical
and adaptable nanocarrier system for the targeted delivery of chemotherapeutics. Dendrimers are made up of three parts: a central
core acting as inducer, various interior branches arranged in layered
form, and multiple surface end groups for covalent conjugation. The
internal central core moiety has reacting sites, with branches extending
out from it. The first-generation monomers (G1) are those linked to
the center (G0), and surrounding it, a pair of second-generation monomers
(G2) are observed. Arrangement of the next generations will be followed
by a similar approach ( ). Their wide-ranging nanosized
particles, instantaneous synthesis, tendency to conjugate, and their
ability to demonstrate numerous copies of lethal functional groups
necessary for rearrangement, make them appealing platforms for drug
delivery. 
 A concise list of dendrimer-based formulations
for treating lung
carcinoma and their outcomes has been summarized in . Therapeutic small molecules
could be encapsulated in the innermost core through either hydrogen/chemical
linkage or lipophilic interaction. To
improve bioavailability and target-specific delivery, methods like
acylating or PEGylating the active terminal surface and fabrication
of dendrimers with receptor proteins could be done, respectively.
PEGylated dendrimers are a type of dendrimer which have attracted
the interest of formulation scientists because of their prolonged
distribution duration in the circulatory system, reduced accumulation
in various body organs, and minimal toxicity. Incorporating poly(ethylene
oxide) (PEO) with PEG aids in synthesizing PEG-dendrimers. PEGylated dendrimer nanoparticles exhibited
promising potential as an aerosol-inhaled drug delivery method when
studied in a related investigation. Furthermore,
doxorubicin-conjugated PEGylated dendrimers when administered through
inhalation routes resulted in sustained duration of residence of drug
in carcinoma tissues and efficiently lowered carcinoma load in rats. Commercially available dendrimers are primarily
divided into two types: poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) and poly(propyleneimine)
(PPI). The former is found to be used
more preferably for delivery of chemotherapeutic and other peptides
which must be delivered efficiently and effectively to specified sites. These PAMAM dendrimers are hydrophilic, biocompatible,
and nonimmunogenic. They have the capacity for increasing the bioavailability
of chemical entities while reducing their frequency of administration
which supports their usage as a medication delivery technique. A study was conducted to synthesize a nano
drug delivery system of doxorubicin conjugated generation-4 succinamic
acid (G4SA) PAMAM dendrimers and to evaluate them in an in
vitro lung carcinoma 3D model ( ). It was observed that in comparison with
free doxorubicin, dendrimer-based doxorubicin formulation exhibited
three times greater permeation rate with 3.1-fold increased rate of
aggregation of drug in the innermost core region of co-cultured spheroids.
PPI dendrimers could also be incorporated with the drug moiety by
diversified techniques which makes them essential for evaluation in
biomedical applications. PPI dendrimers
exhibit internal hydrophobic properties as a result of the presence
of branched alkyl chains. Furthermore, because of the linkage of amides
with branched alkyl chains, these PPI dendrimers have a more lipophilic
core as compared to PAMAM dendrimers. , The toxicity
of PPI dendritic delivery, like that of PAMAM dendrimers, can be minimized
by surface-acetylation or other comparable methods. 
 Dendrimer-integrated
photo-medicinal platforms can be applied as
molecular imaging contrast agents to facilitate detection of cancer
precisely by coupling the optical features of photoactive agents with
the qualities of other distinct components. Luong et al. used a folic acid (FA)-conjugated PAMAM dendrimer
with a superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) core to successfully deliver
the hydrophobic anti-tumor medication 3,4-difluorobenzylidene curcumin
(CDF). Furthermore, incorporating CDF in a FA-PAMAM dendrimer resulted
in higher targeting ability, anti-cancer activity, and MRI contrast-enhancing
capabilities. Chen et al. demonstrated
that a dendrimer complexed with a nanocomposite of Au nanoparticles,
cyanine dye (Cy5.5), and Gd(III) could be used as a tri-modal imaging
agent for CT (Au nanoparticle), fluorescence imaging (Cy5.5), and
MRI (Gd(III)) to impart improved spatial and density resolutions with
high specificity. Developing nanomedicines will surely benefit from
such integrated multimodal theranostic strategies.

4.4

## Nanoemulsions
Administration of chemotherapeutics
in the form of nanoemulsions might influence intratumoral chemotherapeutic
accumulation, as nanoemulsion delivery employs various pathways for
enhanced bioavailability. Nanoemulsions
are droplets of water in oil (w/o) or oil in water (o/w) having an
average radius of 10–100 nm which are translucent or transparent.
These heterogeneous dispersions exhibit a stable thermodynamic profile.
They are formed by dispersing aqueous phase in oil phase, as both
these phases are immiscible with each other, the dispersion is maintained
by reducing the interfacial tension with the help of different surfactants
and co-surfactants. The distinctive
nanoemulsion architecture is administered with hydrophobic or lipophilic
chemotherapeutics for creating hydrophilic and lipophilic conditions.
Such a design of nanoemulsion aids in reducing liver bypass, inhibits
drug decomposition in abnormal environments, eliminates P-glycoprotein
outflow, promotes mucosal penetration, and therefore improves the
chemotherapeutic systemic availability. Furthermore, decreased stomach emptying and enhanced drug solubility
due to a large expansion in the interfacial area is made possible
by producing nanoemulsion droplets which may be linked to improved
bioavailability. Subsequently, the functionalization
of 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (HP-β-CD), lipoid E
80 (agents which elevates permeation) enhance the bioavailability
of embedded chemotherapeutics by temporarily opening cellular tight
junctions. , Improved bioavailability of
chemotherapeutics in the tumor microenvironment (TME) depends, whether
the targeting is active or passive when nanoemulsion is administered
intravenously. , Furthermore, nanoemulsions are
advantageous, as they possess enhanced therapeutic absorption due
to increased surface area and hence improved drug bioavailability.
An additional feature is that it shields the drug from UV (ultraviolet)
radiation and oxidative degradation, which improves the drug’s
stability in the formulation. Nanoemulsions
also have the advantage of being resistant to bacteria, fungus, and
viruses. Furthermore, its customizable
droplet size has the potential to ameliorate the infiltration tendency;
for instance, decreased skin irritability was observed when the mean
droplet size was smaller, as the small-sized globule easily infiltered
into the skin through hair follicles and pores (where the surrounding
healthy tissues were undisturbed). Doxorubicin
is an anti-cancer substance which is used to treat a variety of malignancies.
On the other hand, it has hazardous effects on healthy tissues because
of its broader dispersing characteristic feature and a shorter half-life.
A pH-responsive lapidated nanoemulsion containing doxorubicin prodrug
(DNE) was developed which possesses a significant biocompatibility.
The bioluminescent findings from the experiment on the mouse model
showed a substantial decrease by DNE in distant lung metastases. Kim and Park created a NSCLC-targeting nanoemulsion
having hyaluronic acid-conjugated paclitaxel. While creating the nanoemulsion of conjugated paclitaxel,
the formulation was subsequently chelated with the targeting moiety,
hyaluronic acid, using a microfluidizer at high pressure. The experiment
was carried out on nude mice which had overexpressed CD-44 in NCI-H460
cell tumor xenograft. Cancer progression was more effectively inhibited
due to the astounding encapsulation efficiency (>100%). − Li et al. also reported on a nanoemulsion of docetaxel, a cancer-fighting drug from the same family.
Researchers had created an o/w emulsion with the use of medium-chain
triglyceride (MCT) composed of the given constituents: (i) poloxamer
188, (ii) oleic acid, and (iii) egg lecithin. In nanoemulsion and
commercial formulation groups, histological examination of tumor development
indicated necroptosis of cancer cells (by formation of a capsule along
the fibrous connective tissues). Due
to the absence of breaching of the fibrous connective tissue barrier,
malignancy of cancer cells was prevented, and the cancerous cells
did not metastasize to other body parts. The production and effectiveness of curcuminoid (derived via Curcuma longa) nanoemulsion were observed against cancerous
cell lines. The curcuminoids and nanoemulsion
of curcuminoids were treated with two distinct cell lines: H460 cells
(large cell lung cancer) and A549 (adenocarcinoma of lung). The curcuminoid
containing nanoemulsion affected the H460 cancerous cells by overexpressing
the P21 gene (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor) which was followed
by reduced cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and cyclin B, which eventually
led to the cessation of cell cycle in G2/M phase. Moreover, an elevation
in the P53 gene expression of A549 cancerous cells was indirectly
responsible for an overexpression of p21 gene which ultimately lowered
CDK1 and increased cyclin B levels, halting the cell cycle in the
G2/M phase. The o/w carvacrol encapsulated
nanoemulsion was developed (by ultrasonication), as a delivery mechanism
for carvacrol on a nanoemulsion platform. CANE or Carvacrol nanoemulsion
tested against human A549 cancer cell lines (in vitro) and against a nude mouse xenograft model (in vivo), resulted in a dose-dependent cytotoxic response in the A549 cancerous
cell lines. Inhalable nanostructured
lipid particles were formulated by Jyoti et al. to administer 9-bromonoscapine,
a tubulin-binding alkaloid that inhibits cell growth and induces death
in NSCLC cells. The quick incorporation of the formulated nanoemulsion
system through a specific mechanism (endocytosis) may be ascribed
to the uneven external surface instead of uniform surface of lipid
containing nanoemulsions, which may justify the increased apoptosis. Tanshinone conjugated nanoemulsion was synthesized
by scientists for testing the ability of nanoemulsion to inhibit the
growth of A549 cells. By ultrasonication, Tween 80, Capryol 90, and
ethanol were used to create nanoemulsion. The produced formulation
had an enhanced storage stability, homogeneity as well as improved
encapsulation. Furthermore, as compared to tanshinone extract, the
nanoemulsion exhibited substantial tumor cell suppression or death.
Tanshinones can indeed halt the G0/G1 phase
of cell cycle by overexpressing p53 and p21 genes, PJNK (Phospho-c-jun
NH2 terminal kinase) while decreasing the expression of
cyclin E1, cyclinD1, and CDK2. Nanoemulsions
are drawing much interest in the biomedical application of lung cancer
therapy and R&D. However, numerous obstacles need to be addressed
in order to ensure the safe and stable administration of nanoemulsions.
The major requirements for developing nanoemulsion formulation involves
employing the excipients for providing a stable, effective, and target-specific
profile by preventing the occurrence of undesirable adverse effects
and confirming the biological outcome of the drug.

4.5

## Micelles
Micelles are colloidal nanoparticles
( ) which are
formed in an aqueous environment when synthetic amphiphilic copolymer
or surfactant is greater than a specific concentration, which is essentially
the CMC (critical micelle concentration). , 
 Smaller size (diameter less than 100 nm) of the
polymeric micelles
is one of the reasons behind selecting them as an ideal drug delivery
tool as they actively escape RES and renal exclusion. They even allow
themselves to passively increase the penetration of the endothelial
barrier in the area prevailing with the tumor. Polymeric micelles
show great potential as hydrophobic drug delivery vehicles. Rapid self-assembling of amphiphilic block copolymers
in aqueous environment due to hydrophobic or lipophilic interactions
is responsible for designing the distinctive zones which form the
structural configuration of micelles. Micelles consist of a hydrophobic
center and a hydrophilic barrier which functions by preventing protein
linkage, particle agglomeration, and opsonin linkage. These get decomposed
in the circulatory pathways, before entering the targeted region. Liu et al. (2012) covalently functionalized
β-CD (β cyclodextrin) fabricated micelles with folic acid
(FA), doxorubicin (DOX), and contrast media (DOTA-Gd) which showed
decreased cell viability ( ). 
 Kataoka et al. demonstrated effective entrapment
of doxorubicin
(DOX) by poly(ethylene glycol)-poly(-aspartic acid) block copolymer
[PEG-PAsp (DOX)] and the formulation is termed as NK911 which is currently
being assessed in phase-II clinical trials. Unimeric micelles are more appropriate for drug delivery than diblock
(hydrophilic–hydrophobic) or triblock (hydrophilic–hydrophobic–hydrophilic)
particles due to their lower molecular mass of polymeric residues
after micelle disintegration. Micelles
are effective nanocarriers for the delivery of cytotoxic hydrophobic
substances like antineoplastic drugs. These medications get enmeshed
in the innermost central region, resulting with increased aqueous
solubility, reduced toxic profile, tumor cell-specific aggregation
and drug resistivity reversal. Furthermore, prolonged blood circulation
time could be achieved with hydrophilic shell by inhibiting identification
through reticuloendothelial barrier and preventing alveolar uptake.
As a result of the tighter particle size characterization and extended
plasma circulation (in vivo), they specifically aggregate
around tumorous sites, which eventually improves therapeutic efficiency
and bioavailability of weakly water-soluble drugs. The biodegradability of therapeutic delivery systems is
an essential feature which makes this approach a preferable option
for formulating anti-cancer and ocular drugs. Drug integration into
micelles enhanced circulatory residence time, lowered tumorigenesis,
and reduced the toxicity significantly. Various polymeric micelles
were conjugated with the purpose of treating lung cancer and were
evaluated through preclinical studies which are summarized in . Distributions based
on conjugation with polymeric micelles are preferred because of their
inherently adaptable structures. The capacity to influence their surface
permits delivery of theranostic chemicals to particular regions, increasing
the efficacy, susceptibility, and selectivity of therapeutic and diagnostic
approaches. They may also be readily manipulated to increase theranostic
solubility and biocompatibility. Micelles conjugated with targeting
agents (alpha fetoprotein (AFP) antibodies), surface incorporated
with MRI imaging tools (Gd ions), and antitumor drug (paclitaxel)
(TGPM) showed growth inhibitory potential, and MRI revealed the deposition
of TGPM at the target tissue of H22 tumor containing mice due to AFP
(alpha-fetoprotein) overexpression. Polymeric
poly(ethylene glycol)-phosphatidylethanolamine micelles incorporated
with paclitaxel and coupled with SPIO nanoparticles imaging agents
displayed concurrent MRI and antitumor action. 
 
4.6

## Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs)
CNTs are
lipophilic hollow tubes composed of carbon atoms with diameters ranging
from 4 to 100 mm that vary depending on how graphene molecules are
arranged. CNTs have the appearance of
a single rolled-up sheet of graphene ( ) which is related to the family of fullerene
(third allotrope of carbon family). There
are two forms in which nanotubes are categorized: (i) having a single
wall and (ii) having multiple walls, having an outer diameter of 4–20
Å and 20–1000 Å, respectively. The former can be
made when just a single graphene sheet is rolled into a cylinder-like
shape, whereas the latter is created when several concentric layers
of graphene are rolled to form a cylindrical appearance. Since the
past few decades, their applications have been investigated to deliver
chemotherapeutic substances because of their vast ability to develop
new and better delivery systems. However, their negative health effects
are a huge concern. Specific biological
and physicochemical properties, such as hollow monolith formation,
enhanced mechanical efficiency, higher length and diameter ratio,
increased surface area, ultra-massive molecular weight, nanoneedle
shape, elevated thermal and electrical conductivity, and the ability
to alter the surface, make them a promising drug delivery vehicle. , They can pass through the cellular membrane via endocytosis and
then enter the cell because of their needle-shaped features. Drug substances could be injected into the inner
chamber of CNTs or bonded to the surface, either covalently or non-covalently.
Furthermore, the anchoring of various ligands to the surface of CNTs
allows for the targeted therapy of a chemotherapeutic drug to a desired
location. Certain chemotherapy drugs, such as doxorubicin, paclitaxel,
and cisplatin, have been delivered using CNTs. Three common ways for manufacturing CNTs include laser
ablation, thermally enhanced chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and
arc discharge. CNTs are a carbon only
moiety with a unique chemical structure which has hundredfold strength
when compared to steel while weighing only one-sixth of it. They also
have an outstanding thermal conductance. It is therefore, considered
as a fascinating nanocarrier, which is capable for identification
of cancer cells as well as delivering medicines or smaller chemotherapeutics
to the carcinomic cells.
 CNTs are fundamentally soluble in neither aqueous
nor organic medium.
They cause severe toxic effects in biological fluids are a massive
concern which needs to be addressed. Chemical variation enhances biocompatibility, lowers toxicity, turns
them into water-soluble nanocarriers, and makes them serum-stable
substances. The first anti-cancer medication
to be coupled with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) to target
epidermal growth factor receptors was Cisplatin. The findings revealed
that the drug was more effective against squamous cancer cells with
high EGFR expression. Furthermore, due to its nano size, it demonstrated
improved efficacy in preventing tumorigenesis instead of targeting
it passively. In vitro and preclinical studies on docetaxel-loaded CNTs in PC3 and S180
(murine sarcoma) cell lines have shown that they are more impactful
than free docetaxel. In another study,
the efficacy of PEGylated nanotubes incorporated with a chemotherapeutic
agent was studied with regard to its mitochondrial apoptosis, cytotoxic
profile in NSCLC, its cellular uptake and dynamics. The authors attempted
to see that the compound was mostly received by clathrin-mediated
endocytosis, which would help the A549 cell line generate early endosomes.
In addition, the cytotoxicity studies revealed that PEGylated conjugates
induced mitochondrial death at a higher degree than the unconjugated
moiety. A549 cancer cell lines were
targeted by administering doxorubicin hydrochloride via nanotube/gold
hybrids. Non-covalent interactions between aromatic rings (π–π)
of doxorubicin and CNTs, resulted in the adsorption of large amounts
of doxorubicin on both internal and external surfaces of the nanotubes.
Findings from cellular experiments in vitro indicated
efficient delivery and administration of doxorubicin via nanoparticles. Poloxamer, a hydrophilic non-ionic surfactant,
was utilized for stabilizing supramolecular nanotubes containing doxorubicin
complexes. For assessing the drug payload capacity of multi-walled
carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), fluorescence spectrophotometry was employed.
It was observed that the concentration of CNTs has a significant impact
on the intensity of doxorubicin fluorescence. Additionally, a transmission micrograph may be employed
to ensure that CNTs are released efficiently. In contrast to doxorubicin–pluronic
complexes and simple doxorubicin, cytotoxic assessment on MCF-7 cell
lines revealed significant toxicity. According to Arya et al., paclitaxel conjugated single walled nanotubes
resulted in an upregulated rate of apoptosis in cancerous tissues.
Furthermore, they concluded that synergistic or additional effects
(ROS-associated) produced due to CNTs were mostly responsible for
the increase in paclitaxel’s cytotoxic impact in lung cancer. Sobhani et al. used fabricated CNTs to study
the cytotoxicity of paclitaxel. The drug was attached to the surface
of MWCNTs using a poly(citric acid) spacer that lowers the nanotube
hydrophobicity. Based on their findings, it was concluded that paclitaxel
loaded on functionalized CNTs had a greater level of cytotoxicity
due to elevated cell infiltration when assessed in comparison with
free paclitaxel drug. 
CNT linked
nanomedicine imparts ways to combine imaging and pharmacological
action as a “theranostic” tool in biomedicine. Specifically,
CNTs can be combined with other nano-based formulations from various
sources to obtain synergetic, imaging and therapeutic effects. These
theranostic blended nanoparticles might be applied to identify, visualize,
and treat numerous kinds of cancers. Furthermore, unique conjugated
nano-platforms can aid in cancer therapy optimization and chemotherapeutic
toxicity reduction. Mashal et al. synthesized tissue-mimicking conjugates
with varying proportions of SWCNTs and assessed their dielectric characteristics
and microwave heating response. In CNT-blended
mixes, the researchers noticed a linear temperature rise. Al Faraj
et al. synthesized doxorubicin-encapsulated SWCNTs for targeting and
monitoring metastasized tumors. Free-breathing
MRI and bioluminescence imaging were used to observe the patients.
The magnets were implanted in the lungs of tumor-bearing mice at the
metastatic tumor locations. The study depicted that amalgamation of
non-invasive MRI (to locate tumor areas sensitively) with magnets
that promote the magnetic targeting of CNTs improved overall treatment
outcome. CNTs may be integrated with a variety of materials, including
metals, polymers, and mesoporous silica, for application in theranostics
for cancer treatment.

4.7

## Gold Nanoparticles (AuNPs)
It is
well known that drugs, genetic materials, proteins, and tiny molecules
can all be delivered using AuNPs, which have been recently identified
as a potential delivery vehicle for transporting and releasing drugs
into various types of cells. Several enticing characteristics are
responsible for making them an excellent tool for delivering chemotherapeutics.
To begin with, the innermost section ( ) is safe, biocompatible, and inert, which
is the primary reason behind using these particles as an initiating
point for building carriers.
 AuNPs are found in various sizes ranging from 5
nm to 200 nm in
diameter, which may also be synthesized by regulated dispersion. In 1951, Turkevitch described a simple, methodical
bottom-up approach for synthesizing small gold molecules. Reduction
of sodium tetrachloroaurate ions with trisodium citrate, resulted
in the formation of nanosized dispersed particles (ca. 20 nm). The
technique has then been improvised progressively over time. Several
chemical and physical techniques now synthesize AuNPs with controlled
particle size and shape. Essentially,
drug delivery vehicles must consider both size and dispersion. Finally,
AuNPs’ highly adjustable and multivalent surface configurations
allow for conjugation (covalently or non-covalently) with a variety
of drug substances or biomacromolecules on their surfaces. Moreover,
the therapeutic applications of the noble metal, gold have been widely
explored, including its application in sensitized diagnosis, detection,
and classification of lung tumor types.
The flexibility with
which AuNPs may be fabricated is one of their
most appealing features. AuNPs are beneficial in both active and passive
targeting because of their ability to modify the surface. Due to high
water solubility, the drug, methotrexate (MTX) generally has a poor
tumor retention capacity, which is responsible for its delayed or
weaker therapeutic effect in cancer patients. A mouse model with Lewis
lung carcinoma when administered with MTX encapsulated AuNPs, demonstrated
a significant accumulation in cancerous tissues which eventually improved
the treatment effectiveness. Covalent
binding of hydrophobic paclitaxel to AuNPs via DNA linker was demonstrated
by Zhang et al. (2011) ( ), where they reported enhanced in vitro cytotoxicity against cancer cells. Gold nanoclusters
with fluorescent tagged antibodies on their surfaces have been created
with the purpose of specifically targeting overexpressed EGFR tumor
cells. This configuration imparts the
pathway for gold-based nanoparticles to be applied in both magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and treatment. Currently, photodynamic therapy
(PDT) has been widely employed for AuNPs to transport purpurin-18-N-methyl-d-glucamine (Pu-18-NMGA), a water-soluble
PDT drug, to A549 cell lines. The photodynamic
activity of Pu-18-NMGA-AuNPs was greater than that of free Pu-18-NMGA.
 The potential of utilizing gold nanocarriers
as medication and
biomolecule transporting tools, originates from the versatility of
the AuNP monolayer platform. Researchers
described a new AuNP carrier system with polyethylene glycol (coating),
heptakis-(6-deoxy-6-mercapto)-block-cyclodextrin
(chemotherapeutic), and anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies (targeted
ligand). Biocompatibility of PEG derivatives is responsible for protecting
nanocarriers and the drug encapsulated within it from enzymatic decomposition.
Because of the tendency to defend pharmaceuticals from enzymatic,
physical, or chemical destruction, cyclodextrins (CDs) are one of
the most preferred drug delivery tools. B-Lapachone entrapped within
the core cavity of β-CD is recognized for use in the treatment
of various carcinomas (like breast, lung, and prostate). 
AuNPs have been widely used as cancer
theranostics because of their
ease of synthesis and functionalization, excellent biocompatibility,
and multifunctional theranostic features. Knights et al. recently published a study that showed the
size-dependent effects of gold nanorods (AuNRs) on photoacoustic (PA)
imaging response and pulsed-wave photothermal therapeutic (PW-PPTT)
efficacy, that is critical for AuNRs clinical translation. Additionally,
Nanospectra has developed a silica-gold nanoshell stabilized by PEG
for the photothermal therapy to the solid tumors using an NIR light
source. 

4.8

## Magnetic Nanoparticles (MNPs)
MNPs
have extensive pharmaceutical and biomedical applications, mainly
in MRI, tailored drug/gene therapy, and cell transfection (magnetofection).
The appended ligands influence the magnetic field around the nanocarriers
and aid in targeted drug delivery either actively or passively. Application
of various MNPs has been approved by the FDA when they are used simultaneously
with conventional chemotherapy regimen, resulting in a significant
outcome in cancer treatment. Nanoparticles
of gadolinium, and platinum are utilized for chemotherapy and other
imaging strategies because of their aggregating tendency near the
tumor location. MNPs comprise superparamagnetic
material with an average size of more than 25 nm. MNPs that are non-biodegradable are covered with a substance
that enables the magnetic core to leach thereby aiding in their elimination
from the body. Magnetic hyperthermia is a safe lung cancer treatment
that uses heat to destroy tumor tissue. The exposure of these MNPs
to an external magnetic field results in the induction of thermal
effects that eventually cause slower cell death when the temperature
is above 42 °C, but instant death when temperature is above 45
°C. Similarly, the exposure of
MNPs to alternating current results in the generation of sublethal
heat, thereby exacerbating the tissue injury. In a mouse model of
NSCLC-based hyperthermic destruction, Sadhukha et al. investigated the efficiency of tumor-targeted
SPIO nanoparticles. The SPIO small molecules targeted the overexpressed
EGFR which improved drug retention in tumors and reduced cancer progression
substantially. Magnetic core and a surrounding functional covering,
together constitute MNPs. Elements including iron (Fe), cobalt (Co),
gold (Au), and nickel (Ni) make up the innermost core which offers
it magnetic characteristics. The surface coat, on the other hand,
inhibits aggregation and restricts magnetic core interaction with
other particles. This surrounding coat
contains a biologically effective therapeutic drug or a ligand. The
first experiment with MNPs that can detect lung cancer micrometastasis
was carried out by Wang and co-workers. Fabrication with the pan-cytokeratin epithelial tumor cell marker
effectively identifies tumor cells in the blood circulation from patients
with lung cancer. Drug resistance is subsequently surmounted using
MNPs. Using cisplatin-loaded MNPs, an A549 cancer cell xenograft model
which is resistant toward cisplatin, can be chemosensitized. Several
molecular biologists then concluded that tumors treated with cisplatin-loaded
MNPs had a substantial decrease in the concentration of lung resistance-related
proteins and elevated cisplatin cytotoxicity. Iron oxide and doxorubicin exhibited magnetic and paramagnetic
characters respectively, because of which, they tend to have greater
cytotoxic activity. To target EGFR,
gold-coated iron oxide nanoparticles were incorporated with 225-antibody,
which caused DNA deterioration and cell cycle termination in the M/G2-phase. Another study demonstrated the cytotoxicity through C-225 (Cetuximab) conjugated
nanoparticles on NSCLC. Cisplatin (a hydrophobic pharmaceutical agent),
necessitates the use of a specific carrier to enhance its anti-cancer
action. As a result, a functionalized Fe3O4 nanoparticle
coupled with a PEG-PLGA copolymer has been constructed, demonstrating
enhanced cisplatin anti-cancer efficacy in lung cancer. Nanoparticles of lower sizes are well known
to be inhaled forming agglomerates in the lungs. MNPs are now encapsulated in micro-sized particles to effectively
overcome this challenge. The most frequent materials utilized to make
magnetic nanocomposite particles are iron oxide and d-mannitol
nanoparticles. This method circumvents therapeutic molecules from
diffusing through the bloodstream and transports the drug directly
to the specific target location. Iron
oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) coupled with gold have been reported to
increase nanocarrier bioavailability and are deemed safe for treating
lung malignancies. The transport of
MNPs to the lungs could be beneficial and worth investigating further
as a promising diagnostic tool or a medicine delivery method. In theranostic
nanoparticle synthesis, MNPs, particularly IONPs consisting of magnetite
(Fe3O4) or hematite, have been regarded important
nanomaterials (Fe2O3) They are used in MRI contrast,
medication administration, controlled and prolonged release, and hyperthermia
therapy. Even human clinical trials are now being conducted on several
of them. 

4.9

## Solid Lipid Nanoparticles (SLNs)
Another type of vehicle for drug and gene delivery are SLNs. SLNs
have a myriad of benefits, including the ability to encapsulate hydrophobic
drugs more easily, reducing their negative consequences on the GI
(gastro-intestinal) tract, and preserving sensitive drugs from an
acidic pH ( ). 
 These particles were first developed in the early
1990s. Many lipophilic
or hydrophobic drugs were cytotoxic, so SLNs provided an essential
foundation for such medicines to be entrapped. SLNs are colloidal
nanocarriers for dissolved and dispersed therapeutics (size ranging
from 50 nm to 1 μm) with a highly lipophilic lipid matrix comprising
of solid lipids such as monoglycerides, diglycerides, triglycerides,
waxes, fatty alcohols, free fatty acids, and steroids. SLNs have a solid lipid content of 0.1–30%
(w/w), having the tendency to easily dissolve in aqueous media. Generally,
0.5–5% of surfactants are helpful to stabilize the SLNs. In terms of stability, enhanced biocompatibility,
enhanced drug payload, and convenient production on commercial scale,
SLNs outperform their lipid counterparts. SEM (scanning electron microscopy)
and TEM (transmission electron microscopy) evaluation have indicated
that SLNs have a spherical form with a size range of 50 to 1000 nm. A regulated release profile, sustained release
characteristics, with a quicker in vivo decomposition
are all considered benefits of SLN-based drugs when compared to particles
composed of PLA or PLGA. Furthermore, as compared to particles produced
from certain polymeric materials, SLNs were shown to have better tolerability
in the lungs which contributes significantly to their safety profile. As a result, this system is suggested for the
administration of pulmonary drugs, in a solution or as a dry powder,
without causing inflammation. SLNs combine
the properties of fat-emulsion carriers, liposome carriers, and polymeric
nanoparticles, making them excellent for targeted drug delivery. 
This strategy has demonstrated enormous
potential for targeted
utilization (particularly intracellular) by manipulating gene expression
and cellular communication. Currently, ultra-solid lipid nanoparticles
are employed to target the tumor location. Anti-tumor drugs such as doxorubicin, etoposide, and idarubicin are currently administered using these nanocarriers
which increase their bioavailability. Furthermore, SLNs are considered as good and efficient gene carriers.
Cationic SLNs have demonstrated excellent transfection of p53 gene
loaded with chemotherapeutic agents at targeted sites. Trimyristin (high-melting triglyceride) was
used to synthesize novel SLNs of DCX (docetaxel). This strategy has
resulted in elevated levels of DCX in tumor tissues while lowering
them in other organs such as the heart, kidney, liver, and lungs.
For optimizing the efficacy of SLNs, usually one or more glycerides
(having high melting point) are used for synthesis. Choi et al. transfected SLN-carrier
p53 into p53 null lung carcinoma cell line H1299. When compared to
commercially available Lipofectin, the authors of this study effectively
mapped overexpressed p53 protein which ensured that this system of
drug delivery could be employed in genetic transfection with adequate
drug payload.
According to a recent study, synergistic effects
were observed
when amalgamation of paclitaxel and Bcl-2 siRNA were incorporated
into SLN. Yuan and colleagues observed
that drug-loaded targeted SLNs had a greater proportion of drug uptake
in A549 cells, as compared to SLNs incorporated with drug. Hydrophilicity
of PEG facilitates an initial burst release, and it was further reported
that drug-loaded PEGylated SLNs released more drugs in comparison
to target-specific SLNs. When doxorubicin
containing SLNs were administered through IV route in mice it was
observed that the drug concentration in the lungs was greater than
when they were administered with the solution of doxorubicin. According to Leiva et al., in vitro anti-cancer activity was considerably improved by paclitaxel-loaded
tripalmitin SLN formulation as it facilitated prolonged or sustained
release of drug and reduced IC50 of paclitaxel which resulted
in greater cytotoxicity in lung and breast cancer tissues. 
Theranostic applicability, biocompatibility,
and biodegradability
of created nanomedicine have all been demonstrated in previous research
studies, as well as the precise in vivo screening
and drug administration utilizing SLNs. The findings showed that the
created SLN theranostic nanoformulation has the potential to make
a significant contribution in the field of oncology and diagnosis
at the same time. Paclitaxel and siRNA were used as the anti-cancer
agent. Paclitaxel and QDs (quantum dots) were distributed throughout
the lipid core, whereas anionic siRNA was electrostatically coupled
to the external cationic interface. In lung cancer, the integration
of the dual therapeutic drug paclitaxel and siRNA loaded in SLN was
efficiently deposited and showed synergistic anti-cancer action. Significantly,
QD fluorescence in SLN allowed researchers to measure increased in vivo cellular uptake of the drug on-site while reducing
off-site cancer cell uptake and thus its theranostic action was assessed. , 

4.10

## Hydrogels
Hydrogels are polymeric
three-dimensional mesh, which has the property of retaining a significant
amount of water within their fibers. It is a binary polymer solution system which has a cross-linker.
Hydrogels have gained much attention from the last two to three decades
because they possess various unique characteristics which are useful
in biomedical applications. P-HEMA, or poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate),
was the earliest designed hydrogel to be produced by DuPont scientists
in 1936. But it was not until 1960 that Wichterle and Lim realized
the relevance of P-HEMA hydrogels as good candidates for contact focal
point purposes. Based on their cross-linking
process, hydrogels may be divided into physical and chemical hydrogels
using different production procedures. , Cross-linking
of hydrogels could be done either chemically (ionic, covalent, and
atomic) or physically (hydrogen bonding). Chemical-based approaches,
such as thermoresponsive, Michael addition, self-assembling hydrogel,
and pH-responsive strategies, are therefore recommended for creating
hydrogels of various strengths and controlled drug release.
Hydrogels (sol–gel–sol) are generally functionalized
with polymers (PEG-PCL-PEG/DDP, PECE/DDP) possessing a polymeric micellar
combination of paclitaxel and cisplatin. At room temperature, hydrogels
exist in solution form, but when it attains body temperature it gets
transformed into a gel. The principal mechanism of this gel form by
which it treats cancer, is to form a drug depot through which the
medication keeps diffusing gradually. Cisplatin diffuses from the
thermosensitive polymer and the gradual release of micellar paclitaxel
occurs through the gel state to the nearby cancerous tissues. Hydrogel
formulations inhibit tumorigenesis while also prolonging the organism’s
lifespan. Lung cancer may be potentially treated with hydrogels having
two-drug combinations. 
For the
treatment of NSCLC, scientists have designed a hydrogel-based
drug delivery system for intravenous administration. Targeting the cancerous tissues was achieved by two methods.
The first stage is passive targeting, followed by IV treatment where
GMPs (glycomacropeptides) selectively concentrate in the lungs. Passive
targeting yields a 10-times enhancement in anti-cancer medication
efficiency with a ten-time decreased peak systemic drug levels, according
to preliminary results. The second method is active targeting where
two different types of nanoparticles are suggested. Initially, ligands
on the NP surfaces are designed for targeting cancerous nodules specifically.
The secondary NP group is likewise incorporated with cell surface
ligands, but instead of selectively delivering drug contents within
the cancer cell, these NPs are intended to firmly attach to cancer
cell surface receptors and persist there to block the metastatic signaling
cascade. The NPs contained in the GMPs disperse out and approach cancerous
cells, once the GMPs have accumulated passively in the lung, resulting
in a high level of targeted selectivity. 
Following cellular absorption of nanocarriers, expansion of
the
polymeric nanoparticles is observed in moderately acidic medium because
it has evolved to a hydrophilic structure from a hydrophobic structure.
This produces nanosized hydrogels, which exhibit intracellular activity
and drug depot traits. These nanoparticles are promptly absorbed by
A549 cell lines (88.3 ± 0.8% uptake in 24 h), which consequently,
expands for releasing the entrapped moieties, and may efficiently
deliver the chemotherapeutics in vitro. Paclitaxel,
an antitumor drug, has been found to have a 3- to 4-fold affinity
for enlarged nanoparticles, permitting them to function as intracellular
drug depots which facilitates aggregation of the drug locally. 
Incorporating SWCNTs with peptide hydrogels
may widen tissue engineering
applications and may provide hydrogels a broader application-oriented
perspective for cell biomaterials. EFK8 is a self-assembling peptide
with enhanced mechanical properties. Since phenylalanine is prevalent,
it confers stronger hydrophobic interactions. The inclusion of SWCNTs
to the EFK8 hydrogel (while maintaining its modulus) yields higher
motility in cells comparable to firmer hydrogels, emphasizing the
relevance of cell scaffold interactions in metastasis. 
In A549 cell line, Khatun et al. reported
versatile cancer theranostic uses of graphene-doxorubicin conjugated
in hyaluronic acid nanogel. This nanocomposite has been employed for
thermal chemotherapy applications, as well as real-time and non-invasive
optical imaging and controlled drug release. Carbon dots (CDs) are predominantly used in theranostics and are
implanted into the chitosan-containing hydrogel, where the hydrogel
serves as a matrix for embedding CDs via non-covalent conjugation.
Elimination of cancerous cells is also facilitated by the anti-cancer
drug, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) which is implanted in the hydrogel through
hydrophobic interactions and further integrated with CDs to form 5FU@CDs-HY,
which has anti-cancer action. The moiety also has properties of a
screening agent and is employed for visualization during cellular
uptake in cancer cells. The silk nanoparticles
of cisplatin were developed by Kim et al. Spray-drying was used to
create a composition including silk fibers and cisplatin with or without
cross-linkage. Different release profiles result from the presence
or absence of a cross-linking agent in the formulation. Without the
use of a cross-linker, cisplatin silk nanoparticles showed significant
cytotoxicity. The addition of acid and/or ions cause(s) hydrogel sol–gel
transitions in silk fibroin nanoparticles. , Silk strands are more durable and help to keep nanoparticles steady
throughout the storage period and in vivo investigations.
Therefore, anti-cancer medicines are delivered to the lungs using
silk fiber nanoparticles, which have greater cytotoxicity and bioavailability.
The anti-cancer drug docetaxel (DTX) and the triblock copolymer
hydrogel are employed in the formulation of PLGA-PEG-PLGA triblock
copolymer, which does not influence the solubility of DTX but reduces
its toxicity concerns. On A-549 lung tumor-bearing BALB/cA mice, a
triblock copolymer hydrogel formulation was assessed, and it was found
to improve the pharmacokinetic profile over 3 weeks in a sustained
release pattern. 

4.11

## Quantum Dots (QDs)
QDs are nanosized
colloidal particles with atom-like characteristics that have recently
been synthesized via nanofabrication ( ). These QDs
are thought to be a potential treatment option for lung cancer. Modifying
the surface of QDs makes it more soluble and biocompatible which converts
it to a superior fluorescent probe. The
core of the material is composed of a crystalline metalloid which
is shielded by a cap or shell which enhances the overall bioavailability. 
 Large absorption spectra, high photobleaching,
and photostability
are few of the unique properties exhibited by QDs. Because of the restricted wavelength of the emission spectrum,
this nanoparticle system displays redundant fluorescence and excitation
cycles. These characteristics have made
QDs a trendy topic, particularly for clinical imaging of diseased
tissue specimens from patients who had cancer, for identifying the
type and phase of disease, directing therapy regimen, and predicting
prognosis. , QDs might potentially be utilized
to investigate cell differentiation and development throughout embryogenesis. In general, QDs are made up of elements from
groups II–VI/III–V. Cadmium selenide (CdSe), cadmium
telluride (CdTe), zinc sulfide (ZnS), and zinc selenide (ZnSe) are
among the elements in groups II–IV. Gallium nitride (GaN),
gallium arsenide (GaAs), indium phosphide (InP) and indium arsenide
(InAs) are among the elements in group IIIV. 
When using QDs in biological research investigations, solubility
in aqueous medium is a frequent concern for various forms of QDs.
Apart from directly synthesizing QDs in aqueous solutions, layering
with polymer and exchanging the ligands have efficiently overcome
solubility issues. Lipid-coated QDs
demonstrate promising outcomes toward tumor cells. An amalgamated treatment strategy was studied and constructed
by incorporating several anti-cancer agents (paclitaxel, doxorubicin,
and carboplatin) and Bcl-2-targeted siRNA into a novel QD nanocarrier.
The findings suggested that the QD-based delivery method resulted
in 3- to 4-fold improvement in cytotoxicity for A549 cell lines when
compared to free drug therapy. Furthermore, effectiveness of the regimen
was improved, revealing that QD-based multifunctional delivery systems
could be successfully employed in treating lung cancer when used in
combination therapy.
Quantum dots are noted for their high fluorescence
emission, which
might be valuable for diagnostic and theranostic applications; unfortunately,
the heavy metals in their composition could cause severe toxicity,
necessitating the employment of alternative imaging strategies. Since
tumor cells tend to overexpress biotin, biotinylated graphene QDs
might be a viable option for cancer theranostics. Aside from being
less cytotoxic than heavy metal QDs, graphene QDs have ideal surface
tenability characteristics that provide specific changes and may therefore
be developed for a myriad of theranostic purposes. Wu and colleagues described carbon dots functionalized
with positively charged polyethylenimine (PEI) and negatively charged
siRNA molecules, as well as folate as the tumor-specific moiety for
being applied as theranostic agent. Bioluminescence (the dots demonstrate
absorbance and emission at 360 and 400 nm, respectively) could be
used to track the accumulation of nanomaterials, and the authors were
able to report a decline in lung tumor volume in vivo. 

4.12

## Inhalational
The pulmonary route
is a more significant, direct, and appealing delivery strategy when
compared to conventional methodologies of drug delivery (oral or parenteral).
The local approach of delivery of drugs with the help of nanocarriers
is to avoid the first-pass metabolism or to overcome the need for
injections. Direct therapeutic delivery to the lungs significantly
contributes to the local treatment of asthma, cystic fibrosis, and
COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) and advanced treatment
of cancer and diabetes. Direct pulmonary targeted delivery has more
absorption efficiency compared to conventional administration, and
therefore reduces systemic toxicity. Local toxicity could occur due
to the deposition of both drugs and excipients. Traditional inhalation
methods were not able to achieve specific targets which necessitates
the need of developing novel delivery methods. Furthermore, reduced thickness, high surface area, and
intense vascularization of the alveoli makes the pulmonary delivery
an excellent delivery approach. The prolonged release of drugs, strong
tendency for association with drugs, and target specificity are some
of the reasons scientists are attracted to explore inhalable nanoparticles.
As they can withstand high nebulization forces, they can easily be
formulated into aerosols. The duration of the administered drug in
the respiratory tract could be enhanced by evading mucociliary transport
and phagocytosis by lungs. 
Polymeric nanocarriers: Drug delivery through nanotechnology
in the treatment of cancer has significantly progressed over the past
decades. Polymeric nanocarriers play a vital role in inhalable drug
and gene delivery. Doxorubicin released by isobutyl cyanoacrylate
polymeric nanoparticles showed that polymeric nanocarrier caused cytotoxicity
(secondary) triggered via alveolar phagocytes which provides a superior
treatment for lung cancer. After initial phagocytosis, exocytosis
of segments of nanoparticles occurs when alveolar phagocytes start
imitating the action of Kupffer cells which causes the death of surrounding
tumorous cells. Murine macrophages of alveoli were treated with nanocarriers
and then were introduced to H460 cells. Free doxorubicin did not produce any secondary cytotoxic effects
when it was introduced to macrophages, but in the presence of nanocarriers
containing doxorubicin, macrophages demonstrated optimum cytotoxicity
after 8 and 24 h. The effects of nanoparticle treatment resulted in
the formation of interferon gamma and macrophage inflammatory protein
which initiated cellular immunity and inflammation, thus augmenting
tumor rejection.
Lipid Nanocarriers: Many in vivo and in vitro studies have revealed
the therapeutic
efficacy of 9-nitrocamptothecin (9NC) via an inhalable route instead
of oral or i.v. or i.m. routes for treating lung cancer. Formulation
of 9NC conjugated liposomes with dilauroylphosphatidylcholine [MMAD
(mass-mean aerodynamic diameter) 1.2–1.6 μm] inhibited
B16 melanoma pulmonary metastases in mice after 16–21 days
of treatment. Interestingly, the quantity of inhaled dose of 9NC was
3 to 20 times lower when compared with intragastric, intravenous or
intramuscular dosage forms but showed a similar effect. Preparation of solid lipid nanocarrier by amalgamating
glycerol and various esters of behenic acid showed greater stability
during nebulization time with better inhalable fraction instead of
epirubicin (EPI) solution. Inhalable EPI-solid lipid nanocarriers
have a greater concentration of drug within the cancer-affected area.
In another study with solid lipid nanocarriers, inhalable paclitaxel-solid
lipid nanocarriers showed better effect and lesser side effects compared
to i.v. formulation. Inhalable celecoxib
entrapped lipid nanocarriers demonstrated controlled release of celecoxib.
In comparison with celecoxib solution, nebulized celecoxib-encapsulated
nanostructure showed 4 times better retention time in the lungs. Nebulizing the drugs enhances the homogeneity
and stability of lipid nanocapsules. Paclitaxel–lipid nanocapsules
and paclitaxel showed similar cytotoxic effects against lung cancer
but lipid nanocapsules influence the stability of the drug in the
lungs. 
Hybrid Lipid–Polymer
Nanoparticles: The
innermost core of poly glutamic acid provides viscosity to lipid polymer
nanoparticles, which leads to prolonged release of 5-FU when compared
to polymeric microspheres and liposomes. Drug release rate of 5-FU
is affected through diameter of nanoparticle and thickness of lipid
shell. Enhanced release rate of 5-FU
was observed (70% to 85%) when the thickness of the shell was reduced
from 300 to 100 nm which also influenced the overall size reduction
from 1000 to 600 nm. Drug disintegration was affected by the thickness
of the shell because it regulated the amount of water which could
enter inside the LNPs (lipid NPs). The initial 5-FU concentration
in the lungs was 1000 times higher than in the systemic circulation
after inhaling LNPs, indicating a larger deposition fraction. Another
study was conducted where Paclitaxel-loaded hybrid PEG5000–1,2-distearoyl-phosphatidylethanolamine
(PEG5000-DSPE) micelles were administered to deeper alveolar tissues
via nebulization. The core moiety of
micelles was secured from phagocytosis by PEG chain through macrophages
which led to its increased residence in lung tissues. When inhalable
micelles conjugated with paclitaxel were administered, 45 times greater
AUC (area under the curve) was observed in lungs of rat as compared
to administration through intravenous route, which further resulted
in significant enhancement in the concentration of drug in the kidneys,
liver, and spleen (because of instant absorption through RES macrophages).
Overall prolonged release of drug was observed from the core (12 h)
with reduced enzymatic degradation of DSPE when compared to free drug
which promptly enters the systemic pathway.
Inorganic
Nanocarriers: Pulmonary application
of metal NPs are limited because of their adverse effects of causing
toxicity in lung tissues. Toxicity caused by metal NPs could be regulated
by influencing the concentration of inhaled metal, particle size of
aerosol, and time of exposure with lung tissues which could enhance
their use as a theranostic agent (diagnosis and therapy). Employing
nanomagnetic aerosols for targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic agents
to various affected regions of lungs through “nanomagnetosols”
has an impact on enhancing lung deposition of drugs at tumorous sites
while decreasing the toxicity toward healthy tissues. Furthermore, concentration of SPIONs aerosols
could be directed greatly toward the central airway instead of the
entire lung by regulating the applied magnetic field. When plasmid
DNA loaded SPIONs aerosol were administered to mice in the presence
or absence of magnetic field, it was observed that the right lung
which was influenced with application of magnetic field had a 2-times
greater concentration of plasmid DNA as compared to the left lung
where magnetic field was absent. In
a study conducted to prevent tumorigenesis, PLGA coated Fe3O4 nanocarriers were loaded with aerosolized quercetin. Coating avoided agglomeration of particles
by improving the size distribution of nanoparticles. In a culture
media of cells from human lung epithelium, PLGA-coated MNPs did not
show cytotoxicity. But PLGA-MNPs encapsulated with drugs demonstrated
cytotoxicity by decreasing the quantity of viable A549 cancerous cell
lines.
Actively Targeted Inhalable Nanoparticles: The
particle size of inhaled aerosol is critical for precise targeting
of tumorous cells which are located in various regions of the lung.
Accumulation of aerosol particles with size of 5 μm–10
μm is observed in larger airways and oropharynx while particles
with smaller size of 1 μm–5 μm deposits in alveoli
and smaller airways. An 8- to 9-fold
inclination was observed in the quantity of internalized drug, when
administered via nanosized particles (100 nm–150 nm) as compared
to microsized particles (3 μm–5 μm). Precisely controlled modification of aerosol
particle size is required as it will directly affect the internalization
of drug into tumorous tissues and accumulation of drug in lungs. , − 

5

## Diagnostic Agents Used for Lung Cancer
The advantages of timely diagnosis of carcinoma have sparked a
lot of scientific interest, since it significantly improves the rate
of survival. Early diagnosis of tumors could aid in the total cure
of the disease. As a result, the demand for methods that could identify
pulmonary nodules in their earlier stages of growth has increased.
Early diagnosis is related to a considerably improved survival pattern,
highlighting the need for correct LC staging for reasonable treatment
regimen selection for maximum anti-cancer effectiveness. Sputum cytology,
chest radiography (CXR), bronchial biopsy, polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), fluorescence bronchoscopy, and computed tomography (CT scan)
are all widely applied techniques to diagnose LC and to determine
the severity and extent of the disease (also known as staging). In
the case of inadequate or restricted scope of different traditional
diagnostic methods for early-stage tumor identification, NPs have
plenty of promise in the clinical environment since they can precisely
target the diseased region. In diagnostic radiography, the problem
of “missing lung cancer” has also been a subject of
concern. These missed detections in LC imaging result in the development
of early-stage illness to advanced-stage disease. Nanotechnology is progressing toward the development of
novel chemicals for cancer screening, staging, and treatment regimens,
resulting in the intriguing potential for biomedical imaging. Particles at the nanoscale size have unique
physical and chemical properties that allow detecting tools to be
built with increased signal intensity, enumeration, magnification,
contrast, and dispersion. Nanomedicines
have therefore evolved progressively as a game-changing phenomenon
for developing anti-cancer drugs. By regulating nanocarriers they
may carry screening agents and chemotherapeutic agents for improved
imaging and treatment effectiveness. − 
Metallic
and Non-metallic Nanocarriers: Noble
metal nanoparticles have sparked interest because of their admirable
thermal, electrical, and optical characteristics. To begin with, the
core is devoid of toxicity, possesses high biocompatibility, and is
inert, which makes it a great moiety to start when building a carrier.
Polymeric Nanocarriers: Because of its biocompatibility,
biodegradability, noncytotoxicity, and variety of physicochemical
characteristics, these have piqued importance in the field of oncology
for screening as well as in therapeutic strategies.
Biologically Derived Nanocarriers: These nanocarriers
have risen to prominence because of their related biocompatibility,
simplicity of morphological changes, and notable tendency of fabricating
the surface with multiple active drugs, therefore they are being used
in medical procedures.
 summarizes
the many types of nanodiagnostic devices employed for identifying
early stages of lung cancer with pulmonary metastases.
 
6

## Drug Delivery Changes
Over the past
decade, drug delivery strategies based on nanoparticle
systems have seen tremendous growth and development. Nanocarriers
are most likely three-dimensional constructs of multiple components
arranged in the proper spatial arrangement for their operations. Minor
modifications in the method or composition might have a deleterious
impact on the complex superposition of components. Synthesizing adequately
sized nanoparticles for delivering an efficacious payload of therapeutic
agent with the capability of targeting the specific site has always
made the technique troublesome. In the biological surroundings, various
risk factors such as indistinct shape, improper size characterization,
inadequate biocompatibility, and unsuitable surface topology are observed.
Because of the variations in physical, biological, and chemical profile
of the nanoparticles, developing an appropriate and relevant delivery
system which could administer medication to the lungs is considered
to be arduous. Numerous challenges have to be surmounted by these
nanosized systems when they reach clinical and preclinical stages
of drug discovery, which include systemic clearance, immunological
reactivity, tendency to overcome biological barriers, and target specificity.
Certain characteristics must be considered while developing an appropriate
nanocarrier system to be used for clinical purposes: Absolute knowledge
about critical components with their respective interactions, capability
for exhibiting target-specific action by overcoming biological barriers,
identifying significant features and their impact on performance,
and capacity for replication within manufacturing duration, efficient
production in sterile form, convenience for storage and administration
and high stability. To achieve successful
delivery of chemotherapeutics to the alveolar region several considerations
must be met which include formation of definite sized particles for
better tumor retention, eluding proteolysis, and overcoming mucus
and epithelial absorption barriers (which may affect absorption of
drug). The determination of physicochemical parameters is crucial
to identify interaction between particles in a biological media, tendency
to aggregate, adsorption of the protein surface of nanoparticles,
and nanoparticle intracellular trafficking. If any significant change
occurs in the parameters, it may affect the therapeutic efficiency
(where insufficient drug is delivered) or may cause undesirable side
effects which could be toxic. Intravenous injection of particles greater
than 500 nm is not recommended since these particles are quickly removed
from systemic circulation. Meticulously
controlled steps should be carried out for fabrication of polymeric
nanoparticles, to obtain a homogeneous size of less than 200 nm. Using
standard extrusion techniques, the particle size composition could
be modified. When in vivo studies are conducted, the fate of the nanocarrier is determined
by surface charge. The zeta potential of nanoparticles has a significant
impact on particle–particle interactions and aggregation tendencies.
Positively charged nanoparticles have a stronger attraction to the
body’s negatively charged cellular membranes. However, careful
examination of these nanoparticle systems is required before testing
in an in vivo system. In general, multi-functionalization
enhances the complexity of the nanoparticles. Although metallic and
inorganic nanoparticles have shown potential anti-cancer effects,
they also possess the risk of causing damage to normal cells. For
example, amorphous silica nanoparticles could trigger inflammatory
responses in the targeted site. Titanium
dioxide is biologically significant and is used in multiple biomedical
purposes but its toxicity to the normal cells is a concerning issue
which needs to be resolved. There’s
a need to improve immunotherapy’s adaptability, productivity,
and persistence to stimulate the anti-cancer immune system. To ensure safety, individual assessment of
various nanocarrier conjugated systems should be performed (by in vivo and in vitro toxicity studies)
before they are allowed for clinical use.

7

## Future Perspectives
Novel drug delivery
systems (NDDSs) are being explored for a broad
array of applications. They have shown potential for enhancing the
safety, effectiveness, and accuracy of therapeutic regimens. These
systems surmount the fundamental concerns with conventional regimens,
which include absence of targeted delivery, lower therapeutic efficiency,
undesirable adverse effects, and drug resistivity, while also outperforming
their predecessors in terms of early metastatic detection. The ability
of nanoparticles to distribute medication exclusively to specific
targeted tissues via peptide, PEGylation, or receptor ligand linkage
delivers an option that creates an optimum local concentration of
drug with lower dosages and lower cytotoxicity than topical administration
of the free drug. Multiple investigations have reported that embedding
chemotherapeutics in nanocarriers reduces cytotoxicity compared to
administering them as free drug solutions. With the existing advancements
in nano-based systems, they have been hailed as one of the potential
strategies for the treatment of lung cancer. However, there are still
several unmet needs that must be addressed before they can be formalized.
Drug resistance can be caused by insufficient drug release from nanocarriers.
Resistance offered by multiple drugs is likely to be resolved using
techniques such as enhanced multifunctionalized nanocarriers for targeted
drug delivery to specific tumor, endosomal disruption for immediate
cytoplasmic release of drug, and providing combination treatment via
multiple chemotherapeutics. Further, as we progress from microsized
to nanosized particles, there is a decline in size but, inclination
in surface area and particle number. Because nanoparticles have a
larger surface area, they have more chemical reactivity, which makes
it difficult to predict how they would react under varied situations.
Nanoparticles have enhanced chemical reactivity which produces reactive
oxygen species (ROS), that can trigger inflammatory responses, DNA
deterioration, and oxidative stress, eventually causing cytotoxicity.
However, only a few liposomes and nanoparticle-based compositions
have received FDA approval so far. Liposomes and lipid-based nanoparticles
are prone to oxidative breakdown, and have the tendency to accumulate,
leading to reduced therapeutic efficacy and are therefore less stable
when compared with other nanocarriers. Even though most lung malignancies
are detected at an advanced stage, a suitable delivery approach via
an appropriate nanocarrier which can release the drug to peripheral
and central lung tissues, along with circulatory pathways, are needed
for targeting local and distant metastatic malignant nodules. Additional
advancements are needed to facilitate the regulated release of chemotherapeutic
drugs through stimuli sensitive carriers. Cancer theranostics includes
both diagnosis and target-specific therapy delivered through multi-purpose
nanocarriers which include screening and chemotherapeutic chemicals,
which might become crucial in the future to regulate cancer therapy.
It has the potential for detecting cells with tumors and then eliminating
them with minimal adverse effects, and provide instant in
vivo screening technologies, and demonstrate treatment benefits.
As a result, future studies should focus on identifying efficacious
nanoparticles that are highly stable, have enhanced deagglomeration
potential, and improved infiltrating efficacy. Varying the physical
(mass median diameter and porosity) and chemical characteristics of
nanoparticles (amphiphilic particles, target ligands, and stable polymers)
might help preserve stability and prevent agglomeration during storage.
To have a synergistic boosting impact on local and systemic distribution,
a drug can be embedded into several nanoparticles, such as liposomes,
dendrimers, and micelles.
In addition to the challenges of designing
and synthesizing nanocarriers,
researchers must also consider the lack of standards in the evaluation
of nanomedicines, which involves manufacturing procedures, functional
testing, and safety protocols. Therapies including nanocarriers must
fundamentally circumvent identical challenges that a newly synthesized
drug possesses, which includes: ideal composition and characteristics
of compounds, repeatable manufacturing techniques, establishment of
analytical techniques to adequately characterize the compound, preferable
pharmacological evaluation with toxicity tests, and demonstration
of safety and effectiveness in pre-clinical and clinical studies.
A single active ingredient is generally found in standard medicines.
On the other hand, various active compounds are embedded in nanoparticles
which make them complicated. As a result of such a complexity, conventional
pharmacokinetic, bioequivalence, and safety inspections must be updated.
To strategically tackle the development of new nanoproducts obtained
from novel methodologies with ease of drug delivery, regulatory authorities
must establish an intensive set of tests with shortened clearance
procedures. Substantial investigation in this sector is expected to
seek new perspectives and replace the standard dose method with NDDSs
in the future, therefore improving health care delivery.

8

## Conclusion
Lung cancer is one of the
most common cancers with a high mortality
rate. Early identification and better treatment strategies are highly
essential to elevate the efficiency of treatment of carcinoma. Theranostic
agents use a distribution platform based on nanotechnology, to deliver
both therapeutic and imaging compounds to the desired location of
the body. Because of unique physical characteristics possessed by
nanostructures, they frequently have the capacity to resolve solubility
and stability problems of chemotherapeutic drugs by surface modification.
Nanotechnology has limitless potential and novel applications are
constantly being investigated as it is a discipline that has recently
spawned novel methods for lung cancer treatment. Researchers have
used several forms of nanocarriers to overcome the shortcomings of
traditional treatment by improving active or passive target specificity
and reducing cytotoxicity toward healthy cells. Aiming the regimen
toward overexpressed targets greatly enhances lung cancer treatment
results. The greater surface area of nanoparticles contributes to
the larger therapeutic payload as well. Liposomes, SLNs, micelles,
dendrimers, MNPs, CNTs, QDs, hydrogels, and nanoemulsions, polymeric
NPs are some of the nanocarriers which are formulated to be utilized
as theranostics. The quality of nanocarriers is significantly crucial
for transferring the drug to the tumor site as it directly affects
the infiltration of drug and accumulation of drug in the cancerous
tissue. The capacity to identify and quantify cancer at its initial
stage with higher resolution and predicting the response of cancer
therapy will also depend on the theranostic agent. These significant
advancements in lung cancer therapy, as well as the creation of different
superior novel drug delivery systems, have helped to boost the morale
of patients undergoing cancer treatment.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
All the authors are thankful to their respective affiliated
institutions for providing research facilities to carry out this work.