pmcNeuropathol Appl NeurobiolNeuropathol Appl Neurobiol379blackwellopen7609829NANNeuropathology and Applied Neurobiology0305-18461365-2990pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleWiley Open Access CollectionPMC9300154PMC9300154.1930015493001543481179510.1111/nan.12774NAN127741Original ArticleOriginal ArticlesNeurotherapeutic implications of sense and respond strategies generated by astrocytes and astrocytic tumours to combat pH mechanical stress
pH sensing and response in astrocytesJohn et al.JohnSebastian K. G.Gayathri KrishnaAswani P. MishraRashmihttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6729-2528 rashmimishra@rgcb.res.in

1

Brain and Cerebrovascular Mechanobiology Research, Laboratory of Translational Mechanobiology, Department of Neurobiology
Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology
Thiruvananthapuram
Kerala
India

2

Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE)
Manipal
Karnataka
India

*
Correspondence

Rashmi Mishra, Brain and Cerebrovascular Mechanobiology Research, Laboratory of Translational Mechanobiology, Department of Neurobiology, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thycaud Post, Poojappura, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, 695014, India.
Email: rashmimishra@rgcb.res.in

091220212202248241279110.1111/nan.v48.2e12774
2492021
1912021
14112021
200720222107202229072022© 2021 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Neuropathological Society.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract

## Aims
Astrocytes adapt to acute acid stress. Intriguingly, cancer cells with astrocytic differentiation thrive even better in an acidic microenvironment. How changes in extracellular pH (pHe) are sensed and measured by the cell surface assemblies that first intercept the acid stress, and how this information is relayed downstream for an appropriate survival response remains largely uncharacterized.

## Methods

In vitro cell‐based studies were combined with an in vivo animal model to delineate the machinery involved in pH microenvironment sensing and generation of mechanoadaptive responses in normal and neoplastic astrocytes. The data was further validated on patient samples from acidosis driven ischaemia and astrocytic tumour tissues.

## Results
We demonstrate that low pHe is perceived and interpreted by cells as mechanical stress. GM3 acts as a lipid‐based pH sensor, and in low pHe, its highly protonated state generates plasma membrane deformation stress which activates the IRE1‐sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2 response axis for cholesterol biosynthesis and surface trafficking. Enhanced surface cholesterol provides mechanical tenacity and prevents acid‐mediated membrane hydrolysis, which would otherwise result in cell leakage and death.

## Conclusions
In summary, activating these lipids or the associated downstream machinery in acidosis‐related neurodegeneration may prevent disease progression, while specifically suppressing this key mechanical ‘sense‐respond’ axis should effectively target astrocytic tumour growth.

In this manuscript, we have delineated the molecular steps by which normal and neoplastic astrocytes adapt to microenvironmental acidosis. The major highlights of the study are as follows: (1) High extracellular proton concentrations (pHe) generate mechanical stress on the astrocytes. (2) GM3 glycosphingolipid acts as a plasma membrane resident low pHe mechanical stress sensor and transducer. (3) GM3 activates the master controller protein IRE1, which further recruits the sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2‐cholesterol machinery to enable effective anti‐acidosis survival responses in brain astrocytes and astrocytic tumours. (4) IRE1 activation is neuroprotective in brain acidosis associated pathology. (5) IRE1 inactivation along with the additional depletion of surface cholesterol via STF‐083010 + Amphotericin B combination drug is promising in acidosis driven astrocytic tumour therapeutics.
 

astrocytescholesterolglioblastoma therapyGM3lateral compressive mechanical forcespH stresstumour microenvironmenttumour sense–respond stress signallingDepartment of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India
10.13039/501100001407BT/RLF/Re‐entry/16/2011BT/PR4959/MED/30/770/2012BT/PR6331/GBD/27/403/2012BT/PR26735/MED/31/378/2017Senior Research Fellowship from Indian Council of Medical ResearchFellowship Award ID:2014‐26530File no. BMS/FW/SCR/201426530/MAR 2015/04/KL/GOVT We further measured astrocyte total surface force and surface stiffness at low pHe versus physiological pHe, via Atomic Force Microscopy. Both total force and surface stiffness measurements confirmed a significant positive correlation between extracellular proton concentrations and rise in plasma membrane mechanical stress (Figure  ).
We next wanted to determine whether differential mechanical stress generated due to different levels of pHe can be transmitted into the cell.
For this, we employed an F‐actin crosslinking alpha‐actinin FRET‐based mechanical stress sensor [ , , ]. In this FRET‐based force‐sensing probe, one end of spectrin is fused with EGFP and another end with m‐Cherry. If the plasma membrane is laterally compressed via extensive protonation of its surface, there should be a gain in FRET efficiency as the distance between EGFP‐mCherry FRET pairs will decrease. This probe was transfected into astrocytes, and then an acidification protocol was followed. Astrocytes grown in high proton concentration microenvironments showed a higher gain in FRET probe efficiency (Figure  , also see Figures  and for representative images related to this panel). This suggests that high extracellular proton levels caused in‐plane surface compression.
Importantly, in recovery experiments, when low pH conditions were replaced with medium at physiological pH, the FRET readings reversed to that observed at pH 7.4 (Figure  ). This indicates that the FRET probe could rapidly and faithfully read the changes in extracellular pH levels due to its protonation‐dependent membrane compression and relaxation sensitivity.
The FRET‐based force measurements were made in two human astrocyte cells from different sources. NHA1/SVG is an SV40 transformed normal human astrocyte cell line engineered for better passaging [ ], ease of handling and has been instrumental in many previous studies [ , , ]. NHA2 represents untransformed human normal primary astrocytes (from Lonza). Besides these, we also compared freshly isolated astrocytes from postnatal mouse brains (Figure  ). For subsequent in vitro studies, we used NHA1/SVG human astrocyte cell line. However, the major conclusions were confirmed in mouse primary astrocytes and in the mouse brain acidification model. Astrocytes from all sources showed similar trends in FRET efficiency at comparable pH levels. The next step was to deduce how low pHe translates into membrane lateral compressive stress, enabling astrocytes to adapt to acidosis.

## Low pHe is sensed by sialic acid containing glycan headgroups on the astrocyte surface enabling membrane compression
In the Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) recordings, the cantilever detachment force required to detach the ‘cantilever’ from the cell's surface showed a positive correlation with the rise in extracellular proton concentrations (Figure  ). The detachment force frequency distribution also indicated that more cells exerted a higher back pulling force on the AFM cantilever at low pHe values (Figure  , please see the associated diagram in panel ‘F’ for more details). This suggests that the surface might have developed a ‘dense glycocalyx’ due to protonation mediated glycan‐glycan ligations of membrane proteins and lipids. This phenomenon might have been responsible for exerting a back pulling force on the retracting cantilever due to glycocalyces ‘viscous adhesive nature’. We confirmed this speculation via SNA lectin staining (Figure  ), which showed aggregation of predominant glycan moieties on the surface. These observations, therefore, indicate that protonation can physically drag the surface glycans into localised domains, ensuing membrane lateral compressive stress.
Notably, within glycan headgroups of both lipids and proteins, the negatively charged sialic acid moiety is highly susceptible to protonation. So, the next question that arose from SNA lectin based observation was whether sialic acid is involved in glycan clustering and lateral compressive stress? To address this, astrocytes transfected with the FRET‐based force‐sensing plasmid were treated with neuraminidase/sialidase to shave the sialic acid moieties, followed by pH treatment. A significant loss in FRET efficiency of the force‐sensing probe in astrocytes exposed to low pHe values was observed. This indicates that cells had lost their ability to sense and transmit the information on high microenvironmental proton levels (Figure  , see Figure  for representative FRET efficiency images). We thus found that the sialic acid moieties play a significant role in generating pH‐mediated surface mechanical stress. It may be noted here that neuraminidase activity is reduced at a pH below 6.0 [ ]. Therefore, the membrane compression at pH 5.8 was slightly higher than at other pH ranges (Figure  ).
 Overall, these observations indicate that sialic acid‐containing conformationally flexible surface molecules can play an important role in extracellular pH sensing.

## GM3 glycosphingolipid is crucial in sensing low pHe via protonation dependent differential clustering of its sialic acid glycan moiety
Kidney and gastric luminal epithelia, constantly exposed to low pH, are enriched in GM3 glycosphingolipid at their apical membranes [ , , ]. Therefore, we wondered whether astrocytes in an acidified microenvironment (such as that encountered during ischaemia or cancer) could utilise GM3 as a major surface pH sensor due to its conformational receptivity and susceptibility to protonation via its sialic acid containing headgroup.
To explore this, we depleted GM3 below homeostatic levels via siRNA mediated downregulation of the enzyme ST3Gal5 (GM3S). An siRNA concentration that downregulated GM3S to 60%–70% was selected, as complete depletion of this gene leads to aberrant cell de‐adhesion [ ]. We expected that if GM3 per se is required for pHe sensing, reducing its levels (through GM3S siRNA) would be sufficient to disturb the protonation‐driven clustered organisation involved in the pH sensing process.
GM3 depleted astrocytes were subjected to various pH microenvironments, and FRET‐based mechanical stress probe readings were inferred (Figure  ). Reduced surface GM3 caused significant loss in the compression of the FRET probe. Hence, it failed to correctly sense the low extracellular pH levels (Figures  and ). This suggests that GM3 is a crucial pHe sensor on the surface. Complimentary studies were performed by exogenously feeding GM3 to GM3 depleted astrocytes before pH treatment, and this preserved FRET probe sensitivity to pHe levels (Figure  ).

## Differential GM3 clustering triggers ER associated IRE1‐sXBP1 survival genes at low pHe
After obtaining evidence of the involvement of GM3 in surface pH sensing and in the translation of this information into membrane stress, we looked for direct evidence of differential GM3 clusters on astrocytes in response to different concentrations of extracellular protons.
For this, we detected the GM3 clusters by two imaging‐based protocols. In the first method, the anti‐GM3 antibody was incubated on physiological and low pHe treated live cells (Figure  , cells were kept on ice during surface incubation of anti‐GM3 antibody to prevent endocytosis). Another set of cells were given pHe treatments and were first fixed at RT followed by surface incubation of antibody (without permeabilization) (Figure  ). The signal was developed by incubating the fluorophore‐conjugated secondary antibody on the cell surface without cell permeabilization to reveal surface levels and organisation of GM3 (Figure  ). In the second method, the astrocyte plasma membrane was first fed with fluorescently conjugated GM3 lipid (TopFluor GM3), followed by pH treatments (Figure  ). Both methods of GM3 cluster detection showed similar results at comparable pHs. Indeed, at lower pH values, we noticed a steep rise in the GM3 cluster area.
To further confirm the GM3‐GM3 homo‐clustered organisation, equimolar concentrations of FRET pair labelled GM3 lipids, that is, TopFlour GM3 (TF‐GM3) and Rhodamine Red GM3 (RR‐GM3), were fed to astrocytes surface, followed by pH treatments (Figure  ). In this assay, we noticed a significant gain in FRET efficiency between FRET donor‐acceptor pair labelled GM3 molecules at low pH values, showing homo‐ligation of GM3 molecules and formation of higher‐order oligomeric‐multimeric states (Figure  ).
It is of utmost importance to note here that we did not register any significant FRET between lactosylceramide and GM3 or between GM1 and GM3, when labelled likewise with FRET donor‐acceptor pairs (Figures  and ). Lactosylceramide has a similar structure to GM3 except that it lacks sialic acid moiety. This again suggests that GM3 interacts with neighbouring GM3 molecules through the sialic acid protonation at low pH. GM1 is structurally similar to GM3 and also contains a sialic acid moiety, but the sialic acid is not situated at the terminal moiety of the sugar headgroup on this lipid, unlike that in GM3. This suggests that the position of sialic acid is also a strong determinant of GM3 homo‐ligation in response to protonation. These observations that the presence and the position of sialic acid imparts unique properties to GM3 to respond to protonation and act as a pH sensor is supported by the observation that both lactosylceramide and GM1 failed to produce micron‐sized clusters akin to GM3 in low pH conditions (see respective panels in Figure  ).
We wanted to explore whether GM3 clustering induced membrane compression can directly transmit information on pHe levels to the astrocyte interior to mount an adaptive response. We tried to resolve the GM3 clustered topology at the nanoscale via STED super‐resolution microscopy and found that GM3 clustered areas, at low pHe, form inwardly directed membrane curvatures and tubes (Figure  ).
Such GM3 curvatures can contact the plasma membrane juxtaposed peripheral ER and influence ER stiffness as well as ER‐associated survival dynamics. Therefore, we wanted to decipher whether GM3 curvatures‐ER contact sites enabled pHe mechanotransduction. To trace this, we transfected the astrocytes with a plasmid construct encoding the peripheral ER membrane fluorescent probe (named GFP‐MAPPER), which enables direct detection of ER‐PM contact‐sites [ ]. We found that the GM3 clustered organisation at low pH showed significant colocalization with GFP‐MAPPER (Figure  ). In fact, not just with STED, even in maximum intensity projections of confocal image stacks of 0.1 μm slice thickness, we could detect prominent GM3 curved and tube‐like assemblies that significantly colocalized with GFP‐MAPPER at low pH (Figure  ). We obtained similar results with fluorescently labelled GM3 lipid fed to plasma membranes (Figure  ), which remarkably colocalized with another peripheral ER marker E‐Syt2 tagged with mCherry [ ]. This indicates that clustered GM3 focal curvatures might have fused with peripheral ER. If GM3 enriched inward curvatures and tubes crosstalk with peripheral ER membranes, these stiff membrane areas may directly transmit the low pHe mediated compressive force to the ER membranes and even to the nucleus and chromatin (as the nuclear envelope is continuous with the ER membrane) [ ]. To test this, we performed live‐cell spectral measurements of merocyanine 540 fluorescence emission to map the fluidity of (i) ER‐PM contact points (using GFP‐MAPPER to identify peripheral ER) (ii) and of total ER (using GFP‐Sec61beta).
 Merocyanine 540 dye is partitioned out from high lipid packed areas of the bilayer, and reduction in its fluorescent emission represents more lipid packed/or stiff membranes [ , ]. Colocalization of merocyanine 540 with peripheral and total ER markers was significantly reduced in astrocytes exposed to low pHe (Figure  ). Hence, in astrocytes interfacing low pH, ER membranes were more densely lipid packed and stiffer. Conversely, in GM3 depleted astrocytes exposed to low pH, merocyanine 540 was well colocalized with ER membranes, clearly indicating that GM3 was responsible for ER membrane stiffening (please see insets in Figure  ).
In keeping with the fact that the ER is continuous with the nuclear envelope, we also found an increase in nuclear envelope stiffness indicator Lamin A [ ] but lack of DNA damage indicator phospho‐γH2AX. This protective stiffening effect on chromatin was significantly lost in GM3 depleted astrocytes exposed to low pHe's (Figures  – ). This suggests that GM3 clustering passes on the lipid bilayer stress to both ER and nuclear envelope (NE) membranes leading to their rigidification.
For the nucleus, stiffening of the envelope would mean robustly protecting the chromatin from DNA damage [ ]. Further, since chromatin has direct contact sites with the nuclear envelope and that euchromatin is more proximal to the nuclear envelope, NE stiffening should aid in making the chromatin conformationally poised for binding of appropriate mechanotransduced transcription factors for induction of pHe responsive genes. Indeed, we found an increase in nuclear H3K9ac and H3K27ac [ , ], which are crucially involved in positively regulating gene transcription (Figure  ). In GM3 depleted astrocytes, H3K9ac and H3K27ac were not found to increase upon low pH treatments. However, GM3 depleted astrocytes fed with GM3 lipid prior to treatment showed a significant rise in H3K9ac and H3K27ac levels, suggesting that GM3 was involved in enabling sensing and transduction of extracellular low pH information to the nucleus for activation of transcription.
However, in the context of the ER, could GM3 mediated mechanical remodelling/stiffening mean appropriately switching on the crucial cytoprotective lipid biosynthesis and UPR machinery via the ER stress sensor IRE1 [ , ]? ER‐resident IRE1 has been shown to sense membrane lipid stress via its self‐oligomerization, phosphorylation and activation to effect generation of cytoprotective pathways [ , ]. Activation‐induced enhancement in IRE1 RNAase activity generates splicing of the IRE1 associated factor XBP1. Spliced XBP1 (sXBP1) transcribes SREBP2, which upregulates ACSS2, a crucial enzyme in cholesterol synthesis [ ]. So, the next step was to determine whether IRE1 and its downstream effectors act as essential mediators in pHe mechano‐adaptations via GM3.To test this, we transfected astrocytes with a doxycycline‐inducible conditional plasmid of IRE1 fused with EGFP reporter gene [ ]. We induced the plasmid with a very low dose of doxycycline and then incubated the cells with media adjusted to various pH values. We found that IRE1 was significantly clustered in low pH incubations, and this clustering was substantially less in GM3 depleted cells in the respective pH conditions. In contrast, in GM3 depleted cells exogenously fed with GM3 lipid prior to low pH treatments, IRE1 clustering was found to be preserved (Figure  ).
IRE1 homo‐clustering causes its phosphorylation‐dependent activation; hence the observed fluorescent IRE1 clusters essentially represent activated IRE1. Still, we confirmed endogenous IRE1 phosphorylation at low pH values in GM3 undepleted, GM3 depleted, and GM3 repleted cells via the use of a specific antibody (Figure  ). IRE1 oligomeric activated state was positively correlated with the generation of spliced XBP1 in low pHe values (Figure  ). sXBP1 levels were found to be significantly lower in GM3 depleted cells exposed to low pH. This supports the observations that the GM3 clustered organisation passed the plasma membrane stress to ER membranes via contact and fusion, causing ER lipid stress, which is reported to activate IRE1 activation, leading to the formation of sXBP1 (Figure  ).
 

## Cholesterol is a major biosynthetic product of GM3 activated IRE1‐sXBP1 mechanotransduction enabling survival response machinery at low pHe
We observed that in low pH, sXBP1 cytoprotective targets such as DNAJC3 (p85IPK), DNAJB9 and SREBP2, were upregulated in astrocytes (Figure  ). SREBP2 generation was significantly less in sXBP1 inhibited (via STF‐083010 treatment), and GM3 depleted astrocytes when exposed to low pHe values (Figure  ).
Since SREBP2 downstream target ACSS2 generates excess Acetyl CoA, which serves as a critical substrate for cholesterol synthesis, we further explored the link between ACSS2 and the GM3‐IRE1‐sXBP1 axis. We observed a significant correlative rise in sXBP1 and ACSS2 expression and their nuclear translocation at low pHe values, which was found to be inhibited in STF‐083010 treated and GM3 depleted cells, while this was not so when GM3 depleted cells were fed with exogenous GM3 before pH treatments (Figure  ). This suggests that GM3 clustered organisation was crucially involved in ACSS2 mediated cholesterol biosynthesis via the IRE1‐sXBP1‐SREBP2 arm. The role of GM3 was confirmed through immunocytochemistry in low pHe incubated astrocytes (Figure  ). We also established the indispensability of sXBP1 in the transcription of SREBP2‐ACSS2 in freshly isolated mouse primary astrocytes (Figure  ), which was comparable to human astrocytes (Figure  ). The sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2 lipogenesis axis correlated with the rise in surface cholesterol in low pH conditions, indicating excess cholesterol synthesis and surface transport. At the same time, this was not so in STF‐083010 treated condition, wherein sXBP1 is inhibited (Figures  and ). We also tested whether the rise in surface cholesterol at low pH values was due to cholesterol extraction from the media in the form of lipoproteins or endogenous biosynthesis. For this, we repeated the surface cholesterol measurements in the delipidated media at different pHs. We found that the raised surface cholesterol was predominantly due to endogenous synthesis and not from the media (Figures  and ). Intriguingly, in a de‐lipidated medium, the surface cholesterol was far more enhanced, again confirming the existence of endogenous cholesterol biosynthesis feedback mechanisms to regulate the levels of crucial lipids on the surface [ ].
To confirm the cytoprotective role of sXBP1‐cholesterol in the prevention of low pHe mediated membrane acid hydrolysis and leakage, we undertook cell membrane permeability assays. sXBP1 generation inhibitor (STF‐083010) was used to suppress the excess cholesterol synthesis pathway and thus its surface levels. The enhanced permeability of membranes at low pH, upon reduction in surface cholesterol, confirmed the necessity to maintain high levels of surface cholesterol (Figure  ).
However, the crucial question was: Is this phenomenon observed in acidified brain regions? To ascertain this, we first needed a reliable marker of acidification. Surface expression of LAMP2 protein enables the identification of acidified tissue regions [ ]. In vitro, astrocytes showed high LAMP2 surface expression when exposed to low pHe (Figure  ). As identified by surface LAMP2 expression, ischaemic regions of the otherwise normal human brain showed a corroborative increase in nuclear sXBP1‐ACSS2 and GM3‐cholesterol colocalization. This observation supports GM3‐sXBP1‐ACSS2‐cholesterol axis cytoprotective function in low pH conditions (Figure  ).
To further substantiate that this axis works faithfully in vivo, we induced brain acidification in postnatal mice by established protocols and compared it with un‐acidified brains. The brain acidification was confirmed by CAIX and LAMP2 immunostaining (Figures  and ). Surface LAMP2 positive regions showed corroborative GM3 clustering and high cholesterol levels (Figure  ). Regions in astrocytes with clustered surface GM3 correlated well with activation of IRE1 (Figure  ) and showed enhanced nuclear translocation of sXBP1 (Figure  , white arrows points to nuclear localisation). The sXBP1 nuclear translocation in the acidified brain was substantially reduced when treated with the inhibitor of sXBP1 generation, STF‐083010. The astrocytes in the acidified brain also showed significantly higher levels of SREBP2 (Figure  ) and ACSS2 (Figure  ). However, this was not observed in brains treated with STF‐083010. sXBP1 inhibition in mouse primary astrocytes and in the acidified mouse brain via STF‐083010 treatment showed downregulation of sXBP1 pro‐survival targets such as DNAJC3, GRP78 and instead enhanced ER stress anti‐survival proteins such as ATF4 and NF‐kB (Figure  – ) [ , , ]. STF‐083010 treated acidified mouse brain showed high LDHA levels in the extracellular spaces (see extracellular punctate dots vs smooth cytoplasmic staining), indicating enhanced cell membrane damage and necrosis (Figure  ).
 Together, these observations support the consistency of in vitro and in vivo pHe sensing and adaptation machinery.

## Inhibition of splicing activity of IRE1 in combination with depletion of excess surface cholesterol negatively impacts the growth of astrocytic tumours
There is strong evidence that acid stress promotes tumourigenesis. Hence, we wondered whether brain tumours of astrocytic origin recapitulate the same GM3‐IRE1‐sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2‐cholesterol survival axis as deduced in astrocytes under acid stress. We first examined astrocytoma/glioblastoma patient tissues immuno‐histochemically for presence of anti‐acid molecular players, which were identified earlier in our study. Since LAMP2 protein is observed to be trafficked to the surface of GBM cells in low pHe (Figure  ), LAMP2 antibody was used to detect the acidic regions in GBM tissue. There was significant co‐occurrence and enrichment of clustered GM3 and high cholesterol in acidified regions of astrocytic tumours vs the normal human brain (Figure  ). We further documented that astrocytic tumours of different grades showed a corresponding increase in nuclear sXBP1 and ACSS2 localisation in acidified regions, indicating the preservation of GM3‐sXBP1‐ACSS2‐Cholesterol survival machinery in acidified tumour zones (Figure  ). Also, the survival and the prognostic value of XBP1 and ACSS2 in patients with astrocytic tumours were confirmed to be highly significant, wherein higher expression was associated with reduced survival (Figure  ).
 If excess cholesterol generated from the GM3‐IRE1‐sXBP1‐ACSS2 axis is essential for the survival response in the acidified tumour environment, then would it be beneficial to deplete the excessively raised levels of cholesterol in tumours [ ]? Therefore, we wanted to test whether simultaneous inhibition of sXBP1 mediated excess cholesterol synthesis pathway along with its surface depletion may prove to be effective in attenuating tumour growth at all pHs. The GBM patient‐derived cell lines indeed showed increased levels and nuclear translocation of sXBP1 and ACSS2 in low pH conditions, making it amenable to test our hypothesis (Figure  , for images, see Figure  ). For this, we used STF‐083010 [ ] to inhibit the IRE1‐sXBPI‐SREBP2‐ACSS2‐cholesterol synthesis axis and combined it with Amphotericin B (cholesterol sequestering FDA approved antibiotic, used at non‐toxic concentrations as referenced in citation no [ ]) to simultaneously deplete the excess surface cholesterol levels via cholesterol sequestration from the plasma membrane.
 The effects of combination drugs on tumour cell survival were assayed in several GBM tumour cells through MTT, cell count, colony and sphere growth maintenance assays (Figure  ). We observed that the cholesterol targeting drug combination was effective in attenuating tumour growth at various pHs. The formulation even worked well on tumour cells grown at physiological pH because tumour cells generally require higher cholesterol even at physiological pH than normal brain cells (Figure  ).
In summary, if we follow the strategy of inhibiting excess cholesterol biosynthesis with simultaneous sequestration of excess surface cholesterol, massive depletion of excess cholesterol from GBM tumour cells can be achieved (Figure  ; for images, see Figures  and ). On the one hand, patient data on GBMs document the use of acetate as a significant source of energy, wherein ACSS2 enables its conversion to Acetyl CoA for endogenous cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis [ ]. On the other, in vitro and mouse GBM studies also show the dependence of GBM on low‐density lipoproteins (LDLs) as the source of cholesterol [ ]. We find that LDL cholesterol was reduced in astrocytes growing in low pH microenvironments (Figure  ). In contrast, HMGCR levels (a rate‐limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis) was increased (Figure  ), supporting the reports that endogenous cholesterol synthesis is required for GBM survival in acidic conditions.
 To pursue this, we provided the exogenous source of cholesterol in the form of LDL particles to glioblastoma cells in the delipidated medium in various pH conditions. In this experimental set‐up, the sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2 mediated ‘excess’ cholesterol synthesis pathway was kept inhibited via STF‐083010 or with a more robust STF‐083010 and Amphotericin B combination treatment (Figure  ). The results point to significant membrane leakage, suggesting that tumour cells heavily depend on the de novo synthesis of high cholesterol levels and exogenous uptake is not sufficient for an anti‐acid defence (Figure  ).

## GM3‐IRE1‐sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2‐cholesterol axis is required for acid adaptation in astrocytes and astrocytic tumours
To further substantiate that the anti‐acid survival mechanism acts through the GM3‐sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2‐cholesterol axis, we performed several supporting experiments. In order to rule out that the possibility that GM3 can exercise its anti‐acidosis pro‐survival effects independent of sXBP1 cascade, we ran membrane permeability assays in sXBP1 depleted, but GM3 enriched astrocytes and astrocytic tumour cells. We found that membrane integrity was severely compromised in the absence of sXBP1 expression (Figure  ). However, transfection of sXBP1 plasmid in GM3 depleted cells could rescue membrane leakage (Figure  ). Hence, sXBP1 is an essential pro‐survival target of GM3 in combating acid stress.
sXBP1 has been previously shown to enable survival through c‐myc and HIF1α [ , ]. We documented that there was an appreciable expression of c‐myc in sXBP1 depleted acidified mouse primary astrocytes. This confirms that sXBP1 is not the sole regulator of c‐myc expression and that sXBP1 does not mediate anti‐acid survival through c‐myc (Figure  ). We next performed in situ proximity ligation assay between HIF1α and sXBP1 in human/mouse astrocytes and GBM tumour cells depleted of sXBP1 targets SREBP2/ACSS2. We observed that although a significant HIF1α and sXBP1 interaction was present (Figure  ), the plasma membrane integrity was compromised if SREBP2/ACSS2 was downregulated in these cells exposed to acid stress (Figure  ). The same study further established that in both sXBP1 inhibited or GM3 depleted cells, plasma membrane leakage could be prevented by SREBP2 or ACSS2 expression via plasmid transfections (Figure  ). Hence, SREBP2/ACSS2 were the primary essential targets of sXBP1 in the anti‐acid survival response. Indeed, only in the presence of GM3 and sXBP1, the endogenous transcript levels of SREBP2 and ACSS2 were found to rise in astrocytes/astrocytic tumours under acid stress (Figure  ).
Further, the loss of either sXBP1, SREBP2 or ACSS2 significantly reduced the surface cholesterol, and the plasmid expression dependent rescue experiments showed that repletion of SREBP2 or ACSS2 in sXBP1 inhibited cells could restore the need for high surface cholesterol in acidic stress (Figure  ). Therefore, SREBP2 and ACSS2 were found to be crucial regulators of excess cholesterol synthesis.
We furthermore established that cholesterol is the essential final responder in the prevention of plasma membrane leakage, by supplementation of exogenous cholesterol in (i) GM3 depleted, (ii) sXBP1 depleted (iii) SREBP2 depleted and (iv) ACSS2 depleted astrocytes and astrocytic tumour cells under acidic stress (Figure  ). No leakage was observed upon cholesterol supplementation in any of the mentioned conditions.
In tumour dendritic cells, reactive oxygen species (ROS) intermediates have been reported to generate sXBP1, which promotes excessive lipid droplet accumulation impairing dendritic cells (DC's) anti‐tumour functions [ ]. We document that in both complete and delipidated acidified media (devoid of LDL source of lipids), fewer lipid droplets are formed in astrocytes/astrocytic tumours (Figure  ), even though ROS levels were found to be higher in low pH conditions (Figure  ). So, the capacity of astrocytes and astrocytic tumours to handle ROS or lipid droplets accumulation differ from DC's. Again, when we inhibited ROS with Vitamin E treatment, we did not find any difference in either activated IRE1 clusters (Figure  ) or in the expression of sXBP1 in astrocytes and astrocytic tumours (Figure  ). Both IRE1 and sXBP1 were crucial targets downstream of GM3 (Figures  and ). Hence, in our system, ROS was not associated with the activation of sXBP1. This is probably due to appreciable levels of ROS intermediates degrading proteins HO‐1 and NQO1 in astrocytes and astrocytic tumours exposed to low pH (Figures  and ) [ , , ].
Furthermore, we find that inhibition of ROS from astrocytes and astrocytic tumours exposed to low pH does not impact trafficking of higher cholesterol to the surface (Figures  and ), but mild leakage was ensued even in GM3 enriched cells (Figure  ). This could be because ROS plays a crucial role in fluidizing the membrane and does not allow the membrane to become alarmingly rigid in pathological conditions such as acidosis. Hence, loss of ROS may make the membrane mildly leaky, although ROS by itself could not inhibit the loss of membrane integrity under acidosis, which is a unique function of the anti‐acidosis GM3‐IRE1‐sXBPI‐SREBP2‐ACSS2‐cholesterol synthesis machinery. Hence, a working model of the sense and respond strategies generated by astrocytes and astrocytic tumours to combat extracellular pH stress is presented in Figure  (please also see Figure  ).
 

## DISCUSSION
Our study presents new insights into the brain's acid stress adaptation and puts forward a mechanistic biophysical pathway on how acid stress is combated by the astrocytes (see Figures  and ). The exact mechanism is further utilised in astrocytic tumours for survival under acid stress. Intriguingly, rising levels of extracellular proton concentrations are interpreted as gradients of mechanical force via protonation mediated homo‐clustering of surface GM3 glycosphingolipid. The clustered organisation, which occurs due to ligation of neighbouring sialic acid glycan moieties of GM3 in response to protonation, proportionately compresses the plasma membrane and raises the surface mechanical stress. Micron‐sized GM3‐clustered membrane invaginates as curvatures and tubes and tether peripheral ER, thereby ‘relaying’ the mechanical stress to ER membranes, causing multimerization and activation of ER membrane resident IRE1, which is known to be activated by ER lipid bilayer stress. Activated IRE1 multimeric clusters then induce splicing of XBP1, which upregulates survival pathways crucially involving SREBP2‐ACSS2 mediated cholesterol synthesis and trafficking to the surface. An increase in surface cholesterol thus provides mechanical stiffness and prevents acid‐mediated membrane leakage. Hence, low pH is combated by astrocytes through a unique survival mechano‐machinery that involves GM3 as a mechanosensor, activated IRE1 as a mechanotransducer, sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2 as mechano‐effectors and cholesterol as a mechanoresponder of acid‐stress. Therefore, activating this unique mechanical sense‐response axis in acid stress associated neurodegeneration may prevent disease progression, while modulating it will effectively target the astrocytic tumour growth.
Cholesterol synthesis and surface trafficking may be a sound survival strategy to acidosis, mainly because cholesterol provides structural support to the cell membranes. The increase in cholesterol levels in a lipid bilayer causes tighter packing of fatty acid tails for better membrane tenacity. It prevents the separation of the lipid bilayer into absolute liquid and absolute gel/solid phases that would otherwise lead to the formation of gaps between the two phases allowing cytoplasmic contents to leak out of the cell until these gaps are sealed via lateral diffusion of neighbouring lipids. Hence, an increase in surface cholesterol stiffens the plasma membrane, causing non‐permeability to undesirable solutes and prevents the membrane from acid‐induced leakage.
Conversely, since GBM tumour cells have significantly higher cholesterol synthesis than normal cells, especially in acidic niches, inhibition of ‘excess’ cholesterol synthesis pathway via IRE1‐sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2 axis attenuation seems to be a more rational strategy than profound use of statins. Targeting HMGCR, a rate‐limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis, via statin is highly counterproductive. Studies have shown that statin resistance develops in tumours due to multidrug efflux receptors on the surface. The statins are taken up by the normal cells, creating cholesterol synthesis abnormalities and negatively impacting other branches of the mevalonate pathway involved in cell protection [ ]. Also, statins are required in very high doses to inhibit excess cholesterol synthesis in tumours, which impacts the normal functioning of other organs.
It is well established that excessive cholesterol is the Achilles' heel in GBM treatment [ ]. So, in contrast to statins, targeting ‘excess’ cholesterol pathways via ACSS2 inhibition can effectively compromise the survival of GBM cells without adversely impacting the normal cells. ACSS2 can be inhibited by specific inhibition of the RNAse activity of IRE1 that generates sXBP1.
However, we found that inhibition of excess sXBP1 via STF‐083010 in combination with Amphotericin B, an FDA approved drug that sequesters cholesterol from the surface, was more effective in inhibiting GBM growth. The dosage of Amphotericin B used in our study has been determined to be non‐toxic in an animal model [ ]. Amphotericin B has low CSF penetrance but has shown promising results in managing fungal brain infections and glioma stem cells elimination by immune activation [ , , ].
GM3‐IRE1‐sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2‐Cholesterol acid ‘sense and respond’ machinery players have a far‐reaching involvement in neuroprotection. For example, the normally acidic nature of the hippocampus shows a shift to an alkaline environment in Alzheimer's Disease (AD), indicating a putative role of the acidic microenvironment in learning and memory [ ]; correlatively, acidosis adaptation effectors deduced in our study, namely sXBP1 [ ] and ACSS2 [ ], are also involved in memory formation and cognition [ , ]. Further, pharmacological activation of the IRE1‐sXBP1 pathway has been identified to reduce mutant amyloid precursor protein (APP) associated mitochondrial toxicity in cellular models of AD [ ].
Activation of sXBP1 in astrocytes is documented to have a positive pro‐survival role during ischaemia, and hypoxic cerebral injury, as sXBP1 can activate ERAD and reduce the load of unfolded proteins [ , , , , , ]. The major problem arises during the reperfusion stage, which triggers molecular players to which sXBP1 can bind and then cooperate to trigger apoptosis. Therefore, sXBP1, activated by the cell for protection, becomes a villain during the reperfusion phase. Considerations are that for providing the overall neuroprotection during the reperfusion phase, sXBP1 should be potentiated, while ER stress apoptotic players such as CHOP (with which sXBP1 interacts and produces adverse effects) should be simultaneously inhibited [ , , , , ].
Not only during injuries, but routine brain activity levels also generate large amounts of CO2, leading to brain acidification, which our astrocytes can clear [ , ]. Our study presents the underlying machinery that can do so. SREBP2 and ACSS2 are already documented as pro‐survival factors in the acidic microenvironment of pancreatic cancers [ ]. confirming SREBP2 as a crucial component of anti‐acid stress adaptation machinery. Biosynthesis of SREBP2 in astrocytes is also shown to prevents neuronal cell death [ ]. Hence, the clinical literature on the individual players in our acid stress adaptation machinery strongly supports their neurotherapeutic roles in various acidosis associated disorders. What is novel in this study is that amongst the multiple pathways that astrocytes and astrocytic tumours may upregulate to counter acid stress, GM3 induced IRE1‐sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2‐Cholesterol is an essential mechano‐machinery. This novel machinery provides us with a controllable handle to switch survival in astrocytes if they cannot do so independently, such as brain injuries or in biologically aged individuals. The same machinery can be switched off to target astrocytic cancers.

## FUNDING INFORMATION
This work was supported by the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India through the following grants: BT/RLF/Re‐entry/16/2011; BT/PR4959/MED/30/770/2012; BT/PR6331/GBD/27/403/2012; BT/PR26735/MED/31/378/2017 to RM. SJ is supported by Senior Research Fellowship from Indian Council of Medical Research (Fellowship Award ID:2014‐26530; File no. BMS/FW/SCR/201426530/MAR2015/04/KL/GOVT).

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## ETHICS STATEMENT
Please note that the human tumour tissue arrays (cat nos. GL208 and GL806e) are directly procured from US Biomax Inc, USA. The link to obtain specification sheets of the mentioned tissue arrays are as follows: https://www.biomax.us/tissue-arrays/Brain/GL208, and https://www.biomax.us/c2/index.php?route=product/product&product_id=58843

This is a commercially established repository for procuring human tumour tissue samples and samples related to other pathologies. The tumour tissue arrays with Cat. No. GL208 and GL806e are classified according to WHO 2007, 3rd edition and WHO 2016, 4th edition respectively. Again, according to US Biomax Inc., post‐mortem normal brain sections in lane H with positions H6, H7, H8, H9 of tissue array, cat no.GL806e (B031) are from road accident victims. The company has disclosed its consent form format to the user. No further institutional ethical approval was required by the authors for the use of human tissues from the certified commercial source. The tissue arrays are procured according to the purchase and import ethics of Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (RGCB) under the purchase order nos. RGCB/PUR/16/372/PO/9965 and RGCB/PUR/21/343/PO/1854/FE.
The mouse astrocyte‐associated data and mouse CO2 inhalation experiments were performed on C57/Bl6J mice strictly according to the protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (certificate number IAEC/164/RM/2012 and IAEC/707/RM/2018 respectively) of Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (RGCB).

## CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION
All authors agree to publication of the article.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Rashmi Mishra: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis; Funding acquisition; Investigation; Methodology; Project administration; Resources; Supervision; Validation; Visualisation; Writing‐original and revised draft. Sebastian John: Data curation; Formal analysis; Investigation; Methodology; Validation; Visualisation; Writing‐original draft. Gayathri K.G: Investigation. Aswani Krishna P: Investigation.

## PEER REVIEW
The peer review history for this article is available at https://publons.com/publon/10.1111/nan.12774.

## Supporting information
Figure S1: Schematic representation of experimental procedures followed in the study for quick reference of the various experimental phases
Figure S2: Representative FRET‐based force probe ratiometric images of astrocytes incubated at different pH units. Related to Figure 1e
Figure S3: F‐actin stress fibre formation at low pH
Figure S4: Representative force probe FRET ratiometric images of astrocytes treated with neuraminidase and then exposed to different pH units, related to Figure 2a
Figure S5: Representative force probe FRET ratiometric images of astrocytes treated with siRNA of GM3 synthase and when GM3 synthase depleted cells were fed with GM3 lipid and then exposed to different pH units, related to Figure 2b
Figure S6: Representative force probe FRET ratiometric images of astrocytes fed with Bodipy FL GM1 and Rhodamine GM3 or Bodipy FL Lactosylceramide and Rhodamine GM3 and then exposed to different pH units, related to Figure 2f
Figure S7: Representative images of the colocalization of ER‐PM markers, GFP‐MAPPER and E‐Syt2 with GM3 lipid, related to Figure 3a
Figure S8: Nuclear Lamin A expression in scramble siRNA transfected or GM3S siRNA transfected astrocytes upon exposure to different pH units.
Figure S9: Lamin A and Sec61b colocalization upon exposure to different pH units.
Figure S10: Nuclear γH2AX levels in mock siRNA transfected or siRNA GM3S transfected astrocytes exposed to different pH units
Figure S11: Quantitation of nuclear γH2AX levels in mock siRNA transfected or siRNA GM3S transfected astrocytes exposed to different pH units
Figure S12: Astrocytes exposed to low pH show enhanced nuclear localization of H3K9Ac and H3K27Ac, epigenetic activators of transcription, in the presence of GM3
Figure S13: GM3 enhances co‐expression of sXBP1‐SREBP2‐ACSS2 lipogenesis axis in low pH microenvironment of astrocytes
Figure S14: sXBP1 is required for significant co‐expression of SREBP2‐ACSS2 lipogenesis axis in low pH microenvironment of mouse primary astrocytes
Figure S15: sXBP1 is required for significant co‐expression of SREBP2‐ACSS2 lipogenesis axis in low pH microenvironment of human astrocytes
Figure S16: Representative images of astrocytes' surface cholesterol levels in low pH units with or without STF‐083010 treatment and when pH treatments were given in delipidated media, related to Figure 4 h.
Figure S17: Surface expression and colocalization of LAMP2 with plasma membrane marker WGA in astrocytes exposed to different pH units.
Figure S18: In vivo mouse model of brain acidification faithfully upregulates CAIX/CA9 protein, a marker of the acidic microenvironment.
Figure S19: In vivo mouse model of brain acidification faithfully upregulates SREBP2 in the acidified brain only in the presence of sXBP1.
Figure S20: GRP78 and DNAJC3, the downstream cytoprotective targets of sXBP1 are inhibited by STF‐083010 treatment in low pH treated mouse primary astrocytes.
Figure S21: GRP78 and DNAJC3, the downstream cytoprotective targets of sXBP1 are inhibited by STF‐083010 treatment in acidified brain.
Figure S22: ATF4 and NF‐kB, the downstream cell death associated targets of ER stress are upregulated by STF‐083010 treatment in low pH treated mouse primary astrocytes.
Figure S23: ATF4 and NF‐kB, the downstream cell death associated targets of ER stress are upregulated by STF‐083010 treatment in acidified brain.
Figure S24: Surface expression and colocalization of LAMP2 with plasma membrane marker WGA in glioblastoma tumour cell lines exposed to different pH units.
Figure S25: Representative images of the expression of sXBP1 and ACSS2 in GBM tumour cell lines exposed to different pH units, related to Figure 8a,b.
Figure S26: Representative images of the surface and total cholesterol levels in U87MG glioblastoma tumour cell line exposed to different pH units, related to Figure 9a.
Figure S27: Representative images of the surface and total cholesterol levels in LN229 glioblastoma tumour cell line exposed to different pH units with or without drug treatments, related to Figure 9b.
Figure S28: mRNA expression of HMGCR in GBM cells exposed to different pH units, related to Figure 9c.
Figure S29: Propidium Iodide (PI) based membrane leakage assay shows that sXBP1 is a crucial downstream effector of GM3 in the generation of low pH adaptation in astrocytes and astrocytic tumours
Figure S30: c‐Myc, a crucial oncogene, is not a non‐redundant downstream target of sXBP1 and cannot by itself rescue astrocyte membrane leakage in a low pH microenvironment.
Figure S31: In situ proximity ligation assay (PLA) shows that HIF1α interaction with sXBP1is not reduced in astrocytes and astrocytic tumours cells that were depleted of SREBP2 and ACSS2.
Figure S32: Propidium Iodide (PI) based membrane leakage assay shows that SREBP2 and ACSS2 are the essential downstream prosurvival targets of GM3‐sXBP1 low pH adaptation machinery in astrocytes and astrocytic tumours
Figure S33: SREBP2 and ACSS2 transcript levels confirm that these are the essential downstream pro‐survival targets of GM3‐sXBP1 low pH adaptation machinery in astrocytes and astrocytic tumours
Figure S34: SREBP2 and ACSS2 are crucial downstream targets of sXBP1 in the enhancement of excess surface cholesterol in low pH treated astrocytes and astrocytic tumour cells
Figure S35: Propidium Iodide (PI) based membrane leakage assay shows that cholesterol is an essential pro‐survival responder in low pH adaptation machinery in astrocytes and astrocytic tumours
Figure S36: Lesser lipid droplets (LD) accumulation was found in astrocytes/astrocytic tumours exposed to low pH conditions vs the physiological pH, although ROS levels were found to be higher in low pH conditions
Figure S37: GM3 and not ROS enhances IRE‐1 clustering/activation in low pH treated astrocytes and astrocytic tumours.
Figure S38: ROS does not impact sXBP1 transcript levels in low pH treated astrocytes (human and mouse primary) and astrocytic tumours (LN229 and U87MG).
Figure S39: HO‐1 and NQO1, the downstream anti‐oxidant targets of ROS are activated in acidified astrocytes and astrocytic tumour cells.
Figure S40: HO‐1 and NQO1, the downstream anti‐oxidant targets of ROS, are inhibited by STF‐083010 treatment in acidified brains.
Figure S41: GM3 and not ROS enhances surface cholesterol in low pH treated astrocytes and astrocytic tumours.
Figure S42: GM3 and not ROS enhances surface cholesterol trafficking in low pH treated astrocytes and astrocytic tumours.
Figure S43: Depleting GM3 and not ROS causes membrane leakage in pH treated astrocytes and astrocytic tumours.
Figure S44: Self‐explanatory flowchart representation of the sense and respond strategies generated by astrocytes and brain tumours of astrocytic origins to combat extracellular pH stress.
Click here for additional data file.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We sincerely thank the following scientists for sharing their research resources: Prof. Pietro De Camilli, Yale University School of Medicine for E‐Syt2‐mCherry and EGFP‐E‐Syt2 (Addgene #66831) plasmids; Prof. Peter Walter, University of California, San Francisco for doxycycline inducible GFP‐IRE1 construct; Prof. Christine Mayr, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center for GFP‐ SEC61B plasmid (Addgene #121159); Prof. Tom Misteli, National Cancer Institute, NIH, USA for pBABE‐puro‐GFP‐wt‐lamin A plasmid (Addgene #17662), Dr Jen Liou, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center for GFP‐MAPPER plasmid; Dr Tetsuya Kitaguchi for FRET Probe Actinin‐sstFRET‐GR plasmid (Addgene#83416), Dr Sankar Bhattacharyya, THSTI, Faridabad for pIRE1 and other UPR related antibodies; Prof. Pankaj Seth, National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, for immortalised human astrocyte cell line, originally procured from Prof. Eugene O Major, NINDS/NIH, USA; U K Ravi/Kishore, Toshniwal Bros.(SR) Pvt. Ltd. and Vijay K Mistari, Senior Technical Assistant, BSBE, IIT Powai for Atomic Force microscopy.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are included within the article and its supporting information file.