3815pheelsevierAntiviral ResearchAntiviral ResPMC9122840912284091228403560569910.1016/j.antiviral.2022.105345Animal models for studying coronavirus infections and developing antiviral agents and vaccines
LinQisheng LuChunni HongYuqi LiRunfeng ChenJinding ChenWeisan ChenJianxin aGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development and Safety Evaluation, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, ChinabCentre for Inflammatory Diseases, Monash University Department of Medicine, Monash Medical Centre, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168, AustraliacState Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, ChinadDepartment of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria, 3086, Australia∗Corresponding author. College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, China.
∗∗Corresponding author. La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Australia.
1These authors contributed equally to this work.
21520222031053451053452152022© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

## Abstract
In addition to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), SARS-CoV-2 has become the third deadly coronavirus that infects humans and causes the new coronavirus disease (COVID-19). COVID-19 has already caused more than six million deaths worldwide and it is likely the biggest pandemic of this century faced by mankind. Although many studies on SARS-CoV-2 have been conducted, a detailed understanding of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 is still lacking. Animal models are indispensable for studying its pathogenesis and developing vaccines and antivirals. In this review, we analyze animal models of coronavirus infections and explore their applications on antivirals and vaccines.
Keywords: Coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, Animal models, Vaccine, Antiviral agent

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Apr 2; Revised 2022 Apr 30; Accepted 2022 May 17; Issue date 2022 Jul.

1.

## Introduction
Coronaviruses (CoVs) represent a group of enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses in the family Coronaviridae, order Nidovirales ( ). CoVs are among the RNA viruses with the largest genome size. Their genome is organized from 5′-methylated cap to 3′-polyadenylated tail into open-reading frame 1 ab (ORF1ab), spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N) ( ). There are four genera of CoVs, α-, β-, γ-, and δ-CoVs. While CoVs may infect a range of animals including swine, cattle, horses, dogs, cats, rodents, and birds, only α- and β-CoVs can infect humans ( ).
There are seven known species of human CoVs. HCoV-OC43, HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-229E, and HCoV-NL63 are the four common species continually circulating in humans and cause mild to moderate respiratory infections ( ; ; ; ). However, the other three, severe acute respiratory syndrome CoV (SARS-CoV), Middle East respiratory syndrome CoV (MERS-CoV), and the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 causes severe acute respiratory diseases and endanger global health. In 2002 and 2003, the outbreaks of SARS-CoV resulted in approximately 800 deaths ( ). Since 2012, there were numerous reports of MERS-CoV infections and deaths, with approximately 2500 laboratory-confirmed cases and 868 associated deaths as of December 2019 ( ). The novel SARS-CoV-2, first identified in Wuhan, China, in December 2019 ( ), is causing the ongoing pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), and the global death toll is now approximately 6.3 million ( , https://covid19.who.int/), highlighting the urgent need for developing preventative and control strategies.
It has been suggested that wild bats are the potential reservoir hosts of the three deadly coronaviruses, SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 ( ; ) and the viruses can be transmitted across species through one or more intermediate hosts ( ; ). Civets ( ) and dromedary camels ( ) have been identified as potential intermediate hosts of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, respectively. Pangolins might be a potential intermediate host of SARS-CoV-2 as indicated by the study that the genome of pangolin-CoV isolated from dead Malayan pangolins is 91% identical to that of SARS-CoV-2 ( ). To date, non-human primates (NHPs) ( ; ), hamsters ( ) and ferrets ( ) have been shown to be susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Animal models are of great importance to understanding the cause and pathogenesis of many infectious diseases, especially the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic ( ). They could also aid the development of vaccines and antivirals for human CoV disease prevention and intervention. In this review, we summarize animal models employed in studies of human CoV infection to date. We specifically address the animal models utilized in SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 studies.

2.

## Lethal human Coronavirus infections, SARS, MERS and COVID-19
The common clinical symptoms of SARS-CoV infections include fever, unproductive cough, muscle soreness, headache, chills and dyspnea ( ), with the exception of approximately 10% cases developing gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea ( ). The typical laboratory findings include lymphopenia and elevated lactate dehydrogenase ( ). COVID-19 patients generally manifest fever, cough, muscle pain and fatigue, which are also accompanied by noticeable leukopenia and lymphopenia and increased level of serum aspartate amino transferase ( ). A small portion of COVID-19 patients might develop severe acute respiratory distress, acute heart injury, liver injury and renal insufficiency ( ; ). These patients usually have higher serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-7, IL-10, IL-17, GCSF, IP-10, MCP-1, MIP-1α and TNF-α, a result of severe acute immune reaction called “cytokine storms” ( ; ; ).
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a negative regulatory enzyme in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), functioning to lower blood pressure and maintain fluid and electrolyte balance ( ). It is widely expressed in tissues across the body, such as lungs, intestines, heart, eyes, brain, kidneys, and testes ( ). It has been demonstrated that SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 both utilize ACE2 as their entry receptor ( ; ). Interestingly, however, the binding affinity of SARS-CoV-2 to ACE2 via its S protein receptor-binding domain (RBD) is approximately 10–20 folds higher than that of SARS-CoV ( ). This greatly enhances the transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Meanwhile, the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to cross the species barrier ( ) poses a much greater threat to human health. Worse, while the original COVID-19 pandemic is yet to be brought under control, various SARS-CoV-2 variants have boosted COVID-19 transmission ( ). They have not only made the COVID-19 pandemic much worse, but also threatened the efficacy of so far largely successful COVID-19 vaccines ( ). According to the new nomenclature of the World Health Organization (WHO) ( , https://www.who.int/en/activities/tracking-SARS-CoV-2-variants/), clinically relevant variants of concern (VOC) include Alpha (originally termed as B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351), Gamma (P.1), Delta (B.1.617.2) and Omicron (B.1.1.529) variant as well as two other variants of interest (VOI), i.e. Lambda (C.37), and Mu (B.1.621). In particular, over the past year, the SARS-CoV-2 Delta and Omicron emerged successively and became the dominant variant. The SARS-CoV-2 Delta was first identified in India in December 2020 ( ), and Delta variant contains seven S protein mutations, including three mutations (T19R, G142D and R158G) in NTD, two mutations (L452R and T478K) in RBD, two mutations (D614G and P681R) near S1/S2 cleavage site ( , https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/voc_voi_290921.pdf?sfvrsn=61b3acff_5). The newly emerging SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant, which was first identified in Botswana and South Africa in November 2021 ( ) and is designated a new VOC variant by the WHO ( , https://www.who.int/en/activities/tracking-SARS-CoV-2-variants/), has seriously jeopardized the current prophylaxis and therapeutic strategies. The Omicron variant is particularly frightening since it contains 32 amino acid mutations in the S protein, making it by far the most mutated variant discovered yet. Several of these mutations are also seen in Beta and Delta variants, such as K417N, N501Y, T478K, and D614G ( , https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/voc_voi_290921.pdf?sfvrsn=61b3acff_5). Studies have demonstrated that the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant is highly transmissible and induces moderate neutralizing antibody responses ( ; ).
Patients with MERS-CoV infection develop symptoms similar to those of SARS, including early-stage fever, chills, muscle aches, diarrhea, and late-stage acute respiratory and/or renal failure ( ; ). Hematological analysis of MERS patients revealed severe lymphopenia and markedly elevated C-reactive protein ( ). Unlike SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, MERS-CoV uses dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) as its entry receptor ( ). DPP4, also known as adenosine deaminase complexing protein 2 or cluster of differentiation 26 (CD26), is an ectopeptidase ubiquitously expressed on the cell surface of most tissues ( ; ). Interestingly, while its ectopeptidase activity, degrading substrates such as incretin hormones, growth factors, and cytokines, is associated with a variety of metabolic diseases ( ), whether such activity is necessary for cell entry of MERS-CoV remains to be determined.

3.

## Animal models of SARS, MERS and COVID-19
3.1.

## Non-human primates
Non-human primates closely mimic humans in genetics, physiology and immunology, thereby making them the ideal animal models for human disease studies. Studies examining the susceptibility of New World and Old World monkeys including rhesus macaque, common marmoset and cynomolgus macaque to SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 reported that while these species allow the replication of these viruses in their airway and lungs, their symptoms, lung pathology and immune responses vary significantly ( ; ).
3.1.1.

## Rhesus macaque
As we currently understand, rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) are reliable animal models in studying highly pathogenic coronaviruses due to their susceptibility to SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 and intrinsic biological similarity related to humans ( ). A previous report showed that SARS-CoV could replicate in the respiratory tract of rhesus macaques, whereas the titer of correlated neutralizing antibody induced in the sera were generally low and the animals were found largely asymptomatic ( ). In contrast, strong inflammatory cytokine responses and severe pulmonary pathology have been observed in the SARS-CoV-2 infected rhesus macaques compared to infected cynomolgus macaques and common marmosets, indicating that rhesus macaques are more susceptible animal model for SARS-CoV-2 study ( ). Collectively, interstitial pneumonia characterized by thickened alveolar walls, monocyte and lymphocyte infiltration ( ; ; ), as well as virus-induced inflammatory cytokine and chemokine production could be observed in most SARS-CoV-2 infected rhesus macaques ( ; ). Moreover, lymphocytopenia associated with severe infection could also be detected in infected rhesus macaques ( ; ; ), which was similar to those reported in COVID-19 patients ( ; ; ). Importantly, the neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) induced by the primary SARS-CoV-2 infection could effectively prevent rhesus macaques from secondary infection ( ; ). Rhesus macaques are also susceptible to MERS-CoV infection as reported by de Wit and colleagues. They showed that rhesus macaques allowed widespread dissemination of MERS-CoV in their respiratory tract and developed mild to severe interstitial pneumonia as early as 3 dpi ( ). Therefore, rhesus macaques have so far been identified as suitable animals for modeling human MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infection.

3.1.2.

## Common marmoset
Common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus), the smallest NHP in the New World, appear to be the best NHPs for modeling SARS and MERS. Common marmosets infected with SARS-CoV showed mild clinical diarrhea and dyspnea and developed interstitial pneumonitis characterized by pulmonary infiltration of mononuclear cells and multinucleated syncytial cells, edema and bronchiolitis ( ). There was also concomitant hepatitis, mild diffuse colitis and multifocal lymphocytic myocarditis ( ), resembling the extrapulmonary tissue inflammation commonly observed in SARS patients ( ; ; ). Similarly, common marmosets infected with MERS had a high viral load in their lungs and developed severe respiratory disturbances and extensive bronchial interstitial pneumonia ( ). This is likely due to the nearly identical DPP4 between common marmoset and human, with a 100% identity of the 14 virus-contacting amino acid residues ( ). In contrast, common marmosets are less sensitive to SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to rhesus macaques, as evidenced by lower or barely detectable viral RNA in the swab samples and tissues of infected common marmosets ( ). Consistently, a study comparing rhesus macaques, baboons, and marmosets in response to acute lung infection with SARS-CoV-2 found that marmosets only showed mild infection with mild recruitment of interstitial lymphocytes and macrophages ( ). These together confirm that common marmosets are suitable animal models for the pathogenesis study of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection, but not so for SARS-CoV-2.

3.1.3.

## Cynomolgus macaque
To date, cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) as an animal model are only used to study SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infection. SARS-CoV-infected cynomolgus macaques develop mild symptoms as rhesus macaques do. As previously reported, SARS-CoV-infected cynomolgus macaques displayed mild to moderate symptoms, such as reduced appetite and activity, mild cough and sneezing, and mildly labored breathing ( ; ). Moreover, the viral RNA levels in nasal and oral swabs were low ( ). Aged cynomolgus macaques are more prone to SARS-CoV infection, as evidenced by higher viral RNA load ( ) and more severe lung pathology ( ) relative to those in younger adult macaques. Similarly, interstitial pneumonia with endotheliitis accompanied by elevated inflammatory cytokines and decreased lymphocyte infiltration could be observed in both SARS-CoV-2 infected cynomolgus macaques and rhesus macaques ( ). Recently, Rockx et al. detected virus replication in the respiratory tract, as well as in the ileum, colon, mesentery and tonsil ( ). More importantly, they found higher levels of viral load in the nasal swabs of aged cynomolgus macaques, in line with the clinical observation that the elderly are more susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Interestingly, however, no overt clinical signs and body weight loss were observed in any of SARS-CoV-2-infected cynomolgus macaques ( ; ). This resembles the clinical characteristics of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections. Together, these studies support cynomolgus macaque as a suitable model for studying the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections and as an alternative NHP model for testing drugs' and vaccines’ efficacy.

3.2.

## Mice
Syngeneic mice are the most frequently used animals in laboratories, because they are not only cheap and easy to care for but also have identical genetic background, which leads to minimum individual differences and better reproducibility. Over the past decade, various mouse models have been developed for SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 studies. Although wild-type mice could be infected by SARS-CoV, no mortality was observed in any SARS-CoV-infected wild-type mouse models, which is not conducive to the development of antiviral drugs and vaccines. Moreover, wild-type mice are not suitable for MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV-2 studies as the viral S proteins do not show sufficient tropism to mDPP4 and mACE2 ( ; ). Therefore, to obtain susceptible mouse models, various strategies such as developing transgenic mice ( ; ) and receptor-transduced mice ( ; ; ) have been widely applied.
3.2.1.

## WT mice
The susceptibility of WT mice to SARS-CoV infection is age-associated. For instance, some previous reports showed that while 4- to 6-wk-old young BALB/c mice intranasally infected with SARS-CoV allowed viral replication in the respiratory tract, they did not develop symptoms or lung pathology, and the virus was cleared within a week ( ). However, Roberts et al. showed that intranasal SARS-CoV infection caused significant weight loss, hunching, ruffled fur, slight dehydration and pulmonary inflammation in 12- to 14-month-old BALB/c mice. In addition, the virus was detected in the upper respiratory tract and even in the liver of the old BALB/c mice ( ). Therefore, the susceptibility of WT mice to SARS-CoV infection seems to be positively correlated with age, in accordance with previous findings which demonstrated an age-related viral replication, clinical illness and pneumonia in WT BALB/c mice ( ). This parallels human SARS-CoV infections, to which the elderly are more susceptible.
Both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 utilize ACE2 as entry receptor, however, the binding affinity of mACE2 to SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 is different. An in vitro analysis of viral S protein-receptor binding affinity showed that the binding affinity of SARS-CoV and SAR-CoV-2 S protein to mACE2 was 63.1% and 0.8% of that to hACE2, respectively ( ). This is probably due to that the sequence identity of receptor binding motif (RBM) in RBD shared by SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 was only 47.8% ( ). These together may explain why wild-type mice could be infected by SARS-CoV but not SARS-CoV-2 ( ; ). In addition, there are 9 different contact amino acid residues between mACE2 and hACE2 in the ACE2-RBD interface, among which H353 of mACE2 was not conducive to virus binding as K353 in hACE2 is critical for contacting T487 in the S protein's RBM ( ). Recently, and reported that the residues K31 and K353 in hACE2 could interact with Q493 and the carboxyl oxygen of G502 within the S protein RBD of SARS-CoV-2 to form hydrogen bonds, respectively, which could stabilize hACE2 and S protein interaction. Therefore, amino acid substitution at positions 31 and 353 of the hACE2 is not conducive to the receptor binding of the virus. Subsequently, produced a variety of different ACE2 mutants, such as K353H, Y83F/K353H, F83Y, H353K, and F83Y/H353K. By comparing the binding between these mutants and the SARS-CoV-2 S protein, they revealed that residue H353 in mACE2 affected its binding to SARS-CoV-2 S1. Together, the presence of histidine at position 353 in mACE2 prevents SARS-CoV-2 S protein from binding to mACE2, which further explains why WT mouse model could not effectively simulate COVID-19. found that when amino acids at positions 273 to 340 in mDDP4 were replaced by amino acids at positions 279 to 346 in hDDP4, mDPP4 was endowed with the ability to support MERS infection. Moreover, they mutated five amino acids in this region of mDPP4 into corresponding amino acids in hDPP4 to produce five mDPP4 mutants including P282 T, A288L, R289I, T330R, and V340I. By introducing A288L and T330R mutants, they demonstrated that mutated mDPP4 could be adapted to support MERS-CoV infection, suggesting that the difference between mDPP4 and hDPP4 at residue A288L and T330R is the reason why mDPP4 does not support MERS-CoV infection.

3.2.2.

## Mouse-adapted virus strains
One practical approach to overcome weak entry receptor tropism is to use mouse-adapted virus strains. For instance, reported that a SARS-CoV-2 mouse-adapted strain specifically named MASCp6 could productively replicate in the lower respiratory tract of WT BALB/c mice, which subsequently developed severe interstitial pneumonia. They further showed that it was Asn501 to Tyr (N501Y) one critical amino acid change that potentially associated with the increased virulence of SARS-CoV-2 MASCp6 in mice ( ). Different from the former method of obtaining adapted strain through the continuous nasal passage in 9-month-old BALB/c mice, obtained an adapted SARS-CoV-2 strain named HRB26M through 14 passagings in 4–6-week-old young BALB/C mice. HRB26M replicates efficiently in the upper and lower respiratory tracts of BALB/c and C57BL/6J mice and causes severe pathological changes in old BALB/c mice. Whole HRB26M genome sequencing revealed Q498H mutation in the S protein's RBD and A81T mutation in its ORF1ab-non-structural protein 8 (nsp8). These mutations might be associated with the enhanced virus binding and replication ( ). Taken together, using mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 strains could potentially overcome weak host receptor tropism to yield useful information. Importantly, great caution should be taken to make sure such strains are less virulent than its wild isolate.

3.2.3.

## hDPP4- and hACE2-transduced mice
Mice transduced to express hDPP4 or hACE2 have been key animal models for studying SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV-2 infections. Simply expressing hACE2 or hDPP4 renders mice susceptible to the relevant CoV and the infected mice reproduce the relevant symptoms and pathology observed in the infected patients. For example, C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice transduced by adenovirus encoding hDPP4 became permissive for MERS-CoV infection ( ). These mice developed perivascular and peribronchial lymphoid infiltrates in the lungs early after infection and subsequently interstitial pneumonia. Using the same approach, Sun et al. recently generated hACE2-transduced mice to investigate the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 infection ( ). As expected, the Ad5-hACE2-transduced mice showed productive viral replication in their lungs and developed severe pulmonary pathology, with a concomitant ruffled fur, hunched back and dyspnea at 2 dpi and approximately 20% weight loss at 4–6 dpi. Further, these studies both demonstrated that knocking out interferon-α/β receptor (IFNAR) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) in type-I IFN signaling pathway resulted in more severe disease and pulmonary pathology in these infected hACE2-transduced mice ( ; ). Similarly, Hassan et al. observed more severe pathological characteristics in SARS-CoV-2 infected AdV-hACE2 transduced mice with immunosuppression ( ). Taken together, hACE2-transduced mice with immunodeficiency were able to reproduce more severe pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2, which could be used to study the mechanisms associated with severe pathogenesis in immunodeficient patients.

3.2.4.

## Transgenic and receptor-engineered mice
To date, various transgenic mice have been developed to study SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and the development of vaccines and specific therapeutics. McCray and the team cloned hDPP4 and hACE2 under cytokeratin-18 gene promoter and generated K18-hDPP4 and K18-hACE2 transgenic mice on a C57BL/6 background, which lead to epithelial expression of the transgenes ( ; ). Interestingly, the SARS-CoV-infected K18-hACE2 mice developed severe clinical illness including significant weight loss, lethargy, labored breathing and died by 7 dpi ( ). Similarly, after intranasal MERS-CoV infection, K18-hDPP4 mice showed significant weight loss, hypothermia and died 6–7 days after infection ( ). Surprisingly, the animals also showed central nervous system damage and kidney damage at the later stage of the infection ( ), the typical clinical manifestations observed in some severely ill patients ( ; ). This mouse model was later used in the study of SARS-CoV-2 infection, in which the authors demonstrated that K18-hACE2 mice were highly susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection, characterized by a rapid weight loss, high viral load and proinflammatory cytokine levels and massive immune cell infiltration in the lungs ( ). Likewise, Menachery et al. cloned hACE2 under a lung ciliated epithelial cell-specific HFH4/FOXJ1 promoter and generated HFH4/FOXJ-HACE2 transgenic mice on a C3H × C57BL/6 background that were susceptible to SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections ( ; ). Particularly after SARS-CoV-2 infection, the HFH4/FOXJ-HACE2 mice appeared to reproduce interstitial pneumonia and pathology observed in COVID-19 patients, including significant weight loss, lymphocytopenia and higher creatine kinase levels ( ). Researchers also made susceptible mice through editing their viral entry receptor gene using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. For example, Cockrell et al. replaced two amino acids of mDPP4 at positions 288 (A→L; exon 10, 5 → 3) and 330 (T→R; exon 11, 5 → 3) from the hDPP4 and the engineered C57BL/6 mice supported effective MERS-CoV infection and replication in the lungs, and more importantly, the infected mice developed severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)-like symptoms ( ). Likewise, via replacing mACE2 with hACE2 in WT C57BL/6 mice using CRISPR/Cas9 knock-in technology, Sun et al. generated a stable hACE2-expressing mouse model to investigate SARS-CoV-2 infection. In this study, both infected young and aged hACE2-knock-in mice had high viral load in their trachea, lungs and brains, and the aged mice also developed interstitial pneumonia ( ). Taken together, once mice express a hDPP4 or hACE2 or a genetically engineered mDPP4 or mACE2 that supports the relevant CoV entry, they can be very useful models as researchers are able to reproduce most of the clinical outcomes observed in patients.

3.3.

## Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus auratus)
Unlike mACE2 that has 9 contact amino acid residues different from those of hACE2, there are only 2 different contact residues between hamster ACE2 and hACE2 in the ACE2-RBD interface. More importantly, the amino acid residue at position 353 in hamster ACE2 is a lysine, same as that in hACE2, which might be the major reason why hamsters are more susceptible to SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 than mice ( ). Both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 could replicate to a high titer in the hamster's respiratory tracts and lungs, whereas the replication of MERS-CoV was not supported ( ; ; ; ). Roberts et al. reported that viral titer peaked at 3 dpi in the lungs in SARS-CoV-infected hamsters, and the viruses were continuously detected in the upper and lower respiratory tracts and were not cleared until day 7 ( ). The authors indicated that this represented a more efficient viral replication with longer-duration in comparison with the data they obtained from SARS-CoV-infected WT mice, in which the viral titer was lower by 1.2 log at 3 dpi and the viruses were cleared as early as 5 dpi. Additionally, they found that the serum neutralizing antibodies produced during primary infection were still detectable at 28 dpi and completely protected the hamsters from secondary SARS-CoV challenge. However, in this study the infected hamsters showed no signs of illness ( ). Some studies demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 could infect and replicate in hamsters and cause clinical manifestations of weight loss, rapid breathing, ruffled fur, hunched back, lethargy and significant lung tissue damage ( ; ; ). Similar clinical symptoms were also observed in SARS-CoV-2 Alpha challenged hamsters ( ). In addition, virus transmission from infected to naïve hamsters were demonstrated via both direct contact and indirect aerosol routes. Further, all infected hamsters recovered by 14 days post challenge, with serum neutralizing antibodies developed and maintained at a detectable level ( ; ; ). Similar findings were reported by Imai and colleagues ( ). Of note, this study also showed that passive transfer of convalescent serum from infected to naïve hamsters restrained viral replication in the lungs, suggesting inhibitory effects of the serum neutralizing antibodies. Syrian hamsters are one of the most useful animals for studying gender differences in COVID-19. In a study by Dhakal et al., male hamsters showed a higher incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and the infected male hamsters displayed more weight loss and more severe lung damage compared to female hamsters ( ). Yuan and colleagues reported similar results, noting that male hamsters were more susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 than females ( ). These results are significant and should be of concern as there is much clinical evidence that men are more susceptible to COVID-19 than women ( ; ). In recent studies, SARS-CoV-2 Omicron caused less lung infectivity and pathogenicity in hamsters than Delta and B.1.1 did ( ), which is consistent with what has been observed with human patients ( ). Taken together, most reported studies support hamsters as potential model animals for CoV-, especially SARS-CoV-2-related studies.

3.4.

## Ferret
The fact that ferret lung is anatomically and physiologically similar to human lung makes ferrets a popular model for studying various respiratory pathogens, including influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus and coronavirus ( ). Ferrets support the replication of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 but not MERS-CoV ( ; ; ), likely due to the 9 amino acid variations in the S protein interaction region of the ferret DPP4 compared to hDPP4 ( ). Following SARS-CoV infection, viruses were detected in the lungs of the ferrets, accompanied by obvious lung tissue damage, and the animals were lethargic. However, no other clinical symptoms, such as weight loss, were observed ( ). Similarly, weight loss and death were not observed in SARS-CoV-2 infected ferrets ( ; ; ; ). Nevertheless, ferret models are still of great interest for studying SARS-CoV-2 as it can be transmitted via both direct contact and aerosol in these infected hosts, which mimics COVID-19 in humans ( ; ; ). For example, whether infected by high dose of SARS-CoV-2 UCN19 ( ) or low doses of SARS-CoV-2 CoV/Munich/BavPat/2020 ( ), no obvious clinical symptoms could be observed in the infected ferrets. Interestingly, ferrets in the direct contact group were infected 1–3 days post-exposure after being contacted with the inoculated donor group while those in the indirect contact group, placed in adjacent cages, only became infected between 3 and 7 days post-exposure. In addition, the pattern of virus shedding, and the level of SARS-CoV-2 RNA were similar among the groups, which further confirmed that SARS-CoV-2 could be transmitted through direct contact and aerosol in ferrets ( ). Bear in mind, animals in their direct contact group could also potentially be infected through aerosol. Taken together, ferrets are more suitable for simulating the rapid spread of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 in humans than for pathogenesis in severe patients ( ).
In summary, wild bat might be the potential natural host, while NHP, mouse, hamster, civet, pangolin, ferret and camel could all potentially serve as the intermediate hosts as shown in 
. The use of these animals as experimental models may support the study of SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and the development of vaccines and specific therapeutics.
 

4.

## The application of animal models in therapeutic and vaccine evaluation
Animal models are primarily used to investigate disease pathogenesis and evaluate therapeutic and vaccine effectiveness. Here, we show natural and intermediate hosts of SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 in . Importantly, animal models used for therapeutic and vaccine evaluation should ideally reveal the different therapeutic outcomes, antibody levels and protective effects against disease challenge between treated and untreated groups ( ).
4.1.

## Therapeutic and vaccine for SARS and MERS
To date, various animal models have been applied to evaluate therapeutics and vaccines against SARS and MERS ( , 
). To cope with the threat of SARS, several vaccines including adenovirus vector vaccines ( ; ) (targeting SARS-CoV S protein's S1 subunit), inactivated vaccines (the whole SARS-CoV) ( ), recombinant MAV vector vaccine (S protein) ( ; ; ), subunit vaccine (N-terminal segment of the S protein) ( ), DNA vaccine (S protein) ( ) and recombinant BHPIV3/SARS vector vaccine (S protein) ( ) were developed using animal models such as rhesus macaques, cynomolgus macaques, mice, ferrets and hamsters. Animal models such as rhesus macaques, mice, ferrets and hamsters were also used to verify the effects of siRNA inhibitors ( ), stinging nettle lectin ( ), interferon-α ( ) and two monoclonal antibodies (MAb201 ( ; ) and CR3014 ( )), confirming their inhibitory effects against SARS-CoV infection.
 Unlike SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV cannot infect small animals such as WT mice, ferrets and hamsters. Currently, the main animal models used for MERS vaccine development and evaluation include transgenic mice, and NHPs. Accordingly, transgenic mouse models have been used to assess vaccines such as recombinant Measles Virus vector vaccine (targeting MERS-CoV S protein) ( ), DNA vaccine (S protein) ( ), recombinant MVA-MERS-S vaccine (S protein) ( ), recombinant bivalent (MERS-CoV and Rabies Virus) vaccine (S protein S1 subunit) ( ) and subunit vaccine (composed of 212-amino-acid fragment spanning residues 377–588 of the S protein) ( ). Other vaccines including recombinant VSV vector vaccines (S protein) ( ), recombinant S protein RBD vaccines (composed of 240-amino-acid fragment spanning residues 367–606) ( ) and ChAdOx1 MERS vaccines (S protein) ( ) were developed using rhesus macaques, among which DNA vaccines have been proven protective ( ). Using rhesus macaques, researchers demonstrated the therapeutic effects of a combination treatment of IFN-α2b and ribavirin, inhibiting viral replication and improving clinical outcomes ( ). Monoclonal antibodies (MCA1 ( ), hMS-1 ( ) and 4C2h ( ) and polyclonal antibody (SAB-301 ( )) specific for the S protein were evaluated and shown effective in common marmoset, CAG-hDPP4 transgenic mouse model and Ad5-hDPP4-transduced mouse model. In marmosets, lopinavir/ritonavir or interferon-β1b alone or in combination was demonstrated to effectively reduce virus titer and limit infection-induced pathology ( ). In Ces1c−/- hDPP4 transgenic mice, remdesivir was evaluated and shown to significantly reduce MERS titer and lung pathology ( ).

4.2.

## Therapeutic and vaccine for COVID-19
SARS and MERS outbreaks and their relevant studies provided lessons that enable us to respond promptly and effectively to the new pandemic COVID-19. In 
, we summarize the order in which several animal models have been developed and used for drug and vaccine evaluation since the outbreak of COVID-19, based on the times of online literature reports. Furthermore, we have collected studies utilizing animal models in the evaluation of most relevant medicines, monoclonal antibodies, and vaccinations. Of note, multiple animals such as rhesus macaques, cynomolgus macaques, mice, ferrets, and hamsters have been utilized in these studies ( ). To date, totally 559 vaccine studies and 2011 therapy studies including 1916 drug and 95 monoclonal antibody studies for combating COVID-19 were listed on the ClinicalTrials.gov site. Among these, 131 vaccines, 648 drugs, and 21 monoclonal antibodies have entered phase III clinical trials ( , https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/covid_view). Nowadays, there are currently 10 COVID-19 vaccines on WHO's emergency use list ( , https://extranet.who.int/pqweb/vaccines/vaccinescovid-19-vaccine-eul-issued), as well as four medications and five monoclonal antibodies licensed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for emergency use authorizations ( , https://www.fda.gov/emergency-preparedness-and-response/mcm-legal-regulatory-and-policy-framework/emergency-use-authorization#coviddrugs), but not all vaccines and therapies have been studied in animal models ( 
). Here, we focus on describing some representative vaccines and specific therapy studies based on animal models.
 4.2.1.

## Therapeutic medicine
Therapeutic medications are vital in epidemic prevention and control as well as in treating patients. To date, paxlovid, molnupiravir, remdesivir, and baracitinib have been licensed by the FDA to treat COVID-19 patients ( , https://www.fda.gov/emergency-preparedness-and-response/mcm-legal-regulatory-and-policy-framework/emergency-use-authorization#coviddrugs). Viruses invade host cells and cause diseases, which is essentially a race between viruses and the infected host. From this perspective, antiviral drug development strategies can be roughly divided into two types, targeting viruses themselves and targeting host cell factors.
The viral proteases of SARS-CoV-2, including 3C-like protease (3CLpro), RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), and papain-like protease (PLpro), play crucial roles in viral replication and have been proven to be important targets for the development of drugs against SARS-CoV-2 ( ; ; ). Some drugs targeting SARS-CoV-2 virus proteases have shown good clinical effects. Molnupiravir (MK-4482/EIDD-2801) targeting SARS-CoV-2 RdRp was shown to reduce the risk of hospitalization or death in non-hospitalized adult patients by approximately 50% ( ). Paxlovid targeting SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro significantly reduced hospitalizations and mortality in severe COVID-19 patients, with an 89% reduction in mortality compared to that of the placebo ( ). Remdesivir targeting SARS-CoV-2 RdRp significantly reduced the time to recovery relative to control ( ). Here, we primarily focus on the effectiveness of these three drugs on SARS-CoV-2 in animal models. Cox et al. showed that molnupiravir could significantly lower viral load in the upper respiratory tract of SARS-CoV-2-infected ferrets and completely blocked viral transmission to the untreated animals ( ). Additionally, molnupiravir significantly reduced viral RNA load and titer in the lung of hamsters infected with the SARS-CoV-2 B.1-G, Alpha, and Beta variants ( ). Paxlovid is a combination of PF-07321332 (nirmatrelvir) and ritonavir. The former is an inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro, while the latter is an inhibitor of CYP3A4 isoenzyme, which contributes to the enhancement of PF-07321332 ( ). PF-07321332 was effective in reducing pulmonary lesions and viral load in mouse models using the adaptive SARS-CoV-2 MA10 strain ( ). A recent study showed that PF-07321332 could effectively inhibit SARS-CoV-2 variant replication including Alpha, Beta, B.1.1.28.1, and Delta, with EC50 values ranging from 70 to 280 nM. Furthermore, oral administration of PF-07321332 (250 mg⋅kg−1⋅d−1) twice daily protected Syrian hamsters against SARS-CoV-2 Delta and Beta variants and blocked transmission of Delta variant to untreated hamsters ( ). Unlike molnupiravir and paxlovid, remdesivir is administered intravenously and was the first drug to be approved for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Remdesivir might play an important role in early viral replication to reduce disease progression ( ). As reported, rhesus macaques were used to evaluate the efficacy of remdesivir and the results showed that treatment with remdesivir early after SARS-CoV-2 infection was associated with reduced virus replication and immune infiltration in the lungs ( ). Although remdesivir had shown promising therapeutic effects in vitro and in animal studies, its effectiveness in clinical studies remains controversial. A randomized, double-blind clinical study indicated that remdesivir did not effectively reduce mortality in severe COVID-19 patients ( ). Sun et al. showed that remdesivir had low tissue distribution and permeability in vivo, so the concentration of remdesivir necessary to kill SARS-CoV-2 virus in the lung tissue could not be reached via intravenous injection, therefore, a combination of intravenous and pulmonary administration was recommended to improve its efficacy ( ). Remdesivir cannot be administered orally because it is hydrolyzed in the gastrointestinal tract to nucleoside monophosphate, which cannot easily cross cell membranes due to its negatively charge ( ). Notably, oral administration of remdesivir parent GS-441524 was demonstrated to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication and its spread in ferrets ( ). Furthermore, GS-441524 effectively inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication and reduced lung inflammation and injury in AAV-hACE2 mice when administrated intraperitoneally ( ).
Viruses are intracellular obligate parasites, and their replication relied on a variety of host proteins. Due to the high variability of SARS-CoV-2, drugs targeting the virus itself might fail when crucial variation occurs at the target site. Another important strategy for developing drugs against SARS-CoV-2 infection is to target host factors that, often possess broad-spectrum antiviral activity, which breaks free from the variability of SARS-CoV-2 ( ). SARS-CoV-2 requires host-derived Transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) for membrane fusion with host cells. Hence, drugs that inhibit TMPRSS2, such as camostat mesylate, can effectively block the entry of SARS-CoV-2 and its replication in the lung cells ( ). Further, it was used to treat severe COVID-19 patients ( ). Li et al. show that another TMPRSS2 protease inhibitor, nafamostat, effectively inhibited the replication of SARS-CoV-2 in Calu-3 and primary human airway epithelial cells, and was more effective than camostat mesylate. Furthermore, in Ad5-hACE2-transduced mouse and K18-hACE2 mouse, they demonstrated that prophylactic administration of nafamostat significantly reduced weight loss and pulmonary viral titers induced by SARS-CoV-2 ( ). The excessive inflammatory cytokine storm caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection is one of the important factors causing death in severe COVID-19 patients ( ), therefore, reducing inflammation seems to be one of the effective ways to treat COVID-19-induced pneumonia. Both the β-galactosidase (β-gal)-activated prodrug SSK1 ( ) and JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor baricitinib ( ), were reported to dampen inflammation response and showed protective effects in SARS-CoV-2 infection rhesus macaques.
Compared to monotherapy, drug combinations improve therapeutic effects, reduce drug's adverse reactions, and minimize drug resistance ( ; ). White et al. proposed drug combinations as the first line of defense against pandemics ( ). Although numerous drug combinations are currently in the clinical trial, extensive preclinical studies are lacking ( ). Only some drug combinations have been validated in animal models. For instance, Yuan et al. showed that the anti-leprosy drug clofazimine inhibited SARS-CoV-2 by interfering with S protein-mediated membrane fusion and viral helicase activity. In addition, clofazimine and remdesivir showed synergistic antiviral effects in hamster ( ). As a result, remdesivir dosage was reduced 10-fold and clofazimine dosage was reduced 1.6-fold. Furthermore, the drug combinations effectively inhibited viral shedding in the nasal wash, which could not be achieved with remdesivir or clofazimine alone ( ). Combining anti-inflammatory methylprednisolone with remdesivir was more effective in inhibiting viral replication, reducing inflammation and tissue damage in SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters compared with single administration ( ). Combining drugs targeting different viral proteases, such as molnupiravir and PF-07321332, was shown to be synergistic in inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant infection in Calu-3 cells ( ; ); however, the effectiveness of this combination needs to be further investigated in animal models and clinical trials.

4.2.2.

## Monoclonal antibody
Monoclonal antibodies have become an important tool in the fight against COVID-19 due to their high specificity ( ). Both pre- and post-treatment with a monoclonal antibody, named as CB6, isolated from a convalescing COVID-19 patient were shown to effectively inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection in rhesus macaques. In vitro experiments further demonstrated that CB6 acted by interfering virus-ACE2 interactions ( ). More interestingly, Li and the team built VEEV-VRP-CB6, a vehicle for delivering CB6 monoclonal antibody to the lung, and demonstrated that it could effectively prevent BALB/c mice infected with mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 strain (MP7) body weight loss and reduce viral titer in the lung and nasal turbinate ( ). Such evidence supports the use of monoclonal antibody against COVID-19. In Ad5-hACE2-transduced mouse model, pre-treatment with an anti-SARS-CoV-2 mAb 1B07, which recognizes SARS-CoV-2 S protein RBD, was shown to effectively block SARS-CoV-2 infection, prevent body weight loss, and inhibit the production of several pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines ( ). Similarly, another monoclonal antibody against S protein RBD, COVA1-18, was demonstrated recently to significantly reduce SARS-CoV-2 infections in three animal models, including hamsters, Ad5-hACE2 transduced mice, and cynomolgus macaques ( ).
When compared to single monoclonal antibody therapy, therapeutic cocktail antibodies, a combination of many monoclonal antibodies with different fine specificities, showed increased efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 variants ( ). So far, FDA has approved several therapeutic cocktail antibodies, including REGEN-COV (Casirivimab and Imdevimab), Evusheld/AZD7442 (tixagevimab co-packaged with cilgavimab) and a combination of bamlanivimab (LY-CoV555) and etesevimab (LY-CoV016) for emergency use ( , https://www.fda.gov/emergency-preparedness-and-response/mcm-legal-regulatory-and-policy-framework/emergency-use-authorization#coviddrugs). To be specific, both pre- and post-treatment with REGEN-COV were shown to effectively reduce viral load in the lower and upper airways and protect rhesus macaques and hamsters from losing body weight ( ). Jones et al. demonstrated that intravenously injecting LY-CoV555 monoclonal antibodies 24 h before SARS-CoV-2 infection could effectively reduce virus replication and load in the lower and upper airways of rhesus macaques ( ). However, studies on Evusheld/AZD7442 in animal models are still to be conducted. Moreover, an in vitro study demonstrated that COVA1-18 in a cocktail with COVA1-16 could effectively neutralize SARS-CoV-2 variant D614G, Alpha and Beta ( ). Taken together, monoclonal, especially cocktail monoclonal antibodies hold great promise for future COVID-19 treatment, especially for those who have preclinical conditions including compromised immunity and old age, as these could be ever ready and mixed with great flexibility to take into account of variant specificities.

4.2.3.

## Vaccine
Animal models especially NHPs, transgenic mice and receptor-transduced mice are of great importance in evaluating the effectiveness of vaccine candidates against SARS-CoV-2. Rhesus macaques have been the best animal model among NHPs and they have been extensively used to evaluate vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 infection ( ), ranging from inactivated virus vaccines ( ; ; ), DNA vaccines ( ; ), mRNA vaccines ( ; ), subunit vaccines ( ), nanoparticle vaccines ( ) to several adenovirus vector-based vaccines ( ; ; ). Van Doremalen and Munster teams developed an adenovirus-vector-based vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 encoding the full-length SARS-CoV-2 S protein and evaluated its immunogenicity and efficacy in rhesus macaques ( ). They showed that ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 could elicit a robust humoral response and a predominantly type-1 T helper cell-mediated cellular response. More importantly, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19-vaccinated rhesus macaques were protected from secondary SARS-CoV-2 challenge. Recently, Fischer et al. demonstrated that ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination prevented Syrian hamsters from being infected by SARS-CoV-2 Alpha or Beta variant as they showed no weight loss or lower respiratory tract infection ( , ). Similarly, developed a chimpanzee adenovirus-vectored vaccine candidate ChAd-SARS-CoV-2-S encoding the full-length SARS-CoV-2 S protein. They demonstrated that a single intramuscular immunization of ChAd-SARS-CoV-2-S induced robust humoral and cellular responses and blocked subsequent SARS-CoV-2 infection in the upper and lower respiratory tract in the highly susceptible K18-hACE2 transgenic mice. assessed the efficacy of a purified and inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine PiCoVacc and showed that it could induce SARS-CoV-2 specific neutralizing antibodies in mice, rats and rhesus macaques. When being intramuscularly administrated three times at a dose of 6 μg each time per rhesus macaque, PiCoVacc effectively stimulated the production of neutralizing antibodies which subsequently protected the rhesus macaques from SARS-CoV-2 infection. No viral load was detected in the pharynx, crissum and lung in the PiCoVacc vaccinated rhesus macaques at 7 dpi, while severe interstitial pneumonia had developed in the control group. Similarly, another inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine BBIBP-CorV ( ) was shown to induce high levels of neutralizing antibody in mice, rats, guinea pigs, rabbits and NHPs (cynomolgus macaques and rhesus macaques). More importantly, two-dose immunizations with BBIBP-CorV at 2 μg each time protected rhesus macaques from intratracheal SARS-CoV-2 infection as no virus was detected in the lungs of all vaccinated rhesus macaques. Likewise, using rhesus macaques, researchers demonstrated that a single dose of the adenovirus serotype 26 (Ad26) vector-based vaccine Ad26.COV2.S encoding the full-length SARS-CoV-2 S protein could induce robust neutralizing antibody responses ( ) and specific CD8+ and CD4+ T cell responses, and protected rhesus macaques from SARS-CoV-2 Alpha and Beta variant ( ) challenges. Additionally, in hamsters, a single immunization of Ad26.COV2.S, termed as Ad26-S.PP in the report ( ) could prevent pneumonia and mortality caused by high-dose SARS-CoV-2 infection. Similar outcome was observed in a study using BALB/c mice challenged with mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 HRB26M and ferrets vaccinated with a replication-defective human adenovirus type 5-based COVID-19 vaccine candidate (Ad5-nCoV) encoding the full-length SARS-CoV-2 S protein ( ). A single vaccination of Ad5-nCoV protected BALB/c mice from mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 HRB26M infection in the upper and lower respiratory tracts and protected ferrets against SARS-CoV-2 infection in the upper respiratory tract. Likewise, data from rhesus macaques and mice showed that a recombinant serotype 5 adenovirus vaccine candidate Ad5-S-nb2 carrying a codon-optimized gene encoding SARS-CoV-2 S protein was immunogenic and protective as it elicited both spike-specific humoral and cellular immune responses ( ).
The messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines have played and are still playing an important role in the fight against COVID-19. Corbett and colleagues ( ) synthesized an mRNA vaccine named mRNA-1273 encoding the full-length prefusion SARS-CoV-2 S protein that was stabilized in its prefusion conformation by two proline substitutions and showed that inoculated rhesus macaques produced higher titer neutralizing antibodies than those found in convalescent-phase human sera. Moreover, mRNA-1273 vaccine induced Th1 and interleukin-21-producing Tfh responses, a critical Th response required for efficient antibody response, and effectively protected the infection of upper and lower respiratory tract in rhesus macaques. Two recent studies showed that boosting mRNA-1273 vaccine could limit the replication of SARS-CoV-2 Beta variant in rhesus macaques ( , ). Similar outcomes including high neutralizing antibodies and Th1 response could be observed in the mRNA vaccine BNT162b-inoculated mice and rhesus macaques; and BNT162b provided effectively protection on rhesus macaques from 1.05 × 106 PFU SARS-CoV-2 challenge ( ). Subsequent clinical trial data showed that two-dose regimen of BNT162b2 provided up to 95% protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection ( ). However, several in vitro studies demonstrated that the neutralizing capacity of the BTN162b2 vaccinated human sera against SARS-CoV-2 variants was reduced. Specifically, compared with the original wild SARS-CoV-2 strain, the neutralizing capacity of these human sera against the five SARS-CoV-2 variants Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta and Omicron decreased by 2.6 ( ), 4.9–14 ( ; ), 3.8 ( ), 5.8 ( ) and 14.9 ( ) folds, respectively. According to a recent study, three doses of the BNT162b2 vaccine effectively neutralized SARS-CoV-2 Omicron and was 100-fold more effective than antibodies induced by two doses, suggesting that promoting the third booster dose of vaccination might be an effective way to prevent and control future epidemics ( ).

5.

## Advantages and limitations of animal models used in the study of SARS, MERS and COVID-19
An ideal animal model should mimic human SARS, MERS and COVID-19 in aspects such as viral receptor expression and distribution, infection route, correlation between virus titer and disease severity, pathogenesis as well as morbidity and mortality ( ). Here, we review the ability of six animal models to recapitulate the COVID-19 characteristics in 
. However, it is difficult, if not impossible, to develop an animal model that could perfectly recapitulate all the characteristics of human SARS, MERS and COVID-19. Therefore, it is important to understand both the advantages and limitations of the above reviewed animal models ( 
).
 Although NHPs are considered as the most reliable animal models for vaccine and antiviral evaluation, as large animals, NHPs require larger experimental space and more cost compared with small animals, which limits large-scale animal experiments ( ). Besides, all the species have limited susceptibility, and are only suitable for studying one or two of the three viruses. For instance, rhesus macaques are suitable for SARS-CoV-2 and MERS-CoV studies but not for SARS-CoV. Lu et al. demonstrated that rhesus macaques are the best model for SARS-CoV-2 infection ( ). Hence, antivirals such as remdesivir and vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 were mainly tested in rhesus macaques ( ). One drawback of this model is that the SARS-CoV-2-infected rhesus macaques are mainly asymptomatic or show mild clinical disease ( ; ), despite most COVID-19 patients also show asymptomatic, which is not conducive to severe SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. In this regard, marmosets seem to be the best model for studying SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV because they reproduce pulmonary and extrapulmonary manifestations of SARS and MERS patients ( ; ). However, MERS-CoV does not cause damage to marmoset's kidneys, and thus the model is not suitable for studying the clinical MERS-associated renal disease ( ). WT mice are not suitable for MERS and COVID-19 studies as they do not have suitable viral entry receptors. Furthermore, although infected transgenic mice often show severe clinical symptoms that are conducive to studying highly pathogenic coronaviruses pathogenesis, sometimes their symptoms might be more severe than those in humans, hindering drug and vaccine development. For instance, MERS-CoV infection has been demonstrated to cause a mortality rate of 100% in CAG-hDPP4 transgenic mice ( ). Theoretically, this may represent an ideal animal model that can effectively recapitulate the disease, and thus the model should be highly recommended. However, the presence and distribution of viral receptors in the transgenic mouse brain, as indicated by the detection of viral RNA and damage in the brain following MERS-CoV infection ( ), could potentially limit its use for the evaluation of vaccines and antivirals developed to target the infection in the lungs. K18-hACE2/hDPP4 ( ; ; ) and HFH4/FOXJ-HACE2 ( ) transgenic mouse models also have such limitations. In contrast, infected receptor-transduced mice couldn't show severe clinical symptoms, to some extent, this model is useful for antiviral drug and vaccine development since the majority of COVID-19 patients in the real world will not have fatal clinical manifestations. However, the receptor-transduced mice using adenoviral vectors mainly express hACE2 in the respiratory tract of mice, which makes mice susceptible to SARS-CoV-2. By this way, viral vector-mediated expression of hACE2 is local and temporary, but not systemic and permanent expression like transgenic method( ; ).Therefore, the receptor-transduced mice are not conducive to studying highly pathogenic coronaviruses pathogenesis, especially extrapulmonary pathogenicity ( ).
Hamsters and ferrets support viral replication of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 but not MERS-CoV, therefore, hamsters and ferrets are rarely used as animal models to evaluate vaccines and antivirals specifically targeting MERS-CoV. The advantage of hamsters and ferrets over other animal models is that SARS-CoV-2 can be transmitted via both direct contact and indirect aerosol routes in them, hence these two models are better for SARS-CoV-2 transmission studies ( ; ). Of note, ferrets are much more expensive than hamsters and CoV-infected ferrets do not show classical clinical symptoms as those in human. In this respect hamsters are more suitable for studying SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2.

6.

## Concluding remarks
We have been witnessing the enormous impact of COVID-19 pandemic on global public health since the end of 2019. Currently, the newly emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants, such as the Delta and Omicron, coupled with the relatively slow vaccination pose a continuous threat worldwide. It is therefore extremely important to effectively sped up the vaccination process globally and to urgently and rigorously evaluate current vaccines since their safety and efficacy are still debated. Furthermore, to develop the next generation vaccines and novel therapeutics, we need to have a detailed understanding of the SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 infections, host immune responses, and immune pathology. These could be greatly speeded up by using preclinical tests in animal models. To this end, the present review provides an overview of animal models, their suitable applications, and their advantages and limitations in the studies of SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 infections. Whether an animal model is suitable for vaccine and antiviral development depends on how well it recapitulates the relevant human disease. This includes firstly the successful virus entry and replication in the animals and subsequently the development of measurable clinical symptoms. In humans, some severe COVID-19 patients are found to suffer chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and obesity. It would be ideal that these diseases could be taken into consideration in developing and optimizing future animal models. Ideally, suitable animal models would also support the evaluation of vaccines and antivirals. If vaccine and antiviral candidates could all be tested rigorously in such animals to determine their effectiveness and side effects, this would surely minimize the risk posed by the vaccines and antivirals to the clinical trial patients and volunteers. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, many animal models have been successfully developed as summarized in this review. We firmly believe that many ground-breaking studies will follow using these precious models. We anticipate a much better understanding of the coronaviruses, especially SARS-CoV2 and COVID-19 in the near future, which ultimately will help us to bring the current pandemics under control.

## Funding
This work was supported by the Local Innovative and Research Teams Project of Guangdong Pearl River Talents Program (Grant, 2019BT02N054), the Emergency Project of the Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of Guangdong Province for Tackling Key Scientific and Technological Problems of 2019-nCoV Pneumonia, and Special Technologies R&D Program for COVID-19 of Guangdong Province (Grant, 2020A111128014).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## References