822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC9185691918569191856913554924210.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00767Direct Cell Radiolabeling for in Vivo Cell Tracking with PET and SPECT Imaging
GawnePeter
J ManFrancis BlowerPhilip J T M de RosalesRafael §School
of Biomedical Engineering & Imaging Sciences, King’s College London, St Thomas’ Hospital, London, SE1 7EH, U.K.⊥Institute
of Pharmaceutical Science, School of Cancer
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, King’s College London, London, SE1 9NH, U.K.*Email: rafael.torres@kcl.ac.uk.
1252022122111026610266–103181162022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The arrival of cell-based
therapies is a revolution in medicine.
However, its safe clinical application in a rational manner depends
on reliable, clinically applicable methods for determining the fate
and trafficking of therapeutic cells in vivo using medical imaging
techniques—known as in vivo cell tracking. Radionuclide imaging
using single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) or positron
emission tomography (PET) has several advantages over other imaging
modalities for cell tracking because of its high sensitivity (requiring
low amounts of probe per cell for imaging) and whole-body quantitative
imaging capability using clinically available scanners. For cell tracking
with radionuclides, ex vivo direct cell radiolabeling, that is, radiolabeling
cells before their administration, is the simplest and most robust
method, allowing labeling of any cell type without the need for genetic
modification. This Review covers the development and application of
direct cell radiolabeling probes utilizing a variety of chemical approaches:
organic and inorganic/coordination (radio)chemistry, nanomaterials,
and biochemistry. We describe the key early developments and the most
recent advances in the field, identifying advantages and disadvantages
of the different approaches and informing future development and choice
of methods for clinical and preclinical application.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Sep 2; Issue date 2022 Jun 8.

1.

## Introduction
1.1.

## Cell Tracking: Preclinical and Clinical Applications
In vivo cell tracking describes the use of medical imaging techniques
to allow the noninvasive visualization of the biodistribution and
trafficking of active cells throughout a living organism. This information
is highly beneficial for disease diagnosis (e.g., infection/inflammation),
the imaging of biological mechanisms, and developing and evaluating
the efficacy of cell-based treatments. Following several reports of toxicity and deaths associated with
certain cellular therapy treatments in the clinic, it is essential
to fully understand the biodistribution, accumulation, and tissue
residence of therapeutic cells both during their preclinical development
and in the clinical setting when treating patients.
Cell tracking
has been extensively used in both preclinical and clinical studies.
Notably, the in vivo tracking of autologous radiolabeled white blood
cells for the diagnosis of inflammation and infection has been performed
in patients for decades. More recently cell tracking has allowed noninvasive
assessment of the fate of tumor cells in animal models, providing
an invaluable tool to understand tumor development and metastasis,
and supporting the assessment of antitumor therapies. Furthermore,
cell tracking supports development and evaluation of cellular therapies
(e.g. CAR T-cells, stem cells) by helping to answer
the fundamental question: where do the cells go after administration?
Significant developments have been made in recent years, particularly
in T cell and stem cell engineering, that call for a variety of new
and improved cell tracking methods to fully understand the biodistribution,
accumulation, and tissue residence of therapeutic cells in preclinical
and clinical settings.
There are a wide range of chemical methods
and strategies to label
cells for noninvasive in vivo cell tracking. These may be broadly
categorized into indirect cell labeling and direct labeling methods,
schematically represented in . To choose the best approach for a specific application,
it is important to have a clear understanding of their respective
advantages and disadvantages. These will be summarized in the following
section.
 
1.2.

## Direct Cell Labeling versus Indirect Cell
Labeling
Indirect cell labeling usually requires genetic
manipulation of the cells by stable transfection of a reporter gene.
Reporter genes are used to induce the expression of proteins, such
as cell receptors, transporters, or enzymes; imaging can then be performed
by using contrast agents that specifically interact with these proteins
( A). A key
benefit of indirect cell labeling is that the reporter gene protein
is, ideally, present throughout the lifespan of the cell and is passed
on during cell division. This allows in vivo imaging over a long period
of time—potentially over the lifetime of the patient/subject—and
if suitably calibrated, in principle provides information on the proliferation
of the cells in vivo as well as their location. For long-term imaging,
repeated administrations of the tracer are required. Additionally,
some reporter genes can provide cell viability information as the
corresponding protein does not function in a dead cell (e.g., the
sodium-iodide symporter NIS is ATP-dependent and thus can only function
in a live cell environment). Despite these advantages, the need for
genetic manipulation of cells to allow imaging contrast is often seen
as barrier to clinical translation, though this is less of an issue
with cellular therapies that are already genetically modified during
their development (e.g., CAR T-cells). 
By comparison, direct cell labeling ( B) is in principle a simpler cell tracking
method as any chemical agent capable of entering cells or binding
to cellular membranes can potentially be used for cell radiolabeling.
Cells are usually labeled or “tagged” ex vivo/in vitro
by incubation with the direct labeling agent, followed by injection
into the subject. In vivo imaging can then be performed over time
to assess the distribution of the cells. There are several methods
for direct cell labeling. For example, uptake of the imaging probe
can be mediated by phagocytosis or by the attachment to the cell membrane.
These will be discussed further in . It is important to note that since cells
do not need to be modified genetically as a requirement for direct
cell labeling, this method presents a lower regulatory barrier for
clinical application compared to indirect methodologies. However,
it does not allow imaging of cell proliferation, and can be restricted
by the efflux of the labeling agent from cells over time, which can
lead to reduction and misinterpretation of the imaging signal ( B).
Imaging
modalities available for in vivo cell tracking vary greatly
in properties, such as their spatial and temporal resolution, sensitivity
(defined as the amount of contrast agent or label required to obtain
sufficient imaging signal), field of view (FOV), and depth penetration.
Thus, each modality comes with advantages and drawbacks. While in
this Review we will focus on radionuclide-based imaging methods, to
provide context the following subsection contains a brief overview
of the other key imaging modalities used for cell tracking ( ), with examples
of cell labeling agents and their relevant pros and cons. Radionuclide
imaging will then be discussed in more detail in detail in .
 
1.3.

## Medical Imaging Techniques for Cell Tracking
(Non-radionuclide Based)
1.3.1.

## Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is based on the spin
characteristics
and magnetic properties of atomic nuclei. Protons (1H)
are the primary nuclei used for MRI contrast as they are abundant
in water molecules within living systems. Imaging contrast in MRI
is generated by the different longitudinal (T1) and transverse (T2) relaxation
times of protons present in different tissues. Cell tracking with
MRI requires exogenous imaging agents, which influence T1 and T2 of water protons
or provide alternative spin-active nuclei and provide additional imaging
contrast or allow “hotspot” imaging. Several agents
containing paramagnetic metals (e.g., Gd3+ and Mn2+/3+), providing T1-weighted (positive) contrast,
have been developed for both direct and indirect cell labeling. Additionally, superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
(SPIONs), which provide T2-weighted (negative)
or T1-based contrast depending on their
properties, can be used to label cells via endocytic mechanisms. As well as imaging 1H, other spin-active
nuclei such as 19F can be detected with MRI after administration
of exogenous compounds (such as 19F-rich molecular compounds
or nanoparticles) allowing “hotspot” MR imaging. , While MRI as a modality provides exceptional spatial resolution
(1–2 mm clinically) without the need for ionizing radiation,
it suffers from its low sensitivity (typical in vivo contrast agent
concentrations are 10–3–10–5 M) resulting in the need for large amounts of cell labeling agents
to be administered (e.g., 10–30 pg Fe/cell clinically for SPIONs). 

1.3.2.

## Magnetic Particle Imaging
(MPI)
Magnetic particle imaging (MPI) is a relatively recent
imaging modality,
first introduced in 2005, allowing the
direct imaging of SPIONs based on their magnetization in an external
magnetic field. Several SPION-based MRI tracers have been repurposed
as MPI tracers and, hence, have also been used for cell labeling and
in vivo tracking with MPI. − Cell tracking with MPI offers
several benefits over MRI and other modalities. First, it benefits
from a positive “hotspot” contrast with no endogenous
signal from tissue. Additionally, it is highly sensitive, with the
MPI signal being linearly quantitative with magnetic particle concentration,
allowing calculation of the number of labeled cells. However, MPI suffers from a relatively low spatial resolution,
compared to MRI, and it needs to be combined with an additional imaging
modality to provide anatomical information. Furthermore, unlike MRI,
CT, and nuclear imaging, there are currently no clinical MPI scanners
available. Nonetheless, MPI remains a highly promising imaging modality
for cell tracking.

1.3.3.

## Computed Tomography (CT)
Computed
tomography (CT) is a widely available medical imaging technique based
on the differing levels of X-ray attenuation of tissues of varying
density in the body resulting in imaging signal contrast. CT provides
3D images at high spatial resolution (∼0.1 mm preclinically
and ∼0.5 mm clinically) and has practically unlimited depth
penetration in tissues. However, the use of highly ionizing X-rays
results in high radiation doses. While
generally used for anatomical imaging, CT contrast can be generated
by the administration of materials containing high Z elements (e.g., Au, I, Yb, Ba). In the context of cell tracking,
gold nanoparticles are often the first choice to label cells because
of their biocompatibility and favorable imaging contrast properties. , However, as with MRI, the low sensitivity of CT cell tracking results
in the need for high concentrations of contrast agent for in vivo
detection that could lead to potential toxicity issues.

1.3.4.

## Optical Imaging (OI)
Optical imaging
(OI) is based on the detection of light emissions from molecules after
their excitation, detected by external cameras that convert this signal
into images. For preclinical in vivo applications, optical fluorescence
imaging is often used. This relies on imaging agents consisting of
exogenous chemical compounds that fluoresce after excitation by an
external light source of a certain wavelength. A widely used alternative
is bioluminescence imaging, where no excitation light is needed; instead,
photons are generated by an endogenous chemical reaction, usually
involving a reporter gene. In terms of
cell labeling, reporter gene products such as fluorescent proteins
(e.g., GFP, RFP) and luciferases (using luciferin) have been widely
used for cell tracking with fluorescence and bioluminescence imaging,
respectively. Alternatively, lipophilic optical dyes, such as 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-
tetramethylindodicarbocyanine (DiD) have been used to directly label
cells for in vitro and in vivo cell imaging. OI techniques suffer from limited tissue penetration (a few mm,
and up to a few cm in the near-infrared range) of both the excitation
and emitted light, which affects sensitivity and spatial resolution,
as well as significant tissue autofluorescence. Although the use of
molecules emitting in the near-infrared is a partial remedy, this
can limit in vivo cell tracking by optical imaging to the intraoperative
and preclinical fields. Nonetheless, optical imaging is a highly sensitive
technique compatible with light microscopy, making it an invaluable
tool for the imaging of cells at multiple scales: from the whole-body
to single-cell level. 

1.3.5.

## Photoacoustic Imaging (PAI)
Photoacoustic
(or optoacoustic) imaging (PAI) is based on the excitation of contrast
agents or endogenous chromophores (e.g., oxyhemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin,
melanin) by externally applied light pulses. Upon relaxation, energy
released as heat creates pressure waves that can be detected with
an acoustic transducer. PAI is highly
sensitive (in the pM range) and has submillimeter spatial resolution,
It can penetrate several cm of tissue but suffers from a limited FOV.
Despite this, because of the lower scattering of sound waves by tissue
compared with photons, PAI has better depth penetration than standard
OI techniques. Cell labeling and tracking
with PAI has primarily been performed by loading cells with gold nanoparticles. More recent examples have performed cell labeling
and tracking with organic semiconducting polymer nanoparticles capable
of being excited in the second near-infrared region (NIR-II), which
can mitigate depth penetration issues with PAI. 

2.

## Fundamentals of Radionuclide
Imaging
2.1.

## Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography
(SPECT) and Scintigraphy
Single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) imaging utilizes gamma (γ) ray emitting radionuclides.
The emitted γ rays have well-defined energy levels which are
detected using a gamma camera, allowing the creation of a planar image,
known as gamma scintigraphy. Alternatively, in SPECT imaging, a gamma
camera is rotated around the imaging subject to capture the gamma
emissions in 3D. To accurately determine the origin of the gamma ray
photons, collimators are used to exclude diagonally incident photons.
However, because of this exclusion the use of collimators reduces
the fraction of gamma ray photons detected, resulting in a decrease
in the imaging sensitivity ( A).
 Several gamma-emitting radionuclides
are available ( ) for radiolabeling a variety
of different compounds, from small molecules and peptides to antibodies,
nanoparticles and cells. In the clinic, the most widely used radionuclide
is 99mTc which offers a moderately short half-life (6 h,
which is long enough for convenient synthesis of radiotracers while
not imposing prolonged radiation exposure to the subject, but only
allows tracking of cells for a few hours), favorable nuclear emission
properties (89% γ radiation abundance at 140 keV) and convenient
generator-based production. Because of
its metallic character, 99mTc radiotracers are based on
the formation of coordination complexes between the radionuclide and
a chelating agent. Another key SPECT radionuclide is 111In, which has a relatively long half-life (t1/2 = 2.81 d) allowing imaging over several days; this is beneficial
for the in vivo tracking of molecular species with longer biological
half-life, such as antibodies, nanoparticles, and cells. For the radiolabeling
of organic molecules, there are several iodine radionuclides for SPECT
imaging, each with a different half-life, allowing short-term (123I, t1/2 = 13.3 h) and long-term
imaging studies (125I, t1/2 = 60.5 d; 131I, t1/2 = 8
d). However, 131I is also a β– emitter,
which underpins it main clinical use as a component of therapeutic
radiopharmaceuticals but limits its application for cell tracking.
Clinical imaging with 125I is limited by its long half-life
and the low energy of its emissions (27–35 keV).
 
2.2.

## Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
Positron emission
tomography (PET) involves the imaging of positron
(β+) emitting radionuclides. When the emitted positrons
encounter electrons, they undergo mutual annihilation due to the matter-antimatter
interaction, resulting in the release of energy in the form of two
gamma photons, which are emitted in opposite directions at an approximate
180° angle from each other with a distinct energy of 511 keV
( B). PET scanners
allow the detection of these 511 keV γ rays (known as coincidence
detection) by using a ring of gamma detectors. The location of the
annihilation event can be determined along a so-called “line
of response”, which in turn allows the approximate position
of the positron-emitting radionuclide to be elucidated. Positrons
are emitted from the nucleus in random directions and can travel a
short distance (up to a few mm in tissue, depending on their energy)
before annihilating. This distance is known as the positron range
and fundamentally limits the spatial resolution of the PET scanner;
PET radionuclides with high positron energy will have a long positron
range, meaning a greater uncertainty on the position of the emitting
nucleus and therefore a poorer spatial resolution.
A selection
of PET radionuclides is shown in . Small molecules are often radiolabeled with “organic”
PET radionuclides, such as 11C and 18F to give
radiotracers with unchanged or almost unchanged chemical structures. 18F (t1/2 = 110 min) is currently
the most widely used PET radionuclide in the clinic, usually as the
glucose derivative [18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose
([18F]FDG, see ) used mainly for cancer and inflammation imaging.
There are also longer-lived organic PET radionuclides, such as 124I (t1/2 = 4.2 d) and 76Br (t1/2 = 16 h). As well as the organic
PET radionuclides, several radiometals are available for use with
PET ( ). Like 99mTc, 68Ga (t1/2 =
67.6 min) offers the benefits of generator production and is widely
used preclinically and increasingly in the clinic for labeling peptides
and small molecules. The longer-lived 64Cu (t1/2 = 12.7 h) and 89Zr (t1/2 = 3.3 d) are also commonly used for PET imaging of long-circulating
antibodies, nanoparticles, and cells.
 
2.3.

## Advantages and Disadvantages of Radionuclide
Imaging
Radionuclide-based imaging techniques have several
properties that are worth discussing in the context of the previously
discussed imaging techniques. First, unlike optical imaging modalities,
radionuclide imaging has no major tissue depth penetration limitations,
and its large field of FOV means it can usually be performed on a
whole-body scale. However, radionuclide imaging has lower spatial
resolution compared to MRI and CT. Furthermore, the use of radionuclides
means that the radiation doses the subject receives during scanning
must be carefully considered and managed, particularly when combined
with CT imaging. A large benefit of radionuclide imaging is how sensitive
(10–10–10–12 M—the
typical radionuclide concentration in vivo) it is compared to other
imaging modalities with a large FOV, such as MRI and CT. This usually
means the administered radiotracers (in the scale of micrograms or
less, c.f. grams for MRI/CT) do not perturb the biological system
being imaged or cause significant toxicity. For example, receptor-targeted
radiopharmaceuticals can usually be used without risk of saturating
or significantly activating the receptors. Radionuclide imaging is,
therefore, well suited for the imaging of molecular processes (known
as molecular imaging), while also being highly versatile in that very
many processes can be targeted for imaging. Additionally, radioactive
emissions do not suffer from significant tissue attenuations, allowing
quantification of tissue uptake ex vivo and in vivo with high accuracy
and temporal resolution. This can make it highly complementary when
used with other modalities (such as MRI and CT), which allow high
resolution imaging but suffer from lower sensitivity and do not generally
image molecular processes.

2.4.

## PET versus SPECT
As mentioned above,
both PET and SPECT have lower spatial resolution than other medical
imaging techniques. The spatial resolution of current clinical SPECT
scanners (7–15 mm) is lower than PET scanners (6–10
mm). However, preclinically there is
little difference in spatial resolution between PET and SPECT; both
are capable of submillimeter resolution. In SPECT, the use of collimators excludes a large fraction of gamma
ray emissions from the radionuclides, while with PET this is not the
case making the modality more effective at detecting decay events.
SPECT imaging also has the advantage that multiple isotopes and radioactive
compounds can be used in the same subject to image different molecular
targets simultaneously, due to the distinct energy emissions that
SPECT radionuclides may have. This is known as multiplexed imaging. In contrast, multiplexed imaging is not possible
with current PET scanners, as the annihilation γ rays detected
by PET imaging have the same 511 keV energy regardless of the positron
energy or radionuclide. Additionally, clinical SPECT imaging is generally
less costly and more widely available than PET imaging, although the
latter is becoming increasingly widely available. Finally, the recent
development of a new form of clinical PET, “total-body PET”,
offers a step change in the potential versatility and capability of
this technique. Total-body PET scanners allow the imaging of radiotracers
in humans at significantly lower radiation doses (up to 40×),
much shorter acquisition times, , or both. The potential
impact of this technology on cell tracking will be discussed later.

3.

## Overview of Cell Radiolabeling and Tracking
Methods
In the previous section, we have discussed the various
benefits
of radionuclide imaging for in vivo cell tracking methods compared
to other modalities available. We will now briefly discuss the various
in vivo tracking methodologies used with radionuclide imaging ( ) with a focus on
the benefits and pitfalls of each.
 3.1.

## Indirect Cell Labeling and Tracking
As discussed in , indirect cell
labeling requires the genetic manipulation
of cells to express a reporter gene. Within the context of radionuclide
imaging, a reporter gene is usually a protein (receptors, transporters
and enzymes) that facilitates the uptake or binding of a radiotracer,
which after administration of the cells allows “hotspot”
imaging of their location within the body by repeat injections of
the radiotracer ( A). For example, receptor-based reporter genes induce the expression
of cell receptors that can then be targeted by specific imaging tracers.
Several researchers have modified cancer cell lines with the human
somatostatin type 2 receptor (hSSTR2), a gene that is not significantly
expressed in healthy adult tissues. This allows in vivo imaging of
tumors using a 99mTc-labeled peptide conjugate that specifically
targets hSSTR2. , More recently, the prostate specific
membrane antigen (PSMA) was used as a reporter gene for the tracking
of CAR T-cells using the prostate cancer PET agent [18F]DCFPyL. Similarly, transporter-based reporter genes,
such as the sodium-iodide symporter (NIS), allow the cellular uptake
of radiotracers through cell membrane transporters. Cells genetically
modified with NIS can be imaged in vivo using iodide-mimicking radiotracers
such as [99mTc]TcO4–, [18F]BF4–, [18F]SO3F–, and [18F]PF6–, as well as radioiodine isotopes ([123/124/125I]NaI), using PET and SPECT. − Finally, enzyme-based reporter genes allow tracking of cells via
the enzymatic trapping of radiotracers within genetically modified
cells. A prominent example is the genetic modification of cells to
express the herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase gene (HSV1-tk).
Upon entering the modified cells, radiolabeled substrates of HSV1-tk
such as 9-[4-[18F]fluoro-3-(hydroxymethyl)butyl]guanine
([18F]FHBG) are phosphorylated by the enzyme and trapped
within the cell. 
One major drawback
of indirect cell labeling is the need to genetically modify cells,
which is often considered to be a significant barrier to clinical
translation because of the increased complexity of the technique and
the requirement for additional safety evaluation. However, for cellular
therapies that inherently involve genetic manipulation (e.g., CAR
T-cells), this should not in principle represent a significant issue.
Indeed, Gambhir and collaborators have reported the clinical tracking
of CAR T-cells using reporter gene technology with PET. , Alternatively, indirect cell tracking can be performed using radiotracers
targeted to specific endogenous cell markers present on the cells
of interest ( Aii) even without genetic manipulation. A key recent example of this was reported by Simonetta et al., who
used immunoPET to image the Inducible T-cell COStimulator (ICOS) which
was up-regulated during activation of human CD19.28z CAR T cells. Anti-ICOS mAbs radiolabeled with 89Zr enabled the in vivo imaging of activated CAR T-cells without damaging
the antitumor effect of the therapeutic cells. However, the use of
radiolabeled antibodies may be undesirable due to their long blood
half-lives. To overcome this, smaller binding proteins with shorter
circulation half-lives and faster clearance such as radiolabeled peptides, single-chain Fv fragments (scFv) , and minibodies targeting cell markers
have been used. One potential limitation with this approach is the
limited number of radiotracer molecules per cell. While imaging surface
markers allows for a more specific approach, the 1:1 ratio of targeting
ligand to surface protein may limit the sensitivity of the method
when low numbers of infiltrating cells are present. Direct labeling and, to some extent, indirect cell labeling
using reporter genes, overcome this issue by allowing many more radiotracer
molecules per cell. Additionally, the use of an exogenously administered
imaging tracer has the drawback of leading to misinterpretation of
the imaging signal, as hotspots associated with the tracer cannot
be distinguished from those associated with the target cells. For
example, the signal of imaging tracers cleared through the liver may
be misinterpreted as the presence of administered cells. Furthermore,
this method is limited to specific examples where the cell of interest
has unique or low abundant targetable proteins. While indirect cell
labeling is not the focus of this review, it remains a highly valuable
cell tracking tool and readers are referred to other reviews on this
topic. , 

3.2.

## Ex Vivo Direct Cell Labeling
Compared
to indirect cell labeling, direct cell labeling is a simpler cell
tracking method that does not involve the genetic manipulation of
cells. Cells are usually radiolabeled ex vivo/in vitro by incubation
with a radiotracer, followed by injection of the radiolabeled cells
into the imaging subject ( B). In vivo PET or SPECT imaging can then be performed
over time to assess the distribution of the cells. The radiolabeling
mechanism can vary depending on the type of probe. Cells can be radiolabeled
using radiotracers designed to bind to or integrate into the cell
membrane. Alternatively, imaging probes can be specifically designed
to permeate the cell membrane and become trapped intracellularly.
Finally, cells can be labeled via the uptake of radiolabeled particles,
which can be mediated by endocytic or phagocytic pathways. A limitation
of direct cell labeling is that the imaging time window of this technique
is limited by the half-life of the radionuclide used. Direct cell
labeling can also be restricted by the efflux of the radiotracer/radionuclide
from the radiolabeled cells in vivo. Additionally, information on
in vivo cell proliferation cannot be determined because when cells
divide, the radionuclide probe will be redistributed between daughter
cells, causing “label dilution”. Hence, ideal direct cell labeling agents should facilitate fast,
efficient (high yield) cellular uptake, with high cellular retention
of the radionuclide (slow label efflux), while not affecting the cell
viability. Furthermore, they should allow imaging over relatively
long periods of time (if needed for the imaging application). Hence,
long-lived radionuclides (such as 111In, 89Zr)
are usually preferred.

4.

## Chemical Probes for Ex Vivo
Direct Cell Radiolabeling
As outlined in previous sections,
attaching a radiolabel to cells
prior to their administration—ex vivo direct cell radiolabeling—is
the most straightforward and robust method of radiolabeling and tracking
cells with PET/SPECT. The simplicity of direct cell labeling ex vivo
means that in theory any chemical probe capable of entering or binding
to cells can be repurposed for this application, and various cellular
chemistries and processes can be utilized for this purpose. In practice,
several concepts should be carefully considered before selecting a
cell labeling agent. In this section, we will review the various methodologies
used for direct cell tracking and discuss the broad library of chemical
probes that have been developed for each method, and their respective
benefits and disadvantages. First, we will introduce and define basic
cell radiolabeling concepts, which will be referred to throughout
the rest of the Review.
4.1.

## Key Concepts for Direct
Cell Radiolabeling
4.1.1.

## Cellular Uptake/Labeling
Efficiency
A key concept for assessing a direct cell labeling
agent is the extent
of cellular uptake, which refers to the amount (%) of radioactivity
associated with cells. This is often expressed as labeling efficiency
(LE; A), defined
as the percentage of radioactivity added that is associated with the
cells after the labeling process. Generally, after the incubation
of a direct cell radiolabeling agent with the target cells, the reaction
is “quenched” by removal of the supernatant. If the
cells are in suspension, this is usually done by pelleting the cells
(i.e., gentle centrifugation) and removing the supernatant, followed
by a washing step. Typically, LE is defined by the equation below:
 However, there are other
ways of expressing
cellular uptake, which provide additional information, such as activity/cell,
percent activity added per milligram of protein or a ratio of intracellular/extracellular
radioisotope concentration. These units
have the benefit of correcting for cell numbers, which may affect
cellular uptake; higher cell numbers are expected to lead to higher
labeling efficiencies. Hence, the method used to calculate and compare
cellular uptake of radiotracers should be carefully considered for
each radiotracer, both when designing studies or interpreting results
from the literature. High labeling efficiencies are desirable to reduce
waste of expensive radionuclide and minimize problems associated with
purification steps, particularly when cell numbers are restricted.
 
4.1.2.

## Cellular Retention of the Radiolabel
A second fundamental aspect of direct cell radiolabeling is the retention
of the radiotracer/radionuclide inside or on the surface of the cells
after quenching of the radiolabeling step. This is of high importance
because, unlike fluorescence or bioluminescence, radioactive emissions
cannot be “switched off” or selectively activated and
all radiotracer signal will be acquired by the detector whether it
originates within the labeled cell or not. Consequently, it is difficult
to tell a priori from a PET or SPECT image whether the signal represents
live cells, damaged cells, radioactive cell debris, or leaked radiotracer
( B). To mitigate
this, several approaches should be taken in conjunction. First, the
radionuclide retention should be maximized, ideally for the useful
duration of the study. This includes considering the physicochemical
interactions of the radiotracer with the various cellular constituents
(e.g., receptors, membrane, intracellular proteins) and its intracellular
metabolism, but also ensuring that the amount of radiotracer does
not result in significant cell damage. Second, any unincorporated
radiotracer should be removed by washing the cells after incubation
with the radiotracer and before further use in vitro or in vivo, to
ensure that at least at the point of administration the radioactivity
is fully associated with the cells of interest. Calculation of radiotracer
retention is performed using the same equation as for LE, the only
difference being that it is measured at a specified time after the
initial radiotracer incubation and washing step. The factors that
can affect radiolabel retention will be discussed in more detail in .

4.1.3.

## Cell Viability and Functionality
Finally, it is essential
that direct cell labeling methods have no
significant effect on the viability, activity, motility, and trafficking
of the target cells, because the radioactive signals from directly
labeled cells do not report on whether the cells are alive or functioning
normally. This is important because dying (e.g., apoptotic) or dead
cells not only have different circulating patterns from live cells
in the body but can also release their radiolabel more quickly. This
may lead to misleading images. It is therefore essential to assess
the damage the radiolabeling method may do to the target cells over
time. Ideally this should be performed over a period of time corresponding
to the desired in vivo imaging time frame. As well as the viability
of radiolabeled cells, the functionality of these cells must not be
affected by the radiolabeling method. For example, cytotoxic cells
(i.e., CAR T-cells) should be tested to confirm they retain their
cell-targeting and killing ability after radiolabeling. The viability
and functionality of cells can be affected by the radiotracer itself
(e.g., through radiation-induced DNA damage; C), as well as the labeling conditions along
with the chemical compounds used to mediate radiolabeling. Hence,
it can be important to perform suitable controls (i.e., with the absence
of radioactivity) to establish the potential cause for any effects
on cell viability or functionality observed. A more detailed discussion
on the effects of radionuclides on cell viability and testing the
functionality of radiolabeled cells can be found in and , respectively.
We will now discuss in detail different
chemical methods that have been developed for the radiolabeling of
cells in vitro/ex vivo, summarized in .
 

4.2.

## Radiometal–Ionophore
Complexes
Most compounds used for direct cell radiolabeling
are “radiometal–ionophore”
complexes, which consist of a radiometal and an ionophore. An ionophore
is defined as a ligand which binds to a metal ion reversibly for transport
across lipid membranes. The resulting
radiometal complex is sufficiently hydrophobic to allow passage across
cell membranes but insufficiently stable to remain intact within the
cell ( A). Once
inside the cell, the radiometal can be transchelated by intracellular
proteins/macromolecules, resulting in
trapping of the radionuclide–and a radiolabeled cell. Effective
radio-ionophore agents should facilitate fast uptake and slow radionuclide
efflux (which requires rapid transchelation once inside the cell),
while not affecting the cell viability. lists the various ionophore ligands used
for direct cell radiolabeling.
 4.2.1.

## 8-Hydroxyquinoline (Oxine)
8-Hydroxyquinoline
(oxine, A)
is a metal-chelating ligand known to bind a wide variety of metals
through the pyridyl nitrogen and the hydroxyl group, which becomes
deprotonated, allowing the formation of neutral, lipophilic metal
complexes. , To the best of our knowledge
the first use of oxine for direct cell labeling with radionuclides
was in 1976 by McAfee et al., who reported the synthesis of the [99mTc]Tc-oxine and [111In]In-oxine complexes for
the labeling of red blood cells (RBCs) and white blood cells (WBCs/leukocytes). Following these initial uses, both compounds
were subsequently used for the radiolabeling of platelets. The indium metal center in [111In]In-oxine
is likely in the 3+ oxidation state, and the observed lipophilicity
of the compound suggests that the most likely chemical identity is
the neutral [111In]In(oxinate)3 complex (X-ray
structure with nonradioactive 113In isotope in A). However, because
of the complex redox chemistry of technetium, the identity of the
[99mTc]Tc-oxine complex is not known. Technetium(V) complexes
of oxine have been previously reported in the oxo [99Tc][TcO(oxinate2)]+ form. However,
these complexes were synthesized from different precursors (tetrabutylammonium
tetrachlorooxotechnetate(V)) compared to the [99Tc]Tc-oxine
preparation ([99mTc]TcO4– with
tin pyrophosphate); therefore, this
may not be the structure of the radioactive complex. Regardless, only
[111In]In-oxine was taken further and was later used to
image leukocytes in humans, eventually
being approved for leukocyte imaging by the FDA in 1985 and used clinically
for imaging inflammatory disease. [111In]In-oxine labeling
of cells required a medium free of plasma proteins because of transchelation
of the 111In. This was a particular issue when labeling
platelets due to in vitro damage to the cells. Additionally, oxine has low solubility in aqueous solvents,
and early protocols consequently entailed a variety of organic solvents
(i.e., ethanol, chloroform) for synthesis and purification–which
can be cytotoxic. , Furthermore, the [111In]In-oxine complex is highly lipophilic, causing reduced recovery
in aqueous medium due to adherence to plastic/glass vessels. These
problems were overcome later by the use of the surfactant polysorbate
in formulations. , The [111In]In-oxine
formulation was withdrawn from the EU market by GE Healthcare, apparently
because of insufficient medical demand, although it is now available in Europe from Curium. It was replaced
by [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO (see ) for the labeling and tracking of leukocytes—the
primary use of the tracer in clinics at that time. However, the need
for tracking cells for longer periods of time has recently resulted
in a renewed interest in [111In]In-oxine for the in vivo
tracking of cellular therapies preclinically and clinically.
 The use of oxine as an ionophore for 68Ga was first
reported by Welch et al.; being the first use of a PET radiometal
for cell labeling. Because of the redox
inertness of Ga3+, the neutral [68Ga]Ga-oxine
complex is likely the [68Ga]Ga(oxinate)3 complex
(X-ray crystal structure in A). The [68Ga]Ga-oxine complex was used
to radiolabel both red blood cells and platelets with ∼93%
LE for the former, and lower for platelets
(∼20–50% after washing). This is possibly due to presence of transferrin
in the platelet labeling mixture, which may transchelate the 68Ga3+ ion. More recently, [68Ga]Ga-oxine
was used for the radiolabeling of CAR T-cells with high cellular retention
(>90% after 2 h), with no effect on cell viability up to 48 h. However, [68Ga]Ga-oxine has limited
use for cell tracking applications that require long imaging timeframes
because of the short half-life of 68Ga (68 min). Nevertheless,
[68Ga]Ga-oxine was recently used clinically for the labeling
and tracking of heat-denatured RBCs over short periods with clinical
PET/CT imaging. 
Similarities between
the reactivity and preferred ligand types
of In3+ and Zr4+ have led to the development
of a PET alternative to [111In]In-oxine for long-term cell
tracking using 89Zr. , , The neutral [89Zr]Zr(oxinate)4 ([89Zr]Zr-oxine) compound likely exists as the dodecahedral complex (X-ray
structure in A) based on X-ray crystal structures of the nonradioactive complex. A comparison of [89Zr]Zr-oxine with
[111In]In-oxine revealed lower or similar cell uptake for
[89Zr]Zr-oxine, depending on the cell type, but also a
lower efflux of 89Zr after 24 h. An in vivo comparison of the two compounds using eGFP-5T33 myeloma
cells revealed a significantly higher uptake and retention of 89Zr in the target organs (liver, spleen, and bone marrow)
compared to 111In, with the presence of 89Zr-labeled
cells confirmed in those organs using FACS analysis ( A). Sato et al. explored the
in vivo retention of 89Zr in radiolabeled NK cells in rhesus
macaques. They continuously infused the 89Zr chelator deferoxamine
(DFO) to clear any released activity through the renal system. It
was found that the whole-body activity dropped to ∼70% injected
dose (% ID) after 1 d, and down to 50% ID after 7 d ( B). However, after administration
of 89Zr-labeled dead/dying cells DFO-enhanced renal clearance
of 89Zr was observed, with the whole-body radioactivity
decreased to 8% within just 1 day ( B). While this
suggests that most of the activity released is from dead/dying cells,
the release of the 89Zr radiolabel from intact cells due
to instability cannot be ruled out. Despite this, the increased retention
in vivo of 89Zr coupled with the improved imaging properties
of PET may allow [89Zr]Zr-oxine to extend the useful time
frame for tracking cells in vivo. Indeed, PET imaging has been performed
preclinically up to 14 days postadministration of cells. [89Zr]Zr-oxine has since been used
by several groups for the in vivo tracking of various cell types,
particularly for cell therapy models ( ; , , , , B–E)
and an easy-to-use kit formulation for the clinical radiosynthesis
of [89Zr]Zr-oxine has also been reported. 
 The synthesis of [64Cu]Cu-oxine has also been reported
by Socan et al., who used the compound to radiolabel WBCs and RBCs;
the radiometal complex was synthesized using an on-cartridge method
with which the corresponding 68Ga, 111In, and 89Zr oxine complexes were also prepared. [64Cu]Cu-oxine showed promising radiolabeling
properties with a LE of 67.6% and 57.1% for RBCs and WBCs respectively,
and 83% cellular retention of 64Cu in RBCs and 55% in WBCs
after 48 h. Finally, oxine was reported as an ionophore for 52Mn (t1/2 = 5.6 days); the authors showed
that under dilute conditions (to mimic the case in the radiochemistry
reaction) the bis(oxine) complex was likely formed with the manganese
metal in the 2+ state. This [52Mn]Mn(oxinate)2 complex allowed the direct labeling of
a variety of cells, and showed comparable labeling of gamma-delta
T-cells to [89Zr]Zr-oxine. However, cellular efflux of 52Mn was rapid, with only 27% remaining in cells after 24 h
compared to 78% for 89Zr. The released activity was shown
to be highly hydrophilic (with a negative LogP value); hence not the
[52Mn]Mn(oxinate)2 complex. Because of the bioactivity
of manganese, it is likely the 52Mn is trafficked out via
a cellular process, possibly through the known manganese efflux pathways,
ferroportin and SLC30A10, which potentially limits the utility of the
agent for direct cell tracking.

4.2.2.

## Tropolone
2-Hydroxy-2,4,6-cycloheptatrien-1-one
(tropolone; A) is a bidentate ligand that coordinates metal ions via the two
oxygen donor atoms of the carbonyl and hydroxyl group. It was first
investigated as an ionophore for cell labeling with 111In, , likely as the [111In]In(tropolonate)3 complex (X-ray structure in B). The [111In]In-tropolone complex
was developed as a water-soluble direct cell labeling agent, overcoming
the insolubility of oxine in aqueous medium. The higher stability
of the tropolone complex also avoids trans-chelation of the radiometal
to transferrin, which limited the use of [111In]In-oxine
for labeling platelets in plasma. A
clinical study showed that [111In]In-tropolone-labeled
leukocytes could localize lesions with an accuracy similar to those
labeled using [111In]In-oxine. However, [111In]In-tropolone failed to replace it, likely
due to it not being commercially available (at the time), and because
it was not demonstrably better than oxine in the clinical setting. 
Tropolone was also reported as an ionophore
for cell labeling with 64Cu. The [64Cu]Cu-tropolone complex was shown to label leukocytes
with 83% LE, however the cellular retention was low with just 24%
remaining after 24 h. To overcome this, the authors employed a unique
approach using an additional chelating agent during the radiolabeling
procedure; the membrane-permeable, calcium chelator quin-MF/AM ( B). This agent crosses
the leukocyte cell membrane in its more lipophilic, protected acetoxymethyl
(AM) ester form, which cannot bind Cu. However, once inside the cell
the AM groups are cleaved by intracellular esterases forming the negatively
charged anionic form which has a very high affinity for Cu2+. This hydrolyzed form of the compound was proposed to rapidly chelate
the 64Cu from the tropolone complex, trapping it within
the cell. Indeed, radiolabeling with quin-MF/AM present increased
the cellular retention at 24 h from 24% to 79%. Ferris et al. tested tropolone for cell labeling with 89Zr. Cell labeling with [89Zr]Zr(tropolonate)4 was tested in a mouse macrophage cell line (J447) and was
found to give ∼22% LE after 1 h, with ∼49% being retained
after 24 h (c.f., ∼22% cell uptake obtained with [89Zr]Zr(oxinate)4 and 91% cellular retention after 24 h.
The tropolone complexes of 68Ga (X-ray structure of
nonradioactive complex in B), 89Zr, and 64Cu, were also
prepared by Socan et al. and their RBC radiolabeling properties compared
with those of the corresponding 68Ga-, 64Cu-,
and [89Zr]Zr-oxine complexes. For 68Ga, oxine was shown to be more favorable for RBC
labeling than tropolone (73% LE and 51% LE respectively). The cellular
retention of 68Ga was also very low when using tropolone
(15% after 4 h) compared with 62% after 4 h for [68Ga]Ga-oxine.
Oxine was also shown to be a better ionophore for radiolabeling RBCs
with 89Zr, with 82% and 44% LE for [89Zr]Zr-oxine
and [89Zr]Zr-tropolone, respectively. Furthermore, the
amount of 89Zr retained in RBCs after 24 h was lower when
using tropolone (30%) than with oxine (80%). However, both oxine and
tropolone were shown to be favorable for 64Cu-RBC labeling,
with 70% and 91% LE, respectively. High cellular retention of 64Cu was also seen for both compounds with 77% and 86% after
24 h for tropolone and oxine, respectively. It is possible that the variations in cell uptake and retention
observed using various radiometals with tropolone could be related
to the differences in Lewis acidity of the metal ions. The “harder”
Lewis acids Zr4+ and Ga3+ may form more stable
complexes with the oxygen donors of tropolone compared with the softer
Cu2+, potentially resulting in lower release of the metals
intracellularly—as well as passive diffusion of the stable
[68Ga]Ga-tropolone and [89Zr]Zr-tropolone complexes
out of cells. Regardless, this highlights the importance of considering
the inorganic coordination chemistry of the radiometal ion used when
designing and using ionophores.

4.2.3.

## Other
Ionophore Ligands
Another
early reported ionophore for cell labeling was acetylacetone (acac, A), which was primarily
used for 111In—likely as the tris(acetylacetonate)
complex. In(acetylacetonate)3 is a tris(β-ketoenolato)
distorted octahedral complex with the three ligands each forming a
six-membered chelate ring with the indium ion (X-ray structure in C). , The first use of the ligand for direct cell labeling with 111In was by Sinn et al. in 1974 for erythrocyte labeling. , It was later included in the cell labeling ligand survey by McAfee
et al., who reported the radiolabeling of leukocytes. Initially, as with tropolone, it was developed as an alternative
to oxine because of the higher solubility of acetylacetone in aqueous
buffers. , However, acetylacetone failed
to replace oxine and other ionophores for 111In, possibly
because of less favorable performance in clinical studies. For example,
granulocytes labeled with [111In]In-acetylacetonate were
shown to have inferior sensitivity and visualization of infection
in patients, compared cells labeled with [111In]In-tropolone. 
Another ionophore used for cell labeling
is 2-mercaptopyridine-N-oxide (MPO, A), which is the conjugate
base of pyrithione. The ligand is bidentate with metal binding occurring
through the negatively charged thiolate and the N-oxide oxygen atom.
The [111In]In-MPO complex for cell radiolabeling was first
developed in 1985 for platelet labeling. The cell labeling of platelets with 111In by MPO was
found to be comparable to that with oxine. MPO was also later used with 68Ga for platelet labeling, , as well as with 67Ga; however,
the labeling efficiency of these agents was shown to be much lower
(∼15%) compared with [111In]In-MPO (∼80%). 
In an interesting study, Ellis et al.
synthesized and screened
a variety of hydroxypyranones and hydroxypyridinones as bidentate
ligands for In3+, which formed 3:1 (L:M) complexes with
the metal. They identified 3-hydroxy-6-propoxymethyl-4H-pyran-4-one
(PMHP; A) and
6-butoxymethyl-3-hydroxy-4H-pyran-4-one (BMHP; A) as potential ionophores for cell labeling
using 111In. A subsequent
study showed that these ligands allowed increased cellular uptake
of 111In (∼90% LE) in mixed leukocytes compared
to tropolone (76% LE), with similar efflux rate (approximately 20%
after 4 h). However, radionuclide efflux
was not assessed at later time points, which is more relevant for
longer-term cell tracking. This may explain the absence of any subsequent
reports using these compounds. A similar ligand, ethyl maltol ( A), was reported
as an ionophore for 89Zr by Ferris et al. Uptake of the
proposed [89Zr]Zr(ethyl maltolate)4 complex
was shown in colon cancer cells (HTC-116) with ∼43% retention
after 1 h and with 26% after 24 h. Because
of its less favorable radiolabeling properties compared to [89Zr]Zr-oxine, this ligand was not taken any further.
Diethyldithiocarbamate
(DEDTC; A)
was first used as a ligand with 99mTc for cell labeling
by Sampson et al. in 1988. The radiometal
complex was proposed to be the bis(ligand)nitrido
complex with the Tc/Re core in the 5+ oxidation state ( A). It was able to radiolabel
a crude leukocyte suspension with a LE of ∼73%. N-Ethoxy-N-ethyl-dithiocarbamate (NOET; A) was later used
analogously with 99mTc and 188Re for leukocyte
radiolabeling by Demaimay et al. Interestingly,
radio-HPLC analysis of cell lysates demonstrated that the radiometal
complex was still intact, with no release of the radiometal occurring
intracellularly. However, this would likely lead to low cellular retention
of the compound. Several dithiocarbamates (DEDTC, DMDTC, and DPDTC; A) were explored
as ionophores for 64Cu, likely as the bis(dithiocarbamate)
Cu2+ complexes (e.g., [64Cu]Cu(DEDTC)2). DEDTC exhibited the highest cell
labeling efficiency for J774 mouse macrophages with 61−73%
LE after just 1 min. The cell uptake of 64Cu when using
DMDTC and DPDTC was slightly lower with ∼35% and 55% after
30 min, respectively. However, rapid cellular efflux of 64Cu was observed with all the dithiocarbamates with cellular retentions
between 15–21% after just 20 h, making these compounds inappropriate for long-term cell tracking.
Demaimay et al. later compared a library of dithiocarboxylate ligands
( A) for Tc/Re-based
cell labeling agents. The authors first
tested the effect of the carboxylate counterion of the ligand on leukocyte
labeling using the 99mTc complex of a dithiohexanoic acid
ligand. It was found the tetramethylammonium salt was capable of labeling
leukocytes, whereas the sodium salt could not. Interestingly, they
showed that the LE of leukocytes increased linearly with increasing
chain length on the dithiocarboxylate ligand; with ∼25% LE
for the 7-carbon chain to ∼65% for the decyldithiocarboxylate
ligand. However, limited data on cellular
retention or viability was reported, and hence, it is difficult to
assess the effectiveness of these compounds as direct cell labeling
agents.

4.2.4.

## [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO
Another
key SPECT radiotracer for direct cell labeling is technetium-99m hexamethylpropylene
amine oxime ([99mTc]Tc-HMPAO; B). The compound was initially developed
for brain imaging because of its lipophilicity (and hence its ability
to cross the blood–brain barrier) and its chemical instability
(hence its trapping once in the brain). These properties are the same as those required for cell labeling
by the ionophore approach and [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO was first
used to label cells in 1986 by Peters et al. for the imaging of leukocytes. The [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO complex likely
exists in the five-coordinate technetium(V) oxo form. The mechanism
of trapping within cells relies on the conversion of the complex to
a hydrophilic form; however, to the best of our knowledge, neither
the structure of this hydrophilic form nor the mechanism of conversion
are known. Glutathione has been to shown to convert [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO into a hydrophilic form. Additionally, it has been shown that liposomes encapsulating glutathione
resulted in higher uptake and retention in the aqueous core, consistent
with this mechanism. The main application
for [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO was the tracking of leukocytes for
the imaging of inflammatory bowel disease, but since the discontinuation of [111In]In-oxine sales
in Europe, [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO is now used for most indications
in which a leukocyte scan is warranted. Due to the generator production
of the radiometal, [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO leukocyte imaging is
cheaper and more convenient compared to using [111In]In-oxine,
and imparts lower radiation doses. , However,
the shorter half-life of 99mTc (t1/2 = 6 h) compared to 111In (t1/2 = 2.80 d) limits its use in the long term cell tracking
in vivo.

4.2.5.

## Bis(thiosemicarbazones)
with 64Cu
One of the earlier ligands investigated
for cell labeling
with 64Cu is the lipophilic, redox-active pyruvaldehyde-bis(N4-methylthiosemicarbazone) (PTSM). Cu-PTSM exists
as an approximate square planar N2S2 complex
( A and D) which is uncharged due to deprotonation. The lipophilicity of the Cu(II)-PTSM complex
allows it to cross the cell membrane efficiently, while the rate of
efflux from cells is controlled by the redox reactivity. Intracellular
reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I) destabilizes the complex, leading to
its dissociation and trapping of radioactive copper inside the cell. However, this release mechanism results in
low cellular retention of the isotope. In C6 glioma cells, 36% retention
after 5 h was observed, and efflux studies
in the OVA-Th1 cells revealed that 47% of [64Cu]Cu-PTSM
remained after 5 h and only 14% after 24 h. A similar trend was observed by Charoenphun et al., who prepared
the copper complexes of several bis(thiosemicarbazones) (GTS, GTSM,
PTS, and PTSM; A). Cellular uptake in J774 mouse macrophages of 64Cu
plateaued at 50–60% LE for all of the radiometal complexes.
However, rapid cellular efflux of 64Cu was observed with
all ligands with cellular retentions between 14–28% after 20
h. This low cellular retention is likely
due to copper cellular transport mechanisms (see ) and may limit the use
of these compounds for long-term cell tracking. [64Cu]Cu-PTSM
was later compared with 64Cu labeled poly(ethylenimine)
(64Cu-PEI; B) for cell labeling. PEI has
been used as a gene carrier and can enter cells via endosomes, by
becoming cationic via amine protonation. In vitro studies showed that [64Cu]Cu-PTSM uptake into
cells was much greater compared to 64Cu-PEI (70–80%
and 20%, respectively, after 3 h), and also had approximately half
the radiation efflux after 27 h. However, the PEGylation of 64Cu-PEI (64Cu-PEI-PEG) partially ameliorated these issues. 

4.3.

## Cell Surface Labeling
The transport
of radionuclides into cells using ionophore ligands is clearly a successful
and widely used strategy. However, the potential radiotoxicity associated
with the delivery of ionizing radiation-emitting radionuclide intracellularly
(see )
is often stated as a concern. A potential (although as yet unproven)
way of mitigating this effect is by radiolabeling cells on the cell
membrane, further away from the nucleus which would likely reduce
the toxicity of Auger-electrons (but not gamma photons) emitted by
some radionuclides (e.g., 111In, 123I). The radiotoxicity of a cell labeling agent
is both radionuclide- and cell-dependent, and hence, more research
is needed in the field of radiobiology to establish the effects of
cell-radiolabel location on radiotoxicity. Regardless, the chemical
structure of the cell membrane easily allows the binding and association
of a variety of different compounds ( ) through various interactions ( ). In this section,
we will discuss the main methods used for the direct labeling of cells
via their plasma membrane.
 4.3.1.

## Cell Surface Protein Binding
An
early method for cell surface labeling was to radiolabel proteins
present on the cell surface ( A) as reported by Melder et al., who used [11C]CH3I ( D). , Nonradioactive CH3I is a commonly used methylation agent capable of attaching a methyl
group to variety of functional groups (amines, thiols, carboxylates)
via the SN2 substitution reaction. The fact that some of
these functional groups are present on cell membranes allowed the
use of [11C]CH3I to radiolabel natural killer
(NK) cells. While the labeling efficiency of [11C]CH3I was not reported, the attachment of the tracer to the cell
surface (cellular retention) was shown to be stable (>90%) over
the
60 min tested. Additionally, the radiolabeling method was shown to
have little effect on the cell viability and cytotoxic activity of
the NK cells. However, the short half-life
of 11C (t1/2 = 20 min) considerably
limits the PET imaging window and is a major drawback for cell labeling;
in this case imaging was performed up to 60 min. 
The cell surface labeling method was later expanded
by Olasz et al., who used N-succinimidyl-4-[18F]fluorobenzoate ([18F]SFB; D) to radiolabel cells via
amine residues on their surface. It
was shown that bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) could be
radiolabeled with the agent with a cell labeling efficiency of ∼20%.
Interestingly, the cellular retention of the radiotracer was shown
to be lower at 37 °C than at 4 °C (44% and 91%, respectively,
after 4 h), suggesting that this tracer is removed from the cells
through membrane turnover or a metabolic process rather than passive
efflux. A variation of this method, incorporating a fluorescent cyanine
dye (Cy3 or Cy5), was reported by Wang et al. for RBC radiolabeling
via amine residues. The compound was
radiolabeled via reaction of a dioxaborolane precursor with [18F]F– forming the trifluoroborate [18F]BF3-Cy3-NHS ( D) Interestingly, the authors showed that
the dye was stably attached to the cell surface and not transferred
to neighboring cells. RBCs labeled with each of the two NHS dyes were
mixed together and left for 14 h, after which fluorescence microscopy
showed the absence of spectral overlap between the two fluorophores
( A), demonstrating
that there was no mixing of fluorophores between cells. Despite this,
cell radiolabeling with this compound was inefficient with only ∼2%
(actual value not reported) of added activity associated with RBCs
after labeling. This may be due to the lack of isolation and purification
of the [18F]BF3-Cy3-NHS radiolabeled agent before
its use in the cell labeling procedure. Additionally, high bone uptake
could be seen in PET images of the radiolabeled RBCs suggesting release
of the radionuclide as [18F]F– from [18F]BF3-Cy3-NHS/RBCs in vivo.
 Bansal et al. developed a 89Zr-based cell labeling agent
using an isothiocyanate derivative of the chelator desferrioxamine
(DFO). , The isothiocyanate group of [89Zr]Zr-DFO-NCS ( D) most likely reacts with free amines present on the cell
surface to form a thiourea linkage. This technique demonstrated good
labeling efficiency (30–55%, depending on cell type), and excellent
retention of radioactivity over 7 days. In vivo PET imaging showed distinct differences between the distribution
of [89Zr]Zr-DFO-NCS labeled cells and that of unchelated 89Zr. However, the authors did not investigate the in vivo
biodistribution of the [89Zr]Zr-DFO-NCS as a negative control,
although this compound is likely to be rapidly excreted. Understanding
the biodistribution of stable cell surface labeling agents is needed
to confirm that the PET signal observed when performing in vivo cell
tracking relates to that of labeled cells.
Similarly, Pham et
al. reported two dual modality PET/fluorescent
cell labeling agents comprising of a hydrophilic fluorescein dye conjugate
containing 124I with either a maleimide (124I-FIT-Mal; D) or dithiophenolmaleimide (124I-FIT-(PhS)2Mal; D)
moiety for cell labeling via free thiol groups on membrane proteins. 124I-FIT-(PhS)2Mal had
much higher LE than 124I-FIT-Mal and was chosen for further
evaluation. Labeling efficiency was further increased by pretreating
cells with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), a disulfide bridge
reducing reagent, confirming that conjugation occurred via free thiol
groups on the membrane. Fluorescence microscopy confirmed tracer binding
to the cell surface. Cellular retention of 124I-FIT-(PhS)2Mal was high with >65% still associated with cells after
7
days. In vivo PET imaging of Jurkat
cells labeled with 124I-FIT-(PhS)2Mal showed
uptake in the bladder was observed at 4 and 24 h ( B), suggesting urinary clearance
of 124I-FIT-(PhS)2Mal released from cells. Assessment
of the in vivo release of iodide by this radioiodine-based tracer
using thyroid radioactivity uptake as a marker was not possible as
the animals were pretreated with potassium iodide to block uptake
of any free 124I. The expected distribution of the cells
was observed, with initial uptake in the lungs followed by gradual
redistribution to the liver and spleen ( B); the labeled cells showed a biodistribution
that was distinct from administered 124I-FIT-(PhS)2Mal which was rapidly excreted ( B) indicating good in vivo stability of
the compound on cells.
An interesting approach for surface labeling
was recently reported
by Lu et al., who used metabolic glycoengineering biosynthesis to
incorporate reactive groups on the surfaces of cells. Chemically modified
monosaccharides with non-natural functional groups have been shown
to hijack the glycosylation pathways in mammalian cells, leading to
the presentation of modified glycans on the surface. The authors used this methodology to incorporate azide-functionalized
oligosaccharides on the surface of CTLs by first pretreating them
with the monosaccharide Ac4ManNAz for 24 h to generate
azide groups, and then labeling with radioactive biorthogonal click
component [64Cu]Cu-NOTA-DBCO ( ). The cell
labeling was shown to be specific for the glycoengineered cells with
approximately three times higher LE for CTLs treated with the monosaccharide
than for untreated cells. Additionally, the cellular retention of
the bound [64Cu]Cu-NOTA-DBCO was high, with <20% efflux
of 64Cu after 48 h. While this method may be unnecessarily
complicated for direct cell labeling and tracking, glycoengineering
could be used as a basis for indirect cell labeling: azide-functionalized
cells could potentially be imaged longitudinally using bioorthogonal
tracers.
 
4.3.2.

## Antibody–Receptor
Binding
Although cell labeling with antibodies is usually
performed in vivo
(i.e., radiolabeled antibodies are administered intravenously to accumulate
on the target cells), it is also possible to directly label cells
with antibodies in vitro before infusing them ( B). Depending on the antibody and its target,
it may remain on the cell surface or be internalized. A useful review
covering the various parameters affecting the fate of antibodies in
vivo was recently written by Thomas and Balthasar. For example, one study using 64Cu- and 89Zr-labeled anti-CD45 antibodies (as TETA or DFO conjugates,
respectively) showed no internalization by human peripheral blood
stem cells (hPBSCs), and the higher cell labeling efficiency observed
with [89Zr]Zr-DFO-CD45 (2000-fold higher in terms of μCi/cell;%
LE not reported) compared with [64Cu]Cu-TETA-CD45. This
suggests the cell labeling was affected by the antibody-chelator conjugation
method. On the other hand, Griessinger
et al. reported the use of radiolabeled antibodies that could bind
to the surface receptors on T-cells and be internalized. The cell
labeling properties were compared with [64Cu]Cu-PTSM. The uptake of 64Cu-labeled internalizing
antibodies was found to be three-times lower than that of [64Cu]Cu-PTSM (∼14% and 46%, respectively). However, the radiolabel
retention with 64Cu-labeled internalizing antibodies was
superior with ∼74% retained activity after 48 h compared to
<10% for cells labeled with [64Cu]Cu-PTSM. This is likely due to the higher stability
of the [64Cu]Cu-DOTA complex compared to [64Cu]Cu-PTSM. Additionally, the internalized antibodies are mostly
sequestered within the endosomal/lysosomal compartment (see ), reducing
the availability of 64Cu for endogenous export mechanisms.
Despite this, the internalizing antibodies also caused a significant
reduction in cell viability with a ∼40% loss in cell viability
after 48 h at the lowest level of activity used, limiting the use
of this cell labeling method.

4.3.3.

## Lipid
Bilayer Intercalation
As
an alternative to attaching radiotracers to the surface of cells via
covalent bonds to proteins, carbohydrates, or receptor binding mechanisms,
direct cell labeling agents can be designed to intercalate into the
lipid bilayer of cell membranes ( C). An early example of this approach was
the compound 125I-PKH-95; a radioiodinated derivative of
the lipophilic optical dye PKH-26 ( E) developed in the early 1990s. It was hypothesized that the long alkyl chains
present on the compound would allow “anchoring” of the
complex into the cellular membrane. One study showed better cellular
retention of 125I-PKH-95 in macrophages compared with [111In]In-oxine. Similarly, a
study using a series of iodo-(dialkylaminostyryl)pyridinium dyes radiolabeled
with 125I/131I for the radiolabeling of leukocytes
showed that the compounds with longer alkyl chains (n = 8–10) were less efficient cell labeling agents than those
with dibutyl or dihexyl chains. The
suggested reason was the aqueous insolubility and possible micelle
formation, of the compounds with longer chains. The lead candidate1-[e-3-[1251]iodo-prop-2-enyl]-4-[4-(dihexylamino)styryl-pyridinium
([125I]I2P-di-6-ASP; E) was later taken forward and used by Albright
et al. to radiolabel splenocytes. One
potential drawback of using radiolabeled dyes that integrate into
membranes is their transfer to neighboring cells, leading to misleading
imaging signal. This has previously been shown to occur in vivo with
stem cells labeled with a variety of lipophilic fluorescent dyes,
including PKH26. Although this phenomenon,
to the best of our knowledge, has not been demonstrated with radioactive
analogues of these dyes, it is highly likely to occur as well. Similarly,
Kumar et al. described the radiolabeling of red blood cells using
a porphyrin-phospholipid conjugate (PoP). The porphyrin macrocycle ring allowed chelation with 64Cu ([64Cu]Cu-PoP; E) and hence the radiolabeling of RBCs and their imaging
with PET. Membrane exchange was shown to occur with nonradioactive
PoP in vitro when incubating unlabeled RBCs with RBCs labeled with
the porphyrin conjugate, although this was not tested on RBCs radiolabeled
with [64Cu]Cu-PoP. However, while in vivo, PET imaging
showed that radiolabeled RBCs had a distinct biodistribution from
the free [64Cu]Cu-PoP agent ( C), the circulation time of the labeled
RBCs was lower than expected, suggesting loss of the PoP agent in
vivo or low cell viability of the labeled RBCs. 
Alternative tracers for cell surface labeling include
hexadecyl-4-[18F]fluorobenzoate ([18F]HFB),
[64Cu]Cu-DOTA-hexadecylbenzoate ([64Cu]Cu-DOTA-HB),
and hexadecyl-4-124I-iodobenzoate ([124I]HIB)
( E). [18F]HFB allowed labeling of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) with
25% LE and >90% retention up to 4 h and
enabled the visualization of progenitor cells in the heart for up
to 4 h. [124I]HIB and [64Cu]Cu-DOTA-HB labeled cells showed moderate labeling efficiencies,
with high retention of activity for [124I]HIB (>90%
up
to 24 h). , Overall, tracers that label
the surface by noncovalent insertion into the cell membrane, such
as [18F]HFB and [124I]HIB, showed much higher
retention than the protein-binding N-succinimidyl-4-[18F]fluorobenzoate ([18F]SFB) and FDG. , [124I]HIB could also
image adipose-derived stem cells in the heart for 3–9 days, whereas FDG was rapidly taken up by neighboring
tissue. The mechanisms behind the difference in retention between
the cell surface labeling agents [18F]HFB/[124I]HIB and [18F]SFB were not explored, but it is possible
than protein-rich areas of the membrane (to which [18F]SFB
is more likely to bind) are more frequently recycled or that surface
protein-bound radiolabels are cleaved by extracellular proteases.
[18F]HFB was found to preferentially bind to disrupted
membrane fragments on dead cells over live intact cells. This could be a potential drawback for in vivo
cell tracking with this agent, as dead cells can have different biodistribution
profiles compared to live cells, leading to misinterpretation of the
images. In general, validation of the
membrane intercalation method for cell radiolabeling is still lacking.
Labeling efficiency is often either low or not reported and in vitro
cellular retention of the radiotracers over long periods of time (several
days) is not known. This, coupled with the potential issue of membrane
transfer with these compounds, may explain why this method has not
found widespread use compared with other labeling methods.

4.4.

## Other Small Molecule-Based Methods
As we
have previously discussed, small molecular weight compounds
can be used for the ex vivo radiolabeling of cells; either via the
passive transport across the membrane or by direct attachment to the
cell surface itself. However, other small molecules can be trafficked
into cells through passive or active transport mechanisms and converted
into hydrophilic forms via intracellular pathways reducing the ability
of the radionuclide to diffuse out of cells ( C). summarizes the various small-molecule-based direct
cell radiolabeling methods discussed in this section.
 One of the earliest
direct cell labeling methods was the use of
radioactive chromate ([51Cr]Na2CrO4; t1/2 = 27.7 d) for the labeling of
RBCs/erythrocytes, first reported in 1950, and used for the radiolabeling of leukocytes in 1955—but
not for imaging. While the exact mechanism
of cell labeling is not known, it has been shown that intracellular 51Cr is primarily in the 3+ oxidation state and bound to proteins, suggesting reduction of the chromate ion occurs
intracellularly. The chromic ion has been shown to bind to the β-globin
chain of intracellular hemoglobin in erythrocytes. However, it is likely the radiometal can bind to other
intracellular macromolecules as well. This mechanism may also depend
on cell type. For example, it was shown that leukocytes have a highly
specific transport mechanism for [51Cr]Na2CrO4, with uptake being reduced by the use of nonradioactive chromate
and metabolic inhibitors; other divalent anions only slightly inhibited
uptake. However, this cell labeling
method is not appropriate for in vivo cell tracking as 51Cr is not suitable for imaging because of the low gamma-ray yield
(10%, 0.32 MeV) emitted from the isotope and long half-life (27.7
d), leading to a significantly higher dose compared with other radionuclides.
A relatively simple method for cell labeling takes advantage of
the trapping mechanism of [18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose ([18F]FDG) used in the vast majority of clinical
PET scans. [18F]FDG is transported across the cell membrane
and into the cytoplasm via GLUT-1 transporters and is phosphorylated
within the cell by hexokinase to [18F]FDG-6-phosphate ( A). Hence, direct
cell labeling can be blocked by the presence of nonradioactive glucose. With a fluorine atom instead of a hydroxy group
on the second carbon, [18F]FDG-6-phosphate cannot be isomerized
and metabolized further and is trapped intracellularly. However, the
retention of 18F inside most leukocytes and stem cells
is poor, as [18F]FDG-6-P undergoes dephosphorylation back
to [18F]FDG, leading to the release of 20–40% of
the original activity within an hour. , , , , , This does not preclude the use
of direct cell tracking with [18F]FDG for in vivo imaging
applications within a short time frame—there have been several
clinical studies using [18F]FDG-labeled cells ( ), but this radiotracer has yet to see routine use
as a cell labeling agent. Furthermore, released [18F]FDG
is then taken up by neighboring tissue cells, leading to an artificial
increase in signal which is not a true reflection of the presence
of the administered cells ( ). This issue, along with low cellular retention of
[18F]FDG and the short half-life of 18F, likely
limits the use of this radiotracer for cell tracking despite its broad
availability in the clinic.
 An example of released [18F]FDG being taken up by neighboring
tissue was elegantly illustrated in a comparison with human endothelial
cells (HUVECs) labeled with 3′-deoxy-3′-L-[18F]-fluorothymidine ([18F]FLT; ). Uptake of [18F]F-FLT into
cells is proposed to occur via thymidine kinase 1 (TK1) activity.
[18F]F-FLT is converted through TK1 and other enzymes into
[18F]F-FLT-diphosphate and [18F]F-FLT-triphosphate,
which are then trapped inside the cell ( B). Additionally, [18F]FLT uptake
is dependent on the cell cycle, with higher activity during the S-phase
(DNA synthesis) during which the expression of thymidine kinase 1
(TK1) is increased. Consequently, uptake
is limited to actively dividing cells and [18F]FLT is less
likely to be incorporated by surrounding tissue ( ). 12% LE was achieved, and
the cellular retention of the radioactivity was shown to be ∼80%
up to 60 min. Radiolabeling had no apparent effect on cell viability,
proliferation, or structure. While cell labeling and tracking with
[18F]FLT clearly has advantages over [18F]FDG,
the method may be limited by the low labeling efficiency and the short
half-life of 18F.
A similar cell labeling method
was reported by Agger et al. with
the radiolabeled thymidine analogue 5-[124I]iodo-2′-deoxyuridine
([124I]IdU, B), which can be incorporated into DNA intracellularly
during DNA replication. No data on cellular
uptake or retention was reported in this study. However, using a DNA-binding
radiotracer for cell tracking purposes is a potentially risky strategy
due to the potential damage to DNA molecules (see ). Agger et al. reported cell
viability of 71–90% for OT-I spleen cells with little detail
on how this was measured. The authors showed that radiolabeled cells
had similar tumor accumulation to nonradiolabeled cells based on flow
cytometry analysis. However, no evaluation of DNA damage to radiolabeled
cells was carried out.
Finally, 123I-, 125I-, 11C-, and 18F-labeled sulfonamide derivatives
have been shown to specifically
radiolabel RBCs in vitro and in vivo by targeting carbonic anhydrase
II (CA II), a metalloenzyme expressed on RBCs. , − Although the radioiodine compounds were
tested in the clinic, there does not appear to have been widespread
use of this class of molecules for labeling of RBCs and use as blood
pool imaging agents.

4.5.

## Particle Uptake
Finally, while a
vast portion of the direct cell labeling literature focuses on small
molecules, larger compounds are capable of direct cell labeling. The
uptake of radioactive particles (colloids and nanoparticles; D) has also been
explored. While the size and shape of radiocolloids may vary greatly
between tens of nanometers to several micrometers, nanoparticle-based methods use particles with a generally
smaller and homogeneous size for radiolabeling. Additionally, nanoparticle
uptake into cells can be modified by the use of coatings and external
membrane permeabilizing agents. On the basis of these properties,
we will discuss colloids and nanoparticles in separate subsections.
4.5.1.

## Colloids
Radioactive colloids have
been known since the 1950s as effective direct cell radiolabeling
agents. Following the discovery that colloidal matter is quickly taken
up by phagocytic cells in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow after
systemic administration, pioneering work by Ganz et al. and Gosselin et al. using 198Au colloids demonstrated that this uptake was
mediated by phagocytosis. This was quickly identified as a useful
method to directly label cells for in vivo cell tracking using nuclear
imaging ( D).
After this early work using 198Au colloids, focus shifted
to 99mTc because of its excellent emission properties for
gamma imaging, and availability from benchtop generators. Gillespie
et al. first evaluated 99mTc radiolabeling of a series
of cells of mouse and human origin by in situ reduction of [99mTc]TcO4– using stannous chloride. The exact radiolabeling mechanism using this
methodology was not investigated, but it is highly likely that 99mTc incorporated into the cells via two mechanisms: (i) direct
binding of reduced forms of Tc (likely Tc5+ or Tc3+) to cell membrane components or (ii) by formation of Sn–Tc
colloids that [99mTc]TcO4– can form when being reduced with large amounts of stannous salts,
possibly assisted by the presence of Na2CrO4. Radiolabeling yields using this methodology were consistently high
and the authors demonstrated the ability of the labeled cells to synthesize
DNA. Interestingly, the presence on Na2CrO4 increased
cell labeling efficiency by ∼30%, allegedly by the pertechnetate
carrier effect of the chromate anion, although more experiments would
have been required to prove this is the case. Furthermore, they reported
in vivo cell tracking of murine cancer cells (murine fibrosarcoma
Sa I) for the first time, finding they distributed to the lungs, liver,
and spleen after intravenous administration. Ferrant et al. also used
this technique to radiolabel red blood cells and evaluated it in patients
for the first time in comparison with the then-standard method based
on 51Cr. 
White blood
cells (WBC) have also been radiolabeled using reduced 99mTc via Sn reduction, that as mentioned above is likely to
be mediated by 99mTc–Sn colloids. Being able to
image autologous WBCs is a useful method to diagnose infections/inflammation.
Linhart et al. explored this concept in vitro, showing radiolabeling
yields of 30% and satisfactory functional activity tests (e.g., chemotaxis)
postradiolabeling. Kelbaek et al. refined
this methodology for WBC radiolabeling, exploring different amounts
of Sn salts (SnF2 and SnP2O7), and
confirming retainment of cell function after radiolabeling. 
An important report in this area identified
the factors that control 99mTc WBC labeling by phagocytic
uptake of Tc–Sn colloids.
The size and shape of Tc–Sn colloids can vary greatly; , it was found that the most important factor for reproducibly labeling
WBCs using this technique was a mean particle
size of 2.1 μm. , Using 99mTc-SnF2, Puncher et al. used autoradiography of smears and frozen
sections of labeled cell suspensions to show that this colloid was
selective for neutrophils when radiolabeling leukocyte-rich plasma,
and that erythrocytes were the cell type most highly radiolabeled
when performing this procedure in whole blood. Interestingly, autoradiographs identified two distinct
labeling mechanisms: one that is stable and where the radioactivity
was diffuse and intracellular (predominant in neutrophils and monocytes)
and another one where the radioactive particles were weakly bound
at the cell membrane in localized spots (predominant in red blood
cells and lymphocytes). Additionally, they reported that the phagocytic
inhibitor cytochalasin B showed no effect on cell labeling of neutrophils
with SnF2 and 99mTc, suggesting phagocytosis
was not the mechanism of uptake. However, they noted the amounts used
may have only partly inhibited the phagocytosis, with the cells in
high excess compared to the labeling agent to still allow uptake. An interesting comparison between 99mTc-labeled leukocytes (via 99mTc-SnF2 colloids)
and 111In-labeled leukocytes (via [111In]In-oxine)
for imaging abdominal infection in patients was reported by Carter
et al. This study concluded that 99mTc-SnF2 colloid labeling of leukocytes compared
favorably to the ionophore-mediated [111In]In-oxine method,
particularly due to its simple and easily reproducible radiochemistry
that facilitates adoption and routine use of this technique. However,
work by Tsopelas et al. has observed that both 99mTc-SnF2 colloids and 99mTc-SnF2 colloid-labeled
leukocytes showed very similar biodistributions in rats (predominantly
in the liver and spleen). This similarity
in distribution makes it very difficult to distinguish cellular uptake
and free colloid distribution in vivo. Furthermore, the heterogeneity
of the SnF2 radiocolloid formation coupled with the uncertainty
of the mechanism of cell radiolabeling, compared with other radiolabeling
methods, limit the use of these compounds.

4.5.2.

## Nanoparticles
The clearance of
nanoparticles by phagocytic cells (e.g., macrophages) makes these cells good candidates for labeling
with radiolabeled nanoparticles ( and ). Internalization of nanoparticles by nonphagocytic
cells can also be induced, for example using a protamine sulfate-heparin
or with electroporation. Chitosan nanoparticles (CNs) have been reported
for direct cell labeling. CNs were directly labeled with both 64Cu and 89Zr without the need for a chelator, and
used to radiolabel human leukocytes. , The Cu2+ and Zr4+ ions likely bind to the amine and hydroxyl
groups abundantly present on the chitosan polymer. Uptake of the radiolabeled
particles was proposed to occur via phagocytosis. Using the same chitosan
polymer, 89Zr-CNs showed much higher uptake compared with
the 64Cu-CNs—∼70% and 25%, respectively—and
higher cellular retention was observed for 89Zr-CNs (53%
after 24 h), whereas almost all activity was lost from 64Cu-CN-labeled leukocytes after just 3 h.
 Son et al.
labeled red blood cell-derived exosome-mimetic vesicles
(RBC-EMVs) with 99mTc using the stannous chloride method.
The vesicles were then used to radiolabel WBCs. Uptake of 99mTc-RBC-EMVs was shown to be dose-
and time-dependent, and the incubation times (12–18 h) required
to reach maximum uptake levels in cells are too long for this method
to be clinically applicable.
Carboxymethylcellulose-based nanoparticles
were directly radiolabeled
with 68Ga3+ and, subsequently, used to radiolabel
WBCs. Labeling efficiencies of ∼16%
were achieved after 45 min, with low cellular retention (52% after
just 45 min) observed. These results indicate this approach may not
be the most favorable for this application.
Lee et al. reported
the radiolabeling of dendritic cells using
radiolabeled oligonucleotide-modified AuNPs. The AuNPs were reacted with a water-soluble Bolton–Hunter
reagent via free amines on adenine present in the oligonucleotides.
This allowed radiolabeling of the AuNPs with 125I or 124I ( A). Subsequently, an additional Au shell was formed on the radiolabeled
particles ( A). Cellular uptake of the AuNPs was found to be dose- and time-dependent,
with the peak of ∼40% LE being reached after 3 h. The cellular
retention of the AuNPs was good with ∼60% retention after 3
days with limited effect on the cell viability (>80% after 48 h)
suggesting
little cytotoxicity of the AuNPs. Interestingly, it was shown that
the additional gold shell was necessary for high cellular retention,
as radiolabeled AuNPs without the protective gold layer showed rapid
removal from dendritic cells (almost all radioactivity gone within
3 h). However, the requirement for this
additional shell formation step complicates the method and would likely
limit its clinical utility.
 Radiolabeled AuNPs have
also been used for direct cell labeling
of CAR T-cells. AuNPs were radiolabeled by the use of a DOTA-thioctic
acid bioconjugate ( B), which allowed attaching DOTA to the gold surface and radiolabeling
with 64Cu. The nonphagocytic
cells were labeled using an electroporation process, which increases
the permeability of cell membranes via pore formation by the application
of an electric field. Although electroporation
could be faster and enable the labeling of more cell types than endocytosis/phagocytosis
mechanisms, which can take several hours for AuNPs, this process severely impacts the viability of the cells. The authors subsequently reported the labeling
of CAR T-cells using 64Cu-labeled USPIONs. The commercial nanoparticles were preconjugated
with the chelator DOTA. To avoid the use of electroporation the authors
used DMSO as a membrane permeabilising agent to increase uptake of
the USPIONs. It was found that 3% DMSO allowed increased uptake of
nanoparticles into the CAR T-cells—with 50% LE achieved with
optimized conditions—but led to a reduction in the cell viability
compared to unlabeled controls.
Belderbos and collaborators
reported the use of radiolabeled superparamagnetic
nanoparticles consisting of a magnetite core (Fe3O4) embedded in an aluminum hydroxide shell (Fe3O4@Al(OH)3) for the tracking of mesenchymal stem
cells. , The aluminum hydroxide shell allows the
direct adsorption of [18F]F–. One major
drawback of this method is the instability of the 18F label
on the particles, which was demonstrated in vitro in serum, and in
vivo, where bone uptake was observed ( C). This was also seen for the radiolabeled
MSCs, albeit at lower levels. ADSCs
have also been radiolabeled using 111In-labeled SPIONs. After incubation with cells, histology and
TEM showed the nanoparticles were taken up intracellularly and were
present within the lysosomes. One drawback of this method was the
need for a long cell labeling time (16 h) which may limit its clinical
use. Nonetheless, cellular retention was high with ∼73% of
activity remaining in the ADSCs over 7 days, with no effect on cell
viability or cell function for up to 7 days. 
Yao et al. reported the labeling of bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSCs)
with cobalt protoporphyrin IX (CoPP)-loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticles
(CPMSNs) with a 125I-conjugated/spermine-modified dextran
polymer (125I-SD) as the shell (CPMSN@125I-SD), achieving 46% LE after 4 h and 60% after 8
h. Nanoparticles without the cationic coating had significantly lower
uptake (15% after 8 h). The CPMSNs were found to be unstable intracellularly
with the gradual release of Si and the porphyrin observed over time;
the effect of this on cellular retention of the 125I radiolabel
was not explored.
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) were
also used for cell
labeling, taking advantage of the ability
or MSNs to form stable coordination complexes with oxophilic radiometals
such as 68Ga and 89Zr, through deprotonated
Si–O– groups on their surface. The MSNs were also coated in lipofectamine
to increase cellular uptake. This allowed 95% LE of MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells for lipofectamine-coated 68Ga-labeled MSNs,
with only 20% LE for the uncoated MSNs. However, cellular efflux of 68Ga using this method was high, with nearly 50% of activity
released after 2 h, primarily as unchelated 68Ga. Larger amounts of 89Zr could be
incorporated into cells with the MSNs, likely due to the increased
oxophilicity of the Zr4+ ion, but with similar efflux to
the 68Ga-MSNs. This labeling method was highly efficient
and allowed the loading of a single breast cancer cell with enough
activity (∼70 Bq per cell) to allow the in vivo tracking of
a single cell using PET ( D) While the radiolabel stability and cell viability
of this method is not optimized for long-term in vivo cell tracking
for cell therapy applications, this study does highlight the beneficial
cell labeling properties of lipofectamine-coated MSNs.
Harmsen
et al. also used silica nanoparticles directly labeled
with 89Zr for cell labeling. Self-assembling nanocomplexes were formed by mixing 89Zr-labeled SiNPs with protamine and heparin, a cell labeling strategy
previously reported by Thu et al. using ferumoxytol. This heparin-protamine combination was also shown to allow
cell labeling with just the addition of neutralized [89Zr]Zr-oxalate by Pantin et al. The
authors labeled HPCs with the 89Zr-protamine-heparin complex.
Rapid efflux was observed, with <25% retained after 14 h. Harmsen
et al. demonstrated that the combination of SiNPs, heparin and protamine
facilitated endocytic uptake of the nanoparticles ( E). CAR T-cell LE with the
nanocomplexes was ∼83%, with both protamine and heparin necessary
for high LE, however no in vitro cellular retention data was reported.
No effect on cell viability was observed for up to 7 days. Notably,
the 89Zr-labeled SiNPs were shown to remain within CAR
T cells in vivo for about 1 week, after which they were progressively
released into the tumor tissue that the CAR T cells had surrounded. 
One potential drawback to the use of
nanoparticles as cell labeling
agents, in particular SPIONs, is the transfer of these labels from
administered cells to resident tissue macrophages. , While this phenomenon has not been reported with cells labeled with
radioactive nanoparticles, this highlights the need for ex vivo validation
that the radionuclide signal maintains its association with the original
cells (i.e., with FACS analysis or histology). 

5.

## Important Considerations
for Direct Cell Radiolabeling
In this section, we will describe
aspects that should be considered
when radiolabeling cells, including radiolabel retention, radiolabeling
conditions, dosimetry, radiotoxicity, and retention of cell functionality.
While some of these considerations are also applicable to indirect
cell radiolabeling or radiolabeling of molecules more generally, we
will address them mainly in the context of direct cell labeling.
5.1.

## The Cell Population: What Are We Labeling?
Cells used
for radiolabeling are often mixed populations of cells
rather than individual cell types, particularly for radiolabeled blood
cells. With mixed populations, in images obtained after injection
of radiolabeled cells, a non-negligible fraction of the signal may
arise from labeled cells that behave differently from the cells of
interest in terms of target organs and circulation time. The main
reason for using mixed cell populations is a technical limitation:
until the development of automated cell sorting instruments and antibody-coated
magnetic beads, the only way to separate blood cell populations was
by differential centrifugation, based on differences in densities
between cell types. The classical method involves centrifuging anticoagulated
blood mixed with a solution of methylcellulose and hydroxypropyl methylcellulose
to facilitate the sedimentation of erythrocytes, producing a supernatant
containing leukocytes, platelets, and plasma proteins—all of
which can be further separated by centrifugation at higher speeds.
Thus, from a healthy human it is possible to obtain a leukocyte preparation
containing 40–70% of granulocytes (primarily neutrophils, but
also non-negligible proportions of eosinophils and basophils), with
the remainder comprising of mononuclear cells (lymphocytes, monocytes,
NK cells, etc.), “residual” platelets, and erythrocytes
in proportions that may vary considerably in patients with infections
or hematological diseases. This crude separation method remains the
standard endorsed by nuclear medicine societies and allows the presence
of platelets and erythrocytes in numbers similar to the total leukocyte
numbers. , The use of discontinuous density
gradients can further separate granulocytes from mononuclear cells,
but this technique alone does not allow more precise separation, for
example of neutrophils from eosinophils or B cells from T cells. For
mixed cell populations, postlabeling cell separation using beads or flow cytometry can provide a higher level of homogeneity. In theory, flow-assisted
cell sorting could also measure differences in radiotracer uptake
between cells from a “pure” population but in different
states of activation or metabolic activity (e.g., at difference stages
of the cell cycle), provided a marker can be found to identify these
states. After radiolabeled cells have been administered to an animal,
the digestion of target organs into single-cell suspensions followed
by cell sorting and gamma-counting could also be used to assess the
retention of the radionuclide within the initially labeled population. 
The first clinical study of radiolabeled
leukocytes already acknowledged the issue of labeling mixed cell populations,
noting a much higher accumulation of radioactivity in the spleen of
patients injected with 111In-labeled cells containing large
numbers of erythrocytes compared to the patient who was administered
an erythrocyte-depleted preparation. The stannous pyrophosphate labeling method for 99mTc
suffers from the same drawback, as it efficiently labels residual
erythrocytes in WBC preparations. This
realization led early investigators in the field to evaluate the selectivity
of various radiotracers for leukocytes over erythrocytes, although
the radiotracers initially found to be the most efficient for cell
labeling were not selective. [111In]In-tropolone was found to label preferentially granulocytes over
erythrocytes. Evaluations of [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO for cell labeling showed it was selective for granulocytes, , , but in more detailed studies,
it was later found to label eosinophils 10 times more efficiently
than neutrophils, , meaning that a large fraction
of the 99mTc signal in a WBC scan could actually originate
largely from eosinophils, despite these cells being far less abundant
than neutrophils. With the use of bead-purified populations, eosinophils
kinetics in humans were later characterized and found to have notably different migration patterns from neutrophils (see ). It is therefore important to properly characterize
the cells that will be radiolabeled and, whenever possible, to use
pure cell populations. Even within supposedly homogeneous cell populations,
the distribution of the radiotracer is not always homogeneous (that
is, some cells may carry much greater load of radioactivity than others
that are otherwise identical). It should
also be kept in mind that the labeling efficiency with a given radiotracer
can vary considerably from one cell type to another, for example LE
values for [111In]In-oxine can exceed 85% for platelets,
neutrophils and lymphocytes, , , , whereas for stem cells the variability
is higher with reported values anywhere between 30–85%. , , − 
 
5.2.

## Radiotracer Retention and the Intracellular
Fate of Radionuclides
A second fundamental aspect of direct
cell radiolabeling is the retention of the radiotracer/radionuclide
inside or on the surface of the cells after quenching of the radiolabeling
step. This is of high importance because, unlike fluorescence or bioluminescence,
radioactivity cannot be switched off or selectively activated and
all radiotracer signal will be acquired by the detector whether it
originates within a cell or not. Consequently, it is difficult to
tell a priori from a PET or SPECT image whether the signal represents
live cells, damaged cells, radioactive cell debris or leaked radiotracer.
To mitigate this, several approaches should be taken in conjunction.
First, the radionuclide should ideally be fully retained by the cells
for the useful duration of the study. This includes considering the
physicochemical interactions of the radiotracer with the various cellular
constituents (receptors, membrane, intracellular proteins) and its
intracellular metabolism, but also ensuring that the amount of radiotracer
does not result in cell damage. Second, any unincorporated radiotracer
should be removed by washing the cells after incubation with the radiotracer
and before further use in vitro or in vivo, to ensure that at least
at the point of administration the radioactivity is fully associated
with the cells of interest. Finally, for in vivo experiments, the
typical distribution of the unincorporated radiotracer—and
for radiometal chelates, the distribution of both the intact radiotracer
and the free radiometal—should be known or established in advance.
Thus, signal originating from an organ known to accumulate a certain
radiotracer or radionuclide can sometimes be an indication of release
from the cells. For example, unchelated 64Cu has high uptake
in the liver; an organ in which administered radiolabeled cells will
often accumulate. Hence, when using imaging 64Cu-radiolabeled
cells, it may be difficult to distinguish signal from labeled cells
localized in the liver from signal originating from released 64Cu from cells. A summary of the typical distribution of radiometals
after intravenous administration can be found in the review by Man
et al. A notable caveat is that the chemical
form of the radionuclide released from the cells is rarely known.
5.2.1.

## Impact of Labeling Conditions on Radiotracer
Retention
Aside from the affinity of the radiotracer for
cells, several factors can affect the labeling efficiency and retention.
Although it is not within the scope of this Review to review cell
separation methods, it should be kept in mind that for blood cells
in particular, the separation technique can affect cell viability,
metabolism, and activation state, which can in turn affect the uptake
and retention of radiotracers. It is, therefore, important to ensure
the isolation and labeling conditions are suitable for each cell type.
Adjuvants can be used to facilitate labeling, for example an early
study showed that sodium chromate could “facilitate”
the entry of 99mTc into cells. Similarly, SnCl2 is often used with 99mTc.
Tin chloride reduces the technetium so that it can bind to cellular
components, but the indiscriminate nature of this reaction also means
that the presence of serum during labeling will reduce the labeling
efficiency. Stannous pyrophosphate and stannous fluoride were also
investigated but did not achieve high labeling efficiency of PMNs
with 99mTc. An early survey
of radiotracers determined that lipophilic radiotracers generally
had much higher labeling efficiencies than hydrophilic radiotracers
and that labeling in plasma-free conditions was often preferable to
the presence of plasma. Some metals,
such as gallium and indium, form stable complexes with transferrin; therefore, incomplete removal of transferrin
when isolating blood cells can reduce labeling efficiency with 67Ga-, 68Ga-, or 111In-based radiotracers.
The use of heparin as an anticoagulant required higher concentrations
of MPO or tropolone to label leukocytes with [111In]In-MPO
or [111In]In-tropolone than when using citrate. , By chelating metal ions found in plasma, citrate may reduce the
amount of ions that could compete with 111In for binding
to MPO or tropolone. While citrate is a commonly used anticoagulant,
excessive amounts of citrate can chelate cell-bound radiometals, such
as 111In, and reduce labeling efficiency. It is, therefore, important to wash cells before adding
the radiotracers to remove any contaminants, either endogenous or
used in the cell isolation process, that could compete with radiotracer
uptake by the cells. The stability of [111In]In-oxine in
granulocytes was shown to be low, as most of the oxine (measured by
UV spectrometry) was released from the cells in the first 10–15
min of the labeling process, whereas more than 99% of the 111In was retained by the cells 2 h after radiolabeling. After 15 min
of incubation, 80% of the 111In was found associated with
cytosolic proteins, but after 60 min, 40% of the 111In
was associated with nucleic material. Predictably, increasing the cell concentration during labeling resulted
in higher labeling efficiencies with [99mTc]Tc-oxine, [111In]In-oxine, [111In]In-MPO, [111In]In-tropolone,
and [18F]FDG. , , , , , Increasing the incubation time
moderately improved the labeling efficiency of [99mTc]Tc-oxine
in platelets from approximately 25% to 40% over 2 h but did not affect the labeling efficiency of [111In]In-oxine, [111In]In-MPO, and [111In]In-tropolone
in saline or Tyrode’s buffer, as the labeling efficiency reached
80–90% after only 5 min incubation. , Labeling efficiency with [99mTc]Tc-oxine was not affected
by temperature, whereas labeling at 4 °C was less efficient than
25 or 37 °C for [111In]In-oxine, [111In]In-MPO,
[111In]In-tropolone, and [18F]FDG. , , Similarly, labeling at 37 °C
was more efficient than at room temperature for [99mTc]Tc-SnF2 colloid, as expected for a radiotracer for which the uptake
relies on phagocytosis. The presence
of plasma proteins during the labeling step greatly reduced platelet
labeling efficiency with [99mTc]Tc-oxine, [111In]In-oxine, , , and to a lesser extent, in the case of [111In]In-tropolone, , whereas labeling efficiency of platelets with [111In]In-MPO
in the presence of plasma was high. , However,
increasing the neutrophil concentration to around 108/mL
when labeling with [111In]In-tropolone resulted in high
(>80%) labeling efficiencies even in 90% citrated plasma. 
The subject of labeling in plasma or
saline was investigated in
many early studies. Removing plasma is undesirable because it introduces
additional steps, takes longer and places cells in nonphysiological
conditions. Although this clearly affects labeling efficiency, consequences
for cell functionality after labeling are less clear. Isaka et al.
noted that platelets labeled with [111In]In-tropolone in
plasma had transiently higher accumulation in liver than platelets
labeled in saline. However, the difference disappeared around 60 min
after injection. Another study found
that platelet survival was lower when labeled in saline or Tyrode’s
buffer, compared to plasma, although distribution between organs 6
days after injection in rabbits was not significantly affected. It is likely that the issue of labeling in
saline or in plasma is highly dependent on the cell type, as some
cell types (in particular platelets and neutrophils) can very easily
become activated in response to mechanical stress or changes in pH
and temperature. Activation during labeling should be avoided, as
activated leukocytes have longer transit times in the lung vasculature
and this could potentially be mistaken for an underlying pathology. 
The amount of chelator can also influence
labeling efficiency.
For 111In, tropolone, oxine, and MPO concentrations of
20–400 μM were found to be optimal for platelet and leukocyte
labeling. , , , , , For [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO, the concentration of HMPAO did not
affect labeling efficiency. Presumably,
at lower concentrations the complex is insufficiently stable in solution
to label cells. At higher concentrations, the excess of ionophore
could compete with cellular components for the binding of 111In during the labeling, reducing transchelation on which intracellular
trapping depends, and [111In]In-tropolone may then diffuse
out of the cells. Finally, if a cell
labeling agent is taken up by an active mechanism (e.g., receptor
or transporter), the labeling medium should not contain the natural
substrate for that transporter. For example, the presence of glucose
or mannose in the labeling medium reduces the uptake of [18F]FDG by cells due to competition for glucose transporters. 

5.2.2.

## Intracellular Fate of
Radionuclides
The fate of the radionuclide once inside cells
affects both the retention
of the radionuclide and the radiobiological effects on the labeled
cells. It depends on the mechanism of entry, the chemical form in
which the radionuclide is found (e.g., released or bound to the ionophore
or chelator), and whether the radiotracer and radionuclide can be
metabolized by the cells. In this section we discuss the case where
radiolabeled cells remain viable and metabolically functional. The
toxicity of radionuclides to cells is described in , and for more detailed
descriptions of the physiological roles and intracellular trafficking
pathways of (radio)metals, we refer the reader to recent reviews. − 
Radiotracers that enter cells through endocytic mechanisms
will be found in endosomes and lysosomes, from which they may be released
into the cytoplasm. Endocytic mechanisms and metabolic processes vary
between cell types. Erythrocytes, for example, do not exhibit catabolic
activity. Much of the knowledge in this area originates from studies
of radiolabeled antibodies and metabolism of metals. For example,
receptor-mediated endocytosis of 111In- and 90Y-labeled antibodies resulted in high retention of the radionuclide
because of the lysosomal sequestration of radiolabeled amino acids, − whereas with iodinated antibodies the retention of radioiodine was
much lower. , , While the retention of radioiodine could be increased by treating
cells with metabolic inhibitors, , such treatments
may also alter cell function and should be considered carefully as
images obtained in these conditions may not accurately reflect the
physiological behavior of cells. The cellular retention of 124I after internalization of 124I-labeled gold nanoparticles
was significantly increased when the nanoparticles were protected
from deiodination by an additional gold shell. Internalizing antibodies labeled with 99mTc
have also led to the binding of 99mTc to cytosolic proteins
rather than lysosomal sequestration. Several radiometals used for cell labeling have similar chemical
properties to iron and, therefore, share some of its biological pathways.
Most mammalian cells acquire iron through transferrin-mediated endocytosis,
and manganese, indium, and gallium can also enter cells through this
route. The low pH in the endosomal and
lysosomal compartments causes the release of metals from transferrin.
In this compartment, Fe3+ and Mn3+ must be reduced
to Fe2+ and Mn2+ to be transported into the
cytosol by divalent metal transporters, such as DMT1, Zip14 and TRPML1
(see review by Byrne et al. ). However,
In3+ and Ga3+ are known not to be reduced and
transported into the cytosol by similar mechanisms, and it is unclear whether or not they can escape the lysosomal
compartment.
Radiolabeling agents that passively diffuse across
the cell membrane,
such as oxine or tropolone radiometal complexes, can bypass the endosomal
route to directly reach the cytoplasm and may also enter the nucleus.
From that point on, the retention depends on the existence of catabolic
pathways and efflux mechanisms. While iron and zinc are exported from
cells by ferroportin, gallium, copper, and manganese are not substrates
of this transporter. For [89Zr]Zr-oxine and [52Mn]Mn-oxine, large differences in labeling
efficiencies between cell types have been reported, with higher retention
of 89Zr compared to 52Mn. , Manganese is a cofactor for many enzymes, including arginase, glutamine
synthetase, and manganese superoxide dismutase. Manganese is shuttled
within cells by a number of transporter proteins and exported from
cells by ferroportin and SLC30A10 (see Annagiani and Tuschl ). In contrast, zirconium has no biological
role and few chemical similarities with other biological metals and is, therefore, more likely to remain trapped
inside the cells after dissociation from its chelator. Efflux of 89Zr from labeled cells, through currently unknown mechanisms,
is slow and is not a major impediment to imaging. , , Studies have shown that labeling cells with
[64Cu]Cu-tropolone and [64Cu]Cu-PTSM was followed
by a high efflux of 64Cu, , and this
could be partially prevented by adding a membrane-permeable compound
that is hydrolyzed intracellularly into a chelator with high affinity
for Cu2+, trapping the copper inside the cell. This further supports the hypothesis that biological
metals (and their radioactive isotopes) that are not tightly bound
to chelators when entering the cell can be used by the cell machinery.
Many fundamental processes are performed by copper-dependent enzymes,
such as superoxide dismutase, ceruloplasmin, cytochrome-c oxidase,
and tyrosinase, based on redox cycling between Cu(I) and Cu(II). There are many copper transport mechanisms
inside cells. For example, the export of copper from the lysosomes
into the cytosol is thought to be mediated by an interaction between
CTR1 and CTR2, and copper is loaded into secretory vesicles for cellular
export by the metallochaperone ATOX1 and the copper ATPases ATP7A
and ATP7B. It is likely that the low
retention of 64Cu in cell labeling studies is due to 64Cu entering these export pathways.
The lipophilicity
of [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO enables it to cross
cell membranes, after which it accumulates in organelles where it
is converted into hydrophilic species, possibly by glutathione and
other thiolated proteins, trapping 99mTc inside the cell. , Although the evidence for this mechanism is sparse, [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO has been used as an indicator of cellular redox status,
for example in the brain and in the lungs. , 

5.2.3.

## Methods to Determine the Localization of
the Radiolabel Inside Cells
The most common way of measuring
the activity of radiolabeled cells is to centrifuge cells and measure
the resulting pellet in a dose calibrator. However, this provides
only an average over the whole cell population, and no information
about the distribution of activity among cells of the population or
its localization on the surface or inside the cells. Intracellular
localization of the radionuclide is usually determined by cell fractionation,
where cells are lysed and separated into their main constituents (e.g.,
membrane, cytoplasmic, and nucleic fractions) by density gradient
centrifugation. Another method to determine the distribution of radioactivity
among a cell population or within individual cells is microautoradiography,
showing for example that [111In]In-oxine predominantly
localizes in the nucleus of leukocytes and that the colloidal radiopharmaceutical 99mTc-SnF2 preferentially labels neutrophils because it is taken up
through phagocytosis ( ). With a slightly lower spatial
resolution than microautoradiography but perhaps technically less
involved, the recent development of radioluminescence imaging has
enabled the determination of the fate of radiotracers inside living
cells, with a resolution of around 20–25 μm ( ). , , The uptake of [18F]FLT by actively dividing cells, explained by higher levels of thymidine
kinase 1 (TK1) expression during the S-phase, could be imaged at single-cell
level, and single-cell pharmacokinetic
analysis of [18F]FDG uptake was performed. Finally, mass spectrometry imaging techniques,
such as laser ablation inductively coupled mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS),
time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (Tof-SIMS), or NanoSIMS,
can be used to localize trace metals with high sensitivity and spatial
resolutions below 500 nm (see reviews by Wu et al., Witt et al. , ), although we have not found reports of these techniques being applied
to radiometals to date.
 

5.3.

## Radiobiology
and Toxicity
Ionizing
radiation can damage biomolecules directly due to the direct deposition
of low linear energy transfer (LET) radiation (e.g., photons) and
high LET radiation (e.g., neutrons, Auger electrons, protons, alpha-particles,
and heavy ions). With the radionuclides used for cell labeling, radiation-induced
damage originates mainly from Auger electrons, positrons, and secondary
electrons formed by Compton scattering of γ rays. Because of
the high penetrating power of γ rays, these secondary electrons
can be formed anywhere in the body, but cells closer to the source
will be more affected. Radiochemical
impurities, originating from daughter radionuclides or from side reactions
during production, are an additional source of damage. For example, 111In can contain the radioactive impurity 114mIn
(t1/2 = 49.5 d) which decays to 114In (t1/2 = 71.9 s), which in turn emits
high-energy (777 keV) β– particles. Auger
electrons are emitted by nuclei decaying through electron capture
or internal conversion. Although the energy of Auger electrons is
low (<25 keV), they have relatively high LET (1–20 keV/μm)
owing to their very short-range (≤100 nm) and can, therefore,
be highly damaging to cells if emitted in close proximity to radiosensitive
organelles, such as nuclear DNA or the cell membrane. However, radiation-induced damage to biomolecules
is predominantly indirect, occurring through the radiolysis of water.
The excessive and uncontrolled formation of hydroxyl and superoxide
radicals and other reactive oxygen species (ROS) and subsequently
formed reactive nitrogen species (RNS), can lead to protein oxidation
and nitrosylation, lipid peroxidation, and DNA damage. These result
in abnormal cell signaling, perturbed enzymatic activity, genetic
mutations, and cell death through increased apoptosis. For more detailed explanations of the biological
and biochemical effects of ionizing radiation and how to evaluate
DNA damage, we refer the reader to several reviews of the field. − Because most of the radiation-induced damage to cells involves ROS
and RNS, there is potential for antioxidants to be used as radioprotective
agents. These have mostly been evaluated in the context of external
X-ray irradiation and cancer radiotherapy, and we refer the reader
to a recent review by Smith et al. for
further details. To the best of our knowledge, radioprotective agents
are not currently used in conjunction with radiolabeled cells.
The literature on radiobiology in the context of cell tracking is
rather limited; studies investigating radiation-induced cell damage
mostly focus on radiotherapy or environmental exposure to ionizing
radiation. Overall, studies of cell radiolabeling suggest that the
toxicity is primarily due to radionuclide decay rather than chemical
toxicity of the ligand. , , , , The intracellular localization of the radionuclide has major implications
for its toxicity. Radiation damage from 99mTc and 111In is primarily caused by Auger electrons, , which have a very short-range (≪1 μm) and cause damage
to biomolecules in the immediate vicinity of the emitting radionuclide.
Therefore, radiolabeling agents that bring the radionuclide into close
proximity to the nucleus and mitochondria are more likely to cause
DNA damage, as shown with [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO. , Conversely, labeling agents that remain on the cell surface or within
the membrane are less likely to induce DNA damage. Unfortunately,
very few studies have compared the radiotoxicity of cell labeling
agents based on their subcellular location. In one example, toxicity
was slower to appear in stem cells incubated with 111In-labeled
nanoparticles than with [111In]In-oxine, presumably because
in the former case the 111In was more strongly bound to
the nanoparticles and therefore less available to diffuse into the
nucleus or mitochondria and bind other cellular components such as
DNA. 
Aside from radiotoxicity,
some chelators and impurities have also
been shown to be toxic. For example, tropolone and acetylacetone have
been shown to reduce neutrophil chemotaxis and phagocytosis, , , whereas for oxine the effects
on chemotaxis have been inconsistent between studies. , , One study found radiolabels such
as [111In]In-oxine to be equally toxic to cells even after
complete decay, suggesting the existence of additional cytotoxic mechanisms. When labeling with 111In, impurities
such as Cd2+ can also be transported into the cells and
have toxic effects. , Differences in cell types and
uncertainties around the quantity and purity of ionophores could account
for discrepancies between the various studies.
In addition to
the toxicity of the radiotracer to the labeled cells,
the radiation dose to the rest of the body is an important factor
to consider. Nonradiolabeled cells can be damaged by the emissions
of nearby labeled cells, but also through biological signals (e.g.,
ROS, proinflammatory cytokines and other stress-associated molecules)
released by radiolabeled cells. While
an extensive discussion of the dosimetry of different radiolabeled
cells is beyond the scope of this review, a few key points deserve
mention. To date, clinical applications of radiolabeled cells have
mostly involved intravenous delivery. As we describe further in this
review, cells administered intravenously follow a general pattern
of transient trapping in the lung circulation, typically for a few
hours, followed by migration to a large extent in the liver, spleen,
or bone marrow depending on the cell type. The lungs, liver, spleen,
and bone marrow are, therefore, the main organs at risk from radiation
delivered by radiolabeled cells. − For red blood cells,
although labeling with 51Cr resulted in higher RBC viability
than labeling with 99mTc (using SnCl2; 83% for 51Cr vs 67% for 99mTc after 24 h) or [111In]In-oxine (94% for 51Cr vs 85% for 111In
after 24 h), the high radiation dose to the spleen associated with
the use of 51Cr and the improved imaging offered by 99mTc and 111In were strong arguments in favor of
the latter radionuclides. After 111In labeling, 114mIn and 114In have
been shown to contribute up to 10% (for radiolabeled leukocytes) and
even 33% (for radiolabeled erythrocytes) of the absorbed dose to the
spleen. There is much less dosimetry
data available for more recent radionuclides, such as 64Cu or 89Zr in the context of cell therapies, mainly because
this type of imaging has rarely been performed in patients and preclinical
studies are often proof-of-concept, tracer validation studies. For 89Zr-labeled cells, a recent study of NK cells in rhesus macaques
has suggested that administered activities up to 1.1 MBq/kg body weight
would be safe in humans, which is well above the amount required to
obtain good quality PET/CT images. This
bodes well for human application. In this study, deferoxamine (DFO)
was infused to rhesus macaques to chelate and accelerate the urinary
elimination of extracellular 89Zr, resulting in images
with better contrast and a lower radiation dose to the subjects, an approach that could easily be translated
clinically. Patient safety will also greatly benefit from technological
improvements, such as total-body PET scanners, as the expected 40-fold
increase in sensitivity , , will allow significant reductions in the amount of activity used
for radiolabeling.

5.4.

## Functionality of Radiolabeled
Cells
Ideally, radiolabeling cells should not affect their
viability and
functionality. This is fundamental for a radiolabeled cell to provide
an image that is representative of the biological process studied.
The direct labeling of cells typically involves multiple washing steps
with centrifugation and pipetting, particularly in the case of blood
cells if a density gradient separation method is used. The repeated
manipulation steps can reduce cell viability and functionality or
lead to cellular activation, independently of the radiotracer used.
It is important, therefore, to use cell isolation methods that are
as gentle as possible. An illustration of this issue was given by
Dewanjee et al. showing that platelet
aggregability was far more affected by the isolation process than
by the actual radiolabeling. A common test to evaluate the functionality
of radiolabeled neutrophils after administration in patients is to
measure the percentage of cell-bound activity in the blood shortly
(approximately 45 min) after infusion, as cells damaged or activated
during the labeling process will more rapidly accumulate in the lungs,
liver, and spleen. 
A related question
with direct practical implications is how many cells to radiolabel?
For WBC labeling in the clinic, the standard practice is to isolate
WBCs from 50 to 60 mL of the patient’s blood and radiolabel
however many cells are obtained, as long as the ratios of RBCs and
platelets to WBCs are within acceptable limits, with an amount of
radiotracer (e.g., 20–37 MBq for [111In]In-oxine,
600–1000 MBq for [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO) that is usually
not adjusted for cell numbers or patient weight. , Given the high inter- and intraindividual variability in circulating
leukocyte numbers (depending for example on infection/allergy status),
this results in considerable variability in terms of activity-per-cell.
In some patients, for example, in neutropenia cases, it can also be
difficult to obtain a sufficient number of cells, which will in turn
affect labeling efficiency. For cell therapies in the clinic, the
number of administered cells is better controlled and based on patient
weight. To avoid damaging precious therapeutic cells, it is common
to radiolabel only a fraction of the administered cells, , − which will have higher activity-per-cell
than if the entire amount had been radiolabeled and therefore may
suffer from radiation-induced damage. In a preclinical setting, this
fractionated approach is not always possible because the total number
of cells that can be injected safely in a small animal is significantly
lower. In summary, radiolabeling of cell therapies needs to satisfy
multiple independent requirements guided by very different considerations:
the total number of cells to administer is determined by the biological
properties of the cell therapy product and by patient safety/efficacy
considerations; the total activity to use depends on the chosen radionuclide,
the desired time scale for imaging, the sensitivity of the scanner
and the expected number of cells at the target location. Linking these
parameters is the radiobiology aspect that imposes further constraints.
In other words, for in vivo cell tracking, a balance needs to be struck
between image quality, toxicity to the radiolabeled cells, and whole-body
dosimetry. An excessive amount of radiotracer in the cells might lead
to premature cell death or loss of critical functionality, such as
chemotaxis or proliferative abilities. The resulting image may offer
a good contrast but may be biologically and medically irrelevant.
On the contrary, cells labeled with an insufficient amount of radiotracer
may retain full functionality, but this may result in count rates
too low for meaningful imaging–and therefore unnecessary exposure
of the subject to ionizing radiation and waste of resources. If the
number of cells to be administered is large, the amount of radioactivity
per cell may not adversely affect the radiolabeled cells, but the
total administered dose should also remain within safe limits for
the organs in which the cells will accumulate.
Not all cell
types are equally affected by radiolabeling. Lymphocytes
are known to be particularly sensitive to radiolabeling. For 111In, activities of around 5–10 kBq/106 cells
were found to be “safe” (i.e., survivable) for lymphocytes , − and hepatocytes, whereas activities
higher than 20–30 kBq/106 cells may be sufficient
to adversely affect cell trafficking. , , , For 99mTc, activities of 100 kBq/106 cells led to the appearance
of numerous micronuclei in lymphocytes. Illustrating the difference between cell types, human embryonic
stem cells labeled with [64Cu]Cu-PTSM remained capable
of proliferating with up to 74 kBq/106 cells, whereas HeLa cells proliferated unhindered
with up to 185 kBq of 111In bound per million cells. Similarly, mesenchymal stem cells labeled with
up to 140 kBq/106 cells remained viable and able to produce
cardiac myosin for up to 14 days. Some
studies have reported that even higher activities per cell were achievable;
for example, the viability and chemotaxis of endothelial progenitor
cells were not affected up to 4 days after labeling with 10 MBq/106 cells of [111In]In-oxine, whereas the same functions in hematopoietic progenitor cells were
significantly affected 24–48 h after radiolabeling. However, it was also shown that the toxicity
of [111In]In-oxine and [89Zr]Zr-oxine may only
become apparent after 2–5 days. , , , Yoon et al. showed
that the proliferation of MSCs over 14 days was significantly inhibited,
but not abolished, by 111In at 38 MBq/106 cells,
although this effect was not visible in the first 24 h following labeling. The toxicity of [18F]HFB on cardiac
progenitor cells was only apparent 24 h after labeling, despite the
short half-life of 18F. Stem
cells labeled with [18F]FDG also showed only transient
decreases in proliferation ability, which normalized 4 days after
labeling. These studies illustrate how
functional assays for radiolabeled cells should be performed on a
time scale that is relevant both to the cell type and the radionuclide
used and that simple viability assays immediately after radiolabeling
are not sufficiently reliable indicators. Furthermore, nonuniform
uptake by cells could also confound the reliability of viability and
functional assays because cells that are more heavily labeled than
the average are more likely to have damaged function and contribute
disproportionately more to the signal.
Furthermore, not all
cell functions are equally affected by radiolabeling.
For example, chemotaxis of neutrophils radiolabeled with [111In]In-oxine and [111In]In-tropolone was more affected
than phagocytosis. The motility of dendritic
cells was not affected by labeling with [111In]In-oxine
(11–74 kBq/106 cells) or [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO
(1.85–18.5 MBq/106 cells), nor was their phenotype affected by labeling with [89Zr]Zr-oxine (90–110 kBq/106 cells). Antitumoral T-cells and stem cells radiolabeled
with relatively high activities of 89Zr (150–300
kBq/106 cells) were still capable of killing tumor cells, , , whereas their ability to proliferate
was severely curtailed at much lower activities. , Another study found that [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO (1.5 MBq/106 cells), [111In]In-oxine (135–180 kBq/106 cells), and [18F]FDG (120–160 kBq/106 cells) inhibited T cell proliferation without affecting their
immediate viability, but at those levels of activity, the [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO-labeled cells retained their cytotoxic abilities whereas
the [111In]In-oxine- and [18F]FDG-labeled cells
did not. The implication for lymphocytes
is that short-term tracking (up to 24–48 h) that does not rely
on cell proliferation can be performed with higher amounts of activity
than longer-term tracking, for which it will be crucial to reduce
the amount of activity per cell; total-body PET will come into its
own in this situation.
To assess cell viability after radiolabeling,
standard viability
assays using Trypan blue or annexin V/propidium iodide or other viability
markers can be employed, in combination with a light microscope, an
automated cell counter or a flow cytometer. The general principle
of these assays is that the membrane of healthy cells is impermeable
to the dye, whereas the membrane of a dead or dying cell will allow
the dye to permeate through. Thus, a simple microscopic analysis can
distinguish between colorless, live cells and stained dead or dying
cells. Annexin V further allows the detection of apoptotic cells as
it binds to phosphatidylserine residues which are normally present
on the cytoplasmic side of cell membrane but are exposed outwardly
during apoptosis.
Cell functionality assays will depend on the
cell type and the
main function that is expected from the cell population. For neutrophils
and eosinophils, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, ROS production, or granule-release
assays can be used. , More recently, measuring HMGB1,
an endogenous marker of cellular damage, has been suggested. For lymphocytes, cytokine secretion (e.g.,
IFNγ for CD4 or CD8 T cells, IL-10 for Tregs), phenotyping and
proliferation assays are typically desirable. In the case of cytotoxic
T cells, a cell killing assay performed with the radiolabeled T cells
against the target cells is highly recommended. It is also recommended
not to limit such studies to a single stimulus. For example, proliferation
of radiolabeled lymphocytes was affected differently depending on
the stimulus used. For stem cells, proliferation,
metabolic activity and differentiation assays can be performed. , For platelets, aggregation and degranulation assays can be used
to assess function. In clinical practice, however, priority is given
to administering the labeled cells to the patient without delay and
functionality and viability tests are too time-consuming to be performed
for each patient. The tests are, therefore, mostly performed during
the method development and validation stages, and later at regular
intervals. For radiolabeled WBC, in routine use a simple visual inspection
of the sample is typically performed to check for the absence of clumps
that would indicate leukocyte activation. , 
Finally, radiolabeling cells is itself a method of assessing
their
viability that has been employed for decades, using for example the
uptake of tritiated amino acids. By
measuring the amount of tracer taken up, the protein metabolism of
cells can be evaluated. Alternatively, cells can be labeled with 51Cr, which is released upon cell death. This method has been
used, for example, for the in vitro evaluation of T cell toxicity,
where the target tumor cells were radiolabeled. , 

6.

## Applications and Clinical Translation of Cell
Tracking
Cell tracking is based on the unique migratory capabilities
of
each cell type. It is worth repeating here the importance of properly
characterizing the cell population to be radiolabeled or at the very
least being aware of the caveats of radiolabeling mixed cell populations.
The applications of radiolabeled cells can be broadly divided into
diagnostic and therapeutic categories. In diagnostic imaging, a subset
of patient cells, usually select populations of circulating blood
cells, are extracted, radiolabeled, and infused into the same patient
to determine their trafficking dynamics as a sign of normal or abnormal
physiological function. This includes for example the labeling of
red blood cells to determine their rate of splenic destruction, or
the use of white blood cells to localize infection sites. Therapeutic
applications encompass the use of radiolabeled cells as a means of
tracking the engraftment of therapeutic cells, such as stem cells
for regenerative medicine or tumor-killing cells in oncology, to potentially
predict therapeutic efficacy or the appearance of adverse effects.
Therapeutic cells may originate from a different donor (heterologous)
to the recipient or from the same donor (autologous), usually after
ex vivo expansion or genetic modification. Some of the more recent
studies have also combined the administration of radiolabeled cells
with pharmacological interventions, for example, inhibitors of specific
signaling pathways or tumor-sensitizing agents, showing how these
compounds can affect cell trafficking to and from various organs. summarizes the clinical
uses of direct cell labeling and tracking to date.
 With technological improvements,
the quality of information has
also vastly improved. Studies performed by scintigraphy or early SPECT
imaging provided only qualitative or semiquantitative evaluations
of cell trafficking. Modern SPECT reconstruction algorithms and PET
imaging now allow more precise quantification of cell numbers in organs,
detection of very low cells numbers (around 104 cells , , ) and much more accurate localization
of administered cells.
6.1.

## Infection/Inflammation
Along with
RBC labeling, WBC labeling for infection imaging was one of the first
applications of cell tracking, starting with the clinical studies
by McAfee, Segal, and Thakur. , Neutrophils are first-responder
cells, rapidly recruited from circulation to sites of infection and
inflammation. The release of pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) from those
sites drives the activation of the immune system. Local activation
of monocytes and macrophages by PAMPs amplifies the immune response
by releasing chemotactic factors that attract and guide neutrophils
toward the injury or pathogen. This biological process underpins the
use of radiolabeled WBC as infection imaging agents.
A meta-analysis
of leukocyte imaging studies to diagnose osteomyelitis of the diabetic
foot found that [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO-WBC scintigraphy had 91%
sensitivity and 92% specificity, comparable to [18F]FDG-PET/CT
(NB: not 18F-labeled WBC), whereas [111In]In-oxine-WBC
scintigraphy had a sensitivity of 92% and a specificity of 75%. For prosthetic joint infections, sensitivity
and specificity of radiolabeled leukocytes are around 85% for scintigraphy
and SPECT, increasing to 90–95% with SPECT/CT. For spondylodiscitis, radiolabeled WBC have
not shown satisfactory results. For
cardiovascular implant-related infections, the sensitivity of [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO-WBC SPECT/CT was 90–94% and the specificity
close to 100%. , Examples of these applications
are shown in . Other indications for which radiolabeled leukocytes are clinically
relevant include central nervous system infections, infective endocarditis,
inflammatory bowel diseases and fevers of unknown origin. Overall, [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO and [111In]In-oxine have been found to be equivalent from a clinical
perspective, and it is generally the
availability of either radiolabeling agent that is the determining
factor. [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO has been the main agent to radiolabel
leukocytes in Europe since the commercial discontinuation of [111In]In-oxine in 2014. A number of preclinical , , and clinical − studies have investigated the use of [18F]FDG for labeling
leukocytes, but the poor intracellular retention of 18F
after [18F]FDG labeling and the additional cost compared
to standard [18F]FDG PET/CT seems to have prevented routine
use in this indication despite the wide availability of this PET radiotracer.
In preclinical models, 64Cu has been explored as an alternative
option to label WBC for PET imaging, , but the in
vitro retention of 64Cu was lower than 111In
and preclinical studies showed high background signal in the abdominal
region. The limited availability of 64Cu is also an impediment
to its widespread use and clinical translation. More recently, [89Zr]Zr-oxine has emerged as a potential candidate for PET
imaging of WBC, , but no clinical results have
been reported to date.
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an inflammatory
disease of the lungs primarily driven by neutrophils. Radiolabeled
leukocytes have been found in higher numbers in the lung parenchyma
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients compared
to healthy nonsmokers, and longer transit
times in the lungs of patients with acute COPD compared to stable
COPD. Experimental administration of
bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in healthy volunteers also resulted
in increased accumulation of neutrophils compared to control individuals (see ), in line with the observation that primed (preactivated)
neutrophils had longer transit times in the lungs. , On the other hand, asthma is often characterized by eosinophilic
inflammation of the lungs, which can be observed with radiolabeled
purified eosinophils (see ). In asthmatic patients,
eosinophil clearance from the lungs was delayed in subjects challenged
with an allergen compared to nonchallenged subjects and subjects treated
with inhaled corticosteroids prior to challenge. Eosinophil uptake in the lungs was also increased in obese
asthmatic patients compared to nonobese asthmatic subjects. Such studies suggest that nuclear imaging of
neutrophils and eosinophils could be a useful, noninvasive way of
monitoring the effects of novel treatments for COPD and asthma. Radiolabeled
platelets have also been used to show the recruitment of platelets
into the lung airspaces in acute lung inflammation in mice. 
 
6.2.

## Cardiovascular
Function
The labeling
of red blood cells (RBCs) with 51Cr was one of the earliest
applications of direct cell labeling and has been the gold standard
method for measuring transfusion recovery for nearly 50 years. 51Cr is not suitable for imaging,
and imaging-compatible alternatives to this method include the use
of 99mTc (for in vivo labeling of RBCs with stannous chloride)
or 111In-labeled RBCs. The lower retention of 99mTc is a source of error in these measurements and thus would favor
the use of 111In, , but the wider availability
of 99mTc and the overall simpler procedure of in vivo RBC
labeling has made the latter the more common approach. Radiolabeled
RBCs allow blood pool imaging, which is a useful technique to evaluate
cardiac function, measure regional blood
volume in the brain, and detect hemangiomas , and gastrointestinal bleeding ( A), although it
has progressively been replaced in some of these roles by nonradioactive
techniques such as Doppler ultrasonography or MRI. Heat-damaged RBCs
are also used for spleen imaging ( B-E). [68Ga]Ga-oxine was recently
evaluated in the clinic for the labeling of heat-denatured RBC, helping
to identify a benign splenic nodule that could otherwise have been
mistaken for a metastatic lesion. 
 A few preclinical studies have
recently explored the labeling of
RBCs with [18F]FDG. RBCs are well suited for [18F]FDG labeling as they have high expression of the GLUT1 transporter.
Overall, preclinical studies have shown that [18F]FDG has
good uptake in RBCs compared to other cell types and encouraging imaging
performance for use in blood pool imaging. − One study showed the possibility of performing in vivo 18F-labeling of RBCs using 4-(2-[18F]fluoroethoxy)benzenesulfonamide,
with good agreement between PET and MRI measurements of heart function, but no further development appears to have
taken place. Surface-labeling of RBCs with 18F has been
used to detect small areas of intracranial hemorrhage. Other candidates for PET imaging of RBCs include
oxine complexes of 64Cu and 89Zr. , 
Radiolabeled platelets have previously been used clinically
for
thrombus imaging, for example to detect deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary
embolism, again mostly with [111In]In-oxine, [111In]In-tropolone, and [99mTc]Tc-HMPAO. − , However, the relatively slow
accumulation of platelets at the target site and interference by anticoagulant
agents limit the utility of the procedure.
Radiolabeling platelets is, as for erythrocytes, also a method to
evaluate their recovery and survival after transfusion. 
[111In]In-oxine-labeled monocytes
have been used preclinically
to investigate atherosclerosis, showing that the specific accumulation
of monocytes in large atherosclerotic lesions in the aortas of apolipoprotein
E-deficient mice, best imaged 5 days after administration, was reduced
after treatment with statins. It is often
highlighted that nuclear medicine techniques have the advantage of
using very small amounts of tracer and thus minimize the risk of disturbing
the observed system. In this case, however, the number of radiolabeled
cells administered exceeded the number of constitutively circulating
monocytes, effectively pushing the system outside of physiological
conditions.

6.3.

## Auto-Immune Diseases, Transplantations,
and
Stem Cell Grafts
Imaging the engraftment of stem cells has
been a major field of application of direct cell radiolabeling. The
variable success rate of stem cell therapies in clinical trials has
been rationalized by unknown factors such as the degree of engraftment
of administered cells. However, only imaging can localize and quantify
this. Therefore, determining how many cells actually remain and proliferate
in the target organ could potentially predict the success of the intervention
in patients. 
Allogeneic hepatocyte
transplantation is an alternative to orthotopic liver transplantation
for severe liver diseases, but evaluation of cell engraftment after
transplantation is challenging. In the
clinic, hepatocytes administered through the portal vein remained
in the liver for at least 1–5 days. , In contrast, intravenously administered mesenchymal stem cells transited
through the lungs before reaching the liver and to a larger extent
the spleen, although advanced cirrhosis accompanied by splenomegaly
in patients may have skewed the distribution toward the spleen. Preclinically, microautoradiography and scintigraphy
were used to show that intrasplenically transplanted [111In]In-oxine-labeled hepatocytes translocated from the vascular spaces
of the spleen to hepatic veins. 
Several studies have used cells labeled with 18F, 64Cu, 124I, 111In, or 99mTc,
for example endothelial progenitor cells, hematopoietic progenitor
cells and mesenchymal stem cells, in animal models of myocardial infarction, − , , , , , , , , , − as well as patients. , , , While the majority of the cells accumulated transiently in the lungs,
then in the liver and spleen, engraftment in the heart was usually
observed after intracoronary, intraventricular, or intramyocardial
delivery ( ). , , , , , , − , , , , In contrast, stem cell engraftment in infarcted tissue after intravenous
delivery has been more variable. Some reported little or no accumulation
in the heart, , , whereas others did observe engraftment in the heart after intravenous
delivery. , The results appear to differ depending on
the species, the exact type of cell, the amount of activity used for
labeling and the chelator used in the radiotracer. Short-term distribution
of stem cells appears to depend mainly on the injection route, as
demonstrated in a recent comparison of [18F]FDG-labeled
stem cells in mice, rats, rabbits, and nonhuman primates. Unsurprisingly, the hypoxic environment of
infarcted tissue is not favorable to cell engraftment, as shown by
the much shorter persistence of radiolabeled cells compared to healthy
tissue. 
 Additionally, the number of engrafted cells was
low even in the
more successful studies, in some cases detecting as few as 104 cells. , , This type of information could only be obtained through imaging,
further highlighting the advantages of quantitative and highly sensitive
nuclear imaging methods over MRI. The relative tolerance of MSCs to
high radiolabeling activities , , is an additional benefit, as small numbers of cells can easily be
visualized, and the total administered dose to the patients can remain
low. The more recent preclinical studies using PET have shown not
only the degree of uptake of stem cells but their distribution within
the target organ; some have used additional
reporting modalities to evaluate their viability. Differentiated kidney lineage cells labeled with [64Cu]Cu-PTSM and implanted in fetal monkeys were observed to
remain at the site of injection for up to 3 days. There was significant loss of signal on the third day,
presumably due to a loss of cell viability, but it is unclear whether
this decline was caused by the radiolabeling. It is expected that
the use of longer-lived PET radionuclides, such as 89Zr,
will allow such studies to extend several days or weeks after administration.
One of the longest imaging studies to date showed that following intravenous
administration, 89Zr-labeled endothelial progenitor cells
accumulated significantly more in the lungs of rats with pulmonary
arterial hypertension compared to control rats for over 10 days, and
that this occurred after the initial lung sequestration of cells had
subsided. One strategy to promote the
survival of stem cells implanted in ischemic sites is to protect them
from oxidative stress. For example, Yao et al. labeled stem cells
with silica nanoparticles loaded with cobalt protoporphyrin IX as
an antioxidant agent. The nanoparticles were additionally labeled
with 125I, allowing the tracking of stem cells in ischemic
mouse brains over 7 days and revealing their migration toward the
ischemic areas. In this case, the cobalt
protoporphyrin also served as a photoacoustic imaging agent ( F−H).
Hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells have also been used in
bone marrow transplantation and bone fracture models ( ), where PET imaging showed
that pharmacological modulation of the CXCR4 signaling pathway could
affect the homing of intravenously administered 89Zr-labeled
cells to the bone marrow. , These studies further
demonstrate that radiolabeling of cells is a powerful technique to
study the impact of pharmacological interventions on cell trafficking
between organs and would merit more frequent usage.
 Aside from the persistence of
cells at the site of engraftment,
PET imaging has also been used to optimize the injection technique.
Image-guided surgical placement of catheters is usually done with
ultrasound imaging or MRI. One study used PET and 89Zr-labeled
hematopoietic progenitor cells to demonstrate that the standard intrabone
delivery performed by hand via two distinct injection sites led to
leakage of cells from the first site during the second injection,
evidenced by diffuse activity surrounding the initial injection site
and in the lungs, which did not occur after a single injection with
a precisely controlled infusion rate. However, a follow-up study in rhesus macaques showed that even this
optimized intrabone delivery of hematopoietic progenitor cells was
less beneficial than the much simpler intravenous administration. Bone-marrow derived MSCs were also imaged in
the brains of rats with traumatic brain injury. Finally, radiolabeled leukocytes have been used preclinically
to evaluate graft rejection as an alternative to biopsies, , , − showing for example that 18F-labeled lymphocytes could
distinguish between allograft rejection and other causes of organ-specific
toxicity. 
The success of stem
cell therapies depends on their long-term engraftment.
This is a major limitation of direct cell labeling, as cells cannot
be relabeled after administration. Cell tracking after direct labeling
is therefore limited by the half-life of the radionuclide and will
only inform on early engraftment, particularly if 18F is
used. Indeed, in several studies differences in engraftment at later
time points were revealed by histological methods. , , For longer-term, noninvasive
tracking, reporter gene imaging strategies or stem cell-specific tracers
that can be administered repeatedly, such as antibodies, should be
investigated.

6.4.

## Cancer Immunotherapies
Recent developments
in cell therapies in the field of oncology, and particularly the emergence
and recent clinical approvals of CAR T cell therapies, have led to
an increased interest in the use of nuclear imaging to track such
cells in the past decade. This recent surge, however, builds on work
done over more than 40 years. Before the advent of genetically engineered
cells, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and lymphokine-activated
killer (LAK) cells were considered promising therapies, and it is
now established that the immunological profile of TILs, i.e. the relative
proportions of infiltrating cell subpopulations (e.g., CD8+, CD4+, γδ cells, Tregs, B cells, NK cells)
affects the clinical outcome. , Therefore, tools to
assess whether adoptively transferred cells reach their target are
required. Clinical studies using 111In-labeled TILs or
DC-stimulated tumor antigen-specific T cells in melanoma patients
showed that administered cells accumulate in the lungs, liver and
spleen in the first 24 h after infusion. Cells trapped in the lungs
were then mostly released into the circulation and accumulated in
tumors over the following days. , , While the uptake of lymphocytes in tumors is dependent
on the presence of their cognate antigens on tumor cells, the pattern
of transient trapping in the lungs and durable uptake in the liver
and spleen is commonly observed in clinical studies using intravenously
administered radiolabeled lymphocytes. , , , , , − 111In-labeled γδ-T cells were observed to
accumulate in tumors in patients a few hours after administration,
although patient numbers were too limited to draw further conclusions. Bernhard et al. show images from a patient
in which 111In-labeled HER2-specific T cells were unable
to penetrate liver metastases because of the barrier of stromal cells
surrounding the tumor. In the case of
macrophage activated killer (MAK) cells, uptake of 111In
and 18F-labeled MAKs at the tumor site was observed in
approximately half of the patients, after either intravenous or intraperitoneal
administration ( ).
 The same pattern of lung trapping followed by high uptake in the
liver and spleen was observed in preclinical studies. , , , , It was established using fluorescence
2-photon microscopy that activated T cells are larger and more elongated
than naïve cells, and their size slows them down as they pass
through pulmonary capillaries. Therefore,
longer persistence in the lungs observed by PET or SPECT imaging may
be an indication of early T cell activation. In mice, homing of T
cells to secondary lymphoid organs (lymph nodes) has also been observed,
independently of the specificity of the T cells. In contrast, radiolabeled cells administered intraperitoneally
or subcutaneously remained in the vicinity of the injection site and
uptake in the liver or spleen was much lower. , One study also observed migration to perithymic lymph nodes of mice
after intraperitoneal administration of 64Cu-labeled T
cells. Key features and advantages of
PET for imaging during adoptive cell therapies, for example, its high
sensitivity, its utility to determine cell uptake kinetics and their
dependence on tumor size and vascularization, were already apparent
in very early preclinical studies. For example, despite the very short
half-life of 11C (20 min), activated murine NK cells labeled
with [11C]methyl iodide and injected in close proximity
to the tumors accumulated 5× more in the tumors than similarly
administered control cells, and heterogeneous uptake was observed
particularly in larger tumors. , 89Zr-labeled
NK cells have been investigated preclinically for the treatment of
hematological malignancies but low trafficking to the bone marrow
was observed. The use of 5-[124I]iodo-2-deoxyuridine ([124I]IdU) allowed the visualization
of tumor antigen-specific T cells in tumors with as little as 0.3
kBq/106 cells. [111In]In-oxine and [89Zr]Zr-oxine-labeled γδ-T
cells have been shown to accumulate in tumors in preclinical models; , this accumulation was dependent on the presence of a functional
γδ-TCR67 and increased after treatment with
a liposomal aminobisphosphonate drug. Similar increased uptake in tumors expressing a specific antigen
was observed in mice with 89Zr-labeled CAR T cells , ( ) and
other tumor antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells. , Tracking CAR T cells with 68Ga-oxine has also been performed.
The half-life of 68Ga was, unsurprisingly, too short to
observe the accumulation of CAR T cells in solid tumors, but for short-term
tracking, the results were the same as with 89Zr-labeled
cells and the radiation doses much lower. Overall, studies of radiolabeled lymphocytes in oncology show that
adoptively transferred lymphocytes expressing tumor-specific antigens
can indeed accumulate in tumors, provided the specific tumor antigens
are accessible.
Preclinical studies using DCs labeled with [111In]In-oxine
or [18F]SFB showed that local administration of DCs leads
to accumulation in the draining lymph nodes, whereas intravenous administration
leads to a similar distribution pattern to that of lymphocytes, i.e.
initial accumulation in the lungs followed by liver and spleen. , , Results using 111In-, 99mTc-, or 64Cu-labeled DCs in humans
exhibited more variability but the overall picture is one where migration
of DCs to the lymph nodes depends on the route of administration,
with local routes (intralymphatic, intradermal, subcutaneous) showing
much more uptake in lymph nodes than after intravenous administration. , , , , Interestingly, mature DCs were
found to remain trapped in the lungs of patients much longer than
nonmatured DCs after intravenous administration, and the use of 64Cu-PET enabled detection of as few as 7000 cells per lymph
node. 
In other oncological applications,
tumor cells have been radiolabeled
to study metastasis in preclinical models, examining for example the
role of protein kinase C (PKC) or surface sialylation in the accumulation
of metastatic cells in the liver , or the tropism
of different tumor cell lines to the liver and lungs. However, tumor metastasis is generally a slower
process than the radioactive decay of the most commonly used radionuclides
for cell labeling. For such studies, it is nowadays preferable to
use reporter gene imaging systems, which allow repeated imaging of
cells over much longer periods (see reviews by Iafrate et al. and
Serganova and Blasberg , ).
Fewer studies, however,
have attempted to correlate the therapeutic
efficacy with the degree of cell uptake as determined by nuclear imaging.
In patients, the combination of 111In-labeled TILs with
cyclophosphamide (an immunosuppressant using in cancer chemotherapy)
resulted in higher tumor accumulation of TILs than without cyclophosphamide,
and clinical response was observed in 38% of the patients who showed
TIL uptake in tumors, but in none of the patients who showed no uptake
in tumors. Preclinically, 111In-labeled tumor antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells were shown to
accumulate in higher numbers in the tumors of lymphodepleted mice
compared to nondepleted mice, and this combination also resulted in
a greater therapeutic effect ( ). Similarly, ovalbumin-specific
T cells labeled with 89Zr accumulated in ovalbumin-expressing
tumors and induced tumor shrinkage in mice. In the future, the uptake of labeled cells at the target location,
determined by quantitative imaging methods and particularly PET, may
become a key clinical end point in trials of cell therapies.
Finally, radiolabeling and imaging therapeutic cells could also
be an additional safety measure in the clinic, particularly for novel
adoptive cell-based therapies. There are notable reports of engineered
autologous T cells attacking healthy tissue and resulting in severe
toxicity and even patient deaths, either because the target antigen
was also expressed on nontumor cells (e.g., liver toxicity in the
case of carbonic-anhydrase-IX (CAIX)-targeting CAR T cells attacking
CAIX expressed on bile duct epithelial cells, and pulmonary toxicity due to the recognition of tumor
antigen ERBB2 on lung epithelial cells ) or because of unexpected cross-reactivity of the T cells with an
antigen expressed on a nontarget organ (e.g., cardiotoxicity of MAGE
A3-specific T cells cross-reacting with the muscle protein titin , ). Nuclear imaging of adoptive cell therapies could detect the accumulation
of cells in nontarget locations and thus provide an early warning
of impending toxicity and allow mitigating measures (e.g., immunosuppression)
to be taken rapidly.

7.

## Conclusions and Future Perspectives
Cell labeling and tracking using nuclear medicine techniques has
been used for decades in both preclinical and clinical studies. With
the advent of novel and highly efficacious cell-based therapies such
as those based on CAR technology, as well as new immune cell types
(e.g., natural killers T cells, γδ-T cells, dendritic
cells), there is an increasing need to develop novel methods to image
the fate of these cells after administration in patients, to help
understand under what circumstances they may be efficacious or give
rise to toxic side-effects.
In this Review, we have reviewed
the different chemical methods
available to date for directly radiolabeling cells. Compared to indirect
methods, direct radiolabeling has specific advantages (e.g., avoiding
genetic modification) and disadvantages (e.g., relatively short-term
imaging, potential of radiolabel loss over time), that we have discussed.
Overall, direct cell radiolabeling remains the most widely used method
to track cells in the clinical setting. Therefore, we expect that
direct radiolabeling will continue to play a key role in the development
and evaluation of cell-based therapies, although we note that clinical
translation of these techniques is significantly slower nowadays than
in the early days of their development. Taking into account the current
regulatory frameworks, and to improve the clinical translation of
new direct radiolabeling techniques, researchers need a clear understanding
of these regulatory hurdles from the early stages of their development.
Cell-based therapies are more complex in their production and distribution
than patient-based white blood cells and hence may be limited in how
and when they can be radiolabeled and imaged. In addition, improved
radiobiological and functional assessment of the impact of radiolabeling
on the cells of interest should always be implemented to ensure confidence
in image interpretation. We also highlight the importance of understanding
the fate of the radionuclide after cell radiolabeling, in vitro and
in vivo, as this will allow efficient assessment of the success of
cell tracking studies. This is particularly important when using ionophore-based
methods that may result in the leakage of free radionuclides, such
as 64Cu, that share accumulation in organs and excretion
pathways with those of the cells themselves (for example, liver and
spleen), or when using phospholipid-based radiolabeling, as phospholipids
may exchange between different cells.
In our view, the more
exciting development in this field is the
advent of total-body PET, a new scanner technology that promises a
remarkable 40-fold increase in sensitivity. The significance of this technology in the future of cell tracking
studies should not be underestimated: it should allow significantly
lower levels of radioactivity per cell, allowing tracking of radiosensitive
cells, tracking different cell types, imaging multiple radiotracers
in the same patient using short-lived radionuclides, and tracking
directly labeled cells for much longer periods of time compared to
current PET technology. Another area in which these radiolabeling
technologies can play a significant role in the development of cell-based
therapies is in the new field that is evaluating how pharmacological
interventions can modify cell trafficking, aiming to improved therapeutic
outcomes and safety profiles. We hope that the different direct radiolabeling
strategies reviewed and outlined in this review, as well as the discussion
of their preclinical and clinical applications to date, will enable
scientists from different areas to effectively choose the most appropriate
radiochemical method for their cell-tracking studies.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr Orbett T. Alexander (Chemistry
Department, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa)
for sharing X-ray crystallography data. This work was supported by
the EPSRC programme for next generation molecular imaging and therapy
with radionuclides (EP/S032789/1), the Wellcome EPSRC Centre for Medical
Engineering at KCL [grant number WT 203148/Z/16/Z], a CRUK Multidisciplinary
Project Award [grant number C48390/A21153], the King’s College
London & Imperial College London EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training
in Medical Imaging [EP/L015226/1], the KCL/UCL Comprehensive Cancer
Imaging Centre funded by CRUK and EPSRC in association with the MRC
and DoH (England), the Medical Research Council Confidence in Concepts
scheme, the Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre at KCL, the KHP/KCL
CRUK Cancer Centre, a Wellcome Trust Multiuser Equipment Grant: A
multiuser radioanalytical facility for molecular imaging and radionuclide
therapy research [212885/Z/18/Z], the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre based at Guy’s and
St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust and KCL [grant number IS-BRC-1215-20006],
the MRC Doctoral Training Programme, the Research England Confidence
in Collaboration scheme. 'This research was funded in whole,
or in
part, by the Wellcome Trust [WT 203148/Z/16/Z][212885/Z/18/Z]. For
the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public
copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising
from this submission.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations Used
ATPadenosine triphosphate
ATOX-1antioxidant protein
1
CARchimeric antigen
receptor
CTR-1/2high affinity copper uptake
protein 1/2
CXCR4chemokine receptor type 4
DBCOdibenzocyclooctyne
DEDTCdiethyldithiocarbamate
DMT-1divalent metal transporter 1
DMDTCdimethyldithiocarbamate
DNAdeoxyribonucleic acid
DOTA2,2′,2″,2‴-(1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetrayl)tetraacetic
acid
DPDTCdipropyldithiocarbamate
FACSfluorescence-activated
cell sorting
FOVfield of view
GFPgreen fluorescent protein
HMGB-1high mobility group box 1 protein
HMPAOhexamethylpropylene amine oxime
LElabeling efficiency
MRmagnetic resonance
NHSN-hydroxysuccinimide
NISsodium iodide symporter
NOTA1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-triacetic
acid
PTSMpyruvaldehyde
bis(N4-methylthiosemicarbazone)
RBCred blood cells
RFPred fluorescent protein
SiNPssilica nanoparticles
SLC30A10solute carrier
family 30 member
10
SPIONssuperparamagnetic
iron oxide
nanoparticles
TETA1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane-1,4,8,11-tetraacetic
acid
TRPML-1transient
receptor potential
mucolipin 1
WBCwhite blood cells
ZIP-14zinc-import protein 14

## Biographies
Peter Gawne is a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Postdoctoral
Fellow
at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT) in Genova, Italy. He
received his Masters in Chemistry from the University of Hull, before
joining the Medical Imaging CDT at King’s College London (KCL)
and Imperial College London in 2015; obtaining a Masters of Research
in Medical Imaging Science, followed by his PhD in Radiochemistry
at KCL—under the supervision of Dr Rafael T. M. de Rosales.
He, subsequently, worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the
same group focusing on the radiolabeling and imaging of cells and
nanomedicines. He is currently based in the lab of Prof. Paolo Decuzzi
at IIT working on the radiolabeling and imaging of particle-based
drug delivery systems for the treatment of neurological diseases.

Francis Man is a postdoctoral Research Fellow
at King’s
College London. He obtained a PharmD from the University of Strasbourg
in 2010. He then obtained a PhD in Chemical Biology from King’s
College London in 2016, working on the anti-inflammatory mechanisms
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis-derived peptides. His
recent work has focused on developing novel radiotracers based on 89Zr and 18F for tracking cell therapies and nanomedicines
by positron emission tomography, using liposomal bisphosphonates to
improve the efficacy of therapeutic T cells, and investigating the
kinetics of IgE-class antibodies. His research interests include molecular
imaging, cell therapies, and inflammatory diseases, in particular
the use of noninvasive in vivo imaging methods to predict disease
evolution and treatment efficacy.

Philip
J. Blower has been at King’s College London as Chair
in Imaging Chemistry in the School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging
Sciences since 2006. His research interests are best summarized as
“molecular imaging” mainly using inorganic chemistry
tools linked to bioconjugate chemistry. A key theme has been development
of simple, accessible radiolabeling processes. In the 1990s, he pioneered
the chemistry of rhenium and copper radionuclides for radionuclide
therapy and PET. Most recently he focussed on use of PET to study
metallomics and in vivo cell tracking. As Head of the Imaging Chemistry
and Biology Dept (ICAB), he has overseen its growth from one (in 2006)
to 11 academic groups. He has published >200 peer-reviewed papers
and supervised 40 successful PhD students. His path to this point
followed a BA in Natural Sciences (Cambridge) and DPhil in Chemistry
(Sussex) and postdoctoral experience in inorganic chemistry at Indiana
University and Oxford University. His first academic post was a joint
NHS/academic appointment (1987) at Kent and Canterbury Hospital (Radiopharmacy)
and the University of Kent (Biosciences).

Rafael T. M de Rosales is Reader in Imaging Chemistry at the Department
of Imaging Chemistry & Biology within the School of Biomedical
Engineering & Imaging Sciences at King’s College London.
He obtained a BSc in Chemistry from the University of Granada (Spain)
and a PhD in Bioinorganic Chemistry at the University of Edinburgh
(UK) in 2004, followed by a Marie Curie Postdoctoral Fellowship in
Naples (Italy) and a postdoctoral research position in bioinspired
inorganic catalysis at Imperial College London (UK). In 2007 he moved
to King’s College London, where he leads a research group developing
metal-based radiotracers for nuclear medicine applications and as
imaging tools to facilitate the efficient development and application
of novel therapeutic platforms such as drug delivery systems, cell
therapies, and extracellular vesicles.

## Author Present Address
† Laboratory of Nanotechnology for Precision Medicine, Fondazione
Instituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 16163, Genova, GE, Italy

## Author Contributions
‡ These authors contributed equally.

The views expressed
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the
NIHR, or the Department of Health.

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): Research in the RTMR group
has received funding by AstraZeneca, plc (PhD studentship), GlaxoSmithKline,
plc (PhD studentship), Theragnostics, Ltd. (PhD studentship), and
Lipomedix Pharmaceutical, Ltd. (in kind contributions).

## References