pmcJACS AuJACS Au4063jacsau101775714auJACS Au2691-3704American Chemical SocietyPMC9327084PMC9327084.1932708493270843591146510.1021/jacsau.2c003091PerspectiveSynthesis and Application of Trehalose Materials
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0755-2951VinciguerraDaniele https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3992-4254GelbMadeline B. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3692-6289MaynardHeather D. †Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University
of California, Los Angeles, 607 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, California 90095-1569, United States‡California
NanoSystems Institute, University of California,
Los Angeles, 570 Westwood
Plaza, Los Angeles, California 90095-1569, United States*Email: maynard@chem.ucla.edu.06072022250720222741323615611587060720222807202219022025© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2022The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Trehalose is a naturally
occurring, nonreducing disaccharide that
is widely used in the biopharmaceutical, food, and cosmetic industries
due to its stabilizing and cryoprotective properties. Over the years,
scientists have developed methodologies to synthesize linear polymers
with trehalose units either in the polymer backbone or as pendant
groups. These macromolecules provide unique properties and characteristics,
which often outperform trehalose itself. Additionally, numerous reports
have focused on the synthesis and formulation of materials based on
trehalose, such as nanoparticles, hydrogels, and thermoset networks.
Among many applications, these polymers and materials have been used
as protein stabilizers, as gene delivery systems, and to prevent amyloid
aggregate formation. In this Perspective, recent developments in the
synthesis and application of trehalose-based linear polymers, hydrogels,
and nanomaterials are discussed, with a focus on utilization in the
biomedical field.

trehalosepolymerstabilizationhydrogelproteinNational Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases10.13039/100000062R01DK127908University of California, Los Angeles10.13039/100007185NApmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9au2c00309document-id-new-14au2c00309ccc-price1

## Introduction
Trehalose is a naturally
occurring, nonreducing disaccharide formed
by the α,α-1,1 glycosidic linkage of two glucose units
(α-d-glucopyranosyl-α-d-glucopyranoside)
( ). This specific
bond bends trehalose into a rigid clamshell structure. , Trehalose, as an amorphous sugar, has the highest glass transition
temperature (Tg) of disaccharides at 114
°C and an anhydrous melting temperature
(Tm) of 203 °C. The exact stereochemical arrangement of the many hydroxyl
groups is important in the formation of specific hydrogen bonds. , , , It
is well established that trehalose acts as a bioprotective agent against
various environmental stresses such as freezing and drying, and is
produced as an osmoprotectant by some microorganisms and plants in
response to stress; although, it is not naturally found in mammals.
Trehalose is often more effective than other sugars at maintaining
cellular integrity by protecting the native three-dimensional structure
of cell bilayers and proteins, inhibiting their denaturation, degradation,
and aggregation. , , − Relative to other sugars, trehalose has a higher affinity for water
and occupies a larger volume when hydrated. , This property, however, is also likely responsible for the relatively
high viscosity of trehalose solutions. This drawback is often accepted in the medical field in favor of
the better stabilization properties and relative inertness of trehalose,
which lacks the free aldehyde groups susceptible to unwanted Maillard
reactions that are common with other sugars. , , Furthermore, as the glycosidic bond is highly
stable, trehalose is less susceptible to hydrolysis, thereby making
it more inert than sucrose, the other common nonreducing sugar ( ). Nonetheless, when
ingested, the trehalose glycosidic bond is hydrolyzed in humans by
the intestinal enzyme trehalase to form two molecules of glucose,
which are subsequently adsorbed and metabolized. 
 Trehalose is a highly versatile stabilizer that has already
been
implemented in the biomedical field in a wide variety of formulations.
Despite its widespread use, the precise stabilization mechanism is
still disputed and most likely depends in part on the environmental
conditions and the type of molecule being
stabilized. The multiple theories to explain
trehalose stabilization include water entrapment or preferential exclusion,
water replacement, and vitrification ( a). Generally,
these three mechanisms rely on trehalose decreasing the local mobility
of biomacromolecules by sequestering or replacing water, or by resisting
solvent crystallization through the formation of a glassy matrix around
unstable biomolecules, respectvely. , , , The difference between
the water entrapment and replacement theories lies in whether a solvation
layer around the protein is present or if trehalose is directly interacting
with the protein surface. Vitrification requires trehalose to form
an amorphous or glassy matrix to prevent the formation of ice crystals
that cause “freeze concentration”, that, is the concentration
of solute in the remaining liquid which can result in protein denaturation. 
 Despite early research seeking a single answer to the stabilization
mechanism question, it is possible that multiple mechanisms work simultaneously
and/or are influenced by the specific biomacromolecule. Repeated lyophilization
studies indicated that trehalose must continue to maintain direct
or indirect hydrogen bonds with the polar residues of proteins to
maintain the native conformations of the biomolecules once dried. , , One of the earliest molecular
dynamics (MD) studies on trehalose concluded that trehalose does not
affect the structure of water in sufficiently dilute conditions and
therefore trehalose must stabilize proteins by water replacement. Only a few years later, further MD exploration
contradicted this theory, finding that trehalose has significant water
interactions and disrupts the natural tetrahedral network of water,
attributing the high degree of order in part to the conformational
rigidity of trehalose. , , Additionally,
the authors concluded that, while trehalose clearly had kosmotropic
effects and could cause water entrapment, the ability to structure
water does not exclude water replacement or vitrification as the mechanism
by which trehalose stabilizes biomolecules. This view has been demonstrated
experimentally with spectroscopic experiments reporting the importance
of water entrapment and destructuring, − water replacement, , and the formation of a glassy matrix by trehalose. , , More generally, researchers agree
that these mechanisms can and do act in combination to prevent the
unfolding, misfolding, and aggregation of biomacromolecules. , 
Regardless of the mechanism, researchers have repeatedly shown
trehalose to be a more effective stabilizer than other sugars. , , For instance, in stabilizing
pyrophosphatase and glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase against heat,
trehalose was about twice more effective than the same mole concentration
of sucrose and maltose or double the mole concentration of glucose
or fructose. Comparatively, trehalose
was a better liposome protectant than sucrose against lyophilization
followed by storage or heating conditions. 
As a small molecule, trehalose is a highly effective stabilizer
and has been incorporated into polymers and other polymeric materials
for even more dramatic stabilization results. − As our group has previously shown, in heat and lyophilization
stability assays, proteins retain greater bioactivity in the presence
of trehalose polymers (excipient, conjugate, hydrogel, or nanogel)
than alone or with the same weight concentration of trehalose. , , In the same vein, trehalose nanoparticles
were better than trehalose alone at preventing proteins from undergoing
fibrillation. Cryopreservation assays
of different mammalian cells in the presence of increasing amounts
of trehalose polymer similarly showed improved cell growth after freezing
with a polymer rather than trehalose alone. These studies have also shown that trehalose materials stabilize
biomolecules and cells at a lower relative concentration than that
of trehalose itself. , , Unexpectedly, with this improved stabilization work, linear trehalose
polymers did not show similarly high viscosities as the small molecule
or more complex fluid flow properties. 
Taken altogether, these characteristics firmly demonstrate
the
utility of trehalose polymers in the rapidly growing biopharmaceutical
market. In this Perspective, different polymerization strategies to
prepare trehalose-based polymers and materials will be first discussed
and critically analyzed. Afterward, various applications in the biomedical
field, such as protein stabilization, gene delivery, and amyloid aggregate
prevention, will be presented and discussed ( b–d). To conclude, we will provide
an outlook and propose future directions for the field to move forward.
Trehalose glycolipids and their polymeric derivatives will not be discussed as these have already been reviewed
elsewhere. , 

2

## Polymerization
Strategies
Many strategies have been employed over the years
to synthesize
poly(trehalose) polymers with various architectures. Linear polymers
can be prepared following two different approaches: (a) step-growth
polymerization where trehalose is incorporated by polyaddition or
polycondensation directly into the backbone of the polymer or (b)
chain-growth polymerization where trehalose is linked to unsaturated
monomers as side chains and, typically, radical polymerization affords
linear chains with trehalose pendant on the side chains. Cross-linked
materials can be prepared by (c) curing of trehalose containing multiple
olefins to afford insoluble thermoset resins or cross-linking of poly(trehalose)
in aqueous conditions to give hydrogels ( ).
 2.1

## Backbone Trehalose
A selection of
polymers with trehalose in the backbone is summarized in . The first attempt
to prepare linear trehalose polymers was reported in 1979 by Kurita
et al., when the authors employed direct addition polymerization to
copolymerize trehalose with diisocyanates yielding polyurethanes 1, although likely producing branched polymers as a side product. They later resolved this issue by synthesizing
diaminotrehalose using sequential protection–deprotection steps
to selectively modify the C-6,6’ hydroxyl groups. The modified
trehalose was then reacted with various diisocyanates, such as diphenylmethane
diisocyanate, to afford polyureas by polyaddition using various polar
solvents at temperatures ranging from 5 to 20 °C. The resulting
polymers could be biodegraded using trehalase or α-amylase. Similarly, trehalose hydroxyls could be reacted
with terephthalaldehyde, terephthalaldehyde bis(dimethyl acetal),
or 1,x-bis(2-formylphenoxy)alkanes (x = 4–12) to afford polyacetals 2 by polycondensation. , This strategy possessed the advantage of being regioselective for
C-6,6’ hydroxyls with no protection steps required. However,
this methodology presented some clear disadvantages such as harsh
polymerization conditions, low (8.5 kDa) maximum molecular weight
(MW) obtained, no glass transition temperature (Tg) found up to the decomposition temperature (Td) of 325 °C, and the formation of a mixture of polymers with different end groups
or even cyclization. To overcome these
drawbacks, Teramoto et al. designed a different strategy to regioselectively
modify trehalose with 4-allyl-oxybenzaldehyde and then polymerize
by hydrosilylation with SiH-terminated dimethylsiloxane oligomers. Polymers 3 with a MW up to 50 kDa
were obtained when the mixture was heated at 80 °C for 72 h.
Yields were generally high (ca. 80%), but MW polydispersity (Đ) was also very high, averaging 3.5. The polymers
presented two Tg peaks: one (ca. −110
°C) independent of and one (96–152 °C) dependent
on siloxane oligomer segment length. In
parallel, they developed a synthetic strategy to afford degradable
linear poly(trehalose) 4 by exploiting a Diels–Alder
reaction between trehalose bearing difurfurylidene and bismaleimides.
At a high temperature (140 °C), the polymer underwent a retro
Diels–Alder and degraded into its monomers. In a follow up study, the two strategies were combined
by using difurfurylidene trehalose and maleimide bearing dimethylsiloxanes
oligomers. The degradable and flexible poly(trehalose-siloxanes) presented
similar advantageous thermal properties to the previous siloxane copolymer
while retaining degradability from the Diels–Alder reversibility. Finally, trehalose was derivatized to afford
a diepoxide and polymerized following the addition of aliphatic diamines
in the presence of a base catalyst. While the trehalose diepoxide
had low solubility in various organic solvents, requiring the polymerization
to be conducted in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone at 200 °C, the resulting
polymer was soluble in a range of organic solvents and showed a Tg of 100 °C and a Td of 320 °C. 
 Another early development in the polycondensation approach involved
reacting monomers containing amine-reactive imidoester groups with
diaminotrehalose in the presence of sodium carbonate to afford cationic
polyamidines 5. The polymerization only took 16 h, but
yields were limited (23–45%). As
part of the development of a family of sugar-containing polycations,
trehalose was functionalized in the 6 and 6’ positions with
dimethylamine, which proceeded through a diiodide intermediate. The
tertiary amines were then reacted with 1,6-dibromohexane via Menschutkin
reaction, yielding polycations 6 bearing quaternary amines.
The polymerization was conducted at 40 °C for 3 days, but yields
were similarly modest (32–38%). 
The above-mentioned strategies share some common advantages,
such
as resulting in copolymers with well-defined monomer sequences and
often bearing a degradable backbone. Nonetheless, some disadvantages
are also noticeable. Each polymerization reaction was limited in monomer
scope, as they need to be chemically compatible and often require
harsh conditions. Moreover, polymers were generally obtained in low
yield and conversion, the polymerizations were difficult to control,
resulting in branching or cyclization, and MWs were often low with
high polydispersity.
Arguably, CuI-catalyzed azide–alkyne
cycloaddition
(CuAAC) has been the most successful reaction employed to synthesize
polymers with trehalose in the backbone. It solves many of the issues
discussed above, requiring friendlier conditions and resulting in
higher yields, higher MW, and lower MW dispersities. CuAAC is widely
applied both in polymer and carbohydrate syntheses. The strategy was popularized by Reineke
and co-workers in their effort to synthesize cationic trehalose copolymers
for gene delivery (see below for a description of this application). − Trehalose bearing two azido groups in the 6 and 6’ positions
was prepared by iodination of the respective hydroxyl group, followed
by substitution with sodium azide, and finally protection of the remaining
hydroxyls with acetyl groups. The diazidotrehalose monomer was polymerized
by a reaction with dialkyne-oligoamine monomers. Specifically, an
equimolar mixture of the monomers was heated at 50 °C in a 1:1
cosolvent system of tert-butyl alcohol and water
in the presence of CuII and sodium ascorbate and stirred
for 4–24 h depending on the amine. Finally, the hydroxyls and
the amines were deprotected following conventional methods to afford
the desired water-soluble copolymer 7 ( ). In addition to the milder
polymerization conditions than those for previously discussed strategies,
these reactions could easily obtain polymers with higher MW, up to
40 kDa, Đ as low as 1.2, and higher degree
of polymerization (DP: 56–61), although protection/deprotection
steps were still required and removal of the Cu catalyst might be
laborious. This synthetic strategy and
these conditions allowed the facile customization of many characteristics
of the final polymer including polymer length, , amine number, , and end group chemistry by introducing
a capping monomer at the end of the polymerization. , Additionally, a third comonomer could be added, for instance, to
add a lanthanide chelating moiety for theranostic purposes. 
 Other applications involving polymers prepared by CuAAC include
a glycopolymer with thermoresponsivity around body temperature and an asymmetric trehalose bearing both an
alkyne and azide for copper-free topochemical azide–alkyne
cycloaddition. In the first case, trehalose
primary and secondary alcohols were selectively tosylated and acetylated,
respectively. After the initial protection, the tosyl groups were
displaced with azides. Dialkyne terminated polyethylene glycols (PEGs)
with MWs of 200, 600, and 1000 Da were prepared by reaction with propargyl
bromide, and the comonomers were polymerized at 60 °C for 24
h with copper wire as a catalyst ( a). Acetal-protected glycopolymers containing
600 Da PEG showed a cloud point at 2 mg/mL of 39 °C ( b), but acetyl deprotection
led to water-soluble polymers that did not present thermoresponsive
behavior. Interestingly, the analogous polymers of 200 and 1000 Da
PEG were insoluble in water or presented a phase transition at 90
°C, respectively. In the last example,
an asymmetric acetylated trehalose monomer bearing either an azide
or an alkyne at the primary alcohols was synthesized in five steps,
with most yields being above 80%. To avoid challenges from conventional
glycopolymer synthesis, topochemical click chemistry was used. The
monomer was crystallized from a 2:1 mixture of either ethyl acetate
or chloroform and n-hexane. The crystals were heated
at 90 °C, and the polymer was visible by 1H NMR after
24 h, reaching full conversion within 96 h, with the highest attained
MW being ca. 7 kDa ( c–e). This innovative
approach requires more exploration in the future, as it solves issues
related to purification and metal removal related to conventional
CuAAC chemistry. However, the final product was still acetylated and
would require a final deprotection step to produce trehalose for various
applications, and the obtained MW was relatively low. Additionally,
preparing copolymers might be more difficult than polymerization in
the solution phase, due to the potentially incompatible crystal structures
and alignment or the inability to prepare crystals from an eventual
comonomer.
 
2.2

## Side-Chain
Trehalose
 illustrates some examples
of polymers bearing trehalose on the side chains. The earliest reports
of side-chain trehalose polymers employed enzymes, such as proteases
or lipases, to regioselectively modify trehalose at the C6 position
with vinyl esters that could subsequently be polymerized by free radical
polymerization (FRP) to afford poly(vinyl esters) 8 bearing
trehalose on their side chains. − The polymers were explored biologically
in terms of lectin recognition and enzyme inhibition or as inhibitors of amyloid β (Aβ) aggregation
in Alzheimer’s disease. In the
latter case, to improve amyloid β inhibition, a trehalose acrylamide
monomer (TrMA) was prepared in eight steps and polymerized via FRP
using 2,2′-azobis(2-amidinopropane)dihydrochloride (AAPD) as
the initiator in water. Acrylamide copolymers with different trehalose
contents (10, 20, 40, 100 equiv %), constant MW of 100 kDa, and Đ values of 1.4–1.6 were prepared. 
 Our group became interested in the field of trehalose polymers,
and shortly after, began making numerous contributions to the pendant
trehalose design with a particular interest in preparing well-defined
protein–polymer conjugates. , , − , − An approach taking advantage of the benefits of reversible-deactivation
radical polymerization (RDRP) was the initial focus. A styrenyl monomer
bearing a monodiethyl acetal in the para position was reacted selectively
in the 4,6 positions by acetalization to afford the styrenyl acetal
trehalose monomer in 41% yield. Using a pyridyl disulfide (PDS) functionalized
chain transfer agent (CTA), polymers 9 were synthesized
via reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT)
polymerization. As is common for controlled
polymerization techniques, this method presented many advantages such
as low dispersity, possibility to target a specific molecular weight,
compatibility with multiple architectures, and high end group retention. The last advantage was especially important
because the PDS group was installed at the ω-chain end for a
postpolymerization reaction with proteins to create polymer–protein
conjugates ( a). Inclusion of a short PEG spacer between the PDS and the CTA improved
conjugation yields with the protein as visualized by sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Polymerizations
proceeded in controlled fashion for 6 h with high conversion, affording
a series of polymers with MWs in the 4–50 kDa range and Đ values as low as 1.05. Shortly after, the trehalose monomer and polymer library was expanded
to include methacrylate acetal 10, styrenyl ether 11, and methacrylate 12, with each prepared in
a few steps with moderate yields. FRP with azobis(isobutyronitrile)
(AIBN) at 80 and 65 °C for the styrenyl and methacrylate monomers,
respectively, successfully yielded polymers of 10.8–23.4 kDa. The styrenyl ether monomer synthesis was undertaken
without any protection steps, resulting in a mixture of regioisomers
that were easily isolated by preparative HPLC. Four isomers were isolated, with the styrenyl group in
position 2, 3, 4, or 6. Regioselectivity could be controlled through
a careful choice of base metal counterion for the etherification reaction,
with sodium and potassium hydroxide favoring the 4 or 6 position,
respectively, and a higher reaction temperature or the use of water
as a solvent, raising O6 relative yields. Quantum mechanical calculations
confirmed that each isomer maintained the clam shell conformation,
important for the stabilizing properties of trehalose. Stenzel and co-workers also exploited the high
chain-end retention of RAFT polymerization to design and synthesize
polymer–gold nanoparticle (AuNP) or polymer-cellulose nanofiber (CNF) constructs to inhibit microbial adhesion. In the first case, acetylated
trehalose acrylate was prepared in three steps with a modest 7% overall
yield. Polymerization was conducted at 70 °C in dioxane using
a trithiocarbonate CTA, obtaining a polymer with a low MW and dispersity
(8.9 kDa, Đ: 1.1). Afterward, the polymer was
deprotected using sodium methoxide and used to coat AuNPs through
thiol–gold interaction. In the
second case, a four step trehalose acrylate synthetic procedure was
employed, involving protection and deprotection of hydroxyls with
trimethylsilyl chloride. This improved synthetic scheme raised the
overall yield to 34%. A CTA bearing an aldehyde in α position
was used to afford the trehalose polymer (MW: 10.8 kDa, Đ: 1.07), which was grafted to TEMPO-oxidized CNFs via Passerini reaction
( a). 
 Among the other advantages
of RDRP, the ability to generate well-defined
block copolymers has been employed by Reineke and co-workers. A trehalose-methacrylamide
monomer was polymerized by RAFT polymerization to form a poly(trehalose)
macroCTA from which the chain was then extended with a cationic block
to afford polymer 13 and used for gene delivery and stabilization
( b). Similarly, diblock terpolymers were readily
prepared by polymerizing trehalose-methacrylamide with a variety of
comonomers for use in micelle formulations or pH-responsive drug delivery. , The ability to generate block copolymers was also exploited by Wang
et al. to investigate how the positioning of trehalose monomers within
a single-enzyme nanoparticle (SEN) affected protein stabilization.
A PEG-macroCTA was used to initiate polymerization of either statistical
or block copolymers of N-[3-(dimethyl amino)propyl]
acrylamide (DMAPA) with acrylamide, trehalose, or sucrose monomers.
DMAPA is a cationic monomer that favors protein binding and interaction.
To form SENs, the polymers were mixed with the enzyme glucose oxidase
(GOx) and then cross-linked by a radical process using trehalose acrylate
and bis(acrylamide). 
Moving beyond
RAFT polymerization, atom transfer radical polymerization
(ATRP), and specifically activators generated by electron transfer
(AGET) ATRP, has been employed by our group and others to prepare
poly(trehalose) polymers. For example, an insulin–poly(trehalose)
conjugate was synthesized by installing a nitrophenyl carbonate-activated
ATRP initiator at a lysine residue (LysB29), HPLC purifying the singly
modified insulin, and using AGET ATRP to “graft from”
the protein ( b). By growing the poly(trehalose) directly
from insulin, both purification and isolation of a singly modified
lysine conjugate were streamlined when compared to “grafting
to” insulin. , AGET ATRP was chosen to polymerize
the trehalose monomer because of the mild, aqueous, and room temperature
conditions required for the insulin. A sacrificial resin was added
so that the polymerization would occur. Recently, we used AGET ATRP to graft poly(trehalose) to the antibody
Herceptin (trastuzumab) and Herceptin antigen-binding fragment (Fab)
via a bis-sulfone alkyl bromide initiator, which was chosen as a specific,
stable, and irreversible reduction-conjugation handle for disulfide
bridging. It was hypothesized that the bis-sulfone might undergo ligand-assisted
elimination, giving an alkene that may potentially lead to side reactions
and loss of polymerization control. Through careful optimization of
polymerization conditions, such as a tris(2-pyridylmethyl)amine (TPMA)
ligand equimolar concentration relative to Cu salts or more dilute
monomer concentrations, the reaction occurred in a satisfactory controlled
fashion, with Đ below 1.10. The resulting polymer
was then conjugated to Herceptin and Herceptin Fab, and mass spectrometry
experiments revealed that, while conjugation of the full antibody
led to a heterogeneous mixtures with multiple modification sites,
single modifications were achieved for the Fab. Mantovani and co-workers prepared linear and 4-arm star
poly(propargyl methacrylate) polymers via classic ATRP, and azido-trehalose
and other sugars were added in a postpolymerization CuAAC reaction. Morelli et al. used a similar CuAAC postpolymerization
modification approach to functionalize azido-bearing poly(disulfide)s
with alkyne-trehalose and other sugars. The polymers were prepared
by ring-opening disulfide exchange polymerization and underwent the
postpolymerization modification with high yield. Both strategies employed
post-polymerization modification to allow a direct biological comparison
of the various glycopolymers without concern for possible different
polymer physicochemical characteristics. 
Maynard, Sawamoto, and co-workers also utilized ruthenium-catalyzed
living radical polymerization to copolymerize acetylated trehalose
methacrylate (AcTrMA) with poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate (PEGMA)
and 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl methacrylate (13FOMA) to obtain amphiphilic
macromolecules capable of self-assembly in water and organic solvents.
The choice of solvent was critical in controlling the polymerization,
achieving low dispersity and equimolar monomer incorporation. Initial
AcTrMA and 13FOMA polymerizations carried out in toluene yielded polymers
with relatively high dispersities (Đ: 1.55),
whereas switching to 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) reduced Đ to 1.27. However, polymerization time greatly increased, up to 96
h. Ultimately, a 6:4 mixture of toluene/DCE produced lower dispersity
(Đ: 1.35) polymers in reasonable reaction times.
The addition of PEGMA as a comonomer lowered the dispersity even more
(Đ: 1.26), as the monomer has intermediate
polarity that mediated the interaction of the other two comonomers.
The polymers were deacetylated using hydrazine hydrate, and self-assembly
as monitored by dynamic light scattering (DLS) showed a bimodal distribution
of smaller peaks of 10 nm coming from single-chain species and larger
peaks at 100–200 nm resulting from interchain assemblies. 
Our group has made several efforts to
incorporate biodegradable
moieties into poly(trehalose) structures. One strategy used RAFT polymerization
to copolymerize 5,6-benzo-2-methylene-1,3-dioxepane (BMDO), a cyclic
ketene acetal (CKA) which ring opens during polymerization to form
degradable esters, with but-3-enyl methacrylate (bMA), an alkene containing
monomer. No cross reactivity of the alkene unit was noticed during
polymerization, but the final dispersity was relatively high (Đ: 1.76), attributed to mismatch reactivity between
the monomers. Thiol–ene chemistry was then used to add thiol-trehalose
to the alkenes, yielding polymer 14. The polymer was
degradable in basic conditions, with a 59% molar mass loss as shown
by gel permeation chromatography (GPC). Alternatively, biodegradable units were introduced in the polymer
chain via ring opening polymerization (ROP) of cyclic esters. Polycaprolactone,
polyvalerolactone, polycarbonate, and polylactide with reactive alkene
side chains were polymerized with different organocatalyst and cocatalyst
systems at room temperature with fast kinetics and low dispersity.
Thiol-trehalose was again added during postpolymerization, by thiol–ene
chemistry ( c). , The trehalose polycaprolactone 15 underwent hydrolytic cleavage within 24 h in accelerated basic conditions. 
Compared to the trehalose backbone strategy,
the side chain approach
presents some advantages. The ability to use controlled polymerization
techniques opens the door for the fine-tuning of MW and dispersity,
adding chain-end control and allowing for bioconjugation and the ability
to form well-defined random, gradient, or block copolymers along with
a larger (co)monomer scope and orthogonality. Moreover, modification
of the side chains allows for the introduction of different functionalities
as comonomers. Trehalose meth(acrylate) monomers are perhaps the most
useful, with them being polymerized by FRP, RAFT polymerization, and
ATRP (AGET or Ru-catalyzed) and often not requiring protection steps
to achieve controlled polymerization with narrow molecular weight
distributions. Nonetheless, monomer yields are still generally very
low and polymer backbones are usually not degradable, unless more
complex synthetic strategies are employed such as involving the use
of CKAs or needing postmodification to introduce trehalose.

2.3

## Thermoset Resin
Other than producing
linear polymers, trehalose monomers can be cross-linked to form thermoset
resins of insoluble polymer networks with outstanding thermomechanical
properties ( ). Out of concern for the environment, a focus on producing thermosets
from renewable resources has led multiple scientists to replace petroleum-based
polymers with biorenewable stocks, such as saccharides. , 
 Teramoto and Shibata provided the first example of a thermoset
polymer based on trehalose. Styrenyl
moieties were installed on the sugar by reaction with p-chloromethylstyrene, with a maximum degree of substitution (DS)
of 3.2. The monomer was then cured by applying heat and pressure (200
°C, 29 bar, 30 min), and the thermal properties were analyzed.
A correlation between Tg and DS was found,
showing lower Tg (ranging 118–143
°C) with higher DS. Only 5% of the resin degraded over 50 days,
and no further degradation was observed up to 90 days. This was attributed
to the hydrolytic stability of the styrenyl backbone. The Reineke group functionalized trehalose with succinic
anhydride for use as a cross-linking hardener for their epoxy-containing
trimethylolpropane triglycidyl ether (TTE)-based or epoxidized soy bean oil (ESO)-based thermosets ( a). The properties of the cured thermosets varied greatly,
with Tg values of 63 and 3 °C and
tensile strengths up to 47 and 1.3 MPa for the TTE- and ESO-based
trehalose thermosets, respectively. In particular, the trehalose/TTE
resin showed a high adhesion strength of 3600 psi. The TTE resins
were degradable in both basic and acidic conditions, reaching full
degradation in a few hours or 1–2 months, respectively, but
remained stable at neutral pH. On the other hand, trehalose containing
ESO resins were instead stable in both neutral and acidic conditions
but quickly degraded in basic media, with higher rates for resins
with more unreacted carboxylic groups. The different behavior in acidic
media was attributed to the higher hydrophobicity of the ESO moiety
compared to TTE, whereas in base the carboxylic groups facilitate
water penetration. The authors noticed
that the ESO resins prevented cell adhesion and growth and attributed
this to the low elastic modulus, thus proposing the material as a
potential antifouling coating material. Conversely, in a different study, trehalose cinnamoyl ester (TC)
smooth thin films promoted fibroblast cell proliferation, with better
results than a standard polystyrene culture plate. TCs were prepared by esterification between trehalose and
cinnamoyl chloride, and thin films were prepared by photocuring of
the monomer solution, as cinnamoyl undergoes dimerization to form
a cyclobutane ring under UV irradiation ( b). The polymerization is favored with a
DS of 4 compared to a DS of 8, due to the larger steric hindrance
from the extra cinnamoyl groups in the latter. Photocured TCs showed
a Tg of 91.6 °C. In a follow up study, unreacted hydroxyl groups of the
TCs were further functionalized with 4-(4-hexyloxybenzoyloxy)phenoxy-6-oxohexanoic
acid (HBPHA) as a mesogenic unit, yielding a material with a liquid-crystal
morphology from 150 to 180 °C. The resulting thin film was found
to be biocompatible, and plates coated with the film allowed fibroblast
cell attachment and had properties comparable to those of a polystyrene
culture plate. Due to the mesogenic characteristics of the material,
some of the spindle shaped cells were found to align in a controlled
fashion. 
 An alternative photocuring
strategy employs thiol–ene photopolymerization
of allyl-etherified trehalose (AT) with various thiols, such as pentaerythritol-based
tetrathiol (S4P) or isocyanurate-based
trithiol (S3I). , The films were transparent to
visible light and presented a Tg of approximately
27–28 °C in most cases. Interestingly,
the S4P-based film showed a higher tensile strength and modulus but
a lower elongation at break than those of the S3I-based film. To improve the thermomechanical properties,
polysilsesquioxanes were included as co-cross-linkers in the production
of the S3I-based film, affording organic/inorganic hybrid nanocomposites.
The resulting films were transparent and uniform even at the microscopic
level. Additionally, the Tg,, tensile strength, and modulus were higher than those of the organic
analogues, increasing with inorganic content. In a recent report, AT was functionalized with cysteamine hydrochloride
to afford aminated trehalose. The monomer was cured with sorbitol
polyglycidyl ether (SPE) in the presence or absence of CNFs. The surface
of films without CNFs was smooth, and while the addition of CNFs rendered
surfaces uneven, they also had the expected effect of increasing the
tensile strength and modulus. In the case of trehalose polymers with
high amine content and cross-linking, the Tg was ca. 43.6 °C regardless of the presence of CNFs. At lower
amine content and cross-linking, the Tg decreased from 62 to ca. 50 °C in the presence of CNFs. 

2.4

## Hydrogels/Microgels/Nanogels
Hydrogels
are highly cross-linked polymer networks able to trap and retain large
amounts of water that have many applications in biomedicine and biotechnology. Like thermosets, hydrogels containing trehalose
have been made. Our group proposed a simple two-step synthesis to
prepare trehalose-based hydrogels. , Trehalose
was modified by etherification with 4-vinylbenzyl chloride, and after
precipitation in dichloromethane (DCM) a mixture of mono-, di-, and
trisubstituted monomers was obtained. The crude mixture was polymerized
directly in water at room temperature using ammonium persulfate (APS)
and tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) as a co-initiator pair, with
the multisubstituted monomer acting as the chemical cross-linker.
The purified hydrogel was obtained as a colorless powder, although
this first attempt provided only a modest 17% yield. By increasing the 4-vinylbenzyl chloride to trehalose ratio,
greater trehalose modification was achieved, with a preference for
the monosubstituted monomer ( a). The scaled up multigram reaction gave a 76% yield,
a large increase from that of the previous synthesis. Many solvent
systems were screened to identify a greener alternative to the precipitation
step that previously used toxic DCM and hexane. Eventually, ethyl
acetate/toluene (2:3) was selected as that afforded the highest yield
of 64% after radical gelation, which occurred within 10 min. 
 The examples discussed above employed chemical
cross-linking, but
trehalose polymers can also be physically cross-linked to form hydrogels.
When well-engineered, these hydrogels can be reversible and even stimuli
responsive. For instance, our group synthesized a glucose-responsive
trehalose polymer hydrogel for insulin stabilization and delivery,
taking advantage of the dynamic covalent bond formed between phenyl
boronic acids (PBA) and diol containing molecules. A styrenyl trehalose
polymer was prepared by FRP and mixed in phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) with an 8-arm PEG bearing PBA at every end group. A gel formed
within 5 min, and it was hypothesized that the multivalency of the
trehalose polymer favors gelation since trehalose itself has a very
low affinity for PBA. Due to the higher binding affinity of PBA for
glucose compared to trehalose, in the presence of glucose, the polymer
was displaced, cross-linking was broken, and the hydrogel dissolved
in a concentration dependent manner. 
Burek and co-workers designed a series of thermoresponsive and
acid degradable hydrogels using modified trehalose as a cross-linker
and N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) as a monomer. − Trehalose was functionalized with 2-, 3-, or 4-allyloxybenzaldehyde
to form diacetals regioselectively at the C4 and C6 positions. These
trehalose cross-linkers were insoluble in water; thus, water/dimethylformamide
(DMF) mixtures were employed for the polymerization, with 1:1 and
2:1 ratios. The TEMED/APS co-initiator pair was used to generate the
initial radicals, with TEMED maintaining a basic pH to avoid acetal
hydrolysis throughout the 2 h polymerizations at room temperature.
The effects of the solvent system, cross-linker identity, and mole
percent on the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) and volume
phase transition temperature (VPTT) of the hydrogels were studied.
Due to the low mole percent of trehalose cross-linker, VPTTs were
similar to those of NIPAM homopolymer hydrogels with a range of 31.5–34.5
°C until the mole percent was increased to 4%, when the VPTT
unexpectedly decreased to 29 °C. The authors hypothesized that
water preferentially interacts with trehalose moieties, resulting
in weakened hydrogen bonds with the NIPAM amide groups. The same characteristics
also influenced swelling abilities, with low cross-linking, 2-isomers,
and higher water content in the solvent system leading to higher swelling
capacity. Due to the presence of acetals in the cross-linker, the
hydrogel degraded within hours in an acidic solution at room temperature,
although no degradation occurred at acidic pH above the VPTT, due
to the shrinkage of the hydrogel and masking of the acetals ( ). 
 To obtain a hydrogel able to degrade at physiological
temperatures,
hydrophilic comonomers, such as acrylamide (AAm), N-(2-hydroxyethyl)acrylamide (HEAAm), and N,N-dimethylacrylamide (DMAAm), were added in the polymerization
feed. Using 13–25 mol % of these comonomers, hydrogels with
VPTTs of 37–42 °C were obtained, with HEAAm and AAm containing
hydrogels showing the highest VPTT values. With increased hydrophilic
comonomer content, swelling capacities and degradation rates also
increased, making degradation possible at physiological temperature. Among other parameters that were altered to
tune and modify thermomechanical and degradations properties, a different
trehalose comonomer, 4,6-O-acrylidene-α,α-d-trehalose, was prepared and found to be water-soluble, eliminating
the need for DMF during the polymerization. Moreover, it enabled a
higher overall trehalose content for protein stabilization, although
incorporation was much lower than the theoretical feed content (up
to a 75% difference). 
Alternatively,
hydrogels with an even higher trehalose content,
up to 51.7 wt %, were prepared to treat neurodegenerative diseases,
with trehalose as the drug being delivered. To ensure these hydrogels would also be degradable at basic pH,
an ester moiety was added to the trehalose cross-linker. , The degradation characteristics could additionally be controlled
by the nature of the linker in the para and meta positions of the
acetals and by the hydrophilicity of comonomers used. , A final set of degradable chitosan hydrogels was prepared using
a diiodo-trehalose derivative as the chemical cross-linker; these
hydrogels could be fully biodegraded in 96 h by trehalase. 
Interestingly, O’Shea et al. developed
tricomposite hydrogels
by thiol–ene reaction using enzyme derived diacrylate trehalose,
PEG diacrylate, and trimethylolpropane ethoxylate thiolactate as a
thiol-bearing cross-linker ( b). Within a few minutes of mixing, hydrogels with
varied trehalose contents were prepared and their rate of degradation
increased proportionally with trehalose amount. Using attenuated total
reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR), they
found that the signal strength of the hydroxyl hydrogen bond was linearly
dependent on trehalose content. Moreover, hydrogels in the semidry
state were found to possess more robust mechanical properties, such
as stiffness and tensile strength, compared to fully hydrated gels,
and complete dehydration led to materials with properties comparable
to analogue gels not containing trehalose, confirming the importance
of the carbohydrate in hydrogen bond formation and organization. 
Related to hydrogels in composition and
applications, nanogels
and microgels are defined as highly cross-linked hydrophilic polymers
that form particles at the nanometer or micrometer scale, respectively.
Our group synthesized trehalose-based nanogels for the stabilization
and delivery of glucagon, an unstable peptide hormone used in the
treatment of hypoglycemia. Briefly, a
PDS containing trehalose copolymer, poly(pyridyl disulfide methacrylate-co-trehalose methacrylate) (PDSMA-co-TrMA),
was prepared by FRP of the respective monomers. Cross-linking with
a 1 kDa PEG-dithiol yielded nanogels of about 9 nm regardless of the
amount of cross-linker, although the size could be controlled by tuning
the polymer concentration. By installing two thiols on glucagon using
dimethyl-3,3′-dithio-bis(propionimidate), the peptide itself
could be used as a cross-linker to form nanogels in less than 2 h,
with a 60–70% yield. A higher pyridyl disulfide methacrylate
(PDSMA) content, a polymer concentration of 0.5−1 mg mL–1, and a 5:1 thiol ratio of polymer to glucagon resulted
in more uniform particles. Another example
was provided by Wandzik and co-workers, where an acrylidene trehalose
monomer and its diacrylidene version, as a cross-linker, were copolymerized
with NIPAM to form thermoresponsive microgels by surfactant-free precipitation
copolymerization. The microgels had diameters in the 200–400
nm range, dispersities < 0.1, and shrinking abilities above their
VPTT (ca. 29 °C). However, when dispersed in solutions with ionic
strengths of 0.165 M, such as in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle
medium (DMEM) cell culture media, the microgels aggregated into a
macroscopic hydrogel above their VPTT. 

3

## Applications of Trehalose Materials
3.1

## Protein and Peptide Stabilization and Delivery
Based
on the known stabilization ability, hydrophilicity, and biocompatibility
of trehalose as a small molecule, many groups hypothesized that incorporating
trehalose into a polymer would aid in drug solubility and prevent
the aggregation, denaturation, and degradation of proteins. In the
following section, the ability of trehalose polymers to stabilize
proteins and peptides as excipients, conjugates, and hydrogels ( ) will be discussed.
 3.1.1

## Excipients
Linear or star homopolymers
and copolymers of trehalose have been studied as excipients for different
protein drugs, although all have utilized pendant trehalose monomers
rather than incorporating trehalose into the backbone.
The earliest
published use of trehalose polymers specifically to stabilize proteins
as an excipient and as a protein polymer conjugate came from our group
in 2012. RAFT polymerization of styrenyl
trehalose yielded polymers that stabilize hen egg white lysozyme (HEWL)
against heat (90 °C for 1 h, 100 mol equiv of polymer) and lyophilization
(10 cycles, 1 or 100 mol equiv of polymer). The HEWL activity after
exposure to these stressors was vastly improved with added trehalose
polymer, up to 100% activity as compared to less than 20% activity
without polymer added. Furthermore, the polymeric form was considerably
better than trehalose at stabilizing the enzyme, although comparable
stabilization ability was found for the excipient or conjugate form. This study was rapidly expanded to include other
trehalose side chain polymers. The derived
polymers, as well as small molecule trehalose, were applied in 1–80
weight equivalents (wt equiv) to horseradish peroxidase (HRP), β-galactosidase
(β-gal), and GOx. The percent original activity of β-gal
after three lyophilization cycles or of HRP ( a) and GOx after heating (70 °C for
30 min) clearly showed that all of the polymer excipient formulations,
except for 1 wt equiv of pTrMA with β-gal, significantly increased
the remaining enzyme activity (60–100% HRP, 50–100%
β-gal, and 80–95% GOx activity) relative to no excipient
or trehalose. Moreover, the polymers were noncytotoxic in vitro on
four different cell lines up to 8 mg/mL ( b) and were
later found to also be nontoxic in vivo. 
 Counterintuitively, initial experiments with trehalose polymers
did not appear to have improved stabilization with increasing MW even though concentration clearly played a critical
role in stabilizing proteins. , , Eventually, the stabilization effect was confirmed to be MW dependent
for trehalose poly(ester)s. Pelegri-O’Day
et al. found that, while keeping the total amount of polymer or trehalose
in solution constant, increasing the MW of trehalose-based polymer
excipients resulted in more stable protein formulations. A later study with pTMA showed that the molecular
weight effect was only observed at lower concentrations of polymer,
with larger polymers requiring a significantly lower concentration
in order to fully stabilize the protein insulin when compared with
smaller polymers ( ). Due to the polymer backbone
connecting individual trehalose molecules, the likelihood of a higher
concentration of trehalose molecules in the polymer interacting with
the protein surface is increased. This effect is named multivalency.
Taking the effect of both MW and concentration into account, trehalose
polymer formulations were optimized to reduce the total amount of
polymer needed to stabilize proteins. 
 After exploring the initial range of model enzymes,
researchers
began employing trehalose polymers to improve the formulation properties
and stability of therapeutically relevant drugs: insulin, , , , granulocyte colony stimulating factor (GCSF), , and probucal as well as antibodies. Trehalose polystyrene, polymethacrylate, , polycaprolactone, polyvalerolactone,
polycarbonate, and polylactide polymers were all able to maintain fully intact insulin (97–100%)
despite heat and agitation (37 °C and 250 rpm for 3–4
h). Although these polymers have yet to be compared in a single experiment,
Pelegri-O’Day et al. found that, with 10 wt equiv of the ROP
degradable polymers, there was no difference in insulin stabilization,
indicating that the side chain trehalose was more important to the
stabilizing properties than the polymer backbone was. Additionally,
Messina et al. found that all of the different regioisomers of poly(trehalose
styrenyl ether) fully stabilized insulin to mechanical agitation. Thus, the backbone and regioisomer may not be
as critical factors as the polymer molecular weight and concentration.
An additional therapeutic that has been studied with a range of
different trehalose polymers is GCSF, a particularly unstable protein.
The degradable poly(trehalose caprolactone) maintained GCSF activity
even after both mild (4 °C for 1.5 h) and aggressive (60 °C
for 30 min) temperature changes with 100 wt equiv as measured by improved
proliferation of murine myeloid leukemia NFS-60 cells, 168% and 179%,
respectively, which hold comparison with fresh GCSF, showing 150–180%
proliferation. In a similar heating assay
(40 °C for 30 min), a RAFT copolymerized BMDO-trehalose copolymer
maintained GCSF activity at 66% with 10 wt equiv and 51% with 500
wt equiv. While this was better than
no excipient (ca. 30% activity), the degradable copolymer results
were inferior to the nondegradable poly(trehalose styrenyl acetal)
which resulted in 75–100% remaining GCSF activity depending
on the weight equivalents used. While
all three polymers were found to be noncytotoxic up to 1 mg/mL (primary
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) or human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) and murine myeloblasts
NFS-60), the degradation products of
the BMDO-trehalose copolymer reduced cell viability to 74%. Similarly
to how the BMDO-trehalose copolymer better stabilized GCSF at lower
weight equivalents than higher ones, Mantovani’s group found
that linear and four-arm methacrylate-based trehalose polymers were
better at stabilizing a highly concentrated model monoclonal antibody
(mAb1, 50 mg/mL) against heat (25 and 40 °C for 7 weeks) with
a lower mole equivalent of polymer (1 and 100 vs 200 and 300). The reason for this is uncertain, but it demonstrates
that various weight equivalents should be studied. Indeed, our group
explored the effect of polymer concentration and MW of poly(trehalose
methacrylate) on the stabilization of intact insulin, determined by
HPLC analysis. This study showed that, for insulin, increasing the
MW or concentration led to greater insulin stability against environmental
stresses ( ). Based on the similarities in stabilization
properties across polymer backbones, it seems likely that excipient
formulations of the other trehalose polymers could be similarly optimized
to reduce the amount of polymer in solution.

3.1.2

## Conjugates
Another application
of trehalose polymers is in protein–polymer conjugates. Conjugating
the polymer directly to the protein could further improve the stabilization
of the protein. The polymer may extend the half-life of the biomolecules
in vivo as an additional advantage: conjugation of PEG, or PEGylation,
has been extensively shown to lengthen the half-life of proteins,
including some already on the market such as Somavert, PEGasys, and
Neulasta. , Beyond PEG, poly(oxazoline),
poly(N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide), and other
polymers have also been used to improve the pharmacokinetics (PK)
of biologics, so trehalose polymers were anticipated to improve PK. 
Thus far, the only reports of protein
conjugates made with trehalose polymers have come from the Maynard
lab, using diverse conjugation methods, proteins, and trehalose polymers.
The first publication focused on modification of HEWL. “Grafting to” with RAFT synthesized
styrenyl trehalose polymer (MW: 8.0–49.5 kDa) formed the conjugates.
Conjugation improved the enzyme stability against both heat (1 h at
90 °C) and lyophilization (10 cycles) with up to 100% or 81%
HEWL activity, respectively, relative to 17% and 18% of protein alone.
The conjugates were more active after lyophilization than polymer
as excipient or trehalose, while the conjugate and excipient were
comparable after heat stress.
This work was expanded to focus
on one of the most widely used
therapeutic proteins, insulin, both as a nonspecific “grafted
to” conjugate and as a site-specific
“grafted from” conjugate. The conjugation approaches relied on reductive amination or nucleophilic
substitution, respectively. In the second case, the greater nucleophilicity
of lysine B29 over the N-terminal amines was exploited by increasing
the reaction pH from 8.0 to 9.5 in order to favor single modification
of insulin using a nitrophenyl carbonate-activated ATRP initiator
as described above ( b). While the dose of insulin required for each conjugate
was higher than that of native insulin, the site-specifically modified
insulin required only a 3-fold dosage as compared to the 5-fold dosage
of the original conjugate (16 vs 48 vs 80 μg/kg) in order to
lower glucose concentrations in mice comparably ( a). Excitingly, both insulin
conjugates stabilized insulin against an accelerated heat stress (90
°C for 30 min) better than unmodified insulin did; by insulin
tolerance tests (ITT) in mice, the conjugate retained 100% activity
after heat treatment in vivo, while the unmodified protein had 17%
activity ( c). The longer insulin plasma lifetime
of the conjugate compared to insulin was confirmed in mice. The trehalose
polymer prolonged the plasma lifetime in a comparable fashion to a
similarly sized PEG conjugate, suggesting that the polymers have that
advantage of PEG ( b). 
 Disulfide bonds were exploited
for nonspecifically or site-selectively
conjugated trehalose polymers onto an antibody and Fab, respectively. The conjugation of multiple 16 kDa trehalose
polymers to Herceptin and the single 23 kDa trehalose polymer to Herceptin
Fab did decrease binding affinity as indicated by ELISA, likely due
to polymer steric hindrance: conjugates had higher EC50’s relative to the unmodified antibody and Fab, 0.90 vs 0.26
nM and 2.74 vs 0.56 nM, respectively. However, conjugation of the
trehalose polymer significantly increased the stability of both the
antibody and Fab against heat stress (75 °C for 1 h) with around
50% soluble antibody or Fab conjugate rather than 0% soluble unmodified.
All of the above protein–polymer conjugates provided the
greater protein stability that is expected from trehalose polymers.
Additionally, comparing the stability of conjugates to trehalose polymer
and trehalose small molecule excipient formulations has shown some
improvements in stabilization. , For insulin, polymer
conjugation also enhanced the circulation time of the biomolecule
and prolonged the effect of treatment. , Similar results
are anticipated for other proteins. As expected, decreased bioactivity
was the main drawback observed from conjugation, , , but site-selectivity provided some improvement.
Similar to PEG conjugates, improved protein half-life is expected
to help mitigate the loss of activity, achieving a balance between
the two properties. Additionally, it is likely that a more conscious
selection of conjugation sites could further reduce the loss in bioactivity,
as thus far conjugation sites have been chosen for their accessibility
as site-selective points of modification without considering the effects
on the biomolecule activity. Alternatively, the use of self-immolative
linkers to form polymer/protein conjugates, that release the native
protein following certain stimuli, could also mitigate the loss of
activity. , 
Interestingly, polymers
with trehalose in the backbone have never
been tested as an excipient or conjugate for protein stabilization
but only for delivery of genetic material as discussed below. In the
conjugate case, this might be due to a lack of general conjugation
strategies that can be applied to a variety of backbone polymers because
of the difficulty in obtaining mono-end-functionalized (i.e., semitelechelic)
polymers. A study with a direct comparison of the two strategies could
help elucidate the structure–activity relationship of the polymer
and inform future advancements.

3.1.3

## Hydrogels
Hydrogels should allow
both the immobilization of proteins as well as controlled or sustained
release through passive diffusion or through network degradation and
dissolution. They present some common advantages of drug delivery
systems compared to simple linear polymers, such as ease of functionalization,
responsiveness to stimuli, degradability, and the possibility to deliver
multiple drugs at the same time. Additionally, it can be expected
that incorporating trehalose into hydrogels would provide the same
or better protein stabilization observed with linear trehalose polymers.
Thus, hydrogels have been explored for protein stabilization.
Our group and the Langer group simultaneously published two different
routes for creating enzyme-stabilizing trehalose hydrogels. Our system
used styrenyl or multistyrenyl trehalose as monomer and cross-linker,
respectively, and focused more on the protein stabilization. Langer’s group utilized trehalose diacrylate
as part of a three-component system with diacrylate-PEG and trimethylolpropane
ethoxylate thiolactate (TMPE-TL) and explored protein release kinetics. Our group utilized a styrenyl trehalose hydrogel
to stabilize phytase, which is an enzyme important to agriculture
feed stocks. Variable pressure scanning election microscopy (SEM)
was used to characterize the hydrogel, and the images revealed micrometer-sized
pores which could easily fit the enzyme ( a,b). Thus, phytase was entrapped within
the network structure at 1, 10, and 40 wt equiv of hydrogel to protein.
The trehalose hydrogel was able to protect phytase during exposure
to feedstock production-relevant conditions (90 °C, 1 min, 53
wt % water), maintaining 80–100% activity as compared to 39%
activity for phytase alone. The best performing formulation (10 wt
equiv) was used to study release kinetics, and ca. 80% of the phytase
was released in 6 h from the hydrogels by passive diffusion with no
agitation. An expansion of this work
tested additional feedstock relevant enzymes (phytase, β-glucanase,
and xylanase). As with the original work,
the enzymes were encapsulated in the trehalose hydrogel, exposed to
90 °C for 1 min with 50 wt % water, and then tested for activity.
Similar to the original work, with 10 wt equiv, >98% activity was
maintained with all enzymes, while only 15–58% enzyme activity
was observed when the protein was tested alone ( c). Notably, phytase and xylanase
activity was increased to above 100% in the presence of the gel, possibly
due to the gel network and/or trehalose scaffold stabilization enhancing
substrate binding or stabilizing the proteins in the activity assay
conditions. These results were also compared to the stability of the
enzymes in the presence of the same amount of molecular trehalose
(0.54, 2.7, and 5.4 wt equiv), and only the highest concentration
consistently retained any significant amount of activity (65–100%)
relative to the enzymes alone; all hydrogel concentrations outperformed
the equivalent concentrations of free trehalose. Importantly, similar
to the original work, sustained quantitative release of phytase was
achieved within 4 h at 37 °C ( d), which is a relevant time frame for the
average feed transit in the small intestine of pigs. 
 Langer and co-workers developed three-component
trehalose/PEG/TMPE
hydrogels with varying amounts (6.25–100% diacrylate component)
of trehalose incorporation, which were found to have faster protein
release with increasing trehalose content for both ovalbumin (OVA)
and IgG proteins, despite the large difference in size ( a). This, along with a triphasic release profile,
suggested that the initial diffusion release gives way to network
degradation-based release and that the higher the amount of trehalose
component, the faster this degradation occurs. Furthermore, HRP was
encapsulated in the hydrogel, then exposed to heat (37 °C for
up to 12 days), and subsequently recovered to test activity and showed
that a higher trehalose content results in higher recovered activity
(100% activity for gel with maximum trehalose content vs 50% for gel
with half the amount of trehalose vs 7% for gel with 25% amount of
trehalose) ( b). Conversely, the hydrogels with less trehalose content could destabilize
the protein, because hydrolysis of the network exposed carboxylate
groups. 
 In an effort to expand the functionality
of trehalose-based hydrogels,
Burek et al. incorporated NIPAM, mono- and bis-functionalized trehalose,
and other hydrophilic comonomers into thermoresponsive diacetal trehalose
hydrogels. By modifying the solvent system
and the concentration of different components, these hydrogels could
be tuned for specific LCST, VPTT, and degradation rates. Interestingly,
model protein bovine serum albumin (BSA) was encapsulated in the hydrogels
and the release rate could be controlled based on the temperature
and swollen/dry state. That was particularly important to avoid the
so-called “burst release”, that is, the sudden and immediate
release of a high percentage of a drug payload upon administration.
Typically, linear or sustained release is preferred to achieve a longer
therapeutic effect, while controlled release is employed when time
or stimuli responsiveness is desired. However, burst release can be
utilized effectively for emergency treatments, where a high amount
of drug needs to enter circulation rapidly. From swollen hydrogels,
BSA was released in PBS pH 7.4 at 37 °C in a burst fashion, with
about 60–70% of the protein released within 30 min. Nearly
quantitative release was reached within 2–6 h regardless of
the hydrogel components. However, if the gels were dried first, release
was delayed with higher trehalose content hydrogels and proceeded
in linear fashion, only reaching complete release in 5–8 h
( a). The
hydrogels at different concentrations were also shown to stabilize
β-Gal against acidic pH (pH 3.0) and 37 °C for 1.5–6
h with 65–95% (10 wt %) or 56–88% (5 wt %) enzyme activity
remaining compared to 42–82% for β-gal alone. The authors further explored the tunability
of the hydrogel degradability and subsequent protein release by using
different trehalose diacetal cross-linkers that could be cleaved in
acidic conditions and lead to hydrogel degradation, as demonstrated
by SEM ( b),
to yield soluble polymer chains and free trehalose. With this design, the release profile of BSA in PBS pH
5.0 at 37 °C was initially linear and sustained until degradation
of the hydrogel and enlarging pore size resulted in a burst of BSA,
typically after 40–50% had already been released. The onset
of this degradation-based burst release of BSA at pH 5.0 began at
21–72 h with complete release in 30–100 h, but this
burst was suppressed at the physiological pH of 7.4. This pH-dependent release profile could be useful in the
treatment of diseases involving acidic environments, such as cancer.
 Our group further explored
responsive trehalose hydrogels by incorporating
boronic acid into networks to confer glucose responsiveness for insulin
release. By mixing pendant trehalose
polymers with 8-arm PEGs end-capped with boronic acid groups, insulin
was encapsulated within a hydrogel formed by the dynamic covalent
bonds between boronic acid and trehalose. In a hyperglycemic event,
the network is dissolved by glucose displacing trehalose in the boronic
acid interaction, due to the 5.4× higher binding affinity of
glucose with boronic acid, and the insulin released. The trehalose
hydrogel stabilized insulin against accelerated heating conditions
(90 °C, 30 min) with 74% intact insulin relative to 39% with
the 8-arm PEG or only 2% with insulin alone. Furthermore, insulin
was completely released from the hydrogel in 1 h at 1000 mg/dL glucose
or 2 h at 500 mg/dL glucose, whereas at 0 mg/dL glucose only 60% of
insulin was released in 2 h, demonstrating glucose-dependent release. Nonetheless, background release at 0 mg/dL was
high, and thus, further tuning of the system would be needed to achieve
useful on-demand insulin release. In a similar vein, glucagon, a highly
unstable peptide used in hypoglycemia treatment, was entrapped within
a nanosized trehalose network matrix to improve stabilization. Glucagon is a peptide notorious for its isoelectric
point around physiological pH, making it very difficult to stably
store in solution. Moreover, it can form toxic fibrils when in solution
for a few days or exposed to higher temperatures. Glucagon was modified
to have two free thiol groups and then used to cross-link the trehalose-PDSMA
copolymer. The resulting nanogels increased the solution stability
of glucagon from less than 24 h at physiological pH to at least 3
weeks. This was demonstrated by the lack of glucagon fibrils in transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) images after 7 and 21 days in solution and
by the appearance of the fibrils after reduction of the nanogel ( a–c). The
in vitro activity of the thiolated glucagon was found to be similar
to that of native glucagon. Glucagon released under mild reducing
conditions was fully active ( d). Wang et al. prepared
SENs for the stabilization of GOx using statistical or block copolymers.
The former was able to generate stronger binding with the enzyme as
shown by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), although DLS suggested
that block copolymers favored the formation of SENs over multienzyme
nanoparticles. Moreover, block copolymers were slightly better protein
stabilizers (Tm: 74.1–75.2 °C
vs 72.7–73.2 °C), as measured by differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC). A more pronounced stabilization effect was found
when SENs were cross-linked (Tm: 82.8–83.2
°C), indicating that physical entrapment is more important for
this particular system than the nature of the polymer or the sugar.
Increasing the percentage of trehalose to 100% in the cross-linked
shell resulted in a higher Tm of 92.8
°C. The same trends could be found when measuring enzyme activity
after exposure to 60 °C for 60 min, with remaining activity increasing
from 25% to 65% after cross-linking and to 85% when encapsulated within
a trehalose shell. 
 Other recent examples of trehalose-based hydrogels have shown expanded
uses for skin burn treatment and for
cryopreservation and to act as a cell scaffold. , Recently, microgels were used as soft matrices for 3D cell culture or in microfluidic microchambers. 
As with other hydrogel drug delivery
systems, these trehalose-containing
hydrogels and nanogels offer tunable release and degradation delivery
matrices. Even the multifunctionalized trehalose used as monomers
and cross-linkers still provide stabilization for the encapsulated
proteins. Avoiding burst release is an ongoing issue, but the tunability
on display already indicates that optimization is possible to match
a specific application. Additionally, both thermoresponsive and chemically
responsive trehalose hydrogels have already shown great promise for
stabilization and controlled delivery of proteins.

3.2

## Gene Delivery
Gene therapy recently
witnessed a surge in translation to the clinic with the approval and
widespread use of mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccines, and many more nanoparticle
gene formulations for a range of diseases are currently in clinical
trials. Polymeric materials play an
important role in these nonviral gene delivery strategies, including
trehalose materials. 
Backbone
poly(trehalose) was selected early on by the Reineke group to prepare
cationic copolymers carrying amidines or quaternary amines for plasmid DNA
(pDNA) stabilization and delivery. The influence of sugar size, charge
spacing, and charge type of the trehalose polymer polyplexes on transfection,
toxicity, and pDNA stabilization were investigated. Amidine-based
polyplexes demonstrated higher transfection ability than quaternary
amines while achieving comparable toxicity. The presence of trehalose significantly lowered the cytotoxicity. This work was expanded using a click-chemistry-based
synthetic strategy to prepare cationic glycopolymers with trehalose
in the backbone as described above. − While trehalose promoted stability and prevented aggregation, the
cationic units interacted with DNA phosphate groups and amido-triazole
units promoted DNA binding via hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions.
As such, triazole containing polymers complexed pDNA at lower amine/phosphate
(N/P) ratios when compared to analogues without triazoles. Moreover,
increasing the number of amine repeating units (1–6, polymers
labeled Tr1–Tr6, a) resulted in higher pDNA affinity, polyplex stability
in cell media, pDNA transfection, and gene expression in HeLa cells. Nonetheless, although cellular uptake was higher
than that for Jet-PEI, a common polymer used for gene delivery, gene
expression was lower, possibly indicating low endosomal escape ( b). Higher amine
content yielded higher cell toxicity, but trehalose copolymers were
still much less toxic than Jet-PEI (70% vs 25% at N/P = 15) ( c). While Tr1 was found to interact with pDNA through
an electrostatic mechanism, Tr3 and especially Tr4 were more dependent
on base pair interactions though hydrogen bonding, probably due to
the longer spacer between amine groups. 
 Although the amine number
did initially have a significant effect
on polyplex formation, transfection, and stability, the effect tailed
off at higher numbers (Tr5, Tr6), as evidenced by reduced transfection
of polyplexed pDNA into rat mesenchymal stem cells (RMSC) (20% Tr4
vs 10% Tr5 vs 8% Tr6). To investigate
chain length effect on biological properties, Tr4 was prepared at
different DP (35, 53, 75, and 100). Interestingly, while chain length
had no apparent impact on pDNA binding, heparin displacement, ITC,
pDNA degradation, or gene uptake, increasing the DP resulted in higher
polyplex stability in complete media and higher gene expression, but
with an unfortunate increase of toxicity in HeLa cells ( d). Moreover, higher DP Tr4 showed an impressive
40% transfection of pDNA in RMSCs, demonstrating
that as expected transfection is dependent on cell type. Further,
exploring different polymer end groups of Tr4 polymers led to the
discovery that carboxyl, octyl, and oligoethyleneamine groups caused
higher pDNA uptake and gene expression than other end groups, including
adamantane, alkynyl-oligoethyleneamine, and azido trehalose in HeLa
cells. The azido-trehalose end-capped
Tr4 was also found to have reduced efficacy compared to PEGs and triphenylacetamide
end groups in RMSCs. Additionally, 4D
spatiotemporal cellular imaging was used to demonstrate that decreasing
nanoparticle size allowed for faster advancement to the perinuclear
zone. In particular, Tr4 was internalized via the caveolae/Rab-5 dependent
pathway, a type of endocytosis involving the formation of flask-shaped
vesicles of the cell plasma membrane, and reached the area within
4 h of cellular internalization ( e). 
Importantly,
RAFT side chain trehalose-cation block copolymers
stabilized pDNA polyplexes against one cycle of lyophilization and
reconstitution; both colloidal stability and gene delivery ability
were retained after the physical process, outperforming PEG analogues
( ). Other than pDNA, Tr4 , and RAFT copolymers were used to deliver
small interfering RNA (siRNA), demonstrating theragnostic abilities and colloidal and freeze/drying stabilization
properties. 
 Finally, additives to increase transfection efficiencies
and protein
expression have been explored for delivering pDNA with trehalose-based
polymers. Increasing the heparin concentration was found to linearly
increase green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression in primary fibroblasts
(PFB), human liver carcinoma HepG2, and human glioblastoma U87 cells
(4-fold), despite only increasing cellular internalization in HepG2
cells. It is possible that this discrepancy is due to heparin-coated
Tr4 polyplexes being taken up by a different endocytic pathway (clathrin-mediated
endocytosis and micropinocytosis) or to enhanced nuclear delivery. The effect of plasmid size on gene delivery
was studied with heparin-coated polyplexes, and, predictably, larger
plasmids (10 kbp) had reduced gene expression in primary human dermal
fibroblasts (HDFs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). An
alternative additive, dexamethasone, was used to destabilize the nuclear
barrier and increase trafficking enhancing transfection and expression. 
Both backbone and side chain trehalose
polymers were used to deliver
genetic material to cells and increase protein expression. Most studies
focused on pDNA transfection, and overall Tr4 emerged as the best
candidate in term of uptake, gene expression and low toxicity. However,
biological properties can be further tuned by changing chemical parameters
such as DP or chain end functionalities. Interestingly, the use of
RAFT polymerization allowed the preparation of block copolymers, with
trehalose and cationic block distinctly separated, whereas click chemistry
afforded alternate copolymers with each unit of trehalose separated
by a cationic monomer. Although a direct comparison of the two strategies
has not been reported yet, it is not surprising that RAFT block copolymers
were able to stabilize polyplexes to lyophilization cycles, likely
due to the greater clustering effect of the trehalose block, and even
deliver pDNA in vivo. Conversely, Tr1–6 alternating backbone
copolymers formed more stable polyplexes in complex media, possibly
due to the higher interaction and stabilization provided by the triazole
moiety, which results also in high uptake and transfection.

3.3

## Aggregate Prevention for Amyloid Disorders
Trehalose
has been found to be effective in the treatment of different
neurodegenerative pathologies including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s,
and Huntington’s diseases. , Although
the exact mechanism is not clear yet, it likely includes antiaggregation,
anti-inflammation, and, in particular, autophagy induction, that is,
the intracellular removal or destruction of unnecessary or dysfunctional
components. Trehalose glycoclusters and nanocarriers were more efficient in delaying fibril formation and protein aggregation
and protecting neurons than the small molecule trehalose, indicating
that the cluster effect seen in stabilizing proteins with trehalose
polymers is also applicable. Recently, poly(trehalose) was also found
to be effective in preventing Aβ peptide aggregation, part of
the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. In two instances, Miura
and co-workers prepared poly(trehalose)s by FRP and studied their
effect on Aβ aggregation inhibition. , The polymer with a short adipoyl trehalose spacer showed greater
aggregation inhibition than molecular trehalose, 20% vs 60% aggregation,
respectively, protecting HeLa cells from Aβ cytotoxicity. However,
a longer alkyl side spacer, sebacoyl, was found to induce aggregation. To eliminate the spacer contribution, acrylamide-trehalose
copolymers were prepared and found to better prevent Aβ aggregation
than small molecule trehalose-, maltose-, and lactose-based polymers,
again decreasing Aβ aggregate cytotoxicity ( ). Surprisingly, polymers
with higher trehalose content were not more efficient at preventing
aggregation, possibly due to higher steric hindrance and difficulties
generating hydrogen bonds. 
 Notably, Debnath et al. prepared poly(trehalose) zwitterionic nanoparticles
with an iron oxide core that were able to bind and completely disintegrate
mature Aβ peptide or HEWL fibrils in 10 days or 20 h, respectively.
These rates were 3–4 orders of magnitude more effective than
that of molecular trehalose in preventing aggregation and aggregation-derived
cytotoxicity in a Huntington’s disease cell or mouse model. The same group found similar results for other
neurodegenerative diseases using different trehalose nanoparticles:
with a gold core, dendrimer-based, poly(lactide)-based to confer degradability
and biocompatibility, or prepared by
heating/carbonization of trehalose. In
every case, the nanoparticles were more effective than molecular trehalose,
again indicating that trehalose is more effective in a multivalent
system than in small molecule form.

3.4

## Others
Beyond the applications discussed
thus far, there have been assorted forays into other realms including
photolithographic printing of proteins and metal-incorporated nanoparticles
for the detection of bacteria and infection prevention. Trehalose
polymers have enabled the direct-write electron-beam lithography of
multiple proteins into nanometric and submicrometer width lines and
patterns. Direct write of proteins is not possible because the process
requires harsh electron beam irradiation and vacuum. By spin coating
proteins with a styrenyl ether trehalose polymer (polySET), many proteins
were able to withstand multiple iterations of these harsh conditions.
The original experiments patterning HRP, GOx, IgG (chicken, human,
mouse), streptavidin (SAv), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) found that there was significantly
more active protein with the trehalose polymer than with trehalose,
PEG, or nothing ( a,b). This protein patterning
method was applied as the basis for a sandwich immunoassay measuring
inflammatory cytokine production by localized surface plasmon resonance
(LSPR). Antibodies for two common cytokines,
interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
could be sequentially lithographically patterned using the trehalose
polymer and still capture their respective cytokine from LPS-stimulated
cell media.
 In the pursuit of detecting and treating bacterial infections,
trehalose polymers have been incorporated into nanoparticles encapsulating
iron oxide, poly(trehalose acrylate)
AuNPs, or CNFs. As trehalose is a key component of the cell wall and glycolipids
of some organisms, some bacteria, including mycobacteria, have lectins
that will specifically bind to trehalose. Based on an earlier iteration
of iron oxide nanoparticles directly incorporating trehalose that
interacted strongly with Mycobacterium smegmatis, researchers synthesized iron oxide encapsulated
pendant trehalose poly(lactic acid) polymer micelle nanoparticles. The nanoparticles not only specifically detected M. smegmatis over Staphylococcus epidermidis and Escherichia coli (Gram-positive and Gram-negative,
respectively) but also could facilitate bacteria removal by magnetically
dragging the trehalose-lectin bound bacteria ( c–e). Using similar trehalose–lectin
interactions, it was possible to reduce bacterial infection by grafting
a RAFT polymerized poly(trehalose acrylate) to AuNPs by thiol–gold
interaction or to CNFs using aldehyde-functionalized
poly(trehalose) via Passerini reaction. The trehalose nanoparticles prevented HUVECs from being infected
with Staphylococcus aureus by preferentially binding
with HUVEC lectins, thereby inhibiting the first step in bacterial
infection, i.e., adhesion via lectin-glycan bonding. Trehalose-coated
AuNPs and CNFs were found to be noncytotoxic up to 0.75 and 0.50 mg/mL,
respectively, for either mouse macrophage RAW 264.7 cells or HUVECs.

4

## Outlook and Future Perspective
In terms of
academic research, trehalose has long been used as
a stabilizer for a variety of biologics, such as protein and genetic
material, viruses, and microorganisms, or as a cryoprotectant for cells and tissues. Moreover, trehalose is being explored as a therapeutic
for cancer and metabolic diseases, as an autophagy inducer, and as a stabilizer for nebulized formulations that does
not induce toxicity in the lungs, among
many other applications. However, in the past decade, poly(trehalose)
has emerged as a promising and potentially superior alternative to
the sugar alone. In this Perspective, recent advances in the synthesis
and applications of trehalose-based linear polymers, resins, gels,
and nanoparticles were presented and discussed. Based on the presented
knowledge, some open questions remain: How do polymers with trehalose
in the backbone or in the side chain compare against each other? How
can the synthesis be improved to increase yields and avoid tedious
protection steps? What is the in vivo safety and metabolic fate of
trehalose polymers? Which other application or diseases can be tackled
with poly(trehalose)? More generally, what does the future hold for
this sugar with unique properties?
The Maynard group has pioneered
the use of poly(trehalose) for
protein stabilization, and similarly the Reineke group has advanced
the field for gene therapy with many contributions. Nonetheless, despite
the widespread and successful use of poly(trehalose) for biologic
stabilization, there is a surprising lack of research into the use
of poly(trehalose) as a therapeutic. Only a few examples can be found
in the literature, including work from Miura and co-workers that first
demonstrated the efficacy of poly(trehalose) in the treatment of neurodegenerative
disease. In more recent years, the Jana group proposed many formulation
strategies to advance this research field. Additionally, in the last
couple of years, the Langer and Stenzel groups simultaneously proved
how poly(trehalose) is effective in the detection and prevention of
bacterial infections. Considering the wide variety of therapeutic
applications that have been explored for molecular trehalose, we expect
that poly(trehalose) may similarly provide more therapeutic opportunities
yet to be developed.
Similarly, the success of trehalose in
the pharmaceutical industry
may indicate the great potential of poly(trehalose) use in the future.
Specifically, in 2011, there were only four U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approved therapeutic formulations (Herceptin, Avastin, Lucentis,
and Advante) containing trehalose as an excipient, while several others
were approved in Japan. Moreover, trehalose was already widely used
in the food and cosmetic industries and
was classified as GRAS (generally regarded as safe) by the FDA. Just
a decade later, with the increased use and technology advancement
of protein therapeutics, trehalose usage has witnessed an incredible
surge in the biopharmaceutical field and in FDA approved products.
In the antibody production field alone, trehalose is now the second
most commonly used sugar for osmolality-adjustment, with over 20 antibody
formulations, and it is the second most common sugar used as a lyoprotectant,
present in 11 products. Furthermore,
the biocompatibility of trehalose makes it an ideal candidate for
other fields, including plastic manufacturing and agriculture. In
this regard, some of the trehalose-based thermoset resins already
showed their potential. One could assert that molecular trehalose
is fully explored for its potential. Considering its similarity to
trehalose, the next step in the field should be to further explore
poly(trehalose) as an excipient for therapeutic applications. A multitude
of trehalose polymers have already shown increased efficacy in stabilizing
and preventing biomacromolecules aggregation compared to molecular
trehalose and other sugars both in vitro and in vivo, making poly(trehalose)
an interesting candidate for incorporation into therapeutic protein
formulations. Many synthetic strategies have proven successful in
synthesizing trehalose polymers, with click chemistry and controlled
radical polymerization being the most popular preparation methods
for backbone and side chain trehalose polymers, respectively. Nonetheless,
monomer preparation is still challenging, often requiring tedious
protection/deprotection steps and providing low yields. An improved
synthetic methodology is required to move poly(trehalose) toward the
clinic. Further, despite all this promising research, few studies
on the safety and in vivo fate of trehalose polymers can be found.
Comprehensive studies regarding poly(trehalose) biodistribution, long-term
accumulation, pharmacokinetics, immunogenicity, and toxicity in general
are needed to advance this polymer that shows great potential for
routine use in everyday life.

## Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
This work was
supported by the UCLA Innovation Fund and by the National Institutes
of Health by Grant Number NIDDK R01DK127908.
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.