3433avcAntiviral Chemistry & ChemotherapyAntivir Chem ChemotherSAGE PublicationsPMC9623364962336496233643630501510.1177/20402066221130853Meeting report: 34th international conference on antiviral
research
BrancaleAndrea CarterKara DelangLeen DevalJerome DurantelDavid GentryBrian G JordanRobert JulanderJustin G LoMichael K Pérez-PérezMaria-Jesús SchangLuis M Seley-RadtkeKatherine L ShiPei-Yong VasudevanSubhash G WhitleyRichard J SpenglerJessica R 
1Cardiff School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, UK
2Evotec SE, Hamburg, Germany
3KU Leuven Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Transplantation, Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and
Chemotherapy, Leuven, Belgium
4Aligos Therapeutics, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA
5CIRI - Centre International de Recherche
en Infectiologie, Univ Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Inserm, U1111,
CNRS, UMR5308, ENS Lyon, Lyon, 69007, France
6Department of Pharmaceutical and Administrative Sciences, College of
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Drake University, Des Moines, IA, USA
7Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA
8Institute for Antiviral Research, Department of Animal, Dairy, and
Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, USA
9Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High Consequence
Pathogens and Pathology, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
10Instituto de Química Médica (IQM-CSIC), Madrid, Spain
11Baker Institute for Animal Health and Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
12Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, MD, USA
13Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA
14Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 8-College Road 169857, Singapore
15Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus,
Queensland, Australia
16Professor of Pediatrics, Microbiology, Medicine and Neurosurgery, The University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA✉Jessica R. Spengler, Viral Special
Pathogens Branch, Division of High Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road NE, MS H18-SB, Atlanta, GA
30329, USA. Email: JSpengler@cdc.gov

271020223020402066221130853204020662211308532112022© The Author(s) 2022This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access page (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
As a result of the multiple gathering and travels restrictions during the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, the annual meeting of the International Society for
Antiviral Research (ISAR), the International Conference on Antiviral Research
(ICAR), could not be held in person in 2021. Nonetheless, ISAR successfully
organized a remote conference, retaining the most critical aspects of all ICARs,
a collegiate gathering of researchers in academia, industry, government and
non-governmental institutions working to develop, identify, and evaluate
effective antiviral therapy for the benefit of all human beings. This article
highlights the 2021 remote meeting, which presented the advances and objectives
of antiviral and vaccine discovery, research, and development. The meeting
resulted in a dynamic and effective exchange of ideas and information,
positively impacting the prompt progress towards new and effective prophylaxis
and therapeutics.
Keywords: Virus, antiviral, therapeutics, vaccines, ICAR, ISAR meeting

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jul 2; Accepted 2022 Sep 19; Collection date 2022.

## Introduction
As a result of the SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pandemic, ICAR 2021 was held virtually from
Monday, March 22, through Friday, March 26, 2021, using the OnAIR virtual event
platform. ISAR was fully committed to make this virtual meeting an interactive
experience by preserving as many of the components of past in-person ICAR meetings
as possible. Of course, the attendees could not enjoy casual (and not so casual)
conversations over coffee breaks, cheese and wine poster sessions, lunches, dinners,
or banquets. Nonetheless, they were given ample access to all speakers and to each
other, and the sessions were marked by lively interactions between attendees,
presenters, and panel members. The virtual platform used, and the decision of having
the sessions pre-recorded and available for pre- (and post-) viewing, were conducive
to many productive interactions. The interactivity was particularly highlighted
during the speed dating, women in science, poster awards, and PechaKucha competition
activities. This last activity was as lively and enjoyable as usual, although some
presenters came to realize the challenges of having complex videos in their slides
during remote presentations. As ISAR is an international society, the interactive
live sessions were organized around two prime-time periods to accommodate speakers
and attendees from around the world, held 11:00 am through 1:00 pm and 8:00 pm
through 10:00pm EST In addition, attendees were able to listen to the talks, which
were all recorded, at their leisure.
Similar to in-person meetings of previous years, the virtual ICAR2021 program was
outstanding, including topical keynote lectures on SARS-CoV-2 vaccines, antivirals,
and a variety of models, as well as on pandemic preparedness. As other viruses are
not going away, the problems caused by them still demand new antivirals. The
sessions on influenza, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), herpes, hepatitis,
retroviruses, and arboviruses were complemented with sessions on therapeutics and
innovations. Altogether, the program provided an excellent update on the many
advances in the field, from understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases to
optimizing new chemical entities targeting them.
Below are summaries of the presentations prepared by the session Chairs and other
contributors to provide an overview of the excellence of ICAR2021.

## Session 1: influenza and respiratory syncytial virus

## Treating RSV infection. Louis Bont, M.D., Ph.D., University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
Louis Bont discussed the incidence and impact of RSV in the
Netherlands and globally, noting severe disease in both pediatric and elderly
patients. While currently no treatment is approved for RSV bronchiolitis,
Louis presented several considerations that may improve
intervention options: timing of treatment, simultaneous use of immunomodulators,
and the promise of new antibodies that are both efficacious and stable over
extended time periods.
The F protein of RSV, a key target for antivirals, has two conformational
variants: a functional pre-fusion confirmation and an inert post-fusion
confirmation. Epitopes differ between conformations; antibodies directed at the
pre-fusion epitopes are highly neutralizing, while those directed against
post-fusion epitopes are not. Numerous RSV antivirals are under development,
including antibodies (mostly against F), fusion inhibitors (also targeting F),
and nucleoside analogues targeting intracellular RSV. A healthy human challenge
model for RSV is used to evaluate antiviral-mediated replication inhibition in
low-risk populations. However, high efficacy in vitro often does not translate
to improved clinical outcomes. For example, presatovir, a fusion inhibitor, does
not decrease viral loads or improve the clinical response in patients treated
4–5 days after symptom onset. Similarly, while inhaled ALX-0171, a formulation
of antibodies against RSV F, dose-dependently decrease RSV replication in
airways of infected infants treated 3 days after onset of symptoms, it did not
lead to a positive clinical response. These studies and data from other
respiratory virus antivirals suggest that clinical development of RSV treatments
should focus on initiating treatment earlier, within 24 h of symptom onset.
Is stopping viral replication the way forward, or should other contributors to
viral pathogenesis also be modulated? Louis discussed how immunopathogenesis may
explain challenges in developing antivirals, and suggested immune system
suppression in conjunction with antiviral treatment. In particular, high levels
of neutrophils are seen in the airways of RSV-infected children; these are
phagocytosing cells that degranulate and form neutrophil extracellular traps
(NETs). Checkpoint treatment can decrease formation of NETosis and may work in
conjunction with antivirals to improve outcome.
Finally, Louis discussed vaccines and immunoprophylaxis. He highlighted
next-generation monoclonal antibodies (mAb) with demonstrated potency and
notably long half-lives (MEDI8897), which allow a single prophylactic injection
to effectively prevent severe RSV in the first year of life. However, he
cautioned that mAb-resistant RSV mutants have been selected in vitro to these
newly highly promising treatments, suggesting that though they are not yet seen
in nature, they may occur, as has happened in clinical trials with other
candidate mAb.

## The polymerase complex of the non-segmented negative strand RNA viruses:
differences in initiation mechanisms. Rachel Fearns, Ph.D., Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Rachel Fearns centered her lecture in the context of the work of her
lab, which studies RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRP) of non-segmented,
negative-strand RNA viruses (nsNSVs), particularly that of RSV. In RSV, as in
other nsNSVs, the genome is used both for transcription, providing capped and
polyadenylated mRNAs, and for replication, which produces the encapsidated
antigenome RNA. Her group has found that RSV polymerase initiates RNA synthesis
from two different sites: position 1U in the promoter region begins RNA
replication, while position 3C begins transcription, the latter being dominant.
Rachel's lab is studying in detail how start site usage is controlled using
cell-based minigenome and cell-free biochemical assays. The evidence to date
points to relative concentrations of NTP, particularly ATP and GTP, and promoter
sequences as the main determining factors for start site usage. The group has
also addressed whether similar control strategies are used by other nsNSVs. So
far, Rachel's group has found that human metapneumovirus (HMPV), which, like
RSV, belongs to the family Pneumoviridae, has a similar
promoter sequence and probably uses a similar mechanism as RSV. However, viruses
in the families Paramyxoviridae or
Rhabdoviridae (e.g., vesicular stomatitis virus [VSV])
appear to have a single initiation site at 1U.
These data from the biochemical assays examining RSV initiation mechanisms were
further analysed at the structural level. During the formation of the initiation
complex, the priming loop contains an aromatic or proline residue that interacts
through stacking interactions with the incoming NTP. The VSV priming loop
extends into the active site, whereas the putative RSV priming loop does not.
Thus, Rachel's group performed mutational analysis of the aromatic and proline
residues in this presumed RSV priming loop. The data indicated that Pro1261
indeed stabilizes the initiation complex and may also function as a priming
residue. When mutated to Ala, the LP1261A defect was overcome with
high concentrations of NTPs or by changing the divalent cation from
Mg2+ to Mn2+. The more open structure of RSV, in which
the priming loop does not project into the active site, might be required for
the initiation complex to be able to start from two different positions (1U or
3C). Dissecting the similarities and differences among the polymerases of nsNSVs
will be very helpful for the development of broad antiviral strategies.

## Now that we have the world's attention, posed the question: are we prepared
for the next pandemic? Ron Fouchier, Ph.D., Erasmus Mc Rotterdam, Dept
Viroscience, Rotterdam, Netherlands
In his talk, Ron Fouchier emphasized the zoonotic nature of many
respiratory viruses and the importance of animal hosts in pandemics, and
discussed vaccination of animals and limiting exposure to potentially infectious
hosts as approaches to mitigate human disease. He spoke about a generalized lack
of global preparedness for pandemics and a need for pro-active programs,
preferably intervening when changes occur in animal populations, or at least
shortly after disease spreads to humans. Ideally, spillover into domestic
animals and humans could be prevented, but if it did occur, broadly acting
antivirals would be available.
Influenza is an important example of a zoonotic agent with pandemic potential.
Influenza pandemics are frequent and range in severity, and mortality is high in
interpandemic years. A single zoonotic event becomes a threat when it acquires
the ability for human-to-human transmission. Ron presented ongoing research on
influenza to identify high-risk viruses among a diverse virus family and to
design broadly active vaccine candidates against these viruses. When
investigating whether bird influenza virus could acquire the ability to transmit
between mammalian models through droplets and aerosols, Ron's group identified
three traits required to confer this phenotype: (1) a switch in receptor
specificity; (2) pH stabilization of the HA protein; and (3) polymerase
adaptation that allows replication at lower temperatures in mammalian upper
airways. This knowledge can now be applied in “smart surveillance” to permit
early intervention, stopping outbreaks in domestic species and preventing
putative pandemics when changes detected in surveyed virus samples indicate
increased pandemic potential. Ron finished by discussing pre-pandemic vaccine
design and development of a universal H5 vaccine candidate. He noted potential
added value in using biological response modifiers in treatment regimens and a
desire to develop improved options for use in pandemic scenarios.
In summary, Ron expressed the need for better preparedness for future pandemics
via the development and use of diagnostics and surveillance networks, basic
research of infectious disease pandemic threats, preventive actions (e.g., at
the infected host-human interface), novel vaccine and antiviral development, and
availability of generic drugs that may prevent co-morbidities and improve speed
of recovery.

## The flavonoid cyanidin shows antiviral and immunomodulatory properties
against RSV, in vitro and in vivo. Carlos Bueno, Ph.D., Departamento de Química
Biológica-IQUIBICEN, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina
Carlos Bueno presented the fourth talk of the session. He started by
highlighting that RSV is able to interfere with the immune system and the host
response. Interfering with the immune response could thus be exploited for
therapeutic strategies against RSV. Carlos’ presentation centered on cyanidin, a
flavonoid present in red berries and other fruits. The anti-inflammatory effects
of this natural product have been described, and in his presentation, Carlos
analyzed its antiviral activity and immunomodulatory properties against RSV in
vitro and in vivo. In particular, he showed that cyanidin modulated cytokine
production in RSV-infected epithelial cells and TLR-stimulated epithelial cells.
Treatment with cyanidin in a murine model of RSV improved the course of the
acute disease, particularly evidenced by reduced RSV titers in the lungs and
attenuated airway inflammation. The presented data support considering cyanidin
as a potential therapeutic alternative against RSV infection.

## Antagonism by a baloxavir and oseltamivir drug combination against
baloxavir-resistant, but not against oseltamivir-resistant influenza a virus
infections in mice. Scott Gibson, B.S., Institute for Antiviral Research, Utah
State University, Logan, Utah, USA
The presentation by Scott Gibson illustrated different outcomes of
drug combinations in treating influenza depending on the pre-existence of
drug-resistant mutations. Scott used two drugs with different mechanisms of
action: baloxavir marboxil, an inhibitor of influenza cap-dependent
endonuclease, and oseltamivir, a well-established neuraminidase inhibitor. A
baloxavir marboxil-resistant influenza A/California/04/2009 (H1N1pdm) virus,
selected by passaging the virus in increasing concentrations of baloxavir
marboxil, and an oseltamivir-resistant clinical isolate influenza, A/Hong
Kong/2369/2009 (H1N1pdm), were used to challenge BALB/c mice. Combination
therapy was less protective than oseltamivir monotherapy against the
baloxavir-resistant virus, suggesting strong antagonism of the
oseltamivir-baloxavir combination against a baloxavir-resistant virus.
Conversely, combination therapy provided higher protection against
oseltamivir-resistant influenza virus compared to oseltamivir monotherapy.
Baloxavir marboxil alone or in combination with oseltamivir showed a potent
antiviral effect against an oseltamivir-resistant, highly pathogenic avian
influenza virus, A/Taiwan/1/2017 H7N9.

## A single-dose live-attenuated YF17D-vectored SARS-Cov-2 vaccine candidate,
Lorena Sanchez-Felipe, Ph.D., KU Leuven, Rega Institute, Leuven, Belgium
Lorena Sanchez-Felipe presented the results of a large collaboration
between multiple institutions testing the efficacy of a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
candidate based on the live-attenuated YF17D vaccine. Three constructs
containing the wild-type protein expressing S1 and S2 and a cleavage mutant
version that only expresses S9 or one that expresses only S1, all inserted
between E and NS1-5, were produced. All constructs expressed the recombinant
genes and all produced small plaque phenotype, demonstrating attenuation. The
vaccines were tested in a hamster challenge model; the S1-expressing construct
was not highly immunogenic or protective, but the other two were, stimulating
strong antibody responses and protecting against a high dose challenge
(2 × 105 PFU/animal). Large reductions in viral infectivity and
RNA levels in the lungs and reduced pathology were noted at necropsy. Cell
responses were evaluated in a mouse model and, interestingly, the S1-expressing
construct, which was not efficacious in hamsters, induced the highest levels of
CD4 and CD8 cells expressing interferon (IFN)-γ and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-α. As expected, the vaccine also protects mice against lethal YFV
challenge. In non-human primates (NHP), the S0 vaccine also induced high levels
of antibodies, particularly neutralizing antibodies, and decreased viral
replication. In a second hamster experiment, a high single dose of vaccine
(104 PFU) produced strong antibody responses and protection in as
little as 10 days. These results were published in Nature.

## Session 2: pandemic preparedness
2021.

## Gertrude Elion memorial award lecture: innovation in the quest for treatment,
prevention, and cure of viral disease. William Lee, Ph.D., Gilead Sciences,
Foster City, California, USA
William Lee reflected on thirty years of antiviral discovery and
development at Gilead Sciences. As Head of Research for over twenty years, he
defined innovation as the fusion of ideas, invention, and execution that comes
together to create a product that improves the human experience. Innovation has
many origins and takes focus, time, resources, and passion. Over the past three
decades, such innovations have led to treatments for influenza, hepatitis B
virus (HBV), HIV, and SARS-CoV-2 infections, as well as to the cure for
hepatitis C virus (HCV). To illustrate his personal experience in antiviral
innovation, he reviewed the evolution of single-tablet HIV drug discovery and
treatment, including Atripla in 2006, Stribild in combination
in 2012, Genvoya in 2015, and Biktarvy in 2018. William emphasized that besides
developing new medicine, innovation should also include access to medicine in
low- and middle-income populations. Finally, he presented some exciting results
on using a broad neutralizing antibody (PGT121) and TLR7 agonist to induce a
simian-human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) cure in NHPs.

## Antivirals and preparedness for pandemics: what we have and what we need.
Tomas Cihlar, Ph.D., Gilead Sciences, Foster City, California, USA
Tomas Cihlar discussed how countermeasures for pandemic preparedness
should include surveillance, diagnostics, prevention, and treatment. Besides
influenza virus, the WHO has prioritized other viral pathogens with pandemic
potential, including filoviruses (Ebola and Marburg viruses), coronaviruses
(MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-1, and SARS-CoV-2), paramyxoviruses (Nipah virus and
henipaviruses), arenaviruses (Lassa virus); flaviviruses (Zika, dengue, West
Nile, and yellow fever viruses), alphaviruses (chikungunya virus), poxviruses
(smallpox virus), and “disease X,” the next emerging pathogen. He reviewed
(i) the available treatments for WHO priority pathogens;
(ii) two regulatory approval paths for medicine (regular
approval based on safety and efficacy from clinical trials and “Animal Rule”);
(iii) then-current COVID-19 therapy (antibody cocktails and
small molecule drugs such as remdesivir); (iv) two
complementary approaches for developing antivirals (antibody and small molecule
inhibitors); (v) antiviral approaches targeting viral proteins
and host proteins/pathways; (vi) options for developing
virus-specific and broad-spectrum antivirals; and (vii) pros
and cons of repurposing clinical drugs for new indications. To achieve
end-to-end drug discovery, consortia, coalitions, and partnerships are needed to
coordinate funding and execution between government, industry, academia, and
non-profit organizations.

## Scientific basis for the rapid development of highly effective RNA-based
COVID-19 vaccine. Philip Dormitzer, M.D., Ph.D., Pfizer, Pearl River, New York,
USA
Philip Dormitzer reviewed the lightspeed journey of Pfizer/BioNTech
COVID-19 vaccine (BTN162b2) development. Five innovations have contributed to
the rapid development of the COVID-19 mRNA vaccine: synthetic biology, RNA
platform, lipid nanoparticles for RNA delivery, spike antigen stabilized in the
prefusion conformation, and innovative clinical trials in both USA and Germany
using different age groups (18–55 and 65–85 years of age) in parallel. The speed
of vaccine development is essential for rapid control of epidemics and
pandemics. For example, vaccine development was too slow during the 2009 H1N1
pandemic. Philip showcased Novartis's pre-developed self-amplifying RNA
platform, which allows quick insertion of a viral antigen, that was deployed
when responding to the H7N9 flu outbreak in 2013, just eight days after the
viral sequence became available. Finally, he discussed the approaches to tackle
then newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 variants to safeguard the efficacy of COVID-19
vaccine. The neutralizing antibody results, together with real-world
effectiveness, suggest that BTN162b2 vaccine remained efficacious against those
variants. If needed, boosting with the same BTN162b2 vaccine could enhance
immune protection against new variants.

## SARS-CoV-2 biology and countermeasure development. Pei-Yong Shi, Ph.D.,
University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA
Pei-Yong Shi presented two reverse-genetics systems of SARS-CoV-2,
an infectious cDNA clone and a trans-complementation system for single-round
SARS-CoV-2 infection. The single-round SARS-CoV-2 infection system has the
potential to be used at biosafety level 2 (BSL2), which would accelerate
research on SARS-CoV-2 antivirals, vaccines, and virology by opening the field
to researchers without access to BSL3 containment. Using these systems,
Pei-Yong's team has developed reporter SARS-CoV-2 constructs expressing
luciferase and other reporter genes, enabling high-throughput antiviral
screening and testing neutralizing antibodies. These assays enabled the rapid
development of Pfizer/BioNTech's vaccine. These genetic systems have also
allowed studies of the biology of SARS-CoV-2 variants and efficacy of
vaccine-elicited antibody neutralization against these variants. For example,
the D614G substitution in the spike protein was the first prevalent variant
discovered in SARS-CoV-2. Using hamster and human primary airway cultures,
Pei-Yong and his collaborators showed that this substitution increases viral
replication in the upper respiratory tract in infected hamsters, promoting viral
transmission. Their results also showed that the spike N501Y substitution of
variant B.1.1.7 (alpha), the prevalent variant at the time, enhanced viral
spike/hACE2 receptor affinity, leading to increased viral transmission.

## EIDD-2749, a broad active ribonucleoside analog that is highly efficacious in
animal model of arenaviral disease. Brian Gowen, Ph.D., Utah State University,
Logan, Utah, USA
Lassa fever and other arenaviral haemorrhagic fevers are listed as priority viral
diseases by the WHO. Brian
Gowen showed that EIDD-2749, a uridine ribonucleoside analog, is a
broad-spectrum antiviral with good oral pharmacokinetics and once daily dosage.
EIDD-2749 has EC90 of 3.4 nM and 6.2 nM against Tacaribe virus and
Junin virus in Vero cell culture. Doses of 10 mg/kg EIDD-2749 fully protected
Tacaribe virus-infected AG129 mice from death even when treatment was initiated
7 days post exposure. Infected animals treated with the compound had
undetectable viral loads in organs and sera. Moreover, even treatment with as
low as 0.5 mg/kg EIDD-2749 fully protected AG129 mice infected with Tacaribe
virus. Additionally, treatment with 10 mg/kg EIDD-2749 starting 7 days post
exposure fully protected AG129 mice infected with Junin virus from death,
viremia, disease, and weight loss. Overall, the study shows that EIDD-2749 is a
promising potential therapeutic for treating disease caused by arenaviruses.

## Replication of alphaviruses: molecular mechanism? Dahai Luo, Ph.D., Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
To review alphavirus replication, Dahai
Luo first presented the structures and functions of viral nsP1
(MTase/GTPase), nsP2 (helicase/protease), nsP3 (with yet undefined roles in
replication and interactions with host proteins), and nsP4 (RdRP). Next, he
presented the crystal structure of Ross River virus snP4 polymerase domain at a
2.6 Å resolution. The structure showed considerable flexibility, and even
conserved domains were disordered. Although the polymerase motifs were not
tightly folded, the protein retained robust RNA polymerization activity, albeit
weaker than that of dengue NS5. Finally, Dahai presented the cryogenic electron
microscopy structure of chikungunya virus nsP1 protein. The structure showed
twelve NSP1 molecules forming a crown-like ring with a central channel ∼7 nM in
diameter that allows the transportation of viral RNA and proteins. The top ring
contains the catalytic domains (MTase/GTPase), and the bottom ring contains the
membrane-associated domain serving as the neck for assembly of the viral
replication complex. These studies are breakthroughs towards obtaining
high-resolution structures of the nsP1-4 replication complex, which could
provide new approaches for antiviral discovery and rational drug design.

## Inhibition of human norovirus replication in cell culture and zebrafish
larvae by a novel class of protease inhibitors. Jana Van Dycke, Ph.D., KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
No antiviral or vaccine is clinically approved for norovirus treatment and
prevention. The goal of the study presented by Jana
Van Dycke was to identify inhibitors of norovirus. Toward this
goal, they found that compound DC40_2267 acts as a viral protease inhibitor. It
inhibited the replication of mouse norovirus and human norovirus replicon with
EC50 of 40 nM and 10 nM, respectively. The compound also showed
antiviral activity in a cell-based protease assay. Resistance selection mapped
escape mutations to the viral protease. Micro-injection of human norovirus into
the yolk of zebrafish larvae showed viral replication, allowing in vivo testing
of antivirals. Treating the infected zebrafish larvae with compound DC40_2267 in
water led to a reduction of viral RNA. The compound also showed antiviral
activity in a mouse model, suggesting that DC40_2267 warrants further
development for treating norovirus.

## Session 3: COVID-19 vaccines
The coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines session was an exciting discussion of both
considerations and evaluation of antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 and vaccines, as
well as presentation of the recent data on vaccines developed by Moderna and
Janssen.

## A perspective on viral vaccine immunity and the issue of disease enhancement.
Ann Arvin, M.D., Stanford University, Vir Biotechnology, California, USA
Ann Arvin provided a timely presentation on vaccine enhanced disease
(VAED) in light of considerations for COVID-19 vaccine development and use.
Broadly, she discussed potential mechanisms of immune enhancement, clinical
experience with immune enhancement, and implications for COVID-19 vaccine
development. Mechanisms of humoral and cellular immunity that protect against
viruses may also theoretically enhance illness when an individual with
pre-existing immunity encounters the pathogen; this can occur via
antibody-dependent enhancement (Fab-dependent or Fc-mediated) and/or cellular
immunopathology (T cell responses that trigger exaggerated inflammatory
cytokines or skewed T cell responses that interfere with effective immune
control). However, clinical evidence for VAED is very rare. Noted exceptions
include antibody-dependent enhancement in rare cases of secondary dengue
infection, and VAED in children given formalin-inactivated RSV and measles
vaccines in the 1960s. Ann also spoke about influenza, a virus against which
pre-existing immunity is only partially protective and natural immunity
generally does not result in disease enhancement. She cited the exception of the
2009 H1N1 pandemic, during which cases of potential immune enhancement were
reported.
Ann finished by focusing on the implications for COVID-19 vaccine development.
She provided evidence that cross-reactivity between coronaviruses confers a
protective effect, and as additional support for the benefits of pre-existing
immunity, she noted that more rapid adaptive immune responses correlate with
improved outcomes. She discussed multi-inflammatory syndrome in children, which
was poorly understood early during the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic;
however, the data do not suggest that aberrant adaptive immune responses induce
this disorder. Ann emphasized that preventing SARS-CoV2 infection remains the
best approach. Antibody- or T cell-dependent responses have not been associated
with any negative findings in COVID-19 vaccine studies up to this point, and no
immune pathology was associated with vaccine candidates under investigation.
Importantly, with the above examples, Ann also discussed the limitations of in
vitro and animal model systems in investigating VAED potential. She emphasized
that VAED due to pre-existing immunity cannot be differentiated by clinical
signs or biomarkers. Therefore, evaluating the incidence and respective risk of
these events requires rigorous, large-scale clinical trials to assess vaccine
efficacy and adverse events, and these evaluations must continue in
post-licensing surveillance efforts.

## Antibody responses to the SARS-Cov-2 spike protein. Florian Krammer, Ph.D.,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA
Florian Krammer lectured about antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2
spike protein after infection and vaccination. He started with a review of the
structure of the virus, focusing on the spike protein, and described how his
group had started optimizing antibody tests very early. By February 2020 an
ELISA test was ready for clinical use. The test proved highly specific and
sensitive, detecting 99.5% of the PCR + donors and about 40% of the suspected
positives. More than 100,000 donors were screened by October, with some 30,000
scoring as positive, of whom more than 90% had robust anti-spike antibody
responses. The ELISA titres correlated well with neutralizing antibody responses
and showed that anti-spike antibodies are stable for ∼3 months, declining
somewhat by 5 months to stable levels until stabilizing at month 7. Not
surprisingly, the levels of antibody responses were highly heterogenous among
individuals. Florian discussed protection against reinfection in NHPs, with
little detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the upper respiratory tract and none in the
lungs. However, no antibody titer correlates of protection are yet known for
SARS-CoV-2 as there are for other viral infections or toxoids. Florian then
described the longitudinal PARIS cohort that was originally designed to follow
the long-term immunology of infected patients; when the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
became available, this cohort became well suited for evaluating the effects of
vaccines in recovered individuals. In brief, one dose of mRNA vaccine increased
and homogenized the antibody titres in all recovered patients, reaching high
titres, while the second dose did not provide obvious additional benefit. The
ratio of neutralizing to total antibodies was lower in vaccinated persons;
however, this resulted from increased levels of both neutralizing antibodies and
total antibodies, with the later increasing more, and thus poses no obvious
concern. Florian completed his talk by discussing variants of concern and their
effects on neutralizing antibodies. No simple relationship is evident between
variants and neutralization, with some variants being more or less resistant to
neutralization by some antibodies. Interestingly, the N-terminal domain (NTD),
not the receptor binding domain (RBD), was identified as the most important for
the ability of antibodies to neutralize the virus. Florian's talk presented a
tour-de-force effort to develop the tools for evaluating serological responses
and protection against infection and to apply these tools to a rapidly
progressing pandemic, garnering important and useful data used for decision
making in real time.

## Janssen's effort in the development of an Ad26-based COVID-19 vaccine,
Hanneke Schuitemaker, Ph.D., Janssen Vaccines and Prevention, Leiden,
Netherlands
Hanneke Schuitemaker presented the development of Janssen's
SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, Ad26.COV2.S. This vaccine is based on the adenovirus Ad26
platform, which uses a non-replicating vector to shuttle genes of interest into
the recipient. Various sequence modifications of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
were evaluated, including those optimizing expression, immunogenicity, and
manufacturability. Variations in signal peptides and prolines and the use of
membrane-associated or soluble protein were investigated. The final construct
was based on the pre-fusion structure of the spike protein and included a
mutation of the furin cleavage site, a stabilizing double proline substitution
in the hinge region, and a wild-type signal peptide; the final construct is a
membrane-associated protein.
Extensive testing in preclinical models, including NHP and Syrian hamsters,
demonstrated safety and efficacy as well as assisted in dose determination. In
the NHP model, infectious virus was found in lungs of all infected, unvaccinated
animals, but in none of the 6 vaccinated animals. In hamsters, significant
weight loss (20% or more) was seen in all unvaccinated animals after viral
challenge, but no weight loss was observed in animals vaccinated with either
dose evaluated. Lung tissue from unvaccinated infected hamsters showed virus and
infiltrating immune cells, while neither was seen in vaccinated hamsters.
Importantly, no vaccine-associated respiratory disease was observed.
The design of the phase 1/2a study was complex and meant to provide sufficient
data at the interim analysis to support the start of a phase 3 study. There were
3 cohorts; cohort 1 included 400 subjects aged 18–55 to demonstrate safety and
immunogenicity, cohort 2 included 270 subjects aged 18–55 to study duration of
response and boosting, and cohort 3 included 375 subjects 65 and older to
demonstrate safety and immunogenicity in this age group. Overall, the profile at
interim analysis showed acceptable safety and immunogenicity in all age groups,
with lower reactivity in cohort 3. Immunogenicity was demonstrated by ELISA,
neutralizing antibody assessment, antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis, and
CD4+ and CD8+ response assessment.
The phase 3 ENSEMBLE study started on September 21, 2020, with administering a
single dose of 5 × 1010 viral particles. The study was conducted on
three continents and eight countries, including Brazil and South Africa, where
emerging variants of concern beta and gamma were present at the time. The key
findings included 66% vaccine efficacy in protecting against moderate to severe
disease in all countries starting 2 weeks post vaccination. In the US, vaccine
efficacy was 72% against moderate to severe disease, and globally, the study
found 85% protection against severe disease. Protection levels were similar in
South Africa, which at the time of the trial had high circulating levels of
B.1.351 (beta) variant. Vaccine efficacy was similar across ages, comorbidity
status, gender, race, and ethnicity. Acceptable vaccine safety was observed,
with most adverse events being mild to moderate and resolving in 1–2 days.
Hanneke noted that Janssen has a significant focus on ensuring global access to
this vaccine. She noted that it takes many partners to make such a rapid and
robust development program successful, citing many of the same collaborators
mentioned by Tal Zaks.

## Overview of Moderna COVID-19 vaccine: safety, immunogenicity and efficacy,
Tal Zaks, M.D., Ph.D., Moderna, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Tal Zaks gave an update on the preclinical and clinical development
of Moderna's mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine. Prior to the
pandemic, Moderna had developed multiple viral vaccine programs, including those
against influenza virus, RSV, Zika virus, chikungunya virus, human
metapneumovirus/human parainfluenza virus 3, and cytomegalovirus, which provided
the company with tremendous experience and allowed them to rapidly apply their
platform to developing a COVID-19 vaccine. Tal asserted that this was
essentially a “digital medicine” approach, as time from sequencing the virus to
initiating vaccine development was 48 h. Working closely with NIH and the FDA in
their phase I studies, Moderna scientists were able to rapidly acquire the data
needed to support phase 2 studies. Initial safety data from phase 1 informed
phase 2 study design, and dose determination from phase 1 triggered
implementation of the phase 2 studies. Phase 1 studies demonstrated a tolerable
safety profile of the vaccine and showed consistent development of neutralizing
antibody titers after a single dose, with titers increasing even further after
the second dose. The response was independent of age and, on average,
post-vaccination antibody titers were higher than antibody levels in
convalescent serum.
Phase 3 studies had a simple design and were executed with strong collaboration
with NIH and FDA. Entry criteria included individuals at high risk of infection,
encompassing a significant proportion of patients over 65 and those with
comorbid conditions, and who were representative of US demographics. Tal noted
the difficulty of balancing the desire for a rapid trial with including
individuals that fully reflect the diversity of the US population. Analysis of
the study data revealed an overall 94.1% efficacy rate, with data at the time of
analysis demonstrating 100% protection against severe disease. Of note, data
from Pfizer's independently developed mRNA-based vaccine phase 3 trial, released
a week later, demonstrated efficacy within 1% of the Moderna results. Local
adverse events were mostly associated with pain at the injection site. Systemic
adverse events included fatigue, headache, myalgia, and arthralgia; these
effects increased with the second dose, but were transient, expected, and
correlated with the immune response. Thus, the safety profile was determined to
be tolerable enough to warrant use for clinical benefit.
A significant attribute of the Moderna mRNA vaccine is its relative stability.
The vaccine is stable for 6 months at −20°C, for 30 days at 4°C, and for 12 h at
room temperature. Additionally, a multi-dose vial is stable for 6 h after the
first puncture.
At the time of the talk, millions of individuals had been dosed with real-world
data confirming the tolerability and efficacy seen in the phase 3 study.
Evaluation of efficacy against variants of concern B.1.1.7 (alpha), B.1.351
(beta), and P.1 (gamma) also had shown protection, with neutralizing titers
against B.1.1.7 equivalent to titers against the targeted original Wuhan
variant. Neutralizing titers against beta and gamma were 6-fold lower than
against the Wuhan variant, but were still higher than those in convalescent
sera. Moderna was preparing a new vaccine based on the beta variant as a booster
for those previously vaccinated, as well as a primary vaccine.
Tal noted that this rapid success in vaccine development could only be achieved
with significant collaboration amongst many individuals and organizations,
including numerous ISAR members and other investigators and organizations, such
as BARDA, OWS, a diversity and inclusion panel, principal investigators, study
sites, and study participants.
Overall, like for SARS-CoV-2 antivirals, the rapid, coordinated, and robust
efforts to understand the immune response and bring forward safe and effective
vaccines has been unparalleled.

## Career development interactive workshop: You belong: finding confidence in the
face of self-doubt and impostor syndrome. Jen Heemstra, Ph.D., Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
The annual 2021 ICAR career event was an interactive workshop given by Jen
Heemstra, a full professor of chemistry with a very popular Twitter
account (@jenheemstra), on which she regularly shares advice on mentoring and
science careers.
The topic of the workshop was impostor syndrome, the feeling of doubting one's
abilities and accomplishments and feeling like a fraud. Nearly everyone struggles
with self-doubt or impostor syndrome in some form at various points in life, but the
changes and struggles brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic have exacerbated them.
Although eliminating these thoughts entirely may just not be possible, handles and
tools to recognize and manage them exist
Jen first reflected on her career path, confessing her own feelings of self-doubt. At
times she felt like she was moving backwards, further away from her career goals.
However, those times were not wasted: they gave her skills and perspectives that
made her even more successful. Her main point was to emphasize that while the career
path of others may look like a smooth, straight line, it really is not. She also
underscored the importance of having great mentors.
The interactive part of the workshop started after this interesting reflection on
Jen's career path. First, participants were asked to think about times when they
felt confident in their ability to do something well, how they felt during the
activity or event, and whether this confidence and attitude impacted the outcome.
Next, participants reflected on times when they doubted their ability do something
well, and why they felt that way. Jen pointed out that two things can undermine
confidence: what other people tell us and what we tell ourselves. We only have full
control over the latter category.
As a tool to refute such thoughts, Jen proposed a framework of facts and stories.
Based on facts, multiple stories can be crafted. Jen gave the example of starting a
postdoc in a new lab, needing to learn new techniques and not understanding much of
what is presented at group meetings. One story that can be made of this situation
is, “I am not good enough at research to belong here.” However, other facts could
tell a different story: “Other group members also had to learn these techniques when
they started; I have worked hard before to learn, and I can do it again.” With these
different facts, one can build a story of belonging and confidence of eventually
rising to the level of the other group members.
Jen provided some common stories people tend to tell themselves and solutions for
fighting them. For example, we tend to attribute positives to luck and negatives to
objective measures. In addition, we tend to overemphasize the importance of the
areas in which we are weak while underemphasizing the importance of our strong
areas.
Jen concluded that our confidence level can impact our enjoyment of activities and,
to some extent, their outcome. Importantly, she emphasized that individuals can
change their stories by taking a broader look at the facts. Finally, she advised
surrounding ourselves with people who help us to tell positive stories, and to
reciprocate such stories for them.

## Session 4: COVID-19 therapeutics and diversity speaker award
2021.

## Diversity speaker award recipient lecture: my career-long fascination with
antiviral therapeutics. Craig Cameron, Ph.D., University of North Carolina
School of Medicine
Craig Cameron was the recipient of the first ISAR's Diversity
Speaker Award, an award developed last year and initially funded by Dr Ann Kwong
and Dr Kathie Seley-Radtke. The purpose of the award is to recognize outstanding
scientists who have overcome adversity in their careers, including belonging to
any demographic underrepresented in science. Craig gave an excellent overview of
his career path and his current research focus. He began his career in 1997 at
Penn State University and remained there until a few years ago, when he
relocated to the University of North Carolina School of Medicine. Throughout his
career, he has had two major goals: developing antiviral strategies with
broad-spectrum potential and developing strategies based on viral enzyme
mechanisms. At the beginning of his career, Craig noted, information about
RdRPs, particularly poliovirus RdRP, was limited. To address that gap, he
developed a model system that remains an important tool for studying many RNA
viruses to this day.
In the 2000s, Craig's attention turned to ribavirin (RBV), an apparently typical
nucleoside chain terminator that seemed to have unique properties. His group
discovered a new mechanism of action for RBV, termed lethal mutagenesis, adding
a second mechanism of action for nucleosidic antivirals. As an extension of
those studies, Craig's group also developed a number of new assays to study
mitochondrial polymerases, which are typically off targets for nucleoside
analogues. As a result, the group was able to pursue new nucleoside analogues
that targeted these polymerases directly.
Craig next focused on developing magnetic tweezers, which allowed his group to
study nucleotide incorporation by RdRP into extending RNA and its inhibition.
Using this tool, he and others were able to obtain incorporation rates over
thousands of cycles of addition at single-nucleotide resolution. Using these
magnetic tweezers, his group studied nucleosides like favipiravir and
remdesivir, observing a phenomenon they termed pausing. Pausing subsequently
leads to backtracking from double-stranded RNA to single-stranded RNA, and back
to double-stranded, without dissociation. Thus, the group identified a third
type of mechanism if RdRP inhibition for nucleoside derivatives, pausing, in
addition to chain termination and lethal mutagenesis.
Finally, Craig discussed his current focus: developing tools for single cell
analysis. This approach is not only innovative, but needed due to the genetic
heterogenicity of virus and cell populations, variability of drug uptake,
metabolism, and other factors. Such tools would allow new insights into
infection, replication, antiviral activity, and metabolism of different viruses,
as well as infection outcomes for different populations. In short, Craig is an
impressive scientist who has long served as a role model for many!

## The SARS-CoV1 and 2 replication/transcription machinery and its future for
drug-design, Bruno Canard, Ph.D., CNRS and Aix-Marseille University, Marseille,
France
Bruno Canard provided an excellent background on viral polymerases
and how they have served as one of the best targets for nucleoside antiviral
drug design for decades. Unsurprisingly, the RdRP of coronaviruses, including
SARS-CoV-2, are currently being studied as antiviral targets. Several
nucleosides are being pursued as potential therapeutics against COVID-19.
Uniquely among human pathogenic viruses, the coronaviruses a encode
proof-reading exonuclease ExoN, nsp14 in SARS-CoV-2, which has rendered many
nucleoside analogues ineffective. Despite this challenge, the SARS-CoV RdRP is
endowed with several properties that still make it an attractive target. It is
at least 10-fold more active than any other known viral RdRP and has unusually
high nucleotide incorporation rate. Consequently, it is highly error prone, and
some nucleoside analogues, particularly 2ʹ-modified ones, are incorporated
efficiently. The RdRP and exonuclease activities lead to a trade-off between
insertion ability and the excision rate of the ExoN. Bruno's studies have shown
that the active site of SARS-CoV-2 polymerase has some peculiar features that
can be exploited in developing antiviral therapeutics.
Among the nucleosides tested against SARS-CoV-2 reviewed by Bruno is favipiravir,
a nucleobase that is transformed in vivo to a nucleoside triphosphate.
Favipiravir is classified as a lethal mutagenic nucleoside analogue. Another one
is remdesivir, which appears to work by several mechanisms including the typical
delayed chain termination of the RdRP and by inhibiting second strand synthesis.
Interestingly, though remdesivir is an ATP analogue, it is significantly
incorporated as a GTP analogue, and is indeed excised by nsp14 ExoN. In
addition, some reports also found mutagenic mechanisms for remdesivir.
Sofosbuvir was also discussed; however, Bruno mentioned that it is readily
discriminated against by the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase and is also excised by
nsp14.
Bruno discussed the new ExoN assay developed by his group and its
use to search for ExoN inhibitors. The last compound discussed was AT-527 from
Atea, which was the focus of J.P. Sommadossi's talk (Session 4).
Bruno showed the results of the structural studies currently conducted by his
lab, which revealed that two molecules of the AT-527 triphosphate interact with
the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase, one at the NIRAN site and the other at the RdRP
active site, highlighting how unique this compound is in the fight against
SARS-CoV-2.

## Development of small molecule protease inhibitors against SARS-Cov-2.
Kyeong-Ok Chang, D.V.M., Ph.D., Kansas State University, Kansas, USA
Kyeong-Ok
Chang presented a collaborative work between his group and those of
Dr. Scott Lovell (Kansas State University), Dr. Groutas (Wichita State
University), and Dr. Stanley Perlman (University of Iowa) developing small
molecule protease inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses. He
started by highlighting the significance of coronaviruses in human health,
describing the 3C-Like protease (3CLpro) as an antiviral target, and providing
its structural analysis. He highlighted that 3CLpro is a dimer and reviewed its
substrate specificity. In over 10 years of previous work with di- and
tri-peptidyl compounds, this collaboration had developed the dipeptidyl GC376,
which is active against many human and animal coronaviruses and has shown
activity in clinical trials against feline infectious peritonitis, a fatal
disease produced by a feline coronavirus. An FDA Investigational New Animal Drug
had already been filed for using GC376 to treat feline infectious peritonitis at
the time of the meeting. Further optimization has been pursued through target,
cell-based, and structural assays with a strong focus on the cap modifications.
Overall, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 were more potently inhibited than SARS-CoV by
most compounds. Two compounds were tested in infected primary human airway
endothelial cells. Several compounds were co-crystalized with MERS-CoV,
SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro. The structures show that the cap of one
compound interacted differently with the protease of MERS-CoV, which was
correlated to higher potency of the compound. One compound was shown to be
active in mice infected with a mouse-adapted strain of MERS-CoV. Treatment was
effective, though less potent, if started as late as 48 h after infection, but
starting later was ineffective. Other compounds were optimized for SARS-CoV-2
and tested in K18 hACE2 transgenic mice. In a model that induces about 50%
mortality, treatment resulted in survival of all animals, whereas in a model
that induces 100% lethality, 90% of treated mice survived. These studies have
shown that dipeptidyl compounds provide a solid foundation for the development
of antivirals against coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2.

## Targeting the proteases of SARS-Cov-2 and other RNA viruses. Christoph
Nitsche, Ph.D., Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
Christoph Nitsche discussed targeting the proteases of several RNA
viruses, particularly flaviviruses, alphaviruses, and now coronaviruses. He
began by describing Zika virus NS2B-NS3 protease in detail, then discussing
boronic acid peptide derivatives that potently inhibit NS2B-NS3 of Zika, dengue,
and West Nile viruses. However, NS2B-NS3 cleaves a dibasic peptide, which poses
a challenge to developing a peptide-based inhibitor with good activity in cells.
Using novel Click chemistry, Christoph's group developed a platform to generate
and screen macrocyclic peptides as an alternative class of high affinity
NS2B-NS3 inhibitors. The best compound had a Ki of
0.14 µM and a half-life of about 20 h in the presence of the protease.
Nonetheless, the protease activity has to date precluded co-crystalizing the
protease with the macrocyclic uncleaved inhibitor.
Christoph then discussed de novo selection of NS2B-NS3 inhibitors using mRNA
display, in which an RNA library is translated while the peptide remains
attached to the RNA encoding it via puromycin ligation. The peptides include
unnatural amino acids and cyclize spontaneously. Interestingly, none of the
enriched peptide sequences that were selected to be synthesized in larger scale
and tested bound to the active site. Two types of molecules were identified.
Some were potent inhibitors acting most likely via an allosteric inhibition
mechanism. Other compounds bound to the active site with high affinity but did
not inhibit. Christoph then moved on to discuss the structural similarities
between 3CLpro of SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2, as well as the
commonalities of their cleavage sites, which are mostly uncharged. He also
discussed the dimerization interface of 3CLpro as a potential drug target. Next,
Christoph reviewed several published SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro inhibitors and their
properties, highlighting that all of them attach covalently. Rational design of
macrocyclic peptide inhibitors that cannot covalently attach themselves to the
protease proved challenging. The group also attempted the above de novo
selection approach, which had successfully identified inhibitors of Zika virus
protease, and found some inhibitors made of canonical amino acids that need to
be further characterized and improved.

## AT-527, a double prodrug of a guanosine nucleotide analog, is a potent
inhibitor of SARS-Cov-2 in vitro and a promising oral antiviral for treatment of
COVID-19. Jean-Pierre Sommadossi, Ph.D., Atea Pharmaceuticals Inc, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA
Jean-Pierre
Sommadossi presented new biological data for AT-527, a new
nucleoside/tide therapeutic entering Phase 3 clinical trials for
COVID-19. As his group's studies have shown, AT-527 offers
several advantages over remdesivir, another nucleoside analogue in the same
mechanistic class which has received emergency authorization for treating
COVID-19. Both drugs disrupt viral replication by inhibiting the RdRP.
Remdesivir must be administered intravenously, while AT-527 is orally
bioavailable. Moreover, levels of the triphosphate of AT-527 (AT-9010) are
7-fold higher in human epithelial cells than those of triphosphate remdesivir.
In addition, AT-527 has a favorable safety profile, enhanced potency, and better
selectivity. Also of importance, the synthetic route to produce AT-527 is quite
facile and highly amenable to scale-up, whereas remdesivir is produced via a
tedious synthetic route and scaling up its production has been challenging due
to the hazardous steps needed to add the 1ʹ-cyano group.
AT-527 is similar to sofosbuvir, as both compounds feature a fluorine and a
methyl group at the 2ʹ-position of the nucleoside scaffold, and both are
McGuigan ProTide prodrugs. However, the nucleobase of AT-527 possesses a diamino
functionality, with the N6-NH2 group masked by a methyl group. This
group essentially serves as a second prodrug moiety, as it is removed in vivo to
yield the guanosine analogue. This is a highly advantageous feature of this
nucleoside, as other O-alkylated nucleoside analogues heretofore have exhibited
significant mutagenic toxicity, while the AT-527 N-alkyl diamino base has not.
Finally, in addition to being active against COVID-19, AT-527 has also shown
pan-genotypic activity against HCV and, in combination with daclatasvir, is more
effective and can potentially be given for less time than sofosbuvir. The first
HCV patient enrolled in the phase 3 clinical trial started treatment with AT-527
on April 30th, 2021, just before this virtual ICAR meeting.
Jean-Pierre hoped to report the results of the ongoing clinical trials for
AT-527 soon.

## Multidisciplinary approaches identify compounds as potential new therapeutics
for SARS-Cov-2, Benjamin Bailly, Ph.D., Institute for Glycomics, Griffith
University, Queensland, Australia
Benjamin Bailly described a drug repurposing screen that used
molecular docking to identify compounds that can inhibit the binding of
SARS-CoV-2 S to ACE2, followed by biophysical surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
testing of selected hits and testing antiviral activity in cell culture. More
than 50,000 compounds were screened in silico, identifying several potential
binders to ACE2 or to the RBD of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein. Of these hits, Evans,
Blue, EGCG, Levodopa, velapatasir and albrutinib scored as ACE2 binders in SPR,
and several of them inhibited interactions between S RBD and ACE2. Only a
handful of compounds bound to S on virus-like particles as evaluated by SPR, but
all of them inhibited the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 S RBD and ACE2. The
group then further evaluated the efficacy of selected compounds to inhibit
infection of Vero-E6 cells by an early Australian SARS-CoV-2 isolate closely
related to the original Wuhan isolate. Some compounds, including Evans, Blue,
and suramin (which had been previously identified as active against SARS-CoV-2)
inhibited SARS-CoV-2 infection with EC50 in the tens of micrograms,
and two others, lifitegrast and lumacaftor, also inhibited infection but only at
higher concentrations. Other compounds that inhibit S binding to ACE2 did not
inhibit infection. Benjamin finished the talk by discussing current and future
work continuing this project.

## Session 5: retroviruses and herpesviruses
This session consisted of six outstanding talks that focused, as the name of the
session implies, on diseases produced by retroviruses and herpesviruses, and on
treatments of such diseases. The talks can be divided into two categories based on
the virus discussed. We will first summarize talks covering herpesviruses, followed
by the lectures discussing retroviruses.

## HSV-1 and Alzheimer's disease: causation or association? Understanding the
biologic plausibility. Christine Johnston, M.D., University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA
Christine Johnston who provided sound evidence for the role that
herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) may play in the development of Alzheimer's
disease (AD). The hypothesis that HSV-1 may contribute to or even cause AD has
been proposed for decades, but actual causality has yet to be established. While
Christine's talk did not discuss evidence that establishes actual causality, she
did provide evidence from multiple disciplines (epidemiology, in vitro studies,
and animal models, to name the most important ones) that strengthen the case for
a causal link between HSV-1 and AD. One of the more prominent examples
demonstrates that HSV-1 infection is associated with amyloid beta production and
induces abnormal phosphorylation of tau protein, both of which are associated
with the development of AD.

## New helicase-primase drug candidates with sufficient target tissue exposure
affect latent neural herpes simplex virus infections. Gerald Kleymann, Ph.D.,
Innovative Molecules GmbH, Bad Salzuflen, NRW, Germany
Gerald Kleymann provided information about IM-250, a
helicase-primase drug for the treatment of HSV infections. IM-250 is ∼100-fold
more potent in vitro against wild-type HSV than the current standard of
treatment (acyclovir). In addition, this drug maintains a high level of activity
against HSV-1 isolates in a lethal challenge mouse model and against HSV-2
isolates in a non-lethal guinea pig model. IM-250 has a long in vivo half-life,
as well as good bioavailability, excellent target tissue exposure, and a broad
volume of distribution—all excellent qualities in a drug for clinical use.

## The molecularly engineered H84T banLec has broad-spectrum antiviral activity
against human herpesviruses. Megan Lloyd, Ph.D., SUNY Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, New York, USA
Megan Lloyd discussed the potential for H84T BanLec, a molecularly
engineered lectin, as treatment for diseases caused by the herpes family of
viruses. H84T BanLec binds to N-linked glycans on the viral envelope, preventing
viral entry, uncoating, and spread. Since N-linked glycans are present on the
envelope of herpesviruses, this compound was postulated to inhibit these
viruses. Indeed, H84T BanLec demonstrated broad-spectrum anti-herpesvirus
effects with little to no observed toxicity in vitro. In addition, H84T BanLec
was as effective as cidofovir (CDV) against varicella zoster virus (VZV) in vivo
but was better tolerated. Further experimentation demonstrated that H84T BanLec
prevented herpesvirus spread but not virion production in infected cells.

## Oral USC-373, an HPMPC prodrug, prevents varicella zoster virus replication
in a mouse model. Jennifer Moffat, Ph.D., SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, New York, USA
Jennifer Moffat discussed data demonstrating that oral USC-373, a
CDV analog/prodrug, is highly potent against VZV (both wild-type and
acyclovir-resistant variants). In addition, USC-373 prevented replication and
spread in vivo compared to vehicle controls regardless of route of
administration (injection or oral). Importantly, oral administration of the drug
had highly significant, long-lasting effects on viral replication even at the
lowest doses.

## Barriers to curing HIV infection. Robert Siliciano, M.D., Ph.D., Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Robert Siliciano discussed the problems associated with curing HIV
infections. Current anti-retroviral therapy prevents HIV replication but does
not eliminate the latent reservoirs in the long-lived memory CD4 T-cells from
which the virus can rebound, resulting in disease progression. Thus, any
curative HIV measure must include a means to remove or even eliminate extremely
stable latent HIV reservoirs. To achieve this goal, certain fundamental
parameters must be evaluated, such as accurately measuring reservoirs with
intact proviruses that can cause infection separately from defective proviruses
that cannot. In addition, the majority of cells in the reservoir are not
generated as a result of new infections, but rather by proliferation of
previously uninfected cells. Unfortunately, proliferation of these cells is
controlled by normal antigenic responses rather than viral control, meaning that
suppressing their proliferation can result in a severely compromised immune
system.

## Lenacapavir: a first-in-class phase 2/3 HIV capsid inhibitor with potential
for twice yearly dosing. Jennifer Zhang, M.Sc., Gilead Sciences, Inc, Foster
City, California, USA
Jennifer Zhang discussed the use of lenacapavir as a long-term
(low-dosing) agent. After several rounds of chemical modifications to optimize
potency and metabolic stability, the result was a compound that affects capsid
function at multiple points during the HIV lifecycle and can potentially be used
as a long-lasting therapeutic option. The ultimate driver for this project is
improving patient compliance, through the requirement of only an injection once
every 6 months instead of taking a pill daily without interruptions.

## Session 6: other viruses and women in science speaker award

## Women in science speaker award recipient lecture: genetic diversity and
evolution of herpesviruses. Graciela Andrei, Ph.D., Rega Institute for Medical
Research, Leuven, Belgium
Graciela Andrei provided an overview of herpesviruses, classical
anti-herpesvirus agents, and new antivirals with novel targets (helicase-primase
inhibitors, terminase inhibitors, and a UL97 protein kinase inhibitor). She
discussed that failure of antiviral therapy is largely due to presence of
mutations in viral kinases and herpesvirus DNA polymerases, and that most
resistant mutations map to conserved regions of these viral genes. She then
provided a summary of factors leading to herpesvirus drug resistance, including
viral factors, immune suppression, host factors, and drug factors.
Graciela suggested viewing antiviral drug resistance as an evolutionary process
and emphasized what can be learned from translational drug resistance research.
She then presented work with the Research Group for Antiviral Resistance
(RegaVir) platform, which provides rapid genotyping and/or phenotyping of
clinical isolates to analyse different aspects of drug resistance (e.g., novel
mutations, multi-drug resistance, compartmentalization, dynamic evolution,
heterogeneity). The aim is to identify viral drug resistance as reason for
therapy failure, optimize antiviral therapy, avoid drug toxicity, improve
patient care, and reduce cost of antiviral treatment. Graciela used several
patient-based examples to demonstrate the utility of the platform in providing
insights into herpesvirus diversity and rapid evolution in the immunocompromised
host, and into adjusting therapy. She highlighted the advantage of
next-generation sequencing (NGS) to detect minor viral populations and emergence
of drug resistance. She provided other examples in which RegaVir identified
contributors to increased risk for developing (multi)drug resistance in
immune-privileged sites, compartmentalization of (multi)drug resistance, and
simultaneous and concomitant herpesvirus infections.
Graciela completed the talk by discussing her laboratory work investigating a
novel mechanism that may contribute to herpesvirus genetic diversity: mutations
in DNA polymerase (DNApol) that affect DNA replication fidelity. Her lab
identified two novel amino acid changes in the C297W (3ʹ–5ʹ exonuclease domain)
and C981Y (thumb domain) of murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV-68) DNApol related
to a mutator phenotype; association of C297W with a mutator phenotype was
validated by CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. Finally, studying population evolution
by NGS indicated that the competitive fitness of MHV-68 mutator phenotype
viruses with and without antivirals was significantly impaired.

## Antiviral agents for serious RNA virus infections; a personalized medicine
approach. Judith Breuer, M.D., Institute of Child Health UCL, London, UK
Judith Breuer discussed the challenges and approaches to clinical
treatment of Othornaviridae infection, including measuring
efficacy in vivo and finding the cause of failed treatment in a talk entitled,
Antiviral agents for serious RNA virus infections; a personalized
medicine approach. Favipiravir is an RdRP-targeting drug with known
liver toxicity but broad-spectrum antiviral activity. It acts as a chain
terminator when administered at high concentrations, and has a lethal transition
mutagenesis effect when administered at low concentrations. Judith's group aimed
to evaluate if favipiravir treatment was associated with clinical improvement
and if a biomarker could be used to identify any clinical improvement. Treating
patients infected with norovirus, influenza B, or RSV indicated that clinical
improvement coincided with detection of lethal mutagenesis in these viruses. To
better understand how and why mutational frequency was associated with clinical
improvement, a mathematical model of the RSV mutational threshold was developed,
showing that ∼11 mutations/genome resulted in a 4–8 fold reduction in viral
fitness. Finally, in collaboration with Dr Joana Rocha-Pereira's laboratory, a
hamster model of SARS-CoV-2 infection was developed to address whether loss of
fitness correlated with clinical improvement. The collaborators observed that
low-frequency C→T and G→A mutations in the virus increased over time in a
dose-dependent manner when the hamsters were treated with favipiravir. No change
in viral load was detected, but a dose-dependent loss of viral replication
(fitness) and decreased host tissue damage were observed. Overall, Judith
concluded that favipiravir has a modest but important effect on clinical status;
treatment with favipiravir is associated with increased mutagenesis; mutagenesis
is shown in models to reduce viral fitness; and even significant reduction in
viral fitness is not associated with large reductions in viral load.
Judith continued by discussing combination therapy using an example of influenza
B treatment with favipiravir and zanamivir, in which favipiravir was found to
work synergistically. Finally, she discussed studies of remdesivir treatment in
patients, which did not produce evidence of mutagenesis; remdesivir was found to
suppresses viral load in some patients but not in others. She emphasized the
benefit of remdesivir but also the need for combination therapy to overcome
tissue penetration limitations of remdesivir used alone. Overall, RdRP
inhibitors have the potential to act as broad-spectrum antiviral agents against
RNA viruses, though their clinical benefit may not be associated with reduced
viral loads. Instead, some RdRP inhibitors induce lethal viral mutagenesis;
lethal mutagenesis levels of ∼15–20% appear to be associated with clinical
improvement and reduction in viral fitness. Finally, combination therapy,
including combinations with other RdRP inhibitors, is likely to produce
synergistic effects.

## Four-segmented Rift Valley fever virus as a novel live-attenuated vaccine for
animal and human use. Jeroen Kortekaas, Ph.D., Wageningen Bioveterinary
Research; BunyaVax, Lelystad, Netherlands
Jeroen Kortekaas presented ongoing work on a novel Rift Valley fever
virus (RVFV) vaccine platform in a talk entitled, Four-segmented Rift
Valley fever virus as a novel live-attenuated vaccine for animal and human
use. He first reported on innovations in animal model development,
describing a new model system in which RVFV is transmitted from lamb to lamb by
laboratory-reared Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. These models can be
used to study mosquito-mediated transmission and to evaluate vaccine efficacy.
He then introduced the four-segmented RVFV vaccine platform being developed for
human (hRVFV-4s) and veterinary (vRVFV-4s) use. The vaccines are generated by
splitting the M genome segment into two M-type segments, each encoding one of
the two structural glycoproteins, Gn or Gc. For added safety, the NSs gene is
either completely deleted (vRVFV-4s) or partially deleted (69%, hRVFV-4s).
RVFV-4s replicates efficiently in cell culture but is completely avirulent in
mice (intraperitoneal or intranasal inoculation models), pregnant ewes, and
lambs (intramuscular and subcutaneous inoculation). Jeroen presented a series of
studies demonstrating that vRVFV-4s does not disseminate in vaccinated animals,
sheds or spreads to the environment, or reverts to virulence. Single-dose
vaccination efficacy was evaluated in lambs, goats, calves, and pregnant ewes;
such vaccination induced protection against homologous and heterologous
challenge.
Based on the success of the veterinary vaccine, the Live-Attenuated Rift Valley
Fever Vaccine for Single Shot Application (LARISSA) consortium was formed to
evaluate the platform for human use. The human candidate vaccine was shown to be
immunogenic and efficacious in both mouse and lamb models. Safety studies in
marmosets showed no weight loss in vaccinated animals. However, vaccinated
animals developed elevated body temperatures that were dose-dependent and began
24 h earlier than in control animals infected with wild-type RVFV. This
observation was ascribed to the robust innate immune responses to vaccination
and was supported by concurrent neutrophilia in vaccinated animals. In
conclusion, hRVFV-4s was found to be safe in marmosets, was not shed or spread
to the environment, and induced a rapid innate immune response and neutralizing
antibodies within 7–14 days after single-dose vaccination. Altogether,
RVFV-4s-derived vaccines were shown to be safe and efficacious, supporting their
continued development for both animal and human use.

## Understanding the multiple functions of the bunyavirus polymerase protein.
Maria Rosenthal, Ph.D., Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg,
Germany
Maria Rosenthal summarized current knowledge of the role of
bunyavirus L protein, a multi-functional and multi-domain protein that contains
the viral RdRP and serves as a good drug target, in the talk entitled,
Understanding the multiple functions of the bunyavirus polymerase
protein. She provided helpful analyses comparing bunyavirus L
protein with the polymerase complexes of other viruses (e.g., influenza virus,
order Articulavirales). Maria emphasized that while our
knowledge of L protein structure and functions has increased over the years, it
remains a challenging target due to its size and flexibility, as well as its
diversity among bunyaviruses.
Maria described the advances in our understanding of the L protein structure and
functions attained by her lab through studies combining biochemistry, structural
biology, and virology methods. By solving structures of a C-terminal domain in
the L protein using X-ray crystallography, the group identified a cap-binding
domain essential for viral transcription. She highlighted that the details of
cap binding differ within the order Bunyavirales and compared
to other viruses, even those with structurally similar polymerases. Furthermore,
her group established expression and purification procedures for full-length L
proteins to investigate their structure using single-particle cryo-electron
microscopy and characterize their diverse functions in biochemical assays. These
results, along with data published by other groups, demonstrate the functional
and structural similarities and differences of the L proteins within
Bunyavirales and compare them to those of influenza virus
polymerase complex. These studies furthermore support targeted drug development
strategies against bunyaviruses.

## Rational modifications and biological evaluation of novel non-nucleoside
inhibitors of the viral polymerase with antiviral activity against norovirus.
Salvatore Ferla, Ph.D., Swansea University, Swansea, Wales, UK
Salvatore Ferla discussed work on the development of novel norovirus
antivirals that target the RdRP in a talk titled, Structure and ligand-based
virtual screening using different RdRP crystal structures of human and murine
norovirus identified two compounds that inhibit RdRP in the micromolar range,
though neither showed interesting antiviral activity in cell-based assays due to
poor solubility. To improve solubility, rational modifications were introduced
in the hydrophobic ring portion of these molecules, including inserting
carboxylic substituents in ring 1 and replacing with heteroaromatics in ring 2.
These changes improved water solubility without affecting the
polymerase-inhibitory activity of the compounds, yet no antiviral activity was
observed in cell-based assays. To confer antiviral activity, a scaffold
replacement procedure was applied; unfortunately, the new compound only
inhibited RdRP by 20% at 100 µM.
A computer-aided flexible alignment approach was subsequently used, identifying
the TPB compound as overlapping best with the group's original first-hit
structure. Twelve new compounds were designed and synthesized based on combining
TBP attributes with key structural aspects from the first hit; four displayed
antiviral properties. Two molecules were subsequently selected and analysed by a
synthetic chemistry approach. Twenty-three additional compounds were synthesized
based on this new scaffolding. The new compounds were very promising antivirals
but also unstable in aqueous solution. Since these compounds represent one of
the few examples of non-nucleoside polymerase inhibitors with significant
antiviral activity against human norovirus replication in a cell-based system,
the future goal is to increase their stability and solubility in water.
Salvatore's group is also planning mutational studies and the use of in
silico techniques to design more potent compounds.

## Metabolic stabilization of a novel inhibitor of human dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase (hDHODH) with potent broad spectrum antiviral activity. Nora
Fohrmann, M.S., University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
Nora Fohrmann presented work on improving the metabolic stability of
the lead structure in a novel series of compounds with strong antiviral activity
against a panel of RNA viruses, including several bunyaviruses, Lassa virus, and
Ebola virus, in a talk entitled, Metabolic stabilization of a novel
inhibitor of human dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (hDHODH) with potent broad
spectrum antiviral activity. The antiviral activity of these
compounds is based on inhibiting hDHODH, a cellular enzyme involved in de novo
biosynthesis of the pyrimidine nucleotides crucial for viral RNA replication.
The lead structure of these compounds, containing an elongated alkyl chain, was
identified using a hit-to-lead approach evaluating the structure/activity
relationship. However, a pharmacokinetic investigation of this lead structure
showed metabolic stability (S9, rat) of only 22%, which is insufficient for in
vivo evaluation.
To improve stability, the lead compound main metabolite was identified via liquid
chromatography–mass spectrometry and the site of metabolism was stabilized via
rational derivatization. Three lead optimization cycles were conducted during
which the redesigned structures were synthesized and their metabolic stability
and enzymatic inhibition were biologically evaluated. The initial cycle of
modifications increased stability, but reduced activity mildly to significantly.
Of the modified structures, the urea compound was selected for subsequent
optimization cycles. The urea analogue was synthesized in 6 steps with good
yield; this approach was used to generate further derivatives for the next two
optimization cycles. The structure was modified to stabilize against
hydroxylation, increasing stability to 90% but resulting in strong reduction of
activity. The final optimization cycle focused on reducing IC50 by
modifying the linker fragment. This improved IC50 and only reduced
the stability to 70%. Overall, while stability of the lead compound was
improved, a decrease in IC50 against certain agents (e.g., Lassa
virus) was observed in culture. Future work will continue to optimize stability
and potency.

## Small molecules from the diketo acid class engage and inhibit the
endonuclease domain of a panel of bunyaviruses and interfere with viral
replication in vitro. Sebastiaan ter Horst, B.S., KU Leuven, Rega Institute for
Medical Research, Belgium
Sebastiaan ter Horst discussed the work on the endonuclease domain
of RdRP as an antiviral target for bunyaviruses. Structural studies of the
domain support the concept that the chelating agent class of diketo acids could
serve as starting point for creating broad-acting antiviral candidates. The
group found the endonuclease domain to be well conserved, more so than the
polymerase domain, especially within bunyavirus families. This domain is present
in and shares sequence similarities with other negative-strand RNA viruses like
influenza. Based on this rationale, the group investigated drugs with known
activity against influenza as candidates for bunyavirus treatment. Interaction
studies were performed using a panel of bunyavirus cap-snatching endonucleases
in a thermal shift fluorescence resonance energy transfer- (FRET) based nuclease
monitoring assay and GlideSP docking simulations. In addition, in vitro
inhibition assays were performed with BUNV-mCherry reporter virus.
The first-in-class FDA-approved diketo acid-based influenza drug baloxavir
efficiently bound to the endonuclease of La Crosse virus (LACV), though with
lower affinity than it bound to influenza virus endonuclease. Furthermore,
baloxavir inhibited BUNV-mCherry replication in vitro with an EC50 of
0.7 μM. This inhibition profile was similar to that of RBV, a last-resort option
for treating bunyavirus infections, but was at lower compound concentrations.
The group also demonstrated a synergistic effect of baloxavir and RBV at certain
concentrations. To see if other anti-influenza antivirals may also be suitable
for treating bunyavirus infections, the group evaluated L-742,001.
Interestingly, a common hydrophobic sub-pocket was identified in binding assays
with LACV, Andes virus, and RVFV; L-742,001 and its derivatives demonstrated
EC50 values between 5.6 and 6.9 μM in vitro.
Overall, this group found that the cap-snatching endonuclease domain is a valid
target that can be exploited by chelating the metal ions in the active site of
the domain. Future work will focus on rational design of a molecule to better
fit the extensive and shallow binding site of bunyaviral endonuclease with the
aim of developing efficacious broad-spectrum inhibitors.

## Session 7: arboviruses
While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact all our lives, the session on
arboviruses at the 34th ICAR covered the field of vector-borne viral
infections well. The session had three invited speakers -- Dr Jenny Low (Singapore),
Dr Johan Neyts (Belgium), and Dr Mark Heise (USA) -- and three speakers selected
from the submitted abstracts: Dr Justin Julander (USA), Dr Gerry Rassias (Greece),
and Dr Jinhong Chang (USA).

## New strategies for modelling and treating emerging viral pathogens. Mark
Heise, Ph.D., University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Mark Heise provided an impressive update on the use of mouse strains
developed in the Collaborative Cross to identify factors that contribute to the
severity of chikungunya virus infection. Through these efforts, different host
pathways were identified that contribute to different disease phenotypes. These
results highlight the contributions of the Collaborative Cross project to
further our understanding of the pathogenesis of emerging viruses.

## Biologics as therapeutics for rapid response- can we get there fast enough?
Jenny Low, M.D., M.P.H., Singapore General Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore
Jenny Low shared a perspective of the ongoing arbovirus infections.
Singapore experienced its highest ever dengue case numbers in 2020, recording
more fatalities than from COVID-19 at that stage. Jenny also discussed the swift
bench-to-bedside development of therapeutic antibodies against Zika virus, which
was made possible by advances in identifying potent antibodies and development
for scale-up of biotherapeutics to be used in human clinical trials together
with the adaptive trial designs that allow overlapping studies addressing key
clinical development steps. The complexities associated with the roll out of
Dengvaxia were touched upon by Drs. Neyts, Low, and Rassias, and the need for
effective antiviral small molecules and therapeutic antibodies was
discussed.

## Pan-serotype dengue virus inhibitor that blocks the NS3-NS4B interaction and
exhibits unprecedented in vivo potency. Johan Neyts, Ph.D., KU Leuven, Rega
Institute, Leuven, Belgium
Johan Neyts presented exciting data on JNJ-A07, a nM to pM range,
pan-serotype inhibitor of dengue virus replication developed together with
Janssen Pharmaceuticals. This compound is active in vitro in several cell types.
Its mechanism of action appears to involve blocking of NS2B-NS3 interactions
with NS4B. The compound was also active in AG129 mouse infection models,
including during infections under antibody-dependent enhancement conditions. A
high barrier to the selection for resistance was demonstrated. Although escape
mutants with signature mutations in NS4B eventually appeared, they arose after
months of passaging the virus supernatant. The excellent preclinical data,
including compelling pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) information,
support this compound, a first-in-class directly acting antiviral against the
four serotypes of dengue virus, reaching early phase human trials.

## The integrity of yellow fever virus replication Complex maintained by
Nonstructural 4B protein and targeted by a small molecule antiviral agent.
Jinhong Chang, M.D., PhD., Baruch S. Blumberg Institute
Continuing with the development of inhibitors of non-structural proteins,
Jinhong Chang's talk focused on mechanistic studies of BDAA, a
small molecule inhibitor of NS4B, in yellow fever virus infection. After
screening nearly 200 analogs of BDAA, the group discovered a compound with
potency in the nanomolar range. Detergent treatment followed by IFA revealed
that the mechanism of the compound may involve disruption of the membrane
invagination enclosing the viral replication complex to expose the dsRNA, which
are then cleaved by cellular RNases. The role in dsRNA protection by NS4B
suggests that this protein has a key role in the replication vesicles formed by
the replication complex.

## Development of a novel dengue protease inhibitor. Gerry Rassias, Ph.D.,
University of Patras, Department of Chemistry, Patra, Greece
Gerry Rassias described the activity of a NS2B-NS3 prodrug, SP-471P,
with low micromolar range activity against all four serotypes of dengue virus.
SP-471P inhibits viral RNA replication and production of infectious viral
particles even when administered 6 h post infection. Mechanistically, SP-471
appears to inhibit both normal intermolecular protease processes and
intramolecular cleavage events at the NS2B-NS3 junction, as well as at NS3
internal sites, which are critical for virus replication. The importance of the
internal cleavage site and its dominant negative effect on virus RNA replication
appears intriguing and is being investigated in more detail. The protease is a
challenging target, but the team is focused on exploiting this new finding and
the unique prodrug approach to discover more potent inhibitors.

## The ribonucleoside analog EIDD-2749 is broadly active in the treatment of
eastern equine encephalitis and chikungunya viral infections. Justin Julander,
Ph.D., Institute for Antiviral Research, Utah State University, Logan, Utah,
USA
Justin Julander presented work on a potent, broadly active
nucleoside analog. Treatment of Eastern equine encephalitis (EEEV) or
chikungunya virus infection in mouse models with the ribonucleoside EIDD-2749
resulted in improved outcomes. This compound was also effective when treatment
was delayed until 48 h after virus challenge.
The potent small molecule inhibitors targeting non-structural proteins of dengue
virus and yellow fever virus, a nucleoside analog with activity against EEEV and
chikungunya virus, and a monoclonal therapeutic antibody against yellow fever
virus described by Dr. Low together demonstrate the efforts of the antiviral
research community in responding to visible gaps in the availability or access
to countermeasures for various emerging viruses. Even when an effective vaccine
is available, the need for such countermeasures is still of high importance, as
evidenced during the 2016–17 yellow fever outbreak in Angola and Democratic
Republic of Congo.

## Session 8: hepatitis viruses and William Prusoff memorial award
2021.

## William Prusoff memorial award recipient lecture: mid-term report on my
academic journey to discover novel HBV/HDV therapeutics, David Durantel, Ph.D.,
INSERM, Lyon, France
David Durantel began his award lecture by profusely thanking his
mentors, particularly Dr Fabien Zoulim, and the people who had worked with him,
especially Dr Julie Lucifora, highlighting how important these interactions and
collaborations have been in his career. He then introduced the major problems
resulting from HBV and hepatitis delta virus (HDV) infections, including the
approximately 1 million deaths per year, mostly due to the resulting
hepatocellular carcinoma. Both viruses persist as nuclear episomes, but HDV is a
satellite virus that uses HBsAg-coated particles vesicles to spread between
cells. Although there are approved antivirals against HBV and many more are
being studied, none can completely eliminate the infection and thus none can
fully protect against the residual risk. Several innovative approaches are being
pursued to decrease the residual risk, from host-targeting agents with combined
antiviral and anticancer activities through nucleic acid polymers or siRNA to
decrease antigenemia, to restoring T cell functionality with checkpoint
inhibitors or therapeutic vaccines, to epigenetic regulation to lose the cccDNA
episomes.
David also reviewed the variety of models used in the development and evaluation
of anti-HBV or D antivirals, from cultures of primary human hepatocytes to
progenitor cell lines that differentiate into hepatocytes in culture (HepaRG) to
mouse models. Chimeric immunodeficient mice expressing hepatotoxic proteins
reconstituted with human primary hepatocytes are most useful in evaluating
antivirals but also limited because they cannot be used to study immunological
processes. Immunocompetent mice can be transduced with adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vectors that efficiently deliver the vectored HBV genomes into the liver,
thus allowing the evaluation of the roles of immune responses during HBV
therapy.
David then discussed the standard antiviral treatments based on the direct acting
antivirals (DAA) entecavir, TDF, and TAF. These potent DAA potently reduce
viremia while having little effect on HBsAg and cccDNA, although the models
suggest they should decrease cccDNA. Considering that HIV/HBV co-infections are
common, having nucleosidic prodrugs that only get activated in the liver to
treat HBV without risking selection for HIV resistance would be an asset; these
nucleosides are a goal of HBV medicinal chemistry. Another goal is the
development of combination therapy using nucleosidic and capsid assembly
modulators (CAMs) ; there is thus a strong focus on these inhibitors. CAMs can
result in the formation of empty or aberrant capsids, and also have secondary
mechanisms of action affecting uncoating and cccDNA establishment, for example.
At higher concentrations, capsid inhibitors may inhibit HBeAg secretion. The
core antigen HBc also has regulatory functions, having a complex interactome. It
plays a role in cccDNA and HBV RNA biology through interactions with both
molecules and many host factors including RNA binding proteins (RBPs).
David then discussed the latest developments and directions in HBV antiviral
therapy. Capsid inhibitors resulting in aberrant capsids have been found to
decrease RNA biogenesis, leading to decreases in pregenomic (pg) and total RNA
accumulation, but not in cccDNA, after 75 days of treatment in culture.
Consistently, David advocated for combination treatment with long-term
nucleosidic and capsid inhibitors to enable mutual potentiation between these
two drugs. Another approach would be to inhibit protein kinases that modulate
HBc activity and oligomerization. For example, targeting of PLK1, which is
involved in HBc phosphorylation and HBc assembly, with small molecules or siRNA
inhibits HBV replication in culture or mouse models, and could therefore
synergistically complement nucleosidic and capsid inhibitors. Another protein
kinase has been recently identified to phosphorylate the capsid and to be
required for HBV replication, although the identity of the kinase could not be
disclosed at the time. Yet another approach is to use immunomodulators to
activate innate immunity, thus replacing interferon. RIG-I agonists were
preferred early on, but the adverse effects that resulted in the halting of the
clinical trials of inarigivir have since tempered the enthusiasm for this
approach. The focus has thus shifted to the Toll-like receptors, mainly TLR2 and
3 (TLR 7 and 8 are not expressed in the liver). Their agonists have been shown
to decrease cccDNA to some extent, but their major effect is on the production
and accumulation of HBV RNA. An additional advantage of these agonists is that
they are also active against HDV. Although their mode of action is still being
evaluated, these agonists have shown good activity in the AAV mouse model as
nanoparticles with polylactic acid, which home to the liver where they are
maintained for weeks. These formulations have proven active in the AAV mouse
model and, in contrast to lamiduvine, they resulted in no rebound.
David concluded that combination therapies are needed for HBV and directed our
attention to the presentations by John Tavis and Adam Ghering (both Session 8). He indicated the need to target RNA
biogenesis, accumulation, and stability, and stated that several drugs achieve
these goals, including DAA, immunomodulators, and antimetabolites like the FXR
agonist vonafexor, which also inhibit HDV replication (also discussed by
Julie Lucifora, see Session 8).

## Towards combination treatments for chronic hepatitis B: a virologist point of
view. John Tavis, Ph.D., Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, Missouri,
USA
John Tavis discussed HBV therapy. HBV is an
enveloped, partially double-stranded DNA virus that replicates in hepatocytes.
HBV replicates within the viral capsid by reverse transcription of a pgRNA,
which is catalyzed by a polyfunctional polymerase that bears both reverse
transcriptase and RNase H activities. HBV chronically infects ∼250 million
people worldwide and results in >850,000 deaths per year. Currently approved
HBV therapies include PEGylated IFNα (pegIFNα), which is associated with serious
side effects. Nucleos(t)ide analogs (NAs) like lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir,
telbivudine, and tenofovir strongly suppress viral replication and normalize ALT
levels in most patients. However, they do not fully abrogate disease progression
and are life-long treatments, with a functional cure rate below 10% and
quasi-universal rebound upon treatment arrest More efficacious curative
therapies for chronic hepatitis B (CHB) infections will almost certainly require
combinations of multiple drugs acting by complementary mechanisms. The biggest
obstacle to curing HBV is the elimination of its nuclear episome, cccDNA, which
is the template for all replication intermediates of HBV. It persists in liver
cells due to long apparent half-life and replenishment by de novo infection and
intracellular amplification. Eliminating or permanently silencing cccDNA is key
to curing HBV.
Obtaining a sterilizing cure involving complete elimination of cccDNA seems
unlikely at the moment. Therefore, a functional cure that suppresses both HBV
DNA and serum-secreted HBsAg by restoring the anti-HBV immune response and
reversing disease progression is a more realistic goal for future therapies.
Given the excellent safety profile of already approved nucleoside therapies,
future curative drugs should maintain this favorable safety profile, both as
single agents and combination therapies. To achieve this goal, a very wide
variety of treatment strategies are under development. The major classes of
drugs being explored include DAA that interrupt production or intracellular
maintenance of HBV. The most advanced agents of this class are entry inhibitors,
CAMs, siRNAs, and replication inhibitors (mainly improved nucleosides). Host
targeting approaches aim to suppress HBV by interrupting cellular mechanisms and
immune enhancement by exploiting the power of the adaptive immune response
against HBV. At this point, it is unclear which drug combinations are most
promising for achieving a functional cure in the highly diverse hepatitis B
patient population. Therefore, combinations studies should not only be
rationalized based on preclinical demonstration of synergy, but also be
empirically tested in the clinic.

## Towards combination treatments for chronic hepatitis B: an immunologist's
point of view, Adam Gehring, Ph.D., Toronto General Hospital Research Institute,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Adam Gehring presented the counterpoint to the virology perspective
of the previous lecture in his talk entitled, Towards combination
treatments for chronic hepatitis B: an immunologist's point
of view. One of the major limitations of all DAA is that they only
target steps of the viral replication cycle downstream of cccDNA, including
viral RNA biogenesis, protein synthesis, and rcDNA production. Therefore, HBV
DNA and HBsAg rebound after treatment termination, posing a major challenge even
for new DAA candidates like antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) and siRNAs. A
coordinated immune response is required for clearance of HBV infection. However,
HBV-specific T and B cell immunity display a profile of profound exhaustion in
CHB patients. Immunotherapeutic drugs being developed for CHB target both innate
and adaptive immunity. These include therapeutic vaccines, checkpoint
inhibitors, and small molecules targeting host pattern recognition
receptors.
Therapeutic vaccines have the longest history as immunotherapeutic interventions
in CHB but have thus far proven ineffective, having no significant impact on HBV
replication despite inducing T cell immunity associated with production of
anti-HBs antibodies. Newer vaccine candidates currently in early phases of
clinical development include DNA vaccines, adenovirus or modified vaccinia
vectors, and peptides. These candidates aim at inducing a stronger T cell
response with more immunogenic adjuvants. Checkpoint inhibitors are gaining
attention, with increasing data on safety profiles from cancer patients, but
have only entered small pilot studies. Innate immunomodulators targeting pattern
recognition receptors have demonstrated target engagement but only modestly
impact viral replication in monotherapy. Selgantolimod (SGLN), a TLR-8 agonist
that effectively engages its receptor, induced a strong innate immune response
causing a moderate decline in HBsAg levels in a phase-2 clinical study. However,
SGLN failed to demonstrate additional reduction of viral DNA over
standard-of-care nucleosdic drugs. Similarly, 24 weeks of treatment with TLR-7
agonist GS-9620 induced cytokine production but not DNA decline.
Given the limited benefit of immunotherapeutic drugs used as single agents, the
expectation is that combination therapy will be required to achieve hepatitis B
cure. This combination will likely include DAA in combination with
immunomodulatory drugs inducing complementary mechanisms of action to facilitate
antiviral immunity in the liver. Perhaps the most promising immune combination
so far is therapeutic vaccine administered together with checkpoint inhibitor
PD-L1, which results in sustained decrease of HBsAg in the woodchuck model.
Combining immune drugs with DAA that reduce HBsAg could be a potential avenue to
restoring T cell functionality. In the AAV-HBV mouse model, the combination of
TherVacB therapeutic vaccine with anti-HBV siRNA resulted in sustained reduction
in HBsAg levels long after cessation of drug treatment. This approach is
currently being pursued in the clinic. Finally, nucleic acid polymers acting as
secretion inhibitors have clinically demonstrated strong HBsAg reduction when
combined with TDF and pegIFN, resulting in a 35% rate of functional cure in all
patients treated. Given the currently limited data showing benefit of combining
two modalities, three agents may be needed to achieve higher levels of
functional cure.

## Principles of hepatitis E virus replication, persistence and antiviral
strategies. Eike Steinmann, Ph.D., Ruhr University in Bochum, Bochum,
Germany
Eike Steinmann's talk focused on hepatitis E virus
(HEV). HEV is the causative agent of hepatitis E and the
leading cause of acute viral hepatitis, affecting approximately 20 million
individuals and resulting in 3.3 million symptomatic infections and
44,000–70,000 deaths per year. HEV is a zoonotic, single-stranded,
positive-sense RNA virus of about 7 kb sub-classified into eight genotypes. The
main transmission route to humans in Europe and the US is through consuming
undercooked pork contaminated with HEV genotype 3. Other sources of infection
include consumption of contaminated water, shellfish, crops, and other meat
preparations. In Africa and large parts of Asia, the main mode of transmission
is drinking water contaminated with genotypes 1 or 2. Although HEV is usually a
self-limiting disease, immunocompromised individuals are at risk of developing
chronic infection that rapidly progresses to fibrosis, cirrhosis, or even liver
failure.
Current therapy options to treat hepatitis E are limited to the unspecific
antivirals RBV and pegIFN. RBV leads to viral clearance in only 80% of
chronically infected patients. However, RBV has not been evaluated in acutely
infected patients and is contraindicated in pregnant women, a major high-risk
group, emphasizing the urgency of developing new therapy options. The mechanism
of action of RBV is complex and involves both direct antiviral effects and
immune stimulation. In responders, RBV increases mutations in the viral genome,
leading to amino acid changes. Although these mutations are not associated with
RBV resistance, some of them increase viral fitness. Strains with increased
fitness have been used to improve in vitro cultivation of HEV in hepatoma
cells.
Both host and viral targets have been evaluated in vitro for future HEV
therapies. The RNA polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir, already approved to treat
HCV infections, failed to inhibit HEV in the clinic. Currently, the only drug
candidate with demonstrated in vivo anti-HEV effect is the natural product
silvestrol, which acts as a host translation inhibitor. Derivatives of
silvestrol are currently being evaluated in vitro.

## CD40 agonists boost IFN-induced signalling pathway and subsequent anti-HBV
response in vitro and in vivo. Antoine Alam, Ph.D., Evotec ID, Lyon,
France
Antoine Alam discussed the continued need for improved therapeutics
for CHB. The combination of CD40 agonism and type-I IFN stimulation (IFN-β,
specifically) in inhibiting HBV infection was explored both in vitro and in
vivo. CD40L boosts the anti-viral effects of IFN-β in HBV-infected primary human
hepatocytes, leading to decreased HBeAg and pgRNA. This combination also
increased the release of the IFN-responsive protein CXCL10, but not the
inflammatory protein IL-8. The combination boosted other interferon stimulated
genes, such as CXCL9, CXCL11, and ISG20, a key player in innate antiviral
immunity. Furthermore, co-administering CD40L and IFN-β to AAV/HBV-infected mice
led to significant and synergistic reduction of all viral parameters, including
circulating HBV DNA, HBeAg, and HBsAg, as well as pgRNA and intra-hepatic HBV
DNA. Importantly, ex vivo treatment of either human or murine whole blood cells
with CD40L and IFN-β did not significantly induce inflammatory markers, such as
IL-6 or TNF-α. Together, these results show that the combination of CD40L and
IFN-β has potent anti-HBV activity in vitro and in vivo with minimal
inflammation. Such a combination may have important therapeutic effect in CHB
patients.

## Efficient inhibition of hepatitis B virus cccDNA and pregenomic RNA by HBV
ribonuclease h inhibitors during infection of HepG2-NTCP cells. Ranjit Chauhan,
Ph.D., Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA
Ranjit Chauhan discussed HBV and antiviral targeting of the viral
ribonuclease H (RNaseH). Establishment of HBV cccDNA early after HBV infection
through recircularization of viral replicative intermediates contributes to HBV
persistence. RNaseH is a promising drug target, but how its inhibition impacts
cccDNA formation is unknown. Three RNaseH inhibitors from different chemotypes,
1133 (N-hydroxypyridinedione, EC50 = 0.11 µM), 110 (hydroxytropolone
EC50 = 0.30 µM), and 1073 (N-hydroxynapthyridinone,
EC50 = 1.5 µM), efficacious against intracellular HBV DNA
accumulation in inducible replication systems, were tested for effects on HBV
product formation in infected HepG2- NTCP cells. Cells were infected for 12 h
and compounds were added immediately following infection at concentrations of
0.05 µM, 0.5 µM, and 5 µM. Total intracellular HBV DNA, cccDNA, pgRNA, and total
HBV RNA accumulation were evaluated 7 days post infection. The inhibition of
total intracellular HBV DNA was dose responsive, with ∼99% inhibition (compared
to vehicle control) achieved by all compounds at 0.5 µM. All compounds inhibited
cccDNA formation by 75–95% at 0.5 µM. Inhibition of cccDNA was reflected in
suppression of pgRNA levels by >90% (by 1133 and 110) and >50% (by 1073).
Similar inhibition was detected for all HBV RNAs using primers targeting the HBx
region. In conclusion, HBV RNaseH inhibitors can efficiently suppress cccDNA
formation in vitro. Viral suppression was more pronounced than predicted by
EC50s in stably transfected cells, presumably due to suppression
of cccDNA amplification. These data support progression of RNaseH inhibitors as
therapeutic candidates for the treatment of CHB.

## Farnesoid X receptor alpha ligands inhibit hepatitis delta virus replication
and propagation in physiologic cell culture model. Julie Lucifora, Ph.D.,
INSERM, Ciri, Lyon, France
Julie Lucifora spoke about HDV, a satellite of HBV. Both HBV and HDV
use the human sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (hNTCP), the main
transporter of bile acids (BA) in the liver, to enter hepatocytes. Links between
BA and HBV infection are not limited to the entry step. Indeed, the farnesoid X
receptor alpha (FXR), the nuclear receptor of BA, is a proviral factor for HBV
and FXR ligands act as inhibitors of HBV replication. The putative links between
BA metabolism, FXR, and HDV replication have not been explored. In HepaRG and
primary human hepatocytes co- or super-infected with HDV/HBV, treatment with FXR
ligands like GW4064, ECDCA, or tropifexor significantly decreased the levels of
total intracellular HDV RNAs by ∼50%. The effect was reversed in FXR
loss-of-function experiments, confirming the specificity of action.
Immunofluorescent staining and western blot analyses of infected cells showed
that FXR ligands also modestly decreased the amount of intracellular delta
antigens. The effect on viral progeny was very strong, with >98% loss of
infectivity, as assessed by reinfection of Huh7.5-hNTCP cells. FXR ligands
potently inhibit HDV replication and propagation in vitro, independently of
their effect on HBV. The antiviral effect was far superior to that of IFNα, the
current standard of care for chronic HDV patients. Although the precise
mechanism of HDV inhibition associated with FXR agonists has yet to be
elucidated, FXR appears to represent an attractive target for HDV antiviral
therapy.

## Session 9: technology and Antonín Holý Memorial Award
The last session on Wednesday, March 25th, provided the opportunity to get
updated on some new and interesting technologies that are just starting to be
applied to antiviral research and will likely have an increasing impact in the near
future. The session was chaired by Dr. Jennifer Moffat and
Dr. Andrea Brancale, and included three outstanding
keynote presentations by Dr. Matthew Disney,
Dr. Chris Meier, and Dr. Christiane Wobus. These
invited talks were preceded by the Presentation of the Antonín Holý Memorial Award
Lecture, delivered by this year's Award recipient Dr. Eddy Arnold. The presentations
were all pre-recorded; however, a most interesting and lively live Q&A with all
speakers concluded the session.

## The Holý Award recipient lecture: the long and winding road: 35 years of HIV
reverse transcriptase structure, mechanism, and successful anti-AIDS drug
design. Eddy Arnold, Ph.D., Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey,
USA
Eddy Arnold gave a very personal account of his remarkable
scientific career. Eddy is well known for his incredible
contributions to HIV research, especially in the fields of structural biology
and drug design. His talk showed that he was a true pioneer in understanding on
mechanism by which non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI) bind
to the reverse transcriptase of HIV-1. These studies were a challenging
endeavor, partly because the enzyme is very flexible and adopts multiple
conformations; the NNRTI binding pocket is not even visible in the
apo reverse transcriptase (RT) structures. With his skills
and knowledge, Eddy contributed significantly to the discovery of two
FDA-approved NNRTI drugs (etravirine and rilpivirine) and development of six
licensed medicines. In his talk, Eddy presented his scientific achievements as a
journey. More importantly, he fondly acknowledged the remarkable people he met
along his path. His talk was very warm and personal, loaded with anecdotes that
made the story about the discovery and development of NNRTIs compelling and
real. Indeed, during the Q&A session, he also answered a question about his
interactions with Dr Paul Janssen, and his words were still full of admiration
and gratitude, recognizing Dr Janssen as a leader and innovator in the field. A
modest, yet outstanding, scientist, Eddy proved to be a very worthy Holý
awardee.

## Sequence-based design of small molecules targeting RNA. Matt Disney, Ph.D.,
Scripps Institute, La Jolla, California, USA
Matt Disney began the presentations on new technologies on antiviral
research. His talk discussed the development of new molecules and strategies to
target viral RNA, revealing the potential of targeting RNA in antiviral drug
discovery. This approach could rival or, more likely, complement, the standard
antiviral approaches that target viral proteins. Matt described two strategies
on which his group is working. One strategy is to understand the
three-dimensional structure of viral RNA using available sequences and then
using this knowledge to identify compounds that could bind to specific conserved
structural motifs. In this context, he discussed his work on identifying new
compounds that bind SARS-CoV-2 RNA. The second strategy focusses on recruiting
ribonuclease enzymes to facilitate the processing of viral RNAs. This intriguing
approach is in some ways similar to PROTAC, which is becoming increasingly
popular in drug discovery. During the Q&A session, Matt answered a few
questions about selectivity and resistance barrier of RNA binding compounds. He
also highlighted that preprint servers are becoming an increasingly important
way to share information efficiently and quickly, and emphasized the importance
of these servers to his group's work.

## Design of nucleotide prodrugs for antiviral chemotherapy—the
TriPPPro-approach. Chris Meier, Ph.D., Universität Hamburg, Hamburg,
Germany
Nucleosides are the most prevalent class of antiviral drugs, generally active as
triphosphate analogs. However, this highly charged form does not cross
biological membranes, and thus cannot be administered as a drug as such. A
prodrug approach (the ProTide strategy) was successfully applied to deliver
nucleoside monophosphate into cells in recent years, but phosphorylation to
achieve the active triphosphate form still requires the participation of
cellular enzymes, which discriminate against certain types of modified
nucleosides. With the new approach developed by Chris Meier, the
active triphosphate form is cleverly masked and thus able to cross cellular
membranes, and is then released inside the cell to exert its activity. The new
approach, TriPPPro, which is currently state-of-the art, has the potential to
open a new era in nucleoside drug discovery. Chris discussed this point during
the Q&A, and although it is difficult to predict whether this approach will
be clinically successfully in the end, it is already showing the maturity to be
developed towards clinical applications in the near future.

## Investigating enterotropic virus infections in human intestinal organoids.
Christiane Wobus, Ph.D., University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Christiane Wobus discussed her work on organoids and 3D cultures in
drug discovery. Organoids are becoming an important tool available for drug
discovery and development. They are often considered to be more representative
of physiological conditions than standard two-dimensional cell culture, and more
accurately mimic in vivo results. Although these cultures may appear cumbersome
and with limited reproducibility, Christiane discussed how flexible they truly
are and showed that they can be generated from patient-derived cells. A very
interesting work described by Christiane centers around enteroids. She discussed
the ability to create these “mini-guts” with an inner cavity and described how
useful they are in studying viruses that infect the GI tract, including
SARS-CoV-2 (50% of COVID-19 patients have GI tract symptoms). During the
Q&A, Christiane gave her view of the future of more widespread organoid use
in antiviral drug discovery. This approach is now also establishing itself as an
extremely useful tool in other research fields.
Overall, this was a truly exciting and inspirational session, which presented a
view of some fascinating new technologies that will most likely become familiar
in the near future. The audience was inspired to continuously evaluate these and
similar new technologies for their potential applications in antiviral drug
discovery and development.

## Session 9: other respiratory viruses

## Emerging deadly viruses and their glycoproteins—From infection to vaccines
and antivirals. Hector Aguilar-Carreno, Ph.D., Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York, USA
The COVID-19 pandemic has emphasized the ongoing need to study emerging zoonotic
pathogens. Hector Aguilar-Carreno and his laboratory have spent
over two decades studying the glycoproteins of such pathogens, including Nipah,
Hendra, Ebola, and influenza viruses, and, more recently, SARS-CoV-2. Utilizing
both classical and molecular virological methods, his group's work exemplifies
the potential translation of basic science to the future development of novel
vaccines and therapeutics against these viruses.
Hector discussed the development and evaluation of a multi-valent VSV vaccine
concurrently pseudotyped with the viral entry glycoproteins of Nipah, Hendra,
and Ebola viruses and showed that this approach provides complete protection
against lethal challenge with each virus in Syrian hamsters. The viability of
this platform to address infections with ecological and potentially
epidemiological overlap can be applied to generating potential pan-coronavirus
vaccines, an approach that Hector's group is currently pursuing.
Through the discovery and characterization of a series of membrane-intercalating
compounds, Hector's group has developed a compound (XM-01) as an inactivation
agent that preserves viral glycoproteins in their native conformations. Mice
immunized with XM-01-inactivated influenza showed improved survival and
decreased morbidity from viral challenge when compared to mice immunized with
influenza inactivated by formalin fixation. Moreover, sera from mice immunized
with XM-01-inactivated influenza virus developed comparably more potent anti-HA
and anti-NA neutralizing antibodies.
Hector's group has also recently established multiple animal models for studying
coronaviral infections, including K18 hACE2 mice and Syrian hamsters for
SARS-CoV-2 research, and is currently investigating an intranasally administered
TMPRSS2 protease inhibitor that significantly protects K18 ACE2 mice from
SARS-CoV-2-induced morbidity and mortality.

## Remdesivir treatment for emerging virus infections. Emmie de Wit, Ph.D.,
NIAID, Hamilton, Montana, USA
Emmie de Wit presented work with colleagues evaluating remdesivir in
NHP models of Nipah virus, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Remdesivir is an
adenosine nucleotide prodrug approved for treatment of COVID-19. The prodrug is
metabolized to the active triphosphate form used as a substrate by the viral
polymerase. Incorporation of the nucleotide analog into the viral RNA during
replication inhibits the viral polymerase, leading to reduced virus replication.
Remdesivir has broad-spectrum activity and is active in cell culture against
filoviruses, coronaviruses, and paramyxoviruses. African green monkeys (n = 4
per group) were inoculated with 2 × 105 TCID50 of Nipah
virus by intranasal and intratracheal routes. Remdesivir (10 mg/kg) or placebo
(vehicle) was administered once daily by IV bolus for 12 days starting at 24 h
post inoculation. Placebo-treated animals exhibited signs of severe disease and
were euthanized by day 8 when they reached signs requiring humane euthanasia.
Signs of disease in animals treated with remdesivir were notably less severe
compared to placebo treated animals. Viral loads in the upper respiratory tract
(nose and throat) were similar in all treatment groups, but no viremia or severe
lung disease was observed in animals treated with remdesivir; all
remdesivir-treated animals survived to day 92 of the study. A single
remdesivir-treated animal had histopathological evidence of meningoencephalitis
but no neurological signs were observed.
Remdesivir was also evaluated in a rhesus macaque model of MERS-CoV infection.
Animals (n = 6 per group) were inoculated with 1 × 106
TCID50 of MERS-CoV-2 by intranasal, intratracheal, or ocular
routes. Animals were treated with 5 mg/kg of remdesivir or placebo by IV
administration either one day prior to inoculation or 12 h post inoculation,
followed by daily treatments on days 1–6. Animals were euthanized on day 6 post
inoculation and antiviral efficacy was measured. Remdesivir treatment reduced
clinical signs of disease, viral load in the lungs, and lung lesions measured by
histopathology compared to placebo. The antiviral effects were more pronounced
in animals treated 24 h prior to inoculation than in animals treated 12 h post
inoculation.
A rhesus macaque model of SARS-CoV-2 infection was developed that resembled mild
human disease with measurable pulmonary infiltrates observed on radiographs and
by histopathology. Animals inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 by intranasal,
intratracheal, oral, or ocular routes exhibited high levels of viral shedding in
the nose and throat and intermediate detection of virus in rectal swabs. No
viral RNA was detectable in urogenital swabs or in blood and urine. Viral loads
peaked 1 day post inoculation and infectious virus was cleared more quickly than
viral RNA from the lungs. Animals (n = 6 per group) were treated with placebo or
remdesivir starting at 10 mg/kg 12 h post inoculation followed by 6 consecutive
daily treatments of 5 mg/kg. Animals were euthanized on day 7 post inoculation.
Remdesivir did not impact shedding of virus in the nose or throat or in rectal
swabs compared to placebo-treated animals. However, relative to placebo-treated
animals, remdesivir treatment reduced clinical disease, viral lung pathology,
and viral titers in bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) 12 h after the initial
treatment and in lung tissue on day 7 post inoculation. These data support
continued evaluation of remdesivir for treating paramyxovirus and coronavirus
infections.

## The ABCs of rhinovirus infections and asthma. James Gern, M.D., University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
James Gern presented work with colleagues to set the stage for
developing vaccines against rhinovirus. Rhinovirus infections are highly
associated with wheezing illness in children over 1 year of age and are an
important risk factor for developing asthma later in life. Rhinoviruses are also
an important trigger exacerbating asthma in adults and children. Three main
genotypes of rhinovirus exist, RV-A, RV-B, and RV-C, with approximately 170
associated types that co-circulate in the human population causing a spectrum of
respiratory disease from asymptomatic infection or mild upper respiratory
disease to pneumonia. RV-A and RV-C are most often associated with clinical
disease. The antigenic diversity associated with rhinoviruses is a primary
reason rhinovirus infections are maintained in the human population causing
seasonal infections year after year. The antigenic diversity of rhinovirus
strains presents a challenge for developing effective vaccines to prevent or
reduce disease associated with rhinovirus infection.
Longitudinal data from the Childhood Origins of Asthma (COAST) birth cohort study
were analysed to determine the relationships between age and RV-C infections.
Neutralizing antibodies specific for RV-A and RV-C were determined using a novel
PCR-based assay. Data were pooled from 14 study cohorts in the United States,
Finland, and Australia, and mixed-effects logistic regression was used to
identify factors related to the proportion of RV-C versus RV-A detection.
RV-A and RV-C infections were common in infancy, whereas RV-C was detected much
less often than RV-A in older children. The prevalence of neutralizing
antibodies to RV-A or RV-C types was low in children 2 years of age and
increased through the teen years. At each age, RV-C seropositivity was 3–5 times
more prevalent. The ratio of RV-C to RV-A titers during illnesses was
significantly related to age, CDHR3 genotype (putative RV-C receptor and asthma
susceptibility allele), and wheezing illnesses. These data suggest the RV-C may
be more immunogenic than RV-A causing more disease in early life but less
disease as children age due to development of neutralizing antibodies.
Identifying rhinovirus types associated with symptomatic disease and recognizing
that RV-C neutralizing antibodies are protective reduces the complexity of
antigens required for development of a polyvalent vaccine.

## Roles of PNKP and CDK1 in Zika virus replication and pathogenesis. Malgorzata
(Gosia) Rychlowska, Ph.D., Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
Malgorzata (Gosia) Rychlowska described the pathogenicity of Zika
virus to neuronal cell progenitors. Zika virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus
that can be both sexually and vertically transmitted in humans, with the latter
sometimes resulting in neonatal microcephaly due to Zika virus-induced DNA
damage in human neural progenitor cells. Given that rare mutations in the DNA
damage repair protein polynucleotide kinase (PNKP) also results in microcephaly,
Gosia and colleagues sought to evaluate whether Zika virus infection affected
PNKP. A PNKP inhibitor showed dose-dependent inhibition of Zika virus infection.
Through fluorescence microscopy, Zika virus infection induced cytoplasmic
co-localization of PNKP with Zika virus NS1. Interestingly, a mutant with
cytoplasmic PNKP phenotype results in microcephaly. Zika virus induced mitotic
abnormalities consistent with the morphological hallmarks of mitotic catastrophe
in neural progenitor cells, and a cell cycle inhibitor blocking CDK1
(roscovitine) was shown to inhibit Zika virus replication, likely by inhibiting
formation of replication complexes from the endoplasmic reticulum. Since CDK1
colocalized with Zika virus NS1 by fluorescence microscopy, the accumulation of
CDK1 and the CDK1 activator Cyclin A was tested and the complexes were
immunoprecipitated from infected cells to assess their biochemical activity by
kinase assays. The results from this study indicate that Zika virus likely
induces CDK1 to form replication complexes while displacing PNKP into the
cytoplasm, thereby resulting in mitotic catastrophe.

## Plant lectin urtica dioica agglutinins (UDA) is a potential inhibitor against
rabies virus in a muscle model. Xinyu Wang, M.S., Rega Institute, Laboratory of
Virology and Chemotherapy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Xinyu Wang focused on strategies for treating rabies virus. Rabies
virus is transmitted to humans through the bite of an infected animal; left
untreated, rabies is almost uniformly fatal. Current treatments involve early
administration of rabies immunoglobulin and vaccination. While these treatments
are effective, they are expensive and have limited availability. Xinyu and
colleagues screened a lectin library to identify inhibitors of rabies virus
infection in cell culture. Two lectins, UDA and BanLec, were identified as
inhibitors of rabies virus replication with EC50 values of 8.2 and
7.2 μg/mL, respectively. Time of addition studies demonstrated that UDA binds to
the cell surface to block virus entry. UDA pre-treatment reduced viral yield in
cell culture 5-fold. A model using isolated pig muscle explant was developed to
measure rabies virus replication. Treating pig muscle tissues with UDA
(3 × EC50 value) reduced rabies virus replication over 100-fold
relative to vehicle treatment. Replication was quantified using a rabies
reporter virus expressing mCherry protein and by immunohistochemical staining
for the rabies virus N protein. These data suggest that lectins could be an
alternative treatment for rabies virus infection.

## Arbovirus infectivity is significantly reduced by components of the bacterial
cell wall. Lana Langendries, M.S., Rega Institute for Medical Research at KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
While transmission of arboviruses (e.g., Zika, dengue, yellow fever, and
chikungunya viruses) through mosquito bites at the skin has been well
characterized, little is known about the interactions of arboviruses with skin
microbiota present at the site of infection. To investigate this question,
Lana
Langendries studied the effects of bacterial cell wall components
on the infectivity of such arboviruses. Incubating alphaviruses (chikungunya and
Semliki Forest viruses) with lipopolysaccharides (LPS) or lipoteichoic acids and
peptidoglycans of Gram-positive bacteria significantly reduced the infectivity
of these viruses in vitro. This was not due to cell-dependent effects, as
pre-incubating cells with LPS prior to infection did not affect viral
infectivity. Furthermore, treating cells with Toll-like receptor 4 inhibitor did
not ablate the LPS-dependent inhibition of viral infectivity. A virucidal assay
involving incubating LPS-treated viruses with or without RNAse showed that LPS
incubation rendered alphavirus genomes more susceptible to RNase degradation,
suggesting that LPS compromises the structural integrity of the viral envelope.
Transmission electron micrographs of Semliki Forest virus incubated with LPS
showed progressive changes in virion morphology, which correlated with
decreasing viral infectivity, thus further supporting the case for a virucidal
effect of bacterial LPS against arboviruses.

## Concluding remarks
ISAR actively addressed the challenges posed by a viral pandemic by supporting
antiviral and vaccine discovery and the research and development community through
sharing of curated pre-prints and other information early in the pandemic. These and
other efforts, including ICAR 2021, supported the lively and timely exchange of
information about researchers, developers and other stakeholders involved in
curtailing the effects of the pandemic. Although the virtual format of the 2021
annual meeting prevented some of the exchanges that occur at live ICAR meetings,
overall, the goals of the annual meeting were achieved and the event was extremely
successful at supporting the Society's mission.

## Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the contributions of all presenters. The authors thank Dr.
Tatyana Klimova for assistance with editing the manuscript.

## Footnotes
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article
ORCID iDs: David Durantel https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9226-3419
Michael K. Lo https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0409-7896
Katherine L. Seley-Radtke https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0154-3459
Jessica R. Spengler https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5383-0513