2814apsbActa Pharmaceutica Sinica. BActa Pharm Sin BElsevierPMC99410749941074105018773684615310.1016/j.apsb.2023.02.010Regulating the microenvironment with nanomaterials: Potential strategies to ameliorate COVID-19
LiuZhicheng HanZhuolei JinXin AnJusung KimJaewon ChenWenting KimJong Seung ZhengJi DengJun aDepartment of Urology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University), Chongqing 400037, ChinabDepartment of Urology, Urological Surgery Research Institute, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University), Chongqing 400038, ChinacInstitute of Burn Research, Southwest Hospital, State Key Lab of Trauma, Burn and Combined Injury, Chongqing Key Laboratory for Disease Proteomics, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University), Chongqing 400038, ChinadTianjin Key Laboratory of Composite and Functional Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, ChinaeDepartment of Chemistry, Korea University, Seoul 02841, South KoreafDepartment of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Army Medical Center, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University), Chongqing 400042, China∗Corresponding authors. jongskim@korea.ac.krjizheng023@aliyun.comdjun.123@163.com
†These authors made equal contributions to this work.
212202313936383638–36582122023© 2023 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
COVID-19, caused by SARS-CoV-2, has resulted in serious economic and health burdens. Current treatments remain inadequate to extinguish the epidemic, and efficient therapeutic approaches for COVID-19 are urgently being sought. Interestingly, accumulating evidence suggests that microenvironmental disorder plays an important role in the progression of COVID-19 in patients. In addition, recent advances in nanomaterial technologies provide promising opportunities for alleviating the altered homeostasis induced by a viral infection, providing new insight into COVID-19 treatment. Most literature reviews focus only on certain aspects of microenvironment alterations and fail to provide a comprehensive overview of the changes in homeostasis in COVID-19 patients. To fill this gap, this review systematically discusses alterations of homeostasis in COVID-19 patients and potential mechanisms. Next, advances in nanotechnology-based strategies for promoting homeostasis restoration are summarized. Finally, we discuss the challenges and prospects of using nanomaterials for COVID-19 management. This review provides a new strategy and insights into treating COVID-19 and other diseases associated with microenvironment disorders.
KEY WORDS: Coronavirus disease 19, Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, Therapeutic approaches, Nanotechnology, Nanomaterial technologies, Microenvironment, Microenvironmental disorder, Altered homeostasis

## Graphical abstract
Nanomaterials can server as potential strategies to ameliorate COVID-19 via regulating the disordered microenvironment of patients.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Dec 15; Revised 2023 Feb 8; Accepted 2023 Feb 10; Issue date 2023 Sep.

1.

## Introduction
Since December 2019, coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) triggered by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been an alarming and unprecedented global virus epidemic , . As of October 7, 2022, data provided by the World Health Organization (WHO) show that over 617 million COVID-19 cases and 6.53 million COVID-19-related deaths have been confirmed worldwide (https://covid19.who.int). Clinical observations have verified that some patients with serious COVID-19 experience a delayed type I interferon (IFN) response , , oxidative stress , hyperinflammation , even cytokine storm (CS) syndrome , ( ). Patients with COVID-19 suffer from the microenvironmental disorder, and altered homeostasis may induce serious clinical outcomes and even lead to death , . Therefore, efficient therapeutic approaches for microenvironmental disorder in COVID-19 are urgently needed.
 Research has largely focused on managing COVID-19, such as by applying biosensing technologies , , , developing vaccines to prevent infection , , repurposing molecular drugs and neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) to fight against the virus , , , and administering symptomatic therapy to alleviate clinical symptoms ( ). Vaccines , , , , , have been urgently approved by the WHO to respond to outbreaks. However, these vaccines have not provided sufficient coverage to end the epidemic. The high frequency mutation of SARS-CoV-2 results in the risk of immune evasion and acceleration of transmissibility , . In addition, most drugs that have been clinically repurposed to treat patients with COVID-19 have produced unclear benefits and may cause serious side effects in some cases. For example, although chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), which are widely used antimalarial agents, have shown anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity in vitro, the results of large clinical trials have failed to confirm their efficacy against COVID-19 , . Cardiotoxicity is rare but potentially life-threatening in some patients taking HCQ . CQ has also shown disappointing results in the management of COVID-19 thus far . Remdesivir, another promising COVID-19 treatment, has shown little or no effect on the survival of infected individuals . Corticosteroids have been used for COVID-19 management; however, their effectiveness is still disputed , . In addition, the anti-SARS-CoV-2 efficiency of some NAbs has attracted attention , , , including REGN10987/REGN10933, COV2-2196/COV2-2130, LY-CoV555/LY-CoV016, AZD1061/AZD8895 and BRII-196/BRII-198. However, the neutralization potency of these NAbs is substantially compromised by mutations , . Symptomatic therapy to alleviate symptoms in clinical practice mainly includes reducing the temperature of patients with a high fever, providing ventilators to critically ill patients with severe respiratory failure, using plasma exchange technologies to remove excessive hazardous substances in the circulatory system and prescribing herbal medicine to promote recovery , . However, these therapies do not completely cure COVID-19, and some of them, such as ventilators, NAbs and plasmapheresis, are very expensive and in short supply , . Therefore, new therapies for COVID-19 are urgently being sought.
Nanomaterials with excellent biocompatibility can be modified to show specificity for their targets with less toxicity, higher drug delivery efficiency, and longer drug retention time. Therefore, nanotechnology-based approaches are increasingly attracting researchers’ attention , , . Indeed, several researchers have reported that nanomaterials are useful to capture or eliminate hazardous substances and intervene in signaling pathways, inhibiting deterioration , . For instance, cell membrane-coated nanoparticles (NPs) exhibit broad-spectrum cytokine neutralization; specifically, a decoy NP was used in a powerful two-step approach to neutralize COVID-19 . Although studies of the use of nanomedicine to regulate and ameliorate microenvironmental disorder in COVID-19 patients have been reported, most of the literature has focused on a single aspect of homeostasis, such as immune disorders , or hyperinflammatory status . Moreover, no literature review has systematically summarized the homeostasis alterations and progress in relevant nanotechnology-based treatments for COVID-19. To fill this gap, we first summarize the alterations in homeostasis as a consequence of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Then, progress in the application of nanotechnology to target these changes and the underlying mechanisms are presented. Finally, we discuss the challenges and prospects of nanomaterials for COVID-19 management.

2.

## Major receptors of SARS-CoV-2 invasion
SARS-CoV-2 is a new pathogenic β-coronavirus of the Coronaviridae family , . Its genome encodes nonstructural proteins (Nsps), accessory proteins and four crucial structural proteins: spike (S), nucleocapsid (N), membrane (M), and envelope (E) proteins . S protein, which is cleaved into the S1 and S2 subunits, plays an essential role in host attachment and infection in COVID-19 , , , . The receptor-binding domain (RBD) within the S1 subunit is identified by angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which is regarded as a major receptor for SARS-CoV-2 . In addition, transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) is also considered a mediator involved in the SARS-CoV-2 entry process .

3.

## Alterations of homeostasis in hosts with COVID-19
Individuals with COVID-19, especially patients with severe cases, may exhibit a delayed IFN-I response , , CS , , and excessive oxidative stress . A disordered microenvironment potentially inhibits the normal function of the body, promotes disease progression, and restricts the effects of potential therapeutic drugs. Therefore, an understanding of the microenvironmental changes and the involved mechanisms may benefit COVID-19 prevention and treatment.
3.1.

## Delayed IFN-I response and potential mechanisms in patients with COVID-19
IFN-I is the first line of the host's defense against viral infections . Type I IFNs, an essential component of the antiviral innate immune system, comprise a series of IFN-α subtypes, a single IFN-β and other specific proteins . SARS-CoV-2 delays the IFN-I response in patients with COVID-19 , , .
In general, the host system promptly and perfectly detects pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) upon viral invasion of a host cell , . Then, the immune system initiates antiviral responses. The family of PRRs includes Toll-like receptors (TLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene-1 (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs) , among other receptors. Pathogens-triggered RIG-I/MDA-5 may induce the phosphorylation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) through mitochondrial antiviral signaling proteins (MAVs) and initiate the transcription of type I and type III IFNs , . Activated TLR3 and TLR7/8 recruit Toll/IL-1 receptor domain containing adaptor inducing IFN-β (TRIF) and Myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) , respectively, to stimulate the nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) signaling pathway and IRF3/IRF7-dependent type I IFN production , . In addition, type I IFN production contributes to signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) phosphorylation, and phospho-STAT forms a trimeric complex with IRF9 that enters the cell nucleus to increase the transcription of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) ( ).
 Based on accumulating evidence, SARS-CoV-2 blunts the IFN-I response in patients with severe COVID-19 , , . Considering the potent antiviral activities of type I IFNs and COVID-19 severity, we speculate that SARS-CoV-2 avoids type I IFN-mediated immune responses , , , . In addition, this virus may also directly mediate the evasion of other host antiviral actions of various interferon-stimulated genes and inhibit innate and adaptive immune cell actions. The N protein in SARS-CoV-2 binds to RIG-I, impeding IFN production and inhibiting ISGs expression . The M protein curbs type I and III IFN expression by targeting RIG-I/MDA-5 to prevent their phosphorylation , . Therefore, several mechanisms have been proposed to explain virus evasion , , , . The virus may evolve to (1) evade host sensing processes, (2) mediate IFN production, and (3) evade the antiviral actions of various interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Moreover, a delayed IFN-I response not only impedes immune-mediated viral clearance and antigen presentation, thereby providing a window for viral replication, but also induces a persistent inﬂammatory response , , , . These observations suggest that therapies related to IFN-I should be considered for the treatment of COVID-19.

3.2.

## Relevant mechanisms initiating CS in patients with COVID-19
The delayed IFN-I response in patients with COVID-19 mediated by the mechanism discussed above leads to immune disorders and the production of inflammatory substances , . Strong evidence suggests that inflammatory cytokines derived from hyperactivated immune cells are involved in the development of COVID-19 . Therefore, determining the deﬁnitive mechanisms of the CS associated with COVID-19 is very important for the development of promising and effective treatments. In general, the release of cytokines by the immune system is a very finely tuned process. However, SARS-CoV-2 triggers a CS and even death by suppressing the type I IFN response , , , and excessively activating immune cells , . In the early phase of infection, the replication of numerous viruses triggers the delayed secretion of antiviral IFNs , , , , , accompanied by an overwhelming release of abundant proinflammatory cytokines , , , , . Additionally, macrophages stimulated by IFN signaling and proinflammatory cytokines secrete specific chemokines to recruit neutrophils, monocytes and other inflammatory cells to infection sites , , . Moreover, the levels of proinflammatory cytokines are strongly correlated with a high serum titer of the virus and an increased risk of death , , .
Studies have shown that in addition to the close link between the IL-6 concentration and COVID-19 outcome, the levels of phospho-STAT3 are higher in patients with COVID-19 than in control groups , . IL-6, which is mainly produced by macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs) and monocytes, is a predominant activator of neutrophils and T cells via the janus tyrosine kinase/STAT (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway in a setting of inﬂammation . Then, activated T cells facilitate further macrophage activation via the secretion of specific cytokines , such as TNF-α, IFN-γ, and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Evidence has also suggested that IL-6 expression is induced by Ang II binding to the angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) to activate JAK/STAT signaling . JAK/STAT signaling is activated by IL-6, and it subsequently stimulates the generation of various cytokines that facilitate the action of dysfunctional mediators, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), contributing to vascular permeability , , , . These data collectively suggest that IL-6 plays an important role in disease progression in patients plagued by COVID-19.
Hyperactivation of the NF-κB pathway has been reported to be involved in COVID-19 initiation and progression , . Understanding the mechanism by which NF-κB signaling regulates inflammatory responses will help us to seek new strategies to mitigate the NF-κB pathway-related CS and reduce the progression of severe COVID-19 ( ).
The NF-κB signaling pathway is composed of NF-κB1 (p50), NF-κB2 (p52), RelA (p65), RelB and c-Rel , , , which are typically confined to the cytoplasm by the inhibitory protein of the NF-κB (IκB) family of proteins . In the canonical NF-κB pathway, IκB kinase (IKK), which is composed of IKKα/β and the NF-κB essential modulator (NEMO, also named IKKγ), phosphorylates IκBs , leading to translocation of the RelA/p50 complex into the nucleus and activation of the transcription of various inflammation-associated genes , . The noncanonical NF-κB pathway is also stimulated by a group of activated tumor necrosis factor superfamily receptors (TNFRs) via B cell-activating factor receptor (BAFF), CD40 and lymphotoxin β , . NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK) activates and cooperates with IKKα to mediate p100 phosphorylation, promoting the generation of mature p52 and noncanonical NF-κB complex p52/RelB formation , , . Activation of NF-κB signaling via the canonical or noncanonical pathway promotes the secretion of a series of chemokines and cytokines , , such as IL-6, TNF-α, GM-CSF, IL-8, and MCP1. TLRs regulate the NF-κB signaling pathway via two different TLR adaptors, MyD88, and TRIF , . First, the cytokines TNF-α and IL-1β stimulate TLRs and recruit and activate MyD88 , which is involved in Interleukin receptor-associated kinase (IRAK) activation and the subsequent facilitation of transforming growth factor-β-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) activation following TNFR-associated factor (TRAF) 6 ubiquitination , . Upon stimulation, TAK1 activates IKK by initiating the phosphorylation and degradation of IκBα, which leads to NF-κB activation , , . In addition, the TRIF-dependent TLR pathway mediates the production of type I IFNs and ISGs . The TLR pathway is involved in the recruitment of TRAFs by TRIF, especially TRAF3, and subsequently activates TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and IKKϵ through TRAF3 ubiquitination , . Activated TBK1 and IKKϵ then phosphorylate IRF3 and induce IRF3 dimerization, contributing to the transcription of type I IFNs , .

3.3.

## Relevant mechanism of excessive oxidative stress in patients with COVID-19
COVID-19 may disturb the redox microenvironment , , , . Oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between pro-oxidant and antioxidant molecules in a biological system . Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) are produced by various physiological reactions in the human body. In general, these dynamic physiological reactions maintain a balance; however, excessive oxidative stress may result from excess free radicals produced in response to SARS-CoV-2 invasion ( ).
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) exerts an important effect on the process of SARS-CoV-2 invading host cells , , , and the development of oxidative stress in patients with COVID-19. The interaction between renin and angiotensinogen promotes the degradation of angiotensinogen into angiotensin I (Ang I) . Ang II is produced from the cleavage of Ang I by the ACE protein , . Ang II exerts a variety of effects and plays important roles in the pathophysiological effects of the RAAS , . It also facilitates the generation of superoxide species, leading to oxidative stress , , . In addition, ACE2 promotes Ang II transformation into angiotensin 1-7 (Ang 1-7), which counteracts the effects of Ang II via the Mas receptor . Therefore, one possible explanation for the excessive oxidative stress and hyperinflammation in infected individuals involves the consumption and exhaustion of ACE2 via its binding to SARS-CoV-2, which restricts the conversion of Ang II to Ang 1‒7 and subsequently initiates oxidative stress .
In addition, the inflammasome is a crucial part of innate immunity , . Inflammasome-related proteins include NLR-family pyrin domain-containing proteins (NLRPs), such as NLRP3, NLR-family caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-containing protein 4 (NLRC4), absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2), and pyrin , , . Among these proteins, NLRP3, pro-caspase-1 and apoptosis-associated speck-like protein (ASC) containing a CARD comprise the NLRP3 inflammasome, which plays an important role in facilitating the maturation of pro-IL-1β/pro-IL-18 to IL-1β/IL-18 . Generally, the process of NLRP3 inflammasome activation requires two steps: priming and activation . PAMPs are recognized by TLRs, activating NF-κB signaling to induce the transcription of inflammasome-related genes , . NF-κB signaling is activated by numerous stimuli, including ATP, viral RNA, and an increase in ROS levels, leading to the assembly of NLRP3, ASC, and pro-caspase-1 into a protein complex , , , .
As intermediates stimulated by pathogens, ROS trigger NLRP3 inﬂammasome formation and activation, thereby facilitating the immune response . NF-κB, thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) , , and nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) participate in the response to oxidative stress and NLRP3 activation. Aberrant ROS production may increase the consumption of nitric oxide (NO), reducing the bioavailability of NO . The disproportionality in NO-ROS levels triggers the upregulation of inﬂammation-related protein expression. Furthermore, mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) are also related to the activation of the NLRP3 inﬂammasome, and accumulating damaged mitochondria are expected to be indispensable for activating NLRP3 , , . ROS also play an important role in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and NLRP3 inﬂammasome activation. In particular, imbalanced sterol synthesis and distribution, ER stress-induced protein misfolding, calcium ion release and ROS production stimulate NLRP3 inﬂammasome activation , ( ).

4.

## Nanotechnology-related strategies ameliorate COVID-19
Nanotechnology-based therapeutic strategies can be applied as potential treatments for COVID-19, depending on their intrinsic physical and chemical characteristics. NPs must be the appropriate size (usually 1–100 nm) , , and have many interface/surface options, a highly speciﬁc surface area and excellent potential for modification , , , , . In applications in biological research or medicine, nanomaterials show excellent performance, including good biocompatibility, enhanced drug delivery efficiency, easy gene modifications and optimal interactions between target analytes and captured molecules on sensors , , , , , , , , , . Advances in nanotechnology have allowed researchers to engineer elaborate nanostructures with distinct biological characteristics and surface chemistry. Therefore, utilizing nanomaterials in COVID-19 treatment has been of tremendous interest since 2019 .
Nanomaterials may mitigate infections by delivering antiviral molecular drugs for prevention and therapeutic strategies for COVID-19 management , , . In addition, drugs prepared by combining cell-derived targets with nanomaterials, as well as inorganic and organic NPs, play critical roles in blocking virus proliferation, regulating immune disorders and eliminating excessive inflammation and oxidative stress in patients with COVID-19 , , , . In the first half of this review, we briefly introduced the pathology and mechanism of COVID-19 and analyzed in detail the alterations in homeostasis occurring after SARS-CoV-2 infection in patients. In this section, we focus on nanotherapies for the microenvironmental disruption in patients with COVID-19 ( ). The nanomaterials used in these therapies are classified into five categories: (1) nanomaterials targeting PAMPs of viruses, (2) nanomaterials regulating PRR signaling pathways, (3) nanomaterials regulating immune cells, (4) nanomaterials eliminating excessive inflammatory cytokines, and (5) nanomaterials eliminating excess ROS ( ).
 4.1.

## Nanomaterials targeting PAMPs of viruses
As discussed above, PAMPs induce an excessive inflammatory response and oxidative stress when PRRs recognize them on cell membranes , , . PAMPs are viral elements that include specific nucleic acid motifs and particular products of viral infection that are essential for pathogen infection. The binding between PAMPs and PRRs is an indispensable initiator of the CS and oxidative stress in patients , . Thus, nanomaterials targeting the interaction between viral PAMPs and host cell PRRs may be a practical approach for COVID-19 treatment , . In this section, we summarize ACE2-related NPs to neutralize viruses and metal NPs that can intervene in the interaction of the SARS-CoV-2 RBD with ACE2.
SARS-CoV-2 enters cells through the interaction between the RBD of the S protein and host ACE2. Therefore, the administration of recombinant human ACE2 protein and S protein has been used as a new therapy , , . According to the latest studies, some researchers have applied ACE2-based NPs to intervene in the invasion of SARS-CoV-2. For example, Li et al. showed that ACE2 nanodecoys derived from human lung spheroid cells (LSCs) bind to SARS-CoV-2 to neutralize the virus and mitigate infection. ACE2-based NPs were delivered to lung cells through inhalation therapy, were maintained for over 72 h and were nontoxic. A similar observation was reported in another study in which researchers prepared ACE2-NPs by extruding the membranes of human embryonic kidney (HEK)-239T cells with abundant ACE2 expression. These NPs acted as decoys to capture SARS-CoV-2 S pseudovirions because ACE2 interacts with S1, which is one subunit of the S protein, resulting in the inhibition of virus invasion and infection in vitro and in vivo ( A). Moreover, Cys141 and Cys498 in ACE2 are critical for the membrane targeting of ACE2 because they are S-palmitoylated by zinc finger DHHC-type palmitoyl-transferase 3 (ZDHHC3). Hence, Xie et al. prepared extracellular vesicles (PM-ACE2-EVs) fused to the S-palmitoylation-dependent plasma membrane (PM) with ACE2 to block the interaction of the SARS-CoV-2 S-RBD with host cells. This strategy provided a new opportunity to construct a promising, novel biomaterial that inhibits SARS-CoV-2 infection ( B).
 In addition, some researchers have proposed strategies to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection by combining NPs that can be degraded in vivo with ACE2-rich cell membranes . Zhang et al. from University of California San Diego reported that cellular nanosponges (NSs) effectively counteracted SARS-CoV-2 infection. These NSs were prepared with a polymer core consisting of plasma membranes from human lung epithelial type II cells or human macrophages ( ). During entry, SARS-CoV-2 also binds glycosaminoglycans such as heparin. Thus, the researchers introduced heparin to modify the cellular NSs as part of a broad-spectrum antiviral strategy. In addition, they discovered that increasing the heparin density on the surface of cellular NSs enhances their inhibitory effects on SARS-CoV-2 .
 Furthermore, the structure of liposomes is similar to cell membranes and has good biocompatibility and wide adaptability such that they have low requirements for the properties of drugs being delivered and slowly release drugs in vivo to prolong drug effects; therefore, liposome-based NPs are favored by many researchers , , . For example, Chen et al. found that liposome-based NPs carrying either the recombinant ACE2 protein or anti-SARS-CoV-2-neutralizing antibodies and phosphatidylserine ligands completely inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection by blocking the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 S protein with host ACE2 on cells. The neutralizing capacity of nanotrap-ACE2 was particularly effective, especially compared with that of soluble ACE2. In addition, through phosphatidylserine-guided phagocytosis, macrophages engulfed and neutralized nanotraps bound to the virus ( A).
 Moreover, metal-based NPs have antiviral effects, and some researchers have also performed related studies of their effects on SARS-CoV-2 , , . For example, researchers from Xiamen University prepared a spherical cocktail neutralizing aptamer-gold NP (SNAP) to block the interaction of the Omicron RBD with ACE2. Because of the size-matched gold scaffold and multivalent multisite aptamer binding, SNAP conjugates tightly and binds to the RBD of the virus to deactivate Omicron ( B).
These NPs effectively capture SARS-CoV-2 and completely block its infection of ACE2-expressing cell lines and primary lung cells. This new therapeutic tactic might be readily developed into a viable treatment for COVID-19. However, many of the aforementioned NPs are derived from cells or combined with cell membranes. In the future, researchers may need to focus on the biocompatibility, biomodification, and mechanism of NPs to exploit their advantages in biology, medicine, and treatment. Moreover, the use of nanotechnology to produce more biologically active materials is also urgently needed for antiviral applications.

4.2.

## Nanomaterials regulating PRR signaling pathways
As we discussed above, the host PRRs identify PAMPs upon virus invasion and activate downstream pathways, such as the TLRs, MyD88, NF-κB, RIG, and TRIF pathways, which are necessary for initiating the COVID-19-related CS and oxidative stress. Therefore, intervening in related signaling pathways may be an effective strategy for the treatment of COVID-19.
Gold NPs (AuNPs) effectively modulate signaling pathways and hence inhibit the generation of proinflammatory cytokines . In a trial report, subnanometer gold clusters (SAuNCs) effectively inhibited TLR4 stimulation and cytokine production in a mouse model. The decreased cytokine levels, in turn, inhibited excessive ROS production and prolonged the lifespan of mice with sepsis. Based on these results, SAuNCs effectively suppress the expression of TNF-α, IL-6, and MCP-1 . Moreover, Yang et al. developed specific peptide decorated-AuNPs, nanobased TLR inhibitors, to modulate endosomal pH and significantly attenuate signaling via multiple TLRs ( ). Therefore, NPs decorated with specific peptides might serve as novel anti-inflammatory tools. AuNPs synthesized from an ethanol extract of Euphrasia officinalis (EO) leaves exhibited little cytotoxicity and remarkably suppressed NO, TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 release from RAW 264.7 cells treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Further research illustrated that EO-AuNPs not only significantly inhibited the phosphorylation and degradation of IκB and the nuclear translocation of NF-κB p65 but also inhibited LPS-triggered inflammation by restraining the activation of the JAK/STAT pathway .
 Some biodegradable NPs have also been used to regulate signaling pathways , . For example, poly γ-glutamic acid (γ-PGA) induces potent immune responses through the TLR4/MyD88 signaling pathway. This result suggests that γ-PGA NPs have an antigen-carrying capacity and elicit adaptive immune responses to the carried antigen . Xu et al. modified Astragalus polysaccharide NPs with a chitosan derivative (chitosan/tripolyphosphate), and these nanomaterials showed much better therapeutic efficacy in resisting inflammation by mediating the TLR4-NF-κB signaling pathway. Moreover, biodegradable mesoporous silica NPs modified by polyethyleneimine (MSN-PEI) might decrease toxicity and maintain the capture efficiency of PEI and can be applied to decrease the activation of the TLR9-MyD88-NFκB pathway by trapping cell-free DNA (cfDNA) .
Biomimetic nanocomposites prepared with special magnetic separation techniques exhibit greater effectiveness in capturing PAMPs , , . For example, Shen et al. synthesized biomimetic nanocomposites consisting of macrophage membranes and polyethyleneimine-modified Fe3O4 NPs (Fe3O4@MMs), which effectively suppressed the activation of the PRR pathway and inhibited the secretion of TNF-α, IL-6 and other cytokines via the magnetic separation of AMPs by stabilizing the macrophage membrane and increasing the affinity of the NPs for PAMPs. These Fe3O4@MMs were disguised as macrophages and specifically captured LPS to prevent immune response activation.
These nanomaterials were not directly applied in the management of COVID-19, but their therapeutic effects on related diseases have been verified. In particular, AuNPs exert excellent effects on regulating TLR-, NF-κB-, and JAK/STAT-related signaling pathways, providing a potential therapeutic strategy for SARS-CoV-2 infection by decreasing the activity of proinflammatory pathways. In addition, the flexible modification of biodegradable polymers and silica NPs also endows them with more possibilities for the regulation of signaling pathways. Moreover, the modulation of other PRR-related pathways, such as RIG and TRIF, would be a new direction for treating SARS-CoV-2 infection.

4.3.

## Nanomaterials regulating immune cells
According to the illustration of the immune mechanism that is activated by SARS-CoV-2 invasion, a large number of immune cells are activated and release large amounts of inflammatory cytokines. In turn, immune cells are stimulated by proinflammatory cytokines, leading to immune dysregulation in patients. Nanomaterials are widely studied in biology and medicine due to their excellent chemical and physical properties, such as intervening in the expression and signaling pathways of immune cells through their intrinsic properties or loaded drugs , , . Therefore, the introduction of NPs to target immune cells may be another inspired strategy for COVID-19 , , such as the most important macrophages and neutrophils involved in the immune response activated by SARS-CoV-2.
Macrophages are mainly responsible for the initiation, maintenance, and resolution of inflammation, and a dysregulated macrophage-mediated inflammatory response may induce severe clinical symptoms and tissue damage. Therefore, for patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, utilizing nanotechnology targeting alveolar macrophages may be a particularly effective strategy. For example, Chakravarthy and colleagues reported quantum dots (QDs), which are nanoconjugates of cadmium selenide–cadmium sulfide–zinc sulfide (CdSe/CdS/ZnS) as the system for delivering doxorubicin to lung macrophages, improving inflammatory lung injuries.
Due to the high levels of mannose on alveolar macrophages, some mannose-modified lipid NPs have been applied to treat lung injuries , . In particular, Singh et al. synthesized mannosylated albumin NPs that target CD206+ monocyte-derived macrophages, and the TGFβ1 small-interfering RNA (siRNA) contained in these NPs prevent lung fibrosis ( ). Polymer NPs that are degraded have also been introduced to regulate macrophages , , , . For example, Kraynak et al. developed NPs composed of a PLGA core and phosphatidylserine (PS)-supplemented cell plasma membrane (PS-MNPs). These NPs promoted macrophage phenotype switching to reduce inflammatory cytokine expression and inflammation . In addition, Thamphiwatana et al. employed biomimetic NPs composed of a core with biodegradable poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) and a macrophage-derived cell membrane (MΦ-NP). The hydrophilic surface glycans of the PLGA core stabilize the macrophagocyte membrane to increase the stability of the MΦ-NPs, which inherited the biological properties of the macrophagocyte membrane and effectively interacted with PAMPs .
 Moreover, based on the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performance of Fe3O4 and the photothermal effect of polydopamine (PDA), researchers combined the two materials and functionalized them with hyaluronic acid (HA) to successfully prepare HA-PDA@Fe3O4 NPs. The researchers improved the effectiveness of macrophage-based immunotherapies and interfered with premetastatic niche formation in the lung . Metal-based NPs have also attracted researchers’ attention , , , . Wang and coworkers prepared peptide-coated AuNPs, and the NPs target macrophages in the lung to promote inflammation resolution, protecting the lung from injuries. Through this treatment, the number of alveolar M2 macrophages increased, and the numbers of both alveolar and interstitial M1 macrophages decreased.
Neutrophils are involved in various inflammatory diseases, such as COVID-19, atherosclerosis, and diabetes mellitus , , . Decreasing neutrophil infiltration may be a potentially useful measure to relieve inflammation. Therefore, the delivery of drugs acting on neutrophils to the site of inflammation using NPs is the most direct approach , , , . For example, Tang et al. were inspired by the specific recognition between platelets and inflammatory neutrophils and synthesized platelet-mimetic NPs consisting of a PLGA inner core and coloaded them with piceatannol and superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO). With this system, the inhibitor was delivered to neutrophils and decreased neutrophil infiltration; using MRI, these NPs were applied to recognize, intervene, and monitor inflammatory neutrophils in individuals with acute ischemic stroke. Moreover, Wang et al. synthesized drug-loaded albumin NPs. These NPs inhibited neutrophil transmigration to mitigate inflammation, and the loaded spleen tyrosine kinase inhibitor (piceatannol) detached the adherent neutrophils and elicited their release into the circulation .
NPs efficiently deliver drugs into disease-related immune cells, but their performance is significantly affected by their surface properties. Some researchers prepared poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-b-poly(lactide-co-glycolide)-based cationic lipid-assisted NPs to increase the interaction of NPs with neutrophils, and these materials target neutrophils more easily upon changing the PEG density and surface charge . In addition, pharmaceutical-based NPs have not substantially improved outcomes; therefore, Saito et al. designed drug-free biodegradable NPs. The NPs consist of poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolide) and poly(dl-lactide), which target circulating inflammatory neutrophils and monocytes in the vasculature to inhibit them from migrating into inflamed tissue. Hence, inflammation was ameliorated .
The direct application of these NPs to the treatment of COVID-19 has been difficult, but these strategies might provide us with inspiration for the preparation of immunomodulatory nanomaterials against SARS-CoV-2, especially those mediating the adhesion and migration of multiple types of immune cells and for the dynamic tracking of treatment effects , , . In addition, these methods provide possibilities to modulate immune cell dysregulation caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection utilizing NPs to decrease the levels of cytokines and activate the IFN response , .

4.4.

## Nanomaterials for eliminating excess inflammatory cytokines
Affected by virus interventions, various innate and adaptive immune cells are activated in patients infected with SARS-CoV-2. Subsequently, the levels of PD-L1, IL-6, IL-2, TNF-α, GM-CSF, and other inflammatory cytokines are disrupted by an excessive immune response, leading to a CS , . Therefore, suppressing the CS is also an effective strategy for patients. However, many inhibitors (e.g., siltuximab, tocilizumab, inﬂiximab, remdesivir, sofosbuvir, and galidesivir) have not led to satisfactory COVID-19 management because of their indeterminate efficacy and high cost. In addition, they do not target late-stage infection and have little effect on maintaining the balance of the microenvironment , . Nanomaterials have higher efficiency and certain pertinence because they more directly regulate the imbalance of homeostasis. Therefore, introducing NPs and nanotechnology may be a new therapeutic strategy for maintaining the balance of the microenvironment .
The virus invades host cells and causes hyperinflammation. Thus, we not only must inactivate the virus but also must clear the excess cytokines if we want to promote the rehabilitation of patients. After considering these issues, some researchers have performed related studies , . For example, Rao et al. prepared engineered cell membrane nanodecoys that fused cell membrane nanovesicles derived from 293T/ACE2 cells with those from human myeloid mononuclear THP-1 cells. These nanodecoys, containing antigens from both source cells, compete with host cells for virus binding, protecting host cells from SARS-CoV-2 infection. Moreover, depending on the abundance of cytokine receptors, these nanodecoys neutralized IL-6 and GM-CSF, which are important inflammatory cytokines in the process of SARS-CoV-2 infection ( ). Moreover, the combination of cell membranes with NPs might represent another effective strategy , , , .
 Nanotraps block the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and host cells, inducing the accumulation of viruses and thus preventing more severe clinical symptoms . They also neutralize inflammatory cytokines, leading to more efficient treatment , . Park et al. synthesized polyethylene glycol (PEG)ylated NP albumin-bound (PNAB) materials called PNAB-Rg6 and PNAB-Rgx365 to enhance the prolonged biological activity of steroidal ginsenoside saponins and inhibit blood clot formation and vascular inflammation. Moreover, by activating the downregulated NF-κB pathway, these NPs alleviated tissue damage and the CS to increase the percentage of survivors with COVID-19 . In addition, according to recent reports, SARS-CoV-2-infected patients show clinically reduced 25-hydroxycholesterol (25-HC) levels and increased cytokine levels. Kim et al. described nanovesicles (25-HC@DDAB) combined with 25-HC and didodecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB) to that restore intracellular cholesterol levels and restrain CS initiation to alleviate that condition, reducing inflammatory cytokine levels.
Macrophages phagocytose pathogens, and their cell membranes contain a large number of receptors that can be used as a source of nanomedicine. One study described alveolar macrophage (AM)-like NP polymeric cores wrapped with AM membranes that contain AM surface receptors . Using this approach, nanomedicines prepared directly from macrophage membranes for the inhibition of inflammatory cytokines function as macrophages in vivo. These NPs prevent virus entry into host cells, absorbing various proinﬂammatory cytokines. The experimental results indicated that multifunctional AM-like NPs treated with near-infrared irradiation decreased the viral burden and cytokine levels, which conferred a signiﬁcant survival advantage in surrogate mouse models with COVID-19 . Another similar NP with a nanocore consisting of lopinavir and PLGA coated with macrophage membranes was reported . These PLGA-LPV@M NPs neutralized IL-6, IL-1β, TNF-α, and other proinflammatory cytokines and effectively decreased the activation of macrophages and neutrophils. Moreover, lopinavir (LPV), a model antiviral drug, prevents SARS-CoV-2 infection during treatment ( ). Therefore, loading antiviral drugs or introducing photothermal molecules into NPs might play dual roles to exert better therapeutic effects, and this method could be applied in other drug design strategies. In addition, this strategy also suggested that nanomedicines should be developed toward synergistic treatment and the integration of diagnosis and treatment combined with imaging technology in the future .
 In addition, some researchers have found that using exosomes released from lung epithelial cells exposed to SARS-CoV-2 to treat lung tissue can result in inflammation . This inflammatory response is due to exosome Nsp12Nsp13 absorption by lung macrophages, which results in the release of an array of inflammatory cytokines after NF-κB activation. Subsequently, apoptosis of lung epithelial cells is induced by the increased release of TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β from exosomeNsp12Nsp13-activated lung macrophages. Therefore, researchers developed the ginger exosome-like NP (GELN) microRNA (miRNA) aly-miR396a-5p to abolish lung inflammation .

4.5.

## Nanomaterials for eliminating excess ROS
In recent years, ROS have become a very important research ﬁeld because they play a vital role in mediating various physiological functions. Endogenous ROS, which are controlled by antioxidant enzymes, are produced during cellular respiration and normal metabolism , . However, this balance is disrupted in hyperinflammation induced by COVID-19, and excessive ROS production is extremely toxic to host cells and patients’ health. One feasible approach involves employing antioxidants to reduce the excessive ROS level that results in poor outcomes for patients with COVID-19. However, treatments based on traditional antioxidants are not ideal because of their poor stability, low bioavailability, and efficacy. For example, vitamin C is unstable when exposed to heat, light, moisture, oxygen and metal ions, accompanied by color changes, limiting its application , . Fortunately, potential strategies based on novel materials have provided new opportunities to maintain the redox balance in the body. Below, we summarize related nanomaterials acting as delivery systems and some NPs with enzyme-like activities or redox effects.
Nanomaterials with properties such as higher drug loading, decreased immunogenicity and toxicity and better biocompatibility have been applied to ROS-detoxifying enzyme delivery. For example, long-circulating liposomes containing superoxide dismutase (SOD) show superior anti-inﬂammatory activity and a prolonged circulation half-life , , , . Chen et al. synthesized an amphiphilic block copolymer consisting of melatonin, self-assembled PEG and poly(propylene sulfide) (PPS) to prepare ROS-responsive polymeric NPs that may function as an effective drug delivery system for the preferential release of encapsulated drugs to reduce tissue neutrophil infiltration and inflammatory cytokine levels at the lesion site. In addition, the hydrophobicity, easy degradation, and low bioavailability of curcumin have hindered its use in previous clinical treatments. However, as shown by Wang et al. , curcumin was encapsulated into solid lipid NPs, which exert sustained drug release and restrain inflammatory cytokine release by preventing the chemical degradation of curcumin. Hence, combining bioactive enzymes or traditional antioxidants with nanotechnology-based delivery systems may lead to better therapeutic effects.
Nanomaterials possessing enzyme-like and redox activities or integrated with ROS-detoxifying enzymes have also attracted increasing attention for ROS elimination , , and some unique NPs have been developed as single-atom catalysts (SACs). For example, ceria exhibits strong catalase or SOD enzyme-like activity, which leads to remarkable therapeutic effects by eliminating ROS. Furthermore, the Ce3+/Ce4+ surface ratio has been increasingly linked to antioxidase mimetic activity , , . Other investigations have also illustrated that ceria hinders the secretion of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and prevents macrophagocytes from secreting TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β. Building on previous efforts, Soh et al. synthesized modified ceria nanomaterials by incorporating zirconia and termed them CZ nanozymes, which exhibited high antioxidant activity and inhibited inflammatory injury to a greater extent than nanozymes based on ceria alone. Of these exceptional NPs, melatonin activity is critical for impeding the production of inflammatory mediators, including COX-2, IL-6, IL-1β, iNOS, and NLRP3, by decreasing the phosphorylation of the NF-κB p65 subunit.
Similarly, many trials related to improved nanomaterials with anti-inflammatory properties deserve attention. In our research, a composite hydrogel comprising amine-functionalized star-shaped PEG (starPEG), heparin and Cu5.4O ultrasmall nanozymes (Cu5.4O@Hep-PEG) effectively adsorbed the inflammatory chemokines MCP1 and IL-8, inhibiting the migration of macrophages and neutrophils. Moreover, oxidative stress was mitigated because these nanozymes scavenged ROS in wound fluid, and the continuous release of Cu5.4O promoted angiogenesis , . In another study, researchers synthesized molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) nanosheet-based hydrogels decorated with tannic acid-Fe (MoS2@TA/Fe NSs) that possess both POD-like and catalase (CAT)-like activity to eliminate redundant ROS and RNS in a neutral environment. In addition, upon exposure to tannic acid, the hydrogel inhibited the release of inflammatory factors, resulting in the maintenance of balanced antioxidant systems and prevention of inflammation to promote wound self-healing , .
Carbohydrate-derived NPs were also applied to ROS scavenging. Long et al. prepared hydrophilic carbohydrate-derived NPs (C-NPs) with conjugated π-systems that produced antioxidant effects. This strategy was applied to the liver to ameliorate hepatic ischemia‒reperfusion injury (IRI). A recent study by Zhao et al. revealed that biocompatible glycyrrhizic acid (GA) NPs (GANPs) inhibited the multiplication of MHV-A59, a surrogate for SARS-CoV-2 and inhibited the expression of proinﬂammatory cytokines induced by MHV-A59 or the N protein of SARS-CoV-2. In addition, GANPs significantly reduced ROS levels and alleviated ROS overproduction induced by MHV-A59 ( ).
 

5.

## Challenges and prospects for nanomaterials administrating COVID-19 and related diseases
Nanomaterials are exciting therapeutic strategies for COVID-19 and other related diseases. We have summarized the use of nanomaterials to block SARS-CoV-2 invasion and regulate microenvironmental disorders, resulting in neutralization of the virus and alleviation of inflammation and clinical symptoms. However, some drawbacks persist that may hinder nanomaterials from being translated from the laboratory into clinical applications, such as uncertain tissue interactions, lack of required dissemination and deposition in the body, complex preparation processes and unknown impacts on the environment , , . Considerable efforts are needed to optimize nanomaterials and address these limitations and other unknown risks. For example, exploring the mechanisms of action of different nanomaterials and tissues and their distribution in vivo, such as accelerating trials in large animals and clinical trials. Moreover, simple, facile, human-friendly and environmentally friendly methods for preparing nanomaterials are urgently needed. In addition, introducing imaging or AI-assisted methods to control nanomaterials for precision treatment flexibly would facilitate intelligent treatment , .
In the future, nanotechnology will be widely applied in medicines, treatments, and other biological fields. As we mentioned above, the progression of disrupted homeostasis is not caused by a single factor but by multiple factors. Therefore, developing multifunctional NPs or combining different targeted nanomaterials would be an effective solution . Surface properties, such as topographical features, stiffness, functional groups and interfacial free energy, profoundly affect nanomaterial functions . Therefore, improving the surface properties of nanomaterials is an important direction for promoting biocompatibility and usability. In addition, more nanomedicines and nanoplatforms should be designed for drug delivery and therapies for COVID-19 and related diseases, and the mechanism underlying the interaction of NPs with tissue should be investigated to achieve more targeted treatments. Moreover, theragnostics, a new medical science, has used nanotechnology-based strategies to detect and eliminate viral or bacterial threats , . The combination of diagnosis and therapy would be a new strategy for nanomaterial development, which is assisted by imaging and supported by changes in the physical, chemical, and optical properties of NPs. Although the clinical translation of nanomaterials is very difficult, with the efforts of scientists, more nanomedicines would enter clinical trials and ultimately benefit patients. Furthermore, the application of nanotechnology to disease prevention is also an important research direction.
In this review, we systematically illustrated the alterations in homeostasis and potential molecular mechanisms related to microenvironment disorders in patients with COVID-19, including the delayed IFN-I response, CS initiation, and excessive oxidative stress. We subsequently summarized therapeutic strategies using nanomaterials to target PAMPs of viruses, regulate PRR pathways and immune cells, and eliminate excessive cytokines and ROS. This review provides new ideas and insights for the treatment of COVID-19 and other diseases related to microenvironment disorders.

## Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 92168106, China), the key project for clinical innovation of Third Military Medical University (No. CX2019LC107, China), and the National Research Foundation of Korea (CRI project No. 2018R1A3B1052702, Korea).

## Author contributions
Jong Seung Kim, Ji Zheng and Jun Deng contributed to the conception and preparation of the manuscript; Zhicheng Liu, Zhuolei Han, Xin Jin and Wenting Chen drafted the manuscript and made the figures; Jusung An and Jaewon Kim reviewed and edited the manuscript; Jong Seung Kim, Ji Zheng and Jun Deng obtained funding and supervised the manuscript. All of the authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

## Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Footnotes
Peer review under the responsibility of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.

## Contributor Information
Jong Seung Kim, Email: jongskim@korea.ac.kr.
Ji Zheng, Email: jizheng023@aliyun.com.
Jun Deng, Email: djun.123@163.com.

## References