319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC942302794230279423027NIHMS18306383597748410.1016/j.celrep.2022.111192Temporal control of PDGFRα regulates the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition in wound healing
YaoLongbiao RathnakarBharath H KwonHae Ryong SakashitaHiromi KimJang H RackleyAlex TomasekJames J BerryWilliam L OlsonLorin E 1Cardiovascular Biology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA2Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA3Department of Surgery, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA4Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
L.Y., B.H.R., H.R.K., and L.E.O. conducted experiments and analyzed data. L.Y., B.H.R., H.R.K., H.S., J.H.K., A.R., and W.L.B. provided essential materials. L.E.O., J.J.T., and W.L.B. conceived the study and provided funding. L.E.O. supervised the project and drafted the manuscript. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript and approved the final version.
*Correspondence: lorin-olson@omrf.org
16820224071111921111922982022This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
Fibroblasts differentiate into myofibroblasts by acquiring new contractile function. This is important for tissue repair, but it also contributes to organ fibrosis. Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) promotes tissue repair and fibrosis, but the relationship between PDGF and myofibroblasts is unclear. Using mice with lineage tracing linked to PDGF receptor α (PDGFRα) gene mutations, we examine cell fates during skin wound healing. Elevated PDGFRα signaling increases proliferation but unexpectedly delays the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition, suggesting that PDGFRα must be downregulated for myofibroblast differentiation. In contrast, deletion of PDGFRα decreases proliferation and myofibroblast differentiation by reducing serum response factor (SRF) nuclear localization. Consequences of SRF deletion resemble PDGFRα deletion, but deletion of two SRF coactivators, MRTFA and MRTFB, specifically eliminates myofibroblasts. Our findings suggest a scenario where PDGFRα signaling initially supports proliferation of fibroblast progenitors to expand their number during early wound healing but, later, PDGFRα downregulation facilitates fibroblast differentiation into myofibroblasts.

## In brief
Yao et al. use lineage-tracing and wound-healing experiments in mice to investigate functions of the PDGFRα signaling pathway in the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition. Their analysis indicates an early role for PDGFRα-SRF signaling to support fibroblast proliferation, followed by PDGFRα downregulation and a transition to MRTF-SRF control over myofibroblast differentiation.

## Graphical Abstract

 

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionno

## INTRODUCTION
Most organs possess the ability to respond to tissue injury by forming scar tissue. In this process, fibroblastic progenitor cells proliferate and secrete extracellular matrix (ECM) before differentiating into contractile myofibroblasts ( ; ). The myofibroblasts acquire force-generating properties through de novo expression of alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMA) and other proteins normally found in smooth muscle cells ( ; ). Transient myofibroblasts in wound healing are beneficial because their contraction reduces the size of the tissue defect needing to be plugged by scar tissue ( ), but persistence of myofibroblasts leads to fibrosis that creates a significant clinical burden ( ).
The principal source of myofibroblasts in wound healing is local fibroblastic progenitors, sometimes called fibro-adipogenic progenitors because of their dual potential for fibrogenic and adipogenic differentiation ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Progenitors become activated by cytokines and growth factors released from platelets and infiltrating leukocytes ( ). Among these signals, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) has a key role driving proliferation and migration ( ; ). From lineage-tracing studies in mice, it is known that many PDGF-activated progenitors differentiate into αSMA+ myofibroblasts ( ; ). This leads to an expectation that PDGF promotes, and might be required for, myofibroblast differentiation. The myofibroblast phenotype largely depends on the transcriptional activity of serum response factor (SRF), which is constitutively localized to the nucleus. Extracellular signals and matrix stiffness enhance SRF activity through two coactivators, MRTFA and MRTFB, which shuttle in and out of the nucleus depending on actin polymerization ( ). SRF and myocardin-related transcription factors (MRTFs) are required for transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) to induce fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transitions ( ; ), and pharmacological activation of MRTFs enhances myofibroblast differentiation in wound healing ( ). SRF directly regulates two distinct genetic programs driving proliferation or myofibroblast differentiation ( ; ). As an upstream signal, PDGFRα regulates SRF and MRTF during neural crest development ( ; ), but whether PDGFRα engages SRF and MRTF to regulate myofibroblast differentiation has not been investigated.
PDGF binds to tyrosine kinase receptors on the cell surface, composed of PDGFRα and/or PDGFRβ, which induces receptor dimerization and kinase activation. Autophosphorylated tyrosines on the receptor cytoplasmic region then serve as binding sites for the effectors of downstream signaling pathways including PI3K, ERK, PLCγ, and STATs ( ; ; ). PDGFRα and PDGFRβ are expressed on fibroblasts in most adult organs at homeostasis ( ). Of particular interest, organ fibrosis develops spontaneously (without injury) in mice with a D849V knockin mutation in PDGFRα ( ). This mutation, also called the K (kinase domain) mutation, impairs autoinhibitory functions of the kinase domain and allows constitutive signaling to occur. PDGFRαK-driven fibrosis involves altered cell fate, where fibroblastic progenitors become activated fibroblasts that produce collagen at the expense of adipogenic potential ( ; ). Whether these PDGFRαK-activated fibroblasts progress to become contractile myofibroblasts is unknown.
Given that PDGFRα signaling is critical for wound repair and the appearance of myofibroblasts is critical for wound closure, we aimed to resolve the relationship between PDGFRα and myofibroblasts. Do PDGFRαK-activated cells spontaneously differentiate into αSMA+ myofibroblasts? How does the loss of PDGFRα affect the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition? What is the functional relationship between PDGFRα, SRF, and MRTFs? Our results show that the temporal control of PDGFRα signaling regulates the transition from proliferating progenitor to contractile myofibroblast. Elevated PDGFRα signaling increases proliferation but delays the emergence of αSMA+ myofibroblasts from activated fibroblasts. On the other hand, deletion of Pdgfra decreases proliferation and formation of activated fibroblast progenitors, as well as myofibroblast differentiation, which is accompanied by loss of Rac1 activity and SRF nuclear localization. Finally, similar to Pdgfra deletion, Srf deletion decreases proliferation and myofibroblast differentiation, but double deletion of Mrtfa and Mrtfb specifically causes a loss of αSMA+ myofibroblasts without affecting proliferation and formation of activated fibroblast progenitors. These phenotypes suggest that PDGFRα has overlapping functions with SRF in control of proliferation and migration, but PDGFRα has distinct functions from SRF and MRTFs in myofibroblast differentiation.

## RESULTS

## PDGFRαK impairs dermal wound healing
To investigate the consequence of elevated PDGFRα signaling in tissue repair, we performed wound-healing studies on Ubc-PdgfraFlp/+ control mice and Ubc-PdgfraK/+ mice with constitutively active PDGFRα. Ubc-PdgfraFlp/+ mice have a lox-PDGFRα:STOP-lox-Flp° cassette inserted at Pdgfra, along with UbcCreERtg and Rosa26FSF-tdTomato alleles. In these mice, Tmx induces deletion of a floxed cassette to allow Flp° expression in PDGFRα+ cells ( ). Ubc-PdgfraK/+ mice have a lox-STOP-lox-PDGFRαK-T2A-Flp° cassette inserted at Pdgfra, plus UbcCreERtg and Rosa26FSF-tdTomato. In these mice, Tmx induces deletion of a floxed cassette to allow expression of PDGFRαK together with Flp° ( ). In both models, Pdgfra-derived cells express Tomato based on the intersection of global Ubc-driven Cre and fibroblast Pdgfra-driven Flp ( ). Tomato is not expressed in the absence of Tmx ( and ). We chose globally active UbcCreER because our goal is to target and track any cell that expresses Pdgfra in tissue repair. Recent studies have identified unexpected progenitor sources for myofibroblasts, including adipocytes and myeloid cells, that acquire Pdgfra expression only when recruited to the wound site ( ; ). Using a “fibroblast-specific” Cre (e.g., Pdgfra-CreER) would exclude these progenitors and would be redundant with PdgfraK.Flp/+ and PdgfraFlp/+ as knockin alleles of Pdgfra. We administered Tmx three times (days −9, −7, and −5), created wounds on day 0, and then excised wounds and surrounding skin at day +7 ( ). We used histomorphometry on the wound center ( ) to measure three wound features: wound bed cross-sectional area, wound contraction as a percentage of the original 5 mm width (a lower percentage indicates more contraction), and epithelialization, which means the percentage of the wound surface covered by newly generated epidermis (a higher percentage indicates more epithelialization). Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wound beds display a significantly larger cross-sectional area ( ) and retain most of their original size at day 7, whereas control wounds contract to ~50% of the original size ( ). Only 3/8 Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds completely epithelialize by day 7, compared with 8/8 Ubc-PdgfraFlp/+ wounds ( ). In both genotypes, PDGFRα is expressed in granulation tissue ( ). Collagen, the most abundant ECM in the dermis and granulation tissue, and periostin, a matricellular protein secreted by myofibroblasts, are both reduced in Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds compared with PdgfraFlp/+ ( and ). Therefore, elevated PDGFRα signaling leads to defective wound healing by day 7 rather than improved healing.
 

## PDGFRαK enhances proliferation but delays myofibroblast differentiation
We used the Rosa26FSF-tdTomato reporter to assess proliferation, migration, and differentiation of Pdgfra-derived cells. By EdU incorporation in day 4 wounds, we observe that PdgfraK-derived Tomato+ cells in mutant wounds are significantly more proliferative than Tomato+ cells in control wounds ( and ). The location of Tomato+ cells at day 7 verifies that both genotypes contain Tomato+ cells distributed throughout the granulation tissue, but the Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds clearly contain more Tomato+ cells ( ). Therefore, elevated PDGFRα signaling enhances progenitor proliferation and migration, in agreement with previous work showing that PdgfraK/+ embryonic fibroblasts were more proliferative and more migratory ( ).
In Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds, αSMA+ cells are densely clustered at the wound perimeter and center, with intervening areas lacking αSMA ( ). The area of αSMA stain is significantly lower in Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds ( ). More specifically, in Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds, areas with the most αSMA+ cells are anti-correlated with Tomato+ cells (arrowheads in and ). We verified anti-correlation of these markers at the individual cell level by calculating the myofibroblast index of αSMA expression in Tomato+ cells. Indeed, differentiation of PdgfraK-derived progenitors into αSMA+ myofibroblasts is severely reduced at day 7 ( and ). By day 10, however, complete epithelialization is achieved in Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds, and myofibroblast indices are similar between Ubc-PdgfraFlp/+ and Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds ( – ). This indicates that the myofibroblast deficiency induced by PDGFRαK is temporary. Together, these results show that PDGFRαK produces abundant new tissue through increased cell proliferation and migration, but these cells exhibit delayed fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition during the first week of healing.

## PDGFRαK-driven fibrosis does not involve myofibroblasts
Myofibroblasts are not found in most tissues at homeostasis, but they appear in wound healing and many fibrotic diseases because of pro-myofibroblast signals (e.g., TGF-β) and mechanical forces that are not present in healthy tissue. PDGFRαK drives spontaneous fibrosis in the skin and other organs ( ), but whether this induces αSMA+ myofibroblasts is unclear. To investigate, we administered Tmx to 10-day-old Ubc-PdgfraK/+ mutant pups and Ubc-Pdgfra+/+ littermates and sacrificed them 5 months later to analyze fibrosis in skin, intestine, subcutaneous fat, and skeletal muscle ( and ). In each organ, trichrome stain confirms fibrotic deposits in mutant tissues that are absent from controls ( – ). Fibrotic regions contain high cell density with Tomato labeling but no ectopic αSMA. These results suggest that PDGFRαK signaling in uninjured tissue drives fibrosis without converting progenitors into myofibroblasts.

## Opposing functions of PDGFRαK and TGF-β on myofibroblast differentiation
To examine the ability of PDGFRαK-expressing cells to differentiate and function as myofibroblasts in vitro, we isolated primary dermal fibroblasts (DF) from Pdgfra+/+ and PdgfraK/+ mice. We tested contractile function by suspending DFs in collagen lattices attached to tissue culture plastic and induced myofibroblast differentiation by treating with 10% serum for 4 days. Mitomycin C was included to control for proliferation differences. Upon release from the plastic, Pdgfra+/+ DFs contract strongly, reducing the lattice to 30% of the original size, but PdgfraK/+ DFs contract poorly, achieving only 60% of original size ( ). PdgfraK/+ DFs also contract poorly when treated with TGF-β1 ( ). Under growth conditions, morphological differences are obvious in that PdgfraK/+ DFs are smaller and exhibit lower αSMA expression than Pdgfra+/+ cells ( and ).
 TGF-β1 induces myofibroblast differentiation through the action of SMAD2/3 transcription factors, MRTFs, and p38 kinases ( ; ; ). To more closely examine the TGF-β1 response, we serum starved Pdgfra+/+ and PdgfraK/+ DFs and then treated them with TGF-β1. In response, αSMA is upregulated from 0 to 12 h of treatment in both genotypes. Increased αSMA is coordinated with downregulation of PDGFRα, and both responses are delayed in PdgfraK/+ DFs ( ). TGF-β1 induces similar SMAD3 phosphorylation in both cell genotypes ( ). Reciprocal changes are also seen at the level of Pdgfra and Acta2 (αSMA) mRNA in TGF-β1-treated Pdgfra+/+ cells ( ).
To investigate transcriptional regulators of myofibroblast differentiation in PdgfraK/+ DFs, we examined SRF, MRTFA, and MRTFB. Surprisingly, MRTFA and MRTFB are upregulated in PdgfraK/+ DFs compared with in Pdgfra+/+, and SRF expression is normal ( ). MRTFA and MRTFB accumulate in the nucleus of serum-treated cells of both genotypes ( ), suggesting that SRF-MRTF signaling is functional in PdgfraK/+ DFs. This is surprising because SRFs and MRTFs should strongly promote myofibroblast differentiation ( ; ; ). Therefore, although the molecular mechanisms by which PDGFRα opposes myofibroblast differentiation are still unclear, these results argue against defective TGF-β-SMAD or SRF-MRTF signaling. Moreover, these results show that PDGFRα and TGF-β exert opposing influences on the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition, with TGF-β having the ability to downregulate PDGFRαK in DFs during myofibroblast differentiation ( ).

## Pdgfrα is downregulated in myofibroblasts and is not required for their maintenance
The ability of TGF-β1 to downregulate PDGFRα suggests that PDGFRα might not be critical for later stages of wound healing after myofibroblast differentiation. We observed marked downregulation of PdgfraH2BGFP in day 7 wounds compared with adjacent unwounded dermis ( ). This is consistent with downregulation of PdgfraH2BGFP in fibro-adipogenic progenitors in injured versus uninjured skeletal muscle ( ). Immunofluorescence for PDGFRα and αSMA also demonstrates significant downregulation of PDGFRα from day 5 to day 7, alongside upregulation of αSMA expression ( and ). Similar patterns are observed at the mRNA level, with Pdgfra trending down alongside upregulation of Acta2 and Postn ( ).
To test PDGFRα function in myofibroblasts, we used PostnMerCreMer, a Tmx-regulated Cre active in myofibroblasts but not in progenitors ( ; ). We verified Cre activity in the skin by creating wounds in PostnMerCreMer;ROSA26LSL-Tomato;Col1a1-GFP reporter mice and then administering Tmx after wounding. GFP is expressed in unwounded dermis and wound tissue. However, Tomato+ cells are sparse in unwounded dermis and abundant in the wound bed, consistent with labeling myofibroblasts specifically ( ). Tomato is only seen in wounds with Tmx ( ). Interestingly, when wounds are mounted flat and sectioned in the plane of the skin, Tomato+ cells form a cell-dense ring around the margin of the wound bed with a lower density of labeled cells in the wound center ( ). This pattern suggests that myofibroblasts localize to the wound edges on days 5–6 before coalescing into the wound center during tissue contraction. Next, we generated myofibroblast Pdgfra controls and knockouts (controls: Postn-PdgfraFlp/+; knockouts: Postn-PdgfraFlp/Flp), and PdgfraK/+ mice, with PostnMerCreMer ( – ). By day 7, the wounds of all mice were similar in area, contraction, and epithelialization ( – ). In this experiment, sequential intersection of Postn-driven Cre and Pdgfra-driven Flp mediates activation of a Flp-dependent reporter. However, Tomato+ cells are not detected in any of the genotypes ( ), consistent with downregulation of Pdgfra in Postn+ myofibroblasts. αSMA+ myofibroblast are localized to the wound center in all genotypes ( ). We verified Cre-mediated recombination of the Pdgfra loci by PCR genotyping of Postn-PdgfraFlp/+ and PdgfraK/+ wounds ( and ).
 To confirm the functionality of PostnMCM for gene deletion in myofibroblasts, we combined it with Mrtfa−/−;Mrtfbflox/flox mice ( ) to generate myofibroblast Mrtfa/Mrtfb knockouts (Postn-Mrtfa−/−bflox/flox). Controls were mice without PostnMCM or Mrtfa+/− (both denoted as Mrtfabcontrol) ( – ). At day 7, knockout wounds are poorly contracted with incomplete epithelialization ( – ). Tomato is expressed in both genotypes, albeit reduced in Postn-Mrtfa−/−bflox/flox wounds ( ). The αSMA+ area is significantly lower in Postn-Mrtfa−/−bflox/flox wounds compared with controls ( and ), and specific to the Postn-derived Tomato+ population, a majority are αSMA+ in controls, but this overlap is severely reduced in Postn-Mrtfa−/−bflox/flox wounds ( and ). These results show that PostnMCM is effective for gene deletion in dermal myofibroblasts and that MRTFs are critical for sustaining myofibroblasts, as expected ( ).

## Progenitor proliferation and myofibroblast differentiation require PDGFRα
To investigate how Pdgfra knockout affects wound healing, we generated conditional Pdgfra knockout mice (Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp) with Ubc-PdgfraFlp/+ littermates as controls ( – ). Immunohistochemistry confirms the absence of PDGFRα in Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp wounds ( ). Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp wounds display a larger cross-sectional area and retain most of their original width at day 7 compared with control wound beds ( – ). In half of the Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp wounds, there is delayed epithelialization, with epithelial tongues migrating down into the wound bed ( and , arrowheads), creating an open gap beneath the attached eschar ( , asterisk). Collagen and periostin are reduced in Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp granulation tissue ( and ). Proliferation is significantly reduced in Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp wounds at day 4 ( and ). In control wounds at day 7, αSMA+ myofibroblasts and Tomato+ cells migrate to the center of the granulation tissue. But in Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp wounds, myofibroblasts localize to the wound edges, and Tomato+ cells are sparse ( and ). The area of αSMA stain and the percentage of Tomato+ cells with αSMA are both significantly lower in Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp wounds ( – ). Therefore, progenitor cells lacking Pdgfra are less proliferative and resist myofibroblast differentiation during wound healing.
 

## PDGFRα and RAC1 regulate SRF nuclear localization
We noted that SRF is markedly more cytoplasmic in Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp wounds compared with its predominantly nuclear localization in wound tissue from Ubc-PdgfraFlp/+ mice ( and ). Reduced myofibroblast differentiation in Pdgfra-deficient wounds may be due to the lack of appropriate signaling needed for SRF activity. NIH/3T3 fibroblasts express PDGFRα and are a well-characterized model to investigate how SRF regulates genetic programs governing proliferation and contraction ( ; ). We used CRISPR-Cas9 to create PdgfraCRISPR-KO 3T3 cells. Knockout cells (aR-KO) do not activate signaling cascades or gene expression in response to PDGF-AA, but they retain low levels of PDGFRβ and respond weakly to PDGF-BB ( , , and ). In the presence of serum, which contains PDGF as one of its major growth factors, aR-KO cells exhibit a rounded morphology with less F-actin and αSMA ( and ). Transcripts for Srf and Acta2 are low in aR-KO cells ( ), but SRF protein levels are still similar between 3T3 and aR-KO cells ( ). We tested contractile function in attached collagen lattices with 10% serum for 4 days (with mitomycin C). Upon release, serum-treated 3T3 cells contract the lattice, but aR-KO cells fail to contract ( ). We treated cells with serum to examined MRTF nuclear accumulation, which revealed that nuclear MRTFA and MRTFB are diminished in aR-KO cells compared with wild type (WT) ( ). Interestingly, there is very little SRF in the nucleus of aR-KO cells regardless of treatment ( ). MRTF nuclear localization is governed by actin, such that G-actin binds to MRTF to keep it in the cytoplasm, and actin polymerization consumes G-actin to allow MRTF to accumulate in the nucleus ( ). But SRF is usually considered a nuclear protein, and unlike MRTF, SRF does not rapidly translocate in response to serum, nor does it interact with actin. To see if αSMA expression could be rescued, we generated aR-KO cells with a doxycycline-inducible MRTFA mutant that cannot bind actin, which renders it constitutively active, and found that this restores αSMA expression while also restoring SRF nuclear localization ( ). RhoGTPases promote SRF nuclear localization in airway smooth muscle cells ( ), and PDGFRα can activate the RhoGTPase RAC1 ( ; ; ). Consistent with this, serum fails to induce GTP-bound RAC1 in aR-KO cells ( ). To determine whether RAC1 is needed for SRF nuclear localization, we used small interfering RNA (siRNA) to knock down RAC1, which reduces SRF nuclear localization ( ). Therefore, PDGFRα is needed to activate RAC1 and localize SRF to the nucleus in 3T3 cells ( ).
 To examine the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition in primary fibroblasts, we isolated DFs from PdgfraFlp/+ and PdgfraFlp/Flp mice. However, both genotypes are similar in regard to αSMA expression, despite efficient deletion of PDGFRα ( ). Serum induces GTP-bound RAC1 in both genotypes, and SRF nuclear localization is not significantly different between genotypes ( and ). However, RAC1 siRNA could block nuclear localization of SRF in PdgfraFlp/+ DFs ( ). These results suggests that an unidentified factor upstream of RAC1 compensates for loss of PDGFRα in cultured primary DFs. PDGFRβ can regulate SRF transcriptional activity in developing mural cells ( ), and we noted that PDGFRβ is more highly expressed in primary DFs compared with 3T3 cells ( , lanes 1–2 versus 3–4). Thus, it is conceivable for PDGFRβ to compensate for loss of PDGFRα in cultured primary DFs. However, the strong phenotype of Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp wounds indicates that it does not compensate in vivo. We conclude that loss of RAC1 and SRF activity in Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp progenitors may contribute to defective wound healing ( ).

## Mrtfa/Mrtfb and Srf are both required for myofibroblast differentiation, but Srf alone is required for proliferation
Since MRTFs and PDGFRα appear to have different roles in Postn+ myofibroblasts ( and ), we decided to test the role of MRTFs in PDGFRα+ progenitors by generating Pdgfra-Mrtfa−/−bflox/flox mice with PdgfraCreER. Controls were mice without Cre or were Mrtfa+/− (both denoted as Mrtfabcontrol) ( – ). Immunofluorescence confirms the deletion of MRTFB in Pdgfra-Mrtfa−/−bflox/flox wounds ( ). KO wounds at day 7 remain at their uncontracted width, and some fail to completely epithelialize ( – ). However, there is no difference in proliferation between KO and control wounds at day 4 ( and ). Interestingly, KO wound beds are filled with Pdgfra-derived cells ( ) but are devoid of αSMA+ myofibroblasts ( – ). The remaining αSMA+ cells are mural cells, which are spared from Mrtfb deletion due to the specificity of PdgfraCreER to the fibroblast lineage. In summary, Mrtfa/Mrtfb-deficient wounds exhibit normal progenitor proliferation, and Pdgfra-derived cells can efficiently migrate into the wound bed, but myofibroblast differentiation is specifically abrogated. This is in contrast to Pdgfra-deficient wounds, which are deficient in progenitor proliferation and myofibroblast differentiation. This suggests that MRTFs and PDGFRα have different functions in the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition.
 For comparison with Mrtfa/Mrtfb-deficient wounds, we generated Pdgfra-Srfflox/flox mice and Pdgfra-Srfflox/+ controls ( – ). We confirmed that SRF protein is eliminated from Pdgfra-Srfflox/flox wounds ( ). Like Pdgfra-deficient wounds, Srf-KO wounds display significant healing defects at day 7 ( – ). In day 4 wounds, we used a Col1a1-GFPtg reporter to identify collagen-producing fibroblasts. EdU labeling of these cells is significantly reduced in KO wounds ( and ). In Srf-KO wounds, the center of the wound bed lacks Tomato+
Pdgfra-derived cells, and the few αSMA+ myofibroblasts are restricted to the extreme edges of the wound ( and ). The area of αSMA stain is significantly lower than in Ubc-PdgfraK/+ wounds ( ), and myofibroblast differentiation of Pdgfra-derived cells is greatly reduced ( and ). Overall, the healing defects resulting from Srf deletion in progenitors are similar to defects resulting from deletion of Pdgfra itself. This is consistent with SRF mediating the major functions of PDGFRα. In contrast, in Mrtfa/Mrtfb-deficient wounds, the specific loss of myofibroblasts without affecting progenitor proliferation/migration suggests distinct roles for PDGFRα and MRTF.
 

## DISCUSSION
Understanding myofibroblast differentiation is critical for improving wound healing, reducing scarring, and unlocking regenerative potential. In this study, we used conditional mutations and lineage tracing to evaluate the transition of fibroblastic progenitors into myofibroblasts under different PDGF signaling conditions, in the absence of MRTFA and MRTFB, or in the absence of SRF (summarized in and ). Although PDGF signaling is well known to promote fibrosis ( ; ; ), and inhibition of PDGFRα in mice reduced fibrosis in organ-specific models ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), the specific role of PDGFRα in the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition has not been elucidated. Our results show that in early wound healing, progenitors require PDGFRα to support SRF activity and progenitor proliferation that is independent of MRTFs. This PDGFRα-SRF pathway should expand the progenitor population for later differentiation. Myofibroblast differentiation is then coordinated with downregulation of PDGFRα signaling, which may be necessary because our results suggest that PDGFRα opposes myofibroblast differentiation. Furthermore, because we observe fibrosis without myofibroblasts in PDGFRαK mice with spontaneous fibrosis of the skin, muscle, heart, fat, and intestine ( ), we conclude that PDGFRα is not sufficient to induce myofibroblast differentiation when acting alone.
We deleted or activated PDGFRα in periostin+ myofibroblasts, but this did not lead to wound-healing defects, nor did it lead to activation of a reporter that depends on the intersection of Posn- and Pdgfra-driven recombinases. However, the same Postn-MerCreMer driver can generate wound-healing defects by deleting Srf ( ) or by deleting Mrtfb on an Mrtfa−/− background ( ), and it can directly activate a Cre-dependent Tomato reporter during wound healing. Therefore, our negative results with PDGFRα mutations argue that continual expression of PDGFRα is not required in myofibroblasts. This is in agreement with PDGFRα downregulation during normal wound healing and in mouse DFs treated with TGF-β1, which both occur in coordination with αSMA upregulation. TGF-β was previously shown to downregulate PDGFRα in fibro-adipogenic progenitors during muscle repair ( ). Contreras et al. highlighted TGF-β-p38 signaling as a pathway for downregulation of PDGFRα protein, but there are likely to be multiple mechanisms for PDGFRα protein and mRNA downregulation at the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition.
Conditional KO of Pdgfra before wounding results in impaired healing with reduced proliferation, ECM secretion, and myofibroblast differentiation. In this context, SRF appears to be more cytoplasmic. Further investigation with Pdgfra KO in 3T3 cells demonstrates that PDGFRα is indeed needed for SRF nuclear localization. In these Pdgfra-deficient cells, SRF mislocalization to the cytoplasm is correlated with depressed RAC1 activity. Further arguing for RAC1 having a role in SRF subcellular localization, knockdown of RAC1 in primary DFs shifted SRF to the cytoplasm. It remains to be tested whether RAC1 regulates SRF nuclear localization in vivo. However, conditional KO of Rac1 in Col1a2-expressing cells led to wound-healing defects ( ). SRF is regulated by a variety of mechanisms including cofactor exchange ( ), mRNA stabilization ( ), phosphorylation ( ), and nuclear localization ( ). Components of a PDGFRα-RAC1-SRF pathway have been previously suggested. In glioblastoma, activation of RAC1 by PDGFRα required the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Dock180 ( ). In skeletal development, activation of RAC1 by PDGFRα required PI3K signaling ( ; ). In craniofacial development, Pdgfra or Srf deletion in neural crest cells resulted in a cleft midface reminiscent of Rac1 deletion in neural crest ( ; ). These findings provide evidence for a PDGFRα-RAC1-SRF pathway in diverse scenarios. However, although we find that 3T3 cells are dependent on PDGFRα and RAC1 for SRF nuclear localization, primary DFs require RAC1, but PDGFRα is not required. This suggests that cultured primary fibroblasts have PDGFRα-redundant pathways to activate RAC1 and SRF.
We find that defective SRF nuclear localization in Pdgfra-KO 3T3 cells is rescued by an MRTFA mutant that constitutively localizes to the nucleus. This rescue may result from nuclear MRTFA interacting with SRF to retain it in the nucleus, which does not imply that PDGFRα and MRTFs have a similar function in the fibroblast lineage. Indeed, KO of Srf with Pdgfra-CreER results in defective fibroblast proliferation and myofibroblast differentiation, which is similar to KO of Pdgfra itself (summarized in ). In contrast, deletion of Mrtfa/Mrtfb does not impair proliferation but profoundly blocks myofibroblast differentiation. These in vivo phenotypes argue that PDGFRα and MRTFs have distinct functions, both of which overlap with SRF functions.
Fibroblastic progenitors are still being identified in diverse organs ( ), with expression of PDGFRα typically required, but not sufficient, for their identity ( ). At rest, fibroblastic progenitors secrete organ-specific matrix and signaling proteins to maintain the organ stromal compartment. When activated in a wound, these cells proliferate, migrate, increase production of matrix proteins, and may transition into myofibroblasts or undergo differentiation into other cell types (e.g., adipocytes or osteoblasts), depending on the organ and extracellular cues. This study provides a rationale for temporal regulation of PDGFRα as a cell progresses through the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition. Negative cross-talk from PDGFRα to pro-myofibroblast signals like TGF-β may allow time for the proliferative phase of wound healing until TGF-β downregulates PDGFRα at an appropriate time for myofibroblast-driven scar maturation.

## Limitations of the study
We investigated the function of genes in fibroblastic progenitors that differentiate into myofibroblasts. The precise origin of progenitors was not our focus. However, besides DFs, it has been shown that adipocytes and myeloid cells can also transition into myofibroblasts during wound healing ( ; ). In many organs, the adventitial layer of blood vessels has been identified as a niche for PDGFRα+ progenitors that give rise to myofibroblasts ( ; ). It is likely that all of these sources contribute progenitors, to differing degrees, to meet the demand for tissue repair in adult life. We note that in PDGFRαK mice, white adipose tissue displays a perivascular pattern of fibrosis suggestive of adventitial progenitors ( ), as reported previously ( ). We did not see this in the intestine or dermis or during skin wound healing. We did not monitor adipocyte regeneration from myofibroblasts because this process only occurs in larger wound sizes, not the 5 mm wounds we used here ( ). Finally, the mechanisms by which PDGFRα-RAC1 promotes SRF nuclear localization and how TGF-β downregulates PDGFRα are questions that remain to be investigated.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Lorin E. Olson (lorin-olson@omrf.org).

## Materials availability
All unique reagents generated in this study are available from the with a completed Materials Transfer Agreement.

## Data and code availability
Numerical data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

## Mice
See for a summary of mouse strains used in this study. All animal experiments were performed according to procedures approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation. Mice were maintained in a 12 hr light/dark cycle and housed in groups of two to five with unlimited access to water and food. All strains were maintained on a mixed C57BL/129 genetic background at room temperature. Both males and females were analyzed. All animal comparisons were age-matched and littermate controls were used whenever possible, except for Ubc-PdgfraFlp/+ and Ubc-PdgfraK/+ mice ( ), which can only be generated by different breeding pairs. As a result, it is practical to perform experiments on Ubc-PdgfraFlp/+, Ubc-PdgfraFlp/Flp, and Ubc-PdgfraK/+ mice at the same time, which is why the same F/+ control quantifications are used in and . The lines Ubc-CreERtg (JAX:007001)( ), Pdgfra-Cretg (JAX:013148)( ), PostnMerCreMer (JAX:029645)( ), ROSA26Ai14 (JAX:007914)( ) and Srffloxed (JAX:006658)( ) were purchased from the Jackson Laboratories. PdgfraH2B:EGFP (JAX:007669)( ) was from Philippe Soriano. The Flp/frt-regulated reporter ROSA26frt-STOP-frt-tdTomato was modified from (JAX:021875)( ) as described previously ( ). Pdgfraflox-PDGFRa-flox-Flp and Pdgfraflox-STOP-flox-PDGFRaK:Flp were described previously ( ). PdgfraCreER (JAX:032770)( ) was from Brigid Hogan via Fabio Rossi. Col1a1-GFPtg ( ) was from David Brenner via Jeremy Duffield. Mrtfanull and Mrtfbfloxed ( ) was from Eric Olson.
Tamoxifen (Tmx) was prepared as a 20mg/mL stock in corn oil. To induce Cre recombination in 10-day-old mice, pups were gavaged once with 100 mg Tmx/kg bw. To induce Cre recombination before wounding, 6 – 9-week-old mice were gavaged three times with 100 mg Tmx/kg bw on alternating days, and wounds were created four days after the last treatment. To induce Cre recombination after wounding, wounded mice were gavaged with 100 mg Tmx/kg bw on days 1–3 after wounding. To create excisional wounds, mice were administered analgesic (Ketoprofen 5mg/kg) followed by inhaled anesthesia (5% isoflurane/1% oxygen). Dorsal hair was shaved and then completely removed using depilatory cream (Nair). The exposed skin was sterilized with 70% ethanol. Excisional wounding was performed using a 5mm biopsy punch to create 4 full-thickness dermal wounds. Mice were then single housed and wounds were left uncovered during healing. At the time of harvest (4 or 7-days post wounding), wound areas and a margin of unwounded skin were harvested and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight. For in vivo proliferation assays, mice were intraperitoneally injected with 200 μL of 2 mM EdU solution in 0.9% saline 4 hours before sacrifice.

## Primary cells
Dermal fibroblasts were isolated from E18.5 fetuses (PdgfraFlp/+ and PdgfraFlp/Flp) or 2 to 5-day-old pups (Pdgfra+/+ and PdgfraK/+) generated with PdgfraCretg. Skin was dissected and floated dermis-side down on 0.25% Trypsin at 37°C for 1 hour. Partially digested skin was then digested in DMEM + 500U/mL collagenase type II at 37°C for 1 hour with trituration every 15 minutes. After filtration through a 100 μm filter, cells were plated in growth medium consisting of DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum, L-glutamine, and 2mM penicillin/streptomycin and maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2. Primary dermal fibroblasts were used for experiments at passage 2 or 3. Tomato expression was used to assess the rate of recombination. Cultures of PdgfraFlp/+ and PdgfraFlp/Flp DF were 85–90% Tomato+ and PdgfraK/+ cultures were >95% Tomato+. Primary fibroblasts were grown in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), L-glutamine, and 2mM penicillin/streptomycin and maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2. For serum starvation, cells were grown in 0.1% FBS for 24 hours.

## Cell lines
CRISPR/Cas9 was used to generate Pdgfra-knockout NIH/3T3 cell lines. First, Cas9-expressing cells were created by lentiviral transduction. To construct the vector, eCas9 1.1 was excised with Age1 and EcoR1 and ligated into pENTR eGFP C1X (gift from Dr. Eric Campeau) plasmid cut with the same restriction enzymes creating pENTR eCas9 1.1. Then pENTR eCas9 1.1 was mixed with pLenti CMV Hygro DEST and Clonase II to create the lentiviral expression construct pLenti CMV eCas9 1.1 Hygro, which was confirmed by sequencing. This lentiviral construct was used to generate VSV-G pseudotyped lentivirus as previously described ( ). eCas9 1.1-expressing cells were selected with 100 μg/mL of hygromycin. Second, lentivirus expressing Pdgfra sgRNA was created by cloning the sgRNA (sequence: TGAGGACCAGAAAGACCTGG) into lenti-Guide Puro to create lenti-mm sgPDGFRα #2 Puro. This lentiviral construct was used to make VSV-G pseudotyped lentivirus. Lentivirus was incubated with NIH 3T3 eCas9 1.1 cells and subsequently selected with Puromycin. Cells resistant to Hygromycin and Puromycin were seeded as individual cells in a 96-well plate and allowed to expand to create Pdgfra-knockout (aR-KO) clonal cell lines. Individual clones were analyzed by Western blot to detect loss of protein. In addition, genomic DNA was PCR amplified from the clones denoted as NIH/3T3 aR-KO#2 and #3 using primers flanking the sgRNA targeting sequence found in the first coding exon (PdgfraEx1F and PdgfraEx1R, see ). PCR product was subcloned and sequenced. Sequencing clone #2 showed a 5 base pair deletion (CAC CA) resulting in a frame-shift mutation creating a premature stop codon (5′-ATG GGG ACC TCC deletion GGT CTT TCT GGT CCT CAG CTG TCT CCT CAC AGG GCC GGG CCT CAT CTC CTG CCA GCT CTT ATT ACC CTC TAT CCT CCC AAA CGA GAA TGA-3′). Sequencing clone #3 showed deletion of the first coding exon. All NIH/3T3 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, L-glutamine, and 2mM penicillin/streptomycin and maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2. For serum starvation, cells were grown in 0.1% FBS for 24 hours. Doxycycline-inducible constitutively active (CA) MRTFA was introduced to aR-KO cells by lentivirus. First, we amplified the mouse MRTFA cDNA (CloneID BC050941) with primers MRTFA-ΔN-forward and MRTFA-reverse ( ), which generates a truncated MRTFA lacking the N-terminal RPEL domains that bind G-actin ( ). The amplicion was digested with Mfe1 and Sal1, then ligated into pENTR IRES iRFP720 digested with EcoR1 and Sal1. This clone was then recombined into pInducer 20 using Clonase II. After lentiviral transduction, aR-KO cells with CA-MRTFA were selected with 1mg/mL G418. Finally, aR-KO cells with CA-MRTFA were treated with 500ng/mL doxycycline for 48 hours to induce mutant MRTFA.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Histology and immunostaining of tissue
All tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C. For histological stains, paraffin sections were deparaffinized in Histoclear and then rehydrated through stepwise decreasing ethanol concentration to distilled water. For hematoxylin and eosin staining, slides were stained with Hematoxylin for 1 minute and then washed with tap water. Slides were then incubated in Eosin Y for 2–3 minutes and then washed again with tap water. The Picrosirius Red Stain (PSR) Kit was used for PSR staining and stained sections were imaged under polarized light. For immunohistochemistry, deparaffinized slides were incubated in 3% H2O2 diluted in methanol for 10 minutes to quench endogenous alkaline phosphatase activity and then washed in PBS 3 times. For antigen retrieval, slides were incubated for 15 minutes in steaming 10 mM sodium citrate buffer pH6.0 and then cooled to room temperature. Slides were blocked with 5% goat serum in PBS for 1 hour at room temperature prior to addition of primary antibody in PBS with 5% goat serum overnight at 4°C. PBS with 5% goat serum was used for no primary antibody negative controls. Slides were washed 3 times with PBS and then incubated with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Vectastain ABC Kit) in PBS with 5% goat serum for 1 hour at 4°C. Slides were washed 3 times in PBS and then incubated with the ABC complex (Vectastain ABC Kit) at room temperature for 1 hour. Following another 3 PBS washes, slides were developed (DAB Peroxidase Substrate Kit) and counterstained with hematoxylin. Slides were rinsed in tap water, dehydrated, mounted with Permount, dried, and imaged on a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope. For immunofluorescence, deparaffinized slides or frozen slides were blocked with 5% donkey serum in PBS for 1 hour, then incubated with primary antibody overnight a 4°C in a humidified chamber, then washed three times, then incubated with fluorescent secondary antibody for 1 hour. For EdU detection, slides with frozen or paraffin tissue sections were incubated with EdU reaction cocktail (175 μL PBS, 4 μL CuSO4, 0.2 μL Alexa Fluor 488 Azide, and 20 μL 0.5 M ascorbic acid) for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Paraffin sections were subsequently stained with anti-RFP antibody for Tomato co-labeling. Frozen sections were not stained with anti-RFP because Tomato fluorescence was sufficient. After staining, slides were washed three times with PBS including one wash including DAPI, then coverslipped using Fluoro Gel with DABCO. After drying they were imaged on a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope or Nikon C2+ confocal microscope. Due to the large size of many mutant wounds, imaging of entire wound beds typically required multiple individual microscope images to be assembled into one image.

## Western blotting

## Whole cell extracts
Protein was extracted from cells with ice cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate) with the addition of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM EDTA, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM NaF, 1mM PMSF). After 10 minutes incubation on ice, lysates were sonicated for 30 seconds, followed by incubation on ice for 30 minutes. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation.

## Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts
cytoplasmic proteins were extracted by resuspending cells in ice cold hypotonic buffer (20 mM Tris pH7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors followed by resting on ice for 20 min to allow cell swelling. Then 1/20 volume of 10% NP-40 was added to each suspension, which was then vortexted to disrupt cytoplasmic membranes. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes and supernatant containing cytoplasmic extract was removed. Nuclei were then washed with a large volume of hypotonic buffer. Then clean nuclei were lysed in ice cold nuclear extract buffer (10 mM Tris pH7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After 10 minutes incubation on ice, lysates were sonicated for 30 seconds, followed by incubation on ice for 30 minutes. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation. For all extracts, protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. Then denaturing loading buffer was added to each lysate, each was boiled for 10 minutes, and aliquots containing 5 μg of protein were separated by 8% or 12% gel SDS-PAGE, using parallel gels for proteins of similar size. In the case of nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts, 5 μg of each fraction was loaded on the same gel. As the cytoplasm accounts for ~75% of the total cellular protein, yet 5 μg of each fraction was loaded, the nuclear fractions will be over-represented in these blots relative to the cytoplasm. Proteins were transferred from gel to nitrocellulose membranes, blocked with 5% BSA, and then subjected to detection with primary antibodies in 5% BSA block. Membranes were then probed with horseradish-peroxidase conjugated antibodies diluted in 5% milk block. Primary and secondary antibodies were used at 1:1000–1:2000 and 1:5000, respectively. Blots were developed with ECL Western blotting substrate and autoradiography film.

## RAC1-GTP detection
To detect the active, GTP-bound form of RAC1, we used Active RAC1 Detection Kit following the manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were grown to 50% confluence, then serum starved for 24 hours, then treated with medium containing 10% FBS for 10 minutes. After lysis (buffer from the kit) and determination of protein concentration, input fractions were removed and stored. Then 500 μg protein of each lysate was interacted with recombinant GST-PAK1-PBD (from the kit), separated based on affinity for glutathione (resin from the kit). Bound protein was eluted from the resin with denaturing loading buffer and was separated by 12% gel SDS-PAGE. 5 μg of each input fraction was separated on the same gel as the bound protein. After transfer to nitrocellulose membranes, eluted RAC1 (RAC1-GTP) and input RAC1 (total RAC1) were detected by Western blotting with anti-RAC-1 antibody.

## siRNA transfection
To knockdown RAC1, we used Lipofectamine RNAiMAX to introduce Rac1 siRNA or control siRNA. Cells were grown to 50–70% confluence in 6 cm plates, then 3 μL of each siRNA was transfected according to manufacturer’s instructions. After 48 hours, cells were harvested for nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts to be used for Western blotting.

## Immunocytochemistry
Cells seeded on chamber slides were allowed to attach overnight, then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes. Cells were then permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-X100 and blocked in PBS with 5% donkey serum for 30 minutes. Then anti-αSMA antibody was applied at 1:250 with 5% donkey serum overnight at 4°C in a humidified chamber, then washed three times, then incubated with fluorescent secondary antibody at 1:250 and phalloidin at 1:100 for 1 hour, then washed three times with one wash including DAPI, then coverslipped using Fluoro Gel. After drying they were imaged on a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope.

## Collagen matrix contraction assays
Cells were cultured in three-dimensional type 1 collagen matrixes (collagen concentration, 1mg/ML; cell concentration, 1 × 106 cells/mL). Matrixes were formed from 0.25 mL of cell/collagen solution that was placed on a pre-warmed 35 mm TPP cell culture dish and allowed to polymerize for 5 minutes. Fibroblasts in matrixes were then cultured in complete medium with 10% FBS for 24 hours, followed by 4 days with 0.1% FBS or 10% FBS or 2ng/mL TGFβ−1. Mitomycin C (0.625 μg/mL) was add to the medium to suppress proliferation differences between control and mutant cells. Medium was replaced every 48 hours. After 5 days in culture, the matrixes were photographed, then gently detached from the bottom of the dish to allow contraction for 24 hours, then photographed again with a digital camera. Each experiment was repeated twice with similar results.

## RNA isolation and quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR)
Total RNA was isolated from cultured cells or wound tissue using Trizol. cDNA reverse transcription was performed using random primers and SuperScript III RT. Quantitative PCR was performed on a CFX96 real-time PCR system (Bio-Rad) with iQ SYBR Green master mix (Bio-Rad). Bio-Rad CFX Manager (V2.1) software was used for analyzing cycle threshold (Ct) values and melting curves. Fold differences in mRNA levels were normalized to the expression of Gapdh. Primer sequences are listed in .

## Genomic DNA isolation and genotyping Cre-recombination by PCR
To verify Cre-recombination of the PdgfraFlp and PdgfraK alleles when combined with PostnMCM, genomic DNA was isolated from unwounded skin or wound tissue by digesting with proteinase K followed by phenol/chloroform extraction. Then 35 cycles of PCR were performed with 200 ng of DNA. To detect the Cre-recombination product of the lox-PDGFRα:STOP-lox-Flp° cassette in PdgfraFlp mice, SA-Forward and Flpo-Reverse primers were used. To detect the Cre-recombination product of the lox-STOP-lox-PDGFRαK-T2A-Flp° cassette in PdgfraK mice, SA-Forward and aK-Reverse primers were used. Positive control DNA was isolated from PdgfraFlp and PdgfraK mice with Sox2Cre. Primer sequences are listed in .

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

## Statistical analysis
Data are presented as means +/− SEM or +/− SD as indicated in the figure legends. Differences were analyzed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test between two groups using Graphpad Prism 9. All measurements were from distinct biological samples (individual mice). Statistical parameters are found in the figure legends, including exact n and number of biological repeats. Each mouse was considered a biological replicate.

## Quantification of wound bed area, wound contraction, and % epithelialization
Day 7 wounds were embedded in paraffin and sectioned through the center of the wound. Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Digital microscope images were captured. Quantification was performed using ImageJ. Wound bed area was defined as the area bounded by the intact dermis flanking each side of the wound, the scab or new epidermis above, and the fascia or bottom of the tissue sample below. To calculate wound contraction, the wound width from intact dermis to intact dermis was measured and divided by the original wound width (5 mm). To calculate epithelialization, the two epithelial tongues were measured and their combined length was divided by the wound width.

## Quantification of αSMA+ area and intensity of PDGFRα in wound tissue
Day 5 or day 7 wounds from wild type mice were cryosectioned through the center of the wound. Tissue sections were stained with antibody to detect αSMA or PDGFRα, followed by anti-rabbit or anti-goat secondary antibody with fluorescent conjugate. Digital microscope images were captured. Quantification of αSMA+ area and wound bed area were performed using ImageJ, then converted to a percentage. Quantification of PDGFRα staining intensity was performed using ImageJ to measure wound bed area, total PDGFRα fluorescence, and background fluorescence. After normalizing for area, the background fluorescence was subtracted from the total PDGFRα fluorescence to determine corrected fluorescence integrated density expressed as relative fluorescence units (RFU).

## Quantification of cell proliferation and myofibroblast differentiation
For proliferation measurements, day 4 wounds were cryosectioned through the center of the wound. Tissue sections were stained for EdU and digital microscope images were captured with EdU, Tomato, and DAPI. Between 100 and 350 Tomato+ cells were scored per mouse, except for where Col1a1-EGFP+ cells were counted. For each mouse the % EdU+ cells among the fluorescent population, or the proliferation index, was calculated by dividing the number of EdU+Tomato/EGFP+ cells counted by the total number of Tomato/EGFP+ cells counted. For myofibroblast measurements, day 7 wounds were cryosectioned through the center of the wound. Tissue sections were stained for αSMA and confocal microscope images were captured with αSMA, Tomato, and DAPI. Between 100 and 1600 Tomato+ cells were scored per mouse. For each mouse the % αSMA+ cells among the Tomato+ population, or the myofibroblast index, was calculated by dividing the number of αSMA+Tomato+ cells counted by the total number of Tomato+ cells counted. Quantification was performed manually. Experiments were not blinded, as the mouse genotypes were known prior to analysis. In some cases, blinding was impossible because wound morphology or labeling patterns revealed the genotype.

## Quantification of collagen matrix contraction
The diameter of each matrix before contraction and at various time intervals after release was measured using digital images and Image J software. The percent of initial lattice area was calculated by dividing the final matrix area (24 hour time point) by the area before contraction. Contraction assays were performed three times with different biological replicates of each genotype.

## Supplementary Material
1
 

## Highlights
Elevated PDGFRα signaling delays myofibroblast differentiation in wound healing
PDGFRα deletion reduces proliferation and myofibroblast differentiation
Early wound healing involves overlapping functions of SRF and PDGFRα
MRTF and PDGFRα have distinct functions in early versus late wound healing

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sathish Srinivasan and all members of the Olson lab for helpful discussions. We thank Fabio Rossi and Brigid Hogan for sharing the PdgfraCreER mouse line. We also thank the Microscopy Core and Mouse Phenotyping Core Facilities (associated with P30-GM114731 and P20-GM103636) of the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation Centers of Biomedical Research Excellence. The Olson lab is supported by US National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants R01-AR070235 and R01-AR073828 (L.E.O.). This work was also supported by P20-GM103639, R35-GM142786 (W.L.B.), and R01-GM060651 (J.J.T.); grants from the Oklahoma Center for Adult Stem Cell Research – a program of TSET (L.E.O.); and grants from the Oklahoma City-based Presbyterian Health Foundation (L.E.O. and W.L.B.).

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
 can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111192.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
1

## Data Availability Statement
Numerical data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.