4614revcardmedReviews in Cardiovascular MedicineRev Cardiovasc MedIMR PressPMC1126697411266974112669743907663110.31083/j.rcm2308284The Remaining Conundrum of the Role of the Na+/H+ Exchanger Isoform 1 (NHE1) in Cardiac Physiology and Pathology: Can It Be Rectified?
KarmazynMorris PierceGrant N FliegelLarry Sanchis-GomarFabianAcademic Editor
1Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada

2Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, Albrechtsen Research Centre, St. Boniface Hospital, and Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R2H 2A6, Canada

3Department of Biochemistry, University Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, Canada
*Correspondence: lfliegel@ualberta.ca (Larry Fliegel)
§Retired.
15820222382842842972024Copyright: © 2022 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license.

## Abstract
The mammalian exchanger (NHE) is a family of ubiquitous 
membrane proteins present in humans. Isoform one (NHE1) is present on the plasma 
membrane and regulates intracellular pH by removal of one intracellular proton in 
exchange for one extracellular sodium thus functioning as an electroneutral 
process. Human NHE1 has a 500 amino acid membrane domain plus a C-terminal 315 
amino acid, regulatory cytosolic tail. It is regulated through a cytosolic 
regulatory C-terminal tail which is subject to phosphorylation and is modulated 
by proteins and lipids. Substantial evidence has implicated NHE1 activity in both 
myocardial ischemia and reperfusion damage and myocardial remodeling resulting in 
heart failure. Experimental data show excellent cardioprotection with NHE1 
inhibitors although results from clinical results have been mixed. In cardiac 
surgery patients receiving the NHE1 inhibitor cariporide, subgroups showed 
beneficial effects of treatment. However, in one trial this was associated with a 
significantly increased incidence of ischemic strokes. This likely reflected both 
inappropriate dosing regimens as well as overly high drug doses. We suggest that 
further progress towards NHE1 inhibition as a treatment for cardiovascular 
disease is warranted through the development of novel compounds to inhibit NHE1 
that are structurally different than those previously used in compromised 
clinical trials. Some novel pyrazinoyl guanidine inhibitors of NHE1 are already 
in development and the recent elucidation of the three-dimensional structure of 
the NHE1 protein and identity of the inhibitor binding site may facilitate 
development. An alternative approach may also be to control the endogenous 
regulation of activity of NHE1, which is activated in disease.
Keywords: NHE1 regulation, NHE1 inhibitors, cardiac hypertrophy and remodelling, ischemia/reperfusion injury, pyrazinoyl guanidine

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jun 8; Revised 2022 Jun 29; Accepted 2022 Jul 8; Collection date 2022 Aug.

## 1. Introduction
The ubiquitously expressed mammalian exchanger (NHE) is a 
family of membrane proteins of human cells of which there are currently 10 known 
isoforms. Isoform one (NHE1) removes a single intracellular proton in exchange 
for a single extracellular sodium ion (Fig. A) and is ubiquitously present 
throughout the tissues and cell types of the body [ , ]. NHE maintains 
intracellular pH ( ), thus protecting cells from acidification 
which results from metabolism. It also responds to osmotic challenge regulating 
cell volume [ , ]. There are nine SLC9A type isoforms of NHE, two SLC9B types 
and also two SLC9C types. Most isoforms of NHEs have restricted cellular 
locations or intracellular locations but NHE1 (SLC9A1) is the primary plasma 
membrane isoform found in virtually all mammalian cells [ , , , , , , ]. NHE1 consists of 
two general domains. One is the membrane transport domain which moves ions, and 
the second is a regulatory cytosolic domain (Fig. B). The human N-terminal 
membrane transport domain is approximately 500 amino acids and its atomic 
structure has recently been determined [ ]. The human cytosolic regulatory 
domain is an additional 315 amino acids that functions to regulate the membrane 
domain [ ].
 The physiological and pathological roles of NHE1 are many. Outside of the 
myocardium NHE1 plays a role in cell growth, proliferation and differentiation 
[ , , , , ]. NHE1 is also an important trigger of growth and metastasis in cancer, 
notably as a trigger of metastasis in breast cancer [ , , , , ]. Genetic mutations in 
NHE1 and its absence, have been shown to be responsible for the disease 
Lichtenstein-Knorr syndrome which manifests itself through many developmental 
defects and ataxia and hearing loss [ , ].
In the myocardium, NHE1 is the only plasma membrane isoform of 
exchanger present. Its activity was demonstrated as early as 1984–1985 [ , , , , ] 
and a human clone was initially isolated from the myocardium in 1993 [ ]. NHE1 
is associated with both ischemic reperfusion damage to the myocardium and heart 
hypertrophy and its inhibition shows beneficial effects in animal models of this 
disease [ , , , ]. It is inhibited by pyrazinoyl guanidines including amiloride, a 
potassium-sparing diuretic used for decades to treat hypertension and heart 
failure (in combination with other drugs). NHE1 is also inhibited by benzoyl 
guanidines such as cariporide which were later developed for clinical 
experimentation (Fig. A). Despite its key role in cardiac physiology and 
pathology, there is as yet no known NHE1-based therapy developed for clinical 
protection of the myocardium. Why is that?
 This review presents a discussion of the structure, chemistry and regulation of 
NHE1 in the myocardium as well as location of inhibitor binding sites and the 
potential development of novel NHE1 inhibitors. This is followed by assessment of 
the role of NHE1 in cardiac pathologies including ischemic and reperfusion 
injury, myocardial hypertrophy and remodeling resulting in heart failure as well 
as its role in diabetes related cardiac pathology. Finally, we discuss the 
clinical potential of NHE1 inhibitors to treat heart disease reflecting on 
completed, ongoing and future clinical trials. Our goal is to both update the 
field and to stimulate potential development of new inhibitors that can be useful 
in treating heart disease and indeed other common human afflictions.

## 2. Expression and Localization of Myocardial NHE1
NHE1 plays an important physiological role in regulating intracellular pH 
( ) in the myocardium. Through the generation of protons by 
intermediary metabolism, and also because of the negative membrane potential, 
protons accumulate within the cytosol and inhibit contractility. NHE1 removes 
these protons. Cardiac NHE1 has distinct activity characteristics, having a very 
steep relationship between and activity [ ]. While 
 - based transporters can also contribute partially to recovery from 
intracellular proton accumulation [ , , , , , , ], as can lactate proton symport [ ], so 
when NHE1 is inhibited or absent, these other mechanisms can aid in pH recovery 
from acidosis. Additionally, evaluation of the relative contribution of 
bicarbonate dependent and the NHE transporter to acid extrusion showed that NHE1 
is the dominant transporter for proton efflux following intracellular acid load 
[ ]. NHE1 appears to be the principal pH regulatory mechanism in cardiomyocytes. 
It is the only plasma membrane isoform present in the myocardium that localizes 
to the intercalated disks and transverse tubules [ , ]. Cardiac cells do not 
possess NHE2–5 [ , , , ] and NHE6–9 are localized to intracellular organelle 
membranes such as mitochondria, endosomes and the Golgi network so they do not 
directly contribute to proton extrusion from cardiomyocytes [ , ]. cDNA for 
NHE1 codes for the identical NHE1 message as in other tissues [ ] and though a 
different size mRNA for NHE1 has been shown to occur in ischemic conditions [ ], 
this does not code for a functional protein. exchange has been 
clearly demonstrated in cardiac sarcolemma vesicles where it was inhibited by 
amiloride [ , ]. The level of NHE1 protein is low, similar to other tissues, 
but it is clearly very active. It has been possible to immunoprecipitate NHE1 
in vivo from isolated cardiomyocytes and tissue, and in vivo 
phosphorylation was demonstrated [ , ]. Expression levels of NHE1 in the heart 
can vary. Ischemia, with or without reperfusion, increases NHE1 mRNA up to 
seven-fold [ , ]. Expression in the myocardium also varies developmentally. In 
rabbit fetal and neonatal hearts mRNA levels are elevated [ ]. These results 
correlate well with gene expression from the NHE1 promoter which was examined in 
transgenic mice and showed that NHE1 transcription was maximum in the heart and 
liver in 12-day-old embryonic mice [ ].

## 3. Regulation of NHE1 in the Myocardium

## 3.1 Hormonal Regulation
NHE1 is normally quiescent in the myocardium at neutral pH, however the protein 
is activated when intracellular pH decreases and is also activated by stimuli 
such as growth factors, hormones and osmotic stress. These tend to shift the 
activity curve such that the protein is active at more alkaline 
 . Regulation of NHE1 occurs in all tissues. This review is 
restricted in large part to regulation of NHE1 in the myocardium (see also 
reviews in [ , ]. Regulation of NHE1 in the myocardium is extremely important. 
Evidence has shown that activating NHE1 activity through changes in regulation of 
the protein, accentuate NHE1-induced damage to the myocardium [ , , , , ]. As noted 
above, NHE1 activity and mRNA levels are elevated by myocardial ischemia, with or 
without reperfusion [ , ] and this may exacerbate NHE1’s detrimental effects 
in disease. Additionally, targeting regulation of NHE1 has been suggested to be 
an important approach to treat myocardial disease [ ]. Hormones and growth 
factors modulate cardiac NHE1activity and contribute to its role in cardiac 
pathology. Endothelin-I, angiotensin II, -adrenergic agonists, 
thrombin, and epidermal growth factor are known to stimulate NHE1 in the 
myocardium. Hormonal regulation often works through activation of protein kinases 
that phosphorylate the regulatory cytosolic domain of NHE1. Angiotensin II and 
endothelin stimulate NHE1 activity and their release can occur locally after 
stretch [ , ]. The stimulatory action of angiotensin II occurs via 
the receptor and occurs through protein kinase C and an epidermal growth 
factor mediated mechanism. The receptor mediates an opposing, 
counteracting inhibition of NHE1 [ ]. Endothelin-1 stimulates NHE1 activity [ ] 
as noted above, and inotropic effects of endothelin on the heart may be at least 
partially attributed to its stimulation of NHE1 [ ]. 1-adrenergic 
agonists like phenylephrine stimulate NHE1 activity by the 
 1A-adrenoceptor/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 
pathway [ , , ] and this is blocked by Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(RSK) [ ] and mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) [ ] inhibition. NHE1 
stimulation by 1-adrenergic agonists may also play a role in 
exacerbation of reperfusion-induced arrhythmias [ ]. Thrombin also activates 
NHE1 in cardiomyocytes through a protein kinase C-mediated mechanism [ ] though 
protein kinase C does not directly phosphorylate the NHE1 cytosolic domain [ ]. 
Fig. illustrates some of the hormones acting to stimulate NHE1.
 

## 3.1.1 Hormonal Regulation of NHE1 through Kinase-Dependent 
Phosphorylation
Hormonal activation of NHE1 occurs at least partially through protein 
kinase-mediated phosphorylation or through interaction with other regulatory 
proteins (or lipids). While the exact percentage of activation in the myocardium 
that occurs through phosphorylation is not known, it has generally been estimated 
to be 50% of hormonal regulation though this surely varies with cell type (see 
reviews [ , ]). A number of different protein kinases phosphorylate the 
regulatory tail which is thought to occur mainly in the C-terminal 180 amino 
acids [ , ]. In brief, phosphorylation-mediated regulation of NHE1 in several 
tissues was described earlier [ , , , , ]. Amino acids phosphorylated 
include Ser648 by Protein kinase B (PKB or Akt) and [ , ] amino acids Thr718, 
Ser723, Ser726, Ser729 by p38 MAPK (equivalent human numbering) [ ], and see 
also [ ] for review).
The MAPK phosphorylation pathway was identified as being important in NHE1 
regulation in the myocardium. This pathway is regulated by many hormones 
including endothelin, angiotensin II, catecholamines and some cytokines [ ]. 
This pathway has also been shown to play a role in ischemia reperfusion 
activation of NHE1 leading to cardiac injury [ ] and this containing 
pathway is activated by several other stimuli. One way to activate NHE1 in the 
heart is by sustained intracellular acidosis which leads to activation of Ras 
signaling and the kinases ERK1/2 and that directly phosphorylate the 
NHE1 C-terminus [ , , , ]. The ERK1/2 and pathway has also been 
shown to be activated and to phosphorylate NHE1 during cardiac ischemia 
reperfusion injury [ ]. Several studies have tried to localize the precise sites 
phosphorylated by the activated kinases. Early in vitro studies [ , ] identified four general regions of phosphorylation of NHE1 in the cytosolic tail, 
(1) S693; (2) T718,S723/726/729; (3) S766/770/771; and (4) T779,S785 and of 
these, Ser770 and Ser771 of region three were found to mediate ERK1/2 activation 
of NHE1 by sustained intracellular acidosis in heart cells [ ]. Additionally, 
Ser703 was also earlier identified as being phosphorylated by the kinase 
 in several studies [ , ] including a study on vascular smooth 
muscle cells, and this amino acid has also been suggested to be important in 
ischemic and reperfusion injury in the myocardium [ ], though sustained 
intracellular acidosis can activated NHE1 independent of Ser703 and [ ] (Fig. ). A way to activate NHE1 through ERK1/2 during cardiac ischemia 
reperfusion, is by the elevated bursts of reactive oxygen species. Hydrogen 
peroxide has been shown to activate ERK1/2 and this increases phosphorylation and 
activation of the exchanger [ , , ]. How phosphorylation 
activates NHE1 is still somewhat of a mystery, but it is clear that it results in 
structural changes in the cytosolic regulatory domain which somehow affect 
activity of the membrane domain [ , , ].
Some other protein kinases also phosphorylate NHE1 though these are less well 
studied. Heart -Raf protein can associate with NHE1 C-terminal domain 
and can phosphorylate the cytosolic tail at Thr653 [ ]. Another regulatory 
kinase of cardiac NHE1 is PKB [ ]. It phosphorylates amino acid Ser648 and 
this phosphorylation produces an inhibitory effect. Ser648, is within the 
calmodulin (CaM) high-affinity binding region (see below).

## 3.1.2 Role of Phosphatases 
The requisite dephosphorylation of NHE1 protein must occur sometime after 
activation of the protein. It is not as well studied in the myocardium. Both 
protein phosphatases 1 and protein phosphatase 2A (PP1 and PP2A) directly 
associate with NHE1 [ , ]. Colocalization of NHE1 and PP2A was shown in 
ventricular cardiomyocytes [ ]. The calcineurin A subunit also binds to NHE1 
[ ], but its role in dephosphorylation of NHE1 is not yet known. Its binding 
may facilitate NHE1-induced translocation of NFAT and myocardial hypertrophy 
progression [ ]. An interaction between NHE1 and the Src homology 2 
domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase (SHP-2) has also been confirmed. 
Functionally, SHP-2 overexpression caused a higher steady state 
 , and increased recovery from an acid load [ ].

## 3.2 Other Regulatory Processes

## 3.2.1 Osmotic Regulation
It is known that exchanger is activated by osmotic regulation. 
Upon exposure to hyperosmotic solutions NHE1 rapidly increases activity which 
results in cellular alkalinization. This is part of the regulatory volume 
increase in cells whereby they compensate for shrinkage that is induced by 
hyperosmolar external media [ ]. Cardiomyocytes exposed to hyperosmolar 
solutions also show this osmotic activation of the exchanger. 
The effect is blocked by calmodulin antagonists and the myosin light chain kinase 
inhibitor ML-7 [ ]. Experiments in intact hearts also show hyperosmotic 
activation of NHE1 which produces intracellular alkalinization [ ]. During 
myocardial ischemia, accumulating metabolites can cause a hyperosmotic 
extracellular milieu [ ] which could be a mechanism of activation of NHE1 
in vivo.

## 3.2.2 Regulation by Nitric Oxide
Nitric oxide (NO) has been shown to regulate NHE1 activity in adult ventricular 
cardiomyocytes in a study where which NO levels were manipulated through various 
approaches [ ]. The response was biphasic such that NHE1 flux was activated by 
low NO levels but inhibited by high NO amounts. These responses were dependent on 
two pathways, namely a cGMP-dependent NHE1 activation and a cAMP-dependent 
inhibition. The protein kinases PKG and PKA were tested for their ability to 
phosphorylate the NHE1 C-terminus and multiple residues were phosphorylated 
including Ser648 and Ser703. PKA was more selective for Ser648, possibly 
accounting for the inhibitory effect of cAMP. The biphasic effect of nitic oxide 
was specific to adult cardiomyocytes and was not observed in neonatal myocytes or 
in MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells [ ].

## 3.2.3 Protein-Mediated Regulation 
Protein mediated regulation of NHE1 also occurs through the cytosolic regulatory 
tail. Binding occurs by regulatory proteins, and also by other proteins that may 
be using NHE1 as a scaffold for other cellular functions aside from regulation of 
NHE1 activity. This regulatory mechanism has been suggested to account for 50% 
of the regulation of NHE1 (see reviews [ , ]) though this is clearly difficult 
to quantitate and will surely vary with cell type. Most of this type of 
regulation has been studied in non-myocardial tissue and is briefly reviewed. The 
“scaffolding” of proteins may vary in response to cellular stimuli [ ]. As 
noted above, protein phosphatases bind to the NHE1 tail and facilitate 
de-phosphorylation of the tail and have other physiological consequences [ ]. 
In “opposition” to the phosphatases are kinases which also bind to the NHE1 
tail. NHE1 acts as a scaffold for ERK and Raf [ ]. ERK binds to the cytosolic 
domain at specific D-domain and F-sites binding sites. These binding sites, and 
the interaction of NHE1 with ERK affect not only the phosphorylation and 
activation of NHE1 but also the regulation and activation of ERK itself [ ]. 
Direct binding of ERK to NHE in the myocardium has not, to our knowledge, been 
demonstrated.
Other interaction partners of NHE1 were reviewed [ ] for all general tissues and 
will be briefly summarized. Several studies have also examined the 
“interactome” of the regulatory NHE1 cytosolic tail, describing protein that 
bind to the NHE1 C-terminus from the kidney [ ] and from breast cancer cells 
[ ]. Results from some of these are outlined below.

## 3.2.4 Regulation by Calmodulin 
The calcium-binding second messenger protein known as calmodulin mediates 
 -induced activation of NHE1. It binds in the presence of on 
two locations on the tail of NHE1. One is the high affinity binding region (amino 
acids 637-656) and a second is a lower, intermediate affinity region with binding 
at amino acids 657-700 [ , , ]). Calmodulin regulates NHE1 activity through 
its high affinity binding site on the NHE1 tail. It binds there preventing this 
autoinhibitory domain from inhibiting the membrane domain. As noted above, 
protein kinase B phosphorylates NHE1 within the calmodulin high-affinity binding 
region at amino acid Ser648 (Fig. ). This results in a reduction in NHE1 
activity by preventing calmodulin binding to NHE1, and thereby preventing 
blocking of the autoinhibitory site on the cytosolic NHE1 tail. Snabaitis 
et al. [ ] suggest that during ischemic and reperfusion injury this may 
be a cardioprotective mechanism. There are not many studies on the regulation of 
NHE1 by calmodulin in the myocardium. It has been shown that the calmodulin 
blocker W7, inhibits NHE1 activity in isolated cardiomyocytes [ , ].

## 3.2.5 Regulation by Calcineurin B Homologous Proteins 
There are several isoforms of Calcineurin B homologous proteins (CHPs, CHP1, 
CHP2 and CHP3) [ , , , ]. These are -binding proteins with EF-hand 
motifs that bind ions similar to calmodulin. CHP1 is expressed in the 
heart and many other tissues. CHP2 expression is mostly restricted to intestinal 
epithelial cells and malignant tumor cells. CHP3, was initially detected in mouse 
testis. It is also expressed in the heart, stomach and brain, and some 
specialized cells such as hematopoietic cells. CHP1 binds to the NHE1 tail at 
amino acids 518-537 and this binding enhances NHE1 activity [ , ] (Fig. ). 
Mutation of the CHP1 binding site causes NHE1 to have a shorter cellular 
half-life and causes reduced cell surface expression [ ]. CHP3 also has 
 -dependent binding to NHE1. CHP3 can also enhance NHE1 stability and 
activity at the plasma membrane [ ]. However, while CHP1 and CHP3 are both 
expressed in the heart, their role in NHE1 regulation in this specific tissue has 
not been studied.

## 3.2.6 Regulation by ERM Protein Family 
Ezrin, radixin and moesin, the ERM family form links between NHE1 and 
actin filaments of the cytoskeleton [ , ]. This linkage helps facilitate 
cell migration [ ]. NHE1 has ERM binding motifs in amino acids 552-560 of its 
cytoplasmic tail [ ]. While not a great deal has been studied with regards to 
ERM proteins and the myocardium, one study [ ] examined the intracellular 
location of ERM proteins in left ventricular cardiomyocytes and found that they 
were localized predominantly at the intercalated disc regions. With intracellular 
acidification this localization changed, with more localization of activated 
phospho-ERM in the transverse tubules, which is where NHE1 was localized. This 
effect was blocked with the NHE1 inhibitor cariporide. These results suggested 
that ERM proteins may mediate at least some of NHE1 activation in the myocardium.

## 3.2.7 Regulation by Heat Shock Proteins 
Heat shock proteins, both Hsp70 and Hsp90, have been shown to be 
associated with NHE1 in several studies [ , , , ] and inhibition of 
heat shock proteins can affect NHE1 activity [ , ]. Hsp90 may affect NHE1 
function through alteration of phosphorylation of the protein via AKT 
kinase [ ]. A role of the association in inflammatory response has been 
suggested [ ] and though the association has been shown in different tissues 
such as kidney and breast cancer cells [ , ], it has not been extensively 
studied in the myocardium. One study has examined cardiofibroblasts [ ] and 
showed the NHE1 interacted with Hsp70 by immunoprecipitation.

## 3.2.8 Regulation by Carbonic Anhydrase II (CAII) 
Having an association with a membrane protein which moves ions such as those 
which CAII or other proteins produce, is thought to facilitate transport of the 
ions and is called a membrane transport metabolon [ ]. CAII is a protein that 
catalyzes the hydration of carbon dioxide which leads to production of 
bicarbonate ions and protons. It occurs in a metabolon with NHE1 and other 
membrane ion transport proteins [ , ]. A CAII-NHE1 interaction of this type 
has been studied in some detail in the myocardium. Initial studies characterized 
the fundamentals of the interaction and demonstrated that CAII binds to NHE1 
in vivo, at the penultimate 13 amino acids of the regulatory 
cytosolic tail (Fig. ). Ser796 and Asp797 form part of the CAII binding site on 
NHE1. The association of NHE1 and CAII was dependent on NHE1 being phosphorylated 
upstream of the CAII binding site [ , ]. The association of these two 
proteins was then studied in the myocardium when varying myocardial stretch. 
Stretch is known to activate NHE1 (see Section 3.2.11) so the association of NHE1 
with CAII was examined following stretch of rat papillary muscle by 
co-immunoprecipitation of the two proteins. Stretch increased association of NHE1 
and CAII and inhibition of reduced the interaction, suggesting that 
phosphorylation was involved [ ]. The same group [ ] examined the association 
of NHE1 and CAII in obese type 2 diabetic mice. Both control (heterozygote) and 
obese mice showed co-immunoprecipitation of NHE1 and CAII, and they observed an 
increase in the amount of CAII attached to NHE1 in homozygote obese diabetic 
mice. It was suggested that there is an increase in the amount of this “membrane 
transport metabolon” in the failing mouse heart [ ].

## 3.2.9 Lipid Regulators of NHE1
Phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-bisphosphate is a different binding cofactor of NHE1, 
being a lipid and not a protein. It binds in two cationic juxtamembrane binding 
regions of NHE1, at amino acids 513-520 and 556–564 of the rat protein which are 
equal to amino acids 509-516 and 552-560 of human NHE1 [ ]. Mutation of these 
binding sites decreases NHE1 transport efficiency [ ]. The second region 
overlaps with a region between amino acids 542-598 which is called a lipid 
interacting domain, with a hydrophobic sequence 573LIAFY577 within it 
that binds the lipids diacyl glycerol and phorbol esters. These directly activate 
NHE1 [ ]. Lipid regulators of NHE1 in the myocardium were examined some time 
ago, though not in the context of these lipid binding domains. Green et 
al. [ ] showed that in cultured cardiac cells phorbol esters activate NHE and 
produce cellular alkalinization. Phorbol esters have also been shown to activate 
NHE1 in rat vascular myocytes [ ] and Vigne et al. [ ] showed that 
phorbol esters activate NHE in skeletal muscle myoblasts. Phorbol esters almost 
certainly act through these lipid binding sites since it has been shown that 
protein kinase C cannot directly phosphorylate the C-terminus of NHE1 directly 
[ ] and NHE1 phosphorylation does not to correlate directly with protein kinase 
C activity [ ].

## 3.2.10 Role of ATP Binding 
NHE1 is an ATP binding protein. Early studies showed that depletion of 
intracellular ATP levels inhibits NHE1 activity [ , , , , ]. More recently, direct 
binding of ATP to the NHE1 cytosolic domain was demonstrated by photoaffinity 
labeling and equilibrium dialysis. The location of ATP binding was localized to 
amino acids Gly542-Pro598 of human NHE1 (Fig. ). ATP binding affected the pH 
dependence of NHE1 activity, ATP depletion caused an acidic shift in the 
 required for activation of NHE1 [ ] which can shift the 
threshold for activation by about a half a pH unit [ , ]. In cultured rat 
aortic smooth muscle cells, the activity of NHE1 has been shown to be reduced in 
response to hypoxic conditions with an increase in the threshold for activation 
of NHE1 [ ]. ATP would be reduced under hypoxia which may account for this 
change in activity though direct ATP binding effects were not shown in this study 
[ ]. A similar result was also demonstrated in cultured rat ventricular cells. 
Treatment of cells with 2-deoxyglucose demonstrated NHE-dependence on ATP levels 
[ ]. Given that ischemia causes depletion of intracellular ATP levels, this 
study also suggests that NHE1 activity would be reduced during cardiac ischemia 
in the intact heart.

## 3.2.11 Regulation of NHE1 by Stretch 
Stretch enhances myocardial contractility by two mechanisms. One rapid mechanism 
is the classic Frank-Starling mechanism that is attributed to enhanced 
myofilament calcium responsiveness. The second mechanism is the “slow force 
response” which occurs more slowly, as its name suggests. It is due to an 
increase in calcium transient size as a consequence of stretch activating 
autocrine and paracrine mechanisms [ , ]. It is in the slow force response 
that NHE makes a significant contribution. Knockdown or inhibition of NHE1 blunts 
the slow force response [ , ]. The mechanism by which this response works 
has been studied in several authors and was reviewed earlier [ , ]. Briefly, 
stretch caused release of Angiotensin II, and activation of the AT1 receptor. 
This results in formation and release of endothelin which causes NHE1 
hyperactivity. The increased NHE1 activity causes an increase in intracellular 
sodium and results in an increase in intracellular calcium though the reversal 
activity of the exchanger. Concurrently elevated reactive 
oxygen species can trigger NHE1 phosphorylation. Some of this activation may be 
through the local hormones [ , ]. Stretch activates angiotensin/endothelin 
dependent chain of events leading to increasing phosphorylation of Ser703 of NHE1 
and elevated ERK phosphorylation [ ]. Inhibition or knockdown of the 
mineralocorticoid receptor also reduces the activation by stretch, blocks 
reactive oxygen species elevation and blocks ERK and phosphorylation 
[ ]. Additionally, knock down or blockade of the epidermal growth factor 
receptor also blocks this slow force response [ , ]. Conversely, p38-MAPK 
activation after myocardial stretch limits ERK and phosphorylation, 
and NHE1 phosphorylation through activation of a dual specificity phosphatase 
which inhibits the slow force response [ ]. This NHE1-dependent stretch induced 
slow force response is important since the increase in the calcium transient is 
thought to be involved in development of cardiac hypertrophy and therefore a 
contributor to heart failure. This mechanism possibly acts as an early step 
towards cardiac pathology if the stimulus remains over time. The activation of 
NHE1 after stretch may thus have important clinical implications (reviewed in 
[ ]).

## 3.2.12 Alteration in NHE1 Activity by Diet 
Relatively little research has been carried out to identify the impact diet has 
on NHE1 function and expression. Generally, high fat diets have been shown to 
increase oxidative stress and heart dysfunction. This may be associated with an 
activation of NHE1 because long term ablation of NHE1 activity via the 
use of NHE1-null mice mitigated the deleterious cardiac effects of the high fat 
diet [ ]. However, perhaps the most powerful dietary intervention that 
demonstrated NHE-1 inhibition was provided by ginseng, a widely used medicinal 
herb particularly in Asian societies. Ginseng provided a direct anti-hypertrophic 
action in cultured cardiomyocytes, and importantly, inhibited heart failure 
through an attenuation of the upregulation of NHE1 activity typically exhibited 
in hypertrophic responses [ ].
The mechanism whereby diet alters NHE1 activity is unclear. However, one may 
speculate that the membrane lipid composition which influences related membrane 
transporters like the - exchanger (NCX) [ , , , ] may induce 
similar effects on NHE1 activity. In support of this hypothesis, acute 
administration to isolated cardiomyocytes of the omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty 
acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) inhibited NHE1 
activity [ ]. Consistent with this effect, supplementing the diet with EPA and 
DHA in a rabbit model of volume and pressure overloaded cardiac hypertrophy and 
failure attenuated the upregulation in NHE1 activity [ ].

## 3.3 SLC9A1 Gene Regulation
The NHE1 gene has been cloned from several species including the human, porcine 
and rabbit forms of the promoter [ , , ]. The human gene has 12 exons and 11 
introns and the mouse gene has a similar design [ ]. There is a very large 
(41.5 kb) intron between the first and second exon while the other introns are 
much smaller [ ]. Studies in vitro and in transgenic mice with the 5’ 
flanking region of the mouse promoter showed that NHE1 expression in the 
myocardium is high during early embryonic development and showed that the NHE1 
protein is at relatively high levels in the neonate and declines with age [ , , , ]. This effect may be comparable to the myosin heavy chain where a 
switch to fetal type of gene expression during hypertrophy increases expression.
A number of studies characterized transcription factors and regions important in 
expression in tissues outside the myocardium AP-1. The C/EBP family have been 
shown to be important in some cell types [ , ]. The porcine, rabbit and 
mouse and human NHE1 promoter, are homologous particularly in the proximal 500 bp 
of the 5’ flanking region [ , , , ]. Consensus sequences for the 
transcription factors AP-1, C/EBP and Sp1 are conserved between pig and human 
[ ]. A proximal AP-2 binding site in the mouse NHE1 promoter is important in 
expression in fibroblasts and in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells [ , ]. The 
NHE1 promoter is activated in some models of cell differentiation including in 
P19 cells or in L6 muscle cells [ , ]. Some other regions of the promoter 
important in expression are a poly (dA:dT) region of the NHE1 promoter is located 
at bp -155 to -169 of the mouse gene which was tested in L6 and NIH 3T3 cells 
[ ]. Several other regions of the NHE1 promoter were studied in a variety of 
cells. COUP-TF (Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor) type I 
and II is more distal (-841 to -800 bp) and is also important in expression 
[ ]. Thyroid hormone receptor TR 1 is also implicated in 
regulation of the promoter [ ].
Studies directly examining NHE1 promoter regulation in the myocardium are rare. 
A 1.1 kb region of the mouse promoter drove expression in cardiomyocytes that was 
stimulated by serum. Deletion of a proximal AP-2 site decreased promoter activity 
4-fold [ ]. Mutation of that site, combined with deletion of distal regions of 
the promoter, virtually eliminated promoter activity in cardiomyocytes. DNase I 
footprinting analysis showed that the poly(dA:dT) rich region (-155 to -169), is 
protected by heart nuclear extracts as is the COUP-TF element [ , ]. Thyroid 
hormone may regulate the NHE1 gene in the heart. Treatment of heart cells with 
thyroid hormone increased protein binding of nuclear extracts in the COUP-TF 
region and treatment of cardiomyocytes with thyroid hormone increases NHE1 
protein expression [ ]. 

NHE1 levels have been shown to be elevated in the myocardium following ischemic 
heart disease and some of this could be mediated through reactive oxygen species 
(ROS). Increasing serum from 0.5 to 10% induces NHE1 promoter activity in NIH3T3 
fibroblasts [ ]. The increase correlates with increased superoxide 
production and NHE1 promoter activity and superoxide production could be 
blocked by the oxidase inhibitor diphenyleniodonium [ ]. Tiron, a specific 
 superoxide scavenger, could also block increases in NHE1 promoter 
activity and protein levels [ ].
Aside from these earlier studies, there has been a surprising dearth of recent 
work on the promoter in the myocardium. It would be interesting to examine NHE1 
transcription in detail during cardiac hypertrophy and in response to ischemia 
and reperfusion.

## 4. Structure of NHE1 and Location of Inhibitor Binding Site 
The structure of NHE1 and the inhibitor binding site is of paramount interest as 
clearly the binding site will affect the efficacy and potency of inhibitors and 
the site itself will affect the design of novel inhibitors. Traditionally, human 
NHE1 has been thought of as a 12 transmembrane protein with a large cytoplasmic 
tail (Fig. A, Ref. [ , , ]). This type of low-resolution model was initially 
based on hydrophobicity plots and later more experimental evidence was added, 
mostly using cysteine accessibility studies along with hydrophobicity plot [ , ]. These studies initially suggested 12 transmembrane segments were present 
with two intracellular re-entrant loops, one between TM4 and TM5 and one between 
TM8 and TM9. There was a larger extracellular loop predicted between TM9 and T10.
 The structure of the E. coli NhaA ( antiporter type A) 
protein was deduced in 2005 [ ] and this led to attempts to model human NHE1 
based on the structure of the E. coli protein [ ]. However, this led 
to some conflicts in interpretation [ , , ]. The E. coli 
protein, NhaA (for antiporter type A) has significant 
differences from the mammalian protein. For example, the stoichiometry of 
exchange in bacteria is [ ] compared to the electroneutral 
1:1 exchange of mammalian NHE1. However, it is worth briefly reviewing a few 
fundamental aspects of this structure which are similar in other forms of this 
type of transport (see also reviews [ , , ]). The crystal structure of 
acid-inactivated NhaA has 12 TM segments. A critical feature is a TMIV-XI 
assembly. Both these helices are discontinuous, interrupted by an extended 
segment. The discontinuous helices form mid-membrane dipoles. It was suggested 
that the charge on D133 compensates for the opposing N-terminal end and K300 for 
the opposing C-terminal end of the helix [ , ]. The pore contains 
cytoplasmic and periplasmic funnels, both of which narrow so that hydrated 
cations cannot pass. The ion binding site of NhaA is formed around the extended 
segments of TMs IV and XI and includes D164, D163, and T132 [ , ]. It is 
hypothesized that binding to the active site from the cytoplasm causes a 
charge imbalance. This triggers movements of the TMIV-XI assembly, exposure of 
 to the periplasm, its release, and proton. Although this model for the 
function of NhaA is well developed and elegant, there is some controversy. Arkin 
et al. [ ] proposed a variation of the model, in which 3 conserved Asp 
residues are key to antiport. D164 is the binding site, 
D163 controls accessibility, and D133 mediates pH regulation. More recently, K300 
was proposed to be essential for stability but not for electrogenic transport 
[ ].
Structures of other exchangers have been more recently 
elucidated. This includes that of the archaeal antiporter NhaP1 
from Methanococcus jannaschii [ , ], NapA from Thermus 
thermophilus [ , ], NhaP [ ] (a /H exchanger of 
Pyrococcus abyssi, an archaeon from deep-sea hydrothermal vents), NHE9 
[ ] (another mammalian isoform related to NHE1), NHA2 [ ] (a more distant 
mammalian exchanger more closely related to NhaA). Generally, a 
summary would be to that these exchanger types have significant 
similarities to NhaA of E. coli despite their low homology to the 
E. coli protein. Functionally this includes acid residues for cation 
coordination, and the presence of a exchanger fold consisting of 
discontinuous transmembrane segments with a mid-membrane unwound stretch of amino 
acids. Some publications have also suggested alternating access to key acidic 
(Asp) residues using elevator like structural movements of transporter domains 
[ , , ].
Very recently, the structure of human NHE1 in complex with the regulatory 
protein CHP1, was determined by cryogenic electron microscopy (Cryo EM) [ ]. The 
structure was of amino acids 87-590, which formed 13 transmembrane helices and 3 
cytosolic helices. The topology was generally consistent with previous models 
except a previous re-entrant loop between a previously labeled TM9 and TM10, is 
actually two TM helices. A simplified model of the topology is shown in Fig. B. 
The model is based on the Cryo EM structure of human NHE1. TM 1 was added based 
on an earlier molecular model of NHE1 and experiments involving cysteine labeling 
of TM 1 which showed that TM 1 was present in the intact protein [ , , ] 
(Numbering of NHE1 TMs will from here on include TM1 as shown in Fig. B.)
NHE1 was a homodimer in the Cryo EM structure. Each monomer was made of a 
dimerization domain of TM segments (TMs 2-4, and 8-11, amino acids 99-176, plus 
288-405) plus a core domain (TMs 5-7 and 12-14, amino acids 187-283 and 411-505) 
[ ] (see Fig. B). TMs 6 and 13 (amino acids 223-253 and 445-469) have the 
NHE-fold with an unwound region in the middle and they cross each other (Fig. C). The helix breaks are thought to participate in forming the ion permeation 
pathway. In their structure there was a funnel between the dimerization domain 
and the core domain of each protomer. The funnel is formed by TMs 2,3,4,6,7 and 
11. Proton-titratable residues in the funnel are E131, D172, D238, D267 and E391 
(indicated in Fig. B). This results in a negatively charged cavity which was 
thought to participate in cation binding and proton sensing [ ]. D267 was 
thought to participate in cation binding and is critical to activity [ , ]. 
The S263 sidechain was also thought to participate in ion transport and D238 was 
thought to indirectly participate, coordinating a water molecule [ ]. E391 is 
essential [ ] but because of its location away from the cation binding site it 
may affect folding or stability of the protein and was not thought to directly 
binding cations. E131 was thought to be a pH sensor functioning when protonated 
to accelerate cation release [ ]. Mutation of F162 has been shown to have a 
large effect, reducing efficacy of cariporide and mutation of I169 and I170 
accentuate this effect [ ]. Mutation of E346 has also been shown to have large 
effects on inhibitor efficacy [ , ].
Considering the potential benefits of NHE1 inhibition in cardiac disease, there 
has always been great interest in the determination of the exact site of 
inhibitor binding. Classically, a number of studies carried out site specific 
mutagenesis on amino acids believed to be involved in inhibitor binding. Then any 
changes in inhibitor efficacy were examined. Some of these studies have suggested 
a number of amino acids with large effects on inhibitor potency as being 
important in human NHE1 inhibition that includes human F167 [ ], L167 (rat) 
[ ], Gly174, Leu163 [ ] while other studies have showed smaller changes in 
drug potency with mutation of human L265 and L255 [ ]. Other studies [ , , ] used large scale replacement of pieces of NHE1 to try to determine which 
regions are critical in drug interaction, but these have the disadvantage of 
increased likelihood of disruption of the structure of NHE1. Molecular modeling 
of NHE1 and inhibitor docking was also attempted [ ] and a number of amino 
acids were suggested to interact with inhibitors at different potential binding 
sites.
While these studies provided interesting information, the recent Cryo-EM 
structure directly showed the inhibitor binding site of the benzoylguanidine 
cariporide [ ]. Cariporide bound from the extracellular side of NHE1 in a pocket 
located between the dimerization and core domain. It was surrounded by TMs, 4, 7, 
9, 10 and 13. The extracellular loop #1 from the opposing subunit, and resides 
of TM 9 and 10 may be essential for the binding pocket. Amino acid D267 of TM7 
points up into the inhibitor binding pocket and interacts with the positively 
charged group of the guanidine (Fig. D,E) [ ]. The side chain of F162 (TM4) 
also interacts with the guanidine group and the phenyl ring of cariporide which 
agrees with mutational studies [ ]. The guanidine group is also coordinated by 
the side chain of E346 (TM9) which agrees with another mutational studies [ ]. 
Cariporide also has a methylsulfonyl group at the meta- and para- position of the 
phenyl ring (Fig. B). These are buried in a sub pocket formed by D159, L163, 
D95, H98 and V99. Mutational studies, including of L163, support the importance 
of these amino acids in inhibitor binding [ ].
It is also important to note that it has long been suggested that inhibitors 
such as amiloride, bind to the same or are overlapping with, the cation binding 
site (reviewed in [ ]). The Cryo-EM structure of NHE1 could not visualize the 
precise location of the ion, which is thought to be partially hydrated, 
and is about the same size of the guanidine group [ , ]. Given the 
coordinating amino acids, their characteristic charges, location, and the size of 
the pocket, the authors hypothesized that F162, D267 and E346 coordinate the 
 ion in the outward facing site [ ]. Mutation of these residues affects 
both inhibitor efficacy and activity, supporting this hypothesis [ ].

## 5. Development of Inhibitors of NHE1: Past and Present
Because of the extensive experimental evidence that NHE1 participates in cardiac 
pathologies including ischemia and reperfusion injury as well as myocardial 
remodeling and heart failure (discussed in Sections 6 and 7) there has been 
substantial interest in inhibition of NHE1 and in the development of clinically 
useful compounds for treatment of the diseased myocardium. Early pharmacological 
studies probing the function of NHE1 in biological systems including heart 
disease employed the use of amiloride (Fig. A), a potassium-sparing diuretic or 
its derivatives such as ethylisopropylamiloride (EIPA), methylisobutyl amiloride 
(MIA), hexamethyl amiloride (HMA), dimethylamiloride (DMA) (Fig. C) and others. 
While these agents are effective in inhibiting NHE1, they lack specificity 
against the NHE1 isoform, have non-specific effects on many aspects of cardiac 
performance [ ] and are also effective against other ion regulatory systems. 
This concern regarding non-specificity was rectified to a large degree by the 
development of novel second generation NHE-1 specific inhibitors by the 
pharmaceutical industry. The first among these was the benzoylguanidine 
derivative HOE694 ((3-methylsulphonyl-4-piperidino-benzoyl) guanidine 
methanesulphonate developed by Hoechst AG (now part of Sanofi) and which was 
demonstrated to exert cardioprotective and antiarrhythmic effects in ischemic and 
reperfused hearts [ ]. This was followed by the development of a new 
NHE1-specific inhibitor initially designated as HOE642 
(N-(Aminoiminomethyl)-4-(1-methylethyl)-3-(methylsulfonyl)-benzamide) [ ] and 
subsequently renamed as cariporide (Fig. B) in preparation for clinical 
development. As will be evident from the discussion below, cariporide is the most 
extensively studied of the NHE1-specific inhibitors both experimentally as well 
as in clinical studies particularly with respect to mitigating ischemic and 
reperfusion injury.
The development of these benzoyl guanidine derivatives has led to the rapid 
formulation of numerous newer and more potent NHE1-specific inhibitors. For an 
in-depth description of the development and chemistry of NHE1-specific inhibitors 
please refer to [ ]. A partial list of these agents is provided in Table 
(Ref. [ , , , , , , , , ]). Virtually all of the agents listed in this table possess 
the monocyclic acylguanidine structure found in the amiloride-based inhibitors 
(with the exception of SL 59.1227) but demonstrate markedly enhanced specificity 
towards NHE1 as well as greater potency. Preclinical and clinical studies with a 
number of these agents are discussed in greater detail below.
 Recently one group has developed a novel series of compounds of 6-substituted 
amiloride and hexamethylene amiloride (Fig. C) derivatives as inhibitors of 
NHE1. Depending on the precise compound made, they may also inhibit human 
urokinase plasminogen activator [ , , ]. The reasoning behind modification of 
amiloride (and its derivative) for use as an inhibitor is that amiloride is a 
pyrazinoyl guanidine, a clinically safe compound used as a potassium-sparing 
diuretic. Given the problems the benzoyl guanidine derivative cariporide for 
treatment of heart failure (see below) it was reasoned that using a pyrazinoyl 
guanidine core that differs in the aromatic core from cariporide (a benzoyl 
guanidine, Fig. ) and related NHE1 inhibitors might be a prudent approach to 
avoid side effects and regulatory issues for drug development. 6-substituted 
amiloride/HMA compounds have increased potency towards NHE1. Amiloride is an 
ideal candidate for a scaffold to build a dual-targeting compound with 
cardiovascular beneficial properties. HMA is both significantly more potent and 
more specific towards NHE1; amiloride inhibits sodium channels but HMA much less 
so [ ]. Inhibitors have been developed with nM potency towards NHE1 and show no 
effects on diuresis or urinary level in rats [ , , ]. 
While in theory these compounds sound extremely promising, they have not yet been 
tested for efficacy in prevention of ischemic and reperfusion injury or in the 
prevention of deleterious cardiac remodeling.
It is of note that some of these compounds have a dual action, inhibiting 
urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) [ , , ]. In the myocardium, uPA 
induces cardiac fibrosis and human hearts with end stage failure and fibrosis 
have elevated plasminogen activator activity [ ]. Excess uPA promotes cardiac 
fibrosis in association with M2 macrophages [ ]. Blocking the uPA pathway 
reduces cardiac macrophage accumulation, excess collagen formation and heart 
fibrosis [ ]. Thus, it may also be of interest to test the effect of dual 
inhibition of NHE1 and uPA, in heart failure models. To our knowledge this has 
not been done. Caution is advised though, as urokinase inhibition could increase 
thrombolysis and thrombosis. Fortunately, a large number of NHE1 inhibitory 
compounds have been made with varying degrees of uPA inhibition from none, to 
little, to potent inhibitors of both uPA and NHE1 [ , , ].

## 6. Role of NHE1 in Cardiac Ischemic and Reperfusion-Induced Injury

## 6.1 Theoretical Concepts
Although the entry of excessive extracellular into the cardiomyocyte 
was recognized early on as a key event in the toxic effects of ischemic injury to 
the heart ( overload) [ ], the mechanism whereby this excess 
entered the cell remained unknown until decades later. Blocking the L-type 
 channel had limited clinical utility in protecting the heart from 
ischemic and reperfusion injury so that was clearly not the mechanism for 
 entry [ ]. Lazdunski proposed in 1985 [ ] that a mechanism involving 
NHE and NCX activation was responsible for the toxic entry of into the 
myocardium as is summarized in Fig. . This scheme reinforces the concept of a 
close link between NHE1 and NCX not only with regards to ischemia and reperfusion 
but also pertaining to NHE1-dependent cardiac hypertrophy, as discussed in 
section 7 of this review. However, NHE1 inhibition has been shown to attenuate 
the deleterious effects of many factors including to varying degrees, 
interactions with G-protein-coupled receptors [ ], the 1A 
adrenoceptor subtype [ ], protein kinases [ , , ], angiotensin I and II 
receptors [ ], membrane lipids [ ] and endothelin-1 [ ]. The primary 
cardioprotective action of the inhibitors, however, remains in their ability to 
block , and movements via the NHE1 and NCX 
transport pathways in the myocardial cell (Fig. ).
 

## 6.2 Studies with Amiloride Analogues
Karmazyn’s laboratory was the first to demonstrate the likely validity of this 
concept by demonstrating a cardioprotective effect of amiloride, in isolated 
perfused rat hearts subjected to ischemia and reperfusion [ ]. This seminal 
observation using a well-known inhibitor of transport (amiloride) was 
independently confirmed and extended by two other labs shortly thereafter. Tani 
and Neely demonstrated both metabolic and ionic data consistent with an 
involvement of the NHE and NCX pathways in ischemic/reperfusion injury [ ]. By 
this time, Edwin Cragoe, Jr. had established a large library of amiloride 
analogues at the Merck laboratories [ ] that were more specific inhibitors of 
the NHE pathway than amiloride and this significantly accelerated the work in 
this area. Several laboratories took advantage of this advancement and employed 
several of these amiloride analogues in a series of studies to again elicit 
significant cardioprotection during ischemia and reperfusion challenge to the 
heart [ , , , , ].
A biochemical approach further indirectly implicated the NHE pathway in the 
cardiac damage by modifying the extracellular acidity and levels during 
the ischemia and reperfusion insult [ , , , ]. Ionic changes 
consistent with a role for NHE during ischemia/reperfusion and its blockage by 
NHE inhibitors were demonstrated by radioisotopic [ ], atomic absorption 
spectrometric [ ], electrophysiological [ ] and nuclear magnetic resonance 
methods [ ]. The cardioprotection was observed whether the NHE inhibitors were 
delivered prior to ischemic insult or solely during reperfusion although 
protection was generally greater when the drug was present during the ischemic 
period [ , ]. The cardioprotective effects of NHE blockers were not species 
specific. Protection was observed in hearts from rats and guinea pigs [ ].
All of these studies were consistent with a critical involvement of NHE in the 
cardiac damage [ , , , ], cardiac contractile dysfunction [ , , ], and arrhythmias [ , ] that are evident during the ischemia and 
reperfusion insult. NHE inhibitors were cardioprotective not only during ischemia 
and reperfusion challenge but protected the myocardium during 
hypoxia/reoxygenation insult [ ], hypothermic conditions [ , ], oxidative 
stress [ , ], and pacing induced-heart failure [ ]. Conversely, NHE 
inhibitors did not provide cardioprotection during ischemic pre-conditioning 
[ ] or the paradox protocol of myocardial overload [ ].

## 6.3 Studies with New Generation NHE1 Specific Inhibitors 
Earlier studies using amiloride or its analogues as cardioprotective agents 
presented some difficulty in interpretation as they lacked specificity in terms 
of targeting NHE1. Moreover, virtually all studies with these agents were carried 
out using in vitro cardiac preparations with no studies on more 
clinically-relevant in vivo animal models. This situation was rectified 
to large degree by the development of highly specific NHE1 inhibitors as 
discussed in section 5. The first of these agents to be developed was the benzoyl 
guanidine derivative HOE 694 which was shown to produce extensive protection in 
both isolated rat hearts as well as in rats subjected to coronary artery ligation 
[ ]. Although HOE 694 was not destined for clinical development this was not the 
case for HOE 642 (cariporide) (Fig. B), a more potent NHE1 inhibitor, developed 
shortly thereafter [ ] and which, in an initial study was shown to exert potent 
cardioprotective effects in both isolated hearts as well as in vivo 
coronary artery ligation followed by reperfusion [ ]. This protection was 
manifested in terms of reduction in the incidence of arrhythmias, reduction in 
tissue injury as well as preservation of energy metabolites [ ]. Cariporide 
subsequently emerged as the most widely studied of the newer generation of NHE1 
inhibitors as a cardioprotective strategy. Indeed, these studies using cariporide 
have shown excellent cardioprotection across different animal species and 
experimental models [ , , , , , , ].
The consistent protection seen with cariporide was clearly evident in subsequent 
studies utilizing newer NHE1 specific inhibitors including AVE 4890 [ ], 
MS-31-038 [ ], BIX [ ], BIIB 513 [ ], EMD 85131 [ ] and others. Indeed, 
it can be safely stated that virtually all animal studies using these agents have 
consistently demonstrated excellent cardioprotection irrespective of experimental 
model or animal species. This consistency in demonstrating cardioprotective 
efficacy of NHE1 inhibitors is likely unmatched by any other strategy. Indeed, 
Garrett Gross’ laboratory at the Medical College of Wisconsin has reported that 
NHE1 inhibition with BIIB 513 was superior to ischemic preconditioning 
particularly when ischemic preconditioning was no longer effective as a result of 
prolonged ischemic duration [ ].

## 6.4 Studies with NHE1 Transgenic Mice
A number of studies were undertaken to determine whether genetic modulation of 
NHE1 alters the cardiac response to ischemia and reperfusion. Surprisingly, 
overexpression of NHE1 in transgenic mouse hearts resulted in enhanced recovery 
after reperfusion of ischemic isolated perfused hearts which the authors 
attributed to improved metabolic parameters [ , ]. Ironically, in one study 
the protection seen with NHE1 overexpression was similarly observed with 
cariporide [ ]. In another study, cardiac overexpression of NHE1 resulted in 
modest protection against ischemia and reperfusion in vivo although this 
was not affected by zoniporide, a highly specific NHE1 inhibitor suggesting that 
the protection was not NHE1 dependent [ ]. With aging, NHE1 overexpressing mice 
exhibited increased apoptosis, left ventricular contractile dysfunction, 
myocardial remodeling and premature death which the authors attributed to 
sustained endoplasmic reticulum stress [ ]. While further work is required in 
this area, when taken together the results suggest that NHE1 overexpression 
per se may not be necessarily deleterious to the ischemic myocardium 
although inhibiting the exchanger to a critical level confers protection. This 
concept is reinforced by the finding that genetic ablation of NHE1 in mice 
confers protection against ischemic and reperfusion injury in isolated perfused 
hearts [ ].

## 6.5 NHE1 Inhibition for Post-Cardiac Arrest Resuscitation: An 
Ischemia and Reperfusion Scenario
Successful cardiac resuscitation, particularly after out-of-hospital sudden 
cardiac arrest, represents a major medical challenge. This reflects the very poor 
outcome in terms of successful resuscitation which is seen in only about 10% or 
less of cardiac arrest victims, although these rates vary depending on various 
factors [ ]. Cardiac resuscitation is in essence an ischemia (cardiac arrest) 
and reperfusion (resuscitation) scenario thus suggesting a potential benefit of 
cardioprotective agents in terms of improving resuscitation efforts. Indeed, NHE1 
inhibitors have been proven to be of immense benefit for improving post-cardiac 
arrest resuscitation in experimental animal models. Much of the original and 
pioneering work in this area comes from Gazmuri’s laboratory in Chicago who first 
proposed this concept (see below) and who recently published a comprehensive 
review of the role of NHE1 in cardiac resuscitation [ ]. As such only a brief 
discussion is presented here.
As just noted, the first report demonstrating a beneficial effect of NHE1 
inhibition was presented by Gazmuri and colleagues who showed that cariporide 
improved post ventricular fibrillation recovery in isolated rat hearts as well as 
rats in vivo subjected to cardiac arrest [ ]. It is interesting that 
with respect to the latter, cariporide reduced the degree of chest compression 
required to attain sinus rhythm and precluded the necessity for electrical 
defibrillation in six of eight animals studied whereas electrical defibrillation 
was required in all 8 control rats [ ]. Moreover, and importantly, over 90% of 
cariporide treated animals survived the cardiac arrest-resuscitation protocol 
compared to just over 60% seen in control animals [ ]. A similar beneficial 
effect of cariporide was also convincingly demonstrated by these and other 
investigators using a pig model of cardiac arrest followed by attempted 
resuscitation [ , ]. Thus, cariporide improved hemodynamics following 
resuscitation compared to control animals, completely prevented mortality while 
reducing neurological deficit [ ].
From a mechanistic perspective, the beneficial effects of NHE1 inhibition in 
improving cardiac resuscitation appear to be similar to mechanisms seen in 
classic cardioprotection seen in ischemic and reperfused hearts with NHE1 
inhibitors. Thus, it has been reported that the NHE1 specific inhibitor AVE4454B, 
although less effective than cariporide in terms of improving cardiac 
resuscitation [ ], improved cardiac resuscitation in the rat which was 
associated with diminished cardiac mitochondrial calcium overload [ ]. The 
beneficial effects of cariporide were also associated with diminished 
arrhythmogenesis including ectopic activity and reduced the shortening of the 
action potential duration associated with resuscitation [ , ]. Further 
mechanistic insights into the improved resuscitation produced by NHE1 inhibitors 
were provided in a study using the NHE1 specific inhibitor zoniporide. In this 
regard zoniporide, as expected, improved ventricular recovery following 
ventricular fibrillation-induced cardiac arrest in pigs, effects associated with 
improved myocardial metabolic status including preserved myocardial creatine 
phosphate to creatine ratios thus indicating improved oxidative phosphorylation 
[ ]. Mitochondrial as well as neuronal protection with cariporide was also 
demonstrated in an asphyxia model of cardiac arrest in the rat although the 
protection was evidently dependent on cariporide dose [ ]. Thus, while a 
protective response was seen using either 1 or 3 mg/kg cariporide no protection 
was evident when the cariporide dose was increased to 5 mg/kg [ ]. The 
protective effect of the two lower cariporide doses was enhanced under 
hypothermic resuscitation conditions whereas no additional benefit was observed 
with 5 mg/kg cariporide [ ]. Taken together, the latter results suggest that 
the optimal beneficial effect of NHE1 inhibitors in cardiac resuscitation may be 
dependent on various factors including drug dose and resuscitation conditions.
Finally, it should be added that a contribution to the beneficial effect of 
cariporide in cardiac resuscitation may reflect improved hemodynamics, 
particularly in conjunction with the initial chest compression. Thus, Gazmuri’s 
group has shown, using a rat closed chest ventricular fibrillation model, that 
cariporide enhances hemodynamic efficacy of resuscitation by producing comparable 
or higher systemic as well as regional blood flows while at the same time 
reducing depth of compression, a finding of substantial clinical relevance in 
terms of improving efficacy of closed chest cardiopulmonary resuscitation [ ].

## 7. Role of NHE1 in Cardiac Hypertrophy, Remodeling and Development of 
Heart Failure

## 7.1 Sodium as a Key Factor in the Hypertrophic Program 
The role of sodium in the development of cardiac hypertrophy is well 
established. High dietary sodium is associated with an increased incidence of 
cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. Indeed, heart failure patients exhibit 
defective sodium cellular regulation which could compound the deleterious effects 
of sodium on cardiac pathology [ ]. Although one of the mechanisms associated 
with sodium-induced cardiac hypertrophy involves the secondary response to 
chronic hypertension, substantial evidence supports a direct effect of sodium on 
myocardial hypertrophy thus directly contributing to myocardial remodeling and 
the development of heart failure. Thus, elevations in sodium concentrations 
directly produce hypertrophy in cultured myocardial myoblasts [ ] and 
administering a high sodium diet to rats produces cardiac hypertrophy 
independently of blood pressure elevation [ ]. Moreover, the sodium channel 
blocker tetrodotoxin prevents isoproterenol-induced hypertrophy in cultured H9c2 
cardiomyoblasts [ ]. One of the multiple sodium-dependent direct mechanisms 
proposed to induce cardiac hypertrophy involves the elevation of intracellular 
calcium concentrations due to reduced calcium efflux via the NCX or 
reverse mode NCX activity [ ]. This mechanism is supported by studies showing 
that selective chronic inhibition of NCX inhibits cardiac hypertrophy in 
nephrectomized hypertensive rats, a model of heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction, independently of blood pressure reduction [ ]. However, 
elevations in intracellular sodium concentrations can directly produce 
hypertrophy by stimulation of intracellular signaling molecules linked to the 
hypertrophic program, including protein kinase C [ ] as well as reactive oxygen 
species [ ]. Moreover, high intracellular sodium concentrations may also 
contribute to cardiac hypertrophy by altering mitochondrial dynamics resulting in 
metabolic remodeling although the precise mechanisms underlying these events have 
not been fully elucidated [ ]. As discussed below, studies using NHE1-specific 
inhibitors have demonstrated a multitude of intracellular mechanisms potentially 
contributing to a sodium dependent hypertrophic program. It is interesting to 
point out that NHE-dependent cardiac hypertrophy manifests primarily as 
pathological hypertrophy and does not seem to be involved in physiological 
adaptive hypertrophic responses. In this regard, it has been proposed that AKT 
(protein kinase B)-dependent NHE1 phosphorylation prevents NHE1 overactivation in 
physiological hypertrophy [ ] and thus it is likely that NHE1 activation does 
not partake in the physiological hypertrophic program. High intake of dietary 
sodium in experimental animals has also been linked to activation of the 
adrenergic system, particularly that involving 1 receptor activation 
resulting in a myocardial hypertrophic response [ ]. The critical role of 
sodium in the development of cardiac hypertrophy has been shown not only in 
experimental animals but also clinically in studies demonstrating that high 
urinary sodium excretion is independently associated with the development of left 
ventricular hypertrophy in both non-diabetic hypertensive subjects [ ] as well 
as in patients with Type 2 diabetes [ ].

## 7.2 Studies with NHE1 Inhibitors
A number of studies have documented an important role of NHE1 in mediating the 
enhanced intracellular sodium elevations, particularly under ischemic insult. For 
example, Bak and Ingwall showed that amiloride, a nonspecific NHE inhibitor, 
blunted the rise in intracellular sodium in ischemic isolated rat hearts [ ]. 
However, as mentioned, amiloride is a nonspecific agent which affects other 
cellular processes in addition to NHE inhibition and thus, studies using this 
drug alone should be interpreted cautiously. However, Baartscheer and colleagues 
showed that cariporide markedly inhibited intracellular sodium overload and 
improved calcium regulation in rabbit hearts ex vivo in which the 
animals were subjected to 12 weeks of chronic combined pressure and volume 
overload [ ].
While NHE1 activation likely represents a major mechanism for intracellular 
sodium elevation, other cellular processes may also contribute and should be 
mentioned. For example, inhibition of the late sodium current with the selective 
inhibitor ranolazine inhibited both hypertrophy and fibrosis as well as improving 
cardiac function in mice exposed to chronic pressure overload produced by aortic 
banding [ ]. Importantly, this effect was associated with a suppression of 
sodium overload and improved intracellular calcium homeostasis [ ].
A number of lines of evidence suggest that NHE1 is a major contributor to the 
development of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. First, cardiomyocyte 
hypertrophy is associated with upregulation of NHE1 expression and activity in 
cardiomyocytes in a number of diverse experimental models [ , , , , , , , ] as well 
as in cardiomyocytes harvested from humans with end stage heart failure [ ]. 
Secondly, many paracrine, autocrine and hormonal factors which are important 
initiators of the hypertrophic program are also potent activators of NHE1 
activity in the heart, among these being angiotensin II, endothelin 1 and 
 1 adrenergic agonists [reviewed in [ ]]. Indeed, paracrine and 
autocrine factors including angiotensin II and endothelin-1 have been shown to be 
key initiators of NHE1 activation (see Section 3) and the hypertrophic program 
following the production of myocardial stretch [ ]. Thirdly, the importance of 
NHE1 to the development of cardiac hypertrophy and indeed myocardial remodeling 
and heart failure in general has been borne out by a large number of studies 
employing a variety of experimental models as summarized in Table (Ref. [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]). One of the first observations documenting an 
antihypertrophic effect of NHE1 inhibition originated from the Karmazyn 
laboratory which showed that cariporide effectively attenuated early (one week) 
and late (twelve week) hypertrophic responses and left ventricular dysfunction 
following sustained coronary artery ligation in the rat [ , ]. This 
laboratory further demonstrated that NHE1 inhibition also can reverse 
myocardial remodeling and heart failure when treatment is delayed for up to four 
weeks following coronary artery ligation [ ]. The ability of NHE1 inhibition to 
reverse remodeling and heart failure is an important observation from a clinical 
standpoint. This beneficial effect has also been demonstrated in a 
pressure/volume overload model of heart failure in the rabbit when cariporide was 
started one month after the initiation of heart failure [ ]. It should be noted 
that the salutary effects of NHE1 inhibition occurred in the absence of infarct 
size reduction thus demonstrating a direct antihypertrophic effect of NHE1 
inhibition. It is interesting that early and transient treatment of rats with a 
potent NHE1-specific inhibitor for one week, followed by a five-week period in 
the absence of any pharmacological intervention, resulted in substantial 
reduction in hypertrophy and heart failure, suggesting that early activation of 
NHE1 following insult may be critical for the subsequent development of heart 
failure [ ]. While NHE1 inhibition exerts antihypertrophic effects on its own, 
it is interesting that the benefit was enhanced with coadministration of 
cariporide with an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (ramipril) in rats 
subjected to 18 weeks of sustained coronary artery occlusion [ ]. 

 

## 7.3 NHE1 Inhibition in Different Heart Failure Models Not Involving 
Myocardial Ischemia
The ability of NHE1 inhibition to attenuate cardiac hypertrophy is not 
restricted to experimental models involving myocardial ischemia. For example, 
Cingolani’s group showed that cariporide reduced the hypertrophic response as 
well as myocardial fibrosis in the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) which was 
dissociated from blood pressure reduction [ , ]. Moreover, cariporide 
effectively prevented cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis and left ventricular 
dysfunction in a transgenic mouse model overexpressing the 1 
adrenergic receptor [ ]. This study strongly suggests that NHE1 inhibition 
could be an effective treatment for the prevention of hypertrophy and heart 
failure due to increased sympathetic drive. Indeed, this is borne out by studies 
showing that cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis caused by 30-day infusion of 
isoproterenol to rats, can be prevented by the NHE1 specific inhibitor BIIB723 
[ ]. Genetically induced ablation of the cardiac atrial natriuretic peptide 
(ANP) receptor similarly produces a cardiac hypertrophy phenotype with 
accompanying heart failure that can be significantly inhibited by cariporide in 
the absence of blood pressure reduction [ ]. Hearts from these animals 
exhibited enhanced NHE1 activity thus suggesting that the ANP-guanylate cyclase 
system is an inhibitory regulator of cardiac NHE1 activity thereby mitigating the 
cardiac hypertrophic response to hypertension-related pressure overload [ ]. In 
addition, cariporide inhibited the myocardial remodelling and heart failure in 
mice subjected to pressure overload produced by five-week thoracic aortic banding 
[ ].
NHE1 likely plays an important role in the development of heredity hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Bkaily’s group has shown that dietary administration of the 
NHE1-specific inhibitor EMD 87580 (rimeporide) prevented the development of 
hypertrophy, necrosis, intracellular sodium and calcium overload, as well as 
preventing early mortality in a dystrophic hamster model [ , ]. Moreover, 
rimeporide administration to dogs with muscular dystrophy resulted in a reduction 
in left ventricular function deterioration in these animals [ ]. Such promising 
results in animal models has led to clinical testing of rimeporide in young boys 
with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD, N = 20). A phase 1B clinical trial 
revealed that four-week treatment with rimeporide is well tolerated and produces 
no safety concerns [ ]. Coupled with encouraging, although preliminary 
biomarker data suggesting some clinical efficacy, further larger scale 
placebo-controlled studies are planned to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
rimeporide in reducing cardiomyopathy associated with DMD. The mechanisms 
underlying the beneficial effects of NHE1 inhibition in dystrophic cardiomyopathy 
are not known with certainty but, as already alluded to, likely involve 
attenuation of calcium and sodium overload. Moreover, as DMD is associated with 
mitochondrial dysfunction [ , ], protection by NHE1 inhibitors may involve 
mitochondrial protection as observed in other models of heart failure (see 
Section 7.5).

## 7.4 Induction of Hypertrophy by NHE1 Activation
Direct effects of various hormonal as well as paracrine and autocrine factors, 
some of which have already been referred to, can produce hypertrophy either 
directly on cultured cardiomyocytes or via chronic in vivo 
infusion through NHE1-dependent mechanisms. Among these are aldosterone [ , ], estrogen [ ], cardiac glycosides [ ], isoproterenol [ ] and 
angiotensin II acting via the angiotensin receptor [ , ], 
the effect of the latter possibly mediated by endogenous endothelin-1 and NHE1 
activation [ ]. These NHE1-dependent effects of pro-hypertrophic factors may be 
important in understanding their roles in cardiovascular diseases such as heart 
failure. For example, aldosterone has been shown in a landmark clinical study 
(the RALES study) to play an important role in development of heart failure, as 
demonstrated by a significant reduction in mortality and morbidity in heart 
failure patients treated with the mineralocorticoid receptor blocker 
spironolactone [reviewed in [ ]]. The role of increased catecholamine drive and 
angiotensin II in cardiac pathology are well established and represent targets 
for established therapies for treating cardiovascular disorders. The deleterious 
effects of catecholamines on the development of heart failure are mostly mediated 
by 1 adrenoceptor activation [reviewed in [ ]], indeed 
 1 blockers are generally contraindicated due to vasodilator 
effects of these agents resulting in reflex sympathetic activity [ ]. 
Nonetheless, 1 adrenoceptor activation in the heart can produce 
deleterious effects such as increased cardiac fibrosis via calcineurin 
activation (of relevance see section 7.5) which would contribute to the severity 
of myocardial remodelling and heart failure [ ] With respect to angiotensin II, 
targeting this hormone for the treatment of heart failure has been a mainstay for 
therapy for decades. This is generally achieved either by inhibition of 
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) or by the use of receptor 
antagonists (ARBs) although there is some evidence based on meta-analysis of 
clinical trials that ACE inhibition is more effective than ARBs in reducing 
mortality in heart failure patients [ ]. We believe that benefit would also be 
achieved by NHE1-specific inhibitors. In fact, such protection could in theory be 
superior to that seen with targeting individual agonists as pro-remodelling 
effects of numerous autocrine, paracrine and hormonal factors would be inhibited 
by targeting NHE1. It must be added however that beneficial endogenous factors 
have also been identified such as insulin-like growth factor 1, which has been 
shown to improve cardiac function in hypertrophied hearts of spontaneously 
hypertensive rats while suppressing NHE1 activity [ ].
A non-pharmacological mode of NHE1 upregulation involves genetic modification of 
the antiporter resulting in enhanced NHE1 activity. In this regard, Fliegel’s 
group showed that transgenic mice expressing an overactive form of NHE1 exhibit 
cardiac hypertrophy in the absence of any pro-hypertrophic insult, when compared 
to mice expressing the wild type NHE1 [ , ]. Additionally, infection of 
neonatal rat ventricular myocytes with an adenoviral vector expressing a 
constitutively active NHE1 resulted in a hypertrophic response in the absence of 
any other pro-hypertrophic intervention [ ].

## 7.5 Potential Mechanisms Underlying NHE1-Dependent Cardiac 
Hypertrophy
The mechanisms by which NHE1 activation induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy are 
likely complex and associated with the stimulation of a number of intracellular 
pathways. As discussed above, NHE1 interacts with various intracellular cofactors 
and binding partners which in general, enhance the antiporter’s activity. With 
respect to the development of hypertrophy specifically, it has been reported that 
the ubiquitous multifunctional protein osteopontin originally identified in bone 
may be an important cofactor in mediating the hypertrophic influence of NHE1 
activation. Thus, a close relationship between NHE1 and osteopontin expression 
was identified in cultured cardiomyocytes and silencing osteopontin in these 
cells supressed the hypertrophic effect of NHE1 overexpression [ ]. Furthermore, 
osteopontin expression upregulation and the hypertrophic response in H9c2 
cardiomyoblasts treated with angiotensin II was prevented by rimeporide [ ].
Among the strongest candidates as a key factor in mediating the pro-hypertrophic 
effect of NHE1 activation is stimulation of calcineurin, a serine/threonine 
protein phosphatase which is an activator of transcriptional factors well known 
to be important in the pathological hypertrophic program as well as evolution to 
heart failure, among these being nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and 
myocyte enhancer factor 2 (Mef2) [ , ]. As calcineurin can be activated by 
increased intracellular calcium concentrations or more specifically by formation 
of a calcium/calmodulin complex, it is not surprising that stimulation of NHE1 is 
a likely contributor to increased calcineurin activity leading to cardiomyocyte 
hypertrophy based on the concepts discussed in section 7.1 related to increased 
intracellular calcium concentrations. Indeed, overexpression of cardiac NHE1 
per se has been shown to be sufficient to increase intracellular calcium 
levels, upregulate the calcineurin pathway and induce cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, 
thus demonstrating a strong link between NHE1 and the calcineurin pathway in 
promoting the hypertrophic program [ ]. Inhibition of cardiac hypertrophy both 
in vivo as well as in cultured cardiomyocytes is associated with 
concomitant regression of calcineurin/NFAT expression [ ]. Kilić et al. [ ] showed that early and transient NHE1 inhibition was sufficient in 
preventing the hypertrophic response and calcineurin activation both in rats 
subjected to sustained coronary artery ligation as well as myocytes exposed to 
phenylephrine treatment. The relationship between NHE1 and calcineurin activity 
has also been reported with other antihypertrophic strategies including treatment 
with ginseng [ ] or a chimeric natriuretic peptide [ ]. Thus, NHE1-dependent 
calcineurin activation and subsequent cardiomyocyte hypertrophy likely follows 
the series of events summarized in Fig. . 

 The evidence for calcineurin notwithstanding, other intracellular mechanisms may 
also contribute to protection of the hypertrophied myocardium shown by NHE1 
inhibitors particularly concerning mitochondrial preservation during the 
remodeling process. Recent evidence, for example, suggests that the 
antihypertrophic effect of NHE1 inhibition with rimeporide in cultured H9c2 cells 
treated with angiotensin II is associated with suppression of the activation of 
Cathepsin B, a cysteine protease involved in cardiovascular and other pathologies 
[ ]. Mitochondrial protection as demonstrated by reduced mitochondrial 
dependent generation of reactive oxygen species may also be of importance in 
understanding the anti-remodeling effects of NHE1 inhibition [ ]. Karmazyn’s 
laboratory has previously shown that rimeporide reduced MAPK activity, preserved 
mitochondrial membrane potential, attenuated permeability transition pore opening 
and reduced superoxide generation in phenylephrine-treated neonatal rat 
cardiomyocytes while supressing the hypertrophic response [ , ]. Further 
evidence suggests that NHE1 inhibition reduces mitochondrial dysfunction in the 
hypertrophied heart by attenuating phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein 
kinase (AMPK)/glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3 ) during 
hypertrophy both in vivo following sustained coronary artery ligation or 
in cultured myocytes in which hypertrophy was induced by endothelin-1 [ ]. A 
potential mitochondria-related locus of protection by NHE1 inhibitors may be 
related to attenuation of mitochondrial fission during the post-infarction 
remodeling process thus preserving mitochondrial fission/fusion balance. Indeed, 
excessive mitochondrial fission is known to contribute to cardiac pathology 
associated with the development of cardiac remodeling and failure [ ]. In this 
regard, upregulation of the primary fission protein Fis1 was significantly 
blunted by EMD87580 in hearts of rats subjected to 12 or 18 weeks of sustained 
coronary artery ligation [ ]. Thus, when taken together, it appears that 
mitochondrial protection represents an important component underlying the 
salutary effects of NHE1 inhibition in cardiac hypertrophy, acting via 
multifaceted mechanisms to preserve mitochondrial integrity.

## 7.6 Anti-Remodeling Effects of Drugs Developed for the Treatment of 
Type 2 Diabetes: Evidence for NHE1 Inhibition 
It is interesting to note that NHE1 inhibition may also contribute to the 
antihypertrophic and remodelling effects of drugs not initially developed for 
this purpose. An example of this are the sodium-glucose cotransport 2 inhibitors, 
the so-called gliflozins, developed for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus 
but which exert a number of beneficial effects on the heart not related to 
glucose regulation but which likely involve NHE1 inhibition [ , , , , ]. For 
example, dapagliflozin reduced fibrosis, inflammation and left ventricular 
dysfunction in db/db diabetic mice chronically (30 days) infused with 
angiotensin II [ ]. These beneficial effects were associated with a number of 
cellular effects including decreased intracellular calcium transients, decreased 
inflammation, decreased ROS production as well as decreased expression of the 
voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel and decreased NCX levels while 
inhibiting NHE1 [ ]. The relative contribution of each of these mechanisms 
awaits concrete elucidation. Gliflozins, are drugs that work primarily on the 
kidney to aid in glucose homeostasis in diabetic patients and may have effects 
through NHE1 (see section 8.1). In addition to the gliflozins, teneligliptin, a 
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes in 
some countries has been shown to reduce cardiac hypertrophy and the concomitant 
increase in NHE1 expression in spontaneously hypertensive rats that was 
attributed to normalization of the elevated plasma angiotensin II levels observed 
in these animals [ ].

## 7.7 Potential Role for Genetic Polymorphisms in Human Disease
Genetic polymorphisms of NHE1 have been reported and this includes at least one 
that results in human disease (recently reviewed in [ ]). Briefly, the first 
genetic defect in humans that was found to be attributable to NHE1 was reported 
by Guissart et al. [ ]. Lichtenstein-Knorr syndrome is one of several 
autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias with a variety of neurological symptoms, 
cardiomyopathies and ataxias [ ]. It is of juvenile or adolescent onset with 
ataxia and sensorineural hearing loss [ ]. Guissart et al. [ ] showed 
that the SLC9A1 (NHE1) gene, is responsible for the defect in this disease. A 
mutation in the SLC9A1 gene changed Gly305 to Arg. The Gly305Arg mutation causes 
reduced expression and decreased protein glycosylation. It also caused almost a 
complete absence of targeting of the protein to the cell surface and virtually no 
protein activity at the cell surface [ ]. After this report another study [ ] 
reported a different human mutation resulting in similar symptoms including 
cerebellar ataxia. In this case the mutation at amino acid Ile288 caused a 
premature truncation of most of the protein.
NHE1 knockout mice have also been characterized. One spontaneous mutation of 
NHE1 in mice was a change causing Lys442 to become a stop codon and terminate 
NHE1 within the transmembrane domain. Homozygous defective mice had a slow-wave 
epilepsy (swe) mutation. They also had an ataxic gait including locomotor ataxia 
that was prominent in their hind limbs Mutant homozygous mice were of small size 
and less than half survived to weaning [ ]. A second study in mice confirmed 
the above physiological effects with a targeted disruption of NHE1 [ ]. The 
genetic knockout of NHE1 allowed an interesting insight into NHE1 physiology in 
the myocardium. When mice with the genetic knockout of NHE1 were subjected to 
cardiac ischemia reperfusion injury, they were resistant in comparison to the 
controls [ ]. This confirmed the role of NHE1 in ischemia reperfusion damage.
Various specific genetic polymorphisms have been identified in the NHE1 gene 
though a thorough study of their total incidence and effect on the myocardium is 
lacking. One polymorphism was a change of Asn266 to His [ ]. The mutation was 
not fully characterized clinically. Mutant N226H protein was expressed and 
targeted properly however, the N266H protein had no detectable activity. The NHE1 
cytoplasmic tail is responsible for regulation of NHE1. Another study 
characterized the effect of stop codon polymorphisms in the regulatory tail 
[ ]. Stop codons at amino acid 321, 449 and 735 were examined (mutations at 321 
and 449 were actually within the membrane domain). Mutants stopping at amino 
acids 321 and 449 lost NHE1 activity and did not target properly to the plasma 
membrane. They were also more rapidly degraded than wild type protein. The mutant 
protein ending at amino acid 735 had reduced expression and activity.
Another study [ ] examined the effect of change of two polymorphisms in the 
phosphorylatable amino acids in the regulatory tail. It examined the Ser703 and 
Ser771, to proline polymorphisms [ ]. Ser703 is critical to 14-3-3 binding to 
NHE1 and to NHE1 activation by growth factors [ , ] (Fig. ). Ser771 is also 
important in Erk 1/2 dependent activation of NHE1 [ , ] (see section 3.1.1). 
The Ser703Pro mutant had virtually the same activity, targeting and expression 
levels as the wild type NHE1 protein. However, the Ser771Pro mutant protein had 
reduced activity and expression levels, but normal cell surface targeting. The 
Ser771Pro mutant showed abnormal regulation. It was not strongly activated by 
sustained intracellular acidosis, but was activated partially even by very short 
periods of acidosis. It was hypothesized that insertion of a Pro in this location 
leads to an abnormal conformation that alters synthesis or degradation of the 
protein and causes an abnormal regulation of the protein by conformational 
changes in the tail, and by the inability to be phosphorylated [ ]. It is not 
known how mutation of these regulatory amino acids could affect NHE1 function in 
humans. However, Ser703 is phosphorylated by p90 ribosomal S6 kinase. A mouse 
heart dominant negative p90 ribosomal S6 kinase mutant was resistant to 
myocardial injury induced by left coronary artery occlusion [ ]. One might 
postulate that humans carrying the Ser703Pro polymorphism might also be resistant 
to coronary artery occlusion, but this remains to be demonstrated.

## 8. NHE1 in Diabetes and Related Heart Diseases
Because of the ubiquitous expression of the NHE throughout the tissues and cell 
types of the body [ , ] and its important function in each of these tissues, it 
is perhaps not surprising that changes in NHE expression and function have been 
implicated in a variety of diseases in a wide range of tissues and cell types. 
This includes brain development and function [ ], dental pulp [ ], immune 
function and inflammation [ ], kidney function [ ], epilepsy [ , ], 
gallstone formation [ ], cataracts [ ] and muscular dystrophies [ ]. These 
areas of NHE lesions have, in some cases, led to heart related problems as well. 
For example, it has been suggested that the heart failure associated with Becker 
and Duchenne muscular dystrophies may be in part due to NHE1 over-activation and 
the subsequent overload [ ]. In support of this hypothesis, the 
chronic administration of a NHE-1 inhibitor to a dystrophic animal model 
prevented the intracellular overload and early death due to heart 
failure [ ]. Additionally, with the predominant place inflammation and 
infection has in cardiovascular disease [ ], it may be a particularly fruitful 
avenue for future research to determine if the beneficial cardiovascular effects 
of NHE inhibitors may be due in part to an action on the immune system and the 
pathways that ultimately produce inflammation. However, the two disease 
conditions that have been associated with NHE malfunction and may also have the 
most significant impact upon the cardiovascular system are diabetes mellitus and 
renal disease.

## Diabetes, Heart Disease and Exchange 
A significant change in how diabetic heart disease was viewed was first proposed 
with experimental evidence in the 1970’s and early 1980’s [ , , , , , , , , ]. Instead of 
diabetic heart disease and failure being viewed as a primarily vascular lesion 
[ ], the aforementioned works clearly identified a subcellular basis for a 
cardiomyopathy independent of vascular complications. The cardiac dysfunction was 
demonstrated in both insulin dependent and non-insulin dependent models of 
diabetes [ , , , ].
Insulin dependent models of diabetes exhibited hearts resistant to 
ischemic/reperfusion insult [ ]. A reduced recovery was 
found in response to an acid load in cardiac muscle preparations from insulin 
deficient diabetic animals [ ]. This suggested that a decrease in NHE activity 
or expression levels was present in the diabetic heart. A direct demonstration of 
a reduced exchange activity was found in cardiac sarcolemmal 
vesicles isolated from diabetic animals in comparison to control preparations 
[ ]. However, expression levels of NHE1 mRNA were unchanged in hearts from 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats [ ]. The decrease in 
exchange in the heart would be expected to lessen the influx of i, 
much as a drug that inhibits NHE, as discussed earlier in this manuscript. This, 
in turn, would result in a protection of the diabetic heart from 
ischemic/reperfusion injury.
However, whereas type 1 diabetic animals are more resistant to ischemia, insulin 
resistant Type 2 diabetic animals were conversely more sensitive to ischemic 
challenge. The decreased post-ischemic cardiac performance exhibited by hearts 
from late-stage insulin-resistant models of diabetes, may be due to greater 
endogenous stores of glycolytic substrates and the resultant excessive production 
of lactate and [ ]. This would tend to enhance the exchange of ions 
through the NHE pathway and generate augmented cardiac damage [ ]. This 
enhanced NHE activation in Type 2 diabetes agrees well with its activation during 
hyperinsulinemia [ ]. Packer [ , ] has proposed a key role of cardiac and 
vascular NHE1 as well as renal NHE3 as principal factors linking diabetes with 
the development of heart failure. Thus, it was proposed that 
neurohormonal-dependent upregulation of NHE1 and NHE3 would result in 
NHE1-dependent cardiac remodelling coupled with NHE3-dependent renal sodium 
retention, the combination accelerating the progression to heart failure [ ].
As noted above in section 7.6, sodium/glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) 
inhibitors, gliflozins, are drugs that work primarily on the kidney to aid in 
glucose homeostasis in diabetic patients. Empagliflozin has been reported to 
attenuate both sodium and calcium dysregulation in mouse ventricular myocytes 
treated with ouabain potentially via NHE1 inhibition [ ]. It is also 
important to note that empagliflozin has recently been shown to reduce oxidative 
stress in cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells and coronary artery 
endothelial cells through a mechanism involving NHE1 inhibition [ ] thus 
providing further supporting evidence for the beneficial effects of gliflozins on 
the heart through NHE1 inhibition. However, several recent studies have suggested 
that these compounds also inhibit cardiac NHE1 activity [ , , , ] and 
expression [ ]. This inhibition appears to be the mechanism for a lowering of 
cytosolic , vasodilation [ ], a decrease in lactate generation [ ], 
an attenuation of the diabetic cardiomyopathy [ ] and a reduction in infarct 
size in the post-ischemic reperfused heart [ ]. This inhibition of NHE1 by 
SGLT2 inhibitors appears to be a class action effect as empagliflozin, 
dapagliflozin and canagliflozin have been reported to inhibit NHE [ ]. It 
should be noted however that there is controversy in this area and there are 
reports that SGLT2 blockers do not directly inhibit NHE1 [ , ]. The 
different results reported may be due to species differences or due to the method 
of drug application. Indeed, in a recent report [ ] the long-term treatment of 
H9c2 cells with empagliflozin was shown to inhibit expression of the NHE1 protein 
while short term treatment did not inhibit NHE1 expression. This also raises the 
possibility that some of the effects observed are due to inhibition of protein 
expression, rather than a direct inhibitor effect on the protein.
The glifozins are not the only non-specific drug interactions that may have 
their biological action via a primary effect on the NHE. NHE3 in the 
kidney is affected by incretin-based agents, antagonists of the renin-angiotensin 
system, insulin and insulin sensitizers, statins and spironolactone [ ].

## 9. The Effects of NHE1 Inhibitors in Clinical Settings
The robust experimental data demonstrating substantive cardioprotective 
properties of NHE1 inhibitors, unmatched by other cardioprotective strategies, 
rapidly progressed to clinical evaluation of NHE1 inhibitors in patients with 
coronary artery disease, mostly employing cariporide as the drug of choice. The 
first such study recruited a total of 100 patients who had experienced an acute 
myocardial infarction (AMI) and who were subjected either to percutaneous 
transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) with cariporide administered at the time 
of reperfusion or with a placebo [ ]. Patients receiving cariporide exhibited 
improved left ventricular function three weeks post-PTCA and reduced plasma 
enzyme levels within 72 hours after reperfusion, the latter indicating an 
inhibition of reperfusion injury by cariporide [ ].
The results of the above study were somewhat surprising in view of the small 
number of patients recruited but also because experimental studies have 
demonstrated that optimal protection by NHE1 inhibitors occurs when the drug is 
also present during the ischemic period before the onset of reperfusion. 
Clinically, this can be achieved under controlled I/R conditions such as in 
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG, discussed below). Indeed, a Phase II 
clinical study named “Evaluation of the Safety and Cardioprotective Effects of 
Eniporide in AMI” (ESCAMI) study was conducted to investigate the hypothesis that 
eniporide would reduce injury given as an adjunct to reperfusion performed either 
by thrombolysis or PTCA [ ]. This was a phase 2 international multicenter 
randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, dose-finding trial which was 
carried out in two stages: in Stage 1 (433 patients), eniporide was administered 
at 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg or 200 mg whereas in Stage 2 (978 patients), based on 
the results of Stage 1 eniporide was further studied at doses of 100 mg or 150 
mg. For both stages, eniporide or placebo was administered over a 10-minute 
infusion period. Specifically, in patients subjected to thrombolytic therapy, 
infusion was completed at least 15 minutes after starting thrombolytic treatment, 
whereas in angioplasty, the patient’s infusion was completed at least 10 minutes 
before the start of PTCA. The results of the Stage 1 study were encouraging in 
that there were significant reductions in infarct size, the primary efficacy end 
point of the study, of 25.7% and 41.7%, were found with 100 mg and 150 mg 
eniporide, respectively. This effect was more evident in the PTCA treated 
patients. However, no protection was observed in Stage 2 of this trial using 
these two eniporide doses. It is interesting to add that in a subgroup of over 
300 patients who were subjected to delayed reperfusion ( 4 hours after onset 
symptoms) a significant reduction in heart failure symptoms was observed in the 
150 mg eniporide group when compared with placebo (placebo 21.9%, eniporide 
11.1%).
Further evaluation of the protective effects of NHE1 inhibitors was then carried 
out in two important clinical trials. The first of these was the Guard During 
Ischemia Against Necrosis (GUARDIAN) trial which was designed to determine 
whether cariporide could reduce mortality and MI in patients at risk of 
myocardial necrosis as well as to determine the drug’s safety [ ]. GUARDIAN was 
a combined phase 2/phase 3 international multicenter, double-blind, randomized 
and dose-finding study in which the primary objective was to evaluate the 
efficacy of cariporide in reducing all-cause mortality and/or MI across the 
various entry populations 36 days after randomization. This study recruited 
11,590 patients who were either hospitalized for an acute coronary syndrome 
(unstable angina or non–Q-wave myocardial infarction) or who were subjected to 
either PTCA or CABG. Patients were randomized to receive either one of three 
cariporide doses of 20 mg, 80 mg or 120 mg or placebo which were administered 
every eight hours for two to seven days as a 60-minute infusion. Starting time 
for cariporide administration differed based on the underlying condition and as 
decided by individual investigators. Generally, cariporide was initiated as soon 
as possible after admission in patients with acute coronary syndrome and between 
15 minutes and 2 hours before PTCA or CABG. Doses of 20 and 80 mg were 
ineffective across all clinical settings. However, at day 36 CABG patients who 
were treated with 120 mg cariporide exhibited a significant 25% risk reduction 
in either death or myocardial infarction which primarily reflected a 32% risk 
reduction in nonfatal infarctions.
The GUARDIAN study, while showing no overall benefit of cariporide when assessed 
across all clinical settings, did demonstrate substantial benefit, as noted 
above, with fewer end-point events when administered at the 120 mg dose to 
high-risk CABG patients. This encouraging result was subsequently used as the 
major basis for the phase 3 Exchange inhibition to Prevent 
coronary Events in acute cardiac condition (EXPEDITION) trial to study the 
potential benefit of cariporide on death and non-fatal myocardial infarction in 
CABG patients [ ]. Thus, in this trial a total of 5761 patients were randomized 
to receive intravenous cariporide as a 180 mg 1-hour preoperative loading dose 
followed by 40 mg per hour over a 24 hour and then by 20 mg per hour over the 
subsequent 24 hours, or placebo. The primary composite endpoint of death or MI in 
the EXPEDITION study was assessed at 5 days with patients followed for up to 6 
months.
The results from the EXPEDITION trial were promising vis a vis the 
cardioprotective effects of cariporide in that the incidence of death or MI was 
reduced from 20.3% in the placebo group to 16.6% in patients treated with 
cariporide as was the incidence of MI alone (18.9% in the placebo group vs 
14.4% in cariporide-treated patients), both highly significant reductions. These 
beneficial effects were maintained at 6 months follow up. Unfortunately, the 
beneficial cardiac effects of cariporide were associated with increased mortality 
from 1.5% in the placebo group to 2.2% with cariporide. These increases were 
statistically significant at 5 days and 3 months follow up but not at 6 months 
and were caused almost exclusively by a significantly higher incidence of 
thromboembolic strokes in patients receiving cariporide [ ].

## 10. Perspectives and Future Directions 
This paper has presented an overview of NHE1 in terms of its chemistry, 
regulation and its role in cardiac pathologies, the latter pertaining primarily 
to myocardial ischemic and reperfusion injury as well as myocardial remodeling 
resulting in heart failure. Much has been learned about the role of the 
antiporter as a critical regulator of intracellular pH but of greater relevance 
to the present discussion, its potential as a target for pharmacological 
intervention for cardiac therapeutics. The robust experimental evidence 
demonstrating salutary effects of NHE1 specific inhibitors has led to a rapid 
evaluation of these agents in the clinical setting particularly with respect to 
the assessment of cariporide as a cardioprotective agent in patients subjected to 
reperfusion protocols. Needless to say, the overall results seen in clinical 
trials with cariporide, as well as with eniporide, have been disappointing as 
evidenced by lack of efficacy and unexpected side effects as seen in the 
EXPEDITION study (even though a cardioprotective influence was demonstrated). A 
thorough evaluation of these results has previously been presented [ ] and 
will, therefore, be discussed briefly here.
The results of the initial small study [ ] notwithstanding, the failure to 
demonstrate efficacy in either the ESCAMI study or in either the thrombolysis or 
PTCA arms in the GUARDIAN trial, is surprising as animal data clearly 
demonstrated optimal protective efficacy of NHE1 inhibitors when the drug is 
present during the ischemic period, as noted in Sections 6.2 and 6.3. Indeed, 
when CABG patients were treated prior to surgery with the highest cariporide dose 
(120 mg group) in the GUARDIAN study, significant cardioprotection was observed 
[ ]. Thus, expectations were high for favorable results in EXPEDITION as only 
CABG patients were recruited to this study with one standard cariporide dosing 
regimen. In fact, a significant cardioprotection was seen in EXPEDITION but the 
results were associated with a significantly increased incidence of ischemic 
strokes, thus resulting in an early cessation of the trial. The reasons for the 
increased incidence of strokes in cariporide-treated patients are not known with 
certainty. Importantly, we do not know for example whether this reflects a 
property of NHE1 inhibitors in general or cariporide specifically. The former is 
unlikely as NHE1 inhibitors have been extensively shown to exert cerebral 
protective effects and have been proposed as a potential treatment for strokes 
[ ]. In addition, inhibitors of platelet NHE1 inhibit platelet aggregation 
[ ].
There is a strong possibility that the increased incidence of strokes seen in 
EXPEDITION reflected the substantially different dosing regimen as well as total 
dose of cariporide administered when compared to that administered in the 120 mg 
CABG group in the GUARDIAN study. Thus, the total cariporide administered to 
patients in EXPEDITION was 1620 mg over a 48-hour period compared to 720 mg 
during the same time period in the GUARDIAN study. It is therefore possible, or 
even likely, that the increased incidence of strokes seen in cariporide-treated 
patients in EXPEDITION reflected an unnecessary overdosing with cariporide, 
particularly when compared with the highest dose CABG group in the GUARDIAN study 
which resulted in cardioprotection but no increase in the incidence of strokes 
[ ]. As the treatment regimen in the highest cariporide dose CABG group in 
GUARDIAN resulted in cardioprotection, it is difficult to rationalize the more 
than two-fold increase in cariporide dosing in EXPEDITION during the pre-surgery 
48-hour period. As outlined by the late Dr Gerald Buckberg, a renowned cardiac 
surgeon who was a participating investigator and a member of the EXPEDITION 
Steering Committee, the sponsoring company of the trial altered the steering 
committee’s recommendations regarding dosing by extending drug delivery duration 
and adding a high dose delivery. “They did this despite our emphasizing that 
these patients did not need elevated doses” [ ].
The increased incidence of cerebrovascular events seen in EXPEDITION had a 
profoundly negative effect on the clinical development of NHE1 inhibitors as 
evidenced by a total cessation of all NHE1 inhibitor-related research and 
development by the pharmaceutical industry. Whether this action was justified is 
difficult to address as there is a complete paucity of data in the literature 
addressing the question of a possible pro-thrombotic effect of cariporide 
specifically or NHE1-specific inhibitors in general. For example, was the 
thrombotic effect of cariporide due to high dosing and can this be confirmed in 
the laboratory setting? Are there any insights into potential mechanisms for the 
pro-thrombotic effect of cariporide and does this involve NHE1 inhibition or 
non-specific effects of cariporide? This question would be particularly important 
to address since NHE1 activity likely contributes to platelet aggregation with an 
attenuation of the latter by NHE1 inhibitors, as already noted above. Do other 
NHE1-specific inhibitors share this pro-thrombotic effect particularly at high 
doses? Does the method of administration influence the deleterious effect of 
cariporide? In this regard, cariporide and other NHE1 inhibitors would obviously 
be most effective as cardioprotective agents in CABG patients, based on existing 
clinical data with cariporide. Would an oral preparation be effective in 
producing cardioprotection and would this minimize any possible prothrombotic 
risk compared to drug infusion? In view of the immense potential of NHE1 
inhibitors for the treatment of heart disease as outlined in this review, the 
results of the EXPEDITION study should likely not have precluded the development 
of newer NHE1-specific inhibitors without addressing the issues just raised. The 
potential for NHE1 inhibitors to benefit patients with cardiovascular disorders 
warrants further research and possible clinical development of these agents. As 
stated by the EXPEDITION study authors “the use of NHE inhibitors could lead to 
significant improvement in medium- and long-term survival among patients 
undergoing heart surgery as well as those at risk of MI at any time” [ ]. This 
potential benefit should not go unexplored.
With the recent elucidation of the 3D structure of NHE1 [ ] and the development 
of novel inhibitors towards NHE1, there are also new opportunities. Understanding 
the precise location of the inhibitor binding pocket and its coordination may 
allow medicinal chemists to design novel inhibitors with even higher specificity 
and potency towards NHE1. Additionally, some such novel NHE1 inhibitors have 
recently been developed [ , , , ] though they have not been tested in a 
cardiovascular disease setting. The advantage of novel inhibitors that are 
structurally different from cariporide is that they may avoid the stigma of the 
previous problems and it may be easier to obtain regulatory approval for them. 
There has also been little attention to altering NHE1 regulation in the disease 
state, which is another approach that has shown some promise [ , , ], but 
has not been further developed in the clinic.

## 11. Conclusions
In summary, we propose that NHE-specific inhibition remains a worthwhile 
endeavour in the development of effective therapeutics for the treatment of heart 
disease. The scientific evidence for an effective approach to mitigating damage 
to the myocardium remains very strong as is the concept of NHE1 inhibition for 
the treatment of heart failure. Despite concerns with earlier clinical trials, 
the rationale and approach remain sound and new compounds for proposed treatment 
along with a more careful application based on experimental data could lead to 
useful clinical treatments for this major health problem.

## Acknowledgment
We thank B. Buckley, University of Wollongong, for his assistance drawing the 
structures of amiloride, cariporide and HMA. We thank the peer reviewers for 
their opinions and suggestions.

## Footnotes
Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Author Contributions
LF, GP and MK designed the manuscript. All authors contributed to editorial 
changes in the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

## Funding
Work cited from the authors’ laboratory was funded by past Canadian Institutes 
of Health Research Operating Grants (MK, LF #MOP 97816) or a Foundation Grant 
(GNP) from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest. Morris Karmazyn and Grant N. Pierce 
are serving as the Guest editors of this journal. Grant N. Pierce is 
serving as one of the Editorial Board members of this journal. We declare that 
Morris Karmazyn and Grant N. Pierce had no involvement in the peer review of this 
article and have no access to information regarding its peer review. Full 
responsibility for the editorial process for this article was delegated to Fabian 
Sanchis-Gomar.

## References