pmcCurr Res ToxicolCurr Res Toxicol4075currestoxCurrent Research in Toxicology2666-027XElsevierPMC11910676PMC11910676.111910676119106764009246110.1016/j.crtox.2025.100220S2666-027X(25)00006-41002201Research PaperEvaluation of the endocrine disrupting potential of Di-isononyl phthalate
LeaI.A.ilea@toxstrategies.com BuergerA.N. FeifarekD. MihalchikA. HeintzM.M. HawsL.C. NyambegoH. GoyakK. PalermoC. BorghoffS.J. aToxStrategies LLC, 31 College Place Suite B118, Asheville, NC 28801, USAbExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences, Inc., Health and Environmental Sciences Division, Annandale, NJ, USA⁎Corresponding author. ilea@toxstrategies.com2025012202584791831002202102024131220242312025010220251603202522062025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Corrigendum to “Evaluation of the Endocrine Disrupting Potential of Di-isononyl Phthalate” [Curr. Res. Toxicol. 8 (2025) 100220]
82342025100233Current Research in Toxicology10.1016/j.crtox.2025.100233PMC1217254340529321

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Assessment of endocrine disrupting properties of di-isononyl phthalate (DINP)
•Assessment used EFSA/ECHA Guidance for identification of endocrine disruptors.
•DINP does not show endocrine disruptor activity in the estrogen pathway.
•DINP does not show thyroid mediated adverse effects in vivo.
•DINP unlikely to mediate androgen or steroidogenesis endocrine effects.

Low molecular weight ortho-phthalate compounds have been implicated in disruption of androgen pathways when exposure occurs during the masculinization programming window. Di-isononyl phthalate (DINP) is a high molecular weight phthalate and a high production volume chemical. To understand the potential for DINP and its metabolites to disrupt endocrine pathways, a weight of evidence assessment was conducted according to the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA)/ European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) Endocrine Disruptor Guidance (2018). Toxicological data related to estrogen (E), androgen (A), thyroid (T), or steroidogenesis (S) pathways was assessed. Literature searches returned 110 articles from which data were extracted and assessed in conjunction with 105 high-throughput assays. An in-silico assessment of the EATS activity for DINP metabolites also was conducted. Based on the available evidence, DINP did not elicit thyroid- or estrogen-related apical outcomes in vivo. There were no studies evaluating thyroid hormone levels in vivo which, according to the ECHA/EFSA guidance, constitutes a data gap and prevents a conclusion being drawn on the T-pathway. The E, A, and S-pathways were sufficiently assessed to conclude on the endocrine disrupting potential of DINP. Based on the lack of apical outcomes, DINP did not disrupt the E-pathway. For the A and S-pathways, there was limited evidence to support adverse apical outcomes, so a mode of action assessment using a structured adverse outcome pathway (AOP) framework was performed. No biologically plausible link could be established between the key events in the hypothesized AOP that lead to adverse outcomes. Further, no dose or temporal concordance for A- and S-mediated findings were identified. Therefore, DINP does not meet the ECHA/EFSA criteria to be considered an endocrine disruptor.

## Keywords
Di-isononyl phthalateDINPEndocrine disruptionHazard identificationWeight of evidenceAndrogenEstrogenThyroidSteroidogenesispmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Abbreviations
DINPdi-isononyl phthalate
WoEweight of evidence (WoE)
ECHAEuropean Chemicals Agency (ECHA)
EFSAEuropean Food Safety Authority
Eestrogen
Aandrogen
Tthyroid
Ssteroidogenesis
AOPadverse outcome pathway
EDendocrine disruptor
CLPClassification, Labelling and Packaging
OECDOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
EDCendocrine disrupting chemicals
MPWmasculinization programming window
MoAmode of action
DEHPdiethyl hexyl phthalate
DBPdibutyl phthalate
CEPFood Contact Materials, Enzymes and Processing Aids
NOAELno observed adverse effect level
NOELno observed effect level
MNGsmultinucleated germ cells
MiNPmono-isononyl phthalate
MOiNPmono-oxoisononyl phthalate
MCiOPmono-carboxyisooctyl phthalate
MHiNPmono-hydroxyisononyl phthalate
EPAUS Environmental Protection Agency
HEROHealth and Environmental Research Online
HThigh throughput
ToxCastToxicity Forecaster
TiABtitle and abstract
PECOPopulation, Exposure, Comparator and Outcome
MIEmolecular initiating event
KEkey events
QCquality control
RoBrisk of bias
OHATOffice of Health Assessment and Translation
AGDanogenital distance
ERestrogen receptor
ARandrogen receptor
NISsodium iodide symporter
TPOthyroperoxidase
TRthyroid hormone receptor
SMILESsimplified molecular-input-line-entry system
QSARquantitative structure-activity relationships
PPARperoxisome proliferator activated receptor
COUP-TFIIchicken ovalbumin upstream promotor transcription factor 2
EOGRTSExtended One-Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study
TGtest guideline
LHluteinizing hormone
FSHfollicle-stimulating hormone
CERAPPCollaborative Estrogen Receptor Activity Prediction Project
TSHRthyroid-stimulating hormone receptor
TRHRthyrotropin releasing hormone receptor
PXRpregnane X receptor
LABClevator ani/bulbocavernosus muscle
TPtestosterone propionate
T4thyroxine
T3triiodothyronine
TSHthyroid stimulating hormone
CARconstitutive androstane receptor
LO(A)ELlowest observed (adverse) effect level
(F)LC(fetal) Leydig cell
AOadverse outcome
StARsteroidogenic acute regulatory protein
Cmaxmaximum concentration
AUCinfarea under the curve
MEHPmono (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
MBPmonobutyl phthalate
WHOWorld Health Organization
IPCSInternational Programme on Chemical Safety

## Introduction
In 2023 the European Commission amended the Classification, Labelling and Packaging (CLP) Regulation ((EC) No 1272/2008) to include endocrine disruption as a new hazard class. An endocrine disruptor (ED) is an exogenous substance or mixture that alters function of the endocrine system and consequently causes adverse health effects in an intact organism, its progeny, or subpopulations (WHO/IPCS, 2002). The CLP regulation requires all manufacturers, importers or downstream users of substances or mixtures to classify, label and package hazardous chemicals appropriately before placing them on the market. The European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) is currently preparing an update of the Guidance on Application of the CLP criteria to chemicals including guidance on the new hazard classes. Until then, the Agency has directed reliance on the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)/ ECHA Guidance for biocidal products and plant protection products ( ).
In 1998, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) began identifying test guidelines for the screening and testing of endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs). A conceptual framework for testing and assessment of chemicals as EDs is described in the Revised OECD Guidance Document 150 (OECD, 2018). This framework provides a way to organize data to help determine whether a chemical is acting as an ED. Guidance developed by the EFSA and the ECHA relies heavily on the OECD conceptual framework in the development of additional guidance on how to gather, consider, and analyze data to comply with obligations under the Biocidal Products Regulation or the Plant Protection Products Regulation to identify EDs (ECHA/EFSA, 2018). The framework can also be used to assess endocrine disruption in non-pesticides or biocides.
Phthalates are a group of synthetic compounds that are used in many industrial and consumer products to make plastics more flexible and durable. They are dialkyl or aryl/alkyl diesters of phthalic acid with varying length linear or branched chains. As a chemical class, ortho-phthalates have been widely studied as potential male reproductive toxicants. Studies have shown that for some low molecular weight ortho-phthalates, exposure of rats during the prenatal period, particularly during the masculinization programming window (MPW), results in a group of effects referred to as rat phthalate syndrome. This syndrome has been well studied with phthalates such as diethyl hexyl phthalate (DEHP) or dibutyl phthalate (DBP) and is characterized by effects such as cryptorchidism, hypospadias, impaired spermatogenesis/infertility, and focal testicular dysgenesis (variably characterized as focal morphological abnormalities of the testis and seminiferous tubules including change such as partially formed testicular cords, Leydig cell hyperplasia and aggregation, or ectopic Sertoli cells) ( , , ). Effects are thought to be linked to the length of the carbon chain backbone, with C3-C6 chains associated with reproductive toxicity ( ).
Di-isononyl phthalate (DINP) is a complex mixture of diesters available as two types: 1,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid esterified with branched alcohols consisting of C8-C10 (C9 rich) alkyl side chains (primarily C7 carbon backbone) or esterified with isononyl alcohols. In 2018, the ECHA Risk Assessment Committee performed an evaluation of the reproductive and developmental toxicity database for DINP and concluded DINP does not induce effects warranting classification according to the CLP Regulation ( ). In 2019, the EFSA Food Contact Materials, Enzymes and Processing Aids (CEP) Panel reviewed the toxicological data for DINP and established a no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) of 15 mg DINP/kg-bw/day for increased incidence of spongiosis hepatis in liver, increased liver enzyme levels, and increased absolute and relative liver and kidney weights from a study in Fisher 344 rats ( , ). Regarding reproductive and developmental effects, the EFSA Panel identified a no-observed-effect level (NOEL) of 50 mg DINP/kg-bw/day based on decreased fetal testosterone production and histopathological changes in testis (i.e., multinucleated germ cells, MNGs) ( , ). They concluded DINP has effects on both the reproductive system and the liver, with the liver as the more sensitive target organ (EFSA, 2019).
In view of the addition of endocrine disruption to the CLP regulation, a comprehensive review of the toxicological data for the endocrine effects of DINP exposure occurring through perturbation of the E, A, T, or S-pathways was performed. The stepwise methodological approach, described in the ECHA/EFSA ED guidance document (2018), was applied, and subsequently a mode of action (MoA) assessment performed.

## Methods
The ED potential of DINP (CASRN 28553–12-0, CASRN 68515–48-0) was assessed by applying the ECHA/EFSA guidance (2018) for identification of effects on EATS-pathways using the workflow provided in (A – ED Assessment Strategy).

## Data identification
Per ECHA/EFSA guidance (2018), an assessment of endocrine disrupting properties should be based on all available relevant scientific data to include both data generated in accordance with internationally accepted study protocols and other scientific data applying systematic review methodology. Therefore, structured searches of primary literature were performed for DINP (February 29, 2024) and DINP metabolites: mono-isononyl-phthalate (MiNP), mono-oxoisononyl phthalate (MOiNP), mono-carboxyisooctyl phthalate (MCiOP), mono-hydroxyisononyl phthalate (MHiNP) (February 8, 2024). Searches were not date limited and were conducted in PubMed, Embase, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Health and Environmental Research Online (HERO) literature databases using the search syntax provided in (B – Literature Search Syntax). In addition, citation mining and hand searching of authoritative assessments including EPA ( ), Australia's National Industrial Chemicals Notification and Assessment Scheme ( ), ECHA ( ), California Environmental Protection Agency's Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment ( ), EFSA ( ), and Health Canada ( ) were performed (March 2024) to identify unpublished (industry) toxicology study reports describing DINP exposures. These unpublished reports were included in the assessment only when cited in publicly available sources. Information from high-throughput (HT) assays available from the EPA Toxicity Forecaster (ToxCast) program ( ) was queried for DINP, MiNP, and secondary metabolites MOiNP, MCiOP, and MHiNP ( ). Assay data, including activity calls, cytotoxic concentrations, and assay information, were downloaded from the EPA’s Tox21/ToxCast downloadable data and reviewed for activity in a battery of assays relevant to each of the EATS-pathways. Concentration-response curves and data quality flags for all active assays were evaluated as part of this assessment.
Relevant studies were identified by title and abstract (TiAb) screening. If study relevance could not be determined at the TiAb level, full text was examined. Inclusion/exclusion criteria were defined by Population (P), Exposure (E), Comparator (C) and Outcome (O) (PECO) as follows: P: mammalian or non-mammalian species at any life stage; E: DINP or DINP metabolites; C: humans exposed to the lowest level of DINP identified in the study or experimental animal receiving vehicle-only; O: any EATS-pathway endpoints for in vivo, in vitro, in silico, or epidemiological studies. Studies considered eligible were moved forward to data extraction.
Following the initial assessment of data, targeted literature searches were performed in the PubMed literature database for molecular initiating events (MIEs) and key events (KEs) relevant to the MoA assessment (April 9, 2024; see B – Literature Search Syntax). The identified studies were reviewed for relevance to the MoA assessment by TiAb screening.

## Data extraction
Data were extracted from in vivo toxicology studies (using various study designs), epidemiological studies, in vitro assays in the peer reviewed literature, and HT assays that mapped to the E, A, T, or S-pathways. All assays/studies were used to identify apical effects and if these effects occurred through a mechanism that involved perturbation of an endocrine pathway. Data associated with endocrine-related and general toxicity endpoints were reviewed and extracted from identified studies into the Excel template provided as E of the ECHA/EFSA guidance document (https://efsa.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.2903/j.efsa.2018.5311). Study metadata (e.g., study principle, test substance purity and data for each endpoint) were captured regardless of the direction or level of the reported change. When not provided by study authors, the approximate relationship between parts per million (ppm) in the diet and dosage in the animals (mg/kg-bw/day) was based on average food consumption in young and old rats with 1 ppm DINP in the diet approximately equivalent to 0.075 mg/kg-bw/day ( , ). Quality control (QC) review for each study was performed by a second reviewer to ensure the accuracy of the data extraction. Data relevant to the MoA assessment only were reviewed and summarized independent of the ECHA/EFSA Excel template.

## Study quality assessments
For each in vivo and in vitro study, a study reliability assessment was made for all studies by one reviewer. Evaluations were performed based on the Klimisch scoring approach. This approach assigns scores of reliable without restriction (1), reliable with restriction (2), not reliable (3), and not assignable (4) (Klimisch et al., 1997). If studies were scored as either 1 or 2, they were considered reliable and incorporated into the evaluation. If they were scored as a 3 (not reliable) or 4 (not assignable), they were not incorporated in the evaluation. As such, only studies that were considered reliable with/or without restriction were used in the line of evidence assessments. Excluded studies and reasons for exclusion are provided in (C – Reason for Exclusion).
Critical appraisal was performed by risk of bias (RoB) assessment on all studies evaluated as part of the MoA assessment. RoB assessments were performed by two scientists with expertise in toxicology, reproductive toxicity, experimental animal studies, and/or in vitro studies. The scientists performing RoB assessments were not involved with the EATS data extraction (described in Section 2.2) or evaluation (described in Section 2.4 below). RoB was evaluated for endpoints within studies relevant to the MoA assessment using the Office of Health Assessment and Translation (OHAT) RoB tool (NTP-OHAT, 2019). Endpoints relevant to the MoA assessment were assigned one of the following ratings: 1) definitely low RoB, 2) probably low RoB, 3) probably high RoB or not reported, and 4) definitely high RoB. The lower the RoB, the higher the methodological quality of the study endpoint ( ). Each critical appraisal underwent QC to ensure a consistent approach was taken across all studies and endpoints.

## Evaluation and assessment of lines of evidence
In accordance with the ECHA/EFSA guidance document, lines of evidence were assembled using the data extracted from the literature ( ). Lines of evidence describe groups of endpoints that together can be used to assess potential endocrine activity and endocrine mediated apical and potentially adverse effects ( ). ‘Adversity’ and ‘adverse’ are used throughout the work presented herein as defined by ECHA/EFSA as a “change in the morphology, physiology, growth, development, reproduction or life span of an organism, system or (sub)population that results in an impairment of functional capacity, an impairment of the capacity to compensate for additional stress or an increase in susceptibility to other influences” ( ).
Endocrine activity was described by two lines of evidence including 1) in vitro mechanistic, and 2) in vivo mechanistic data. Lines of evidence that identify apical effects were extracted from in vivo studies. Adverse effects associated with disruption in EATS-pathways were identified in the ECHA/EFSA template as: 1) EATS-mediated, and 2) EATS-sensitive endpoints; along with generalized effects as associated with systemic toxicity endpoints. Examples of EATS-mediated endpoints include reproductive organ weight and histopathology, as well as developmental markers such as anogenital distance (AGD) and vaginal opening ( ). EATS-sensitive endpoints are considered as potentially sensitive to, but not diagnostic of, EATS-pathways (e.g., reproductive outcomes such as gestation length, litter size, and viability). Systemic toxicity data include endpoints such as body weight changes, as well as liver and kidney weight and histopathology, to support and contextualize the distinction between a direct effect of the chemical causing general toxicity versus a perturbation in any of the EATS-pathways. Epidemiological and in silico data were assessed as a line of supportive evidence for signals of effects for EATS-mediated endpoints associated with exposure to DINP ( ).
Each line of evidence was evaluated for each of the EATS-pathways by applying a WoE assessment. Where data were available, if none of the EATS mediated endpoints suggested an adverse outcome occurred via E-, A-, T-, or S-pathways, DINP was considered to have no evidence of an endocrine effect. Each line of evidence was categorized based on available data as having ‘high’, ‘medium’, or ‘low’ confidence in the findings, based on the categories described by which include: 1) High – outcomes (positive or negative) observed in one or more studies of high reliability (performed according to standardized test guidelines) with no conflicting results; 2) Medium – outcomes (positive or negative) observed in one or more studies or assays of partial reliability (non-guideline), with no conflicting results; effects observed in one or more studies of high or partial reliability with conflicting results (e.g., no change versus decreased testosterone levels) that could be explained by differences in study design; Low – outcomes (positive or negative) were observed in one or more studies of high or partial reliability with conflicting results that could not be explained by differences in study design. Systemic toxicity was assessed in parallel with the EATS endpoints and used for study interpretation but was not used to diminish the confidence in the observed effects.
Based on ECHA/EFSA guidance, an assessment was performed of whether the available DINP information was sufficient to support a conclusion on EATS-mediated adversity in humans and mammals ( ). To perform this assessment, the DINP dataset was compared to the available test guidelines for mammals described in Table 14 of the ECHA/EFSA Guidance ( ). For assessment of EAS-mediated adversity, the endpoints foreseen to be investigated in an extended one-generation reproductive toxicity study (OECD TG 443) or a two-generation reproductive toxicity study (OECD TG 416) were compared to the endpoints measured in the available DINP studies. For T-mediated adversity, the thyroid endpoints foreseen to be investigated in the following guidelines studies were compared to those measured in the DINP studies: OECD TGs 407, 408, 416, 443 and 451–3. DINP guideline and non-guideline studies were used to determine data sufficiency. Following this analysis, and according to the ECHA/EFSA guidance, if ‘EATS-mediated’ adversity was not sufficiently investigated and no ‘EATS-mediated’ adversity was observed, EATS-related endocrine activity was assessed. This was performed by determining whether the following information was available for DINP: ToxCast Estrogen Receptor (ER) Bioactivity Model output or uterotrophic bioassay (E), Hershberger bioassay (A), and H295R steroidogenesis assay and the ‘aromatase assay (human recombinant)’ (S). Owing to the lack of T in vitro mechanistic assays, endocrine activity for the T-pathway was considered sufficiently investigated if the T endpoints in the in vivo assays described above were investigated. The impact of missing data or a lack of evidence were considered when assessing the confidence in the findings. Missing data can either reduce the level of confidence in the findings or, when the data gap is filled by other lines of evidence, have no effect on the overall level of confidence.

## Mode of action assessment
Based on the guidance provided by ECHA/EFSA ( ), a MoA assessment establishes the biological plausibility of a link between endocrine activity and endocrine related adverse effects using a WoE approach. Because Adverse Outcome Pathways (AOPs) provide a structured framework that can be used to integrate evidence to support MIEs and KEs ( ), a hypothesized AOP that describes a phthalate antiandrogenic Leydig cell MoA was used as the framework for a MoA assessment of A- and S-pathways, along with conducting an integration of dose and temporal concordance of any observed effects ( ).

## Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) assessment of DINP and metabolites
DINP metabolites, MiNP, MOiNP, MCiOP, and MHiNP, were evaluated by means of the full endocrine activity suite within Leadscope Model Applier (v2022.0.2–3). The suite includes the following endpoints, all of which were considered to address potential for endocrine disruption activity:•Androgen receptor (AR) binding
•AR transactivation antagonist
•Aromatase inhibition
•ER bioactivity
•Sodium iodide symporter (NIS) inhibition
•Thyroperoxidase (TPO) inhibition
•Thyroid hormone receptor (TR) binding and transactivation

Chemical structures of DINP metabolites were searched in the EPA CompTox Chemicals Dashboard (v 2.2.1) to identify simplified molecular-input-line-entry system (SMILES) codes associated with each compound of interest. These SMILES codes and those representing the product in commerce were then input into the Leadscope interface for QSAR assessment. Descriptions of models used are provided in (D – QSAR Model Predictions).

## Results

## Evidence identification and extraction
The literature searches for DINP and DINP metabolites identified 4248 articles (de-duplicated) from PubMed, Embase, and EPA HERO and six additional primary peer reviewed articles from review of authoritative sources ( ). A total of 102 primary peer reviewed publications met the inclusion criteria and were therefore considered relevant and included in the evaluation. Fourteen unpublished (industry) toxicology study reports containing endocrine endpoints relevant to the EATS assessment were also identified for DINP; therefore, a total of 116 studies were reviewed at full text ( ). The results for both formulations of DINP (CASRN 28553-12-0 and CASRN 68515-48-0) were combined in this analysis based on the findings of a study testing the effects of the two formations of DINP (CASRN 28553-12-0 and 68515-48-0) on fetal rat testosterone production and testicular gene expression following in utero exposure and showing statistically indistinguishable results ( ). In addition, HT assays that mapped to EATS endpoints were identified in the EPA ToxCast database for both formulations of DINP. Data for a total of 99 Tox21/ToxCast HT assays were downloaded and evaluated; no HT data were available for DINP metabolites. 
All studies that met the inclusion criteria were evaluated. When study relevance was confirmed and study reliability considered, six studies were scored as ‘not reliable’ and were removed from the endocrine WoE assessment leaving 110 articles in the initial data extraction and assessment ( ). Studies excluded based on either relevance and/or reliability of data were excluded for reasons such as no dose levels were provided or insufficient information available in the study report to have confidence in its reliability. After the preliminary data evaluation, a MoA assessment was conducted based on a hypothesized AOP relevant to phthalate toxicity using 19 articles from the preliminary evaluation and 4 articles identified in targeted literature searches for MIEs for this hypothesized AOP (PPAR binding/ antagonism, arachidonic acid release, and chicken ovalbumin upstream promotor (COUP)- transcription factor 2 (TFII) expression).
The OECD Conceptual Framework lists OECD test guidelines and standardized test methods that can be used to assess chemicals for ED potential and organizes these test methods across different levels of biological organization (OECD, 2018). OECD guideline, as well as non-guideline or guideline-like studies that are published in the peer reviewed literature are integrated into the framework ( ) to provide an assessment of the sufficiency of the data available and to determine if additional studies may be required. 
The DINP evidence base included 26 epidemiology studies and 10 in silico models at Level 1; 99 HT assays that mapped to EATS-pathways and 26 in vitro assays considered Level 2 methods; four mechanistic studies at Level 3; 45 in vivo repeat administration studies at Level 4; and one study at Level 5 ( ). Nine of the studies were conducted according to OECD test guidelines, but given the age of some of the studies and as the guidelines are periodically updated, it was not assumed that these studies contained sufficient data to meet the current guideline standards. OECD states that the list of test methods provided in the conceptual framework is not exhaustive and assays other than those described in the framework can be used to assess endocrine disruption. All studies (those conducted according to standard test guidelines and those that were not) were evaluated, and data extracted into the ECHA/EFSA Excel template. 
After reliability assessment, and as described in the ECHA/EFSA guidance (2018), the studies conducted using in vitro and in vivo mechanistic methods (Levels 2 and 3, respectively) and the endpoints measured using these test methods were evaluated to provide information on E, A, T, or S endocrine pathway activity. In addition, studies conducted using in vivo test methods providing data on effects on endocrine-relevant endpoints (Levels 4 and 5) and the endpoints measured by these studies were evaluated to support the identification of effects associated with endocrine pathway perturbations. The evidence base for endocrine activity included 20 unique endpoints identified as providing in vitro mechanistic data and 15 unique endpoints describing in vivo mechanistic data. The evidence base for endpoints identified as endocrine-related included 32 unique EATS-mediated endpoints and 24 unique endpoints classified as sensitive to, but not diagnostic of perturbations in EATS-pathways. The available data and lines of evidence are summarized in .

## Identification of data and integration of lines of evidence
Each line of evidence was organized by E-, A-, T-, or S-pathway ( E – Lines of Evidence). Where available, general adversity or systemic toxicity data were considered in conjunction with the EATS-mediated endpoints ( ). In silico and epidemiological data were considered as a supportive line of evidence only ( ).

## Analysis of evidence: estrogen pathway
In the assessment of DINP endocrine activity mediated by E, there was evidence from two different sources: in vitro assays and in vivo mechanistic assays ( ). The in vitro assays (ToxCast HT and peer reviewed literature) were not metabolically competent and lacked the capability to activate the DINP diester to the monoester forms. The evidence available for DINP metabolites (MiNP, MOiNP, MCiOP, and MHiNP) came from in silico predictions for ER binding and agonist and antagonist activity and a single in vitro study of MiNP, MOiNP, and MHiNP that showed no evidence of activity (agonist or antagonist effects) at 100 μM using human ERα or ERβ reporter gene constructs ( ). A summary of the evaluated evidence for DINP E-mediated effects is provided in ; detailed information for each study is provided in (F – All EATS Data) and in Supplemental DINP Evidence Analysis. 
Overall, the WoE ( ) showed DINP only caused effects at high dose levels that were also associated with general toxicity. This finding was supported by studies that showed a lack of association between estradiol, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH) levels, age at puberty, and DINP metabolite concentrations in epidemiology studies, negative predictions in for DINP metabolites in in silico models, as well as the overall lack of activity in in vitro assays for ER antagonist/antagonism activity and in vivo mechanistic studies (Levels 1, 2, and 3 methods) that showed DINP did not elicit activity in the estrogen pathway. Detailed information for each study is provided in (F – All EATS Data) and in Supplemental DINP Evidence Analysis.

## Analysis of evidence: thyroid pathway
In the assessment of endocrine activity mediated by T, the evidence for DINP comes from two different sources: in vitro data and in vitro mechanistic assays ( ). The in vitro assays (ToxCast HT and peer reviewed literature) were not metabolically competent and lacked the capability to activate the DINP diester to the monoester forms. The evidence available for DINP metabolites (MiNP, MOiNP, MCiOP, and MHiNP) came from in silico predictions for NIS and TPO inhibition as well as TR binding and activation ( ). In vitro mechanistic data for the T-pathway showed DINP had no effect on TR, thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR), or thyrotropin releasing hormone receptor (TRHR) in 16 out of 16 assays (Tox21/ToxCast HT assay data). In HT assays of liver nuclear receptors relevant to thyroid pathways (conjugation and elimination of the thyroid hormone (TH)) ( ), DINP had no effect in constitutive androstane receptor [CAR] binding assays. In two (out of five) assays of the pregnane X receptor [PXR], DINP was active with an AC50 between 1.63 and 54.33 μM, suggesting that DINP may induce drug metabolism enzymes. In vitro mechanistic data for the T-pathway showed increased iodide uptake in a single in vitro assay conducted in FRTL-5 thyroid follicular cells at 10-3 M DINP (for 72 h). Thyroid-mediated adversity was assessed in a total of 16 studies and no changes in thyroid weight or histopathology were observed ( ). A summary of the evaluated evidence for DINP mediated effects on the T-pathway are provided in . Detailed information for each study is provided in (F – All EATS Data) and in Supplemental DINP Evidence Analysis. 
Overall, DINP did not produce T-mediated apical effects even at high dose levels that were also associated with general toxicity. This finding was supported by epidemiology studies that showed a lack of an association in hormone changes and concentration of DINP as well as in silico models that showed an overall lack of NIS and TPO inhibition and TR binding. One in vitro mechanistic study showed DINP had the potential to change iodide uptake by NIS.

## Analysis of evidence: steroidogenesis pathway
In the assessment of endocrine activity mediated by S, the evidence for DINP came from two sources: in vitro and in vivo mechanistic assays ( ). The in vitro assays (ToxCast HT and peer reviewed literature) were not metabolically competent and lacked the capability to activate the DINP diester to the monoester forms. The evidence available for DINP metabolites (MiNP, MOiNP, MCiOP, and MHiNP) came from supporting in silico predictions for aromatase inhibition activity ( ). No in vitro studies of DINP metabolites were available. In vitro mechanistic data for the S-pathway showed DINP had no effect in an HT aromatase assay ( ). No DINP related effects were observed in the HT H295R steroidogenesis assay in which 11 steroid hormones were evaluated (17α-hydroxypregnenolone, progesterone, 17α-hydroxyprogesterone, 11-deoxycorticosterone, androstenedione, deoxycortisol, cortisol, corticosterone, testosterone, estrone, and estradiol). In other in vitro (peer reviewed literature) H295R assays, a statistically significant increase in estradiol level was detected at all concentrations of DINP (0.03–30 μM) ( ) and a weak increase in estradiol levels that Lee and colleagues interpreted to be of low relevance ( ). Overall, in vivo mechanistic studies supported the lack of effects of DINP on serum estradiol levels. A single study showed a decrease in serum estradiol at 20 and 200 mg/kg-bw/day in adult mice administered 0, 2, 20, and 200 mg/kg-bw/day for 14 days ( ) ( ). No assessment of systemic toxicity was performed in this study but in other mouse studies conducted using similar doses, toxicity was not observed ( ). In two other studies in which adult mice were administered up to 200 mg/kg-bw/day DINP for 10–14 days, there were no changes in serum estradiol levels ( , ). Similarly in adult marmosets, no change in serum estradiol was observed following administration of 100, 500, or 2,500 mg/kg-bw/day DINP for 13 weeks ( ). Further, no dose-related changes in serum estradiol were observed in two studies of rats and mice exposed in utero to DINP up to 20,000 ppm (∼1,500 mg/kg-bw/day) ( , ) ( ). 
DINP had weak or no effect on testosterone synthesis as evaluated in the H295R steroidogenesis assay ( , ). In vivo assessment of testosterone levels in males, was evaluated in 12 in utero exposure and three adult exposure studies. No changes in serum testosterone levels were observed in adult exposure studies in mice or monkeys. In five (of six) studies with DINP exposure (up to 1,500 mg/kg-bw/day) conducted during the masculinization programming window (MPW; approximately gestational day [GD] 15.5–18.5 in rats), ex vivo rat testis testosterone production in GD 18–21.5 animals was reduced ( , , , , ). When fetal intratesticular testosterone content (testicular homogenates or extracts) was measured, the majority of studies (four of six) showed no change following DINP exposure between GD 17.5–21 despite exposure to high levels of DINP (up to 900 mg/kg-bw/day) ( , , , ). In one study in which a reduction of fetal intratesticular testosterone was observed, testosterone content was measured at both 2- and 24-h post-dose. At 2 h post-dose, testosterone level was reduced, but no change was detected at 24 h (compared to concurrent controls), suggesting the change in testosterone level may be a transient effect ( ). No effects were observed in serum testosterone levels in rats exposed to DINP (up to 20,000 ppm [∼1,400 mg/kg-bw/day]) during the MPW in five of five studies ( ). DINP showed inconsistent effects in transcriptomic assays evaluating steroidogenic gene/protein expression, providing some support for S-mediated endocrine activity ( ). A summary of the evaluated evidence for DINP mediated effects on the S-pathway are provided in . Detailed information for each study is provided in (F – All EATS Data).
Overall, the WoE showed some evidence in DINP-mediated effects on the S-pathway leading to changes in steroidogenic gene or protein expression and hormone levels (estradiol and testosterone). In epidemiology studies, limited studies showed a lack of an association between changes in hormones and DINP metabolite concentrations. In silico models showed no effects on steroidogenesis.

## Analysis of evidence: androgen pathway
In the assessment of endocrine activity mediated by A, the evidence for DINP came from two different sources: in vitro and in vivo mechanistic assays ( ). The in vitro assays (ToxCast HT and in peer reviewed literature) were not metabolically competent and lacked the capability to activate the DINP diester to the monoester forms. The evidence available for DINP metabolites came from supporting in silico predictions for AR binding, agonist, and antagonist activity ( ) and a single in vitro study evaluating AR activity for MiNP, MOiNP, and MHiNP that showed no agonist or antagonist activity at 100 μM using human AR reporter gene constructs ( ). In vitro mechanistic data for the A-pathway showed DINP was active in a single AR antagonist Tox21/ToxCast HT assay (AC50 = 7.16 μM). A total of 17 Tox21/ToxCast HT assays were evaluated as part of this assessment. No activity was observed in 16 of these assays. No DINP-related effects were observed in four in vitro assays for AR agonist or antagonist activity ( , , , ). The Leadscope AR QSAR model prediction showed no AR activity predictions for the monoester forms (MiNP, MOiNP, MCiOP, and MHiNP) ( ). The ToxCast Pathway Model, which integrates all AR HT assay data, predicted DINP to be negative for AR-related activity (binding, agonism, or antagonism). 
In vivo mechanistic studies evaluating testosterone levels are discussed in Section 3.5, Analysis of Evidence: Steroidogenesis Pathway. In a Hershberger assay, designed to evaluate the antiandrogenic effects of DINP (0, 20, 100, or 500 mg/kg-bw/day for 10 days) in 4-week-old castrated male rats, decreased weight in two of five androgen sensitive tissues was observed: levator ani/bulbocavernosus muscle (LABC) weight in the high dose group (p < 0.05) and seminal vesicle weight observed in all dose groups compared to testosterone propionate (TP) alone ( ). There was no significant change in weight, and no indication of reduced growth, of the Cowper's glands, glans penis, or prostate; no change in liver weight was observed. Significantly decreased serum testosterone levels and increased LH levels were observed in the high dose group. No evidence of general toxicity was observed in these animals, with no changes in mortality or body weight. Evidence for DINP related endocrine activity for the A-pathway is summarized in .
Lines of evidence assessing A-mediated adversity that resulted in changes in apical endpoints were evaluated in animals exposed either during gestation or as adults and showed limited evidence for changes in androgen-mediated end points (AGD, nipple retention, genital abnormalities, reproductive tract weights, and malformation incidence). Results of these studies are summarized in , are discussed in Section 3.7. Mode of Action Assessment and described in detail in F – All EATS Data and Supplemental DINP Evidence Analysis.
Overall, the WoE showed inconsistent-evidence for DINP-mediated effects on the A-pathway including changes in fetal testosterone production, and decreased testis weight, testicular dysgenesis (variably characterized but broadly included abnormal testicular histopathology, agenesis and/or atrophy), genital abnormalities (e.g., cryptorchidism, hypospadias), decreased AGD and sperm motility, and increased nipple retention. Epidemiology studies showed some evidence for a A-mediated adversity with changes in testosterone levels associated with DINP metabolites levels but no evidence of AR agonism or antagonism in in vitro mechanistic assays.

## Analysis of evidence: non-mammalian data
Eighteen non-mammalian studies were evaluated as part of this assessment. Two of the eighteen were excluded ( C – Reasons for Exclusion) and data extracted from the remaining sixteen studies ( F – All EATS Data). Data were available for fish (Danio rerio, Oryzias melastigma, Oryzias latipes, Sparus aurata) and amphibian (Xenopus laevis) species as well as Daphnia magna, Drosophila melanogaster, and earthworm (Eisenia fetida). One Level 4 (OECD TG 222 ) and one Level 5 assay (OECD TG 240 ) were conducted according to OECD test guidelines to assess endpoints relevant to E-, A-, or S-pathways; none of the studies assessed the T-pathway ( , ). The Level 4 study was an earthworm reproduction test in which adult worms were exposed to the limit dose of 1,000  mg DINP/kg soil (nominal concentration; mean measured concentration 982.4 mg DINP/kg soil) for 56 days. No significant changes in mortality or fecundity (number of juveniles produced) occurred ( ). The Level 5 study was an extended one generation assessment of dietary exposure of Medaka fish (Oryzias latipes) to 20 mg DINP/kg diet (nominal concentration; mean measured concentration 21.9 mg DINP/kg diet). There were no effects on survival, development, growth, nor reproduction after 280 days of exposure ( ) The authors conclude that DINP had no estrogenic/antiestrogenic or androgenic/antiandrogenic effects based on the lack of changes. Data for all studies are provided in F – All EATS Data and summarized in G – Summary Non-mammalian Data.

## Data sufficiency and identification of data gaps
According to the ECHA/EFSA guidance, an assessment of the sufficiency of the dataset is required to support a conclusion on the absence of ED potential. Firstly, a determination of whether a dataset is sufficient to support a conclusion on the absence of EATS-mediated adversity is made. According to the assessment strategy, if ‘EATS-mediated’ adversity was not sufficiently investigated (i.e., the dataset was insufficient) and no ‘EATS-mediated’ adversity was observed, then EATS-related endocrine activity should be considered to support a conclusion on the absence of ED potential ( ). To perform the data sufficiency assessment, endpoints measured in all DINP studies (guideline and non-guideline) were compared to the endpoints included in regulatory test guidelines based on the ECHA/EFSA recommendation to consider all available information ( L – Data Sufficiency).
To assess the sufficiency of the DINP dataset to conclude on EATS-mediated adversity, the endpoints measured in the DINP guideline two-generation reproductive toxicity study (OPPTS 870.3800, related to OECD TG 416) ( ) were compared to the ECHA/EFSA recommended extended one- or two-generation reproduction toxicity studies (OECD TG 416 or 443, OECD Level 5 test methods). Overall 25 out of the 47 recommended E, A, T, or S endpoints in OECD TG 416 (Table 14; ( ) were measured in the two-generation reproductive toxicity study by Waterman et al. (2000; L – Data Sufficiency). Notably, this two-generation reproductive toxicity study (OECD TG 416) does not include assessment of thyroid hormones. Given the absence of 22 of the 47 recommended E, A, T, and S endpoints, guideline and non-guideline Repeated Dose or Reproductive Toxicity studies for DINP (OECD Level 4 test methods) were next considered to determine whether these remaining recommended endpoints had been investigated for DINP. This assessment provided information for an additional 16 endpoints, including age at balanopreputial separation and vaginal opening, AGD, estrus cyclicity, sperm parameters, and thyroid and uterus weights. Overall, the following EATS-mediated endpoints were not evaluated for DINP: coagulating gland weights, sperm morphology, and vaginal smears. In addition, TH level (T3, T4) or TSH levels were not evaluated. This analysis performed according to the sufficiency criteria outlined in ECHA/EFSA guidance (2018) showed that the dataset for E-, A-, and S-pathways were borderline insufficient and for the T-pathway was insufficient.
As the E-, A-, T-, and S-datasets all showed some data gaps, an assessment of whether ‘EATS-mediated’ adversity was observed was performed next. Regarding the A- and S-pathways, studies showed some evidence of DINP-mediated adversity ( , ) with changes in expression of steroidogenic genes and proteins, decreases in fetal testosterone, testicular dysgenesis, and genital abnormalities. As the potential for adversity was observed, no assessment of related endocrine activity was required for A and S, and a MoA assessment was triggered (Section 3.9. Mode of Action Assessment). For E and T-pathways, there was very minimal evidence of endocrine mediated adversity. No apical effects except for those occurring at dose levels that elicited general toxicity were observed for the E- and T-pathways except for a single study showing a change in estrus cyclicity at three-months following administration of up to 200 mg/kg-bw/day DINP in adult mice for 10 days ( ). Overall, the WoE suggests no E- or T-mediated adversity.
According to the ECHA/EFSA criteria, the insufficiency of the E and T datasets and the lack of endocrine-mediated adversity requires an assessment of endocrine activity. According to this criteria, endocrine activity can be assessed using in vitro and in vivo mechanistic endpoints. To consider E-related endocrine activity to be sufficiently investigated, information from the ToxCast ER Bioactivity Model or uterotrophic bioassay in rodents (OECD TG 440; E-pathway) need to be available to support a conclusion on the absence of EAS-related endocrine activity ( ). The endocrine activity of DINP across the E-pathway was investigated using these methods. Information was available from three uterotrophic studies and the ToxCast ER Bioactivity Model for DINP; therefore, the dataset to support an evaluation of the E-pathway was sufficient to support a determination on endocrine activity. DINP had no estrogenic activity in three uterotrophic assays ( , , ) and was predicted to be negative for ER binding in the ToxCast Bioactivity Model that integrated the findings from data from 17 of the 18 HT assays to measure ER agonist and antagonist responses. Overall, the sufficiency of the dataset based on the ECHA/EFSA sufficiency guidance (2018), and lack of findings demonstrated DINP had no endocrine activity for the E-pathway.
In vitro mechanistic test guidelines and in vivo mechanistic tests are not available for the T-pathway in mammals; therefore, to consider T-related endocrine activity to be sufficiently investigated, information for in vivo mechanistic endpoints from Repeated Dose studies (OECD TG 407, 408, 409, 416, and 451-3) ( ) are required. No measurements of thyroid hormones (T3, T4, and TSH), or changes in thyroid histology such as thyroid colloid area were performed following exposure to DINP. Thyroid follicular cell height was assessed in a single repeated dose 90-day feed study in dogs exposed to up to 40,000 ppm (∼3,000 mg/kg-bw/day) DINP ( ). Overall, there was insufficient data to conclude on T-related endocrine activity.
As DINP is rapidly and completely metabolized after oral administration in mammals, the potential endocrine activity of DINP metabolites should be considered when assessing data sufficiency. Metabolism is integral to the in vivo studies conducted to assess ‘EATS-mediated’ adversity endpoints (e.g., OECD TG 416); therefore, the data sufficiency assessment conducted for DINP includes the metabolites. The WoE suggests no E- or T-mediated adversity, however there are some data gaps. As such, an assessment of EATS-related endocrine activity is required for DINP metabolites. In vivo mechanistic evidence for DINP is inclusive of DINP metabolites; therefore, uterotrophic bioassays in rodents (E-pathway) provide sufficient evidence to support a conclusion on E-related endocrine activity. There is an overall data gap for DINP (parent) to evaluate T-related endocrine activity, as such there is a data gap for DINP metabolites as well, and therefore, according to ECHA/EFSA (2018) sufficiency criteria, there are insufficient data to make a conclusion on T-related endocrine activity or adversity. For A- and S- pathways, as the potential for EATS-mediated adversity was observed, a MoA assessment is required.

## Mode of action (MoA) assessment
While AOPs are chemical-agnostic, a hypothesized AOP that describes a phthalate antiandrogenic Leydig cell MoA has been proposed by Li and Spade ( ) and was used as the framework for a MoA assessment of A- and S-pathways, along with integration of dose and temporal concordance of observed effects. This AOP was selected as it is one of the most recent publications describing an AOP related to phthalate in utero effects on fetal testis development and function and also includes events aligned with previously published AOPs ( , , , , ) and the AOP-wiki.
The WoE assessment identified a small number of studies that described changes potentially mediated through the A-pathway following in utero exposure to DINP during the MPW. Observed effects included an increased incidence of MNGs in F1 testes ( ), decreased AGD, reduction in fetal testicular testosterone levels, fetal Leydig cell (FLC) clustering, and changes in spermatogenesis in male rodents.
All data from 23 publications (19 identified from the EATS evaluation and 4 identified from targeted literature reviews (see )) describing potential effects mediated by the A-pathway were mapped to MIEs, KEs, and adverse outcomes (AOs) in the hypothesized Leydig cell AOP in which reduced testosterone biosynthesis in FLCs leads to reproductive tract malformations ( ). Critical appraisal of the mapped data showed a medium RoB (appraised as Tier 2) for 3 endpoints in three studies: binding of DINP to PPARγ via surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy (Schaffert et al. 2022), testosterone biosynthesis in the H295R steroidogenesis assay ( ), and accessory sex organ weight in F1 rats following exposure to DINP from GD 12-PND 14 ( ) ( H – RoB Assessment); however, the majority of endpoints incorporated into the MoA had a high RoB (appraised Tier 3) and no endpoints had a low RoB (appraised Tier 1). The most common sources of bias in the studies evaluated were the lack of test agent characterization, use of inappropriate statistical methods, use of small numbers of animals per dose group, and assessment of endpoints at time points that are not considered the most sensitive to capture the changes in the endpoint being measured, e.g., evaluation of AGD in animals older than PND 4 when this measure is inherently more variable. To ensure a comprehensive assessment of hazard was conducted, all studies, regardless of appraised RoB tier, were included in the MoA assessment. The evidence for each event in the mapped hypothesized AOP is summarized in and illustrated in and available in full in (I – MoA Data). 
Three MIEs have been proposed for the phthalate toxicity pathways although these should be considered as hypothesized only as there is no known MIE for phthalate toxicity in the developing male reproductive system ( ). No studies were available assessing the effects of DINP exposure on arachidonic acid release or prolonged expression of the nuclear receptor COUP-TFII in Leydig cells. In this analysis, there was some evidence that showed DINP monoesters (MiNP and MHiNP) bound to and activated human PPARs (PPARα, PPARβ and PPARγ) in immortalized cell lines with a lowest NO(A)EC of 3 μM ( , , ). There was less evidence to show DINP activation of PPARs with only one of four studies showing activation of human PPARγ with an NO(A)EC of 1 μM ( ) ( I – MOA Data). While phthalates are known to bind and activate PPARs in the liver, available evidence suggests PPAR activation in the fetal testis is not causally related to phthalate-driven, androgen-related effects in the developing male rat, (i.e., changes in fetal testosterone production following exposure to phthalates during the MPW were not coincident with changes in expression of PPARα target genes; also, exposure to known PPARα activators during the MPW produced changes in PPARα target genes but no changes in fetal testosterone production) ( , , , ).
Integration of evidence to support the hypothesized testosterone-mediated AOP ( and H – MoA Data) showed some/limited evidence of DINP effects in the KEs leading to apical outcomes. A decrease in Insl3 gene or INSL3 protein expression in fetal rat testis was observed in 3 of 4 studies suggesting a potential disruption in INSL3 signaling (following in utero exposure to DINP), which plays a role in masculinization of the reproductive tract. In one study, these changes were reported at dose levels of 10 mg/kg-bw/day but were coincident with changes in fetal (but not maternal) body weight that could suggest systemic toxicity ( ). No measurements of fetal body weight were provided in the other two studies reporting deceased Insl3 expression and using higher dose levels of DINP (500 mg/kg-bw/day), which precluded assessment of toxicity in these studies. There was some evidence (five of six studies) for a reduction in fetal or neonatal testicular testosterone levels when measured ex vivo; however, when using testicular homogenates, five of six studies showed no changes in testosterone level despite use of similar exposure periods, dose levels, and sampling ages as the ex vivo studies. Supporting an overall lack of effect on testosterone production, there was no evidence of serum testosterone changes in neonatal (GD 21 and PND 7) and older rats (PND 90, PNW 20, and 3–7 months of age) ( J – MoA ). Only two studies that provided evidence of changes in testicular testosterone content also provided data on the dam or fetal body weight for assessment of systemic toxicity. In the two studies that provided these data, no change in dam/pup body weights were observed in one study ( ), whereas a decrease in pup weights was observed at all doses (LO(A)EL 10 mg/kg-bw/day) suggesting fetal toxicity may factor into the findings of the latter study ( ).
There was limited evidence for DINP’s effects on FLC clustering that may be associated with changes in testosterone biosynthesis. The incidence or size of FLC clusters was increased in three of six studies. In two of these, there was a significant reduction in maternal and/or fetal body weight at doses as low as 10 mg/kg-bw/day in one study, which suggests some degree of systemic toxicity in GD21.5-PND 2 rats ( , ). At a later timepoint (PND 14), a reduction in AGD occurred in one study using a similar dose levels ( ), but no changes in AGD were noted at even later timepoints (PND 49–50 and 90) ( , , ).
When considering the AOs, only one of eight studies showed a dose dependent decrease in AGD (absolute and normalized to the cube root of the body weight) in neonates (defined as PND 0–4 per OECD 443 recommended sampling time), and this change (LO(A)EL 40 ppm (∼3 mg/kg-bw/day) at PND 1) was coincident with a reduction in fetal body weight at the same dose levels and sample time; no assessment of maternal toxicity was provided in this study ( ). Reduced male accessory sex organ weight was observed in one of seven studies using high doses (up to 1,500  mg/kg-bw/day) that resulted in seminal vesicle but not prostate or Cowper’s gland weight reduction ( ). In other studies, using similar doses, exposure windows, and sampling times, no changes in accessory sex organ weight occurred. This lack of findings was supported by evidence that showed decreased testis, penis, or LABC weights in only two of seven studies ( J – MoA ). In utero exposure to DINP did not produce evidence for cryptorchidism or hypospadias (four studies) at dose levels up to 1,500 mg/kg-bw/day ( I – MoA Data).
Assessment of dose and temporal concordance showed, in the absence of changes in fetal body weight, DINP exposure at dose levels of ≥ 250 mg/kg-bw/day produced changes in KEs ( K – Temporal + Dose Concordance). However, dose levels of DINP ≥ 250 mg/kg-bw/day also failed to produce changes in KEs or to produce AOs. Overall, there was no dose and temporal concordance between KEs and AOs in this hypothesized AOP, and, in the absence of generalized toxicity, it is therefore concluded that it is unlikely there is a biologically plausible link between the endocrine-related activity and EATS-mediated adversity.

## Discussion
Due to the well documented effects of low molecular weight phthalates on male reproductive tract development, and their widespread use, phthalates have been extensively reviewed by multiple regulatory authorities. With the upcoming addition of endocrine disruption to the list of information requirements considered under EU REACH regulations, this comprehensive review of the literature was conducted both to inform the likelihood that the high molecular weight phthalate, DINP, acts as an endocrine disruptor and to identify any limitations or data gaps in the existing body of evidence. One of the limitations identified in the course of this work was that many of the studies for DINP were conducted before test method guidelines were developed or updated and, while they provided valuable and consistent information, the confidence in these methods could not be classified as ‘high’ given the ECHA/EFSA sufficiency criteria requires data on all endpoints consistent with the most recent test guidelines.
Overall, there were sufficient data to support a conclusion on the potential for EATS-mediated adversity for DINP in E-, A-, and S-pathways. For the T-pathway, a data gap was identified in the form of a lack of in vivo mechanistic data (TSH and TH levels), and the lack of thyroid colloid area measurement. For DINP metabolites, there was sufficient evidence to support a conclusion on EATS-mediated adversity for E-, A-, and S-pathways based on in vivo data, but the lack of mechanistic data prevented a conclusion on endocrine activity for the T-pathway. ECHA/EFSA requires an assessment of the sufficiency of a dataset to support a conclusion on the absence of EATS-related endocrine activity only if EATS-mediated adversity has not been sufficiently investigated and no EATS-mediated adversity was observed (E- and T-pathways). In the case of DINP and its metabolites, an assessment of EATS-related endocrine activity was triggered by the stringent data sufficiency requirements in the ECHA/EFSA guidance and because there were some, albeit inconsistent, adversity outcomes within the dataset and minimal data gaps. This assessment identified the need for additional testing for the T-pathway; however, while generating data for TSH or TH levels would fill the data gap, changes in these hormones are proposed to drive the apical outcomes that were not observed in in vivo DINP studies and therefore these measurements are unlikely to change the outcome of the hazard classification conclusion for endocrine disruption or effect risk assessment. When considering the ED potential of DINP through E- and T-pathways, there is no evidence that DINP mediates endocrine-related effects. The analysis herein relies on the ECHA/EFSA guidance for the identification of endocrine disruptors for biocidal and plant protection products as this is serving as an interim guidance until the Agency releases the guidance on application of CLP criteria for endocrine disruptors. It remains to be understood if the sufficiency criteria and new data generation requirements will be harmonized across regulations.
“Rat phthalate syndrome” describes a group of effects observed in male rats from exposure to low molecular weight phthalates (C3-C6 backbone) during a critical developmental window of male sexual differentiation. These effects include reproductive abnormalities characterized by malformations of the epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate, external genitalia (hypospadias), and cryptorchidism together with retention of nipples/areolae and demasculinization of the growth of the perineum resulting in a reduced AGD ( ). Rat phthalate syndrome can be experimentally induced in rats by exposure to chemicals that block androgen synthesis or action during the MPW (GD 15.5–18.5 in rats) ( , ). Rat phthalate syndrome can be induced by phthalate esters such as DEHP and dibutyl phthalate (DBP). Inconsistent evidence of effects arising from exposure to DINP during the MPW has led to the conclusion that DINP has a lower antiandrogenic potency than other phthalates ( ).
In this evaluation, there was some evidence that exposure to DINP within the MPW resulted in a limited number of effects that could potentially be mediated through the A- and S-pathways; however, the MoA analysis failed to show evidence that could plausibly link early KEs to AOs of male reproductive tract malformations and fertility through the hypothesized testosterone-dependent phthalate toxicity AOP proposed by Li and Spade ( ). This AOP was selected as it is one of the most recent publications describing an AOP related to phthalate in utero effects on fetal testis development and function. Numerous AOPs related to ‘phthalate syndrome’ (decreased AGD, infertility, decreased sperm count, cryptorchidism, and hypospadias) have been proposed, most of which include A-pathway related KEs involving FLC changes and decreased androgen production ( , , , ). The Li and Spade AOP includes events that align with these previously published AOPs and therefore was used for in the MoA assessment. There is no known MIE for phthalate toxicity of the developing male reproductive tract, but several have been proposed. Low molecular weight phthalates are associated with increased expression of COUP-TFII in FLCs, which can lead to suppression of Leydig cell steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1)-regulated gene expression and reduced production of testosterone ( ). More recently, inhibition of phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) enzyme leading to arachidonic acid release from intracellular stores and resulting in reduced steroidogenesis gene transcription has been proposed as an MIE ( ). No experimental data were available to assess DINP for either of these proposed MIEs. However, this analysis showed that regarding the third proposed MIE, PPAR activation, there is in vitro evidence of DINP monoester binding / activation of PPARs, but the relevance of this finding as an MIE for perturbation of the A-pathway is doubtful in the light of evidence suggests that activation of PPAR signaling is not a component of the phthalate toxicity in the fetal rat testis ( , , , ).
Decreased Leydig cell Insl3 gene expression plays a role in gubernacular outgrowth and testicular descent ( , ). While there is little known about the regulation of INSL3, there is evidence that decreased INSL3, and testosterone levels are associated with AOs such as cryptorchid testis. The evidence available for DINP shows a decrease in Insl3 gene expression in fetal testis following in utero exposure, with three (of four) studies providing evidence to support this change and a LO(A)EL of 10 mg/kg-bw/day based on changes in gene expression. Maternal toxicity (assessed by decrease in body weight or body weight gain) was not evident in two of these studies and not measured in the third, but decreased pup body weight was coincident with the observation of decreased Insl3 expression in one of the three studies (and not measured in the third) ( , , ).
The assessment described herein showed some evidence of a reduction in fetal testicular testosterone following exposure to DINP. The evidence was stronger when measured using an ex vivo culture model of rat testis rather than tissue homogenates or extracts. In other proposed AOPs related to phthalate toxicity, decreased androgen production is associated with decreased steroidogenic biosynthetic protein expression e.g., steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), CYP11A1, CYP17 ( , ). The loss of testosterone ultimately leads to inhibition of urethral tube closure and hypospadias. Some evidence of changes in steroidogenic gene expression was reported with lower levels of Cyp11a1 Hsd3b1, StAR, Cyp17a1 Cyp11b1, Cyp11b2, Hsd3b, Scarb1, Dhcr7, and Hsd17b3 mRNA in GD 18, 21, or 21.5 rat testis following exposure to DINP ( , , , ). The NO(A)EL for these studies was 10 mg/kg-bw/day and occurred with a loss in male pup body weight but no obvious signs of maternal toxicity. Not all studies reported changes in steroidogenic genes in vivo and in vitro. H295R steroidogenesis assays showed no effects, although in vitro assays do not account for the metabolism of DINP. The inconsistent changes in androgen production may partly be attributed to the different methodologies used for testosterone measurement but may also be the result of differences in the age at which animals were sampled. In one study, fetal testicular testosterone at GD 19 was shown to be reduced at 2 h post-dose, but when GD 20 (24 h post-dose) animals were assessed, the hormone levels had recovered to control levels ( ), suggesting the potency of DINP (at dose levels up to 750 mg/kg-bw/day) was not sufficient to support a persistent change to androgen synthesis. Indeed, no changes in serum testosterone levels were observed in rats from PND 1 to adulthood.
In utero exposure to some phthalates leads to FLC changes (such as aggregates and intratubular LCs), immature Sertoli cells, and malformed tubules ( ). While there is no direct connection between the formation of FLC aggregates and reduction in fetal testosterone, FLC cytoplasmic volume tends to mirror steroidogenic activity ( ). Formation of large aggregates as a result of in utero exposure to DBP produces FLC aggregates through altered cellular migration, rather than excessive LC proliferation, but also reduces FLC size by reduction in cytoplasmic volume ( ). In this analysis, three studies showed an increase in the incidence of animals with large FLC clusters ( , , ). One of these studies assessed cell size and cytoplasmic volume and showed an increase in both at lower doses of DINP (10 and 100 mg/kg-bw/day). Even at dose levels up to 1,000 mg/kg-bw/day, no decrease in cell or cytoplasmic volume was reported, although concentrations of intratesticular testosterone were significantly reduced at 1,000 mg/kg-bw/day DINP. As FLC clustering and reduction in testosterone occurred at the same time, it is possible that generalized toxicity was a factor in these findings because loss of male pup body weight was observed in this study at all dose levels of DINP ( ). Similarly, the finding of increased incidence of FLC aggregates reported by Clewell et al. may also have been confounded by systemic toxicity as male pup body weights were reduced at the same dose level as FLC aggregates were reported (750 mg/kg-bw/day) ( ). Saturation of DINP metabolism and significant changes of kinetics occur between the DINP dose levels of 250 mg/kg-bw/day and 750 mg/kg-bw/day, where despite a three times increase in dose, maximum concentration (Cmax) and area under the curve (AUCinf) do not increase ( ). The deviation from linearity in metabolism at 750 mg/kg-bw/day may reflect reduced bioavailability at higher dose levels and indicate the maximal biological response to DINP exposure may be reached at a doses of ≤ 750 mg/kg-bw/day. In turn, this may have implications for the ability of DINP to manifest the downstream outcomes that occur as a result of fetal androgen reduction.
Markers of FLC function such as AGD and nipple retention, show limited evidence of effect following DINP exposure. AGD in particular, can be considered a marker of androgen levels throughout the whole MPW ( ). In pups aged PND 0 to PND 4 (OECD 433 recommended sampling time), there were two studies showing a reduction in absolute or scaled (to the cube root of body weight) AGD in PND 1 males exposed in utero to 40 ppm DINP (∼3 mg/kg-bw/day) or 900 mg/kg-bw/day ( , ). In Lee et al. (2006), this occurred in association with a decrease in male pup body weight (on PND 1), which may suggest systemic toxicity. No maternal body weights were provided in this study for an assessment of maternal toxicity. In Boberg et al. (2011), while there was no significant effect on male pup body weight at PND 1, there was a (non-statistically significant) trend for decreased body weight with increasing DINP dose. In addition, there are reported challenges in reproducing the statistical significance of the change in AGD ( ), although, in a corrigendum to their article, Boberg et al. published additional details regarding the statistical analysis important to informing on the reliability of the outcomes ( ). Overall, the WoE for changes in AGD in early postnatal life was negative, with eight studies showing no change in AGD before PND 3 despite use of dose levels up to 1,500 mg/kg-bw/day.
In animals PND 14 and older, one study showed evidence of decreased AGD, but this occurred at the same dose as decreased male pup body weight, suggestive of a systemic effect rather than an antiandrogenic effect ( ). The decreased AGD occurred on PND 14 in pups exposed to the highest DINP dose (11,400 ppm; target dose 720 mg/kg-bw/day), but did not occur at PNDs 2 and 49. Given that differences in AGD induced by antiandrogenic influences in utero should be apparent at birth, the difference observed at PND 14 without a correlative difference at PND 2 suggests that the PND 14 observation was unlikely due to an anti-androgenic effects. The lack of change in AGD supports the idea that exposure to DINP during the MPW does not persistently alter androgen production in developing fetuses. Another biomarker of antiandrogenic effects is nipple retention. In rat toxicity studies, exposure to dihydrotestosterone during male development induces regression of the nipples ( ). Exposure to high dose levels of some high molecular weight phthalates e.g., DEHP during the MPW can induce a high number of retained nipples in individual pups ( ), although the majority of studies report lower numbers for individual animals and a higher frequency of animals with retained nipples ( ). In this analysis, while nipple retention is not a KE or AO defined in the hypothesized AOP used for the MoA, this endpoint is a mandatory measurement under several OECD test guidelines (e.g., OECD TG 443) and is typically assessed in combination with AGD to assess antiandrogenic effects. Exposure to high doses of DINP induced nipple retention in PND 13–14 rats in three of four studies (LO(A)EL 750 mg/kg-bw/day) ( , , ), although a dose response could be established in only two of the studies. This finding was persistent to adulthood in only one of the four studies, where a statistically significant increase in the mean number of nipples per rat (1.38 nipples/rat) was observed at 1,500 mg/kg-bw/day ( ). By comparison, in a review article by Schwartz et al., the number of nipples found in control rats was shown to vary by up to 2/rat ( ). The distinction between a transient and permanent effect is an important consideration, as the OECD guidance document on mammalian reproductive toxicity testing defines permanent, not transient, nipples as a malformation ( ). The WoE suggests no permanent effect on nipple retention as a result of DINP exposure.
A mechanistic assessment of the antiandrogenic effects of DINP in a Hershberger assay has sometimes been cited as evidence of DINP’s effects on the A-pathway based on decreased weights for two androgen-dependent tissues (seminal vesicle and LABC) in castrated rats (Lee & Koo, 2007). Compounds that significantly decrease weights of two or more androgen-sensitive tissues (as well as displaying some degree of reduced growth in all other target tissues) in the presence of TP are generally considered positive for anti-androgenicity ( ). However, a significant reduction in exogenously administered TP was found at 500 mg/kg-bw/day DINP, and it has been shown that a positive Hershberger result (when it is performed to assess antiandrogens) can be achieved when the test compound induces liver drug metabolizing enzymes (Freyberger et al., 2007; Freyberger & Schladt, 2009). While exposure of castrated rats to DINP did not increase liver weight, the reduction in TP levels suggests increased metabolism and clearance of the exogenously administered TP, rather than DINP acting as an antiandrogen. Induction of liver enzymes is suggested by the observed activity of DINP in PXR HT assays, activation of PPARs by the MiNP and MHiNP, and reports of increased liver weights following DINP exposure in the literature ( ). The reduction in TP means less is available to interact with the ARs to maintain androgen-sensitive tissue weight, and as the rats used in this assay were castrated, there was no endogenous testosterone that could compensate for the lower levels of testosterone due to increased metabolism ( , ).
Reductions in androgen dependent organ weights (testis and accessory organs) has been included in some, but not all, proposed AOPs as an AO following phthalate exposure ( , , ). There was very little evidence that exposure to DINP during the MPW results in reduction of organ weights with observed changes occurring in two studies using high doses of DINP. Decreased absolute penis, LABC, and seminal vesicle weights occurred in adult F1 animals in one study, although the effects occurred only with the use of high dose levels (1,500 mg/kg-bw/day) DINP ( ). In the other study showing effects on organ weight (absolute and relative testis weight), the decrease was measured in PND 27 animals exposed to high levels of DINP (up to 20,000 ppm DINP; ∼1,500 mg/kg-bw/day) but the authors note that the body weight of male pups was reduced during the exposure period (GD 15-PND 10), returning to control levels only on cessation of exposure. Whether the effects on testis weight were indicative of an antiandrogenic effect or whether they were the result of systemic toxicity is not clear; however, in most studies, no change in androgen dependent organ weights was evident. Moreover, there was no evidence that DINP elicited genital malformations such as cryptorchidism or hypospadias, nor dose related changes in sperm motility or reduced fertility in rats. Taken together, these findings indicate DINP exposure during the MPW may induce KEs in the hypothesized phthalate Leydig cell AOP proposed by Li and Spade (2022), but also show very limited evidence of DINP producing permanent or AOs in the hypothesized AOP and no dose or temporal concordance for observed effects.
The relevance of changes in the rat fetal testosterone pathway following phthalate exposure is of questionable relevance to humans. Although it is well established that for some phthalates e.g., DBP, toxicity in male rats occurs through suppression of testosterone production in FLCs, this MoA is not relevant in all species. In fetal mice, decreased testicular testosterone was not associated with exposure to DBP, mono (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate) (MEHP) or monobutyl phthalate (MBP) ( ). Similarly, studies of fetal human testis xenograft models in mice exposed to DBP have shown normal fetal testis growth and function at dose levels ≤ 500 mg/kg-bw/day that suppresses testosterone production in rats ( ). Coupled with the fact that the limited effects observed in rats following exposure to DINP occurred at doses far exceeding human exposure estimates (mean exposure from food: 0.232–4.27 μg/kg-bw/day) ( ) the results of this ED assessment suggests that DINP does not pose an endocrine disruption hazard to humans.

## Conclusion
In conclusion, according to the ECHA/EFSA criteria to evaluate a substance as an ED, as defined by World Health Organization (WHO)/International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS), DINP does not show endocrine disruptor activity in the E-pathway and is unlikely to mediate ED effects through the A- or S-pathways. This conclusion is based on a lack of evidence for endocrine activity across these pathways for which a biologically plausible link can be established to EAS-mediated relevant adverse effects noted in vivo. DINP does not show T-mediated adverse effects in vivo, but insufficient evidence was available to evaluate endocrine activity.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
I.A. Lea: Data curation, Writing – original draft. A.N. Buerger: Writing – review & editing, Visualization. D. Feifarek: Data curation. A. Mihalchik: Investigation. M.M. Heintz: Conceptualization, Project administration. L.C. Haws: Supervision, Funding acquisition. H. Nyambego: Writing – review & editing. K. Goyak: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing – review & editing. C. Palermo: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing – review & editing. S.J. Borghoff: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.

## Funding
This work was supported by ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences. The contents of this manuscript solely reflect the view of the authors. Contributions to this manuscript by Drs. Christine Palermo, Hesbon Nyambego, and Katy Goyak were made while employed by a producer of DINP.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: ToxStrategies LLC reports financial support and article publishing charges were provided by ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences Inc. H. Nyambego reports a relationship with ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences Inc that includes: employment. K. Goyak reports a relationship with ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences Inc that includes: employment. C. Palermo reports a relationship with ExxonMobil Biomedical Sciences Inc that includes: employment. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1

## Supplementary Data 2

## Data availability
I have shared a file that contains the data associated with this manuscript

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank Drs. John Rogers and Neepa Choksi for support performing the RoB assessments.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crtox.2025.100220.
1https://www.epa.gov/comptox-tools/exploring-toxcast-data#Download (invitroDBv4.1, downloaded May 2024).
2The ToxCast ER pathway model for bioactivity uses integrated data from 17 of the 18 high throughput assays to measure agonist and antagonist responses in an unweighted manner with subtraction of background and other nonspecific assay interferences including cytotoxicity. The model output includes area under the curve (AUC) scores for agonist and antagonist activity as described by Browne et al. (2015).
3US EPA ORD, Center for Computational Toxicology (2018): ToxCast Database: invitrodb version 3.5. The United States Environmental Protection Agency’s Center for Computational Toxicology and Exposure. Dataset. https://doi.org/10.23645/epacomptox.6062623.v10.
4OECD (2016), Test No. 222: Earthworm Reproduction Test (Eisenia fetida/Eisenia andrei), OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 2, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264264496-en.
5OECD (2023), Test No. 240: Medaka Extended One Generation Reproduction Test (MEOGRT), OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 2, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264242258-en.