319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC121862501218625012186250NIHMS20856624034379810.1016/j.celrep.2025.115687A retinoic acid:YAP1 signaling axis controls atrial lineage commitment
AbrahamElizabeth KostinaAleksandra VolmertBrett RouleThomas HuangLing YuJingting WilliamsApril E MegillEmily DouglasAidan PericakOlivia M MorrisAlex StronatiEleonora Larrinaga-ZamanilloArantza FueyoRaquel ZubillagaMikel AndrakeMark D AkizuNaiara AguirreAitor EstarasConchi 1Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Aging + Cardiovascular Discovery Center, Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA2Institute for Quantitative Health Science and Engineering, Division of Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA3Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA4Raymond G. Perelman Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA5Integrative Genomics and Bioinformatics Core, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA6Department of Child and Adolescence Psychiatry, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA7Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA8Cancer Epigenetics Institute, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA9Molecular Modeling Facility, Program in Cancer Signaling and Microenvironment, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA10Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, C.E.; methodology, C.E. and E.A.; investigation, C.E., E.A., A.K., B.V., A.A., E.M., A.L.-Z., E.S., A.D., O.M.P., and M.Z.; formal analysis, T.R., N.A., L.H., J.Y., A.E.W., R.F., and A.M.; visualization, C.E., E.A., A.K., B.V., A.A., T.R., N.A., L.H., J.Y., and A.E.W.; writing – original draft, C.E. and E.A.; writing – review & editing, C.E. and E.A.; funding acquisition, C.E., A.A., and E.A.
*Correspondence: conchi.estaras@temple.edu
8520254451156871156872462025This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell RepPrevious version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on July 12, 2024: "A Retinoic Acid:YAP1 signaling axis controls atrial lineage commitment".

## SUMMARY
In cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs), retinoic acid (RA) signaling induces atrial lineage gene expression and acquisition of an atrial cell fate. To achieve this, RA coordinates a complex regulatory network of downstream effectors that is not fully identified. To address this gap, we applied a functional genomics approach (i.e., scRNA-seq and snATAC-seq) to untreated and RA-treated human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived CPCs. Unbiased analysis revealed that the Hippo effectors YAP1 and TEAD4 are integrated with the atrial transcription factor enhancer network and that YAP1 activates RA enhancers in CPCs. Furthermore, Yap1 deletion in mouse embryos compromises the expression of RA-induced genes, such as Nr2f2, in the CPCs of the second heart field. Accordingly, in hESC-derived patterned heart organoids, YAP1 regulates the formation of an atrial chamber but is dispensable for the formation of a ventricle. Overall, our findings revealed that YAP1 cooperates with RA signaling to induce atrial lineages during cardiogenesis.

## In brief
Abraham et al. discovered that retinoic acid triggers YAP1 binding to atrial enhancers in human cardiac progenitors to facilitate chromatin accessibility and gene expression. YAP1 deletion compromises atrial chamber formation in heart organoids and disrupts the transcriptome of the second heart field and retinoic acid signaling in mouse embryos.

## Graphical Abstract

 

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2025 May 27.

## INTRODUCTION
Vitamin A is an essential dietary vitamin. It undergoes metabolic conversion to retinoic acid (RA) through a series of enzymatic reactions, with RA acting as a nuclear ligand of RA receptors (RARs) to regulate gene transcription. In early development, RA signaling regulates the posterior-to-anterior patterning of the cardiac progenitor cell (CPC) pool located in the second heart field (SHF) by promoting differentiation of the posterior SHF (pSHF) toward the acquisition of atrial and sinus venosus lineages, and restricting the anterior SHF (AHF) pool, which develops into the right ventricle and outflow tract. – Thus, fine-tuned expression of RA target genes is necessary to control the cell-fate decisions of the SHF; and, when perturbed, it interferes with heart structure and atrial development. , – Conveniently, the activity of RA can be recapitulated in both human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived CPCs (hCPCs) , and hESC-derived heart organoids. , These human models are excellent platforms to study how RA regulates the gene program that guides the cell-fate decisions of CPCs.
For RA to successfully generate posterior lineages, including atrial fates, it induces the expression of transcription factors (TFs), including HOXA1 and NR2F2, while repressing TFs such as HAND1 and MEF2C. , , , NR2F2 is necessary and sufficient to confer atrial identity, , – and cardiomyocyte (CM)-specific Nr2f2 ablation produces a ventricularized atrial chamber due to ectopic expression of ventricular genes in the atrial tissue. Moreover, human mutations in NR2F2 lead to congenital heart defects. – Furthermore, RA target genes must be precisely regulated in each cellular context as RA elicits distinct responses in diverse cell types during developmental processes. , It is likely that the interactions with different regulatory proteins, local chromatin environment, or nearest neighboring factor binding motifs are important parameters underlying specific RA transcriptional programs. Thus, identifying RAR and NR2F2 co-factors has the potential to shed light on the complex gene regulatory processes underlying RA activity in CPC differentiation.
YAP1 and its homolog, TAZ, are the transcriptional effectors of the Hippo pathway; this pathway regulates cell proliferation and growth during development. When Hippo kinases phosphorylate YAP1/TAZ, they remain in the cytoplasm. When dephosphorylated, YAP1/TAZ translocate into the nucleus and interact with TEAD1-4 DNA binding proteins to induce the expression of genes that promote proliferation. While the importance of YAP1 in CM proliferation has been demonstrated, , only a few studies showed that YAP1 has a role in cell-fate decisions of CPCs. For example, in zebrafish, knockout of the Hippo kinases increased the number of atrial CMs, without affecting the proliferation of CPCs or the number of ventricular CMs. This suggests that YAP1 regulates atrial differentiation in zebrafish. However, the role of YAP1 in the differentiation of CPCs and the structure of the heart in mammals remains elusive.
In this study, we report that YAP1 is a transcriptional regulator of atrial lineage genes in human and mouse models of heart development. In hCPCs, RA signaling activates lineage enhancers containing YAP1 and TEAD4 proteins along with other key cardiac TFs, such as NR2F2 and GATA3. Single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) analysis on mouse embryos revealed that YAP1 activates the expression of RA target genes in the CPCs of the SHF, including Nr2f2, while repressing AHF genes such as Mef2c. Furthermore, Yap1 deletion leads to persistent expression of Hand1, a typical ventricular marker. , Consistent with these results, we show that YAP1 regulates the formation of an atrial chamber in hESC-derived heart organoids, while the ventricle chamber is unperturbed. Overall, the data presented reveal that YAP1 is integrated within the RA-dependent enhancer TF network of CPCs and regulates the acquisition of atrial lineages.

## RESULTS

## RA-induced transcriptome changes are captured in hCPCs
To gain insight into the mechanisms of RA in the specification of hCPCs, we utilized hESCs to model the developmental steps toward the acquisition of atrial and ventricular cardiac lineages. hESCs are differentiated to ventricular CMs following a temporal modulation of Wnt signaling (GiWi protocol ). However, the addition of 1 μM RA to the media of early hCPCs, from day 4 to day 7, is sufficient to rewire the differentiation of hCPCs toward an atrial-like CM fate ( and ). We performed single-cell transcriptome analysis at differentiation day 5 in the presence (RAplus) or absence of RA (RAminus) for 24 h. We identified two predominant populations in our cultures, one corresponding to hCPCs (PDGFRA+), , and another expressing high levels of endoderm markers such as FOXA2 (PDGFRA−), which lacks cardiac potential ( ). We found 159 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in RAplus versus RAminus hCPCs (64 upregulated and 95 downregulated, abs(Log2FC) ≥ 0.5 and adj p < 0.01) ( ; ). Untreated hCPCs expressed genes typically enriched in ventricular precursor genes, such as ISL1, whereas RA-treated hCPCs showed downregulation of these markers and increased levels of posterior-like SHF genes such as MEIS2 and HOXB1 genes , ( , , and ). Thus, our hESC-derived, untreated and RA-treated hCPCs, express markers of ventricular and atrial progenitors, respectively. This is consistent with the developmental potential of these cells; scRNA-seq analysis on cell cultures at differentiation day 30 showed that the RAplus hCPCs preferentially differentiate into atrial-like CMs (TNNT2+
MYH6high
NPPAhigh
NR2F2high) compared with the RAminus hCPCs, which mostly differentiate into ventricular-like CMs (TNNT2+
MYL2high
LBHhigh
MYH7high) ( and – ; ). Further analysis revealed that the day 30 cultures were primarily composed of two major populations: CMs (TNNT2+; ~50%–60% of total cells) and smooth muscle cells (MYL12B+ TNNT2−; 40%–45% of total cells), which are present in similar proportions in CMs derived from RAminus and RAplus hCPCs ( – ). However, as expected, most of the TNNT2+ CMs in the RAplus culture are enriched in atrial markers compared with RAminus ( ). We conclude that our cardiac induction strategy in hESCs effectively generated ventricular and atrial-like hCPCs and CMs in the absence and presence of RA, respectively.
 

## RA signaling induces the opening of TEAD4-containing enhancers
To uncover mechanisms involved in the specification in hCPCs in response to RA signaling, we applied single-nuclei ATAC sequencing (snATAC-seq) technology , to our RAplus and RAminus day 5 differentiation cultures. Similar to the scRNA-seq, two predominant hCPCs and endoderm populations were identified by differential chromatin accessibility of key lineage genes, including TNNT2 (CPCs) and FOXA2 (endoderm) ( ). The RA treatment profoundly remodeled the chromatin accessibility profile of hCPCs: we found 11,800 differentially activated regions (DARs) in RAplus versus RAminus hCPCs, while 7,456 lost DNA accessibility ( ). Of these, 5,586 and 4,793 were associated to protein coding genes, respectively ( and ). Most of these genes were grouped in gene ontology (GO) categories related to heart formation ( ), and a fraction of them showed changes in gene expression ( ; ).
 We ran a DNA motif analysis through RA-regulated regions. Among the less-accessible regions, the TGIF1 binding motif was the most impacted in response to RA ( ). TGIF1 is an inhibitor of the RA-dependent RXR alpha transcription. , The HAND1 and HAND2-recognized motifs also lost accessibility, correlating with the downregulation of HAND1 observed in RA-treated cells ( and ). Among the regions that gained accessibility, we found DNA motifs bound by the TFs GATA3, HOXA1, MEIS1/2, FOXP1/2, and NR2F2. These TFs have recognized roles in cardiac development and/or SHF differentiation. For example, GATA3, HOXA1, FOXP1, and MEIS1 are necessary for conotruncal development, consistent with relevant roles in SHF differentiation. , – Meanwhile, NR2F2 functions as an atrial specifier. , , Furthermore, these TFs are known to be induced by RA signaling, , , – making their enrichment in RA-treated hCPCs an expected outcome. Interestingly, we found that 4,111 of the RA-opened sites contain the motif recognized by TEAD4 (the third motif most enriched, and ; ). TEAD4 is a key downstream effector of the Hippo signaling pathway. TEADs rely heavily on YAP1 for their transcriptional activity and, while they have been extensively studied in the context of CM proliferation, , the involvement of YAP1:TEAD complexes in CPC differentiation is poorly understood. , , Additionally, their role in mediating the activities of RA signaling remains unknown. Therefore, we sought to investigate their contribution to RA signaling during CPC differentiation.
Most of the DARs containing TEAD4 motifs are located in regions distal to gene TSSs ( ), consistent with the known association of YAP1 and TEADs at enhancers. Accordingly, 2,402 out of the 4,111 DARs were co-occupied by the typical enhancer mark H3K4me1 ( ). Furthermore, GO analysis revealed that these RA-induced TEAD4 DARs lie near genes controlling cardiac chamber development and CM differentiation ( ). Interestingly, up to 79.6% and 65.1% of RA-induced TEAD4-DARs contain motifs recognized by the TFs NR2F2 and GATA3, suggesting that these factors bind the same enhancers in response to RA. Other motifs significantly associated were MEIS1/2 and FOXP1 ( and ). To confirm the presence of TEAD4 protein in these enhancers, we performed ChIP-seq analysis of TEAD4 in RA-treated hCPCs. We identified 4,679 TEAD4 peaks in the chromatin of RA-treated hCPCs and a strong association with RA-DARs containing TEAD4 motifs ( and ). Altogether, these data show that RA induces lineage enhancers containing TEAD4 proteins ( ).

## YAP1 binds RA-lineage enhancers containing TEAD4
In general, TEAD TFs associate to co-repressors in a closed-chromatin conformation status and the binding of YAP1 releases the co-repressors and opens the chromatin to regulate transcription. We observed that RA triggers the opening of chromatin regions containing TEAD4; thus, we speculate that RA induces YAP1 binding to these sites. ChIP-seq analysis of YAP1 and TEAD4 shows that RA treatment triggers a widespread increase in YAP1 binding to RA-induced DARs containing TEAD4 bound motifs ( ; and ). Approximately 10% of total YAP1 peaks (670 out of 6,428) associated with RA-induced DARs ( ), and strongly associated with TEAD4 motifs-containing DARs (531 out of 670, chi-squared test for independence p value of 2.26e–16, and ). We validated YAP1 and TEAD4 binding dynamics by ChIP-qPCR analysis on RA-induced TEAD4 enhancers near RA-regulated target genes ( , , , and ). Consistent with the ChIP-seq data, our ChIP-qPCR analysis revealed that YAP1 binding significantly increased in response to RA in the majority of the tested regions, while TEAD4 binding increased in some of the analyzed regions ( , , , and ). This is expected, as TEAD4 binding to the chromatin is more stable and less dynamic than YAP1’s. , 
 RA-induced TEAD4 enhancers often contained motifs bound by other key TFs, including GATA3 and NR2F2 ( , , and ). To further explore their involvement, we performed ChIP-qPCR analysis to assess NR2F2 and GATA3 recruitment in response to RA on the TEAD4-containing enhancers near LBH, APOA2, and NPPB genes. As shown in , RA treatment led to the concomitant recruitment of YAP1, GATA3, and NR2F2 to TEAD4-bound enhancers. To further investigate the likelihood of a molecular complex involving these factors, we employed AlphaFold3 molecular modeling to predict their binding configurations on the NPPB promoter. The DNA sequences preserve the order of the original cognate DNA motifs on a portion of the promoter, and addition of TEAD4, NR2F2, GATA3, and YAP1 proteins yields coherent and strong models that further demonstrate the simultaneous binding of these TFs to chromatin ( and , and for details).

## YAP1 regulates RA-lineage enhancers containing TEAD4
To interrogate whether the opening of RA-induced TEAD4 sites in hCPCs are YAP1-dependent, we performed snATAC-seq experiments in RA-treated YAP1 knockout (KO) hCPCs (day 5), and compared with wild-type (WT). Globally, we identified 7,066 DNA regions that lost accessibility in YAP1 KO compared with WT hCPCs, while 989 regions gained accessibility, consistent with a general role of YAP1 in facilitating chromatin opening ( ). Among the RA-induced chromatin regions, 1,722 lost accessibility in the YAP1 KO, from which 1,275 (75%) contained TEAD4 motif-activated regions ( and ). Interestingly, motifs bound by GATA and MEIS TFs, which were enriched in the TEAD4 containing enhancers ( ), also lost accessibility ( ). Furthermore, the GO analysis of the RA- and YAP1-regulated chromatin regions showed enrichment on critical cardiac development terms, including CM differentiation ( ). Overall, these findings show that YAP1 is necessary for the opening of critical RA enhancers in hCPCs.
 

## YAP1 regulates RA target genes in hCPCs
We analyzed how YAP1 levels affect the transcriptome of the RA-treated hCPCs by scRNA-seq analysis. Similar to WT, we identified two main populations corresponding to CPCs and endodermal cells in the YAP1 KO day 5 cultures ( ). Our analysis showed that YAP1 deletion affected the expression levels of 74 genes (41 upregulated and 33 downregulated, abs (Log2FC) ≥ 0.5 and adj p < 0.01, ; ). Among these, we identified the typical NR2F2-repressed genes APOA1 and APOA2, which are also direct YAP1 targets ( and ), and other RA target genes involved in heart development, including KDR, 
CHCHD10, 
GYPB, and HAS2 ( ). We also found specific atrial genes downregulated in the YAP1 KO hCPCs, including MYL7, 
ACTC1, and NPPB. – Conversly, ventricular lineage genes, such as HAND1 and MEF2C were upregulated in the YAP1 KO hCPCs ( and ). Furthermore, GO analysis of DEGs further supports the relevance of YAP1 target genes in CPC differentiation and heart development ( ). We detected YAP1 binding peaks on MYL7 and NPPB loci, suggesting that YAP1 directly activate these atrial genes ( and ). Some repressed genes, including APOA2, were also direct YAP1 targets. We did not detect YAP1 binding on HAND1 or ACTC1 genes, suggesting that these are indirect targets ( ). Overall, these results underscore transcriptionally positive and negative activities of YAP1-bound enhancers, consistent with previous findings, to activate RA-induced lineage genes while repressing alternative cell fates.

## YAP1 compromises the transcriptome of atrial-like CMs in directed differentiation approaches
To test whether YAP1 affects the differentiation of RA-treated CPCs, we let the RA-treated YAP1 KO hCPCs differentiate toward atrial-like CMs (aCMs). No significant differences were observed in the number of YAP1 KO and WT cells throughout differentiation, suggesting that YAP1 is dispensable for the survival and/or proliferation of cells during 2D differentiation ( ). Furthermore, RA-treated YAP1 KO hCPCs efficiently differentiate into beating CMs ( ). However, scRNA-seq analysis revealed critical developmental genes differentially expressed in the YAP1 KO aCMs compared with WT ( and ; ). These genes include HES1, a NOTCH target gene expressed in the SHF, important for development of the outflow tract, and ACTA1, which has been implicated in myopathies affecting the heart. Also, YAP1 KO aCMs expressed higher levels of genes typically enriched in ventricular CMs, such as LBH, compared with WT. Convergently, the expression of common atrial markers, such as NPPA and KCNA5, , were reduced in the YAP1-deleted aCMs ( ). We also identified a group of genes involved in Ca2+ signaling, including phospholamban, SERCA, and CHCHD2 ( – ). Altogether, these results show that YAP1 deletion disturbs the atrial CM transcriptome and suggest potential defects in the differentiation program.

## YAP1 regulates the development of an atrial chamber in human patterned heart organoids
To further dissect the role of YAP1 in heart chamber development, we incorporated a pioneer model of hESC-derived heart organoids. , These organoids develop from hESCs in a self-assembly fashion and develop distinct atrial and ventricular chambers, facilitated by the activity of an endogenous RA gradient originated from a proepicardium (PE)-like organ ( ). YAP1 KO organoids develop effectively from day 0 to day 30, although the KO organoids are smaller and more elongated than WT ( , , and ).
 To analyze the contribution of YAP1 to the acquisition of atrial and ventricular lineages in the organoids, we performed analysis of atrial (NR2F2, GJA5, and NPPA) and ventricular (MYL2, MYL3, and MYH7) CM-specific genes during organoid development, from day 10 to day 30. While the ventricular genes are consistently upregulated from day 20 to day 30, the atrial markers, are significantly reduced in the KO organoids versus WT ( ). The increase in ventricular markers correlated with increased expression of the pan-CM marker gene TNNT2 in the YAP1 KO organoids, suggesting that the overall CM differentiation was not impaired by YAP1 deletion ( ).
Furthermore, previous studies have shown that treating the organoids with an RA inhibitor from day 20 onwards is sufficient to prevent chamber patterning induction. We interrogated whether YAP1 inhibition in this developmental window is sufficient to recapitulate the RA deficiency effect. We treated H9-derived WT organoids with the YAP1 inhibitor dasatinib from day 20 to day 30. Compared with untreated organoids, dasatinib (YAP1)-treated organoids had reduced atrial marker expression, including NR2F2, while the expression of MYL3 was upregulated, in alignment with the YAP1 KO results ( ).
To further assess how YAP1 impacts the formation of the chambers, we analyzed the size of atrial and ventricular chambers by measuring the areas stained by well-established ventricular (MYL3) and atrial (NR2F2) restricted markers, normalized to organoid size (measured by DAPI area), by IF analyses on day 30. The analysis revealed that the size of the ventricle chamber is similar in WT and YAP1 KO organoids. Strikingly, the area of the atrial chamber is significantly reduced in the YAP1-deleted organoids ( and ).
As mentioned above, organoids derived from YAP1 KO hESCs are smaller than WT ( ). We analyzed the proliferation marker Ki67 throughout organoid differentiation and found a significant reduction in the KO organoids compared with WT ( – ). However, the decrease in Ki67 levels was more pronounced in later stages of differentiation ( ) and in the CM population ( and ). The reduced proliferation was not sufficient to compromise the overall CM count at day 30, as demonstrated by the proportion of TNNT2+ cells in the KO organoids compared with WT ( and ).
We conclude that, although YAP1 deletion may impact the proliferation of atrial CMs in KO organoids, this alone does not explain the differences observed in atrial and ventricular chamber size or CM subtype marker expression throughout differentiation. Instead, our findings support an important role for YAP1 in directing CPC differentiation toward atrial lineages, affecting atrial chamber development while promoting ventricular fate.

## YAP1 regulates PE development in the heart organoids
During development, CPCs exposed to RA signaling also differentiate to form a PE organ, a transient developmental structure that develops near the posterior part of the heart tube and releases paracrine signals, including RA, to pattern the heart tube and the formation of atrial and ventricular chambers , – ( ). Notably, we found that YAP1 KO organoids have an underdeveloped PE, as shown by significant reduction in the areas stained by WT-1 and ALDH1A2 proteins compared with WT ( ). The reduction in PE organ development is consistent with YAP1 deletion, causing an impaired RA signaling activity in the CPCs during heart development. Furthermore, our findings align with previous studies suggesting a potential role for YAP1/TAZ in epicardium development in mouse models. 
Therefore, we conclude that YAP1 is necessary for the proper expression of RA signaling genes in CPCs and its deletion affects the formation of the atrial chamber and PE in human heart organoids.

## Efficient depletion of YAP1 levels in embryonic clusters of late gastrulating mouse embryos
Recent evidence suggests that the distinct cardiac progenitor populations are specified as they emerge from the differentiating epiblast cells of the gastrula. , Thus, to interrogate the role of YAP1 in cardiac specification in vivo, we used a Yap1Flox/Flox:Soxcre system to conditionally delete Yap1 in the epiblast ( ). Sox2 is expressed in the pluripotent cells that undergo gastrulation, generating the three germinal layers: ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm. Among these, the mesoderm layer harbors the different CPC pools. , We performed scRNA-seq analysis on E7.75 embryos, which by our eye staging corresponds to a late streak ( and ).
 Following optimized procedures in our lab, 10 Yap1 cKO (Yap1Flox/Flox:Soxcre) and 7 control (Yap1Flox/+:Soxcre) embryos were processed for sequencing ( – ). We annotated 19 clusters based on the expression of known markers, including the three main CPC populations: FHF (Tbx5+), SHF (Tbx1+), and the recently discovered Juxta Cardiac Field (Mab21L2+) ( , , and ). Importantly, Yap1 deletion was confirmed in all Sox2+-derived clusters in the Yap1 cKO embryos ( ). Consistent with our in vitro findings, conditional Yap1 deletion did not negatively impact cell-cycle progression ( ).
All Yap1 cKO cells could be projected to control cell populations, but in varying proportions ( and ). The pseudotime analysis identified 8 trajectories ( , , and ). The hematopoietic trajectory showed accelerated differentiation in Yap1 cKO embryos, correlating with an increase in hematopoietic precursors ( , , and ). Other primitive streak-derived lineages, including cardiac and mesodermal lineages, exhibited only slight acceleration. We observed a reduction in the number of Yap1 cKO cells in the epiblast and surface ectoderm, corresponding to trajectory 8, that exhibited delayed differentiation in Yap1 cKO embryos compared with controls ( , , and ). We conclude that deletion of Yap1 in the Sox2cre lineage accelerates epiblast differentiation toward primitive streak-derived lineages, with the strongest effects in early hematopoietic trajectories.

## Yap1 regulates the transcriptome of the cardiac fields
Among the 19 clusters identified, the 3 heart fields were the ones with the highest number of DEGs in the Yap1 cKO compared with control embryos ( ; ). We identified 590 DEGs in the SHF (abs(Log2FC) > 0.25, adj p < 0.05), 322 upregulated and 268 downregulated ( and ). Many of the DEGs, including Six1, 
Cited2, 
Smarcd3, and Chd7, are involved in the formation of heart structures derived from the SHF progenitors; such as the outflow tract, arteries, and septum ( ). Importantly, we also found DEGs directly involved in the patterning of the SHF cells. Following the trend we observed in vitro, the pSHF marker Nr2f2 was downregulated, and the AHF markers Gata6, 
Mef2c, , and Irx5 were upregulated in the Yap1 KO SHF cells ( and ). RT-qPCR and western blot (WB) analyses confirmed the same regulation trends for critical SHF genes ( and ). Yap1 cKO embryos die around E9 before chambers develop ( ), but analysis on E8.25 embryos confirmed a persistent reduction in NR2F2 protein levels, along with reduction in the atrial-enriched protein NPPA ( ) in the Yap1 cKO compared with controls.
Correlating with our in vitro data ( ), the scRNA-seq analysis of E7.75 embryos revealed Hand1 upregulation in the cardiac mesoderm cluster (cluster 3, Log2FC 0.43, adj p = 0.000144, ) of Yap1 cKO embryos compared with controls. This increase was also confirmed by RNAscope ( ) and WB analysis ( and ). To further assess the role of Yap1 in the cell-fate decisions of the CPCs, we introduced an additional Cre line to delete Yap1 specifically in cardiac lineages. For this, we used the Mesp1cre/+ knockin strain where Cre is expressed at E6.5 in the cardiogenic mesoderm. WB analysis of E9 Mesp1cre/+:Yap1fl/fl embryos reiterated a reduction in NR2F2 and increased in HAND1 levels in the cKOs compared with controls. We did not detect differences in TNNT2 expression, suggesting that the conditional Yap1 deletion did not compromise overall CM differentiation ( ), following the same trends that we observed in the organoids ( ). Altogether, these findings further support a specific role of Yap1 in the regulation of cardiac lineage genes in vivo.

## Yap1 regulates the activity of the RA signaling pathway in the embryo
To test whether Yap1 deletion affects the overall activity of RA signaling pathway, we performed a single-cell pathway enrichment analysis (SCPA ) focused on the vitamin A/RA pathway in Yap1 cKO versus control embryos. Interestingly, vitamin A/RA pathway genes were significantly enriched across the clusters of the cardiovascular trajectories, including the cardiac mesoderm, the FHF and SHF, along with the neuroectoderm and somitic mesoderm upon Yap1 deletion ( and ). Accordingly, the RA target gene Hotairm1 was downregulated across several of these clusters in the Yap1 cKO embryos, while Hdac1 and Ncoa2, typical RAR co-repressors, were upregulated ( and ; ). We also observed DEGs involved in the activity of the vitamin A/RA pathway. For instance, in the SHF, Rbp1, which transports retinol inside the cell was low in Yap1 cKO compared with controls, and Cyp26a1, the enzyme responsible for RA degradation was upregulated ( , , , and ). We also observe a downregulation trend in Aldh1a2 levels, the enzyme responsible for RA production, across clusters ( – ), in line with what we observed in the organoids ( ). Altogether these results show that Yap1 deletion alters vitamin A/RA metabolic genes and suggests that it may decrease the bioavailability of RA in the early embryo. Overall, we conclude that Yap1 regulates both RA target genes involved in lineage acquisition and pathway homeostasis in the embryo ( ).
 

## DISCUSSION
During heart development, RA signaling acts on the CPCs of the SHF to induce posterior fates, including atrial, sinus venosus, and PE lineages. , , – In this study, we discovered that the Hippo effector YAP1 regulates critical RA target genes in CPCs. Our findings show that RA treatment triggers YAP1 recruitment to cardiac enhancers, along with NR2F2 and GATA3 TFs. The deletion of YAP1 hinders the RA-induced opening of enhancers and expression of lineage genes. In agreement, we also found that YAP1 regulates the formation of an atrial chamber and PE organ in hESC-derived heart organoids, while it is dispensable for ventricle development. Our in vivo analysis further supports these findings by showing that YAP1 regulates the activity of vitamin A/RA in the early embryo and the expression of genes involved in the anterior-posterior patterning of the SHF.
Our findings are consistent with previous observations in mouse embryos, which demonstrated that enhancers containing TEAD motifs are significantly enriched in the CPCs of the pSHF compared with the AHF and are predicted to be SHF lineage determinants. However, the role of these enhancers had not yet been tested experimentally. Our studies reveal that the RA signaling is the input that induces the activation of TEAD enhancers in the CPCs through the recruitment of YAP1.
Our data suggest that the majority of RA-induced TEAD4 enhancers also contain NR2F2 and GATA3 proteins. However, we did not resolve the TF hierarchy of these enhancers. While TEAD4 TFs are already bound to the enhancers in the absence of stimuli (in this case RA), it is unclear whether NR2F2 or GATA3 recruit YAP1, or if YAP1 brings these factors to open the enhancers. Our molecular modeling analysis supports a model where the DNA binding domain of these TFs engaged the major groove of the DNA at their respective cognate motif sequences in the DNA. However, the model does not support direct protein-protein interactions between TEAD4 and NR2F2 or between TEAD4 and GATA3. This finding aligns with a model in which enhancer accessibility is facilitated by a pioneer-like factor (i.e., GATA TFs) or a TF with chromatin remodeling capacities (i.e., YAP1 ) facilitates the recruitment of additional TFs by exposing their respective DNA motifs.
Previous studies in mouse embryos reported that conditional Yap1 deletion in the cardiac lineage leads to hypoplastic hearts without significantly affecting overall heart structure, suggesting that Yap1 does not control differentiation of CPCs. , To the best of our knowledge, the earliest ablation of Yap1 in the cardiac lineage in mice was done using a knockin Nkx2.5-cre mouse line, which drives Yap1 deletion at E7.5 in the cardiac progenitors of the cardiac crescent. This Yap1 cKO impaired CM proliferation, leading to severe myocardium hypoplasia and embryonic lethality. However, this model is not suitable for studying the role of YAP1 in CPCs for a few reasons. First, the Nkx2.5-cre driver becomes active at ~ E7.5, which is too late, as evidence show that CPCs commit to their lineages during gastrulation at ~ E6.5. , Second, the Nkx2.5-Cre driver is mostly active in CPCs committed to ventricle lineages, , as other CPCs (atrial committed CPCs , or CPCs from the Juxta Cardiac Field ) do not express Nkx2.5. Using a Sox2-cre driver, that deleted Yap1 around E5.5 in the pluripotent cells of the epiblast, we uncovered additional YAP1-target genes in the CPCs. Among them, we identified Nr2f2, Hand1, and Mef2c genes, master regulators of CPC differentiation and chamber development, , which strongly support the notion that YAP1 participates in the cellfate decisions of the CPCs in vivo. However, additional studies are still necessary to assess how YAP1 activities in the CPCs impact the anatomy of the heart in vivo (see ).
We found that YAP1 regulates transcription of RA target genes involved in vitamin A homeostasis. Vitamin A homeostasis refers to the capacity to maintain the pathway’s activity despite a range of fluctuations in substrate availability. Mutations in the genes that regulate RA production or activity disrupt vitamin A homeostasis and impact heart development. These include family members of ALDH (RA producers) and CYP26 enzymes , (RA degraders), CRBPs (RA transporters), and downstream effectors, such as NR2F2. , Furthermore, vitamin A activity can also be impacted by mutations in cardiac genes. A vivid example is the TBX1 gene, whose haploinsufficiency causes heart phenotypes in DiGeorge syndrome. , Mice lacking Tbx1 have altered vitamin A/RA activity and expression of ALDH1A2 and CYP26 enzymes. , Thus, it would be interesting to investigate the contribution of YAP1 to vitamin A dysregulation in patients with structural defects in the heart, such as DiGeorge syndrome.
Overall, our work defines an axis composed by the vitamin A/RA and YAP1 signaling pathways relevant for heart development. Furthermore, the revelation of YAP1’s role in the patterning of the chambers could be leverage for advancing organoid engineering by using small molecules to modulate YAP1 activity to precisely steer chamber development.

## Limitations of the study
We acknowledge that our studies provide limited evidence on atrial chamber formation, in vivo. Addressing this limitation would require mouse models allowing transient YAP1 depletion during gastrulation. Conditional knockouts using Sox2-cre and Mesp1-cre are unsuitable for analyzing atrial chamber formation, as the mutant embryos die before the structure of the heart is formed. To investigate how YAP1’s role in CPCs impacts the heart structure, future efforts should focus on developing models enabling transient Yap1 depletion in mesoderm progenitors, followed by later rescue. Along these lines, we utilized the Sox2-Cre driver, which deletes Yap1 in the epiblast at around E5.5. , CPC development occurs rapidly after mesoderm emerges, and this driver ensures Yap1 deletion at the time of cardiac commitment. We validated critical genes using the Mesp1-Cre driver; where Cre is expressed in the cardiac mesoderm cells from E6.5. However, it also remains uncertain whether Mesp1-Cre deletes genes early enough to fully capture early cell-fate decisions of CPCs. Therefore, both Cre lines have inherent limitations in precisely defining YAP1’s role during early cardiac specification.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Conchi Estaras (conchi.estaras@temple.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
The sequencing data reported in this paper can be accessed at NCBI GEO with accession numbers: GSE271249, GSE270962, GSM5745696, GSM5745695.
This study does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Cell lines
All in vitro experiments were performed with either H1 (WAe001-A) or H9 (WAe009-A) human embryonic stem cells. The YAP1 KO H1 hESCs has been previously described by our lab. Sanger sequencing and WB analysis were performed to confirm YAP1 deletion. Cells are regularly tested for mycoplasma using published procedures and primers. All cell lines were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in a humidity-controlled environment.

## Mice
All animal work complied with ethical regulations for animal testing and research and was done in accordance with IACUC approval by Temple University and followed all AAALAC guidelines (IACUC protocol #4973). The Yap1fl/fl (Yap1tm1.1Dupa/J) and the Sox2cre mice (B6.Cg-Edil3<Tg(Sox2-cre)1Amc>/J) were purchased from Jackson laboratories. The Mesp1cre/+ was generated by Dr. Saga and kindly transferred by Dr. Astrof. Six to ten weeks old mice were used for breeding. Yap1fl/fl mice were crossed with Sox2cre/+:Yap1fl/+ or Mesp1cre/+:Yap1fl/x, to generate conditional YAP1 knockouts in the Sox2 lineage (Sox2cre/+:Yap1fl/fl) or Mesp1 lineage (Mesp1cre/+:Yap1fl/fl), respectively, and littermate controls. Only males were carrying the Sox2cre allele were used for the crossing due to known maternal inheritance of this Cre. 

## METHOD DETAILS

## hESC culture and directed cardiac differentiation
All experiments were performed using WT and YAP1 KO H1 hESCs previously described. These cells were cultured in mTESR1 media on 6-well Matrigel-coasted tissue culture plates. hESC colonies were split with 0.5mM PBS/EDTA to maintain stocks of the cells. Typically, cells were spilt at a 1:20 ratio every 5–7 days. For experiments, colonies were dissociated using Accutase and Rock inhibitor and counted with an automated cell counter per desired cell number. The differentiation protocol was adapted from previous publications. , Briefly, hESCs were passaged using trypsin or Accutase, and started differentiation when reached ~80% confluency. At day 0, hESCs were treated with 6 μM ChIR in double feed of mTESR1 media. The timing of the day was recorded so that media could be replaced exactly 24 h later. At day 1, exactly 24 h later, the media were replaced with RPMI/B-27 minus insulin. On day 3, half the media was removed from each well from plate, mixed with an equal amount of fresh RPMI/B27 minus, and 7.5μM IWP-2 was added. RA 1uM was added on day 4 for atrial induction. On day 5, media was changed to RPMI/B27 minus insulin. The CPC analyses were done on day 5 cultures. From day 7 onwards, media were exchanged for RPMI/B27 plus insulin and replenished every 3 days. Contraction of cells begin from day 8–10. The analysis of atrial and ventricular CMs were performed at day 30 of differentiation. Cell number was analyzed by dissociating the cells with Accutase, staining them with Trypan Blue solution, and counting viable cells using the Countess 3.

## Immunostaining staining and 2D imaging of hESCs-CMs
hESCs-derived CMs were dissociated using Accutase and plated in chambered glass slides coated with laminin. Cardiomyocytes were recovered in culture for 3–5 days before continuing. Cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature and wash two three times with DPBS−/−. After fixation, cells were permeabilization with 0.5% Triton in DPBS−/− for 20 min at room temperature. Cells were washed with DPBS−/− three times. Then incubated with blocking solution (3% Donkey serum in PBST) for 30 min at room temperature. Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking buffer and incubated overnight at 4°C. The next day, the cells were washed 3 times with DPBS−/− and incubated with 1 μg/ml DAPI for 10 min. Images were captured by a Nikon Eclipse Ti confocal microscope using Nikon NIS-Element AR software.

## Western blotting
For whole-cell protein analysis, samples from untreated and RA-treated CPCs were lysed with RIPA buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The samples were then placed on ice for 10 min and centrifuged at 5000g for 10 min. The supernatant containing the protein was collected. The protein concentration was quantified using the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Subsequently, protein samples (25ug) were loaded onto polyacrylamide Tris-glycine SDS gels and subjected to electrophoresis. Wet transfer was performed, and the gels were transferred to 0.45um PVDF membranes. These membranes were blocked for 1 h at room temperature in 2% BSA in TBST, followed by overnight incubation with the primary antibody at 4 °C. The next day, membranes were washed three times for 5 min with TBST and then incubated with secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. An additional three more occurs for 5 min each with TBST, chemiluminescence detection was used, and the membranes were imaged on a Chemidoc system.

## Methods for modeling AlphaFold3 protein-DNA complexes
Protein sequences and domain boundaries were refined from Uniprot entries for the following transcription factors: TEAD4_HUMAN (Q15561), COT2_HUMAN (P24468 – also known as NR2F2), GATA3_HUMAN (P23771), and YAP1_HUMAN (P46937).
The AlphaFold3 (AF3) was utilized to model transcription factors bound to DNA to form a variety of complexes with various stoichiometries. Given the experimental evidence for transcription factor binding to the NPPB promoter presented in this work, a 71 base-pair portion of this promoter was chosen as it contained two TEAD4 cognate binding sites, a NR2F2 cognate binding site and a GATA3 cognate binding site ( ). To make a model for this specific portion of the NPPB promoter, two TEAD4 protein monomers, and a single monomer of NR2F2 and GATA3 proteins were utilized. Subsequently for simplicity of presentation, we also used AF3 with a shorter DNA that contains the same cognate binding sites in the same order, but removed 29 base-pairs from the large gap in the middle, resulting in a 42 base-pair DNA. In all cases, the models produced had the DNA-binding domains of each protein positioned precisely to allow extensive binding contacts between the main DNA-binding helix to the major groove of the cognate DNA sequence. In comparing TEAD4 binding to its cognate sequence, the AF3 model shared 9 of the 14 hydrogen bonds found in the known X-ray crystal structure PDB code 5GZB.
Both TEAD4 and NR2F2 have N-terminal DNA binding domains followed by a flexible unstructured linker which connects to a second folded effector domain in the C-terminal half of the protein. The cognate DNA sequence strictly governed the position of the N-terminal DNA binding domains, while the flexible linker allowed many different positions for the C-terminal domains among the various models sampled. AF3 consistently did not predict stable heterodimeric protein-protein interactions between the following possible three protein pairs: TEAD4-NR2F2, TEAD4-GATA3, NR2F2-GATA3. In contrast, modeling with two TEAD4 proteins showed that the TEAD4 C-terminal YAP binding domain forms a homodimer interface in all models observed so far. This TEAD4 homodimer forms a moderately weak interface in the absence of YAP1. However, when YAP1 is present (especially residues 50–100) it acts like “molecular glue” to hold two TEAD4 proteins together. A beta strand from YAP1 inserts between the two TEAD4 protein domains to form a tighter interface that AF3 predicts to be more stable. (see second figure panel with YAP1 peptide in gold color). While previous crystal structures have shown mouse (3JUA) and human (8A8R) YAP1 wrapping around a single TEAD4 domain, these AF3 models are the first to demonstrate a YAP1 peptide inserting between two TEAD4 C-terminal domains. Super positioning of protein-DNA complexes, analysis of interfaces and contacts, and figure preparation were done with ChimeraX. N-terminal trimming of proteins used in modeling. Most of the AF3 modeling used full-length canonical protein sequences from Uniprot. To optimize AF3 modeling, some models were built with protein sequences that trim away flexible unstructured N-terminal tails as follows: TEAD4(1–32) and NR2F2 (1–75).

## Generation of hESC-derived patterned cardiac organoids
H1 (WT and YAP1 KO) and WT H9 hESCs were cultured in Essential 8 Flex Medium with 1% penicillin streptomycin (Gibco) in 6-well plates on growth factor reduced Matrigel (Corning) inside an incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2. hESCs were passaged using ReLeSR passaging reagent (STEMCELL) upon reaching 60–80% confluency. Organoid formation comprised two phases. From Day 0 to Day 20, cardiac bodies were generated as previously described. In the second phase, cardiac spheres were induced to maturation using the EMM2/1 developmental induction media from Day 20 to Day 30 as shown previously. Cardiac organoids were processed at the indicated timepoints or let differentiate until Day 30, as specified. For YAP1 inhibitor experiments, 5μM Dasatinib was added to the media from Day 30 to Day 30 to developing WT H9 organoids. Organoids were collected on Day 30 for downstream analysis.

## Immunofluorescence, confocal microscopy, and image analysis of organoids
hESC-cardiac organoids were transferred to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes using a cut 200 μL pipette. Organoids were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 30 min. Following this, organoids were washed using PBS-Glycine (1.5 g/L) three times for 5 min each. Organoids were then blocked and permeabilized using a solution containing 10% donkey normal serum, 0.5% Triton X-100, and 0.5% BSA in PBS on a thermal mixer at 300 RPM at 4°C overnight. Organoids were then washed with PBS and incubated with primary antibodies in a solution containing 1% Donkey Normal Serum, 0.5% Triton X-100, and 0.5% BSA in PBS on a thermal mixer at 300 rpm at 4°C for 24 h. Following this, organoids were washed with PBS. Organoids were then incubated with secondary antibodies on a thermal mixer at 300 rpm at 4°C for 24 h in the dark. Subsequently, organoids were washed with PBS and mounted on glass microscope slides. To retain three-dimensionality, 90-μm polybead microspheres were placed between the slide and a No. 1.5 coverslip to provide support pillars. Organoids were imaged using a Nikon A1 Confocal. Images were analyzed using ImageJ. When comparing images across or between conditions, for each channel of an image being measured, pixel intensity values were equalized to that of the H1 WT condition. The circularity index was calculated using the following formula: Circularity Index = 4*pi*(Area)/(Perimeter∧2).

## Isolation of RNA, cDNA conversion, and qPCR
hESC cardiac organoids were collected into a 1.7mL tube, washed twice with PBS, and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA isolation. Mouse embryos were snap-frozen immediately after isolation and processed once genotyping was confirmed. RNA isolation was initiated by adding Trizol to each organoid or mouse embryo. Chloroform was then added immediately, and the samples were mixed by hand for 5 min at room temperature. The samples were centrifuged at 5000g for 15 min at room temperature, and the aqueous phase was transferred to a new tube on ice. Due to the relatively small number of cells, Glycoblue was added to the aqueous phase along with isopropanol to aid RNA precipitation. The samples were mixed by hand, incubated for 40 min at room temperature, and then centrifuged for 45 min at 5000 g at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the resulting blue pellet was washed twice with ethanol and centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 g at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was dried on ice for 5 min to remove any traces of ethanol. The pellet was resuspended in water and quantified using a Nanodrop. A total of 250ng of RNA was reverse transcribed using the iScript Reverse Transcription Supermix. cDNA samples were then amplified using either FAST SYBR Green Master Mix or PowerUp SYBER Master Mix on a Quant Studio 3. Relative transcript abundance was calucated using the ΔΔCt method with GAPDH as the reference gene.

## ChIP-qPCR and ChIP-seq procedures
ChIP experiments were performed as previously described. In short, the cells were double crosslinked with 2mM di (N-succinimidyl) glutarate (DSG) for 45 min followed by 1% formaldehyde for an additional 15 min, at room temperature. Fixed cells were lysed and sonicated using a probe sonicator. The chromatin was then centrifuged at max speed for 30min. Supernatant containing the chromatin was collected and subjected to overnight incubation with specific antibodies at 4°C. Subsequently, DNA purification was carried out using the Qiaquick PCR purification kit (QIAGEN, 28106). For ChIP-qPCR analysis, DNA was eluted in 75ul of elution buffer, with 2ul used for each qPCR reaction. Amplification was performed utilizing SYBR Green master mix and conducted in a QuantStudio3 instrument. ChIP-seq experiments were performed in the same fashion as ChIP-qPCR. The NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library Prep Kit was used for library preparation followed high-throughput sequencing using NextSeq1000.

## ChIP-seq analysis
ChIP fragments were sequenced in an Illumina sequencer. Reads were aligned to the Human hg19 genome assembly (NCBI Build 37) using STAR (v2.5.1b, doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635. Dobin et al. ) with default parameters. Reads soft-clipping and splicing were turned off by specifying ‘–alignEndsType EndtoEnd – alignIntronMax 1’ for ChIP-Seq mapping. Only reads that mapped uniquely to the genome were considered for further analysis. Peak finding, motif finding and peak annotation, genome browser read density files were performed using HOMER (v4.9.1). Peaks were identified using ‘findpeaks’ program, using input condition as background reference and default parameters (4-fold enrichment over input control, 4-fold enrichment over local tag count, a Possion p-value of 1e-4, and style factor). Peaks were annotated by associating with the closest RefSeq defined TSS by the ‘annotatePeaks’ program in HOMER. Overlapping peaks of YAP ChIP-seq with RA-ATACseq peaks was performed using ‘merge-Peaks’ with parameters ‘-d given’.

## Embryo isolation and scRNAseq procedure of E7.75 embryos
We followed procedures for the single-cell analysis of perigastrulating mouse embryos that we previously optimized in the Estaras lab. To analyze conditional Yap1 KO embryos, timed pregnancies were calculated from the noon of the day of the vaginal plug, considered E0.5. Thus, embryos were isolated seven days later at 3p.m., which corresponds to E7.75. The visceral yolk sac was collected for same-day genotyping for Cre and flox. For the single-cell RNAseq experiments, multiple pregnancies were synchronized to obtain enough number of embryos with desired genotype. For the single-cell analysis, 10 cYap1 KO embryos (sox2cre: Yapfl/fl) and 7 heterozygous controls (sox2cre:Yapfl/+) were processed. After genotyping, embryos were pooled and dissociated using trypsin for 5 min at 37°C. After 5 min, trypsin was neutralized with three times the amount of DMEM/10% FBS. The 10x Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ GEM, Library & Gel Bead Kit v3.1 was used. Generation of gel beads in emulsion, barcoding, GEM-RT cleanup, complementary DNA amplification, and library construction were all performed as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Qubit and tapestation were used for library quantification before pooling. Libraries were pooled and sequenced using NextSeq2000.

## scRNAseq analysis of E7.75 embryos
Single cell sequencing reads were counted individually for each sample using cellranger (v7.1.0) with default parameter. Detection of doublet and cells contaminated with ambient RNA were assessed using scrublet and soupX (v1.6.2), in R and Python, respectively. Low-quality cells, including doublets, cells with over 25% mitochondrial content, and those expressing fewer than 2000 RNA features, were filtered out. Most analysis were performed using the Seurat R package (v4.3.0), including quality control plots generated with FeatureScatter and VlnPlot Seurat’ functions. Samples were normalized and variance stabilized using the SCTransform function in Seurat, regressing out variables including nCount_RNA, percent.mt, percent.rb, S.Score, and G2M.Score. Principal component analysis (PCA) was run with 19 principal components for both samples. The samples were then integrated using Seurat’s SelectIntegrationFeatures, PrepSCTIntegration, FindIntegrationAnchors, and IntegrateData functions with 3000 selected features and the SCTransform normalization method. For visualization of gene expression in UMAP, and heatmap, the SCT, and RNA assay were used, respectively. Differential gene expression analysis for each cluster between genotypes was performed on the RNA assay using the FindMarkers Seurat function after log normalization and scaling. Genes were considered differentially expressed when adjusted p-value, based on Bonferroni correction was below 0.05. Cell type count differences between genotypes for each cell types were assessed by randomly downsampling WT samples 100 times to the same number of cells as the cYap1 KO sample (3,621 cells). For each iteration, the number of cells in each cluster was counted. Chi-squared tests with Bonferroni correction were used to assessed significant differences in cell counts between genotypes across clusters. Pathway analysis was performed using the SCPA R package (v1.5.4) with curated gene lists selected from the MSigDB C2 database. Pseudotime trajectory analysis was generated using the condiments R package (v1.2.0). Trajectory inference was performed with the Slingshot package (v2.2.1) and visualized with the ggplot2 R packages. Gene ontology analysis was performed using the enrichR R package (v3.2) using the GO_Biological_Process_2023 library and visualized with ggplot2.

## scATACseq of hESC-CPCs and CMs and bioinformatics analysis
WT and YAP KO H1 Day 5 cell cultures (untreated and RA-treated) and Day 30 CMs (RA-treated) were processed for single-cell RNA-seq following procedures shown in . Two differentiation experiments were pooled for gem generation and library preparation using the 10x Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ GEM. Single cell sequencing reads were aligned to human reference genome hg19 and then counted individually for each sample using cellranger (v2.1.1) with default parameter. For quality-control filtering, aligned cell and transcript counts from each sample were processed by Seurat R package (v3.9.9) by removing low-quality cells and doublets containing over 10% of mitochondrial reads, fewer than 200 detected genes and over 10,000 detected genes. Samples were log normalized with NormalizedData function and the NormalizeData function and the top2K variable genes were identified with the FindVariableFeatures function. Principal component analysis (PCA) was run with 10 principal components for both samples. The samples were then integrated using Seurat’s merge function. Clusters were identified with the FindClusters function with a clustering resolution set to 0.4 and 0.8 for two datasets, respectively. Clusters with only one cell were removed. Differential gene expression analysis for each cluster between genotypes was performed on the RNA assay using the FindMarkers Seurat function with default Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test. Genes were considered differentially expressed when adjusted p-value, based on Bonferroni correction was below 0.01 and absolute value of fold change in log2 scale was higher than 0.5.

## Single-nuclei ATAC-sequencing (snATAC-seq) of hESC-CPCs and bioinformatics analysis
WT and YAP KO H1 Day 5 cell cultures (untreated and RA-treated) were used for snATAC-seq analysis. Two differentiation experiments were pooled for downstream processing. Sample preparation, library generation and single-cell sequencing snATAC-seq were carried out at the Center for Epigenomics at UCSD. The procedure followed the protocol described in Cusanovich et al.(Cusanovich et al., 2015). Briefly, DMSO-frozen hESCs were thawed in 37°C water bath until liquid (~2–3 min) and immediately placed on ice. Nuclei were isolated and permeabilized using OMNI buffer (0.1% NP40, 0.1% Tween 20, 0.01% Digitonin) as described(Corces et al., 2017). Nuclei were counted, and 2k nuclei were dispensed per well; 96 wells per sample for tagmentation. After tagmentation (and addition of the first barcode), nuclei from individual samples were pooled. 20 nuclei from each sample were sorted per well (768 wells total). Following nuclear lysis, the second barcode was added, and DNA molecules were pooled and purified. Before sequencing, the quality of the library was certified by analyzing fragment size distribution and DNA concentration. Sequencing was performed in a HiSeq 4000 device.
SnapTools (v1.4.7) and SnapATAC (v1.0.0) developed at Ren’s Lab, UCSD were used for the scATAC- seq analysis(Fang et al., 2021). In brief, reads were map ped to hg19 reference using bwa mem (v0.7.12)(Li and Durbin, 2009) and sorted by samtools (v1.9)(Li et al., 2009). Then reads were pre-processed by SnapTools using default parameters and chromosome bin size of 5000. Cells with less than 500 unique molecular identifier (UMI) reads were removed from downstream analysis. The distribution of counts in promoter ratio was inspected, and cells with the ratio <0.1 or >0.6 were removed. MACS2 (v2.1.2)(Zhang et al., 2008) was used for peak calling from pooled reads (parameters: -g hs–nomodel –shift 37 –ext 73 - -qval 1e-2 -B –SPMR –call-summits). Chromosomal bins overlapped with the ENCODE hg19 blacklist regions, random genomic contigs, or mitochondrial chromosomes were removed from the analysis. Top 5% of the most expressed bins were also removed. Dimension reduction by Latent semantic analysis (LSA) was performed on binary chromosomal bins and visualized by UMAP using the top 30 principal components and a random seed of 10. Differential regulated (DR) regions were called by SnapATAC command “findDAR” using parameters “bcv = 0.1, fdr = 0.05, pvalue = 0.01, test.method = exactTest, seed.use = 10”. DR regions with false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 and absolute log2 fold-change >1 were considered as significantly different. Motifs enrichment analysis was performed by HOMER (v4.9.1)(http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/), with parameters “-size 200 -mask”. The nearby genes associated with DR regions were annotated with ‘annotatePeaks’ program from HOMER with default parameters. Gene ontology analyses of the associated genes were carried out by over-representation analysis (ORA) using WebGestaltR R package. Pathways with FDR<0.05 were considered as significantly enriched and were visualized with enrichment ratio. To calculate the distribution of normalized read coverage round the center of DR regions, HOMER ‘annotatePeaks’ program was used with a window size of +/−3kb and a bin size of 25bp. The normalized read coverage was visualized in heatmap.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The statistical tests used in this study were selected based on the type of comparison and the number of groups analyzed. For comparisons between two groups, a two-tailed Student’s t-test was used to assess statistical significance. When comparing multiple groups, either a one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied as appropriate. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. For single-nucleus and single-cell experiments, Chi-squared tests with Bonferroni correction and the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test were used to analyze cell type distributions and differentially expressed genes. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism version 10 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). The specific statistical tests and number of biological replicates for each experiment are detailed in the corresponding figure legends.

## Supplementary Material
1234567 can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115687.

 

## Highlights
RA induces YAP1 recruitment to atrial enhancers in cardiac progenitors
YAP1 modulates chromatin accessibility of RA-induced enhancers
YAP1 regulates formation of an atrial chamber in human patterned heart organoids
Yap1 deletion impacts the transcriptome of RA signaling in cardiac progenitors

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the following: Dr. Elrod’s lab for discussions in joint lab meetings and reagents, Dr. Whetstine’s lab and the Genomics Facility at the Fox Chase Cancer Center for technical support for single-cell experiments, andFox Chase Molecular Modeling Facility, funded in part by the NIH Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA006927. Dr. Saga and Dr. Astrof for distribution of the Mesp1-cre mouse line. The Salk Institute Bioinformatics and Stem Cell Cores, and the center for Epigenomics at UCSD. This work is funded by the NIH/NHLBI R56HL163146 (to C.E.), NIH/NICHD R01 HD106969 (to C.E.), W.W. Smith Charitable Trust (to C.E.), NIH/NHLBI T32 5T32HL091804 (to E.A.), NIH/NICHD F31HD113419 (to E.A.) and the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (to Kathy Jones, former C.E. advisor, GC1R-06673-B). Work in Dr. Aguirre’s laboratory was supported by startup funds from MSU, the NIH/NHLBI (K01HL135464, R01HL151505), by the Corewell-MSU Foundation, Frederick Meijer Heart and Vascular Institute (Corewell Health), the Alternatives Research and Development Foundation and the NSF (2333155).

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
1234567

## Data Availability Statement
The sequencing data reported in this paper can be accessed at NCBI GEO with accession numbers: GSE271249, GSE270962, GSM5745696, GSM5745695.
This study does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.