EMBO JEMBO J78emboj8208664EMBJThe EMBO Journal0261-41891460-2075Nature Publishing GroupPMC7327499PMC7327499.1732749973274993248499410.15252/embj.2019104163EMBJ20191041631ArticleArticlesNR2F1 regulates regional progenitor dynamics in the mouse neocortex and cortical gyrification in BBSOAS patients
Michele BertacchiBertacchiMichelehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4402-4974 RomanoAnna Lisa LoubatAgnès Tran Mau‐ThemFrederic WillemsMarjolaine FaivreLaurence Khau van KienPhilippe PerrinLaurence DevillardFrançoise SorlinArthur KuentzPaulhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2814-6303 PhilippeChristophe GardeAurore NeriFrancesco Di GiaimoRossellahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3604-3697 OlivieroSalvatore CappelloSilviahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-4539-9038 D'IncertiLudovico FrassoniCarolina StuderMichèlehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7105-2957 michele.studer@unice.fr
1
Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, Inserm, iBV
Paris
France

2
Clinical and Experimental Epileptology Unit
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta
Milano
Italy

3
UMR1231 GAD, Inserm ‐ Université Bourgogne‐Franche Comté
Dijon
France

4
Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic Génomique des Maladies Rares
FHU‐TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne
Dijon
France

5
Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Service de Génétique Médicale
CHU de Montpellier
Montpellier
France

6
Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs »
Centre de Génétique, FHU‐TRANSLAD
CHU Dijon Bourgogne
Dijon
France

7
Hôpital Carémeau
UF de Génétique Médicale et Cytogénétique
Centre de Compétences Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs
CHU de Nîmes
Nîmes
France

8
Unité Fonctionnelle de Génétique Clinique
Hôpital Robert Debré
Paris
France

9
Département de Génétique et Procréation
Hôpital Couple‐Enfant
CHU de Grenoble
Grenoble
France

10
Centre de référence maladies rares « Déficiences intellectuelles de causes rares »
Centre de Génétique, FHU‐TRANSLAD
CHU Dijon Bourgogne
Dijon
France

11
Génétique Biologique, PCBio, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Besançon
Besançon
France

12
Epigenetics Unit
Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine
University of Torino
Torino
Italy

13
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI)
Jena
Germany

14
Department of Biology
University of Naples Federico II
Napoli
Italy

15
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry
München
Germany

16
Neuroradiology Unit
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta
Milano
Italy
*Corresponding author. Tel: +33 489150720; E‐mail: michele.studer@unice.fr02620200172020391336050210.1002/embj.v39.13e1041630212201901420201542020020620200107202026032026© 2020 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licensehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
The relationships between impaired cortical development and consequent malformations in neurodevelopmental disorders, as well as the genes implicated in these processes, are not fully elucidated to date. In this study, we report six novel cases of patients affected by BBSOAS (Boonstra‐Bosch‐Schaff optic atrophy syndrome), a newly emerging rare neurodevelopmental disorder, caused by loss‐of‐function mutations of the transcriptional regulator NR2F1. Young patients with NR2F1 haploinsufficiency display mild to moderate intellectual disability and show reproducible polymicrogyria‐like brain malformations in the parietal and occipital cortex. Using a recently established BBSOAS mouse model, we found that Nr2f1 regionally controls long‐term self‐renewal of neural progenitor cells via modulation of cell cycle genes and key cortical development master genes, such as Pax6. In the human fetal cortex, distinct NR2F1 expression levels encompass gyri and sulci and correlate with local degrees of neurogenic activity. In addition, reduced NR2F1 levels in cerebral organoids affect neurogenesis and PAX6 expression. We propose NR2F1 as an area‐specific regulator of mouse and human brain morphology and a novel causative gene of abnormal gyrification.

Reduced levels of the neuronal differentiation factor NR2F1/COUP‐TFI impairs brain cortex folding in humans, and disrupts regional neural progenitor dynamics in the neocortex of a BBSOAS disease mouse model. 

BBSOAScell cycle dynamicscortical foldingneurodevelopmental diseaseNR2F1/COUP‐TFI

## Subject Categories
Development & DifferentiationNeuroscienceRegenerative MedicineAgence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) 10.13039/501100001665ANR‐15‐NEUR‐0002‐04ANR‐11‐LABX‐0028‐01European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO) 10.13039/100004410STF#8035Ville de Nice ‐ Aides Individuelles aux Jeunes ChercheursFondation Jérôme Lejeune 10.13039/100007353199162 Genomic DNA samples from all patients were subjected to exome sequencing (ES), as previously described (Orphanomix Physicians’ Group et al, ). Genome Aggregation Database (GnomAD) metrics (misZ: 4.17; pLI: 0.99) predict the NR2F1 gene to be highly intolerant to missense mutations, in agreement with the pathogenic phenotype caused by loss‐of‐function (LOF) variants (Bosch et al, ; Chen et al, ). We identified six novel mutations in the NR2F1 gene (Table  ; Fig  G), absent from the GnomAD database. In P1, a missense variant (c.425G>A; p.Arg142His) was detected in the functional C4‐type zinc‐finger domain of the DBD. Several pathogenic variants have been previously described in this domain (Chen et al, ). Differently, P2 showed a stop‐gain variant in exon 2 (c.729_730delinsCT; p.Gln244*) predicted to lead to nonsense‐mediated mRNA decay, since located at 50–55 nucleotides upstream of the last intron–exon junction (Lykke‐Andersen & Jensen, ). A novel variant, 115 bases downstream of the initiation site and leading to a truncation (c.115G>T; p.Glu39*), was identified in P3, while in the case of P4 a variant at the initiation site (c.2T>C; p?) is anticipated to interrupt protein translation. A novel missense variant was also characterized in P5, located in the functional DBD zinc‐finger domain (c.292T>C; p.Tyr98His), similarly to P1. Finally, P6 carries a missense variant, located in the LBD proximal to C‐terminal side and leading to protein truncation (c.967_968delAA; p.Lys323Serfs*73). In all patients, Sanger sequencing confirmed the de novo occurrence. No additional single nucleotide and gene copy number variant that could explain the phenotype was identified. All these patients depicted a reproducible and regional brain malformation defect, apart from P1, with very similar clinical features. Taken together, we introduced six new patients with NR2F1 variants located at the initiation site, in the DBD and LBD, and showing similar clinical and brain malformation defects.

## NR2F1 displays distinct expression gradients along the human brain axes and micro‐modules encompassing primary convolutions
The presence of local alterations in cortical folding of this new cohort of BBSOAS patients suggests that NR2F1 might act in a regionalized manner during the gyrification process. To this purpose, we investigated NR2F1 expression pattern in different cortical regions of human gestational week (GW) 11 and GW14 fetal sections. NR2F1 expression in apical and basal NP cells as well as differentiated neurons showed a clear latero‐posterior high to medio‐anterior low expression gradient (Figs  H and I, and G–J), which reminds the same graded expression profile along the A‐P and L‐M brain axes previously described in mouse embryos (Armentano et al, , ). Together with the high protein similarities between rodents and humans, these data support highly conserved expression patterns, and possibly function during evolution (Alzu'bi et al, , ; Bertacchi et al, ).
The human cortex differs from that of the mouse for its gyrencephalic pattern, i.e., the formation of gyri and sulci that allows an expansion of the total cortical surface (Sun & Hevner, ; Fernández et al, ). The first neocortical folds (also called primary convolutions), such as the Sylvian or calcarine fissures as well as the parieto‐occipital sulcus, arise as early as GW9 (Kostovic & Vasung, ; Sarnat & Flores‐Sarnat, ), but are more evident between GW13 and GW15, when they display a cytoarchitectural organization of progenitors that reminds that of later secondary and tertiary gyri/sulci (Kostovic & Vasung, ; Hansen et al, ; Zhang et al, ; Vasung et al, ; Kostović et al, ). Basal radial glia (bRG), a specialized progenitor cell type able to produce a high number of neurons and abundantly represented in gyrencephalic species at the outer subventricular zone (oSVZ) (Hansen et al, ; Reillo et al, ; Pollen et al, ), possibly contribute to cortical folding in association with other progenitor parameters (Garcia‐Moreno et al, ; Kelava et al, ). The modular expression of some genes has been proved to control local abundance of neurogenic bRG cells, ultimately positioning gyri and sulci (de Juan Romero et al, ). We found that NR2F1 expression levels are finely modulated around these developing primary folds (Fig  J–Q). While low NR2F1 levels are observed at prospective sulci (Fig  J, K′, N and P′), where SOX2+ bRG and TBR2 + intermediate progenitor (IP) cells are very few (Fig  K–L″), NR2F1 levels increase in folded regions (Fig  J, L′ and Q), where a high amount of IP and bRG cells are formed together with increased neuronal production and tangential dispersion (Figs  P″ and R, and K–L″). Hence, micro‐modules of low to medium/high NR2F1 levels are associated with distinct local distribution of progenitor types (Fig  L–L″) and specific abundance of cells expressing HOPX (Fig  P–R), a bona fide marker of human bRG cells (Pollen et al, ). These data suggest a modular and fine regulation of NR2F1 expression levels around forming convolutions that could be associated with the process of cortical gyrification, as previously described for other genes (de Juan Romero et al, ) (Fig  M).

## Nr2f1‐mediated control of self‐renewal potential in mouse neurospheres
The high NR2F1 expression profile in NP cells and the finding of microgyral malformations in BBSOAS patients prompted us to investigate NR2F1 in NP physiology. In mouse, Nr2f1 has been previously shown to coordinate neurogenesis (Faedo et al, ); however, its exact function within the different NP populations and in cell cycle regulation has not been investigated so far. Hence, as a first step in assessing Nr2f1 action in NP self‐renewal ability, we cultured NP‐derived neurospheres, representing free‐floating progenitor clusters, established from E15.5 Ctrl (WT) and Nr2f1null (KO) cortices (Armentano et al, ), and cultured for several passages in FGF2 and EGF‐containing medium (Reynolds et al, ; Brewer & Torricelli, ). Interestingly, while WT neurospheres expanded until step 5 and underwent exhaustion by step 9 (Fig  A and B), Nr2f1 KO neurospheres displayed long‐term self‐renewal for more than 15 steps (up to 30 passages tested; Fig  B). Besides their capacity of continuously self‐amplifying, Nr2f1 mutant neurospheres were both more numerous and bigger in size (Fig  A); however, we reasoned that the latter parameter could be influenced by fusion of adjacent neurospheres. Thus, we dissociated some cell clusters and isolated single neurospheres to evaluate their independent growth (Fig  C): by day 6 of in vitro culture, single mutant neurospheres depicted a significantly bigger size compared to WT ones (10.2 ± 2.4% and 14.7 ± 1.7% diameter increase at day 6 and day 10, respectively; P = 0.002 and P = 0.003). This enhanced growth was associated with a doubled number of PH3+ dividing NPs within the neurospheres (Fig  D and E). Enhanced mitotic activity was not dependent on the specific culture protocol used, as we detected an increased number of PH3+ cells also when NPs were cultured as a monolayer ( ). These results show that NPs have increased self‐renewal capability upon Nr2f1 loss, further reinforced by enhanced proliferation, and suggest that, normally, Nr2f1 might restrain self‐renewal potential of cortical NP cells.
 

## Progenitor pool amplification in Nr2f1 KO mutants leads to occipital neocortex expansion
To dissect the role of Nr2f1 in NP cell behavior in vivo, we directly quantified the number of proliferating progenitors in the neocortex of WT and Nr2f1 KO at different ages by using the proliferation marker Ki67 and focusing on the lateral pallium (LP) of posterior cortices, a region of highest Nr2f1 expression from E9.5‐E10.5 (Tomassy et al, ). Ki67+ proliferating NPs increased in the mutant starting from E14.5 and were maintained in high numbers until P0 compared to WT brains (Fig  A–D). Different types of progenitors, such as apical radial glia (aRG) or bRG cells, contribute to neuronal production in a direct or indirect way via the generation of IP cells (Florio & Huttner, ). To distinguish among NP subtypes, we stained mutant cortices for Pax6 (labeling aRGs next to the ventricular zone—VZ—or bRGs in subventricular zone—SVZ) and Tbr2 (a bona fide IP marker in SVZ). Nr2f1 KO cortices displayed a higher number of Pax6+ RG cells from E12.5 to E17.5 compared to littermate controls (Fig  E–G), suggesting enhanced aRG self‐renewal. Notably, IP production (a good indicator of the start of neurogenesis) was delayed, as mutant cortices showed a peak of Tbr2+ cells at E16.5, instead of E15.5 as in WT brains (Fig  H). Nevertheless, a high number of IPs were still maintained until birth (P0), indicating that IP‐dependent neurogenesis is taking place at later time points in mutant brains compared to WT ones (Fig  H). Interestingly, Pax6+ Tbr2− bRGs, which are normally scarcely represented in murine brains (Reillo et al, ; Wang et al, ), doubled their numbers in mouse mutant cortices at late developmental stages (Fig  F, F′ and I), possibly as a result of the overall Pax6+ cell pool expansion. The identity of bRG cells was not only assessed by Sox2, Ki67, and Tbr2 triple labeling and by their basal position (Fig  A–G), but also by P‐Vimentin, which labels the apical process of dividing bRGs (Fig  H and H′). A fraction of mitotic bRGs in the mutant basal SVZ, here referred to as oSVZ, also expressed low levels of Tbr2 (Fig  I–K), in accordance with previous studies and suggesting the presence of bRGs converting into IPs in loco (Hansen et al, ; Stahl et al, ). Interestingly, heterozygous (HET) embryos (lacking only one Nr2f1 allele, hence more similar to BBSOAS patients) already showed a trend in increasing progenitor abundance during neocortical development (Fig  A–F). These results indicate that Nr2f1 regulates the number and local abundance of apical and basal NPs, notably Pax6+ aRG and bRG cells, in a dosage‐dependent manner.
 We next wondered whether aberrant proliferation of mutant NP cells affects the shape and volume of the early mouse cortex. Early proliferating aRGs normally expand the neuroepithelium tangentially while leaving the VZ thickness unchanged (Caviness, ). Consistently, the early NP increase in mutant brains was reflected by cortical hemisphere expansion, as confirmed in whole brains and in brain sections (Fig  J–K′). The hemisphere expansion was quantified by measuring the extension of the inner ventricle wall (dotted line in Fig  K and K′). The hemisphere increased size was evident only in the posterior‐most region of the cortex (average 78.9 ± 18.3% posterior increase; P = 0.024), consistent with Nr2f1 highest expression in posterior cortex (Fig  L). Taken together, we found a regional increased number of NPs and an evident expansion of posterior hemispheres in early mouse Nr2f1 mutant embryos.
The balance of symmetric versus asymmetric NP division is a fundamental process necessary to finely regulate brain neurogenesis and size (Götz & Huttner, ; Matsuzaki & Shitamukai, ). As the generation of Tbr2+ basal IPs was delayed in mutants while the number of Pax6+ cells was increased, we reasoned that Nr2f1 loss could promote symmetric divisions, hence amplifying the apical progenitor pool at early time points. To confirm the self‐renewing ability of mutant progenitors, we employed an in utero electroporation (IUE) approach to directly visualize symmetrically dividing cells (self‐renewing) and asymmetrically dividing ones (undergoing neurogenesis), by means of Sox2‐GFP and Tis21‐RFP reporter plasmid co‐electroporations at E12.5 (Saade et al, ). NP cells which are dividing symmetrically to self‐renew appeared as green cells (GFP+), whereas neurogenic divisions producing two neurons were labeled in red (RFP+) (Fig  M). Asymmetrically dividing NP pairs, in which one daughter cell self‐renews while the other one differentiates, expressed both plasmids resulting in a yellow signal (Fig  M). Nr2f1 KO brains showed a higher proportion of self‐renewing cells 18 h after IUE compared to WT electroporated littermates (Fig  N–P), indicating an abnormally longer process of symmetric divisions upon Nr2f1 loss. Moreover, in a short‐term birth‐dating analysis, cortices injected with EdU at E12.5 and then stained for Ki67 24 h later showed a lower proportion of EdU+Ki67− cells exiting the cell cycle in KO embryos compared to WT littermates (Fig  Q–R′). Consistent with previous data, HET embryos depicted an intermediate effect (Fig  G–J). These data strongly indicate that Nr2f1 normally promotes asymmetric cell division and thus neurogenesis, and that in its absence NP cells divide symmetrically and expand their pool, ultimately delaying neurogenesis.

## Increased neuronal output in the posterior hemispheres of mouse Nr2f1 mutant brains
We then asked whether the highly proliferative NP pool observed in mouse mutant brains eventually undergoes neural differentiation, as suggested by delayed Tbr2 expression. To directly visualize differentiating cells, we injected EdU at given stages and evaluated the number of EdU+Ki67− cells reaching the intermediate zone (IZ) or the cortical plate (CP) 24 h later (short‐term EdU protocol; Fig  A–D). While remaining significantly longer in the cell cycle at early stages (E12.5; Figs  Q–R′ and A), mutant NPs generated a higher number of differentiating cells at later stages compared to WT (at E16.5 and P0; Fig  A–C′). However, when evaluating neural differentiation as a fraction of the total EdU+ population, we found no difference between WT and KO after E15.5 (Fig  D). This suggests that the abnormal increased number of locally produced neurons after E15.5 (Fig  A) is an indirect consequence of an amplified NP pool, rather than of a higher tendency to undergo differentiation. Consistent results (high neuronal production at mid‐late neurogenesis) were obtained with a long‐term EdU injection approach, in which EdU was injected at different embryonic ages and then evaluated at P0 (Fig  E). To further reveal the type of neurons produced in KO cortices, we co‐labeled EdU+ cells with layer‐specific markers and found that both early produced Tbr1+ and later generated Cux1+ neurons were over‐represented in mutant brains (Fig  F–G″), whereas the number of Ctip2+ neurons was not affected (Fig  F–F″). Notably, cells produced at E17.5 still included high number of neurons in the mutant brain, together with slightly increased gliogenesis, as assessed by triple EdU GFAP NeuN labelling (Fig  H–J). As a consequence of intensive neurogenesis, mutant brains displayed a 27.1 ± 2.7% and 34.2 ± 1.7% increase in CP thickness at E17.5 and P0, respectively, and expanded occipital hemispheres (Fig  K–L″). Tuj1+ post‐mitotic neuron numbers confirmed an initial delay in neurogenesis followed by a significant neuronal increase in KO cortices at following stages (Fig  L, L′ and M), and leading to the formation of a thicker posterior CP with over‐represented early‐ and late‐generated (Tbr1+ and Satb2+) neurons (Fig  N–Q). Taken together, our data show that Nr2f1 loss triggers a progenitor pool increase followed by a boost in neurogenesis, which correlates with an early lateral growth of the cortical neuroepithelium and a late radial expansion of the CP, globally leading to an occipital cortex enlargement.
 

## Region‐specific control of cell cycle dynamics by Nr2f1
As part of its role in regulating neurogenesis, we reasoned that Nr2f1 could control the cell cycle length itself by setting the average mitotic activity along the A‐P neocortical axis. Key players of neocortical area mapping, such as Pax6 and Emx2, have been shown to finely regulate cell proliferation dynamics in a region‐specific manner, linking areal identity to specific cell cycle durations, neurogenic activities, and cell fate acquisition (Dehay & Kennedy, ; Borrell & Calegari, ). By quantifying different classes of PH3+ progenitors at a stage when both apical and basal progenitors are present, we found no difference in anterior/motor regions, while mutant brains showed increased mitoses in posterior/sensory neocortical regions, where Nr2f1 is normally highly expressed (Fig  A–C).
 To directly measure the cell cycle duration time, we employed a double EdU/BrdU protocol in which pregnant females are injected with EdU first, followed by BrdU 1.5 h later, and then sacrificed at 2 h to process treated embryos (Martynoga et al, ; Mi et al, ) (Fig  D). The ratio of single EdU+ or double EdU+BrdU+ cells over the total number of Ki67+ cycling cells in the neocortical neuroepithelium (Fig  E–E″) was used to estimate the cell cycle time (Tc, the time needed to complete a full cell cycle) in E12.5 and E14.5 brains. While the cell cycle duration was not altered in anterior‐most regions, it was instead greatly reduced in more posterior Nr2f1 KO cortices (33.5 ± 1.7% shorter Tc), implying an accelerated cell cycle of E12.5 and E14.5 KO brains (Fig  F and F′), with HET brains already showing a trend toward cell cycle acceleration (Fig  G). As an alternative approach, we employed fluorescence‐activated cell sorting (FACS), which evaluates the percentage of S‐, G2‐ and M‐phase cells after PH3 and propidium iodide staining ( ). The number of cycling cells undergoing division (PH3+) or entering S‐and G2‐phases was higher in E17.5 mutant posterior cortex compared to WT ( ), with little or no difference in anterior halves of cortices, in line with the Nr2f1 graded expression profile. At E14.5, cell cycle progression was accelerated by 10% in HET posterior cortices and by 17% in KO ones, compared to control samples ( ). Overall, these results show that Nr2f1 dosage links positional identity of cortical progenitors to distinct cell cycle dynamics.
Based on these data, we decided to focus on the posterior/occipital cortex, where cellular abnormalities were more pronounced, for further cell cycle analysis. We wondered whether Nr2f1‐dependent control of mitotic activity was taking place at specific time points. The total number of PH3+ mitotic figures was higher in mutant cortices all along corticogenesis, especially from E14.5 to E17.5 (Fig  A). By specifically quantifying mitoses in different compartments, we found increased divisions for both apical (Pax6+PH3+ in VZ) and basal (Pax6+PH3+ in oSVZ) RG cells. Tbr2+ mitoses (SVZ) followed the same trend previously described for IP numbers, i.e., an initial delay in the mutant followed by high and sustained late activity (Fig  B–D). To assess whether and how Nr2f1 controls cell cycle duration during corticogenesis, we performed double EdU/BrdU injection from E10.5 to E16.5 and found that the cell cycle of mutant progenitors was mainly accelerated during early/mid‐neurogenesis (Fig  E). An EdU cumulative labeling approach in E13.5 posterior cortices (Fig  F–H), coupled with PH3 staining to visualize G2‐ and M‐phase cells (Fig  I–K), allowed us to precisely measure the duration of different cell cycle phases in VZ/SVZ NPs (Contestabile et al, ) (Fig  L). Compared to WT, Nr2f1 KO NP cells had a slightly (14%) longer S‐phase, typical of “younger” self‐renewing progenitors (Calegari, ; Lange et al, ; Arai et al, ) (Fig  L). S‐phase lengthening was compensated by a significantly 31% shorter G1‐phase in the mutant, which resulted in an overall shorter cell cycle duration (Fig  L). Taken together, our data indicate that Nr2f1 operates a fine, region‐specific control of cell cycle progression along the A‐P axis, with strongest effects in the posterior/occipital neocortex. In its absence, cell cycle acceleration will contribute to altered cortical morphology, reminiscent of a posterior macrocephaly.
 Finally, we investigated whether Nr2f1 levels influenced NP cell physiology also along the L‐M neocortical axis, since Nr2f1 shows a lateral‐high to medial‐low gradient along the neocortical neuroepithelium, reaching highest levels in the latero‐ventral region (Armentano et al, ; Faedo et al, ). While different Nr2f1 levels correlated with distinct degrees of neurogenesis and NP populations along the L‐M axis ( ), this gradient was partially lost following Nr2f1 removal ( ). Interestingly, at E17.5, Sox2+Pax6+ bRG cells were extremely abundant in the DP ( ), which has been recently described as a gyrus‐like region of the mouse cortex for its abundant presence of Hopx+ bRG cell population (Vaid et al, ). On the contrary, bRGs were scarcely represented in the medial (MP) and lateral (LP) pallia ( ). Upon Nr2f1 genetic inactivation, the L‐M distribution of bRGs was altered ( ). Strikingly, the LP became populated by an abundant bRG cell population ( ), suggesting the acquisition of a more “dorsal‐like” progenitor identity. Cell cycle length, as quantified by double EdU/BrdU injection at E14.5 ( ), was significantly accelerated in the LP of mutant brains ( ). The DP, characterized by intermediate Nr2f1 levels, showed a smaller but significant cell cycle acceleration ( ). Taken together, our data indicate that cell cycle progression and progenitor ratios are finely tuned by Nr2f1 dosage along both the A‐P and L‐M axes ( ).

## Nr2f1‐mediated regulation of Pax6 expression levels and cell cycle genes
Next, we aimed to identify some of the molecular mechanisms underpinning the high production of NP cells in posterior cortices of Nr2f1 KO mice. Pax6 plays a crucial role in controlling cell cycle and fate of both apical and basal NPs (Englund, ; Asami et al, ; Mi et al, ). Since persistent Pax6 expression in basal progenitors promotes proliferation and neurogenesis (Wong et al, ) and Pax6 levels can be modulated by Nr2f1 (Faedo et al, ; Tang et al, ), we hypothesized that abnormally increased Pax6 expression levels might contribute to the occipital expansion observed in Nr2f1 KO brains. Indeed, we found increased Pax6 protein in the LP of E12.5 and E14.5 mutant brains (Fig  A–C; see also Fig  E and E′), confirmed by a 33.3 ± 5.8% increase in Pax6 transcript, as quantified by RT–PCR (Fig  D). Interestingly, Nr2f1 HET brains already showed a significant increase in Pax6 expression compared to WT littermates ( ), even if not reaching the same level of KO ones. To assess whether Nr2f1 can modulate Pax6 expression in a cell‐autonomous way, a Nr2f1‐overexpressing plasmid was electroporated into E12.5 cortices and Pax6 signal intensity evaluated in GFP+ cells 24 h later (Fig  E–G″). GFP+ progenitors with high Nr2f1 expression down‐regulated Pax6 (Fig  H), confirming that Nr2f1 cell‐autonomously restrains Pax6 expression levels in cortical progenitor cells.
 Furthermore, since Nr2f1 mutant NP cells show accelerated cell cycle progression, we investigated the expression of several key cell cycle genes by RT–PCR on E12.5 posterior cortices (Fig  I). While most genes failed to show any significant differences between E12.5 WT and KO brains, we nevertheless observed altered expression of some interesting candidates involved in cell proliferation and cell cycle control, such as DCT, CycD1, and P21 (Fig  I). The dopachrome tautomerase enzyme DCT has been previously demonstrated to be essential for promoting NP proliferation (Jiao et al, ); hence, its increase could be partially responsible for the increased mitotic index of mutant cells. Moreover, the expression of cyclin D1 (CycD1), an essential regulator of the G1–S transition phase, was also affected in the mutant (43.7% lower compared to WT; Fig  I). Since CycD1 expression is particularly high during the G1‐phase (Glickstein et al, ), its diminution could depend on the G1‐phase shortening observed in KO cells (Fig  L). Interestingly, Nr2f1 KO cortices revealed decreased P21 expression compared to WT counterparts (Fig  I). The cyclin‐dependent kinase inhibitor P21 is considered an inducer of neurogenesis, as it is transiently expressed in a subset of NPs to trigger cell cycle exit and differentiation (Siegenthaler, ). To support a causal relationship between Nr2f1 and P21, we acutely down‐regulated Nr2f1 via IUE of a CRISPR/Cas9 plasmid (herein called PX458‐αNr2f1) in which the single guide RNA (sgRNA) recognizes the ATG starting codon of the Nr2f1 gene, hence targeting and disrupting the sequence necessary for its translation ( ). Nr2f1 expression was down‐regulated or completely abolished in GFP+ electroporated cells ( ), indicating CRISPR/Cas9‐mediated loss of one or two Nr2f1 alleles, respectively. Upon PX458‐αNr2f1 IUE, we found a 59.5 ± 11.3% drop in the number of P21+ cells undergoing neurogenesis (Fig  J–L). Together, we showed that Nr2f1 exerts its control on NP proliferation by modulating both cortical area patterning genes (such as Pax6) and distinct cell cycle genes (such as P21) (Fig  M).
Moreover, as NR2f1 mutants display multiple deficits in addition to changes in cell cycle, we decided to employ a full transcriptomic profile analysis to have a more comprehensive picture of genetic changes upon Nr2f1 loss. We compared WT and KO cortical transcriptomics by RNA‐Seq at E15.5, a key stage of neurogenesis. Among differentially expressed genes (DEGs; see ), 102 and 68 were significantly up‐ and down‐regulated, respectively (Fig  N). Gene ontology (GO) analysis of DEG genes highlighted “neuron differentiation” and “neuron development” as most significant categories (Fig  O; see for complete results), in line with the role played by Nr2f1 during neurogenesis. GO analysis by Panther Overrepresentation analysis or by Ingenuity pathway analysis showed similar results, additionally highlighting “axonal guidance signaling” and “netrin signaling” as highly regulated categories ( ). The “neuron differentiation” GO category included known master genes of neurogenesis as well as cell adhesion, NP delamination, and axon guidance, such as Rorb, Ephb3, Sema6a, and Slit3 (Fig  P). Interestingly, the third GO category (“MAPK signaling pathway”) suggests that Nr2f1 could orchestrate NP proliferation, fate, and differentiation in an indirect way by regulating signaling pathways with broader action (Begemann & Michon, ; Faedo et al, ), in addition to specific cell cycle or cortical master genes. Further functional studies are needed to validate Nr2f1 target genes and/or regulated pathways.

## Genetic manipulation of Pax6 levels rescues both in vitro self‐renewal potential and in vivo cell cycle dynamics of Nr2f1‐deficient NP cells
To directly investigate whether Pax6 acts as a major effector downstream of Nr2f1 during cortical NP proliferation, we genetically decreased Pax6 expression levels by crossing a Pax6 null line (St‐Onge et al, ) with the Nr2f1 mutant line. To aim for a functional rescue, we looked for a decrease and not a full loss of Pax6 levels in a Nr2f1 KO background. First, we measured Pax6 mRNA levels in neurospheres obtained from E15.5 dissociated Pax6 mutant cortices and confirmed progressive diminished levels in heterozygous (Pax6 HET) and null (Pax6 KO) neurospheres (Fig  A). As expected, Pax6 expression was increased in Nr2f1 KO neurospheres, and subsequent removal of one Pax6 allele (Nr2f1 KO, Pax6 HET; Fig  A) efficiently decreased Pax6 transcripts in a Nr2f1 KO background. Interestingly, Nr2f1 KO, Pax6 HET neurospheres were smaller and proliferated for maximum up to 10 passages (Fig  B and C), indicating that Nr2f1‐dependent modulation by Pax6 levels is key for NP self‐renewal. To directly investigate the self‐renewing ability of mutant progenitors, we dissociated neurospheres and plated NP cells at low density to perform a paired‐cell test. Double Map2 and BLBP staining identified neuronal and progenitor cells, respectively, in newly dividing cell couples (Fig  D–D″), assessing differentiation versus self‐renewal. Isolated progenitors from Nr2f1 KO neurospheres generated a higher number of P‐P (symmetric proliferative) cell divisions, at the expense of P‐N (asymmetric) and N‐N (symmetric differentiative) ones, confirming a higher tendency of mutant NPs to self‐renew compared to WT ones (Fig  E). However, when one Pax6 allele was removed, cell division proportions went back to levels comparable to WT cells with a reduced number of symmetric proliferative divisions (Fig  E). This indicates that Pax6 and Nr2f1 agonistically control the self‐renewal efficiency of dividing NP cells in the developing neocortex.
 We next wondered whether cell cycle progression was also affected in brains with high or low Pax6 levels. As for neurospheres, we removed one Pax6 allele to restore almost normal protein levels in the LP of E12.5 Nr2f1 KO cortices (Fig  F–H′; pixel intensity quantification in Fig  I). By double EdU/BrdU incorporation, we evaluated the cell cycle duration in different mutants: while the cell cycle was shorter in Nr2f1 KO posterior cortices, it slowed back to a normal rate after removal of one Pax6 gene copy (Fig  J). Interestingly, Pax6 HET animals displayed an even longer cell cycle time compared to WT (Fig  J), suggesting that, differently to what reported for more anterior cortical regions (Georgala et al, ; Mi et al, ), Pax6 can act as a cell cycle accelerator in posterior cortex. Finally, we tested whether Pax6 modulation could rescue Nr2f1‐dependent control of NP cell division in vivo. We visualized the cleavage plane of dividing NPs by labeling them for P‐Vim and γ‐Tubulin to evaluate their division angle (Fig  K). A vertical cleavage plane has been associated with symmetric divisions originating two identical pluripotent daughter cells, whereas oblique or horizontal cleavage planes are mainly linked to neurogenesis, as they give rise to basal progenitors and neurons (Noctor et al, ; LaMonica et al, ; Florio & Huttner, ; Matsuzaki & Shitamukai, ). Nr2f1 KO NPs tended to divide more often through a vertical cleavage plane compared to WT ones, indicative of increased self‐renewal activity (Fig K). Upon loss of one Pax6 allele, the division plane of dividing NPs in vivo was however restored to levels similar to WT (Fig  K). Together, our data indicate that key proliferative features of Nr2f1 mutant progenitors can be rescued by lowering Pax6 levels. This implies that a complex network of interconnected key area mapping genes is required for the correct neurogenic activity to take place in a time‐ and region‐specific manner.

## NR2F1 controls neurogenesis in human brain organoids
To investigate whether human NR2F1 is also able to regulate neurogenesis, we used in vitro 3D cerebral organoids, which recapitulate some of the major characteristics of early human brain development (Lancaster et al, ; Wang, ; Klaus et al, ). Immunostaining of human iPS‐derived organoids showed increased NR2F1 expression levels from day 30/40 to day 70 of in vitro differentiation (Fig  A–C), as well as distinct protein levels with higher expression in NPs than in post‐mitotic neural cells (Fig  B–B″), in accordance with our previous expression data (Fig  G′, G″, I′ and I″). Notably, day 40 neuroepithelia also displayed distinct NR2F1 protein levels in function of PAX6 expression (low NR2F1 level in high PAX6‐expressing neuroepithelia, and vice versa; Fig  D–G), suggesting that the complementary expression profile between NR2F1 and PAX6 is most likely an evolutionary conserved process.
 To start investigating NR2F1 role in human progenitors, we electroporated the CRISPR/Cas9 plasmid (PX458‐αNR2F1) into day 33‐cultured cerebral organoids, taking advantage of the high (100%) sequence conservation between mouse and human, and analyzed NR2F1 expression 7 days later (Fig  H–J). The control experiment consisted in electroporating the empty PX458 plasmid, without sgRNA sequence directed against NR2F1 sequence. As in mouse cortex, the plasmid efficiently down‐regulated NR2F1 expression (Fig  I and J), confirming that the PX458‐αNR2F1 vector can modulate NR2F1 expression both in mouse brain and human organoids. Next, we evaluated protein levels of the NP marker SOX2 and of the neuronal marker TUJ1 in GFP+ control‐ and PX458‐αNR2F1‐electroporated cells. We found that decreased NR2F1 levels were associated with increased tendency of progenitors to remain in the cell cycle and express SOX2 or PAX6, together with a reduced differentiation rate of double TUJ1+GFP+ cells (Fig  K–N). Indeed, the number of GFP+ progenitor cells was increased at the expense of TUJ1+ 7 days after IUE (Fig  M), similarly to what previously shown in mouse embryos. Overall, this is a first step demonstrating the evolutionary conservation between mice and humans of NR2F1 as a major regulator of cortical neurogenesis through modulation of the NP pool and PAX6 expression levels.

## Discussion
Altered balance of cell proliferation, differentiation and neuron migration can lead to cortical malformations, often associated with a huge variety of clinical manifestations, such as intellectual disability (ID), schizophrenia, epilepsy, and/or autism spectrum disorder (Barkovich et al, ; Sun & Hevner, ; Parrini et al, ; Juric‐Sekhar & Hevner, ). Thanks to human genetic and animal model studies, it is now well accepted that macrocephaly, polymicrogyria, and/or microcephaly can be due to alterations in progenitor cell behavior (Boland et al, ; Finding of Rare Disease Genes (FORGE) Canada Consortium et al, ; Lee et al, ; Poduri et al, ; Mirzaa et al, ; Marchese et al, ; Terrone et al, ), as also recently confirmed by 3D‐cell culture assays (Lancaster et al, ; Li et al, ). Moreover, advances in DNA sequencing technologies and concurrent improved resolution of neuroimaging techniques have allowed the identification of more genes and signaling pathways underlying different types of MCDs (Juric‐Sekhar & Hevner, ). In this study, we aimed to investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying brain malformations of an emerging neurodevelopmental disease, called BBSOA syndrome, in which patients (mainly children) show clinical features of ID, epilepsy, repetitive behaviors, speech problems, and autistic‐like traits. A previous report focused on the optic atrophy defect (Bertacchi et al, ), an important component of the clinical phenotype (Bosch et al, ; Chen et al, ), but nothing was known on whether NR2F1 haploinsufficiency would lead to particular types of cortical malformations. In this study, we describe a new cohort of BBSOAS patients who show a reproducible area‐specific folding defect resembling polymicrogyria and restricted to supramarginal and angular gyri, a region known to be involved in a number of processes related to language, spatial cognition, memory retrieval, attention, and number processing (Stoeckel et al, ; Oberhuber et al, ). NR2F1 is expressed in a modular fashion along primary convolutions, particularly in neurogenic bRG cells, and its down‐regulation affects neural differentiation in human brain organoids. In the mouse, precise levels of Nr2f1 are necessary for maintaining the delicate balance between proliferative and differentiative cells via the control of key patterning genes and cell cycle modulators. Thus, we propose NR2F1 as a novel regulator of cell proliferation and human cortical folding acting predominantly in an area‐specific manner during early development.

## Regional modulation of the progenitor pool size by a Nr2f1 expression gradient
Our data show that precise Nr2f1/NR2F1 levels along the A‐P axis correlate with specific profiles of progenitor abundance and their neurogenic activity in both mouse and human brains. In this study, we thoroughly assessed the effects of mouse Nr2f1 removal on cell cycle progression in the posterior cortex, where Nr2f1 is expressed at its highest level (Armentano et al, 2006; Tomassy et al, ). Nr2f1 promotes asymmetric divisions by regulating cell cycle progression, hence modulating the progenitor pool amplification during cortical development. Upon loss of Nr2f1, the posterior‐most region undergoes extensive and prolonged proliferation, followed by delayed neurogenesis and high neuronal production, ultimately leading to extended occipital hemispheres (model in Fig  A and B). The expansion of occipital convolutions described in P1 and P2 is somehow reminiscent to the posterior macrocephaly we describe in the mouse and could be the result of similar mechanisms of progenitor pool expansion, due to cell cycle acceleration and delayed neurogenesis. Thus, we propose that precise expression levels of NR2F1 are fundamental for the correct and area‐specific balance between progenitor self‐amplification and neurogenesis. Indeed, intermediate Nr2f1 expression levels in the dorsal pallial region, recently described as a gyrus‐like structure and characterized by an abundance of Hopx+ cells (Vaid et al, ), seem to be appropriate to trigger efficient neurogenesis, while concomitantly allowing basal progenitor amplification (summarized in ). In human embryos, NR2F1 expression initially spans the A‐P and L‐M axes of the developing neocortex, but local modules of precise NR2F1 levels are associated with distinct degrees of neurogenesis and bRG populations during formation of primary convolutions. Hence, medium dosage of NR2F1 localized in developing folds could provide a “neurogenic boost”, which would trigger high neuronal output while allowing sustained cell proliferation, both necessary for cortical expansion and folding (Fig  M). We thus propose NR2F1 as a novel modulator of progenitor cell production, including bRGs, in distinct localized regions.
 However, our finding that Nr2f1 loss in the mouse leads to an amplification of progenitors, notably aRG and bRG cells, seems apparently contradictory to the initial observation that NR2F1 in human cortex is highly expressed in bRG‐rich gyri. The two observations can be reconciled by interpreting the role of NR2F1/Nr2f1 as a pro‐neurogenic factor. Medium–high levels of human NR2F1 in cortical folds correlate with high abundance of bRGs and thus with high neurogenesis, whereas low NR2F1 levels in sulci are associated with low neurogenesis. In the mouse, complete Nr2f1 loss results in prolonged proliferation and delayed neural differentiation, consistent with the idea that Nr2f1 is promoting neurogenesis. Hence, the specific consequence of murine Nr2f1 loss on radial glia amplification represents an indirect effect of enhanced cell proliferation associated with sustained Pax6 levels and is thus only apparently controversial with high NR2F1 expression in human bRG cells.

## The role of Nr2f1 in cell cycle control
Previous reports have linked cell cycle progression to fate acquisition. Neural progenitors with longer S‐phase and shorter G1‐phase undergo self‐renewal instead of neurogenesis (Calegari, ; Lange et al, ; Arai et al, ). Consistently, neural progenitors in Nr2f1 mutants, showing accelerated cell cycle due to a shorter G1‐phase, increase the progenitor pool by symmetric division, while neurogenesis is delayed. Cyclin‐dependent kinase inhibitor P21 is normally up‐regulated in NPs lengthening the G1‐phase and exiting the cell cycle to differentiate (Siegenthaler, ; Buttitta & Edgar, ; Heldring et al, ); hence, P21 down‐regulation in Nr2f1‐deficient progenitors could explain a delay in neurogenesis observed in mutant brains. Interestingly, we found that specific cell cycle durations are associated with regional abundance of progenitor subtypes, such as bRG cells in the dorsal pallium. Consistently, a link between increased proliferation and expansion of basal progenitor population, ultimately resulting in macrocephaly, was demonstrated in a mouse model in which the cell cycle progression was artificially and transiently accelerated (Nonaka‐Kinoshita et al, ). It is tempting to speculate that specific cell cycle dynamics might be required for regionalized bRG amplification and that Nr2f1 levels could be key for controlling both cell cycle time and apico‐basal progenitor ratio in an area‐specific fashion.

## NR2F1‐mediated control of PAX6 in mouse and human brains
Our molecular characterization indicates that Nr2f1/NR2F1 inhibits Pax6/PAX6 in mouse and human brain primordia, respectively. In mouse, Pax6 is known to act not only as an area patterning gene but also as a key regulator of cell cycle duration (Mi et al, ; Estivill‐Torrus et al, ), cell division plane (Asami et al, ), and progenitor activity (Englund, ; Wong et al, ). Sustained Pax6 expression generates bRG in the developing neocortex (Wong et al, ), in line with our data. However, it must be noted that Pax6 seems to act as a break for cell cycle progression (Georgala et al, ), which is then accelerated in Pax6 Sey mice (Mi et al, ). On the contrary, we found that lowering Pax6 expression slows down cell cycle progression and restores normal cell cycle time in the posterior cortex of Nr2f1 mutants. Hence, Nr2f1 and Pax6 might play different roles in function of their reciprocal area‐specific co‐expression levels, as previously suggested for Pax6 (Bishop, ; Bishop et al, ; Zembrzycki et al, ; Sansom et al, ; Asami et al, ). High Pax6 expression in anterior cortex directly correlates with low Nr2f1 expression, and vice versa in posterior cortex, and a complementary expression pattern between NR2F1 and PAX6 can also be reproduced in human cerebral organoids. Accordingly, functional modulation of Nr2f1 affects Pax6 expression in mouse, in line with previous findings (Faedo et al, ; Tang et al, ).
Finally, while endogenous Nr2f1 levels follow the neurogenic gradient along the L‐M axis, this is not the same for the A‐P axis; the occipital‐most cortex, expressing highest Nr2f1 levels, has a delayed development compared to the anterior cortex with very low levels of this gene. We believe that Nr2f1 gradient expression along the A‐P axis is more related to acquiring a distinct areal identity than to modulating neurogenesis, in line with its recognized role as a “sensory” mapping gene (Alfano et al, ). Pax6 would be instead responsible for promoting neurogenesis in the anterior‐most cortex by controlling cell cycle parameters, as previously shown (Mi et al, ). It is well recognized that the regulation of the tangential extent of individual areas, as well as their precise neuronal pool, is under the control of cell cycle duration and rate of cell cycle re‐entry of progenitors (Lukaszewicz et al, ). Hence, reciprocal regulation of early cortical master genes, such as Pax6 and Nr2f1, would control the regional expansion of progenitor cell types, ultimately orchestrating regional and area‐specific growth (Cadwell et al, ).

## Regional gyral pattern abnormalities in NR2F1‐haploinsufficient patients
In this study, we report six novel cases of patients carrying NR2F1 mutations who are affected by ID and other cognitive disorders (Table  ). Patients display multiple cognitive symptoms together with optic nerve atrophy, a key feature of BBSOAS (Bosch et al, ; Chen et al, ). Here, we expand the clinical features of the BBSOA syndrome by describing for the first time some subtle but consistent brain malformations, such as aberrant cortical folding of the supramarginal and angular gyri and elongated occipital convolutions, in a new cohort of BBSOAS patients. Some phenotypic traits described in the six new patients, such as speech difficulties, stereotypical movements, and hyperactivity, are consistent with malformations in those specific regions (Stoeckel et al, ; Oberhuber et al, ). In spite of the impossibility to obtain high‐resolution MRI images for all patients, we speculate that similar brain malformations might be shared among other BBSOAS patients. The abnormal gyral pattern we have observed in our cohort of patients, which is not associated with cortical thickness abnormalities, does not completely fall under the classical description of PMG or other MCDs (Manzini & Walsh, ; Barkovich et al, ). However, canonical MCD classifications proposed to date not always encompass the high morphological heterogeneity described in patients with abnormal microgyria (Guerrini & Dobyns, ).
A direct implication of NR2F1 in the development and positioning of cortical folds could not be tested in the mouse model. In fact, lissencephalic brains, such as the murine one, are not suitable and/or permissive systems to interrogate cortical folding, as they normally develop a smooth surface. While manipulation of few genes can nevertheless trigger cortical convolutions (Stahl et al, ; Florio et al, ; del Toro et al, ) and/or greatly amplify basal progenitor abundance (Borrell, ), genetic misexpression more often results in a general increase or decrease of the murine cortical size, without surface bending (Groszer, ; Kwon et al, ; Lange et al, ; Tokuda et al, ; preprint: Gompers et al, ). Consistently, down‐regulating Nr2f1 in the mouse leads to occipital macrocephaly by acting on cell cycle progression and progenitor pool size, but these changes were not selectively affecting the bRG population and thus inducing cortical gyrification. Genes inducing folding in gyrencephalic species have been shown to be expressed in local modules, predictive of gyri and sulci positioning (de Juan Romero et al, ). Accordingly, human NR2F1 is both expressed along macro‐gradients (A‐P and L‐M axes) and locally modulated in micro‐modules; hence, NR2F1 could provide a link between positional identity of distinct neocortical areas and local formation of gyri and sulci. We speculate that abnormally low levels of NR2F1 could lead to accelerated cell cycle progression and altered ratio of distinct progenitor subtypes, resulting in specific types of cortical malformations, such as elongated occipital convolutions or PMG‐like abnormalities. However, to directly demonstrate NR2F1 involvement in cortical folding, more experimental approaches will be required in the future, such as the use of ferret, a gyrencephalic animal model previously employed for challenging the formation of cortical convolutions (Nonaka‐Kinoshita et al, ; de Juan Romero et al, ; Fernández et al, ).

## Conclusion
Our BBSOAS mouse model has disclosed increased proliferative progenitor activity in the occipital cortex, due to sustained Pax6 expression together with delayed P21‐dependent block of cell cycle progression. Even if the involvement of a similar genetic pathway needs to be validated in human brains, our first data on brain organoids (this study, and M. Bertacchi and M. Studer, manuscript in preparation) point to that direction.

## Materials and Methods

## Study approval
The individuals and families with BBSOAS were recruited through multiple French clinical genetics centers. Written informed consent was obtained from the legal guardians of the probands, according to the Declaration of Helsinki. All experiments involving the use of human samples conformed to the principles set out in the WMA Declaration of Helsinki and the Department of Health and Human Services Belmont Report. Fetal tissues were kindly provided by Cécile Allet and Paolo Giacobini (Lille, France) and were made available in accordance with French bylaws (Good practice concerning the conservation, transformation, and transportation of human tissue to be used therapeutically, published on December 29, 1998); studies on human fetal tissue were approved by the French agency for biomedical research (See Bertacchi et al, ; “Agence de la Biomédecine, Saint‐Denis la Plaine”, France, protocol no.: PFS16–002). All mouse experiments were conducted in accordance with relevant national and international guidelines and regulations (European Union rules; 2010/63/UE) and have been approved by the local ethical committee in France (CIEPAL NCE/2019‐548).

## Mouse cell culture
Embryonic neocortical tissue was isolated at E12.5 or E15.5, dissociated, and cultured in neurospheres following previous protocols (Reynolds et al, ; Brewer & Torricelli, ). As an alternative to neurosphere culture, NPs were dissociated by trypsin digestion and seeded as a monolayer on a Matrigel‐coated plastic surface (Conti et al, ).

## Human brain organoids
Human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells and brain organoids were obtained and cultured as previously described (Lancaster et al, ; Klaus et al, ).

## Immunofluorescence
Mouse embryonic brains/whole heads were processed for immunostaining, as previously described (Armentano et al, , ; Terrigno et al, ). Primary and secondary antibodies used are listed in detailed (see ). Images were acquired at an Apotome Zeiss, using the AxioVision software.

## EdU/BrdU injection and cell cycle time calculation
The nucleoside analogs EdU (5‐ethynyl‐2′‐deoxyuridine) and BrdU (5‐bromo‐2′‐deoxyuridine) were both injected at 10 mg/kg intraperitoneally in pregnant females carrying embryos at the desired age. For the calculation of cell cycle time, we followed a previously described protocol (Martynoga et al, ). For cumulative EdU cell cycle quantification (Nowakowski et al, ; Takahashi et al, ; Contestabile et al, ), E13.5 embryos were labeled with multiple EdU injections (at 0, 2, 4, and 6 h). In all protocols listed, EdU was detected using EdU click‐iT technology (Invitrogen, C10340), while BrdU required acid antigen retrieval (30 min at 37°C in 2N HCl with 0.5% Triton X‐100) followed by immunostaining (Sigma B8434, 1:1,000, mouse). Detailed version of these protocols can be found in the Appendix File.

## 
In utero electroporation (IUE)
IUE was performed on E12.5 mouse brains targeting the latero‐dorsal regions of the telencephalic dorsal pallium. Conditions of electroporation have been previously described (Parisot et al, ; Terrigno et al, ). The Sox2p‐GFP and Tis21p‐RFP plasmids were a kind gift of E. Marti and G. Le Dréau (Saade et al, ). For Nr2f1 knock‐out/knock‐down, we used a CRISPR/Cas9 vector (Ran et al, ) in wild‐type background mice. The anti‐Nr2f1 sgRNA probe for the CRISPR/Cas9 construct (cloning primers: CACCgcgagatccgcaggacgacg; AAACcgtcgtcctgcggatctcgc) was selected and checked for specificity in silico with Crispor (http://crispor.tefor.net/) and then cloned in the PX458 empty vector (Addgene; pSpCas9(BB)‐2A‐GFP).

## Electroporation of organoids
Human brain organoids were kept in neural differentiation medium without antibiotics for 2 h before the experiment. The organoids were then placed in an electroporation chamber (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA), and the plasmid DNA was injected at a concentration of 1 μg/μl in several positions (Cárdenas et al, ; Klaus et al, ). The organoids were then subjected to five pulses at 80 V with a 50‐ms duration in an interval of 500 ms using an ECM830 electroporation device (Harvard Apparatus).

## Cell cytometry
Neocortices were dissected on ice and digested using a Worthington Papain Dissociation System (Serlabo technologies LK003150), following manufacturers’ instructions. Low‐bind Eppendorf tubes were used to limit material loss. Dissociated single cells were washed twice with ice‐cold PBS 1X, then fixed by slowly adding ethanol while mixing on a vortex, and stored at −20°C. For cytometric analysis, cells were immunostained following the same immunofluorescence protocol used for cryostat sections, with the only difference that a brief centrifugation (5 min at 170 g) was performed between each solution change to recover the cells at the bottom of Eppendorf tubes and discard the supernatant. Cells were analyzed with BD LSRFortessa and FACSDiva software (Becton Dickinson) on the basis of 10,000 total events (debris excluded).

## RNA‐Seq
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), and its integrity was analyzed by using the DNF‐471 Standard Sensitivity RNA Analysis Kit on Fragment Analyzer instrument (Advanced Analytical Technology, Ankeny, IA, USA). RNA‐Seq libraries were prepared from total RNA using TruSeq RNA Sample Preparation v2 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol and sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 platform (Illumina). Sequencing reads were trimmed out of the low‐quality bases with FASTX‐Toolkit and mapped on mm9 genome assembly by using TopHat v2.0.6 (Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA). Differentially expressed genes (DEG) were called by using DESeq2 software (Love et al, ) (see for complete list of DEG genes). Genes with a P < 0.01 were considered for downstream Gene Ontology (GO) analysis (see for GO analysis with DAVID web software, Ingenuity pathway analysis, or Panther Overrepresentation test, respectively). GO analysis showed in Fig  O was performed by using DAVID web software (Huang et al, ).

## Statistics
All data were statistically analyzed and graphically represented using Microsoft Office Excel software and GraphPad Prism (version 7.00). Quantitative data are shown as the mean ± standard error (SEM). For cell percentage/number quantification after immunofluorescence (IF), measurements were performed on at least 9 sections coming from 3 to 5 different animals, unless otherwise stated (see for details). To minimize subjective bias, sample identity (e.g., genotypes) was randomized by associating an identification number to each sample before processing. Fixed embryos with damaged tissues were excluded from any further analysis/processing. Microscope images were processed with Photoshop or ImageJ software, by randomly overlapping fixed‐width (100 μm) rectangular boxes on the area of interest (e.g., the lateral pallium of the neocortex), then quantifying positive cells inside the boxes. When calculating percentages over the total cell number, the latter was quantified by counting DAPI+ nuclei, unless otherwise specified. Data were compared by two‐tailed Student's t‐test (when comparing two data groups) or by two‐way ANOVA (analysis of variance; for comparison of three or more groups), and statistical significance was set as follows: *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001. Sample size, statistical test used, and detailed list of statistical results for each experiment are listed in .

## Real‐time RT–PCR
Neocortices were dissected in ice‐cold PBS1X and stored at −80°C. Total RNA was extracted with NucleoSpin RNA II columns (Macherey‐Nagel). Analysis was performed as previously described (Bertacchi et al, , , ). Primer sequences are listed in .

## Author contributions
MS and MB conceived and designed the research project. MB, ALR, AL, CF, and RDG performed experiments and collected data. MB, ALR, AL, and MS analyzed data. RDG and SC provided experimental material and contributed to data analysis and discussion. FTM‐T, MW, PKK, LF, PK, CP, LP, AG, FD, AS, and CF were involved in the clinical investigation and identification of BBSOAS patients. MS, CF, FTM‐T, and LD'I supervised patient data collection and analyzed MRI scans. FN and SO performed and analyzed the RNA‐Seq transcriptomics. MB prepared manuscript figures. MB and MS wrote the manuscript. All authors provided critical review of results and approved the manuscript.

## Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Supporting information
Appendix
Click here for additional data file.
Expanded View Figures PDF
Click here for additional data file.
Review Process File
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to E. Setti for technical help and F. Calegari for insightful comments. We thank E. Marti and G. Le Dréau for the Sox2‐GFP and Tis21‐RFP plasmids, A. Mansouri for the Pax6 null line, and Salsabiel El Nagar for cell cycle primers. We also thank the iBV animal facility and especially A. Martres and K. Moneret for animal handling and care, the PRISM Microscopy facility for their regular support, and V. Virolle at the molecular biology facility for the generation of the PX458 αNr2f1 CRISPR/Cas9 plasmid. Cryostat sections of human samples were kindly provided by C. Allet and P. Giacobini (Lille, France). This work was supported by an ERA‐NET Neuron II grant (ImprovVision) ANR‐15‐NEUR‐0002‐04, by the Jerome Lejeune Foundation (grant No. 199162), and by “Investments for the Future” LabEx SIGNALIFE (grant ANR‐11‐LABX‐0028‐01) to MS and by a postdoctoral fellowship from the city of Nice, France (“Aides Individuelles aux Jeunes Chercheurs”), to MB. The visit of MB in the Lab of SC to perform human organoid experiments was supported by an EMBO short‐term fellowship (STF#8035).

## Data availability
The RNA‐Seq datasets produced in this study are available in the following database: Gene Expression Omnibus GSE146595 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE146595).