pmcBMC CancerBMC Cancer16bmccancBMC Cancer1471-2407BMCPMC13191948PMC13191948.113191948131919484195772610.1186/s12885-026-15975-7159751ResearchTranscriptome and experimental validation identify prognostic genes associated with lipotoxicity in thyroid carcinoma
LinBin ]. Recent trends show an increasing incidence of THCA [ ]. In 2022, global cancer statistics reported approximately 821,173 new THCA cases, reflecting a 4.1% increase, making it the seventh most common cancer worldwide [ ]. In China, THCA is the second most prevalent cancer, with an age-standardized incidence rate of 24.6 cases per 100,000 individuals, accounting for over half of the global new cases in 2022 [ ]. Despite the rise in incidence, the prognosis for patients diagnosed with differentiated THCA remains generally favorable, particularly when diagnosed and treated early [ ]. The most common clinical presentation is a painless neck mass, with additional symptoms such as dysphagia and hoarseness [ ]. Treatment options include surgical resection, radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, and thyroid hormone suppression [ ]. Treatment efficacy is influenced by factors like histological subtype, disease stage, and patient age [ ]. Early diagnosis and adherence to treatment guidelines are vital for improving outcomes. While differentiated THCA typically has a favorable prognosis, managing undifferentiated thyroid cancer (UTC) and RAI-refractory THCA remains challenging, often leading to suboptimal treatment responses and lower survival rates, highlighting the need for novel therapeutic strategies [ , ]. Recent molecular studies, particularly genomic research, have provided valuable insights into THCA, revealing several new therapeutic targets. However, reliable biomarkers to predict disease progression and treatment outcomes are still lacking. Identifying novel prognostic genes is essential for understanding the molecular mechanisms driving THCA and will aid in developing more effective therapeutic approaches.
Lipotoxicity occurs when excess lipids, particularly free fatty acids (FFAs) and triglycerides (TGs), accumulate in non-adipose tissues such as the liver, skeletal muscle, pancreas, and cardiac tissue. This accumulation disrupts cellular function, triggers inflammatory responses, and ultimately leads to cell death [ ]. Lipotoxicity is driven not only by lipid overload but also by complex molecular mechanisms, including oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and the activation of inflammatory signaling cascades [ ]. These interactions contribute to the onset of metabolic disorders, organ dysfunction, and the development of chronic diseases. Lipotoxicity has widespread effects on key organs, especially the pancreas, liver, and skeletal muscle, where it can induce insulin resistance, exacerbate metabolic syndrome, and contribute to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) [ – ]. For instance, elevated FFAs levels impair pancreatic β-cell function and induce apoptosis by activating specific receptors and signaling pathways central to type 2 diabetes pathogenesis [ ]. Concurrently, lipid accumulation in hepatic and muscle tissues exacerbates insulin resistance, accelerating the progression of metabolic disorders [ ].
Lipotoxicity plays a significant role in the initiation and progression of various cancer types [ – ]. Dysregulation of lipid metabolism affects tumor cell behaviors such as proliferation, migration, and invasion, facilitating tumor growth and malignant transformation [ , ]. By-products of fatty acid metabolism, including cytokines like interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), activate inflammatory signaling pathways in neoplastic cells, enhancing their growth and metastatic potential [ ]. In THCA, lipotoxicity promotes tumor cell survival and invasiveness by altering the fatty acid metabolism balance in thyroid cells, a key factor in disease progression [ ]. This suggests that lipotoxicity may play a critical role in THCA pathogenesis.
Modifications in lifestyle, such as improvements in diet, increased physical activity, and weight reduction, can substantially reduce lipotoxicity and mitigate the progression of metabolic disorders [ , ]. Furthermore, pharmacological interventions and targeted therapies have demonstrated efficacy in reducing lipotoxicity and its associated complications [ , ]. Future research should focus on understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying lipotoxicity, aiming to develop a robust theoretical framework that supports the advancement of innovative treatment strategies, offering new alternatives for clinical management. Recent studies of THCA's molecular mechanisms have provided valuable insights for precision oncology. The integration of multi-omics approaches—encompassing genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics—has allowed for a comprehensive characterization of THCA at multiple molecular levels. These strategies are essential for elucidating disease pathogenesis, identifying novel diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers, and discovering potential therapeutic targets, thereby enhancing our understanding of THCA biology and enabling clinical application [ ].
Although the precise role of lipotoxicity in THCA remains unclear, particularly regarding its molecular mechanisms and prognostic influence, this research aims to investigate the contribution of lipotoxicity-associated genes in THCA. The study employs transcriptomic profiling, bioinformatics tools, and experimental validation to explore this relationship. Specifically, the research has four main objectives: first, to identify prognostic genes; second, to develop and validate a prognostic model; third, to examine the association between the risk model and clinical characteristics; and fourth, to assess the relationship between the immune microenvironment and risk stratification. Through univariate Cox regression and LASSO analysis, prognostic genes related to THCA were identified, and a prognostic model was developed to assess the influence of these genes in THCA. Additionally, the study explores enriched pathways, immune features, and the tumor microenvironment in THCA patients, opening new avenues for targeted therapy.

## Materials and methods

## Data source
Data, including gene expression matrices, clinical characteristics, and mutation details for 512 THCA samples, were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/). A TCGA-THCA dataset, comprising 513 THCA samples (cancer tissue) and 59 control samples (normal adjacent tissue), was used for analysis. All 512 THCA samples included survival information. These samples were randomly split into a training set and a validation set in a 7:3 ratio [ , ]. The training set contained 358 THCA samples, and the validation set comprised 154 THCA samples. A total of 467 lipotoxicity-related genes (L-RGs) were sourced from GeneCards (https://www.genecards.org/), using a correlation score > 0 for "Lipotoxicity" (as of November 15, 2024) [ ].

## Differential expression analysis
Differential analysis was conducted on the TCGA-THCA dataset (THCA versus control) using the R package "DESeq2" (v 1.40.2) [ ]. Count data served as input for DESeq2 to perform differential expression analysis, with internal normalization tailored to RNA-seq count data [ ]. For analyses requiring normalized expression values (such as visualization and model building), FPKM data were used [ ]. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified with a |log2 fold change (FC)|> 0.5 and P < 0.05. Visualization of the volcano plot and heatmap was performed using the "ggplot2" package (v 3.4.1) [ ] and the "pheatmap" package (v 1.0.12) [ ], respectively. The top 10 genes with the highest upregulation and downregulation were displayed, ranked by their log2 FC values.

## Identification candidate genes
Candidate genes were determined by examining the overlap of DEGs and L-RGs using the R package "VennDiagram" (v 1.7.1) [ ]. protein–protein interactions (PPI) between the candidate genes were analyzed using the STRING database (https://string-db.org), and the network was visualized using Cytoscape (v 3.8.2) [ ], with an interaction score threshold set at ≥ 0.4. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses were conducted using the "clusterProfiler" package (v 4.2.2) [ ]. Data visualization was carried out using "ggplot2" (v 3.4.1) [ ].

## Development of prognostic model
In the training dataset, univariate Cox regression (Hazard Ratio (HR) ≠ 1 and P < 0.05) was applied to identify prognostic genes from the candidate genes using the R package "survival" (v 0.4.9) [ ]. The cox_zph function was used to perform the proportional hazards (PH) test for genes associated with prognosis, with significance set at P > 0.05. Genes that met the PH assumption and were significantly linked to THCA prognosis were visualized in a forest plot (P > 0.05). Next, a least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) analysis was performed using the "glmnet" package (v 4.1–8) [ ] to identify feature genes from the candidate prognostic genes that passed both the Cox and PH tests. Finally, multivariate Cox regression analysis was conducted on the feature genes using the "survival" package (v 0.4.9) (HR ≠ 1 and P < 0.05) to determine prognostic genes. These genes were then used to construct a risk assessment model.\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
 \usepackage{amsmath}
 \usepackage{wasysym} 
 \usepackage{amsfonts} 
 \usepackage{amssymb} 
 \usepackage{amsbsy}
 \usepackage{mathrsfs}
 \usepackage{upgreek}
 \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
 \begin{document}$$\mathrm{risk}\ score=\sum_{\left(i=1\right)}^nCoef\left(i\right)\times\mathrm{expr}\left(i\right)$$\end{document}
In this formula, coef represents the risk coefficient for each prognostic gene, while expr reflects its gene expression level.
To further assess the relationship between the identified prognostic biomarkers and lipotoxicity-related processes, Spearman correlation analysis was conducted between the prognostic genes and those from the FATTY_ACID_OXIDATION.v2026.1.Hs.tsv and GOBP_INTRINSIC_APOPTOTIC_SIGNALING_PATHWAY_IN_RESPONSE_TO_ENDOPLASMIC_RETICULUM_STRESS.v2026.1.Hs.tsv gene sets sourced from the MSigDB database (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb). The analysis was performed using the "psych" package (v 2.4.6.26) (https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=psych), with a correlation threshold of |cor|> 0.3 and P < 0.05. Additionally, weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was performed on the expression matrix from the training set using the "WGCNA" package (v 1.73) [ ]. Samples were clustered, and an optimal soft-thresholding power was selected to construct a scale-free network. The gene module most strongly correlated with the prognostic genes was identified, followed by GO and KEGG enrichment analyses using the "clusterProfiler" package (v 4.15.0.003) (P < 0.05) [ ].

## Evaluation and validation of risk models
Risk scores were computed using the previously established prognostic model. THCA samples with survival data from both the training and validation cohorts were classified into high-risk and low-risk groups based on the optimal threshold of the risk score. Survival outcomes between the two risk groups in the training set were compared using the Kaplan–Meier (KM) method via the "survminer" package (v 0.4.9). The optimal cutoff value for the risk score was determined using the survcutpoint function in the "survminer" package (v 0.5.0) [ ]. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were generated, and the area under the curve (AUC) was calculated for survival outcomes at 1, 3, and 5 years using the "survivalROC" package (v 1.0.3) [ ]. Heatmaps were generated using the "pheatmap" package (v 1.0.12). The validation dataset was used to further validate the prediction model. Risk curves, KM survival curves, and ROC curves were generated, with AUC values calculated for survival durations of 1, 3, and 5 years. Heatmaps were also produced for visualization.

## Independent prognostic factors
The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used on the training dataset to evaluate differences in gene expression levels related to prognosis across clinical characteristics. The results were visualized using violin plots generated by the "ggplot2" package (v 3.4.1) (P < 0.05). Univariate Cox regression analysis was employed to evaluate the association of risk scores with various clinical characteristics (HR ≠ 1 and P < 0.05). Significant variables were further assessed using the PH assumption test (P > 0.05). A multivariate Cox regression model was applied, and the PH assumption test was conducted to determine independent predictive variables. A nomogram was developed using the "rms" package (v 6.8.1) [ ], incorporating the autonomous prognostic factors. The nomogram's predictive validity was evaluated by generating calibration curves for 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival intervals using the "rms" package (v 6.8–1). Additionally, the model's discriminatory capacity was assessed by generating ROC curves for 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates using the "survivalROC" package (v 1.0.3). Decision curve analysis (DCA) was conducted to produce decision curves for the same survival durations.

## Immune microenvironment
The XCELL algorithm was used to assess the distribution of 64 distinct immune cell types in each THCA sample from the training cohort. The Wilcoxon test was then applied to compare immune cell infiltration between the two risk categories, with a significance threshold set at P < 0.05, identifying differentially infiltrated immune cells. The results were visualized through stacked histograms and boxplots generated by "ggplot2" (v 3.4.1) [ ]. A quantitative comparative analysis was performed to evaluate the infiltration levels of differentially expressed immune cells between the two risk groups using the "ggplot2" package (v 3.4.1). Spearman's correlation was calculated using the "psych" package (v 2.2.9) (|cor|> 0.3 and P < 0.05) to examine relationships between immune cell types and prognostic genes. Additionally, differences in common immune checkpoints [ ] between the two risk groups were analyzed using the Wilcoxon test for THCA samples in the training set (P < 0.05). The TIDE platform was used to calculate various scores for the two patient risk groups, with differences in scores compared using the Wilcoxon test (P < 0.05).

## Drug sensitivity
To assess chemotherapy response variations between the two risk groups, data for 198 commonly used chemotherapy drugs were retrieved from the Genomics of GDSC (www.cancerRxgene.org). The "pRRophetic" software (v 0.5) [ ] was utilized to compute IC50 values for targeted therapies within THCA using the training cohort data. The Wilcoxon test was applied to compare IC50 values across the two risk groups for each drug, with a significance level set at P < 0.05.

## Gene set enrichment analysis
In the training dataset, the two risk groups of THCA patients were analyzed using "DESeq2" (v 1.38.0), and the log2 FC values were sorted in descending order. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed using the c2.cp.kegg.v2023.1.Hs.symbols.gmt file from the MSigDB database, along with the "clusterProfiler" package (v 4.7.1.003). Significant GSEA results were defined by a |Normalized Enrichment Score (NES)|> 1, a False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.25, and a P-value < 0.05. Pathways showing significant enrichment were visualized using the "enrichplot" package (v 1.18.3) [ ].

## Somatic mutation analysis and microbial differences analysis
Somatic gene mutations in THCA from the training set were analyzed using the "maftools" package (v 2.10.0) [ ] for visualization. Tumor mutational burden (TMB) was assessed by calculating the total number of somatic mutations in each THCA sample. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare TMB scores between the two risk groups, with a significance level set at P < 0.05. Spearman's correlation analysis was conducted using the "Corrplot" software (v 0.92) [ ] to explore the relationship between TMB and risk scores, with criteria set at |cor|> 0.3 and P < 0.05. The BIC database (http://bic.jhlab.tw/) is a newly developed database specifically focused on cancer-related bacteria. Differences in microbial populations across the two risk groups were assessed using the Wilcoxon test, yielding statistically significant results (P < 0.05). The top 15 microbes, ranked by P-value, were presented.

## Construction of regulatory network
To explore the regulatory mechanisms of prognostic gene expression, molecular regulatory networks were constructed. Transcription factors targeting prognostic genes were predicted using the Cistrome database (http://cistrome.org/db/#/). A network diagram illustrating the interactions between transcription factors and mRNA was generated using Cytoscape (v 3.8.2). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) associated with prognostic genes were identified using the DIANA-microT tool (http://diana.cslab.ece.ntua.gr/microT/) and the miRanda database (https://mirdb.org/). Overlapping miRNAs were identified by comparing the results from both databases, and the intersecting miRNAs were determined using the "VennDiagram" package (v 1.7.3). Visualization of the miRNA network was performed using Cytoscape (v 3.8.2). A pathway network enriched with lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA interactions was constructed. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) linked to miRNAs were identified using the starBase database (http://starbase.sysu.edu.cn/index.php), applying a filtering criterion of clipExpNum > 4. The pathway network involving lncRNA, miRNA, and mRNA interactions was visualized using Cytoscape (v 3.8.2).

## RT-qPCR
Tissue samples from both cancerous and normal control tissues were obtained from five individuals diagnosed with THCA at Qingdao Municipal Hospital [ , ]. Detailed clinical information is provided in Additional file 1. RT-qPCR analysis was performed using these samples. Ethical approval for this study was granted by the Clinical Trial Ethics Committee of Qingdao Municipal Hospital (Approval №: 2025-KY-069 (Expedited), reviewed on 27 March 2025), and informed consent was obtained from all patients. Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was employed to verify the expression levels of prognostic genes. Total RNA was extracted from ten samples using TRIzol (Ambion, Austin, USA), following the manufacturer's protocol. RNA was then reverse transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) using the SureScript First-strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Servicebio, Wuhan, China), as per the established protocol. RT-qPCR was conducted with the 2 × Universal Blue SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (Servicebio, Wuhan, China). Primer sequences used for PCR are listed in Additional file 2. GAPDH was used as the housekeeping gene, and relative expression levels of the prognostic genes were quantified using the 2−ΔΔCt method. Data analysis and visualization were carried out using GraphPad Prism.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using R software (v 3.9.1). The Wilcoxon test was applied to assess group differences (P < 0.05). For RT-qPCR comparisons, a t-test was used to determine statistical significance, with P < 0.05 as the threshold. The study was conducted between April 2025 and July 2025.

## Results

## Identification and functional enrichment of candidate genes
Differential analysis identified a total of 5,777 DEGs between THCA samples and control groups, with 3,286 genes up-regulated and 2,491 down-regulated (Fig.  a, b). A set of 137 candidate genes was identified by intersecting DEGs and L-RGs (Fig.  c). The PPI network revealed 1,041 interactions among 130 proteins, with notable interactions involving TNF, GAPDH, and IL6, which interact with the majority of proteins in the network (Fig.  d). GO analysis identified 1,546 biological functions, including 1,439 biological processes (BP), 34 cellular components (CC), and 73 molecular functions (MF), with a significance threshold set at P < 0.05 (Fig.  e) (Additional file 3). In BP, candidate genes were primarily enriched in processes such as response to nutrient levels, lipid localization, and cellular response to peptides. In CC, these genes were predominantly located in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen. In MF, they were primarily associated with functions such as receptor-ligand activity, cytokine activity, and lipase activity. KEGG pathway analysis revealed 248 significantly enriched functional pathways, including the AMPK signaling pathway (P < 0.05) (Fig.  f) (Additional file 4). 

## IL11 and SNAI1 as prognostic genes
A total of 16 candidate prognostic genes identified by univariate Cox regression showed significant association with survival and passed the PH assumption test (Fig.  a). LASSO analysis identified interleukin-11 (IL11) and snail family transcriptional repressor 1 (SNAI1) as feature genes (Fig.  b). Prognostic genes were further validated using multivariate Cox regression and the PH assumption test (Fig.  c, d). To explore the association of these prognostic genes with lipotoxicity-related processes, correlation analysis was conducted between the prognostic genes and lipotoxicity-related pathway genes. Results showed that IL11 was significantly negatively correlated with most pathway genes, while SNAI1 was significantly positively correlated (Fig.  e). Additionally, WGCNA was performed on the training set to identify the gene module most closely co-expressed with IL11 and SNAI1. Functional enrichment analysis of the blue module, which displayed the strongest co-expression relationship with the prognostic genes (Fig.  f-i), revealed significant enrichment in biological processes closely related to lipotoxicity, including positive regulation of fatty acid metabolic processes, regulation of fatty acid metabolism, and reactive oxygen species metabolic processes (Fig.  j). These results suggest that IL11 and SNAI1 are not only significantly correlated with lipotoxicity-related pathways but may also play a role in key lipotoxic processes such as lipid metabolism and oxidative stress, further supporting their potential as lipotoxicity-related prognostic genes. 
A risk model was constructed based on prognostic genes. In the training set, THCA patients were classified into two risk groups using the optimal cut-off value of 3.044782: a high-risk group (73 samples) and a low-risk group (89 samples). Similarly, in the validation cohort, patients were divided into high-risk (16 samples) and low-risk (138 samples) categories using the same cut-off value. Risk curves for both the training and validation sets showed a gradual increase in mortality with higher risk scores (Fig.  a, b). KM analysis demonstrated that patients in the high-risk group had significantly lower survival rates (P < 0.05) (Fig.  c, d). Additionally, in the ROC analysis for 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival, AUC values greater than 0.6 indicated that the risk model was effective in predicting survival outcomes for THCA in both the training and validation cohorts (Fig.  e, f). The AUC in the validation set was comparable to that in the training set, suggesting that the model was not prone to overfitting. The heatmap of prognostic gene expression profiles indicated a strong correlation between these genes and poor prognosis in THCA (Fig.  g, h). 

## Risk score and age group as independent prognostic factors
Independent prognostic analyses were performed to develop a robust clinical decision support system. Both the risk score and age group were identified as significant variables. The PH assumption was satisfied for all variables in the univariate Cox regression (Fig.  a). In multivariate Cox regression, both the risk score and age category remained significant, establishing them as independent prognostic factors (HR > 1). The PH assumption was also satisfied in this analysis (Fig.  b). A nomogram was then constructed to visualize the risk model (Fig.  c). Calibration curves for 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival were clustered in the upper right region (0.8–1.0), indicating high predictive accuracy (Fig.  d). The AUC values for 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival surpassed 0.8 (Fig.  e). Furthermore, DCA demonstrated that the model provided superior net benefit, emphasizing the excellent predictive power of the nomogram (Fig.  f). 

## Immune microenviroment
Figure  a illustrates the abundance of 64 immune infiltrating cell types. Further analysis identified 26 differential immune cells showing significant differences between the high- and low-risk groups (P < 0.05), including plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), macrophages, and natural killer (NK) cells, among others (Fig.  b). Quantitative comparison of immune cell infiltration levels revealed that all 26 immune cell categories exhibited statistically significant variations between the two risk groups (P < 0.05) (Fig.  c, d). Correlation analysis demonstrated a notable positive association between mesangial cells and GMP, with the strongest negative correlation observed between osteoblasts and MEP (Fig.  e). Further correlation analysis between the 26 differential immune cells and prognostic genes revealed that mesangial cells had the strongest positive correlation with IL11 (P < 0.0001), while osteoblasts showed the strongest negative correlation with IL11. For SNAI1, hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) exhibited the strongest positive correlation, whereas common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) demonstrated the strongest negative correlation (P < 0.0001) (Fig.  f). In the training set of THCA samples, expression levels of 5 immune checkpoints (NRP1, CD274, CD80, CD160, and IDO2) exhibited significant differences between the high- and low-risk groups (P < 0.001), with all showing higher expression in the high-risk group compared to the low-risk group (Fig.  g). These results suggest significant differences between the high- and low-risk groups in terms of fibroblast activity, immune checkpoint expression, T cell dysfunction, immune evasion, and immune cell exclusion. The high-risk group displayed significantly higher T cell dysfunction, immune cell exclusion, and TIDE scores, confirming its dual-mechanism immune escape phenotype. These results highlight the unique characteristics of the immune microenvironment in each group (P < 0.05) (Fig.  h). 

## Drug sensitivity analysis
IC50 values, which reflect drug sensitivity, were used to assess THCA's response to various drugs. A lower IC50 value indicates greater drug sensitivity, while a higher IC50 value suggests greater resistance. Significant differences in IC50 values between the two risk groups for the top 10 drugs are displayed, sorted by P-values (Fig.  a) (P < 0.05). The IC50 values for AZD8055, BMS.754807, Bortezomib, Dasatinib, MK.2206, Nutlin.3a, TW.37, and Vorinostat were significantly lower in the high-risk cohort, indicating enhanced sensitivity to these drugs (P < 0.05). Conversely, Cisplatin and Gefitinib exhibited significantly lower IC50 values in the low-risk group (P < 0.05), highlighting the differences in drug response characteristics between the two risk groups (Fig.  b). GSEA results further demonstrated that the two risk groups exhibited distinct enrichment patterns (Additional file 5). The low-risk group showed significant enrichment in pathways such as aminoacyl tRNA biosynthesis (Fig.  c), while the high-risk group was enriched in pathways related to cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions (Fig.  d) (Additional file 6). 

## Somatic mutation and microbial differences
The waterfall plots for the two risk groups in the training dataset are shown in Fig.  a, and the somatic mutation types for these groups are depicted in Fig.  b. In high-risk patients, the most commonly mutated gene is BRAF, with a mutation frequency of 59%, primarily in the form of missense variants. This is followed by mutations in NRAS (8%) and HRAS (4%), both of which are well-established oncogenes. Other frequently mutated genes include TG (3%), DNAH10 (2%), and TTN (2%). A comparative analysis revealed significant differences in gene mutation characteristics between the two risk groups. In the low-risk group, BRAF remains the most frequently mutated gene, but its mutation frequency decreases to 61%, followed by NRAS (12%) and TG (6%). Notably, the mutation frequency of TTN in the low-risk group increases to 6%, with frameshift variants predominating. Additionally, specific mutations in genes such as ATM, KMT2A, and MYLK appear in the low-risk group, each accounting for 3% of the mutation frequency. Overall, the low-risk group displays a distinct mutation profile, which may be closely related to patient prognosis. Box plots illustrating the distribution of TMB in the two risk groups are shown in Fig.  c. TMB values in both groups are primarily between 0 and 0.5, with a statistically significant difference observed (P = 0.00179). Outliers are represented as black dots, with some samples having TMB values exceeding 2.0. The TMB was slightly higher in the low-risk group. A scatter plot in Fig.  d demonstrates the relationship between TMB and risk scores, revealing a significant negative correlation (cor = −0.175, P = 0.00112). The regression line indicates that as the TMB score increases, the risk score tends to decrease. These results suggest that TMB may be an important prognostic marker, with higher TMB levels linked to lower risk scores. Microbial differences between the two risk groups are shown in Fig.  e. At the class level, 15 bacterial classes were analyzed, with Gammaproteobacteria showing the most significant difference (P < 0.001), with relative abundance ranging between 0.2 and 0.9. Other classes, such as Actinobacteria and Alphaproteobacteria, also exhibited statistically significant differences (P < 0.05). At the order level, Neisseriales displayed significant variations (P < 0.001), with greater relative abundance in the low-risk cohort, ranging from 0.3 to 0.9. Most orders had relatively low abundance (less than 0.3), and the differences between many orders were not statistically significant. At the family level, Moraxellaceae showed the highest relative abundance (0.4–0.6) and was markedly higher in the low-risk cohort. Other families, such as Corynebacteriaceae and Methylobacteriaceae, also demonstrated significant differences (P < 0.05). At the genus level, Acinetobacter and Actinomyces showed relatively high abundance (0.2–0.4), with Acinetobacter significantly more abundant in the low-risk group (P < 0.001). These results indicate significant variations in microbial composition between the two risk groups at different taxonomic levels, providing insights into the microbial factors associated with risk stratification. 

## Regulatory networks for prognostic genes
The TF-mRNA network was constructed, revealing 140 potential TFs that regulate prognostic genes. Notably, FOXP2, RELA, and NR2F1 were identified as co-regulated by the prognostic genes (Fig.  a). In the miRNA-mRNA network, 2 prognostic genes were linked to 60 miRNAs. IL11 was predicted to be regulated by 30 miRNAs, while SNAI1 was associated with 37 miRNAs (Fig.  b). Furthermore, an lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA-enrichment pathway was constructed, involving 26 miRNAs and 50 lncRNAs that may regulate prognostic genes. For example, OIP5-AS1 might influence gene expression through multiple miRNAs, which in turn are predicted to modulate SNAI1 and IL11 expression. These genes were further implicated in cell adhesion and cytokine signaling pathways, establishing a multi-level regulatory network spanning from lncRNAs to functional pathways (Fig.  c). However, since the TF predictions for IL11 and SNAI1 are derived from the Cistrome database and lack validation through thyroid-specific ChIP-seq or ATAC-seq data across PTC and FTC subtypes, their regulatory roles remain predictive and require further experimental validation. 

## Verification of expression
Statistical analysis and graphical representation of the SNAI1 gene, with outliers marked in yellow, showed significant differences between the THCA and control groups. IL11 was highly expressed, while SNAI1 expression was significantly lower in the THCA group (P < 0.05) (Fig.  ). 

## Discussion
The prevalence of THCA has markedly increased in recent years [ ]. Lipotoxicity, characterized by cellular dysfunction and tissue damage resulting from abnormal lipid metabolism, has garnered significant attention for its involvement in various cancers [ ]. The present study represents the first systematic investigation into the prognostic relevance of L-RGs in THCA, utilizing an integrative approach that combines transcriptomic profiling, clinical survival data, and experimental validation. A comprehensive analysis of the TCGA database identified 137 DEGs linked to lipotoxicity. Based on this, a prognostic model was established, comprising two genes, IL11 and SNAI1. To mitigate the risk of overfitting, the dataset was randomly divided into training and validation sets at a 70% to 30% ratio, ensuring the validation set was independent and appropriate for model evaluation. Feature selection was conducted using LASSO regression, with the regularization parameter (λ) determined via tenfold cross-validation, effectively eliminating redundant features. The AUC values from both the training and validation sets were comparable, confirming the absence of significant overfitting. The model demonstrated robust predictive performance (AUC > 0.6) in both cohorts, effectively stratifying patients into high- and low-risk groups, with significant differences in overall survival (OS) (P < 0.05). Qi et al. [ ] developed a prognostic model based on ferroptosis-related genes, demonstrating its predictive capability for OS in THCA patients using an independent cohort. Similarly, Li et al. [ ] created a nomogram integrating factors such as age, tumor size, and distant metastasis, utilizing data from the SEER database. Furthermore, Chen et al. [ ] established a prognostic model focusing on metabolic reprogramming through an integration of transcriptomic, metabolomic, and clinical data, aiming to distinguish high- and low-risk THCA patients. Building on these studies, our prognostic model enhances predictive performance, with improved accuracy and validation metrics. Specifically, increased IL11 expression, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, may initiate inflammatory cascades linked to lipid peroxidation within the tumor microenvironment. In contrast, decreased expression of SNAI1 may affect tumor invasiveness through the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) pathway, highlighting the intricate interplay between dysregulated lipid metabolism and malignancy. Wu et al. [ ] developed a prognostic model based on lipid metabolism in uterine corpus endometrial cancer (UCEC), identifying key hub genes and investigating the molecular pathways associated with their functions. Unlike their study, our research does not delve into the mechanistic details of these pathways. On the other hand, Peng et al. [ ] explored the link between lipid metabolism-related biomarkers and patient survival in cancer, primarily focusing on survival outcomes without considering the relationship between cancer and other clinical or biological factors.
Multi-omics analyses provide deeper insights into the biological mechanisms underlying risk stratification. In this study, a multi-omics approach was employed to comprehensively elucidate the biological foundations that drive risk stratification in THCA. Our findings revealed that the high-risk cohort exhibited an immunosuppressive microenvironment, characterized by an increased presence of tumor-promoting macrophages (M2 subtype), regulatory T cells (Tregs), and a depletion of cytotoxic T cells (CD8 + T). These results are consistent with prior research highlighting the immunosuppressive microenvironment as a hallmark of aggressive malignancies like THCA [ ] [ ]. Regulatory Tregs and exhausted CD8 + T cells are known to suppress anti-tumor immune responses, thereby facilitating tumor progression [ ]. Correlation analysis showed that IL11 was significantly positively correlated with mesangial cells and negatively correlated with osteoblasts, while SNAI1 exhibited a positive correlation with HSCs and a negative correlation with CLPs. These findings suggest that IL11 and SNAI1 may reshape the tumor immune microenvironment by modulating the functions of specific immune cell types, influencing the pathogenesis of THCA. As a pro-inflammatory cytokine, IL11 may recruit or activate stromal components such as mesangial cells, creating a pro-inflammatory environment. This activation may trigger downstream signaling pathways, including JAK/STAT and PI3K/AKT, which promote tumor cell proliferation and EMT [ , ]. SNAI1, a key transcription factor in EMT, may influence the differentiation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells [ ], thereby regulating lymphoid lineage commitment and differentiation. This alteration leads to effector T cell exhaustion or Treg enrichment, thereby fostering an immunosuppressive microenvironment [ , ]. In summary, IL11 and SNAI1 may synergistically drive immune evasion and disease progression in THCA by remodeling immune cell composition and function.
Lipid metabolism imbalance promotes immune evasion by reshaping the immunosuppressive niche [ ]. The present study demonstrated that lipid metabolism dysregulation, driven by altered L-RGs, plays a significant role in creating the immunosuppressive microenvironment observed in high-risk THCA patients. This aligns with recent research highlighting the pivotal role of lipid metabolism in modulating immune responses across various cancers [ , ]. Specifically, excessive lipid accumulation can activate inflammatory signaling pathways, leading to the recruitment and polarization of immunosuppressive cell types, such as M2 macrophages and Tregs [ , ]. Furthermore, elevated expression of immune checkpoint molecules, such as PD-L1 and IDO2, in the high-risk cohort emphasizes the critical role of lipid metabolism in immune evasion. These checkpoint molecules are commonly upregulated in tumors with an immunosuppressive microenvironment, facilitating immune tolerance and promoting tumor progression [ ]. Our findings provide new insights into the relationship between lipid metabolism and immune evasion in THCA, suggesting that targeting lipid metabolism could enhance anti-tumor immune responses. Although recombinant cytokines have shown considerable therapeutic promise in various diseases, the exact mechanisms by which they exert their effects in THCA treatment remain insufficiently understood. While our study suggests potential therapeutic applications of recombinant cytokines in THCA, further experimental validation is required to confirm their efficacy.
Personalized Treatment Strategies Based on Drug Sensitivity Profiling: Drug sensitivity analysis revealed significant differences in chemotherapy responses between high-risk and low-risk THCA patients. Specifically, high-risk patients demonstrated increased sensitivity to PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway inhibitors, such as Dasatinib, and proteasome inhibitors like Bortezomib. In contrast, low-risk patients responded more favorably to conventional chemotherapeutics, such as cisplatin. These variations in drug response align with the distinct molecular and immunological profiles of each risk group. Dysregulation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway is common in cancers with immunosuppressive microenvironments, making these tumors more responsive to inhibitors targeting this pathway [ ]. Additionally, proteasome inhibitors have been found to modulate immune responses and induce apoptosis, particularly in cancer cells with an immunosuppressive phenotype [ ]. These findings highlight the potential for personalized treatment strategies based on risk stratification, which could optimize therapeutic outcomes and minimize unnecessary toxicity in THCA patients. This approach is in line with the growing emphasis on personalized medicine in oncology, where treatments are tailored to the specific molecular and immunological characteristics of individual tumors [ ]. Notably, our analysis showed that the high-risk group exhibited higher in vitro sensitivity to cisplatin, a result that contrasts with the chemotherapy-resistant phenotype commonly seen in RAI-refractory THCA [ ]. This discrepancy may stem from biological differences between cell line-based models (e.g., GDSC database) and the actual tumor microenvironment, where factors such as hypoxia, immune evasion, and stromal cell interactions can affect chemotherapy efficacy [ ]. Furthermore, the pan-cancer model used in this study has not been calibrated with THCA-specific cell lines. Therefore, while in vitro drug sensitivity data provide useful insights for risk stratification, caution is warranted when translating these findings into clinical practice. Further validation in primary tumor models or patient-derived organoids that incorporate the tumor microenvironment is needed.
Microbiome Analysis and Its Impact on Tumor Progression: Our investigation revealed a significant increase in Gammaproteobacteria among the high-risk group, correlating with changes in L-RG expression. This finding offers preliminary insights into how the microbiome may interact with lipid metabolism in the context of THCA. The microbiome plays a pivotal role in regulating host metabolism and immune responses, which in turn impacts cancer progression [ ]. For example, specific bacterial taxa have been shown to influence lipid metabolism by producing metabolites that modify gene expression and signaling pathways [ ]. These results highlight the potential of microbiome-targeted strategies to influence tumor development and immune responses in THCA, warranting further exploration of the mechanisms behind this interaction.
Transcriptomic data from public databases were analyzed using bioinformatics methods, and DEGs were identified through differential expression analysis. A total of 137 potential candidate genes were recognized through comparative analysis with known L-RGs. These genes were further refined using statistical techniques, including univariate Cox regression, LASSO regression, and multivariate Cox regression, which led to the identification of IL11 and SNAI1 as key prognostic markers.
IL11, a cytokine with significant roles in both normal physiology and disease pathogenesis [ ], promotes tumor migration and metastasis in various malignancies [ ]. As a member of the IL-6 family, IL11 binds to its receptor IL11R [ ], initiating multiple downstream signaling cascades, including JAK/STAT, PI3K/AKT, and MAPK pathways, all of which regulate critical cellular functions [ , ]. In this study, IL11 was identified as a lipotoxicity-related prognostic gene, suggesting its potential pivotal role in lipid metabolism disorder-mediated THCA progression. A key characteristic of lipotoxicity is the aberrant accumulation of FFAs in non-adipose tissues, which induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, upregulating IL11 expression through activation of inflammation-related transcription factors such as NF-κB and STAT3 [ – ]. Epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation, also contribute to the regulation of IL11 expression [ ], indicating that lipotoxicity may modulate IL11 levels through a multi-layered regulatory network. In the tumor microenvironment, lipotoxicity-induced cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) secrete significant amounts of IL11 [ ], establishing a paracrine signaling loop with tumor cells. This interaction not only promotes EMT in tumor cells [ ] but also further remodels the microenvironment, creating a "lipotoxicity-inflammation-fibrosis" niche that supports tumor progression [ ]. Consequently, IL11 functions not only as an effector molecule in lipotoxicity signaling but also as a central hub linking lipid metabolism dysregulation, chronic inflammation, and malignant tumor phenotypes. Targeting IL11 may simultaneously inhibit lipotoxicity-driven inflammation and pro-tumorigenic signaling, offering a promising therapeutic strategy for lipotoxicity-related THCA.
SNAI1 encodes a zinc finger transcription factor essential for EMT and tumorigenesis [ , ]. This protein facilitates tumor migration and metastasis by downregulating epithelial markers such as E-cadherin, while simultaneously promoting the expression of mesenchymal markers like N-cadherin [ ]. Previous research has established SNAI1 as an oncogenic driver in thyroid cancer, contributing to disease progression through EMT [ ]. However, in the present study, SNAI1 was identified as a lipotoxicity-related prognostic gene with lower expression in THCA tissues, indicating that its regulatory mechanisms in THCA may be more intricate. A lipotoxic environment is typically characterized by chronic inflammation and oxidative stress, which activate key upstream regulatory pathways of SNAI1 transcription [ – ], such as TGF-β and Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Moreover, lipotoxicity may indirectly modulate SNAI1 expression stability via inflammation-related transcription factors like NF-κB [ , ]. Within the lipotoxic microenvironment, SNAI1 protein may gain stability through post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation, thereby preserving its EMT-regulatory activity [ ], enhancing its pro-invasive effects, promoting tumor cell migration and metastasis, and ultimately accelerating disease progression and poor prognosis in patients.
The risk assessment model integrating IL11 and SNAI1 demonstrated robust predictive power, with an AUC exceeding 0.6 for survival rates at 1, 3, and 5 years. A nomogram combining risk scores with clinical characteristics, such as TNM stage, accurately predicted patient survival probabilities. Notably, IL11 expression correlated with advanced TNM stage, highlighting its involvement in disease progression. Examination of the immune microenvironment revealed significant differences in immune cell infiltration and checkpoint molecule expression between risk categories. Furthermore, drug sensitivity profiling uncovered differential responses to chemotherapy, emphasizing the potential of risk-stratified treatment strategies. Regulatory network analysis further revealed the complex regulation of these genes by transcriptional and non-coding RNAs.
This study has several limitations. First, the prognostic model was validated only with internal TCGA data, without external cohort validation, which may limit its generalizability. Additionally, the model's predictive performance could be suboptimal due to the potential omission of critical L-RGs, reliance on a single feature selection method, and the constraints of single-omics data analysis. Second, the regulatory mechanisms of IL11 and SNAI1 have not been experimentally validated, and the predicted regulatory networks—including transcription factors and miRNA targets—were not filtered or verified using thyroid-specific datasets or CLIP-seq evidence. Furthermore, bioinformatics approaches come with inherent limitations, including gene screening thresholds and algorithm selection for immune infiltration assessment, which may lead to false positives. The drug sensitivity analysis was based on pan-cancer cell line data, which may not fully reflect clinical conditions in THCA. The mutational analysis primarily focused on classical driver genes, with insufficient exploration of other molecular events, while the microbial analysis would benefit from a higher taxonomic resolution.
Future research will enhance model predictive performance by integrating multi-omics data to more comprehensively characterize the landscape of L-RGs. This will include validating the independent prognostic value of the current risk signatures through joint analysis with clinicopathological parameters and establishing multi-center independent validation cohorts to assess model reliability. Additionally, further investigations will cross-validate bioinformatics results using multiple algorithms, calibrate drug sensitivity predictions using organoid models, and deepen our exploration of microbial features through metagenomic sequencing. Key miRNA-target interactions will be experimentally verified using CLIP-seq data and dual-luciferase reporter assays. These efforts will advance our understanding of lipotoxicity-related mechanisms in THCA.

## Conclusion
In conclusion, this study systematically identified and validated IL11 and SNAI1 as key lipotoxicity-related prognostic biomarkers in THCA. Through integrative bioinformatics and experimental validation, this study developed a robust prognostic model that effectively stratifies THCA patients into high- and low-risk groups with distinct survival outcomes. The model demonstrated consistent predictive performance across both training and validation cohorts, highlighting its reliability. Multi-omics analyses revealed significant differences in the immune microenvironment, drug sensitivity, somatic mutations, and microbial composition between the two risk groups, emphasizing the complex relationship between lipid metabolism and tumor progression. Notably, the high-risk group exhibited an immunosuppressive microenvironment and differential responses to chemotherapy, suggesting potential avenues for personalized treatment. While these findings provide valuable insights, the study's limitations—including the lack of external validation and mechanistic investigation of IL11 and SNAI1—highlight areas for future research. Moving forward, independent cohort validation, functional studies to elucidate molecular mechanisms, and further refinement of the prognostic model will be critical for enhancing its clinical applicability. Our findings offer a foundation for understanding lipotoxicity's role in THCA and provide promising targets for risk stratification and tailored therapeutic strategies.

## Supplementary Information

Additional file 1: Supplementary table of clinical sample details.

Additional file 2: Primer sequences used for RT-qPCR validation of prognostic genes in thyroid carcinoma (THCA).

Additional file 3: Gene Ontology (GO) biological process, cellular component, and molecular function enrichment analysis of candidate lipotoxicity-related genes (L-RGs).

Additional file 4: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis of candidate lipotoxicity-related genes (L-RGs).

Additional file 5: Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) results for high-risk and low-risk groups in thyroid carcinoma (THCA).

Additional file 6: Enriched KEGG pathways in high-risk and low-risk groups of thyroid carcinoma (THCA).

## Abbreviations
THCAThyroid carcinoma
L-RGsLipotoxicity-related genes
DEGsDifferentially expressed genes
RT-qPCRReverse transcription quantitative PCR
pDCsPlasmacytoid dendritic cells
RAIRemoval, radioactive iodine
UTCUndifferentiated thyroid cancer
FFAsFree fatty acids
TGsTriglycerides
NAFLDNon-alcoholic fatty liver disease
IL-6Interleukin-6
TNF-αTumor necrosis factor-alpha
TCGAThe Cancer Genome Atlas
PPIProtein-protein interactions
ROCReceiver operating characteristic
AUCArea under the curve
K-MKaplan-Meier
DCADecision curve analysis
corCorrelation coefficient
NESNormalized enrichment score
FDRFalse discovery rate
TMBTumour mutation burden
miRNAsMicroRNAs
GOGene Ontology
BPBiological processes
CCCellular components
MFMolecular functions
OSOverall survival
UCECUterine corpus endometrial cancer
TregsRegulatory T cells
IL-11Interleukin-11
IL-6Interleukin-6
CRCColorectal cancer
EMTEpithelial-mesenchymal transition
TETsThymic epithelial tumors
SNAI1Snail Family Transcriptional Repressor 1
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Bullet Edits Limited for the linguistic editing and proofreading of the manuscript.

## Authors’ contributions
Bin Lin：Conceptualization, Data curation, Validation, Visualization, Writing–original draft, Writing–review & editing. Xiaodong Ding: Data curation, Validation, Visualization, Writing–review & editing. Xianqiang Yu: Validation, Writing–review & editing. Min Li: Visualization, Writing–review & editing. Weizheng Mao: Conceptualization, Project administration, Supervision, Writing–review & editing. This work currently described has not been published, is not being considered for publication elsewhere, and its publication was approved by all authors.

## Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

## Data availability
The datasets analyzed for this study can be found at [TCGA-THCA] [TCGA; https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/], and further details can be obtained from the corresponding author.

## Declarations

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
I certify that the research has been approved by the Clinical Trial Ethics Committee of Qingdao Municipal Hospital. The approval number and date of approval are as follows: [Approval №:2025-KY-069 (Expedited)] and [2025.3.27] and performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent was obtained from the patients.

## Consent for publication
Not applicable.

## Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.