pmcCell Rep MedCell Rep Med3954cellrepsmedCell Reports Medicine2666-3791ElsevierPMC12432385PMC12432385.112432385124323854079584410.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102297S2666-3791(25)00370-21022971ArticleEnhanced regenerative and developmental potential of embryonal and stem cell-derived platelets compared to adult platelets
HuangBaiming LiLe YaoShun FengYue ZhangRunqing LiangWei WuYuting SuPei WangFei ZhouWen WangHongtaowanghongtao@ihcams.ac.cn LiuCuicuiliucuicui@ihcams.ac.cn ZhouJiaxizhoujx@ihcams.ac.cn 1State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, National Clinical Research Center for Blood Diseases, Haihe Laboratory of Cell Ecosystem, Institute of Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China2Tianjin Institutes of Health Science, Tianjin 301600, China3HaemoCure lnc, Tianjin 300459, China4Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Science, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, China∗Corresponding author wanghongtao@ihcams.ac.cn∗∗Corresponding author liucuicui@ihcams.ac.cn∗∗∗Corresponding author zhoujx@ihcams.ac.cn5These authors contributed equally
6Lead contact
19820251182025684968321022972111202412520252172025110820251409202515092025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
The molecular features and multifaceted roles of platelets have been well characterized in adult mammals, but little is known about platelets at earlier developmental stages. In this study, we conduct transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of mouse embryonic platelets and find that, compared to adult platelets, they exhibit reduced classic immune-regulatory and procoagulant features but enhanced development-supporting traits. Notably, embryonic platelets interact more robustly with various cell types, including fibroblasts, and significantly accelerate refractory wound healing. Mechanistically, embryonic platelets promote fibroblast proliferation by releasing higher levels of IGF2. We also identify a CD59(a)+ platelet subpopulation in adult mice and humans that mimics the function of embryonic platelets. Additionally, human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived platelets share similar molecular and functional properties with embryonic platelets. Our findings highlight the unique multi-omics signatures and superior regenerative potential of embryonic and human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived platelets, offering promising directions for tailoring platelet-based therapies to specific clinical needs.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Multi-omics analysis unveils the functional features of embryonic platelets
•Embryonic platelets outperform adult platelets in fibroblast proliferation and wound repair
•An embryonic-like CD59(a)+ platelet subpopulation present in both mice and humans
•hiPSC-derived platelets closely resemble embryonic platelets both molecularly and functionally

Huang et al. reveal the multi-omics signatures and superior regenerative potential of embryonic and hiPSC-derived platelets and identify an embryonic-like CD59(a)+ platelet subpopulation in adults, offering promising directions for tailoring platelet-based therapies to specific clinical needs.

## Keywords
embryonal plateletmulti-omics analysesdevelopment-supporting characteristicfibroblastsCD59ahiPSC-derived plateletpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: August 11, 2025

## Introduction
Platelets, as a terminal component of the blood system, are indispensable for hemostasis, maintaining vascular integrity, regulating blood homeostasis, and immune responses. , , , , While these roles are well characterized in adult platelets, growing evidence indicates significant variation across developmental stages. For instance, neonatal platelet transfusion therapy has been associated with adverse outcomes such as abnormal thrombosis, , , highlighting key differences between neonatal and adult donor platelets. Neonatal platelets exhibit a longer lifespan, reduced coagulation responses, , , , , and distinct gene and protein expression profiles compared to adults. , , , At earlier developmental stages, embryonic platelets have been found to differ markedly from adult platelets in terms of morphology, glycoprotein expression, and coagulation capacity. , Recent single-cell transcriptome and functional studies from our group and others have revealed that embryonic megakaryocytes possess distinct morphological and molecular traits compared to adults. , , , , Importantly, they may produce platelets through a budding mechanism, unlike the pre-platelet extension model seen in adult megakaryocytes. These findings suggest that embryonic platelets may have unique characteristics and functions. However, current research remains limited, often comparing them to adult platelets without investigating their intrinsic molecular or functional advantages. This gap highlights the need to further explore embryonic platelet biology and its therapeutic potential.
Although platelets are anucleate, they retain diverse RNA and protein repertoires, allowing for functional and molecular complexity. , , , , Omics technologies have been widely used to investigate platelet biology. For example, transcriptomic profiling has identified nearly 10,000 protein-coding transcripts in platelets. A large-scale study of 204 healthy adults found that highly expressed genes—such as B2M, PPBP, TMSB4X, ACTB, FTL, CLU, and PF4—are conserved across individuals and associated with immune responses, cell adhesion, and cytoskeletal dynamics. To study developmental differences, multi-omics analyses have primarily focused on adult peripheral blood platelets and neonatal cord blood platelets. , , Data showed that neonatal platelets express more mRNAs involved in protein synthesis, while genes for calcium transport, metabolism, and signaling are downregulated compared to adults. Proteomic studies further reveal that adult platelets are enriched in immunomodulatory and activation-related proteins, while neonatal platelets express more ribosomal and metabolic proteins. These differences likely contribute to the weaker coagulation responses of neonatal platelets and may help explain the risks associated with adult platelet transfusions in neonates. In contrast, embryonic platelets remain poorly characterized due to limited availability and low abundance. Their omics features are largely unexplored, representing a key gap in our understanding of platelet development.
In adult platelets, research has expanded beyond hemostasis to explore interactions with immune cells like neutrophils, T cells, and endothelial cells. These interactions influence immune responses, , , promote angiogenesis, , enhance wound healing, and support tumor cell migration, , demonstrating platelets’ multifaceted roles. However, the non-hemostatic functions of neonatal and embryonic platelets remain largely understudied. In 2004, Palumbo et al. disrupted platelet production by knocking out Nfe2 in embryonic megakaryocytes, revealing that platelet-deficient embryos had reduced body length at birth, suggesting developmental impairment. Later studies showed that platelets are essential for separating lymphatic and blood vessels during embryogenesis, mediated by the platelet-specific receptor CLEC2. This vascular regulatory role persists into adulthood. , , Conditional Clec2 knockout in platelets also impaired pulmonary mesenchymal development, , highlighting their organogenic functions. Despite their weaker coagulation capacity, embryonic platelets appear to play indispensable roles in development. Yet, most studies focus on individual genes like Clec2, with little attention to broader molecular or functional changes. This raises important questions. Do embryonic platelets have functional advantages in non-classical roles? Are these due to intrinsic molecular traits or developmental context? Answering these will require integrated molecular and functional analyses.
In summary, while adult platelets have been extensively studied, the molecular and functional features of embryonic platelets remain largely uncharted. Our study presents the comprehensive transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of embryonic platelets. Compared to adults, embryonic platelets showed reduced immune-regulatory and procoagulant traits but were enriched in development-supporting characteristics. Functionally, they promoted fibroblast proliferation and more effectively accelerated refractory wound healing. Mechanistically, they released higher levels of Insulin-Like Growth Factor 2 (IGF2), enhancing fibroblast proliferation and wound repair. Importantly, we identified a CD59(a)+ platelet subpopulation in both adult mice and humans that mirrored the function of embryonic platelets. Moreover, human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived platelets displayed similar molecular features and regenerative functions. These findings reveal the regenerative potential of embryonic platelets and highlight human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived platelets as a promising resource for tissue repair. This work lays the foundation for future investigations into stage-specific platelet properties and their therapeutic applications.

## Results

## Embryonic platelets enriched in developmental genes, with lower coagulation and immune-regulatory gene expression
Our group recently performed single-cell transcriptome analysis of megakaryocytes derived from human fetal liver, yolk sac, and adult bone marrow, , revealing their significant differences in gene expression profiles and functional characteristics across developmental stages. Given that megakaryocytes are the precursor cells of platelets, these findings imply that platelets at different developmental stages may also exhibit distinct gene expression patterns and functional properties. To investigate this, we sorted CD41+Ter119−Hoechst− peripheral blood platelets from embryonic day (E)15.5 mouse embryos for transcriptome sequencing and used peripheral blood platelets from 8-week-old adult mice as controls to analyze the molecular features of embryonic platelets ( A and A). 
Consistent with previous research, embryonic platelets were significantly larger in size and exhibited a greater mean distribution width compared to adult platelets ( B and S1C). Furthermore, thiazole orange (TO) staining revealed markedly higher TO fluorescence intensity in embryonic platelets, indicating a higher RNA content ( D). Principal-component analysis (PCA) demonstrated high correlation within each group and clear transcriptomic differences between embryonic and adult platelets ( B). Comparison of overall gene expression abundance further confirmed that embryonic platelets possess a more enriched transcriptome relative to adult platelets ( C).
To better understand the transcriptomic differences between embryonic and adult platelets, we conducted differential expression analysis, identifying 2,202 genes that were significantly upregulated and 1,057 genes that were significantly downregulated in embryonic platelets ( D). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) verification of representative genes, including Prap1, Col18a1, Rtn2, Ifit2, Mctp1, and P2ry12, confirmed the sequencing results ( E). Functional enrichment analysis revealed that genes upregulated in embryonic platelets were mainly involved in developmental processes and the biosynthesis of proteins, RNA, and other biomolecules, while downregulated genes were primarily enriched in classical coagulation and immune regulation pathways ( F and E). These results indicate distinct functional differences between embryonic and adult platelets.
Further categorization of the upregulated development-related gene sets in embryonic platelets showed enrichment in neural, vascular, muscular, epithelial, and morphological development pathways ( G). Notably, genes encoding various growth factors, such as Igfbp2, Igf2, Fgf18, and Vegfa, were highly expressed in embryonic platelets ( H), suggesting greater proliferative capacity. Additional upregulated genes included those associated with specific organ development, such as Krt4, Krt7, and Stfa3 (involved in skin development and keratinocyte proliferation ); Asb4 and Fkbp10 (in heart and aorta development ); Fabp7, Nr2f1, and Nna (in neural development , , ); Ogn and Ptgfrn (in bone development ); and Myh14, Myog, and Myoz1 (in muscle development ). Furthermore, genes involved in extracellular matrix remodeling, including Fap, Mfap2, and Adam12, were also upregulated in embryonic platelets ( H), suggesting roles in morphogenesis and tissue formation.
Conversely, genes associated with platelet coagulation, including P2ry1, Selp, Cd9, and P2ry12, were significantly downregulated in embryonic platelets ( F). Many immune-regulatory genes were also reduced in expression, including major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II family genes (H2-K1, H2-DMa, and H2-Ab1), immunoglobulin lambda light chain genes (Iglc1 and Iglc2), T cell receptor-related genes (Cd3d and Cd3g), and innate immune genes such as Clec2d and Ifit2 ( G). These findings suggest that embryonic platelets have not yet developed the immune-regulatory functions observed in adult platelets and that these capabilities likely mature after birth.
In summary, transcriptomic analysis reveals that embryonic platelets are enriched in genes related to multi-organ development and biomolecular synthesis, while showing reduced expression of genes involved in coagulation and immune regulation. These findings suggest that embryonic platelets are functionally distinct from adult platelets, supporting roles in tissue growth and organogenesis during development, whereas adult platelets are more specialized for coagulation and immune defense.

## Embryonic platelets highly express proteins related to developmental support and biosynthesis
To gain a more comprehensive understanding of the characteristics of platelets during the embryonic stage, in addition to transcriptome analysis, we also performed proteomic analysis of platelets from both the embryonic and adult stages ( A). PCA results show significant differences between embryonic and adult platelets at the proteomic level ( B). Further differential protein analysis revealed that 325 proteins were upregulated in embryonic platelets compared to adult platelets, while 211 proteins were downregulated in embryonic platelets ( C). Representative differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), including RPL32, RPL10A, and SELP (CD62P), were validated by intracellular flow cytometry, confirming the reliability of the proteomic findings ( D). Similar to the transcriptome results, upregulated proteins in embryonic platelets were mainly involved in protein synthesis and developmental support, while downregulated proteins were primarily related to coagulation and immune regulation; functional enrichment analysis and corresponding gene set scoring confirmed these findings ( E and 2F). 
When categorizing the upregulated proteins in embryonic platelets, we found that, consistent with the transcriptome results, growth factors like IGF2BP3 and IGF2, which have widespread proliferative effects, were significantly more expressed in embryonic platelets than in adult platelets ( G). Additionally, proteins associated with skin tissue and keratinocyte proliferation (FBLN1, KTR14, and KTR10), cardiovascular system development (FDPS, NEDD4, and TTN), neural development and neurotransmitter transmission (PHGDH and MTHFD1L), skeletal muscle development (CARM1, LMNA, and SERPINH1), and extracellular matrix remodeling (TGM2, CDH5, and SERPINF2) were also significantly upregulated in embryonic platelets ( G). In contrast, classic coagulation-related proteins, such as coagulation factors F10 and F5 and fibrinogens FGB, FGA, and FGG, as well as immune-regulatory proteins including interferon-induced protein IFI47 and MHC class I antigens H2−K1, H2−Q10, and H2−D1, were significantly downregulated in embryonic platelets compared to adult platelets ( H and A). This further confirms at the proteomic level that embryonic platelets may have stronger developmental support potential compared to adult platelets, while their classic coagulation and immune regulation abilities are still immature during the embryonic stage. Overall, comparative proteomic analysis shows significant differences between embryonic and adult platelets, suggesting a functional transition in platelets from “developmental support” in the embryonic stage to “coagulation” in adulthood.

## The correlation between the transcriptome and proteome in embryonic platelets
Existing studies indicate that the overall correlation between the transcriptome and proteome in adult platelets is around 0.3. However, due to limited multi-omics data, the degree of correspondence between RNA and protein in embryonic platelets has not been previously reported. In this study, after obtaining transcriptome and proteome data from embryonic platelets, we conducted an integrative correlation analysis. The results showed an overall correlation coefficient of 0.43 between the transcriptome and proteome in embryonic platelets, slightly higher than that in adult platelets ( A). 
We then performed an overlap analysis of 3,259 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 535 DEPs in embryonic and adult platelets, revealing that 314 DEPs showed no significant changes at the RNA level and only varied at the protein level. Of these, 61.1% were upregulated in embryonic platelets, while 38.9% were downregulated ( B and A). Interestingly, many of these proteins, which exhibited changes only at the protein level, include common plasma-secreted proteins. Coagulation-related proteins such as Coagulation Factor V (F5), Fibrinogen Beta Chain (FGB), and Fibrinogen Gamma Chain (FGG) were downregulated at the protein level in embryonic platelets ( C, top), while Alpha Fetoprotein was specifically upregulated ( C, bottom). These plasma proteins, which showed no changes in RNA levels but did exhibit changes in protein expression, suggest that changes in platelet protein expression may reflect not only shifts in transcriptional activity but also serve as an independent sensor of microenvironmental changes in the surrounding plasma.
We also explored molecules in embryonic platelets with changed expression in both transcriptome and proteome data. The overlap analysis showed 211 DEPs with corresponding gene expression changes ( B). Correlation analysis of these overlapping DEPs and DEGs revealed that over 80% of the molecules in embryonic platelets exhibited synchronized changes in both omics (either upregulated or downregulated) ( D). Among the 125 genes with upregulated expression in both omics’ datasets, development-related molecules such as Anxa2 and Fbln1, as well as translation-related molecules like Rp13 and Rps6, were prominent ( E). In contrast, immune- and coagulation-related molecules such as H2−D1, B2m, and Selp showed significant downregulation in both RNA and protein levels in embryonic platelets ( F).
In summary, the integrative analysis of the two omics datasets revealed that the RNA and protein expression in embryonic platelet only show partial overlap. Our results suggest that it will be important to trace their change both in RNA and protein level for further exploring their biological significance in embryonic platelets.

## Embryonic platelets likely play a key role in supporting multi-organ development by interacting with various cell types, especially fibroblasts
Through transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, embryonic platelets display high expression of numerous molecules related to developmental support, suggesting that they might have a greater proliferative potential compared to adult platelets. To validate this hypothesis, we explored the potential interactions of embryonic platelets with various cell types to gain insights into their functional advantages ( A). Single-cell transcriptomic data from mouse embryos revealed strong interaction signals between embryonic platelets and connective tissue cells, particularly fibroblasts, including limb bud and facial fibroblasts, as well as other cell types like meningeal cells, chondrocytes, endothelial cells, and keratinocytes ( B). Notably, fibroblasts exhibited the highest interaction intensity ( B), hinting that they might be the primary targets through which embryonic platelets exert their developmental support function. Additionally, embryonic platelets showed enrichment in gene sets promoting fibroblast proliferation, including growth factors Fgf2, Fgf18, Igf1, and Igf2 and extracellular matrix components Col3a1, Fbln1, and Smoc2 ( C, A, and S4B). Proteins promoting fibroblast proliferation, such as IGF2, FBLN1 (Fibulin 1), ANXA2 (Annexin A2), and RASH (HRas Proto-Oncogene, GTPase), were also more highly expressed in embryonic platelets ( D). These results suggest that embryonic platelet, characterized by elevated expression of various proliferative factors, may possess an enhanced capacity to promote fibroblast proliferation. 
To test the functional impact of these findings, we applied an in vitro scratch assay using mouse embryonic fibroblasts and observed continuously for 24 h by using live imaging. Interestingly, co-culturing with embryonic platelets significantly enhanced scratch closure rates of fibroblasts compared to adult platelets ( E and 4F). This supports the hypothesis that embryonic platelets have a stronger capacity to promote fibroblast proliferation. Given the widespread role of fibroblasts in the development of various tissues and organs, these interactions suggest that embryonic platelets may play an essential role in supporting multi-organ development by enhancing fibroblast function.
To further explore the molecular mechanism by which embryonic platelets promote the proliferation of fibroblasts, we conducted intracellular flow cytometry to assess levels of IGF2, a representative secreted factor highly expressed in embryonic platelets. IGF2 expression in embryonic platelets was approximately 1.5-fold higher than in adult mouse platelets ( G). To evaluate whether this increased IGF2 secretion underlies the enhanced proliferative effect, we supplemented fibroblast cultures with exogenous IGF2. The addition of 0.5 ng IGF2 mimicked the proliferative effect of adult platelets, while 1 ng IGF2 reproduced the effect observed with embryonic platelets ( H). Furthermore, treatment with the IGF2 receptor inhibitor linsitinib in platelet-fibroblast co-cultures effectively abrogated the proliferative effects of both adult and embryonic platelets ( I). Together, these results indicate that embryonic platelets promote fibroblast proliferation primarily through elevated IGF2 secretion, highlighting a potential role in supporting tissue growth and organ development.

## Embryonic platelets are more effective than adult platelets in accelerating the repair of refractory wounds
Due to the high expression of genes supporting multi-organ development in embryonic platelets, as well as their pronounced ability to promote fibroblast proliferation and migration, we hypothesized that embryonic platelets might be useful for repairing certain hard-to-heal wounds, potentially offering a clear advantage over adult platelets. To test this hypothesis, we created a full-thickness skin defect model in C57/BL6J wild-type mice to preliminarily assess wound-healing capabilities in vivo. We applied PBS, embryonic platelets, or adult platelets to the wound area and monitored wound healing to determine if embryonic platelets offer a repair advantage ( A). Results showed that, compared to the control and adult platelet-treated groups, the wounds treated with embryonic platelets closed significantly faster, reaching a healing rate of over 80% by day 4 ( B and S5C). This finding indicates that embryonic platelets can accelerate the repair of acute skin defects more effectively than adult platelets.
In addition to acute skin injuries, the refractory wounds caused by diabetic foot in patients with diabetes are common sources of mortality and disability due to poor prognosis and chronic disease burden, making accelerated repair of these chronic wounds especially crucial. To further investigate the efficacy of embryonic platelets in repairing chronic, hard-to-heal wounds, we generated full-thickness skin wounds on the backs of db/db BKS (C57BLKS/J ) type 2 diabetic mice and evaluated the wound-healing effects of embryonic and adult platelets ( A). Unlike in the acute injury model, the PBS-treated control group exhibited significantly reduced self-healing capacity in this model, indicating that the wounds in this model were more difficult to heal ( B, 5C, B, and S5C). Remarkably, from day 4 onward, the wound area in the embryonic platelet-treated group was notably smaller than in the other two groups, with less exudate, reaching an approximately 80% healing rate by day 6 ( B and 5C). In comparison, while adult platelets accelerated early wound healing faster than PBS, their efficacy was inferior to that of embryonic platelets, with a healing rate still below 70% by day 8 ( C). These results indicate that embryonic platelets are significantly more effective than adult platelets in promoting the repair of refractory wounds in diabetic mice. 
The wound-healing process involves the coordination of multiple cell types, including the formation of granulation tissue by new capillaries and proliferating fibroblasts, and re-epithelialization by epidermal cells to form new skin. , , To further analyze the tissue and cellular basis of platelet-mediated wound repair, we collected wound tissues from the diabetic mice on day 4, day 6, and day 8 of repair, respectively, for H&E staining and performed layer-by-layer analysis of the cells in each wound layer ( D). Analysis of the epidermal layer showed that, in the PBS-treated group, only a thin layer of keratinocytes formed at the boundary between the new and original tissue, with some scab remnants; the adult platelet-treated group still had scab coverage in the upper wound layer and an incomplete epidermal structure, whereas the embryonic platelet-treated group exhibited a more complete epidermal structure with multiple layers of keratinocytes and complete scab shedding, indicating a higher degree of healing ( D, top and medium). Further quantitative analysis revealed that, compared to the adult platelets and PBS control, embryonic platelets significantly promoted the length and thickness of re-epithelialization at day 4 and day 6 ( E and 5F). These findings suggest that embryonic platelets enhance epidermal tissue regeneration by accelerating keratinocyte re-epithelialization.
The formation of early granulation tissue provides sufficient nutrients and oxygen for wound healing, while efficient absorption of granulation tissue in the later stages is important for inhibiting scar formation. , , To compare granulation tissue absorption among groups in different stages of repair, we further observed newly generated subcutaneous tissue at the wound site. Interestingly, embryonic platelets significantly enhanced both the early formation and later resolution of granulation tissue during wound repair ( D and 5G). At the early stage (day 4), the granulation tissue area beneath the wound was markedly larger in the embryonic platelet-treated group compared to the other two groups. By the later stage (day 8), granulation tissue in the embryonic platelet-treated group had undergone more rapid absorption, with clear fat tissue and a subcutaneous structure closer to normal tissue, while thick granulation tissue remained in the wounds of both the adult platelet-treated and PBS control groups ( D). Quantitative analysis further confirmed that the subcutaneous granulation tissue area in the embryonic platelet-treated group was lower at day 8 than in the other two groups ( G).
Moreover, we observed an increase in the number of alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)+ myofibroblast after treatment with embryonic platelets, suggesting that embryonic platelets may accelerate wound healing by promoting wound fibroblast formation ( H and 5I). Consistently, collagen deposition was significantly elevated in the group treated with embryonic platelets, and the structure of the subcutaneous tissue more closely resembled the normal physiological level ( J and 5K). These results indicate that embryonic platelets promote more effective granulation tissue resolution and collagen deposition than adult platelets, thereby enhancing skin repair and tissue remodeling.
In conclusion, embryonic platelets effectively promote the repair of refractory wounds through multiple mechanisms, including accelerating wound closure, enhancing epithelial regeneration, and promoting tissue remodeling, thereby improving wound healing more effectively than adult platelets.

## A subpopulation of CD59(a)+ platelets mirrors the wound-healing benefits of embryonic platelets
Our previous research demonstrated that embryonic and adult megakaryocytes perform distinct functions through different subpopulations, , , suggesting potential heterogeneity in platelets as well. This raises the question of whether the developmental support and wound-healing advantages of embryonic platelets are also driven by specific subpopulations. To address this, we screened platelet surface markers correlated with genes involved in development support and fibroblast proliferation ( A). By intersecting the top 10 markers for each category, we identified CD59a and CD37 as highly correlated surface markers ( B and 6C). Compared to CD37, CD59a showed higher expression in embryonic platelets and greater differential expression relative to adult platelets ( D and A), suggesting CD59a as a potential marker for embryonic platelet attributes. 
Flow cytometry revealed that CD59a marks a subpopulation of platelets in both embryonic and adult stages, with a significantly higher proportion in embryonic platelets (79% ± 7.80% vs. 18% ± 6.90%) ( E). Given the limited availability of embryonic platelets, we investigated whether adult CD59a+ platelets retain embryonic-like characteristics that could serve as an alternative for therapeutic applications. Interestingly, CD59a+ adult platelets exhibited higher forward scatter (FSC) values, indicative of a larger, embryonic-like size ( B). More importantly, adult CD59a+ platelets also expressed higher levels of IGF2, a key growth factor promoting fibroblast proliferation, when compared to CD59a− platelets, indicating that they possess embryonic-like molecular features ( F).
To assess whether these “embryonic-like” CD59a+ adult platelets enhance wound healing, we sorted CD59a+ and CD59a− platelets from adult mice and tested their effects in acute and chronic wound models in diabetic mice. Remarkably, CD59a+ platelets significantly accelerated wound closure by day 4, achieving approximately 80% healing with minimal exudate ( G and 6H). In contrast, CD59a− platelets showed no significant difference from the PBS control in healing chronic wounds ( G and 6H). These findings suggest that the CD59a+ subpopulation in adult platelets not only exhibits embryonic-like characteristics but also performs similarly to embryonic platelets in wound repair. Thus, the superior repair function of embryonic platelets may be largely due to their higher proportion of CD59a+ cells, which diminishes with development, resulting in reduced repair capabilities over time.
To further determine whether this embryonic-like platelet subpopulation exists in human peripheral blood (hPB), we examined the expression of CD59—the human homolog of mouse CD59a—in platelets from healthy adults. Flow cytometry analysis confirmed the presence of a CD59+ platelet subpopulation in adult hPB ( C), which exhibited a larger size compared to CD59− platelets ( D). To assess the functional conservation of this subpopulation between humans and mice, we sorted human CD59+ and CD59− platelets and evaluated their effects on wound healing in diabetic mice. Consistent with findings in the mouse CD59a+ platelet subpopulation, human CD59+ platelets significantly enhanced wound repair relative to CD59− platelets ( I and 5J). The identification of this human CD59+ platelet subpopulation holds promise for developing new therapeutic strategies to treat refractory wounds.

## hiPSC-derived platelets resemble embryonic platelets transcriptomically and functionally
Given the embryonic-like characteristics and potent wound-healing capabilities of the CD59+ platelet subpopulation in adult humans, it is plausible that human embryonic platelets possess even stronger regenerative potential. However, due to their limited availability and the ethical and practical constraints of fetal sample collection, clinical application of human embryonic platelets is not feasible. In vitro-produced platelets have been proposed as a promising alternative to donor-derived platelets. , Our previous research indicated that megakaryocytes derived from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) more closely resemble embryonic megakaryocytes. Therefore, we hypothesized that platelets derived from hiPSCs may share molecular features and functions with embryonic platelets.
To investigate this, we collected platelets from hiPSCs and from hPB for transcriptome sequencing ( A). PCA analysis revealed significant transcriptomic differences between hiPSC-derived and hPB platelets ( B). Compared to hPB platelets, hiPSC-derived platelets exhibited 8,766 upregulated and 4,363 downregulated genes ( C), indicating substantial transcriptomic divergence. Functional enrichment analysis of these DEGs showed that hiPSC-derived platelets highly expressed gene sets related to developmental support ( A, S7C, and S7D) and showed lower expression of genes associated with hemostasis and immune response ( B, S7E, and S7F), similar to patterns seen in mouse embryonic versus adult platelets. 
To further assess similarity between in vitro-regenerated and embryonic platelets, we performed integrative analysis of their DEGs. Approximately 80% of differential genes in hiPSC and embryonic platelets shared similar expression trends ( D), indicating high transcriptomic similarity. Specifically, genes upregulated in both groups were enriched in multicellular organism and anatomical structure development, while genes associated with leukocyte activation and immune response were downregulated ( E). Representative gene analysis showed that extracellular matrix component genes such as COL3A1, IGF2, MFAP2, and TNNC1 were elevated in both embryonic and hiPSC platelets ( C and S7D), while hemostasis- and immune-related genes like SELP and LTBP1 were reduced in both compared to adult hPB platelets ( E and S7F).
Differential gene set analysis further showed that genes related to developmental support and fibroblast proliferation were more highly expressed in hiPSC-derived platelets than in hPB-derived ones ( F). CD59, a marker more representative of embryonic platelet characteristics, was also expressed at significantly higher levels in hiPSC-derived platelets ( G). Flow cytometry analysis confirmed that the proportion of the CD59+ subpopulation was significantly greater in hiPSC-derived than hPB platelets ( H), suggesting superior repair potential. To test this, we enriched both platelet types and evaluated their effects in a diabetic mouse wound model. Notably, hiPSC-derived platelets, exhibiting embryonic-like features, significantly accelerated wound healing compared to hPB platelets ( I and 7J).
In summary, hiPSC-derived in vitro-regenerated platelets more closely resemble embryonic platelets than hPB platelets, showing a “pro-embryonic” profile with reduced classical coagulation and immune features and enhanced developmental support. This highlights their potential advantages for tissue regeneration and repair applications.

## Discussion
Our study employs an analysis of the transcriptomic and proteomic characteristics of embryonic platelets and integrates those with comparisons to adult platelets, revealing significant differences. Embryonic platelets are notably enriched in gene sets that support multi-organ development, while expressing lower levels of genes related to coagulation and immune regulation. Embryonic platelets can interact with various cell types, especially fibroblasts. Further functional analysis demonstrated that embryonic platelets significantly promote the proliferation of fibroblasts via IGF2, thus accelerating the repair of refractory wounds, a function that is notably superior to adult platelets. Interestingly, a conserved CD59(a)+ subpopulation in mouse and human adult platelets also performs functions akin to those of embryonic platelets, providing direct evidence of functional heterogeneity in platelets. Additionally, this study found that hiPSC-derived platelets with high proportion of CD59+ subpopulation show molecular features and functions similar to those of embryonic platelets, suggesting the need for comprehensive evaluation of the molecular features of hiPSC-derived platelets and their differences from adult-derived platelets, while also considering their functional completeness and differences compared to adult platelets in vivo.
This study reveals the multi-omics characteristics of embryonic platelets, offering a valuable resource to better understand their molecular features and potential functions. A key finding is the marked reduction of two major adult platelet functions—coagulation and immune regulation—in embryonic platelets. This reduction aligns with the lower physiological demand for these functions during embryonic development, as platelets gradually acquire mature coagulation and immune capacities after birth. In contrast, embryonic platelets are highly enriched for genes that support multi-organ development and robust repair potential, reflecting the specific physiological needs during embryogenesis.
Although platelets lack a fully nucleated cellular structure, they nonetheless contain rich omics information and exhibit pronounced differences across developmental stages. Previous neonatal platelet omics studies similarly reported significant distinctions from adult platelets. , , However, platelet transcriptomic and proteomic data cannot be directly equated with those of nucleated cells, as they only partially overlap, highlighting complex origins. , Given their unique structure and frequent material exchange with other cells, platelet omics data likely serve dual roles: indicating intrinsic platelet functions by providing molecular bases for specific activities and acting as biomarkers or biosensors that reflect important physiological or pathological changes. Advances in single-cell and multi-omics integration technologies will enable deeper exploration and broader biological interpretation of platelet omics.
Under physiological conditions, platelets fulfill diverse roles including promoting coagulation, regulating immunity, maintaining homeostasis, and supporting development. , , Their broad functional range is supported by interactions with multiple cell types such as endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and immune cells. These interactions occur through direct contact, endocytosis, or extracellular vesicle release, facilitating transfer of RNA and protein molecules that modulate target cell functions. , , , , For example, activated platelets can inhibit vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation by releasing miR-223, which targets PDGFRβ and promotes differentiation. In inflammatory contexts, platelet-derived extracellular vesicles are internalized by neutrophils, transferring transcription factors, microRNA, and mitochondria, thereby amplifying inflammation. 
Embryonic platelets also engage with endothelial and lung mesenchymal cells through specific receptor-ligand interactions that may regulate developmental processes. For instance, embryonic platelets are activated when CLEC2 binds podoplanin (PDPN) on lymphatic endothelial cells, leading to transforming growth factor (TGF)-β release that promotes differentiation of lung mesothelial cells into alveolar duct myofibroblasts. , Extending this, our comprehensive analysis of embryonic platelet interactions across whole-embryo cell types revealed the strongest interactions with fibroblasts, key components of connective tissue. Embryonic platelets express high levels of growth factors (e.g., Fgf1, Fgf2, Fgf7, and Fgf18), insulin-like growth factors (Igf1 and Igf2), and various collagen types (Col3a1, Col4a2, Col6a2, and Col9a1), likely promoting fibroblast proliferation. We confirmed that embryonic platelets significantly stimulate fibroblast growth through IGF2 secretion. Since fibroblasts produce extracellular matrix components such as collagen, embryonic platelets likely contribute structurally to multi-organ development by enhancing fibroblast proliferation.
While adult platelets also interact with fibroblasts, they tend to influence fibroblast fate conversion rather than proliferation. For example, adult platelets promote atrial fibroblast differentiation via TGF-β1 release and direct cell contact. Additionally, adult platelets induce chemotaxis and differentiation of human skin fibroblasts into myofibroblasts through polyphosphate release. This suggests that platelet-fibroblast interactions vary by developmental stage and physiological or pathological context, though the detailed mechanisms remain to be fully elucidated.
From a therapeutic perspective, adult platelet-based treatments—including platelet-rich plasma (PRP), exosomes, and lysates—have been extensively studied for tissue repair in skin, , , tendons, , spinal cord, and cartilage. However, the application of embryonic platelets in tissue repair has not yet been explored. Our findings demonstrate that embryonic platelets outperform adult platelets in promoting repair of both acute and chronic wounds, showing particular promise for difficult-to-heal wounds such as diabetic ulcers. Wound healing is a complex, multi-stage process involving hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation/repair, and remodeling, with multiple cell types coordinating each phase. Platelets are critical in early hemostasis and inflammatory phases, while chronic wounds generally exhibit impaired inflammation. During proliferation, fibroblasts and new capillaries form granulation tissue, and epithelial cells re-epithelialize wounds. In remodeling, fibroblasts deposit collagen to form scars, which later reorganize to restore tissue structure and function. , In this study, we found embryonic platelets significantly accelerate the process of wound repair by enhancing the early wound fibroblast formation and epithelial regeneration, as well as the later granulation tissue resolution and collagen deposition.
Moreover, the molecular characteristics of embryonic platelets are primarily represented by a CD59a+ subpopulation. Adult platelets from mouse and human peripheral blood also contain a CD59(a)+ subpopulation with wound-healing functions. Building on previous work on megakaryocyte heterogeneity, , , , we propose that distinct megakaryocyte subpopulations produce platelets with different functional tendencies tailored for specific physiological or pathological contexts. The identification and characterization of the CD59(a)+ platelet subpopulation provide direct evidence of platelet functional heterogeneity, paving the way for precise, subpopulation-based platelet therapies.
Importantly, hiPSC-derived platelets exhibit transcriptomic profiles closely resembling embryonic platelets and contain a significantly higher proportion of the CD59+ subpopulation. This suggests that, beyond their traditional use for coagulation transfusion, hiPSC-derived platelets merit further investigation for their potential in multi-organ development support and repair of refractory injuries. Supporting this, recent work by Kosakal et al. showed that hiPSC-derived megakaryocytes and platelets produce growth factors promoting wound healing, and hiPSC-derived platelets significantly enhance fibroblast proliferation and diabetic wound repair compared to adult PRP. 
In conclusion, our study provides insights into the transcriptomic and proteomic features of embryonic platelets. Combined cell-level and functional analyses indicate that embryonic and hiPSC-derived platelets play crucial roles in multi-organ development and refractory injury repair, highlighting their therapeutic potential beyond traditional adult platelet functions.

## Limitations of the study
Beyond skin wound healing, further in-depth research is needed to elucidate the functions and mechanisms of embryonic platelets, hiPSC-derived platelets, and the CD59+ subpopulation, particularly in organoid construction and the repair of diverse organ injuries.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Jiaxi Zhou (zhoujx@ihcams.ac.cn).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•The raw sequence data reported in this paper have been deposited in the Genome Sequence Archive in National Genomics Data Center, China National Center for Bioinformation/Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, with accession codes CRA027211 (mice) , and HRA012083 (human). , The previously published transcriptomic data of hPB platelets were downloaded from OEP003718 and re-analyzed for comparison with hiPSC-derived platelets. The mass-spectrometry-based proteomic data are available in the platform iProX with ID IPX0010204001.
•No custom code was generated.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the corresponding author upon request.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the CAMS Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences (2021-I2M-1-073 and 2023-I2M-2-007), the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (82125003, 82200141 and 32271161, and 32471167), the 10.13039/501100012166National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFA1103000 and 2021YFA1100703), the Tianjin Municipal Science and Technology Commission Grant (24ZXZSSS00080), and 10.13039/501100006606Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (24JCJQJC00110).

## Author contributions
B.H. and L.L. contributed equally to this work. J.Z. and C.L. coordinated and designed the project. B.H., C.L., and R.Z. provided the bulk RNA sequencing data and mass-spectrometry-based proteomic data of mouse and human platelets. L.L. did the transcriptome and proteome analysis. B.H. and Y.F. performed experiments and data acquisition. W.L., S.Y., Y.W., P.S., F.W., W.Z., and H.W. provided insights and methods. C.L., J.Z., and F.W. wrote, reviewed, and edited the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Mouse models
8-10 weeks male and female C57BL/6J mice (BKS.Cg-Dock7m+/+HFK, strain#11001A) were purchased from the Beijing Huafukang Bioscience Co., Ltd. 10–12 weeks male db/db C57BL/KsJ mice (BKS.Cg-Dock7m+/+ Leprdb/J, strain#000642) were purchased from Shanghai Model Organisms Center. All mice were maintained in SPF-grade sterile conditions, and all animal experiments were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology (SKLEH), Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (ethical approval number: IHCAMS-DWLL-NCRIF2021005-1).

## Human samples
Human peripheral blood samples were procured from the Blood Biobank of the Institute of Hematology and Blood Disease Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. The samples comprised whole blood donations from healthy Asian donors (20–45 years old, male/female) who met standard blood donation criteria and had no history of hematological or systemic diseases. Sample collection, pre-processing, and laboratory operations were approved by the Ethics Committee for the Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (ethical approval number: CIFMS2021012-EC-2), with informed consent waived in strict accordance with institutional biobank regulations.

## Cell culture
Mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells (OriCell, Cat#MUIEF-01001) purchased from Cyagen Biosciences Inc. were cultured in OriCell MEF Complete Culture Medium (OriCell, Cat#MUXEF-90011) containing OriCell Basal Medium (OriCell, Cat#BHDM-03011) and OriCell Fetal Bovine Serum with Culture Supplement for Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts (OriCell, Cat#MUXEF-05001). Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) BC1 provided by Dr. Linzhao Cheng (University of Science and Technology of China) were cultured in custom mTeSR1 Complete Kit (StemCell, Cat#05896) containing mTeSR1 Basal Medium and mTeSR1 5X Supplement without Select Factors. After six days, the medium was replaced with StemSpan SFEM (StemCell, Cat#09650). All cells were confirmed to be mycoplasma-free and were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2.

## Method details

## Mouse peripheral blood collection and platelet purification
Embryonic peripheral blood was collected from mouse embryos at embryonic day 15.5 (E15.5). Female and male mice were co-housed daily during the 18:00-20:00 period at a female-to-male ratio of 2:1. The day following co-housing was designated as embryonic day 0.5 (E0.5), the subsequent day as E1.5, and so forth, with embryonic age expressed as E plus the number of days post-fertilization. At E15.5, embryos were quickly removed by laparotomy and washed twice in preheated MTB solution at 37°C to remove any peripheral blood on the surface. In a separate dish, the decidua and yolk sac were carefully stripped, ensuring the placenta remained connected to the embryo. The embryos were then washed again with MTB at 37°C and placed in a dry dish. After decapitation, peripheral blood was quickly collected from each embryo using a capillary pipette pretreated with ACD anticoagulant, then transferred to a sodium citrate anticoagulant tube. On average, 300-500μL of peripheral blood was obtained from each litter of embryos.
Adult peripheral blood was collected from mice aged 8–10 weeks. The mice were anesthetized with 10% chloral hydrate, and a laparotomy was performed along the abdominal midline to expose the inferior vena cava. A syringe preloaded with 100 μL of ACD anticoagulant was used to draw blood from the inferior vena cava, starting with a quick extraction followed by a slower pace to prevent vascular collapse. The collected blood was then transferred to a centrifuge tube and gently mixed by flicking to ensure proper anticoagulation.
Both embryonic and adult blood samples were diluted with an equal volume of normal saline solution and centrifuged at 80g for 10 min. The supernatant was carefully transferred to a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube to remove most nuclear cells. CD41 and Ter119 antibodies were added at a ratio of 1 μL of antibodies per 107 cells, and Hoechst nucleic acid dye was added at a 1:100 volume ratio. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. After incubation, the platelet suspension was diluted with 300–500 μL of MTB buffer. CD41+Hoechst−Ter119- platelets were then sorted using a FACS Aria III flow cytometer (BD Biosciences).

## Human iPSC differentiation and platelet purification
Human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) hematopoietic differentiation was performed using a serum-free and feeder-free monolayer culture system as previously described by Wang et al. After 10 days of hematopoietic differentiation under chemically defined conditions, cobblestone-like hematopoietic cells were mechanically detached and induced for megakaryocytic differentiation in a rotary system of culture at a density of 5 × 105 cells/mL. The cells were cultured in StemSpan SFEM serum-free medium supplemented with 50 ng/mL thrombopoietin (TPO), 20 ng/mL stem cell factor (SCF), 15 ng/mL interleukin-3 (IL-3), 15 ng/mL interleukin-6 (IL-6) and 20 ng/mL interleukin-11 (IL-11) for 6 days. Additionally, StemRegenin 1 (75 nM) was included for the first 3 days, and Y-27632 (5 μM) was added during the last 3 days to support megakaryocyte development.
After 6 days of induction, the cultured platelet-like particles were collected by centrifuging the culture supernatant at 800×g. The pellet was resuspended in CGS buffer, containing 10 mM sodium citrate, 30 mM D-glucose, and 120 mM NaCl (adjusted to pH 6.5 with citric acid), along with 1 mM prostaglandin E1 to stabilize the particles. The suspension was then layered over a BSA gradient (2%–12% in PBS) and centrifuged at 80g for 10 min. Platelet-like particles were collected from the upper layers (approximately 5%), mixed with an equal volume of 1% BSA in PBS, and centrifuged again at 800g for 10 min. Finally, the platelet pellet was resuspended in Tyrode’s solution, preparing them for subsequent analyses.

## Sample preparation for transcriptomics and proteomics
For RNA-seq analysis, purified mouse and hiPSC-derived platelets without detectable leukocyte contamination were lysed using Trizol reagent to extract RNA. The RNA-seq library preparation followed the VAHTS mRNA-seq V3 Library Prep Kit protocol, after which the cDNA libraries were sequenced on the NovaSeq 6000 platform at Novogene. For proteomic analysis, platelet samples were prepared as described in prior research. Platelets were lysed in 8M urea, and proteins underwent enzymatic digestion with trypsin. Peptides were then fractionated via high pH reverse-phase HPLC, followed by separation using the EASY-nLC 1200 system. Data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, where both the peptide parent ions and their fragments were analyzed with high resolution. This approach enabled detailed transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of both mouse and hiPSC-derived platelets.

## Platelet transcriptomic data analysis
Quality control of the raw data of platelet transcriptome was performed using Cutadapt v3.7, which removed adaptors and low-quality bases. STAR-2.7.2a was used to map reads to the reference genome of mouse (mm10) or human (hg38). Featurecount (v2.0.1) was used to calculate the reads counts and the gene expression value was defined as transcripts per million (TPM). Differential gene expression analysis was conducted using the DESeq2 R package (v1.3.8.3). Genes with a false discovery rate (FDR; i.e., q-value) less than 0.05 and an absolute fold change greater than 2 were defined as differentially expressed genes. Functional enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes was performed using g:Profiler (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/gost). The functional gene set enrichment score was calculated as: , where Xi represents the gene expression value in TPM, and n is the number of genes in the gene set. The correlation between functional gene sets and surface marker genes was calculated using the Pearson correlation coefficient based on the functional gene set enrichment scores and the gene expression values (R: cor.test).

## Platelet proteomic data analysis
The raw data from the mouse platelet proteome were analyzed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.15.0) along with the UniProt protein database to produce a protein expression matrix. Differential protein expression was then assessed with the limma R package (v3.54.2), defining differentially expressed proteins as those with a false discovery rate (q-value) less than 0.05 and an absolute fold change greater than 1.5. Functional enrichment analysis of differentially expressed proteins was performed using the same method as described above. The functional gene set enrichment score was calculated as: , where Xi represents the protein expression value, and n is the number of genes in the gene set.

## Integrated transcriptomics and proteomics analysis
For this analysis, UniProt accessions were mapped to Ensembl gene IDs, resulting in a comparable dataset of genes/proteins for correlation analysis. The correlation between transcriptomic and proteomic data was assessed for both embryo and adult samples by calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient, which provided a measure of the relationship between gene expression at the mRNA and protein levels (using the cor.test function in R). For differentially expressed genes and proteins correlation analysis, proteins that show differential expression only at the protein level were defined as DEP Unique; Genes/proteins with a fold change greater than 2 in transcriptomics and a fold change greater than 1.5 in proteomics or a fold change less than −2 in transcriptomics and a fold change less than −1.5 in proteomics were classified as having consistent expression patterns. Genes/proteins with a fold change greater than 2 in transcriptomics and a fold change less than −1.5 in proteomics or a fold change less than −2 in transcriptomics and a fold change greater than 1.5 in proteomic were classified as having inconsistent expression patterns.

## Cell-cell interaction analysis
To investigate cell-cell interactions between major cell types in the mouse embryo and embryonic platelets, previously published single cell transcriptomic data of whole mouse embryos were reanalyzed (accession number GSE137986). The marker genes defining each cell type were shown in the . The CellChat package (v1.6.1) was used to assess intercellular communication patterns. First, differentially expressed ligand-receptor genes in platelets and other cell types were identified using the ligand-receptor database (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p < 0.05). The average expression values of these ligand-receptor genes in specific cell types were then calculated. Next, using the protein-protein interaction network (STRINGdb) and incorporating the random walk algorithm, the interaction intensity between ligand-receptor gene pairs from the two cell groups was assessed. This approach allowed us to identify interaction networks that reveal how embryonic platelets interact with other cell types within the embryonic environment.

## Integrated transcriptomics analysis in human and mouse
To compare gene expression patterns between human and mouse platelets, a homologous gene analysis was conducted to identify comparable genes shared by the two species. Genes exhibiting a fold change greater than 2 or less than −2 in both species were classified as homologous genes with consistent expression patterns. Functional enrichment analysis was subsequently carried out on these consistent genes using the same method previously described. Conversely, genes showing a fold change greater than 2 in one species but less than −2 in the other were classified as homologous genes with inconsistent expression patterns.

## Measurement of platelet count and size
To analyze platelet parameters, 10 μL of peripheral blood from both embryonic and adult mice was collected and diluted with 240 μL of veterinary diluent. The mixture was gently mixed to ensure homogeneity. Platelet count (×109/L), mean platelet volume (MPV), and platelet distribution width (PDW) were measured using a hemocytometer (Mindray).

## Flow cytometry analysis of platelets
For surface marker staining, platelet suspensions were incubated with fluorescent antibodies at a ratio of 1 μL per 107 platelets for 30 min in the dark. Hoechst nucleic acid dye was also added to the suspension for nucleic acid staining. For intracellular protein staining, peripheral blood was first fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at room temperature for 15 min. After fixation, Tyrode solution was added, and the sample was centrifuged at 300g for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 5 min to collect the platelet pellet. The pellet was resuspended in 1× permeabilization solution containing the antibodies for intracellular proteins and incubated for 1.5 h. Afterward, the platelets were washed with Tyrode solution via centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 5 min. Next, the platelet pellet was resuspended in 50 μL MTB containing 1 μL of secondary fluorescent antibody and incubated at room temperature for 45 min. After one more wash, the platelets were resuspended in Tyrode solution for flow cytometry analysis. Flow cytometry was performed on a FACSCanto II instrument (BD Biosciences), and the data were analyzed using FlowJo V.10.1 software.

## Immunofluorescence staining of platelets
For surface marker staining, platelet suspensions were incubated with fluorescent antibodies (2–4 μg/mL) in the dark for 30 min. For intracellular protein staining, platelets were first fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 15 min, then permeabilized and incubated with primary antibodies (2–4 μg/mL) in a 1× permeabilization solution for 1 h. After a wash, the platelets were incubated with secondary fluorescent antibodies for 30 min.
The platelet suspension was then transferred to the center of a confocal dish, and fluorescence signals were recorded using a spinning disk confocal microscope with a PerkinElmer UltraVIEW VoX imaging system. Digitized images were captured using Volocity 4.0 software and analyzed with Volocity image processing software. For quantitative analysis, the same fluorescent channel threshold for CD41 was applied to all images, and the "Find object" command was used to define the complete outline of each platelet. Fluorescent intensity in individual platelets was quantified through automated analysis of the microscope images. All images used for comparative analysis were captured with the same exposure time to ensure consistency.

## Quantitative real-time PCR
Mouse platelets (1×107) were purified using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and subsequently lysed with Trizol reagent for RNA extraction. Reverse transcription was conducted with the GoScript Reverse Transcriptase A2801 kit. For qPCR, a mixture of SYBR Green reagent, nuclease-free water, forward primer, reverse primer, and cDNA was prepared in a ratio of 5:2:1:1:1. The qPCR reactions were conducted on the QuantStudio 7 Flex System in 384-well format. The primer sequences used are as follows:
Prap-F: 5′ AAACAGAGAAGGTCTGGGATACT.
Prap-R: 5′ GGCATCTGGACGCTTTTCCT.
Col18a1-F: 5′ GTGCCCATCGTCAACCTGAA.
Col18a1-R: 5′ GACATCTCTGCCGTCAAAAGAA.
Rtn2-F: 5′AGTGGCAGACCTGTTGTACTG.
Rtn2-R: 5′ACGGACACGATGCTAAAGTGC.
Lfit2-F: 5′ GGAGAGCAATCTGCGACAG.
Lfit2-R: 5′ GCTGCCTCATTTAGACCTCTG.
Mctp1-F: 5′ CCACAAGAACCTAAATCCTGTGT.
Mctp1-R: 5′ AAAGGCTGAGCCCATAAAGTC.
P2ry12-F: 5′ ATGGATATGCCTGGTGTCAACA.
P2ry12-R: 5′ AGCAATGGGAAGAGAACCTGG.
Igf2-F: 5′ GTGCTGCATCGCTGCTTAC.
Igf2-R: 5′ ACGTCCCTCTCGGACTTGG.
The relative expression of gene normalized to reference gene Gapdh was calculated by ΔΔCT.

## Coculture of mouse fibroblast and platelets
Mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells were manually counted under a microscope and seeded at a density of 4×104 viable cells/cm2 into a culture dish (culture-insert 4 Well μ-Dish 35 mm high culture dish). After approximately 36 h, the cell density reached 80%. To create scratch wounds, the culture-insert was removed using sterile tweezers in a biosafety cabinet. After washing with PBS, 200 μL of MEF complete culture medium containing 5×106 platelets was added to the wells. Cell morphology and scratch area were observed and recorded under a time-lapse microscope every 2 h. The scratch area was quantified using ImageJ software.
To evaluate the effect of platelets on fibroblast proliferation, MEFs were seeded into 96-well plates and co-cultured with platelets at a 1:50 ratio. To investigate the mechanism by which platelets promote fibroblast proliferation, IGF2 was added to the fibroblast culture medium at concentrations of 0.5 or 1 ng/mL. Additionally, the IGF2 receptor inhibitor, Linsitinib, was added at a concentration of 10 μM to block the binding of IGF2 to fibroblasts. After 24 h, CCK8 solution was added and incubated for 2 h. The absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate reader to assess fibroblast proliferation.

## Mouse model of skin wound healing
Eight-to ten-week-old female C57BL/6J mice or ten-to twelve-week-old male db/db BKS mice with type 2 diabetes were anesthetized via intraperitoneal injection of 10% chloral hydrate. The back skin was shaved and disinfected using 75% alcohol. Two symmetrical full-thickness skin wounds (6 mm) were created on the dorsal skin using a biopsy punch. On days 0 and 2, the wounds were treated with either 20 μL of PBS or a PBS suspension containing 5×106 platelets. The wound area was recorded every two days starting from day 0. Wound area measurements were analyzed with ImageJ software, and the percentage of wound closure was calculated using the formula: Closure% = (W0-Wr)/W0 X 100%, W0 = the initial wound area; Wr = the residual wound area.

## Histology and immunohistochemistry of wound tissues
Mouse wound tissues (1 cm2) were collected on day 10 post-study, bisected at the wound center, and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24–48 h. The tissues were then dehydrated progressively in increasing concentrations of ethanol before embedding in paraffin wax with a melting point of 52°C–60°C. Once solidified, the paraffin blocks were sectioned at a thickness of 5 μm. Sections were baked at 60°C for 2 h and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
For H&E staining, sections were dewaxed in xylene for 5–10 min and rehydrated by immersing them sequentially in anhydrous ethanol, 95% ethanol, 85% ethanol, and 75% ethanol for 5 min each. Following a 1-min rinse in water, sections were stained with Harris hematoxylin for 3–5 min, rinsed again in water, and differentiated with 0.8%–1% hydrochloric acid alcohol. After a brief water rinse, eosin staining was applied for 1–2 s. Sections were dehydrated in 95% ethanol and anhydrous ethanol (1–2 min each) and finally cleared in xylene before coverslipping for microscopic examination.
α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) was used to label the activated myo-fibroblasts in the paraffin sections of the wound tissue. The statistical analysis of its expression intensity was carried out by quantifying the mean optical density using the Image Pro Plus (IPP) software. The collagen deposition in the wound was quantitatively compared by Masson’s trichrome staining. We defined the tissue beneath the newly formed epidermis as the neotissue, and the area of the collagen component stained blue, namely the collagen volume fraction (CVF%), was quantitatively calculated by the Image Pro Plus (IPP) software.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. Statistical analyses and graph generation were performed using GraphPad Prism 8. A standard t-test was employed to analyze experimental data, with statistical significance set at ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗p < 0.0001, ns: not significant.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Table S1

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102297.