pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiol101183755plosPLOS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC12396750PMC12396750.112396750123967504085398610.1371/journal.pbio.3003355PBIOLOGY-D-25-002371Short ReportsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBrainHippocampusMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBrainHippocampusBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologySignal TransductionCell SignalingSignaling CascadesWNT Signaling CascadeResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentStainingImmunostainingBiology and Life SciencesBioengineeringBiotechnologyGenetic EngineeringGenetically Modified OrganismsGenetically Modified AnimalsEngineering and TechnologyBioengineeringBiotechnologyGenetic EngineeringGenetically Modified OrganismsGenetically Modified AnimalsBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionGene RegulationPhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical DataA developmental gradient of COUP-TFI expression regulates the relative size of hippocampus dorsal and ventral subregions
Dorsal-ventral patterning of the hippocampus by COUP-TFI expression gradientTsengChing-SanConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft ZhuangZi-huiFormal analysisInvestigationVisualization HsingHsiang-WeiFormal analysisInvestigation LeeChia-MingMethodologyResources HsuTsan-TingMethodologyResources PanYu-KuanFormal analysis HsuehYi-PingMethodologyResources ChenBi-ChangMethodologyResources https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4103-7286ChouShen-JuConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan2
Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan3
Research Center for Applied Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan4
Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, TaiwanGalazoMariaAcademic Editor files.PLOS Publication Stagevor-update-to-uncorrected-proofPublication Update2025-08-29

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
The hippocampus (Hp) is a major learning and memory center in the limbic system that can be divided into multiple domains. Along the rostrocaudal axis, at least two distinct functional domains, the dorsal and ventral Hp, have been identified. The dorsal Hp (dHp), which corresponds to the posterior Hp in primates, is involved in spatial learning. Place cells (neurons that fire in response to specific spatial information) are enriched in the dHp [ , ]. Ablation or defective lamination of the dHp disrupts spatial memory [ – ]. However, ablation of the ventral Hp (vHp), corresponding to the anterior Hp in primates, does not affect spatial learning. Instead, vHp ablation or dysfunctions significantly reduced anxiety-like behaviors [ – ]. Anxiety cells (neurons that fire during anxiogenic situations) have been identified in vHp [ ]. Supporting these functional differences, distinct Hp domains, including the dHp, vHp, and the intermediate Hp (positioned between the dorsal and ventral Hp), have unique gene expression profiles, cytoarchitectures, neuronal excitability, and connectivity patterns [ – ]. In this study, we investigated how these subregions are specified during development.
During corticogenesis, the Hp originates from the hippocampal neuroepithelium (HNE) in the medial pallium [ , ]. Signaling molecules, such as Wnts expressed in the cortical hem (CH), and transcription factors (TFs), like Lhx2 and Emx2 expressed in the HNE, are known to play critical roles in the specification and growth of the Hp [ , ]. Within HNE, COUP-TFI (also known as NR2F1) is expressed in a high-caudal-to-low-rostral gradient. Recent studies showing that the deletion of COUP-TFI resulted in a dysmorphic Hp with a specific loss of the dHp [ , ] prompted us to study whether COUP-TFI expression gradient is involved in patterning Hp subregions. However, to our surprise, different from what was reported based on marker gene analyses done on limited numbers of sections, our systematic examination of multiple subregion-specific markers across the entire hippocampus at postnatal day 7 (P7) revealed that in the COUP-TFI conditional knockout (cKO) mice, where COUP-TFI is deleted in the cortex by the Emx1-Cre, the relative size of dHp was actually expanded at the expense of the vHp. To further investigate this issue, we analyzed Hp patterning in the COUP-TFI conditional transgenic (cTG) mice, where COUP-TFI expression is elevated in the cortical progenitors, including the HNE [ ]. We found that increased COUP-TFI expression led to a ventralized Hp in which vHp invaded the dorsal regions forming ectopic ventral structures. These patterning changes in the cKO and cTG were consistently observed in the Cornu Ammonis (CA)1 and CA3 regions. Our findings suggested that the high expression level of COUP-TFI promotes the vHp identity, while loss of COUP-TFI shifts the balance toward dHp fate. Additionally, the formation of ectopic vHp structures in the dorsal territories in the cTG suggests that the Hp subregions have differential cell affinities, which are likely involved in compartmental segregation.
Mechanistically, our results showed that the low-rostral-to-high-caudal gradient of COUP-TFI in the HNE is involved in generating the expression gradient of several downstream genes in the Wnt signaling pathway. Thus, we conclude that COUP-TFI, together with Wnt signaling, is crucial for patterning Hp into distinct functional domains along the dorsoventral axis to ensure proper hippocampal functions.

## Results

## COUP-TFI expression level regulates hippocampal size
To determine the overall structure and size of the Hp, which is embedded in the cortex, we employed light sheet microscopy on cleared brains of Thy1-YFP transgenic mice (Thy1-YFP-H line) [ , ]. Consistent with previous reports, we observed an uneven distribution of YFP-expressing neurons across various brain regions, with higher densities in the deep layer of the motor area of the frontal cortex (F/M), auditory cortex (AuD), nucleus accumbens (Acb), amygdala (Amg), and Hp [ ] ( and ). We further noted that the density of YFP-expressing neurons changed along the rostrocaudal axis in Hp. Along with the higher YFP-expressing cell densities in the caudal part of CA1 and CA3, YFP signals were noticeably stronger in the caudal Hp ( ).
 To determine whether COUP-TFI expression level affects the development and patterning of the Hp, we crossed Thy1-YFP transgenic mice with COUP-TFI cKO (COUP-TFIf/f; Emx1Cre/+) and cTG (COUP-TFITG/O; Emx1Cre/+) mouse lines, which respectively eliminated and elevated COUP-TFI expression in the cortex during cortical development. The overall cortical sizes were similar between control mice (COUP-TFIf/f, or COUP-TFITG/O) and COUP-TFI mutants, including cKO and cTG at 2 months of age and at P7 ( and ). Notably, COUP-TFI cKO mice exhibited enlarged ventricles with a smaller Hp than the control brains, agreeing with previous findings [ , ] ( ). Correspondingly, the Hp was larger in the cTG. We found the YFP expression level in the Hp was decreased in the cKO, while the domain with strong YFP signals expanded in the cTG ( and ). These findings suggest that COUP-TFI plays a crucial role in regulating Hp size and patterning.
To confirm the size changes in the Hp, we estimated the overall size of the Hp and the individual sizes of Hp subregions on Nissl-stained serial coronal sections from P7 control and COUP-TFI mutant cortices. Compared with the control cortex, the rostral end of the Hp appeared in a more caudal section of the cKO and in a more rostral section of the cTG ( and ), meaning that the overall Hp size was significantly reduced in the cKO (n = 8; p = 0.003) and increased in the cTG (n = 8; p = 0.027) ( and ). We further compared the areas of pyramidal cell layers (PCLs) of CA1 and CA3 regions between control and COUP-TFI mutants. In rostral sections, we found that the PCL areas in both CA1 and CA3 were smaller in the cKO, and larger in the cTG ( and ). Although the overall size of CA3 remained similar between control and COUP-TFI mutants, CA1 size was significantly decreased in cKO mutants and increased in cTG mutants (control versus cKO, p = 0.013; control versus cTG, p = 0.034) ( ). Thus, we showed that Hp volume correlates with COUP-TFI expression level; a smaller Hp was observed in cKO mice with lower COUP-TFI expression, while a bigger Hp was found in cTG with higher COUP-TFI expression.
Importantly, the changes in Hp size in the COUP-TFI mutants were not due to differences in embryonic neurogenesis. The distributions and densities of neurons labeled with EdU pulses at E13.5 and E15.5 were comparable between control and COUP-TFI mutants in both CA1 and CA3 PCLs at P0 ( and ). Furthermore, the inside-out neurogenetic gradient in the CA1 region was maintained in the COUP-TFI mutants in both rostral and caudal levels, as evidenced by a relatively even distribution of E13.5-born neurons and an enrichment of E15.5-born neurons in superficial sublayers in both rostral and caudal sections [ ] ( ). In contrast, EdU labeled neurons in CA3 region did not exhibit a clear laminar distribution at P0 in either control or mutant animals ( ).

## COUP-TFI expression level regulates dorsal-ventral balance of CA1
In addition to the changes in size, we observed structural changes in the COUP-TFI mutant Hp at P7. As CA1 PCL thickness and cell density changed along the rostrocaudal axis in the control Hp ( and ): the PCL in dorsal CA1 (dCA1) was significantly thinner and had a higher cell density compared to that in ventral CA1 (vCA1) (n = 8; thickness, p < 0.001; cell density, p < 0.001) ( – ). We selected a rostral and a caudal section to compare among different genotypes based on their similarity in Hp morphology and relative locations (as shown in ). We found the CA1 PCL thickness was significantly decreased in cKO (n = 8; rostral, p = 0.010; caudal, p = 0.008) and significantly increased in the cTG (n = 8; rostral, p = 0.009; caudal, p = 0.024) at both levels ( and ). Furthermore, the CA1 PCL cell density was significantly increased in the cKO (n = 7–8; rostral, p = 0.045; caudal, p = 0.005) and decreased in the cTG (n = 7–8; rostral, p = 0.041; caudal, p = 0.027) ( ). Additionally, except that the stratum radiatum (SR) was thinner in the cKO CA1, we did not observe significant differences in thickness and cell density of the SR and the stratum oriens (SO) in control and COUP-TFI mutants ( and ).
 We then measured the thickness of PCL in the middle of CA1 over the entire rostrocaudal axis and showed the increase of the CA1 thickness from rostral to caudal in both control and COUP-TF mutant mice ( ). Furthermore, the PCL was thinner in cKO CA1, especially in the rostral sections, and thicker over the entire CA1 region in cTG ( ). To ensure that the Hp cytoarchitectural and molecular properties were compared at the same rostrocaudal levels across genotypes, we scaled up the smaller Hp in cKO and scaled down the larger Hp in cTG to align the most rostral ends and most caudal ends of Hp among all samples. Using this analysis, we still found that CA1 PCL was significantly thinner in the cKO and thicker in the cTG at correlated positions along the rostrocaudal axis ( ).
Using the CA1 pyramidal cell marker Satb2 and Ctip2, we found that in control Hp, most of the CA1 pyramidal neurons co-expressed Satb2 and Ctip2 (Satb2+ Ctip2+), whereas a population expressing only Ctip2 (Satb2− Ctip2+) was enriched in the deep sublayer in caudal CA1 PCL ( and ). The change in neuronal composition correlated with the changes in CA1 PCL laminar thickness. We found the caudal-enriched Satb2− Ctip2+ population was reduced in the caudal CA1 in cKO, but increased in both rostral and caudal CA1 in cTG ( and ). Together with the reduced thickness and increased cell density in the cKO CA1 PCL and the increased thickness and decreased cell density in the cTG CA1 PLC, these findings suggested that the Hp was dorsalized in cKO and ventralized in cTG. This finding agreed with the Thy1-YFP expression patterns observed in the COUP-TFI mutant Hp, but it challenged previous reports suggesting that the dorsal Hp failed to form in cKO mutants [ , ].
To further determine the Hp patterning changes induced by altering COUP-TFI expression levels, we stained the Hp tissues with dHp- and vHp- specific markers in COUP-TFI mutants at P7. We used two mutually exclusive markers, Wolframin (Wfs1) to label the rostrally located dCA1 and Decorin (Dcn) to label the caudally located vCA1 [ – , , ] ( , , and ). In the cKO, Wfs1 was expressed in rostral CA1, similar to the control, but its expression domain was expanded to the caudal CA1. Moreover, the Dcn+ domain in the cKO Hp was shifted ventrally in the caudal CA1 ( ). In the cTG, while Dcn expression patterns in the vCA1 remained similar to that in the control, we found Wfs1 expression domain in the dCA1 became fragmented ( ). In some of the Wfs1− domains, we detected ectopic expression of Dcn ( and ), suggesting the formation of ectopic vCA1 within the dCA1 in cTG. However, some Wfs1− domains, especially in more rostral sections, did not express Dcn ( ). To quantify the changes in the balance between dorsal and ventral Hp in COUP-TFI mutants, we aligned the rostral and caudal ends of the Hp among all genotypes as described above and compared Wfs1+ and Dcn+ cell numbers at comparable levels along the rostrocaudal axis between control and COUP-TFI-mutant Hp. This analysis confirmed that the Wfs1+ dCA1 expanded and the Dcn+ vCA1 shifted caudally in the cKO ( ). As such, the ratio of total Dcn+ vCA1 cells to Wfs1+ dCA1 cells in the entire Hp was significantly decreased in the cKO compared with control (n = 7–8; p = 0.043) ( ), suggesting the cKO CA1 was dorsalized. Meanwhile, the fragmented Wfs1+ domain and ectopic Dcn expression in the cTG dorsal CA1 caused a significant increase in the ratio of Dcn+ to Wfs+ cells in the cTG (n = 8; p = 0.004) ( , ), suggesting ventralization of the CA1.
We further considered the possibility that hippocampal curvature might vary between genotypes. To address this, we performed immunostaining for Wfs1 and Dcn on transverse sections spanning from the dorsal to the ventral pole of flattened hippocampi from different genotypes ( ). With this, we confirmed that Wfs1 expression domain was expanded while Dcn expression domain was reduced in cKO Hp. Furthermore, in cTG Hp, Wfs1 expression in the dorsal CA1 also appeared fragmented, accompanied by ectopic domains of Dcn expression ( ).
We further analyzed a scRNA-seq database [ ] to identify additional specific molecular markers for dCA1 and vCA1 ( ). Measuring total RNA from the entire Hp of control and cKO, we found, while the expression level of Rbfox3 (the gene encodes NeuN) remained unchanged between control and COUP-TFI mutants, significant increases in the expression of dCA1-enriched genes (n = 6; Wfs1, p = 0.006; Egr1, p = 0.033; Nr4a1, p = 0.038; Igfbp4, p = 0.003; Cadm2, p = 0.003; Pou3f1, p = 0.018) and alongside significant decreases in the expression of vCA1-enriched genes in the cKO (Dcn, p = 0.002; Cpne7, p = 0.002; Nov, p = 0.002; Nnat, p = 0.006; Cadm1, p = 0.011; Cpne2, p = 0.044) ( ). Correspondingly, significant decreases in the expression of dCA1-enriched genes (n = 6; Wfs1, p < 0.001; Egr1, p = 0.016; Nr4a1, p = 0.013; Igfbp4, p = 0.015; Cadm2, p < 0.001; Pou3f1, p = 0.002) and significant increases in the expression of vCA1-enriched genes were found in the cTG (Dcn, p = 0.008 Nov, p = 0.025; Cpne7, p = 0.024; Nnat, p < 0.001; Cadm1, p = 0.004; Cpne2, p = 0.014) ( ). We further validated these findings using in situ hybridization for Dcn, Cpen7, and Nnat, three genes enriched in the vCA1, to confirm the caudal shift of vCA1 in the cKO and the formation of ectopic vCA1 clusters in the cTG dorsal CA1 ( ). Thus, we concluded that COUP-TFI regulates the dorsal-ventral patterning of the CA1, with its deletion leading to an expansion of dCA1 and its overexpression leading to the formation of ectopic vCA1 domains.

## COUP-TFI expression levels regulate the position of CA2 and the dorsal-ventral balance of CA3
Given the high interconnectivity among CA1, CA2, and CA3, we next examined whether the patterning changes could be detected in CA2 and CA3 in COUP-TFI mutants at P7. We used Pcp4 (Purkinje cell protein 4) to label CA2 neurons that are located between CA1 and CA3 in the rostral Hp [ ] ( ). In the cKO, a Pcp4+ domain was detected between CA1 and CA3, similar to the control ( and ). However, we found ectopic Pcp4+ domains in the rostral CA1 of cTG ( and 2). These ectopic Pcp4+ cells typically clustered in the rostral CA1 of cTG and they did not express Satb2, a general CA1 marker ( , , and ). The ectopic Pcp4 expression in the cTG dCA1 was accompanied by another CA2 marker, Rgs14 (Regulator of G-protein signaling 14) ( ). These ectopic CA2 and vCA1 domains contributed to the fragmented dCA1 in cTG Hp and they were typically located more rostrally than the ectopic vCA1 domains ( ). Furthermore, additional Pcp4+ cells could be detected in the deep layer of CA1 in the caudal Hp ( 3). In the caudal CA1 of cTG, we also observed an increased number of Pcp4+ neurons compared with the control ( 4).
 Based on the expression of genes specific to dCA3 and vCA3 ( ), we found CA3 was also dorsalized in the cKO and ventralized in the cTG, similar to our observations in CA1. The dCA3-enriched genes Prkcd, Cpne9, and Trps1 were significantly up-regulated in the cKO (n = 6; Prkcd, p = 0.048; Cpne9, p = 0.049; Trps1, p = 0.045; Neurod6, p = 0.036; Ephb1, p = 0.009, Cyp26b1, p = 0.010) and down-regulated in the cTG (n = 6; Prkcd, p < 0.001; Cpne9, p = 0.009; Trps1, p = 0.015; Neurod6, p = 0.015; Ephb1, p = 0.013, Cyp26b1, p = 0.002) Hp. Conversely, vCA3-enriched genes Calb2, Plcxd3, and Prss23 were significantly down-regulated in the cKO (n = 6; Calb2, p = 0.025; Prss23, p = 0.005; Plcxd3, p = 0.036; Igfbp3, p = 0.038; Htr2c, p = 0.036; Plagl1, p = 0.042) and up-regulated in the cTG (n = 6; Calb2, p = 0.011; Plcxd3, p = 0.019; Prss23, p = 0.012; Igfbp3, p = 0.002; Htr2c, p = 0.002; Plagl1, p = 0.049) Hp ( ). We confirmed these findings by demonstrating the expression domain of Prkcd (Protein kinase c delta, enriched in dCA3) extended to more caudal sections, while the Calb2 expression (Calretinin, enriched in vCA3) [ ] domain was decreased in size in the cKO ( and ). In cTG, Prkcd expression in dCA3 became fragmented in the rostral sections with ectopic Calb2 expression domains ( and ). These results suggested that the expression level of COUP-TFI coordinates the dorsal-ventral patterning of multiple CA subregions.

## COUP-TFI expression levels regulate Hp patterning
Using the markers for specific Hp subregions across the entire rostrocaudal axis: Wfs1 for dCA1, Dcn for vCA1, Prkcd for dCA3, Calb2 for vCA3, and Pcp4 for CA2 ( ), we summarized the changes in Hp patterning in COUP-TFI mutant. We rescaled the Hp size in different genotypes to directly compare the relative positions and size of Hp subregions within the Hp. In the cKO, the dCA1 and dCA3 were expanded and caudally shifted, which was associated with relatively smaller and caudally shifted vCA1 and vCA3, as compared to the control ( ). Conversely, in the cTG, the vCA1 and vCA3 expanded to form ectopic vCA1 and vCA3 domains within the dCA1 and dCA3, respectively ( ). Additionally, ectopic CA2 domains emerged within the cTG rostral dCA1 ( ). Thus, we concluded that COUP-TFI expression levels determine the location and size of Hp subregions.

## COUP-TFI regulates Wnt downstream genes to pattern hippocampal CA subfields
To address whether COUP-TFI regulates Hp patterning in hippocampal progenitors or neurons, we crossed COUP-TFI transgenic mice with Nex-Cre mice to overexpress COUP-TFI in postmitotic neurons [ ]. In the P7 cTG-Nex (COUP-TFITG/O; Nex-Cre) mice, we did not detect changes in CA1 thickness, lamination, or the expression patterns of Wfs1 and Dcn ( ). This lack of effect suggested that COUP-TFI functions in progenitors and not in postmitotic neurons.
We next performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq for COUP-TFI to identify its downstream targets in E13.5 cortices. The candidate COUP-TFI downstream genes were enriched in several key signaling pathways, including VEGF, EGFR, Wnt, and hedgehog pathways ( ). As the Wnt signaling pathway was previously shown to be critical for Hp development [ , ], we examined the expression of genes that are both involved in Wnt signaling and have COUP-TFI binding sites in their regulatory regions (e.g., Axin2 and Lef1) in the medial pallium. While the expression level of Wnt ligand Wnt3a gene was unchanged in the CH across the rostrocaudal axis, the expression patterns of Axin2 and Lef1 each showed a high-caudal-to-low-rostral gradient in the HNE (the Hp primordium), correlated with the expression gradient of COUP-TFI ( ). This suggested that, in addition to being regulated by Wnt signaling, Axin2, and Lef1 expression are likely to be regulated by COUP-TFI.
 We further compared the expression levels of Wnt3a, Axin2, and Lef1 in the medial pallium of control and COUP-TFI mutant cortices. While Wnt3a expression remained unchanged, both Axin2 and Lef1 in the HNE were down-regulated in the cKO and up-regulated in the cTG ( ). Quantifying the intensity of the in situ hybridization signals of Axin2 and Lef1 in the HNE on serial sections along the rostrocaudal axis, we found that both Axin2 and Lef1 expression was dramatically attenuated in the cKO and up-regulated and rostrally shifted in the cTG ( ). Such shifts in the expression gradient of the Wnt signaling downstream genes in the medial pallium correlate with the patterning phenotypes observed in the COUP-TFI mutant Hp. Our findings suggested that COUP-TFI regulates Hp patterning through an interplay with Wnt signaling coming from the CH.

## Discussion
Although much is known about hippocampal structures, functions, and neuronal properties, the genetic programs governing Hp development remain largely unclear. In this study, we identified a key mechanism for patterning Hp subregions, demonstrating that the high-caudal-to-low-rostral expression gradient of COUP-TFI in Hp progenitors directs the fate of Hp subregions. Specifically, higher levels of COUP-TFI expression promote the vHp identity. This conclusion was made based on our comprehensive analyses of Hp cytoarchitecture and gene expression patterns across the entire Hp in the COUP-TFI mutants. This whole-Hp analysis approach enabled us to capture phenotypes that might have been missed by examining marker gene expression on individual sections. In the COUP-TFI cKO, we observed expanded expression domains of genes typically enriched in the dorsal CA1 and CA3 and a corresponding restriction of expression domains for genes normally enriched in ventral CA1 and CA3. Conversely, in COUP-TFI cTG, the overexpression of COUP-TFI resulted in the ectopic formation of ventral CA1 and CA3 regions in the dorsal hippocampus, replacing parts of the dorsal CA1 and CA3 ( ). In conclusion, our study identified COUP-TFI as an intrinsic regulator of Hp subregion patterning, with its gradient of expression playing a pivotal role in distinguishing dorsal from ventral hippocampal identities.

## Determination and segregation of subregions in the hippocampus
Previous electrophysiological, anatomical, and molecular studies suggested that Hp is organized in a graded fashion along the dorsal-ventral axis [ , ]. For example, the size of place fields gradually increases from dorsal to ventral in the Hp, indicating a graded functional organization [ ]. Furthermore, Hp innervation with the amygdala and the anterior olfactory nucleus follows a topographical gradient, wherein the pyramidal neurons located more ventrally project to more medial portions of these subcortical structures [ , ]. Gene expression gradients are also present in the Hp along the dorsoventral axis. Additionally, different sets of genes have been shown to be enriched in specific subregions of the adult Hp, including the dHp, vHp, and the intermediate Hp, although the precise boundaries of these subregions have not been clearly defined [ , ].
In this study, we showed that even at an early postnatal stage, when not all the subregion-specific genes are fully expressed, the Hp can already be divided into dorsal and ventral compartments using a handful of marker genes. Our findings align with previous work showing that within the first postnatal week in rats, the connectivity between Hp and entorhinal cortex is established in an adult-like topography and several dorsally or ventrally enriched genes are expressed at the respective pole of the neonatal Hp [ ]. This suggests that Hp compartmentalization is initiated early in development, well before the onset of mature hippocampal functions at 3–4 weeks postnatally in mice [ , ]. Based on the early intrinsic genetic patterning, the functions of Hp subregions are likely to be further refined by extrinsic factors, such as sensory input, which has been shown to be important for hippocampal maturation [ ].
Interestingly, when COUP-TFI expression was elevated in cTG mice, we observed the formation of ectopic vCA1 and CA2 domains within the dCA1, as well as ectopic vCA3 within the dCA3. This finding is consistent with our previous study, in which COUP-TFI overexpression led to the emergence of ectopic medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) domains in the neocortex (NC) [ ]. In that study, we showed that cortical progenitors were multipotent and could give rise to either MEC or NC neurons. The fate choice of these progenitors was determined by two patterning TFs with opposing expression gradients: high level of COUP-TFI (expressed in a high-caudal-to-low-rostral expression gradient in cortical progenitors) promoted MEC cell fate, while another, yet undefined TF (expressed in a high-rostral-to-low-caudal gradient) likely promoted NC cell fate. In our cTG model, COUP-TFI overexpression created a condition in which both patterning TFs were expressed at high levels, resulting in a zone of fate instability where progenitors could adopt either fate. Subsequently, the physical segregation of these distinct cell populations was driven by differential cell affinities.
In the current study, we propose that a similar mechanism governs the Hp dorsal-ventral patterning. COUP-TFI, which is normally expressed in a high-caudal-to-low-rostral gradient in HNE, appears to promote ventral hippocampal identity. Its ectopic overexpression in the rostral HNE, which normally gives rise to dorsal Hp, generates an instability zone where both dorsal and ventral Hp neuronal types are produced. These dHp and vHP neurons then undergo segregation, likely via differential cell adhesion, leading to the formation of ectopic ventral domains within dorsal hippocampal regions. Overall, our findings suggest that distinct hippocampal subregions, including dorsal and ventral CA1 and CA3, are likely segregated by differential cell adhesion affinities, and COUP-TFI plays a key role in patterning of these subregions.
Due to the lack of specific markers for dorsal and ventral CA2, we could not determine whether the dorsoventral patterning changes could also be found in CA2 in the COUP-TFI mutant Hp. However, the observation of ectopic Pcp4+ clusters in the CA1 of COUP-TFI cTG suggests that similar adhesion-based mechanisms may also underlie the segregation of CA1 and CA2 neurons.

## COUP-TFI regulates the Wnt signaling pathway during Hp development
COUP-TFI is expressed in a high-caudal-to-low-rostral gradient among Hp progenitors, and this expression pattern correlates with its function; a high level of COUP-TFI promotes the caudally located vHp. The role of COUP-TFI in patterning the Hp is similar to its role in the area patterning of the neocortex [ , ], suggesting that similar mechanisms may operate across these regions. As Hp is part of the archicortex, a phylogenetically older region of the cerebral cortex, this TF gradient-based patterning mechanism may represent an evolutionarily conserved process.
COUP-TFI was previously implicated in several aspects of cortical development, including neurogenesis and neuronal specification, through its regulation of multiple genetic pathways [ – ]. Here, we identified Wnt signaling pathway as one of the COUP-TFI downstream genetic networks involved in Hp patterning. Wnt signaling was shown to regulate Hp development. For example, Wnt3a expressed in the CH is required for Hp outgrowth [ , ]. Our results showed that COUP-TFI regulates several Wnt downstream genes, including Lef1 and Axin2, to be expressed in the medial pallium in a high-caudal-to-low-rostral gradient. This expression gradient of Wnt downstream genes implies that Wnt signaling is likely to be involved in Hp patterning. Although our study showed that COUP-TFI could positively regulate the expression gradient of Wnt downstream genes along the rostral-caudal axis in the hippocampal progenitors, previous work demonstrated that COUP-TFI represses β-catenin signaling in cortical progenitors [ ]. This difference in findings suggests that the functions of COUP-TFI in regulating the Wnt signaling pathway might be context-dependent, with different effects in distinct cortical regions.
Given that different Hp subregions are associated with distinct functions, we anticipate that altering the relative size of these subregions would have behavioral consequences. However, we did not explore this aspect with our current animal models because COUP-TFI expression was altered across the entire cerebral cortex in them. Changes in COUP-TFI expression would likely affect other cortical regions, such as entorhinal cortex, which is involved in spatial navigation, and amygdala, which plays a role in emotion processing. The broad effects make these animals unsuitable for isolating the behavioral outcomes of hippocampal mispatterning. Nevertheless, loss-of-function mutations of the COUP-TFI gene are known to cause Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome in humans, a rare developmental disorder [ , ] in which patients often display intellectual disabilities [ ]. This highlights the significance of COUP-TFI in cognitive development.
The dHp and vHp differ not only in function and molecular properties but also in disease susceptibility. For example, the dHp CA1 exhibits greater vulnerability to ischemic insults [ , ], while the vHp is closely linked to conditions such as depression [ ], temporal lobe epilepsy [ , ], schizophrenia [ ], and Alzheimer’s disease [ , ]. Understanding the mechanisms of Hp patterning, such as those involving COUP-TFI, may provide valuable insights into the links between Hp development, function, and disease vulnerability. Further studies are essential to unravel the full implications of hippocampal patterning in health and disease.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
All experimental procedures involving mice were conducted in accordance with the approved animal protocol (AS IACUC Protocol ID: 24-07-2198) by the Institutional Animal Care and Utilization Committee at Academia Sinica. The procedures strictly follow the guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals established by the Council of Agriculture in Taiwan.

## Animals
COUP-TFI floxed and transgenic mice were provided by M.-J. Tsai, and Emx1-Cre mice were obtained from K. Jones. Controls and conditional COUP-TFI cKO and cTG mice were generated by mating COUP-TFIf/f or COUP-TFIf/+ with COUP-TFIf/+; Emx1Cre/+ and COUP-TFITG/TG with Emx1Cre/+ mice. The mice were housed in a climate-controlled room with a 12h light/dark cycle, and provided food and water ad libitum. The identification of a vaginal plug and the day of birth were designated as E0.5 and P0, respectively. All control and COUP-TFI mutant mice were littermates, with mouse genotypes determined by PCR as previously described [ ].

## Tissue clearing and light-sheet microscopic image reconstruction
Fixed brains from postnatal day 60 (P60) male reporter mice were processed using a modified PEGASOS-based tissue clearing protocol. Samples were first decolorized in a solution containing 25% N,N,N′,N′-Tetrakis(2-hydroxypropyl)ethylenediamine (Quadrol) and 5% ammonium hydroxide for 2 d, with daily solution changes. Delipidation was carried out in a graded series of tert-butanol (tB) solutions with 3% Quadrol: 30% tB for 4 h, 50% tB for 6 h, and 70% tB for 24 h. This was followed by dehydration in 75% tB and 3% Quadrol for 24 h. Final optical clearing was achieved in a PEG-based medium consisting of 75% benzyl benzoate (BB), 22% polyethylene glycol methacrylate (PEGMMA), and 3% Quadrol for another 24 h. Imaging was performed using a custom-built scanning Bessel beam light-sheet fluorescence microscope controlled by Micro-Manager software. The system employed dual-sided illumination from two opposing 4× dry objectives (Olympus, NA 0.28), arranged symmetrically on either side of the sample chamber and directed through flat windows. A matched 4× detection objective (Olympus, NA 0.28), fitted with a custom-designed protective cap, was positioned orthogonally to the illumination axis to allow immersion into the clearing medium. The system was equipped with a four-line laser light source, and fluorescence signals were captured using a scientific CMOS camera (Andor Zyla 4.2 Plus). Volumetric datasets were acquired as sequential x–y plane slices. 3D reconstructions were generated using Maximum Intensity Projection (MIP) and volume rendering algorithms. YFP-positive (YFP⁺) neurons and hippocampal boundaries were segmented and analyzed using Imaris software (Oxford Instruments).

## Tissue preparation
To characterize the histological features of the Hp, control, COUP-TFI cKO and cTG mice at P7 or P60 were anesthetized and perfused transcardially with 4% formaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The brains were then isolated and further fixed in 4% formaldehyde at 4 °C overnight, followed by dehydration in 30% sucrose solutions. The flattened cortices were fixed in 4% formaldehyde between two glass slides at 4 °C overnight. For experiments on embryonic stage animals, embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) embryos were collected from deeply anesthetized pregnant mice. The embryonic heads were immediately removed for fixation at 4 °C overnight followed by dehydration.

## Nissl, immunofluorescence, and EdU staining
For frozen tissue sectioning, brains were embedded in Tissue-Tek optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound (Sakura Fientek), and sectioned using a cryostat (Leica). Coronal sections were prepared at 25 µm thickness for P7 and P60 mice. For Nissl staining, brain sections were rinsed with water and stained for 10 min in a solution containing 0.2% cresyl violet and 0.5% acetic acid. Following a brief rinse with water, the sections were dehydrated through an ascending alcohol series (70%, 95%, and 100%) for 1 min each, then cleared in xylene and mounted in neutral mounting medium DPX (Sigma). For immunostaining, tissue sections were subjected to antigen retrieval in boiling 10 mM sodium citrate buffer (pH 9.0) for 10−20 min, followed by cooling for 30 min. Permeabilization and blocking were performed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 0.3% Triton X-100 and 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1 h at room temperature. Sections were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies at the specified concentrations (detailed in ). Following three washes with PBS, sections were incubated with corresponding fluorescence-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. For EdU (5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine) labeling, EdU (500 ng) was injected into timed-pregnant mice, and the EdU-positive cells were detected with a Click-iT EdU imaging kit (Invitrogen). Nuclei were counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI).

## RNA extraction and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from hippocampal tissues using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) and reverse transcribed with an oligo-dT primer and reverse transcriptase (Promega). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed using the asymmetrical cyanine dye SYBR Green I mixture (Roche) and a LightCycler 480 system. Data analysis was conducted according to the comparative Ct (threshold cycle) method. Primers used are listed in .

## In Situ hybridization
In situ hybridization was performed as previously described [ ]. Antisense RNA probes (primers for generating transcription templates listed in ) were labeled with digoxigenin (DIG) using a DIG-RNA labeling kit (Roche). Coronal sections, prepared at 25 µm thickness for P7 and at 20 µm for E13.5 embryos, were pretreated with 10 μg/mL proteinase K at room temperature for 10 min, followed by prehybridization for 1 h. Sections were then hybridized with RNA probes at 65 °C overnight. After posthybridization washes, the sections were incubated with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-DIG antibody (Roche) overnight at 4 °C. The distribution of RNA probes was visualized by chromogenic staining with 0.34 mg/mL NBT (nitro blue tetrazolium chloride) and 0.18 mg/mL BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate).

## Morphometric analysis, image acquisition, and quantification
For morphometric analysis of the hippocampus and its subregions, a series of coronal sections was prepared at a thickness of 25 μm. Every sixth section along the rostrocaudal axis was stained for Nissl or specific neuronal markers. Images were captured using an upright microscope (Axio Imager A2, Zeiss) equipped with an automated system or a high-throughput slide scanner (TissueGnostics). Cell density, laminar thickness, and area were quantified using ImageJ. To estimate total volumes and cell numbers, values obtained from the sampled sections were multiplied by a factor of six (every sixth section was examined). To ensure consistent comparison of patterning changes across samples despite hippocampal size variability, section positions were scaled to a proportional axis. To determine gene expression gradient ( ), HNE was divided into six equally spaced domains on five adjacent coronal sections. The average intensity of RNA in situ hybridization color reaction signals was measured within each domain. These intensity values were normalized to the background level of each section. Relative expression levels were then calculated by comparing the average intensity of each domain to the highest expression observed, which was in the most caudal ventral domain. The average intensity values of each domain were then visualized as a heatmap to illustrate the gradient.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq)
The dorsal telencephalon was isolated from E13.5 wild-type mouse embryos. The tissues were dissociated and crosslinked with 2 mM Di(N-succinimidyl) glutarate (DSG), before fixation in 1% formaldehyde. The crosslinking reaction was quenched with 125 mM glycine. The cell lysates were sonicated to generate chromatin fragments averaging 100–300 bp in length. Chromatin-protein complexes were then immunoprecipitated overnight at 4 °C using either mouse anti-COUP-TFI antibody or mouse gamma globulin (Jackson ImmunoResearch) as a control. The COUP-TFI-bound chromatin complexes were captured with Dynabeads Protein G (Invitrogen) at 4 °C for 2 h. Final chromatin fragments were extracted and sequenced using the Illumina NextSeq platform. Reactome enrichment analysis was performed using a PANTHER website [ ].

## Data presentation and statistical analysis
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM and were analyzed using SigmaPlot software. Statistical significance was determined using one-tailed Student t test for comparisons between genotypes with Bonferroni correction applied due to repeated comparisons. For comparisons along the rostrocaudal axis, the Mann–Whitney U test with Bonferroni correction was used. Significance in figures is denoted as follows: *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001 for comparisons between genotypes, and #P < 0.05; ##P < 0.01; ###P < 0.001 for comparisons between rostral and caudal sections. For Mann–Whitney results with correction, thresholds were adjusted to *P < 0.025; **P < 0.0025; ***P < 0.001, respectively.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Consistent cortical surface area between control and COUP-TFI mutant mice (Related to ).
(A) Dorsal views of the brain from control and COUP-TFI mutant mice at P7. (B) Comparisons of brain surface area, length, and width in control and COUP-TFI mutant mice revealed no significant differences (N.S.). Scale bar, 5 mm. Statistical analyses were performed using Student t test. The data underlying this figure can be found in .
(S1_Fig.TIFF)
S2 Fig

## Rostrocaudal changes of the Hp in COUP-TFI mutant mice (Related to ).
(A) Serial Nissl-stained coronal sections of P7 control, COUP-TFI cTG, and cKO hippocampus along the rostrocaudal axis. (B, C) Distribution of EdU-labeled cells derived at E13.5 and E15.5 in rostral and caudal CA1 (B) and CA3 (C) PCL of COUP-TFI cKO, control and COUP-TFI cTG Hp at P0. (D, E) Quantification of EdU-labeled cell number in the deep and superficial sublayers of CA1 (D) and CA3 (E) regions at the rostral and caudal levels in COUP-TFI cKO, control and COUP-TFI cTG Hp at P0. Scale bars, 1 mm (A); 50 μm (B, C). Statistical analyses were performed using Student t test. The data underlying this figure can be found in .
(S2_Fig.TIFF)
S3 Fig

## Changes in CA1 thickness and layer organization in COUP-TFI mutant Hp (Related to ).
(A, B) Quantification of layer thickness (A) and cell densities (B) in stratum oriens (SO) and stratum radiatum (SR) in COUP-TFI cKO, control, and COUP-TFI cTG Hp at rostral and caudal levels. (C, C’) Morphometric analysis of PCL thickness between COUP-TFI cKO, control and COUP-TFI cTG mice along the rostrocaudal axis. Position number is based on , with normalized positions indicated on the right (C’). (D) Coronal sections of rostral and caudal Hp of P7 COUP-TFI cKO, control and COUP-TFI cTG mice stained with Ctip2 (green) and Satb2 (red). Enlarged images of insets are shown on the right (d1-d6). (E) The distribution of Ctip2- Satb2+ (red), Ctip2+ Satb2- (green), and Ctip2+ Satb2+ (yellow) neuronal populations across the CA1 pyramidal cell layer in COUP-TFI cKO, control, and COUP-TFI cTG hippocampus at the rostral and caudal levels. Scale bars, 1 mm (D); 100 μm (d1-d6). Statistical analyses were performed using Student t test (A, B) and Mann–Whitney U test (C, C’). The data underlying this figure can be found in .
(S3_Fig.TIFF)
S4 Fig

## Complementary distribution of Wfs1+ and Dcn+ neuron populations in CA1 along the rostrocaudal axis (Related to ).
Serial images of immunostaining for Wfs1 (green) and Dcn (red) in coronal sections of P7 control and COUP-TFI cTG CA1, and quantification of signal intensities along the rostral to caudal axis. Neurons in the rostral CA1 were mostly Wfs1+ and those in the caudal CA1 were mostly Dcn+ in control. In COUP-TFI cTG, patches of Wfs1+ and Wfs1- neurons were found in rostral CA1. Dcn+ neurons were ectopically identified in the Wfs1− domain, adjacent to Wfs1+ neurons in rostral CA1 in COUP-TFI cTG. However, the ectopic Dcn+ cells were not present in most examined sections. Scale bars, 100 μm.
(S4_Fig.TIF)
S5 Fig

## Dorsal-ventral patterning changes in COUP-TFI mutant CA1 observed in flattened hippocampus (Related to ).
(A) Diagram illustrating the flattening and sectioning. P7 cortical hemispheres were dissected and flattened between two glass slides (a1). Transverse hippocampal sections were obtained by slicing perpendicularly to a line connecting the dorsal and ventral poles (a2). (B) Nissl staining (left) and immunostaining for Wsf1 (green, a dorsal CA1 marker) and Dcn (red, a ventral CA1 marker) in transverse sections of the hippocampus from indicated genotypes. B) Nissl staining (left) and immunostaining for Wsf1 (green, a dorsal CA1 marker) and Dcn (red, a ventral CA1 marker) in transverse sections of the hippocampus from indicated genotypes. The size of Wfs1 expression domains (between arrowheads) was increased in cKO and decreased in cTG. Ectopic Dcn expression was found in the dorsal hippocampus of cTG (*). Scale bar, 500 μm.
(S5_Fig.TIFF)
S6 Fig

## Identification of genes enriched in Hp subregions (Related to and ).
(A) UMAP representation of excitatory neurons from hippocampal CA regions (based on scRNAseq database [ ])colored according to CA region. (B) UMAP representations of dorsal and ventral CA1 and CA3 subregions, as well as CA2. (C) Representative genes enriched in the dorsal and ventral CA1 and CA3 regions. The data underlying this figure can be found in .
(S6_Fig.TIFF)
S7 Fig

## Changes in the expression of genes enriched in vCA1 in COUP-TFI mutant CA1 (Related to ).
In situ hybridization of Dcn, Cpen7, and Nnat on rostral and caudal coronal sections of P7 control and COUP-TFI mutant Hp. Within CA1, these genes are enriched in the vCA1. The expression of these markers was ventrally shifted in the cKO (arrowheads). Ectopic expression domains were identified in the cTG (marked by asterisks). Scale bar, 500 μm.
(S7_Fig.TIFF)
S8 Fig

## Expression of CA2 markers, Pcp4 and Rgs14, in COUP-TFI mutants (Related to ).
(A) Immunostaining and quantification of signal intensities for Pcp4 (green) and Satb2 (red) in P7 serial coronal sections of control and COUP-TFI cTG hippocampi along the rostral to caudal axis. (B) Immunostaining of Pcp4 and Rgs14 in P7 serial coronal sections of COUP-TFI cKO, control, and COUP-TFI cTG Hp. In the ectopic Pcp4 expression domains within the COUP-TFI cTG CA1 PCL (solid arrowheads), higher Rgs14 expression was detected. However, Rgs14 was not expressed in the Pcp4+ cells in the deep layer of CA1 in the caudal CA1 (open arrowheads). Scale bars, 1 mm (B), 100 μm (A and b1-b4). DG, dentate gyrus; i., intensity; Sub, subiculum.
(S8_Fig.TIFF)
S9 Fig

## Serial sections of markers associated with altered dorsoventral patterning in the hippocampi of COUP-TFI mutants (Related to and ).
Serial images from immunostaining revealed changes in distinct markers, including Wfs1 (green) and Dcn (red) (A), Prkcd (green) and Calb2 (red) (B), and Pcp4 (green) and Satb2 (red) (C), along the rostrocaudal axis in hippocampi from control and COUP-TFI mutants. Scale bars, 1 mm.
(S9_Fig.TIF)
S10 Fig

## COUP-TFI overexpression in postmitotic neurons does not affect Hp patterning (Related to ).
(A) Similar hippocampal structures were detected in Nissl-stained P7 coronal sections of control and COUP-TFI cTG-Nex (COUP-TFITG/O; NexCre/+) cortices at rostral and caudal levels. Enlarged images of insets are shown on the right (a1-a4). (B, C) Immunostaining of Ctip2 (green) and Satb2 (red) (B) and Wfs1 (green) and Dcn (red) (C) in rostral and caudal hippocampi of control and COUP-TFI cTG-Nex revealed similar lamination in both rostral and caudal CA1. Enlarged images of insets are shown on the right (b1-b4, c1-c4). DG, dentate gyrus; Sub, subiculum. Scale bars, 1 mm (A-C),100 μm (a1-c4).
(S10_Fig.TIFF)
S1 Movie

## 3D reconstruction of light sheet microscopic images from cleared brains of Thy1-YFP transgenic mice (Related to ).
The density of YFP-expressing neurons varied along the rostrocaudal axis of the hippocampus (Hp). Compared with control mice, the Hp was enlarged in the cTG. In contrast, YFP expression in the Hp was reduced in the cKO, whereas the domain of strong YFP signals was expanded in the cTG.
(S1_Movie.MOV)
S1 Table

## Antibody list.
(S1_Table.PDF)
S2 Table

## PCR primer list.
(S2_Table.PDF)
S3 Table

## ISH primer list.
(S3_Table.PDF)
S1 Data

## Source data for main and supporting figures.
(S1_Data.XLSX)

We thank Dr. Ming-Jer Tsai for providing the COUP-TFI floxed and transgenic allele, Dr. Kevin Jones for Emx1-Cre, and Dr. Chau-Ren Jung for providing statistical consultation. We also thank Dr. Wen-Hsin Hsu and other members of the Chou laboratory for their help.
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003355.r001Decision Letter 0
Hart, PhDTaylorSenior Editor© 2025 Taylor Hart, PhD2025Taylor Hart, PhDhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
3 Feb 2025

Dear Dr Chou, 
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Determining the relative sizes of hippocampal subregions along the dorsal-ventral axis by COUP-TFI expression gradient" for consideration as a Short Reports by PLOS Biology.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff, as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise, and I am writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. After your manuscript has passed the checks it will be sent out for review. To provide the metadata for your submission, please Login to Editorial Manager (https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology) within two working days, i.e. by Feb 05 2025 11:59PM.
If your manuscript has been previously peer-reviewed at another journal, PLOS Biology is willing to work with those reviews in order to avoid re-starting the process. Submission of the previous reviews is entirely optional and our ability to use them effectively will depend on the willingness of the previous journal to confirm the content of the reports and share the reviewer identities. Please note that we reserve the right to invite additional reviewers if we consider that additional/independent reviewers are needed, although we aim to avoid this as far as possible. In our experience, working with previous reviews does save time. 
If you would like us to consider previous reviewer reports, please edit your cover letter to let us know and include the name of the journal where the work was previously considered and the manuscript ID it was given. In addition, please upload a response to the reviews as a 'Prior Peer Review' file type, which should include the reports in full and a point-by-point reply detailing how you have or plan to address the reviewers' concerns. 
During the process of completing your manuscript submission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF. 
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Taylor
Taylor Hart, PhD, 
Associate Editor
PLOS Biology
thart@plos.org
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003355.r002Decision Letter 1
Hart, PhDTaylorSenior Editor© 2025 Taylor Hart, PhD2025Taylor Hart, PhDhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
12 Mar 2025

Dear Dr Chou,
Thank you for your patience while your manuscript "Determining the relative sizes of hippocampal subregions along the dorsal-ventral axis by COUP-TFI expression gradient" was peer-reviewed at PLOS Biology. It has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, an Academic Editor with relevant expertise, and by several independent reviewers. 
In light of the reviews, which you will find at the end of this email, we would like to invite you to revise the work to thoroughly address the reviewers' reports.
Reviewers called the paper descriptive but interesting and potentially important, and R2 is very positive and only raises minor points. However, the other reviewers noted several areas where the conclusions require further support. R1 pointed out some under-explored areas in the paper and missing technical details. R3 and R4 raise several concerns about the alignment and delineation of hippocampus regions, based on anatomy and molecular markers. These reviewers also pointed out areas where discrepancies with prior literature were not well addressed.
We would like to invite a Major Revision of this submission. In line with our discussion with the Academic Editor, we must emphasize the need to perform new experiments and analyses to better delineate the differences in hippocampus subregions between mouse genotypes, including through adding data from additional molecular markers. In particular, you should carefully consider the points raised by R4 regarding hippocampus organization and thoroughly address them in your response. You should also revise the text to better integrate the findings with prior literature and include missing technical details, and otherwise address the reviewers' concerns. 
Given the extent of revision needed, we cannot make a decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is likely to be sent for further evaluation by all or a subset of the reviewers.
In addition to these revisions, you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 3 months. Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension. 
At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we may withdraw it.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript. 
*NOTE: In your point-by-point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually, point by point.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response. 
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Revised Article with Changes Highlighted" file type. 
*Re-submission Checklist*
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this re-submission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record. 
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision:
*Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

*PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5

*Blot and Gel Data Policy*
We require the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements

*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Taylor
Taylor Hart, PhD, 
Associate Editor
PLOS Biology
thart@plos.org
------------------------------------
REVIEWS:
Reviewer #1: Tseng et al. work focuses on understanding the role of COUP-TF1, a transcription factors, in the development of the hippocampus, particularly, in the patterning of hippocampal subregions. The authors use a combination of anatomical and molecular approaches to analyze how a deficit (cKO) or an overexpression (cTG) of COUP-TF1 affects the sizes of the different subregions. 
The work is mainly descriptive (which I don't see as a negative point), and the authors have carefully analyzed the changes in the cKO and cTG with different markers and across the whole dorso-ventral axes. I particularly appreciate having supplementary figures with additional images to show stainings at different rostro-caudal levels. I feel few points could be better investigated or discussed, but I overall think this work will be rather interesting for the field of developmental neuroscience and those studying the hippocampal regions. 
Major comments:
* The authors show how changes in the level of COUP-TF1 often leads to the expression of region-specific markers in ectopic regions. For example, the expression of Dcn in patches of CA1 or of Pcp4 in deep PCL in caudal CA1. This is very interesting, though it is not very much discussed in the manuscript. What could be the reason of these ectopic expression? In particular, in the Discussion, the authors mention that their data support the notion that CA1 PC and CA3 PC derive from different progenitors, but vCA1 and dCA1 would derive from the same progenitors. If that is the case, how do we explain the ectopic cells? Are those the consequence of migration defects (like abnormal cells migrating in the wrong place). Or are they the product of misspecification of specific cells from some specific progenitors? I would appreciate if the authors could speculate in the discussion, as these data might be difficult to interpret for scientists outside of the field.
* The authors have some data with Edu labeling in the supplementary figures, where they show that there is no increase in cell production. These data nicely fit with what is reported in Fig.2B. However, I am sure that the authors known that the literature has showed a difference in the DOB of deep VS superficial and that CA3 and CA1 cells follow different timeline for DOB and peak of neurogenesis. It would be extremely interesting if the authors could add i) analyses of the deep VS superficial part of the PCL (a simple 50-50 division could work, or authors could use specific markers to distinguish them); and ii) also similarly analyses of CA3. This would help in establishing if the differences observed are also caused by a mis-timed differentiation or neurogenesis.
* Fig. 4B. The high-caudal-low-rostral gradients are a bit hard to catch, as they seem a bit subtle. In particular, it almost seems like it is more the size of the HNE that changes, rather than the signal intensity (in particular for Axin2). Perhaps the authors could use some dashed lines to show the areas we should focus on and have some higher magnification images that better support their claim. 
Minor comments: 
* From Fig.2A-2c, it is unclear what is counted in the B and C. The text seems to suggest all the CA1 area, but the figure and legend say "CA1 PCL". The authors should specify. And since it seems that also the neuropil is affected in the cKO and the cTG, the authors might consider analyzing those differences and discuss what could be the reason, in case they have analyzed only the PCL.
* It is rather curious that the authors never analyze the Dentate Gyrus. Since the paper is about subregions of the hippocampus, there could be an expectation that this subregion is also included in the analysis. While I am not asking the authors to add work on the DG, perhaps they should specify in the text (and perhaps the title) that they are analyzing only the CA regions, which could be called "Hippocampus proper". 
* For the experiments in Fig.S2, do authors count only cells in the PCL? If so, they should specify it. 
* Related to the Edu experiments, they seem to be completely missing from the Methods section. Authors should add that. 
* Fig.S4, legend: typo in Reference for RNA-seq database (I guess it's #30 and not #3).
* Fig.4D, authors should explain somewhere how the quantification was done and how the "square" was obtained. 
* The methods section in general is lacking a bit in details regarding equipment models and parameters used. For example, nothing about that is reported for the Light-Sheet microscope. It would be nice if the authors could add that and re-check their methods section. 
* Fig.2. In D, an explanation of the arrow heads is missing. In G, I assume V/D cell ratio means the authors first did the Dcn/Wfs1 ratio for the Ventral and Dorsal region and then calculated that ratio. That could be explained a bit better in the legend.
* I couldn't find the Supplementary Movie 1 in my files. 
-----------
Reviewer #2: Outstanding and novel results on the role of Nr2f1 in regulating regionalization of the mouse hippocampus studied using Nr2f1 loss and gain of function mutants. The figures are excellent. Quantifications are carefully done. The writing is precise.
Therefore, the paper Merits publication with some minor editing and no further review.
For the Intro and/or Discussion, please reference Faedo et al, Cerebral Cortex, 2007 and Ypsilanti et al PNAS 2021. These papers showed that in the cerebral cortex, Nr2f1 alone or with Nr2f2, promote ventral identity (see Figure 3 of PNAS paper). Figure 8 of cerebral cortex paper showed that loss and gain of Nr2f1 regulates D/V patterning of the cortex. While it is well known that Nr2f1 promotes caudal identity, it is not well appreciated that it also has a key role in patterning the ventral cortex. This is highly relevant to Nr2f1's role in hippocampal D/V patterning.
Regarding the NR2F1 ChiP-seq - please reference Ypsilanti et al PNAS 2021 who also performed this type of analysis on the E12.5 cortex, although they focused on the neocortex and Nr2f1 binding to regulatory elements of other TFs. They did report that Nr2f1, Pax6, Emx2 Lhx2 and Pbx1 showed co-binding to regulatory elements near several WNT receptors (Frz1,5,7 & 8; Supplemental Figure 2 I).
Regarding WNT signaling, Faedo et al, Cerebral Cortex, 2007 provided evidence that loss of Nr2f1 increased the ventral spread of the bat-gal WNT reporter allele, whereas gain of Nr2f1 repressed Bat-gal activity.
-------------
Reviewer #3: Tseng et al present a nice body of work examining the role of COUP-TF1 in patterning the dorsal-ventral axis of the hippocampus. Their work adds to the literature by using both knock out and an enhanced expression of COUP-TF1, and they conclude that COUP-TF1 knock out leads to the expansion of the dorsal hippocampus (while reducing the ventral hippocampus) and that overexpression has the opposite effects (reduced dorsal hippocampus, expanded ventral hippocampus with ectopically expressed ventral hippocampal cells). I greatly appreciate their attention the different subregions of the hippocampus.
Because the curvature of the hippocampus can make it difficult to assess and align sections of a shortened or elongated hippocampus with that of wild-type mice, the analyses with Nissl-stained sections are harder to believe than the tissues that are stained with specific markers of cell type and location along the dorsal-ventral axis. In particular, the ventral morphology of the cKO is quite challenging to align with the other two genotypes and it is difficult to tell how much of that is due to cutting this more caudal tissue at a very different angle due to a shortened curvature. Perhaps a more appropriate prep would be to dissect the hippocampus and section the flattened hippocampus to compare dorsal, intermediate, and ventral across genotypes.
Similarly, scaling up the cKO and scaling down the cTG is also difficult to interpret because it isn't clear if the differences in sizes are evenly distributed, or how they relate to the control. Instead, it might be useful to do percent of the axis, and certainly the qRT-PCR analysis of the whole hippocampus is more compelling. 
Of note, the labeling of vCA1 in the cKO image of Figure 2A is questionable. The authors have identified a window of very thin pyramidal layer to measure and claim is thinned in the cKO mouse, but they have labeled the CA1 layer quite extensively into what is likely the CA3 layer, based on the widening of the cells. Clearer delineations of the subfields would give the reader more confidence in the assessment of the subregions by this group. 
I would like to note a few issues in the discussion: 
"In this study, we showed that even at an early postnatal stage (P7), when not all the subregion-specific genes are fully expressed, the Hp can still be divided into dorsal and ventral compartments using a handful of marker genes. This suggests that Hp compartmentalization takes place early in development, well before the Hp begins to show adult-like functions at three to four weeks after birth [39]."
While this is true, they do not note that both connectivity of the hippocampus with its main cortical input the entorhinal cortex, as well as dorsally or ventrally enriched gene markers at the dorsal/ventral extremes of the neonatal hippocampus are identifiable at birth (O'Reilly et al Brain Structure and Function 2015).
Additionally, they state: "Further compartmentalization and refinement of these subregions likely takes place during Hp maturation, as physical activities are known to significantly contribute to hippocampal development in humans [40, 41]."
Isn't "further compartmentalization and refinement" the definition of maturation? This sentence feels empty and vague and the references 40 and 41 are taxi driver studies; are these two studies really support for the role of "physical activities to significantly contribute to hippocampal development in humans?" Instead the authors could cite articles that indicate the sensory input is relevant for hippocampus maturation, such as studies of early eyelid opening leading to earlier maturation of the dentate gyrus (e.g. Dumas Dev Psychobiology 2004), or perhaps relate the timing of their studies to other changes in maturation across sensory systems, because sensory input is important for hippocampal-based learning an memory. 
Finally, they state that the hippocampus has been functionally described to have gradients along the axis but that "when analyzed at the molecular level, the hippocampus can be divided into distinct domains. Different sets of genes are enriched in specific subregions of the adult Hp, including the dHp, vHp, and an intermediate region between them [10, 38]." 
Citation 38 by Fanselow presented the case that the two domains may not be distinct, based on gradients of molecular labeling. If you look at the extremes, you can identify distinctions, but the boundaries are not necessarily clear cut. 
A few minor comments:
1) The use of dHp and vHp and then swapping back and forth between this nomenclature and the rostral-caudal nomenclature makes the manuscript harder to follow. 
2) in Figure 2, it is very hard to see the letters a1-a6 on the images.
---------------
Reviewer #4: 
In their manuscript entitled "Determining the relative sizes of hippocampal subregions along the dorsal-ventral axis by COUP-TFI expression gradient", Tseng and colleagues highlight the role of transcriptional regulator Couptf1 in the regionalization of the hippocampus and investigate how the expression gradient hippocampal progenitors (high-caudal to low-rostral) may contribute to distinguishing the fate of dorsal and ventral hippocampal regions. The authors used Couptf1 conditional knockout (cKO) and Coutf1 overexpression (cTG) models to study the effects of decreased or increased Couptf1 expression in the emergence of dorsal and ventral hippocampal fate and in the molecular regionalization of the hippocampus. 
Using anatomical analysis and expression of molecular markers they proposed that Couptf1 deletion results in the expansion of the dorsal hippocampus at the expense of the ventral region, and that increased Couptf1 expression results in ectopic generation of ventral hippocampus in the dorsal region. Moreover, they point to Wnt signaling as a mechanism regulated by Couptf1 to control dorsoventral regionalization in the hippocampus.
Overall, Tseng et al. highlight an important concept linking Couptf1 to the regionalization of the hippocampus. The involvement of Couptf1 in hippocampal regionalization has been proposed previously, and this study supports Couptf1's role in hippocampal morphogenesis. This study offers a new perspective on how Couptf1 may regulate hippocampal regionalization, contrasting the current view in the literature. However, the study presents important shortcomings in supporting their main claims. 
Main concerns:
1. One of the author's main claims is that Couptf1 regulates the dorso-ventral balance of CA1, as well as the position of CA2. The authors claim that the dorsal hippocampus (dHP) expands at the expense of the ventral hippocampus (vHP) in the absence of Couptf1. Previous publications (cited by the authors) using two different Couptf1 mutant models (including the Emx-Cre;Couptf1fl/fl system used in this study) have shown that Couptf1 is necessary for the specification and differentiation of the dorsal hippocampus, and its mutation mostly affects the differentiation of the dorsal CA1. This is in stark contrast with the author's main claims however the authors do not discuss this discrepancy.
The authors show that the HP is smaller in the Couptf1 cKO (as observed in previous studies), and that the thickness of the pyramidal layers in CA1 and CA3 changes. These morphological changes indicate the abnormal development of these fields. The study argues that the reduced thickness and increased cell density in the cKO CA1 and the increased thickness and decreased cell density in the cTG CA1 suggested that the Hp was "dorsalized" in the cKO and "ventralized" in cTG. These anatomical changes are unlikely to reliably distinguish regional differences given the dysmorphism of the HP in the cKO. Their claim that dHP expands at the expense of the vHP is mostly supported by the expanded expression of the Wsf1 marker in CA1 from rostral to caudal (Figure 2D). Of note, expression of Wsf1 in dHP CA1was shown in the study of Yang and colleagues (doi: 10.7554/eLife.86940) in the same Couptf1 cKO model (Emx1Cre; Couptf1 fl/fl), and appeared to be reduced rather than expanded. There is no discussion regarding the choice of the markers, and given the discrepancy with the literature, it diminished the strength of the data yielded by markers that may not be reproducible across studies.
The upregulation of other dHP markers by qPCR from whole HP in the cKO is not very informative, since it may also reflect an overall abnormal differentiation and misregulation of these genes across the HP rather than the specific expansion of the dHP. Showing upregulation and expanded expression of multiple dHP markers in the tissue via spatial transcriptomics or in situ hybridization will better support this point.
Given the discrepancies in Wsf1 expression with the literature, the claim regarding the "expansion of dHP" needs to be further supported by showing expression in situ of additional markers that distinguish dHP and vHP. Perhaps using the same markers as in the previous studies will help to clarify the starkly different results across studies, in addition to the use of new markers which will add to the rigor and strength of the data.
Similarly, the support for the claim that the vHP is ventrally shifted concomitant with the expansion of the dHP is unclear. Their claim that Dcn (vHP marker) expression is shifted ventrally is unclear based on the images in Figure 2D, and not supported by Dcn quantification in Figure 2F, which does not show statistically significant differences in Dcn between the cKO and the control. The authors showed reduced expression of other vHP makers by qPCR from the whole HP, which as explained above, only indicates an overall reduction in the expression, but is not useful to support the claim that the vHP has shifted ventrally, has become smaller, or any positional effect. 
Overall, the authors are pushing the conclusion that the balance between the regions specified as dHP and vHP is shifted in the Couptf1 cKO favoring the expansion of dHP. Though the premise is interesting, the data presented are currently insufficient to support that conclusion. Stronger data (showing the expansion of expression in situ of several makers that unequivocally distinguish dHP and vHP) is needed to claim that the territory demarcated as dHP has acquired the correct molecular identity of dHP and that the region is indeed expanded.
In addition to the examination of molecular markers distinguishing dHP and vHP, the authors mentioned the distinct connectivity of dHP and vHP with other structures such as the cortex, amygdala, hypothalamus, etc. The authors could use retrograde tracing from different structures to identify the dHP and vHP regions, and determine their identity based on connectivity as an additional method.
2.Location of CA2, and boundary between CA1, CA3 doesn't seem to change in Couptf1 cKO compared to control.
The authors show that the expression of Pcp4 (CA2 marker) is detected between CA1 and CA3, similarly in cKO and controls (Figure 3A), and state "In the cKO, a Pcp4+ domain was detected between CA1 and CA3, similar to the control". If the relative position of CA2 is similar in Couptf1 cKO and controls, how do the authors reconcile these data with their conclusion regarding the dorsalization of CA1 and the expansion of the dCA1? Shouldn't CA2 be affected/shifted too?
3. Couptf1 regulation of Wnt downstream genes. This is a potentially interesting mechanism revealed by the authors' ChIP-seq data. They suggest that Axin2 and Lef1 expression is regulated by Couptf1 in the neuroepithelium. In support of this claim, they show the expression of Axin2 and Lef1 by in situ hybridization. Images illustrating changes in Lef1 expression level between cKO, cTG, and controls are convincing, though it is unclear how the authors quantified protein expression level in Figure 4D, as claimed in the text. The images presented in Figure 4C illustrating Axin2 expression changes are less convincing and there is no quantification of Axin2 expression. Clarification on the quantification of expression, and perhaps additional data supporting these changes in expression would strengthen this interesting claim.
Minor comments:
1. Incomplete header: "COUP-TFI expression levels regulate the position of CA2 and the dorsal-ventral balance in CA3 and"
2. The statistical tests applied in each figure showing quantitative comparisons are not described in the figure legends.
3. The method lacks detailed description and rigor. There is no methodological description for "protein quantification" for Couptf1 and Lef1 described in the text corresponding to experiments presented in Figure 4D. What kind of protein quantification method was performed? 
The 'Stereological analysis, Image acquisition, and Quantification' methods section is poorly described. It seems from their description that the authors performed their volumetric analysis using planimetry, not stereology. If stereology was indeed used, they need to state the probe they used for area estimation and provide the error coefficient for their estimation. It is important to state at which magnification the images were acquired. This influences the accuracy of measurements and quantification.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003355.r003Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
12 Jun 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewer responses-0611.pdf
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003355.r004Decision Letter 2
Hart, PhDTaylorSenior Editor© 2025 Taylor Hart, PhD2025Taylor Hart, PhDhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
23 Jul 2025

*Dear Dr Chou,
Thank you for your patience while we considered your revised manuscript "Determining the relative sizes of subregions of the hippocampus proper along the dorsal-ventral axis by COUP-TFI expression gradient" for publication as a Short Report at PLOS Biology. This revised version of your manuscript has been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, the Academic Editor and several of the original reviewers.
Based on the reviews and our Academic Editor's assessment of your revision, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the following data and other policy-related requests. Please also see the final comment from the Academic Editor, following the reviewer reports.
IMPORTANT: the following editorial points are listed point-by-point (**)
------------
**Title: 
-- We suggest the following alternative title: "A developmental gradient of COUP-TFI expression regulates the relative size of hippocampus dorsal and ventral subregions"
**Financial disclosure statement:
Please add links to the funding agencies in the Financial Disclosure statement in the manuscript details.
**Competing interests: 
Please modify your Competing Interests the following statement “YPH is a member of PLOS Biology’s Editorial Board. The other authors declare that no competing interests exist."
**Ethics: 
-- Please include the specific national or international regulations/guidelines to which your animal care and use protocol adhered. Please note that institutional or accreditation organization guidelines (such as AAALAC) do not meet this requirement.
**Data:
-- You may be aware of the PLOS Data Policy, which requires that all data be made available without restriction: http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability. For more information, please also see this editorial: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001797
Please supply the numerical values either in the a supplementary file or as a permanent DOI’d deposition for the following figures:
1EFGH
2BCFGH
3B
S1B
S2DE
S3ABCC'
S6C
NOTE: the numerical data provided should include all replicates AND the way in which the plotted mean and errors were derived (it should not present only the mean/average values).
-- Please cite the location of the data clearly in all relevant main and supplementary Figure legends, e.g. “The data underlying this Figure can be found in S1 Data” or “The data underlying this Figure can be found in https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXX”

-- Please ensure that you are using best practice for statistical reporting and data presentation. These are our guidelines https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting#loc-statistical-reporting and a useful resource on data presentation https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1002128
-- If you are reporting experiments where n ≤ 5, please plot each individual data point.
-- Supplementary files (e.g., excel). Please ensure that all data files are uploaded as 'Supporting Information' and are invariably referred to (in the manuscript, figure legends, and the Description field when uploading your files) using the following format verbatim: S1 Data, S2 Data, etc. Multiple panels of a single or even several figures can be included as multiple sheets in one excel file that is saved using exactly the following convention: S1_Data.xlsx (using an underscore).
--Please ensure that your Data Statement in the submission system accurately describes where your data can be found and is in final format, as it will be published as written there.
**Code availability:
Per journal policy, if you have generated any custom code during the course of this investigation, please make it available without restrictions. Please ensure that the code is sufficiently well documented and reusable, and that your Data Statement in the Editorial Manager submission system accurately describes where your code can be found.
Please note that we cannot accept sole deposition of code in GitHub, as this could be changed after publication. However, you can archive this version of your publicly available GitHub code to Zenodo. Once you do this, it will generate a DOI number, which you will need to provide in the Data Accessibility Statement (you are welcome to also provide the GitHub access information). See the process for doing this here: https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/archiving-a-github-repository/referencing-and-citing-content
**Model system:
--Please note that per journal policy, the model system/species studied should be clearly stated in the abstract of your manuscript. 
------------
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
In addition to these revisions, you may need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly. If you do not receive a separate email within a few days, please assume that checks have been completed, and no additional changes are required.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks. 
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
- a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
- a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable, if not applicable please do not delete your existing 'Response to Reviewers' file.)
- a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript. 
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:
https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://plos.org/published-peer-review-history/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Taylor
Taylor Hart, PhD, 
Associate Editor
thart@plos.org
PLOS Biology
Reviewer remarks:
Reviewer #1: I appreciate the time and care the authors have spent in addressing the comments. 
I am happy to endorse the manuscript for publication
Reviewer #3: All of my concerns were well-addressed.
Reviewer #4: The authors have satisfactory improved the manuscript. All points has been addressed either with addition of new data, new analysis, or editorial changes.
The resulting manuscript is stronger, suitable for publication in PLOS Biology, and will contribute to understand the role of Couptf1 in the regionalization of the hippocampus.
Comment from the Academic Editor:
Tseng et al. present a comprehensive study investigating the role of COUP-TF1 in regulating the regionalization of the mouse hippocampus. Using both loss- and gain-of-function COUP-TF1 mutants, combined with detailed anatomical and molecular analyses, they provide new insights into how COUP-TF1 influences hippocampal patterning. This work offers a novel perspective that broadens our understanding of hippocampal regionalization.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003355.r005Decision Letter 3
Hart, PhDTaylorSenior Editor© 2025 Taylor Hart, PhD2025Taylor Hart, PhDhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
5 Aug 2025

Dear Dr Chou,
Thank you for completing our editorial requests, including providing source data for your figures. However, we noticed some remaining issues related to the source data, and request that you address them through another Minor Revision.
The data listed for Figure 1F appear to be inconsistent with what's shown in the relevant figure, as it appears that the columns are mismatched. In addition, we noticed that the same excel sheet contains some additional numbers on the right side of the page with uncertain meaning. In your next revision, you should address these issues, and also ensure that all of the provided data is correct and matches the figures. Please also add source data for Figure 1I, which we missed in our prior request.
In addition to these revisions, you may need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly. If you do not receive a separate email within a few days, please assume that checks have been completed, and no additional changes are required.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks. 
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
- a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
- a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable, if not applicable please do not delete your existing 'Response to Reviewers' file.)
- a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript. 
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:
https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://plos.org/published-peer-review-history/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Taylor
Taylor Hart, PhD, 
Associate Editor
thart@plos.org
PLOS Biology
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003355.r006Decision Letter 4
Hart, PhDTaylorSenior Editor© 2025 Taylor Hart, PhD2025Taylor Hart, PhDhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version4
8 Aug 2025

Dear Dr Chou,
Thank you for the submission of your revised Short Report "A developmental gradient of COUP-TFI expression regulates the relative size of hippocampus dorsal and ventral subregions" for publication in PLOS Biology. On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Maria Galazo, I am pleased to say that we can in principle accept your manuscript for publication, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email you should receive within 2-3 business days from our colleagues in the journal operations team; no action is required from you until then. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS
We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Thank you again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Hart, PhD, 
Associate Editor
PLOS Biology
thart@plos.org