3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1268673112686731126867314137766210.1016/j.isci.2025.113915A systematic characterization of fibroblast subtypes and heterogeneity
ZhuXiuli KangHongen ZhaoZhongming JiaPeilin 1China National Center for Bioinformation, Beijing, China2Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China3University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China4Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA∗Corresponding author pjia@big.ac.cn
5Lead contact
10112025281211391511391510122025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Summary
Fibroblasts are essential components in development, disease, and treatment response, yet their diversity and function remain incompletely understood. Here, we constructed a comprehensive fibroblast landscape by integrating large-scale single-cell and single-nucleus RNA sequencing datasets spanning 60 major human organs and tissues across various developmental stages and biological conditions. We identified 16 fibroblast subtypes and systematically characterized their tissue specificities, transcriptional heterogeneity, and cell states. Further analyses revealed distinct fibroblast subtypes associated with pluripotency and senescence across tissues. Leveraging the well-defined fibroblast atlas, we demonstrated that different fibroblast subtypes were associated with various complex traits such as anthropometric and immune diseases. Furthermore, analysis using the subtype-specific gene activities in bulk cancer data revealed that myoCAF was a risk factor for patient survival. Collectively, our study provides a comprehensive fibroblast atlas, offering insights into the functions, heterogeneity, and clinical applications of fibroblast subtypes.
Subject areas: Technical aspects of cell biology, Cancer, Transcriptomics

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Cross-tissue single-cell transcriptome analysis reveals fibroblast heterogeneity
•Niche-level cell-cell interactions between fibroblast subtypes and other cell types
•Fibroblast subtypes have unique pluripotency and cellular senescence features
•Fibroblast subtypes correlate with various complex traits and cancer types

Technical aspects of cell biology; Cancer; Transcriptomics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Mar 26; Revised 2025 Sep 16; Accepted 2025 Oct 29; Collection date 2025 Dec 19.

## Introduction
Fibroblasts are essential cells in maintaining the structural integrity and functions of various human tissues. They exhibit robust functional and metabolic capabilities, including protein synthesis and the maintenance of the extracellular matrix (ECM), enabling them to repair and remodel tissues in response to injury throughout growth and development. Fibroblasts are distinct from fibrocytes, where the latter are derived from circulating monocytes and play a role in tissue repair by differentiating into fibroblasts at the sites of injury. Thus, fibrocytes are considered a transitional state between circulating monocytes and active fibroblasts. In this work, we focused on fibroblasts, especially their subtypes, functional characteristics, and impacts on complex diseases, including cancer.
Dysfunctions of fibroblasts can contribute to the pathogenesis of complex disease. For example, in pulmonary fibrosis, aberrant activation and proliferation of lung fibroblasts generate excessive ECM deposition, leading to progressive lung scarring and impaired gas exchange. , With conditions such as heart failure and myocardial infarction, dysregulated cardiac fibroblasts contribute to cardiac fibrosis, which impairs myocardial function and increases the risk of arrhythmias and heart failure progression. , In diabetic nephropathy, dysfunctional renal fibroblasts are attributed to the development of renal fibrosis and progressive loss of kidney function. , In cancer, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) represent abnormally activated ECM cells that emerge during the early stage of tumor development. CAFs secrete growth factors, cytokines, and ECM components that facilitate tumor cell proliferation, metastasis, , and immune evasion. 
Fibroblasts can also be characterized based on their pathway activities, cellular states, responses to environmental stimuli, and interactions with other cell types. Transforming growth factor β signaling is a central pathway regulating fibroblast activation and ECM synthesis in fibrosis and cancer. Specific fibroblast states are increasingly recognized as regulators of immune cell function in inflammatory diseases and cancer. The emergence of senescent cells is generally associated with aging and the decline of tissue regeneration. Senescent fibroblasts exhibit altered gene expression profiles, secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and growth factors, and changes in cell morphology and function. Fibroblasts with cellular senescence properties are present in healthy epithelial tissues, supporting stem cell function and tissue repair. Fibroblasts can also undergo senescence in response to various stresses, such as oxidative stress, DNA damage, oncogene activation, or exposure to pro-inflammatory cytokines. Finally, crosstalk between fibroblasts and other cells can modulate fibroblast activation and tissue remodeling, playing a critical role in both healthy and diseased conditions.
Fibroblasts can be further divided into subtypes that exhibit functional and phenotypic heterogeneity. , Depending on the location, normal dermal fibroblasts are divided into papillary fibroblasts (PapFBs) and reticular fibroblasts. PapFBs are located in the upper layer of the corium and are involved in the formation of skin hair follicles and immune responses. Reticular fibroblasts are located in the lower layer of the corium and are responsible for making skin collagen fibers that trigger the repair of damaged skin. The aforementioned CAFs are mainly derived from fibroblasts inherent in the interstitium surrounding the tumor and can also be formed by epithelial cells, endothelial cells, or mesenchymal stem cells through a series of signal transformations. At least three subtypes of CAFs have been reported: myofibroblastic CAF (myoCAF), inflammatory CAF (iCAF), and antigen presentation CAF (apCAF), each with distinct functions. Buechler identified the universal fibroblasts (UniFBs) in steady-state tissues and activated fibroblasts (ActFBs) in perturbed tissues. Gao and Liu reported 20 and 18 distinct fibroblast subtypes, respectively, classified based on highly expressed genes in each subtype. Nevertheless, the field still lacks a unified fibroblast classification system, as increasing numbers of studies continue to emerge using similar approaches but focusing on more limited disease- or organ-specific contexts. Consequently, the nomenclature for fibroblast phenotypes has become highly inconsistent, creating significant challenges when comparing fibroblast subsets across different datasets due to varying naming conventions.
Considering the diverse functions and dynamic states of fibroblasts, a systematic investigation is pressingly needed to delineate potential subtypes of fibroblasts and elucidate their tissue-specific functions in both health and disease. In this study, we conducted a pan-tissue investigation of the fibroblast subtypes using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) or single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) data from representative human tissues and organs, aiming to construct the landscape for fibroblast subtypes. Through trajectory analyses, we unveiled the diverse directions of fibroblast differentiation and then cross-validated the results using multiple analytical approaches. To elucidate the unique characteristics of fibroblast subtypes, we examined the transcriptional heterogeneity among different subtypes, focusing on cell states, regulatory networks, and functional mechanisms. Furthermore, we investigated the influence of aging on these subtypes and uncovered distinct features related to cell pluripotency and cellular senescence. Finally, we demonstrated that such comprehensive annotation of fibroblast subtypes provides valuable insights into the cellular context of complex traits and diseases, including cancer.

## Results

## The landscape of fibroblasts across human tissues
To examine the distribution of fibroblast cells in various tissues and biological conditions, we constructed a comprehensive landscape including 2,195,794 cells from 16 scRNA-seq or snRNA-seq studies spanning 60 major human organs or tissues ( , and ). These data were generated from 477 samples representing different biological conditions, including normal, disease, cancer, and abortion ( and ). We implemented a series of quality control and processing, including exclusion of low-quality datasets and cells, correction for potential batch effects, initial clustering and merging, and evaluation of the clusters using multiple parameters (e.g., Spearman correlation coefficient [SCC], dendrogram, and t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding) ( ; , , , , , ; ).
 As a result, we obtained 2,062,895 cells from 368 samples from 14 studies. These cells were categorized into 9 major cell types: myeloid cells, B cells, T cells, plasma cells, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, neurons, smooth muscle cells, and fibroblast cells ( A and A; ). We next focused on the fibroblasts ( ; , , , ). To define a high-quality set of fibroblasts, we further filtered the fibroblasts by keeping only those supported by both our pipeline and the original metadata, resulting in 157,984 fibroblast cells for further analysis (45.4% of 347,688 fibroblasts from our pipeline, 55.9% of 256,711 originally annotated fibroblasts) ( ; ). This subset of high-quality fibroblasts was thoroughly validated using multiple measurements, such as well-known marker genes COL1A1 and COL1A2 (83.4% of cells had a count value >1 for COL1A1 or COL1A2, F). Further applying clustree with the Louvain algorithm, followed by assessment using the ratio of global unshifted entropy (ROGUE) algorithm, we identified 41 clusters, which were then merged into 16 fibroblast subtypes based on their shared differentially expressed genes (DEGs) ( ) and the average ROGUE values. Names of these subtypes were based on recommendations from CellMarker2 or their tissue origins ( ; and ). Moreover, we collected fibroblast-related marker genes of normal and tumor tissues from CellMarker2 and calculated a module score for the normal state and CAF-like state, respectively, for the 16 fibroblast subtypes using the AddModuleScore function in Seurat. For the normal state, we collected 331 marker genes, and for the tumor state, we collected 57 marker genes from the CellMarker2 database ( A). We then performed a paired two-sided t test on the module scores between the normal and CAF-like states for each subtype, followed by Benjamini-Hochberg-correction for multiple testing (adjusted p value <0.05) ( B). Strikingly, all subtypes showed a significant difference between the two states. According to the scale of the two states, we stratified the 16 fibroblast subtypes into two groups: the normal-like group (DevFB, DerFB, PapFB, EpiFB, LipFB, MetFB, ProFB, and CytFB) and the CAF-like group (myoCAF, apCAF, CycFB, FCC, UniFB, FCPC, iCAF, and ActFB). More details of the preprocessing steps can be found in the .
 These 16 subtypes are ActFB (n = 14,296 cells), apCAF (n = 7,012 cells), cycle fibroblast ([CycFB] n = 17,434 cells), cytoskeleton fibroblast ([CytFB] n = 9,088 cells), dermal fibroblast ([DerFB] n = 1,052 cells), developmental fibroblast (DevFB, n = 883 cells), epithelial-like fibroblast ([EpiFB] n = 2,001 cells), fibrocartilage chondrocyte cell (FCC, n = 10,909 cells), fibrochondrocyte progenitor cell (FCPC, n = 9,727 cells), iCAF (n = 24,574 cells), lipid fibroblast (LipFB, n = 8,691 cells), metabolic fibroblast (MetFB, n = 4,100 cells), myoCAF (n = 7,256 cells), PapFB (n = 182 cells), proliferation fibroblast (ProFB, n = 8,297 cells), and UniFB (n = 32,482 cells) ( B and 1C; and ). We calculated the SCC of the 8 major cell types and 16 fibroblast types using their average expression. Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering, we observed two clusters, one including 16 fibroblast subtypes and the other including 8 major cell types ( A). The distance among fibroblast subtypes was closer ( B, median SCC among 16 fibroblast subtypes = 0.891, median SCC among 8 major cell types = 0.874, median SCC among 8 major cell types and 16 fibroblast subtypes = 0.786), indicating their similar biology characterizations ( B).

## Tissue-specific fibroblast subtypes
These 16 fibroblast subtypes were distributed across 56 tissues, with four tissues in the original datasets having no fibroblast cells, i.e., epityphlon, blood, fetal eyes, and fetal liver. The fibroblast cells exhibited high heterogeneity across tissues ( E). Of note, fetal and adult tissues each included distinct fibroblast subtypes. For example, UniFB was widely present in nearly all non-abortion tissues, indicating its ubiquitous roles. In contrast, CycFB was prevalent in various abortion tissues ( ). apCAF, iCAF, and myoCAF were detected in most diseases and cancer tissues. , DerFB, FCC, FCPC, LipFB, and PapFB exhibited tissue-specific distributions and have been reported in previous studies. , , , , , , , Among the 16 identified fibroblast subtypes, 10 displayed concordances with previous subtypes, while 6 were putatively not reported, namely, CycFB, CytFB, DevFB, EpiFB, MetFB, and ProFB ( ). Due to limitations in experiment and lack of access to tissue specimens, we instead estimated the components of these 16 fibroblast subtypes, along with 8 other cell types in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) datasets by CIBERSORT ( ). The deconvolution results provided independent supporting evidence for the presence of these fibroblast subtypes ( ).
The Sankey plot in D displays the relationships of fibroblast subtypes, highlighting the strong heterogeneity in tissue development. Among all fibroblast cells, lung tissue constituted the predominant proportion (23.3%, n = 36,818 cells), followed by pleural tissue (9.2%, n = 14,559 cells) ( D and E). Notably, CycFB was significantly enriched in fetal tissues ( ). The original dataset comprised four major categories: normal samples (13 tissues, 56 samples, 31,845 cells), disease samples (34 tissues, 125 samples, 101,030 cells), cancer specimens (13 cancer types, 89 samples, 8,385 cells), and abortion cases (18 tissues, 33 samples, 16,724 cells) ( A–S12C). Particularly for the disease samples, we annotated them into 8 groups following the International Classification of Disease-11 codes. Interestingly, our analysis revealed 9 fibroblast subtypes significantly over-represented across three disease groups ( E). Specifically, cerebrovascular diseases showed prominent enrichment of EpiFB and UniFB subtypes; respiratory diseases, including COVID-19, asthma, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, and respiratory failure, demonstrated significant over-representation of ActFB and apCAF subtypes; and circulatory system diseases (primarily anoxia and hypertension) displayed the broadest subtype spectrum with significant enrichment of CytFB, LipFB, MetFB, myoCAF, and ProFB. Furthermore, CycFB was mainly identified in abortion samples (chi-square test, p < 2.2 × 10−16), while DerFB was mainly identified in normal samples (chi-square test, p < 2.2 × 10−16).
Among the 13 cancer types, the distribution of fibroblast subtypes exhibited marked heterogeneity too ( F and D; and ). We identified 11 significant associations between fibroblast subtypes and cancer types. Notably, the ActFB subtype was the most prevalent, showing significant enrichment in basal cell carcinoma (BCC; chi-square test, p value = 1.19 × 10−13), colorectal cancer (CRC; p value = 5.69 × 10−128), and lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD; p value = 2.56 × 10−214). Three subtypes were enriched in two cancer types each: FCC was enriched in both BCC (p value = 6.87 × 10−27) and uterine carcinosarcoma (UCEC; p value = 1.99 × 10−275), FCPC in esophageal carcinoma (p value = 6.87 × 10−27) and LUAD (p value 1.99 × 10−275), and iCAF in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (p value = 5.33 × 10−28) and UCEC (p value = 8.77 × 10−12).
Among the cancer samples, 6 CRC patients were each sequenced at three sites: a core and a border sample from tumors and a normal mucosa sample. We thus examined fibroblast compositions across different sites to assess their spatial variations ( ). As shown in E, several subtypes displayed substantial site-specific differences. For instance, UniFB and iCAF were primarily observed in normal mucosa, whereas ActFB and myoCAF were enriched in tumor-associated samples (core or border).

## Characteristics of fibroblast subtypes

## Trajectory
To investigate the developmental dynamics and differentiation pathways of fibroblast subtypes, we conducted trajectory inference using three complementary methods to cross-validate our findings. First, we applied the Slingshot method to infer lineage trajectory and construct migration branches. As shown in A, a total of 14 distinct trajectories were identified, revealing diverse differentiation directions among fibroblast cells. Notably, DevFB and ProFB were primarily located at the convergent root of all branches in the lower right region, suggesting that these subtypes represent early developmental stages. Second, we applied PhyloVelo to reconstruct cell trajectories and obtained a differentiation score to each cell. Consistent with Slingshot, DevFB and ProFB exhibited relatively high average velocity scores (DevFB = 34.126, ProFB = 48.446) ( B), indicative of a less differentiated, progenitor-like state. In contrast, apCAF and ActFB displayed lower average velocity scores (apCAF = 23.495, ActFB = 22.612) ( B), consistent with more differentiated stages. Finally, we applied Monocle to further characterize branching trajectories. Due to the large number of cells (n = 157,984), we randomly down-sampled to 15,798 cells, ensuring equal representation of fibroblast subtypes. This process was repeated 6 times to ensure robustness and reproducibility. Remarkably, ProFB consistently appeared at the root of inferred trajectory across all replicates ( A–S13F), reinforcing its potential role as an early progenitor population. We also studied the trajectory of fibroblast subtypes in the same tissues, respectively ( G). There were 46 tissues that had enough data for this analysis. This intra-organ comparisons highlighted both conserved and divergent gene expression programs and supported the notion that certain fibroblast states were developmentally regulated yet maintained organ-specific signatures. Taken together, all analyses indicated that DevFB and ProFB were at the early stages of development.
 

## Cell-cell communication
We employed CellPhoneDB v.5 to dissect the crosstalk between 16 fibroblast subtypes and the other 8 major cell types ( C, , and ). The total interactions of ligand and receptor showed that there were intensive interactions among fibroblast subtypes, especially EpiFB, PapFB, ActFB, LipFB, MetFB, CytFB, and ProFB ( C). Most fibroblasts interacted with endothelial cells intensively, followed by epithelial cells ( B). However, fibroblast cells showed less interaction with myeloid or lymphocyte cells (T cells, B cells, plasma cells) ( A). Specifically, smooth muscle cells had the lowest interactions with fibroblast subtypes ( B). Moreover, we obtained and examined the top 5 ligand-receptor pairs for all cell types ( A). The pair APP-CD74, which could promote immunosuppression and progression of tumors, was the most frequently identified ligand-receptor pair among all interactions (12.8%, n = 82, A). The communications among the fibroblast subtypes were also found to be mediated by specific interactions. For example, COL1A1_integrin_a10b1_complex, which belonged to adhesion by collagen/integrin, was unique to EpiFB ( A) and had been reported to regulate trophoblast invasion. , Another pair, APOE_TREM2_receptor, which belonged to signaling by apolipoprotein, was unique to DerFB and was a risk factor for Alzheimer disease ( A). These specific interactions for each cell type further demonstrated the fibroblast heterogeneity.
Considering the heterogeneity of tissue niches, we further performed niche-relevant cell-cell communication (CCC) analyses across 56 tissues ( B). No detectable CCCs (defined by ligand-receptor pairs with gene expression >0.1) were observed in fetal stomach, fetal thymus, lymph node, rectum, skin, and fallopian tube ( ). Based on the overall number of interactions between the 16 fibroblast subtypes and 8 major cell types in the remaining 50 tissues, the tissues with the highest levels of CCCs included the eye, lung, adipose tissue, muscle, and trachea ( C). In these tissues, fibroblast subtypes showed more frequent interactions with non-immune cells (such as epithelial, endothelial, and smooth muscle cells) than with immune cells (including myeloid cells, T cells, B cells, and plasma cells) ( C). Notably, increased interactions were observed specifically among T and B cells in the thymus ( C). Furthermore, compared with adult/aged tissues, fetal tissues exhibited markedly fewer fibroblast-related interactions, indicating developmental differences in fibroblast communication dynamics ( C).

## Functional characteristics of fibroblast subtypes
The fine-mapped annotations of fibroblast subtypes allowed us to systematically explore the transcriptional heterogeneity of fibroblasts from aspects including cell states, functional enrichment, and regulatory networks. 

## Cell states
We collected 16 gene sets representing different cell states, such as stress, interferon response, and mesenchymal. We calculated scores for these cell states for each cell using the AddModuleScore function from Seurat. As shown in A, four cell states showed substantial heterogeneity in different subtypes, which were the complete epithelial-mesenchymal transition (cEMT), metal reaction (metal), oxidative phosphorylation (oxphos), and stress response states ( A and A; ). Within each fibroblast subtype, we observed both positive (co-occurring) and negative (mutually exclusive) correlations between cellular states. For example, hypoxia and partial EMT states consistently co-occurred across all 16 subtypes (mean SCC = 0.45, ranging from 0.23 to 0.64). In contrast, oxphos and stress states showed consistent negative correlations in all subtypes (mean SCC = −0.24, ranging from −0.45 to −0.08). Interestingly, the correlation patterns among cell states displayed subtype-specific directional differences ( B). For example, the cEMT state correlated positively with the stress state in FCC (SCC = 0.271, p value = 8.92 × 10−119) but negatively in DerFB (SCC = −0.456, p value = 7.46 × 10−44). Similarly, the oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (OPC) and stress states were positively correlated in PapFB (SCC = 0.307, p value = 1.91 × 10−4) but negatively correlated in DevFB (SCC = −0.322, p value = 3.05 × 10−16) ( B; ). Furthermore, correlation heterogeneity was particularly evident when comparing subtypes. In some subtypes, strong and frequent correlations were observed among multiple states, e.g., UniFB showed 111 significant correlations (SCC p value <0.05) out of 16 × 15/2 = 120 possible pairs. In others, the correlations were much less, such as PapFB (61 significant correlations) and DerFB (66 significant correlations). This variability highlights the complex, context-dependent nature of cellular state interactions.
 

## Functional enrichment by GSEA
We performed single sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) analysis with hallmark gene sets from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) (access date: September 2022) to investigate pathway enrichment patterns for each cell. For better visualization, we implemented a semi-supervised hierarchical clustering method (ward.D2) by fixing cell type labels while grouping gene sets. As shown in , two distinct groups of pathways were identified. The first group prominently included EMT, myogenesis, apoptosis, coagulation, and complement pathways, demonstrating consistent enrichment across most subtypes and validating fibroblasts’ essential roles in tissue remodeling, wound repair, and cytoskeletal maintenance. The second group was featured by the mTORC1 signaling pathway. Interestingly, ActFB and ProFB exhibited completely opposed activity patterns in both MYC targets V1 and oxidative phosphorylation pathways. These results further highlighted the transcriptional heterogeneity among the fibroblast subtypes ( ).

## Functional enrichment by VEGA
Considering the heavy sparsity of scRNA-seq data, we employed variational autoencoders enhanced by gene annotations (VEGA) to further investigate the functional characteristics of each subtype. VEGA is a deep learning method that incorporates gene-pathway annotations in one of its layers to enable interpretability and thus provides biological insights into the fibroblast subtypes. Importantly, VEGA can generate nonlinear embeddings of the input scRNA-seq data and provide alternative insights to the ssGSEA analyses. We ran VEGA on all 157,984 fibroblast cells using the same Hallmark gene sets from MSigDB, resulting in an embedding vector for each cell representing the activities for the 50 gene sets. Using the embedding matrix, we conducted the same semi-supervised hierarchical clustering as for ssGSEA results. As shown in B, UniFB exhibited high activities of coagulation, EMT, glycolysis, hypoxia, and myogenesis, all of which were important factors for the construction of the ECM ( ). Further examples included strong activities of the inflammatory response, UV response down, and angiogenesis in ActFB ( B) and E2F targets, heme metabolism, MYC targets v2, notch signaling, and WNT beta-catenin signaling in myoCAF, ProFB, LipFB, MetFB, and CytFB ( B and B). The results from both ssGSEA and VEGA revealed strong heterogeneities across fibroblast subtypes.

## Regulatory networks
Transcription factors (TFs) play a pivotal role in regulating gene expression, contributing significantly to cellular heterogeneity. To systematically analyze TF activities and their target genes, we applied the single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering (SCENIC) method. SCENIC constructed regulons comprising TFs and their direct targets by integrating co-expression patterns with motif enrichment analysis, effectively eliminating indirect interactions. It calculated an AUCell score to assess the activity of each regulon. We applied SCENIC across all subtypes for 622 human TFs. C showed the scaled AUCell scores for the top five most active TFs identified in each fibroblast subtype. Notably, the identified TFs exhibited functional coherence with their respective subtypes. For example, MYOG(+), known to regulate cell cycle and proliferation, was enriched in CycFB, a subtype characterized by active cell proliferation and primarily observed in fetal samples ( C). Similarly, CDX2(+), which drives a pro-inflammatory gene expression program, was specifically detected in iCAFs, aligning with their established roles in inflammation ( C). Strikingly, each subtype exhibited distinct major regulators, reflecting subtype-specific transcriptional programs. We identified six TFs shared across multiple subtypes, which were ARID5B(+) (ActFB and LipFB), EPAS1(+) (DerFB and FCC), HMGB1(+) (CytFB and DevFB), TCF4(+) (CycFB, ProFB, and UniFB), TWIST2(+) (CytFB and MetFB), and UQCRB(+) (DerFB, FCPC, and iCAF), implying that these TFs were involved in a relatively common regulatory program in fibroblasts ( C). We also expanded our analyses to eight non-fibroblast cell types using SCENIC. Specifically, we uncovered 80 cell type-specific TFs, including EBF1(+) in B cells, NR2F1(+) in endothelial cells, TCF21(+) in smooth muscle cells, INSM1(+) in epithelial cells, BATF(+) in T cells, PRRX1(+) in neurons, XBP1(+) in plasma cells, and FOS(+) in myeloid cells ( A). Furthermore, we identified 102 fibroblast-specific TFs that may serve as markers to distinguish fibroblasts from other major cell types ( B). Furthermore, 77 TFs were shared in fibroblast subtypes and non-fibroblast cell types. These results suggested both fibroblast-specific transcriptional signatures and conserved regulatory programs of cell types ( B).

## Cell pluripotency and cellular senescence of fibroblast subtypes
To explore the developmental dynamics of fibroblast subtypes, we studied their age-dependent distribution patterns along with the pluripotency and senescence characteristics. We first stratified all samples into three age groups: fetal specimens (including unborn or aborted samples), adult specimens (20–60 years), and elderly specimens (≥60 years). As shown in A, there were pronounced inter-group distinctions, particularly in fetal samples. Specifically, CycFB was dominant in fetal specimens but showed minimal presence in both adult and elderly groups ( B). Between the adult and elderly groups, FCC and UniFB decreased, whereas apCAF and ProFB increased with age ( B). Given these robust age-subtype associations, we subsequently examined cell pluripotency and senescence of fibroblast cells, which were important indicators of cellular aging. , 
 To assess pluripotency (encompassing stemness and differentiation), we collected 26 gene sets comprising 7,419 genes from the StemChecker database ( ). For each gene set, we calculated a module score and compared their difference among the three age groups by using the two-sided Wilcoxon test ( A) and fitting linear regression models. The beta coefficients from the regression models served as indicators of pluripotency status. As shown in C, we observed that 10 gene sets (2,987 genes) exhibited age-related increases (beta >0, denoted as differentiation gene sets) and 11 gene sets (3,828 genes) showed age-related decreases (beta <0, designated as stemness gene sets) (|t-statistic| from the regression model >30). We collectively refer the 2,987 genes as the differentiation gene set and the 3,828 genes as the stemness gene set, each of which can be used to calculate a differentiation score and a stemness score for each cell ( D). As expected, the differentiation score of each cell increased with age ( B), whereas the stemness score decreased ( D). Particularly, fibroblast cells from the fetal specimens displayed elevated stemness scores (toward the top in D). In addition, comparative analysis of subtypes revealed that tumor-like CAF populations (such as apCAF, iCAF, and myoCAF) exhibited particularly increasing stemness ( E). Interestingly, EpiFB displayed dual characteristics of elevated differentiation and stemness potential, consistent with their epithelial-mesenchyme plasticity ( C and S20E).
Senescent cells play important roles in human development and diseases. To systematically characterize senescence-associated transcriptional profiles, we retrieved the genes associated with cell senescence from the CellAge database, including 525 over-expressed and 734 under-expressed genes during cell senescence. We similarly calculated module scores for these two gene sets for each cell, where the over-expressed genes represented a high level of senescence and the under-expressed genes a low level of senescence, respectively ( E). Subtype-wise exploration of the senescence score showed that CycFB, which was dominantly found in fetal specimens, showed minimal expression of over-expressed marker genes and maximum expression of under-expressed marker genes ( G and S20I).
By exploring all four scores in 46,041 fibroblast cells, i.e., the differentiation scores ( A), the stemness scores ( B), the over-expressed scores ( C), and the under-expressed scores ( D), we found the differentiation and over-expressed scores showed similar performance ( D, A, and S21C), as did stemness and under-expressed scores ( E, B, and S21D). Thus, we combined differentiation and over-expressed gene sets to create a senescence signature (n = 4,353 genes, A) and combined stemness and under-expressed gene sets to form a stemness signature (n = 3,721 genes) ( ). Comparison between the fibroblast subtype-specific markers and the senescence or stemness gene signatures showed that iCAF shared 73 genes (39.7% of iCAF) with the senescence signature genes and CycFB shared 114 genes (48.2% of CycFB) with the stemness signature genes ( F). This is consistent with the observation that CycFB was extremely prevalent in fetal tissues ( B).
By examining the fibroblast subtypes in three age groups in each tissue, we identified 10 tissues qualified for the following analyses (with at least one condition with >100 cells, B–S22D). For each tissue, we tested if any fibroblast subtypes showed over-representation in different age groups ( F–4H) using Fisher’s exact test. Accordingly, CycFB was the most significantly enriched subtype in the fetal group in 7 tissues, including the adrenal gland, intestine, lung, muscle, pancreas, skin, and stomach. The iCAF showed an increasing percentage with age in intestine, lung, and muscle, i.e., fetal → adult → elderly ( G).
We next explored the senescence characteristics across different age groups for each subtype in each tissue. This analysis encompassed 16 conditions across 10 fibroblast subtypes distributed among 5 tissues ( E). As shown in H, the iCAF subtype exhibited the age-related differences in 4 tissues: in the adrenal gland, iCAF showed higher senescence scores in the fetal group than in the elderly group (adjusted p value = 3.60 × 10−26); in the intestine, higher in adult than elderly (adjusted p value = 1.30 × 10−83); in the lung, higher in adult than elderly (adjusted p value = 4.80 × 10−2); and in muscle, higher in adult than elderly (adjusted p value = 1.90 × 10−318). This indicates that iCAF subtypes show greater senescence heterogeneity across the lifespan ( H). This also aligns with the high proportion of senescence signatures observed in iCAF ( F). In the lung, apCAF showed significantly higher senescence scores in the elderly than in the adult group (adjusted p value = 6.50 × 10−67) ( H).

## The well-defined fibroblast subtypes unveiled cell-type compositions critical for clinical outcomes
The well-defined fibroblast subtypes also allowed us to infer cell type compositions in bulk RNA-seq data and explore their associations with clinical outcomes. Using subtype-specific DEGs as gene sets, we calculated enrichment scores using GSVA for each set in each sample across 33 cancer types from TCGA. The density of the enrichment scores for 16 fibroblast subtypes is present in A. For each cancer type (full name available in ), we categorized the samples into two groups by the mean value of the enrichment scores across samples and conducted the survival analyses ( ). We identified 72 fibroblast subtype and cancer type associations (log rank test, p value <0.05) ( ; ), among which 53 remained significant using the multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression model adjusting for clinical covariates (age, sex, tumor stage, pathology N stage, and pathology T stage) (p value <0.05, B). Among these associations, the subtype myoCAF most frequently distinguished outcomes (p value <0.05 in BLCA, BRCA, HNSC, LUSC, MESO, READ, and STAD, B), while BLCA showed the broadest subtype associations (9 fibroblast subtypes, B). In BRCA, iCAF and myoCAF showed opposing prognostic effects, where a lower iCAF composition was correlated with a favorable outcome (log rank test: hazard ratio [HR] = 0.672, p value = 0.016; Cox test: HR = 0.659, p value = 0.175; ), whereas a higher myoCAF composition was associated with worse prognosis (log rank test: HR = 1.279, p value = 0.130; Cox test: HR = 4.949, p value = 0.013; B). Overall, myoCAF was significantly associated with seven cancer types as a risk factor (READ, MESO, BRCA, HNSC, STAD, LUSC, and BLCA, C, ordered by decreasing HR), with four (MESO, STAD, LUSC, and BLCA) supported by the log rank test (p value <0.05, D). Additional survival analyses for other fibroblast subtypes, including iCAF and apCAF, were shown in and . These results were consistent with previous reports linking increased myoCAF composition to adverse outcomes. , 
 

## The well-defined fibroblast subtypes unveiled cell-type contexts for complex traits
The well-annotated fibroblast subtypes can also help us understand the cellular mechanisms underlying complex diseases. We collected genome-wide association studies (GWASs) summary statistics for 74 traits ( ) and applied two complementary methods to identify the fibroblast subtypes that exhibited excessive expression of trait-associated genes at both cell-type and single-cell resolutions: the decoding cell-type specificity (deCS) method and the single-cell disease relevance score (scDRS) method. For both methods, we first defined trait- or disease-associated genes by using multi-marker analysis of genomic annotation (MAGMA) method. MAGMA maps SNPs from GWAS summary statistics to genes using an annotation window of 10 kb and calculates a Z score for each gene.
deCS employs trait-associated genes (top 1,000 genes per trait) to assess their significant over-representation in cell-type-specific genes through Fisher’s exact test. As a result, deCS identified 169 significant associations (unadjusted p value <0.05) out of 74 traits × 16 subtypes (total 1,184 tests). Similarly, scDRS uses the top 1,000 trait-associated genes as defined by MAGMA and conducts cell-level enrichment tests, detecting 361 significant associations (unadjusted p value <0.05). Notably, 106 associations were concordant between both methods, demonstrating significant overlap beyond random expectation (Fisher’s exact test, p value = 1.201 × 10−13, ), confirming the robustness of these trait-subtype associations. Both methods consistently highlighted that apCAF, CytFB, LipFB, and PapFB were the most frequently enriched cell types, particularly in brain and heart tissues ( A and 6B; ). Several cardiac-related traits, e.g., diastolic blood pressure (DBP)/systolic blood pressure (SBP), atrial fibrillation (AF), cardiovascular diseases (CVD), and hyperthension (HTN) (full name available in ), showed enrichment across multiple fibroblast subtypes, including CycFB, ProFB, apCAF, CytFB, and LipFB by the scDRS method, with most findings corroborated by deCS ( ). Additionally, lung diseases (forced expiratory volume in 1 Second / forced vital capacity (FEVi/FvC) and forced vital capacity (FVC)) were enriched with multiple subtypes ( A and 6B). These findings collectively advanced our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of complex diseases at the cellular resolution. 
 

## Discussion
In this study, we conducted a systematic analysis of scRNA-seq data from diverse human tissues and organs across multiple biological conditions, encompassing normal, disease, abortion, and cancer. Our work established an integrative cellular atlas of fibroblasts, identifying 16 distinct subtypes, including 10 previously characterized and six putatively not reported subtypes. By thorough characterization, we revealed the unique expression patterns and heterogeneity of these fibroblast subtypes from various aspects, including cell states, gene regulation network, cell pluripotency, and cellular senescence. With the systematic annotation and definition of marker genes, we further demonstrated the clinical relevance of these fibroblast subtypes by inferring their relationships with prognosis and unveiling the cellular contexts of complex tissues. Overall, we present a systematic investigation of a single-cell transcriptional atlas of fibroblasts and their subtypes in human tissues. The well-annotated fibroblast subtypes serve as a valuable resource for future research.
Characterizing a specific cell type, such as fibroblasts, presents significant challenges, particularly given the rapidly growing and continuously evolving collection of publicly available scRNA-seq datasets. In our study, to reduce the noise, we adopted a stringent strategy to define fibroblast cells by requiring supporting evidence from both NES and CellTypist upon the batch-corrected data and further validating using the well-known fibroblast marker genes, COL1A1 or COL1A2. Thus, we considered the data and information on fibroblasts were of high quality in this study. We examined fibroblast subtypes over multiple developmental stages, tissues, cancer types, and diverse disease or normal conditions to ensure that we covered all possible types of fibroblast subtypes. Importantly, among the 16 subtypes, seven subtypes were considered not reported as they have not been reported in literature yet: CycFB, CytFB, DevFB, EpiFB, MetFB, and ProFB. CycFB was mainly identified in abortion (i.e., fetal) tissues. Its active regulon was regulated by the transcriptional factor MYOG, which was involved in cell cycle and proliferation, supporting that CycFB was indeed active in early developmental stages. DevFB and ProFB were found at the early branches of fibroblast evolutionary trajectories. Note that DevFB and ProFB were identified in all types of tissues, indicating that their location in the trajectory branches was not inflated by the developmental stages. EpiFB, as the name suggested, was involved in collagen adhesion, EMT processes, and the regulation of trophoblast invasion. , The remaining three subtypes, ActFB, CytFB, and MetFB, were enriched in the E2F targets, heme metabolism, MYC targets v2, notch signaling, and WNT beta-catenin signaling pathways, implying a high metabolic activity.
These well-defined fibroblast subtypes provided opportunities to decode disease-relevant cell types and regulatory mechanisms. Integrating these fibroblast subtypes with GWAS summary statistics data, we found that multiple complex traits and diseases were associated with various subtypes, including Drinks per Week (genes highly expressed in 8 subtypes by deCS and 5 by scDRS), FEV1-forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio (14 by deCS and 8 by scDRS), FVC (12 by deCS and 7 by scDRS), height (12 by deCS and 3 by scDRS), and waist-hip ratio (WHR) (9 by deCS and 6 by scDRS). In cancer, CAF has long been recognized as an essential component of TME and is involved in multiple processes, including interaction with the immune cells and affecting the outcome of immunotherapy. Two subtypes of CAF, i.e., iCAF and myoCAF, both of which have been replicated in our study, were found to be particularly associated with different clinical outcomes. For example, samples with increased myoCAF percentage tended to have adverse survival. , From the aspect of subtypes, CycFB, ProFB, apCAF, CytFB, and LipFB were significantly associated with many diseases. Interestingly, CycFB has high stemness properties and could be a candidate cell type for reversing aging.

## Limitations of the study
There are several limitations of our study. First, we did not use data from other omics to verify the regulatory patterns of fibroblast subtypes. With the development of single-cell technologies, other types of omics data can be included in the future to verify the current results and further illustrate biological regulation and other mechanisms. Second, it is necessary to verify the fibroblast subtypes in vivo or in vitro. Third, cross-species studies will further support fibroblast characteristics and functions. Large-scale, pan-organ, and pan-tissue data are expected to be available soon. Fourth, more investigation is required to understand the functions of subtypes in cancer tissues, especially their relationships with clinical outcomes.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Peilin Jia (pjia@big.ac.cn).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new reagents.

## Data and code availability

•Data: The gene expression datasets generated during this study were publicly available and can be downloaded through GEO web portal using accession listing GSE109816, 
GSE121893, 
GSE123813, 
GSE130148, 
GSE131907, 
GSE132257, 
GSE144735, 
GSE145137, 
GSE150430, 
GSE153643, 
GSE158127, 
GSE159929, 
GSE160269, 
GSE171524, 
GSE134355 (Human Cell Landscape, HCL), and GSE201333 (Tabula Sapiens).
•Code: The bioinformatic analysis codes and source data were uploaded to GitHub (https://github.com/zxl2014swjx/Fibroblast) and Figshare (https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Fibroblast_Heterogeneity/29582057) and are publicly available.
•Other items: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions of the current study were present in the manuscript and the .

## Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (92374103 and 32270706) and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB38010400). We would like to thank the authors for generating and publicly sharing the sc(n)RNA-seq data used in this study, which made our study feasible.

## Author contributions
X.Z., Z.Z., and P.J. conceived the study. X.Z. acquired, analyzed, and interpreted the data. X.Z., H.K., Z.Z., and P.J. wrote the manuscript. P.J. provided funding support. X.Z., H.K., Z.Z., and P.J. reviewed and approved the final version.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental models
This study did not involve experimental models.

## Method details

## Single-cell RNA sequencing data
Datasets GSE109816 and GSE121893. The original study conducted single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) for samples with cardiomyocytes and non-cardiomyocytes from normal, failed, and partially recovered adult human hearts. Transcriptome profiling of 21,422 single cells was provided, with annotation information for age, gender, and cell types.
Dataset GSE123813. The original study collected site-matched tumors from basal and squamous cell carcinoma before and after anti-PD-1 therapy (Pembrolizumab and Cemiplimab) with ICI response and conducted scRNA-seq (n = 79,046 cells). It included pre- and after- treatment patients and left- and right- basal sites.
Dataset GSE130148. The original research aimed to chart the landscape of the upper and lower airways. The dataset contained scRNA-seq data (n = 10,360 cells) for healthy and asthmatic lungs (provide sample sizes).
Dataset GSE131907. The original study conducted scRNA-seq for normal and cancer (early and advanced tumor stage, lymph node and brain metastases) lungs from 44 patients (n = 208,506 cells). The 9 major cell lineages of lungs included stromal, immune, and gliocyte.
Dataset GSE132257 and GSE144735. The two studies conducted scRNA-seq using the colorectal tissues from the normal mucosa and primary colorectal cancer patients (CRC) with the accession ID GSE132257 (n = 18,409 cells) and GSE144735 (n = 27,414 cells). The annotated CRC landscape contained 6 major cell types. The clinical information was available, including microsatellite instability (MSI) and consensus molecular subtypes (CMS) annotations.
Dataset GSE145137. The original study conducted scRNA-seq on a single case of chemotherapy-resistant, muscle-invasive urothelial bladder cancer (MIUBC) (n = 2,075 cells).
Dataset GSE150430. The original study conducted scRNA-seq to reveal the landscape of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) (n = 48,584 cells). A total of 15 NPC tumors and 1 normal sample were included in this dataset. The immune-related signatures were predicted to improve clinical outcomes in NPC.
Dataset GSE153643. Muus et al. conducted scRNA-seq using the adipose and liver tissues from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. It was a part of the GSE153643 datasets (n = 24,250 cells) of adipose and liver tissues.
Dataset GSE158127. Lung tissues from three lung transplantation patients with severe nonsolving COVID-19-associated respiratory failure were investigated using scRNA-seq. The dataset included 269,809 cells for lung tissues.
Dataset GSE159929. This dataset included scRNA-seq data (n = 84,363 cells) for 15 major tissues, all of which were from a male donor who died of traumatic brain injury. The tissues included the bladder, blood, common bile duct, esophagus, heart, liver, lymph node, bone marrow, muscle, rectum, skin, small intestine, spleen, stomach, and trachea.
Dataset GSE160269. The original study conducted scRNA-seq for Zhang X. et al. (2021) provided 60 esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma (ESCC) cases with TNM stage and 4 adjacent normal esophageal individuals (n = 208,659 cells). Additionally, the smoke and drink status were downloaded from the Supplemental data. The original study identified 8 major cell populations, including CD45−cells (epithelial cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, pericytes, and fibroblastic reticular cells) and CD45+ cells (T cells, B cells, and myeloid cells).
Dataset GSE171524. The original study conducted single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) for the lethal lung tissues obtained from 21 COVID-19 patients who died of the disease. A total of 116,314 cells were obtained and used to identify cellular composition, cell states, and cell-to-cell interactions to improve understanding of long-term complications of severe SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Dataset GSE134355. The original study generated a comprehensive human cell landscape (HCL) containing more than 60 tissues and 599,926 cells from fetal and adult donors.
Dataset GSE201333. This dataset is also called the Tabula Sapiens dataset for humans. It included scRNA-seq data for 24 tissues from 15 donors (n = 483,152 cells) with age and gender information. The scRNA-seq data were divided into four main cell types, i.e., immune cells, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and stromal cells.

## Single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq data preprocessing
To analyze the distribution of fibroblast cells in different tissues and biological conditions, we collected a comprehensive dataset including 2,195,794 cells from 16 scRNA-seq or snRNA-seq studies representing 60 major human organs or tissues ( and ). These data were generated from 477 samples representing different biological conditions, including age, sex, smoking, and drinking, among others. The original samples can be divided into four categories: normal, disease, cancer, and abortion ( and ).
The workflow of data processing is shown in . We required each sample to have at least 2000 cells ( and ), resulting in 368 samples from 14 cohorts encompassing 2,062,895 cells. Furthermore, we used Scanpy to exclude genes expressed in less than 3 cells and to filter out cells with less than 200 genes or with a high fraction of counts from mitochondrial genes, resulting in 2,034,315 cells ( A–S2D). To remove potential batch effects, we applied the harmony analysis using the top 2000 highly variable expressed genes (HVGs) ( G and S2H) and obtained batch-corrected data ( E, before harmony; F, after harmony). Afterward, we applied the Louvain algorithm and classified all cells into 20 clusters ( A). The similarity among clusters was assessed by using the Spearman correlation coefficient (SCC) ( B) and dendrogram ( C). Subsequently, t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) was employed to reduce dimension and visualize the cell clusters in a two-dimensional space ( A). By reviewing the dendrogram and the expression levels of well-known representative marker genes (e.g., CD79A and MS4A1 for B cells, GNLY, NKG7, and IL7R for T cells, etc.) ( D) as well as the cluster-specific genes ( E), we merged the 20 clusters into 9 major cell types. They were myeloid cells (17.8% of total cells, n = 361,099 cells), B cells (7.0% of total cells, n = 141,400 cells), T cells (CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, and NK cells) (24.5% of total cells, n = 497,892 cells), plasma cells (2.8% of total cells, n = 57,366 cells), epithelial cells (20.8% of total cells, n = 423,326 cells), endothelial cells (6.1% of total cells, n = 123,411 cells), neuron cells (2.9% of total cells, n = 59,833 cells), smooth muscle cells (1.1% of total cells, n = 22,300 cells), and fibroblast cells (17.1% of total cells, n = 347,688 cells) ( A and C; ).
As a result, we obtained 2,062,895 cells from 368 samples from 14 studies. These cells were categorized into 9 major cell types: myeloid cells, B cells, T cells, plasma cells, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, neurons, smooth muscle cells, and fibroblast cells ( A, , and C; ). We next focused on the fibroblasts ( ; , , , and ). Among the 9 cell types from our analyses, there are 347,688 fibroblast cells. In contrast, using the metadata from each of the original studies, we identified 256,711 pre-defined fibroblasts ( ). Considering the inconsistency between the two lines of annotation, i.e., our “harmony pipeline identified” fibroblasts and the pre-defined fibroblasts (overlapping n = 223,476 cells), we further implemented two ways of filtering strategies. Firstly, we curated a fibroblast gene set consisting of 538 fibroblast-related markers and conducted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). Normalized enrichment score (NES) was calculated for each cell using the fibroblast signature set. Secondly, we applied CellTypist to annotate the cell types for each cell. Applying to our harmony-identified fibroblasts, we retained cells that had NES >1.0 (n = 302,202 cells) and were annotated as fibroblasts by CellTypist (n = 176,940 cells), resulting in 157,984 fibroblast cells for further analysis (45.4% of 347,688 harmony-identified fibroblasts, 55.9% of 256,711 pre-defined fibroblasts ( ; ).
We next took two strategies to verify the resultant fibroblast cells. First, we explored multiple features of these fibroblasts in the original datasets, including the number of genes, the total number of counts for a cell, the proportion of mitochondrial read counts, and the proportion of total counts for a cell that were ribosome-associated ( A–S4D), confirming that there was no outstanding feature to drive the cell classification. Second, we explored the expression of marker genes for fibroblasts. Among the top 20 HVGs, 60% were previously reported marker genes for fibroblast ( E; ). We also verified that the majority of fibroblast cells expressed the two well-known fibroblast markers, COL1A1 and COL1A2 (83.4% of cells had a count value >1 for COL1A1 or COL1A2) ( F).
With the evaluation of the fibroblast cells, we next defined the subtypes of fibroblast cells. We applied clustree with the Louvain algorithm, followed by assessment using the Ratio of Global Unshifted Entropy (ROGUE) algorithm. Branches of clusters generated at different resolution values from 0 to 3 were shown in A, and the t-SNE plots were displayed in B for the clusters at each resolution value. The local inverse Simpson’s index (LISI) showed that at the resolution = 2.3, the clusters exhibited the highest LISI than the clusters obtained at other resolution values, indicating better separation of the clusters and well-controlled batch effect at this resolution value ( C). We also applied ROGUE to fine-map the appropriate resolution values and found that at resolution = 2.3, the median value of ROGUE reached the highest, resulting in 41 clusters ( D).
For each of the 41 clusters, which can be visualized in A and S6B, we explored their distribution in each tissue of origin and found that many cell types were enriched in specific tissues ( C), e.g., clusters 16 and 19 enriched in adipose and clusters 4 and 5 enriched in fetal-related tissues. We then identified the marker genes ( A) for each cluster and merged those that shared at least 5 of the top 20 DEG ( ). For example, clusters 1 and 28 shared 5 DEG genes, although the two clusters were enriched in different tissues ( B) and were merged. After this step, the 41 clusters were merged into 25 clusters. Clusters were further merged if the average ROGUE was higher than each cluster individually. Names of these subtypes were based on recommendations from CellMarker2 or their tissue origin ( ; and ). 

## Classification of fibroblast subtypes
We used clustree with the Louvain algorithm to identify the subclusters of the fibroblast group. As for the batch effect, we used the local inverse Simpson’s index (LISI) to estimate the results of removing the batch effect. The LISI defines the effective number of datasets near a single cell of a class. The higher the LISI value, the more datasets in the neighborhood, and the smaller the batch effect. To assess the purity quantification of each single cluster, we employed ROGUE, which has been proven robust and independent of methods used for normalization, dimensionality reduction, and clustering. Thus, we used ROGUE to guide the splitting (re-clustering) and merging of the subtypes of fibroblasts to finally determine the fibroblast subtypes.

## Evaluation of the differentiation potential of different single-cell subsets
A pseudo-time analysis was implemented to construct the evolutionary trajectories and understand the developmental trend of fibroblast subtypes. Specifically, we applied three complementary methods, i.e., Slingshot, PhyloVelo, and Monocle, to investigate the development and differentiation of fibroblast subtypes. For all the trajectory analyses, we utilized the normalized expression data from each sample.

## Deconvolution of TCGA bulk RNA-seq by CIBERSORT
The reference signature matrix was constructed based on the average gene expression profiles of 8 major cell types and 16 fibroblast subtypes. mRNA expression data and corresponding clinical information from TCGA were obtained via cBioPortal. Deconvolution was performed using CIBERSORT with default parameters, except that the number of permutations was set to 100, as recommended by the authors to enhance robustness.

## Functional enrichment by GSEA and VEGA
To explore the functional gene sets that are enriched in each fibroblast subtype, we applied GSEA from the R package clusterProfiler. The Hallmark gene sets were downloaded from MSigDB. Multiple test correction was implemented by the Benjamini & Hochberg (BH) method.
Variational autoencoders enhanced by gene annotations (VEGA) reduced dimensions for a sparse architecture and increased interpretability by using gene module activities. The input data of VEGAS included a count matrix and an annotation file for the Hallmark gene sets, requiring set sizes between 20 and 1,000 genes. The dropout rate was 0.5. The learning rate was 1 × 10−4. The epoch was set as 15, as the loss value started to increase after this value ( A). The training patience was set as the default value of 10.

## Single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering analysis
We employed SCENIC to dissect the active TFs of each fibroblast subtype. A motif sequence validation statistical method was introduced to infer gene co-expression networks to identify highly reliable transcription factor networks. For each fibroblast subtype, we used three steps to assess the activity of related regulons (TF and target genes) in individual cells, respectively. First, the GRNBoost function infers co-expression modules including a potential TF and its target genes. Second, the RcisTarget function identifies the motifs with correct upstream regulators significantly enriched in each regulon. Third, the AUCell score is calculated for each regulon to present the activities.

## Analyses of TCGA bulk RNA-seq datasets
The mRNA expression counts and clinical information from TCGA were downloaded from cBioPortal. GSVA was used to calculate an enrichment score for each fibroblast subtype in each sample using the bulk expression data (log10-transformed). The gene sets of 16 fibroblast subtypes were generated by using the subtype-specific differential expression genes (DEGs).
Survival analyses and visualization were conducted using the R packages Survival and Survminer. The log rank test was implemented by the survdiff function from the R package Survival. The multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression method was implemented by using the coxph function from the R package Survival. The Kaplan-Meier (KM) plots were created by using functions from the R packages Survival and Survminer.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All software used has been listed in the . The descriptions of statistical tests were specified in the corresponding figure legends. All statistical analyses were performed using R (version 4.1.1).

Published: November 10, 2025

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.113915.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S24

## Table S1. Clinical characteristics of collected samples

## Table S2. Statistics about the 9 major cell types

## Table S3. Statistics of the differentially expressed genes for each cell cluster

## Table S4. The annotations of fibroblast subtypes

## Table S5. The marker genes for fibroblast subtypes

## Table S6. Statistics of fibroblast subtypes in collected cohorts

## Table S7. The previous fibroblast categorizations

## Table S8. The bulk RNA-seq expression datasets from the TCGA database

## Table S9. The full name of the cancer types, related to Figures 1F and S12D

## Table S10. The significant enrichment of fibroblast subtypes in disease or cancer

## Table S11. The cell-cell communications between 16 fibroblast subtypes and 8 major cell types in the tissue niche

## Table S12. The marker genes of cell stemness, cellular senescence, cell state, and DNA damage repair pathways

## Table S13. The correlation among 16 cell states in 16 fibroblast cell types

## Table S14. Results of survival analysis for TCGA bulk RNA-seq data

## Table S15. Information about the GWAS traits obtained from previous works and the UKBB database

## Table S16. Results of fibroblast subtype enrichment analyses for complex traits by using deCS and scDRS

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S24

## Table S1. Clinical characteristics of collected samples

## Table S2. Statistics about the 9 major cell types

## Table S3. Statistics of the differentially expressed genes for each cell cluster

## Table S4. The annotations of fibroblast subtypes

## Table S5. The marker genes for fibroblast subtypes

## Table S6. Statistics of fibroblast subtypes in collected cohorts

## Table S7. The previous fibroblast categorizations

## Table S8. The bulk RNA-seq expression datasets from the TCGA database

## Table S9. The full name of the cancer types, related to Figures 1F and S12D

## Table S10. The significant enrichment of fibroblast subtypes in disease or cancer

## Table S11. The cell-cell communications between 16 fibroblast subtypes and 8 major cell types in the tissue niche

## Table S12. The marker genes of cell stemness, cellular senescence, cell state, and DNA damage repair pathways

## Table S13. The correlation among 16 cell states in 16 fibroblast cell types

## Table S14. Results of survival analysis for TCGA bulk RNA-seq data

## Table S15. Information about the GWAS traits obtained from previous works and the UKBB database

## Table S16. Results of fibroblast subtype enrichment analyses for complex traits by using deCS and scDRS

## Data Availability Statement

•Data: The gene expression datasets generated during this study were publicly available and can be downloaded through GEO web portal using accession listing GSE109816, 
GSE121893, 
GSE123813, 
GSE130148, 
GSE131907, 
GSE132257, 
GSE144735, 
GSE145137, 
GSE150430, 
GSE153643, 
GSE158127, 
GSE159929, 
GSE160269, 
GSE171524, 
GSE134355 (Human Cell Landscape, HCL), and GSE201333 (Tabula Sapiens).
•Code: The bioinformatic analysis codes and source data were uploaded to GitHub (https://github.com/zxl2014swjx/Fibroblast) and Figshare (https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Fibroblast_Heterogeneity/29582057) and are publicly available.
•Other items: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions of the current study were present in the manuscript and the .