319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC131475461314754613147546NIHMS20856744031072310.1016/j.celrep.2025.115637Meningeal-derived retinoic acid regulates neurogenesis via suppression of Notch and Sox2
ComoChristina N O’RourkeRebecca WinklerCaitlin MitchellDanae TranLuuli LorberbaumDavid SusselLori FrancoSantos SiegenthalerJulie 1University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Department of Pediatrics, Section of Developmental Biology, Aurora, CO 80045, USA2University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Neuroscience Graduate Program, Aurora, CO 80045, USA3University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Molecular Biology Graduate Program, Aurora, CO 80045, USA4University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Department of Pediatrics, Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, Aurora, CO 80045, USA5University of Michigan Medical School, Department of Pharmacology and Caswell Diabetes Institute, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA6 Lead contact*Correspondence: santos.franco@cuanschutz.edu (S.F.), julie.siegenthaler@cuanschutz.edu (J.S.)
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.S., S.F., and C.N.C. conceived the research. J.S. and S.F. supervised the research. J.S., S.F., and C.N.C. designed the experiments. C.N.C. and D.M. carried out the experiments. C.C., R.O., and C.W. performed bioinformatic analyses. L.T. produced the plasmids used in the experiments. D.L. and L.S. generated an essential mouse line (RARα-MYC).
2942025445115637115637752026This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
The meninges act as a regulator of brain development by secreting ligands that act on neural cells to regulate neurogenesis and neuronal migration. Meningeal-derived retinoic acid (RA) promotes neocortical neural progenitor cell cycle exit; however, the underlying molecular mechanism is unknown. Here, we used spatial transcriptomics and profiling of retinoic acid receptor α (RARα) DNA binding in Foxc1-mutant embryos that lack meninges-derived signals to identify potential neurogenic transcriptional mechanisms of RA signaling in telencephalic neural progenitors. This identified upregulation of Sox2 and Notch pathway genes, and RARα binds to the Sox2ot promoter, a long noncoding RNA that regulates Sox2 expression. Our experiments using maternal RA treatment and in utero electroporation in Foxc1 mutants support that meningeal-derived RA promotes neurogenesis by suppressing Notch signaling, a progenitor self-renewal pathway. Our findings elucidate a previously unknown mechanism of how meningeal RA coordinates neocortical development and provide insight into how defects in meningeal development may cause neurodevelopmental disorders.

## In brief
We discovered that Foxc1 mutants that lack retinoic acid from forebrain meninges have increased Notch signaling and Sox2 in neural progenitors, leading to decreased neurogenesis. Retinoic acid treatment decreases Notch and Sox2 in Foxc1 mutants to rescue neurogenesis, potentially via the direct regulation of Sox2ot by RARα.

## Graphical Abstract

 

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2025 May 27.

## INTRODUCTION
The development of the central nervous system (CNS) requires precise intercellular crosstalk between neural and non-neural cells. One such example involves non-neural fibroblasts in the meninges. Meningeal fibroblasts surround the entire CNS during development and adulthood to regulate brain development and homeostasis. , The meninges are comprised of three layers (pia, arachnoid, and dura) of fibroblasts, and each layer can be identified by layer-specific markers as early as embryonic day (E)13 in mice. Meningeal fibroblasts help support brain development by secreting factors to regulate neural progenitor proliferation, neurogenesis, neuronal migration, neocortical neuron layering, and attachment of radial glial endfeet. , – Such factors include extracellular matrix proteins, Cxcl12, BMPs, Wnts, and retinoic acid (RA). , , Despite the identification of some meninges-derived factors and their impact on brain development, we have an incomplete understanding of the molecular pathways in neural cells that are downstream of meninges-produced signaling molecules.
Studies in mice and humans in which meningeal fibroblast secreted factors are reduced or absent have identified significant neurodevelopmental defects, , – underscoring the importance of the meninges in brain development. Foxc1-mutant mice are a well-characterized model of aberrant meninges development. Foxc1-mutant embryos have hypoplastic dorsal telencephalic meninges that lack layer-specific markers, including expression of meningeal factors like Cxcl12, BMPs, and RA that regulate neocortical development. , , – Meningeal defects in Foxc1-mutant embryos cause lateral expansion of apical neural progenitors, resulting in a strikingly lengthened neocortex and reduced numbers of neocortical neurons. Interestingly, there is a direct correlation between the extent of meninges defects and the severity of cortical lengthening. In humans, FOXC1 point mutations cause cerebellar hypoplasia (Dandy-Walker malformation), , hydrocephalus, and white matter abnormalities. Furthermore, 6p25 deletion syndrome that includes a FOXC1 gene deletion is characterized by neurodevelopmental delays and intellectual disability, , supporting a key role of FOXC1 and the meninges in human brain development.
RA is a signaling molecule synthesized by meningeal fibroblasts during brain development and lacking in Foxc1-mutant dorsal telencephalic meninges. , Maternal supplementation of RA improves neurogenesis defects in Foxc1 mutants, reduces neocortical length and increases neural progenitor cell cycle exit and neuronal number. This suggests that meningeal-derived RA normally acts directly on neocortical neural progenitors to promote neurogenesis. RA functions by binding to DNA-bound RA receptors (RARs) to activate the transcription of target genes. , RA-RARs are well known to promote neural progenitor differentiation by activating gene transcription. , – 
Studies support that RA is an important factor regulating neurogenesis; however, the mechanism and transcriptional targets in neocortical neural progenitors are unknown. We utilized spatial transcriptomics of E14 Foxc1-mutant mouse heads to study how the absence of meningeal-derived factors alters gene expression in telencephalic neural progenitors. This identified elevated Notch signaling components and Sox2 in Foxc1-mutant telencephalic neural progenitors, pathways that repress neurogenesis. , Maternal RA supplementation reduced elevated Sox2 and Notch signaling in Foxc1-mutant apical progenitors (APs), supporting RA as an upstream regulator. Analyses of RARα DNA binding and chromatin accessibility in control and Foxc1 telencephalic neural progenitors show that RA, via binding to RARα, directly regulates expression of the long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) Sox2ot to suppress Sox2. Cell-autonomous inhibition of Notch signaling in Foxc1-mutant cortical progenitors via in utero electroporation (IUE) was sufficient to correct neurogenesis defects. Collectively, the results of this work provide previously unknown mechanistic insight into how meningeal-derived signals may regulate neural progenitor self-renewal pathways.

## RESULTS

## Spatial transcriptomics identifies pathways altered in Foxc1 mutants that fail to form normal forebrain meninges
To begin to study how meningeal-derived factors like RA regulate neocortical development, we used mutant embryos that lack the transcription factor Foxc1, which is normally expressed by meningeal fibroblasts and blood vessels but not in neural cells ( ). In E14 meninges above the neocortex, control meningeal fibroblasts expressed the fibroblast marker collagen-1 ( , top) and the mature meningeal cellular markers CRABP2 ( , middle) and Raldh2 ( , bottom) that are important for RA signaling and synthesis ( , left). In the same region, Foxc1lacZ/lacZ (knockout [KO]) meningeal fibroblasts expressed collagen-1 but lacked expression of the RA synthesis proteins CRABP2 and Raldh2 ( , right). In contrast to control meningeal fibroblasts, Foxc1-mutant meningeal fibroblasts do not differentiate and fail to upregulate the expression of RA synthesis enzymes Aldh1a2 and Rdh10 in the meninges between E12 and E14 ( , yellow and magenta arrows). This maturation failure in Foxc1 mutants correlated with increased neocortical length at E13 and E14 ( and ). Elevated neocortical length results from increased neural progenitor self-renewal in Foxc1 mutants, , supporting that defective meninges development underlies defects in anterior forebrain development.
To identify pathways underlying meningeal control of anterior forebrain development, we applied 10× Visium Spatial Transcriptomics to whole heads of E14 controls (Foxc1+/+ , n = 2, 1 section per sample) and Foxc1 KOs (n = 2, 1 section per sample), and spatial spots corresponding to the telencephalon were selected for both controls and Foxc1 KOs ( ). Sections used for spatial transcriptomics were standardized between controls and mutants by selecting sections with similar anatomical structures (middle of the eye and ganglionic eminences) ( ). Spatial transcriptomic cluster data were used to make a uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP; split by sample) and produced 5 spatial clusters that were annotated as APs and intermediate progenitors (IPs), interneuron progenitors, immature neurons, migratory neurons, and mature neurons ( ). Spatial cluster identities were annotated using markers reported in an E14 brain single-cell atlas (APs and IPs: Pax6 and Eomes; interneuron progenitors: Dlx2 and Sox2; immature neurons: Malat1 and Lars2; migratory neurons: Cntn2 and Neurod1; and mature neurons: Tcf2 and Neurod6) ( and ).
 The number of spots in each annotated spatial cluster were graphed as a percentage of total spots per cluster for each genotype ( ). Controls had a larger representation of spots annotated as neurons than progenitors (APs and IPs, 5%; interneuron progenitors, 4%; immature neurons, 59%; migratory neurons, 19%; and mature neurons, 13%), whereas Foxc1 KOs had a larger representation of spots annotated as progenitors than neurons (APs and IPs, 29%; interneuron progenitors, 44%; immature neurons, 0%; migratory neurons, 8%; and mature neurons, 18%). This was further supported by differences in progenitor-expressed genes that have been shown to be enriched in progenitors undergoing self-renewing divisions to expand the progenitor pool or neurogenesis to produce neurons. Compared to control APs and IPs, Foxc1-KO APs and IPs had significantly decreased neurogenic progenitor markers (Bhlhe22, Cntn2, and Neurog2) and increased expansion genes (Nr2f1 and E2f1) ( ).
Spatial spot annotation depends on gene expression profiles derived from single-cell data; however, the spatial transcriptomics used in this study lacks single-cell resolution. We used an E14 mouse neocortex single-cell reference dataset and cell type mapping with NNLS and semla tools to better resolve proportional cell types within the spatial spots ( ). This analysis identified cell-type-specific profiles within the spatial spots of our dataset ( and ) that generally aligned with our annotation in , though this improved the detection of APs and IPs in the control spatial data and immature neurons in the Foxc1-KO spatial data. This analysis detected a greater proportion of AP cell type composition in Foxc1-KO spatial clusters (controls: 25% vs. Foxc1 KOs: 32%) and a lower proportion of immature neurons (controls: 19% vs. Foxc1 KOs: 15%). To test if other Foxc1-KO phenotypes like meningeal defects were detectable via spatial transcriptomic analysis, we selected the spots that anatomically correspond to the mesenchyme over the brain, which contains the meningeal layers, in both controls and Foxc1 KOs ( ). We identified 4 clusters that we annotated based on enriched gene expression profiles selected from our and other single-cell datasets: pia/arachnoid (Rdh10, Ngfr, and Aldh1a2), bone progenitors (Runx2 and Sp7), superficial brain/pia (Rdh10 and Foxg1), cranial mesenchyme/arachnoid/dura (Runx2, Aldh1a2, Fxyd5, and Crabp2). We analyzed all clusters containing meningeal genes (pia, arachnoid, and dura) and found that, consistent with our characterization ( ) and prior literature, , 
Foxc1-KO meninges have reduced expression of Cxcl12, Rdh10, Aldh1a2, S100a6, Crabp2, Gja1, and Cldn11 ( ).
We performed pathway analysis on differential gene expression analysis between control and Foxc1-KO AP and IP progenitor clusters using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). GSEA identified “neuron development,” “cell differentiation,” “cellular developmental process,” “system development,” and “multicellular organism development” in the top 10 significantly decreased pathways in Foxc1-KO APs and IPs ( ). These data point to decreased neurogenesis and increased self-renewal pathways in Foxc1-KO mutant APs and IPs, consistent with prior data showing that Foxc1 mutants have increased progenitor self-renewal and fewer neocortical neurons. 
To identify what pathways may be globally altered in Foxc1 KOs, we performed ingenuity pathways analysis (IPA) comparing the combined forebrain spatial clusters of controls vs. Foxc1 KOs. IPA identified that the most significantly overlapped biological pathway, the “development of neurons” (Z score = −4.005, p = 3.44E−49), was significantly decreased in Foxc1 KOs, and two of the highest predicted regulators were Notch1 and Sox2 (increased 1.63- and 1.38-fold, respectively) ( ). Corresponding downstream Notch targets were also found to be upregulated (Hey1, Hes1, and Hes5). Consistent with this, Foxc1-KO samples had increased expression of Notch receptor Dll1 and Notch ligands Notch1, Notch2, and Sox2 across all spatial clusters ( ). We used NICHES analysis to model potential Notch ligand-receptor interactions within and between spatially adjacent spots ( ). This identified high Dll1-Notch1/2 interactions in the neocortical ventricular zone (VZ) specifically, which contains neural progenitors, and the VZ of the ganglionic eminences, which contains interneuron progenitors ( ), in both controls and Foxc1 KOs. This supports that Notch ligand-receptor interactions and likely downstream signaling are limited to the progenitor domains. Collectively, these data support the elevated expression of Notch pathway genes and Sox2 in Foxc1-KO neural progenitor domains. The Notch pathway and Sox2 have well-documented functions in promoting neural progenitor self-renewal and regulating neurogenesis, , , – indicating this elevated expression may underlie decreased neurogenesis in Foxc1-KO anterior forebrain regions.

## RA-RARα directly regulates expression of the lncRNA Sox2ot, an inhibitor of Sox2 gene expression
Foxc1 mutants lack meningeal RA synthesis enzymes and have reduced neocortical RA levels, and maternal RA diet supplementation improves defects in neocortical development in Foxc1-KO and Foxc1 hypomorph (hith) mutants. , This implicates RA, through binding to RARs in neural progenitors, in the regulation of the self-renewal pathways Notch signaling and Sox2 to promote neurogenesis. To determine how RA might transcriptionally regulate the expression of genes involved in neurogenesis identified in the spatial transcriptomic analysis, we first used a transcription factor DNA binding prediction algorithm (LASAGNA) to identify DNA binding sites for RARα upstream of genes in the Notch pathway and Sox2 (−1,000 base pairs upstream to +200 base pairs downstream relative to transcription start sites). We opted to study RARα since it is the main receptor in neural progenitors. , We used Rarb as a positive control since it is known to be regulated by RA via the direct binding of RARα – ; this showed a high score for RARα binding, 94.08 (p = 2.5E−5, chromosomal location is chr14:16,728,769–16,729,905). Of the Notch pathway genes (Notch1, Notch2, Hes1, Hes5, Hey1, and Dll1) and Sox2 identified by spatial transcriptomics as upregulated in Foxc1-mutant progenitors, only Sox2 was predicted to have an RARα-binding site with a similar prediction score to Rarb (score = 96.88, p < 0, chromosomal location is chr3:34,649,005–34,650,204). Notch1, Notch2, Hes1, Hes5, and Dll1 had predicted binding sites but lower prediction scores ( ). The chromosomal location of the predicted RARα-binding site was upstream of Sox2 but also within the lncRNA Sox2ot ( ). This was of interest as Sox2ot has previously been shown to suppress Sox2 transcription in neural stem cells (NSCs) and neocortical progenitors. , We next analyzed published E14 cortical neural progenitor single nuclei Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin-sequencing sn(ATAC-seq)data to determine if predicted RARα-binding sites are within regions of open chromatin, indicative of regions where proteins are bound to DNA and genes that are actively transcribed in neural progenitors. Predicted RARα-binding sites were in ATAC peaks in Sox2 and Sox2ot, notably near the transcriptional start sites ( , yellow boxes; ), suggesting that these regulatory regions are potentially bound by RARα to regulate Sox2 or Sox2ot transcription.
 To identify RARα DNA binding sites in telencephalic neural progenitors of controls and Foxc1 mutants, we crossed mice expressing an Rara allele in which the RARα protein is fused to an Myc sequence (MycTag-RARα) into our Foxc1-mutant background (Foxc1hith/lacZ ). We dissected the neocortices and ganglionic eminences from E14 Foxc1 mutants and littermate controls expressing a single copy of the MycTag-RARα and dissociated the tissue into single-cell suspensions. We used magnetic bead separation to isolate Prom1+ neural progenitors and performed cleavage under targets and release using nuclease (CUT&RUN) analysis with an Myc antibody to isolate and sequence RARα-bound DNA ( ). We performed differential binding analysis using DiffBind to determine if there was a difference in MycTag-RARα-binding sites between controls and Foxc1 mutants; no significantly different bound sites were identified, potentially due to the lack of sensitivity of this assay. Consensus peaks in controls and Foxc1 mutants are reported in . The average number of MycTag-RARα peaks in controls and Foxc1 mutants and the number of consensus peaks are reported in . Our analysis of MycTag-RARα-bound sequences identified consensus peaks in the known RARα target genes Rarb and Atb2b2 that aligned with sites of open chromatin in these genes ( and ). This supports the specificity of our approach to identify RARα-bound DNA. Analysis of MycTag-RARα-bound sequences showed a called peak at the chromosomal region of Sox2ot in both control and Foxc1-mutant samples ( , CUT&RUN Track). This aligned with the ATAC peak in the Sox2ot promoter region, containing the predicted RARα-binding site ( , ATAC track). We did not identify consensus CUT&RUN peaks in open chromatin regions near or within Sox2 or Notch genes except for Notch2 ( ).
RA binding to RARα promotes gene expression by recruiting a coactivator complex that contains proteins with histone acetyl-transferase activity, increasing chromatin accessibility to facilitate gene transcription. If RA-RARα directly regulates Sox2ot expression, we predict that chromatin accessibility near the Sox2ot locus bound by RARα would be sensitive to RA levels. To test this, we used bulk ATAC-seq of neural progenitors isolated from E14 controls and Foxc1 mutants following maternal RA supplementation (schematic, ), a treatment that improves neocortical lengthening in Foxc1 mutants ( – ). Dissociated tissue from neocortices and ganglionic eminences was separated using magnetic beads to isolate Prom1+ neural progenitors and processed for bulk ATAC-seq ( ). To test the feasibility of our approach, we first looked at the impact of low RA (Foxc1 mutants) and supra-physiological levels of RA (controls and Foxc1 mutants + RA diet) on the chromatin accessibility of known RA-RARα targets Rarb, Hoxd13, and Hoxb3 ( ). Chromatin accessibility at the Rarb locus was RA responsive, with significant increases in controls and Foxc1 mutants exposed to the maternal RA diet. Foxc1-mutant neural progenitors had significantly lower chromatin accessibility at Rarb, Hoxd13, and Hoxb8, consistent with lower levels of RA. Maternal RA treatment significantly increased chromatin accessibility at the Sox2ot promoter in control embryos in the same region identified using CUT&RUN as MycTag-RARα-bound chromatin ( ). RA treatment significantly increased chromatin accessibility at Sox2ot in Foxc1 mutants compared to non-RA-treated controls and Foxc1 mutants. Chromatin accessibility upstream of Sox2 was also modulated by RA levels but in the opposite direction of Sox2ot: compared to non-RA-treated controls, consensus peaks were significantly decreased in RA-treated controls and Foxc1 mutants and significantly higher in Foxc1 mutants relative to controls ( ).
 To test if changes in chromatin accessibility led to altered gene expression, we quantified Sox2ot and Sox2 gene expression in VZ neural progenitors using fluorescent in situ hybridization probes. Consistent with chromatin accessibility data, Foxc1 mutants had significantly elevated Sox2 in the neocortical VZ and significantly decreased expression of Sox2ot ( – ). RA treatment significantly increased VZ levels of Sox2ot in both controls and Foxc1 mutants compared to the untreated genotypes, as quantified by expression levels ( and ) and by the number of fluorescent spots per DAPI+ nuclei ( – ), restoring Sox2 and Sox2ot expression in Foxc1 mutants to control, untreated levels. This tissue analysis revealed an inverse relationship of Sox2ot and Sox2 expression in neural progenitors ( ). The CUT&RUN, ATAC-seq, and RNA expression data collectively support that RA, via RARα transcriptional activity, directly stimulates the expression of Sox2ot to reduce the expression of Sox2 in neural progenitors.
Spatial transcriptomics showed that Sox2 expression and Notch ligands and receptors were all elevated in the interneuron progenitor cluster that represents the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) VZ. Further, Foxc1-mutant LGE appeared qualitatively enlarged compared to controls, and this appeared to be normalized with RA supplementation ( , yellow arrow). We observed similar changes in Sox2 and Sox2ot expression in the LGE VZ ( – ). This suggests that LGE neural progenitors also rely on meningeal-derived RA to suppress Sox2.

## Maternal RA supplementation normalizes elevated Notch signaling in Foxc1-mutant neural progenitors
Studies in mice in which Notch signaling is increased in neural progenitors identified similar phenotypes as Foxc1 mutants, including lengthened neocortices, increased neural progenitor self-renewal, and decreased neurogenesis. , Sox2, a transcriptional regulator of Notch pathway genes, , is increased in Foxc1 mutants ( ), and our data ( and ) support that Sox2 is regulated by RA-RARα via Sox2ot. Further, spatial transcriptomics identified increased expression of Notch pathway genes Notch1, Hes1, Hes5, and Hey1 in Foxc1-KO progenitor spatial clusters. We, therefore, tested if RA supplementation normalizes the expression of Notch pathway proteins and signaling in Foxc1 mutants.
Cells in the neocortical VZ were analyzed for expression levels of Notch ligands and receptors using immunofluorescence, followed by quantification using the calculated total cell fluorescence (CTCF). Compared to untreated and RA-treated controls, Foxc1 mutants had increased expression of Dll1 (yellow) and Notch1 (magenta) that were restored to control levels with RA treatment ( – ). To detect Notch signaling activity in neural progenitors, we combined immunofluorescence for Notch intracellular domain (NICD) (magenta) and Sox2 (yellow). Compared to untreated and RA-treated controls, Foxc1 mutants had increased levels of Sox2 ( ) and NICD, and this was rescued with RA treatment ( and ). Notch1, Dll1, and NICD were increased in the LGE of Foxc1 mutants, and this was rescued with RA treatment ( – ). This supports RA being upstream of Notch pathway proteins. In support of an RA-mediated transcriptional mechanism regulating Notch1 and Notch transcription factors, analysis of ATAC-seq data ( ) showed that Foxc1 mutants, which have low RA, had elevated chromatin accessibility upstream of Notch1, Hes1, and Hes5, though this did not reach the >0.05 threshold for statistical significance ( ). RA treatment decreased chromatin accessibility upstream of Notch1, Hes1, and Hes5 in control and Foxc1-mutant progenitors compared to non-RA-treated controls and mutants ( ).
 We next analyzed how the appearance of meningeal defects, including the absence of RA synthesis enzymes, correlated with neural progenitor expression of the Sox2 protein and Notch signaling in Foxc1 mutants. To do this, we quantified Sox2 and NICD expression in the neocortex at time points that precede Foxc1-mutant neocortical lengthening and defects in meningeal expression of RA synthesis enzymes (E12) as well as at time points when these defects are apparent (E13 and E14). Sox2 expression was similar in controls and Foxc1 mutants at E12 but significantly elevated at E13 and E14 ( ). Foxc1-mutant VZ expression of NICD was not significantly different from controls at E12 and E13 but significantly increased at E14 ( ).
These data together support a working model in which meningeal-derived RA functions to regulate Sox2 expression and Notch signaling in VZ neural progenitors to promote neurogenesis in the neocortex.

## Inhibition of Notch signaling in neocortical progenitors increases neurogenesis in Foxc1 mutants
To test whether elevated Notch signaling in neocortical neural progenitors underlies increased self-renewal and decreased neurogenesis in Foxc1 mutants, we used an IUE strategy to inhibit Notch signaling in neocortical progenitors in Foxc1-mutant brains. We electroporated cells in the neocortical VZ with a GFP control plasmid or a plasmid containing dominant-negative recombination signal binding protein for immunoglobin kappa j region (dnRBPJ) together with GFP ( , adapted from Tran et al. ). RBPJ is the activating transcription factor that forms a transcriptional complex with NICD (elevated in Foxc1 mutants) to positively regulate Notch target genes. , – Control and Foxc1-mutant (Foxc1hith/lacZ ) embryos underwent IUE of a single hemisphere at E13.5 and were collected at E15.5. Control and Foxc1-mutant heads at E15.5 showed intact brains and focal fluorescence representing the electroporation site ( , yellow arrow). Brains were sectioned on a vibratome, and the part of the neocortex that contained GFP+ cells was quantified for the expression of Hes1 as a readout of Notch signaling and knockdown via dnRBPJ electroporation ( ). Relative to control brains electroporated with GFP, the Hes1 signal was significantly increased in Foxc1-mutant cells with control GFP electroporation but significantly decreased in control and Foxc1-mutant cells electroporated with dnRBPJ plasmid electroporation ( ). To test if there are non-cell-autonomous effects of the dnRBPJ plasmid between conditions, we analyzed Hes1 levels in non-electroporated cells and found no statistical difference between GFP−control and GFP−control dnRBPJ electroporated cells (3,629 ± 263 vs. 2,952 ± 897, mean fluorescent intensity, p = 0.28) and GFP−Foxc1-mutant and GFP−Foxc1-mutant dnRBPJ electroporated cells (7,747 ± 1,455 vs. 6,701 ± 1,606, mean fluorescent intensity, p = 0.45). Consistent with our NICD analysis, this indicates that Notch signaling is increased in Foxc1-mutant neural progenitors but can be reduced cell autonomously with expression of the dnRBPJ plasmid. The number of GFP+ cells were counted in the VZ (mostly progenitors based on a high percentage of Sox2+/GFP+: 96.35% ± 5.44%), the intermediate zone (IZ), the subventricular zone (SVZ; a mixture of progenitors and post-mitotic neurons), and the cortical plate (CP; mostly post-mitotic neurons based on a low percentage of Sox2+/GFP+: 16.08% ± 3.60%) and plotted to report the fraction or proportion of GFP+ cells in each region ( ). Compared to control cells electroporated with GFP alone, the fraction of control cells electroporated with dnRBPJ in the VZ was significantly decreased, but the fraction in the CP was increased ( ). This result supports that inhibiting Notch signaling in control VZ cells at E13 promotes neurogenesis, consistent with a role of Notch signaling in progenitor cell maintenance and renewal. , , 
 Compared to control cells electroporated with GFP, Foxc1-mutant cells electroporated with GFP were found significantly more frequently in the VZ and less frequently in the CP ( ). This is consistent with increased neural progenitor cell self-renewal and reduced neuron production in Foxc1 mutants. In contrast, Foxc1-mutant cells electroporated with dnRBPJ had a similar proportional distribution in the VZ and CP to control cells with GFP ( ). There was no difference in the distribution of cells in the SVZ/IZ in all conditions. These data support that elevated Notch signaling in Foxc1-mutant VZ cells underlies excessive progenitor self-renewal and decreased neurogenesis.

## DISCUSSION
Here, we provide evidence to support a previously unknown mechanism of meningeal-derived RA in regulating neurogenesis. Our data support a model in which, during brain development, meningeal-derived RA acts on neural progenitors in the neocortex and LGE to drive neurogenesis by suppressing the self-renewal pathways Sox2 and Notch. Our experimental data indicate that RA regulating Sox2 is done directly via RARα binding at the Sox2ot-Sox2 locus in neural progenitors and RA increasing the transcription of Sox2ot, a lncRNA that suppresses Sox2 in neural progenitors to promote neurogenesis. , Sox2 acts upstream of Notch to regulate the balance between neurogenesis and self-renewal. , , , From this emerges a hypothetical model in which meningeal RA promotes neurogenesis in neural progenitors via RAR transcriptional regulation of Sox2ot, leading to decreased Sox2 expression and the downregulation of direct Sox2 targets, such as Notch ligand-receptor Notch1 and Dll1 ( ).
The increase in neocortical progenitor self-renewal in Foxc1 mutants is due to a lack of neural progenitor cell cycle exit, resulting in lateral expansion of the VZ and reduced neuron generation. Our IUE experiment using dnRPBJ supports that this phenotype is due to increased Notch signaling, a potent stem cell renewal pathway. Our RA rescue experiments and the temporal correlation between meningeal defects in RA synthesis enzymes and neocortical lengthening collectively support that meningeal RA functions to reduce Notch signaling in both neocortical and LGE neural progenitors. This points to a previously unknown mechanism for how RA acts as a pro-neurogenic factor.
The increase in Notch signaling seen in Foxc1-mutant neural progenitor cells was at the chromatin accessibility and protein levels, suggesting that RA plays a transcriptional role in regulating Notch signaling. However, we did not identify RARα-binding sites near Notch1 or Dll1, though we did at Notch2, indicating that RA-RAR regulation of Notch ligands and receptors is potentially indirect. Notch1 is a direct transcriptional target of Sox2 in retinal neural progenitors, and Sox2 is required for Notch1 expression and progenitor maintenance during retinal development. Cell-culture-based studies of Sox2 DNA binding in human neural progenitors (differentiated from embryonic stem cell [ESC] lines) showed that Sox2 binds to the Dll1 promoter and regulates its expression. This indicates that excess Sox2 in Foxc1-mutant neural progenitors may stimulate elevated expression of Notch1, Dll1, and, therefore, Notch signaling. Alternatively, RA-RAR may normally inhibit the Notch pathway via non-genomic mechanisms. For example, we identified that non-nuclear RARα inhibits Wnt-β-catenin signaling in brain endothelial cells via protein kinase C (PKC)-mediated degradation of β-catenin. 
We show that RARα is bound upstream of Sox2 within the promoter region of lncRNA Sox2ot and that RA treatment stimulates Sox2ot promotor chromatin accessibility and the expression of Sox2ot, supporting that this lncRNA is a direct target of RA-RARα. RARs are typically constitutively bound to DNA, and transcriptional activity is dependent on ligand binding. This constitutive binding may explain why RARα is bound at Sox2ot in Foxc1-mutant neural progenitors. Lower Sox2ot expression and reduced chromatin accessibility at the Sox2ot promoter in Foxc1 mutants is likely due to lower RA levels in the Foxc1-mutant neocortex, which reduces RAR-dependent recruitment of transcriptional activators. These transcriptional activators include chromatin modifiers Ncoa1, Ncoa1, and p300 and components of the transcriptional machinery, like RNA polymerase II, to increase accessibility. 
lncRNAs such as Sox2ot can act as transcriptional regulators. Two mechanisms of Sox2ot inhibition of Sox2 transcription have been described. Sox2 and Sox2ot expression is inversely correlated in mouse ESCs differentiated into NSCs; increased Sox2ot transcription reduces the chromatin interaction between the Sox2 promoter regions and the Sox2 super-enhancer. The inverse correlation in Sox2-Sox2ot mRNA mirrors our findings in neocortical and LGE neural progenitors. Further, Sox2ot in the neocortical neural progenitors negatively regulates Sox2 by directly interacting with the transcriptional regulator YY1, which binds to the CpG island in the Sox2 locus to suppress the expression of Sox2. The knockdown of Sox2ot in E13.5 neocortical progenitors via IUE increased Sox2 expression and cell proliferation as measured by BrdU incorporation. This is like what we observe in Foxc1 mutants that have significantly diminished Sox2ot in neural progenitors that is rescued with RA supplementation. This supports our hypothetical model that meningeal-derived RA acts upstream to positively regulate Sox2ot, which, in turn, suppresses Sox2 and, potentially, downstream Notch signaling to promote neuron generation.
Foxc1-mutant neocortical VZ phenotypes were also observed in the LGE VZ, including increased Notch signaling and Sox2 expression and decreased Sox2ot, and expression was restored to control levels with RA supplementation. This suggests that meningeal-derived RA is also required for the progenitors in the VZ of the ganglionic eminences to correctly balance self-renewal and neuronal differentiation. We showed previously that ventral forebrain meninges, including expression of Raldh2, are much less affected in Foxc1 mutants. How might the loss of dorsal forebrain meninges impact ventral forebrain neural progenitors? Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the ventricles contains factors that act directly on VZ progenitors that line the ventricular surface to regulate proliferation and neurogenesis; examples include FGF2 and IGF. Studies in chicks identified bioactive RA in CSF and provided evidence that CSF is a route for RA to reach and act on the midbrain neuroepithelium. , More studies are needed to test CSF as a route for meningeal-produced RA distribution and how this is impacted in Foxc1 mutants with regional defects in meningeal development.

## Limitations of the study
The spatial transcriptomic approach we used lacks single-cell resolution; this limits the analysis of potential gene dysregulation in Foxc1-mutant APs and IPs. Although our study focuses on meningeal-derived RA, other meningeal ligands are likely involved, directly or indirectly, in the modulation of Notch signaling or Sox2 expression. Foxc1 mutants lack more than RA production from the dorsal forebrain meninges; other factors such as BMPs, Cxcl12, and Wnt ligands are also reduced. Meningeal Bmps have previously been implicated in neocortical development, and meningeal Cxcl12 is involved in multiple aspects of forebrain, midbrain, and cerebellar development. Additionally, RA deficiency in Foxc1 mutants reduces cerebral vasculature growth; therefore, disruption of neural progenitor-vessel association may decrease progenitor divisions. , Future work will identify the role of other meningeal-derived signals on the regulation of self-renewal pathways like Notch and Sox2 and how these intersect with RA-RAR signaling to ensure normal telencephalic development. We focus here on Sox2-Sox2 as a direct target of RA-RARα and an upstream regulator of Notch signaling. Future work manipulating the RARα-binding site in the Sox2ot locus will permit us to further test if RA-RARα-mediated transcription of Sox2ot is directly upstream of Notch genes and regulates neurogenesis. Finally, other direct or indirect gene targets of RA may play important roles in the mechanism of how RA, from the meninges or other sites of RA synthesis, regulates neurogenesis.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by , Julie Siegenthaler (julie.siegenthaler@cuanschutz.edu).

## Materials availability
The RARα-MYC, Foxc1lacZ/+ , and Foxc1hith/+ reported in this study are available from the with a completed materials transfer agreement from the originating institutions.

## Data and code availability
Spatial transcriptomics data are available at GEO accession number GEO: GSE269283; ATAC and CUT&RUN are available at GEO accession number GEO: GSE269282. Micrographs used in figures are available for download at Dryad: https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.41ns1rnr6. The paper also analyzes publicly available data from GEO (GEO: GSM5091383).
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper are available from the upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Animals
Mice used for experiments were housed in specific pathogen-free facilities approved by AALAC and procedures were performed in accordance with animal protocols approved by the IACUC at the University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus. The following mouse lines were used in this study: Foxc1LacZ/+ mice and Foxc1-hith mutant alleles that have been described previously, , and a MycTag fused to RARα (description below). Timed matings between Foxc1LacZ/+ mice were used to generate Foxc1-KO mice (Foxc1LacZ/LacZ ) or a less severe mutant, Foxc1-mutants (Foxc1hith/LacZ ). Mice were examined for a vaginal plug and the day the plug was found was E0.5. Littermate controls were used in all experiments, these were phenotypically normal genotypes Foxc1+/+ , Foxc1LacZ/+ or Foxc1hith/+ . The influence of sex on the results of the study were not assessed due to the early embryonic timepoints and may be a limitation to the study.

## Generation of MYC epitope tagged RARα mice
To knock-in an MYC epitope tag into the N terminus of RARα, we used homology directed repair (HDR) via CRISPR/Cas9 genomic engineering into B6N mice. Guide design was completed using CRISPOR and the Broad Institute sgRNA Design software, both of which have been refined to better identify off target events. , Results from each software were compared, and the guide which performed best using both algorithms was chosen. Guide activity was verified by incubating guide RNA and Cas9 protein with a PCR product containing the target sequence and comparing the ratio of cut to uncut PCR product.
Zygotes were cytoplasmically injected with guide RNA (TGGGCAGGAACTGCTATTGC TGG, Synthego at 5ng/ul), Cas9 (IDT, Alt-R S.p. HiFi Cas9 Nuclease V3 [cat # 1081060] at 20ng/ul), and HDR DNA template (GCAaGAACTGCTgTTGCTtGCCAGATCCTCTTCTGAGATGAGTTTTTGTTCCATGCCAAGCAGCCACAGTCAGAAGAGCAGGCAAACAGTCTGGCAGGTAGTTGTGATGGCCT, from IDT dialyzed for final concentration of 25ng/ul) where appropriate. Injected zygotes were then transferred into pseudo pregnant recipients. 19 F0 pups were genotyped by PCR using primers outside the region to be modified followed by restriction enzyme digest. Of the pups born, 10 putative positive founders were identified. Several of these mice were bred to wildtype mice and F1 mice were sequenced using sanger sequencing to verify the precise mutation event. Intercrossing of sequence verified F1 mice within the same founder line resulted in homozygous knockin mice. These mice were healthy, bred normally, and had no observable deficits.
Genotyping protocol uses the 5′ primer (GTT GAC TAA CTT GGG ACT TGC) and 3′ primer (ACA ATG GTC ACC CTG GTC TAG) under standard thermocycling conditions with annealing temperature of 62C and extension time of 40sec for 36 cycles followed by digestion using Dde1 enzyme to cleave a unique site introduced during MYC epitope tag insertion. A wildtype allele yields a single 490bp product, while a mutant allele yields 193bp and 327bp products.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Tissue processing, sectioning, immunostaining and in situ hybridization
Pregnant mice were anesthetized using isoflurane and embryos were collected at E12, E13, or E14 by removing the heads and placing them in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight at 4°C. Whole heads were placed into 20% sucrose overnight and embedded in OCT. Mouse heads were sectioned at 12 μm increments using a cryostat and sections mounted on glass slides. Sections were blocked in 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) + 0.05% Triton X- for 1 h at room temperature and incubated with primary antibodies at a dilution of 1:100. Following incubation with primary antibody(s), sections were incubated with appropriate Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies and DAPI (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, United States). In situ hybridization was completed using the ACD Bio Multiplex Fluorescent Detection assay kit (Neward, CA) and their probes against Sox2 and Sox2ot.

## Spatial transcriptomics and analysis
To capture spatial transcriptomic data, we used the 10x Genomics Visium Platform following the manufacturer’s protocol for fresh frozen tissue from E14 control and Foxc1-KO whole mouse heads. Tissue was snap frozen in OCT using liquid nitrogen. Region matched cryosections (matched by the distribution of anatomical structures of the middle eye and ganglionic eminences) of whole heads were collected via cryosection and directly mounted into the capture area (controls n = 2, Foxc1-KO n = 2, 1 section for each biological replicate). Hematoxylin stain and imaging, RNA capture, library prep and sequencing were performed by the Genomics and Microarray core at the University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus. Samples were sequenced and data was packaged using the 10x Genomics SpaceRanger pipeline. Spatial data were integrated into the Seurat data pipeline for differential gene expression analysis. Forebrain spots were selected according to barcodes listed in . Cell type mapping using semla and RcppML was used to identify cell types and proportions within our spatial transcriptomic analysis by using a publicly available E14 mouse brain single cell RNA dataset. GSEA analysis was used to determine differential gene pathways between control and Foxc1-KO APs and IPs. Differentially expressed genes were analyzed for pathway analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) between control and Foxc1-KO forebrain spots. Candidate screening of ligand-receptor interactions using NICHES was used to identify patterns of ligand-receptor cellular interactions in control and Foxc1-mutants by using queried ligand-receptor signaling mechanisms. R Studio with version 2021.09.0, R version 4.3.1, and Seurat version 4.3.0.1 were used for analysis of Spatial Transcriptomic data. Raw data is available with GEO accession number GSE269283.

## RA diet
Pregnant dams carrying control and Foxc1
hith/LacZ embryos were fed an all-trans-retinoic acid (atRA) enriched diet (final concentration 0.35 mg/g food) consisted of atRA (Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved in corn oil and mixed with Bioserv Nutra-Gel Diet, Grain-Based Formula, Cherry Flavor. atRA diet was prepared fresh daily and provided ad libitum to pregnant wild-type females beginning in the afternoon of E10 through the day of collection on E14 as described previously. 

## In utero electroporation and injection
Pregnant dams carrying control and Foxc1 mutant embryos were electroporated as described previously. Survival surgeries were performed on timed pregnant mice (E13.5) to expose their uterine horns. Approximately 1 μl of endotoxin-free plasmid DNA was injected into an embryonic lateral ventricle. The concentrations of the injection solutions containing either DN-RBPJ-IRES-GFP or GFP control were as previously described. Electroporation consisted of 5 pulses separated by 950 ms applied at 45 V. Embryos were put back into the abdominal cavity and were allowed to develop in utero and collected at E15.5. Embryonic brains were sectioned and processed as previously described. 

## CUT&RUN
To isolate neural progenitor cells, control and Foxc1 mutant cortices and ganglionic eminences were dissected on ice, cut into fine pieces using forceps, and dissociated using a Papain kit (Worthington Biochemical; Freehold, New Jersey). Enrichment of apical progenitors was completed using the MACS cell isolation protocol magnetic Prom1 beads (Miltenyi, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). To determine where RARɑ is genomically bound, we performed CUT&RUN analysis using the EpiCypher CUT&RUN assay (Durham, NC). Biological isotype antibody controls were used for all samples to determine background antibody binding. DNA library preparation and sequencing was performed by the Genomics and Microarray core at the University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus. Data was aligned using the nf-core CUT&RUN analysis pipeline with the following parameters: Spike-in normalization, SEACR as the peak caller, ‘norm’ normalization, relaxed threshold, and consensus peak requirement of 3 replicates. Plots were produced using Signac. Differences between control and Foxc1-mutant peaks was analyzed using DiffBind. Raw data is available with GEO accession number GSE269282.

## ATAC-seq
To isolate chromatin from control and Foxc1-mutant neural progenitors exposed to RA diet, we followed the same workflow as mentioned above. Once E14 neural progenitors were isolated, we used an ATAC-seq Library Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, California) to isolate open chromatin. Library sequencing was performed by the Genomics and Microarray core at the University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus. ATAC-seq data was analyzed using the nf-core atacseq analysis pipeline with the following parameters: aligned with bwa and macs2 narrow peak calling. ATAC-seq peak data was visualized using IGV and Signac, and DiffBind was used to determine statistical differences in peak size.

## snATAC seq analysis
Publicly available snATACseq data from E14.5 cortical neural progenitors was downloaded from GEO (GSM5091383), converted to fastq files, and generated an h5 matrix file and fragments file with cellranger_atac count, summits were visualized using Integrated Genome Viewer and objects were generate as a Seurat object using Signac. 

## Microscopy and image analysis
Confocal images were obtained using a Zeiss 900 Laser Scanning Microscope with associated Zeiss Zen Blue software. Images were processed in FIJI ImageJ and Graphic Software. For quantification of fluorescence intensity in FIJI ImageJ, calculated total cell fluorescence (CTCF) was used to obtain a fluorescent intensity measurement in at least 10 individual cells per image within the VZ on sections immunolabeled to detect Dll1, Notch1, NICD, Sox2, Hes1 or processed for RNAscope detection of Sox2 and Sox2ot. Values were averaged across images for a given treatment and/or genotype and the mean reported for individual biological replicate. IMARIS was used to threshold and find the number of DAPI positive cells within the VZ and the number of RNAscope dots/cell. The number of GFP+ cells within the VZ and CP post electroporation was determined by counting individual nuclei within the defined regions as determined by DAPI and Sox2.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism, where one-way or two-way ANOVAs and multiple comparisons were performed in instances with more than two groups. All statistical details can be found in the figure legends.

## Supplementary Material
123SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115637.

 

## Highlights
Meninges-derived retinoic acid promotes neurogenesis by inhibiting Notch and Sox2
Retinoic acid receptor α may control Sox2 by binding to and regulating Sox2ot
Inhibition of Notch signaling in Foxc1-mutant progenitors rescues neurogenesis

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the leadership and staff of the Genomics and Microarray Core at the CU Anschutz Medical Campus for expert processing of samples and sequencing services and the Regional Mouse Genetics Core Facility at National Jewish Health for generating the MycTag-RARα mouse line. The authors would like to thank the members of the Siegenthaler lab and members of C.N.C.’s thesis committee (Dr. Emily Bates, Dr. Kristin Artinger, Dr. Joe Brzezinski, and Dr. Mark Dell’Acqua) for fruitful discussions and feedback that helped shape this project. This work was supported by funding from the NIH, specifically NINDS (F31 NS130941 to C.N.C., R01 NS098273 to J.S., R01 NS124166 to S.F., and F31 NS129289 to L.T.), and from NIDDK R01 DK118155 (L.S.) and R00 DK128537 and P30 DK020572 (D.L.). The Pilot Award for spatial transcriptomics was provided by the RNA Biosciences Initiative at CU Anschutz. All schematics in the figures were made with BioRender (https://BioRender.com/o9wew4d).

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
123

## Data Availability Statement
Spatial transcriptomics data are available at GEO accession number GEO: GSE269283; ATAC and CUT&RUN are available at GEO accession number GEO: GSE269282. Micrographs used in figures are available for download at Dryad: https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.41ns1rnr6. The paper also analyzes publicly available data from GEO (GEO: GSM5091383).
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper are available from the upon request.