3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1123397111233971112339713898945810.1016/j.isci.2024.110199Sustained generation of neurons destined for neocortex with oxidative metabolic upregulation upon filamin abrogation
KopsidasCaroline A LoweClara C McDanielDennis P ZhouXiaoming FengYuanyi 1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Uniformed Services University, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA2Biomedical Instrumentation Center, Uniformed Services University, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA3Department of Medicine, Uniformed Services University, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA∗Corresponding author yuanyi.feng@usuhs.edu
4These authors contributed equally
5Senior author
6Present address: Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Brain Tumor Institute, Children’s National Hospital, Washington, DC 20016, USA
7Present address: Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 475 Vine St, Winston-Salem, NC 27101, USA
8Lead contact
7620242771101991101991072024This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## Summary
Neurons in the neocortex are generated during embryonic development. While the adult ventricular-subventricular zone (V-SVZ) contains cells with neural stem/progenitors’ characteristics, it remains unclear whether it has the capacity of producing neocortical neurons. Here, we show that generating neurons with transcriptomic resemblance to upper layer neocortical neurons continues in the V-SVZ of mouse models of a human condition known as periventricular heterotopia by abrogating Flna and Flnb. We found such surplus neurogenesis was associated with V-SVZ’s upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondrial biogenesis, and vascular abundance. Additionally, spatial transcriptomics analyses showed V-SVZ’s neurogenic activation was coupled with transcriptional enrichment of genes in diverse pathways for energy metabolism, angiogenesis, cell signaling, synaptic transmission, and turnovers of nucleic acids and proteins in upper cortical layers. These findings support the potential of generating neocortical neurons in adulthood through boosting brain-wide vascular circulation, aerobic adenosine triphosphate synthesis, metabolic turnover, and neuronal activity.
Subject areas: Developmental neuroscience, Cellular neuroscience

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•A mouse model of periventricular heterotopia shows neurogenesis in adult V-SVZ
•Adult-made neurons share transcriptome profiles with neurons in upper neocortex
•Elevated V-SVZ activity is coupled with aerobic ATP synthesis and vascularization
•Neurogenesis in adulthood is associated with brain system-wide vitalization

Developmental neuroscience; Cellular neuroscience

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Sep 12; Revised 2024 Apr 1; Accepted 2024 Jun 3; Collection date 2024 Jul 19.

## Introduction
Neurons in the cerebral cortex are generated during embryogenesis following a precisely orchestrated developmental program. This program ensures both the timely production of cortical excitatory neurons from neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs), in the dorsal ventricular-subventricular zone (V-SVZ) situated adjacent to the brain ventricles, and the subsequent radial migration of newborn neurons to form laminated neocortex underneath the brain surface. , , , With sufficient neurons being made to sustain cortical function throughout life, NSPCs turn off neurogenesis and switch to making astrocytes and oligodendrocytes to support neuronal function. , , This NSPC fate-switch occurs before birth in both humans and rodents. Although cell proliferation persists in V-SVZ of juvenile and adult brains of humans, primates, and rodents, , , evidence for neurogenic capacities in the postnatal and adult V-SVZ is limited to producing olfactory neurons in rodents. , , , As olfaction is less pivotal for sensory input in humans than rodents, it remains unclear whether cortical neurons can be made in adulthood to have an impact on human brain function or disorders. Thus, suitable experimental models and direct evidence are necessary to determine the propensity, mechanisms, and the functional implications of neurogenesis in the adult V-SVZ.
By studying the human brain developmental disorder periventricular heterotopia (PH) through murine models of Flna loss of function (LOF), we have shown previously that a “surplus” population of neurons can be made independent of embryonic neocortical neurogenesis and neuronal migration. PH, also known as periventricular nodular heterotopia or subependymal gray matter heterotopia, is a brain malformation characterized by abnormal clumping of isolated or confluent neuronal nodules along the wall of lateral ventricles. , , Although many PH cases are sporadic, LOF mutations of the X-linked gene FLNA account for 20%–30% of instances. , , , , The affected individuals with FLNA mutations are mostly females; males in the pedigree may be affected but are often aborted spontaneously, presumably due to cardiovascular defects. , , The most notable neurological symptom of PH is developing epilepsy beginning in mid-adolescence. , , , Although some affected individuals may present mild cognitive, behavioral, or reading deficits, , , the condition can often be asymptomatic or associated with little or no impairments on intellectual abilities. , , , , , In line with the minimal cognitive deficits, alterations in neocortical structures of the affected brains are often insignificant despite the presence of a large number of periventricular ectopic neurons, , , , , though a recent report of whole-brain multimodal MRI study suggested an association of PH with cortical thickening. Overall, the generation of periventricular neurons has minimal or very mild impairments to canonical developmental programs for neocortical neurogenesis and neuronal migration.
FLNA encodes a 280 kDa protein filamin A (FLNa) and is joined by FLNB and FLNC to form the filamin family. , , While the expression of FLNC is specific to skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscles, FLNA and FLNB are both expressed ubiquitously. The three filamin proteins share a similar structure including an N-terminal actin-binding domain, two hinge domains, 24 immunoglobulin-like (Ig-like) repeats, and a C-terminal dimerization domain, allowing filamins to crosslink actin filaments as homo- or heterodimers. , , Besides actin, filamins have been reported to interact through the Ig-like repeats with over a hundred proteins. These filamin interacting proteins have diverse functions in cell surface, cytoplasm, and the nucleus, , , , , suggesting multifaced roles of filamins in cell signaling, gene expression, and homeostasis besides actin stabilization. Although PH is traditionally regarded as a neuronal migration disorder caused by mosaic FLNA expression in heterozygous females, it does not explain cases caused by germline FLNA mutations in males, , , , , , , which argue against a simple migratory incompetence of FLNA-deficient neurons. While the migration defect of FLNA LOF may be masked by FLNB, our mouse model of Flna and Flnb double LOF in NSPCs showed high penetrance of PH without affecting neocortical neuronal migration and lamination. Instead, we showed that periventricular neurons were made extraneously due to altered V-SVZ microenvironment resulting from epithelium mesenchymal transition (EMT) of polarized radial glial progenitors with filamin deficiency. EMT is a process that entails profound change in cellular phenotype and tissue microenvironment. It was elevated in filamin-deficient V-SVZ due to compromised attenuation of IgF and Vegf signaling between NSPCs and nascent cerebral blood vessels in mid gestation, leading to feedforward escalation of both angiogenesis and neurogenesis. As a result, periventricular neuronal nodules were associated with increased vascular abundance, becoming first detectable at birth but continuing to grow postnatally. This timeline of periventricular heterotopia development in filamin mutant mice agrees with the corresponding human condition, in which neuronal nodules could be seen before birth but usually become evident along with the onset of epileptic seizures in the second decade of life. These together suggest strongly that PH is a condition occurring independent of canonical neocortical neurogenesis, in which a surplus of neurons is generated in the late-embryonic and postnatal V-SVZ.
Consistent with a vascular input in PH initiation shown by filamin-deficient mice, FLNA mutations often cause cardiovascular defects. , , , , , This is intriguing as blood vessels are considered a major neurogenic niche in the V-SVZ of adult mammalian brains. , Apart from supplying oxygen and nutrients for brain energy metabolism, cells of the vasculature can secrete VEGF and other factors to promote NSPCs neurogenesis. , , , Thus, with a microenvironment of abundant blood vessels in the V-SVZ, filamin-deficient NSPCs may fail to turn off the production of neurons after the pre-programmed window of cortical neurogenesis and neuronal migration, resulting in continued generation of neurons destined for the neocortex in the dorsal V-SVZ after birth and the formation of heterotopic neuronal nodules locally.
In this study, we set out to further test the hypothesis that PH results from noncanonical neocortical neurogenesis by determining (1) whether the generation of neocortical neurons persists in the postnatal and adult V-SVZ in mouse models of PH, (2) what constitutes the molecular networks underlying sustained production of periventricular neurons, and (3) how neurons in periventricular nodules are distinctive compared to neurons in the neocortex. Our data demonstrate that filamin deficiency results in PH with combined upregulations of neocortical vascular abundance, oxidative energy production, diverse cell signaling pathways, and expression of neuronal activity genes. Such brain-wide metabolic activation may underlie the generation of neurons with transcriptome resemblance to neurons of the upper cortical layers in the postnatal and adult V-SVZ. These results provide a conceptual possibility of boosting V-SVZ neurogenesis by targeting FLNA to enhance vascular circulation and energy metabolism at the brain systems level.

## Results

## Neurons in periventricular heterotopia increase continuously in juvenile and adult FlnKO mice
Our previous developmental analyses have shown that mice with Flna null mutation die by embryonic day 15 (E15) with severe cardiovascular defects, whereas mice with NSPC conditional Flna deletion mediated by the Emx1-Cre or the Nes8-Cre driver (referred to as FlnacKO mice) survive with little brain anatomical aberrations. , However, when we introduced Flnb mutations to FlnacKO mice, PH, defined by the presence of ectopic neurons (NeuN+) along the wall of lateral ventricles on both sides of the brain, was found in all mice with compound FlnacKO and Flnb homozygous mutations (Flnaf/yCre+; Flnb−/− males or Flnaf/f Cre+; Flnb−/− females, referred to as FlnKO or PH mice collectively hereafter). About 20% of mice with compound FlnacKO and heterozygous Flnb mutations (Flnaf/yCre+; Flnb+/− males or Flnaf/fCre+; Flnb+/− females) were also found to present bilateral PH with similar developmental and brain anatomical phenotype. In all cases, PH becomes detectable at perinatal ages. To better assess the X-linked mosaicism, we also examined a set of female mice with compound heterozygous FlnacKO and homozygous Flnb mutations (Flnaf/wt Cre+; Flnb−/−). Similar to females with heterozygous FLNA LOF in the human condition, female mice with mosaic NSPC Flna conditional and Flnb null mutations exhibited bi-lateral periventricular neuronal nodules with 100% penetrance, whereas Flnb abrogation alone (Flnaf/f Cre−; Flnb−/− females or Flnaf/y Cre−; Flnb−/− males) was not found to cause neuronal heterotopia or other brain structural changes ( A, A, and S1B). Immuno-histological (IH) analyses showed that Flna was predominantly expressed in NSPCs of both embryonic, postnatal, and adult V-SVZ as well as in cerebral blood vessels. It was effectively deleted along with Flnb in the neuroparenchyma of developing, postnatal, and adult brains in FlnKO mice without affecting its vascular expression ( B–1D, C, and S1F). This suggests that the major role of Flna in the neuroparenchyma lies in NSPCs of the V-SVZ where Flna and Flnb form heterodimers and function together. These findings support the validity of using FlnKO mice to model the human PH condition.
 The continued expression of Flna in NSPCs of the postnatal and adult V-SVZ suggested that Flna’s function extends beyond embryonic development. In line with the fact that PH was initiated by NSPC defects that led to extraneous neurogenesis, we found that periventricular neuronal nodules in FlnKO mice grew continuously during not only neonatal development but also young adulthood. By following a cohort of FlnKO mice and their littermate control mice from weaning to 10 months of age, we found that the brain weight of FlnKO mice, while comparable to that of control mice at weaning age, became significantly greater after young adulthood at ages approximately 4 months or older ( E and 1F). In brains of these mature FlnKO mice, periventricular nodules were heterogeneous in size and shape and frequently grew together, forming larger masses or band-like structures with diameters comparable to the thickness of the overlying neocortex. Nonetheless, cerebral cortical size and neuronal lamination were overall indistinguishable between FlnKO and control brains ( G and 1H). Although the nodular mass may disrupt ventricular ependyma and obstruct ventricular circulation to cause hydrocephalus that contributes to enlarged appearance of FlnKO brains, hydrocephalus was only seen in less than half of mutant mice and did not account for the net gain in brain weight from weaning to midlife. Thus, these data suggest that Flna LOF in postnatal and adult NSPCs resulted in progressive addition of neurons to periventricular nodules.
We found periventricular neuronal nodules, regardless of size and distribution, were exclusively surrounded by glial fibers with high level of Gfap ( C–1H, G, and S1H). Gfap is an intermediate filament protein expressed by a subpopulation of astrocytes that are derived from embryonic NSPCs and retain the potential of generating neuroblasts in the adult V-SVZ. , Interestingly, the immunoreactivity of Gfap showed a substantial overlap with that of Flna in the V-SVZ of juvenile and adult brains, and it is not only enhanced around periventricular neurons but also found inside of the nodular mass ( C and 1H). A majority of periventricular neurons expressed Cux1, a marker for excitatory neurons in upper cortical layer II/III generated toward the end of embryonic cortical neurogenesis ( I). This shared cell molecular identity between periventricular and late-born neurons in the upper cortex, combined with the local increase in Gfap+ cells, suggested that NSPCs with Flna and Flnb double LOF failed to shutdown neurogenesis at the end of embryonic development and remained active in the postnatal and adult V-SVZ. The olfactory bulbs in FlnKO mice were of normal size and structure ( E, I, and S1J), which further suggests that periventricular neurons were not migration-arrested olfactory neurons associated with the rodent-specific V-SVZ neurogenesis. Instead, they were likely cortical neurons produced by NSPCs that retained neurogenic propensity in the V-SVZ of postnatal and adult FlnKO mice.

## Increased stemness and cellular activities in the V-SVZ of FlnKO mice
To obtain further evidence for sustained generation of neocortical neurons in adult FlnKO mice, we examined cellular compositions and activities adjacent to periventricular neuronal nodules. Besides Gfap, we found neurons in the nodular mass along the ventricular wall were surrounded by clusters of cells expressing the proliferation antigen Ki67 or the neuroblast marker Dcx ( A–2D and A). Although these markers for stemness and neurogenesis were also detectable in the V-SVZ of control mice, their abundance were remarkably higher around periventricular neurons. Furthermore, we found cells in the V-SVZ of FlnKO mice proliferate much more actively than those in control mice as evidenced by significant increases in EdU incorporation ( E–2G and B). Notably, EdU+ cells in FlnKO V-SVZ are distributed around periventricular neurons along with cells expressing Gfap or Dcx. This suggests that FlnKO NSPCs’ proliferative and neurogenic activities were beyond the routine olfactory neurogenesis and largely dedicated toward generating periventricular neurons. Along with this notion, cells expressing Olig2 and Sox10, which mark oligodendrocytes and precursors, were also significantly elevated in the V-SVZ of FlnKO compared to that of control mice ( H–2K, C, and S2D). Such complementary increase in periventricular neurogenic and oligodendrocyte differentiation indicates there were coordinated upregulation in stemness and cellular activities toward generating both neurons and their supporting cells in the V-SVZ of FlnKO mice.
 

## Upregulation of genes mediating both neurodevelopment and oxidative phosphorylation in FlnKO V-SVZ
To determine the molecular basis and functional gene networks associated with periventricular neurogenesis at the brain systems level, we employed spatial transcriptomics to capture regional specific gene expression profiles. We prepared brain sections from FlnKO and control mice at 3 months of age (n = 3 each) and double stained them with fluorescent-conjugated antibodies to Gfap and NeuN. Guided by Gfap signals along the lateral ventricles, we selected 16 and 15 regions of interest (ROIs) from the dorsal V-SVZ of control and FlnKO brains, respectively. Based on NeuN signals, we also selected 16 and 13 ROIs from upper cortical layers of control and FlnKO brains, respectively. In addition, Gfap-NeuN double staining allowed the selection of 16 ROIs from the periventricular nodules of FlnKO brains ( A). We used the NanoString GeoMx DSP platform, by which RNA-sequencing yielded expression data for 19,962 genes across all 76 sampled ROIs. Comparing regionally specific ROIs between FlnKO and control mice revealed 4,003 and 7,411 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the V-SVZ and upper cortex, respectively. In addition, we identified 612 DEGs between ROIs in periventricular nodules and upper cortical layers of FlnKO mice ( A and B–S3E). Therefore, despite the lack of discernible change in neocortical morphology, generation of periventricular neurons in FlnKO mice was associated with remarkable transcriptome alterations in both V-SVZ and upper cortical layers.
 To assess the molecular profile underling neurogenic activation in the V-SVZ of FlnKO mice, we first queried DEGs identified across V-SVZ ROIs between FlnKO and control mice. Out of the total 4,003 DEGs, the 1,489 downregulated DEGs showed no significant enrichments in pathway analysis. In contrast, the 2,514 upregulated DEGs in FlnKO V-SVZ were found enriched in many functional pathways and biological processes, among which the KEGG pathway of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) was most significantly overrepresented (False Discovery Rate (FDR) = 1.2E-25; fold enrichment = 4.4) ( B). Remarkably, 65 of 133 genes participating in OXPHOS were upregulated in FlnKO compared to control V-SVZ ROIs ( C and A), suggesting strongly that the increased V-SVZ stemness and neurogenic activities in FlnKO mice were supported by elevating mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) function for aerobic ATP synthesis.
The GeoMx DSP data also indicated that transcriptional upregulations in mitochondrial oxidative metabolism were accompanied by increased expression of genes involving neural development and neuronal activities in the FlnKO V-SVZ. Besides neurogenesis, the most significantly enriched BP terms of gene ontology (GO) analysis included vesicle-mediated transport in synapse, trans-synaptic signaling, neuron projection development, and neuron differentiation ( D). As 1,735 of DEGs upregulated across V-SVZ ROIs also showed significantly higher expression in upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice ( A and E), we assessed the 779 genes that were exclusively upregulated in the FlnKO V-SVZ to determine the V-SVZ-specific impact. Our pathway and GO enrichment analyses demonstrated that the V-SVZ-specific DEGs indeed overrepresented biological processes related to mitochondrial respiratory chain assembly, oxidative ATP metabolic processes, neurodevelopment, neuronal differentiation, as well as neuronal networking activities in synaptic signaling, transmission, and behaviors ( E and 3F). The neuronal-activity-related genes upregulated in the FlnKO SVZ included molecules for synaptogenesis and synaptic signaling, such as Syn1, Syn2, Syngap1, Slitrk1, and Clstn2, as well as ion channels and glutamate receptors, such as Scn1b, Scn2b, Kcnc1, Grik5, and Gria1 ( G). For genes associated with neurodevelopment, significant upregulations occurred in diverse molecules that pose both extrinsic and intrinsic effects on neurogenesis and morphogenesis, such as Neurod2, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that can induce neurogenic differentiation and maintain neuronal cell fate; Ngfr, the receptor for nerve growth factor, which plays important roles in neuronal differentiation and survival; as well as Nrcam and Sema6b, which encode neuronal adhesion molecules for axon growth and guidance ( H). Overall, the transcriptome profile underlying increased neurogenesis in FlnKO V-SVZ suggests co-upregulation of energy metabolism with activities toward neuronal differentiation. Such coordinated regulation of genes for mitochondrial function and neural development in the FlnKO V-SVZ suggests that the switch of adult NSPCs from quiescence to neurogenesis and their commitment to neuronal differentiation require a metabolic upregulation to increase the efficiency of ATP synthesis by OXPHOS.
To validate the co-upregulation of V-SVZ neurogenesis with energy metabolism implicated by the GeoMx DSP data, we first performed IH analyses of NeuroD2 and mitochondrial respiratory complex I. In line with a sufficient role of NeuroD2 in inducing neurogenesis, we found NeuroD2’s immunoreactivity was much stronger in the V-SVZ of adult FlnKO mice than that of the control mice ( I). Respiratory complex I is the first enzyme of the ETC containing 45 subunits, of which 38 are produced by the nuclear genome. We found that of the 38 nuclear transcripts of complex I, 28 were upregulated in the FlnKO V-SVZ ( C, 3J, and A). Correlated with increased complex I transcripts, Ndufs1, known as the 75 kDa subunit of complex I, showed stronger immunoreactivities in the FlnKO V-SVZ ( K), suggesting that the elevation in multiple complex I transcripts reflected increased mitochondria biogenesis. To confirm this, we performed transmission electron microscopic analysis to determine the mitochondrial density and ultrastructure in the V-SVZ. We found that despite heterogeneity in size, morphology, and distribution, mitochondria in the V-SVZ of FlnKO mice were not only significantly higher in density compared to those in the V-SVZ of control mice but also showed distinctive structural features ( L–3N). These mitochondria frequently displayed a spherical shape containing densely packed cristae ( N). While the spherical morphology is a characteristic of mitochondria in stem cells, condensed mitochondrial cristae indicate strong ETC activities for ATP synthesis. , These data further support the notion that generation and functional maturation of new neurons in the V-SVZ of FlnKO mice rely on a metabolic upgrade from anaerobic glycolysis to OXPHOS through mitochondrial biogenesis. As ATP is highly indispensable for neuronal activities in the adult brain, our data imply that an essential task for neurogenesis in the postnatal and adult VSVZ is to fulfill the energy demand of neurons in the functional brain.
Notably, our GeoMx DSP analysis also revealed that Snai1, the master EMT inducer that drives the embryonic initiation of PH, remained significantly upregulated in the adult FlnKO V-SVZ along with other EMT inducers, such as Nr2f1 ( O and 3P). This suggests that enhanced EMT resulting from filamin LOF persists to NSPCs in the postanal and adult V-SVZ, contributing to sustained neurogenesis.

## Increased vascular abundance in FlnKO brains supports brain system-wide metabolic activation
The net effect of increased EMT in the embryonic FlnKO V-SVZ was elevations in both neurogenesis and angiogenesis. In the adult brain, vascular circulation is essential for delivering glucose and oxygen to permit high-efficiency ATP synthesis by OXPHOS in order to support neuronal activities. Thus, it is possible that both EMT and energetics upregulation in adult FlnKO V-SVZ are associated with angiogenesis as observed in the developing FlnKO brain. Indeed, by quantifying the density of cerebral blood vessels and the level of vascular endothelial marker CD31, we found that the vascular abundance was significantly higher in FlnKO than in control cortices ( A–4D). Besides an overall increase in density, blood vessels in FlnKO brains, especially those surrounding and inside the periventricular nodules, frequently showed enlarged caliber ( A, 4B, and 4E). The large vessels near heterotopic neurons were also associated with increased propensity of EdU incorporation ( F and 4G), which supports a notion that vascular input contributes significantly to local cellular proliferation, metabolism, and neurogenesis. These results are fully in line with blood vessels being an essential constituent of the V-SVZ neurogenic niche. They suggest that increased vascular abundance in FlnKO brains not only facilitates the delivery of substrates for OXPHOS but also increases the flux of numerous extrinsic factors, such as growth factors, hormones, and endothelium-derived molecules, which are together necessary for NSPC self-renewal and neuronal differentiation.
 Increased vascularization in the FlnKO cortices was further supported by our GeoMx DSP data, which showed significant upregulation of several genes essential for angiogenesis in upper neocortical ROIs. Among transcripts significantly upregulated in the neocortex of FlnKO mice, Hif1a is a potent transcriptional activator of angiogenesis; Nrp1 (Neuropilin 1) can also promote angiogenesis by acting as the receptor for Vegf and/or Sema3A ( H). In addition, several transcripts in the Notch signaling pathway were significantly upregulated in upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice relative to those of control mice. These included the Notch1 and Notch3 receptors, the central Notch effector Rbpj, and the transcription target of Notch signaling Hes1 ( I). Notch signaling plays an essential role in angiogenesis by regulating endothelial tip cell formation, sprouting, and stabilization. The activated Notch receptors are proteolytically cleaved and released as the Notch intracellular domain (NICD). We thus validated increased Notch signaling by determining the abundance of NICD and confirmed its significant elevation in FlnKO relative to control cortices ( J). Although Notch signaling has been implicated in V-SVZ neurogenesis, upregulation of multiple Notch pathway genes, along with Hif1a and Nrp1, occurred specially in upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice. This suggests that in FlnKO mice, V-SVZ angiogenesis is driven primarily by EMT, whereas angiogenesis is regulated by Notch and Nrp1 signaling that spans over broad brain tissue.
The increase in cerebral vascular abundance is expected to have an impact at the systems level, affecting global brain metabolism and function. Consistent with this, genes mediating ETC function and mitochondrial biogenesis were also enriched in upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice ( K). We further validated the transcriptional upregulation of oxidative ATP synthesis in FlnKO cortices by immunoblotting (IB) and ultrastructure analyses. As expected, the cortical tissue of FlnKO mice showed significantly increased abundance of proteins and structures for OXPHOS compared to that of control mice. These include the 75 kDa Ndufs1 subunit of respiratory complex I, the Cox 4 subunit of complex IV, the master regulator of mitochondria biogenesis PGC-1α, and the density of mitochondria ( L–4N). Similar to that observed in the V-SVZ, mitochondria in the neocortex of FlnKO brains showed densely packed cristae ( O), suggesting robust ETC activities for ATP synthesis.
To further reveal the vascular impact on global brain metabolic activities, we examined the hippocampus of FlnKO mice. Besides the V-SVZ, the dentate gyrus of hippocampus is the most active site of neurogenesis in adulthood across all mammals. , , , , Although changes in hippocampal morphology and cellular composition were not evident, FlnKO mice exhibited a significantly higher rate of EdU incorporation in the dentate gyrus relative to their control counterparts ( ). This suggests that increases in cerebral vascular abundance had a brain system-wide influence on cell proliferative and metabolic activities in FlnKO mice. Notably, the total number of EdU+ cells in dentate gyrus was much lower than that in V-SVZ of both FlnKO and control mice, which could account for the lack of discernible differences in hippocampus structure.

## Transcriptional co-upregulation of genes for brain metabolism, cell signaling, neurodevelopment, and neuronal activities in FlnKO cortices
The global metabolic activation in FlnKO brains was also demonstrated by differential transcriptome profiles identified across ROIs of upper cortical layers between FlnKO and control mice. Out of the total 7,411 DEGs, the 4,609 upregulated genes in upper cortex of FlnKO mice showed significant overrepresentation in numerous pathways not only for energy metabolism but also for neuronal activity, signal transduction, and cellular structure regulation ( A, A, and ). Besides OXPHOS and the TCA cycle, upregulation in metabolic pathways extends to thermogenesis, carbon metabolism, and autophagy. In parallel, transcripts encoding molecules for glutamatergic, dopaminergic, GABAergic, and cholinergic synapses, as well as neuronal activity pathways in long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) were all enriched in upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO than those of control mice. The transcriptomic elevation in brain metabolism and neuronal activity was also accompanied by increased expression of genes mediating diverse cell signaling cascades, including Apelin, phosphoinositide, AMPK, ErbB, FoxO, and cAMP pathways ( A and A–S6D). Many of these signaling pathways play important roles in regulating brain metabolism, neurodevelopment, neuronal excitability, and synaptic transmission. Their co-upregulation may support brain system-wide changes in FlnKO mice.
 As there is a substantial overlap in pathways overrepresented by upregulated DEGs in V-SVZ and upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice, we determined their brain regional specificity. Although genes in pathways of OXPHOS, thermogenesis, insulin secretion, and gluconeogenesis were significantly upregulated in both V-SVZ and upper cortex of FlnKO mice, their enrichments in V-SVZ were more pronounced than in upper cortical layers ( A), suggesting a stronger demand of upregulating aerobic glucose catabolism for V-SVZ neurogenesis. In contrast, genes mediating LTP, LTD, autophagy, and Apelin signaling were more significantly enriched in upper cortical than V-SVZ ROIs of FlnKO mice ( A). LTP and LTD are important for synaptic communication and plasticity; autophagy is also crucial for neuronal-activity-mediated metabolic recycling that may facilitate neuronal connectivity and synaptic remodeling; the major role of Apelin signaling is promoting angiogenesis and vasodilation. Therefore, the co-upregulation of molecules in these pathways and increased vascular abundance in FlnKO cortices can have a synergistic impact on the molecular turnover, synaptic signaling, and plasticity of neocortical neurons. In line with this, biological processes overrepresented by upper cortical ROIs in FlnKO mice were predominantly related to nervous system development, including GO BP terms in neuron development, neuron differentiation, and intracellular transport ( B). Taken together, these data suggest that with vascular enrichment, V-SVZ’s neurogenic activation in FlnKO mice is coordinated with brain-wide boost of neuronal signaling and network activities.
To further validate the transcriptional elevation in activities and metabolic turnovers of FlnKO cortical neurons, we queried the 2,874 DEGs that were exclusively upregulated in upper cortical ROIs ( E). We found these transcripts specifically enriched in upper cortical layers of FlnKO mice overrepresented those Reactome pathways largely associated with RNA and protein metabolic synthesis, modification, and turnover ( C). Likewise, GO enrichment analyses showed that these upper-cortical-specific DEGs were significantly associated with MF and BP terms in RNA or nucleotide binding as well as RNA and peptide metabolic processes ( D and 5E). Such upregulation of genes for RNA and protein turnovers makes it possible for rapid molecular exchanges required for synaptic signaling and neuronal connectivity over a wide range. This is also in alignment with the activation of numerous essential molecules for brain metabolism in FlnKO cortices at both mRNA and protein levels. Besides autophagy-associated genes, upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice showed a remarkable upregulation in Gsk3b along with significant increases in Gsk3a and Prkaa2 encoding the catalytic subunit of AMPK ( F and E). Although Gsk3 can regulate a diverse array of cellular activities, it plays a primary role in glucose metabolism and energy homeostasis. The activation of Gsk3 is regulated by the removal of inhibitory phosphorylation, leading to diminished glucose storage and activated glycogen mobilization and glucose utilization. With increased Gsk3b, Gsk3a, and Prkaa2 mRNAs, FlnKO cortical tissues also showed a significant reduction in the inhibitory phospho-Gsk3b and an elevation in the simulative phospho-AMPK ( G). AMPK is an important energy-sensing enzyme that activates energy production and inhibits energy consumption. Therefore, the coactivation of both GSK3 and AMPK is fully aligned with increased oxidative ATP synthesis in FlnKO brains.
The adult brain is the top energy-consuming organ where ATP is mainly used to support synaptic transmission and neuronal communication. While upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice showed enriched transcripts for a wide range of synaptic activities ( A), glutamate synapses dominate excitatory activities for major cortical functions. Notably, 18 of the total 26 glutamate receptor genes were found significantly upregulated in upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO than those of controls ( H and F). These include glutamate metabotropic receptors as well as ionotropic receptors of NMDA, AMPA, kainite, and delta subtypes. Metabotropic glutamate receptors belong to G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that signal through G proteins; ionotropic glutamate receptors are ligand-gated ion channels that are also regulated by GPCRs and G protein signaling. We found that the transcriptional upregulation of glutamate receptors in upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice were coupled with significant enrichment of mRNAs encoding G proteins and key molecules of their downstream MAPK, cAMP, or phosphatidylinositol signaling pathways, including Raf1, adenylate cyclase Adcy8, Prkaca, and Prkca that encode PKA and PKC, respectively ( I and 5J). This suggests upper FlnKO cortices were poised to GPCR hyperstimulation and excitatory activities. Interestingly, we found β-Arestin, a molecule essential for attenuating GPCRs and downstream signaling, was decreased significantly at the protein level along with increases in glutamate signaling proteins, such as mGluR1, CamK2, c-Fos, and phospho-CREB ( K). In addition to diverse GPCRs, , , FLNA also interacts with β-Arestin and plays a role in modulating cell signaling kinetics in embryonic cortices. Therefore, a direct impact of Flna on β-Arestin stabilization, GPCR turnover, and downstream signaling remains plausible in the adult cortex. Collectively, our data suggest that increased V-SVZ neurogenesis and OXPHOS are associated with not only vascular enrichments but also increased excitatory activities in FlnKO cortices.
Consistent with the role of filamin in mediating numerous protein-protein interactions encompassing the actin cytoskeleton and diverse cytoplasmic or nuclear molecules, upregulated genes in both upper cortical and V-SVZ ROIs of FlnKO mice were associated with pathways regulating actin cytoskeleton, gap junction, tight junction, endocytosis, membrane trafficking, and protein-protein interactions at synapses ( A, A, and S6B). In addition, GO analysis showed that upregulated DEGs in FlnKO cortices were enriched in those CC terms essential for neurons, including synapses, dendrites, axons, myelin sheath, and mitochondrion, and those MP terms involving diverse molecular bindings of RNAs, proteins and protein complexes, protein kinases, transcriptional factors, chromatin, cytoskeleton, and nucleotides ( A and S7B). In contrast to the extensive functional annotation of upregulated genes, the 2,802 downregulated DEGs across upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice showed limited association with biological processes and functional pathways. Similar to the 1,489 downregulated genes in V-SVZ ROIs, genes downregulated in upper cortical layers of FlnKO mice were enriched most significantly in the BP term of “response to pheromone” ( C and S7D). These downregulated genes in FlnKO cortices were largely enriched in structures associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) and cell-cell or cell-ECM junctions where they mediate various binding activities for posttranslational modifications ( E and S7F). KEGG pathway analysis suggested that downregulated DEGs in upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice were weakly associated (-Log10 FDR = 1.5–1.7) with a few functional pathways such as cytokine receptor binding, hippo signaling, nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) signaling, regulation of stem cell pluripotency, necroptosis, and cancer ( G and S7H), which overall suggested altered restrictions in cell growth, survival, responses, and homeostasis. Altogether, with increased vascularization, OXPHOS, and metabolic turnovers of RNA and proteins, synaptic signaling, and neuronal activities, both V-SVZ and neocortex of adult FlnKO mice appear to be in a relatively immature and hyperactive state, retaining more features of a youthful, developing brain.

## Periventricular neurons show transcriptome resemblance with upper cortical neurons but reduced expression of neuronal activity genes
We next determined the characteristics of neurons generated in the postnatal and adult V-SVZ by asking how neurons in PH nodules differ from those in upper cortical layers in FlnKO mice, since both regions are predominantly composed of Cux1+ neurons ( I). In contrast to the substantial transcriptomic difference in upper cortical layers between FlnKO and control mice, only 612 genes showed differential expression between PH and upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO mice ( A). This indicates that upper cortical neurons in FlnKO mice share a greater degree of molecular resemblance with periventricular neurons than with their upper cortical counterparts in control mice. Furthermore, the 612 DEGs showed no enrichment in genes representing olfactory neurons, which ruled out the possibility that periventricular neurons came from excessive generation or failed migration of olfactory neurons in FlnKO mice. Instead, the 167 DEGs upregulated in PH ROIs were moderately associated with tube morphogenesis, gliogenesis, ECM organization, and response to stimuli. The 445 DEGs downregulated in PH ROIs showed significant overrepresentation of pathways and biological processes in neurodevelopment and synaptic activities, including synaptic signaling, neuronal system, neuron projection development, regulation of membrane potential, organelle localization, membrane trafficking, behavior, as well as Ca2+ regulation and signaling by Rho GTPase ( A, 6B, and ). In contrast to the remarkable transcriptional upregulation in cell signaling and neuronal communication in the upper cortex, multiple genes encoding synaptic signaling molecules were expressed at a significantly lower level in PH ROIs of FlnKO mice ( C). Notably, many transcripts for glutamate receptors, G proteins, and G protein signaling molecules were significantly downregulated in PH ROIs ( D–6F). In parallel to decreased gene expression in excitatory neuronal signaling, PH ROIs also showed transcriptional downregulation of ionotropic and metabotropic GABA receptors along with ion pumps and channels essential for membrane potential regulation, such as Na+/K+ ATPase (Atp1a1 and Atp1b1), the inward K+ channel Kcnj3, and voltage-gated Na+ channel Scn1b ( G and 6H). This suggests that neurons in periventricular nodules were in an overall less active state compared to their upper cortical counterparts. Moreover, PH ROIs showed significantly decreased expression of genes mediating neuronal projection development ( I). Thus, the transcriptional downregulation in both synaptic signaling and neuronal morphogenesis of PH ROIs suggests that although the postnatal and adult V-SVZ of FlnKO mice retain the potential of generating neurons destined for the neocortex, neurons produced outside of the normal window of cortical development failed to become fully active as they were unable to integrate into the functional cortical circuitry. Therefore, the major difference between neurons in periventricular nodules and upper cortical layers lies in the functional activity instead of neuronal subtype identity.
 To validate that FlnKO neurons in periventricular nodules were less active than those in upper cortical layers, we first examined their levels of c-Fos protein that is commonly used as a marker for neuronal activity. Despite an overall increase in cortical tissues of FlnKO than that of control mice ( K), c-Fos’s immunoreactivity was predominantly presented by upper cortical neurons and was notably weaker or undetectable in neurons of the periventricular nodules in our IH analysis ( A and 7B). Similarly, the significant elevation of glutamate receptor mGluR1 (Grm1) in FlnKO cortices was largely exhibited by upper cortical neurons, though it was highly expressed in a small population of periventricular neurons ( C and 7D). We further showed that compromised c-Fos and mGluR1 in periventricular neurons were accompanied by reduced Camk2, the calcium-/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase that mediates excitatory glutamate signals underlying neuronal plasticity and learning. Although various Camk2 isoforms, including Camk2a, Camk2b, Camk2g, and Camk2n, were among DEGs upregulated in both V-SVZ and upper cortical ROIs of FlnKO compared to control mice ( E, B, S3C, C, and S6D), we found immuno-signals of CamK2 were considerably weaker in periventricular neurons than in upper cortical neurons of the same cortical section ( F). Such joint reduction in glutamate receptors, Camk2, and c-Fos in periventricular neurons fully corroborates our spatial transcriptomics data. They together indicate that neurons produced in the postnatal/adult V-SVZ of FlnKO mice were in a relatively dormant state compared to neocortical neurons generated during embryonic development.
 Further supporting the relatively inactive state of periventricular neurons, we found there were fewer parvalbumin-expressing (PV+) GABAergic neurons in periventricular heterotopia nodules. PV+ inhibitory interneurons in the neocortex are derived from the ganglionic eminence in embryogenesis. In mice, these neurons migrate tangentially to the cortex, reach a steady state at the end of second postnatal week, adopt their electrophysiological properties at weaning age, and play important roles in regulating the activity of cortical glutamatergic excitatory neurons. , Correlated with the higher expression of GABA receptors in upper cortical than in PH ROIs, our IH analysis found the abundance of PV+ neurons was significantly elevated in the neocortex of FlnKO brains than that of control brains but was significantly reduced in periventricular nodules ( G and G). PV+ interneurons are important for excitation-inhibition balance, and their maturation and coupling to glutamatergic neurons contribute to the development of gamma oscillation and enhance cortical circuit performance. , Therefore, the enrichment of PV neurons and GABA receptors in the neocortex, coupled with their deficiency in PH, suggest that neural network activities in FlnKO brains are predominantly conducted by neurons in the neocortex, whereas the contribution of periventricular neurons born in postnatal/adult V-SVZ is likely minimal.
Despite a molecular function of filamin in cross-linking actin filaments, neither cortical nor periventricular neurons in FlnKO mice showed gross structural aberrations by Golgi-Cox stain and morphology analysis, though neurons in PH failed to develop proper spatial organization ( I and ). Nonetheless, both heterotopic and cortical neurons in FlnKO mice showed significant increases in dendritic spine density compared to that of cortical neurons in control mice ( J). In addition, the spine morphology of filamin-deficient neurons was notably distorted. Although changes in spine head size and neck length were undetectable, FlnKO neurons showed thinner spine necks and a significant increase in perforated spines, , exhibiting doughnut-shaped, horseshoe-shaped, or claw-like glomerular endings ( K–7N). As these spine morphology features are largely shared between neocortical and periventricular neurons in FlnKO mice, it suggests that they could result directly from actin cytoskeleton defects due to filamin LOF. Nonetheless, the higher spine density, thinner spine neck, and increases in perforated spines can together provide a larger number and highly fluid contact sites for synaptic transmission, which is consistent with the overall underdeveloped and highly plastic state of FlnKO brains. The reduced cellular mechanical strength and enhanced cellular plasticity may underline the gained activity of both FlnKO NSPCs and neurons.

## Discussion
Although generation of new neurons in the adult brain holds a promise for replenishing neurons lost due to brain injury or degeneration, studies in the past decades have only shown the acquisition of a handful of molecular markers for active NSPCs and neuroblasts or the production of a small number of neurons transiently in the adult brain. Direct evidence for the long-term survival and physiological function of these adult-born neurons remains lacking. As a result of these limitations, whether new neurons can be generated in the adult human brain has been controversial. , , The result of this study demonstrates that a large quantity of neurons resembling neurons of the neocortex can be generated by the postnatal and adult V-SVZ in FlnKO mice, providing direct evidence on the neurogenic capacity of adult V-SVZ. Given the close genetic and phenotypic resemblance between FlnKO mice and the corresponding human PH condition, our result serves as a proof of concept for further exploring the potential of inducing V-SVZ neurogenesis in the adult human brain.
Despite extensive studies of neurogenesis in the brain, mechanisms underlying the intrinsic and extrinsic control of NSPCs’ neurogenic propensity remain largely elusive. Nonetheless, at the systems level, it is conceivable that both intrinsic and extrinsic factors driving neuronal differentiation are well synchronized with the developmental state and physiological activities of the brain. This notion is well supported by results of this study. First, our data suggest that NSPCs’ neurogenic propensity is highly regulated by the brain’s energy metabolic status. In fetal development, brain metabolism is predominately mediated by anaerobic glycolysis. After birth, the brain starts to receive oxygen-rich blood and gradually switches to aerobic catabolism of glucose. By adult age, brain energetics fully relies on OXPHOS, consuming 25% of glucose intake and 20% of inhaled oxygen in order to maintain neuronal communication and synaptic activities. To meet such energy demand of the adult brain, upregulation of genes participating OXPHOS must be necessary for activating the neuronal differentiation of NSPCs as we observed in the V-SVZ of adult FlnKO mice. In close agreement, previous reports also demonstrated that the transition of neural stem cells to progenitor cells of the neuronal lineage was accompanied by increased mitochondrial biogenesis. , Moreover, our data indicate that generation of periventricular neurons in the V-SVZ of FlnKO mice is correlated with increased expression of a myriad of genes involving synaptic transmission, neuronal plasticity, and metabolic turnovers in the neocortex. These data imply that in addition to ATP synthesis, neurogenic propensity of NSPCs in the postnatal and adult V-SVZ is well coordinated with neocortical neurons’ state of differentiation, maturity, and physiological activity. Besides long-distance axonal communications, vitalized V-SVZ and upper cortical layers in FlnKO mice may be functionally connected by vascular circulation. In this case, increased vascular abundance not only boosts oxidative metabolism and ATP synthesis within V-SVZ but also enhances brain-wide metabolic activation and function. Therefore, cerebral blood vessels are both an essential neurogenic niche and a prerequisite for neuronal function in the adult brain.
While the vascular enrichment acts as the external cue to enhance the energetics and activities of cortical NSPCs and neurons, filamin LOF is the intrinsic factor that renders NSPCs and neurons to an underdifferentiated immature state with high susceptibility and sensitized responses to external cues. This is consistent with our earlier finding that filamin LOF led to hyperactive Igf and Vegf signaling in the embryonic V-SVZ. Such deficiency suggests that filamin acts as a gatekeeper for cell signaling and tissue homeostasis. Although filamin has been regarded as an actin stabilizer, the pleotropic phenotype of filamin LOF in humans and mice are not simply explained by deficiencies in actin crosslinking. Besides actin, filamin interacts with numerous molecules for cell sensing, signaling, gene expression, and morphogenesis. This allows it to coordinate intricate cell-cell interactions, signaling networks, intracellular structures, and metabolic processes in various tissue environments. Such unique characteristic of filamin is essential for maintaining the homeostasis and stability of cells bombarded by diverse extracellular cues. In line with this, FLNA mutations have been shown to affect the cardiovascular, skeletal, lungs, gastro, and connective tissues. , , , , Recent studies also suggest a dual function of FLNa in cancer promotion and tumor suppression. These are all fully in line with data presented in this study, which demonstrate that filamin LOF results in the reprograming of a wide range of molecular networks for cell signaling, cell mechanics, cell metabolism, and gene expression. These changes may decrease the homeostatic stability, resulting in sensitization and activation of NSPCs, glia, and neurons at a brain systems level.
Although epilepsy is the main neurological symptom of FLNA mutations, the condition can be asymptomatic and go silently without being detected by MRI. We have not observed spontaneous seizures in FlnKO mice. However, our spatial transcriptomics data revealed a remarkable upregulation of genes mediating excitatory activities in upper layers compared to periventricular nodules. This suggests that seizure activities in the human PH condition originate, at least in part, from hyperexcitabilities of neocortical neurons with FLNA deficiency. In general, seizure activities often result from shifts in inhibitory and excitatory imbalance toward excessive excitability. In FlnKO mice, the density of inhibitory PV+ neurons was significantly higher in the cortex but significantly lower in PH. It remains possible that a deficiency in GABAergic neurons in periventricular nodules accounts for the hyperexcitability of seizure induction. However, reduced c-Fos, Camk2, and glutamate receptors in periventricular neurons, along with a significant transcriptional downregulation in synaptic signaling, altogether suggest that heterotopic neurons are unfavorable candidates for hyperexcitability. Given that the survival, maturation, and activity of PV+ neurons are influenced considerably by the activity of excitatory circuits, a more plausible interpretation is that the increase in PV+ neurons in the neocortex of FlnKO mice reflects a compensatory response to excitation-inhibition imbalance due to hyperactive glutamate signaling, whereas the low PV+ neurons in the periventricular nodules may be a sign of function immaturity of excitatory neurons generated by the postnatal and adult V-SVZ.
To date, our understanding of the neurogenic potential and functional significance of the adult V-SVZ is still at a very early stage. There is a pressing need for developing representative in vivo models to uncover the mechanisms for regulating cellular activities in the adult V-SVZ. Despite that heterotopic neurons generated in the juvenile and adult V-SVZ of FlnKO mice appear unable to integrate into the cortical circuity and acquire full activity and function, these neurons closely resemble excitatory neurons in upper cortical layers. Therefore, this mouse model of human condition raises a possibility of inducing V-SVZ neurogenesis by targeting NSPC-vascular interaction and brain energy metabolism regulated by FLNA.

## Limitations of the study
Although this study provides a direct evidence that the postnatal and adult V-SVZ retains the ability of generating neurons that resemble those in the neocortex with respect to transcriptome profiles, it remains challenging to fully define the underlying mechanism of NSPC activation in the adult V-SVZ. Our results suggest adult V-SVZ neurogenesis involves coordinated changes in a large number of molecules, cell types, and pathways at the brain systems level. Likewise, the function of filamin is also multifaceted and complex, which makes it difficult to delineate the precise molecular mechanism underlying functional alterations in V-SVZ and neocortex of FlnKO mice. Our previous developmental study showed that filamin-deficient radial glial cells underwent sustained EMT, altering the microenvironment of neuronal-fate-restricted progenitors in the embryonic V-SVZ. Although Snail1, the prominent EMT inducer, remains highly upregulated in the V-SVZ of adult FlnKO mice, additional work is required to define the molecular network downstream of Snail1’s action. Given the numerous molecular interactions of filamin and the remarkable transcriptomic changes caused by filamin LOF, future studies are needed to determine the common and differential mechanisms of filamin in NSPCs of the embryonic and adult V-SVZ, neurons of the neocortex, and the neuro-vascular interface that synchronizes neural activities with vascular circulation.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Yuanyi Feng (yuanyi.feng@usuhs.edu).

## Materials availability
All the materials generated in this study are available upon reasonable request to the .

## Data and code availability

•GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiling dataset has been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO): GSE256342 and is publicly accessible.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Mice
Flna floxed (Flnaflox/flox female or Flnaflox/y male) mice, and Flnb knockout mice (Flnb-/-) were generated by conventional mouse embryonic stem cell-based gene targeting. , NSPC-specific Flna conditional knockout mice were generated by crossing Flnaflox/flox mice with Tg(Nes-Cre)1Wmz Cre mice. The Flna;Flnb compound mutant mice were generated by standard genetic cross. Male and female mice from embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) to 10 months of age were analyzed. All mice used for this study were housed and bred in compliance with the AAALAC’s guidelines according to animal study protocols BIO-17-024, BIO-20-018, BIO-21-024, and BIO-23-143 that were approved by the IACUC committees of Uniformed Services University of Health Services. Experiments were performed using littermates or age and genetic background matched control and mutant groups in both sexes.

## Method details

## Fluorescence immunohistological and immunochemical analyses
For immunofluorescence staining of mouse cortical tissue, mouse brains were fixed by transcardial perfusion with PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde and then processed in 12um cryosections or 5 um paraffin sections. After treating with antigen unmasking solutions (Vector Labs), brain sections were blocked with 5% goat serum and incubated with primary antibodies in PBS, 0.05% Triton X100, and 5% goat serum at 4°C overnight, and followed by staining with fluorescence conjugated antibodies and Hoechst 33342. Epifluorescence images were acquired with a Leica CTR 5500 fluorescence, DIC, and phase contrast microscope equipped with the Leica DFC7000T digital camera. Images were imported to Adobe Photoshop and adjusted for brightness and black values.

## GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiling of the mouse whole-transcriptome
Preparation of samples for full transcriptome spatial RNA-seq analysis was carried out following the GeoMx DSP slide preparation user manual (MAN-10150). Briefly, brains of three FlnKO and three control mice at 3 months of age were fixed by transcardial perfusion with nuclease-free PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde. From the fixed brains cryosections of 7-μm thickness were placed on a microscope slide. The slide was incubated with mouse whole transcriptome oligonucleotide probe mix overnight, then washed and stained with Alexa Fluo 647 conjugated antibody to NeuN (Cell Signaling Technology), Alexa Fluo 532 conjugated antibody to Gfap, (Novus Biologicals), and DNA dye Syto13. Tissue sections were then loaded into the GeoMx DSP platform by which immunofluorescence signals were visualized by three colors (Green = Gfap; Red = NeuN; blue = Syto13) for selecting Regions-Of-Interests (ROIs). Circular geometric ROIs of ∼100um in diameter were selected from V-SVZ or upper cortical layers of control and FlnKO brains, as well as periventricular nodules of FlnKO brains. Oligonucleotide probes in each ROI were released by UV light and collected in separate wells of a microtiter plate. Photo-released nucleotides were used to generate sequencing libraries by PCR, during which Illumina i5 and i7 dual-indexing primers were added to uniquely index each ROI. PCR reactions were purified by AMPure beads twice. Library concentration was determined by a Qubit fluorometer and libraries were paired-end sequenced on a NextSeq 500 system (Illumina). The sequencing results were processed through standard GeoMx NGS Pipeline according to GeoMx DSP NGS Readout User Manual (MAN-10153-01), during which raw sequencing FASTQ files were converted to digital count conversion (DCC) files and further processed to obtain data for each target probe in each ROI by subtracting the mean of background and normalizing to Q3 of all targets. The ROIs were categorized according to genotype and spatial groups. Differential gene expression analyses were performed on different groups of ROIs by Student’s t test with Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment. Adjusted p values of < 0.05 were regarded significant.

## Ultra-structural analysis
Mouse brains were fixed with EM grade formaldehyde (2%) and glutaraldehyde (2%) in PBS by transcardial perfusion. The neocortex and V-SVZ of perfused brains were dissected, cut to pieces of < 1 mm3 in size, immersed in the same fixative overnight, and washed three times in PBS. Samples were then washed 3x 15min in cacoldylate buffer (CB, 0.1M, pH 7.4) to remove phosphate ions and subsequently immersed in 2% OsO4 in CB for 1 hour. Following 3x15 min washes in CB, samples were dehydrated in a graduated series of ethanol, infiltrated with Spurr’s epoxy resin (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA), and polymerized at 70°C for 10 hours. Thin sections (70-90nm) were cut on a Leica Ultracut UC-6 ultramicrotome (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Sections were collected on 3mm copper grids and subsequently stained for 30min with 2% aqueous uranyl acetate and for 5min with Reynold’s lead citrate. The stained brain specimens were examined with a JEOL JEM-1011 transmission electron microscope. Images were acquired by an Advanced Microscopy Techniques 4MP digital camera (AMT Corp) and saved as TIFF files. Mitochondria quantification was performed by manually tracing the outer mitochondrial membrane using ImageJ.

## Golgi-Cox staining for neuronal morphology and dendritic spine analysis
Mice were euthanized with CO2; brains were quickly dissected, rinsed with deionized water, immersed in impregnation solution, and processed using FD Rapid GolgiStain kit (FD NeuroTechnologies) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Stained sections were examined under a Leica DM5000 light microscope. Pyramidal neurons in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus regions were imaged with a 40x objective and photographed. For dendritic spine analyses, 16-20 pyramidal neurons in neocortical layer II/III of each mouse were randomly selected for assessment. The number of spines per 10 micrometers in secondary apical dendrites (branched from primary dendrites arising from the soma), spine length, neck width, head width, and the fraction of spines with doughnut or horseshoe-shaped heads, were scored using the NIH ImageJ and Image-Pro software.

## Immunoblotting
Immunoblotting of total cell or tissue proteins was performed by extracting with boiling 2x SDS PAGE sample buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2.5% SDS, 0.7135 M β-mercaptoethanol, 10% glycerol, 0.002% Bromophenol Blue) to fully dissolve the tissue proteins, heating at 95°C for 10 min to ensure protein denaturation, and passing through syringes with a 29-gauge needle three times to sheer nuclear DNA and obtain homogenous extracts. 10-30 ug of total proteins were used for each immunoblotting analysis. The loadings were adjusted and normalized by the total protein content according to Coomassie blue stain of the gel after SDS PAGE and by the level of housekeeping proteins.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size, while all experiments were performed with a minimum of three biological replicates and all cell counts were obtained from at least ten random fields. The experiments were not randomized; the investigators were not blinded to the sample allocation and data acquisition during experiments but were blinded in performing quantitative analyses of immuno-histological images using the NIH ImageJ and Image-Pro software. All statistical analyses were done using GraphPad Prism 10.0 software. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA or unpaired two-tailed Student’s t tests for comparing differences between different genotypes. Differences were considered significant with a p value < 0.05. Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH R01NS87575 to Y.F, and by US Department of Defense award number HU00012320103. The Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences (USU), 4301 Jones Bridge Rd., A1040C, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799 is the awarding and administering office. This project is sponsored by the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences (USU); however, the information or content and conclusions do not necessarily represent the official position or policy of, nor should any official endorsement be inferred on the part of, USU, the Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government.

## Author contributions
Y.F. conceptualized the project, designed and performed the experiments, interpreted the results, and wrote the manuscript. C.A.K. performed experiments and data analysis; C.C.L. performed the experiments and data analysis; D.P.M. assisted with ultrastructural imaging analyses, and X.Z. assisted with experiments.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no conflict of interests.

Published: June 7, 2024

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2024.110199.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S9

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S9

## Data Availability Statement

•GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiling dataset has been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO): GSE256342 and is publicly accessible.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.